EstimatedD Pub Date) Operation Pbsuccess; the United States and Guatemala 1952-
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000134974, dated 6 January 1994.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000134974).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

GIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAK

)
\

(beASe AS SANITIZED

Operation
PBSUCCESS

The United States
and
Guatemala

1952-1954

Operation
PBSUCCESS

The United States
and
Guatemala

1952-1954

Nicholas Cullather

By q
fests
Peco ‘
“

} rF
t

History Staff :

Center for the Study of Intelligence fe

Central Intelligence Agency
Washington, DC

CREDLE,
“ 2 LRN NADAL ASL OS PIBED REOEL GT GOONS DUSTIN ABT ee VALET ED nee ee Pn EST

Pero ee ne ee nr Paras

ne
Peer . 5

All material on this page
is unclassified.

Contents

Foreword ........:::eeceee Quince ener aie ieee eee re 1x
Chapter 1. America’s Back yAard....n-scesesccscsesssecssesseesterenensearensenarensensrans |
Chapter 2. Reversing the Trend .....scccsceeecsscessseeseeeesesnnsassrensnennenetantes 25
Chapter 3. Sufficient vee so lectecctnus lel ceilate tances ee er 55
Chapter 4. The Sweet Smell Of Success -...ccccccecceecceeserseseereetsetes 81
Appendix A. PBSUCCESS Timeline. ......-cccccccceeesssrsret rss recetstestens 97
Appendix B. PBSUCCESS Organizational Chart .......-::-:eeecrre 105
Appendix C. Codewords Used In PBSUCCESS ......-:ececeeeerserretes 107
Bibliography .....sssees-eecccneseseecesseneesceeeenten atten EE 113
—Seeret—

Stas ee

Illustrations
President Jorge UbDICO 20... eeeecceceseceeeeeneceeeeeceseeeseaessesssesensesseaeenseeeeteeaeeenes 3
President Juan José Arévalo.....i. ccc ccccecccccusceeseeceneceeeeaseescsccenneeeeseeeeecceeneeaeeeeees 5

Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, a leader of the 1944 revolution, became president
in 1951 and implemented a land reform program that radicalized
Guatemalan politics. .....cccecceescesceeceeeeceeeseeaseeessseeaeeceeeacecieeaeeateseeeeceaesasereeaees 6

Thomas G. Corcoran, a “purveyor of concentrated influence,” [
J arranged for former DCI Walter Bedell Smith
to join the company’s board Of GireCtOrs. «2.02... tees eseeeeeeeee ne tenetseeeeeeeeentets 9

José Manuel Fortuny, leader of the PGT and a close friend of Arbenz... 13

Eisenhower’s Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles (left), shared his
brother’s enthusiasm for covert action. Here the two brothers exchange

ideas at Washington’s National Airport..........c.cccccececeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeteeseseeneees 24
Carlos Castillo Armas .......cccescecesesceccessecessseeesseasesaseessecsesesteesaeeeeaeeeneseeeeeas 34
Miguel Ydigoras Fuentes .0........cccecccccccsssseneeeseseeeneseeeseereeseeneneneseenseneaseeeees 36

Arbenz was in deep water in late 1953. Learning of the PBSUCCESS plot
against him, he decided to purchase arms from Czechoslovakia. ............. 37

Assistant Secretary of State Henry F. Holland nearly canceled PBSUCCESS
in April 1954 when he learned of serious security breaches.............0+ 42

The Liberacidnista air force on the tarmac at Managua Airport. L

“} The rebel air force con-
sisted of three C-47 cargo planes, six F-47 fighter-bombers, one P-38
fighter, one Cessna 180, and one Cessna 140. 0... cece teeeeretetsees 51

C _Treviews Castillo Armas’s rebel forces. The force was invari-
ably described as “‘ragtag.”” The Agency supplied money and arms, but the
troops had no uniforms OF DOOLS........ ee eeeeee erect eer cateere tts eteseesseeeeenes 54

The SS Alfhem arrived at Puerto Barrios in May 1954 with 2,000 tons of
CZECH ALMS. voce cececesceeeeceeesecceeeeccecsaeaeaeeeesersseeseeseensecetsssseesssesenteseesiiaaes 58

Leaflet dropped on 26 May. “Struggle With Your Patriotic Brothers!
Struggle With Castillo Armas!” oo... ccc ec eee eeeeteteneneeeeeeeeseetteessesesensees 63

—Seeret—

SPRRI RENIN EE Et cece

I ae enrersereereersemesessene seer,

——Seeret—

Castillo Armas leaves his headquarters on the night of the invasion....... 68

Engaging the enemy in Guatemala. The rebels were lightly armed with
Weapons Of SOVIEL Ces io ti cssisccssussdsivossstsgensscudyacesnayoateredeadeseeSieanabsacitlaceedes 69

1955 mural by Mexican artist Diego Rivera depicts John Foster Dulles |
shaking hands with Castillo Armas. Allen Dulles and John Peurifoy pass
money to Col. Elfego Monz6n and other Guatemalan officers while Indian
peasants load bananas aboard a United Fruit ship... eee 87

A year after taking power, President Castillo Armas chats with his aide,

Miguel Mendoza, who served in the Liberacidnista army. ........0:0:eeceee- 88
Maps
Invasion Plans. 18 June: 1 954 scsi su eile a teaseriesgusvecaciiatitesovativaaueetecasneess 66
Actual Invasion, Late June 1954 ooo... ceesceeneeeecceceenesceceeeereceeeesesereceeeens 74
:
—Secret—

Foreword

This work offers a fast-moving narrative account of CIA's Operation
PBSUCCESS, which supported the 1954 coup d'état in Guatemala. This
early CIA covert action operation delighted both President Eisenhower and
the Dulles brothers by ousting President Arbenz and installing Colonel
Castillo Armas in his place. In light of Guatemala’s unstable and often vio-
lent history since the fall of Jacobo Arbenz Guzman in ‘1954, we are
perhaps less certain today than most Americans were at the time that this
operation was a Cold War victory.

It is tempting to find lessons in history, and Allen Dulles’s CIA con-
cluded that the apparent triumph in Guatemala, in spite of a long series of
blunders in both planning and execution, made PBSUCCESS a sound
model for future operations. A major hazard in extracting lessons from his-
tory, however, is that such lessons often prove illusory or simply wrong
when applied in new and different circumstances. Nick Cullather’s study of
PBSUCCESS reveals both why CIA thought PBSUCCESS had been a
model operation, and why this model later failed so disastrously as a guide
for an ambitious attempt to overthrow Fidel Castro at the Bay of Pigs in
1961.

Nick Cullather joined CIA and the History Staff in July 1992, soon
after completing his Ph.D. at the University of Virginia. He is the author of
Illusions of Influence: The Political Economy of United States—Philippines
Relations, 1942-1960, which Stanford University Press will publish this
year. In July 1993 he left CIA to take an appointment as assistant professor
of diplomatic history at Indiana University. This publication is evidence of
his impressive historical gifts and of the highly productive year he spent
with us. “

Finally, I should note that, while this is an official publication of the CIA
History Staff, the views expressed—as in all of our works—are those of
the author and do not necessarily represent those of the Central Intelligence
Agency.

J. Kenneth McDonald
Chief Historian

a nerers

ON AIA ee ie

SPAN PRR RIT LE OTE OO ETA ee we

Chapter L~-

nn

America’s Backyard

They would have overthrown us even if we had grown no bananas.
Manuel Fortuny

The CIA’s operation to overthrow the Government of Guatemala in
1954 marked an early zenith in the Agency’s long record of covert action.
Following closely on successful operations that installed the Shah as ruler
of Iran ‘a . _. ‘4d ine
Guatemala operation, known as PBSUCCESS, was both more ambitious
and more thoroughly successful than either precedent. Rather than helping
a prominent contender gain power with a few inducements, PBSUCCESS
used an intensive paramilitary and psychological campaign to replace a
popular, elected government with a political nonentity. In method, scale,
and conception it had no antecedent, and its triumph confirmed the belief
of many in the Eisenhower administration that covert operations offered a
safe, inexpensive substitute for armed force in resisting Communist inroads
in the Third World. This and other ‘‘lessons’” of PBSUCCESS lulled
Agency and administration officials into a complacency that proved fatal at
the Bay of Pigs seven years later.

Scholars have criticized the Agency for failing to recognize the
unique Circumstances that led to success in Guatemala and failing to adapt
to different conditions in Cuba. Students of the 1954 coup also question the
nature of the ‘‘success” in Guatemala. The overthrown Arbenz government
was not, many contend, a Communist regime but a reformist government
that offered perhaps the last chance for progressive, democratic change in
the region. Some accuse the Eisenhower administration and the Agency of
acting at the behest of self-interested American investors, particularly the
United Fruit Company. Others argue that anti-Communist paranoia and not
economic interest dictated policy, but with equally regrettable results.”

‘Quoted in Piero Gleijeses. Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United
States, 1944-1954 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991). p. 7.

"The principal books on the Guatemalan Revolution of 1954 are Stephen Schlesinger and
Stephen Kinzer, Bitter Fruit: The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala (Garden
City: Doubleday and Co., 1982), Richard Immerman, The CIA in Guatemala: The Foreign
Policy of Intervention (Austin: University of Texas Press. 1982). and Gleijeses, Shattered
Hope.

Operation PBSUCCESS

CIA records can answer these questions only indirectly. They cannot
document the intentions of Guatemalan leaders, but only how Agency
analysts perceived them. CIA officials participated in the process that led-
to the approval of PBSUCCESS, but as their papers show, they often had
little understanding of or interest in the motives of those in the Department
of State, the Pentagon, and the White House who made the final decision.
Agency records, however, do document the conduct of the operation, the

. - how Agency operatives construed
the problem, what methods and objectives they pursued, and what aspects
of the operations they believed led to success. They permit speculation on

whether misperceptions about PBSUCCESS led overconfident operatives
to plan the Bay of Pigs. Chiefly, however, they offer a view other historical
accounts lack—the view from inside the CIA.

Agency officials had only a dim idea of what had occurred in
Guatemala before Jacobo Arbenz Guzman came to power in 1950.
Historians regard the events of the 1940s and 1950s as following a
centuries-old cycle of progressive change and conservative reaction, but
officers in the Directorate of Plans believed they were witnessing some-
thing new. For the first time, Communists had targeted a country “‘in
America’s backyard’’ for subversion and transformation into a “‘denied
area.’’ When comparing what they saw to past experience, they were more
apt to draw parallels to Korea, Russia, or Eastern Europe than to Central
America. They saw events not in a Guatemalan context but as part of a
global pattern of Communist activity. PBSUCCESS, nonetheless, inter-
rupted a revolutionary process that had been in motion for over a decade,
and the actions of Guatemalan officials can only be understood in the con-
text of the history of the region.

The Revolution of 1944

Once the center of Mayan civilization, Guatemala had been reduced
by centuries of Spanish rule to an impoverished outback when, at the turn
of the 20th century, a coffee boom drew investors, marketers, and railroad
builders to the tiny Caribbean nation. The descendants of Spanish coloniz-
ers planted coffee on large estates, fincas, worked by Indian laborers.
Coffee linked Guatemala to a world market in which Latin American,
African, and Indonesian producers competed to supply buyers in Europe
and the United States with low-priced beans. Success depended on the
availability of low-paid or unpaid labor, and after 1900 Guatemala’s rulers
structured society to secure finqueros a cheap supply of Indian workers.
The Army enforced vagrancy laws, debt bondage, and other forms of in-
voluntary servitude and became the guarantor of social peace. To maintain

America's Backyard

the uneasy truce between the
Indian majority and the Spanish-
speaking ladino shopkeepers, labor
contractors, and landlords, soldiers
garrisoned towns in the populous
regions on the Pacific coast and
along the rail line between Guat-
emala City and the Atlantic port of
Puerto Barrios.”

When the coffee market col-
lapsed in 1930, ladinos needed a
strong leader to prevent restive,
unemployed laborers from gaining
an upper hand, and they chose
a ruthless, efficient provincial
governor, Jorge Ubico, to lead the
country. Ubico suppressed dissent,
legalized the killing of Indians by
landlords, enlarged the Army, and
organized a personal gestapo. President Jorge Ubico
Generals presided over provincial
governments; officers staffed state farms, factories, and schools. The
Guatemalan Army’s social structure resembled that of the finca. Eight
hundred ladino officers lorded over five thousand Indian soldiers who slept
on the ground, wore ragged uniforms, seldom received pay, and were
whipped or shot for small infractions. Urban shopkeepers and rural land-
lords tolerated the regime out of fear of both Ubico and the Indian
masses.

Ubico regarded the ladino elite with contempt, reserving his admira-
tion for American investors who found in Guatemala a congenial business
climate. He welcomed W. R. Grace and Company, Pan American Airways,
and other firms, making Guatemala the principal Central American destina-
tion for United States trade and capital. The Bostonsbased United Fruit
Company became one of his closest allies. Its huge banana estates at
Tiquisate and Bananera occupied hundreds of square miles and employed
as many as 40,000 Guatemalans. These lands were a gift from Ubico, who
allowed the company a free hand on its property. United Fruit responded
by pouring investment into the country, buying controlling shares of the
railroad, electric utility, and telegraph. It administered the nation’s only
port and controlled passenger and freight lines. With interests in every sig-
nificant enterprise, it earned its sobriquet, El Pulpo, the Octopus. Company

ny ie
Wide World (AP) ©

‘Im Handy, “*A Sea of Indians’: Ethnic Conflict and the Guatemalan Revolution.” The
Americas 46 (October 1989): 190-192.
“Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 11-19

wv

:
be

é
Sa
4

Need x ILO

{7

ray oy,

a we

OT

7*

~Arbenz or Arana, to succeed Arévalo in 1951.

Operation PBSUC CESS

executives could determine prices, taxes, and the treatment of workers
without interference from the government. The United States Embassy ap-
proved and until the regime’s final years gave Ubico unstinting support.”

As World War II drew to a close, dictators who ruled Central
America through the Depression years fell on hard times, and authoritarian
regimes in Venezuela, Cuba, and El Salvador yielded to popular pressure.
Inspired by their neighbors’ success, Guatemalan university students and
teachers resisted military drills they were required to perform by the Army.
Unrest spread, and, in June 1944, the government was beset by petitions,
public demonstrations, and strikes. When a soldier killed a young
schoolteacher, a general strike paralyzed the country, and the aged, ailing |
dictator surrendered power to his generals. Teachers continued to agitate
for elections, and in October younger officers led by Capt. Jacobo Arbenz
Guzman and Maj. Francisco Arana deposed the junta. The officers stepped
aside to allow the election of a civilian president, a sacrifice that earned
popular acclaim for both them and the Army. The Revolution of 1944 cul-
minated in December with the election of a university professor, Juan José
Arévalo, as President of Guatemala.°

Arévalo’s regime allowed substantially greater freedoms, but re-
mained essentially conservative. Political parties proliferated, but most
were controlled by the ruling coalition party, the Partido Accién
Revolucionaria (PAR). Unions organized teachers, railroad workers, and
the few factory workers, but national laws restricted the right to strike and
to organize campesinos, farm laborers and tenants. The Army remained in
control of much of the administration, the schools, and the national radio.
Modest reforms satisfied Guatemalans, and the revolutionary regime was
highly popular. Most expected one of the revolution’s military heroes,

So sure was Arana of taking power that he laid plans to hasten th
process. In July 1949, with the backing of conservative finqueros, he
presented Arévalo an ultimatum demanding that he surrender power to the
Army and fill out the remainder of his term as a civilian figurehead for a
military regime. The President asked for time, and along with Arbenz and a
few loyal officers tried to have Arana arrested on a remote finca. Caught
alone crossing a bridge, Arana resisted and was killed in a gunfight. When
news reached the capital, Aranista officers rebelled, but labor unions and
loyal Army units defended the government and quashed the uprising. Ina
move they later regretted, Arbenz and Arévalo hid the truth about Arana’s
death, claiming it was the work of unknown assassins. Arbenz had saved
democracy a second time, and his election to the presidency was ensured,
but rumors of his role in the killing led conservative Guatemalans, and
eventually the CIA, to conclude that his rise to power marked the success
of a conspiracy.

SIbid., pp. 21-22; Immerman, C/A in Guatemala, p. 83.

‘Ibid., pp. 38-49.

"tbid., pp. 31-49; Immerman, C/A in Guatemala, pp. 48-57.

*Gleijeses, “The Death of Francisco Arana,” Journal of Latin American Studies 22 (Octaber
1990): 527-551.

—Seeret—
4

ar

America’s Backyard

After the July uprising,
Arbenz and Arévalo purged the
military of Aranista officers and
placed it under loyal commanders
who enjoyed, according to the US
Embassy, “‘an unusual reputation
for incorruptibility.”” "Unions en-
thusiastically supported Arbenz’s
candidacy, expecting him to be
more progressive than Arévalo.
The candidate of the right, Miguel
Ydigoras Fuentes, lagged behind
in the polls, and Arbenz would
win in a landslide. Rightists made
a final bid to usurp power in the
days before the election. Along
with a few followers, a purged
Aranista lieutenant, Carlos Castillo
Armas, mounted a quixotic attack
on a military base in Guatemala
City. He believed Army officers,
inspired by the spectacle of his bravery, would overthrow the government
and install him as president. Instead, they threw him in jail.’

Castillo Armas came to the attention of the Agency [_

J in January of 1950, when he was planning his raid. A protégé of
Arana’s, he had risen fast in the military, joining the general staff and be-
coming director of the military academy until early 1949, when he was as-
signed to command the remote garrison of Mazatenango. He was there
when his patron was assassinated on 18 July, but he did not hear of the
Aranista revolt until four days later when he received orders relieving him
of his post. Arbenz had him arrested in August and held on a trumped-up
charge until December. When a CIA agent interviewed him a month later,
he was trying to obtain arms from Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza
and Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo. The interviewer described him as
‘‘a quiet, soft-spoken officer who does not seem to be given to exaggera-
tion.’? He claimed to have the support of the Guardia Civil, the
Quezaltenango garrison, and the commander of the capital’s largest for-
tress, Matamoros. He met with a CIA informer in August and again in
November, just a few days before he and a handful of adventurers mounted
a futile assault on Matamoros. A year later, Castillo Armas bribed his way
out of prison and fled to Honduras where he thrilled rightist exiles with
stories of his rebellion and escape. He planned another uprising, telling
supporters he had secret backers in the Army. This was delusion. After the

Wide World (AP) ©
President Juan José Arévalo

*Gleijeses. Shattered Hape, pp. 81-83.

—Secret—
5

CARON ERIN

Ye SCR cet

Ra to TE fn nee eee ne te
; . Pas ae “f

By Litas

CES
aeee Ada

Operation PBSUCCESS

7)
=
<5
yy
35
Foy
35
= 2
=a
¥
=
S
1S)
3)
re)

Jacobo Arbenz Guzman, a leader of the 1944 revolution,

1951 and tmplemented a land reform program that rad

pol

lized Guatemalan

{ca

6

ilics

Fe ee oe eee

America's Backyard

July uprising, Arbenz was the Army’s undisputed leader, and he took steps
to keep it that way."

Partisan and union activity had grown amid the freedom of the
Arévalo years, creating new political formations that later affected the
Arbenz regime. The PAR remained the ruling party, but rival parties were
tolerated. The federation of labor unions, the Confederaci6én General de
Trabajadores de Guatemala (CGTG), headed by Victor Manuel Gutiérrez,
claimed some 90,000 members. An infant union of campesinos led by
Leonardo Castillo Flores, the Confederacién Nacional Campesina de
- Guatemala (CNCG), began shortly after the July uprising to form chapters
in the countryside. Toward the end of Arévalo’s term, Communist activity
came into the open. Exiled Salvadoran Communists had opened a labor
school, the Escuela Claridad, in 1947 and though harassed by Arévalo’s
police, gathered a few influential converts, among them Gutiérrez and a
onetime president of the PAR, José Manuel Fortuny. In 1948, Fortuny and
a few sympathizers attempted to lead the PAR toward more radical posi-
tions, but a centrist majority defeated them. Shortly before Arbenz took
office, they resigned from the PAR, announcing plans to form “‘a vanguard
party, a party of the proletariat based on Marxism-Leninism.’ They called
it the Partido Guatemalteco del Trabajo (PGT)."

American Apprehensions

United States officials’ concern about Communism in Guatemala
grew as Cold War tensions increased. Preoccupied by events in Europe and
Asia, Truman paid scant attention to the Caribbean in his first years in
office. The State Department welcomed the demise of dictatorships and
found the new Guatemalan Government willing to cooperate on military
aid programs and the Pan-American Highway. The FBI gathered dossiers
on Fortuny and Gutiérrez in 1946 but found little of interest. Officers from
the newly created Central Intelligence Group arrived in March 1947 to take
over the FBI’s job of monitoring Perdénist and Communist activities, but
Guatemala remained a low priority.

The Berlin crisis, the fall of China, and the Soviet acquisition of
nuclear weapons in 1948 and 1949 made Agency and State Department
officials apprehensive about Soviet designs on the Western Hemisphere.
They reevaluated Arévalo’s government and found disturbing evidence of

wf aI “Col. Carlos Castillo Armas in Initial Stage of Organizing Armed Coup
Against Guatemalan Government,” 19 January 1950, Job 8OR-01731R. Box 38:
“Plans of Col. Carlos Castillo Armas for Armed Revolt Against the Government,” 24 August
1950, Job 80R-O1731R, Box 38:C “TPlans of Col. Carlos Castillo Armas to Overthrow
Guatemalan Government.” 3 November 1950, Job 80R-01731R. Box 38: Gleijeses. Shattered
Hope, pp. 219-220.

“tbid., pp. 76-78.

|

ry es

Operation PBS UCCESS

Communist penetration. Guatemala’s relative openness made it a haven for
Communists and leftists from Latin America and the Caribbean.'* The
number of homegrown Communists remained small, but they held influen-
tial positions in the labor movement and the PAR. The State Department
complained, listing the names of persons to be watched and removed from
high positions, but Arévalo refused to act, revealing a defiance Embassy
officials found inappropriate in a Latin leader. ““‘We would have been con-
cerned with any tendency toward excessive nationalism in Guatemala,”
department officials told the NSC, ‘‘but we are the more deeply concerned
because the Communists have been able to distort this spirit to serve their
own ends.” They saw other signs that Arévalo's nationalism had grown ex-
cessive in his treatment of American companies, particularly United Fruit."

United Fruit executives regarded any trespass on the prerogatives
they enjoyed under Ubico as an assault on free enterprise. The company
continued to report only a fraction of the value of its land and exports for
tax purposes and initially found Arévalo cooperative and respectful. But
United Fruit soon grew concerned about the new government’s sympathy
for labor. In 1947, Arévalo passed a labor code giving industrial workers
the right to organize and classifying estates employing 500 or more as in-
dustries. The law affected many of the larger fincas as well as state farms,
but United Fruit contended—and the Embassy agreed—that the law tar-
geted the company in a discriminatory manner. Workers at Bananera and
Tiquisate struck, demanding higher wages and better treatment. The com-
pany had never asked for or needed official support from the United States
before, but now it sought to enlist the Embassy and the State Department
to do its negotiating.”

The State Department placed the Embassy at the service of the com-
pany. “If the Guatemalans want to handle a Guatemalan company roughly
that is none of our business,” the first secretary explained, “but if they
handle an American company roughly it is our business.” When Embassy
pressure proved insufficient, the company found lobbyists who could take
its case to the Truman administration. Edward L. Bernays, the ‘‘father of
modern public relations,” L \ directed a
campaign to persuade Congress and administration officials that attacks on
the company were proof of Communist complicity. “Whenever you read
‘United Fruit’ in Communist propaganda,” United Fruit’s public relations

as J.C. King later explained, “Generally speaking, when a Communist in a Central
American country gets into difficulties at home, he can find refuge, 3 well-paid job, and often
a public post of major responsibility in Guatemala.” King to Allen Dulles, “Background
Information on Guatemala,” Job 78-01228A, Box 13.

“Department of State, “Guatemala,” 2 May 1951, Foreiga Relations of the United States,
195], 2: 1415-1426.

Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 91-94. United Fruit customarily underreported its production
by 700 percent of value. The company appraised its Tiquisate land at $19 million, but its as-
sessed value for tax purposes was just over $I million.

——__ Secret—
8

America's Backyard

director told audiences, “you may
readily substitute ‘United States.’”’
Thomas G. Corcoran was the com-
pany’s main conduit to the sources
of power. Described by Fortune
as a “purveyor of concentrated in-
fluence,” Corcoran had a network
of well-placed friends in business
and government.

Wide World (AP} ©
Thomas G. Corcoran, a “purveyor
of concentrated influence. "Lo

_\calming bureaucratic
waicis when an occasional regula-
tor found peculiarities in the

airline’s activilies. United Fruit . \ arranged jor former DCI
officials were impressed by his Walter Bedell Smith to join the
quick grasp of the situation. “Your company's board of directors.

problem is not with bananas,” he
told them. ‘“‘You’ve got to handle your political problem.”

Corcoran met in May 1950 with the head of the State Department’s
office on Central America, Thomas C. Mann, to discuss ways to secure the
election of a centrist candidate. Mann considered special action unneces-
sary. His colleagues saw Arbenz as conservative, “an opportunist’’ con-
cerned primarily with his own interests. They expected him to “‘steer more
nearly a middle course”’ because his country’s economic and military
dependence on the United States required it. His ties to the military au-
gured well. The Army received weapons and training from the United
States, and although Embassy officials had only vague notions of its inter-
nal politics, they considered it free of Communist influence. The
department had a low opinion of Arévalo’s policies, but in 1950 it watched

“Jim Handy, “The Most Precious Fruit of the Revolution’: The Guatemalan Agrarian
Reform, 1952-54," Hispanic American Historical Review 68 (1988): 699; Thomas P.
McCann, An American Company (New York; Crown Publishers. 1976), pp. 50-54:
Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, pp. 91-93-

Tyo Allen Dulles, “Current US posi-
tion witn regara tv Vovernment foan requested by Guatemala.” 22 October 1954, Job
79-01228A, Box 23.

—Seeret—
9

Th ce enon ew eo Ree SE Re BLL

Operation PBSUCCESS

for signs of improvement in the new administration.'’ Corcoran searched
for other officials who might be more sympathetic—meeting with the
Agency's Deputy Director, Allen Dulles, on 9 May—but without approval
from State, CIA evinced little interest.”

Despite Dulles’s procedural correctness, Agency officials were, in
fact, more apprehensive about Guatemala than their counterparts at State.
Officials in the Office of Policy Coordination (OPC) grew concerned in
August 1950 about “the rapid growth of Communist activity in Guatemala
and the probability that Guatemala may become a central point for the dis-
semination of anti-US propaganda.” Technically part of CIA, OPC oper-
ated under the direction of Frank Wisner, who reported to the Secretary of
State. The office had undertaken covert propaganda and antisubversive
operations in Europe in 1948 and later expanded its operations to include
Latin America and Asia. [
of OPC’s Latin America Division included Guatemala in [C “la pro-
gram to counter propaganda and subversion in areas where Communist
agents might strike in wartime. They received authorization to send an
agent to enroll in Guatemala City’s Instituto de Anthropdlogia y Historia
where he would try to find “‘suitable indigenous Guatemalan personnel” to
carry out projects devised by LA Division. a 7 was a global program
that included [| ~Jand Alaska. While Guatemala’s inclusion
indicated heightened interest in the potential for subversion there, it did not
mark the beginning of a sustained effort to deal with it by covert means.
The project had a budget of only $6,000 and it produced few results.”

Even without official help, United Fruit could put Guatemala’s feet to
the fire. Bernays laid down a PR barrage that sent correspondents from
Time, Newsweek, the New York Times, and Chicago Tribune to report on
Communist activities in Guatemala. Company officials encouraged Castillo
Armas with money and arms, and the rebel leader began seeking support
from Central American leaders and the United States. A CIA official inter-
viewed him in Mexico City in early 1950 and judged his expectation of
Army support fanciful, but admitted that “if any man in Guatemala can
lead a successful revolt against the present regime, it will be he who will
do it.”’ United Fruit threatened Guatemalan unions and the government,
warning that any increase in labor costs would cause it to withdraw from
the country, When a hurricane flattened part of the Tiquisate plantation in
September 1951, the company suspended 4,000 workers without pay and

"State Department, “Guatemala,” 2 May 1951, Foreign Relations af the United States, 1951,
2:.1489.

an ] “Project Outline L Guatemala,” 23 August 1950, Job 78-865 (DO).
Box I. L {went to Guatemala City in November 1951.

—Seeret—

tN

‘America's Backyard

announced it would not reopen until it completed a study of the business
climate. Courts ordered the workers reinstated, but Walter Turnbull, the
company vice president, ignored the order and presented Arbenz with an
ultimatum. Unless the government guaranteed no wage increases for three
years and exempted the company from the labor code, United Fruit would
halt operations. To prove his earnestness, he suspended passenger shipping
to the United States.”

The administration’s concern about the Arbenz regime had increased
in mid-1951, and there is evidence that the Truman administration en-
couraged the company to take a hard line. United Fruit’s vast holdings and
monopolies on communications and transit in Central America attracted the
attention of lawyers in the Justice Department’s antitrust division as early
as 1919. In May 1951, they were preparing for court action to force United
Fruit to divest itself of railroads and utilities in Guatemala when the State
Department intervened. In a National Security Council session, Department
representatives argued that a legal attack on United Fruit’s Guatemalan
holdings would have ‘‘serious foreign policy implications,” weakening the
company at a time when the United States needed it. The action was sus-
pended until the situation in Guatemala had improved. It is often asserted
that the United States acted at the company’s behest in Guatemala, but this
incident suggests the opposite may have been true: the administration
wanted to use United Fruit to contain Communism in the hemisphere.”

The State Department remained ambivalent about how far it should
go in putting pressure on Guatemala. In June 1951, three months into
Arbenz’s term, the Department had seen no improvement. The President
showed few indications of extremism in matters of policy, but he appointed
several leftists to key positions. The state newspaper and radio criticized
United States involvement in Korea and ran stories copied from Czech
newspapers. American companies got little help from the government in
dealing with labor. The “ascending curve of Communist influence’”’ had
not leveled off under Arbenz, but tilted more steeply upward.”

Department officials were increasingly concerned, but they wanted to
avoid big stick tactics that could prove counterproductive. Guatemala
might obstruct United States military and development programs in the
area or charge the United States with violating the Non-Intervention
Agreement, an accusation that would arouse sympathy throughout Latin
America. The Department decided to discourage loans and drag its feet on
aid and construction programs for Guatemala, steps it considered subtle but

aa 1 sGuatemala.” 13 January 1950. Job 80ROI731R, Box 17, Folder 688:
{ V-pPlans of Col. Carlos Castillo Armas for Armed Revolt Against the
Government,” 23 August 1950, ibid.. NIE 62, “Present Political Situation in Guatemala and
Possible Developments During 1952." Foretgn Relations of the United States. 1952-1954, 4:
1035-1036.

"Memorandum of Conversation, “Possible anti-trust suit by the Department of Justice
Against the United Fruit Company,” 22 May 1953, Records of the Office of Middle
American Affairs, Lot $8078, NARA, RG 59, Box 3.

Notes of the Under Secretary's Meeting, 15 June 1951, Foreign Relations of the United
States, 1951, 2: 1440-1442.

Operation PBSUCCESS

unmistakable signs of Washington’s displeasure. If Arbenz were an oppor-
tunist, such moves might have induced cooperation, but the department’s
analysts misjudged the new President. Twice he had risked his life and
career for democracy. His plans for development and agricultural reform
were modest, but he was determined to carry them out. Stiffening
resistance from the United States and United Fruit led him to reassess his
assumptions, adopt a more radical program, and find friends who shared
his new opinions.

Arbenz, the PGT, and Land Reform

Agency reports described Arbenz as “brilliant, . . . cultured.” The
son of a Swiss pharmacist and a ladino woman, he planned a career as a
scientist or engineer before his father’s suicide impoverished the family
and left him no alternative apart from the military academy. His intelli-
gence and personal magnetism earned him the admiration of cadets and
teachers alike, and he rose quickly to high rank in the officer corps. At 26
he married Maria Villanova, an American-educated Salvadoran from a
prominent landed family. The intellectual, socially concerned couple
studied and discussed Guatemala’s chronic economic and social problems,
and in 1944 they joined the Revolution on the side of the teachers. As
Defense Minister under Arévalo, Arbenz advocated progressive reforms,
unionization, and forced rental of unused land. He and Maria became
friends with the reformers, labor organizers, and officers who made up the
intellectual elite of Guatemala City. Arbenz remained close with friends
trom the academy, Alfonso Martinez and Carlos Enrique Diaz, and increas-

‘ingly associated with members of the PGT, Carlos Pellecer, Gutiérrez, and
Fortuny. He had particular regard for the latter, whose intellect and wit he
put to work in the election campaign of 1950, writing speeches and
slogans.”

The PGT contributed little to Arbenz’s victory in 1950, but it gained
influence under the new regime. Total party membership never exceeded
4,000 in a nation of almost three million, a fact reflected in the party’s
weakness at the polls. Only four Communists held seats in the 61-member
congress, a body dominated by moderates. Arbenz did not appoint any
Communists to the Cabinet, and only six or seven held significant sub-
Cabinet posts. Those few, however, occupied positions that made them
highly visible to United States officials, controlling the state radio and
newspaper and holding high posts in the agrarian department and the social!
security administration. The party’s principal influence came from
Fortuny’s friendship with the President. Arbenz’s coalition disintegrated af-
ter election day into disputatious factions that offered no help amid the
struggles with United Fruit and increasing tensions with the United States.

“Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 134-142.

ah RAM

America's Backyard

The President admired the
undemanding, socially concerned
members of the PGT and relied in-
creasingly on Fortuny’s political
skill. Their relationship grew
closer as the two men worked
toward a common goal—land re-
form. At Arbenz’s direction,
Fortuny, Pellecer, and Gutiérrez
drafted a proposal in.1951 for a
major restructuring of property
ownership in Guatemala. The PGT
leadership’s close ties to the

&
President gave the party influence ae ‘
in Guatemala entirely out of ‘ ee
proportion to its electoral strength. SO
aereee, es

The land reform initiative en- seat sewn Seeanernet ae

. ’ PoP 7 srt Ser
hanced that influence and drew the fReauauodiebdee tees

President even closer to Fortuny. “ Wide World (AP) ©
Arbenz’s attempt at land José Manuel Fortuny, leader of the

reform established his regime’s PGT and a close friend of Arbenz
radical credentials in the eyes of

domestic and foreign opponents. Unable to obtain funding from the United
States or the World Bank, he hesitated for a year, then on 17 June 1952
released Decree 900, an ambitious program to remake rural Guatemala. US
aid officials considered it moderate, “constructive and democratic in its
aims,” similar to agrarian programs the United Statés was sponsoring in
Japan and Formosa. It expropriated idle land on private and government ¢s-
tates and redistributed it in plots of 8 to 33 acres to peasants who would
pay the government 3 to 5 percent of the assessed value annually. The
government compensated the previous owners with 3 percent bonds matur-
ing in 25 years. The proposal aimed not to create Stalinist collectives but a
rural yeomanry free of the tyranny of the finca. For Central America it was
a radical plan, and Guatemalan landowners joined Nicaraguan dictator
Anastasio Somoza in denouncing it. Conservatives feared the program
would release the Indians’ suppressed hunger for land, with unpredictable
consequences for ladinos. Historians Have recently described Decree 900 as
a moderate, capitalist reform, but in 1952 few locai observers saw it as
“Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, p. 59; Memorandum of Conversation, Dr. Robert

Alexander and Mr. William L. Krieg, 1 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 99; Gleijeses,
Shattered Hope, pp. 145-147.

+
{
f
I,

weed

Ra Sa

z
wees

poe
A OPTS
alee

ae Auta rece Ve a? 9 GRRE ME Pe PY

3
2
3
‘
:

Operation PBSUCCESS

anything other than an attack on the wealth and power of Guatemala’s
propertied elite, and by example, on the social order of the region.”

The reform intensified conflict between the regime and United Fruit,
drawing the United States into confrontation with Arbenz. The company’s
plantations contained huge tracts of idle land valued on the tax rolls at a
fraction of their actual worth. In December 1952, workers at Tiquisate filed
for expropriation of 55,000 acres. Other claims followed, and in February
1953 the government confiscated a quarter of a million acres of company
land appraised at just over $1 million. United Fruit claimed the actual
value was near $20 million. The company and the US Embassy charged the
government with discrimination, and the State Department pressed
Guatemala to submit the matter to arbitration. The Department was con-
cerned about more than the company. Officials saw Decree 900 as a poten-
tial opening for the radicalization of Guatemala. Communists would use
land redistribution “‘to mobilize the hitherto inert mass of rural workers,”
destroy the political effectiveness of large landholders, and spread disorder
throughout the countryside. The Department discerned that the law had
originated in the PGT and had “‘strong political motivation and sig-
nificance.”’**

Land reform stirred up conflict within Guatemala as well. Within
weeks of passage, peasants organized to seize land on idle estates.
Vagueness in the law and poor enforcement led to illegal seizures, conflicts
with landlords, and fighting between rival peasant claimants. Pellecer, the
PGT’s peasant organizer, encouraged tenants to take land by force.
Finqueros organized to resist and brought suit against the government. In
February 1953 as disorder reigned in the countryside, entrenched landed in-
terests and peasant unions waged a bureaucratic duel in the capital. Acting

‘on the landlords’ suit, the Supreme Court declared Decree 900 unconstitu-

tional and ordered a halt to expropriations. Arbenz fired the justices, and
after 39 hours of debate, Congress upheld the President. Peasant leaders
claimed victory. ‘“‘One can live without tribunals,”’ Gutiérrez declared, “‘but
one can’t live without land.” The decisive shift of power to Arbenz and
campesino unions aroused the animosity of powerful groups. Left without
recourse, landowners struck directly at peasant organizations, shooting,
hanging, or beating suspected agitators. Leaders of the Catholic Church
criticized the disruption of the social order. The Army felt threatened by
rural unrest and peasant organizers who petitioned for the removal of un-
cooperative local commanders. The opposition remained leaderless and
divided, but escalating conflict over land reform left the populace ex-
hausted and bitter.”

*“Immerman, The CIA in Guatemala, pp. 64-67; Gleijeses, Shattered Hape, pp. 149-164,
Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, pp. 54-56: Handy, “Most Precious Fruit,” pp. 683-686.
*Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, p. 164, NIE 84, “Probable Developments in Guatemala,”
19 May 1953, Foreign Relations of the United Srates, 1952-1954, 4: 1064, 1070.

"Handy, “Most Precious Fruit,” pp. 687-703.

—Seeret—

14

America’s Backyard

The Agency Assessment

Even before implementation of land reform, the CLA saw Guatemala
as a threat sufficient to warrant action. In early 1952, analysts found that
increasing Communist influence made the Arbenz government “a potential
threat to US security.” The failure of sanctions to produce improvement in
the Arbenz government disturbed State Department officials, who began to
contemplate sterner action. Agency officials had stronger views. They saw
a determined Communist effort to neutralize Guatemala and remove it from
the Western camp. They regarded sanctions as insufficient, possibly coun-
terproductive, and saw direct, covert action as the only remedy to
Communist takeover.”

Agency analysts saw no immediate danger of a Communist seizure of
power in 1952, but regarded the PGT as enjoying substantial and increasing
influence. The party had fewer than 200 active members and had failed to
infiltrate the Army, railroad and teachers’ unions, and student organiza-
tions. Analysts saw the party as disciplined and in ‘‘open communication
with international communism.” It would seek to increase its control
through the “coordinated activity of individual Communists,” and by us-
ing the state media to appropriate the slogans and aims of the 1944
Revolution. It had powerful opponents—the Army, United Fruit, large
landholders, the Church—but anti-Communists had failed to coalesce into
a united opposition. Analysts predicted the PGT would be able to keep its
opponents divided and stigmatized, gradually eroding the potential for ef-
fective anti-Communist action.”

Neither the United States nor United Fruit, Agency officials agreed,
could undermine Communist influence with diplomatic and economic pres-
sure. If the company surrendered to Arbenz’s demands, it would hand a
victory to the PGT and the unions, who would then target other US in-
terests. If the company left Guatemala, it would injure the economy, but
not critically. Arbenz would recover and in the process strengthen his ties
to unions and the PGT. Analysts held that the United States was trapped in
a similar dilemma: economic and diplomatic sanctions would hurt the
economy, but not enough to prevent Communists from exploiting the
resulting disruption. State Department observers were less pessimistic, be-
lieving a crisis triggered by United Fruit’s withdrawal or US pressure could
induce Arbenz to align with the right. Pentagon officials sided with the
Agency, and an NIE approved 11 March 1952 predicted a slow, inevitable
deterioration of the situation in Guatemala.™"

“NIE 62. “Present Political Situation in Guatemala and Possible Developments During
1952." Il March 1952. Foreign Relations of the United States. 1942-1954, 4: 1031.

“Ibid., pp. 1033-1035.

“Ibid. pp. 1035-1036.

PETE IE Se ANN

cs
3
:
:
‘
4
i
q
t
‘
:
‘
:

Operation PBSUCCESS

To CIA observers, land reform seemed a powerful weapon for the ex-
pansion of Communist influence. Decree 900 would weaken the power of
conservative landowners while radicalizing the peasant majority and
solidifying its support for Arbenz and the PGT activists who led groups of
campesinos in land seizures. If land reform succeeded, thousands of small
farmers would owe their land and livelihood to the influence of the PGT.
Ironically, the CIA supported the objectives of the Guatemalan reform—the
breakup of large estates into small freeholds—in some of its own pro-
grams. The Agency, worried that feudal agriculture would allow
Communists in the Third World to ride to power on a wave of reform, had
tried for some years to change traditional rural social structures that it con-
sidered vulnerable to subversion. C

‘| had supported a non-Communist farm cooperative movement (
[in 1952, the Directorate of Plans undertook a global program,
L ‘Ito encourage small, independent landowners. In the
“| the program organized 15,000 peasants into 75 study
groups, each of which formed a credit union to help its members buy
land.”' Just as Agency officials saw [ Jas a way to enlarge US
influence, they regarded Decree 9UU as a menacing instrument of
Communist penetration. Control made all the difference.

Agency officials considered Guatemala a potential Soviet beachhead
in the Western Hemisphere. In 1947 and 1948, the Truman administration
developed a subtle understanding of the likely consequences of the
Communist takeover of a government outside of the Eastern Bloc. Officials
recognized that indigenous revolutionary parties received scant support and
often had little contact with Moscow. Even so, they reasoned, Communist
governments would likely take actions—such as closing bases or restricting
trade—that would shift power away from the United States and toward the
Soviet Union. By the onset of the Korean war this analysis lost nuance.
Officials in the State Department, the CIA, and the Pentagon regarded all
Communists as Soviet agents. John Peurifoy, who became Ambassador to
Guatemala in 1953, expressed the consensus when he observed that ““Com-
munism is directed by the Kremlin all over the world, and anyone who
thinks differently doesn’t know what he is talking about.” Agency offi-
cials assumed the existence of links between the PGT and Moscow. They
scrutinized the travel records of Guatemalan officials for signs of enemy
contact and attempted to uncover the workings of an imaginary courier net-
work. These were not manifestations of McCarthyite paranoia but of a fear

"See LL “Vile, Job 79-01025A, Box 81.
“House select Committee on Communist Aggression, Communist Aggression in Latin
America, 83rd Cong., 2d sess., 1954, p. 125.

America's Backyard

shared by liberals and conservatives, academics, journalists, and govern-
ment Officials, that a Soviet conspiracy aimed to strike at America in its
own backyard.”

Agency analysts saw the Guatemalan threat as sufficiently grave by
1952 to warrant covert action. They began to look for State Department
officials who shared their pessimism about overt remedies and to find as-
sets in Central America around which to build a covert program. The
Truman administration, however, remained divided over whether Arbenz
posed a threat dire enough to warrant such strong action. In 1952 and 1953,
indecision led to a fumbling paramilitary program that came close to de-
stroying the anti-Communist movement in Guatemala.

The Agency and the Opposition

As Arbenz completed his land reform plans, the CIA began to ex-
plore the possibility of supporting his opponents. Agency officials believed
that Guatemala was headed for eventual Communist takeover, and that the
opportunity to act was rapidly passing. Without help, the Guatemalan op-
position would remain divided and inert, enabling the PGT to consolidate
its power. Early in 1952, [ ‘| the Director of

Central Intelligence, WalteL.
. J smucn asked the chiet of the

Western Hemisphere Division, J. C. King, to find out whether Guatemalan
dissidents with help from Central American dictators could overthrow the
Arbenz regime. King sent an agent to Guatemala City in March to search
for an organized opposition and find out whether CIA could buy support,
“particularly Army, Guardia Civil, and key government figures.” King

had lived in Latin America in the 1930s [
1

In April 1952, State Department officials welcomed Nicaraguan
President Anastasio Somoza to Washington on his first state visil.
American officials had regarded Somoza as a pariah throughout the 1940s,
but now the dictator received a state dinner and was escorted to meetings

“Ronald Schneider searched PGT records seized by CIA in 1954 and found no evidence of
funds transfers or correspondence with Moscow. Gleijeses, who examined the same records
and interviewed former Agency and Communist officials, concludes that CIA and State
Department fears about Soviet links were grossly exaggerated. The Soviets made one contact
with the Arbenz government, an attempt to buy bananas. ‘The deal fell through when the
Guatemalans could not arrange transport without help from United Fruit Company. Ronald
M. Schneider. Communism in Guatemala, 1944-1954 (New York: Praeger. 1958), p. 41.

Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 187-188.
re Cc. King [ \22 March 1952, Job 79-01025A, Box 7.

—Seeret—
17

SANE SRR

NSN

fyN dees

ae

eee
mene: ears 9 care -
~ 52 ESS PO ae Sia

Siew

6

nema wnpn anes eeeeennse

Operation PBSUCCESS

by Maj. Gen. Harry Vaughan, Truman’s personal military adviser. Somoza
told State Department officials that, if they provided arms, he and Castillo
Armas would take care of Arbenz. At Vaughan’s urging, Truman instructed
DCI Smith to follow up. Smith dispatched C “Ja Spanish-speaking
engineer who joined the Agency in 1951, to make contact with Castillo
Armas and other dissidents in Honduras and Guatemala. L ‘Jarrived in
Guatemala City on 16 June, the day before Arbenz enacted the agrarian re-
form, L. *

“|learned that Castillo Armas’s rebels had financial backing

from. ‘| Somoza, and Dominican dictator Rafael Trujillo and
claimed support from Army units inside Guatemala. At the request of
C “JCastillo Armas produced a battle plan calling for

invasions from Mexico, Honduras, and El! Salvador. The incursions would
be coordinated with internal uprisings led by C

‘71 The plotters
needed money, arms, aircraft, and boats, but L “Jconsidered their plans
serious and likely to proceed whether they received additional help or not.”

Agency officials sought approval from the State Department before
finishing plans to aid the rebels. King located arms and transport, and on
9 July, he gave Dulles a proposal for supplying [L “\ and Castillo
Armas with weapons and $225,000. He recommended that Somoza and
Honduran President Juan Manuel Galvez be encouraged to furnish air sup-
port and other assistance. The proposal emphasized the Agency's minor
role in the plot. The rebellion would proceed in any case, King warned, but
without CIA help it might fail and lead to a crackdown that. would
eliminate anti-Communist resistance in Guatemala. Allen Dulles, the
Deputy Director of Central Intelligence, met the following day with
Thomas Mann of the State Department and the Assistant Secretary of State
for Inter-American Affairs, Edward G. Miller, who told him they wanted a
new government in Guatemala imposed by force if necessary, but avoided
direct answers when Dulles asked if they wanted the CIA to take steps to
bring about that outcome. Dulles accepted the officials’ vagueness as
implying approval, but Smith wanted firmer backing. The DCI contacted

“paul Coe Clark. The United States and Somaza, 1933-1956: A Revisianist Look (Westport:
Praeger, 1992), pp. 187-188; C to Dulles, “Conference with SEEK-
FORD,” 4 August 1952, Job 79-01025A, Box 69. O al

" Yo Dulles, “Guatemalan Situation.” 9 July 1952, Job 79-O1025A, Box
69: J.C. ning. w.cmorandum of Conversation with

"|" 5 May 1952. Job 79-010254, Box 69: C Tio Dulles.
“Conference with C 17 4 August 1952, Job 79-01025A, Box 6¥.[ Lis some-
times referred to in tne documents as “(_ }° Agency sources revealed Castillo Armas
received $136,000 in aid Contact Report 32, | December 1953.

Job 79-0102SA. Box 69.

—Seeret—
18

America’s Backyard if

Under Secretary of State David Bruce and got explicit approval before
signing the order on 9 September 1952 to proceed with operation :
PBFORTUNE.”

King proceeded with plans to supply arms to Castillo Armas. He ac-
quired a shipment of contraband weapons confiscated by port authorities in
New York: 250 rifles, 380 pistols, 64 machineguns, and 4,500 grenades.
Repackaged as farm machinery, they were scheduled to leave New Orleans

in early October. CIA officials encouraged

Somoza and Uatvez w send additional atd, but soon regretted doing so.
Somoza spread word of the Agency's role in the rebellion among govern-
ment officials in Central America, and the State Department learned that
the operation's cover was blown. During a meeting with Miller in Panama,
Somoza’s son, Tacho, casually asked if the “‘machinery” was on its way.
Other diplomats caught wind of the operation, and Secretary Dean Acheson
summoned Smith on 8 October to call it off.”

State Department officials had reason to hesitate. President Truman
had announced in March that he would not seek another term of office,
turning the last 10 months of his presidency into what Acheson called a
“virtual interregnum.”’“° Acheson feared a blown operation would destroy -
the remnants of the Good Neighbor policy carefully constructed by “|
President Franklin D. Roosevelt. The United States had pledged not to in-
tervene in the domestic affairs of any American state and had attempted to
foster Pan-American unity throughout the 1940s. Truman wanted to build
on these policies in order to shield the hemisphere from subversion and to
marshal support for the United States’ global policies in the United
Nations. The 1947 Rio Pact created an Organization of American States i
(OAS) that recognized the obligation of each member to meet an armed at- :
tack on any other. With US support, the United Nations had given the OAS
jurisdiction over disputes within the hemisphere. Latin American leaders
cooperated with these initiatives and followed the United States’ lead in the
UN, but criticized the Truman administration for failing to support eco-
nomic development. They also remained alert for signs of backsliding on
the nonintervention pledge. The appearance that the United States was
supporting the invasion of an OAS member state in retaliation for expropri-
ating American property would set US policy back 20 years. Once
PBFORTUNE was blown, Miller wasted no time in terminating it.”!

anaes

Be |-Chronotogy of Mectings Leading ta Approval of Project A.” 8 October 1952,
Job 79-0102SA, Box 69. [ Jol 1 *Guatemata,” 8 October 1952,
Job 79-01025A, Bax 69: 7 to Dulles, “Guatematan Situation,” 9 July

1952. Job 79-Q1025A, Bax 69.

“Packing list, {undated|. Job 79-Q1025A, Bax 180: [ “Memorandum for the Record,

9 October 1952. Jab 79-01025A. Box oot Memorandum for the Record, 10 October -
1952. Job 79-O1025A. Rox 69.

“Douglas Brinkley, Dean Acheson: The Cald War Years. 1953-71 (New Havea: Yale

University Press, 1992}, p. 6.

“Immerman, CIA in Gucttemala, pp. 1-12: Robert Ferrell, American Diplamacy: A History.

Ord Ed.. (New York: WW. Norctan and Ca., 1978), pp. 766-77!

Operation PBSUCCESS

PBFORTUNE’s demise took the Agency by surprise, and Colonel
King scrambled to salvage part of the operation and allow Castillo Armas
to save face. He arranged for the arms shipment to proceed as far as(_

“\the Canal Zone and to remain there in case the project were re-
vived. Castillo Armas was kept on a retainer of $3,000 a week, allowing
him to hang on to a small force. Through the winter of 1952-53, the opera-
tion led a twilight existence, neither dead nor alive. King remained in con-
tact with Castillo Armas through [ J and
continued to finance the rebels as a precaution in case rebellion broke out
in Guatemala.”

Meanwhile, he began to test how far he could go without State
Department approval. In November, he asked DCI Smith to allow him to
build a pier at the arms storage site in Panama, buy a boat, and fly a por-
tion of the arms to Managua “‘to test our ability to move supplies clandes-
tinely by air.” Smith approved the pier and the boat, but not the flight. On
a slim budget, King tried to develop means to transport arms to sites in
Nicaragua and Honduras, with nearly disastrous results. The aged World
War II transport he acquired left port only twice. On the first trip, Its crew
reconnoitered a supposedly deserted island in Nicaragua for use as a supply
drop, only to discover several hundred inhabitants and a suspicious police-
man. On the second, the boat’s four engines expired in high seas, and the
US Navy had to send a destroyer to the rescue. In the end the boat was left
to rust at its newly built pier.”

Smith and King hoped that the new administration of President
Dwight D. Eisenhower would breathe new life into the project. Early signs
indicated that the new President would be receptive to plans for covert
operations. Eisenhower had promised during the campaign to retake the in-
itiative in the Cold War while reducing Federal spending, goals that made
covert action seem a likely recourse. On 5 March, the Assistant Secretary
of State, John Cabot, asked Wisner about the possibility of stepping up
psychological warfare against Arbenz, but other members of the
Department hesitated.“ Mann predicted that Guatemalan radicalism would
soon be countered by a conservative reaction. If the United States allowed
events to take their course, he said, “the pendulum in Guatemala would
swing back.”’ Paul Nitze, head of the Department’s Policy Planning Staff,
worried that Guatemalan Communism would be difficult to contain and

a “Jto King, “Arrangements to receive certain items in the Canal Zone,”
10 Uctover 1y>2, Job 79-01025A, Box 69. King tof “Central American
Situation,” 10 October 1952, Job 79-01025A, Box 69.

“King to Dulles, 20 October 1952, Job 79-01025A, Box 69. King to Smith, ““PBFORTUNE,”
25 November 1952, Job 79-01025A, Box 69. Sec also J file, Job 79-01025A,
Box 81.

“CO Acting Chief, Western Hemisphere Division, to Wisner, ““Conversa-
tion Kegaraing Guatemala.” 10 March 1953, Job 79-01228A, Box 13.

——Seeret——
20

=,

America’s Backyard

might spill over into neighboring states.“° With no certain mandate, Smith
and King worked to keep the Guatemala operation alive until the new ad-
ministration decided what to do with it.

Despite| ‘Iprediction, Castillo Armas showed little inclination
to launch his revolution without Agency support. King approved of his re-
straint. His greatest fear was that a rebellion would erupt before the
Agency could lend it sufficient help. If the rebels failed, the Agency could
lose its assets in Guatemala. Smith urged State Department officials to
approve a covert aid program before there was no one left to aid. He
stressed the imminence of revolt and the sympathy of Central American
rulers for the rebel cause. He exaggerated only partly. Somoza and Castillo
Armas had no immediate plans, but Guatemala was rife with talk of im-
pending invasion. The meager amounts of aid funneled in by the Agency
persuaded some rebels that they had powerful friends and led them to take
precisely the kind of risk King wanted to avoid.

Failure at Salama

King’s fears were realized on 29 March 1953 when Carlos Simmons
launched a futile attack on the garrison at Salam and provoked a backlash
that cost the Agency and Castillo Armas most of their usable assets in
Guatemala. Two hundred raiders from nearby banana plantations seized the
remote town of Salamé and held it for 17 hours {

“| While the raid’s planners escaped abroad, the rebels went to
jail, and the Guatemalan Government launched a dragnet to round up other
suspected subversives. The failed rebellion C “Jse-
verely impaired Castillo Armas’s potential. The latter’s principal ally inside
Guatemala was Cérdova Cerna, leader of the most prominent anti-
Communist organization, the Comité Civico Nacional. Despite his ties to
United Fruit, Cérdova Cerna’s reputation as a principled opponent of Ubico
(he had resigned the justice ministry in protest) lent respectability to his
resistance against Arbenz. After Salamé, police raids crushed his organiza-
tion and he fled to Honduras, where he began intriguing to gain control of
Castillo Armas’s following. PBFORTUNE suffered a severe blow. The
Agency lost all its assets inside the country and was left to deal with con-
tentious and fragmented exile groups.”

In the wake of Salama, Agency analysts regarded Guatemalan de-
velopments with even deeper pessimism. Opposition within the country,
according to an NIE of 19 May 1953, had been reduced to scattered “urban
elements” who were unlikely to join United Fruit and landholders in a

““Mtemorandum of Conversation, Thomas C. Mann, Paul H. Nitze, 3 March 1953, Job
79-01228A, Box 13.
“Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, p. 103.

—Seeret—
21

ert a OAR

roe

SON ERA

i
t

—Secret—
Operation PBSUCCESS

resistance movement. E] Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua wanted new
leadership in Guatemala, but analysts considered outside intervention
“highly unlikely.” The “only organized element in Guatemala capable of
decisively altering the political Situation,” the Army, showed no inclination
toward revolutionary action. Arbenz still had the power to break free of
Communist influence, but the trend seemed in the opposite direction. “As
long as President Arbenz remains in power the Arbenz-Communist alliance
will probably continue to dominate Guatemalan politics.”’ “Any increase in
political tension in Guatemala,” the Estimate concluded, ‘“‘would tend to
increase Arbenz’s political dependence on this alliance.’’*”

As the State Department’s apprehensions grew during the summer of
1953, it became increasingly receptive to proposals for bold action against
Arbenz. In May, the desk officer for Central America, John M. Leddy,
noted that ‘“‘the trend toward increased Communist strength is uninterrupt-
ed,” and that Salamd had furnished a pretext for a thorough crackdown on
the opposition. Three months later the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs
painted a bleak picture for the National Security Council. The Communists
were using land reform—a program “‘designed to produce social
upheaval”’—to gain control of Guatemalan politics. The situation was
progressively deteriorating. “Communist strength grows, while opposition
forces are disintegrating. ... Ultimate Communist control of the country
and elimination of American economic interests is the logical outcome, and
unless the trend is reversed, is merely a question of time.’

State Department analysts saw few good options. US military inter-
vention or overt economic sanctions would violate treaty commitments and
enrage other American republics. Covert intervention posed the same
danger, if it were discovered. The policy of ‘‘firm persuasion’? had
produced few results so far, and there seemed little chance that continuing
or escalating official pressure would help. “This situation,’’ officials con-
cluded, “‘tests our ability to combat the eruption and spread of Communist
influence in Latin America without causing serious harm to our hemisphere
relations.” In the minds of Eisenhower’s aides, Guatemala put the new ad-
ministration on trial. It represented “‘in miniature all of the social
cleavages, teasions, and dilemmas of modern Western society under attack
by the Communist virus,” explained a member of the NSC staff. ‘““We
should regard Guatemala as a prototype area for testing means and methods
of combating Communism.”*”

“NIE 84, ‘Probable Developments in Guatemala,” 19 May 1953, Foreign Relations of the
United States, 1952-1954, 4: 1061-1070.

“Leddy to Cabot, “Relations with Guatemala,” 21 May 1953, Foreign Relations of the
United States. 1952-1954, 4: 1071-1073: NSC Guatemala, 19 August 1953, /bid., 4:
1074-1086.

“Leddy to Cabot, ‘Relations with Guatemala,” 21 May 1953, Foreign Relations of the
United States, 1952-1954, 4: 1071-1073; NSC Guatemala, 19 August 1953, Ibid., 4:
1074-1086.

—Seeret—.
22

America's Backyard

The administration was ready to meet the challenge. In the summer
of 1953, the new President encouraged his advisers to revise their strate-
gies for fighting the Cold War. In a series of discussions, known as the
Solarium talks, administration officials explored ways to fulfill
Eisenhower's promises to seize the initiative in the global struggle against
Communism while restraining the growth of the Federal budget. The result
was NSC 162/2, a policy known to the public as the “New Look.”’ It
stressed the need for a cheaper, more effective military striking force that
would rely more on mobility, nuclear intimidation, and allied armies. The
new policy placed a greater emphasis on covert action. Eisenhower saw
clandestine operations as an inexpensive alternative to military interven-
tion. He believed that the Cold War was entering a period of protracted,
low-level conflict. Relying too much on the military would exhaust the
economy and leave the United States vulnerable. In his mind, finding crea-
tive responses to Communist penetration of peripheral areas like
Guatemala posed one of the critical tests of his ability as a leader.”

The new administration’s Cabinet stood ready to put the *“‘New
Look”’ into effect. Eisenhower had elevated Allen Dulles to the director-
ship, placing the Agency under the charge of its chief covert operator. The
new DCI's brother, John Foster Dulles, had become Secretary of State, a
development that promised unprecedentedly smooth cooperation with the
State Department, as did the appointment of Bedell Smith as Under
Secretary of State. Under the new administration, key departments and
agencies were headed by officials predisposed to seek active, covert reme-
dies to the Guatemala problem.

By mid-1953, the administration stood poised to take action against
Arbenz. Faltering policies late in the Truman administration—aggravated
by the State Department’s indecision and the Agency’s poor security—ac-
celerated the deterioration of the situation in Guatemala and left the United
States with fewer options. Guatemala no longer had an organized opposi-
tion that could moderate Arbenz’s behavior or offer the United States the
possibility of peaceful change. American commercial interests, particularly
United Fruit, intensified conflict between the United States and the Arbenz
regime and precipitated the disaster at Salama, but played only a contribut-
ing role in shaping policy. Truman and Eisenhower saw Guatemala as suc-
cumbing to Communist pressures emanating ultimately from Moscow. The
threat to American business was a minor part of a larger danger to the
United States’ overall security. The failure of PBFORTUNE, in fact, led
CIA officials to reconsider (

‘J in later ventures against Arbenz.

sy

Leddy to Cabot, ‘‘Relations with Guatemala,” 21 May 1953, Foreign Relations af the
United States, 1952-1954, 4: 1071-1073: NSC Guatemala, 19 August 1953, fbtd., 4:
1074-1086.

23

Sic bipthetsy aan
ree

at rey

= snaamrergersee-
PONT TEG

nh

ae

:
;
;
‘

Operation PBSUCCESS

Wide Warld (AP) ©
Eisenhower's Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles (left), shared his
brother's enthusiasm for covert action. Here the two brothers exchange ideas

at Washington's National Airport.

24

Chapter 2

Reversing the Trend

A policy of non-action would be suicidal, since the Communist movement,
under Moscow tutelage, will not falter nor abandon its goals.
National Security Council, 19 August 1953

Reviewing the situation in Guatemala on 12 August 1953, the staff of
the National Security Council determined that the Arbenz government
posed a threat to the national security sufficient to warrant covert action
against it. Eisenhower's “New Look” policy and the success of TPAJAX,
an operation that overthrew Prime Minister Mohammed Mossadeq of Iran,
elevated the Agency’s reputation to unprecedented heights, and the new ad-
ministration gave CIA primary responsibility for the action while allowing
it to call on other departments for support as needed. The Operations
Coordinating Board cautioned against relying on ‘J noting that

‘| was ‘‘to be used only to the extent deemed desirable by CIA,
and is to be kept informed on a strict need-to-know basis.” The plans
CIA developed in the following weeks reflected the Agency’s confidence
in the tactics it had developed in the first six years of its existence. Despite
the lack of hard information on Guatemalan politics and society, planners
were sure Guatemalans would respond to stratagems proven in Europe, the
Middle East, and Asia. What made the new operation truly appealing was
that covert action tactics would be applied on a grander scale, over a longer
period, and for higher stakes than ever before.

J. C. King’s Western Hemisphere Division staff began developing
plans immediately after the NSC decision. The operation's optimistic
title--PBSUCCESS—reflected the high hopes of its planners.L

‘]Hans Tofte, and. ‘\ drafted an
outline of the Guatemala operation during the dramatic denouement of
TPAJAX. The covert operation shattered Mossadeq’s Tudeh Party and gave
the pro-American Shah unchallenged authority. The Iranian operation’s
chief officer found Secretary of State John Foster Dulles “almost alarm-
ingly enthusiastic’’ about the outcome.” The Eisenhower administration

“Draft NSC Policy Paper, 19 August 1953, Foreign Relations of the Unied States, 1952-
1954, 4: 1083.

“ormit Roosevelt, Countercoup: £ne struggle Jor Cantrat oy tran (New York: McGraw Hill,
1979). p. 209.

—Seeret—
25

fanan: 0-77

we betwen Lets dabiwecn caeroedens

Operation PBSUCCESS

saw this success as proof that covert action could be a potent, flexible
weapon in the Cold War. King’s aides were anxious to prove it again in
Guatemala. They brought considerable experience to the task. had
been an intelligence officer in[ |during the war and had joined the
Agency as soon as it was established in 1947. He served as[ .

J fofte had fled his native Denmark in 1941 and joined
theL serving in Burma and China before quitting to
join the OSS. Impressed by his credentials, William Donovan placed him
in charge of an operation to resupply Yugoslav partisans from a secret base
in[ "|. He eventually came to command a force of over 600 guerril-
las.” After the war he joined CIA and earned a reputation ‘a ‘Jfor
mounting behind-the-lines operations. In 1953 he was a member of the
Psychological and Paramilitary Operations Staff in the Directorate of Plans
(DDP). [ “‘} who served with Army intelligence in Chile during the
war and afterward as a US military adviser in Latin America, was chief of
the DDP’s Central America branch.”

The Plan

The planners decided to employ simultaneously all of the tactics that
had proved useful in previous covert operations. PBSUCCESS would com-
bine psychological, economic, diplomatic, and paramilitary actions.
Operations in Europe, [ ‘J and Iran had demonstrated the
potency of propaganda—“‘psychological warfare —aimed at discrediting
an enemy and building support for allies. Like many Americans, US offi-
cials placed tremendous faith in the new science of advertising. Touted as
the answer to underconsumption, economic recession, and social ills, ad-
vertising, many thought, could be used to cure Communism as well. In
1951, the Truman administration tripled the budget for propaganda and ap-
pointed a Psychological Strategy Board to coordinate activities.’ The CIA
required ‘‘psywar” training for new agents, who studied Paul Linebarger’s
text, Psychological Warfare, and grifter novels like The Big Con for disin-
formation tactics.” PBSUCCESS'’s designers planned to supplement overt

C .

“William J. buauvan to Adjutant General, “Recommendation for Award of Legion of Merit
to Major Hans V. Tofte,”” 19 September 1945, Job 57-102, Box 162.

“Thomas Powers, The Man Who Kept the Secrets: Richard Helms and the CIA (New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 1979). p. 323: 0 7] . Job 78-06607R, Box 2.
Folder 7.

"1 udwell Montague, General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of Central Intelligence
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1992), pp. 203-215.

™Daul Linebarger, Psychological Warfare (Washington: Infantry Journal Press, 1948). For de-
tails of Agency instruction in psywar, see Joseph Burkholder Smith, Portrait af a Cold
Warrior (New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1976). pp. 85-95.

—Seeret—

Reversing the Trend

diplomatic initiatives—such as an OAS conference convened to discredit
Guatemala—with “black operations using contacts within the press, radio,
church, army, and other organized elements susceptible to rumor, pamph-
leteering, poster campaigns, and other subversive action.” They were par-
ticularly impressed with the potential for radio propaganda, which had
turned the tide at a critical moment in the Iran operation.”

The planners’ faith in radio as a propaganda weapon derived from
their experience in other areas of the world, and it ignored local conditions
that limited the strategy’s usefulness in Guatemala. Only one Guatemalan
in 50 owned a radio, and the vast majority of the nation’s 71,000 sets were
concentrated in the vicinity of the capital, in the homes and offices of the
wealthy and professional classes. Agency analysts noted that “radio does
not constitute an effective means of approach to the masses of agricultural
workers and apparently reaches only a small number of urban workers.”
Communist organizations eschewed radio and exercised influence through
personal contact and persuasion. Radio, nonetheless, became a central fea-
ture of the operational plan. Although Guatemalans were ‘‘not habituated”
to radio, an analyst observed, they “probably consider it an authoritative
source, and they may give wide word-of-mouth circulation to interesting
rumors” contained in broadcasts.

[ ‘| Tofte, and [_ ‘]considered Guatemala’s economy vul-
nerable to economic pressure, and they planned to target oil supplies, ship-
ping, and coffee exports. An ‘‘already cleared group of top-ranking
American businessmen in New York City” would be assigned to put covert
economic pressure on Guatemala by creating shortages of vital imports and
cutting export earnings. The program would be supplemented by overt
multilateral action, possibly by the OAS, against Guatemalan coffee ex-
ports. The planners believed economic pressures could be used surgically
to ‘damage the Arbenz government and its supporters without seriously af-
fecting anti-Communist elements.”

Planners had only sketchy ideas about the potential of two crucial
parts of the program: political and paramilitary action. King’s aides be-
lieved that to succeed the opposition would need to win over Army leaders
and key government officials. They considered the Army “‘the only or-
ganized element in Guatemala capable of rapidly and decisively altering
the political situation.” In Iran, cooperative army officers had tilted the po-
litical balance in favor of the Shah. Planners felt PBSUCCESS needed

<0

“King to Dulles. “Guatemala—-General Plan of Action.” 1] September 1953. Job
83-00739R,. Box 5.
“Roosevelt, Cauntercoun, p. 19E.

[

“King to Dulles. “Guatemala—General Plan of Action.” 11 September 1953, Job
83-00739R. Box 5.

—Seeret—
27

ere oe oad
7 et aneee

2t

Operation PBSUCCESS

similar support, but they had few ideas on how to foment opposition.
Arbenz, a former officer, remained popular among military leaders. Castillo.
Armas had little appeal among his former colleagues, and his guerrillas
were no match for the 5,000-man Army. Rebel forces suffered from deser-
tion and low morale, and agents in Honduras reported that without help,
the organized opposition would disintegrate by the end of 1953.”
PBSUCCESS planners were disturbed by the shortage of assets
around which to build a covert program. The Catholic Church opposed
land reform and Arbenz, but was handicapped by its meager resources and
the shortage of native priests. Foreigners were subject to deportation, and
most priests avoided challenging authority. Resistance among landowners
was declining ‘‘due to general discouragement” after the failure of the
Salama raid. The planners noted widespread discontent in both the capital
and the countryside, but saw little prospect of stimulating disgruntled ele-
ments to take political action. The estimated 100,000 passive opponents in-
cluded property owners, laborers, and campesinos who shared few common
goals. Castillo Armas’s organization, ‘“‘a group of revolutionary activists,
numbering a few hundred, led by an exiled Guatemalan army officer, and
located in Honduras,” remained the Agency’s principal operational asset.
In addition, some fifty Guatemalan students belonging to the Comité
Estudiantes Universitarios Anti-Comunistas (CEUA) had { ;

‘| The group pub-
lished a newspaper, El Rebelde. Members who fled the country after
Salama formed an exile group and published a weekly paper, El Combate,
which was smuggled over the border. These assets, the planners reported,
did ‘not even remotely match the 1,500-3,000 trained Communists.”

While TPAJAX achieved victory in less than six weeks, PBSUC-
CESS planners warned that Guatemala would require more effort and pa-
tience. The Agency would have to develop from scratch assets of the sort
that it had used in Iran, a process that might take a year or more.|. \
foresaw a preparation period followed by a buildup of diplomatic ana eco-
nomic pressure on the Arbenz regime. When pressure reached its maximum
point, political agitation, sabotage, and rumor campaigns would undermine
the government and encourage active opposition. During this crisis,
Castillo Armas would establish a revolutionary government and invade
Guatemala. The plan was silent about what would happen next.

Trusting the Agency's proven tactics to generate results, planners saw
no problem in their inability to predict how the operation would play out.
Reviewing their work, Depuly Director for Plans Frank Wisner remarked
“Ibid.

6

] “Report on Stage One PBSUCCESS, Annex B, Friendly Assets and
Potential,” [> December 1953, Job 79-01025A, Box I.

“King to Dulles, “‘Guatemala—General Plan of Action,” 1! September 1953, Job
83-00739R, Box 5 (also in Job 81-00206R. Box 1).

“Ibid.

——Seeret—
28

Reversing the Trend

that “the plan is stated in such broad terms that it is not possible to know
exactly what it contemplates, particularly in the latter phases.’ He added
that he did “‘not regard this as a particular drawback” since adjustments
could be made as the operation unfolded. King expected a long assessment
phase during which specific goals and plans would be set, with periodic
reassessments throughout the life of the operation.”

King and Tracy Barnes, Chief of the DDP’s Political and
Psychological Staff, presented the plan on 9 September to Raymond Leddy,
head of the State Department's Office of Middle American Affairs, and
James Lampton Berry, the Department’s liaison to the Agency. Department
officials had given up on the policy of gradually escalating pressure. Leddy
admitted that “‘prospects do not appear very bright” adding that ‘‘some or-
ganizational work and some fundamental changes in the situation will have
to occur” before a revolt could succeed. He and Berry reviewed King’s
plan in detail and agreed to go ahead.™

PBSUCCESS relied on the State and Defense Departments to isolate
Guatemala diplomatically, militarily, and economically. In King’s plan, the
State Department would mount a diplomatic offensive in the OAS to
declare Guatemala a pariah state and cripple its economy. State and
Defense would work together to enforce an arms embargo and build up the
military potential of neighboring states. The US Navy and Air Force would
provide essential logistical support, maintenance, expertise, and training for
paramilitary forces. Overt initiatives would create an atmosphere of fearful
expectancy, which would enhance the effectiveness of covert action.
PBSUCCESS would be a governmentwide operation led by CIA.”

On 9 December 1953, Allen Dulles authorized $3 million for the
project and placed Wisner in charge. Wisner’s Directorate of Plans as-
sumed exclusive control of PBSUCCESS, neither seeking nor receiving aid
from other directorates. Robert Amory, Deputy Director for Intelligence
(DDI) was never briefed, and Guatemala Station excluded references to
PBSUCCESS in its reports to the DDI. The DDP carefully segregated the
operation from its other activities, giving it a separate chain of command,
communications facilities, logistics, and funds. Wisner ran the operation in
Washington, with Tracy Barnes serving as a liaison tof. Vheadquart-
ers in Florida. King, who had nurtured the operation from its beginning,
was pushed aside to give Wisner a free hand. “‘King was very upset,”
Richard Bissell, the Assistant DDP, recalled later. “PBSUCCESS became
Wisner’s project.”””

“Wisner to Dulles, “Program for PBSUCCESS,”” 16 November 1953, Job 83-00739R, Box 5.
““King to Dulles, ‘‘Guatemala—General Plan of Action,” I1 September 1953, Job
83-00739R, Box 5; William L. Krieg to Raymond G. Leddy. 10 November 1953, Department
of State Decimal Files [hereafter DSDF), 714. O0/11-1053, RG 59. US National Archives.
“King to Dulles, ‘‘Guatemala—General Plan of Action.” I] September 1953, Job
83-00739R, Box 5S.

“Gleijeses. Shattered Hope, pp. 243-244.

—Secret—
29

—Seeret—

Operation PBSUCCESS

The State Department fulfilled its assigned duties, increasing aid to
industrial and road building projects in Honduras, E! Salvador, and.
Nicaragua, and assembling a special team of diplomats to assist PBSUC-
CESS from Central American embassies.”’ The group’s leader, John
Peurifoy, took over as Ambassador in Guatemala City in October 1953. He
was in a familiar réle. As Ambassador to Greece during its civil war, he
coordinated State L ‘Jactivities on behalf of the royalists. An admirer
of Joseph McCarthy, he shared the Senator’s taste in politics. Whiting
Willauer and Thomas Whelan arrived at their ambassadorial posts in
Honduras and Nicaragua in early 1954. Willauer also had a long associa-
tion with CIA. As one of the founders of Civil Air Transport, he had ar-
ranged the airline’s secret sale to the Agency in 1950.” Whelan had
developed strong ties to Somoza and was considered part of the team even
without an intelligence background. The ambassadors reported to the CIA
through former DCI Walter Bedell Smith, whom Eisenhower had appointed
Under Secretary of State.”

Meanwhile, {_ “Jestablished PBSUCCESS headquarters in a

Jd The fe 1 offered facilities for offices, storage, and
aircraft maintenance, and two days before Christmas, the operation moved
‘a ]. Florida, under the
cover name [ ‘] If asked, officers were to explain

that they were part of a unit that did [

Code named LINCOLN, the headquarters soon became the center or fever-
ish activity as over a hundred case officers and support personnel began the
operation’s assessment phase.[ ‘Junder his new title, Special Deputy
for PBSUCCESS, issued orders from a desk facing a 40-foot wall chart
detailing the operation’s phases and categories of action: political,
paramilitary, psychological, logistics.”

Gruff and sL pres | enjoyed the loyalty of his
officers, who regarded him with a mixture of respect{ * * While most
of the LINCOLN staff moved into new suburban tract houses inf

and enjoyed the recreational advantages of one of America’s post-
war boomtowns, [ ‘}spent Jong hours in ( “} and retired late in
the evening to his room at the[ J. He planned the
operation, guided it through its early stages, and managed its crises. While
Wisner was officially in charge, his decisions consisted of selecting amon
alternatives developed by CL “\More than any other official, C ‘
placed his personal stamp on PBSUCCESS.

“Raymond G. Leddy to Ambassador Michael McDermott, 30 December 1953, Records of the
Office of Middle American Affairs, Lot 57D95, RG 59, Box 5, US National Archives.
=William M. Leary, Perilous Missions: Civi Air Transport and CIA Covert Operations in
Asia (University, AL: University of Alabama Press, 1984), pp. 110-112.

"or a discussion of the ambassadorial team, see Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 289-292; and
Immerman, C/A in Guatemala, pp. 140-141.

“Schlesinger and Kinzer, Biter Fruit, p. 113.

——Seerct—
30

——-

wecr-

Reversing the Trend

The Assessment

A shortage of reliable information, rivalries among Guatemalan op-
positionists, and failures of security hampered [ ‘linitial efforts. Case
officers participating in the assessment phase bemoaned the lack of intelli-
gence on Guatemalan Government and society. ) Jwas shocked to learn
that Guatemala Station had “‘no penetrations of the PGT, government agen-
cies, armed forces, or labor unions.” Kermit Roosevelt, who directed
TPAJAX had warned that if the Agency was “ever going to try something
like this again, we must be absolutely sure that people and army want what
we want.””® In Guatemala there was no way to tell. Without sources inside
the PGT.L “Icould only speculate on its tactics and vulnerabilities, and
PBSUCCESS planners increasingly fell back on analogies to other
Communist parties and revolutions, particularly the Russian revolution, in
analyzing enemy behavior.” But in its opening phases, the operation
suffered more from the lack of information on its potential allies: the
Anny, regional leaders, and rebel factions.

Considering the Army critical to PBSUCCESS,{ = needed to
know the chances of a complete or partial defection by the officer corps,
but he lacked sources. The US military advisory group in Guatemala,
which had daily contact with officers, could come up with no information
on the personalities and politics of its advisees.” The military appeared un-
shakably loyal to Arbenz, who rarely trespassed on its prestige or preroga-
tives. The elite Guardia Civil, passionately devoted to the President,
included 2,500 of the country’s best-trained and -equipped soldiers.”
L ‘Jarged his officers to learn more, and in December, George Tranger,
L ~ “Jfound a retired major,

"J wno claimed to know of a disgruntled faction in the officer corps.”
By January, hopes settled on Col. Elfego Monzén, who purportedly talked
of staging a mutiny and boasted of a wide following.” But since the
Station had no source close to Monzén,L could not determine how to
proceed.

4 |Report on Stage One PBSUCCESS,” 15 December 1953. Job 79-01025A, Box 1.
*Koosevelt, Countercaup, p. 210.

™ Attempts to penetrate the PGT were unsuccesful until very late in the operation and then ata
very low level. [ I“Penetration of the PGT,” HUL-A-844, 19 May 1954,
Job 79-01025A, Box 1us. “Att Communist Parties, acting under the direction of the Soviet
Union, follow the same general pattern in seeking to capture free social institutions and
democratic governments,” [ Jobserved. “Some operate openly and others clandestinely,
but all are integral parts of the world wide Communist effon."{ Jto King, “Communist
Activities in Central America,” HUL-A-544, 21 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 102.

™ "Jto Frank Wisner, “Performance of the US Army Mission and Military
Attache in Guatemala,” 9 September 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 23. Wisner thought the
Army might have refused to cooperate on principle or out of reluctance to violate the military
assistance agreement, bul explained that the advisers wanted to help but didn't
know anything because they didn’t socialize with Guatemalan officers.

asf {Report on Stage One PBSUCCESS,” 15 December 1953, Job 79-01025A, Box 1.
"“Tranger to King, “Psychological Barometer Report,” 23 December 1953, Job 79-01025A,
Box 98.

"andrew. B. Wardlaw (First Secretary of the Embassy) to Mr. William L. Krieg (Embassy
Counselor), 26 January 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 98. Folder 8.

—Secret——
31

oad
abe

oe ere ee ees

Operation PBSUCCESS

‘Jalso needed to know how to gain the support of Central
American leaders, and his staff struggled to decipher the byzantine politics
of the region. The largest and best armed of the Central American states,
Guatemala had traditionally sought to reestablish a united Central
American federation under Guatemalan leadership. Neighboring states
feared these ambitions, but disagreed over whether Guatemala posed a
greater threat with a dictatorial or an antidictatorial regime in power.
Somoza resented Guatemala’s antidictatorial stance and eagerly supported
Castillo Armas, whom he considered pliable. [7 ~ SS
|

Somoza’s support became essential to PBSUCCESS, and in early January
1954, the United States granted him a long-sought security treaty, entitling
Nicaragua to substantial military aid. Honduras and El Salvador enjoyed
close ties to the United States but, unlike Nicaragua, they shared a border
with Guatemala. President Oscar Osorio of El Salvador and Juan Manuel
Galvez of Honduras had more ambivalent feelings about inciting a rebel-
lion in a neighboring state. Both felt threatened by Arbenz’s land reform
decree—which might spread rural and labor unrest throughout the region—
and had good reasons to support Castillo Armas. Both, however, also wor-
ried about the risks of supporting the rebellion. Guatemalan forces might
invade Honduras or El Salvador in pursuit of a defeated Castillo Armas. In
victory, the rebels might be equally dangerous, particularly if allied to
Somoza. Rumors circulated that Castillo Armas had agreed to turn his re-
bellion into a war of conquest after the fall of Guatemala City. [ ]
emissaries found Galvez and Osorio demanded a high price for cooperating
with PBSUCCESS. They wanted'US security guarantees, military aid, and
promises to restrain Somoza.”

Since 1944, Mexico had taken a paternal interest in Guatemalan
democracy, and PBSUCCESS planners feared that the government of
Adolfo Ruiz Cortines, if sufficiently aroused, would come to the aid of its
neighbor. In May of 1953, Rufz Cortines awarded Arbenz the highest honor
given to a foreign dignitary, the Great Necklace of the Aztec Eagle. Mexico
responded to US pressure to cut arms supplies to the Arbenz government,
but US diplomats estimated that the Mexicans would react strongly against
further efforts to coerce or intimidate Guatemala. This Mexican attitude
limited measures that could be taken overtly by the United States and in-
tensified the need to maintain cover and deniability.””

“Gleijeses, Shattered Hope. pp. 223-225; [ Jeo PBSUCCESS Headquarters, “Position
of Anastasio Somoza,” HUL-A-646, 5 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103, LINCOLN to
DCI, 23 March 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 2; LINCOLN to DCI, LINC 3169, 26 May 1954,
Job 79-01025A, Box 5; LINCOLN to Director, LINC 4078, 19 June 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 6.

“John Stephen Zunes, “Decisions on Intervention: United States Response to Third World
Nationalist Governments, 1950-1957" (Ph.D. dissertation, Cornell University, 1990), pp.
66-67.

Reversing the Trend

YL ‘\case officers also had to learn the politics of the anli-
Communist opposition. News of the Agency's interest spread quickly
among Guatemalan oppositionists, and LINCOLN was soon inundated with
appeals for support. Cérdova Cerna, Castillo Armas, and Miguel Ydigoras
Fuentes, Arbenz’s opponent in the 1950 election, vied with one another for
Icadership of the Agency-sponsored rebellion. [ ‘Jsought to consolidate
all rebel movements into a united opposition, but nad difficulty reconciling
the pretensions of the three contenders. Despite flaws, Castillo Armas
seemed the best suited to lead the rebellion. The leader of the largest rebel
group—the only one with substantial paramilitary and intelligence
assets—he had an “‘above average” military record and enjoyed the sup-
port of Somoza and Galvez.“ Agency officials regretted his lack of combat
experience but observed a “readiness to take the fullest advantage of future
CIA aid and assistance.” With the help of [ "|who had been his
liaison since PBFORTUNE, Castillo Armas moved his rebels to two bases
in Nicaragua— [

—and dratted plans tor an invasion. —

Castillo Armas’s failure to articulate a political philosophy occasion-
ally worried [ “Jand he instructed his agents to find out “just what
ideas” the rebel leader had ‘‘along the lines of a political-economic con-
cept.” All they had to go on was the “Plan de Tegucigalpa.”’ This
manifesto, issued by Castillo Armas on 23 December 1953, was a vague
summons to arms that denounced the “Sovietization of Guatemala” and
pledged the rebels to form a government that would respect human rights,
protect property and foreign capital, accept the recommendations of United
Nations economic experts, and explore for oil.** When pressed, Castillo
Armas confessed an attraction to “‘justicialismo,” a political program advo-
cated by Juan Perén of Argentina, but he seldom spoke of how he would
govern in practice.” He believed Guatemala’s main problems would be

financial, but he was reluctant to speculate further until he knew in what ~

fiscal condition he would find the treasury. Case officers remained con-
fused but drew reassurance from his unassuming receptiveness to advice.
One interviewer was ‘‘amazed at his common sense, middle of the road
views: this is no Latin American Dictator with a whip.”

“JC, King to Allen Dulles. “Guatemala - General Plan of Action.” 11 September 1953, Job
79-01025A, Box 1:( }“Guatemalan Situation.” 17 March 1952, Job
ROROI731R. Box 17, Folder 688. Castillo Armas also reccived material support from
President Tiburcio Carias Andino of Honduras.

“Allen Dulles tof land Tofte, “Program PBSUCCESS General Plan of Action.”
9 December 1953. Job 83-00739R. Bax 5.

[ J

“C ] HUL-A-662. 5 May 1954, Job 79-01025A. Box 103.

“LT “] “EI Plan de Tegucigalpa.” HUL-A-470, 14 April 1954.
Job 19-ULUZDA, BOX LUZ. :

“For Perén’s philosophy. see F. J. McLynn, “Perdn’s Ideology and its Relation to Political
Thought and Action,” Review af International Sudies 9 (1983) 1. 1-15.

“] HUL-A-662, 5 May 1954. Job 79-01025A. Box 103:
“pisherman” to Chiet of Station Guatemala, HGG-A-732, 28 January 1954, Job 79-01025A,

Box 99.

——Seeret—
33

Operation PBSUCCESS

Carlos Castillo Armas

cr

Reversing the Trend

Physically unimposing and with marked mestizo features, Castillo
Armas had none of the aspect of a caudillo, but Agency officials regarded
this as an advantage, especially in comparison with the leonine demeanor
of Castillo Armas’s rival, Miguel Ydfgoras Fuentes. As a general in
Ubico’s army, Ydigoras gained a reputation as a ruthless enforcer of the
vagrancy laws, on at least one occasion ordering his troops to rape Indian
women and imprison their children.”’ With his aristocrat’s mien and
contempt for the Indian majority, most PBSUCCESS officers saw Ydigoras
as a public relations liability, ‘‘ambitious, opportunistic, and un-

scrupulous.”” ( © Adis
agreed, passing on to Headquarters Ydigorista rumors charging Castillo
Armas with being an agent of Arbenz.” L. JsummonedL alto

LINCOLN for reeducation and assigned a new liaison to the Ydigoras
group. After February 1954, Ydigoras was excluded from PBSUCCESS
plans but remained an operational and security hazard requiring continual
observation.

PBSUCCESS[ Jofficers had good relations with[.

“]and pushed him to assume greater prominence in the rebel leader-
ship. A former. and [ 7], he was
one of the few centrist politicians of stature who had taken a principled
stand against the growth of Communist influence in Guatemala.
PBSUCCESS officers believed his reputation could compensate for
Castillo Armas’s inexperience, although age, ill-health, and old ties to
United Fruit disqualified him for supreme command. Without followers
of his own, [ -_

. ‘| In early February,
‘a | brought Castillo Armas to LINCOLN to sign an accord with
C “Jcreating a provisional revolutionary committee known as
“the junta,”’ and formalizing the rebels’ relationship to the Agency. CIA
would funnel aid to the junta through a fictional organization of American
businessmen called “the group.”
As the Agency organized and assessed its assets in Central America,
the State Department's diplomatic offensive began to take effect. By
the end of January 1954,[ | Jhad established a training base L

“Immerman, The CIA in Guatemala, p. 6).

“Miguel Ydigaras Fuentes,” (undated}, Ydigoras file, Job 79-01025A, Box 81.

“oC _} to Chief, LINCOLN, “Debriefings of
C J March 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box
E I

Cc J

"Ls Teo Chiet of Station Guaemaia, 7] tuc-a-1230, 9 July 1954, Job
79-U1U2SA, Box 104.

——Seeret—
35

i:
:
tT

.

Operation PBSUCCESS

‘lin the Canal Zone,
recruited pilots for black flights,
and made preliminary arrange-
ments to set up a Clandestine radio
station in|. 1% John
Foster Dulles, meanwhile, ar-
ranged for Venezuela to host a
special session of the OAS in
March to discuss the Guatemalan
situation.” He failed, however, to
orchestrate an embargo on Guat-
emalan coffee. Company executives
told State Department officials
that the sale of Guatemalan beans
in highly competitive global mar-
kets could not be limited without
drastic action that would inflate
coffee prices for American con- ;
sumers.”* Dulles had more luck Wide World (AP) ©
controlling the trade in arms and Miguel Ydlgoras-Fucntes
ammunition, in which the United
States enjoyed a dominant position. The US had restricted its own sales of
arms to Guatemala in 1951, and in 1953 the State Department intervened
aggressively to thwart all arms transfers, foiling deals with Canada,
Germany, and Rhodesia.” By December, the Arbenz government could not
purchase guns or ammunition of any kind, and the Army grew increasingly
alarmed about the quantities of military hardware arriving in Nicaragua and
Honduras.” ;

Arbenz became acutely aware of the threat posed by the arms em-
bargo in late 1953 and prepared to take bold, desperate action to lift it.
Conflict touched off by the land reform decree drained the Amny’s small
arsenal and jeopardized the military's ability to fulfill its traditional role as
preserver of order in the countryside.'” As the officer corps grew resentful

ay “|. Job 79-01025A, Box 69;
“Meeting wit KUFUS and RAMON,” 29 January 1954, January chrono file, Job
79-01025A, Box 69. ;

”Peurifoy to Department of State, 23 December 1953, Foreign Relations of the United States,
1952-1954, 4: 1093.

"Edward G. Cale, “Memorandum of Conversation: Guatemalan Coffee,” 25 November
1953, Foreign Relations of the United Stutes, 1952-1954, 4: 1088-1090.

*charon I. Meers, ““The British Connection: How the United States Covered its Tracks in the
1954 Coup in Guatemala,” Diplomatic History 16 (Summer 1992) 3: 414.

ot : j (Guatemala Station) to WH Chief, “Guatemalan Procurement of Arms in
Mexico,” zt December 1953, Job 79-01025A, Box 98.

Chief of Station Guatemala to Chief, WH, HGG-A-643, 13 January 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 98. This was, of course, the embargo’s intended effect. Internal conflict intensified the
sense of crisis and isolation the embargo was meant to convey, and “]gleefully
reported the Army's growing desperation.

—_Seeret—
26

Reversing the Trend

Arbenz was in deep water in late 1953. Learning of the PBSUCCESS plot
against him, he decided to purchase arms from Czechoslovakia.

and apprehensive, Arbenz learned of a second, more dire threat. In
September 1953, a Panamanian commercial attaché in Managua, Jorge
Isaac Delgado, approached an aide to Arbenz and offered to supply infor-
mation on a rebel movement led by Castillo Armas and secretly supported
by the United States. Delgado carried messages between Mexico City and
training bases in Nicaragua and enjoyed the trust of CIA field agents. He
owned an apartment in Managua rented tol. "| Few people knew
more about the inside workings of PBSUCCESS. For the next four months
he worked as a double agent, ferrying messages for “Jand passing
their contents on to Arbenz.'"”

At a fashionable Guatemala City restaurant on 19 January 1954, the
lunchtime crowd enjoyed the spectacle of a heated argument between
Arbenz and his agricultural minister, Alfonso Martinez. The only non-
Communist prominent in the land reform movement, Martinez was a close
friend of the President. The scene touched off rumors that the two men had
quarreled over land reform and the growing influence of the PGT. The next

'?Delgado worked for Somoza as well. Gleijeses, Shatrered Hope, p. 258: Director to LIN-
COLN, DIR 39727, 24 February 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 7: CL *) “Second
Interim Report on Stage Two. PBSUCCESS,” 15 March 1954, Job ry-U1uZoA, Box }.

—Seeret——
37

Operation PBSUCCESS

day, Martinez fled Guatemala, purportedly for Switzerland. The CIA
Station chalked up the incident as a demonstration of growing dissension
within the government, but Headquarters suspected there was more to the
story. Agents in Europe tracked Martinez from Amsterdam to Berne—
where he opened large bank accounts for Arbenz—then to Prague. It soon
became clear that the purported flight was actually a secret mission to buy
Czech arms. Unknown to CIA, PGT chairman Manuel Fortuny had met in
Prague in November with Antonin Novotony, first secretary of the Czech
Communist Party, to negotiate the purchase of 2,000 tons of captured Nazi
weapons. Novotony had delayed, keeping him in Prague through most of
December. “‘I decided,’’ Fortuny remembered later, “‘that the Czechs must
be consulting the Soviets.” Finally, he was allowed to return to Guatemala
with a favorable response. Now Martinez had arrived to complete the
deal.'” .

Over the next few weeks, ‘J staff learned of Delgado’s betrayal
and witnessed its results. Shortly after Martinez ‘‘fled,” the largest police
dragnet since Salama rounded up scores of oppositionists, including
[ ; ‘J virtually the Station’s only source close to the military. The
Foreign Ministry expelled Sydney Gruson, a correspondent for the New
York Times; Marshal] Bannell, a CBS correspondent; and an American
priest." On Thursday, 29 January, [ ‘learned that({. had been
hospitalized for a stomach ulcer and that secret cables kept in his room
contrary to security procedures had fallen into the hands of Delgado. Over
a frantic weekend,{. “I discovered that the compromise had been exten-
Sive, giving Arbenz “intimate knowledge” of rebel training bases, “‘intelli-
gence operations and a fairly accurate concept of the modus operandi of
PBSUCCESS.”' On Monday morning, ‘| Wisner, and King met to
discuss the damage and decide whether to go on with the operation or abort
it. Despite L Js conclusion that the security breach “‘unquestionably has
provided the enemy with adequate information to deduce the official sup-
port of the US Government in Castillo Armas’s operations plus considera-
ble details concerned therewith,’’ the officers decided to continue
anyway.” PBSUCCESS had crossed the Rubicon. To Wisner and( 1
the United States was too firmly committed to turn back.

‘Gleijeses, Shattered Hope. pp. 280-283; Walter Bedell Smith to American Embassy, Berne,

“‘Maj. Daniel Alfonso Martinez Estévez,"" 11 February 1954, Martinez file, Job 79-O1025A,
Box 81; Tranger toL JPsychological Barometer Report,’ 26 January 1954, Job
79-01025A, Box 98; Lirector to(~ “] DIR 38198, 12 February 1954, Job

79-01025A, Box 7.

'‘“Tranger to LINCOLN, ‘‘Psychological Barometer Report,” 10 February 1954, Job
79-01025A, Box 99:0 ‘Reporting on Guatemala by New York Times
Correspondent Sydney Gruson,” 2/ May 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

re ‘Second Interim Report on Stage Two, PBSUCCESS,” 15 March 1954,
Job sy-uruzoa, BOX I.

'*tbid., Director to LINCOLN, DIR 36511, 30 January 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 7.

——Seeret—
38

TO NERY rapreenrne germs =

Reversing the Trend

Ironically, Guatemala’s disclosure of the international plot against it
reinforced the decision to continue with PBSUCCESS. On 29 and 30
January, screaming headlines denounced the “‘counterrevolutionary plot’’
exposed by the government. Arbenz released copies of documents implicat-
ing Somoza and a “‘Northern government” and spelling out PBSUCCESS
plans in detail. Reporters learned the location of training bases[

_\’"” Fearing the

Gsuatemaians woud take their charges before the United Nations, [ J
staff glumly watched the flap unfold. As soon as(_ —_Jcould walk, they
ordered him to Washington for three days of polygraphing.'® Reports from
Guatemala Station, meanwhile, indicated they had less to worry about
than they originally supposed. The government, knowing the gist of
PBSUCCESS messages but not possessing the originals, had forged letter-
heads crudely enough to arouse journalists’ suspicions. The international
press and a skeptical public dismissed Arbenz’s accusations as a political
ploy. The Guatemalan public, the Station Chief reported, considered the
charges “‘pure fantasy,”’ a manifestation “‘of the fear and uncertainty
prevailing in government circles.”'” The American press took the same
view, unanimously accepting the State Department’s characterization of the
charges as a propaganda ploy designed to disrupt the Caracas conference.'®
The January revelations revealed how much the “‘plausible denia-
bility’’ of PBSUCCESS relied on the uncritical acceptance by the
American press of the assumptions behind United States policy. Newspaper
and broadcast media, for example, accepted the official view of the
Communist nature of the Guatemalan regime. In the spring of 1954, NBC
News aired a television documentary, ‘“‘Red Rule in Guatemala,” revealing
the threat the Arbenz regime posed to the Panama Canal.''' Articles in
Reader's Digest, the Chicago Tribune, and the Saturday Evening Post drew
a frightening picture of the danger in America’s backyard. Less conserva-
tive papers like the New York Times depicted the growing menace in only
slightly less alarming terms. The Eisenhower administration’s Guatemala
policy did not get a free ride in press or in Congress. In early 1954, a num-
ber of editorials attacked the President’s failure to act against Arbenz, cit-
ing the continued presence of US military advisers as evidence of official

"Vv. P. Martin, Air Attaché, “Alleged International Plot Against Guatemala,"’ 1 February
1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 82.
‘Director to LINCOLN, DIR 39727, 24 February 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 7.£

ke (> April 1494, sob /9-01025A,
Box su.
‘“Tranger to Lincoln, “Psychological Barometer Report,’ HGG-A-714, 8 February 1954, Job
79-Q1025A, Box 99.
'“Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 260-262.
ms 2] to Chief, Graphics Register, “Guatemala Red Rule News Documentary Film
Request,” 18 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 70.

——Seeret—
39

<

IN

ee ,
SRD.

Operation PBSUCCESS

complacency. Walter Winchell broadcast stories of Guatemalan spies in-
filtrating other Latin American countries and urged the CIA to “get ac-
quainted with these people.””'” This line of criticism led reporters to hunt
for signs of inertia, not for a secret conspiracy. When Arbenz revealed the
plot, American newspapers dismissed it as a Communist ploy, another
provocation to which the administration responded far too passively.’

Assessing the damage, L ‘Jestimated that the operation had lost a
month through confusion and the delays involved in reassigning crypto-
nyms and shuffling personnel.'"" He rallied his dispirited troops with a
reminder that ‘‘the morale of the Nazis in the winter of 1932, just before
their seizure of power in Spring 1933, was at all-time low ebb. The same
thing was true of the French revolutionaries and of the Soviet revolution-
aries, on the eve of their success.’ His psywar staff tried to regain the
initiative by leveling a countercharge supported by an elaborate fabrication.
On 19 February, they planted a cache of Soviet-made arms on the
Nicaraguan coast to be “discovered” weeks later by fishermen in the pay
of Somoza. The story was appropriately embroidered with allegations
about Soviet submarines and Guatemalan assassination squads.'"* As[ J
should have predicted, the press and public greeted the new allegations as
skeptically as they had Arbenz’s. The story “did not receive much, if any,
publicity in the Guatemalan press.”"'"” The deception simply left an impres-
sion that the region’s leaders had carried their intriguing to dangerous
lengths.

Despite good intelligence and decisive action, Arbenz failed to
capitalize on the opposition’s setback. Instead of rallying support for his re-
gime, his January allegations only intensified public anxiety and raised sus-
picions that he was creating a pretext for seizing dictatorial powers. A
more critical failure was his inability to turn the charges of an international
plot into a successful diplomatic initiative. Any hopes Foreign Minister
Guillermo Toriello may have entertained of bringing charges before the

"25 C King to Dulles, “Walter Winchell Broadcast of 3 January 1954," 7 January 1954, Job
79-01228A, Box 23.

'Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 260-263, immerman, The CIA in Guatemala, pp. 7-8.

"EF INCOLN to C ] “Operational LINCOLN Strep.” HUL-A-93,
23 February 1954, Job sy-uluzdA, Box LUI.

"ST “Ho Chief of Station Guatemala, HUL-A-374, 31 March 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box
101.

"SBRSUCCESS History, Job 85-00664R, Box 5, Folder 13:£ to Chief of Station
Guatemala, “KUGOWN/WASHTUB Publicity in Guatemalan Press,” HUL-A-827, 19 May
1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103. The deception, called operation WASHTUB, culminated
with a press conference by Somoza on 7 May at which reporters were told that the Soviet
submarine had been photographed, but that no prints or negatives were available. Gleijeses,
Shattered Hope, p. 294.

aa Jro Chief of Station Guatemala, “Publicity in Guatemalan Press,” 19 May 1954,
WASHIUB file, Job 79-01025A, Box 82. See other items in file for the sometimes bizarre
details of the WASHTUB plot.

——Seeret—
40

Stee epee

wt

Reversing the Trend

Organization of American States were dashed by John Foster Dulles’s
preparations for the Caracas conference. Faced with negative growth for
three straight years, Latin American governments needed trade concessions
and credit from the United States and they were ready to yield on the issue
of Guatemala. The Secretary of State recognized that the “major interest of
the Latin American countries at this conference would concern economics
whereas the chief United States interest is to secure a strong anti-
Communist resolution’’ against Guatemala, but he recognized that
Guatemala’s underdog status and the nationalistic pride of Latin diplomats
would blunt this diplomatic advantage.''* The 1-13 March conference
proved a mixed success. Dulles got his resolution, but only after Toriello’s
denunciations received loud, sustained applause. The Guatemalan foreign
minister condemned the United States for encouraging boycotts and un-
leashing a propaganda campaign intended to tar his reformist regime with
the epithet “Communist.” He presented documents that “unquestionably
show that the foreign conspirators and monopolistic interests that inspired
and financed them sought to permit armed intervention against our country
as ‘a noble undertaking against Communism.” He accused Dulles of using
Pan-Americanism and anti-Communism as instruments to suppress the
growth of democracy and industry in Latin America. "9 «He said many of
the things some of the rest of us would like to say if we dared,” one
delegate explained.'”° The pride Toriello’s speech stirred in Guatemala City,
the Station reported, was little consolation for the sense of gloom that fol-
lowed.”
would not rescue them from the United States. Guatemala was alone.
““Caracas had exposed her isolation,” according to one historian, “and the
messages of support that poured in from politicians, intellectuals, and trade
unionists of several Latin American countries were of little solace.”
PBSUCCESS continued to be plagued by breaches of security, but
the operation had acquired a relentless momentum. In early April, security
investigators discovered telephone bugs “‘similar to the jobs the Russians
used” in the Embassy in Guatemala City, a microphone concealed in a
chandelier in Willauer’s residence, and a tap on the telephone of one of
Peurifoy’s assistants.’ Castillo Armas refused to sever ties to a number of
his assistants who flunked polygraph tests.’ (_ ‘\admitted that mem-
bers of Castillo Armas’s organization had taken classified papers giving

““Immerman, C/A in Guatemala,p. 145.
"address by His Excellency Guillermo Toriello Garrido, Minister of Foreign Affairs of
Guatemala, in the Third Plenary Session, Tenth Inter-American Conference,” 5 March 1954,
Toriello file, Job 79-O1025A, Box 81.

= Gleijeses, Shattered Hope. p. 273.

"'Tranger to LINCOLN, ‘Weekly Psych Intelligence Report.” HGG-A-919, 5-12 April 1954,
Job 79-01025A, Box 99.
__ Gleijeses, Shattered Hape, p. 284.

Audio Counter Surveillance Check,’ April 1954, Job 79-01025A. Box 70.

aspy in Castillo Armas‘s organization, may have passed on the locations of the

paramilitary and communications training bases. Juan (L _J.uspected
of being{ 7} onfederate, was expelled from the Waining program but remained in the
organization.

tle

——Seeret—
4]

After Caracas, Arbenz and the PGT realized international opinion —

:
1
‘

ere

Operation PBSUCCESS

conclusive proof of official US in-
volvement. A Nicaraguan im-
migration officer who helped ar-
range black flights took asylum in
the Guatemalan Embassy in
Managua. Jacob Esterline, a senior
Agency official, estimated that
“the Guatemalan government is well
into the details of PBSUCCESS
and that they have decided to let
the operation proceed undisturbed
until they have prepared and
documented a brief for presenta-
ae tion to the OAS.”"?5 PBSUCCESS
“in its present form appears to be
rather naked,’ Wisner admitted.
“Several categories of people—
hostile, friendly, and ‘neutral’—
either know or suspect or believe ae
that the United States is directly Wide World (AP) ©

; ; : t State
behind this one and, assuming that Assistant Secretary of
: - Henry F. Holland nearly can-

tt,
2

it proceeds to a conclusion, would celed PBSUCCESS in April 1954
be able to tell a very convincing when he learned of serious secu-
story.’’"6 Henry F. Holland, the rity breaches, |

new Assistant Secretary of State

Inter-American Affairs, frightened by the revelations, asked that the opera-
tion be held up pending a top-level review. Wisner suspended all black
flights on 15 and 16 April while the Dulles brothers consulted.’” On the
W7thE ‘Jonce again received the green light.

Preparing for Action

By early April, L. ‘]team had completed its assessments and de-
veloped an operational plan. LINCOLN case officers now felt they under-
stood the preparations necessary to mount a successful coup and the
situation likely to prevail in Guatemala after the operation’s completion.
Rejecting tactics aimed at merely severing Arbenz’s tie to international
Communism, they aimed to produce a radical, revolutionary change in -

"SE sterline to L “Yu ttems for Inclusion in CE Report,” 22 April 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 70

"ways and Means of Improving Cover and Deception for SUCCESS Operation,” 28 April
1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 70.

"’Esterline to [Things to Do,” {5 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 70.
——Seeret—
42

Reversing the Trend

_ Guatemalan politics. They sought the reversal of the Revolution of 1944,
the termination of land reform, and the replacement of Arbenz with a
liberal, authoritarian leader. Afterwards, they foresaw a prolonged period of
dictatorial rule during which the regime would depend on United States aid
and arms. { Vrelt a military coup offered the surest means to this out-
come, and he directed his psychological, political, and paramilitary efforts
at intimidating the Army and inciting it to mutiny.

The final plans for PBSUCCESS called for drastic change. The pro-
gram and rhetoric of the Revolution of 1944 retained its appeal for many
Guatemalans, and LINCOLN had briefly considered appropriating its
themes. But by April they rejected the idea “that a genuinely fervent and
lasting revolutionary movement can be based on the principal program of
the incumbent regime.” It would be difficult to loosen Arbenz’s identifi-
cation with the revolution, ‘|thought, and it might not be worth the ef-
fort. Claiming that Arbenz had betrayed the ideals of 1944 weakened the
argument for action “‘because we are only pleading for ‘reform’ of the
present system and there is a world of difference between reform and revo-
lution.” Case officers also felt they needed more conservative themes to
appeal to the groups in Guatemala most likely to take action against the re-
gime: the Army, conservative students, and landowners. Attacks on land re-
form and other progressive measures would produce the best results with
these groups. “‘Our recommendation,” |cabled agents in the field, is
“that the revolution of 1944 be declared dead.”

L ‘Jinitally considered incorporating Arbenz’s agrarian reform ‘‘as
originally conceived as part of our political program,” but he soon came to
regard it as an instrument of subversion and instructed case officers to
make it a target of disruptive propaganda.” “The Agrarian Reform pro-
gram has provided the communists with weapons which may be useful as
their struggle for domination continues,” he told King.’ He urged field
officers to use “‘all means at hand” to spread “‘slogans like “Communist
land is temporary land,’ or something similar,”” to promote the belief that
‘parcels of land received from the present government would constitute a

ro Tho Chief of Station Guatemala, “Materials for Transmittal to Efiot P. Razmara,”
HUL-A-237, 17 March 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 101. In the September plan, dieft
open the possibility that Arbenz could be coerced into expelling Communists from govern-
ment. Schiesinger and Kinzer claim he attempted a bribe but was rebuffed by Arbenz’s aides.
There is no record of this in Agency archives, but it is not inconsistent with “Jthinking
in early January. By late March, however, the LINCOLN case officer saw no room for
Arbenz in the post-PBSUCCESS government. Bitter Fruit, p. 113.

= objections to Decree 900 were purely tactical. He thought Castillo Armas could
win support among campesinos by backing land reform. The key was to obtain the defection
of Alfonso Martinez, the reform's non-Communist director. When this appeared impossible in
late March. __Jlecided the land reform had to be destroyed. (_  “Agrar-
ian Reform,” 8 March 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 147.

“(so King, “Communist Activities in Central America,” HUL-A-544, 21 April 1954,
Job 79-Q1025A, Box 102.

——_Seeret—
43

Operation PBSUCCESS

proof of guilt in the future.””"*' PBSUCCESS propagandists also spread
rumors that land reform was simply a prelude to collectivized agriculture,
state farms, and forced labor. [ _}bdelieved that the post-Arbenz re-
gime should avoid land redistribution as a solution to rural poverty, and in-
stead should foster the growth of light industry “‘to provide additional
purchasing power to the residents of rural areas” and “‘make goods availa-
ble to them at more reasonable prices.” “Tr ig well known,” he observed,
that ‘raising the level of consumer consumption, the expansion of produc-
tive facilities and the general augmentation of prosperity is not only a good
deterrent toward Communism, but also an effective method of producing
general political stability.”"”

Before deciding on methods and strategies, [ case officers
carefully listed the goals of PBSUCCESS, beginning with the replacement
of Arbenz with a moderate, authoritarian regime. | considered
democracy an “unrealistic” alternative for Guatemala. “Premature exten-
sion of democratic privileges and responsibilities to a people still ac-
customed to patriarchal methods can only be harmful,” he warned. A
“judicious combination of authority and liberty will have to govern the po-
litical system.”’ Concentrating authority in the person of a dictator also in-
volved dangers, and[ advised against setting up a Somoza-style
dictatorship.

The executive power, without being paralized [sic], must be sufficiently

divided in order to provide inner balance. While this at first sight may seem

to be a factor making for instability, it actually has a protective aspect, be-

cause prevents the capture of the center of power by a single hostile
ow.

A ruling committee, or junta, seemed to be the answer. [ ] fore-
saw a six-month period of emergency rule followed by a milder authoritari-
anism of indefinite duration. The principal duties of the new regime were
to provide stability, raise living standards, and ensure protection for
American business.»

AsL Jenvisioned it, United Fruit would receive greater protec-
tion under the new regime, but it would have to offer concessions in return.
United Fruit and other American investments, he conceded, “represent a
part of the American national interest and will be protected by the United

"Eo King, “Communist Activities in Central America,” HUL-A-544, 21 April 1954.
Job, 79-01025A, Box 102.

mL Yo Tranger, “Economic Propaganda Themes,” HUL-A-596, | May 1954, Job
79-O1025A, Box 102.

© Ato Tranger, “Political-Economic Views to be Expressed During the K-Program,””
HUL-A-514, 2} April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 102.

“Ibid.

Ibid.

44

Reversing the Trend

States as such.” But the “United States does not expect American compa-
nies to enjoy abroad immunities and privileges that would make for politi-
cal instability or social injustice in other countries, because such a
- condition of course would be harmful to the over-riding American political
interest.”’ Above all, | Jvanted the new regime to avoid the embarrass-
ment of retreating from victories won by Arbenz. United Fruit executives
would have to understand that there would be no return to the status quo
’ ante. They would have to pay taxes and submit to competition from
Guatemalan companies. Labor unions, purged of Communists, would be
protected. Since ay ‘]2aw American capital as necessary for the new re-
gime’s stability, he saw “no real reason why a legitimate accord, satisfying
the interests of both, cannot be found between American companies in
Guatemala and the Guatemalan government.””'*°

L ‘| could see few details of the future regime clearly, but one fea-

ture was obvious: it would need American money. “Shortly after the

Communists were defeated in Iran, the Iranian Government received gener-
ous assistance,” he recalled. ‘“‘Undoubtedly, the disappearance of the
Communist regime from Guatemala will leave behind a certain economic
and financial chaos which must be rectified by American aid.”’ The new re-
gime should build its reputation by industrializing Guatemala and raising
its standard of living. The World Bank had devised a development program
that should be pursued, but not in the tightfisted way of the past. “There is
increasing recognition in American and other banking circles that the eco-
nomic development of countries such as Guatemala cannot be undertaken
and financed under strictly economic criteria,”’ he explained. ‘““We realize
that there must necessarily be a certain wastage of funds because of local
political conditions. We are prepared to underwrite this wastage.” But
before PBSUCCESS could usher in the new dependent, undemocratic re-
gime, it would have to mobilize Guatemalan activists, strengthen Castillo
Amnas, and coax the Army to commit treason.

Tfinal plans included three areas of action: propaganda (or

pp"), paramilitary, and political. Early in 1954, the Agency began a sus-:

tained effort to intimidate the government and convince Guatemalans that
an active underground resistance existed. The CEUA student group, which

, ‘}” had been active since
late 1953.7 Headed by a young acuvist, [ “| the group
counted 50 members in the capital and a nationwide network of sym-
pathetic students ready to risk arrest for the cause.'” The exuberant anti-
Communism of the CEUA students elated (_ Jtired of the cynical
politics of Ydigoras and Castillo Armas [_ ——
, , i 7 “Ja close friend and
adviser of ag | who first met members

™ Ibid.

"Ibid.

7 L |Report on Stage One PBSUCCESS, Annex B, Friendly Assets and Potential,”
15 December 1953, Job 79-01025A, Box 1. £ ° J

"L ‘J“Report on Stage One PBSUCCESS” 1) vecemoer 1353, Job 79-01025A, Box 1.

—Seeret—
45

BSS

—_Secret—
Operation PBSUCCESS |

[ eae

. i. This tenuous pipeline conveyed all of the plans, publications, and
schemes LINCOLN officers could devise."

The students’ propagandizing met with immediate and well-
publicized success. In their opening salvo on 15 September 1953, they had
pasted 106,000 anti-Communist stickers to buses and trains. They leafleted
public gatherings, sent fake funeral notices to Arbenz and Fortuny, and cov-
ered walls with antigovernment graffiti. Their ‘‘32’’ campaign in March
and April 1954 drew wide newspaper coverage. Students painted the num-
ber 32—for Article 32 of the Constitution, which forbade international po-
litical parties—on walls in the city center. Newspapers recognized it as an
anti-Communist slogan and described the constabulary’s frustrated attempts
to identify the culprits. The students sponsored an “‘Anti-Communist
Hour” on Radio Internacional, an independent station until 21 April, when
armed thugs burst into the station during the airing of the program, beat
several broadcasters, and destroyed their equipment.’ In some of their ac-
tivities, CEUA received help from an organization of anti-Communist mar-
ket women, the Comité Anticomunista de Locatorias de los Mercados de
Guatemala, who spread rumors and passed leaflets among shoppers. The
two groups distributed thousands of copies of a pastoral letter by
Archbishop Mariano Rossell y Arrellana calling for a national crusade
against Communism.'” Case officers judged the outraged reaction of
Arbenz’s officials as indicators of success.

Encouraged by these victories, LINCOLN staffers spent hours invent-
ing schemes for the CEUA students to carry out. The fake funeral notices
were their idea, meant to harass and frighten top PGT officials. Throughout
March and April, they bombarded { _\with suggestions for campaigns
and themes, some useful others whimsical. After the pastoral letter, they
attempted to arouse Catholics with mailings from a phony ‘‘Organization

“Tranger to LINCOLN, “‘Psvchological Barometer Report,” HGG-A-682, 27 January 1954,
Job 79-01025A, Box 98: L 7] Job 63-00545R, Box 274, Folder 35.
Ibid.

“Daul P. Kennedy, “Guatemalans Get Appeal to Revolt.” New York Times, May 5, 1954.

' Tto LINCOLN, “Weekly Psych Intelligence Report,” HGG-A-919, 16 April
1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 99. The pastoral letter was the Church’s most useful contribution
to PBSUCCESS. The Agency did not have a strong tie to the Catholic hierarchy in Guatemala

71 to King, ““Ro-
man Catholic Church in Guatemala,” HUL-A-30, 2 February 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 101.

—Seeret—
46

Reversing the Trend

of the Militant Godless,”’ purportedly headed by members of the PGT.”
They printed stickers reading ‘“‘A Communist Lives Here”’ for the students
to put on houses." Fake newspaper clippings and articles from interna-
tional Communist publications were a favorite ploy.L

and the Station Chief L 1 Guatemala resented these sugges-
tions because of the burdens they placed on field officers and the goodwill
of CEUA. Mailings had to be posted from outlying towns to avoid detec-
tion. Each new scheme involved risks and cost time that could be spent on
successful ongoing operations. ( complained that overwork and
- “ravaging amoebae”’ kept him from spending more than two hours on his
cover assignment in the last two weeks of March. He started holding meet-
ings with [ “Jin his bathroom."

Field officers also felt LINCOLN’s schemes aimed at the wrong
audience, targeting intellectuals, a constituency unlikely to be of much
help.{. | Jaimed to “attack the theoretical foundations of the enemy” on
the grounds that “‘the present state of things in the country is largely deter-
mined by intellectuals.” Tranger disparaged such appeals. The objective,
he told "was to scare the Communists, not debate them. Propaganda
“should be designed to (1) intensify anti-Communist, anti-government sen-
timent and create a disposition to act, and (2) create dissension, confusion,
and FEAR in the enemy camp.” With the backing of q
and{ _\Tranger won his point. Abandoning the “lofty, lengthy tomes
that appeal to the intellectual minority,” psychological efforts aimed, in his
words, at “‘the heart, the stomach and the liver (fear)."""

As the psychological campaign wore on, CEUA activists grew dis-
satisfied with the risks involved and the content of the materials they were
asked to distribute. Some students considered the group’s slogans too harsh
and divisive, a feeling for which[ ‘Thad litde sympathy. ““We are not
running a popularity contest but an uprising,” he fumed. The students’
concerns also, perhaps, stemmed from a suspicion that they were being
used. Field officers admitted they were using the students as bait, in
Tranger’s words, to ‘invite complete suppression of overt anti-Communist,
anti-government units and then use such suppression to demonstrate to the
people here and abroad the nature and seriousness of the menace and refute
claims of ‘democratic freedoms.’” In May 1954, as CEUA began to suffer
attrition through the arrest of its members, students became increasingly
unhappy with the sacrifices they were asked to make. By 26 May, field
officers reported that 10 students were in jail, the others were afraid to
work, and recruiting had fallen to zero. By then a clandestine radjo station

“{  hio Tranger, “Black Letter from the ‘Preparatory Committee for an Organization of
the Militant Godless,” HUL-A-875, 23 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103.

"st “Jo Tranger, HUL-A-516, 21 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 102.

“E Jo LINCOLN. E 7119 March 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 100.

'Tranger tol 3 “KUGOWN/L Activities,” 31 March 1954, Job
79-01025A, Box 99.

——Seeret—
47

Operation PBSUCCESS

had been operating for three weeks and Castillo Armas was leafleting the
capital from aircraft. PBSUCCESS had moved from its propaganda to its
paramilitary phase."

Agency propaganda operations succeeded in making Guatemala into
the type of repressive regime the United States liked to portray it as. By
late April, freedoms of speech and assembly had all but been revoked by
official decrees and unofficial goon squads, which intimidated independent
newspapers and radio stations into silence. Radio Universal, the only
openly anti-Communist radio station, closed after its offices were raided by
goons and its owner placed under arrest. Opposition elements remained ac-
tive owing largely to the failure of Guatemalan police to make systematic
arrests. Guatemala Station reported that the government’s behavior demon-
strated a ‘‘desire to crush opposition activity together with what appeared
to be a lack of knowledge as to how to proceed most effectively.” In the
ensuing weeks, the police would cast scruples aside and move decisively to
suppress the remnants of the opposition.

Despite the intensive effort put into propaganda, [ Jsonsidered it
secondary to the political, or “K’’ program, which aimed to undermine the
Army’s loyalty to Arbenz and bring it over, whole or in part, to the side of
the rebellion. CEUA publications, El Rebelde and El Combate, carried arti-
cles aimed at a military audience. A series of editorials drafted by
LINCOLN in March for El Rebelde communicated the sense of intensify-
ing pressure case Officers wanted the Army to feel. The first, entitled “A
Time to Doubt,” raised questions about whether the Army should continue
its political neutrality. The second, ‘“‘A Time to Think,” threatened the
Army with “‘a terrible fate if it continues on its present collaborationist
path.” The series ended with “A Time to Choose,” urging officers to break
their ties with the government and offer their services to the rebellion “‘if
they wish to share in the triumph over Communism.”'” Egged on by
[ student activists stepped up the pressure on Army officers and
their families with telephone harassment and minor acts of sabotage.” US
military advisers and Embassy officials joined the effort to spread fear and
dissension among the officer corps, telling military leaders in unguarded
terms that the United States could no longer tolerate Arbenz and would
take drastic steps if the Army failed to act. “We were under enormous
pressure,’ one Guatemalan officer remembered. “The US military mission

“*piaydon to PBSUCCESS Headquarters, “Report on ESSENCE Activities.” HUL-A-929,
26 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103.

1 “Tio LINCOLN, ‘Weekly Psych Intelligence Report, 19-26 April 1954,"
HGG-A-969, Job 79-01025A, Box 99.

C “Jo Frances R. Hegarty, 23 February 1954, “Letter of Instructions,” Job 79-01025A,
Box 101.

‘E INCOLN to Chief of Station Guatemala, “Telephone Team for Rumor Propagation,”
HUL-A-134, 2 March 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 101.

—Seeret——
48

Reversing the Trend

even hinted that the United States would invade.”""[ —_Qused all availa-
ble means to impress on Army officers ‘‘the facts of life as far as they are
concerned’’:

a. They are in the United States sphere of influence.

b. If they think that a people of 3,000,000 is going to win ina show-
down with 160,000,000 they need psychiatric help.

c. If they think that the US will never come to 4 showdown, they
don’t understand gringos. It might be useful to explain gringos in the way
that foreigners see them and point out that force is the follower of reason,
in the American pattern.

d. If they think that the Soviet Union can bail them out of this
predicament, they once more require psychiatric help.

e. If they think that the Soviet Union will or even wants to bail them
out, it should be perfectly clear to them that the Soviet Union is exploiting
them only to create a diversion in the US backyard while Indochina is hot,
and that the Soviets will drop them in a hurry when the going gets tough.

f. If they are unhappy about being in the US sphere of influence,
they might be reminded that the US is the most generous and tolerant task-
master going, that cooperation with it is studded with material reward, and
that the US permits much more sovereignty and independence in its sphere
than the Soviets, and so forth.

Although Jhad too few sources close to the Army to know it,
these facts already weighed on the minds of Guatemala’s military leaders.
Deteriorating relations with the United States exacted a price on the
Army's effectiveness and prestige. Successive shocks—Peurifoy’s denunci-
ations, the arms embargo, and Caracas—filled the officer corps with dread
and suspicion. Officers could not tell who among their peers could be
trusted, who would betray. “A great number of the officers are extremely
unhappy about the Communists in the government and the poor
US-Guatemalan relations,” a US adviser reported, but “none dares to
speak out for fear of jeopardizing his personal security.”

1 efforts to find and recruit disgruntled officers continued to
come up short. An attempt to bribe Carlos Enrique Diaz, chief of the
Guatemalan armed forces, failed. “L "was particularly frustrated by

‘“Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, p. 305.

Ibid.

“41 ia2 was to-be approached while visiting Caracas and offered a $200,000 bribe to “act
decisively to change the present Guatemalan problem.” The attempt failed, possibly because
Diaz was surprised to be recognized while traveling with his mistress. to
King, “Col. Carlos Enrique Diaz.” 14 May 1954, Job 79-01025A. Box 70. King to Wisner,
“Approach to Col. Carlos Enrique Diaz.” 6 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 70.

—Seeret—
49

tt,

eh.

Operation PBSUCCESS

his inability to place an agent close to[ _jin April, LINCOLN case
officers obtained the help of [ ,
‘| who agreed to return to Guatemala and attempt to recruit
{ ‘hind others.D ‘|had been popular
among the officer corps and appeared ‘“‘highly knowledgeable regarding
key military personnel targeted under K-Program.”’ | -], he arrived
in Guatemala City and had no trouble mixing with his old friends, but the
results proved disappointing. Officers were happy to reminisce about hap-
pier times but unwilling to discuss current politics. The genial{ ahesi-
tated to pry, and he returned to Miami a week later with nothing to
report.’
By May, -|political program was in crisis. Case officers con-
tinued to believe the Army held the key to the operation’s success and that
€ sould lead an Army rebellion. {L Thad no way to guide or

predict [ actions, and he realized that an abortive or mistimed
coup could min all of his careful preparations. Reluctantly, he instructed
[ ~\who replaced Tranger as Chief of Station in Guatemala in
April) to look for an opportunity to make a cold approach. The stakes were
high.[ “j:ould alienate or endanger L Bul _Jwas ready
to take the risk. He felt that the psychological campaign against the Army
had reached such intensity that if C could make the approach dis-
creetly, [ ‘Jcould be cajoled or bullied into cooperating.’

L “| never intended for Castillo Armas’s force to challenge the

Guatemalan Army. Instead, it was to be used as another psychological
weapon in the campaign to intimidate Arbenz and incite an Army revolt.
He trained and supplied the small force to accentuate its propaganda (rather
than military) value, stressing sabotage and air operations. In March, he be-
gan assembling a fleet that came to comprise a dozen aircraft at an aban-
doned airstrip near Puerto Cabezas, Nicaragua (a base later used by the
Bay of Pigs invaders).'’ Somoza purchased some of the planes (_

‘] and received others under the military assistance agreement. ‘hey were
then loaned to Castillo Armas and registered to

[Jo King, HUL-A-449, 9 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 102:([ wo Chief of
Station Guatemala, “SOCCER debriefing,’ HUL-A-410, 7 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box
102: LINCOLN to DCI, LINC 1535, 2 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 3.

‘* | “K Program,” HUL-A-614, 2 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103;
Guatemala Station to Director, GUAT 866, 16 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box Il. See
Guatemala cables to LINCOLN for June 1954 in Box 11.

'57) INCOLN to SHERWOOD, LINC 4562, 30 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6. The air-
craft used in PBSUCCESS totaled 12: three C-47 (DC-3) cargo planes, six F-47 Thunderbolt
fighter-bombers, one P-38 Lightning fighter, one Cessna 180, and one Cessna 140. In May,
the rebel air force moved to a Nicaraguan base adjoining the Managua airport.

50

Reversing the Trend

~

Managua Airport.

"| The rebel air force consisted
OJ three Urs CUIEY puted, te ots sighter-bombers, one P-38 fighter, one
Cessna 180, and one Cessna 140.

The Liberaci6nista air force on the tarmac at

if “Jin St. Petersburg, Florida."* For{ — Jaircraft linked the
paramilitary and propaganda sides of the operation, enabling the rebels to
strike directly at the government in full view of the entire city.

Since Castillo Armas could not furnish pilots, the Agency hired some
on contract and transferred others from its proprietary airline in the Far
East, Civil Air Transport. Offering $2,000 a month and a $250 bonus for
each successful mission, Willauer rounded up a motley assortment of bush
pilots, ex-military fliers, and expatriate barnstormers with names like [

|” The group leader was [_

_] and King constantly worried
about security and cover for the pilots, who might be downed at any time,
or, inthe case of.[  _} “be bought by the highest bidder." Explaining
the presence of pilots from China was tricky, and the cover story King de-
vised nearly ended in disaster. The pilots, on annual leave, were to whoop
jt up in Miami and Havana “making the usual rounds of clubs and gam-
bling establishments,’’ lose all their money, and fortuitously run into a

unsigned], “Questions arising from Study of LINC 3057 re Purchase of Aircraft.” 24 May
1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 7c. CL Unauthorized Landing of C-47 in Honduras,”
11 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Bax 70.
‘Debriefing Report, (

79-01025A, Box 167.

') INCOLN to Director, LINC 4093. 20 Sune 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

Contact Report, HUL-A-70, 8 February 1954 “Joffice. LINCOLN, present:
Mr. Barnes. _)Xing and C  yMessrs. ( J] “ing, and
[J Job 79-01025A, Box 101.

7] Assistant Air Operations Officer, (undated], Job

—Seeret—
51

Operation PBSUCCESS

“Latin businessman” who promised quick money for flying a few loads of
farm equipment in Central America. Embassy officials had to intervene
when suspicious FBI agents in Havana hauled the pilots in for ques-
tioning.’

Meanwhile, Castillo Armas completed preparations for the invasion.
Training programs at _Jand the two Nicaraguan bases graduated
37 saboteurs in March, 30 tietd officers in mid-April, and a handful of
communications specialists by mid-May. The friendly, taciturn American
instructors, one trainee remembered, were known only by their first names,
which were either Pepe or José.'** Delays in the training program—
particularly for radio operators—pushed the scheduled invasion from mid-
May into June. Most of the rebel recruits could not read, and communica-
tions instructors complained of difficulties in getting across technical con-
cepts."

At least one historian has made the claim that Castillo Armas’s force
was more fearsome than has generally been reported. Frederick Marks
refers to them as small in number but “highly trained and exceedingly
well-equipped,”’ and notes that they had “‘twenty-two thousand rockets,
forty-five thousand rifles, four hundred mortars, and pieces of heavy ar-
tillery.””'° From Agency records, it is clear the rebels possessed neither
rockets nor artillery. Moreover, it is unlikely Castillo Armas’s troops would
have carried more than a single rifle apiece, since they were obliged to
carry all of their food and supplies with them. The rebel army never im-
pressed officials at CIA Headquarters (Bissell later remembered it as “‘ex-
tremely small and ill-trained’’) and in the months before the invasion some
in the PBSUCCESS hierarchy were beginning to have doubts about
Castillo Armas’s suitability for command.'*© Guatemalan officers’ low
opinion of him hampered the political program. Tracey Barnes considered
him a “‘bold but incompetent man” who fantasized about rebellion but
lacked the leadership to follow through on plans.’ however,
strongly defended him. Castillo Armas “‘is the man and there will be no
deviation from that,” he told his case officers. “‘Any criticisms or doubts
of him pale-before the fact that he now has both the manpower and the
materiel to accomplish the job.’’ He reminded critics that Castillo Armas
would have ‘“‘considerable technical assistance. He has the humility and
decency to rely on advice, and his present advisors have his respect and

Chief, WHD, to LINCOLN, ‘Operational Air Support Plan,’ HUL-A-157, 6 March 1954,
Job 79-01025A, Box 101.

'“Gleiieses, Shattered Hope, p. 293.

aa JT Final Report on Stage Two PBSUCCESS”™ [undated], Job 79-01025A, Box 167.
‘Frederick W. Marks IH, ‘The CIA and Castillo Armas in Guatemala, 1954: New Clues to
an Old Puzzle,” Diplomatic History 14 (Winter 1990) 1: 69,

“Interview with Richard M. Bissell, Jr.. 5 June 1967, Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Job
85-0664R, Box 5. ,

‘“"PBSUCCESS History, Job 85-00664R, Box 5, Folder 13.

—Seeret—
Ss?

Reversing the Trend

L_

confidence to a sufficient degree that he would no doubt rely on them for
counsel when it comes to the question of whom he shall associate himself
with both before and after victory.”

As the preparation phase drew to a close at the end of April 1954,
LINCOLN staffers felt a mixed sense of elation and apprehension. Their
propaganda efforts had shaken the Arbenz regime and heartened the oppo-
sition, but the government's crackdown and the fatigue of the CEUA stu-
dents made it clear the effort could not be sustained much longer.
Paramilitary training had made great strides, but Castillo Armas’s feeble
forces and mercenary air force were still no match for the 5,000-strong
Guatemalan Army, if the Army stood by Arbenz.[- J] plans to seduce

“LT “\.0 Chief of Station Guatemala, “*Political-Economic Views to be Expressed During
K-Program,” HUL-A-514, 21 April 1954, Job 79-01025A. Box 102.

Operation PBSUCCESS

- pie Serta = x
L ‘reviews Castillo Armas rebel forces. The force was invaria-

ly described as “ragtag.” The Agency supplied money and arms, but the
troops had no uniforms or boots.

the officer corps remained as tantalizingly promising but as far from con-
summation as they were in January. The psychological pressure on the
Guatemalan Government was reaching its maximum point. The time to act
had arrived, yet it was still unclear how and whether success could be

attained.

54

Chapter 3

Sufficient Means

I think we tend to overlook simply the massiveness of US power viewed
from Arbenz’s position. ... We knew how difficult it was even to get two
more aircraft down there and in action... . I think it was easy for us to forget
that Arbenz felt himself up against the might of the United States, and quite
possibly the impact on him of specific events was that it may simply have
persuaded him that the US was in earnest, and that if these means proved to
be insufficient, then other stronger means would be used.

Richard Bissell’

PBSUCCESS was ready by the beginning of May to place maximum
pressure on the Arbenz regime. had a variety of instruments
at his disposal: propaganda, sabotage, aircraft, an army of insurrectionists,
- and the implicit threat of US military power. He used all of them to inten-
sify the psychological distress of Arbenz and his officials. Even the
paramilitary program—Castillo Armas and his liberacidnistas—served a
- psychological rather than a military function. As an Agency memo pre-
_ pared for Eisenhower explained, the operation relied ‘‘on psychological im-
~. pact rather than actual military strength, although it is upon the ability of
the Castillo Armas effort to create and maintain the impression of very sub-
stantial military strength, that the success of this particular effort primarily
depends.””'” Dealing in the ‘nsubstantial stuff of impressions and degrees
of intimidation, [ could not always measure progress, and it was
difficult for even those close to PBSUCCESS to know what was happen-
ing, whether they were succeeding or failing, and why.

The Voice of Liberation

As Guatemalans turned on their short-wave radios on the morning
of 1 May 1954, they found a new station weakly audible on a part of the
dial that had been silent before. Calling itself La Voz de la Liberacién, it
broadcast a combination of popular recordings, bawdy humor, and

interview with Richard M. Bissell, Jr, 5 June 1967, Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Job
85-0664R, Box 5.
1) amerman, CIA in Guatemala, p. 161.

——Seeret-—
55

eee

Operation PBSUCCESS

antigovernment propaganda. The announcers, claiming to be speaking from
“deep in the jungle,” exhorted Guatemalans to resist Communism and the
Arbenz regime and support the forces of liberation led by Col. Carlos
Castillo Armas. The two-hour broadcast was repeated four times. For the
next week the station broadcast an hour-long program at 7:00 A.M. and
9:00 P.M. daily.” Although only faintly and intermittently heard in the
capital, the station electrified a city where open criticism of the regime had
become dangerous for journalists and private citizens alike. Government
spokesmen denounced the broadcasts as a fraud, originating not in
Guatemala but over the border in Mexico or Honduras. Most listeners,
however, preferred to believe that brave radiomen, hidden in a remote out-
post, were defying official censors and the police.

So began an operation ( “Viater called the “finest example
PP/Radio effort and effectiveness on the books.” The voices heard in
Guatemala originated not in the jungle, or even in Honduras, but in a
Miami "|where a team of four Guatemalan men and two women
mixed announcements and editorials with canned music. The broadcasts
reminded soldiers of their duty to protect the country from foreign ideolo-
gies, warned women to keep their husbands away from Communist party
meetings and labor unions, and threatened government officials with
reprisals...” Couriers carried the tapes via Pan American Airways to
{ _]where they were beamed into Guatemala from a mobile trans-
mitter. When the traffic in tapes aroused the suspicions of Panamanian
customs officials, the announcers moved to[ and began broad-
casting live from a dairy farm (_ - Ja site known as
SHERWOOD. At about the same time, the SHERWOOD operation im-
proved its reception in Guatemala by boosting its signal strength. By
mid-May the rebel broadcasts were heard loud and clear in Guatemala City,
and SHERWOOD announcers were responding quickly to developments in
the enemy capital.

To direct the SHERWOOD operation, Tracy Barnes selected a clever
and enterprising contract employee, David Atlee Phillips, a onetime actor
and newspaper editor in Chile. When Phillips arrived inl _jJin
March, one of the Guatemalan announcers explained that the target
audience was mixed. “Two percent are hard-core Marxists; 13 percent are
officials and others in sympathy with the Arbenz regime. . . . Two percent
are militant anti-Communists, some of them in exile.’’ The remainder was
neutral, apathetic, or frustrated, ‘““a soap opera audience.” The objective,
the announcer continued, was to intimidate the Communists and their sym-

pathizers and stimulate the apathetic majority to act.'”’ Initial broadcasts

"tT INCOLN to Guatemala Station, LINC 2212, 29 April 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 4.

"2 INCOLN to SHERWOOD, LINC 4607, 2 July 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

™Dhillips, The Night Warch (New York: Ballantine Books, 1977), p. 53.

'*Guatemala Station complained of poor reception until 22 May. LINCOLN to SHERWOOD,
LINC 3002, 22 May 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 5.

"Spnillips. Night Watch, pp. 50-31.

—Seeret—
S46

Sufficient Means

would establish the station’s credibility, setting the stage for an “‘Orson
Welles type ‘panic broadcast” to coincide with Castillo Armas’s invasion.
The program would follow the lead of earlier PP efforts, combining in-
timidating misinformation with pithy slogans, and targeting “men of ac-
tion,” particularly the Army." The station’s slogan became Trabajo, Pan y
Patria, work, bread, and country.

In Phillips’ account of the operation, SHERWOOD was singularly
responsible for the triumph of PBSUCCESS. “When the campaign start-
ed,” he observes, ‘“‘the Guatemalan capital and countryside had been quiet.
Within a week there was unrest everywhere.’’'” Scholars have generally
given similar credit to La Voz de la Liberacién, but were it not for a fortui-
tous turn of events the rebel broadcasters might have made only a muffled
impact. Two weeks into the operation Guatemala’s state-run radio station,
TGW, disappeared from the air. Perplexed, [ ‘Jand Phillips soon learned
from Guatemala Station that TGW was scheduled to receive a new antenna
and that the government’s only broadcast medium would be out of commis-
sion for three weeks.'* Through an accident of timing SHERWOOD ac-
quired a virtual propaganda monopoly during the most critical phase of
operation PBSUCCESS. In late May, as Guatemalans witnessed a startling
series of dark and portentous events, the largely illiterate populace turned
to La Voz de la Liberacidén for news.

The Voyage of the Alfhem

But if SHERWOOD represented a master stroke for PBSUCCESS,
Arbenz riposted with an even bolder countermove, long anticipated by CIA
but a complete surprise to the public in Guatemala and the United States.
On 15 May, the Swedish freighter Alfhem arrived at Puerto Barrios carry-
ing thousands of tons of Czech arms. By clever deception, the ship had
evaded efforts by the State Department and the CIA to stop or delay it.
Following the Martinez mission, the Agency had carefully monitored inter-
national arms flows and the traffic in Guatemala’s ports. On 8 April,
Wisner met with State Department and Navy officials to coordinate intelli-
gence gathering. They agreed to ‘‘take no action at this stage to deter or
interfere with the shipment, but rather allow events to take their course at

el Yo Chief of Station Guatemala, “SHERWOOD: Comment on Broadcasts,” HUL-
A-756, 12 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103.

"Phillips, Night Watch, p. 53. Guatemala Station's weekly “Psych Barometer Reports” were
also at odds with Phillips’ version, claiming that the initial sensation caused by the appear-
ance of the clandestine radio quickly wore off. “Psych Intelligence Report,
10-16 May 1954," HGG-A-1121, 18 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 101,

” _} ‘Guatemalan Radio Silence," 28 May 1954, Job
79-01025A, Box 70.

57

Peeters

Operation PBSUCCESS

Sox!
Ree
Wide World (AP) ©
The SS Alfhem arrived at Puerto Barrios in May 1954 with 2,000 tons of
Czech arms.

least to the point when exposure would be most compromising to the
Guatemalans.’”’” The following day, Wisner learned from ‘2

“|:hat the Bank of Guatemala had telegraphically transferred
$4,860,000 through the Union Bank of Switzerland and Stabank, Prague, to
the account of Investa, a Czech firm.’ No Agency official said so at the
time, but the payment revealed the limits of the Communist Bloc’s willing-
ness to aid an ally in the Western Hemisphere. The Czechs would provide
arms, but on a cash and carry basis.'*' On 17 April, the Alfhem, a freighter
registered to the Swedish subsidiary of a Czech shipping firm, departed the
Polish port of Szczecin bound for Dakar, West Africa, en route to Central
America.”

The State Department and the Agency worked frantically to stop the
shipment, which they mistakenly believed was carried in another ship, the
Wulfsbrook, registered to a West German firm. Department officials tried

Wisner to King, “Guatemalan Acquisition of Iron Curtain Arms,” 8 April 1954, Job
79-01228A, Box 24,

u = - “=~ : sae os . +
ae "], LINCOLN to
Chief, WH, ‘‘Financial Position of Guatemala,” 493, 14 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 97.
“The Guatemalan Government was fully capable of paying cash. Its foreign currency
reserves in 1954 topped $42 million. LINCOLN to Chief, WH, ‘*Financial Position of
Guatemala,” 493, 14 June 1954, Job 79-O1025A, Box 97.

"2 chlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, p. 149.

—Seeret—-

SQ

ee ee

Sufficient Means

to persuade the German Government to order the Wulfsbrook into port and
sought help in canceling its insurance.’ The Alfhem meanwhile plied a
circuitous route to Central America. After a week at sea, the captain
received radio orders to proceed to Curagao in the Dutch West Indies. In
the mid-Atlantic, new orders arrived diverting him to Puerto Cortés,
Honduras. On 13 May, just two days out of port, he learned his real desti-
nation and steered for Guatemala. The Agency had not relied completely
on the State Department to thwart the shipment. On 7 May, Wisner sent
limpet mines to the sabotage training bases in Nicaragua. By the time the
Alfhem arrived off Puerto Barrios, however, its destruction posed a ticklish
diplomatic problem. The State Department’s fevered activity had alerted
several European governments, shipping lines, and insurance underwriters
of official US interest. If the ship were sunk, it would be impossible to
deny involvement.’

The arms purchase handed PBSUCCESS a propaganda bonanza. On
17 May, the State Department declared that the shipment revealed
Guatemala’s complicity in a Soviet plan for Communist conquest in the
Americas. John Foster Dulles exaggerated the size of the cargo, hinting
that it would enable Guatemala to triple the size of its Army and over-
whelm neighboring states. The press and Congress responded on cue. ““The
threat of Communist imperialism is no longer academic,” proclaimed the
Washington Post, “it has arrived.’ The New York Times warned that
Communist arms would soon make their way along “secret jungle paths’’
to guerrilla armies throughout the Hemisphere. “If Paul Revere were living
today,” Representative Paul Lantaff imagined, ‘the would view the landing
of Red arms in Guatemala as a signal to ride.’” House Speaker John
McCormack spluttered that “‘this cargo of arms is like an atom bomb
planted in the rear of our backyard.”’'* These fulminations intensified the
fears of many Guatemalans that the incident would provide a convenient
pretext for US intervention.

The Alfhem incident helped break down Honduran objections to aid-
ing PBSUCCESS. The Galvez government viewed the shipment as con-
nected to a major labor conflict that had broken out on United Fruit
plantations on 5 May and spread throughout the country. CIA officials sus-
pected Guatemalan involvement, noting ‘‘an unusual amount of discipline”
and the presence of Guatemalan labor organizers. They admitted, however,
that the strikers had the sympathy of most Hondurans while the company

"RG. Leddy to J. F. Dulles, “Action to prevent delivery of Czech Arms to Guatemala.”
18 May 1954, Records of the Office of Middle American Affairs, General Records of the
Dept. of State, Lot 58D78, Box 2, RG 59; Wisner to Lampton Berry, Policy Planning Staff,
“Proposed Diversion of SS Wulfsbrook.” 6 May 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 24.

“Kermit Roosevelt tof  _|DIR 49642, 7 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 8.

Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, p. 299.

59

ceeoeeroer -

Operation PBSUCCESS

had ‘‘practically no friends.°'%° Honduran officials needed no proof of
Guatemalan complicity, believing all labor strife to be Communist inspired.
On 23 May, Galvez asked the United States to prepare to land Marines if
the situation should spin out of control. The Navy placed two warships in
the Gulf of Honduras.'”” Castillo Armas helped by sending some of his men
to provide muscle for the company." The strike and the arms shipment
persuaded Galvez that he had little to lose by helping PBSUCCESS.

In Guatemala, ( “\propagandists worked to accentuate confusion
caused by the landing of the Czech arms. The Alfhem’s arrival intensified
tensions in the capital. “‘The man on the street,’ Guatemala Station
reported, “[was] rapidly becoming convinced that ‘something’ will soon
happen.” Rightist and centrist members of the government party, PAR,
called for the resignation of party leaders. CEUA students predicted a
Communist coup. Fearing the new weapons would close the nft between
Arbenz and the military, SHERWOOD broadcast rumors that the arms were
sntended not for the Army but for labor unions and peasant cadres.

This rumor turned out to be true. Arbenz and the PGT had intended
the Alfhem shipment to remain a secret, enabling them to divert some of
the arms to workers’ militias before giving the remainder to the Army. The
Amny, however, learned of the Martinez mission and closely watched ship-
ping traffic at Puerto Barrios for signs of the arms’ arrival." Army units
sealed off the pier as soon as the Alfhem docked, setting up a security cor-
don around the port area. José Angel Sanchez, the minister of defense, took
personal charge of security and transportation arrangements. The President
had to give up his plans for arming militias. The weapons belonged to the
Army now, and taking them away would only enrage the officer corps.
Soldiers loaded the crates, marked “optical equipment,” on 123 flat cars
for the trip to Guatemala City.'” The shipment consisted of large numbers
of rifles, machineguns, antitank guns, 100 howitzers, mortars, grenades,
and antitank mines. Some of the weapons had been used, and many bore a
swastika stamp on the metal parts. The antiquated artillery pieces had wooden

ee, Jio Chief WHD. ‘Honduran Communist Activities.” HHT-34, 7 July 1954,
Job 79-01025A, Box 107: 7 “Honduran Public Opinion Favors Suikers,”
HUL-012, 22 May 1954, Job 79-01025A,. Box 107.

Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, p. 301.

“LINCOLN to [_ TJLINC 2960, 21 May 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 4.
'Gleijeses suggests tne United States alerted the Army, but this is unlikely. Agency officials
were themselves confused about the arrival of the shipment, believing until the last minute
that it could be prevented. They also placed no trust in the Armny, considering it penetrated by
Communists. Finally, the establishment of workers militias would have substantially helped
the K-Program break the military's allegiance to the government. Gleijeses, Shattered Hope,
p. 304.

Wisner to Robert B. Anderson, Under Secretary of Defense, “Guatemalan Procurement of
Arms From the Soviet Orbit,” 21 June 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 24.

60

Sufficient Means

wheels. American military advisers, who received the first reliable reports,
estimated that there was enough ammunition to last the Guatemalan Army
10 to 15 years in peacetime."””

{. “Jordered sabotage teams to destroy the Alfhem arms en route,
and the mission provided the first test of Castillo Armas’s forces. Three
four-man teams were dispatched to dynamite railroad trestles between

Puerto Barrios and Guatemala City as military trains passed over them.””".

os 4

Freshly graduated from training programs at they carried
maps A :dentifying the best targets.
All three failed. The first, on 20 May, detonated a charge that damaged an
engine slightly. Shots from the train slew one rebel commando, whose
companions returned fire killing a Guatemalan soldier. Two other attempts,
on 23 and 25 May either failed to reach the target or inflict damage.” The
arms reached the capital safely on the 26th.

Arbenz had momentarily outwitted the Agency, but by so doing he
removed the constraints on the Agency’s ability to retaliate. Before the
Alfhem incident, David Phillips observed, there was still a chance that
Holland or another official in the State Department would pull the plug on
PBSUCCESS. The arms shipment “clearly defined the issue: Guatemala
had received arms from Russia, thus Guatemala and Russia were playing
footsie. From that point, there was no question of the nature of the target,
only the question of how soon and in what manner it would be
destroyed.”

Operation HARDROCK

The Alfhem incident touched off a massive escalation of the US ef-
fort to intimidate the Guatemalan Government. The State Department con-
cluded a military assistance agreement with Honduras and began shipping
planes and tanks to Tegucigalpa. On 24 May, the Navy provided a more
daunting indicator of US resolve in operation HARDROCK BAKER, the
sea blockade of Guatemala. Submarines and warships patrolled the sea ap-
proaches to Guatemala, stopping all ships and searching for arms. The task

force was instructed to damage vessels if necessary to make them stop.
Ships transiting the Panama Canal en route to Guatemala were detained

a L }o LINCOLN, “Information re Alfhem Arms Shipment,” HGG-A-!162,
28 May 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 24; King to Dulles, “Quality and Future Disposition of
Arms Received by Guatemala from the Ship Alfhem,” 16 December 1954, Job 79-01228A,
Box 23, Wisner to Holland, “Guatemalan Arms Acquisition,” 21 June 1954, Job 79-01228A4,
Box 24. CIA had only a sketchy idea of the numbers of actual arms but a firm idea of their
weight (4,122,145 pounds) and value (approximately 35 million)..

"Wisner, “Thoughts and Possible Courses of Action concerning latest Developments in
PBSUCCESS—Anival of the Alfhelm [sic], 18 May 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 24.

cee LINCOLN cables 2900-3099, Job 79-01025A, Boxes 4 and 5.

"Debriefing Report, David Atlee Phillips, {undated}, Job 79-01025A, Box 167.

-——Seeret—-
61

rr

,
e

—Secret—
Operation PBSUCCESS

and searched. The blockade’s blatant illegality made it a powerful weapon
of intimidation. The United States stopped and boarded French and British
freighters in defiance of international law. France and Britain muted their
protests in hopes that the United States would show similar restraint with
regard to their colonial troubles in the Middle East. The message to
Guatemala was clear: If the United States would violate freedom of the
seas, it would not be stopped by so feeble an instrument as the noninter-
vention clause of the Rio Pact.’”

PBSUCCESS, too, stepped up the pressure on the Army. On 26 May,
one of Castillo Armas’s warplanes flew low over the capital, buzzed the
presidential palace and dropped leaflets in front of the headquarters of the
presidential guard. The leaflets encouraged members of the Guardia to
“Struggle against Communist atheism, Communist intervention,
Communist oppression... . Struggle with your patriotic brothers! Struggle
with Castillo Armas!’’’** “I suppose it doesn’t really matter what the
leaflets say,’ Barnes acknowledged. The real message was conveyed by
the plane itself, an intimidating weapon in a region that had never wit-
nessed aerial warfare.’” ‘If they had been napalm bombs and not leaflets,
we wouldn’t be here to talk about it,’’ one editorialist observed. Leaflet
drops on successive days were widely interpreted as practice bombing
runs.’

By the first week of June the population of Guatemala City expected
an invasion any day. Ambassadors left town “‘on urgent orders” from their
governments. The labor union federation placed its members on alert
against ‘‘reactionary elements.”’ Somoza severed diplomatic relations. On
5 June, the retired Chief of Staff of the Air Force, Rodolfo Mendoza
Azurdia, fled in a small plane{ ~ ; -
| | A
In agony, the government and the PGT sought a way out. Arbenz offered
Galvez a nonaggression pact and asked to meet with Eisenhower to relieve
tensions, but neither request elicited a response. The PGT, meanwhile, had
begun to disintegrate. After the Caracas conference, Fortuny had voiced
concerns that the party had gone “‘beyond what was realistically possible,”
advancing its program to an extent that endangered the state. He called for
“self-restraint,”” a pause in the agrarian reform, and urged Communists in
high government positions to resign. Even as he did so, he was plagued by

™Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 312-313: ‘jo Graham L. Page, “‘K-Program,” HUL-
A-989, 6 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103.

' 0 Chief of Station Guatemala, ‘‘Intended Leaflet Drop,’” HUL-A-893, 23 May
1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 103.

" “J interview by Nick Cullather, tape recording, Washington, DC, 19 June 1993
(hereafter cited as (_ "[interview). Recording on file in the DCI History Staff Office,
CIA.

'*Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 309-310.

—Seeret—
62

Sufficient Means

24 LUCHA CON TUS HERMANOS. PATRIOTAS!
1 LUCHA CON CASTILLO ARMAS !

"Leaflet dropped on 26 May. “Struggle Wit

With Castillo Armas!”

self-doubt and the near certainty that he was asking for too little, too late.
Other leaders refused to listen. L A propaganda attacks had whittled
the party’s membership down to an unmovable core, unafraid and prepared
to follow the revolution to the end.'? News of Fortuny’s resignation
reached Agency officials in the first week of June, leaving them perplexed.
Accustomed to dealing with iron-willed totalitarians, they were unused to
seeing an adversary flounder in the face of insurmountable problems and
self-doubt.

Desperate, the regime lashed out at its internal opposition. On 8 June,
Arbenz suspended civil liberties and began a roundup of suspected subver-
sives. Police arrested 480 persons in the first two weeks of June, holding
them at military bases. Many were tortured. On 14 June, one of the few
survivors of the CEUA group found the mutilated and charred body of
( j in the city morgue.” Barnes admitted that the net had

'Ibid., pp. 283-286.
[unsigned], “Informal Memorandum,” 23 June 1954, Leddy file, Job 79-01025A, Box 81.

—Seeret—
63

Operation PBSUCCESS

“suffered losses” and suggested that it be reorganized for the operation's
final phase, but there was nothing left to organize.’ Some 75 detainees
were killed and buried in mass graves in the regime's final days.

The Invasion

It was already muggy at 7:00 A.M. on [5 June when LL al
pulled into a driveway alongside a C “Jhouse belonging to LL
_J wasn’t used to the heat. He had replaced
Tranger as Chief of Guatemala Station in early May, right at the beginning
of the rainy season, when the mornings broke hot and the predictable after-
noon showers brought no relief.{. | lwas breathing down his neck for
results on the military defection project, the ““K-Program,”” and C.
had opted for the coldest of cold approaches. He would go tol ‘7
house, ring the doorbell, and ask the man to stage a Coup. Minutes later, in
Fala, he bluntly explained what. _Jalways called the “‘facts
ot life.” The time had come forL_ “Jio “get moving and take over the
Army.” This was “the last opportunity for the Army to salvage its honor
and even its existence.” L Viistened, nodding in agreement. He
was ready to help, he told A but he would need some assistance in
return. Arbenz still exercised a great deal of control over the officer corps
“1 If Castillo

Armas would have L "J -would start the coup. That
would not be possible, [ ‘replied. The times called for courage, for
taking risks. [ “Jwould have to do things for himself. The two men.

agreed to meet again the following day.”

The K-Program presented a paradox for PBSUCCESS.[ |be-
lieved the operation could not succeed without an Army revolt, but his ef-
forts to bully and frighten the officer corps into action left the military's
leaders divided and cowed. No caudillo emerged to lead soldiers against
the government, and as the o eration wore on it appeared less likely that
one would emerge. Early on. Jad picked|_ ‘\s the most likely
candidate. He had threatened to revolt, he was ambitious and opportunistic.
Peurifoy vouched for his anti-Communism. When the ume came, however,
L J] lemanded more than he offered. At the second meeting, he told
L “Jthat he had consulted

_ TJand the two had agreed that ‘‘a spectacle of force’ would be
needed to swing the Army to the side of the opposition. Labor unions had
organized progovernment demonstrations for the following day. If Castillo

Barnes to PBSUCCESS Headquarters. HUL-A-986, 16 June 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 103.
Guatemala Station to Director, { ‘}. Job 79-Q1025A, Box II.

+ 6 toe

Sufficient Means

“armas could drop a bomb in the infield of the hippodrome, tear gas the

- crowd, and buzz Arbenz’s house, the Army would act. [- con-
sidered this a reasonable request and promised to provide a suitable dis-
203
play.

“\Barnes, and Wisner were less willing to accommodate a

weak-kneed caudillo. An aerial display would prove US involvement, since

’ few Central American governments, let alone rebel movements, could
mount a bombing mission.{. [told | “}the air show was off and
instructed him to go over the facts of life one more time with C ].
[. Jhad other ways to put pressure on the Army. In his calculations,
Castillo Armas “| would soon be in competition, each trying to
topple Arbenz first. PBSUCCESS now had “‘two strings in its bow,” he
told Allen Dulles, Castillo Armas and his forces on the Honduran border,
and ‘juprising in the capital. Both options would be pursued
“since they do not become mutually exclusive until after the disposition of
the present regime.” Even if Castillo Armas suffered setbacks, his invasion
> would create the turmoil necessary forL -o seize control. Likewise,
if £ “failed, his rebellion would still immobilize the Army long
enough to allow Castillo Armas to make gains in the countryside. Even

‘assuming Castillo Armas’s defeat or assuming|_ “lfailure, there is
no problem.”
The invasion plan went into effect on 15 June, the day (_ ay

made his cold approach. Divided into four teams, Castillo Armas’s 480
“shock troops” arrived at staging areas on the Guatemalan border near the
Honduran towns of Florida, Nueva Ocotepeque, Copan, and Macuelizo.
From these areas they were to proceed to the border, arriving near midnight
on the 17th. The plan called for four rebel bands to make five separate in-
cursions into Guatemala in order to project the impression of an attack
across a broad front and to minimize the chance that the entire force could
be routed in a single enounter. The largest force, 198 soldiers, would cross
the border near Macuelizo and attack the heavily guarded port city of
Puerto Barrios. A group of 122 rebels would proceed from a base near
Florida, Honduras, and march on Zacapa, the Guatemalan Army’s largest
frontier garrison. Castillo Armas would command a group of 100 soldiers
split between base areas in Copan and Nueva Ocotepeque. These forces
“would seize the lightly defended border towns of Esquipulas,
Quezaltepeque, and Chiquimula before uniting and marching on the capi-
tal. Meanwhile, a smaller force of 60 soldiers would cross into El Salvador
and invade Guatemala from the finca of

| a

From there they woutd attack the provincial Capital Of Jutlapa (cl >alvador

eet

Guatemala Station to Director, GUAT 874, 17 June 1954, Job 79-01025A,. Box I].
"™“T INCOLN to Director. LINC 3824, 15 June 1954, Job 79-0102SA. Box 5.

—Seeret—
65

Operation PBSUCCESS

Invasion Plan, 18 June 1954

Ah

Staging area

Invasion route

Railroad ; - :

Pan-American Highway on 3 ; 9° “Gulf of
_ s Pata Goria “Honduras |

ret Agets

"| North Pacific
Ocean

Secret 729274 $-94

had refused to allow Castillo Armas to invade from its territory, C
: . . . In
addition to these regular troops, 10 trained saboteurs would fan out into the
countryside ahead of the invading troops, blowing up railroads and cutting
telegraph lines.” The rebels were to avoid direct confrontation with the
Guatemalan Army, which would unify the officer corps and lead to a quick
defeat of the rebellion. Harassing raids in remote areas would enable the

5) INCOLN to Director, LINC 3937, 16 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

66

Sufficient Means

rebels to keep a force intact while sowing panic in the capital and prodding
the military to act. Rebel aircraft were instructed to avoid hitting military
targets.

Even before H-hour, the invasion degenerated from an ambitious plan
to tragicomedy. Salvadoran policemen spotted the Jutiapa force on a road
outside Santa Ana on the afternoon of 17 June and decided to take a look.
They discovered 21 machineguns, rifles, and grenades hidden in a wagon
the men were riding. The police arrested the entire group and threw them
in the Santa Ana jail.”” Castillo Armas eventually got them deported to
Honduras but without their weapons. Jutiapa was spared. Later that even-
ing the Chiquimula force engaged in the first action of the campaign.
Approaching the border near Esquipulas, they were surprised to discover a
border guard and a customs official stationed on the previously unguarded
road. They captured the soldier and shot the customs official. He was the
first Guatemalan casualty.”

Dressed in a leather jacket and checked shirt and driving a battered
station wagon, Castillo Armas led his troops across the border at 8:20 P.M.
on 18 June. At about the same time, his planes, in partial fulfillment of

“|request, buzzed the progovernment demonstrations at the rail-
road station in Guatemala City. SHERWOOD told its listeners that “there
are reports of a battle at Esquipulas, but we do not yet have a tally of the
dead.” Castillo Armas led the Chiquimula detachment, the one thought
least likely to encounter serious resistance. On foot, and encumbered by
weapons and supplies, the rebels made slow progress, and it would be
some days before they actually captured Esquipulas, a few miles from the
border.

Meanwhile, [ | continued to demand the bombing of the race
track. With the invasion under way,{ “|was even less inclined to satisfy
what he considered a frivolous demand. He told Bissell he was ready to
give up on] “) believing he could accomplish the Army’s “‘intimida-
tion or actual defeat through air to ground action supported by shock
forces.” Wisner and Bissell quickly brought him back to reality. The “en-
tire issue in our opinion will turn on the position taken by the Guatemalan
forces,” they warned. If the rebels attacked Army garrisons, they would
succeed only in uniting the military behind Arbenz. And even if the Army
could be intimidated into inaction, police units and labor organizations
could round up the small rebel force with little trouble.” With only one
string in its bow, PBSUCCESS would fail. “Our next move,’ Dulles told
[ |“should be to exert all possible influence to persuade the Army that
their next target must be Arbenz himself if they are themselves to sur-
vive....If the Army acts it, not Castillo Armas will rule the country.”7""

» LINCOLN to Director, LINC 4065, 19 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.
LINCOLN to Director, LINC 3997, 18 June 1954, Job 79-O1025A. Box 6.
Phillips, Night Watch, p. 58.
Richard Bissell tof,  }DIR 05705, 19 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9, Wisner to
L [DIR 05535, 18 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9.
“Dulles to[. DIR 05857, 21 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9.

—Seeret—
67

Operation PBSUCCESS

Castillo Armas leaves his headquarters on the night of the invasion.

[ “J:ontinued to negotiate with while C _\ stepped
up the air war. On 19 June, rebel planes blew up a railroad bridge at
Gualin. Cargo planes dropped pallets of arms over the Guatemalan coun-
tryside to persuade the Army that a fifth column was ready to rise against
the government. Guatemala Station reported that the city was “clearing
rapidly. Cars, carts, tearing to outskirts. Fear, expectation spreading.”
But. ~\semained stubbornly inert.

The initial panic generated by the invasion and air attacks wore off as
Guatemalans realized nothing would happen immediately. On the 20th,
Guatemala Station cabled that the government was ‘“Cecovering its nerve.”
“Capital very still, stores shuttered. People waiting apathetically, consider
uprising a farce, some even speculating it a government provocation.”"""
Castillo Armas’s invaders. were not making the sort of bold strikes needed
to inspire terror in the capital. On the 20th his forces captured Esquipulas,
barely three miles from the border and defended only by a small police
force”? Meanwhile a column of 122 rebels approaching Zacapa from the

7 INCOLN to SHERWOOD, LINC 4036, 19 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.
2G yatemala Station to Director, GUAT 921. 20 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 11.
2". INCOLN to Director, LINC 4153, 21 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

—Seeret-

rn

se oem

Sufficient Means

weapons of Soviet design.

northeast encountered a small garrison of 30 soldiers led by Lt. César
Augusto Silva Girén at the small town of Gualan. Without instructions or
reinforcements from the larger garrison at Zacapa, Girdn engaged the
rebels in a 36-hour firefight, forcing them to flee toward La Union, be-
tween Gualan and Zacapa. Only 30 rebels escaped death or capture. The
casualties included their commanding officer. The survivors reported that
they had been “‘decisively defeated” by a superior force.’

The following day, the rebels’ largest force suffered a colossal defeat
at Puerto Barrios. Twenty insurgents landed a boat on the waterfront as 150
of their compatriots attacked the town from the east. Policemen and hastily
armed dock workers rounded up the amphibious force and ran off the re-
mainder, who fled across the border to San Miguel Correderos, Honduras,
and refused to rejoin the fray. After repeated requests for a report, the
defeated rebels turned off their radios and dispersed.*"* Their loss cost
Castillo Armas almost half his regular army. After three days in action, two
of the invasion’s four prongs had been turned back (one by the Salvadoran
police), and one had been halted by minor resistance.

In an effort to recover momentum, [ ‘Jauthorized air attacks on
the capital the following day, but the results were unimpressive. A single
plane, flying above 1,000 feet, managed to hit a small oil tank on the city
outskirts igniting a fire that was doused in 20 minutes. [ |
described the attack as a ‘“‘pathetic’’ gesture that left the public with an im-
pression of “incredible weakness, lack of decision, fainthearted effort.”’*”*

“Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 326-327; LINCOLN to Director, “Daily Sitrep No. 13,”
LINC 4440, 27 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

*“Ibid.; LINCOLN to Director, LINC 4477, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6; LINCOLN
to Director, “Daily Sitrep No. 9, LINC 4229, 23 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.
““LINCOLN to SHERWOOD, LINC 4194, 22 June 1954, Job 79-01025A. Box 6.

——Seeret—
69

Operation PBSUCCESS

Attempts to use aircraft for propaganda advantage were hampered by
Castillo Armas’s persistent demands for air support. Ensconced at
Esquipulas, he reported his situations as “very grave as result two pronged |
enemy attacks from Zacapa and from Jutiapa via Ipala.” If he did not
receive ‘‘heavy bombardment’’ on these fronts, he would be “forced to
abandon everything.”

Challenge at the UN

As Monzén dallied and Castillo Armas faltered, PBSUCCESS faced
another, potentially fatal challenge on the diplomatic front. On 18 June,
the day of the invasion, Guatemalan foreign minister Guillermo Toriello
petitioned the UN security council to intervene to stop the outside aggres-
sion he blamed on Nicaragua, Honduras, and the United Fruit Company.
On 20 June, the council approved a French motion enjoining all member
nations to refrain from aiding the insurgency. John Foster Dulles was furi-
ous, but to save appearances he had to support the measure. On the 21st,
Toriello asked the Security Council to take “‘whatever steps are necessary”
to enforce the resolution.” The prospect that the council could dispatch a
factfinding mission to Guatemala touched off a flurry of meetings and
phone calls between Wisner, the Dulles brothers, Assistant Secretary Henry
Holland, the President, and Henry Cabot Lodge, the US delegate to the
UN. Eisenhower was ready to use the veto. The United States had never
before vetoed a security council resolution and the first use would mean a
grave propaganda defeat. Wisner argued that the United States should al-
low some kind of an inspection mission and then try to control it. The US
should get the OAS Peace Council designated as the body of first recourse.
“Erjendly”’ delegates from the United States, Brazil, and Cuba dominated
the council. If the UN insisted on sending its own mission, the United
States should direct it to investigate the “causes” of the rebellion, includ-
ing the Alfhem shipment, land reform, and the Communist influence in
government.” Lodge adopted this position, but Holland and other State
Department officials remained apprehensive about international press reac-
tion.

‘

271 INCOLN to Director, LINC 4499, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

oye 7] Assistant Director for Current Intelligence, to A. Dulles,

“Significance of the June 20 UN Security Council Meeting.” 21 June 1954, Job 79-01228A,

Box 24.

2 Wisner, “Memorandum of Ideas Developed in Meeting in Mr. Murphy’s Office Concerning

Guatemalan Situation,” 21 June 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 24; Wisner to Holland, “Recom-

mendations for Use in Connection with Further Proceedings in the United Nations and/or the

OAS Peace Commission, Guatemala,’ 22 June 1954, ibid.; C

“Intelligence Provided Department of State Concerning Guatemala,” 20 July 1954, ibid.;
me Assistant Director Current Intelligence, to Allen Dulles, “Sig-

nificance of the 2U June UN Security Council Meeting,” 21 June 1954, ibid.

—Seeret—
ala)

—————————

Sufficient Means

For much of the world, the spring of 1954 seemed to carry a real
chance for the two superpowers to ease world tensions after eight years of
Cold War. Stalin had died in February 1953, and the new Soviet adminis-
tration appeared less sinister and more ready to reach accommodations. In
May 1954, the superpowers met to arrange a settlement of the difficult
Indochina and Formosa disputes at the Geneva Conference. In the follow-
ing weeks, however, tensions did not ease, and some in the international
press blamed the Eisenhower administration for what was seen as a lost op-
portunity. Some generally pro-Western newspapers regarded Guatemala’s
plight as further proof that the United States had adopted a needlessly
truculent posture. A former British Labor Government minister, Aneurin
Bevan, not surprisingly wrote a column headlined “‘Guatemalan Invasion is
Plot to Save American Property,” which played prominently in The Times
of India and other newspapers. On the morning of 18 June, CBS News
aired a segment on the adverse reaction in Britain, quoting an official who
observed that “despite the United Fruit Company, the United States does
not yet own all of Central America and the Carribbean.” Pravda ex-
plained the invasion as an attempt by the United States to reignite the Cold
War. USIA stations in Germany, Japan, and the Middle East reported the
sympathy of the local press for Guatemala and the universal assumption of
US complicity in the invasion. Even news organs unsympathetic to
Arbenz—like the Iranian state press—acknowledged with certainty that the
rebellion had US support. These reports made State Department officials
nervous, and their jitters spread to the Agency. [ ‘]staff was “‘ter-
rified” that the Guatemalans would make such a ruckus in international
forums that Henry Holland or other State Department officials would pull
the plug.”

The Agency, meanwhile, took steps to ensure that coverage in the
American press had a favorable slant. Peurifoy met with American report-
ers in Guatemala City to discuss “the type of stories they were writing.”
At his suggestion, ‘‘all agreed to drop words such as ‘invasion.”””’ The
French and British consuls agreed to have a word with their correspond-
ents.” Agency officials had earlier managed to have Sydney Gruson, the
New York Times correspondent, reexpelled from Guatemala. In the wake of
the Alfhem incident, Arbenz allowed Gruson back into the country.
[ ‘| staff complained that after his return Gruson’s reports parroted
“Foreign Minister Toriello’s statements regarding the Guatemalan position

247 sner to Holland, “British Attitude Toward the Guatemalan Situation,” 18 June 1954, Job
79-01228A, Box 23.

For international press reaction see Bonn to USIA, 22 June 1954; the Hague to Secretary of
State, 22 June 1954; New Delhi to Secretary of State, 25 June 1954, all three in Job
79-01025A, Box 82; Huntington D. Sheldon to Allen Dulles, “Significance of 20 June UN
Security Council Meeting,” 21 June 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 24.(. ‘Jinterview.
™Deurifoy to Willauer and Holland, GUAT 940, 23 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 11.

—Seeret—
71

Operation: PBSUCCESS

on arms purchases and denial of complicity in the Honduran strikes.”’
L “|speculated that either Arbenz had extracted a quid pro quo in ex-
change for lifting the expulsion, or that Gruson was unwilling to risk
offending Guatemalan officials a second time. He plumbed Agency files
and found that two years earlier Gruson had attended parties in Mexico
City at which Czechoslovak diplomats had been present. He took this evi-
dence to Dulles, and the Director passed it on to Arthur Hays Sulzberger,
publisher of the Times, who reassigned Gruson.”” During the battle for
Guatemala, stories in the Times originated in Mexico City.

The Jaws of Defeat

Prospects for a rebel victory steadily dimmed after the defeats at
Gualdn and Puerto Barrios. ‘Jand his staff, unable to influence the
events on which the outcome of PBSUCCESS now seemed to depend,
relayed daily reports to Headquarters detailing the dwindling fortunes of
Castillo Armas’s forces. On the 23rd, the bulk of the liberacidnistas re-
mained at Esquipulas with their commander, while an advance party en-
tered Chiquimula and traded shots with the Army barracks there. Remnants
of the force defeated at Gualdn and detachments from Esquipulas broke
into bands of 10 to 20 men and scattered among the small towns surround-
ing Zacapa, Teculutan, Vado Hondo, and Jocotdén. From these positions, the
rebels could observe large numbers of government troops moving by rail to
Zacapa.

Historians have debated the question of whether substantial numbers
of sympathizers joined Castillo Armas’s forces in the field.” There is no

ao i J«Reporting on Guatemala by New York Times Correspondent Sydney
Gruson,” 27 May 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23:U Jio PBSUCCESS Headquarters,
“Sydney Gruson,”’ HUL-A-1118, 2 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 104.0 ;

Jr., “Sydney Gruson,”” 2 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 104. Harrison Salisbury has alleged
that Dulles ‘‘deliberately deceived” Sulzberger in order to get nd of Gruson, and that ‘“Gru-
son was too good a reporter. He might spill the beans.”” In fact. was not worried about
Gruson's investigative talents. He wanted at all costs to keep Toriello’s version of events out
of the newspapers during the UN debate, and he feared Gruson was more susceptible to offi-
cial pressure than other correspondents. Dulles claimed he did not suggest a course of action
to Sulzberger, and that “our interest in this individual was only to pass on the information we
had obtained about him and any action taken thereon is the responsibility of Mr. Sulzberger.”
Deputies’ Meeting, 10 June 1954, Dulles papers, Job 80B-01676R, Box 23.

241 INCOLN to Director, “Daily Sitrep No. 9.° LINC 4229, 23 June 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 6.

255 ederick Marks, “The CIA and Castillo Armas in Guatemala, 1954: New Clues to an Old
Puzzle,” Diplomatic History 14 (Winter 1990): 70. Marks alleges that “it is clear that as
Castillo Armas advanced, his ranks were swelled by a massive influx of ranchers, peasants,
and other sympathizers who together posed a real threat to the regular army."

Sufficient Means

doubt that{_ ‘|strategy relied on such reinforcements. The original in-
vasion force numbered only 480 and was broken into smaller contingents
- that would be outnumbered in a fight with even a small Guatemalan Army
garrison. These original soldiers were intended to be the core of a larger
~ force that would spontaneously rise and join Castillo Armas as he marched
on the capital. Preparations were made for weapons to be airdropped to the
swelling ranks. Agency records reveal that recruits did join Castillo Armas,
and in substantial numbers, but only in places where the liberaciénistas
met no resistance. Where the rebels were engaged in actual combat, no
recruits materialized and the original force suffered high rates of desertion.
On the 21st, Castillo Armas had asked for supplies for 500 additional men
at Esquipulas.”* His forces there and in Chiquimula eventually came to
comprise 1,200 men, all receiving food and weapons from airdrops. In the
vicinity of Zacapa, however, where regular Army units constantly threat-
ened rebel bands, the number of insurrectionists dropped from 180 to 30
between 23 and 29 June.” The recruits taxed the operation’s overburdened
supply system without allowing Castillo Armas to strike effectively at the
enemy.

The Arbenz regime, meanwhile, laid plans to destroy Castillo Armas.
The victories at Puerto Barrios and Gualdn gave Arbenz confidence that the
Army would do its duty and crush the invasion. He asked Diaz to allow the
rebels to penetrate into the interior of the country unopposed. Neither man
feared Castillo Armas’s ragtag army, but both considered the invasion part
of a larger US plan to create a pretext for direct intervention. They chose a
strategy designed to defeat the rebels without furnishing a justification for
landing the Marines. On 19 June, most of the soldiers of the Base Militar
and the Guardia de Honor left by rail for Zacapa, where they were ordered
to wait and engage the rebel army when it arrived. When Castillo Armas’s
scouts reached the outskirts of Zacapa, they found trainloads of soldiers
and supplies arriving hourly in the already heavily occupied town. These
war preparations masked the profound demoralization afflicting the officers
responsible for saving the country. Like Arbenz, they feared US interven-
tion, but unlike the president, they placed little faith in the ability of the
United Nations to restrain Eisenhower. Sitting in Zacapa, they ruminated
on the likely consequences of defeating Castillo Armas, murmuring that
Marines might already be landing in Honduras.”

261 INCOLN to Director, LINC 4153, 21 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

"Compare LINCOLN to Director, “‘Daily Sitrep No. 9," LINC 4229, 23 June 1954, Job
79-01025A, Box 6, with LINCOLN to Director, “Daily Sitrep Number 14,"" LINC 4507,
29 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

24 INCOLN to Director, LINC 4412, 27 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6; Gleijeses,
Shattered Hope, pp. 334-340.

73

Operation PBSUCCESS

Actual Invasion, Late June 1954

# wre 4 4
= Staging area

Invasion route

Objective

Final extent of rebel-
controlled territory

Railroad
Pan-American Highway
Road

INTs ; Rebel forces defeated,

Amny garrison surrenders
to rebels without a
fight, 23 June

aS Rebels capture city,

, 20 June 1993
ee,

PRN
dutia Lae
by +.
auth
OY

North Pacific
Ocean

Secret 729791 5-94

The Communists were the first to warn Arbenz that the Army would
not defend the government. On 23 June, a PGT official visited Zacapa and
found the officers cowering in their barracks, terrified and unwilling to
fight. Fortuny reported the situation to Arbenz two days later. In disbelief,
Arbenz sent a trusted officer to speak to the field commanders. He returned
with the same report and a message. The officers “think that the Americans .
are threatening Guatemala just because of you and your Communist |

74

Sufficient Means

friends. If you don’t resign, the Army will march on the capital to depose
you.” He predicted that if Arbenz did not act quickly, the Army would
strike a bargain with Castillo Armas. Confirmation arrived later that day
with the news that the 150-man Chiquimula garrison had surrendered to the
rebels without a fight.”

Agency stations in Guatemala city, [ andl |
never learned what happened at Zacapa.[_ “\ind Peurifoy were con-
vinced that only _|could induce the Army to betray Arbenz, and

remained in the capital, ignorant of the treason of his brother
officers. For{L and other Agency observers in Miami and Washington,
what happened in the next few days seemed curious and magical. Just as
the entire operation seemed beyond saving, the Guatemalan Government
suddenly, inexplicably collapsed. The Agency never found out why. After
the conclusion of PBSUCCESS, no one asked captured Guatemalan offi-
cials what happened in the regime’s final days. Instead, an Agency legend
developed, promoted by Bissell and other officials close to the operation,
that Arbenz “lost his nerve”’ as a result of the psychological pressure of air
attacks and radio propaganda.” In fact, Arbenz was deposed in a military
coup, and neither the radio nor the air attacks had much to do with it. It
was natural, however, for PBSUCCESS officers to feel these elements had
been decisive. In the operation’s last days, they were all that was left.

‘As Arbenz learned the horrible truth,[ _Jstruggled with setbacks
of his own. By 23 June, he judged the K-Program a failure and decided that
the only remaining chance for success lay in a military victory. “Army
defection now considered a matter of a test of arms,’’ he cabled
Headquarters. He ordered CAT pilots to attack military targets, counter-
manding previous orders to spare the Army while defection efforts were
under way. Informing Dulles that “airpower. could be decisive” in the en-
suing days, he asked for additional fighter aircraft. That day, the Director
met at the White House with Eisenhower and Holland. The latter strongly
opposed sending planes to Castillo Armas, a move that would confirm US
involvement and violate a Security Council resolution approved by the
United States. Eisenhower listened to these objections and then asked
Dulles what chance the rebels would have without the aircraft.

“About zero,” the Director replied.

‘Suppose we supply the aircraft,” the President asked. ‘“What would
be the chances then?”

*thid., pp. 332-333.

Oral history interview with Richard M. Bissell, Jr., 5 June 1967, Dwight D. Eisenhower
Library, Job 85-0664R, Box 5.

Dit INCOLN to Director, “Daily Sitrep No. 9," LINC 4229, 23 June 1954. Job 79-01025A,
Box 6.

75

Operation PBSUCCESS

“About 20 percent.”” Dulles allowed. The President considered the
answer realistic and gave the order to send two fighters. “If you’d said
90 percent,” he later told Dulles, “Pq have said no.” Unknown to both
men, the chances of success were substantially higher. The Guatemalan
Army had given Arbenz its ultimatum before the all-out air offensive be-
gan.

The aircraft had little apparent effect on the situation in the field.
Pilots found most of their World War II surplus bombs failed to explode.
Strafing produced the best results, but still failed to prevent or delay the
Army buildup in Zacapa. Rebel planes strafed troop trains, exploding the
boilers of several. The troops, however, continued toward their destination
on foot. Repeated strafing runs would scatter but not deter them. Bombing
runs on Zacapa also had no visible effect on the concentration of forces
there. In a final attempt to spur L “|rebel planes successfully bombed
the Matamoros fortress in downtown Guatemala City on 25 June, touching
off secondary explosions, but _)continued to wait. With the gloves
off, the mercenary aviators became overenthusiastic in their choice of tar-
gets. One dropped his load on a British freighter, the Springfjord, in port at
San José. This time the bombs exploded, sending the vessel to the bottom,
an unfortunate incident for which the Agency later had to pay $1 million in
restitution.”

“\augmented the air strikes with intensified radio propaganda,
breaking into military channels and broadcasting stories of reverses at the
front, without discernible effect. The capture of Chiquimula provided
a momentary bright spot, but { |secognized that Castillo Armas owed
his successes to the Guatemalan Army's restraint. If the Army moved,
the rebellion would be crushed.”*{_ _\ worried, too, about Toriello’s
diplomatic offensive. On the 25th, he foresaw a “‘serious possibility that
cease fire may be enforced soon and inspection teams sent” to Guatemala,
Honduras, and Nicaragua. He instructed Castillo Armas to try to “obtain
the most advantageous position prior to any cessation of hostilities.”

Dwight D. Eisenhower, Mandate for Change. 1953-1956 (Garden City, NY: Doubleday and
Co., 1963), pp. 425-426.

™ Unsigned] to Leddy, 14 July 1954, Leddy file, Job 79-01025A, Box 81. The blame for this
incident can be distributed across a wide front. Somoza told PBSUCCESS pilots at Puerto
Cabesas on the 27th that the Springfjord was unloading fuel and arms (in fact, it was loading
cotton). A bombing run on San José’s fuel tanks was scheduled for that day, and

= “che Agency officer in charge, did not instruct the pilot “specifically te ~oid hit-
ting any shipping.” L FZ -nuested authority to bomb the British vessel from{_ —_Jin-
itiating a discussion between. Jin Florida, and Barnes, at Langley, over whether
bombing of international shipping would further the economic warfare objectives of PBSUC-
CESS. They finally decided not to authorize the bombing “‘at present,” but by then the pilot
was airborne. LINCOLN to Director, LINC 4509, 29 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

1 INCOLN to Director, “Sitrep No. 10," LINC 4271, 24 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6;
LINCOLN to Director, “Sitrep No. 11,” LINC 4368, 26 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6;
LINCOLN to Director, “Sitrep No. 12," LINC 4319, 25 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.
351 INCOLN to Director, ‘“Sitrep No. 12, LINC 4319, 25 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

—Seeret—
76

Sufficient Means

Although Guatemalan troops remained quartered at Zacapa garrison, 7

Castillo Armas faced a growing threat from police and armed peasants. On
26 June, nearly all of the widely dispersed rebel units radioed pleas for air
strikes against armed opponents.’ The following day, Castillo Armas
mounted an attack on Ipala and was tured back. He reported a “‘strong
column” moving from Ipala to Quezaltepeque to sever his line of retreat
from Chiquimula.”’ Although he was fighting a guerrilla campaign,
Castillo Armas conceptualized his position in conventional terms, and
sought with his tiny army to seize and occupy territory. His response to an
attack on any of his “fronts” was to demand an air strike. Agency officials
tired of these demands and of the rebel commander’s preference for frontal
assaults on populated areas, which usually ended in disaster. Bissell and
Wisner wanted the rebels to remain in the countryside, broken into small
contingents that would strike and melt away in true guerrilla fashion.

In that way the rebels could keep the Army occupied while eliminating the ©

chance of losing their entire force in a single disastrous encounter.
On 28 June, Bissell ordered [ ‘Tlto try to get Castillo Armas to change
tactics.”

There was no need. Castillo Armas’s troops had done their job. On
25 June, Arbenz had summoned his Cabinet, party officials, and union
leaders to inform them that the Army was in revolt and that the only hope
was to arm the populace. Diaz and union leaders agreed to cooperate,
but the following day no citizen army materialized. Union members had
previously fought for the government alongside the Army, but the pros-
pect of fighting both the Army and Castillo Armas was too daunting.
SHERWOOD was broadcasting that columns of rebel troops were converg-
ing on the capital. Only a handful showed up to ask for arms, but there
were none available. Diaz reneged on his promise. He was closeted with
SAnchez, Monzén, and other military leaders plotting to seize power for
themselves.””

The Capitulation

Peurifoy met with the plotters on the afternoon of 27 June and
learned that they planned to take power that night. They promised to
“move immediately on seizing commie leaders and sending them out of
the country,’’ but they refused to deal with Castillo Armas, and asked

**, INCOLN to Director, LINC 4931, 26 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.
71 INCOLN to Director, LINC 4477, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.
*Bissell to LINCOLN, DIR 06786, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9.
*Gleijeses, Shattered Hope pp. 342-345.

—Seeret—
77

Operation PBSUCCESS

Peurifoy to arrange a cease-fire. The Ambassador wanted Arbenz out but
he did not intend to “become part of another Mihailovich-Tito deal.”” He
did not “‘trust the Army leaders, either on anti-Communism or on keeping
faith with the United States. They are collaborators with Communism and
must pay penalty in form Castillo Armas assumption of presidency.’’ He
remained silent, allowing the colonels to think they would be allowed to
take power with US consent.” [ | ordered a “maximum air show”’
over Guatemala City for the following afternoon.”

That evening at 8:00 Arbenz announced his resignation. He was turn-
ing over executive power to Colonel Diaz, he explained, ‘‘because I am
certain he will guarantee democracy in Guatemala and all the social con-
quests of our people will be. maintained.” “The enemy who commands the
bands of foreign mercenaries recruited by Castillo Armas is not only weak
but completely cowardly”” as was proven at Puerto Barrios and Gual4n. He
expressed full confidence that, with the Army united behind Diaz, the
rebels would be quickly routed.? He had not ‘‘cracked.”” Diaz had per-
suaded him that an arrangement—a “‘Mihailovich-Tito deal” in Peurifoy’s
words—could be reached that would allow the Army to coopt and then dis-
card Castillo Armas. By turning over power to the military, Arbenz hoped
to salvage most of the gains of the 1944 revolution while defeating the re-
bellion and defusing US opposition.

Moments later, Diaz took the microphone and proclaimed that he was
seizing power in the name of the Revolution of 1944, and that the Army
would continue the fight against Castillo Armas. ““We have been double-
crossed,’” Peurifoy cabled Headquarters. Diaz, Sanchez, and Monzén
formed a junta that retained in power most of the Arbenz Cabinet. When
Peurifoy asked if they would negotiate with the rebels, the junta leaders
“evaded all issues, praised their own anti-Communism, slandered Castillo
Armas.” They warned Fortuny and other Communist leaders to seek asy-
lum in foreign embassies. Peurifoy cabled Washington to “urgently recom-
mend bombing Guatemala City. . . . Bombs would persuade them fast."”

That night [ Jandl ‘|who had arrived in

Guatemala City for the denouement, decided to do some persuading of

their own. At 6:00 in the morning, they called on Diaz to give him an up-
date on the facts of life. [ ° _] began to spell out the importance of

“°peurifoy to Willauer, GUAT 986, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 11.

*1 INCOLN to Director, “Daily Sitrep No. 14, LINC 4472, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 6.

“Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, pp. 199-200.

206 watemala Station to Director, GUAT 992, 28 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 6.

78

aw ae we &

Sufficient Means

acting quickly against the Communists. [_ “Jinterrupted him.
“Colonel,” he explained, “‘you are not convenient for American foreign
policy.”*"* Diaz had to hear it from Peurifoy himself, and a few hours later
the Ambassador confirmed C.  ‘Jinterpretation of American foreign
policy. The colonel grudgingly stepped aside.

With Diaz out of the way, Peurifoy decided the Agency ought to step
aside and allow the State Department to negotiate with Guatemalan offi-
cials. He asked Wisner to “have a little talk” with ~ |] who had
done an “‘outstanding job’’ but needed now to “retire more to the back-
ground.” On 30 June, Wisner sent]. d a message known after-
wards as the ‘“‘shift of gears cable.’’ With hostilities concluded and a
settlement in sight, he observed, the Station should concern itself with ac-
tivities “‘for which this Agency is more strictly responsible and peculiarly
qualified.” The time had come “‘for the surgeons to step back and the
nurses to take over the patient.”” All questions of policy and matters that
could be handled overtly should be dealt with by the State Department.
Agency officials would stay on to collect captured documents and continue
propaganda activities in support of Castillo Armas.”“* PBSUCCESS was
over.

In the 11 days after Arbenz’s resignation five successive juntas
occupied the presidential palace, each more amenable to American
demands than the last. Peurifoy wanted a junta that included both Castillo
Armas and Monzoén. Substantive issues like land reform disappeared after
the first two coups, and discussion centered on ways to satisfy the pride of
the two military groups. Castillo Armas wanted to march into Guatemala
City at the head of his men. Monzé6n refused to allow a triumphal march
and insisted on being allowed to remain in office for a month before ceding
power to Castillo Armas. Peurifoy and President Osorio presided over the
talks in San Salvador. Anxious to arrest the few Communists remaining at
large, Wisner dismissed Castillo Armas’s demands as “‘dangerous non-
sense.”’ Peurifoy bullied and cajoled until on 2 July, the two men signed
the ““Pacto de San Salvador,’ forming a combined Army-liberacidnista
junta”

Wisner cabled his congratulations for a performance that “surpassed
even our greatest expectations.”’ Peurifoy ‘“‘can take great comfort and
satisfaction from fact that his accomplishments are already well known and
fully appreciated in al] important quarters of government.” But it was

*{ interview.

nee CUT foy to Leddy, 13 July 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

“Wisner to Chief of Station Guatemala, DIR 07144, 30 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9.

Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, pp. 353-355; Wisner to Chief of Station Guatemala City, DIR
07304, I July 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9.

“Wisner ta Chief of Station Guatemala City, DIR 08299, 30 June 1954, Job 79-01025A,
Box 9.

79

Operation PBS UCCESS

not a complete victory. A week of chaos had allowed leading Communists
to escape. Many took refuge in embassies. ‘ie } went to see Fortuny,
the former head of the PGT, at the Mexican Embassy and found him a shat-
tered man, unable to speak. As he left, a young attaché stopped him with a
question, ‘‘does this mean the United States will not allow a Communist
government anywhere in the hemisphere?” ( J put on his hat. “Draw
your own conclusions,” he said, and walked out.””

L JJinterview.

80

Chapter 4
The Sweet Smell of Success

What we'd give to have an Arbenz now. We are going to have to invent one,
but all the candidates are dead. 20
US State Department official, 1981

PBSUCCESS officers concluded their business and began withdraw-
ing on 1] July 1954. The Voz de la Liberacién went off the air the following
day, and David Atlee Phillips packed its mobile transmitter for shipment to
the States. In [ ; “|began collecting files and preparing to
close [ _ He ordered Guatemala Station to destroy documents
pertaining to PBSUCCESS.™' As Frank Wisner had said, it was time for
the Agency to return to the tasks for which it was “peculiarly qualified.”
But the Agency would never be the same after PBSUCCESS. The triumph
showed what could be accomplished through covert action, and its lessons,
learned and unlearned, would have ramifications for years to come.
The Agency’s initial jubilation gave way to misgivings as it became
clear that victory in Guatemala had been neither as clear nor as unambigu-
ous as originally thought. In Latin America, the Eisenhower administration
came under heavy fire for its actions, and Guatemala became a symbol of
the stubborn resistance of the United States to progressive, nationalist poli-
cies. Castillo Armas’s new regime proved embarrassingly inept. Its repres-
sive and corrupt policies soon polarized Guatemala and provoked a Morigetics.
renewed civil conflict. Operation PBSUCCESS aroused resentments that oe
continue, almost 40 years after the event, to prevent the Agency from
revealing its role.

Mopping Up

After sending his “shift of gears’’ cable, Wisner turned his attention
to finding ways to exploit the victory of PBSUCCESS. The defeat of
Arbenz not only boosted the Agency's reputation in Congress and the

*°Quoted in Marlise Simons, ‘Guatemala: The Coming Danger,” Foreign Policy 43 (Sum-
mer 1981): 103.

“Cyrus Bumette to J. C. King, “Plot by Arbenz Government Against United Fruit Co.,”
HGG-A-1285, 29 July 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 100.

“Wisner to T I DIR 07144, 30 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 9.

——Secret—
8]

_______ rst /tSaS fla a e

Operation PBSUCCESS

administration, it provided a chance to expose Soviet machinations
throughout the hemisphere. Wisner was anxious not to allow any opportu-
nity to pass. Amid the ruins of Arbenz’s government lay prizes worth col-
lecting: documents, defectable Communists, and openings for propaganda.
Wisner tried to seize what he could.

In early July, he sent two officers, ‘Jand L . of
the Counterintelligence Staff, to Guatemala City to do a “‘snatch job on
documents while the melon was freshly burst open.”” He hoped to find
papers that would enable the Agency to trace Soviet connections through-
out Latin America and identify “people who can be controlled and ex-
ploited to further US policy.”’” In addition, he thought the captured papers:
would conclusively prove the Communist nature of the Arbenz regime. He
named the project PBHISTOR\ L J arrived on 4 July along
with a two-man State Department team. They discovered that the PGT
headquarters and offices of labor unions and police organizations had al-
ready been plundered systematically by the army and unsystematically by
looters and street urchins. L | who arrived a few days earlier,
had bought secret police documents from a small boy. Party and govern-
ment offices stood unguarded, their doors and windows broken, with offi-
cial documents lying on the floor in heaps.”

With the help of the Army and Castillo Armas’s junta, the team
gathered 150,000 documents, but most of what it found had only “local
significance.”” Few of the papers concerned “‘the aspects thal we are most
interested in, namely the elements of Soviet support and control of
Communism in Guatemala.’"** Nor did the documents identify individuals
vulnerable to exploitation. Ronald M. Schneider, an outside researcher who
later examined the PBHISTORY documents, found no traces of Soviet con-
trol and substantial evidence that Guatemalan Communists acted alone,
without support or guidance from outside the country.

The operation produced enough material to fill a booklet distributed
to the National Security Council, members of the Senate, and other in-
terested officials. It contained photographs of Arbenz’s library of Marxist
literature, Chinese Communist materials on agrarian reform, pages from
Mrs. Arbenz’s copy of Stalin’s biography, evidence that Arbenz had tried to
purchase arms from Italy, and various letters and cables revealing a “strong
pro-Communist bias.”” Wisner wanted more incriminating material, but the
brochure was sufficient to impress the NSC staff.”

“Wisner, ‘Exploitation and Follow Ups,” [undated], Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

a Chief RQM., OIS, to Wisner, “Mechanics for Exploitation of Guatemalan
Dorumerts " 78% July 1954. Job 79-Q1228A, Box 23.

* , Counterintelligence Staff, ‘‘Report on Activity in
Guatemala City, 4-16 July 1954,°° 28 July 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

Ibid.

57echneider's Communism in Guatemala, 1944-1954 was based on PBHISTORY matenals.
*Counterintelligence Staff C, “Documents Obtained in a Brief, Preliminary Sampling of the
Documentary Evidence of Communist Infiltration and Influence in Guatemala,’ 28 July
1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

RP

—Seeret—

The Sweet Smell of Success

Apart from documents, the Agency also had an interest in two other
remnants of the Arbenz regime—the Alfhem arms and the assortment of
political refugees encamped in embassy compounds around Guatemala
City. After the United States provided Guatemala with military aid,
Castillo Armas offered to sell the Czech arms to the Agency in order to
raise money to purchase aircraft. Agency officials were initially intrigued,
but when military advisers surveyed the equipment they found it obsolete
and in poor condition. Logistics warned that the arms could be easily
traced, and the Western Hemisphere Division advised that it could think of
no use for them. Allen Dulles declined the offer.”

Wisner and Barnes initially regarded the presence of several dozen
high government and party officials in the embassies of Mexico, Argentina,
El Salvador, and Chile as a propaganda opportunity. In early August, they
proposed to have Castillo Armas’s junta attempt to deport the asylum seek-
ers to the Soviet Union. If the Soviets agreed, it would confirm the former
regime’s relationship with Moscow and remove Arbenz and his cronies
from the hemisphere. If they did not, Wisner beamed, “then we have
another excellent propaganda gambit, viz: ‘See what happens to Moscow's
unsuccessful agents and operatives." The scheme proved impossible to
execute. Guatemala had no diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, so a
request required Moscow’s cooperation, which was not forthcoming.
Wisner remained fond of the idea, but by the beginning of September,
Assistant Secretary of State Henry Holland was trying to get Mexico to
turn former Guatemalan officials over to the junta for trial. Mexico’s
Embassy held the most distinguished cohort, including Fortuny and
Arbenz. Holland tried to persuade the Mexicans to accept the “principle
that the traditional benefits of asylum should be denied international
Communists,” but they would have none of it."

State and Agency officials now began to regard the asylum seekers as
a “troublesome and unsettled matter.” They worried that Guatemalan
Communists would be allowed free passage to Mexico City, where they
could plot their return. It was a useless worry. The PGT members who
wished to stay active in politics remained at large, unmolested by Castillo
Armas’s police, who concentrated on arresting thousands of peasants who
tried to remain on the land granted them by Decree 900. The PGT re-
mained active underground until the late 1960s, when a more proficient

Wiener to Dulles, “Utilization of the Alfhem Arms Shipment to Guatemala,” 14 December
1954, with attachments, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

Wisner to Holland, “Proposal of Combined Department of State and CJA for Action to
Exploit Asylee Situation in Guatemala,” 3 August 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

7 olland to J. Foster Dulles, “Asylee Problem in Guatemala,” 10 August, 1954, Job
79-01228A, Box 23.

22.7 cner to King, “Guatemala; Conference with Messrs Leddy and Mann,” 31 August,
1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

—Seeret—
$3

a

ee wen mananenen ae menemmer re

een ee ls a am

Operation PBSUCCESS

Guatemalan police force arrested, tortured, and killed Victor Gutiérrez and
11 other leaders, sewed their bodies into burlap sacks and dropped them in
the ocean from an army transport plane.”® Castillo Armas, embarrassed by
the deposed president’s continued presence in the capital, allowed Arbenz
free passage to Mexico on 12 September 1954. He insisted on a final hu-
miliation and ordered Arbenz to be strip searched at the airport. For the
next 17 years Arbenz lived a peripatetic existence in France, Uruguay, —
Switzerland, and Cuba, returning finally to Mexico where in 1971 he
drowned in his bathtub.” Fortuny also went to Mexico City, where he still
lives.

In mid-August, Eisenhower summoned the operation’s managers to
the White House for a formal briefing. There, before the Cabinet, Vice
President Nixon, and Eisenhower's family, >} Phillips, 0
Dulles, Bames, Wisner, and King explained the operation with maps and
slides. The audience listened respectfully. At the end, the President asked
how many men Castillo Armas had lost. ‘Only one,” a briefer lied.”
Eisenhower shook his head; ‘“incredible,”” he murmured.’ Indeed, it
had been incredible. Had the Guatemalan Army crushed Castillo Armas
at Chiquimula, as it easily could have done, investigations would have
uncovered the chronic lapses in security, the failure to plan beyond the
operation’s first stages, the Agency’s poor understanding of the intentions
of the Army, the PGT, and the government, the hopeless weakness of
Castillo Armas’s troops, and the failure to make provisions for the possibil-
ity of defeat. All of these were swept away by Arbenz’s resignation, and
PBSUCCESS went into Agency lore as an unblemished triumph.
Eisenhower’s policymakers drew confidence from the belief that covert
action could be used as a convenient, decisive final resort.

Over the following years, the Eisenhower administration employed
covert actions to build a government in South Vietnam and support an
abortive separatist movement in Sumatra. In early 1960, when the Agency
needed to overthrow the regime of Fidel Castro in Cuba, it reassembled the
PBSUCCESS team in L “Bissell, Barnes, and
Phillips all took leading positions in operation JMARC, an operation
designed to create a ‘liberated area’’ in Cuba. As originally conceived, the
area would contain a radio propaganda operation like SHERWOOD and
become a focal point to which opposition elements could rally. Like
PBSUCCESS, the operation relied on a rebel army of exiles and air support
from World War II-era aircraft manned by Cuban and American pilots. It

*Gleijeses, Shattered Hope, p. 388.

Ibid. pp. 390-392.

*SThe number of opposition casualties (as well as the total number of casualties) is unknown,
but Agency files indicate that at least 27 were killed at Puerto Barrios, another 16 at Gualan.
In addition, some 75 members of the civilian opposition were killed in Guatemalan jails be-
fore the fall of Arbenz.

philips, The Night Watch, pp. 62-64,

—Seeret—

OA

—Seeret—
The Sweet Smell of Success

was not a copy of PBSUCCESS, but an improvement built around the ele-
_ments of the Guatemala operation that had been considered effective: radio,
airpower, and an insurrectionary army.” The operation underwent many
changes before ending in fiasco at the Bay of Pigs, but these elements re-
mained central to the plan. Afterwards, many of those involved in the two
operations linked the success in Guatemala with the failure at the Bay of
Pigs. “If the Agency had not had Guatemala,” E. Howard Hunt, a case
officer who served in both PBSUCCESS and JMARC, later observed, “St
probably would not have had Cuba.” Even after the Cuban disaster dis-
credited its strategies, PBSUCCESS continued to cast a shadow on policy
in Latin America. “The language, arguments, and techniques of the Arbenz
episode,” one analyst observed in the 1980s, ‘were used in Cuba in the
early 1960s, {_ in the Dominican Republic in 1965, and in

9 407

International Condemnation

Even before the afterglow of the White House briefing wore off, the
Eisenhower administration had reason to question whether PBSUCCESS
had delivered an undiluted victory. Agency and State Department officials
were shocked at the ferocity of international protest after the fall of
Arbenz. The London Times and Le Monde attacked the cynical hypocrisy
behind America’s “modern forms of economic colonialism,” while in
Rangoon protesters stoned the American Embassy.” UN Secretary General
Dag Hammarskjold charged that “the United States’ attitude was com-
pletely at variance with the [UN] Charter.’”” The British Foreign Office
found German newspapers “surprisingly critical,” even ones “not usually
hostile to America.”’ British officials considered John Foster Dulles’s
gloating remarks after the coup as virtually “an admission that the rebel-
lion was an outside job."

Whitehall soon put aside its initial disgust and helped unruffle
European feathers. Foreign Office officials were ready to lodge complaints
over the naval blockade, the Springfjord incident, and the failure of the
OAS investigation team to get closer than Mexico City. Prime Minister
Winston Churchill, however, persuaded them that forbearance in this 1n-

stance might be rewarded when Britain needed to quell the next distur-—

bance in its empire. “I'd never heard of this bloody place Guatemala until I
L

ae 4

Quoted in Immerman, CIA in Guatemala, p. 190.

ci mons. “Guatemala,” p. 94. Some have claimed an even longer shadow for PBSUCCESS.
Philip C. Roettinger, a PBSUCCESS case officer, wrote in 1986 that “i is painful to look on
as my Government repeats the mistakes in which it engaged me thirty-two years ago. | have
grown up. J only wish my Government would do the same.” Philip C. Roettinger, “The
Company, Then and Now,” The Progressive, July 1986, p. 50.

Rangoon to Secretary of State, 27 June 1954, Job 79-01025A, Box 82.
rreers, “The British Connection,” pp. 422-423.

—Seeret—
85

Nets Ae (one Dee
DRE

ee eee een he ete lll a READ Re OOO

nn na ne ee ee

Operation PBSUCCESS

was in my seventy-ninth year,” he growled. Britain helped cover up the
Springfjord affair and issued a “white paper” that ratified the Agency’s
version of events. Eisenhower, however, felt no obligation to return the
favor in kind, as Churchill’s successor learned two years later at Suez.”

In Latin America, the Arbenz regime’s demise left an enduring
legacy of anti-Americanism. In Havana, Santiago, Mexico City, Buenos
Aires, and Rio de Janeiro, large crowds gathered to burn the stars and
stripes and effigies of Eisenhower and Dulles. “‘Societies of the Friends of
Guatemala” sprang up to keep alive the memory of American imperialism
and Guatemala’s martyrdom.” The State Department was “frightened by
reactions all over,” according to the Secretary.’ An Agency official
reported that the demonstrations “revealed a surprising and embarrassing
influence of Communists on public opinion.” Daniel James, the influential
editor of The New Leader, predicted that “in death the Guatemalan party
may prove to be a bigger assét to the Kremlin than in life.”””

This was an overstatement, but victory over Arbenz proved to be a
lasting propaganda setback. Resentment even found artistic expression in
the work of Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, who depicted in fresco
Peurifoy and the Dulles brothers passing money to Castillo Armas and
Monzén over the bodies of Guatemalan children. Several Mexican maga-
zines reproduced the mural.””* Among the crowds that spat and threw
vegetables at Vice President Richard Nixon in 1957 were signs condemn-
ing the suppression of Guatemala. For Latin Americans determined to
change their counties’ feudal social structures, Guatemala was a formative
experience. ‘The Guatemala intervention,” according to one historian,
“shaped the attitudes and stratagems of an older generation of radicals, for
whom this experience signaled the necessity of armed struggle and an end
to illusions about peaceful, legal, and reformist methods.” 7 This genera-
tion included Che Guevara and Fidel Castro, who learned from
Guatemala’s experience the importance of striking decisively against oppo-
nents before they could seek assistance from outside.

The Liberator

While PBSUCCESS succeeded in removing a government, it failed
to install an adequate substitute. Agency officials might have felt more
sanguine in their victory if Castillo Armas had been an able leader. The

™ hid., pp. 422-428.

Wisner, “The Friends of Guatemala,” 19 June 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.
™Gleiieses, Shattered Hope, p. 371.

» “|-*Comment on ‘Lessons of Guatemala’ by Daniel James,” 19 August 1954, Job
79-01228A.

26«vo No Miento! Gnta Diego,” Impacto, 29 January 1955, pp. 20-25; Lux: La Revista de
los Trabajadores (magazine of the Mexican Electricians Union), 15 February 1955, (cover).
27}ames Dunkerly, Power in the Isthmus: A Political History of Modern Central America
(London: Verso, 1988) p. 429.

86

The Sweet Smell of Success

AS

Le : a: TERESS eee gp SAENOERER S pe SaEE ) x
95, depicts John r Dulles shak-

invasion’s disastrous setbacks dispelled all illusions about his capabilities,
and US officials had low expectations at the outset of his presidency. Even
these proved optimistic. Hopes that he would align himself with centrist
and moderate elements were dashed within weeks, as the new junta sought
out the only elements not tainted by ties to the Arbenz regime, the aged
and embittered retainers of Ubico. Castillo Armas named José Bernabé
Linares, Ubico’s hated secret police chief, to head the new regime’s secu-
rity forces. Linares soon banned all ‘‘subversive”’ literature, including
works by Victor Hugo and Fyodor Dostoevsky. Castillo Armas completed
his lunge to the right by disfranchising illiterates (two-thirds of the elec-
torate), canceling land reform, and outlawing all political parties, labor
confederations, and peasant organizations. Finally, he decreed a “‘political
statute” that voided the 1945 constitution and gave him complete executive
and legislative authority.”

These depredations worried John Foster Dulles less than the new re-
gime’s chronic insolvency. Castillo Armas came to power just as interna-
tional coffee buyers, convinced that prices had risen too high, mounted a
“buyers strike’? against Central and South American growers. A few
months later, Guatemala felt the first effects of a year-long drought that
devastated the corn crop. The new regime opened its arms to American in-
vestors, but the only takers were Mafia figures who joined with
Guatemalan Army officers in opening gambling halis.”’’ Meanwhile,

"Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, p. 221.
*Ibid., p. 234.

87

Operation PBSUCCESS

a

‘

*
0

@.

deen owe Bate ey net Ne BOO OS 8 OR RT EE TI IY OT EO I ”

Wide World (AP) ©
Armas chats with his aide,

ista army.

illo
i

r, President Cast

who served in the L

ing powe

A year after tak.
Miguel Mendoza

beraciéni

i

F

sete emer res eee sewers

RR

The Sweet Smell of Success

American “promoters, carpetbaggers and others” raised expectations in
Guatemala City that a large US aid package would be easy to get. Castillo
Armas surprised the State Department’s Thomas Mann in September with a
request for $260 million in aid, including plans for a $60 million national
highway network.” The Department had planned to give $4 million in
grant aid and to ask the International Monetary Fund for a $20 million loan
for road development, fearing that higher levels would provoke other Latin
countries to submit requests.’ By the end of the year, it was apparent that
each country had entirely unrealistic expectations of the other. The United
States wanted Castillo Armas to maintain a fiscally responsible govern-
ment, while Castillo Armas recognized that his claim to authority rested on
his ability to deliver goods from the United States.

Guatemala quickly came to depend on handouts from the United
States. The government's foreign reserves dropped from $42 million at the
end of 1953 (when it was easy for Arbenz to spare $5 million for Czech
arms), to a rockbottom $3.4 million in April 1955.” At this point, the re-
gime could no longer borrow internally. Capital flight, black markets, and
other signs of approaching bankruptcy discredited the regime. Wisner com-
plained of ‘‘the inability on the part of the Government to realize sufficient
revenues to operate.” When aid and multilateral loans ran out, the State
Department offered to help Castillo Armas obtain private loans, but the
Agency worried about the propaganda ramifications of making its client
beholden to New York banks and recommended against it. ** In April,
Holland increased his request for grant aid from $4 million to $14 million.
The following month, the National Security Council, determining that the
‘‘collapse of the present Guatemalan government would be a disastrous po-
litical setback for the United States,” decided on an aid package totaling
$53 million.”

The Eisenhower administration had to underwrite an increasing
Guatemalan deficit aggravated by corruption and mismanagement. As
L ‘Jnad observed, the United States was prepared to subsidize some
wastage, but the scale of corruption surprised US officials. In 1955, at the
height of the corn famine, Castillo Armas granted several former
Liberacionisias a license to import corn in return for a personal kickback

rn 4emorandum of Conversation, Ambassador Norman Armour, Holland, Mann, 25 January
1955, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1955-1957, 7: 59.

""\aemorandum of Conversation, ‘Current Situation in Guatemala and Projected Aid
Program,’ 28-29 April 1955, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1955-1957, 7: 71-75.
Ibid. p. 73.

Wisner to Allen Dulles, “Guatemala—Continuing economic difficulties,” 30 November
1954. Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

: “Jo Allen Dulles, “Current US position with regard to Government
loan requested by Guatemala,” 22 October 1954, Job 79-01228A, Box 23.

511 olland to Under Secretary of State Herbert Hoover, Jr, 20 May 1955, Foreign Relations
of the United States, 1955-1957, 7: 80-81.

—Seeret-
89

MOTTA ST ANTAMALRERSEAT

‘
;
é
$
‘
t
‘
t

Operation PBSUCCESS

of $25,000. United Nations officials inspected the corn and found it con-
taminated and unfit for consumption. Shortly afterward, a Guatemalan stu-
dent newspaper exposed the scandal, reprinting a copy of the canceled
check used to bribe the president. Castillo Armas responded by ordering a
police crackdown on his critics.*

Opposition to the regime grew more vocal as the second anniversary
of the liberation approached. On 1 May 1956, workers booed government
speakers off the platform at a labor rally and cheered former Arbencista
officials. In early June, embassy officials reported that the Guatemalan
Communist Party was ‘‘well on its way toward recovery,” with under-
ground cells assuming effective leadership of the opposition. On 25 June,
government agents fired into a crowd of student protesters marching on the
presidential palace, killing six and wounding scores more. Castillo Armas

FESS declared a ‘‘state of siege” and suspended all civil liberties. The US
Ambassador stressed to the president “the importance of publicizing, with
supporting evidence, the events as part of a Communist plot.’ The

United States Information Agency (USIA) agreed to help. Holland met

with Guatemalan officials and ‘suggested that in dealing with demonstra-

: tors tear gas was effective and infinitely preferable to bullets.”

Quelling unrest, however, proved more difficult than finding the right
propaganda slant. After another year of escalating violence between the op-
position and the authorities, Castillo Armas was assassinated by a member
of the presidential guard. USIA dutifully portrayed the killing as another
Communist plot. The Liberator’s death opened the way for elections, which
produced a plurality for Ortiz Passarelli, a centrist candidate. Followers of
the defeated nominee of the right, Ydigoras Fuentes, rioted, and the Army:
seized power and invalidated the election. In January 1958, Guatemalans
voted again, and this time they knew what was expected of them. Ydigoras
won by a plurality, and shortly after taking office declared another “state
of siege” and assumed full powers.””

Amid the convulsions of the 1950s, Guatemala’s political center,
which had created the Revolution of 1944 and dominated politics until .
1953, vanished from politics into a terrorized silence. Political activity sim-
ply became too dangerous as groups of the extreme right and left, both led
by military officers, plotted against one another. In the early 1960s, guer-
rilla groups began operating in the eastern part of the country, and in 1966
the United States responded by sending military advisers and weapons,
escalating a cycle of violence and reprisals that by the end of the decade

ce een ee oe eee an lt

**cchlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, pp. 234-235. —

* Folland to J. F. Dulles, 29 June 1956, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1955-1957,
; 7. 124.
i 2®\4emorandum of Conversation, Holland and José Cruz Salazar, Ambassador of Guatemala,
29 June 1956, Foreign Relations of the United States, 1955-1957, 7: 126.

Schlesinger and Kinzer, Bitter Fruit, pp. 236-239.

—Seeret—
90

—Seeret—

The Sweet Smell of Success

claimed the lives of a US Ambassador, two US military attachés, and as
many as 10,000 peasants. In 1974, the Army stole another election, per-
suading another generation of young Guatemalans to seek change through
intrigues and violence. Increasingly, Indians and the Catholic
Church—which had formerly remained aloof from politics—sided with the
left, isolating the Army on the far right.”

Ironically, by attaining its short-term goal—removing Jacobo
Arbenz—PBSUCCESS thwarted the long-term objective of producing a
stable, non-Communist Guatemala. ‘TJhopes that Castillo Armas
would establish a moderate, reformist regime and follow the instructions of
US financial experts were destroyed by the same process that had placed
the Liberator in power. Because Arbenz and the PGT had advocated and
implemented progressive reforms, {_ ‘}-for tactical reasons—had
needed to direct his appeals at the groups most hurt by land reform and
other progressive policies. Moderate elements disliked parts of Arbenz’s
agenda, but were repelled by the bitter disaffection of the opposition.
Resentful landowners and partisans of the pre-1944 regime were the rebels’
natural allies, and Castillo Armas, as their leader, acted as broker between
these ‘“‘men of action’’ and the United States.

During PBSUCCESS, US officials had reason to believe Castillo
Armas’s rightist tendencies would be offset by his openness to advice from
the United States. Case officers found him malleable and receptive to sug-
gestions. But, as the State Department soon learned, Castillo Armas’s rela-
tionship to CIA had been dictated by his circumstances. As president of
Guatemala, he was in a better position to press the demands of his primary
constituency, conservative land barons and political opportunists. When the
United States failed to provide enough aid to satisfy these groups, Castillo
Ammas was forced to appease them in other ways, through graft and prefer-
ment. The United States’ heavy stake in Castillo Armas’s success reduced
its leverage in dealing with him. State Department officials were unable to
bargain with the junta on a quid pro quo basis because they knew—and the
Guatemalans knew—the United States would never allow Castillo Armas
to fail. In Guatemala, US officials learned a lesson they would relearn in
Vietnam, Iran, 4] and other countries: intervention usually
produces “allies” that are stubborn, aid hungry, and corrupt.”

El Pulpo

The United Fruit Company did not profit from victory. Castillo
Armas restored many of the company’s privileges, but they were worth less
than before. The more affluent American consumers of the 1950s con-
sumed less fruit per capita, and independent companies cul into United

We: ae 7

Simons, “Guatemala,” pp. 95-99.

*'The increased-stake, decreased-leverage paradox is explored by Leslie Gelb and Richard
Betts in The Irony of Vietnam: The System Worked (Washington: Brookings Institution, 1979),
pp. 11-13.

9)

Operation PBSUCCESS

Fruit’s share. The company’s profit margin dropped from 33.4 percent in
1950 to 15.4 percent in 1957, and share prices, which peaked at $73 in
1951, fell to $43 in 1959. The company courted environmental disaster by
experimenting with pesticides and selective breeding. Taller, more produc-
tive trees turned out to be more vulnerable to hurricanes, and winds felled
20 million trees a year in 1958 and 1959. A chemical agent used to control
a banana blight killed predators that kept insect pests in check. By the end
of the 1950s, the company faced higher costs and declining yields.”

Political setbacks compounded these disasters. To improve relations
with Latin America, the State Department demanded that the company
grant higher wages, not just in Guatemala but throughout the hemisphere.
Once United Fruit’s usefulness to PBSUCCESS was at an end, the
Eisenhower administration proceeded with its suspended antitrust action,
and in 1958 the company signed a consent decree divesting it of its hold-
ings in railroads and marketing operations. Thomas Corcoran’s heroic lob-
bying and the addition of Walter Bedell Smith to the board of directors in
1955 failed to turn the company around. Smith joined a Boston-bred,
Harvard-educated corporate leadership described by Fortune as ““compla-
cent, unimaginative, and bureaucratic,” too rigid and conservative to con-
tend with the company’s multiplying difficulties.”

United Fruit continued to decline during the 1960s, and in 1972 sold
the last of its Guatemalan land to the Del Monte corporation. A few years
later, the company merged with Morrell Meats to form United Brands, but
the merger failed to stop the slide. In 1975, after a year in which the com-
pany lost $43.6 million and came under Federal investigation for paying a
$2.5 million bribe to the Government of Honduras, United Brands’ presi-
dent, Eli Black, smashed out the window of his corner office in the Pan
Am Building and jumped to his death. Two years later, two New York real
estate developers bought the company and managed to turn a profit. In
1984, United Brands was purchased by a Cincinnati-based insurance hold-
ing company, American Financial Corporation, which owns it today.
Thanks to Americans’ changing diets, banana importing has once again be-
come profitable, and United’s Chiquita brand has recaptured a majority
share of the market. The company’s Tropical Radio division (which once
employed the Salama conspirators) ventured into the cellular telephone
business in the early 1980s and now dominates the mobile phone business
in 20 Latin American cities.”

11 ecbert Solow, “The Ripe Problems of United Fruit,” Fortune, March 1959, pp. 97-233.
* Ibid., p. 98.

“Jefferson Grigsby, “The Wonder Is That It Works at All,” Forbes, 18 February 1980, pp.
104-105; ‘United Brands’ Hidden Charms for Carl Lindner,” Fortune, 19 March 1984, p. 41;
Kerry Hannon, “Ripe Banana,” Forbes, 13 June 1988, p. 86.

—Seeret-—
92

——Seeret—- :
The Sweet Smell of Success

The Story Unfolds

Today, most of the story of PBSUCCESS is available in published
accounts. In Latin America, scholars and journalists assumed US complic-
ity in the Guatemalan affair from the outset, but in the United States the
details of official involvement came slowly to light in the 1960s and 1970s.
During the Eisenhower administration, the Agency took pains to cover its
tracks, 7 , ,

\~ But after Eisenhower and’ Dulles left office,

_ references to the operation began appearing in open sources. In 1961,

Whiting Willauer, in public testimony before Congress, revealed that he
had been part of a special team of ambassadors sent to Central America to
aid an Agency-sponsored plan to overthrow Arbenz. He further testified
that the Agency had trained and equipped Castillo Armas’s forces.
Thruston B. Morton, Eisenhower’s Assistant Secretary of State for
Congressional Affairs, boasted of his role in PBSUCCESS on television
while campaigning for the Senate in 1962. The following year, Eisenhower,
sharing a podium with Allen Dulles, conceded that “there was one time’”’
when ‘‘we had to get rid of a Communist government” in Central
America2” He told the story of how Dulles had come to him with a request
for aircraft for the rebel forces. That same year he repeated the story in his
memoirs, Mandate for Change, and Dulles provided additional details in
his 1963 study, The Craft of Intelligence.’ At about the same time,
Ydfgoras Fuentes published a memoir in the United States in which he
described the Agency’s involvement while concealing his own role in the
operation.

David Wise and Thomas B. Ross put these pieces together in their
1964 exposé on the CIA, The Invisible Governnient, which devoted a chap-
ter to Guatemala. © who flew with the rebel air force,
described his own experiences with considerable embellishment. The
Agency was disturbed by the book’s revelations, and DCI John McCone
tried unsuccessfully to get Wise and Ross to make changes. McCone raised

aa an

David Wise and Thomas B. Ross, The Invisible Government (New York: Random House,
1964), pp. 166-168.

"Dwight D. Eisenhower, Mandate for Change, 1953-1956 (Garden City, NY: Doubleday and
Co., 1963), pp. 425-426; Allen Dulles, The Craft of Intelligence (London: Weidenfield and
Nicolson, 1963), pp. 219, 229. Dulles revealed no sources or methods but made it clear that
the United States had been involved.

L a

93

cee ot ene eee en

VARTA A eben rte ee

Operation PBSUCCESS

no objections, however, to the Guatemala chapter, which, he said,
described events ‘‘before my time.” Like Eisenhower, Dulles, and
Willauer, he regarded the operation, after 10 years, as a subject that could
now be discussed, so long as names and places remained unmentioned.

Amid the push for increased government accountability in the 1970s,
leaks by former Agency employees continued to outnumber official dis-
closures. The Pike and Church committees, which investigated CIA activi-
ties in the 1970s, refrained—at least in public—from commenting on the
Guatemala operation, but ex-CIA officers continued to fill in the details. In
early 1972, Richard Bissell told John Chancellor on national television that
“the whole policy-making machinery of the executive branch of the
government was involved,”” with CIA taking a leading role.” Soon after-
ward, an Associated Press reporter, Lewis Gulick, decided to test a new
Executive order on declassification (Executive Order 11652) by requesting
documents on PBSUCCESS. His request, on 6 July 1972, was the first
declassification inquiry received under the new order, and since it came
from a prominent media figure, Agency officials knew it could not be dis-
missed lightly. Nonetheless, after reviewing the documents, DCI Richard
Helms denied the request in full.’ David Atlee Phillips, who was then the
chief of the Western Hemisphere Division in the Directorate of Operations,
argued that exposing the Guatemala materials would ‘‘only stir more
Hemispheric controversy about CIA when our plate overflows already in
the wake of ~~

'"\ Gulick appealed, but the Interagency Classification
Review Committee, chaired by John Eisenhower, son of the former presi-
dent, backed up the Agency.”

Former Agency Officials, meanwhile, continued to tell their stories.
Publishers found a popular genre in CIA memoirs. In Undercover, pub-
lished in 1974, E. Howard Hunt disclosed his role in the psychological and
paramilitary aspects of the operation.” Four years later, Phillips described
the SHERWOOD operation, a part of PBSUCCESS that had not previously
received press attention, in an account copied almost verbatim from a
debriefing report that is still classified.°°> Many more officials told their
stories to Richard Harris Smith, a former Agency official who was working

Transcript of conversation between DCI McCone, Lyman Kirkpatrick, David Wise, and
Thomas Ross, 15 May 1964, Job 80B-01285A, Box 13, Folder 10.

Untitled transcript, 2 August 1972, Job 79-01025A, Box 153.

*' Angus MacLean Thuermer, Assistant to the Director, to Lewis Gulick, 16 August 1972, Job
79-01025A, Box 153.

Phillips to Executive Assistant, Directorate of Operations, ‘Proposed Topics for
Unclassified History,” 17 October 1973, Job 79-01025A, Box 153.

>rhuermer to Marvin L. Arrowsmith, Associated Press Bureau Chief, 28 August 1973, Job
79-01025A, Box 153.

“F Howard Hunt, Undercover: Memoirs of an American Secret Agent (New York: Berkeley
Publishing, 1974), pp. 96-101.

“Phillips, The Night Warch, pp. 37-68.

—Seeret—
04

—Secret—

The Sweet Smell of Success

on a biography of Allen Dulles. Smith missed his publisher’s deadline, and
in 1980 he showed his uncompleted manuscript to two Newsweek reporters,
Stephen Schlesinger and Stephen Kinzer, who were working on a book on
Guatemala.

In their pursuit of documents, Schlesinger and Kinzer tested the
limits of the newly amended Freedom of Information Act. In 1974,
Congress substantially strengthened the 1966 Act, giving scholars a power-
ful instrument for extracting documents from government agencies. When
CIA denied their request, the two journalists took the Agency to court with
help from the American Civil Liberties Union’s National Security Project.
The lawsuit caused the Agency to collect all of the available documents
on the operation and place them in Job 79-01025A, the collection on
which this history is based. The suit also revealed the operation’s name,
PBSUCCESS, to the public for the first time. CLA won the court action,
and no Agency documents were revealed. Schlesinger and Kinzer,
however, used the Act to obtain documents from the Departments of State
and Defense and the Federal Bureau of Investigation. These documents,
and the revelations of former American and Guatemalan officials, substan-
tiated the story told in their book Bitter Fruit and the more scholarly
studies on PBSUCCESS that have appeared since."

In announcing CIA’s new “openness” policy, made possible by the
end of the Cold War, former Director of Central Intelligence Robert M.
Gates in February 1992 included PBSUCCESS along with the 1953 Coup
in Iran and the Bay of Pigs, as covert action operations whose records will
be reviewed for declassification by CIA’s new Historical Review Group.
Although this new Group’s work on its own priorities was delayed by
legislation later in 1992 that required CIA (and all other agencies and
departments) to’ review all their records relevant to the assassination of
President John F. Kennedy, the review of the PBSUCCESS records is now
scheduled to begin in 1994.

Although the opening of CIA's records on this 1954 operation may
well revive old controversies and criticisms, it will nevertheless at last
allow the Agency to place this episode firmly behind it. Releasing the
Guatemala records should symbolically separate CIA from the kind of
actions it once considered crucial in the struggle against world
Communism. Moreover, these documents will reveal not only the Cold War
pressures, but also the restraining power of multilateral accords like the
OAS treaty, which nearly prevented covert action despite the consensus of
high officials supporting the operation. Finally, and perhaps most impor-
tantly, disclosing information about this formative and still controversial
incident in intelligence history will show that the United States can
honestly confront the painful incidents in its past and learn from its
experience.

“Phillips, The Night Watch, pp. 37-68.

“Serre —
95

Me A

[Pace Go Lect BLANK |

eS ee

Appendix A

PBSUCCESS Timeline

18 July 1949

15 May 1950

3 September 1950

11 November 1950
15 March 1951

22 August 1951

15 September 195]

Col. Francisco Arana, Guatemalan armed forces
chief, assassinated.

Thomas Corcoran, United Fruit Company lob-
byist, meets with Deputy Assistant Secretary
for Inter-American Affairs, Thomas Mann, to
suggest action to oust Guatemalan President
Juan José Arévalo.

Case officer L ) assigned to
project L ‘Jarrives in Guatemala City
C _jestablishes contact with

C

ij ), a student group.
Jacobo Arbenz elected president.
Arbenz inaugurated.

United Fruit Company warns employees that
any increase in labor costs would make its
operations in Guatemala uneconomic and force
it to withdraw from the country.

Windstorm flattens United Fruit’s principal
Guatemalan banana farms at Tiquisate; United
Fruit later announces it will not rehabilitate
plantation until it has completed study of eco-
nomics of Guatemalan operations.

97

Operation PBSUCCESS

26 September 1951

30 October 1951

19 December 1951

2 January 1952

25 March 1952

16 June 1952

17 June 1952

United Fruit suspends 3,742 Tiquisate employees,
refuses to comply with order of Inspector
General of Labor to reinstate the suspended
employees.

Walter Turnbull, Vice President of United Fruit,
gives Arbenz ultimatum. United Fruit will
not rehabilitate plantations without assurance of
stable labor costs for three years and exemption

from unfavorable labor laws or exchange con-
trols.

United Fruit announces reduction in passenger
ship service to Guatemala.

Labor Court of Appeals rules United Fruit must
resume operations at Tiquisate and pay 3,742
employees back wages.

CC

—

a
Mexico city L ‘| begins receiving weekly
reports from Castillo Armas.

Case officer [ 7 arrives in Guatemala

Arbenz-enacts Agrarian Reform Law.

98

EEE

wy te eae eee

Sal eaten heated

10 July 1952

7 August 1952

18 August 1952

2 October 1952

11 December 1952

12 December 1952

19 December 1952

5 February 1953

25 February 1953

18 March 1953

29 March 1953

PBSUCCESS Timeline

DDP Allen Dulles meets with Mann to solicit
State Department approval for plan to over-
throw Arbenz.

Distribution of land under the Agrarian Reform
Law begins.

DCI gives approval for PBFORTUNE.

Pan American Airways settles three-month-old
strike in Guatemala by raising wages 23
percent.

Guatemalan Communist party opens second
party congress with senior Arbenz administra-
tion officials in attendance.

Workers at United Fruit’s Tiquisate plantation
file for expropriation of 55,000 acres of United
Fruit land.

Guatemalan Communist party, PGT, legalized.

Congress impeaches the Supreme Court for
“ignorance of the law which shows unfitness
and manifest incapacity to administer justice”
after the Court issued an injunction against fur-
ther seizures of land.

Guatemala confiscates 234,000 acres of United
Fruit land.

NSC 144/1, ‘“‘United States Objectives and
Courses with Respect to Latin America,’ warns

of a “‘drift in the area toward radical and na-
tionalistic regimes.”

Salama uprising. Abortive rebellion touches off
suppression campaign against anti-Communists
in Guatemala.

99

Operation PBSUCCESS

12 August 1953 National Security Council authorizes covert action
against Guatemala. ,

11 September 1953 L 7] adviser to King, submits
“General Plan of Action’’ for PBSUCCESS.

October 1953 John Peurifoy, new US Ambassador, arrives in
Guatemala City.

9 November 1953 José Manuel Fortuny flies to Prague to negoti-
ate purchase of arms.

SUSETS 16 November 1953 DDP Frank Wisner approves |” ‘|plan and
recommends acceptance by DCI.

9 December 1953 DCI Allen Dulles approves general plan for
PBSUCCESS, allocates $3 million for the pro-
gram.
re 23 December 1954 CIA’s LINCOLN Station opens[_
18 January 1954 Alfonso Martinez, head of the Agrarian

Department, “‘flees’’ to Switzerland. Proceeds
to Prague to negotiate arms deal.

L If 1

° 25 January 1954 Guatemalan Government begins mass arrests of
ie suspected subversives.

29 January 1954 Guatemalan white paper accuses US of plan-
hing invasion. Reveals substantial details of
PBSUCCESS.

2 February 1954 Sydney Gruson, New York Times correspondent, :

expelled from Guatemala by Guatemalan
Foreign Minister Guillermo Toriell¢ ]
Wisner, King meet to decide whether to abort
PBSUCCESS due to white paper revelations.

—Seeret—
100

_ 19 February 1954
24 February 1954

1 March 1954
4 March 1954
5 March 1954
13 March 1954

21 March 1954

9 April 1954

10 April 1954

15-16 April 1954
17 April 1954

20 April 1954

ro

PBSUCCESS Timeline

Operation WASHTUB, a plan to plant a phony
Soviet arms cache in Nicaragua, begins.

Guatemala confiscates 173,000 acres of United
Fruit land.

Caracas meeting of the OAS opens.
Dulles speaks to Caracas meeting.
Toriello rebuts US charges.

OAS votes 17 to 1 to condemn Communism in
Guatemala. Secretary of State John Foster
Dulles briefed on PBSUCCESS.

Paramilitary training program graduates 37
Guatemalan sabotage trainees.

Guatemalan Archbishop Mariano Rossell y
Anrellana issues a pastoral letter calling for a
national crusade against Communism.

Wisner briefs Assistant Secretary of State
Henry Holland on PBSUCCESS. Holland,
shocked by security lapses, demands top-level
review of project.

Black flights suspended pending top-level
review of PBSUCCESS.

“John Foster Dulles and Allen Dulles give

{.  |ehe “full green light.”

Paramilitary training program graduates 30
leadership trainees.

L

101

eae

ih.

mete aed denen oe ERO TTS

Operation PBSUCCESS

1 May 1954

14 May 1954

15 May 1954

20 May 1954

24 May 1954

29 May 1954

31 May 1954

4 June 1954

8 June 1954

15 June 1954

La Voz de la Liberacién, Operation
SHERWOOD, begins broadcasts.

Paramilitary training program graduates com-
munications trainees.

SS Alfhem docks in Puerto Barrios with cargo
of Czech weapons.

Commando raid on trainload of Alfhem
weapons. One soldier and one saboteur killed.
Further sabotage attempts on 2] and 25 May.
All fail. Official Guatemalan radio goes off the
air to replace transmitter. Does not restart
broadcasts until mid-June. Nicaragua breaks
diplomatic relations with Guatemala.

US Navy begins Operation HARDROCK
BAKER, sea blockade of Guatemala.

Arbenz rounds up subversives, netting nearly
all of Castillo Armas’s clandestine apparatus.

Arbenz offers to meet with Eisenhower to
reduce tensions.

Col. Rodolfo Mendoza of Guatemalan air force
defects to El] Salvador with private plane.

Victor Manuel Gutiérrez, secretary general of
the Guatemalan trade union federation, holds a
special meeting of farm and labor unions to
urge them to mobilize for self-defense.

Sabotage teams launched. Invasion forces
moved to staging areas. Chief of Station (7
“| makes cold approach tol

“| prime
defection candidate.

102

17 June 1954
18 June 1954

19 June 1954
“20 June 1954
21 June 1954

25 June 1954

27 June 1954
28 June 1954

29 June 1954

30 June 1954
1 July 1954

2 July 1954

PBSUCCESS Timeline

"| meets again with.
requests bombing of Guatemala City racetrack
as demonstration of strength.

At 1700 hours, Arbenz holds mass rally at rail-
road station. Buzzed by CIA planes. At 2020
hours, Castillo Armas crosses the border.

At 0150 hours, bridge at Gualdn blown up.

Esquipulas captured. Rebels defeated at
Gualan.

Largest rebel force suffers disastrous defeat at
Puerto Barrios.

Matamoros Fortress bombed. Chiquimula cap-
tured. CJA planes strafe troop trains.

Arbenz capitulates. Castillo Armas attacks
Zacapa, is defeated and falls back to Chiquimula.
Agency plane bombs British freighter at San
José.

Diaz, Sdnchez, and Monzén form junta at 1145
hours. Refused to negotiate with Castillo. F-47
dropped two bombs at 1530 hours.

Monzon seizes junta, requests negotiations with

‘Castillo Armas. Zacapa garrison arranges

cease-fire with Castillo Armas.

Wisner sends ‘Shift of Gears” cable, urging
officers to withdraw from matters of policy.

Monzon and Castillo Armas meet in Honduras
to mediate differences.

SHERWOOD ceases broadcasts, begins with-
drawal.

103

err rrr arte Teeter

Operation PBSUCCESS

4-17 July 1954

12 July 1954
1 September 1954

26 July 1957

CIA documents recovery team, PBHISTORY,
collects 150,000 Communist-related documents
in Guatemala City.

LINCOLN office closed.
Castillo Armas assumes presidency.

Castillo Armas assassinated.

tA

Appendix B

nn

~ PBSUCCESS Organizational Chart

Alien Dulles
Director of Central Intelligence

Frank Wisner
Deputy Director for Plans

J.C. King
Chief,
Western Hemisphere Division

Hans V. Tofte

Chief, Psychological/
Political Operations

C a
Special Deputy PBSUCCESS

ey:
Cc 3

—_
Psychological/Political Adviser

LINCOLN Station

aes 1 +
C BI ‘ | ‘
COS Guatemala :

t

1 | ‘
S 4
4

d

ae anna seen

il "] Vester Hemisphere Division F | DES aARe oes

Organization proposed by J.C. King in a memo to Allen Dulles,
““Guatemala—General Plan of Action,” 11 September 1953, Job 83-00739R,
Box 5 (also in Job 81-00206R, Box).

105

ee TEU EPP PEEE ROR T VIN Me He ROO

Soe be tle

Appendix C

Codewords Used in PBSUCCESS

CALLIGERIS Carlos Castillo Armas, rebel leader
DTFROGS El! Salvador ;

E
cr oa E 1
tr J L
L 4 fa

=

ESMERALDITE Labor informant affiliated with Mexican union
ORIT.

‘|

107

Operation PBSUCCESS

L

HTKEEPER

HTPLUME

tf 4

JMBLUG
KMPAJAMA
KMFLUSH

K-PROGRAM

KUCLUB
KUFIRE

KUBARK

J

Mexico City

Panama

[
J

John S. Peurifoy, US Ambassador
Mexico
Nicaragua

Operations aimed at intelligence and defec-
tions. After 11 May 1954, redirected at military
defections.

Communications
Intelligence

CIA

108

—Seecret—_
Codewords Used in PBSUCCESS

KUGOWN Propaganda

LCPANES Costa Rica

LINCOLN PBSUCCESS Headquarters L

ODACID ~ US Embassy

ODENVY FBI

ODUNIT United States Air Force

ODYOKE United States Government

PANCHO Castillo Armas

PBPRIME The United States

SCRANTON Training base for radio operators near
Nicaragua = Te

109

Operation PBSUCCESS

SHERWOOD

i. 2

SKILLET

SKIMMER

L 3

STANDEL

-

»

SYNCARP

WSBURNT

WSHOOFS

CIA radiobroadcasting program begun on
1 May 1954.

Whiting Willauer, US Ambassador to Honduras

The ‘‘Group,” CIA cover organization support-
ing Castillo Armas.

L
4

Jacobo Arbenz, President of Guatemala

:

7

The “Junta,” Castillo Armas’s political organi-
zation headed by Cordéva Cerna.

Guatemala

Honduras

110

ee ee A einnemamenntt ma Ate

Adam
Bond
Caesar
Doc
Eddie
Frank
Goss
Hank
Ike
Jack
Kent
Larry
Mike

Nick

—Seeret-

Codewords Used in PBSUCCESS

_ Field Cryptos

Guatemala City

Puerto Barrios
Quezaltenango
Mazatenango

Quiche

Jutiapa

Coban

Zacapa

San Jose

Florida, Honduras
Carias Viejas, Honduras
Entre Rios, Guatemala
Asuncion Mita

Gualan

Blscanreregs
Peer orren

|Faec \\2 Leer BLANK |

Bibliography

Agency Records

Director of Central Intelligence. Executive Registry Records. Job 80R-
01731R, CIA Archives and Records Center.

: Job 83-00739R. CIA Archives and Records Center.
. Job 85-00664R. CIA Archives and Records Center.

Directorate of Operations Records. Job 79-01025A. CIA Archives and
Records Center.

. Job 79-01228A. CIA Archives and Records Center.

National Archives

General Records of the Department of State. Record Group 59. US
National Archives and Records Administration.

Records of the Office of Inter-American Affairs. Lot 57D95. Record Group
59. US National Archives and Records Administration.

Interviews

C 1 Interview by Nick Cullather, 19 Apnil 1993, Washington,
DC, Tape Recording. DCI History Staff, CIA. ,

Articles and Books

Braden, Spruille. Diplomats and Demagogues. New Rochelle, NY:
Arlington House, 1971.

Castillo Armas, Carlos. ‘‘How Guatemala got rid of the Communists.”’
American Mercury, January 1955, pp. 137-142.

Clark, Paul Coe. The United States and Somoza, 1933-1956: A Revisionist
Look. Westport: Praeger, 1992.

113

wee. etteitie set
SSR Se

ary

hte

ee ene pe ene lin nate ete Om an mmc oa te ie

meres tel hatin tay etna OEE PR oo
SMMING egw otc eemetndh oce mee ernnee same rt

Bibliography

Dulles, Allen. The Craft of Intelligence. London: Weidenfield and Nicolson,
1963. ;
Dunkerly, James. Power in the Isthmus: A Political History of Modern
Central America. London: Verso, 1988.

Eisenhower, Dwight David. Mandate for Change, 1953-1956. Garden City,
New York: Doubleday and Company, 1963.

Fauriol, Georges A. and Eva Loser. Guatemata’s Political Puzzle. New
Brunswick: Transaction Books, 1988. ;

Ferrell, Robert H. American Diplomacy: A History. 3d Ed. New York: W.
W. Norton and Co., 1975.

Fried, Jonathan L. et al. Guatemala In Rebellion: Unfinished History. New
York: Grove Press, 1983.

Gelb, Leslie H. and Richard K. Betts. The Irony of Vietnam: The System
Worked. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1979.

Gleijeses, Piero. ‘““The Death of Francisco Arana: A Turning Point in the
Guatemalan Revolution.’ Journal of Latin American Studies 22 (October

1990): 527-552.

. Shattered Hope: The Guatemalan Revolution and the United

“States, 1944-1954. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1991.

Gordon, Max. ‘‘A Case History of US Subversion: Guatemala, 1954.”
Science and Society 35 (Summer 1971) 2: 129-155.

Handy, Jim. ‘“‘‘The Most Precious Fruit of the Revolution’: The
Guatemalan Agrarian Reform, 1952-54.” Hispanic American Historical

Review 68 (1988): 675-705.

_. ‘*A Sea of Indians’: Ethnic Conflict and the Guatemalan
Revolution, 1944-1952.” The Americas 46 (Oct. 1989): 189-204.

Hitchens, Christopher. ‘“‘Minority Report.” The Nation, July 6, 1985, p. 8.

Hunt, E. Howard. Undercover: Memoirs of an American Secret Agent. New
York: Putnam, 1974. .

114

Bibliography

Immerman, Richard H. The CIA in Guatemala: The Foreign Policy of
Intervention. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1982.

_ “Guatemala as Cold War History.” Political Science
Quarterly 95 (Winter 1980-81) 4: 629-653.

Jensen, Amy Elizabeth. Guatemala: A Historical Survey. New York:
Exposition Press, 1955. . 7

; i

LaBarge, Richard Allen. “Impact of the United Fruit Company on the
Economic Development of Guatemala.” In Studies in Middle American
Economics, ed. by Richard A. LaBarge, Wayne Clegern, and Oriol
Pi-Sunyer. New Orleans: Tulane University, 1968. pp. 1-72.

Linebarger, Paul. Psychological Warfare. Washington: Infantry Journal
Press, 1948.

Manz, Beatriz. Refugees of a Hidden War: The Aftermath of Counterinsur-
gency in Guatemala. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1988.

Marks, Frederick W., Ill. ‘The CIA and Castillo Armas in Guatemala,
1954: New Clues to an Old Puzzle.”” Diplomatic History 14 (Winter 1990):
67-86.

Martinez, Pedro. ‘‘Lessons of the Guatemalan Tragedy.” World Marxist
Review 27 (July 1984): 101-106.

McCamant, John F. “Intervention in Guatemala: Implications for the Study
of Third World Politics.” Comparative Political Studies 17 (October
1984): 373-407.

McCann, Thomas P. An American Company: The Tragedy of United Fruit.
New York: Crown Publishers, 1976.

Meers, Sharon I. ““The British Connection: How the United States Covered

its Tracks in the 1954 Coup in Guatemala.”” Diplomatic History 16 (Sum-
mer 1992) 3: 409-428.

115

~ AAbs

ee cee ree car nb hte

Bibliography

Montague, Ludwell Lee. General Walter Bedell Smith as Director of
Central Intelligence. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press,

1992.

E
J

Payne, Walter A. ‘““The Guatemalan Revolution, 1944-1954: An Interpre-
tation.” The Pacific Historian 17 (Spring 1973): 1-32.

Petersen, John Holger. “‘The Political Role of University Students in
Guatemala, 1944-1968.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pittsburgh, 1969.

Phillips, David Atlee. The Night Watch. New York: Ballantine Books,
1977.

Rabe, Stephen G. “The Clues Didn’t Check Out: Commentary on ‘The
CIA and Castillo Armas.”” Diplomatic History 14 (Winter 1990): 87-95.

Roettinger, Philip C. ‘“The Company, Then and Now.” The Progressive,
July 1986, p. 50.

Schneider, Ronald M. Communism in Guatemala, 1944-1954. New York:
Frederick A. Praeger Publishers, 1958.

Schlesinger, Stephen and Stephen Kinzer. Bitter Fruit: The Untold Story of
the American Coup in Guatemala. Garden City: Doubleday and Company,
1982.

Simons, Marlise. ‘‘Guatemala: The Coming Danger.” Foreign Policy 43
(Summer 1981): 93-103.

Smith, Joseph Burkholder. Portrait of a Cold Warrior. New York: G. P.
Putnam’s Sons, 1976.

Wise, David and Thomas B. Ross. The Invisible Government. New York:
Random House, 1964.

US Congress. House Select Committee on Communist Aggression.
Communist Aggression in Latin America. 83rd Cong., 2d sess., 1954.
Zunes, John Stephen. ‘“‘Decisions on Intervention: United States Response
to Third World Nationalist Governments, 1950-1957.”” Ph.D. dissertation,
Cornell University, 1990.

—Seeret—
116
