National Intelligence Estimate Number 36.1-65-PROBLEMS and Prospects for the U
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012089, dated 3 February 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012089).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

fh

ee

&

A

£:

Ad
hay

ant

2

if
p

iy

j of
aa

‘

pt

Ae

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 36.1-65

arc

i,

Dag DS

“ie
ne

Ba Problems and Prospects for the

_ United Arab Republic ~—

e
fe

:
te

+f

ee
§

Se
RYE Std 2

se

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
"THE PROBE Mi 0x55. iciledec oo 0.8 haste Ba Oe oi baton erate ate I]
GONCLUSIONS 6e20hs ee seh eed ee de ie Ea Pee eG l
DISCUSSION ........... 00 cc eee eee eee ees iS Saad ball ee ted OG al a del he ete & 4
I. NASSER’S REVOLUTION  ..... 0.00. cc cece ee cnn eee ne eees 4
Il. DOMESTIC TRENDS .........-.- Mio eo ahaa acaaht NE woul she hae wile Beane aald 4
III. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS ..............000 cece een eee eeeeee 6
The First Five-Year Plan ........... 0.00 c cee ec eee cence eee enes 6
The Present Economic Crisis ............... Hh geil ec aohe eRiolgshemres ' as
The Second Five-Year Plan i Neoseek tach ete eon enna gat aut naeah de 8
IV. MILITARY AFFAIRS ....... 0.00.0 ccc cece cece ee ccc eee ee eeeeees 9
V. FOREIGN AFFAIRS ............ 0220 cece eee eens ym ee ee ee Il
A. The UAR and the Great Powers ...............00000- cess see indeed 11
B. The UAR, the Arabs, and Israel Pe Ree Retr Sete Tree 13

. THE GENERAL OUTLOOK .....2... 0000000 cece eee

Sad,

PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OF
THE UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC

THE PROBLEM . |

To assess recent trends in the United Arab Republic (UAR) and
to estimate developments over the next few years.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Nasser’s government has had considerable success over the past
decade in fostering economic growth, building up its military forces,
exercising leadership in the Arab world, and making the UAR a coun-
try to be reckoned with in world affairs. During recent years, how-
ever, the UAR has become overextended as a result of trying to do
too much too fast. Since 1960, it has spent over $2 billion more than
it has earned, but massive foreign aid has not prevented economic
difficulties from becoming increasingly urgent. The UAR is bogged
down in a costly military stalemate in Yemen; engaged in an increas-
ingly expensive arms race with Israel, made more tense by the Jordan
waters question; and faces further deterioration of its most important
relations with Western powers. All these difficulties are producing dis-
content within the UAR, and some strains within the leadership.
(Paras. 1-3, 6, 8, 12)

B. There appears little hope for Nasser to win a military victory or
negotiate a satisfactory settlement in Yemen in the next year or so.
The imbroglio will probably continue to cost him heavily in men,
money, equipment, and prestige; it may again involve him in diffi-
culties with the Saudis and even the US, and it is hampering efforts
to establish Arab military cooperation against Israel. The United
Arab Command is useful to Nasser for asserting leadership of the
Arab unity and anti-Israeli causes, but it also saddles him with serious
dilemmas if Arab-Israeli tensions reach a crisis. Nasser will try to

a

avoid a military test with Israel, but a defeat on the Jordan waters
issue would cost him prestige. Although most other Arab leaders
would be unlikely to follow Nasser in extreme measures against the
West, no other leader is likely to replace him as the symbol of Arab
nationalism. (Paras. 27-29, 33)

C. The UAR’s relations with the West appear likely to worsen
particularly with the establishment of West German-Israeli diplomatic
relations. Any significant US arms aid to Israel would contribute to
this trend. The corollary is likely to be greater emphasis on the
common interests between the UAR and the Communist world in
opposing Western influence in the Middle East and Africa. We also
believe, however, that Nasser will remain determined to preserve
his independence against any Soviet encroachments, and that his
policies will reflect an underlying -belief that the West would come
to his aid if the Soviets turned threatening. (Paras. 33-37)

D. Given the UAR’s growing population, limited resources, and
the likelihood that foreign aid will at best decline, the regime will
be forced to hold down investment and consumption. Cuts in: the -
latter particularly will give rise td dissatisfaction, since improving living
standards in the past 10 years have whetted appetites for more—
particularly in the cities. Even if the UAR exacts substantial sacrifices
from its people, its rate of economic growth will probably decline
markedly. Nasser probably anticipates that his policies will produce
a decline in aid from the West. If events lead to a virtual cessation .
of Western aid—including PL-480—the UAR’s economy will suffer
badly, though not to the point of collapse. The Soviets and the oil-
.Tich Arab states might supply a part of the deficiency, but probably
not enough to satisfy the UAR’s needs. (Paras. 37-39 )

E. Insuch circumstances, the Egyptians would be inclined to blame
the West, and Nasser would strike out against Western interests.
For example, he would make a major effort to force the UK and US
out of their bases in Libya. He would probably default on some
Western debt obligations. He would also probably try to persuade
the oil-producing Arab states to bring pressure on the West, though
probably with limited success. We doubt, however, that Nasser would
take any action which he thought substantially increased the chances
of a military confrontation with the West. (Para, 40)

2 oe

F. Prolonged economic hardship and foreign policy frustrations
could in time undermine Nasser’s domestic position, but we consider

this contingency remote. The UAR’s intractable problems will con-
tinue to create strains and differences within the leadership, and sub-
ordinate figures in the regime v ill rise and fall, possibly more fre-
quently than heretofore. Nonetheless, we believe that the military—
the ultimate arbiter—will remain loyal to Nasser, and he is unlikely to

be toppled from power even if his domestic political appeal is eroded.
(Paras. 43-44) ;

po oeet

DISCUSSION

I. NASSER’S REVOLUTION

1. The United Arab Republic (UAR), compared with other less developed
countries, has achieved an impressive record of social progress, political stability,
and economic growth since its 1952 revolution. It has ended the traditional
dominance of the wealthy landlords, merchants, and foreigners; it has greatly
expanded educational and medical facilities and other social services; and it has
done much to modernize the economy. The regime has also fostered Egyptian
pride and dignity by successfully operating the Suez Canal as a purely Egyptian
enterprise and by building up the country’s military strength. The UAR has
secured large amounts of military and economic assistance from the Communist
countries as well as extensive Western economic aid. The UAR is by far the
strongest Arab state, plays a major role in the Afro-Asian world, and has become
a nation to be reckoned with in world affairs.

2. During the past few years, however, the costs of the regime’s efforts have
begun to weigh more heavily on the country and the people. Extensive national-
ization and socialization measures carried out since 1961 have hurt many people
at least partially sympathetic to earlier-reforms. Continued expansion of thé ~
economy and rising living standards have been achieved only at the cost of
extremely heavy foreign and internal borrowing, and the near exhaustion of the
country’s foreign exchange reserves. The foreign exchange squeeze has re-
cently become so severe as to cause shortages of consumer goods and of ma-
terials needed to keep the UAR’s factories operating. At the same time, the suc-
cess of the regime in raising living standards has whetted popular appetites for
more, and has increased the risks of discontent if these are not satisfied.

3. Difficulties at home have been compounded by the UAR’s foreign policy
problems. It is bogged down in a war in Yemen for which no solution is in
sight. The confrontation with Israel is sharpened by the Jordan waters question
and the accelerating Arab-Israeli arms race. In recent months, relations with
Western countries have deteriorated markedly. Thus President Nasser today is
a highly frustrated man, who is trying to cope with an assortment of problems
more difficult individually and collectively than at any time in the past.

Il. DOMESTIC TRENDS

4, Nasser and his supporters, aware of the importance of the armed forces
to their position, have made sure that the officer class has received many of the
choicest fruits of the revolution. However, Nasser believes that for the revolu-
tion to succeed in the long run it needs a stable institutional foundation and
broader participation by the Egyptian people. Two efforts in this direction—
the Liberation Rally in the early years of the regime and the National Union in
the late 1950’s—failed to gain popular support, but a new and more ambitious

4 a

effort is now in progress. Nasser has proclaimed a new constitution, re-estab-
lished the national assembly, and set up a new political organization, the Arab
Socialist Union (ASU). The ASU is a pyramidal structure reaching down to
the village level, but is effectively controlled from the top. Its chief function
so far is to try to rally popular support for government policies and provide a
forum for criticisms and suggestions concerning government administration and
relatively unimportant policies of the regime.

5. During the past two years Nasser has released several hundred Communists
from detention. A number of these have been given important positions in the
press and in the ASU. Others have found jobs in government ministries and
in the trade unions. Nasser apparently is trying to make use of their organiza-
tional talents and other skills to further his socialist program. He probably also
sees this manner of treating local Communists as a means of pleasing the USSR.
However, there appears to be some public concern over the increasing role of
local Communists and growing ties with Communist countries, and Nasser and
other official spokesmen have recently stressed the incompatibility of communism
and Arab Socialism. He rejects such basic premises of Marxism-Leninism as
atheism, the class struggle, the dictatorship of the proletariat, and the inter-
national character of socialism. Nasser almost certainly believes he can control
Egyptian Communists if they get out of line.

6. The difficulties of the past year have produced growing discontent within
the UAR. There. has been grumbling about food shortages, black markets, and
high prices; there have been a few instances of small-scale protest demonstra-
tions, and sporadic illegal strikes by various groups dissatisied by government
economic measures. There is also growing dissatisfaction with the cost of the
war in Yemen. Especially in the cities, people are fearful that Western aid will
be reduced or even halted, forcing further belt-tightening. Lack of freedom of
expression continues to alienate the intelligentsia from the regime. Many of
those who have benefited most by the revolution appear worried that Nasser’s
socialism curtails their prospects for further gains. All this coincides with an
overall decline in the revolutionary elan which characterized much of the middle
levels of society in the earlier years of the revolution. Nasser is worried over
his domestic situation, and his public utterances are defensive in tone. There
are also indications that these strains have led to disagreements among the
leaders over how to proceed.

7. The top leadership has been remarkably cohesive though its membership
has shrunk over the years. Our knowledge about the attitudes of and relation-
ships among the handful of men at the top is limited. It appears that they are
divided along lines of personal rivalry as well as over matters of policy. The
principal figures are Prime Minister Ali Sabri, Nasser’s right-hand man, a strong
supporter of socialism and probably the chief proponent of a policy of close
relations with the Communists; Army chief Abd al-Hakim Amir, who has strong
backing from the military and is otherwise distinguished chiefly for his loyalty
to Nasser; and Vice-President Zakariya Muhi al-Din, a trusted counselor who

a 5

has often resisted close ties with the USSR and who exerts effective control over
the National Police and much of UAR intelligence. Former Vice-President
Baghdadi, once influential, is at odds with Nasser over policies of socialism at
home, activism abroad, and close ties with the Communist world. None of these
men appears to have the capability in his own right to gain precedence over
the others—much less challenge Nasser—and their rise and fall is in response
to Nasser’s manipulation of them.

Ill. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

8. The UAR is nearing the end of its First Five-Year Plan (1960-1965) with
its economy in severe straits as a result of the regime’s attempt to do too much
too fast. In the late 1950’s, Nasser, concerned: over population growth—even
then about 2.5 percent a year—insisted that the country’s economic development
program aim at doubling national income between 1960 and 1970, despite the
advice of Egyptian and Western economic advisors that such a task would re-
quire at least 15 years. He has compounded the difficulty of achieving this
goal by encouraging a very rapid rise in domestic consumption and in welfare
services.

9. Nasser's heavy outlays to increase the UAR’s power and prestige have fur-
ther burdened the economy. The current military budget is on the order of
$300 million a year. This is about seven percent of the UAR’s gross national
product (GNP)—a rate above that of most-advanced industrial nations and more’
than double that of “all bit a few developing nations. This amount probably
does not include the estimated $35-50 million a year being spent on develop-
ment of missiles and jet aircraft, and may not include payments for Communist
military equipment, now about $25 million a year. Further, we estimate that
the war in Yemen and support of the Yemen Arab Republic costs the UAR some
$60-80 million annually, only part of which is in the military budget. Finally,
expenditures for nonmilitary government activities abroad increased from about
$17 million in 1952 to $65 million in 1963, covering items such as diplomatic
representation, propaganda, and some subversive activities.

The First Five-Year Plan

10. The First Plan called for expenditures of nearly $5 billion in order to
achieve a 40 percent increase in national income and provide just over one mil-
lion new jobs. The plan had a number of weaknesses: agriculture was not given
sufficient resources to raise its growth rate from 2.5-3 percent annually to the
scheduled 5 percent; limited attention was paid to the economic as distinct from
the engineering feasibility of individual projects; and little effort was devoted
to determining the particular pattern of investment which would make the best
use of the UAR’s limited financial resources. Moreover, the cotton crop failed in
1961, which cost the UAR about $200 million in foreign currency earnings, and
the wide-ranging nationalization and socialism degrees of 1961 placed almost the
entire burden of running the economy on the government’s inadequate bu-
reaucracy.

6 ae

ll. UAR statistics ‘indicate a growth rate of over six percent annually since
1960, but these statistics overstate the UAR’s progress, and the actual rate
is probably closer to five percent. The claimed rate of economic growth has
been dependent on a very rapid rise in services, but a fair amount of this statis-
tical gain represents no more than the addition of unneeded employees to gov-
ernment organizations. Agricultural output has barely kept pace with the 2.7
percent rate of population growth. Industry expanded about 8-10 percent a year
until 1964, when the rate probably declined. Total investment has increased
in each year of the plan, but the UAR acknowledges that it has amounted to less
than 70 percent of planned levels.

12. The progress of the past five years has been due in large measure to
sizable aid and financing from both the Communist and non-Communist worlds.
Our figures are not precise, but it is fairly clear that the UAR will have received
external grants and loans for its economic programs of nearly $2.5 billion during
1960-1965. About $500 million of this came from Communist countries and at
least $130 million from Kuwait. The UAR has also received Soviet military
equipment priced at nearly $250 million since 1960. During this period the
UAR has repaid about $600 million in foreign obligations. The official economic
aid consists principally of Communist support for the Aswan High Dam and the
industrialization program, large-scale food supplies from the US, and aid for a
wide variety of projects from various Western countries. As of the end of
1964, short-term loans from Western commercial banks accounted for. about
$200 million, drawifigs from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) amounted
to $139 million, and the UAR’s deficit on bilateral trading accounts stood at
about $230 million.

The Present Economic Crisis

13. The UAR’s over-ambitious goals have placed its economy in an extremely
precarious position. Foreign economic and military debt repayments obligations .
have risen sharply to a sum estimated at about $200 million annually—about
25 percent of the UAR’s foreign earnings—and will rise higher in the years
ahead. Personal consumption and nondevelopmental government spending have
increased rapidly in recent years. Hence investment has failed to rise much
above the share of gross national product it amounted to in 1960, and the ratio
of domestic savings to total output may even have declined in recent years.
Foreign aid was equal to something like 40 percent of gross investment by 1963,
and probably has risen since that time. However, a substantial part of foreign
aid is used for consumption rather than investment; indeed, a minimum of five
percent of total UAR consumption is provided by foreign aid. Maintenance
of factories and equipment has been badly neglected, which will limit the useful
life of many UAR projects.

14. Awareness of these dangers has only gradually and partially penetrated
the top levels of the UAR, despite several warnings in recent years by the IMF,
the World Bank, and other authorities. Beginning in early 1964, some prices

ee 7

E gh es

and taxes were increased and some consumer subsidies decreased, and attempts
were made to deal with the foreign exchange problem by cutting back on
imports. Such measures had the effect of slowing down industrial production
and curtailing the availability of consumer goods in urban markets without,
however, significantly reducing consumer demand. Incomes have risen steadily
over the past few years, and city dwellers have come to expect such goods as
television sets, refrigerators, sewing machines, and—among favored groups—
even cars. They have also become accustomed to a better diet as a result of
imported wheat and meat. Adequate funds and fears of shortages spurred
increased buying and hoarding. By late 1964 available supplies of food, cloth-
ing, and manufactured goods in city stores dwindled, and black markets became
common. Prices, which had long been stable, have increased noticeably during
the past year or so.

15. The UAR has taken a series of actions which have postponed the day
when more difficult and far-reaching decisions must be made. It recently sold
part of its gold holdings to cover arrears in short-term debts. It is also trying
to obtain sizable new assistance from Kuwait. Nasser apparently has made
several attempts to secure a hard currency loan from the USSR, and though
both Khrushchev and his successors apparently refused, the Soviet leaders did
recently agree to postpone some UAR debt repayments. Some Western banks
have done the same. Moreover, several Communist countries have apparently
agreed to allow the UAR larger deficits in its bilateral trading accounts and to- -
accept UAR goods in place of hard Currency when UAR trade deficits go
above these new levels, UAR trading organizations have been ordered to import
from the East in order to save hard currency even if prices are higher than in
Western countries.

The Second Five-Year Plan

16. The current problems make it extremely difficult for the UAR to draw. up
a meaningful final version of the Second Five-Year Plan, which is due to start
in July 1965. When the ten year development program was drawn up in 1959,
the Second Plan called for investment of about $5 billion to achieve a 43 percent
increase in output and the creation of nearly two million additional jobs. The
average level of investment called for is not much above the levels planned for
the later years of the First Plan, but is far above the levels actually reached.
Nasser has recently reiterated his aim of doubling national income between
1960 and 1970, a highly unrealistic goal in view of the shortfalls of the First
Plan and the country’s present financial position. However, the government
apparently intends to go ahead only with those projects for which foreign aid
has been secured. Much of the aid now in sight is from Communist countries
for heavy industrial projects with which the UAB has little experience, e.g., heavy
machinery and machine tools. In addition, in some cases aid has been secured
for specific projects but not for the necessary associated facilities, nor is an
adequate supply of raw materials, spare parts, or competent technicians and
managers in sight.

a

17. The UAR would have to achieve several simultaneous improvements in
economic performance if it is to limit net drawings on external resources during
the Second Plan to the level of recent years, while meeting its debt service
obligations and maintaining its recent rate of economic growth. Earnings from
exports, the Suez Canal, and tourism would have to grow at least as rapidly as
debt service payments—and reach about $100 million a year more by 1970.
Import and other foreign currency payments would have to be held at present
levels. Finally, domestic savings and the proportion of investment goods pro-
duced in the UAR would have to increase rapidly enough to offset the necessary
rise in total investments.

18. The simultaneous performance of all three of these tasks is most unlikely.
Foreign currency earnings from the Suez Canal and tourism probably will
continue to grow steadily but unspectacularly. UAR cotton exports will continue
to face sharp competition in world markets, but other exports probably will
show moderate gains.! On balance, the UAR probably will increase its foreign
earnings by about $100 million annually by 1970. Holding down imports and
shifting production from consumer items to investment goods—at the same time
that exports are being increased—will require both considerable belt-tightening
and much improved economic management. We think the UAR is unlikely to
make sufficient progress toward the latter. The task of running the entire
economy is increasingly complex and the changes required in current practices

“are many and difficult. Hence, a considerable degree of inefficiency seems likely

to persist. However, there is considerable scope for holding consumption in
check, and the UAR probably will make some progress on this score. All things
considered, we believe the shortfall in these various tasks will be such that
additional foreign aid of some $100 million annually will be required if major
cutbacks in the UAR’s programs are to be avoided. Thus the UAR will need
about $3.5 billion in foreign economic aid between 1965 and 1970, minus any
debt postponements which it can arrange.

IV. MILITARY AFFAIRS

19. The UAR army has more than doubled in size over the past decade, in-
creasing from 71,000 men in 1955 to 165,000 today. Army capabilities have
improved considerably through receipt of large quantities of Soviet arms, adop-
tion of Soviet military doctrine, reorganization along Soviet lines from division
level down, and from better training. The general calibre of Egyptian military
men has improved, but only in the case of junior officers has this change been
significant. Ship strength of the 8,000-man UAR navy has more than doubled
in the past 10 years, and now includes six destroyers, 10 submarines, 19 patrol
ships (including eight KOMAR guided-missile boats) and 25 motor torpedo
boats. Air force capabilities have increased even more dramatically, and the

\'The UAR has recently made promising oil strikes, which in time probably will improve its
trade balance. However, it is too early to judge the likely extent of this improvement.

as 9

9,000 man air force today possesses over 300 jets, including MIG-21’s and TU-16
medium jet bombers. The logistic capabilities of both ground and air forces
have improved significantly, but shortages of technically trained people and
dependence on foreign sources of supply are continuing problems, particularly
as equipment becomes more complex.

UAR ARMED FORCES *

Ground Forces 1956 1965
Personnel .................005 miteneast ... 108,000 165,000
Infantry Divisions ....................... 4 4
Armored Division ................ Bh Gh etre 1 1
Anti-Aircraft Division .................. “3 baal 1
Anti-Aircraft Brigade .................... 2 :
Division Being Organized ................ ae 1
Independent Brigades ................... 3 7

Air Force
Personnel .............222 00005: .-un.... 4,000 9,000
JOtSEIGNtCTS Seclewtsteaas ri cwtus ious 126 251
Jet Light Bombers ...................... 45 44
Jet Medium Bombers ................. .. fees 25
Prop Transports ....................4-2. 58 68
Turboprop Transports ..........-.-.-.-. Z 17
Helicopters: 23 ev ra.a ss esi satan dees 4)

Navy
Personnel. 05) 08.4 id SoA het da 7,100 8,000
Destroyers’. tein os oe eid ae ele a ee 4 6
Submarines ..........0.. 0.00 cece eee eee <a VI 10
Guided Missile Patrol Boats .............. rae 8
Motor Torpedo Boats .................... 21 25
Mine Warfare Ships ............. Eee a 13 6
Patrol Craft .........0.0.0 ccc. ce cee ee 10 ll

“See the military annex of NIE 30-65, “The Arab-Israeli Problem,” dated 10
March 1965, for additional information on the UAR military forces.

20. The Yemen campaign has given the UAR armed forces their first combat
experience since they were reorganized and re-equipped following the Suez
conflict. They have benefitted in terms of staff planning, logistical support,
and small-scale combat experience, though the latter would be of only limited
usefulness in any war with Israel. For over a year nearly one-third of the
army has been in Yemen, and most units have seen service there as the result
of rotation. The air force has obtained bombing and strafing experience, al-
though it remains untried against a modern air defense system, such as that of
Israel. However, the units in Yemen have generally not covered themselves

10 |

with glory, and the failure to win a decisive victory and the difficult conditions
in Yemen probably have had a detrimental effect on the self confidence of the
armed forces.

21, The UAR seems bent on strengthening its armed forces, and appears
assured of acquiring about all the modern arms its forces can assimilate, at
least until 1970. By that time it may increase the standing army to something
like 200,000 men, and the air force and the navy by some 10-20 percent. The
regime will continue its effort to expand the UAR’s defense production and to
lessen its dependence on foreign sources for armaments. There is no prospect
of the UAR becoming self-sufficient in defense production, but it may gradually
increase its capability to produce the less sophisticated items needed for its
armed forces. Present attempts to produce jet aircraft and surface-to-surface
missiles are likely to yield items of only limited military value, but considerations
of prestige probably will lead the regime to continue the programs despite their
high costs.

V. FOREIGN AFFAIRS 4
A. The UAR and the Great Powers

99. The UAR’s conduct of external affairs reflects Nasser’s personal convictions
and temperament particularly strongly. He wants to establish the fullest measure
of Arab unity under his aegis and play a leading role in the world as an anti-
imperialist. ‘K successful revolutionary himself, he is emotionally and ideologi-
cally attracted to revolutionary and anti-Western movements and believes that
the UAR’s and his own interests are generally best served by actively supporting
such forces in the Arab world and former colonial areas. The heritage of three-
quarters of a century of British domination of Egypt has left Nasser, as well as
most modern Egyptians, deeply sensitive to anything which might appear to be
Western interference or exploitation. In addition, Nasser sees the West, with
its support of Israel and his conservative Arab opponents, as an obsiacle to his
objectives in the Near East and Africa. The corollary of this feeling is that the
UAR leaders feel a certain community of interest with the USSR; they regard
the Soviets as being free of the colonialist stigma, as likewise favoring revolu-
tionary goals, and as sharing Cairo’s desire to eliminate Western political, mili-
tary, and economic positions in the Middle East. These motives and interests
have sometimes resulted in Nasser acting as middleman for the Soviets. In the
case of Cyprus, he provided the base facilities and training for the Soviet equip-
ment supplied to the Greek Cypriots, while receiving more modern replace-
ments, He has facilitated shipment of arms to the Congo rebels. Seen from
Cairo, it is the Communist countries which support the UAR, not the UAR which
backs them.

23. This Egyptian view has been reinforced by the Communist world’s con-
sistent and forthcoming aid policy toward the UAR over the last decade. Since
the 1955 Soviet-sponsored arms deal broke the Western monopoly of arms
supply to the Middle East, the bloc has supplied over $1 billion worth of arms

aw n

for about $500 million. Communist economic credits through 1963 amounted to
about $740 million of which about half has been drawn to date. The UAR has
received about one-third of all economic aid that the USSR has supplied to
non-Communist countries. The USSR has furnished to the UAR about as much
arms aid as to Indonesia, and far more than to any other non-Communist coun-
try. About half of UAR’s exports have gone to the Communist world in recent
years in payment for such assistance and in bilateral trade.

24, Over this period, however, the West has supplied about 75 percent of
the UAR’s imports and purchased about half of its exports. Suez Canal tolls—
paid largely by Western shipping—along with Western tourism provide about
35 percent of the UAR’s hard currency earnings. Moreover, through 1963,
Western credits, which amounted to some $1.3 billion—exclusive of $700 million
in PL-480 foodstuffs—exceeded the amount of Communist economic aid. How-
ever, the sharp increase in Communist credits extended since early 1964 and
the apparent decline in Western willingness to extend new credits suggest that
Nasser will find it more difficult to avoid overdependence on the Communist
countries in the future.

GEOGRAPHICAL BALANCE OF UAR TRADE ®

(in percentages)

she we : Ist half
UAR Exrorts- ~~~ 1961 1962 1963 1963 1964»
Communist Countries® ._....... 45.7 44.1 47.8 48.4 50.2
Rest of the world .............. 54.3 55.9 52.2 51.6 49.8
UAR Imports
Communist Countries .......... 27.8 26.0 20.4 19.4 17.4
Rest of the world .............. 72.2 74.0 79.6 80.6 82.6

* This does not include military equipment.
* Latest figures available for 1964,
© USSR, East Europe, China, Cuba, and Yugoslavia.

25. Despite the extensive economic ties between the UAR and the West, po-
litical relations have fluctuated between fair and very bad. The UAR view
that revolution and radical change are the correct means to shake the Arab and
underdeveloped worlds out of their backwardness has conflicted with the West’s
preference for orderly progress, with minimum disturbance to existing govern-
ments, military bases, and commercial interests. This incompatibility has sur-
faced in a variety of places and issues in the past—e.g., Western base rights in
Libya and Saudi Arabia; US backing of Middle Eastern monarchies and other
moderate governments; and UAR support for rebel movements in sub-Saharan
Africa and in the Arabian Peninsula. Underlying all this is the Arab conviction
that the US stands as the sponsor of Israel, which has embittered the UAR leader-
ship and has set strict limits on the range of US initiatives in the Arab world.

r cary

ponent)

2
2
x
z

B. The UAR, the Arabs, and Israel

96. After a number of years of quiescence, the Arab-Israeli dispute is heating
up again. In response to planned Israeli diversion of water from the Jordan
Valley to southern Israel, Nasser obtained the agreement of Arab leaders on
a program to divert the rivers flowing into the Jordan basin, to build up their
military forces to protect the diversion works, and to contribute substantial
sums, on a continuing basis, to support these programs. These efforts at Arab
cooperation have experienced a fair amount of success to date, and even Lebanon
and Jordan, traditionally cautious about cooperating with Nasser or provoking
Israel, feel compelled to join in the common Arab effort. These developments
have caused growing alarm in Israel, which feels increasingly isolated and
is concerned that a major turning point in its dispute with the Arabs may
be occurring.”

27. Militarily, Nasser’s chief aim in this activity is defensive—at least for
the next few years. He does not want to provoke a military conflict between
Israel and its Arab neighbors, because he still fears defeat. He doubtless
dreams of the reduction of Israel as a power factor and even of its ultimate
elimination as an independent state, but we believe he sees such hopes as
resting far in the future. Meanwhile, he sees the United Arab Command
basically as a means of increasing the Arab’s defensive capabilities against
Israel and of increasing UAR influence over the Arabs. He also recognizes
that little Can be accomplished by military force as long as the major world
powers refuse to countenance any armed Arab attempt to eliminate Israel.

98. The UAP’s continuing involvement in Yemen threatens such Arab solidarity
as has been achieved. It was initially viewed by Nasser as an opportunity
to bolster his prestige by supporting like-minded revolutionaries and to gain
a foothold on the Arabian Peninsula—all at a relatively modest cost. Two
and a half years later he has some 45,000-50,000 troops bogged down in a
military stalemate with the Saudi- and British-supported royalists. UAR un-
popularity among Yemenis of almost all areas and political factions has risen
to epic proportions as a result of UAR heavy-handedness and determination
to dominate the Yemen Arab Republic. In consequence, many Yemenis, once
favorable to the republic, have fallen away, either to join the royalists or to
build up an independent force opposed to the Egyptians. The costs of the
campaign have steadily mounted, and include an estimated 5,000-8,000 Egyptian
dead, and perhaps 10,000 to 20,000 wounded, captured, or missing.

99. Nasser has three broad choices in Yemen. He could renew efforts to
seek a negotiated solution with Saudi Arabia and the contesting Yemeni fac-
tions, recognizing that this would be likely to result in the establishment of
a government distasteful to him. Secondly, he could pursue the general line
of his present policies, which would entail a continued drain with no prospect

2 See NIE 30-65, “The Arab-Israeli Problem,” dated 10 March 1965, for a fuller discussion
of Arab-Israeli matters.

ca) i

for either a victory or a settlement. Finally, he could step up his military
effort, including renewed air attacks on Saudi Arabia, in the hope of either
winning a military victory or greatly improving his position for any future
negotiations. He is nat yet ready to accept the loss of prestige that would be
involved in the first choice, and he probably would be hesitant to follow the
third course very far owing to the dangers involved. In these circumstances,
we believe that his most likely course will be the second, though he probably
will at times step up the fighting and let the attack spill over the Saudi Arabian
border. A serious Saudi-UAR clash would cause Faisal to call on the US for
support. In time, however, we believe Nasser will feel compelled to renew
negotiations, but the longer the stalemate drags on the less satisfactory the
settlement is likely to be to him.

Vi. THE GENERAL OUTLOOK

30. “Positive neutralism,” the hallmark of Nasser’s foreign policy on matters
outside the Middle East, rests on an assumption that the UAR is extremely
important to both the West and the Communist states. If either side should
abandon its interest, the policy would be imndercut, but his conviction of the
importance of the UAR in the Middle East, in Africa, and on the world scene
makes such a development scarcely conceivable to him. Meanwhile, he derives
considerable comfort and freedom of maneuver from the underlying conviction

that he can count on the Soviets to protect him from any unfriendly moves ..

by the West and, conyersely, that the interests of the Western powers would
require that they come to his help if the Soviets turned threatening. The
history of the past ten years provides much support for this thesis, and it is

likely to remain fundamental to his thinking.

31. We believe that positive neutralism will remain a central doctrine of
Nasser’s foreign policy, but this will not mean evenhandedness as between
the USSR and the US; there are too many areas in which Soviet policy and
interests are more immediately compatible with the UAR’s than the policies
of the US are, or can be made to be. This is generally true of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, of remaining Western facilities and special political positions in the
Middle East and Africa, and of Western commercial and oil interests in the
area. In Nasser’s mind, these matters often loom larger than calculation of the
UAR’s economic interests. It will probably at times be possible, and to the
interests of both sides, to de-emphasize these differences, but they will remain
impediments to good relations.

32. In contrast to the situation in the early 1960s, US-UAR relations now
seem headed for a difficult time. In part this is due to a belief by the UAR
leaders that the present US administration lacks sympathy for the UAR, a feeling
of some importance in view of the Arab tendency to place great stress on the
personal relations between heads of state. In addition, the UAR’s present
active policies in the Congo, in the Yemen, and in the Arab-Israeli controversy
have brought it into particularly sharp conflict with the US. Strong criticism
of Nasser in the US press has intensified his antagonism.

14

33. UAR mistrust of the US was enhanced by the revelation that the US
approved and, in part, sponsored West German arms aid to Israel. The situa-
tion was further complicated by the visit of East German President Ulbricht
to Cairo, by Bonn’s efforts to stop the visit, by its suspension of economic aid
to the UAR, and by the prospective establishment of diplomatic relations be-
tween Israel and West Germany. Nasser is attempting to get all the Arab
states to break relations with West Germany. However, several North African
states have refused to do so, and this stand encouraged others, such as Jordan
and Saudi Arabia, to go slow. While the UAR and certain other Arab states
will probably break diplomatic relations with West Germany, most will prob-
ably maintain commercial and other ties with it. It is unlikely that any Arab
state will recognize East Germany, save possibly Cairo and one or two others.
The Arab states will continue to pressure the West on the issue of Israel, but
few of them would be willing to take extreme measures against the West,
especially the US, which would damage their basic interests.

34. Whether the Arab-Israeli conflict erupts into fighting or remains confined
to political tensions, it is already creating additional strains in Nasser’s relations
with the West, and will probably create even more in the years ahead. Revela-
tion of any US decision to supply significant quantities of arms to Israel would
probably be interpreted in Cairo as confirmation that, in the last analysis, US
sympathies are basically with Israel rather than the Arabs. Nasser will prob-
ably step up attacks on the West for its part in the creation and maintenance
of Israel and for its.political and military support of his chief adversary. “This
approach will also involve continued pressures on the more moderate Arab
governments to follow suit. Yet if this trend seems inescapable, there is one
important limitation on how far it might go: just as Nasser often exaggerates
the degree of Western support and responsibility for Israel, he also regards the
US as the party most able to restrain what he considers aggressive Israeli
intentions if it chooses to do so. This belief does not reconcile him to US
support for Israel, but it may set some limits on how far he feels he can alienate
the US over the Arab-Israeli controversy.

35. The UAR’s growing estrangement from both the US and West Germany
comes at a time when the UAR is at odds with the other major Western coun-
tries as well. The UAR will continue its pressure against the British position
in the area. Apart from continuing to organize and support guerrilla and
terrorist operations in Aden and Oman, the UAR will encourage Kuwait and
other Persian Gulf states to loosen their ties with the UK. Nasser will con-
tinue to support elements opposed to the British bases in Cyprus, Libya, and
Malta as well. The UK, in turn, is likely to continue its support for royalist
forces in Yemen and increase its ties with Saudi Arabia in order to oppose
the UAR’s efforts in the Arabian Peninsula. Nasser apparently admires de
Gaulle for his independent attitude toward the US and the UK. There is likely
to be an increase in French-UAR economic relations, along the lines of the
recent French agreement to provide some 400,000 tons of wheat on favorable
credit terms. There may even be some measure of political cordiality, but

ene 8

ties between the two countries are unlikely to expand much as long as France
opposes the spread of Nasser’s influence in the Levant and continues as a
major supplier of weapons to Israel.

36. The serious differences between the UAR and the West will make for
greater cooperation between the UAR and the Communist world, particularly
when it comes to opposing Western interests in the Near East and elsewhere
in the underdeveloped world. Nasser’s experience in cooperating with the
USSR for over a decade without losing his independence has increased his
belief in his ability to do so safely. Moreover, he is aware that the Communist
world is no longer monolithic, and probably feels that if a Rumania can assert
its will against Moscow there is little danger that the UAR will lose its in-
dependence as a result of closer cooperation with and greater dependence on
the USSR.

37. The UAR’s relations with outside powers are particularly significant in
view of its heavy dependence on foreign aid for its economic development. Its
total foreign aid requirements for the next five years probably will be nearly
$3.5 billion—including that needed for debt repayments. The UAR has already
secured $865 million in credits from Communist countries for use in the next
five years. - A continuation of PL-480, say at the average level of the last three
years, would represent another $800 million. This would leave $1.8 billion (at
least $350 million annually) to be obtained, minus any debt repayment that could
be postponed beyond 1970.2 The UAR has no“chance of obtaining this amount.
Aid from Western governments almost certainly will decline substantially from
its recent level of about $175 million in new credit extensions annually—at least
for the next few years. Nasser is likely to seek considerably more help from
oil-rich Arab states, such as Kuwait, Libya, and Iraq, but we doubt that aid
from these countries will fill more than a modest part of this gap. Nor do we
think the Communist countries will increase their aid markedly. Very little
opportunity remains for obtaining more loans from Western banks or increasing :
bilateral trading deficits, though some further postponement of debt repayments
might be arranged. All things considered, we think the UAR will receive some
$200 million annually less than it would need to continue its present programs.

38. Under these circumstances, Nasser will almost certainly be forced to cur-
tail both consumption and investment. He will be most reluctant to cut defense
spending; any cuts in this area are likely to be small and there may even be some
increases. One of the few bright spots for the UAR is that the High Dam is to
go into operation in a few years, and when it does its benefits in the form of
greater irrigation and electric power output gradually will be felt throughout the
country. However, over the next few years the rate of economic growth will
probably decline markedly, and perhaps not be much above the rate of popula-
tion growth. Moreover, unemployment will rise and some factories will be

* There is about $350 million in Western aid in the pipeline, but this could not be drawn
down much within the five-year period without damaging future growth prospects.

i —

forced to curtail production for lack of raw materials and spare parts, as most
of the UAR’s foreign assistance would be from Communist countries for new
projects.

39. A virtual cessation of Western aid—including substantial reductions of
PL-480-—would confront the UAR with a major economic crisis. While the
UAR could reduce its needs for imported foodstuffs somewhat by curtailing
consumption, it probably would have to make up part of any major curtailment
by imports from other sources. For example, the near elimination of PL-480
assistance probably would require the UAR to spend about $75 million above
present levels for food imports. Such. outlays, in conjunction with the reduction
of other Western aid, would probably lead to a sharp decline in industrial pro-
duction, since UAR industry is heavily dependent on imported raw materials
and semi-manufactured goods. The rate of economic growth would decline
drastically, at least for a few years. While the economy would not collapse, it
would be faced with growing dislocations accompanied by widespread urban
unemployment.

40. Such drastic cutbacks in Western aid would almost certainly lead Nasser
to strike back at the West. He would almost certainly cancel the limited US
military air transit rights through the UAR. He would probably default on
some Western debt obligations. He would also make a major effort to force
the US and the UK out of their bases in Libya, pressuring the Libyan govern-
ment itself and stirring up the Libyan people to force the government's hand.
He would also probably try to persuade the oil producing Arab states to bring
pressure on the West. We are doubtful that these states would cooperate in
any scheme, such as cutting off the flow of oil to the West, that would cost them
heavily. However, they probably would provide loans or grants to the UAR
lest Nasser appeal to the Arab masses to push for nationalization of the oil com-
panies or the overthrow of their regimes. We doubt, however, that Nasser
would take any actions which he thought substantially increased the risks of a
military confrontation with either the West or Israel for a variety of reasons,
one being that he doubts the avaliability of effective Soviet support in such an
event.

Al. If. UAR-Western relations deteriorate seriously, there is likely to be a
marked increase in activities and attitudes within the UAR favorable to the
Soviets, most conspicuously in the press, radio, and movie fields. Some of the
few hundred UAR Communists would probably be allowed greater prominence
in the ASU or other activities of the regime. However, we believe that the
UAR’s leaders, while prepared to use local Communists and the East-West dispute
for their own political advantage, will remain ready and able to repress the
Communists if they seem to threaten the regime’s interests.

42. A sharp curtailment of Western aid would pose difficulties as well as
opportunities for Moscow. While the USSR probably would make available
some additional assistance—and postpone debt repayments—for the propaganda
and political benefits involved, we do not think it would move to fill more than

17
a

1

a modest part of the gap left by a Western withdrawal. Moscow would prob-
ably feel that events were already moving in a fashion satisfactory to its interests.
Though it would take advantage of the situation to entrench itself in the UAR,
it would not want to risk actions that might push Nasser back toward the West,
such as making crude attempts to dominate the UAR. If Moscow should at-
tempt to use its leverage to gain greatly increased political influence, we believe
that Nasser would react by seeking to mend fences with the West, and by mak-
ing political efforts to curtail Soviet influence in the Arab world generally. He
would count on other Afro-Asian countries to support him.

43. Nasser would probably have considerable initial success in rallying do-
mestic support by blaming the UAR’s economic troubles on the West, but the
level of discontent and even disaffection would soon rise. There would be
strains within the leadership as the pinch was felt and hard decisions became
more inescapable and more urgent. While Nasser remains fully in control of
the UAR today, his position is not invulnerable to a sustained period of re-
versals. Prolonged economic hardships and continued stalemate in Yemen
would gradually undermine his domestic support. Under these conditions,
Nasser would probably resort to whatever repressive measures he felt were
needed to keep himself in power.

44. Moreover, the key military officers are loyal to Nasser as well as to the
revolution. There is no reason to believe that he will lose his considerable
adroitness in playing off subordinates against one-another, and in assuring that
popular blame for hardships and mistakes is deflected from himself. All things
considered, we believe that he is likely to remain in control of the UAR.

a : Figure

UAR

INDEXES OF ESTIMATED GNP AND GNP PER CAPITA
1945-65"

ere TTA)
LTT TT TT TTT TT LL ae
SURUEHGHRREES2 00800
f SLT
SapcLCanesaniere ry

aE Ue Ceacieie takes

1945 1947 1949 1951 1953 1955 1957 1959 1961 1963 ie)

300

250

200

150

100

*1945-S4 are calendar years, 1954-65 are fiscal years.

UAR

INDEXES OF INDUSTRIAL AND AGRICULTURAL

PRODUCTION
1953-63 . --. 7

1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 aos

relim.)

use i _ ME 3.31014

ony

een

UAR

SELECTED INDICATORS OF INDUSTRIAL OUTPUT

Railroad Freight
Traffic

(Million ton-miles)

195 1958

fron Ore

(Thousand metric tons)

1952 1958

Sulphuric Acid

1962

1963

(Thousond metric font). 1

1952 1958 19

Refrigerators
(Thousonds}

o

1952 1958 1964

§1251 3-65

63

Electric Power
(Million KWH)
4,478

1963

‘Finished Steel

(Thousand metric tons)

1952 1958 1963

Caustic Soda

(Thousand metric tons)

1952 1958 1963

Radio Sets
(Thousands)

oo

1952 1958 1964

Kerosene
(Thousand metric tons)

Crude Petroleum

(Thousond cubic meters)
6

1952 1958 1963 1952 1958 1963
Cement Fertilizer
{Thousond metric a (Thousand metric tons)
BO
1,510

Fae = : 2 ih v

1952 1958 1963 1952 1958 1963
Pumps Dry Batteries
(Units) (Thousands)

z : 4 = ES “ a
1952 1958 1964 1952 1958 1964
Bicycles Cotton Textiles
(Thousands) (Million meters)

i: Se ae foe
1952, 1958 1964 1952 1958 1963

Figures for 1964 are based on fiscal year beginning 1 July 1963. Ail other years are calendar years.

Figure 2

‘
Cte nme neta ae tate dna enmationte a:

Renee | SC 1.3(2)(4)

OO e :

pot. Figure 3

UAR
Million FOREIGN EXCHANGE HOLDINGS’
ee 1955-64

1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 _— se (Oct)

*Exclusive of gold holdings which varied between $174-188,000,000
until late 1964 when they dropped to about $140,000,000.

Data approximately as of end of period.

UAR
Million TOTAL FOREIGN CURRENCY DEBE
Dollars | 1955-64 pete

1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963. 1964

"Excluding US loans repayable in Egyptian pounds.
Data approximately as of end of period.

eaten some ben areesabinnbanetat teu inital tne
stew sei nse apache ob ememnee

Million US
Dollars*

1200

51252 3-65

UAR

FOREIGN RECEIPTS AND PAYMENTS
(Official UAR Estimates)

Current Receipts ©

1962

(approx.)

Figure 4

¢ Sper
is ‘document Was
ction’

es eer

ols with ef : an
“of. Intelligence and ind Resentch,
oF.
ee : Defense ad. the ‘organization’ “of “he-lont Chis ras ‘Stak inet.
we Assistant Chief ; vot. ‘Staff. f for. 3 intlligenico Peperinant at the Army,*
é; jepartment, of the, Army ts ia eed Sart oe
Nay oe of Naval Operation ere

apie rd

may i retained, "6 of.
F seria the, eh siel taaige ook by

“3, Won: ‘this ‘document is “dissominated "overseas, “the overseas
ne SAt the-end of this ‘period, “fhe.
“forwarding” ‘agency, jor =
jarding agency § to retain iin “sceordance ‘with

i
