Possible Developments in South Vietnam
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008009, dated 2 March 1955.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008009).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS IN SOUTH VIETNAM

THE PROBLEM

To assess the consequences of certain possible developments in South Vietnam
and their probable effects upon the strength and stability of that country.

THE ESTIMATE

1, PRESENT SITUATION

1, A political impasse exists in Saigon where
the legally constituted government of Pre-
mier Diem is being challenged by a venal
special interest group, the Binh Xuyen, which
controls the National Security Police, and is
temporarily allied with some elements of
the religious sects.| The presence of 20,000
French troops in the Saigon area plus the
eounsel of Bao Dai and French and US offi-
eials have deterred the government from
exerting its authority over this group by
armed force. The French, who have until
recently provided arms for the Binh Xuyen,
still maintain liaison officers at Binh Xuyen
headquarters, and state that these officers are
assisting in maintaining peace in Saigon.
French policy is openly committed to the re-
placement of Diem at the earliest opportunity.
The French feel he ia incompetent and prob-
ably desire a Premier who would be more
amenable to the preservation of French in-
terests and influence in South Vietnam. The
nead of state in absentia, Bao Dai, also favors
Diem’s removal, and is endeavoring to obtain
French and US agreement as to the manner
in which this could be effected.

“The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of

the Army, believes that the Binh Xuyen ia at

least temporarily allied with major armed ele-
ments of the Hoa Hao sect and has the sym-
pathy of other political elements in South Viet-
nem.

2, To a considerable extent Diem’s difficulties
stem from his own inadequacies. His serious
limitations as an administrator and his in-
flexibility have alienated members of his cab-
inet, most. of whom have resigned or stated
their intentions te resign. Many leading non-
government figures are openly eritical of
Diem's uncompromising attitude toward the
Binh Xuyen and the religious sects and are
opposed to the use of force te settle the dis-
pute. He has refused to accept specific US
and French recommendations for broadening
the base of his government, and such efforts
as he has made to secure the services of prom-
inent Vietnamese have proved ineffectual be-
eause of (a) their reluctance to accept the
unsatisfactory conditions incident to working
with Diem and to join a regime whose political
outlook is uncertain, and (b) their fear of
Binh Xuyen or other terrorism. Diem’s posi-
tion is also being weakened by persistent ru-
mora that US support, to date his strongest
prop, is about to be withdrawn.

3, The mass of the population in South Viet-
nam is not now organized to play an effective
role in the fate of the present government.
Among the politically active minority, Diem.
despite his apparent inability to establish
effective rule, still enjoys a reputation for in-
tegrity and he probably has more nationalist
appeal than any other prospective leader.
The other principal sources of Diem’s present
support are: US backing, eartain key elements

of the Vietnamese National Army (VNA) and
of the Cao Dai forces, many of the 750,000
refugees, the Central Annam provinces, and
& small hard core of loyal political supporters
in Saigon.”

4. The present crisis has not materially
changed the actual military balance of forces:
the VNA remains stronger than its armed
opposition in the Saigon-Cholon area, and
could almost certainly drive the Binh Xuyen
out of Saigon, although probably not without
serious bloodshed and destruction and possi-
bly continuing insurrection. There is some
doubt that the army as a whole in its present
poor state of morale and training would be
effective, or loyal to Diem, should there
develop, for any reason, protracted ‘ and

serious fighting with the sects. This would

be particularly so if Bao Dai should fall to
support Diem in such fighting. The French
have clearly statea that the French Expedl-
tionary Corps would not become involved in
this fighting except as necessary to protect
foreign lives and property.

5. The Viet Minh have not had an identifiable
role in the development of the present crisis.
They have attempted to exploit the situation
in statements by Radio Hanoi and their con-
trolled press calling for Diem’s removal. They
will continue such propaganda efforts and
through subversion will attempt to exploit
any opportunity in this situation to advance
their ends. However, they will almost cer-
tainly not now intervene overtly or in such a
manner as patently to violate the provisions
of the Geneva Accords,

‘The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of

the Army, would prefer that this paragraph read
as follows:

“The mags of the population in South Vietnam

does not appear te have an active interest in the .

fate of the present government, Among the
politically active minority, Diom, despite hia ina-
bility to establish effective rule, still enjoya a
reputation for integrity and strong nationaliat
ideals, He still drawa seme strength from a
amall number of loyal supporters in Saigon and
the Centrai Annam provinces, and from the con-
tinuing though unenthusiastic support of eertain
élements of the Vietnamese National Army
(VINA), 8 8 result ef continuing US support.”

I, PROBABLE RESULTS OF CERTAIN
ALTERNATIVE DEVELOPMENTS

6. Current discussions for resolving the pres-
ent crisis in Saigon have envisaged two broad
alternative approaches:

a. A continuation of Diem in office, at least
for the time being, under conditions of a
broadened and more representative govern-
ment,

b, Immediate removal of Diem by Bao Dai
with the approval of the US and France, and
his replacement by a coalition government.

Continuation of Diem in Office

7. We believe it is possible that continued
French-US efforts to restrain Diem and the
Binh Xuyen will prevent an outbreak of
large-scale hostilities. However, if Diem
should believe that he was about to be re-
moved, he might attempt to prevent such re-
moval by armed action against the Binh
Auyen,

8. We believe that the resolution of the pres-
ent impasse and the implementation of the
Diem solution would to a critical degree de-
pend upon firm and substantial US and
French support.4

9, Full French cooperation in any Diem selu-
tion would almost certainly be unattainable,
although the French might be persuaded to
acquiesce in the continuation of Diem in office
and to ussist in the removal of police powers

*In the Saigon-Choion area there are about 11,-
500 VNA treops. Opposed are approximately
3,500 Binh Xuyen forces. There are in addition
about 4,000 munieipal police, presently under the
control of the government: their loyalties in the
event of large-seale hostilities are uncertain.
Hoa Hao and Cao Dai troops are not presently a
major factor in the question of contre! of Sai-
gon-Cholon area itself. French Expeditionary
Forces in this area total about 20,000,

‘The Aasistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department ef
the Army, believes that the resolution of the
present impasse and the implementation of the
Diem solution would be infeasible: (1) in the
absenee of inercased US commitmenta to Vict-
nam and full French support: or 12) in the ab-
sence of all-out US short-range and long-razz:
support and Freneh aequieseenee te the pro-
Brame and actions related to such US support.

al 3

from the Binh Kuyen. However, in this event
the French would almost certainly try to dis-
soclate themselves from the Diem government
and would blame any failures on the US.

10. With US support and French acquies-
cence, and having won prestige by his victory
over the Binh Xuyen, Diem would be in a
better position than before to proceed with
proposed programs for strengthening South
Vietnam. Although he would continue to be
a poor administrator, he might be more will-
ing and able to attract capable men to his
government. The chances for increased sup-
port of Diem would be enhanced if he had
meanwhile publicly pledged to leave the com-
position of a future government to a repre-
sentative assembly."

Immediate Removal of Diem

11, We belleve Diem would obey orders from
Bao Dai to resign, particularly if Diem were
aware of his loss of US support. However,
Diem and his followers would probably be
extremely bitter and would probably denounce
France, the US, and the new government.
Diem has some capability for developing op-
position to a successor government and might
embark on a course of active resistance.

12. Diem’s removal by Bao Dai would produce
a strong adverse reaction among Vietnamese
nationalists. Regardless of how the removal
were handled, the Vietnamese would feel that
Bao Dai had acted at the behest of the French

‘The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of
the Army, and the Special Assistant, Intelligence,
Department of State, believe that in the elrewmn-=

+ stances outlined in paragraph 9, it would be ex-
tremely difficult te effect a reconciliation be-
tween Diem and the sects. Without full French
support, Diem almost certainly would be unable
te proceed with proposed programs for strength~-
ening South Vietnam, ?

and the sects and with US approval. Never-
theless, we believe that the bulk of the Viet-
namese National Army would transfer its loy-
alties ta the new government,

13. In such a successor government, Bao Dai
and the sects would have great influence.
Such a government would have a better than
even chance of implementing programs for
strengthening South Vietnam, only if: (a)
the government itself were headed by a rec-
ognized nationalist and did not include mem-
bers of Bao Dai’s entourage or discredited
French-orlented politicians; (b) the Binh
Xuyen relinquished control of the National
Security Police; (c) all sects at the outset
agreed to subordinate their armed forces and
territories to national supervision and general
contro]; and (d) the US gave firm and contin-
uing support to the new government, and the
French did not obstruct the development of a
truly nationalist government.

_ Il, GENERAL OUTLOOK

14, Even if the present impasse were resolved,
we believe that it would be extremely difficult,
at best, for a Vietnamese government, regard-
less of its composition, to make prepress
toward developing a strong, stable anti-Com-
munist government capable of resolving the
basic social, economic, and political problems
of Vietnam, the special problems arising from
the Geneva agreement, and capable of meet-
ing the long-range challenge of the Commu-
nists. The functioning of any government
would be complicated by probable continuing
French reluctance to support the development
of a truly nationalist government in South
Vietnam.

*The Assistant Chief of Siaff, G-2, Department of
the Army, believes that Diem’s removal by Bao
Dai would rot preduce a strony adverse reaction
among Vietnamese nationalists, and would there-
fere delete this sentence.

ts we
i He az!

“ow

‘gt he

ers 2
ee tee ae

ae:
=

ae

&
Pe ae
fe a EES

i

ins
Soe

ae as

vo

pee
