Terrorism Review - Latin America: International Terrorist Actions in 1988
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126945, dated 4 January 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126945).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Directorate of Secret ?

Intelligence NOM ORN NX ONT K ICT

ORTON

. 23 February 1909

Warulng Notice Intelligen
s Involved
TEL)

Unauthori
Subject

Natloaal Security
Information

riminal Sanctions

SClon or coer ractor / Conca lt ands

toa has boon authorized for rctcase to...

See. SUTIN re en

ee ee ae eet ced NO SE NR RC a ee ey

Terrorism Review

23 February 1989

Highlights

Cauntecterrost Center

DE

Reverse Blank

This review bs published blweekly by the Directorate of Intelligence. Other
elements of the CLA as well at other agenctes af the US Intelligence Community
are encouraged to rubedt articles for pwtdication. Comments and queries are

wee Looemee

aes ee
Februar (989

Latin America: International
Terrorist Actions ix 198

International terrorist incidents in Latin America
totaled 146 during 1988, up from 108 in 1987. This
increase occurred primarily because of attacks in
Colombia, where terrorists (requently bombed the
country’s multinationally owned pipeline. Peru had
the neat highest number of international terrorist
actions in Latin America. International terrorist at-
tacks in El Salvador increased in 1988, and Chile—
traditionally the third most active venue—experi-
enced a decrease in the number of such actions.
Despite decreases in the number of international
terrorist incidents in Chile and Peru, domestic terror-
ism continued at a high rate in both countries. Bolivia
also experienced an increase in the international
terrorist incidents, which included the attempted
bombing of Secretary of State Shultz's motorcade in

Avaust

US personnel and facilities were the target of about
7S percent of the international terrorist actioas in
Latin America. Nowhere else in the world were US
targets attacked as often as they were in Latin
America.

Nearly all internatioual terrorist activity in Latin
America last year was carried out by indigenous
guerrilla or radical organizations. [9 one iacadent,
however, a group calliag itself the Palestine Com-
maad detonated a bomb at a Jewish monument in La
Paz, Bolivia, to protest the US Government's denial of
a visa to Yasir ‘Arafat. Origias of this group remain
unctear.

Cotensita

Interaational terrorist incidents in Colombia marc
than qeadrupled in 1988, from 19 ia 1987 to 88. A
sabotage campaign carried out by the Nationa! Liber-
atioa Army (ELN) agaiast the Cano Limon—Covenas
pipeline— jointly owned by Colombia and a consor-
uum of US and other Western oil compania—
accouated for the dramatic increase in the aumber of
incidents. The ELN was also responsible for most of

ret

the other international terrorist activity in Colombia:
it carried out 78 of the 88 international terrorist
actions. Nearly all were aimed at foreign business.
The group secks to drive foreign investment out of
Colombia and has caused the country more than $300
million in damages and lost oil revenues. Pipeline
bombings slowed significantly in the last six months
of 1988. Only seven of the $8 bombings occurred after
1 July. A temporary shortage of explosive materials,
improved cecurity measures, and especially public
criticism of the ELN for the environmental damage
done by oi! spillages in the countryside probably
caused the group to slow its pipeline attacks and
concentrate mare on actions in urban areas. In Sep-
tember, the group detonated 2 remote-contro!led
bomb io Bogota as the limousine of the President of
Texaco-Colombia passed through an intersection near
the executive's home.

é by the group were come | }
(9 deucagnigs, up trum ute in (987. The group aa
i .

kidaapod ao American executive in June and held him

for four moatbe, apparently until a ransom could be
'
|
|

aegotialod, A

|
|

na
t —_ |
Of tbe aine taterualiona! terrovis( actions carried out
by the [9th of April Movement (M-19}—a nother
leftist gucrrifla group ia Colombia—most appear to
hare been carried out to show solidarity with causes

beyond the borders of Colombia. fa late March, the
gvoup fired a rocket at the US Embassy in Bogota to

Po a

7; Febeuary 1929

a
&

protest US troop maneuvers in Central America. [n
mid-April, near the second anniversary of the US
airstrikes in Libya, the group bombed the Colombian-
. US Binational Center in Medellin. °

orles

Wz belese that the ve 19—like groups tn
ind Costa Rica
irried out ine mud-april action to mark

} Uhe 1986 US airstrikes in Libya. The M-19 carried

oul other attacks at about the same time on three US
commercial targets. a British company, and a French
bank. °~

veru

In Peru, the numter of international terrorist inci-
dents fell for the secand year in a row, slthough the
threat of such actions remained high. During 1988,
there were 15 international terrorist actions, down
from 41 in 1987. The sharp decline was at least partly
because of the stringent socurity measares observed
by many foreign diplomatic and business personne!
operating in Peru. In addition, a number of arrests of
Sendero Lumtinaso (SL) cell members in the capital
city—including the capture of Osman Morote, a top
SL leader—probably contributed to the disruption of
planned terrorist operations against international tar-
gets.

International terrorst ailacks oy members of the
Marxist-Leninist Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Mave-
meat (MRTA}—pcimarily 2 Lime-basod organiza-
tion—also were down, Infighting over the [ature of
the group and possibly some coocern over the police
successes in Lima my have contribsted to the full.
\-,1 ‘yt
A slowdown of both internations! and docrestic ter-
rorist actions in Liana, perticularty ia the second half
of 1988, bad no effect on spiraling terrorist activities
in rural areas, where the death toll from such actions
increased significantly. SL carried out three of its
seven atlacks on international targets in cural Peru,
resulting in the deaths of an American AID contract

employee in June and two French engineers in De-
cember. Since the December attack, the group report-
cdly has warned other foreigners in rural Peru that
they, too, will be targeted for attacks if they do not
leave the country—a measure no doubt aimed at
further undermining Peru's faltering economy. ”

The smaller, pro-Cuban MRTA continued to pose a
threat to international interests in Peru, although ali
its international terrorist actions occurred during the
first half of 1988. These actions included several
attacks on foreign—including US—businesses, at-
tacks on two US-Peruvian binational centers operated
by USIS, and an attack on the residence of the US
Ambassador, *

El Sstrador he
In El Salvador, a sharp increase in urban terrorism—
particulacly in the second half of 1988—pushed up
the number of international terrorist incidents from
twa in 1987 to 13 in 1988. All the 13 attacks were
against US targets. In declarations made duriag the
fall, elements of the Farabundo Marti National Lib-
eration Front (FMLN) stated their intcation to in-
crease lorrorsm—both domestic aod iateraational—
ia the capital. The guerriflas waraed on several
occasions that US personae! would also be targeted.
Among the actions against US targets were a number
of gunfire attacks on US Embassy vehicles, a rocket
atlsck oa the US AID offices, and another oa the
Sberatoa Hotel. The Sheraton Hote! attack occurred
Jest before Ube arrival of OAS representatives, who
were mecting at the botel in San Salvador for the
organization's 18th General Assembly. These high-
wsibelity urban terrorist actions were apparently
aimed at discreditiag the Salvadoran Gorerament and
foossing international aticotion on the US role in
Ceaural America. The guerrillas probably belicve that
their bargainiag position in connection with their
recently aamounced peace proposal bas boon strength-
caed by the dimate of testability created in Saa

Chie .
Ia Chie, nine international terrorist incidents oc-
curred in 1988—down from [5 the previous ycar. The

decrease in these actions was probably the result of a
deliberate slowdown of such attacks, in connection
with the October 1988 presidential plebiscite. Al-
though most of the nine international terrorist attacks
were unclaimed, they were probably conducted by
members of the Marxist-Leninist Manuel Rodriguez
Patriotic Front (FPMR), Chile’s mast active terrorist
group. The group, which splintered into two factions
in 1987, divided sharply in late October when the
larger “autonomous” faction decided to end a truce—
observed by both factions—and declare war on the
Government of Chile, according to press reports. The
smaller faction, which is more closely aligned with
Chile's Communist Party, reportedly denounced the
“autonomous” faction and apparently is continuing to
forego violence in the hope of assisting the Commu-
nists to devise a more effective politica! strategy for
the December [989 presidential and congressional
elections. Despite the slowdown in actions in the latter
part of 1988, domestic terrorism in Chile increased by
a third over 1987. This increase—trom 164 to 223
attacks—sull falls far short of mid-1980 domestic
terrorist figures. In 1985, for example, there were 850
domestic terrorist actions. “* 7"

Bolivia

International terrorist incideats in Bolivia increased in
1988 to six, up from three in 1937, prompting concern
among Bolivian officials that guerrilla violence may
be on the rise in Bolivia. A few of these actions were
aroong the most significant of 1988 in Latia America.
In August 1988, a bamb detacated next to US
Secretary of Stace Shultz’s motarcade as it traveled
from the alrport outside La Paz into the capital city.
Although two groups calmed responsibility for the
attempted bombing—the Simon Bolivar Commando
and the Pablo Zarate Wika National lodigenous
Foroe—the Simman Bolivar Commaodo, 2 radical fac-
tion withia the Bolivian Communist Party, probably
wat responsible, Members of the Comunando apper-
ently carried owt two previoes attacks on US targets.
In March ($86, a momber of the Simoa Bolivar
Guerrilla Cammaado was implicated in a dynamite
attack og tbe US Embassy in La Paz In May 1987,
the group claimed responsibility for a dynamite aluack

Reverse Blank i)

at Citibank. @

——

Hi )rbe

D

{n December, the assassination of a Peruvian naval

attache in La Paz raised new speculation that SL

activities might be spilling over into Bolivia. Although

an unknown group claimed responsibility for the

action, it appears that SL carried out the attack. The

use of three assassins, shots to the back and head of

the victim, and the calm escape on foot by the

terrorists are characteristic of SL operations. The

wording of the claim note and victim's reputation as a
counterinsurgency expert in Peru also leave little

doubt that the SL had singled ouc the naval attache

for execution. The false claim was probably meant at

least initially to confuse Bolivian security officials. \
Moreover, SL may sot have wanted to jeopardize its fq 4
“people's war” propaganda efforts, especially in Eu- i Ly
rope, by being branded terrorists.

Owthook

We believe the number of intemational terrorist

acUoas in Latia Anterica will decrease in 1989, based

oa the present levels of such activity throughout the

regio and the curreat pace of ELN pipeline bomb-

ings. Last year, botwoen | January aad 15 February.

the ELN already had conducted 30 terrorist actions

agticst Ube pipeline and other oil-relatod facilities.

This year, there have been four during the tame
period. The danecr to forcigners in Latin America,

however, paruoularty US personnel, will probably

remain bigh as radical groups try to drive out foreign
astistance. Their strategy, bowever, may focus more 3
on selective targeting of farcign perwonne! and fess on (L
facilities. es
