Meeting no 2 - 21 April 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012393, dated 5 March 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012393).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tc: 4 Meeting #2, 21 April 1961

‘Le Subject errived at 2125 how's on 21 April 1961. Immediately follow-

. ing hasty greetings Subject sat down end began to report on his visit to the

Soviet Fribassy earlier in the day. He had spent the eerly hours of the evening

efter supper with SHAPOVALOV, ae GRU officer in the Soviet Embassy and admitted

heving consumed a helf bottle of cognac with SHAPOVALOV. ‘This was quite evident
a as the meeting progressed in that Subject digressed from his mein thought even
more extensively then usual. This is the only meeting, however, in which Sub-
ject showed any sort of alcoholic influence ani he certeinly wes not intoxt-
eated even at this meeting. As a matter of principle all perticipants decided
to serve only a mild wine at meetings. This served to quench thirst which
was stimileated by being forced to sit in a hot, stuffy, smoke-filled room for
hours. (The window. had to be shut to keep conversation fron being overheard. .)
eae seid he went to the Soviet Fmbassy to see the REZIDERT.

Sc a a ef a a a a a tera es oes roo

Ceoresdze

| APPROVED FOR RELEASE = 3) ee

3 LMAR 1992

*
we,

~ ames e
——

3- G: Do you remember you satd it would be interesting for you
to get this Nemonie #1057 8: Ah yes, I'll tell you about thet. Wemonic....
the firm le Henry Wiggins. G: How aid you think you would make up a cover
story for getting this metertel...a feirly email quantity...150 frems? 8:
I'll tell you about those intelligence tasks which I fulfilled in my position
ep @ worker on the Committee (GNTK). I'11 tell you ebout the members of
WYNNE's delegation.on which they. wanted charecter Getaile -. those who live
in Tondon -- so that it's ensier for a member of the REZIOENTURA here to
work with him end later perheps to reeruit hin. I mentioned three people
in my operational report on the visit of WYENE's delegation to Moscow in
December 1950, I geve you e list of the seven people who were there,

en Whe were th

2

6. G: Would it be e good thing for you if you vere able to get
the materiol? 8: This is whet I think about it. I'll tell you the tanks
I've got to fulfill. Ie I een MiMi ‘them, this would strengthen my post-
tion considerably, beemse it's vorse to do none of your allotted tasks.
I've been given four tasks ant if I ean do them ell, so meh the better. If
C ean fulfill just two of them I shall heve done well. If I do none of then,
they will either say "he's lazy” or "he doesn't went to work with ue",
G: (in English) Should I ask you if we ean help him exten his stay? A:
I wouldn't et this moment.

7 G: (im Bnglieh) Shall IX ask him to analyze hie mission now?
Hr Yes. G: ell us ebout your misston bere, 8: After WYNNE 's delegetion
left in December 1960, I wrote an operational raport on the operstionel task
which I had bean given, thet is, to report on the people I met uniler the
suspices of the GNTK. They tola me to cultivate the acquaintance of people,
to get on good terms with those who Lived in Lonfon, er not fer fron London,
or in a town near Lonion, becmure our people here heve to get permission to
leave London. G: What sort of man were they looking for, ea businessman?
5: Yes, but tt doemm't metter beenuse every Englishman or American has,
in our opinion, som possibility or other as an egant. Even if we don't
use him directly we can get in touch with other people through him, select
those who are of interest to us, and give them money. We don't efve much.
G: In other words, © contact or a spotter. 5: I give you my word thet I -
got into no agent relationship with any member of WYNNE's delegation. auite
the opposite, since I appronched Eames ana TAREE with ny own prodlen,
with my own life

fe:

9. 8: Wow then, what tasks did they give me? To stuty these
acquaintances sgriny to get to know them better; to work with them, esti-
mete their value es agents, ami if they heve eny value to report to the
RFZIURNT in London ebout their possibilities, ‘The REZIDENT would essipn

- em operational worker. His operational worker de Colonel PAVLOV. He is
the son-in-law of VOROSHILOV. He is temporertly at the Center in Moscow |
at this time. Or he might allot SHAPOVALOV, who hea a lerge mole on his :
right eer. He used to be e secretary in the APPARAT of the military |
atteche in Iniie. He's been in Lomion six months. Or he might assign
sons other operational worker to the job. ' .

so eee 8,

10. 8S: I em to mrrange a meeting with him ant we might heve a
frink ani so on. Then e» further meeting would be erranged at which the
Englishman's weaknesses would be explored ~~ perhaps he might be in debt,
perheps he might need money which he hed lost gembling, ete.. He might ask
for morey himself. It might be possible to take advantage of these weak-
nesses, caupromise him and eventuelly get him into a compromising position
for recruitment. I should like, that is, encther mission assigned to me
is to make “some new acquaintances, perhaps in the firm of Leo, to remenber
then ani to report on them. leday the REZINGNT said to me thet I should
look out for new eequeintances at the Exhibition of Intustriel Fngineering
and report on them to him before my departure, but about three deys prior
to my departure so thet he can assion a case officer to whom.T would intro-
duet my aequeintances. 2 .

fa

2 13. St My second task is to detetmine the methods used by British
Counterintellicence agningt me and my delegetion, who is put on to us, any
provocative questions, eny anti-Soviet propagenia, surveillance methods on
foot or from vehicles, the upe of radio to report our progress from om
block to the next, for instance, down qieen's Street. Those are the sort
of things I should write about. Well, I'll write something.

ih, 6: The third task is the Nenonte. I told you about it yester-
dey. Incidentally, gentlemen, thet reminis me, I thought ebout this in bed...
I didn't slesp for two hours...today or tomorrow we ought to go through all

| my material and deaide how you can use it freely -- through the press or

through notes or hovever you like -~ all the KHRUSHCHEY business end so on,
but only that materiel which does not involve m. ,

15. S: I'LL give you details on fifteen Soviet agents vorking in

| three countries, but don't arrest them now. Don't even put surveilisnce on

them. Somehow we mist eut them out in such a way thet it won't do us any 5
demage. AS I ssid, in Ceylon a corporal is hending over all the American (serve
documents (USTAVY) for money. He has three children and needs money, He RES lat

ie not paid meh but for him it is a materiel subsidy, according to his

steniards, But if you put this corporal in prison or shoot him as he de-
serves, then they will look at his file straight eway. He has a preudonym, —
"DICK" or "BOB", ete. ani all the officers of Strategic Intelitgence who

have hed dealings with him ere listed: (Subject's true neme), IVANOV, PETROV.
They are called in ent interrogated, has there been a leakage from these
people who know that this man is an agent of Soviet Strategie Intelligence --
military, I emphasize. Therefore, thie in a two-ended stick.

16. 8: In Infia everything is frozen. They are not working now;
they are on conservation. In Pekistan they ere working, Init producing only
trifies. It ia true there is one man getting meterial on computers
(SHCHETNO-RESHAYUSRCHIM USTROYSTVAM), He hes naecess, but as I understand
it, be is working through someone. Someone gives him the material as if he
were interested in it, emi this man sells it through e« third person. ‘The
rest are worth nothing. Thay produce only scraps, nonsense. The material
from Ceylon is valusble. It is elways highly evaluated by the Information -
Directorete -- Americen docunents, orders, ant so forth. Incidentally, this
government of Mra. BANDARANAIRE 1s unmuceessful. It may be mecessery to fint
a new regime. They ere going a long wey to the left. That is wy personal.
opinion an’ I have the right end the duty to say these things. Well I ask
you to think sbout all this and to come to an analytical, nen-primitive de-
cision, as on might say.

17. 8S: My next task is to get hold of as mich informtion and material
6s I can which will receive positive evaluation. Incidentally, when KIRKWOOD
was in Moscow, he gave me an overt brochure sbout obtaining fresh water from
nea water. There are these evaporators. Our specialists were very interested
beceuse the methotea wo use to obtein fresh water -- thie is in the Fer Eastern
Theeter -- weter for food, for drinking and for equipment, ami weter to drive
equipment ani tanks art eo forth......by ovr method the cost is six rubles
(014 currency) per eubte meter, bit your method costs either one ruble five
kopeks or ninety-sever kopeks. I don't xremember exactly, but it wee six times

h

wo”

. Nemonic, why give it to me? I don't think it necessary to give it to me. Why

cheaper. I got a good evaluation for this overt brochure. These types of |
visits give so many opportunities to our heavy industry, metallurgy, machine
building, chemistry, artificial rubber.

18. 8: Our specialists still haven't been able to work out how to
fix artificial fur onto a fabric backing. In America there is a firm called
Kapsel end in Canada, the Lion Fur Corporation. This Kapsel Company not
long ego offered us a machine for doing this for $300,000 U.S. dollars. ‘The
factory is in Montreal and on the 15th of May three people are going to Canada
to evaluate this machine -- two specialists and one interpreter. The name of
the interpreter 1s NOZHIN and the head of the delegation is SAPELEVSKIY ant
the third is a woman who is called KLYAKINA. I think, and this is my opinion,
we will not give $300,000 for this machine but we shall study the process
and perhaps steal the secret of the adhesive which sticks the backing to the
fur. Why give $300,000 for a machine? Engineers, academicians, chemists and
people like this are stealing all this from under your nose all the time.

19. 8: I think the Americans do this the right way. ‘They put very
strict limits on the things these people can see. They show them very little.
Our people go to Canada and we consider Canada a synthesis of the top scientific
am industrial thinking of both the U.S. and Great Britain.. The Canadians them-
selves have some clever people but they are working with American or British
machines. You don't allow us to come to America end you don't allow us to do
everything in England, but in Cenada we go very freely and study them. We
deseribe all the secrets and we say, "Thank you for letting us heve everything
so cheaply." The reports our scientists submit must be accurate or they are
reprimanded. Irrespective of how the individual feels, even miserably, one
has to do these things in order to survive in our system.

20. 8: Well then, my task here is to get hold of materials which will.
be of interest on all those firms which have invited us. You, I think, should
help me get this material without doing yourself any harm, of course. I won't
be putting this material in my suitcase -~ those are my orders -- but I shall
be senfing it back in the diplomatic beg through the REZIDENT, addressed to
ROGOV - the small ROGOV. I've got it written down here, Vasiliy Meksimovich,
not the Lt. Gen. ROGOV who is depiity to SEROV. ;

21. 8: That's my third task, ani the fourth is the Nemonie. This

hand it over fox -chemiceal analysis -- or perhaps this is impossible. I'm not
an engineers I don't know. The REZIDENT said to me today that there are many
Nemonics, 85, 120, 105, ete.. Through British Agents who are working for the
Russians, they've gotten hold of one Nemonie -- which one he didn't know -- and
he sent this off to Moscow by diplomatic bag on 17 April. H: I think that was
Nemonic 90. 8: Was it? I didn't know thet. I'm only telling you what the
REZIDENT told me.

. i ee eee
+ - #
.

{2

22. 8: I thought you would be bringing mw photographs from which I
could identify the REZIDERT. He's forty-five or forty-six. OG: Yes, we'll
get them for you. They're being prepared et thts moment. I will heve thes
for you tomorrow. 8: I think this is a very inportont business. Yeatertiny
you asked me to mame all those officers with whon I stutied. I will neme
all whom I studied with. There is this YERMOLENKO. You asked me about who
worked as en illegal. He wes in my elaes. of courses, he's gone abroad uler
a different name viich I don't know, but I ean identify his photogreph, you
unierstand?! I will show you hundreds of these people and I von't meke a mis-
take. I have & very good memory, but I did not want to elog it with a man's
nan¢ and pstronymic. I cen tell you thelr renke ent monemes. You must do
this now since we mey not meet again for some time in the future. I'll show
you Which of then should be thrown out of the countries they are working in,
go they'll have to bring in new ones. I will tell you shout my classmates
and grefuates of other yenrs. Inciéentally the REZIDENT here vsed to be in
America, and then he was sent to Englent.

23. G: Are those all your tasks? S: Yes, that's everything. 6: |
Our question to you ie whether if you fulfill these tacks, would it be a |
greet plus for you? Ani if, perhaps as a reward, they would send you sbroad |
ogein with other delegations? If sc, thie {se the nim we should set ourselves,
Reactly what would belp you must be explained by you etnce it fs clearer to
you what would be most effective. 6: If I fo nothing, they'll eny thet I
wes juat idle, thet I came here only to pee Lomton an Great Britain, amt to
drink wine with the firm ‘which grave us reenptions.

BL, G: We'll look into this. H: This is quite easy. I can get
oll the brochures he needs. 6: Well I'lteent the broemtres by diplometic
beg through the REZIDRNT, Col. ROGOV, not to the Committee, but straicht
te the Informntion Dimectorate, the former Secomi Directorate. H: Well,
this is quite easy. I ean get you etarff fron all the firms. G: We're telk-
ing ebout the brocimres. 5S: Yea, I went extnlogues, welunble looking t
with drawings, interesting thinge -- you Know the sort of thing. ¢G: We'll
get you a whole hesp of brochures. You exn look through them ard piek out
the most import mt omer. S: Those desling with electronics are the most
useful if you con aet then without Semage to youreslvea. At the leo Fectory
they geve us 6 dencription of tha leo, II -. Gur spectalints ere very pleased
with 1t. Today one of our specialists seve © lecture on the mochine Minsk-1,

1 manent cnmetionbans Sania gers af 2 Antes

the computer. Your speclaliste were not porticulerly interested. It wos SF i
pretty old stuff for then. This men LOPATO, of course, knows @ good deal it Ce
abort various big computers (STRBY) end the STRILA-4 whieh are kept in secret. s7rel.

(Rote; These are Soviet mxiels.) Bo I ask you to think about that ant I ask
you egain to put me {in touch vith somebody suitable who equld work with me
properly. Later I can introduce him to a case officer of the REZIIENTIRA here.

ee £3. %: Do ym unterstand how the list of code names T gave you is
used? For exemple, 'yesterday I concluded o desl with Merchant B’. This means
yesterday I hed ea contect with Agent B. This ta how a dispetch or cable is

6

t

written up. Recently two couriers were killed. This happened not long ago,

a few weeks ago. Sometimes they burn the pouches with this materiel ani some-
times it may be intact. You may be able to intercept a diplomatic beg and,

if you can do this, there you will find all the documents of Strategic In-
telligence encoded with the code which I geve you. For instance, a "Merchant"
fe an agent, ete. You unerstamd, when they are enciphering a telegram they
use this code.

26. B: First of all, they disguise the operational words with this
code and then with the help of ten-line figure ciphers, they encipher the |
message and send it off. (Note: ‘This is s one-time ped.) In Moscow, they
heave a corresponding beck and if in Ankara they subtracted, in Moscow they
add, end get the true meaning of the message. So in order’ to decode a message,
we need a code book which is kept ina safe by code clerk. But, for instance,
when I was REZIDENT I hed access to the codes and did my .own enciphering with-
out the help of the code clerk. We've got these books at the Center. When I
wes getting ready to go to Inéis, I went through all this in a seperate room,
ant so forth end so on. It's important that we photograph two or three pages
for the experts so that they can understand the order and freauency of the
mmmber sequences, end try to discover whether there is any higher mathemetical
rule in the structure of the whole. This is my future task which Tf will do |
when I get a muitadle chance. : ~e

27. G: When you use the figures in order to send a message either by
telegram or by some other means, surely you do not repeat the figures a second
time in another message? 8: No, because I subtract the mmbers from another
pad, and those sheets\on which I've already erossed out mmbers are burned in.
an incinerator by certification. In each REZIDENTURA there is a elpher room, &
in England and everywhere else where there is an oxygen tank and a device for
the rapid destruction of elpher material in case or BH incident. ‘That is the
general rule. G: Whet do you call these tables, one time tables (ODNOVRFMENNYE
TABLICHKI)? S: No, these are enlled RAZOVYR tebles, on thin cigarette paper. :
(Subject gives an explenstion of the system by which a word is encoded by
syllables in alphabetical orders for exemple, the RAZVEDCHIK is encoded sylieble
by sylleble.) 8: Ani when I teke the RAZ, 45855, I take pad No. 1 or I take
ped No. 7, end they use ped No. 7 or No. 1 in the Center because they know
which pads I have destroyed. Where I have subtracted, they add, ani vice
versa. : ‘

28. 8; The operational code that I gave you is a fresh code (SVFZHIY). | |
It is used in all REZIDENTURAs. It's a red booklet. At the beginning is the | |
encoding section andl Bt the en is the decoding section. It is in alphabetical
order like a dictionary. . I gave you some examples. I copied this booklet early _
in the mornings or vhan.I was_on duty. I kept it in my safe. /I kept 1 together
with my ciphers. But only this one code Which was intended to meke operationnl
letters secure so thet there were no woris Tike intelligence officer, agent,
sefehoure, or dead drop. Yor instance, if I wanted _to write Rome, I wrote.
"VILLONA”.

™

#2

a4 29. 8: £ eopted thie list out om a pleos of paper emi then typed it

out on a typewriter vhieh I got from Germmmny when I wes a regizentel ter.

I did this as scouretely as possible. I wanted to insure thet it was dom more

tidily then whet I weete on rockets, although thet too should be corprehensible

even though it ie not benutiful. I tried to write out all the words in toto.

I ala went to copy the whole lot owt on a typewriter but I wuld here needed

two months’ to go thet. My wife kept acking om whet I waa veee Lye in

two roons...emt I alenys told her it wae just e report, or (I would typ) when

ny nother vent off to oy uncle's ISCHA with my daughter, If I hel head e eemern -~

a inox oF HOFENing Like thet -. then I certainly eould heve Gone it, G: You

know how to use a Minox then? 9: Of yes, I know how to mnke microdote, how to

une peernt ink, ani I know how to develop secret-writing, thet's ali.
je ow” Sees pleas ata hn :

Zl. G: Firve you eaten yet? 6: Yes, I cte with SIAPOVALCY, with lrtellt-
genes officer NHAPOVALOV. Hie Boglish Le very beds mins in better. The REZIANP
ves comloaiting to me about him today. The RECIDENT is an expertenced ant cunn-
ing man. He wee in fwerica. Incidentally he intents to teke a MY trip efter
PAVLOV, hia deputy, exrives. He's going to go nll ermund the country ani If you
put iwevy curvel lanes on him he'Li report on it to the Center. He'll begin to
worter why becaves there ween't surveilienes on hia before, but sinen (Subject ts
true nave} waa bere, eurmillenen began. You see, he'll get suspicious, Perhaps,
on the other hr, he won't think about it.

32. 8: How welll go throwth the papers whieh I have given you. I'71
tell you whet you cen publish tomorrow in the popera if you like or in notes or

tate , 0% the radio om the “Volee of Amerien” or on the "Voice of the BBC". Let's be-
Vo” | gin with the question of YFRAIN, -Pevel Dodtriyevich. I used to drink wine and
Ww | vodka with him in Ankers.” He wee the KS RELIOENT. Iie wes 2 colonel there. Now
ii | be te the Prorector of the Peoples' Frieniship University in Hoseow. Ineftentally,
this University is In the butlding only recently cecupied by the General Staff
| Reateny iment Vorashiloy wich ia now being united with the Frunze Acedemy. It
art « is sot far from the erematoriun. OTe ete. ,

att 33. S: Let us suppose it would be posathle to expose YER. IN evi to
ly jee show thepe stupid Afrtenns Like Patrice TRG who are being prepared as a
fifth colum. Meny of the stents there heve been recruited nlrenly. They
take these people there who are poor pn” enraged, Teed them, give them money
' ami reemdt then. They heve Lleasons and Horxiat-Leniniet training, develop
j their political views, get a signeture from thea for materinol ersistance ant

i; ‘9nd them baci: te African to atir up trouble for you -- strikes, revolutions,
| ete. This university must be umesked, end we cen do this through this YERZDF
|

§

4

who is both Proreetor end KGB RECIDENT, aml who stuiies the prospects ent
does all the reervuiting. Some have elrenaty been reernited. I heard this
andi believe it. Howrver, 1f YEW.IN Ls exposed they would gay, now vho knows
YER? «=A lemred people know thet he le = KOS offfeer ami on thin list,
of course, Le my neoe beenuse T worked with him in Torkey fron the becinning

; to the enf of his teur, I wea with him for eighteen months. 80 I_nhovld

like to wimask him but I em epprehensive ebout it at the seme time. That

ee ee .

have Like’ to heve been able to produce it then ant to confront him with £t f

am to say, “Whet ere you doing?” be.

inside the USER with particular reference to the hunger strike in Yoronerh |
reported in the written materinl.) 61: KARUSHCREY should be confronted with
epecifiec instances of bet coniitions within the USSR, of which he is tilly

ewere but pretents otherwise. I wrote «ll thie w. Now the Gee
RCLKECZNIK's right te heve a cow has been teken ovay. The order wes given
thet the cows were to be teken te the Koixio7. (Subject deseribed minersble
roral. comiitions -- no roeis -- impossible to gather in harvests — end the.
KOLKA@ system completely fafilet.) 6G: Let us continne rystemetienlly. 8:
Pleane excuse me, my nature is mich thet I get carrion’ eway. Iam afreta.

of forgetting when 8 thought comes into my herd... ¥)>

aN

he
35. (Subject then geve a rorbling mmoloeve on ssiieieel comitiens |i
\

35. Gs: ALL that you ary is very interesting ena cleer cyl no one

~ would querret with it. But our apenta....8: FExeuse m before I forget,

yesterday I began to tell you anil I should like to emphasize this -- om the

-Kewspaper photogrrph vhich shows BINYIWOY's hendquerters, the FYO, ani where

I Bei CAU wes -- Colonel General PHONY of the eyes is the heed of io

control of electronics, Ene ; she prokustion or ell 2 nilitery rocket foctories ani” :
the storage dums. i esk you té renesber that tiie bullding mat b- destroyed.

It ie the center where the planning end firection of the technienl military
machine is concentrate’ ent control of the technical production.

37. 8: Insofar as the egent eituntion for our workers in the countries
{ deel with -- now my adopted countries ~~ it ts complicated. It is not par-
tienlerly eany to work in then. AGENTURA is thin amt in Amerien -- omt I will
telk ebout feerien in particular -- ext this moment there is « REYZICENTURA which

3

2.

:

has direct contact with the center. It is illegal... The radio station is
not cutaide Moccow like the station which reeetved eipher telegrans from
all countries but fe directly on the Arbat in th General Steff. There is
@ powerful station and the agent ani {llegel RELIDEN? vhom they heve sent
off is in intepenlent contact. They train ratio intelligence workers.

In Turkey I hed GUS'KOV. Be is now stuiying at the Academy. Nikolay...
he's taking pert in the first course of specialiats.

38. 8S: We heve two types of radio equipment which are sent out
to our RAZTOENTURAS -~ lerge powerful sets and smaller sets. Ve set up
lerge sets on the frequencies on which our radio stetions originnts and
receive cipher telegrmns, ent thia other omoller set listens tn to the
chamels uged by the Air Force ani the PYO end to other military echonnels.
If the message is of a civil or commercial nature from one tom to another,

let's sey from Ankara to Istanbul in Turkey for instance -- that was vhere

I had s radio atetion unter my control -- he there changes the weve length
oni eeerches. He listens to all the chamels used by aviation ete. trans-
mitted by bases, as I remember it, ezvl all the other channels. Ke inter-
cepts them ant he records or writes then down, or he mskes a digest or

& transcript of the conversation.

39. §S: In this wey they get no grest denl of factuel miteriel. Be
can pinpoint deployments exactly beesuee there are very mony careless people,
officers ant others who give mubers in open text or elphered mumbers which
cen then be deciphered and umterstood. For exemple, an intelligence worker
may go for a walk or ge fishing antl meet s eoldier. He stops to talk ent
smoke @ cigerette with him ond eaks hin, “Whet wit sre you serving with".
The soldier says, “Oh, I'm in the 65th Infantry Regiment.” Well, they
heve a different mmber which they use on the air, but we know that this
is the 65th Regiment. The fool told us. In this ease the erent would not
Bay that he was & Ruasien. He would preter to be a Yugoslav which fa alao
in the Belken Peet, ami the fool soldier would believe hin. This ie e terrible
business, your tosk avi mines. Perhaps other people more experienced than you
ere in thinking out how to curb Soviet Strategic Intelligence, could figure
how this could be done. This I een't tell you at the moment.

4O. Gt One thing I cen tel). you sbout is thia is work with emell
refilo tranmitters which exe carried tn opexntional ears. Fryery READDENTURA

hes theee operrtionnl enra. For instance, in London there are many. The car

is spectelly equipped. The REZIDENT told m that your counter-espionage ser-
vieen have sometimes stopped a mmber of these cara ani checked then. They

ere doing the right thing, but it is recessery to know whet to leak for ent how
to recognize them. This is en important matter. They eré comected with radio
intelligence. ‘These cers should be confiseated. Thet is my opinion. dera-
tional cars are given greet sipnificence. :

10

hi, 8: Contacts are made, as a rule, in operational cars nowedeys. \
Agents are picked up en route when the cars have shaken surveillance. Money |
and materials ore passed and the agents are dropped off. You can atop the
cer and you would not know there was secret material in it. In a car there
are a large number of places in which one can make hiding places. For instance
with the upholstery, like the arm-rests, you can take off the upholstery and
make a smell cavity. You might have one already made in which there is
small pipe in which a cassette, like a film cassette, can be put containing
material which is being taken from or given to an agent. There is an invisible
cavity into which a flexible hose with a special head can be lowered. It screws
onto the container hiddmn there, ‘This is made by the First Section of, SHELYCANOV. :
More and more they are using the gas tenk with a false section. They are even
fitted out to enclose redio transmitters. They make a cavity inside the tank,
completely sealed off, and they put the transmitter in there. Also, uner the
floor where the plating is, they use all the projections and exhaust pipes and
portions of the car chassis as concealment devices. You must look very care-
fully, especially for places out of the line of vision, as I described.

42, B: To continue, they drop off an agent es the car moves. A switch |.
turns off the brake lights as the driver brakes and no red light is seen in :
the rear. The surveiliants think the car is moving, but he has stopped and
unloaded the agent in the dmrkness. The stop signal had been disconnected.

The same can be done with the interior lights when necessary. The door cpens

and normally the light goes on, but it can be disconnected so that when the

agent is picked up or put down the car remaing dark.

43, 8: Operational cars, particularly foreign models, sre kept at the
AVTOBAZA on Gritsevets Street, the AVTOBAZA of the GRU. Yes, there are special.
instructors, drivers who have worked abroad, and they teach courses to new
drivers and sometimes teach us. I studied there. I did thirty hours. If
know where there are hiding places in the Pontiac, the Ford, the Mercedes
Benz, for example, I told you the floor, and the arm rests. In front where
the driver and the passenger sit, the floor opens up and there is a hole under-
neath. Sometimes when a car is followed, material can be jettisoned. If they
held me wp I could throw the material out. I throw the stuff out; I em picked
up; I heave nothing in my hands. They throw stuff out; they drop it. Therefore
the care are adjusted so that when the car stops or brekes, there is no red
light at the back. The car is dark when picking people up or.dropping them
off and there sre many hiding places. An operational cer -~ all operational
cars -- are equipped like this. But such ingemiuity! They teke off the metal
upholstery holders and make a hiding place. You would ‘never guess that there
is a hiding ploce there, You look at the outside surface under the seats.

You must teke the plating off and there you will find the hiding place.
Knowing who the operational case officers ere, you can spot their cars.

‘ * = ae.
a ; é
’ . :

#2

hits ear but that's easy for you to fini art -- that's no problen.

hi. oS: On the question of ratio intellinence -- great significance
is attached to this. We have it here too. In the Fubassy thers is a powerful
station which listens in to all of the chennela. In all the eepitalist econtries
there exe huge stations end little portable ones. They sviteh on the station,
search and listen to the charmels, pick on one far away from the tom -~ ea base
or a storage area whieh hes a radio link. They l{sten to it, write everything
down, locate it, work owt ite designstion and the matters which ere being
worked out. They hear very interesting, secret things. Thus without egents
we obtain preelae detatie from refifo deta ebout the loeation, about the forme-
tion itself, ebout those questions which I head on record -- that supplies are
running short, that they heve not delivered protuce for three days to that
division. We know ite status. They transmit by redio -- here is Belikoshyr,
there is Semsun or Trebizond. Well, this le a very great aseet of strategic
military fnteliigence.

I just left SHAPOVALOY. He brought me here. I wanted to get the mmber of

4S. 8: KGB intelligence also uses the facts which are obtained by
radio intelligence on the subjects which interest them. What does the KB
do? They do surveillance of ua anid of all Soviet subjects and politiernl °
intelligence. What sort of organiention fe tey hevet There is the First
Mireetorate «- thie is operational -- on Drerzhinakty. It is necessary to
sother the Kon. They are very experienced people and they do a lot of harm
to goot people. It ie a terrible business, a tyge orgentsation, flourishing
SK ami rich. They get lerge saleries -- more than we. Well, they also use this
~~ Geta” The First Operstional DirectoreteVia also split into sections (CTDELS).
; All owr directorates ere divided by areas, but theirs are divided by rections
a0) which are working groups against countries. Also in the sections there are
directions (HAFRAVLENIYA). ‘There are aentor officers who are the heads of
Girectionss thet is aleo the organizetion in strategic intelligence. Thre
ere no sub-sections (OTDELENIYE). In the Directorate there are sections.
But there, a section in divided into directions while with us a directorate
he is straight away divided into directions.
i

AG. S: A head of a direction -- . Sny in the Fourth Mrectornte
there ere three directions. Colonel ZASORIR, Konatentin Alekseyervich is the
hesf of one. Me was military attache in Syria -- you must know this. The
other two are headed by Colonel DOLIN, military ettache in Iran, ant Colonel
BLAKHIN. He wea wilfitary etteche in Syrin after ZASORIN. He was there a
long time. Those are the three heede of directions at the present moment --
they are all alive ani kicking. With them I wes a sentor officer under ZASORIN
ari looked efter three countries. I had @HAPOVALOY as.an officer. He is now

an intelligence worker here. G: What are these Aireetions enlleay fo:

Near East, Middle Fest ant Fer East, and exch direction has several eountries.
| G: And& working groups? 8: And working groups.
i
|

12

f2 | bet

%

47. 8: ‘There ie a sefe in which the personal files of the formetion -- |
the files of the agents they are working on -- are kept, along with operatiom1
ecorrespomience, the operational code which I gave you, a journal ani accounts ani
e stomp for the docusents which we type. We type all domenents ourselves. I |
do a little typing mypelf. 5S: We do the typing ourselves ani enter the mmber |
in sa journel. This is seen by « sub-committee twice a month or at least once a
month. We receive an enciphered telegram. I make a short entry end take the mo- |
ber. It is alrwady filed. If I have replied I write a short outline of the reply;)
I write the ensver on a red form -- a cipher telegram «- code it with that code
ami the head of the direction signs it. He also has a peewlonyn -- KAR, wk
like that, you understand. He signsit. I take it to the Eighth Section on the **?
third floor, where the financial section im. The head of the Financtel Section uF
is Colonel TRLFGIN ent Colenel Sib6toy. Excuse me, TRLEGIN ie the heed of the H
Finaneiel Directorate, Colonel BHRETOV ie the bend of the Administrative Direc- |
torete. The head of the Medical| Geetion is Colonel MAKANOV.

CAre vt er

48. 8: Well, gentlemen, -- our task -- ant this is whet we work for --
clearly ell our efforts are directed to the locelisation of Soviet intelligence
connected with reeruitment amt agent work. We are not successful everywhere be-
eeuse they work akillfully to deceive coumterintelligence. This is ea selence
in iteelf. In Anerics, in order to carry out e meeting, sometines an operational
worker will speni the night et his desk on a divan in his office in order to go
out early when the militia te not there -- when the counterintelligance agent hes
gone to sleep beenuge he fs worn out or the policemen is drowsing. He spends the
night in his office in orter to go out early ami to make his contact.

h9. 8: YX ask you to pay pertiquler attention to radio intelligence.
This is a very vulnereble spot which they atteck with grest success. May I go
on with my paper? G: Yes.

20. §&: Well then, on the subject of operationel intelligence work,

SHERSTHFV's Direetorate, I heve heard, ant I will check up on it, that now there
ia no directorate and I don't think the heed of SHERSTHEY. We must look into
this. G: SHMRSTNEV retired in 1958. Wikoley Vasilyevich. 6: Yee, I remember.
Operational intelligence is in the honis of SERCV ~- in the hands of Btretegte
Intelligeneve. G; The heoA now is KCCHCIXOY. 8; Oulte right, but it is not

| a directorate. I'll check tt. It fe eleo not 2 section. It is a group whieh
desle with operational intelligence, but it's not important whet mesber it has.
I shall fini out.

Sl. St: Tw principle is this smi this is very trportent. mm eech mili-

tary district whieh borders on « eapitcliset state there are RP {n which there
ere officers of our Strategic Intelligence. They rum ami Aispetch agents but
they have little depth of intelligence, penstration (geographically). These RP's
ere also engeped in redio intelligence. They listen in on the channels. They
collect data on one question or another. So, let us suppose I xend metertal
from Ankara Which I got from radio intelligence ani they also pick it uw in
Poilisi emi in the Trnns-Caucenusian Military District RP at Leninaken. 2

re “Garved punn

i
H
i
i
i

)
|
le

Si tnt — ede ee

61.» 8: Ineldentelly, en interesting detatl ebout Warkey -- it
is interesting how little they value a men with us -- oven e gewrel,
Major General KMZAKRVICH, the military stteehe in Turkey wos chosen to
be Secretary of the Party Committee in the Eebanay at Ankers. There it
is not called the Perty Committee; for commitlisege purposes they enll it
the Irnde Union. These Party Seereteries ore ealled beck by the Central
Committers onm= # year for “refresher courses”. ,

62. 8: He wert beck ext anid -- SUSLOV was in the eheir -- "r
Went to express the opinion of Avbnasador RYZELY -- thet wes our Abessador
in Anknra ~~ and of myself as Secretary of or Porty Committee. We con-
sider that the Soviet goverment is pursuing the wrong policy towns the
Turkish Government ani the Turkish people. The Turkish people are in a
state of poverty. The lira has fallen, there fe little wheot, everything .
is expensive ete... The Americans are not giving os euch ae Torkey needs,
We should make a lerge loon -- some tens of millions of rubles to the
Tarkieh Goverment so that it moves avey from the Americane”. But BUSLOV

Ww

*gald, "What sort of experiments are these with millions of rubies? Whet
arrurence have you thet we can give this loan ant that the Turkish Govern
ment emi people will turn eway from America ami come over to ust” Be
locked a complete fool -- “what assurencet” SUSLOY is a clever men, &
clever politicien. He abused him gaying, "You want to make euch @ Inge
loan to Turkey at the expense of the peaple but whet quarantee here yout
They take the loan, they eat it, ami how do we get then ewey fron the
‘Americans -- from their exbraee?” as SUSLOV put it. Well, they told him
that he politienlly shortsighted, 11iiterste. They removed hin ex pro-
posed to replince him with ZASORIN, Konatentin Alekgeyevich. But Colonel
MAXHROV -- I mentioned him not long ago -- exentned him. Te hed peines in
his liver ami peins in hie heart and he wat rejected on health grounds.
He's not going ebrosd now. Be will work in the APPARAT ~~ perhaps for two
years. Now they are looking for en ettache to gothere. But SUDIN in pee
pering to go es x ecumsellor. Well, that wes s digression. One thought
lesda to another.

63. &: Row sbout agente who ere mown to me -- I'll cire you
their fl). momames, newer, patronmice, even the yeera in which they
were recruited. ~ heve alrenty talked abort this a let. You should eon-
sider how to leeste then, bt beeruse I ran then, I am certain to be ealled
up for quemtioning. Well, I eked you about thie. I heve told you about
RGEKIN. I heve told you abett YERZIN. Think about how to handle hin,
Gee {” Re {8 the prorector.

Gh. 68: Now about agent work, and methods of work in t*e US ant
in Fnglernd -- Fil tell you abuut Amerfea. What SERIZY told me -- he used
to be counsellor, excuse me, First Seeretery in our Pebesey in America.
Now he is ea covmsellor in Iniie. ‘They exll hin Sergey. I have forgotten
his surnare fer the moment; I'll tell you. He was in Amerion a long time
emi he knows Fngiieh quite well. Sergey SERCRYEVICH. 6G: ‘YURUXHIN: §:
Ho. Well, I'll remerber, He bebbled evry. We have people like that, too,
who chatter to om encther. How 4ifficult {t wes for me to work while he
yopped sbout how be gpent the night on the diven in his offler veiting
for the dawn. In Washington the MEXIDENTURA is under cover. ‘The agents
are old, they wore recruited long ago, aml they heve Little value,

65. 6: Im Rew York, there ore tyo REZIDENTURAS, bosleally unéer
UN cover. ‘Theat wos where the man (MELEXH) waa whom you threw out. You
shoulda heve shot himy you hed go much proof. Incidentally, the American
Counterintelligence knew he wee a SVYOLOCH -- HELA ~~ they “hat evidence.
Then they wrote it all out, expelled him ant resettled him. How ean that
be? I remember I setd to WE 2 und MRR thet in this materiel thre
are certein feta ebout MELEE which may give sa clue. I do not know whet
MELFKA eatd in eourt sbort where he was between 1950 ant 1952. If he pre-
temled thet he was net working {n the Military Diplomatic Acadesy as a

LT

t : een : 2
: 1‘ . 7 ’ é :

#2
' teacher, it would heve been possible to whov him my two pages and to Bay,

“You are the author of a book on the Faslish languege and here is a
nO. 75033, the mmber of the Academy VCh, used in correxpordience.

65. B: dust pricr to ny depertwre I sew MELEKE welking through _
the GRU corridors. I reed thet KENNROY's brother who deals with legal
matters omtered the ease sgninst MELEKR dtemissed. When ZI eppreeched

end que (if they hod secepted my material) thie data about
MELEKE would have been known. You vould here known that he is en intelli-
gence man, (Rote: Sbject agnin repeats how he appenled to Whee} ant

to aocept his materie) ant how they feared it was ® prerocetion. )
Tis you probably did not believe me for eight months. If only you hed
let me know in two worts. This bart me x great deal. J: It's much more
aifficult to work in the Soviet Unton than ft fs out here. S: Of eourse,
you ore right. ,

67. 68: I recently listened to « leeturs by a general cf the EB
on the operstions of American and Briti¢h intelligence personnel in Moscow.
He mentioned that Amerieen intelligence operations were cberrred to be con-
eentrated in the Kreano-Premenskiy Reyon of Moscov. Fvidently the eres
was fours to be suitable for eomiueting meetings there. a wis

68. GO: Wee enything mentioned shout en American attache who ves
PRG'dy 8: Yee, I remember he epoke of « meeting in « bos where money wes
pessed, a considerable man, tut I don’t remenher the detaile at ell. f
aidn't pey close attention to Lt. @: Vas the identity of the Soviet eeent
wentioned? 6: No, nothing was seid shout thet. You gee, in x ense like
that the KNB tremdiately tekes control, Maybe our GRU chiefs know shout
4%, but the rect of us were not informed.

69. 5S: Let mm ask this question, hy couldn't two words have -
been posted, stating, for example, thet I should weit for efeht nonthe?
G2 That could have been done, but ve deliberately refrained until ve could
give you instmetions for s necure wry of pesaing the meteriel yeu told us
you hed. This yes to provide naxtram recurity for yourself as well es for
cum men, &: Did yeu not receive my firet letter through those tire Russian
(language) instructors? ¢: Yes, we did ss I elreedy told you. We herve it
here. But we recelyed {t after a conwidersbie delay. S:; I mde a misteke,
ee I told you before. I wented to say ferevell to them properly at the
Nebereshneys, but I went to the Pereniok ont ran into the two militiamen,
They sev thet I wee apprehensive when I sew the militionen, which wes a
misteke on my pert. When I told them in Russtan to follow me {nto an entry--
way to finteh our conversstion, they becom efreid ani went on. Thay went
elong Osipenko Street toward the Balehuk (Hotel) end. surveilied for a
distance atnee I wos efraid thet they might throw away the metertal. Later,
efter there was such a long interval, of silence, I begnn to think that al-
though they did not throv avey the meterieal, they may hye dispored of it
dater in the toflet of the hotel or something like that. Later I checked

18

(and learned) that they left on the 15th as I told you before. I used
this Armenian friend of mine as my cover for asking about them.

7O. 8: Of course there may be questions here which ere not
any of my business, so you can simply tell me, ("Subject's true name),
this is none of your business." G: By the time the material reached
us in Washington, some time went by. 8: I asked them to deliver it to
your Embessy that sane evening. Did they do this? G: Yes, they did.
They delivered 1t as you requested. 6: Then they were fine lads. I
wish them good health. Tell me this, did you umierstand at once what 7
the subject matter was about and that Y was (Subject's true name)? Gs
Of course we did, immediately. §: That's fine:

Ti. 5: Now let me mention this, in the future if a telephone |
cell is to be maie to me, do not speak in English. This, of course, is
in case our other means for commmication are interrupted and you do
know my telephone. By the wey, what was the subatence of wheat this man
who called me at 1100 hours on a Bundsy tried to tell me? All I could
get was one word - “March”. G: “Merch”, of course is the month. He
tried to ssy that during the month of March or April there would be a
signal for you. Furthermore, he said thet you should wait for this
patiently and should not contect anyone until you see the signal. A
signal will be placed and you will be called again. 5: This all could
have been seid in two words.

72. 8S: Why couldn't you heve placed this information behind
the rediator? G: Because such a signel would say only one thing --
keep waiting. Then to go beck again to the same dead drop with a complete
wet of instructions would create ean additional risk of compromise. 8B:
People go there ell the time. G: Why should the dead drop be used for
this purpose twice when one thme would serge more securely? 8: ALL that
needed to have been done was for ® signal to be placed and a note placed
telling me to wait ani that the material got into the right henis. I em
gure that there is no surveillance on me at all at this time. G: Most
probably not, but there is certainly surveillance on our man whom we
planned for you to contact. Consequently this surveillance fis also a
source of danger to you. 5: But you did believe me, that I had this
other material that I wanted to pass. G: Of course we believed you be-
cause the material that you first sent made it very clear what the situation
was. 8: You checked all that? G: Of course we did. 8: Another thing
which confused me was how to convince MEMO ant MEREBE to ncceyt my
material directly. However, I won't telk sbout that anymore.

19

| Sl. 8: Well, you know whet a mess I should heve been in if WYNNE

hed not taken the metertel. I keep the meterieol at bore vhere my cegendas

ere. The materiol consists of typed eheete which ere wrepped with

| insulation: tupe. G: So you keep it at home. 8; No, ino hiding place

| on my unele’s TACHA. The position wes ticklish. They might teke me ont

| of the ecemittes for training to work unler cover in the capitalist stetes /

ef England or Ceneda, even the United States. May God grent that this /
heppomns beemuee then I emild pley mn importrrt role. Prerything would P
be in my henis, everything - efvhers, retio intelligence, pecple. This /
would be firiportent to us. There ig one egent -~ I don't keow whether he

| is in Fnglem or in fwerten, tut I'L. eweer by my life thet there are

| agents.

|

|

!

H

i

|

|

|

|

O22. S: Yerterdey SHAPOYALOV het on egent meeting. He told ne
shout it yerteminy. The men 4# sownhere on the other side of Loniton.
I got the inpreenion thet he is more kint of o elerk or a press worker
es far ve T coul4é fink ot. I emlén't put direct questions to him
but he told me emmgh sbowt it for it to be untersteniable.

22

#2

83. 8: The question is viet vill ny position be? Siutienly
things will get bed for m. Sow member of the Central Comittee --
you know the sort of SYOLOCH -~ will sry "Such a men”, as myself,
“eannet be tolersted in the GRU. Let's finish with him.” Wealtes, they
know thet the deputy of Major Generel SOLIKOV -~- the leme one I told
you about yesterdny, Mejor Genrrel SHUNORTY, w- told me officially :

jy | Tals report has comm from the KGB exe fib
wy (seme) mede o fples declaration. }
be | teddy with the netiel facts. Bisa fether Vimtinir Floriyanovich wes of
moble dencent.” His father was my grenifether Florien Antonorich.

Penwlg
pee - Bh. of: LT heve recently fount e distent reletive -
afer A he coments the Fer Eostern Wilitery District -- Colonel deneral (subject's
new). i is ry gront uncle but since he knee about our past be does not
Ml) , keep in touch with re. I see him on rere cecasions. He Ins a wife ant
Cae a non -- he is # fat mn -- Valentin Antonovich. Ye ves Chief of Sick’ |
; _ to MALINOVAKIY when the letter eommuried the Fer fret Hilitery District
| pnd When they wade HALINCVSKIY the minister -- this fool -~ they will _teke

ek foyny Velentin Antonorich for a long time. I think he ignores me beemrwse of

ent I do mt sek him out either. ie te the younger brother of my
premifather. ty crenifather wes & great Jurist, & hich-placead official.
He hel e rich heme ant everything wee elegornt.

8. G2 They christened me -- I ves born in Ordehoutkidre -- in
Rterropol mui my neme is in the clmren register in Stevropol. They pearched
out the entry in the archives which vere tekken aswey by the Germane vhen
they destroyed the eity. They ave still stuiying then. ‘Tho KGB is studying
\ every nom: in the archives. That's the wey they work. Well, they tummed
., “wp the fact thet my feather vas & hite frny OffLeer, e second Jieutenent,
*'  ' that in Mey 191). he reasivet the renk of Yiret limuttenent in the Unite
“3: ‘guesta, avi thet he wes killed when his unit wer suremmvied repr Rostov.
; That's whet ny mother heard -- you know these mmors -- emi. whint ehe told
ne. But he sald, “Your mother reported that he died of typhus during
en apiienie’. My nother did not wont to wreck ry life. She geve me
this cover story and thet's whet I wrote et the begiming. I suspected

23 ®. Gand i Led

eer escent

Pr ere ene

{2

of course thet thie was not true. My father was well bern. He finiahed
at the lyenm, be wos « mining endinesr evi then of eoures he joined the
a Whites end fonght egeinst the Soviet regime in th efvil wer. Well, I
ae felt this. My mother mrver told me, the more so since I never sow him
S / om rever celled hin fnther. Iowea i months old when he last held me
\. in his arms ent he never sow me agnin. Theat is whet ny mother told me.

at ae ee | 85. Se Well, SHUMSKIY sald, "Well, there you eve. - Rrite me
ps en explenatory note.” I teok a serli piece of paper si wrote. My
an 3 ane dong not know aborh this, fhe loves me ani I love ber. She has
abate ghery a sister, 2 brother, emia mother. They ere of proletarien descent.
Qeep ons wi Hex Snther was a POLITRABOPHIK. He died in 19523 he had three sters.
He was a goolmen. He swore at Sterling his femily didn't acres with him
bat he eriticized everything. He was a straightforward sort of person.
I ealled my mother to my aumt's house. She (the aunt) Lives on the
‘forth Meshehenekiy etreet. She is the aleter of my mother.
: I called ry mother there aml told her viet kel heppemed. She eaid
" xlneten”’ i “Oleg, I knew nothing ehout this”. I asked her to write me an explenstion)
| She let me hnve a letter explaining thet in mich ent such a yeer ebe had
| potten to know so ent so he seid he ves en engineer and shred her
i his peperess they got married, the efvil wer began; she bore a son shortly

| after thie ani her huisbend disappesred without a treee. This two-page
| letter te now in SHOMSKIY's sefe. Now, when I wens filling out the t
| Lora For r the trip here, I went to SMBURIY ent esta, "hat econ I vrite pre)
a-Btter what _you_hrme to to ee er teif, “Write just as
ou have always written’.

| with a note on top eteting ‘We trust Colom] (Subject's meme)". That
sryed me from being Gienissed from Intelligmer. They pst belter.
me beemise they gore me ny pessport even thoigh it wee held w. As you
know they geve ereryone their passports except me. I got mine et the

‘A. Leet monent. The Foreign revel Comlesion of the Central Cemrittee __

1 examined it at the Inet morent. SVOTACTIC of the KOR site there. If they
hean't given it to me I would heve pone etrai¢ht to the Britirah-or
frericen Febasay av said “To hell with you. Good Bye! ”

| B94. G: This Central Committee, in it a military eamitteet”
B1 The Military feet Lon ve the Hoseow atministration -- genernts end oll
| ieee

2h

P's wife hivd

ee oneal
2 bya the? +
ww + ler?

kot 87. 8: The FOB reporting all this wes in the file,
|

#2

the eolonrin. G: Did they toke your Party emit 8: Thet ts for e
PC3 but when I came to you I geve my enxd to the Party ecemittee. I
Left 1t there enl the Party committee put a stomp on it. G: Ami they
glye you mother book? Ss: They alive you a manll coupon as a reesipt.
Well, thet is ny efturtion.

89. 8: Whet do I want to ask yom pentlemen? Firet we must
think cbowt eryl develop one or two dead drope. This ie exsential. I 5
mee an pleee where enn Iomrt a film -- mmMleveloped, of course. I repent
I will never develop them aince I herve mo merns to do this. 4: Remenber
thet the servieing of a dend drop by one of owe people who is porsibly ~~
probebly -- uvier henvy euryetlienes is a eonstant denger. Tt ean be
font like this but neverthelens..Por ymt to M11 ont clear e dend frog
vhen there is no surveillance is no problem. But althoy: you Live in
Moscow oxi elthouh you are 42, I en gure thet you een heve no ides how
heevy the murvelllence of oll our people in Moscow ts. 6: I do wilerstent.
G: Then dmble this mfrrestanting and you will be closer to the actual
facta. Tile is a erent danger. Understemt re, we ere not worried obout
or man. Whet ean hoppen to him as a diplomet? A small seaminl ent he
is thrmm owt. Ne yill be olive end well Pt... 8 Tem pone. 4: Thank
you, that is right.. Sneomily, even with en idenl dead drop there is
uncertainty if-hotGaetertal is in it for eny leneth of time.

9O. 8; Let us work in meh a wry thet the drop is fw). for oe
only five to ten mimvtes, 4: If yt are werking with euch ae dhort tire
xehadhile, personel contect fa more relicbin. Since at lenet it wold be
known thet the meterinl got ite the richt hends. 8: Thre meeting place
I geve you by the etetun of REPIN -- before the entrance to Tebushinskly
Street, the Tratyekevakly Gallery -- is a moot pleee. You enn chang: the
times I arnve you. I ehenged the recien of Geter. G: A simmnd is no
problem. For exemple, you know the Hovo-Arbetekly Bridge. &: Yes.
Foreign cars tim off there. They live om the Rutuzersakly. I wanted
to put a note in ona of then (f.<, tho errs) which said, "Give this to
the Ameviesan or British Coverments”. I was reedy to ai

Be ER eS

2

¥
~

ene pick me wp along his road of traml: It's dengerous, I suppose. -0: They

would errest you ami the ear, You would be murrmuried by 5 cere. .

8: You know I wes locking for a diplosmtie em which had stopped outside
the restourent aryl which hed the letter "D" on the back. I know the
types of foreipm errs. I looked for foreirners too, but they were ell
tourists. You loww how tourlets renet -- Like MPRRIMAN onl MCBRIOn.

92. H: I think we've got to get it over to him thet whatever
is dom, mot only must he know that this is really ening to be resered
but thet the wmeterial murt be renored in the shortest possible tire.
Thin it the first thing. Now just to eentime for a moment ~~. There
ere vertoun woyr this ern be dom. We've elrenty mentioned « perty xt
wifeh he would be. Te would mow thet the men whe wes going te pick w -
the materLal wes there -- he wld mit it in pleee el the mn wold
remove it. Thet's one mthod; the otter in eqelly sirpir. If there isn't
e perty there ore certrin public plasec, reatmurants mri the like in Moreow
where he anil the men enn be on ¢iven deys, Fyren if there fa movetlionce
there, they enn etl. po to or piss tieawh certain perte of the billding
within « ressonrhble time: of each other. You here thet verletion es well.
fo even if he doos get resovel fron hie post md domm't econe to metings
on « given day of © given month ya om still beve the two people vho are
alrendy known te each other and who reeogrniza each other In the sem eren.
Do you ese whet I meen? This is seein « OLB eni not a brush ecntact,
but in fect hee the sere control esx on brush eomtect. This is an
extention of th: originn! Iien.

93. (Rote: © translated the preceding for Subject.) G: The
simplest thing would be if you awl someone when you know were in the same
plece. The easentiel principle is that the material ia there for as short

a time an possible. Other variations of the seme theme might be like this --

in various public places it would be quite normal, if you know the time art

date to be there, to leave some materiel In a given place and at a given tim

wo that it could be presed though not by personal contact. Thus, you lose
no time and you know that it is in asfe hamis. This can be arranged to be
done in hotels, ete. Of course, the tollet is pertimuarly dangerous --
this is well known. 8&8: Yes, in the GRU we cell At _SOBTIRN/Ye_TAKTUKA.

G: But if there is a telephone booth in the entrafee, you can go in an
telephone BM wee

9h. #H (In Pmglish): Couldn't you do it much more simply than
that? Look, you go into a restaurant; our friend is there first of alls

26

¥2

he is sitting at a given table. He knows that he has got to finish his
meal punctuelly at 7 o'clock or whatever time is agreed upon. At 7
otelock he gets up amt moves from the teble. Somebody elee comes in ani
sits down at the teble. He goes off to pay his bill. The other chap
site eat the table, puts his hend under the table ani removes the stuff
which is atuck underneath. There are all sorts of variations on this.
G: If you have made your teble bookings. H: Yes, these things can be
done in this sort of way. These are Just general ideas. (Hote: 4
explains thie in Russian to Subject who esks about surveilience.)

8: Surveillance is very concentrated against your people in restaurants.
H: (in English) ‘The whole point is that you can do it with surveillance
there because they con't see it. (Note: This is explained to Subject.)

95. 8: I already heve some meterial prepered for you. Try
are without classification stomps, top secret, and written for service
use, not for sale. For instance, there in a new ertillery instruction
(NASTAVLENTYR) -- very interesting. In the Journal VOYENNAYA MYSL on
which {£s written in red "Only for Officers, Admirals, ami Generals of
the Soviet Army” there is an interesting erticle on future planning,
training, ani go on. These are big sn. XY also have three emall
studies (POLOZHENIYA). (<6 tr G7,

96. 8: You should pry special attention to the Dzerzhinskiy /
Academy. I°11 tell you more about it. There are 2,500 etiwiente stiying
‘there and more then 1,000 teachers. This 4s the blacksmith shop where.
rocket cafres sare forged. The students are nccomodated together. There
ts one set of living quarters on the territory of the academy on the
Solyanke anil the other is near the British Mehessy on the Soflyskaya
Neaberechnryn at No. 3%. The reception hall of the Minister of Defense
is there ani your esbeasy is three or four houses away. If your man
etaris on the brite at eight ofelock in the morning he'll see all the
effteers going along with briefcases, crossing the bridge to Golyanka.
Hundreds of them live there in a huge four-story building. Both bachelors
and married officers live there -- they have small separate rooms -- “It
is somthing terrible” (in Fnglish). | ¢ ok

97. 8: I heve a very interesting description of the heatemy, KP
the principles of plemning the duties of the departments (sAremRy signed
by ® colonel generci, the heed of the Aendeny ~- ODINTSOY. His initiels
ore "G.F.” but £ don't want to give you his full name just now. This is
whet I heve ready for you. A large hiding place is necessery for ell this.
But this is interesting. You will detect the principles on which the
instruction process is plammed. ‘There fs no wention of the word rocket,

rose w

27

{2

f

but you will know. Then there ere disgrame giving the division of the
various speeial elasses ~-- which floor they are on -- departwents with
actual modele. All the rockets are broken down in diegrems. That is
the materinl that I have. And then I might be able to take from the
secret library (GRU) any of our documents (USTAVY) on theoretical
perspectives, in which wars are planned anit concrete orders beginning

| with the ..lowest echelons.

98. G: Do you have elesses once & week, or once a month?
5: We have Comaonders' training every Thursday. They give us lectures.
And then one can work {n the top seeret library. One vrites his requirements
on a plece of paper, gives class ani room mmber and are locked {tn and
can study what one likes. I heven't done this yet sgself becuse I
thought ... G: Thie is of the greatest importance. S: Dust listen,
I will give you meteriel... G: (to Hin Pnglish) You know what this
is? Every week since they are military ani high ranking they must keep up
with their military atuifes. They heve ccomanter deys on which they
are given the aflernoon off ~~ they have lectures. But then they are
going to be given exeminationa ent they have precticsl, as he says, map
studies. But in addition to thia, because of the quizzes coming up which
are registered on their efficiency reports for exeminations they must have

| very highly elessified reference material which 10 locked up in the secret

room, Which they, under receipt, are Leevued, not to take out but to sit
down in a little stuty room and study for tvo or three hours on Thursday
efternoons. He ean copy from this, put the matertal there, retirn the

books, end the receipt is okay, because he has studied and is authorized

h
‘ ' e ca
to do thin. Meree Mind : Y : veer -

99. §S: Seleeted coplesjof all the lectures of the VRA which
are kept in the seademy safe at Sokol are brought to the general starr
of our directorete so that our intelligence officers should read thea
emi know whet goes on. Whenever IT like, I ean tske out a leeture on
intelligenee (SFFTSPONTOTOVKA) -- on theory -~ we in strategic intelligence
consider this a selence. G: (to H in Pnglish) Intelligence texts. 6: And
I could photogreph ell this -- they ere all typed ani bound. Gd: Can
you teke them away? 6: Not out of the building. G: Is there enough
light for photogrephy? S: Well -~ at the wintovs with « Minox. -- the
negatives mipht be werk -- you would have te strengthen them ani develop
then. The qinlity might not be very high, but X could not eopy them out.

28

~

f2

G: Returning to eommmnfiestions; - T have a stegestion, Football metches --
you go to # football match at the Lenin or Dinemo Stadium ~-

or someone elee is playing. Our men duys a ticket,..During the intermission
et the half whole crowls go to the nffats for a glass of beer or what

not. To brerk awny from surveillance in this crowl is simple - ant you
meet our man et a very erowted buffet onl brush-pess materials beck and
forth in relative ssfety -. 8: This can be easily done.-

100. J (In English):...Carry om of these (a brtefease) emi.
drop part of 1t. 5: Do you know why this {s a bed ident Because in the
erowl there sre many thieves. You put down your beg ant they wold steal
it. J (In English) I womler if es a basis we would get. some idea of
his movements ~- of his normal movements -~ where he lives, where he works,
where he goes every day (explain to Subject). St I live on this ielend
GORKOGO HABERFZ.HMAYA HAKSIMA 36, Flat 59. The entry {s fron the courtyard,
3rd floor - 3rd entrance -- if there were no survellience I could have
you all as guests in my hone for tea. There is a Lift. The attentdent wD
is an old women. J (ask him how hich the building is) 68: ‘The building y
ig new, It wae built in 19hh. It is e grey building with « beleony at
the top. Nine stories -- a large bullding. And thet is where all the
big people live. In this alley is the headquarters of the Noscow militery J
district. G: Theret Also on the island.

1Ol. ‘The headquarters is on Caipenko Street amt Mextm Corkly \
Street. J: How many femilies are on the seme floor? S: Four, exch
has its own flat, two of the flats heve 2 room and two have 3 -- I heve
two rooms -- a good lorge flat, 45 enwere meters. Before I Lived on t
Mayskovekiy Syimre. Not Qirectly on the squere -- you know the militery =
political acedemy on Bol'shaye Sateveyr at Ho. 2. I Lived eat Bo. 6. A
There we hai a eormon flet of 2 rooms. Theat was during the war. Well '

now, how do I go to work; -- along Ulitsa Osipenko to the bridge ant \ fs
ocross Red Square. J: This is on « dally basis - every morning? 6: we
‘When the weather im good I go on foot. When it reins, I go either by |

erb of on a bus -~ no. & bus along the forkty embankment. G: fows it

G0 over the bridge? S: It goes along Oripenko Street to the Baletmg
and past the Britinh Fubassy to Kanennly Most, seross the bridge to the
Voyentorg avi Kalinin Street. @: By the Kremlin? 5S: Yes. From there
it goes to the Arbct ani then salon: Vorovekly Street where your embaasy
is, seross Vossteniye Street to Krasnayn Preanya to the Archange] ak
eemetery end along Khoroshevekoye Shogse.

29 . ”

ae

2

102. J: Awl where do you get off? GC: On the Arbat? 8: Fo,
mo, I work in two places. In the morning I mst go to sign in at 1
Gorkiy Street beride the telegraph office evi from there I go by —
Bryusovskiy Perenlok where the cmrch is, behind the committee, to
the Cheykovekly Memorinl. The conservetory on Gertsen Street. There
I go left elong the lane te the Yoyentorg ami from there straight

to Frunze Street, where the General Steff in. I do to Intrence fo. 5,

whieh, us you go straight from Frunce Street, is on Griteevets Street.
Futrance 3 18 on Gogolevakly Boulevard where the pistol range is. The
people who use entrance 5 fron Frunve Street are the Minteter ani his
Deputy -- as a rule though the minteter goes through the gates fron
Gritsevets Street in his car -- a Cheyke. G: Ami then there is a squere
where they play volleyball. 6: fuite right (in English), when you
were in Moscow. J: Cen you identify the block, secording to this map,
that he lives on. &: FExouse me, gentlemen, will it be difficult for
me to get into America House. G: Do you need to go in ~~. by the eide
of it, yes, Dut not trto it. S: Why shld I go by the site of itt
Just to throw something over?

103. : Yes. Thet's Just a verintion, but excuse me, between

j whieh streets do you live? S: I live on and my wimtows Look on to Gorkly

Fmbenkment on the tridge. We heve os yerd with a thoronghfare which takes
me from Gorki Embanioent to Caipenke Street. I turn to the

immediately onto Osipenko Street -- the tren stop ia there. Discussion
of exnet loention of house on mp, / 8: This ig Usinskiy Bridge. There
is the Deerzhinskly Aeefeny, Here La the Kitayeskiy Perenlok onl here ts
the Solyenks. The reedeny tekes up the vhole blocks there ere many
billdings there. In the first unit elts VARERTSOY anf the staff of his
groumi_ rocket forces ani the other bulldings are for training, even
storage, ete.

1. Gt Et which bridge are you nearest to? 68: To this om, «
thant 200 meters, ent to this is ebout a kilosster. Cpposite my flirt
is a stop need in the Summer by the River Boat System. VWhen I vas at
the acedeny, I used to eet off at this mtop by the brince aml come along
past the wooring here. 6: From the other side? S: Yee. L've lived
in this fiat for 15 years, sinee 1945 -~ everyone knows me. Right behind
by home is the gerage of the Moscow Militery District - on Avtobaza --
a lorge gerege for ell the common’ ecarn...the exit is onto Csipenko Street.

30

x wateh us. KiB people always go to the receptions. If yore men intends
yee to go to then it will be meeessery to go to the bedroom, to the toflet
; or to the Xitchen where the wine is - close the door smi to ehoose the

Hoy.

Pras en ply

—,

LO OE

a trp ef

freget “a 17404
ACCESS

ia
Oto. ot 4 Lee

eee veen 9 aren oF we ermarconene He ne pan,

(es) | {2

The exact coordinetes -- X ani Y are not know -- of course this is
aiffieult ewi wili net be learned, This is why Khrushehey ent his
Generel Staff herve’ get a goal -~+ to cor through huge arens vith
etoile oa ah Warxpons -- understemd? % ereate a rein of
minsiles -- thie tz Kirushchev's om expression, ami wma_told to me
by Vorenteovs I believe Verentsoy es I believe Cinmrayey -- who anid (|
thet Gyrus Baton hes offered his services. Such dangeérttia people wv
eve deoling with: -- how this is ‘done 1s your bueiness -~ o9 fer as my \
om safety is concerned --, as for as Tea ecnserned, IT heve egoresatve
ant iron vill power est em just a cog -- expeeinily now, See
new assiomentea, :

ud

—

th. oS: Tt aeens-te me thet (in spite of the trenemtous tasks

which are being done by the fnerlen leaders ant the British sn!

fmerican milftery ecommrusris--) the eveletions are wrong -- too meh
eiving in end camlinnee, ont indifference. For instance -- whatever
ern of Aollers ex pouris you expect te allot in you plerming --
you must triple this emwnt in order to be roally strong. Then, when
you beer by your “ax mea” thet Ricushebery {s resty -- that be
hae mony miesiles (evi I oleo will hear things through some of my
ehannels--either in wy present line of work ov through other chennels
with which I hove indirect contect--) then the first blow must be struek~
& knock-out blow-nrl then we will be in x winning position. As I have
saif before, in regerd to your thinking about the tergets -- which we
discussed ~- you must be as mae as thet Q%he bh, that such targets
ton't exist.

135. 0 Ss tr Witler would heve dome this, he youl! herve won
the wer. After oll -- whet did Hitler dot He wasted millions of tons
of metal -- Intt ald not destroy complete! Ly eyen ome Headqnerters. This
I know exectily ~- treat it in the reports of the Generel Steff, ert
heart {t tn lectures giyen uae on militery stretegy. The Chief of the

G-noral Staff aml his depty -- MAIANDIN - a General of the Army - (4 ster) ~

ae Deparby_ chief of the General Stnf? -- I heard his top seeret leche
ebout 2 yotrs after the end of the wer -- in 197 ~~. He hed a lective
sbaxt Witler -~ net Ste of the Hilitery District He 2 which
provided the front with the batallions, Feginents, brigedes, ent
divisions -- wee destroyel by hin. All the millions ef people in the
Moscow Militery District from Kalinin to Kneen vere trained -- ant
oll the tine the Meceww District Genernl Steff vas loceted on Osipernke ulitan |
Amt the Hoseow Defense Zone was intret. IF WtlséF could have blown uw

~

¥2

ell this by commento groupn ~~ if he woul’ her dene away with the
core thet does aJi the plenning, that hee tht experience, the know-how,
then the Sevrlet covermment oni wilitery lendership would heve teen
powerless.

116. fr het is why I inelst thet you consider these tergete-_

such as the (emerel Steff ~- the G/U, FYO, the CC/CPSU, vhere all

the Svolocht who rule everything eve preciding -- all the tnepectors
who have the privileges of a Seeretary of an CDROM -- they hove a
salary, enrs for their own wee, and on allowmes. I em not mentioning
the Geses end ooo diosps which ore unter pround, but the military
districts -. there sre 25 of them -- mo -- 19 now -- in #& few months

I shell be able to report to you thet there are even one or two lesa ~-
they axe being consolidated --. It would be destrable to Sestray tne
Heeafiquertern. It would be good strutesy to get rid of the experteanead
comands because they sre the heart of the Ary. |

es
U7. S: When this A-hour tekes plnece -- ‘then you need 2
nilmitea. Everything must be in rendinoss, by wey of mines equivalent
to onc or fro kLlo-tons -- they een be put into 2 little mutcase (this
is just my own fidec) -- a little srtehel, smi left next to a house --
not inside-- you don't even heve to go insite -- there exe guerds all
erount ext you need a pags to get inside -- ami if you don’t heve °°”
one you might get killed -- Tart prt the things all sroumi the mdlding --~
right next to the quarts -- with a @lock mchentem -- ant Let the woole
esteblisheertt go up in mnke. Then, when the leaders, the fremework
of the working boty--the fromework of the general staff and th: central
directorates, which are the brains of each type of troops -- tonka,
ertillery, evintion, entiairerett .-~ whem these are #11 destroyed, then
let's see them pick themrelves up ani reaover mrickly... Then they will
heve to use som: old, sclerotic posts, not fit for military duty ~~ who
vill not be abla to do anything. When you destroy all the operntional
docurente -- mt from tht air -- not by roekete -- you know how many
arrors con be made by mfaniles ail elrereft -- pray Ged the seeurste
miseiies will be on your side -- now mine.

118. S: ft te so easy to meke a nictake with « riactle ~-
a simple error in eslevietion -- a mireheek on one of the control
mechanteas - ani en mistake ig made. Ywen wille the rocket is being

ce

2

- qweled to the Lemehing ped, envi after it is on the pel, checks are
mulatory. Cos tine Yarentsoy brought #11 the Artillery Generals _

ra toonther -- eormuvera of crtillery Uvirtons oni Artillery in

Metriete snl Groups of Foreen amt he made them mcesure envi check ell

the control meohertans with the help of special instruments, penels,

tel yoltueters, fo thet they would be feiidar with the work of thefr .
2 mibordinetes -~ how many hours ore pert on a technical cheek, fo thet

when they efve on orter to make a check, they would know what thay

were anking. fo he meade the Generels clinb wp eni down the letters
nmi fint this out. He mide then do this for severol eonths. I% war &
gool idne, thin -~ he was a very experience? men.

V9. SO: Nev, whet else, I keep hroping on being en offieer
of the Generel Steff but now in your servies T know 8 good deol ebout
4t -- I gebwutied x mol deal ebout it, #0 I told you before. I venta
like to have eoncone report my iden -- the fAea of a soltter in your
service ~~ but thet of en experience noldter, ‘This fden in, first:
that we must pemtrete to the coment echelons go completely that we
will be able to linuiaate everything et ones. Fetnt muber 2 is to
emt ell this discord ent diffarencns of opinion, evi third to divert
ee Cia ee a towerd militery prepareinean, so thet tho Level of our
whee mend inoss is higwer than thet of the probeble enemy. I know thet in
soce sepeetn yor “niasile businoss” {8 going very well. ve know that
Lé's bettse thas Gires If many respects from infoemstion we got from -—
our agente. We know it's better then we are doing in the Soviet Army.
{But, we cleo isow thet you are not entirely rendy. We know thet all
the guidance assemblies ore not perfected mi thet your selentists are
still working out problems. God willing, I hope thet my ro-called
. “copied Lebonirs" will help your actentists, who, in the speer of
_S the mxt fev months must stily all this, sesinilate it -- see how the
| problems are renslvedy perhaps the inforsntion mry not be ell there

—_
re ae

_ (in detail) after oll, it ie conlensed -~ these were couroer, not the

| Aentomy. IT AL not stuily 5 years es ome foes at the Deerehinestcly .
Aesdeny -- tart the puch in the right direction is ell these for the

4 speclaliet who will stuty this. :

12. | 8: Talk things over, you ers responsible people. Ve

ere resolying series poverncent problems, from my yventage point, with |
ry enpebtlities, mwh of whet I here to offer is not complete, that is, . :

“37

#2

complete in the sense of being comelusive, Inct the besic inforuntion,
Which I heve gleene4’ from my Generel Staff ct from the people vith

: wion IT heve econtect, I entrust into your hewis go thet Lt can be
fully explotted. Mot only by you, bet so thet 1t will reach the very
top level people in order thet they may exemine ani ereluete the
entire matter snd coo to a preetienl conclusion, otherwice its
poraible to lose pli. All the gold, oll ths treesures, Alemonis,
everything of material veluz, 921 the: plush economic eburntance vitich
your people reeslly possers. After nll, one cen tell your people live
well, just look xt the way they deers. They omy not eat exvier, but
they heve brord oni veortables end not just for todey - but for
tomorrey se well -- don't lavgh -- I jiet use this as an eoeeple..

; 121. 8: The governors rast become so thoroughly avere of
\aosae the serflourness of the situation, ent mist, in this ome reapect take
‘ ( en example from Khrushehev ani the Cemmmist Perty -- their sbility
cere? > to eéntrelica ent te extinguish contretictions. Look et the divergence
of opinion which srose between USOR eni Chine. They extinguished that. ——
There are practi differences, even Uistord, theoreticel ant even
Piece i politient, brit I doen't went to go inte ttet now. Bat they know how to
“7 centralize so well. Things exe not going so well with Albante. At
, the meeting of the Cermmniat Parties, Hohe took such ea stam that
~ Commale Dolores Yberruri eid "Snech a revisioniet is secon! only to
Tito". Thie wos the comment made ty Conemie Therrurt. There wes on
interesting caversetion between Khruchchey ant the representetive of
the Chinese Cormmiet Perty, the depty.to MAO Tse-Timg there. You know
this lenter. Ae, as ore all the Chinese, ic defeniing Staelin ant
berates Khrughehey, ont esys thet by hie worries, lowd, piblie, worlé-
wide dineLorure emi denigretion of the pernonelity evlt, he hee
[ witermine’ the mxbhority not only of Stelin but of the entire Ceoxmmnist
“ Ferty. Steltn was the aytbol of the Prrty emi of the people, even of
: the people of other eoumntries. | Khrurhehev became: quite egitated ent
ent@ "fake your Gtalin out of here, together with his bex”, In other
i worla - “Sree Stelin's bedy". Amt you lovw, there vee o time when they
ey vented to mrt Stelin into the srowsl, there wea such a time.

122. &S: I reprat, we must be eble to renolre any mejor
giffereness of opinion, we mist come to on nfreenent, end this we mort
earn from our sremy. He knows how to do this -- the Central Camittee,

| | 30

{2

) the Presidium, Kirurchehey himeel’, We is net so emert, Int he is
energetic aryl resourceful. He vag the Minieter of Agrievltme for
\ three days when he eellet in all the sneretartes of the Cokoms vhon he
hal appointed an secretaries of Cthoms -- they ave oll members of the
Precidiva ~. (ho had been eppointea Minteter of Agrientture by Helenkor,
. Nolotey and Kogrsovich only three drys before) ami through the apperet
Patty | of the Centrrl Committee of the Ccermmist Perty, he was able to gether
| together, by plane, all the secretertes of the Obkems to old Bed Squere,
time be hed 5 quer «- a mejority of people who were cenidetes or
menibers of the CC -- ani they supported Khrushchery beesuse he vee the
one who appointed then es Seereteries of Chkome. ‘The renson I bring
this up now -- if he could not have ential them ell tn om a macmnerrt "ss
notice, then he wuld here remetned crieng the ministers. Perhaps
“ Bolotey or gormsont elee would heve been erected, viet would hove
/ beppenced Inter, I don't know.

; xX ; 123. §: here ore mony dtfferenens of opinion Sotyeen the
oe ' fatellites end the USGR, but Fhrushchey imovs how to loenlice there
i
|
}
!
i

things arvl put them retfe. Tcke 2 look - vocket we ons exe delivered
ane to all the peoples! democrecier, without tin (atorde} verhest, without

the heed, ‘with the exeeptlon of the DUR -- the DM elrenty has this =-
yr_know this, There are tyo briscies there sn two dumps of stoste |
worhenis (Soviet Amy, not in 8
. there welesnen Soviet power the way IT vorld weleom a wll-cimed blow.
san | Welt, be Iowws hew te handle such things. Whet is heppenine right now
ae , many speelelicte, such an engineare, hve bien sent to these eamtrties.

You know, you heye yrtr own chemmela, you wetch euch meves. There are
: ell kints of things going on -- construction of lmunching pletfomn,
building up ecdres. |

neot_in the hinia of the pon). The Fastern sector

32), Sr Mere in an interesting: detedl: recently, when
Khrushchev weet erlline together ell the Janders of the Worsew Pret ~--
polition] ehiefn .- all were chiets of peneret staffs, and all defense

torpntas which were oven ta atteck fron the cir by the British, Arerteans,

( ours, Offensive operations on mers egetret the foe, openly mening the
French emi Veet Gemens. The geen were ons Meadquarters level and

39

lented 2 weeks. The polities’ lecfers returned to Warsaw Pect meetings
after ebout 2 adsyw, tut the military leeders all etaye’d behind. Tho
games went on for 2 weeks. These were full senle moneuvers, centralired.
Tee wex preperetions sre going on full seple -~ there sre many

disagreements «~- moh aomey demented esl squcered out.

Cages Rad MMe

|
|
|
|

a 5
ae

127. G: The Hee!’ Direct ; ata
the lnree Orgoniration ~ Mobilinetion Directorate -~ ORC-H0B, _
G: Whet meber hee it? 6: You know, if Res «a member. Tt used to be
the hth Direetognte, nt now they ert changing the structios, eines the
errival of Zekherov. I will give you specifies later eni_en oreantentional |
chert. There ts n Directorate -- enlled the Tth which ia for Chenienl
en Recterlologienl Warfare. Here you heve the most important
generale, specialists, am trportant ehewists ond baeteriologists, They
heve their own bases, In Siberia eni other places. By the way, it is
very important to bomb the Urel district - you mist moke a Miternl
rein there, In omter te kriock ot the brein, the all-powerful brain.
The Urele exo the forge -- the sxithy. ALL the heavy infustries are

there, ent fertoriés cre being built wlergroud. I don't know

exactly want koebinety.

183. G: ‘In the rediolostenl -- vmler the Chemics] Directornte7
By Yes, it ts weiter it, yea. OG: I eee, so it in like ours - CR.
Ss; Thet'e right -. ebsolutely right. Hew then, there is the Cote
Directorate in the General Steff. We heve (in CRU) the Oth Seetion--
but here it La a Directorate. The 7th Le the CBR, then the 10th _
Directorate ig the one which works with the Cowrtrics of the Peoples!
Verserceles. Yt controls the yp there with «a bureau of [ietructors -
The veepons, brings their people here for Instruction -- this is the
Beth Pirectorrte. G: This is in the Gereret staff sr Yes -- in
the General Steff. ‘Thet is the struction of the General Start.

123. : Ron t you (GRU) alec heve 2 Mrectorete foo the
countrins of the ,-oples Derwernties. 8; Mo we don't. We eoordinste
everything that hee to do with comtries of Peaples Dencernetos with
the Tenth IMrertoarnts of the Generel Stert. we flo mot econmhict
intelligers: operations ogeinet th: eoontrics of Peaples Demmereetios,
GC: Bow ebort the otyisora? + We heyn ofvlsors who are intellipense

ee

YL

fe

officers of GRU who study the intelligence of ths countries of the
Feopler' Democructes end they ore sent as etrisors to the Tenth
Directorate of the General Start. They send the officers off froa there
aml they control then ant coordinate their efforte. We tench the
intelligence people of the Cowrtrtes of Peoples! Demoarnetes thru

our advisers.

|

|

|

|

{

!

|

|

|

|

x 130. Gs: I heve another rent quartion, before I foraet
i to ank you, with rempeect to the miestleg. The Russian lercowm hos
pK len, ® curse in printing since the Intter “Z" and the mmber 3 are the.

Sere on & typewriter, Which destemtion belongs to the eae
Chart wlan Meseribed. The "2" eould stand for fentineyn, $8: No, It SS &
nt three, emi it esulin't be Zentinnyn afnee the rockets are surfaer-to-

surface. Imt me explain: Me -3R is a rocket destonntion ant the

| ‘second member such es I,’ 3R2, ete., ave developrents ‘of the rocket;

| thet fn, rocketea with motifientions. ¢; Why does it begin vith |

| , 3Ri 8: Phat Ls beerune the edopted motel was the third series and the

| edaitionel mmbere ern moditterctinns thereor. Furthermore, everything

in the terion beciming vith 4 menns thet it belongs to rocket ortiliery.

| Tt is like n cole designation and cll euxiliery equipment if {t hes ony

| _ deslenation et all sill slweys begin with 6.0: How sbout the

designetion "Er"? 5: het ts merely e desionation for a lamehing
inetellation (Pugkovnye. Ustexvka) for free rockets. They Lmoeh at

an ongle, aa

| | 13L. Gr Sin sbert the SF-5? 8: thet ts a rocket which
OG 7S | Wen a specicl Seprormnent of the eubuctom rocket P-5, which cen be ,

rs Leumehe’ from a auberrine or a mirfees yossol, ant thr &P-5 has been ~~ Z

i

t

|

|

. : ted Tai uses the srountl forces. Perkhomenko, who wee former

| RcCESS fay chet of staff, emi who te nov wtying Ef the iilitery mliviend

| an Keatemy envi who was n senior lesturer at th Artillery feetemy, told me
Ee ‘ shout thin, aml they eve now stulying 1t. 9: Whot doen the A
| destemntion “F" meen here? 6: Thiet menns evtnerim (Podvodagys) :
| f and they efded the letter “3” when thts wee edepted for the Grounl Forces.
“ | X wrete all this wp.”
|
|

= 132. J: Mees he know bow meny atonte submarines they now heve?
Gun | G: (Trennintes) 8: Ye were told "up to ten". They did not sexy exactly
ae | ten, tit I believe they were minlesding ue. G: How is thet-are there less] <<
ae f: I believe that there sre more, meybe as many ne twenty. G: Penetly qr

¥hen was this yo heard it the last time? S; This wes et the time Io wee

ha

f2

taking the courses over a yerr nego (Subjeet'’s courses ren fron
1 Beptenber 1958 to 1 May 1959.) This eonghruction is being pushed.
Khrushehey has onfered a maber of old neval yeasels to be xernpped.
Kiewever, puch attention was alweyns paid te mibmerines ani there vere
peryver touched. They are not buildiag any eirereft eerrierss they ere
too expentive. This all bersn when Kuometeocy wes removed, He is now
canpletely retired. At that time he protested shout the Leek of vessela
in the Soviet Reavy but Khrushchev, supported by the Generel Steff,
fleeided to refuse even the very scell Soviet Kevy. However, suberriones
ere being constructed. Wheat other questions do heve.

= * ee Lige Aoek evi
133. G: Viet do you neon by the term “Kren™? /Is it 0
deviation from the courses? 8: Yes, it te « deviation from a ret
corse, Thie teed pleem after the morlous atebilizers ant rviders heve
breught the missile to a position of sare deviation om after ths miesile
then completes ite netive period ef flight ent continues on tomar the
terget, "Kren" is the exomt of deviation, or terning, of the missile
mcessary to strike the target. ¢G: In other words, "kren” mst be
esteblished. 5: Yen, It fan calenirted deviation, ant if it is
not correct, the rocket will not hit the texyget. “Tou sea whet I hed
Plienmd wea for WYER to heve pieked wp sll the tie ert have
your experts anelyne Lt price to my sarrivel her. Do you feel _
competent to anmmer questions on thie? S: Yes, I ¢ st ari even if
‘sormthing Is “not elner to me I ten check it om later. However, I on
eure thet waet Thee written would be umderateniable te your
eelentistes.

A3h. Gs) Mbt Md you mean by the tem "Chisto”? I'd better
fini {t for you tn yor origins! notes. Then you enn sce the origiml
context. GS: Flease keep in mind thot theee lerve missiles are nll
two-steoge mianiler ari advise your selentists not to Look for thre.
xtege mteriiles. G: (Shown subject hie original mytex.) 6: I see
whet yrirmern. Here in how this worke. Thin meens thet the control |
etrevits oprrnte in s speeifie pre-eet sequence during the roeket's ; )
Plight. FT heyve Armm wp how thease control elreuite work. AS first
there were Us6fftentties In ec ney ‘current impulse feed
et the richt tire, Int thie hes Lenn solved. Another intererting aetetl
is thet the gyroscopes which ere co extemmively noed In rockets are
golé-plate’l to mvold corrosion by oridetton. Flatiron {2 also weed to
be moe thet delicate tnstrumentes do not corrode. OG: Here is the
dingrem where the "Chisglo” is indfented. 6: Whet thet meens is that

3

——ldl k$§®lCU
+ . 7
2

g2

at different altitivies the atmospheric presmire changes, it arops as
dh. 4; the miasile rinses and this affects the thrust. To maintain the destred
ee thrust, the fuel feed rate is medie to very to obtein the necessary thrust,
a amt this in whet is referred to by “Chislo”. Your scientists will
understem! this. It has to do with eltitwie awit this syotem of Pitct
tubes, end the pressure regulator previden for the correct thrust ant
x| speed of the minsile thru sll phases of its active flight.

135. S: ALL this degen from the originel Y-2 of the Germens,

the DOR. He will not do thia because 1t emi involke a wer. He is

not realy to fire missiles now and he will evold a war at this time.
re wee Fven though he fe giving rockets anil treining personnel to the DOR, they
“TNR - ere still fer fren being ready to use them.

135. S: Tneldentally, I heve heard somthing you should ;
vhs cheek on: The Turke have sent some seeret militery mission to Moscow.
meas } I hope thet this may have been done with your sanction but you should ~
vee eheek to see if the Nokes are not meking some secret deal with the
ve i Soviets. I can tell you exetly when this happened -- it was between
‘ two anil om-half end three months aro. The Turks hed requested some
Soviet mpeelalists from time to time, which doesn't seem alonifieant,
| but you'd batter ekeck on thie Turkish mission to Koseow. I know tlie
: beeever the man who eeecepenied this militery Torkish missfon wes a KOB
i officer who formerly wos GRU end who gradueted from the MDA one year
au eftex I aid. Hie nome te VOSKOROY. WH is now stetioned in Torkey
al he secompanied the mlssion tO Meseow. I wos supposed to meet hin
| becenes he wes bringing some thing: for me from Turkey. ‘They were for
| my wife. If worked fn Turkey with him a little before. He wes here ? elotir f
four days eri did not telephone os, Inrt ny seermtery, FODTSEROVA, WHO ix funte
now works for the Min. of Foreign Affairs, saw him on the street. His to Gente
nome ia Aleksey. She osked him whet be was doing there ari he seid \
thet be wns visiting hia perente fn Lenitngred’s but he hed not been in
{ Teningred emt he cov: with the peermt Turkish mission to Moseow for
four anys. He hes been in Thorkey for five yenrs now and hee still not
been replneed. You showld check on thene Turks. Of course, if this
in & planned tinsion, thet fe different; and if ald from the USSR goes
to all countries, thet is goot for us sinee it is a strain for then.

hh

atest

fa dite

Sha pesnikey , Pipers Mirces|,
ae See ie
4. Aah ee: ret

#2

137. G: Do you know SNOFOV or STAKH who were formerly in ee
GRU an’ ere now in KGB? 8: No, I don't know them, tut I told you Cx at

yesterday thet, acme Oh of the HM graduates go to KOB. G: It would ;
be very hélipful if you write up SITE of your classmates and
give all information about them as to where they vent and what their
present functions are. 8: Show me a grow of photographs ani I wilt
spot GRU officers for you. H: We will herve this for you. 8: Before
my departure? G: Of course. 5S: Please try to arrange them in
packages such as Soviet Fubassy personel in Turkey ani also include

the TORGPREDSTVO. Ry the way, I wented to heve a diplomatic pansport
just an I did when I went to Turkey, but they gsve me only a service.
passport. (Subject shows his passport.) See, your_visa was issued

on &th of April.

Bi 0 oe mcrae i. Eg gs oe a

: 139. 61. 1 spent mony years emongst generels en] eerste
even my wife's father was © gene and my grand-unele also; but his
granison, me, I'm only a colonel. I'l] never be made a general, since
my fother wes a White Arny officer. 6: I wouldn't be too sure. Look
at SHAPOSHNIKOV. He had even been a White Army officer himeelf at one
time. 6: They don't trust me; they'll never make me oe general. My
problem now is to do our work and be ready to fulfill your omers. WP
G: I want you to realize thet the most basie consideration we have be
toward you is Inmeniterian, irrespective of how taportant you may be as
a gource of information. We regard you as sn individuel first of all.
8: I unfereten4 you ent om very greteful for this. It is quite
different with us ant meny good people heve wrighed. G: The difference
in the systens is very simple to wuierstand. All goverment leaders
in countries of the Free World are servants of the people. We even
use the expreasion thet a man is in the eerrice vhen he is militery or in
goverment work. In the USER the goverment is everything and the
individual is nothing. .

45

,

ae ere ee

A
al

Lana ni

RA eee

#2

1hO, 8B: I request that prior to my departure you heve your
experts look over the materiel I hove subsitted so that we can review
it. We ean work here together without sleeping and so enn the experts.
H: The problem is not only to fint rocket experts but one who is a
Russien specker, and besides we ere trying to keep this whole matter
wecure. G: We're going ahead very carefully with this eren by
consulting with experts, we must be sure that the knowledgeable people
ore kept to a minim. §&: In my opinion, this should be coordinated
by someone high up in your general staff vho uilerateands how to hantle
this. ‘Although there may not be many questions now, I's sure they will
arise Jeter. T: You're ebsolutely right.

we eee

Ui. 8: Tell me--do you think WYNNE aid the right thing -
by not teking all ny material when I offered it to him. G: Remenber
he is a simple mortel, ani not en intelligence man. 5: Don't tell .
him anything sbout this. G: Of eorrse not, we are diseugeing it
smongst ourselves. 5: I geve it to him on the way to the airport.
We were sitting in the beck of the cer alone anil I knew that the cer |
was “elean”, He said he wes efreid but he took the letter ant one ,
document. Later in the toilet he wis frightened; he took it enyvey
bitt he wouldn't teke anything else. Frenkly, I was very disappointed
in HERRIMAN end McBRIOK. They should have simply delivered my material
to the Britieh fabsgsy ari their miasion would have been completed.

1ke. G: Ry the way, do you know a man fn your outfit called
SOYVA. He only joined the GNIK reeently emi is preswaably in KGB.
S: I don't remember any such name. I know my own section perfectly
but I don't know all the others. G: He's working in the Gemren A
Direction. 8: All their offices, some ten of.them, are next, to. ae
I don't remember any such name. \cur neighbors ere everywhere in the Vo
eomittee.~they are all over the pleee. 6: Do you know who they wet
8: Of course, Ida. For example, their resident in ow cormittee is

Yevgenly [lich EFVIN.. He is a eolonel just like me. He is tall and
afiisome man. I knew his depty.end I know bie case officers. They also

do the ssme: thing thet we do--I’'m gisd you asked the question. They
end we coopt ordinary workers of the Ministry of Foreign Affeirs and
of Foreign Trade. They work for ws} we pay them money; ani they sign
an obligation, We eleo do this with sclentists and the women. I
coopted MILOVIDCY, Be is now working in the English Sector with
BERDENIKCY. “BERDENIROV is the Fugiish Sector ehief in cur group of

Seapt vf, Jegee psa

-
e

hy

} 7
PU as rise

pe

143. G: Whet ts you program for tomorrow? 8: My program
is as follows: I will get up at C700 hours; after breakfart I will
pick up my professor (KAZARTSEV); and we mist be at the Soviet Exbesay

et 0300 hours. My erble is there now. ant I must get it released s0 =
that we cen stay in Lorton longer, not only ¢ ;

but to work = little Longer with you, whieh
think the Ambeesndor will receive me before 1100 hours emi at 1330
WYNNE will come by with his cer ent we will go to ses

After that we shall meet with WYNNE for supper ani later we will be able
to work together. 6: At what time will you be able to come here?

8S: When wouldl you went me? G: You tell us when you will be free. -

53 You know I'd like to walk eround Lonion a bit -- I haven't walked
five meters yet. There are very meny fine things to see in the stores
ent my wife hey given me a whole list of things to get. There are
beautiful vases mate of porcelain. They cost about 10 pounds. When

I wos & regiments] comenier, we liberated a porcelain-mamifacturing
town -~ the center of the industry in Czechoslovekia, and I brought
hom all kinis of porcelain -yeres ant other items. They even gave a
erystal vaes to Konev ani tome. Anywoy, Ihave many expensive things

at hose, ineluling ruge from Turkey, ami I live on a high seale for
Comunaf am. ie

ee
:
i
8
é
B

lbh, St Thin alde-de-cemp Buzinoy to the marshal (VARFNTSOV) 1:
is alwnys broke. He has three children ant he often asked we to take

him romewhere, eo, heving money thet my wife doem't know anything
ebout, I buy him comme. He knows that when one is abroad there are
always extre sllotrents in foreign currency, so he Le not surprised that

I heve oll kimts of things--that is norml. I like'to live freely ant -

now eni then teke & lady out. I know how to approach them and I never

drink to excess like Burinoy. If say all this to you because I feel you
should know all sbout me, ant if you ordered me to stop doing all these

47

fo

things, Id herve to stop. You know what the moral views of our
goverment are, emi so fer I've never been in eny trouble, but all -
these activities require money for gifts, entertaiment, ete.

VAS. 8: Anyway, I got mynelf into debt ant I vish you
would consider how to reinforce my finnneial hasis a bit. I've already
thought of buying odde and emis hore that I can sel? at a profit there.
I know nome wealthy Jews in Moseow who can even handle alamonds,
Whatever is too bulky, I may need to buy five or ix nevy svesters
ani all kimis of other stuff. WYNNE ean bring thet to me later, but
if it ism irpossible, I would like to have more money to ty these
things while I om here and as many rubles as ym em spere to teke
beck with me. Frenkly, I heave one debt of 1,000 new rubles. A good.
frien! of mine gave me the money to get him, through my comections
in Moscow, # suite of furniture. I ordered this and have the receipts
to show but I spent the money gredwily. Bow many rubles did you plan
to give me? G: (Deliberstely wishing to rention a lower figure than’
3,000 we planned to give him, eald ebort 1,000.) 8: Kew rubles?

G: Yes. 6S: Well you see that would just about eorer my debt less
twenty rubles onl would lexve me nothing st ell, Well, I'll be eble
to buy the firnttire since I heve it ordered. I have just bought a
new TV set, a Temp six, I used to heve o Rubina, I thought of buying
@ emnll transistor radio here (Subject wor given an operationsl
transistor redto ster). I sweer by my daughter and my future work
with you thrt I mist do the folloving. I mist bring ench ant every
friend of mine sore smell item, since they know that I am going
ebreat. It does not have to be en expensive item in every ease but it
would be extremely bad te neglect anyone.

LkG, (Subject Listed a long nwi wide verlety of itens
such ae fountrin pens, neckties, Irdies' nail polish, lipstick end
® gemut of meiicines for Just rwi-of-the-mill friends, anil more
expensive mpeetfic items for influential frienia such es generels,
marshals, tuxt colonels, As mentioned aenin in a Later trenseript,
after this meeting wos over Aubject mocked onthe door some 10 mimites
efter he left, Be was dressed in trousers end his jacket over his
unterweer. He eeme to look for ae notebook le lost, whieh fortimately,
fell into th wlot of the armchair in witch he was sitting. This note-
book was a most detotled, besutifnlly prepered list of iteme which

48

2

his wife prepared. It eortnined magezine elippings of all concelvable
fine ladten' wear written out in red ink ani itemized. There sre also
replicas of the actus] foot siver of his wife's and daughter's feet

in the notebook. Subject elabronted on these items, which visually
more then efequetely supported his earlfer statenents concerning the
items he was expected to bring teck. Im view of the fect thet.
errangements were mete later for WYNHE to bring beck a suitesse full
of itens which Subject hai plamed to get through Customs with no
cheek, it should be strensed here that mony of these items would
unguestionrbly heve importent operetionel simificence, since they will
be given to important Soviet perroneges who will eutometlerlly be
yeluoble, wowitting informants.)

. 147. (In addition to friends hibject wentions whe ere.
prominent, Subject also het mentionrd one: argsistant to Petukhov whose
neme is, Fevel Avrakovich CBOLENTSOY.) 6S: By the way, this nome is
fernour, since he wes the chief administrator umier Molotov art now is the
ehief administrator for Fetukhov. In my notes it says I should bring
a light filter for his comers, as well ag a hoot. Yen mre this will
cost me 2 to 3 powris, end althouh £ aid not receive money for this
I cannot evold bringing it. I've got to bring every girl ant xy
secretery in all offices at least one item, even though it may be the
cheapest Lipstick in Englanf. Fven to OVISHIANI's recretary; I merst
tell you about him. He is my chief, he is married to the daughter of _

Geiser aos Kosygin. Wis father ves 2 Tieutensnt mnerel in the KGB. He was a

. Georgien. I think he is dest. Hie eeceretery, Velya, asked me to get
Gee ne \ some neil polish to match lipstick. If I don't bring this, probvably
Je"S: | Dents POLYAROV, who fs oceupying « similar nlot to mine, but in the

| US Direction will bring this. He hes been in the US twice now with
delegationn,.

UAB. oS: Ry the wey, I just remevbered something inportont.
ec ae Wr are conducting selentifiec trtellicence aseinst the US. For the
; esasigned itellinence miesions of the yrar, covering ell conceivable
ee Ce | types of inlustrien, there were 150 specific intellicence targets listed. /

-~ |} Cn each target there were supplementn). questions -' two, three, or more.

The tergets, brorily spenking, were non-ferrous metal imiustries, steel

industry, ell phases of the ofl inivstry, ete. The interesting thing

ia thet cli 0.5. targets were duplicated and tranmitted to the

hg

{2

delegetions going to Camuia. I know this becouse I gave it to then
with my om hrent. Our letter specified that they should seek this in
Crnaia because so mich of basie Canviten industry uses US protucts.
You shoulé atop this, I will get for you, with ell official seals,
nm complete list of ell theee espionam instructions given to or
delegations. Other duplicate eoples of thin were alao vent te othar
countries where US products are uncd.  "% ~

iho. J: I would recoement thet we dtecuas his finenctal ~
situation agnin tomorrow. G: Let ue fix the time when you will cone |
toncrrow. 6: I juet thought of something. If I could herve al
eorot dinmont, exeetly 1 carat, pot more or lesa, I sm mow thet I
could cesh 1t in for 1200 rubles, Consider this, amt porsibly we
can so work it out thet you wlll uot be concerned about passing any
monies to me through econtects in Moreow for som time. G: We will
consider all this ami we'll talk chont tt aoe more tomorrow and will
try to eamply with ell rsquesta whieh era ‘Terponable, S: Very well,
E will go now ari tomorrow let us plen on meeting between 2100 ent
2200 hours. E'lLl try to eae et 2LOO howe if Teen, 8: Where is
ny key? (The correct key vas four avi given te Bubject) (mubject
left st OLKO hours on 22 April 1941) /. ss

50
