Sixth Report to the President by the President's Board of Consultants on Forei
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096666, dated 1 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096666).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

eet ER he te 3 5)
oe BP gee ate! Uae Nee 3
woe feb 2gaNe mene

WASHINGTON 285.5. Cc. ip) feof
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR jot

9 JAN 1981

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Gordon Gray |
Special Assistant to the President

SUBJECT: Sixth Report to the President by the
President's Board of Consultants on
Foreign Intelligence Activities dated
May 24, 1960 (Recommendation on‘
"Organization and Management of CIA's
Clandestine Services")

REFERENCE: Memorandum for Director of Central
Intelligence, same subject, from Mr,
Gordon Gray, dated December 16, 1960

1, In compliance with your request I submit the following self-
contained compilation of my previous reports on the various steps
which have been taken in response to the two recommendations made
by the Board on October 30, 1958 and May 24, 1960, As you requested,
the following compilation is so arranged as to identify those actions
which were taken or considered in connection with the Third Report of
the Board as distinguished from actions which were taken or considered
in connection with the Sixth Report of the Board,

2, The Third Report to the President by the President's Board
of Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities, dated October 30,
1958 and presented to the President on December 16, 1958 contained
the following recommendation:

"The present mission of the Plans Group of the CLA be
reviewed with consideration given to relieving that Group
Electrostati;

P3Droducti
OF praservatigg uCtion maga

APPROVED FOR RELEASE : Eisenhower i, Furposes by the

STErY for repisce Tent

of a Cétericrating,
MICUPE nonin ” be
26 NOV 1996 oun POUCH AL oem,

Ce a ak . : 7 if Ter ere
7 5 nigven : x oes Er dks Lau AY Be ts wr eae arly

“y ¥ ial THT k Abbe tog Ve ge ee saat Mey S  Sietcted4 I aa sat he eR me eee relate

Shree : als. es ea te wen a, vote inden Phat daiei'y nde bh le. onan. Ween nent ish: ae es”

ae ee Ses ge yt ae -. ae “ st - ee 7 ‘ _ eet ee fe er oe eee

a SEL : : :

alee i
as

< to
ee Fee « 2%

of, and placing elsewhere in the Agency, the responsi-
bilities (1) for the review of (i.e., reporting on and
evaluating) the Political, Psychological and Para-Military
operations of the Agency, and (2) for the formulation of

the intelligence estimates and recommendations upon which
the plans for such operations are based,"

3. The text of the report of December 16, 1958 to the President
explained some of the reasoning of the Board resulting in this recom-
mendation, This report referred to "some of the virtually autonomous
functions assigned to this Group", and states, "From evidence we have
seen, it is our feeling that within this frame of reference, the Plans
Group (for the Agency) may be incapable of making objective appraisals
of its own intelligence information as well as of its own operations when

6. The present Deputy Director (Plans) assumed his position
on January 1, 1959, Shortly after the Third Report was submitted to
the President, He at once undertook a complete review of the mission
and organization of the Clandestine Services, In concert with this the
Electrostatic rezrecuction made

; for preservation Furfcsts by the
2 Eisenhower Liszary fey r>Macement

of 3 cei... eo pt item.

Inspector General of the Agency was engaged in reviewing the overall
organization of the Clandestine Services, Asa further measure I
initiated a Program for Greater Efficiency within the Agency as a whole .
in order to ensure a continuing effort to improve its organization and
methods of operation, This program and other aspects of the Board's
Third Report were discussed at the meeting of the Board’on July 17,
1959, As a result of these several reviews a number of organizational
changes were made and many others were considered but rejected for
various valid reasons, The main objective of these changes was to
improve the efficiency of the Clandestine Services, A new Assistant
Deputy Director (Plans) for Psychological and Paramilitary Operations
was appointed to assist the DD/P in the operational direction of activities
in these functional fields, An Operational Services grouping was created,
combining and centralizing the direction of several elements which perform
functions of common concern to all the Operating Divisions and Staffs,
The Inspection and Review Staff, DD/P was abolished and the Inspector
General of CIA made solely responsible for the comprehensive review of
the activities and operations of the Clandestine Services, reporting
directly to me,

7, The planning system within the Clandestine Services was
revised s0 that a greater distinction is made between operational
planning directives and budgetary estimates, The revised system calls
for an initial DD/P operational plan containing guidance and direction for
the operating divisions and staffs for the forthcoming fiscal year, From
this the divisions and staffs can prepare their more detailed Operational
Programs which go forward for review and approval by the Project
Review Committee which reports directly tome, The budget and fiscal
requirements are generated as a by-product of these Operational Programa,
Finally, Related Mission Directives, also based on the Operational Plan
and Programs and the particular situation in the area concerned, set forth
more precise and realistic objectives and tasks for each field station,

8. In addition to the above these reviews of the mission and
organization of the Clandestine Services highlighted the following aspects
of its work which merited further attention and study and on which action
has been or is being taken:

a. the Agency's responsibility for the coordination of
U.S, clandestine activities abroad —

b. delegation of more authority to the field
Electrostzt:s $eEicuiction oe a |
for Preservation Firscsag f
; Eisenhower Liprary fcr reple
of a Getericrating Manuscript

aot az. ur.
oan ; aes
Bh is ag i “4 i

Bos * ase
80. witht Ba eb Ce, Pentel

c. increased emphasis on scientific and technical | a
collection methods and systems é

d, refinements in what we are reporting and how we Neen 3”
are meporting it

e. greater reliance on over-all perce programs in
the control and management of our operations as
opposed to reliance on individual projects
4.5(c)

g. more emphasis on political action in under-
developed areas

h, development of our capability for "covert limited,
warfare" ’

i, increased records mechanization,

In this major effort to improve the organization of the CS but most
especially the methods and procedures--the way business is transacted--
the DD/P and his Staff have kept in mind the recommendation of the
Board quoted above. Several of the changes made are responsive to

this recommendation,

9, The second part of the Board's recommendation was concerned
with the location of responsibility for the: formulation of intelligence
estimates and of recommendations upon which plans for operations are
based, It suggested that such responsibility not be located in that portion
of the Agency which is responsible for planning operations.

10, The problem of insuring the provision of a valid and unbiased
intelligence base for operational planning purposes has been given much
consideration within CIA during the development of the Clandestine
Services planning cycle. The Board's concern, I feel, has been met by
the procedures described below,

11, Planning for Psychological, Political and Paramilitary oper-
ations is not based on intelligence provided solely by the DD/P.. The

P Electrostztic fearxiuction made
= PreSErvation jprposes by the

: Senhower Linrac: ‘or réy.acement

of a deteriorating manuscript item,

. - % oR . e
Te me ee Set iotdwebinte, Ma ee tet,

een are . pan tae. ay

Fee eae RPE RF ey Sip tice gots

vr eae saa ey Pgaly, re
oN steed LE etal!

RAS .
.? ee oot. a 2 pe’ .- oe,
ioe Te oo RECS, Pte dt

primary source of intelligence for planning purposes is the Office of
National Estimates (ONE), Present DD/P procedures provide for the
use of ONE guidance throughout the entire planning cycle, The Clan-
destine Services General Plan, DD/P's basic Planning document, derives
from current NIE's the contingencies against which Clandestine activities
must be directed, Moreover, specific projects are tested against perti-
nent NIE's or, if a current or relevant NIE is not available or time is

- Sufficiently urgent to make a coordinated NIE impossible, an ONE esti-
mative memorandum is obtained,

13, Significant PP/PM projects having political import and involving
substantial expenditures receive a thorough review and concurrence by
the Department of State and by the 5412 group, before fina] approval by
the Director, Such concurrence is sought on the basis of relevant intelli-

not possible until internal and external procedures, as described above
have been satisfied, Thus action is not taken on intelligence or recom-
mendations from the DD/p alone,

14, The Sixth Report to the President by the President's Board of
Consultants on Foreign Intelligence Activities, dated May 24, 1960, in-
cluded the following comments and recommendation:

"Organization and Management of CIA's Clandestine
Services
ae

"Based upon an exchange of correspondence between the
National Security Council and this Board in November, 1959,
we have continued to follow developments relating to needed
improvements in the organization and management of CIA's

have been made in this area in recent months, we believe
that a way can be found to organize these Services along
more simplified and efficient lines, While we appreciate
that the missions assigned to the Clandestine Services are

4 Electrostatic reprodustinn = madé
° for preservation purc ... dy the
Eisenhower Liutary 7s: "2 uce-nent
of a deteriorating ma. «<ript item.

io) Se

fectiveness, As noted by the Board and as-reported above in this paper

complex, we are hopeful that, through the continuing
studies being made by CIA's Deputy Director /Plans,
these Services will be organized in such manner as to
eliminate unnecessary duplication of effort and achieve
increased effectiveness,"

significant changes in the or anization and management of the CSwere —
i

Electrostztic reproduction made

. for preservation Purp-s?s by the

6 - Elsenhower Library for ” picement
of a Getariorating mar: is. %ot Ham,

.
e

a

B08 |:
7
.

te

PS]

.

«

a

1.5(c)
3.4(b)(1)

1.5(c)
3.4(b)(1)

Through these organizational changes, revision and simplification of
certain basic procedures,-and clarification of the functions and responsi-
bilities of both staff.and iine «omponents we made progress toward our
objectives, It is important to realize that this is a continuing process
and one which must be carried out on a progressive basis with the least
possible disruption of current activities.

16, The CS accomplishes its mission through components responsi-
ble for a prescribed geographical area and through other components
responsible for a prescribed function without geographical limitations,
This approach is required because of the complexity of the tasks and
broad. interests of the CS, Under these arrangements it is inevitable that
some duplication exists but it should not be inferred that all such dupli-

‘cation is unnecessary, We make every effort to reduce duplication to

that which is unavoidable if we are to assure that all our responsibilities
are discharged in a competent and secure manner,

17, The roles of the Special Staffs recently have been further
clarified and delimited with the objective'of eliminating duplication and
relieving the staffs of the responsibility for any activity which can
properly be performed in the operating divisions, I am satisfied that
the Special Staffs have unique and important functions of common concern

!
7: Electrostatic. stction aa tk
for preservstizn purposes tog
Eisenhower Library for repla-:  :!
of a detericrating manuscri,:

wiih

3 , i : ma "Cee », x4
wantin Set coat eh BRL Ao eA Rae
: poe i wines Boo! ae su Deitel Seda sf “

‘
g ce F -
7 ovat
i 5 5 nese aye, 80s ae . oer we Bes
' : . ee . :
3

and world-wide spplication that can not be ac
ating divisions, It is of course essential tha

functional statements of the Staffs which will concentrate on their four
basic functions, viz, :. 2

a. Services of common concern such as liaison with ry
other agencies and with other components of CIA, 3.4(b)(1)
screening of requirements, and certain gs ecialized

o
®.

b. Support activities including certain forms of research,
the promulgation of doctrine, -development of new
ideas and the‘ provision of expert advice and guidance
in the several functional fields, =

c. Developing plans for and assisting in the coordination
of functional programs involving activities in two or
more geographic areas,

d, _ Participating in the evaluation of the production and
‘ accomplishment of the Cs.

18, As an additional measure to prevent possible duplication the
Deputy Director (Plans) further modified the staff organization in the area
divisions to eliminate separate Foreign Intelligence, Counter Intelligence
and Covert Action sections, These divisions now have centralized
operations staffs, we , .

"1.8(c)
3.4(b)(1)

Electrostatic _ Teprocuction madb

breservaticn 7 utposes by the

Eisenhower “F "> G97 replacement

8 of a Cece’: “enustri

Wel hee

© See’

sae tga 2°

Sao ta? Ren TU es GS 0
. eae a Kia SARA c ® 7. t ef A 7 4 ete : p , - ‘e : Mi Sper at) nds ws ” * a
et deplete tae mabe ie anaes Si 2 eh NOT pa oy,
" , ioe be : oes pale ¢ fi pray es an : et : i.
e

20, In order to make the most effective use of our resources in
the performance of certain important functions the Deputy Director
(Plans) is developing standing operating procedures which will be
followed for specific activities. Planning, for example, will be a joint
endeavor of the Projects and Programs Group, the Special Staffs, and
the Operating Divisions under the general supervision and guidance of
the Senior Planning Officer, This planning community will insure that
the talents of appropriate officers and the capabilities of all interested
components of the CS are brought to bear on specific problems, Simi-
larly, appropriate operating procedures will delineate the capabilities
of properly qualified officers and components in the research and
evaluation functions, This is an economical way to do the job since it
will permit effective planning, research, evaluation, etc, without
requiring a number of small units formally established for these“functions,

21, The Deputy Director (Plans) believes the changes he has made
in the past two years in the organization structure and the way of doing -
business in the CS have corrected deficiencies and that the situation in
this regard is now satisfactory. I concur in this belief, This does not
imply that we have achieved such perfection in these important matters
that no future modifications will be desirable, We may require further
adjustments to meet new situations, We must strive progressively to
improve our methods and simplify our structure where feasible, To
meet these requirements the Deputy Director (Plans) will continue to
Study the organization and procedures of the Clandestine Services and
take such action as may be required to contribute to our goal of greater
efficiency in the Clandestine Services

en Dulles
Director
: *
atin tJ}
Electrostatic - reprodu=t! sy Rane
for preservation pers he aoe
Eisenhower Library - : fees i

of a deteriorating *.<i0

im
