Thailand's Security Problems and Prospects
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012500, dated 3 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012500).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

datory Review -
|

Baew oproved for Release

ate ’) 3 DEC 4991

:
3 Ede,
er Shig

Pred

u

aoe
aN
mis Taek aay ake
rae are
we .

PDerat

SE AA
Rane yer a
es OP nent

COhLcee i otk

LATHE ON

:
et
oe ak wat bd et

ve

more ODEN

bE a pon 5 Sch
PALO

EE 2 ESA BEM Ne DIG

Whe!

ie pps fon
eras aver
P iietiesereiye

we

owed heetaicbals

FE gan opie
eto R eget hanes
pa et aX ovis Bk

RIS we
any ate

Re AES

ay
pita seeay
wn MOC Gots, Keres

THAILAND‘S SECURITY PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS

THE PROBLEM

To analyze Thailand’s Security problems and to estimate the trends in Thai-
land’s security and foreign policies over the next year.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Since the end of World War II, Thai-
land’s foreign policy has been character-
ized by close and active alignment with
the US. Recent events in Southeast Asia,
however, have caused the Thai to question
seriously the assessments underlying this
policy. Although no longer convinced
of the efficacy of their alliance with the
West, the Thai have not yet come to be-
lieve that their interests would be served
by withdrawing from it. (Paras. 5, 8, 12)

2. The Thai leaders are now seeking con-
crete evidence of US determination and
ability to halt the Communist advance
in Southeast Asia. At the same time, we
believe that Thailand will soften the
sharp outlines of its anti-Communist pos-
ture and examine the possibilities of some
alternative to total reliance on the West.
However, we do not believe that the Thai
Government will undertake any far-
reaching accommodation with the Com-

munist Bloc or withdraw from alliance
with the West at least within the next
year or so. (Paras. 11, 13, 15)

3. A Chinese Communist or North Viet-
namese overt military attack against
Thailand is highly unlikely, at least for
the period of this estimate. Communist
policy toward Thailand will probably be
directed at moving Thailand away from
close association with the US and toward
a neutralist position. To this end the

USSR and Communist China will prob-

ably concentrate on political pressure,
military threats, and economic induce-
ments rather than on major guerrilla war-
fare, The Communists will, however, in-
crease their subversive and organizational
efforts in Thailand, and incidents of Com-
munist terrorism will probably occur.
The internal security situation in Thai-
land, particularly in the northeast prov-
inces, is likely to deteriorate during the
period of this estimate. (Paras. 24-26 )

Saas 1

= 2

DISCUSSION

I. THAILAND‘S FOREIGN POLICY
REAPPRAISAL

4. The historic character of Thai diplomacy
has been to balance one power against an-
other, to seek a community of interest with
the strongest power in Southeast Asia, to
make a timely. accommodation to changes
in the area’s power realities, and, above all,
to avoid policies so rigid as to make likely
a direct confrontation with the dominant
power. This enabled Thailand to outlast the
thrust of European colonialism and to emerge
relatively unscathed from the period of Japa-
hese imperialism.

5. Since the end of the Second World War,
Thailand’s foreign policy has been charac-
terized by close and active alignment with
the US. The Thai Government has generally
supported US policies in the Far East: and
in the UN, and it has been outspokenly anti-
Communist. The constancy of this policy
is explained by the basic assessments made
by the Thai leaders that the US was the
dominant world power, and that alliance with
the US would enhance Thai international
prestige and would insure sympathetic con-
sideration of Thai interests by the major
powers.

6. Later, when the Chinese mainland had
fallen to the Communists and Communist
armed uprisings were raging in Burma, Indo-
china, and Malaya, the Thai leaders made
further basic assessments which served to
draw Thailand still closer to the US. They
concluded that communism was an urgent
threat to Thailand’s independence and secu-
rity, that open alliance with the West would
deter the Communist aggression, and that
the US had the ability and the will to defend
Thailand. The Thai leaders also found that
outspoken anticommunism opened the way
to extensive US economic and military aid.

7. However, as Communist China’s power in
the Far East increased, as the position of the
Western Powers in Southeast Asia declined,
and as neutralism spread throughout South
and Southeast Asia, the Thai Government
began to feel isolated and dangerously ex-
posed. It was, in part, to reassure Thailand
that SEATO, with headquarters in Bangkok,
was organized in 1954. Thailand has been
very active in SEATO and has encouraged
moves to strengthen the organization. How-
ever, the Thai Government has always looked
to the US, rather than to SEATO as such, to
prevent the expansion of communism in
Southeast Asia and to protect Thailand
against attack.

8. Recent events in Southeast Asia, particu-
larly during the past year, have caused the
Thai to question seriously the assessments
underlying Thailand’s post-World War II for-
eign policy. SEATO’s impotence during the
Laotian crisis has shaken Thai confidence in
alliance with the West as the best means of
deterring Communist aggression. The mount-
ing Communist campaign of guerrilla warfare
in South Vietnam has further intensified Thai-
land’s sense of insecurity. The Thai leaders
are fearful of Communist infiltration across
their long borders. Communist subversive
activity in the north and northeast provinces
is increasing and constitutes a potentially

Serious security problem. The Thai leaders

are fearful of a possible repetition in Thailand
of the kind of guerrilla war the Communists
have waged in Laos and South Vietnam. Thai
feelings of vulnerability are enhanced by the
presence in the northeast of a Communist-
oriented Vietnamese minority and by the un-
certain loyalties of the three million Overseas
Chinese in Thailand.

9. Thailand again feels itself menaced by the
irruption into Southeast Asia of powerful
and expansive forces. The Thai are acutely
conscious of the nearness of the mass armies
of Communist China and Communist North

Vietnam, and they are convinced that Laos
under a neutralist government can no longer
serve as a protective buffer. They are con-
vineed that their rich rice-surplus country
offers a tempting target to Chinese aggression.
In a period of such uncertainty a policy of
accommodation carrying the sanction of his-
torical experience has a strong appeal.

10. The Thai sense of national exposure and
insecurity is increasing, while their confidence
in US ability and willingness to defend South-
east Asia against Communist expansion is
dropping. Moreover, the Thai are becoming
increasingly dubious that alliance with the
US produces any special advantages in regard
to economic or military assistance not en-
joyed by neutralist states, of which they re-
gard Cambodia as the most immediate and
galling example. At the same time, the USSR
has, for the first time, exerted strong and ex-
plicit diplomatic pressure on Thailand to re-
duce its ties with the US.

1l. Foreign Policy Prospects.. The Thai lead-
ers have undertaken a serious reappraisal of
Thailand’s international posture. They have
criticized SEATO’s failure to act in Laos and
have blamed France and the UK for this
failure. Implicitly, however, their criticism
of SEATO is a veiled and indirect expression
of Thai disappointment in the US. What the
Thai leaders are seeking is some concrete evi-
dence of US determination, and some convinc-
ing demonstration of US ability, to halt the
Communist advance in Southeast Asia.

12. Although the Thai are no longer convinced
of the efficacy of the alliance with the West,
they have not yet come to believe that their
interests would be served by withdrawing from
it. The Thai harbor a deep suspicion and fear
of Communist China, and view communism
as irreconcilable with Thai identity and as-
pirations.

13. The Thai military, who dominate the gov-
ernment, recognize Thailand’s near total de-
pendence upon the US to deter Communist
attack or to protect Thailand in the event
of an attack. They are appreciative of their
need for US assistance in the event of a seri-
ous Communist paramilitary effort against

Thailand. The'Thai leadership group, and
in particular Premier Sarit, is profoundly hos- -
tile to communism. Moreover, the govern-
ment is hopeful of new US assistance pro-
grams. Thus, we believe it unlikely that the
Thai Government will undertake any far-
reaching accommodation with the Commu-
nist Bloc or withdrawal from the Western
Alliance, at least for the next year or so.

14. However, if the Thai leaders are not reas-
sured by the US response to their policy reap-
praisal, they will probably conclude that they
must begin attempting to create a basis for
a modus vivendi with the Communist powers,
Such an effort would almost certainly not
imply an immediate or abrupt redirection of
Thai foreign policy. Any shift would be to-
ward neutralism rather than communism and
toward closer rapport with Moscow rather
than Peiping, for the Thai would hope to
hold the Chinese at arm’s length in any move
toward an accommodation with the Commu-
nist Bloc.

15. We believe that over the next year or so,
Thai foreign policy will be characterized by
a series of calculated ambiguities designed to
soften the sharp outlines of Thailand’s anti-
Communist posture, to reduce Thailand’s iso-
lation from the uncommitted nations, and
to increase the degree of flexibility and ma-
heuverability in Thai foreign policy. The
Thai will probably present these moves to the
West as minimal responses to Communist
pressures, or dismiss them as gestures of little
real significance. To the Soviets, the moves
will be presented as tentative but promising
steps toward an accommodation to Commu-
nist interests. In the meantime, the Thai will
Seek expanded US military and economic as-
Sistance, while continuing the search for some
policy alternative to total reliance on the
West.

16. The pace and nature of events in Laos
and South Vietnam will affect the balance
between Thai reliance on the US and Thai
inclinations to seek a neutralist modus vivendi
with the Communist Bloc. Further serious
deterioration of the security situation in South
Vietnam would weaken the already faltering

Thai resolve to maintain an anti-Communist
position. If the US were to commit troops
in an effort to keep South Vietnam and all or
part of Laos from falling under Communist
control, the Thai Government would cooperate
with the effort and would probably be willing
to commit its own forces as well. The Thai
would much prefer that their country be
defended by fighting outside its borders. If,
however, the Thai became persuaded that the
US was not willing to make a commitment
of sufficient size or duration to protect those
countries, Thai doubts of the utility of the
alliance with the US would be reinforced.

17. The death or incapacity of Premier Sarit,
who has been in uncertain health for several
years, would probably not have a significant
impact on Thailand’s international orienta-
tion. Political power would probably remain
in the hands of the military, but it is unlikely
that any single figure would dominate the
junta as Sarit has done. Although Sarit’s
likely successors in the military junta are
anti-Communist, they appear to be more op-
portunistic and might be somewhat more
susceptible to Soviet pressures for expanded
Thai-USSR contacts and for Thai neutralism.

Il. THAILAND’S SECURITY PROSPECTS

18. Security Situation. There has never been
a significant indigenous Communist move-
ment in Thailand. From time to time there
have been upsurges of leftist and pro-Com-
munist activity in the Thai universities, and
parts of the press have played up anti-SEATO
and anti-American themes, seeking to stimu-
late neutralist sentiments. There has also
been evidence of some Communist subversive
activity directed against government elements.
The Sarit regime, however, has kept Commu-
nist and pro-Communist activity at a mini-
mum. More important threats to Thailand’s
security are posed by the possibility of Com-
munist military aggression or, more likely,
subversive and guerrilla activities by Vietnam-
ese or other ethnic minority groups now in
Thailand or which may be infiltrated into the
country.

aa 4

19. Thailand’s ldng borders pose serious se-
curity problems. Thailand and its neighbors
are unable to seal their thinly populated
boundaries against the infiltration of agents
and guerrillas. Large parts of the borders
are in mountainous or heavily forested areas
similar to the terrain along the Laotian/Viet-
namese frontier. Many tribal and ethnic
groups straddle the border and have tradition-
ally moved freely to and fro. Even the Me-
kong River provides no effective barrier to
infiltration.

20. Thailand’s chronically depressed north-
east provinces provide the best target for
Communist infiltration, agitation, and sub-
version, and one in which the Communists
have recently become increasingly active.
These provinces comprise about one-third of
Thailand’s total area and about one-fourth
of the population. The northeasterners are
aware of and resent the economic difference
between themselves and the central Thai.
This discontent gives leftist agitation a con-
genial climate in which to function. The
political vulnerability of the northeast is en-
hanced by the considerable ethnic and linguis-
tic difference between the central Thai and
the northeasterners, who are more closely
related to the Lao. This relationship makes
Thailand particularly sensitive to Communist
advances in Laos.

21. The vulnerability of the northeast is in-
tensified by the presence of a Vietnamese
minority which crossed into Thailand from
Laos as refugees during the 1946-1954 Indo-
china War. From a group originally estimated
at about 75,000, some 27,000 have been repa-
triated to North Vietnam under a Thai-North
Vietnam Red Cross agreement, but it is sig-
nificant that most of the repatriates are
either very young or very old. Repatriation
will probably continue, but we believe that

‘substantial numbers of able-bodied and well-

trained Vietnamese, wholly responsive to Ha-
noi, will remain. They will pose a continuing
threat to Thai security.

22. Thailand’s unassimilated Overseas Chi-
nese community of about three million is a
potential security problem and a source of

concern to the Thai Government. There is
a hard-core Communist element operating
among the Overseas Chinese. Howéver, the
interests of the Chinese are primarily~com-
mercial, and so long as commercial oppor-
tunities remain, the great majority of them
will probably not risk the heavy government
oppression which would almost certainly fol-
low if they were to associate themselves with
the Communist cause.

23. The Thai Armed Forces, with a current
total strength of 123,000 and operating in
conjunction with the 45,000-member National

Police, would be hard pressed even to main- ©

tain internal security in the face of sustained
guerrilla activities supported and directed by
Chinese Communists or North Vietnamese.
Major Thai Army units are concentrated in

the vicinity of Bangkok, with the result that

the army’s capability to defend the: country
from either invasion or subversion is severely
limited. In addition, deployment of Thai mili-
tary units to outlying regions to defend the
border would be extremely difficult because
of the almost total inadequacy of the rail and
highway networks.

24. Security Prospects. A Communist Chi-
nese or North Vietnamese overt: military at-
tack against Thailand is highly unlikely, at
least for the period of this estimate. The
Chinese leaders almost certainly estimate that
such action would result in military involve-
ment with the US on a major scale, and in
view of the current tension in Sino-Soviet

| 5

relations the Chinese may be uncertain as to
the willingness of the USSR to support them
in such a conflict. Moreover, an overt in-
vasion would be out of character with Commu-
nist China’s efforts to project an image of
“reasonableness” and to win increased sup-
port for its policies among Asian and African
nations.

25. Communist policy toward Thailand will
probably be directed at moving Thailand away
from close association with the US and toward
a neutralist position. To this end the
USSR and Communist China will use political
pressure, military threats, and economic in-
ducements, but a major guerrilla war or “na-
tional liberation” struggle in Thailand is not
likely during the period of this estimate. The
Communists probably consider that the “ob-
jective conditions” in Thailand must be
further prepared before the phase of overt

action can be initiated. '

26. The Communists probably will, however,
increase their subversive and organizational
efforts, particularly in the northeast provinces.
Infiltration of agents to work among the Chi-
nese, Vietnamese, and Laotian minority
groups, as well as among the Thai will prob-
ably increase. Communist activity among
the Vietnamese minority will probably be
stepped up, and incidents of Communist ter-
rorism will probably occur. The internal se-
curity situation in Thailand, particularly in
the northeast provinces, is likely to deteriorate
during the period of this estimate.
