The Outlook for Hong Kong
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096492, dated 5 July 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096492).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

- Cle Fret
= Neri) «xf gs
; , ~~ . wx
LBJ LIBRARY | S oreign
Mandatory Revie SAN ee _¥29
Case # NLI_S

Decument *

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE

Intelligence Memorandum

The Outlook for Hong Kong

25 August 196)
No. 1383/67?

This document contains in ytion affecting the national
dcfcuse of the Unitggs@fates, wit e meaning of Title
1S, sections fund 794, of the US as amended.

Central Intelligence Agency
Directorate of Intelligence
25 August 1967 7

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

The Outlook for Hong Kong
Summary

Renewed Chinese Communist pressure on the
British over the situation in Hong Kong raises new
questions concerning the immediate future of the
colony and the prospects over the longer term.

The increasingly fluid situation in Peking and the
continuing "revolutionary" disorder throughout
China make confident predictions of Chinese be-
navior more difficult than ever.

Nevertheless, China's demeanor in the past
three months has led us to conclude that the
Chinese authorities intended from the outset to
keep the Hong Kong issue hot and to continue their
support for dissident elements in the colony. We
have also concluded that Peking undertook a
campaign aimed at gradually eroding the position
of the Hong Kong authorities and thus preparing
the ground for a new attempt by the local Commu-
nists to seize de facto control in a year or so.
We believe that in the meantime the Chinese Com-
munists will refrain from actions against the
colony involving the risk of war, or even moves
which would so disrupt Hong Kong as to put it out
of business and thus deny Peking the vital foreign
exchange earned there.

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelli-
gence and coordinated with the Office of Economic
Research and the Office of National Estimates.

The latest Chinese Communist actions appear to
bear out this analysis. The handing of an ultimatum
to the British and the assault on the British Embassy
in Peking followed a series of humiliating British
rebuffs to Chinese demands. These moves may have
been partly in response to pressure from hard-
pressed Communist leaders in Hong Kong for more
significant support than Peking had been contribut-
ing to their campaign. The sacking of the embassy
did, however, fulfill Peking's threat to the British
of “serious consequences" .without involving serious
risks.

The Hong Kong Communists have probably been
encouraged by these actions and can be expected to
step up their efforts to create disorder. Recent
Chinese Communist behavior and propaganda suggest,
however, that Peking does not intend at this time
to go much beyond the kind of action already taken
to support the local Communist apparatus.

It does not appear likely that the Chinese
Communists intend to attack across the border, but
there are two possible actions stemming from main-
land China that could make the situation very
difficult for the Hong Kong authorities. Red
Guard radical mobs, acting either on their own
or under orders from Peking, could attempt an
aggressive action against the colony. It seems
likely, however, that the Gurkha troops could
contain such a move. More serious difficulties
could arise if military authority in neighboring
Kwangtung Province broke down and masses of
Chinese refugees fled to the freedom of the colony.

The British have shown themselves capable of
handling Communist terrorism and violence within
Hong Kong itself. Nevertheless, the long term
outlook for the colony is uncertain at best.
Business confidence has been shaken and capital is
beginning to flow out from the colony. Unless
peace, however uneasy, is restored to the colony,
a trend could develop which might sharply reduce
the rate of economic growth and lead to growing
unemployment. This would provide the Communists
with new opportunities and that may be what they
are seeking. A change in leadership in Peking,

however, and a consequent change in Chinese
Communist policies would probably reduce the
force behind the Hong Kong Communists’ trouble-
making potential and allow the colony to recover
some of the losses it has suffered.

a3

ii eee

. en

_ @ign Di

- Recent Background

1. The burning of the British Embassy in Pe-

7 king on 22 August came at the end of a period dur-
ing which Peking had probably become increasingly
frustrated by the failure of the Communist apparatus
in Hong Kong to shake the position of the authorities.
In the aftermath of the Sha Tau Kok incident on
8 July the colonial government launched a vigorous
counterattack against Communist efforts to create
large-scale disorder.

2. Troops were used to back up police for the
first time on 12 July in a successful raid which
cleaned out a leftist union headquarters which had
been used as a command post for organized rioting
which had plagued the colony for nearly a week.

The morale of local Communist organizations was
severely shaken by this raid and by subsequent moves
against other control centers which put many Com-
munist leaders behind bars.

3. The number of violent incidents and large-
scale disorders fell off and by the end of July it
appeared that despite continued sporadic terrorist
attacks on the police and against public transporta-
tion services, the authorities were well on the way
toward breaking the back of the Communist apparatus.
a food strike was’ cancelled and the strike against

harbor facilities was increasingly ineffective.

4, Throughout this period Peking's propaganda,
while encouraging the local Communists to carry on
with their fight against "oppression," continued to
stress that the main burden in the struggle would

have to be carried by the "compatriots" in the colony.
When three NCNA representatives in Hong Kong were
arrested around the middle of July, the Chinese Com-
munists protested vociferously and staged small dem-
onstrations in front of the British Embassy in Pe-
king but took no further action.

5. New small-scale border incidents took place
in early August but these do not appear to have been
the result of orders from Peking, or even from pro-

_vincial authorities. Chinese troops guarding the

sani Aha

tote: dos fas 2 Rey GS Wt

border intervened on a number of occasions to pre~
vent major troubles from developing in Kwangtung.
The most serious of these incidents -took place on
11 August when a gang of Red Guard ruffians crossed
the border and attacked the police post at Man Kam
To. The Red Guards disarmed sentries and forced a
British police official to sign an agreement £0. Te=
move barbed wire barriers near the frontier, and to
pay compensation for alleged injuries to a local
farmer.

6. The next day the British coolly repudiated
the "agreement" on the ground that it had been signed
under duress and proceeded to close the border ex—
cept for the rail crossing at Lowu. This prompted
a protest note from the Chinese Foreign Ministry on
14 August which the British rejected, although they
later lifted restrictions at most of the border
crossing points.

7, Three days later, on 17 August, the Hong
Kong authorities closed down three leading pro-Commu-—
nist newspapers which had been printing inflammatory
editorials and arrested key staff members. This ap-
pears to have been the last straw for Peking. The
Chinese Communists’ prestige was already deeply en-
gaged and their inability significantly to affect
the situation nad been repeatedly demonstrated. Un-
der these circumstances Peking apparently decided »
that something had to be done and on 20 August the
Chinese Foreign Ministry delivered a threatening
note to the British charge demanding that the ban
imposed on the newspapers be lifted and the arrested
newsmen released within 48 hours.

8, The British promptly rejected this note
and the Hong Kong Government proceeded with the
trials of the pre-Communist newsmen. Peking's re-
sponse when the deadline set by its "ultimatum"
had passed was to send a Red Guard mob to sack and
burn the British Embassy. This outrage, the most
serious action against a foreign embassy since the
Boxer Rebellion, was probably regarded by the ee
nese Communists as involving small risk and certain
to succeed. It appears intended to intimidate the
Hong Kong authorities, to satisfy the requirement

=~5=

aS

ign D1

that the "serious consequences" threatened in the
note be visited on the British, and to boost the
sagging morale of the Communist apparatus in Hong

. Kong.
The Immediate Future

9, Hong Kong Communist leaders have probably
seen encouraged by this new indication that Peking
is willing to support them. A Communist spokesman
in the colony has threatened an increase in ter-
rorist activity. His declaration at a news con
ference on 22 August that the “liberation of Hong
Kong has begun," however, appears to be nothing more
than a boastful propaganda statement. The Chinese
Communists may augment local pressure against the
Hong Kong authorities by staging new border dem-
onstrations similar to those which have already
taken place, but they will probably not go much be-
yond such action at this time.

10. A blustering People's Daily editorial
broadcast on 20 August--the same day the "ultimatum"
was delivered--asserted that Hong Kong was Chinese
territory, and declared that the “compatriots” in
the colony had the "powerful backing of their mother-
land." In discussing the return of Hong Kong to
mainland control, however, the editorial said only
that it was unthinkable that the colony would Vai=
ways" be under British rule and declared that "im-
perialist blood debts" would be liquidated “sooner
or later." Peking's propaganda still maintains that
the local Communist leaders in Hong Kong must de-
pend for the most part on their own resources in
the struggle against the British. A 22 August NCNA
account of the attack against the British carries
this theme and implies that the “heroic fight"
against the British will depend to a great degree
on the “perseverance” of the "Hong Kong patriots,"
who have the “backing" of the Chinese People's Re-

public.

ll. Although a military attack across the bor-
der from the mainland thus does not appear likely,
= there are two possible actions that would make the
situation exceedingly difficult for the British in

Em oe

gaa tn Ey eg

C. 2 ean &.
\ oreign Di ee

Hong Kong. It is possible that superheated Red Guard

- radicals, under the guise of "volunteers" aiding
their compatriots in Hong Kong, may attempt a con
certed attack over the border. Under the conditions
now prevailing in China such a mob might not be un-
ager orders from Peking, but could be carrying out
Mao's ambiguous decrees that it “is good to make rev-
olution."

12. Such an attack could probably be repulsed
by the Gurkha troops that are now manning the Hong
Kong side of the border. Defense preparations
have been underway for some time now and the local
authorities think that they can contain this kind of
aggressive action. In the event there is such a
showdown, the Chinese population of Hong Kong would
probably universally support the British, since even
the leftists appear to be in terror of Red Guard

excesses.

13. A more difficult problem to handle would
arise if there were 4 sudden, large-scale migration
from Kwangtung Province over the border. The situa-
tion in Kwangtung is at present a very fluid one,
with disorders and turmoil reported increasing. If
there were a complete breakdown in military authority
there, it is possible that masses of refugees would
rush for Hong Kong. It is even possible that the
Peking authorities might instigate such a migration.

14. In the spring of 1962; either through a
misunderstanding of what Peking wanted/‘or through a
breakdown in authority in Kwangtung, there was such
a large-scale influx of mainland Chinese into Hong
Kong. The colony was hard pressed to accommodate
these masses and should a new drive for the free
air of Hong Kong exceed the 180,000 Chinese that
came across in 1962, this might swamp the ability
of the local authorities to handle the situation.

15. Short of these two situations, the immedi-
ate threat to the colony appears to be renewed ef-
forts by the local Communists to harass the security
forces and to terrorize the population. The Commu-
nists probably hope that through these tactics they

. gain willing support or coerce tacit acceptance of

ts ee

ign

anna

é
“s —% Oreign Diss

their actions. The Hong Kong authorities have
shown that they can deal with these tactics, how-
ever, and there is no indication that the British
: are willing to back down now.

The Long-Term Outlook

16. Nevertheless, the long-term outlook for
the colony is uncertain at best. As yet the economy
of Hong Kong has sustained no serious short-run dam-
age. The major manufacturing industries have not
been disrupted and continue to earn profits and pro-
vide employment. Entrepot trade has probably been
reduced to some extent but still continues in large
volume. Tourism, which provides the colony with a
third of its nontrade foreign exchange earnings,
has been temporarily curtailed to some degree, but
it as: still difficult to get reservations at first
class Hong Kong hotels.

17. Despite this picture of “business (almost)
as usual," however, 4 crack may be opening in the
foundations of the colony's prosperity--the confidence
of the local business community in the future of
Hong Kong and the willingness of outside entre-
preneurs to invest there. Hong Kong businessmen
are a tough-minded lot. Many are "refugees" from
pre-Communist China who got out in time with capital
enough to make a new start. They recognize the
vulnerability of Hong Kong to Chinese Communist pres~
sure--including outright seizure--and most of them
have never planned investment on a timetable that
extended much more than five years into the future.
As these men look ahead now after three months of
Communist harassment, however, what they see is the
prospect of a long campaign against the government-—
continuing labor agitation, terrorism, and persist-
ent efforts to destroy public security and make the
colony untenable. In the background, SO long as
the militant Maoists are disrupting the mainland,
they see the threat of a political explosion which
might engulf them.

18. There are signs, perhaps nothing more than
7 straws in the wind, that the confidence of the Hong

oreign D1isse: Sm

Kong business community has been seriously shaken.
If a pessimistic trend should develop, the conse-
quences over time would mean stagnatibdn or even
ruin for the colony. The Hong Kong situation is
such that the economy must maintain dynamic growth
or face collapse. The near-continuous boom which
has been going on for nearly two decades has rested
mainly on the willingness of foreign capitalists,
chiefly overseas Chinese, to invest money in the
colony. As the colony prospered new capital was
attracted from outside which accelerated the rate
of economic growth still more.

19. Outside capital has become increasingly
important in maintaining this cycle, but the will-
ingness of foreign investors to put money into Hong
Kong is strongly conditioned by their reading of
local attitudes. Pessimism on the part of local
business’ leaders leads to growing caution among out-
siders. Current symptons of uneasiness in Hong
Kong are already having this effect. There has
been a flow of capital from the colony and bank
loans to small businessmen have become tighter.
There are reports that some wealthy Chinese business~-
men have concluded that the boom is over and are
planning to liquidate their assets. Partly in re-
sponse to this, American and Japanese investors, who
have been largely responsible for developing new in-
dustries in recent years are now expressing serious
reservations in regard to further investment in the

colony.

20. There is a real danger that without a re-
turn, to stability and business confidence in the
next six months or so a long-range downward trend
might develop. Lack of new investment and a reduc-
tion of the rate of the colony's economic growth
would, over time, bring about rising unemployment.
This would provide the Communists with new opportu-
nities and perhaps with much-needed local support.
Strikes and demands for economic and political bene-
fits might then be far more successful than they have
been in the past few months and this would further
sap the business community's confidence. It seems
probable that this is the outcome that the Commun—
ists are presently banking on--not a takeover of the

-9-

weveeceien Us

oo. Steppe |
aan No Fo gn  wissem

colony from the outside by military means but a
steady erosion from within that will give the local
Communists the whip-hand and result ih a situation

resembling that of Macao.

pals

1.5(¢)(¢)
3.4(0)(1)(6)

1.5ic

\(d)
3.4(0)(1)(6)

23. Finally, as long as the Maoist fanatics
continue to insist on a literal playing out of the
current interpretations of Mao's thought, constant
pressure on the colony can be expected. If new
leaders come to power in Peking, however, and turn
to more moderate and pragmatic designs in an effort
to.restore inner stability on the mainland, the
force behind the Communists! campaign in Hong Kong
will probably abate. An equilibrium can be re-
established and Hong Kong, which will have suffered
a blow from which it will be slow in recovering,
will settle into an uneasy peace with somewhat re-.

duced prosperity.
