Morale on Taiwan
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010785, dated 6 March 1955.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010785).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

he] is

: ; = Bik RR Ceie RD. Sie oy 7 ‘ . as cant * ‘., = = ea
ae Ae NTE Y60-Wf 85> |
5 % Dotimént No. a: ree : 16 Ay * Pe . rs

2 “ee ‘ =
: one 0a

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE. ~ .-0)

Number 20-4 /1-55 Siti, eee.
MRALE ON sasaal \ SY ;

Ac'vance Copy

Submitted hy the 9 ie. hee
Dircetor of Central Intellirence cas ob

The f-ll~wine intellicence crimnizations particips tid

in tne prepiratinn of this estimte: The Central Ine Pee
>) tellicence Apency and the intulli-vence orszantentions ;

of tho Departments of Stote, the Army, the avy, tl

Air Fore, amt The Joint Stsff. — .

7 (Csncurred in by the
InteLirence Advisory Committe

eee an 26 April 1955. C-ncurrinr were the Special Assistant, — -
dos © —_ Intclli ence, Department of Strte; the Assistint Chicf ey
ats ef Staff, G-2, Departmont of the Army; the Director ef —
Naval Intcllizence; the Dirceter of Intellicenco, VSAF; me Sa
an’ the Deputy Dircet-r fer Intelligence, The Joint =k
Staff, The Atomic Encrcy Comnission Representative to

the LAC, aml the Assistant to tho Dircetrr, Fuceral Se
Bureau of Investirtion, abstained, tho subject being
outside “f their jurisdiction. : es

CENTNAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY divahes

4

MORE ON garwane!

THE PROOLE!M

T) anclyze the pattern of porele and eubdvcrainn on Taiwan, and
to estimte the extent and intensity of the rcactions which mcy occur
in Taiwan, nnd in certain other countrices of free Asice/ if the Moteu
end Quenny groups should be lost or evacusted under certoin given cone
ditions.2/ .

THE ESTIMATE

I. GENCR‘Y. CONCIUSIONS

2. On the surface the general state of Chincee Nation-list

morale reinins frirly gon’ dcepite recent events. We hove not detected

Yf “Taiwan” as used herein includce the Penghus (Peserdores).

e/ ie hao a the Eb SI Epreee the ROK, Thailand, South Vietnen, Cambodia,
ani vy

These contingencies hrve been eiven the intelligcnee corsunity os
a bario for nuking thie ontircta.

Cxsasmist subversive setivity of mojur propertions on Toiwan, and
strong C’mberiaceures are being enforec’? throughout tho ieicnd. |
Nevertheless, the: Notional G@ verment hao wrilorgone many fructrations
avi Gosappeiutoents during ite eix years on Taiwan, ond cdverse paycho- ~-
logical foreen rre nlwst eertainly at work benenth the surfnee of

Nation-~liot sceicty. (Parcs. 20, 21, 23)

2. The tclnws of Quemy aw Metsu hove recently ceswed such
inportence in the eycs of the Netionalists that their lose during the
current crisis would be 4 severe blow tc morale, irrespective of the
circumstances or culitiuns uwer which tho loss occurred. The effect

weuld probsbly be cunsidernbdly greater if the islands fell to Communist

ary

wevecn, copecially if US forces wero invulvad, than if they were evacuated -

without corned corflict. In ony event, however, we dbolfove that the blow -

woul’ not be so grert re to ecuse the Notioncliste to fold ao! We

belicve that they would emtinuc their repistance te C.isuniet pressures, —

aoa

at least for c tee! The behavior of the Netionclists would depen’ in

i/ Tre Spccizl Assistant, Intelligence, Departiuert of State, cand the
Asaistcnt Chicf of Staff, G-2, Dupartucat of the Arry, believe that
these two gentences tverly erzhesize the probable effects of pessible
cannges in v-rcle on the future courscs of Nationalist cctica and
would rephrase these sentences oo follows; “In any ovont, wo believe .
that the blow vruld not bo so mrext so to destroy the Notionclist will
to renist or te sct in notion fcrces thet would cause the Nationalists
to fold up. We believe that they would ecntinue their resistance to ;
Counnist preesures ce long ns they hoa sonfidenco in the determinction
eanl cbility of the US to defen) T:ivan. ae 4

fe

.
o Ba 2
.

MET

larve measure on specific US actions with respect to Taiwan, and on -

US renctiens t+ subscquent C-wmnist mvce. (Taran, 23-31) . ee ae
= 3. amur the other Asian revernanta under evnsijlcration SR abieators °
(Japan, the rid lippines, tho RK, Thailand, Sovth Vietnam, Bane - °

badia, ant Lins), evrcuation of the offahere islan's without’ arnof |
ennflict would) proinbly mt ler t+ sirnifieant chances of policy;

4t would be rrected with relicf in Japan, but would arouse som

eenerrn elsewhere in the arun unicr discussicn that the US was ih as -

f ©

propared t- e-mit ite forces to farward areas, (Fara. 37) R F 3
¥
ba

bh. Inss of the islat's ty Cormunist assault, without US

prticiyrti-n in their defense would cause a wicesrroad fecling

among the comtries uncer discussion that if the islands were not
; ; to be defended by tho us, the Nationalist garrisons should have been on ; : :
evacuated rather than sacrificed, US prestice would suffer, Laos, ae :
South Vietnam, Cambadia, and Thailand, in which the US docs not maine
tain forces or Unser, would probebly feo] incroised doubts as to
whether the US would dcfend them in case of need, Theso omntries
would probably be disz.wsed > increasine cauticn in their policios

toward tho Communists, (Para. 38)

- eT

i re * . » = "«
a ris a } . wey. Sea eS
Boo ¢ - : oc 2 2 oN ‘oa OS 1 *)
: « + % e ‘, iz

ge Oo FS forera hel been setively Invelved in defense cper-tivne,

less of the inlets wad ereveroly dasge US presticc throughout the nrete ! .”
There would be n terlency dp the stetus unler dincussicn, except ‘in tho.
PM. te adopt a quawhat wor neutrrlist pesition end to novo less vigore

ously in situctions rinking Coammnist countercction. (Porn. 39),

6. fvong the cversens Chinese loso of the cffohore telands would :
increase Chinese Casanist prestigu suv) the nwiber uf active and poesive
Commnist cupporters. We believe, however, that the mes of overseas
Chinese would tend to remmin uncormuttel unless the stato in whieh they
reside node a decision to accozzodate or wna under cn irnectate threat of

® tokcovor by the C-zamistea. (Paras. 41-b2)

-, -

7 In sumnry, we feel tho effect of tho lvss of Quenoy and Matsu
would depend largely upon whether prior ond subsequent US actions, gove or ~

foiled tu give, convincing evidence of 2 — US detcrninsation to resist ~-

further Cormninist aggression. 7

° . = - ‘6 i te aes ~f ey,

IW. PROT SVTUATION

8. Th people of Talwon fall into tw: min eategvrics, the aaa --.
Trivencse al the Mulnlancers. The forrer are a Inrgecly persive, mone - ei ay
governing clout, <sepein fume resentient against tho minlam = BF
®invedern™ ani their pest policies, but in present cireunstences generally »
constituting a }sycholrgical fector of little importance. Anong the
Moiniwmiers, there are fuur overlepping caipencnts; (s) Chieng Kei-shek

and hie close subzniinctes; (b) the nilitary and the sccurity furces;
A LT a

_————eoor
(c) the buresuerncy; and (ad) nonofficiol persons, including cspeciolly
a en amend
Go tho intelligentsin.
ee

9. Of these coupaicnts » the morcle of ‘the first two is rost
important, since they ¢eterune political action. Chiang Keri -shek emi 5 ee

his elcse suburitinates, by their deeds, their expression of resolve, ‘oa a

n
r

hs . by the expectations which they ccn in part ereate, dotermine in lorge = - <>
peasure the spirit with which decisioné are made and drplenented throughs
out the burcoucratic and nilitary chains of corm. The rilitery and the
secusity forces constitute the key clerents, since they will largely

dctormine the effectiveness of defense, and the likelihood of meas do-

- fection or a ccup d’utct. Tho rank and file burenucracy plays o iesser

role in Ceternining nerale, ep do the intel igentsta, the prece, ani ee
other n-ncffieial elaients. Nevertheless, widesprom disaffectiun ur.

derprelizativn rmrg these Groups would tend eventusLy to vweoken the

Baliuol G vernent. ere ; t ee
. . o; *
. bf
iy gi ti le ge eee eB,
hy ct we

A. The Current State of M: rele

10. Surface nada ond public uttcrances do nwt neconsorily reflect
the true state of Chinese Neticnclist porale am} willirguess to resist
Communist pressures an) imiucenents. The principal factors affecting the
: stnte of mil cf key gruups on Triwen opperr to be the following: (a) prose * .
pects fur 2 return to the minisnds (b) prespeets for US cefense of Sctwon
win support of the NotJonal Government; and (c) olternctives too. os

Nationalist return to power on the mninland (nee paras. 15-19).
pia i

Return to the Mcininnd

21. All clenecnts have been sustained by the hupe thet the National

Geverinent will return to the minland. For several ycare, however,

actual expectations appear to hava been dined, notably among the higher

Civil curl ailditcry cehelens. There has been little cosurance ot any Fc

eg

tire anon; Chinese Netionslicst officials that the US, except thraich : a
involverent in» gener: var, would aselst the Netfloualiste to eotoblish |
% benchheal. As lung as threo years ago ufficiole in private conversations
wuld aliit that, contrary to public oassurcneec, they actunliy harbdored —
little hope of ever returning tu the minland except in the avent of

general war. Mure recently, US official at-tencnts probably have {nercosed

cee

Chinese Nationalist dcubts regeox@ing their prospects for a return to tho
“a0
a ‘

mniniand. fs z
ee . Pa ry

22. Chiang Kr1i-shek 4 the vutetanding synbcl of hupe for return to
the minisnl, and the ehicf erentor and perpetuator of this hope. Chiang .
has teen uniquely successful dn preserving o sense of unity and Purpose on

Taiwan. Unlike the situation on the mainland before 1949, there ore fev

sources of imicpendent power or influence within the regime, and politics

and personal relationships revolve elnost exclusively about his persue.
His etcadf-stness in persmifying return to the mainland has been ree
sporsible for sustaining thie objective, hovever remte or infonsible

4t might be.

7 @

t
J
‘
’

If the Chines; Netionaliste on Taiwan erie te relieve thet thero eould iis
Ww hho cebura to the uciniend, the cffeet upon vornle and upon Chinng -
Knieshck'’s personel prestige would be seriously alvcroc. Hevertheloss, . -

Chiang weuld alnust certainly he able to 103 ntnin his authority. Praeticclly:

specking, however, it wuld be closet dimossible fur Taipei to acknowledge
_ end
pany ccttlcicut vhich wuld fn foct signify that the Nationsl Goverment

no longer hel de jure elein to the mainland. While Nationalist officiols

ond civilians no longer live out of suitcases, they have cs yet pode no

scrious accumeintion to an insular existence. H.wever, certain prograns
which they have unjertaken would tend to focilitate cdjustrunts to con

tinued life on the isicnd. a

» 7°

. oN

dvwen snd Support of the Nationcl Governnent

Prospects for US Pefenne of Tr

Ww. fimng the mst besic requirencnts for rmintenance of norcic |
en Taiven is visible evidence of a firn US futenticn to defend Taivan and
t» support the Natinnel 6 vernment as the lepitinate goverwent of China.

The Mutucl Defense Trecty hes lorgely uct the first of these requirenents.

ed *
rn : a 7, fie ae
' t eo fe Zaye Fee eee 0s
_4 . Yo Bo age eS

But with respect t the sce nd, approhonsions exiat amnr tho

Wationaliats, For oxamplu, there aro doubts nas to US intcn-
tisns rem rlin: the dcfenso of tho offsamre islanis, US attie

turics towarl the "tw--Chinis" formula, and len--turm US policy
_ Top echelom

erncernin: reesrmnition of tho Craymnist rerine,
on Taiwan prebably view with alarm whit they believe to be’a
US tumlency t aveid circet military en-aromcnt with Cwmunist
Chira, and a US willincncss to discuss a yereeful solution of

the Taiwan Straits problem, Trey ferr th:t these develoym-nte

in‘ierte an cventual abandonment the US of support of tho

perhy.s even of the inlependont existence of the National ©

Nation-l GSvernncnt as tho leritimto povernnent ef China_and
=

152

ment itacif.
a omy
. a : -
Altern-tives to a Nitdonalist return to power _on the Moinland 4 -
a rae eine re | “Ips et ri
15. Althourh all rroups mintiin the hopo timt tho he -

National Gevernmunt will return & tho mainland, many individuals
almost ecrtainly have considorod cortain altornatives. The prine
eipol alternrtives would bo (a) defection to the Communists; |
(b) rericnaticn t erntinued life sn Taiwan; and (c) enieration
cal he ec hie ah a i DIES a

7 t ether non-C-mmunist arons.
a none el

-9 = : ae _
SE + wae S

16. The attractions of Communist Chim are probably rrie | ae
mrily )syehslorierl. Tho Chincso Nationiiista on Taiwan ; Re : 3 .
= roeoerd the minian’ as meme where the fomilica of mony etilZ . . os
roemin, In addition, thcre are many dissitisfactinns with the ee - i Oe

siturition on Taiwan, in particular lack of opportumty for many ~-.

} Antollcetvils, wrimr burcrucrats, ani militory officcra, Finally,

Peij:ing excrciecs a powerful appenl throurh its apparent dynamism

an) ite enhincod stature in world affairs, | ormm™ Pye
\

>
17, Since duly 195, and especially since tho sieaAtlin ny, 4 :
of the Tachens in February 1955, the Chincac Communista hive, = .
becn ecnductine a hich pressure propwanta carpadyn aimed at
tucins defections from Taiwan and tho effsh-re isl«nis, This
effort hrs incluied epesifie appeals from formcr frienis on the
mainland t. hich=-level N-ti-nalist officials and officers, ne | 4 es
woll ae ceneral assurances of prrdon andl of full uso of any Coe
fuetor's taicnts. Thie camaim his mt as yct had any visible

sueccess, Lut Cormunist sp-kesmen hive recently claimx! thit 6

a camairn, cdded to ecntimcl military prossurcs asainst the f. bs
PER AC SNE AN A ESET, :

Nntd-m.dists, will dn time result in tho subversion «f Taiwan,

1A, Hawewr, most Chincsy sn Taiwan aro aware that the

Fopressive co ntr-ls of the Pci; ine recime sre much mro- i if as
emrous thin thse t which thcy are subjcctod on the island, “o i‘
In ce norte turns Also the inercasin~ly austere life on the oo

miinlarl hol’s m inmleements for the emirros on Taiwan, where
the stariaed of livine 4s aceon! only t thet of Japan in tho -
Fir East. The thome of return has mt prcelwicd seme derree

of adjustment by minlanée Chincso to their present existence
which his gradually como to appers moro ncceptable and icas
tennsitory. Moreover, the Natisnalist lcadcrahip mw on Taiwan.
constitutes the most unc-mromising anti-C~: munist elomont among .

the Chinese, —_ *
3

19, In vicw of theso ernaicerations, we Leliove thit the |
mumler of Chinose on Taiwan who would lewe for the mainland at
the prceont tine, even if it wore possible t novo frocly out Fy —
ef Taiwan, would bo emi, —

The present state of mrile

20, On the surfrec tho present peneral state of mrals on
Taiwan romiins fairly roo’ deepite reocnt cvonte, Aside from . ue

come pessimistic editorial e-~mmont in tho N-ticnalist-oontmlied ~ ...,

oll a ae

@ . in

“ogress, ther. heave boon few visible evideners of lowered moralo, ”

Woon vortle leas bnliewe that thia relatively aatinfactory Pe, af

EC Re Sateen preeremgmneesapmanet slant ve .

stot: ef ierale mey be mre arpavarent than real, Tho acvorso :
ERE SRT rer NEE OETA N I aS nent PNP ROR SER

peycho lier f-recs analy2zcd abovo, in particular tho dis= ceca
op intnenta over eertain US p-licies, nre almnst certcinly at eat
werk beneath the aurface of Natinnaliat snefoty. These forees :

d= mt azrerr as yet t bu of Berivus prmporticns, but taeir

erosive offect may prepare tho way for an accoluratod cetoriorna] - :
tion cf mralc in tho event Natinnalist Chinn sh-uld suffor acddi-

tinn:l setoacks,

arty
B. Effeetivencss of satered Society . , 3 |

or conclusive, we belicvo that Crmmumist subversive activity on.
Taiwan at the present time is nt of =o proportions arc appare

ently is bein; effeetively SESee nee ay The substantinl threat
* Cascs “f Cmiunist subversinn reavltine in ernvicticn have

been halved in the yast f-ur yoars, from ar avrrarve cf 22 per

month {in 1951 to 13 per mnth in 195k. There is n> nocesenry
eorrelation between the mumbcr of "casce” and the number of ae
individuals ecnvicted, The Foreo Preservation Headquarters

at Taipei stated on 16 N-vembor 1954 thrt 858 execs of sub-

version involving 1,745 persons had benn tabled in tho first

three quarters of 195k. Of these individuals » 597 wore

inter ornvicted.

e % ~~ Lae P
* ° - rd ‘ ‘\ oo ~~ .° c °
sy an ee “Ot te
ee ay e o: ‘em
° @ ro. “dev ae oat
. . = *, *
te agi eo
77 -
oo
re .

which was josed by Communist activittca on Taiwan in 1749-1950"

we ewe

his Since bern markedly reduced by virorous Neti alist cuntore ss tal :
MenPUres, Maticnalist kn-wiletre and aurvei} Lance ef Crmmunist |
Attivitien is Lolicved matt, Cruntcrm.ssurce aro probably most;
effectivo in the ranka of the military, reagsnably an Seon ont:

eivil Iepulstion at Biro, end aomcuhat aces cff.ctive yn
*
hich -fficinisa on Taiwan. Reecnt cefectiana have bsen few,

Over and ave the effectiveness of Naticniliat eceurity one
trols, dfeetion is Inhibited by a mmber nf practical e-nsidera=
tirns: distance fmm the mainland, few mcerne of eyresa Irom.

Taiwan, am’ the diffieulty af establishing ehrnnela ef comunicse

tinn with C-mmunist arents,

Known rceent cefectirns ernsist cf. only 3-5 airmen, and a
very fuw rrounl troops from offshore islin's. General —
Ii-hvang, who bork off from Hone. Kong in March 1955, has
lon, been an equimenl eharnctar, Ho his mt been associated

: with the Natdonmilist lcsdurship since he fled to i-ng Kong
, fron the minland in 1949,
e 1. oe : —

SEC

III, EFFECT ON NATIONALIST MORALE OF THE LOSS OFTHE OFFSHORE

ISLANDS AND OF OTHER FOSSIBLE DEVELOP ENTS

e

A. General: Conaiderations, >

3 .
23. Inss of tho offehcre islan's curing tho current crisis - .,

@ ‘ho 5)ccial assistant, Intollirence, Nupirtrent sf St-to, and

tho Assist-nt Chicf -f Stuff, G2, Lclicve thit Nationalist

e nfidener in the willinrness ami alility of tho US t» ‘lefend
Taiwan is tho miin -encral considoratinn affectinz develo scnte

in Chinese N-tisnalist mrale as well as the sirnifiennce of 3
auch ¢-velopments, They belicve that pora-rayhs 23, 2b, ami 25
taken As a croup ebscure the key importance of this factor and +:
wevld evbstitute the fellowing for those three paraTraphss 7
“Lees °f the offshore ialancs durine the current crisis would
adveraely aff.et Chinese Naticmilist roralc, as would any do- ..
vel>ncnt that arzears te lessen the ehincca ef an ultimte

wor Ue fween the US an’ the Chincsy C-munists or to inticate

that the US wie mevine Purth yr away fro support of Natiomilist— -
agp irations for a rutarn to Gi minliunt, The extent of this

Jera of morale o9 well ca Ste aieiiTleanen, wi)1 dcper! in Jorce
port on hw tlese dovelopmente affect the Chincac Baticnilist =
estimite of Us policy. S lene as Chimso Nth nalist enfle
lence in the willin-ness antl *bility of the US to cefunl Taiwan
ruemiine firm no one of the ecntinennetios eonsideurad below ie

likely alnne to deatroay Uatt-nalinte will to reniut or to cause

tho Chinceo Naticnal Govornment t~ £1] fr-w within,®

» li —- a a

and Matsua thet the loss of these islimia wool

woul) be a sve re biw t Chinenc Wationalint perajo, irrcee .
puetive -f£ the edrcumstancca or ecmiitienn un‘er which it ok
place. Sines retirine t Taiwan in 19h9, the Chincae Nationale_
.ste hove expericncerl a scrics of crisos an) frustrations, of - |
which the evrrent offahero islan! erisis in but the met recent.

The frustrations and isayprintmentea of the past eix yeirs,

ues
torpether with the mra recent hopes that the US would become e y
militarily involved in the cofense of the ¢ffahore Lalan's, vee *,

Nae
hove so increased the peyeholerical imcrtonee of the Oiemys
Ogre rN ET

' have varyi

alverne effcets upon Nationalist morale depending ups the eir-
pene 0 ETE IEEE ECE EE CTD TET SPEEA ET TE TY

eumstanecs of their less as Cescribed in pararrazphs 27-31 belcw,.

2h. Insa of the offshore islan's wuld probably be taken
as evidence that the US was m-vinr further away fr-m support
nf Natiemalist aspiraticne for return te the eaininnd. Nationale
ist lealers, and perhaps the Natinnalist rank-aml-file, probably
do mt have any deo; conviction that the US will: in fact support . .
such a rcturn, except in the event of war between the US and
Communist China. It would be o different mtter, however, to
acmit finally to themselves thit a cherished hope had teen withe .
put fourlation, We do mt believe thit thé Nationalists have yct

ta

-15 = ac af

\

Taiwan. Thoro mi ht mt Le any eucden inercase in Cofecti-res ©
Ye 2 e y

oor t= serch cn admission, or that they woul’ Le driven t &¢ ee

«
ono -

oven if tho offsh-ru ialan'ts were lost and tha US aproared to
record the less as final, They would be f-recd closer tr it,
hewever, and tho inpaet would be ereat amny 111 elements on

A ta an me}
er otier manifestations of changing, Loyaltics, but the lenacer= |
phiy. would find it much more difficult t- euetoin ite own morale

aml tho leyalty of lowor levels,

25. Nevertheless, it is our estimate tht the Nitiomilists

would mt f-ld up, but would e-ntinue their resistance to

C-mmunist pressures, The behavier of the N-tiomilists would deo

Fene in larce measures cn specific US actirns with respect to

Taiwan end US reactinns to subsequent Communist mves.

B, Particuler C ntin eneics

26. Reactions on Taiwan to the lose of the offshore islands

Would wary acconliny to the circumst neces of the lnas, We have

ewnosirtered the foll-winr eontinrcneics.

27. Notinnlist farecs in the ffsh-re islanis svocuited

rt US instiratirn am with US assistance prisr to tho application

ee 7
SPGIET

a

OO ae

g¢
ae

af rut stential ant xl sustained military yreasure tw the Suarunistse ce }
Evacuaticn -f tho effsh-re inlan'a at US instipaticn an? with te
US assistince would he stronously renisted by Chiang Kai-shok

Wel Nstionalist -ffictalcam, Such an evacurtion would rope fer _ : ee oe
the Nrtisnilist leadors a sori-us problem -£ fustificatinn, © 7 bake
Failure t+ defend the offshore Aslanite wowld dcrnare the rrestire |

and sclf-resocet of the Military, The ewacurti-n weuld “Tertly

refluce hapes for early US-Chincse C-mmunist hastilities en’ for

a return to the minlan’, Many Nati-naliste would evince frustra- _
tion and bitterness in a situaticn in which they would ecnsider
thrit their interests were being sutorcimitec t tho puroly dee
fensive intercate -f the US. Cooperatian between the US and

the Nationalists woult be advoraely affected, Nevertheless, all
elenents on Taiwan wuld prebably continue to estimate that the oa. an : |
US woul) dofen Taiwan. Hoye of eventual ewmflict between tho - ; 3

US and Communist China would romin, In these circumstances, Se a

we believe that Nati~malist lenders would ecntinue to enntro]

lInynlties, Lindt subversion, and rocuce Communist military procssures,:

26, Nationalist withtr-wal ACermpanied by a multi-national
SES a een eRe NECTED Soe,

puarantec by certiin non-C-mnunist states -f tho securi of Taiwan,
SSR ne. eterna

The ru-cticn to this e-ntincency would not diffor appreciably from od

-l7-
SEQFET

hit sd parece 27 abs, Fyseuticn would te no more sreeybe .
able bo tis Hatismal Government if ether pe neG semuntst crantrien >
par lded, wbel dna suarant.e of the securthy of Tlwan. wie

puch 8 pworantee misht rive semo aWiitional nsourince of 80=

eurity, it would almost cortuinly bo wwelewme to the Niticnlintes
leeav.o it wsul? tem) t reluco tho ehtncca of wer between tho

US am) C-ennniat Cisna, and thus cueresae the ehancen of aA re

turn t. thy minland, It would, in tae Nationalist view, year

te asaoey ite tw US with the British “twe-Ciina® ys licy, or cven

intierte a Orift tear’ intermticnal trvstocship for Taiwan, state

29. Trelcncel attrition of Hationolist ctren th on tho
offshore frlon’s as a result of s-yere Cxemnist bemtine and
slellin:, without attom trl _aefisure av! without US_counteraction.
Derine a preoloneed yarind of attriti-n, thy Biticnsliste would
dncroisine ly resent the fret that acne of their inet forces were
bed nr eracwally weakened in e-mbit with Somunism while the US
rtac) hye. Tris reacntacnt would be arytravated $f the US
@ Tine a aN, FH) Pesal yr tre ys Jeestet en the eleven coffe

nhore delew'ta, These troapa cre cep l-yed aa fies BOO
on tlie two Isiencs of the Tunsyin - up, 12,367 -n the three

° miin isl-urle of the Natsu Grouy, 2,009 on the twe islands of
the Paichtvan QGrevy, and 6",f07 on the four inlanis af the

Qin y Tepe —

SEG Py . a oe reel
7 ;

A

ena

- os Se ee
. . » a Eo
ne ~
maintained preacnt reatrictions on Nationalists military of arne ae

oad
tirna avainst the mainland, Sheuld Nationalist leaors Lee me tes:

esnvineed thet the US weuld not intervene, “hey mirht request,
~ | US anaistance t €evacuite the dslan“a, In any cvont thero wuld ee ae %
bo mountin.: bittcrnese arainat the US ania fceline that the 7"
US wes intcrestcd in Mleine Tadwan only for ita om scourity,
In time, this continrency wuld rreLably hive a seri- usly ade
verae cffect upon Niticnaliat mroic, Neverthelces, we policy: a oe
that they would e-ntinue tr believo that tho US waulg defend |
Taiwan, an’? the leatership wuld exntinue tr contrs2 loyalties , Fy
te :

am! limit eubversi-n, £7 sy)

3n, Nationalist 2orcca_in the w ffsh-re islanis anle_defentad Y and .
the isilan's scdzod with no_ intervention by US fereos, The reaction eh .
to this enatinreney would be eu'den and even more acricus than
the rereticn we hive noted in baryra-h 29 above. Tho lcas of
Up t ene-fifth of the Nationalist combat forees would materially
reduce Niti-nalist farceg available f-r the defense af Taiwan,
The Insa weuls! «reatly dncrease Nati-nalist vulacrability to
Froparamia themes of C-muauniat invincibility, Nati-~naliet woake ™
ness, arm’ the id lana of the US as an ally, While

National iat leaders wirhte entertain scrinus fouLta ar tr le . . .

34

Antentions with respeet ts the dcfense of Tafwan, wo belleve = ae
that over tle short term they would eontinuc firm in their ee

dvterminticn & dofent Taiwin, U[-ecver, ersntinuatirn of .
this cotermimtirn, an! the alility of the Niticnelist lentor-"
ahip ts retain lnyaltios and to limit eul-vursicn on Taiwan woud;
durend, in larro marure, vprn whether (a) the Nitionmlists hod ©
velicved, 2% thu time of the Communist assault «n the offshore
{alania, thit the US wie morally e>mmittcd t~ tho defcnse of -
these islan'ts an? would in fact defend them; and (h) the nature
of US mecsures taken concurrently with ami immedintcly follewing ae oor

tho inss cf the offshore islan's.

31. Offshore Aslan's lest to a C-mmrist assault a
which the US intervened loerlly and suvseqently Misen-arcd. 7 ae
In tiis eontinzcney, the effect uprn Nationalist mrale would
be oxtrerely crave, Tha Noitionaliste wuld be eriearnoa for :
thu vury existence af their rcgimo, Tho synptems of disinto= —
pratinn wuld quickly develop, Nevertheless, we belicve that ; ‘
Chiane Kai-shek woulA pr-bavly be able in the short term to
maintain ecntrol on Taiwan, Nati-nalist will and determinsticn ,

te reesjst Communist prossurcs emi intucements over tho lon:er .

- 26 o ~ ¥ “-

term ul fepom' in dare dosrce up-n US measurca on Taiwan
a” er.

Fall win, the Inss of tho eff{ah ro islincs and up-n subsoquent ~~

US actions in respouse t> Crmmunist mvoes,.

ame SEA RE ei

Cmrunt=t air raids wn Taiwan carrie! out submement t- the Loss
of the “ffs re islan’s_ un'er any of the suove ecntinrencies,
there would Lo an accelerated cetcrioraticn of meralo an’ loyalty
on Taiwan. If the C-rmunist air raica were heavy and lone con-
timc) without US counteraction, the N.tien lists would lose all

faith in the US. . cues

33. We havo deer asked to ostimtc tho effect upon Chincso
Naticmilist mrale sf the Chinese C-m un‘ sta entablished Qo s8ur-
prise _let-mnt on Taiwan _subdsequent t- the Ines of the -ffah.re
Aislan's. We estimitu that the Chinese C-mmnistsa cannct in tho

near futuro crtablish a surprise l-drmont in sufficient force.

either to overeome Naticnalist militwy resistonee, inclucing

US suj,ort if ncecasary, or te attract mjor defecti-ns,

3k. Death cr retirencnt of Coianr Kai-shck. Chiang is so
2mportant to the unity ani dotcrmin:ticn of the Nationalist —
pevernmnt thit his cesth ar rotirement weuld intratuce sericus

- 21 = 3 ~ = ..

unccrtainlics into the aituation om Taivan, Treecent inciciticns |

Prant te the Uikelihsacdd of a eonstitutional succecesicn Ly Vico
Fresi:tont Cnton Chien, probably f-llewed by J: ckcyine for

on see

ywer behind the seenos, The probable initial loss of unity

in the top lesdorship of the Nitienalist ovement Ster, Chinng
Kal-ahck's dunth or rotircment woul) les refiected at all luvele

of the populction, and micht mike them m-r2 sueceptible tr C-a

munist mves, US policy ani actionea wuld be *f koy dmrortanes

in rest-rin stability and e-nfidence in the rovernment, In_ a
any cvcnt, it is unlikely thst Chianc's dcath or retirement
woulc Ly itself lead to a rardd e*~llapsoe -f the will of tho |
leacers aml perple en Taiwan, since the exterml wifying Zactors -. |

particularly the C-mmunist threat - woule remain, aml since -..2-.-

Chiane's retirement from the scene would preaumbly not alter se ae
: ia) , .
CB

the UG enn itment to support the N-ticnalist covernment,

35. The ataticnine of additional US forces, inclwiiny a
Givision
rrount force, on Taiwan, with the esneurrence cf the Noticmilieto, ~~

followine th: Inss «f the “ffshere isicn's un‘er any of the cire _ ae

Ei terete TS Rian ETE SEEN RRR HRI

oye

cumstances Cescribed in Scetinn III B above, would hive a bene=
ficial cffect sn morale and woul? increase dctormimition to ;
resist, Tho presence of theso forces woull s-mewhrit effect tho “; as

: - 226 ee et ee 6

effects -£ the leas of tho Jalam’s and weull rreatly sineresso
Niticnilist exnfidence in the eccurity of Taiwan, se ones

__ &
IY. EFFECT ON CExTAIN STATES AND GROUFS IK ASIA OF Ti LOSS os
OF THE OFFSHOKE ISLANDS .

*

34. The effcets of the Irae of the offsh re islanie on
other status ef n«n-C-mmunist Asia, Jike tie: cffeets on Taiwan,

would vary with the circumstances unicr which the lnss cccurrod,

37. Sveeurticn of the islan's price to_a C~rmunist rscault
would procuce somo alvcrac effects amonr, the wontons unmler | se a
Ciscussion, ami US preetive prolably would suffer in warying | |
Sc-rees in ail of these e~wtrics. In ‘the Thdlippinca such an
evacuriticn would etinulite e-neern th=t the US was n-t prepared eae
tr ewmnit ite fercos in forward arcas, Sal mivht cnuse the = ie ae
Gevermacnt ts request a clearer definition af the US e-mri tircnt
tn dcfemt Philipyine security, Thcro would Le a loaser e>ncern .
4n Thailané, Lins, Cambodia, ani Suth Vietnam. ROK leaters .
would tye ;Tuntly Cisappointed. Hwever, tho dominant resetion ;
wT Unin catim te oniy consiccra the ruvetions of the ovoracas — a:

Chinese, tha nOK, thu inidisyina, South Victnam, Lana,
Cam.alia, Thailant, and Japon.
- 23

oe vw.
.

in Jaru. wuld te ene of fencral relief, M-reover, mmo of the _
. toe. Win :
LwWwernrents unter “issussicn woul’ Wo unduly eoncurnet by ano:

‘reds.
> ~~.
weeny’

ovacwitinn if the US reaffirned ite intent to ofend Taiwan =”

“3 at ll evrta, ant m-no ef them would miterfally chance their.

»

P*licica as a rcsult of tho ovacuitirn,

38, If the UW hac mt intervene? while the Chincse C-me .
runists scizcd_ the effeh>re islan’s, there woul! be severe

criticism ~f tho US in the ROK, ani t- a lcsser ‘lecreo in tho aa
Philipyincs, Most other -evernmonts unter discussion, cerecdaly -.

the Jarancec, wold te reljoved that h-stilitice between the US igs ee

Seleer ae
a.

an) Coreunist China had not develeped, Hewcever, the adverse

effecta cn mralo arising from loss of the island's, ae deserited yet

in ysravraph 37 alive, would be moro sharply evident, There . = = a

woul. bo a wicesprese feclinr, mreover, thit if the islanes .~ ‘ ba : :

wore mt t bo dcfcmlod ty the US, the Nati-nalist rarrisons _ 7

should h-ve been evacuited rather than sacrifice’, US prostice i

me would suffer. Lava, South Victnam, Cambe:lda, and Thailan?, in ; ae
waich the US docs nt maintain forece or bescs, wouls probably

feel increrased doubte as t> whether the US would dofeml thom in -

ewe of neo), Thess cuntrics woul! pralably te disjosed to

- 2), ~ ae ene : Ds
f SS ind

?
a:
’
'
=a?

« Oe

39. Th the -ffriere intan'a hat been Icnt to a Canrunist
? ss sue aki beh the We net Snbervened dren ly, Bae

sulsequently Misen ared, US prestice throurtout the area uncer
cdseussisn would be very serjcunly CGamared. The acverao effects J
en morale an) jy lieiea ces ribed in the preeeling parc¢rajh
woulc Le av ravatec. There weuld be a tendency in ment ef tho
states un‘cr Ciseusgsion tu aco;.t a eemwhat more ncutralist
position am! to move less vigorously in aiturtinns tht mcht
srouse Co.muxist evuntcractinn, The iOK wevld not werken its

yosture avtinst C-mmunism, but woulc bec>me nore fractinus in

ats rel.ti-ns with the US,

hO. The st-tioniny -f atcitiony] US frcos, Includins a
fron’ ferec Civision, on Taiwan, with the ecneurrence of the
Uationalists, enneurront with any -f the atrve ecntin-eneter,
weuld probably hie a bencficial effect “n moralo in the csun-
tries under disevssicn, At a minimum it probebly wuld assuro
these corntrics thit the US waa fully prepared to Mnor explicit

- Snerentin: coutisn in their prlicics toward the C-mnuniste, ae
defenso conn taents.

© @ ’ % “
UW. The avereeas Chincrc, The pajerity of tho oversecs /
Chincse § asda appear, *t present, te Le unerimitted eithar Dee Ses
tr the Ntionalists er tho Communist cause. They have little “ge : :
bi e-nfi'eree in the leng-term prosjccta of the Nationalists, —. -
2 2 ne pot, TP ok geek
: an’ they have been disdllusicned ly the dvmcatic mlictes ef

Teijdins, Traditional loyaltics to tho Chinuse rovernment aro
being weakenoc, ar a very rmadual prscecas af interratian @
political if n-t cultural = 4ntn the eomamity of resitcnco is
takin: pines. Althsu:rh the mss ef the overscas Chincee wow
probably rumain inéifferent in any ef the above esntinrencios, *-
Acvelopments with respect to tho offslrre ielamle which appeared
te cuhance Jed) ine 's prosatice would increcse the number of
rreeive and active Cemmunist supporters in these c-mmunities, :
ar! reduce the number of these c~mmittcd to the Nationalists.

Defections am-n7 iny ortant Chinese intellcctuals and former or

>.

officials in Hong Keng would increases

L2, Wo belicve, however, that the miss of vations Chinese,
even in the event of a progressivo am) ecriznus dctcrisretion
4n tnu position of the Chincse Notinnal Government, would tend — i
to remain wrcommitted. They woul prepare activcly t& serve Feiping

only if the stato in which they resided mide a deciainn to accwmroe

date nr wis unter an immediate thrent nf a takeover by tho Conmuniste.
-%e |
