West Germany Under Erhard
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012256, dated 3 November 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012256).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

=

SNIE 23-63
hitb CONTROLLED DISSEM 18 December 1963
~ Y

\e

, SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
Pa - NUMBER 23-43

a
Eg

5 ae
EAS

a

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE ©

1, This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the reciplent and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to knaw basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within thelr respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense .
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for
the Department of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Inielligesce), for the Departuent cf
the Navy
t. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, fo. tha Department ot the Ac
Force
- Director of Intelligerice, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
- Director of NSA, for the.National Security Agency:
1, Assistant Director for Centra| Reference, ClAy for any other Department or -
Agency ae 4 oe ee oe iy ashe
2. This copy may be retained, or destroy d by burning:In accordance with applicable,
security regulations, or returned to ihe Contral Intelligence: Agen by arrangement with «
the Office of Central Reference, ClAjw i: Pu on ee Mie Se i
3. When an estimate Is disseminated
it for a period not in excess af onesvean%.
either be: destroyed,. returned tod as
quested of the forwarding .agency'te
1953, 0 ae
: ; “ya gt
4, The title of this estimat
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY"! '

area x.

tae

ed ee

y

ih,

DISTRIBUTION,

White House - oe
National: Security Counell «. ~
Department of State.
Department ‘of: Defense :,

Atomle Energy Commission : r
Federal Bureau of Investigation: 3,

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 23-63

West Germany Under Erhard

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM 1

CONCLUSIONS l

DISCUSSION 3

I. ERHARD AND THE PROBLEM OF LEADERSHIP 3

II. ECONOMIC POLICIES 4
II. PROBABLE ATTITUDES ON MAIN ISSUES OF FOREIGN

POLICY 4

A. Reunification, Berlin, and Relations with the Saviet Bloc 5

B. West German Defense Palicy, NATO, and the MLF 6

C. Relations with France and European Integration 8

WEST GERMANY
UNDER ERHARD"

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the immediate outlook for West Germany under
the leadership of Ludwig Erhard, with particular reference to
West Germany’s role within the Western Alliance and its rela-
tions with the Soviet Bloc for the period up to the West German
parliamentary elections in September 1965.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Erhard has taken over leadership in West Germany with
a firm hand and will in all probability be his party’s candidate
in the September 1965 national election. His foreign and defense
policies will almost certainly continue to stress close relations
with the US. He is by temperament more pragmatic and flexible
than Adenauer. (Paras. 1, 6,7, 13)

B. Erhard, like most West Germans, would like to “do some-
thing” about the division of his country and the plight of the
East Germans. To make progress in this direction, he may be
willing to offer economic inducements to the USSR. (Paras. 8,
11)

C. Germany considers NATO and the US presence vital to
its security. In discussions of NATO strategy, Bonn will remain
convinced that troops defending West Germany must have im-
mediate access to tactical nuclear weapons if NATO's ‘forward
strategy” is to succeed. Germany desires to join the MLF, seeing
it as the most politically feasible way of gaining admittance to

“This estimate supplements and brings up Lo date NIB 23-62 “The Outlook
for West Germany," published 26 July 1962. Many af the basic judgments con-
tained In NIE 23-42 are still valid.

om

the nuclear club and hence more influence in the alliance.
(Paras. 14-17)

D. Erhard favors close European cooperation in the economic
field, including British association with the EEC. He is con-
siderably less enthusiastic about expanding the authority of the
EEC’s institutions. On agriculture, Erhard will go some dis-
tance to get agreement both within the EEC and with the US;
for domestic political reasons he is unlikely to be able to satisfy
either France or the US. (Paras. 19-21)

Sct

DISCUSSION

|. ERHARD AND THE PROBLEM OF LEADERSHIP

1, The Adenauer period in West Germany has ended under circum-
stances which appear to augur well for the future. The transfer of
power to the 64-year-old Erhard has proceeded smoothly. In the face
of Adenauer’s persistent allegations that his helr-apparent lacked politi-
cal acumen and decisiveness. Erhard has moved vigorously and effec-
tively to assert his leadership since taking office in mid-October. As the
most potent vote-getter in the Christian Democratic Christian Social
Party (CDU CSU), he will lead his party in the coming campaign for
the next national parliamentary election in September 1985. Other
leaders. such as Foreign Minister Schroeder or Defense Minister von
Hassel. whatever their ambitions to succeed Erhard, almost certainly
recognize the necessity of postponing their hopes beyond 1965.
Adenauer, though he still holds the potentially important role of CDU
chairman, has lost greatly in power and influence with his departure
from the Chancellorship,

2. Nevertheless, Erhard will have to contend with a complicated tangle
of divisions and rivalries which will almost certainly continue to exist
beneath the surface in the CDU CSU. These challenges are made more
difficult by the knotty problems which West Germany—and indeed the
Alliance as a whole—muast face in the next year or two in the flelds of
economic cooperation and defense policy. They are especially magnified
by the recent increase in German attention to the complex questions
of reunification and relations with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Differences concerning foreign policy issues confronting West Germany
have tended to deepen and exacerbate existing personal and political
rivalries within the ruling CDU CSU.

3. Erhard will also be progressively more concerned with political cam-
paigning as the 1946 election draws nearer. He will have to face a
Social Democratic Party (SPD) which for the first time in the history
of the Bonn Republic feels within Striking distance of a national victory.
He may also be under increasing pressure to cater to and compromise
with his coalition partner, the Free Democratic Party (FDP), on certain
issues. The FDP, as the only small party which remains on the national
political scene, halds disproportionate power, since neither of the two
major parties has an absolute majority in the Bundestag. The pos-
sibility should not be excluded that tension between the coalition part-
ners could bring down the government even before the 1965 election.
This could result in the formation of a grand coalition of the CDU CSU
and SPD.

I. ECONOMIC POLICIES

4. Erhard’'s reputation as the architect of Germany’s economic re-
covery is already secure. Nevertheless, accelerated inflation and the
reappearance of a surplus in Germany’s international payments may
force him to consider modifying existing monetary and fiscal policies.
Erhard’s approach to the problem of inflation is centered on budgetary
restraint and appeals to management and labor for moderation in price
and wage policies. This policy will be somewhat undercut by his promise
of tax reductions in 1944. The payments surplus, expected ta reach a
billion dollars this year, in contrast to a small deficit recorded in 1982,
arises trom a strengthened trade position and a renewed inflow of private
capital.

5. Aside trom these problems, which appear manageable, the German
economy continues to show underlying strength and a capacity for sus-
tained growth beyond the extracrdinary boom of the 1950s. The esti-
mated GNP growth of 3.5 percent in real terms for the current year is
expected to be exceeded in 1964, stimulated by a strong upswing in
export orders and a rise in both production and orders for capital goods.

Ill. PROBABLE ATTITUDES ON MAIN ISSUES OF FOREIGN POLICY

6. In foreign affairs. Erhard's role will be ta continue the policies of
the previous administration, without appearing either inflexible or lack-
Ing in enterprise. He will have to defend himself against the criticism
of such men as former Foreign Minister von Brentano, former Defense
Minister Strauss, and Adenauer himself—all of wham resent their loss
of power and doubt that the new cabinet can be trusted to maintain
the old policies. However, his keen personal interest in asserting him-
self, and thus giving the lle to Adenauer's frequent aspersions on his
political judgment and leadership, will be an important force for innova-
tion in foreign policy. So too, will be the greater power of Foreign
Minister Schroeder, who even under Adenauer was willing to risk the
old Chancellor's censure on the test ban issue and to make clear his
interest in achieving greater diplomatic flexibility tor Germany.

7. There is, moreover, a general feeling in West Germany that foreign
policy should be re-evaluated in the light of the Federal Republic's in-
creasing strength and importance, the competition between Paris and
Washington for German tavor, and a belief—or hope—that the USSR's
economic problems and the Sina-Soviet split may improve the climate
for fruitful negotiations between Moscow and the West. Erhard’s ap-
proach to foreign policy will reflect his awareness of these factors and
the fact that he is by temperament more pragmatic and flexible than
Adenauer. Erhard will show himself more willing to entertain new
lines of action and will almost certainly not react to US moves with the
suspicion characteristic of Adenauer's later years. He almost certainly

‘ a

ae
recognizes, however, that his real freedom of maneuver. with Wet Ger-
many situated as it is at the very center of the Rast-West confrontation,
is extremely limited. He is unlikely to make any approach to the Soviets

without first consulting the US and possibly also Bonn's other major
allies.

A. Reunification, Berlin, and Relations with the Soviet Bloc

8. In his public and private statements since becoming Chancellor,
Erhard has consistently supported present US policy toward the Soviet
Union and on Berlin and the German problem. Differences in approach
to these issues may arise in the future, however, since in West German
eyes they are inextricably bound up with the subject of reunification.
As West Germany's strength has increased in recent years, so also has
its frustration at not being able to achieve any progress toward re-
unification, or any improvement in the lot of Germans living in the
Eastern Zone. Sentiment in favor of “doing something” about this
has grown substantially throughout West Germany since the Berlin
Wall was erected in August 1961.

9. Interest in the possibility of a more active Eastern policy has also
coincided with German industry's widening search for markets, with
the expectations of possible movement in Soviet policy stimulated by
the signing of the nuclear test ban treaty in mid-1963. and with the
atmosphere of political speculation and discussion which developed as
Adenauer’s term of office drew to a close." All parties and all politicians,
generally speaking, recognize that reunification on acceptable terms is
unattainable for the foreseeable future, and virtually al] German leaders
insist that there can be no movement toward accommodation with the
Soviet Union which is not inked to concessions on the German problem,
However, there is considerable variation as to how this principle should
be applied in practice.

10, Adenauer has argued that the Soviet leadership is in deep trouble
over economic conditions and its quarrels with the Chinese and that,
if the West remains firm, the USSR can he made to pay a significant
political price for Western economic help. Certain SPD leaders have

*In the past year, Bonn has already made smal] moves toward improving
relations with the East European countries. Pacts permitting the exchange of
resident trade missions (with semi-diplomatic status) have been concluded with
Poland, Hungary, and Rumania, and actual trade agreements have been signed
with the first two, Negotiations are now underway for similar arrangements
with Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria. In these negotiations the Weat Germans
successfully insisted that West Berlin be automatically Included as part of the
“Deutsche Mark area,” and they will preaumably be able to do s0 with the other
Satellites. The Satellite negotiators had originally refused this concession on
the basis of the long-held Bloc thesis that the Federal! Republic has no authority
or responsibilities In West Berlin.

oa ; 5

<r

put forth proposals for more flexible Eastern policies; Berlin Mayor
Willy Brandt in Particular has placed primary emphasis on trying to
induce the Communists to ease restrictions on the East German popu-
lation. Businessmen such as Berthold Beitz, general manager of Krupp,
and like-minded elements in the FDP are interested in restoring historic
German economic pre-eminence in Eastern Europe, arguing that in-
creasing Satellite contact with a dynamic West Germany will tend to
isolate the East German regime and perhaps bring other political bene-
fits as well. Beitz has also expressed interest in a major economic deal
with the USSR itself, He does not necessarily represent, however, the
prevailing sentiment of industry. Equally influential spokesmen, such
as Fritz Berg of the Federation of German Industry, doubt that increased
trade with the Hast is feasible.

11. Erhard himself has suggested that he would be willing to offer
substantial “sacrifices” by West Germany—perhaps in the form of eco-
nomic aid—in return for Soviet concessions on reunification. He un-
doubtedly realizes that an offer of large-scale or long-term aid to the
Soviet Bloc would raise a host af problems within the Western Alliance.
In any event, whether or not Erhard puts forward new initiatives of his
own in coming months, he will make every effort to assure that the West
tries to extract concessions on the German problem in any negotiations
with the Soviet Union,

12. Another possibility is that the Soviets themselves may seek to
capitalize on German hopes of progress toward a settlement of the Fed-
eral Republic's outstanding problems with the East. On the whole,
we find it difficult to imagine the Soviets offering the kind of political
concessions which would justify, in West German eyes, the extension of
economic aid or long-term credits. In the uneasy West German political
atmosphere, however, even the hint that political concessions were in the
offing could be enough to stir up intensive political debate in which
the unity of the government coalition and perhaps interallied relations
might be considerably bruised.

B. West German Defense Policy, NATO, and the MLF

13. Dependence on the US and active participation in NATO will
almost certainly continue to be the basis of West German clefense policy.
Erhard and his colleagues recognize that US military and diplomatic
support is essential to German Security; they give no heed to those
elements of the party right wing which question the reliability of US
guarantees and seek to play up the French connection, For this reason
West Germany is likely to remain more cooperative than other NATO
allies on many military matters, as well as in making military purchases
to offset the foreign exchange costs of maintaining US garrisons on
German soil. Asa result of its continuing military buildup, the Federal

Republic plays a steadily larger role in NATO defenses. West Germany
plans a significant Increase in the combat readiness of its 12 army divi-
sions by 1966, with parallel {mprovements in both naval and air forces.

14. Nevertheless, the West Germans, with their special clrcumstances
and fears, will probably continue to pose some problems as well. They
will remain convinced that effective maintenance of German territorial
integrity in the face of attack, under NATO's “forward strategy,” will
depend on the defending troops’ having immediate access to tactical
nuclear as well as conventional weapons. As a result the Germans will
remain hard to convince that the flexible response advocated by US
military planners will either deter attack or defend German soil ef-
fectively.

\ 15. The extyeme West German sensitivity to any reduction of US mili-
tary strength in Germany will almost certainly remain a recurrent
source of uneasiness in US-German relations. Erhard is probably less
suspicious on this score than was Adenauer, but will nevertheless ex-
amine closely any US plans to alter US troop dispositions in West Ger-
many. He is well aware of the pressures on the US to cut down on over-
seas expenses and will be cancerned lest balance of payments considera-
tions color US military judgments. Moreover, he will have to give atten-
tion to the West German press, which will continue to react emotionally
to even the most limited and circumscribed US efforts ta eliminate in-
stallations or redeploy unita.

16. The Federal Republic has been concerned to keep military expendi-
tures under control, and is likely to be even more so under Erhard. The
new Chancellor has already manifested an interest in stabilizing the tax
burden and minimizing inflationary pressures by limiting the growth
of federal expenditures to the rate of growth in GNP. Should he apply
this principle directly to the military budget, the West German military
buildup will, as it has in the past, lag behind schedule to some extent.

17, West German participation is of key importance to the proposed
NATO multilateral nuclear force. We believe that the Germans’ deci-
sion to endorse this US proposal was motivated not by a desire to move
toward acquisition of a national nuclear capability, but rather by a
series of political considerations. They believe that the multilateral
approach is the most politically feasible method of gaining admittance
to the nuclear club and hence of moving toward parity with their major
European allies in Western, councils. They see the MLF as preferable
to either an independent German effort or some sort of bilateral ar-
rangement with France. They also do not want the MLF to degenerate
into a two-country program involving only the US and West Germany.
They probably also reason that West Germany's willingness to make
a sizable Investment in the MLF js essential to insure its participation
in any future nuclear sharing. Some German supporters of the MLF,

Sie 7

SECRET

Me) Tlanntarm naliries: Berlin Mé

beet, en ~ eats

pu

especially Defense Minister von Hassel, expect that it will ultimately
develop into a force governed by majority vote. The Germans probably
are also inclined to cooperate with what they believe to be a strong US
wish to establish the MLF. In addition. some Germans consider that
the creation of the MLF would help assure continued US involvement
in the defense of Rurope. No significant shift in this generally pro-
MLF attitude Is likely to be initiated by the Erhard administration.

C. Relations with France and European Integration

18. Erhard has so far been cautious and noncommittal about rela-
tions with France. His relations with de Gaulle will clearly not be as
clase as were those of Adenauer. He has nonetheless expressed approval
of the French-German pact of January 1963, and has said that he in-
tends to improve caoperation between the two countries. The atmos-
hit phere of his two-day meeting with de Gaulle in November 1963 was
cordial,

tinue to center on Common Market developments. Erhard’s attitude
toward the HEC has for some years conspicuously differed from those
i |! of both Adenauer and de Gaulle. The new Chancellor until recently
has shown little interest in the political objectives of the European inte-

j gration movement. Instead, he has been preoccupied with commercial
1h and economic considerations and with promoting European-wide free
i | trade. As Economics Minister he supported formation of an all-Euro-

{

lf

| | 19. For the immediate future, German relations with France will con-
|

pean Free Trade Area to include Britain and other states as well as the
EEC, He also favored measures to bridge the gap between the EEC and
the seven-nation EFTA, after the latter organization was formed by the
i British as a counterweight to the EEC. Later, he strongly supported
| Britain’s application for admission to the EEC. Since becoming Chan-
1 cellor, he has emphasized that the EEC must not degenerate into a self-
‘| sufficient market, that the integration of only six European countries

cannot be considered ‘the ultimate goal,” and that efforts to intensify
“internal European ties with Great Britain” must be an essential part of
Germany's policy.

20. As a liberal economist, Erhard opposes the central direction and
economic planning (dirigisme) implicit in the EEC, and has never been
enthusiastic about giving up national powers to supranational inatitu-
tions such as the EEO Commission. Erhard's dislike of supranationality
and of European “technocrats” recalls that of de Gaulle. The possibility
cannot be excluded, therefore, that Erhard might react sympathetically
! should de Gaulle revive his plan for a so-called “political union” of the
a, Six along essentially intergovernmental lines. The German Chancellor
a would probably insist, however, that any such plan leave open an op-
portunity for Britain's participation.

7 pet

21. Within the EEC, the major difficulty facing Erhard is the complex
problem of agriculture. This is in particular a continuing source of
tension in relations with France. On the crucial issue of EEC grain
support prices, Erhard has indicated that he may be receptive to a
compromise based on the Mansholt proposal which was put forward
by the EEC Commission. and which would reduce significantly the
present high German price level. Regulations affecting other agricul-
tural commodities must also be worked out. Because the EEC has
chosen to link agricultural decisions with adoption of its position for next
year’s Kennedy Round negotiations, the prospects for significant reduc-
tions in tariff and non-tariff barriers will depend to a large extent on the
HEC's success in solving its agricultural problems. In all these matters,
Erhard must reckon with the fact that a substantial segment of the
CDU CSU voters are farmers, and accordingly we believe that Erhard
will be unwilling to go further in lowering the German price level than
called for by the EEC Commission proposal.

22, On many key problems affecting US-West European economic rela-
tions, Erhard js a strong supporter of present US positions. His gov-
ernment—and most West German industries as well—tavor substantial
reductions of trade barriers in the Kennedy Round. Erhard will at-
tempt to influence the Common Market to pursue liberal policies and,
as already indicated, to keep open the possibility ot closer British asso-
ciation with the EEC.

SBier”

ay ; The following

intelligence organizations Participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-

ments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Alr Force, and NSA.
Concurring:

Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Assistant Chiet of Naval Operations (intelligence),
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF

Director of the National Security Agency

Li:partment of the Navy

Abstaining:

The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant Di-

rector, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
ay _ Jurisdiction,

fe was
This ;material contains Information affecting the National Defense of the: Unite | States -

within the meaning of the ssplonage laws, Title 18, USC, Se%s. 793 and 794; the-trans-
Qnty "> “mlsslon or revelation-of which In any manner to an unauthorized person is: prohibited.

Grour |
Excluded from autematie

downgrading and
declasification -
