The Current Situation in Albania with Particular Reference to Greek, Yugoslav A
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011500, dated 2 October 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011500).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PRG

HARRY $ TRUMAN LIBRARY

! President's Secretary's Files

 GoPY NOw2
FOR THE PRESIDENT
OP THE UNITED STATES
Lon ' NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

THE CURRENT SITUATION IN ALBANIA WITH
PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO GREEK,
YUGOSLAV AND ITALIAN INTERESTS

4,
~

APPROVED FOR RELEASE = -
OME.2 MAY 57

RE EEE EE

Nié - 42
Published 20 November 1951

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

HARRY § TRUMAN LIBRAK,

! President's Secretary's Fi

les

oo ene ang

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

THE CURRENT SITUATION IN ALBANIA WITH
- ~ PARTICULAR REFERENCE TO GREEK,
YUGOSLAV AND ITALIAN INTERESTS

NIE - 42

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticipated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the prep-
aration of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence Ad-
visory Committee concurred in this estimate on 15 Novernber,

ei

HARRY § TRUMAN LIBRA x

|! President's Secretary's Files

THE CURRENT SITUATION IN ALBANIA WITH PARTICULAR
REFERENCE TO GREEK, YUGOSLAV AND ITALIAN INTERESTS

THE PROBLEM

To assess the strategic importance of Albania; to examine the stability of the
existing regime; and to analyze Greek, Italian and Yugoslav interests in Albania.

CONCLUSIONS

1. In its physical isolation from the So-
viet Bloc Albania’s importance to the
USSR is more latent than manifest. In
an area of traditional Russian aspira-
tions, its continuance under Soviet con-
trol is a political asset and a matter of
prestige to the USSR especially in view
of the defection of Yugoslavia and the

defeat of Communist aggression in {!

Greece. Economically, Albania is a lia-
bility to the USSR. By itself, Albania is
of minor roilitary importance to the
USSR. However, if overland communi-
cation with the Soviet orbit were re-estab-
lished, it would regain the limited mili-
tary value it possessed for the USSR be-
fore the Yugoslav defection.

2. Resistance activity constitutes a trou-
blesome problem for the Hoxha regime
but is not an immediate threat. As long
as the resistance effort is divided and
does not receive substantial external aid,

the Albanian security forces will proba-
bly succeed in containing it.

7)

Ps ac

4. Italy and Yugoslavia have officially
accepted the principle of the creation of
@ sovereign and independent Albania
with its present boundaries and free from
Soviet control. However, Greece, because
of its clairns to northern Epirus, has so
far not accepted this principle. Whether
or not all three of Albania’s neighbors
could actually be brought to accept an
independent Albania with its present
boundaries would probably depend up-
on the support given the new govern-
ment by the Western Powers.

dot

lc ee ae

* en

. HARRY S TRUMAN LIBRARa

Fresident's Secretary's Files

DISCUSSION

The Sianificance of Albania
5. Politically, Albania is of importance to the
USSR primarily as an outpost of Commun-

ism. The USSR would regard its loss as a
blow to Soviet prestige, particularly since the
defection of Yugoslavia and the failure of the
Communist effort in Greece. Economically,
Albania is a liability to tre USSR. Militarily,
Albania is of minor importance to the USSR.
Although it occupies a strategic location at
the entrance to the Adriatic, under modern
conditions its capabilities for development
are limited. Saseno Island and the port of
Valona have some potential value as bases for
rine craft, small naval attack craft, and sub-
marines. Sascno Island was a minor Italian
submarine base_and there have been recur-
rent} _ rumors in the postwar
years of Sovict efforts to reconstruct these
facilities. There isno[._, | evidence of
extensive Soviet efforts to build up Albanian
air facilities and, although Albania might be
of value as an outpost in an early warning
system for air defense of the Sovict orbit,

1.3) GQ)
Since the defection of Yugoslavia, Al-"

bania has lost most of its strategic impor-
tance to the USSR because of the lack of
overland communication with the Soviet or-
pit. However, Albania would be of some sig-
nificance to a land campaign in the Balkans,
since operations in conjunction with Bulgar-
ja, if successful, could separate Greece frum
Yugoslavia.

The Current Situation In Albania

The Stability of the Regime and

Extent of Soviet Control

6. Prior to the Cominform-Yugoslav rift in
June 1948, Albania was closely tied, both
politically and economically, to Yugoslavia.
Rather than follow Marshal Tito’s heresy,
however, Hoxha chose the Moscow camp and
launched a vigorous campaign for the elim-
ination of “nationalist” elements in Albania.
Hoxha not oniy extricated Albania from its
ties with Yugoslavia, but also succeeded in
eliminating serious competition for leader-
ship within Albania. Reported rivalry be-

tween Hoxha and the Minister of Interior,
Lt. Gen. Mehmet Shehu is likely to be of little
importance as both men are apparently firm-
ly controlled by the Krernlin.

7. Albania is totally dependent upon Soviet
support. Without it, the country’s economy
would be severely shaken within a_ few
months, Sovict control is reinforeed by! J
—- Soviet “experts” in Key positions
in the police, military, and civilian adminis-
trations as well as in the party hierarchy.

8. With Soviet support Hoxha and Shehu
have thus far succeeded in ruling the country
through the usual Cormmunist methods of
police terror and rigid economic controls.
Despite evidence of opportunism and disloy-
alty in the security forces and particularly in
the army, these forces constitute effective m-

Struments for the suppression of opposition.

9. Soviet support to Albania, however, has
not included a mutual assistance pact, prob-
ably because the USSR desires to leave the
situation fluid and to avoid a commitment
which might prove embarrassing.* Albania
has such a pact only with Bulgaria (16 De-
cember 1947).

10. Nevertheless, any change in the Albanian
situation which might threaten Soviet con-
trol would automatically involve a question
of Soviet prestige in an areca in which one
Satellite has already defled the Kremlin, Un-
der present circumstances, such a change
probably could occur only with the support of
one or more of the neighboring states. Such
a development would necessarily lead to a de-
terioration of the international situation.
Soviet action to counteract a change of this
nature would depend upon broader consider-
ations of global strategy.

Resistance to the Present Regime

11. Dissatisfaction «mong the Albanian pco-

ple continues to be widespread and there has

heen some overt resistance within the pest

few years. The reg't.e itself has admitted
*Tae only other Savciites which have not con-
eluded mutual assistance pacts with the USSR are
Fastern Germany and North Korea.

i President's Secretary's Files

the existence of “diversionist” elernents and
attacks upon military and civilian supply
convoys. The most dramatic incident of re-
sistance activity was the bornbing of the
Soviet Legation in February 1951, but local
assassination and limited economic sabotage
have probably been more effective challenges
to Communist authority. Thus far, the Hox- |
“ ha regime has been able fo deal with oppasi-
tion movernents by instituting further re-
.pressive measures. For example, Shehu has
organized Special pursuit battalions which |
operate in the mountainous areas against in-
dividual Tesistance groups.

we Secs

~

I 5
\s

Conflicting Interests of Italy,
Yugoslavia and Greece

17. Albania has long been a bone of conten-
tion among its neighbors. Their interests
conflict to such an extent that, even under
present circumstances, the problem of Al-
bania complicates the development of good
relations and cooperation among Italy, Yu-
gosldvia and Greece. Other problems, such
as Trieste and Macedonia, are of greater imn-
mediate importance In creating dissension
among these powers, but Albania would prob-
ably becorne a critical issue if the present re-
pire were overthrown.

Italian Interests

+ The name of an Albanian hero of the 15th Cen-
tury.

18. Italy’s se hae in Albania has always

hann ta note!

|

oe OMe oes 2a 1.|

HARRY_S

TRUMAN LIBKAK1

President's Secretary's

Italy supported
the creation of an independent Albania in
1912 and later, in 1914, occupied the island
of Saseno and the port of Valona. Italian
troops remained in occupation until 1920,
Italy was then forced to evacuate the main-
land, but retaincd Saseno which was con-
verted into a minor naval and submarine
base. By a pact of friendship and security
with Albania in 1925, Italy established a legal
basis for including Albania in Italy’s sphere of
influence. Italian influence was manifested
by loans, management of nearly all impor-

. tant economic enterprises, and training and

equipping of the armed forces. In 1939, Mus-
solini occupled Albania and united it with
Italy; in 1940, he launched his invasion of
Greece fromm there. Under the Italian Peace
Treaty (1947), Italy recognized the independ-
ence of Albania, ceded Saseno Island, and re-
nounced all public and private property

rights, concessions, claims, etc. in Albania. _

ag)

of sige In its official “statements,

ian Foreign Office has emphasized that con-
tinued Albanian independence and territorial
integrity correspond with Italfan interests.
Italian efforts to improve relations with the
present Communist regime have made no
progress. Formal diplomatic relations were
established in 1949 and, despite Communist
restrictions on the Italian Legation in Tirana,
Italy undoubtedly intends to retain such te
lations as vane as possible.

20. i

Fe
ene

the Ttal- ,

Files

sie Retire Rc at A MM il Pa SED EA REE inet

ee TM
sce cameagne  ,

Greek Interests

22. Greek interests in Albania center upon
Greek claims to southern Albania (northern
Epirus), an area which the Greeks occupied
from 1912 to 1916 and which they have con-
sistently claimed on historical, ethnic, stra-
tegic and economic grounds. The Greeks
also recall that Albania served as a base for
the Italian attack on Greece in 1940 and, in
the postwar years, for Communist guerrilla
operations against Greece. Even at present,
Albania is a base from which Communist
agents sre infiltrated into Greece. _

ai =a

*resident's

ey

long as the Hoxha regime does not resume
full scale support to the Greek guerrillas.

Yugoslav Interests

275. Serbia opposed the principle of an inde-
pendent Albania in the period frorn 1912 to
1918. Following World War I, the Yugoslavs
occupied northern Albania until 1921. In
1926, Yugoslavia finally accepted the Alban-
jan frontier as delineated in 1913. Until the
outbreak of World War II, Italian domination
of Albania prevented Yugoslavia from exer-
cising any influence.

26, This situation changed radically during
World War II when Tito, through Albanian
Communists, mnanaged to obtain control of
the Albanian National Liberation Movement.
Tito’s control was exercised largely through
emissarics attached to the headquarters of
the Albanian Army of National Liberation,
and, from 1944 to 1948, Albania was a puppet
of Yugoslavia. In 1948, Hoxha was able to
extricate Albania from its ties with Yugoslav-
ja following the Tito-Cominform rift,

27. Since 1948, Tito has ostensibly champ-
ioned the principle of an independent, sover-
eign Albania and has condemned both Greck
territorial claims and the alleged Greek pro-
posals for the partition of Albania between
Greece and Yugoslavia. Yugoslavia is par-
ticularly apprehensive of the restoration of
Italian influence or domination. In the past
several months, Yugoslav propaganda has
charged Italy with encouraging the plans of
Albanian exiles for an “ethnic” Albania which
would include the Yugoslav provinces of Ko-
sovo and Metchiya, both populated chiefiy by
Albanians. Tito’s actual objective appears

to be the eventual creation of an anti-Sovict, |

pro-Tito regime in Albania and a return to
the status of 1944-1948. It was apparently
to this end that the “League of Albanian Po-
litical Refugees in Yugoslavia” was formed in
May 1951. The League, which claims to rep-
resent some 5,000 Albanian refugees, is con-
trolled by Albanian Communists who have
fied from Albania since 1948. It was created

reas aeseres ar re

HARRY $ TRUMAN LIBRARy

Secretary's Fileg

by Belgrade as an instrument of Yugoslav
policy, despite its proclaimed objective of “an
independent, free, indivisible, dernocratic ard
republican” Albania. |

|¥ugoslavia’s exposed position, how-
ever, has probably deterred Tito from using
the League to the full. Yugoslav spokesmen
have expressed the fear that any substantial
efforts to overthrow the Hoxha regime might

be taken by the USSR as a pretext for military

action against Yugoslavia.

The Possibility of a Settlement

28. The existence of an Albanian state has in
the past always depended upon the attitude
of stronger powers. Although all three of
Albania’s neighbors would presumably wish
to see the eventual liquidation of the present
regime in Albania, their interests in the ul-
timate status of Albania are incompatible.
Since Albania’s isolation from the Soviet or-
bit in 1948, the policy of each of its neighbors
has been directed at establishing a position
from which it could profit in the event of the
overthrow of the Hoxha regime. As a result”
each country has sought to counter the moves
of the others. This has led to a diffusion of
resistance efforts within Albania. Rivalry
among the three countries over Albania is
also one of the factors limiting the cooper-
ation of these nations in the development of
coordinated defense plans in Southeastern
Europe.

29. Italy and Yugoslavia have officially ac-
cepted the principle of the creation of a sover-
eign and independent Albania within its pres-
ent boundaries and free from Soviet control.
However, Greece, because of its claims to
northern Epirus, has so far not accepted this
principle. Whether or not all three of Al-
bania’s neignbors could be brought to accept
Albanian independence would probably de-
pend upon the support given the new govern-
ment by the Western Powers.

Hoo

1
