El Salvador: Controlling Rightwing Terrorism - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049226, dated 5 January 1985.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049226).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

El Salvador:

Coatrolling Rightwing Terrorism fil I

Introductioa

Politically motivannd civilian killings in El Salvador
fell sharply in 19@4 as the government took action on
a variety of fronts 10 rein in death squads. That
reduction, in coagametion with significant political and
military developaments, has aided democracy and the
promise of an ewemstua! resolution of the civil war.
Recent death threats against President Duarte and
other governmens officials over the issue of dialogue
with the innurgen left, however, have underscored the
truculence of pawserful rightwing terrorist groups that
in the past acted with virtual impunity. Some recent
events, such as rasmors of impeachment maneuvers
against Duarte im the Assembly and coup plotting |
within the military, suggest that the President may be
approaching the Exmits of his ability to constyain
extremist violence. Moreover, the press of political,
military, and sasimeconomic issues may make
Duarte's task difficult over the coming year.

This assessment as a descriptive and anslytic overview
of the structure aad goals of the Salvadoran extreme
right and its terrsmrist capabilities. It reviews those
factors that have contributed to a reduction in rightist
terrorism, ea min prospects for resurgent violence,
and outlines the ven ons for US wle.

Legacy of Viola

Violence is part a the cultural history of El Salvador.
just as h is in amngghboring countries. Salvadorans are
at once intensely mationalistic and community orient-
ed, while also baring fierce champions of personal gain.
Highly ingrainaml in the nations] psyche are ib
interlocking valuses of ownership of property, loyalty
to family and fiteands, and pride of the individual. The
historical record shows that retribution can be swift
against those whan challenge such principles, and the
practice of viola vendetta traditionally has been
common among socioeconomic classes and along

Approved for Release

NOV 1993

the entire political spectrum. Even during the compar-
atively peaceful and prosperous years of the late
1960s and early 1970s, the relative level of common
domestic violence—resulting from property feuds,
spontaneous duels, and crimes of passion—was among
the highest in the world, according to international
statistical references. By the mid · 1970. homicide was
the third leading cause of death in the country

Political violence, similarly, has occurred for genera-
tions. We believe that, before the Marxist insurgency
in 1979, such violence largely reflected the various
military regimes’ efforts to neutralize what were
perceived to be subversive elements. During the past
five years of insurgent war and transition toward
democracy, the public record shows that thousands of
noncombatants have disappeared or have been killed
by unidentified persons and vaguely identified groups.
President Duarte has publicly placed the death toll at
over 40,000 and has primarily blamed rightwing
death squads.’ We agres that a large but unknowable
percentage of the political violence in recent years has
been carried out by rightwing civilian and military
extremists.

tistics on civilisa deaths lndicats that

thers beve been just over 10,000 confirmed by civil

authorities aad the loce! medie since Jesuary 1961. Many thos-

sands more Gglly were killed dering (960, before records were
maintained. Unsubetentisted

6 oe

Evolution of the Extreme Right

Rightwing political violence had its genesis in El
Salvador i late-19th-century conversion from mer-
cantilism to capitalism. At that time the government
confiscated peasant farmers’ subsistence holdings and
turned them over to large caffee growers in order to
develop an agricultural export system. A semifeudal,
social-Darwinian system soon evolved around land-
less wage-earning laborers, a tiny managerial aristoc-
racy, and a constabulary army to maintain order.

By December 1931, however, the world depression
had gutted the economy, and a newly elected civilian
government was threatened by growing unrest. The
Army staged a coup and established a military
dictatorship. A month later, impoverished Indian
laborers seeking return of their lands launched a
small uprising in the western provinces. According to
a variety of academic sources, the rebellion was
Somented in part by Communist Party millianis who
were attempting to integrate rural workers with the
‘fledgling socialist trade union movement in the capi-
tal. Fearing a widespread conspiracy, the Army and

the civilian elites reacted by mass at many as
30,000 peasants in a few weeks.

The resulting endemic national paranola over the
Communist threat reinforced authoritarian rule by
the armed forces and its affluent civilian backers for
the next half century. The chain af military regimes
provided order and stability, and largely gave the
plantation owners and monopolist businessman a free
hand over the economy. Combining with favorable
international economic trends and foreign aid, this
system of rule resulted in substantial material prog-
ress for the upper and middle classes, and develap-
ment of a strong physical and institutional economic
base. Given these historical roots, order and stability

also became closely identified with institutionalized
violence against dissident leftist elements. as well as

intimidat the rural peasant and urban labor
classes.

Control over society was handled by the military
government and civilian elites largely through para-
military constabulary forces, regular Army units,
and numerous afficial and private vigilante organiza-
tions. The historical record shows that, given the
inherent weaknesses of the formal judicial process,
these security bodies would aſien function at the local
level as judge, Jury, and executioner of individuals
perceived to be criminals or subversives.

The Sandinista victory in Nicaragua in July 1979
Shocked Salvadoran military leaders and provided
he catalyst Jor a reformist coup in October, as

Con-
vinced that dramatic political. social, and economic
changes were needed to deter a popular insurrection
among the urban and rural poor during a period of
economic downturn and leftist unrest, the new armed
Sorces leadership formed a civil-military junta with
the moderate Christian Democrats that was commit-
ted to democratic electi jo-sconomic re-
forms eee
perhaps 20 percent of the entire officer corps was
subsequently purged, which, in part, had the fect of
neutralizing many corrupt senior officers and their
subordinates who had long ago been co-opted by
rightist civilian elites. With the Army backing re-
Sorm, the political and economic power of the oligar-
chy was quickly reduced. with many af its key
members liquidating assets and opting for self-im-
posed exile in Guatemala and the United States.

— ee ———

gta

Structure and Operations of the Extreme Right

In our view, the viokent attitudes and actions of the
extreme right represent much more thaa just the
Conservative political spectrum. We believe that the
extreme right is distinguishable from the mainstream
right wing by two basic characteristics:

* Absolute intoleramce of any element that has con-
tributed to change in the pre- 1979 states quo.

* Willingness to comfront that change with active
subversion of the constitutional system and with
violent terror

In our view, the extreme right does not predominate

in any one social, economic, or political sector. Rath-

er, it & a fanatic Gringe drawn from all elements of
society

Indeed, despite a sedative neutralization of the old
order by the 1979 coup, we judge that E Salvador
remains a decide conservative society, with rightist
politics] tendencims running deep in the military, the
Private sector, the genera! public. This wat
illustrated in the 6 May 1984 presidential election,
which gave only @ marrow margin of victory to
Napoleon Duarte. Nearly half of the vote—in the
largest and most ee election in the astion's histo-
ent to the eme rightist candidate, Roberto
D'Aubuisson. De repeated public allegations of
his terrorist tisha, EY Aubulsson won 10 of 14 depart-
ments and a hy of the rural vote over the
progressive

suggests that m Salvadorans perceived D'Aubuis-
son 8s reprosentingg a no-nonsense conservatism that
would lend itself" an reesta law and order and
eradicating the iaumurgency.

Furthermore, iti absence of an effective criminal
justice system . until recently, an Army capable of
containing the iammurgency, the extreme right bas been
fighting what & cammsiders a legitimate clandestine war
against the
rightwing ex

and economic im have been intensely debated in

The Public View of Righewiag Terrorism

The phenomenon of rightist violence, while publicly
denounced by the leaders of virtually all sectors af
Salvadoran society, evokes mixed feelings among
average citizens in private discussion. While some
talk about “death squads” only in hushed tones,
others express detachment and even gallows humor
over the disappearance or assassination of individ-
uals. Occasionally. some will claim to have close
friends on the right who allegedly engage in violence
or who have personal knowledge of specific terrorist
activities. Comversely, others choose to believe that
rightwing terrorist groups do not 4

These contrasting attitudes are evident throughout
soctety and rdlect « great ambivalence about the
national role played by rightwing terrorists. Many
Salvadorans, of all economic classes, believe that,
however repugnant the methods used by rightist
vigilantes, their impact on Marxist subversion has
been largely positive. Such people applaud govern-
ment efforts to professionalise the armed forces end
crack dawn on official corruption and abuses. Al the
same time, however, they denounce the US “obses-
ston” with human rights and rationalize the need to
Aght ling terrorism with “whatever means are
necessary.” Often clied in such arguments is the
Mia treatment meted out during the 1970s to the
Tupamaros in Uruguay, the Montoneros in Argentina,
and the Miristas ia Chile, as examples of extreordi-
nary measuher imes needed to save a society
Srom chaas

Against this backdrop, local criminals probably can
continue to operate as mercenaries for hire to settle
personal scores or All the ranks of ad hoc death
squads for fanatic rightists. Such an enviroament,
moreover, will continue to make it dificult for Sen
Salvador to lavestigate, prosecute, and convict local
security force personnel who may still feel compelled
to act on their on against suspected insurgents and
their sympathizers:

The rightwing extremist minorities of the various
social sectors often wield enough power io influence
events in ways disproportionate to their numbers.
Importan: members of large agricultural, industrial.
and commercial organizations are well-known right-
wing zealots. indicate, for exam-
ple, that 1 number of wealthy Salvadoran expatriates
living in Miami have lent both overt and covert
financial and organizational support to paramilitary
groups associated with coffee exporter Orlando De-
Sola and others. Money and personal connections in
El Salvador permit such individuals to aid or even
participete in illegal activities in that country with
relative freedom from prosecution because of their
ability to bribe and intimidate Salvadoran Govern-
ment and military officials. Accountability for ex-
tremist activities is constrained further because most
of the Salvadoran media are privately owned by
archoonservatives, whose editorial policies include
fierce craicism of even moderate government pro-
grams asd praise for the hardline positions of the far
righ

that some civilians

are umoscha bla.“ 90 use of the power
they wield through control of death squads.
D’Aubalsos and ARENA

The creation of rightwing politicel parties over the
years also has served the interests of the extremist
minority in El Salvador. The most powerful of these
groupings is the Nationalist Republican Alliance
(ARENA). Founded in 1981 by Roberto D’Aubuis-
son—e farmer Army intelligence officer who was
cashiered by the military following the 1979 coup—
ARENA has evolved into the second-largest political
party after the ruling Christisn Democrats

support from a broad spectrum of society and, as 8
multifaceted organization with important contacts
among foreign governments and groups, it has helped
legitimize extremist calls for retrenchment on reforms
and eradication of the insurgent left through more
radical we of force. ¶ |

behind ARENA's legitimate exterior lies a ter-
rorist network led by D' Aubuisson henchmen and
funded by wealthy Salvadoran expatriates residing in
Guatemals and the United States:

ARENA party leader Roberse A
then wile Yolande A for the 1982

trongly implicates

..
D'Aubuisson loyalists in the 1981 murder of two US
labor advisers. Public confessions by the two National

Guard triggermen end reports by eyewitnesses have
connected various civilian and military associates of

D’Aubsisson to the crime. A pro- ARENA Supreme

Court jedge has been successful in using legal maneu ·
vers and personal influence to free Army Capt.
election results show that it commands enthusiastic Eduardo Avila from prosecution for the crime

that D’Aubuisson personally arranged
for lower courts to drop charges against Lt. Isidro
Lopez Sibrian, enother junior officer implicated in the
murders. GaP

In 1983, D'Aubuisson confided QED plans

by security force personnel to eliminate suspected
leftists. He claimed thet eafeguarding human rights

Wes

was impossible in dh insurgent war and advocated D et Rogalado was recruiting
“extraofficial” operations to combat the enemy. Since armer policemen for work in death squads.

that time, have indicated that
ARENA 's terrorist components—directly managed #8
by some of D'Aubuisson's closest advisers—remain to eliminate key leaders of

cammiss. ermen
intact and are preparing for future operations against the Popular Democratic Unity (UPD), 4 large labor
the left, government officials, foreign journalists, and coalition that bas joined the Christian Democratic
diplomatic personnel government to administer agrarian reform programs.

ARENA's clandestine activities appear to be largely
the responsib: .
Regalado.

.

ARENA has cast its nei wide im identifyveg the threat Rural Vigilantes
from the “left.” Following Preaumeni Duarie' election Violence linked to ARENA is only one manifestation

in May 9 of rightwing terrorism in EI Salvador. To eliminate
— that the uarty security appara- challenges io iu power, the extreme right traditionally
t

us also Was targeting members: of the Canstian has used civilian vigilante organizations, elements of

Democratic Party for assassimsaton. Former National the armed forces, and death squads led by ideologues
Police personnel and mercenaries
were w be pa id

for their particigamtion in this special
In the 1960s and 1970s, a surge of political activity
among left-of-center opposition parties peasants, ur-

ban workers, and student groups inspired the creation
t of several official and clandestine rightwing organin ·
elements were establishing 4 of operetions@B ITions, both ad hoc and permanent. The National

for the purpame of organizing armed Democratic Organization (ORDEN), for example,
resistance against the Duarte governmeal. The group was a government-sponsored civic group formed ia

seeks to conduct terrorist opaxastions sgaiast the 1966 and comprising tens of thousands of conservative
Christian Democratic Party amd the US Embessy in peasants, maay of them former Army enlisted person-
San Salvador t ARENA leaders nel who were part of the nation’s inactive reserve

and other extr decided on this ' force, Until its official

course because they fear thas the Duarte administra-; dissolution i EN served both as an

tion might launch investigatioms agains: suspected intelligence-gathering body end instrument of en-

terrorists and thus interrupt desir activities. — real or suspected enemies of the
regi

grepere

assassination attempts da Presiden: Duarte and r "652
other Christian Democratic .? that such government ed groups bave been inne-

tive for several years, vigilante violence—elbsit
These and other operations ase often planned and clining.
implemented by individuals working on: of safchouses in the
belonging to known rightist cavilisn or military offi- ORDEN's structure:
cia. with many of lu former members having joined the

A party Terriiorial Service and Civil Defense Forces—Army-

member 8 personal friend of U AAbulseon run militias that provide local security in outlying
owns a home that ls used as a base for wrrorist villages and tactical intelligence to the military. We
operations and to store weapons and amin. The believe thess militias too often function without offi-
house; cial authorization as peasant vigilantes. The sbduc-
2 SS ia tion in late 1983 of nine agrarian reform workers from
t Anti (ESA), a rightwing the town of San Pedro Masahuat in La Paz Depart-
terrorist group tha ndi- ment. and their subsequent torture and murder in the
cates has been ARENA instrament for Zaragoza ot of La Libertad . was
clandestine operations over the past three en uiſbut to local Civil
asecond Defense i was the 1982 massacre of
peasant farmers in the La Florida hamlet of Santa
Ana Deparimant and killings of Christian Democratic
party members in the jurisdictions of H Fanal aad
Aguilares in San Salvador Departmen

de
tineed

More recently in San Salvador Department, in the Unfortunately for the Duarte administration,
town of Nejapa, Civil Defense personne! have beea many of these officers are former academy classmates
engaging in abuses against peasant farmers affiliated and military colleagues of D'Aubuisson who share his
with one of the larger democratic labo unions ultrarightist views. Although they generally have
abided by the moderate doctrine of their superiors in
San Salvador, several,

are alleged to have associa-
employed by their local commander as 2 “death tions with rightwing terrorist organizations and, in
squad. that the local commander tome cases, to have been leaders of death squads
was being assisted by elements within the regular within the Army snd the security forces W ]

armed forces and is responsible for the deaths of ll

people in the immediate area, including two children. —— career: Aa
Labor officials have delivered 8 protest note to the squads in the operate out of both urban
military high command in San Salvador, military headquarters and rura! outposts. They are led

In addition, the government's Humas by senlor enlisted personnel and junior officers, and
Rights Commission is investigating a case involving they may function with or without the knowledge of
the murders of some 30 local peasants near the town = immediate superiors. In 1983, for example, at least 20
of Armenia in Sonsonate t. During 1981 and perhaps as many as 75 members of an Indian
and 198 Civil Defense agrarian reform cooperative in the Las Hojas hamlet
personnel abducted - of Sonsonate Department were abducted and later
neighbors suspected of subversion and, after brutally executed by regular troops of the 6th Detachment,
killing them, threw their bodies into s deep well. Four
vigilantes have been arrested in this case, and ons has
confessed to the crimes

indicate that some military .
in influenced by disgruntled landown-

ers to take action against the Indians. Neither the
Rural vigilantism is augmented in the towns and cities loader of the operation, Capt. Salvador Figeeros

by civillan mercenaries and fanatics allied with epecif- Morales, nor his commanding officer, Lt. Col. Eimer
ic individuals or groups who routinely have waged Gonzalez Araujo, have been by

their own vendettas against suspected subversives sad superiors.

tical enemies. For

ta to assassinate Julio Rey
Minister of the and a tap Chris-

Preades,
tary tian Democratic leader.
A loyalist Mario Radaellj as 6 “hit man in

unspecified operations. Rightist terrorist cells aloo use The November murder of a Lutheran minister in San
both active-duty and retired military personnel in Miguel Department Illustrates that some actions are
their campaigns, committed by regular military personnel withost su-
in the security fi pervision. Spokesmen for the armed forces have an-
nounced publicty that two Army enlisted mea from
Armed Forces Death Squads the 3rd Brigade confessed to killing the minister on a
In addition to ARENA and rural vigilantes, the whim, sppareatly assuming he had links to insurgents
military has also been responsible for sshsrecf; . in the ares

rightwing violence in El Salvador. Despite the sow
relatively moderate character of the military high Rightwing terrorists have been accustomed to operat-
command, the armed forces’ staff and field commands ing with wide latitude, and it is almost certain that
are largely controlled by a younger generation of some Army and security force personnel continue to
ambitious officers who have proved themselves to bs ,

among the best trained and motivated in a taleat-
deficient officer

Two young girls become nc
tims af a Salvadoran A
death squad. Theis alleged d.
fenses and the name af the
group that killed them are
probably inscribed on the pieces
of paper attached (o their ware-
bound thumbs

WE *

2

: ANE eet Van) a PN
ot Neds 90 t a rr 4 1 e 17 “3
mae 2 ’ I. — .

—— % 0

wl „

12 eee elements of the military, the precise scops and opera-
bored terrorist elements within their ranks. In addi- ions of terrorist groups is more difficult to assess. The
tion to the 6th Detachment in Sonsonate, other methods used by the extreme right—such as interro-
regular military units ee ee gating or killing victims far from where they were

agains, ine sbducted—suggest nationwide capability within at

us ude components of the Army least some of the clandestine organizations. Compart-

Signal Corps, the Air Force, and the Ist Brigade, all mentation, a rigid code of secrecy, and the shifting
three located in San Salvador; the Cavalry Regiment whims of extremist leaders make estimating the num-
in San Andres; the Artillery Brigade in San Juan bers of terrorist organizations and their members

Opico; the Engineers Center in Zacstecaluce: the difficult. The geographic breadth and frequent simul-
former 4th Infantry Detachment in Usulutan: and the h

2nd Brigade in Santa Ana. That several of these are

key units with strong political sway within the mili-

tary institution underscores the difficulty facing the

high command in its efforts to im the human
rights record of the armed forces.

squa say sais e Goring any given

oa

period of time. It is our judgment that most are
nameless and largely ad hoc groups, keyed to specific
missions in local areas. Some appear more permanent-
ly organized, however, and wider ranging. Perhaps the
most notorious of these is the Maximiliano Hernandez
Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade, named for the
military dictator who carried out the 1932 peasant
massacre. This group has operated for several years,
frequently publicizing its abductions and executions
of leftist student and labor leaders with notes attached
to bodies, newspaper advertisements, and radiobroad-
a

— .
groups occasions eir activities with the

security forces, and in some cases specific missions
and personne! probably overlap different organiza-
tions. Perhaps the most outrageous instance of this
occurred in November 1980, when masked gunmen
abducted leftist political leaders during a news confer-
ence held in a Jesuit school meas the US Enjbassy.
Security for the affair was provided by a latge
number of uniformed National Police personnel, yet
the abduction of six top leftists occurred in broad
daylight without any interference from the authori-
ties. The victims’ mutilated bodies were found the

following morning « few miles from the capital,
These

Indicated spperent
working
ist organizations as the Secret Anti-Communist Army
(ESA), the National Salvation Movement (MS-28),
and the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Commandos
(CAS). Son moreover, believe
that the Martinez ESA have a
common leadership whose ultimate loyalties are to
D. aud his financial backers in Miami.

Conatralats on Rightwing Violence

Although the various rightwing tarrorisi groups ro-
main active and appear organizationally intact, they
sre being utilized with far less frequency than in past
years. Indeed, the level of rightis: terrorism in 1984
was surprisingly low, given the stakes involved in the
presidential elections, expectations of summer and fall

Clandestins terror- operatives on kidna

guerrilla offensives, and rule by the moderate Chris-

tian Democrats. New policies by the government and
the military bigh command designed io present terror-
ists with 8 less hospitable climate have probably given
pause to some extreme rightist elements

atiem control rank -and- le extremists.
icated that the high comma
a US demands ech as transferring cer-

tain unsavory officers out of the country—because the
armed forces badly needed US aid. Several Army and
security force officers have siace been sent overseas to
diplomatic posts! hat De-
fense Minister Vi security
advisers—essigned by D’Asbuisson to manage securi-
ty at the Legislative Assembly—ihat if they remained
in El Salvador they would be investigated for their
involvement in terrorist activities. ;

Hector. Regalado, later told
. as chief of
ty to avoid tarnishing ARENA's image during
the spring election campeiga.

actions came in the wake of arrests by the
National Polics of ihres other D'’Aubuisson security
charges. M
the National Police were
respons or anonymous telephone calls to civilians
suspected of involvement with rightwing death
squads. The callers threatened them with prosecution
if they did not leave the coumtry. The National Police
at that time also arrested Army Capt. Eduardo Avila,
implicated in the 1981 murder of two US labor
advisers. Legal maneuvers by extreme rightist sup-
porters, however, soon secured Avila t freedom, and
all serious charges against him were dropped. =~

the Defense
nistry was illingness with-
in the officer corps to investigate extremist elements.

2 —

The cam card of the Mano
Blanca Ae Acad) rightwing
death aqued appears on the
doors af e schoolhouse where
aisasnested members of a left-
wing leechers unlon were em-
plo

’

7

Notices were placed in the local media announcing 8 The present military leadership continues to recognize
campaign by the armed forces against the “death that US aid levels and the effective prosecution of the
squads,” and calling for help from the public and the war rest in part on the Salvadoran armed forces’
justice system in identification aad prosecution of the human rights

squads’ members. One such notice was signed by most as the

of the armed forces’ staff and field commanders. Ia to civiliens suspected of invaive-
addition, the Ministry set up as ad hoc military meat with the death squads and a reiteration of strict
commission at the beginning of 1984 to investigate uldelines for armed forces conduct are likely to
reports of criminal activities and n rights abus continue. In our judgment, the close relationship
withia the armed forces: between key milltary officers and

Throughout 1984, moreover, the Defense Ministry—

under orders from President Duarte—moved to exert Ne You

greater control over the three security forces . the military to constrain extreme rightist actions.
Political

tes were res of the National
Police and Treasury Police, with the latter having Revamping the Justice System
undergone 8 major personne! reorganization that Despite their preoccupation with establishing the
transferred or discharged some 110 officers and en- credſbilliy of the political process while escalating the
listed men from its notorious intelligence and investi; war sffort, both the provisional coalition government
gations section. Colonel Lopez Nuils—staunchly crit- of President Magana and the successor Duaru ad-
ical of rightist violence—was appointed Vice Minister ministration pushed through judicial measures simed
of Defense in charge of public security. This new at controlling the terrorist element. Early in 1984, a
position was created to better coordinate and control

the activities of the two police organizations and the
Notional Guard, gg

„

Rightwing Terrorist Organizations

Salvadoran Aati-Communist Command (CAS)
Created in late 1983. Largely engaged in propaganda.
Publicly denounced Defense Ministry for imposing
Auman rights doctrine on the security forces:
lieves the group may only be front for
0 clandestine organizations.

Death Squadron (EM)

May not be an organized group but rather a generic
label used loosely by ad hoc hit squads probably
operating out af military posts, Trademark since at
least 1979 has been initials EM carved into bodies of
vici

Secret Anti-Communist Army (ESA)

One af the most active groups in recent years. Be-
lieved by some 0 have been formed in
mid-1980 by elements that since have been integrated
into ARENA paramilitary structure. a

White Hand (MB) )

Like the EM and other nameless groups, a probable
ad hoc name for terrorists working out of the Army
and security forces. Trademark traditionally was «
handprint in white paint left on the property of
victims or near their bud

Maximiliane Hernandet Mertine: Aatl-Commaaist
Brigade (MHMD

Responsible for many high-profile killings over the
past five years. Victims often found clutching leaflets
with the group's message on then. HA has used
newspapers, radio, and even television to make an-
nouncements of acts commitied and operations
planned.

Salratios Movement of 28 March (MS- 26

Group first appeared on the scene in late 1983. Its
propaganda and name—28 March 1980 was the last
day of Phase I government expropriation af large
Plantations—sauggest the group represents the inter-
ests of a tiny group af fanatic coffee barons, many of
whom probably reside in Miami

Orgeaization for Liberation From Communism
(Ol

A group that appeared on the scene at about the time
oA the October 1979 coup; its current status is
unknown. May have been absorbed by one or another
of the above groups, possibly the ESA, which some
believe comprises personnel

7 F terrorist organizations such as th White
Warriors Union and the Salvadoran Anti-Communist

Brigade Quay

White Warriers Union (UGA)

Formed in May 1977 following the leftwing kidnap-
ing and murder of Foreign Minister Mauricio Bor-
gonavo. The group was led by Roberto D'Aubuisson
and other National Guard cfficers

emphasis

perceived to be active support-

f if
ors of the insurgent movement. The UGB appears to
have been disbanded soon after the October 1979
coup and D'Aubuisson's release ſrom active duty.

special investigations unit was created with US finan-
cial and technical aid to help the government analyze
terrorist activities and bring to justice perpetrators of
rightwing violence. The much-publicized case a

five National Guard enlisted men charged with tor-
turing and killing four US churchwomen in late 1980
was finally resolved. All five were convicted in May
by a civilian jury and sentenced to 30 years in prison.

2 —— ͤ——

Although an initia! coverup of the affair probably was
orchestrated by midlevel National Guard officers,
there has never been any credible evidence that the
killings of the churchwomen were ordered by higher

authority. M

Conservative women's group confronts visiting lere US legisle-
tors in January [983 with protest signs demanding that Selvador-
an President Magana v to dialogue or negotiate with the

rebels and calling Senator Dodd a “white rat.

Judicial proceedings against civilian and military
personnel arrested for past terrorist acts glso continue |
to progress, albeit unevenly. One setback in this effort,
was the Supreme Court's review of the case of Lt.
Lopez Sibrian, which is November 1984 resulted in
his acquittal of all charges stemming from the 198!
murders of two US labor advisers. As suggested by

er, US pressure recent-
y helped Duarte in December to convinces g reluctant
military high command to have the lisutenant
dropped from the list of active-duty officers. More-
over, Duarte’s government in November warned local
media owners of fines and other legal sanctions if they
continued to publish ar broadcast declarations from
self-proclaimed rightwing terrorist organizations. Af.
ter a two-month hiates, however, extremist communi-
ques and death threats are once again being pub-
lished.

The administration is sow struggling with the right-
ist-dominated Legislative Assembly to create a judi-
cial commission to oversee broad reforms proposed by
Duarte for the civil aad criminal justice system.
recent Assembly bill

would cut off funding to this and other presidential
commissions, probably forcing Duarte to veto this
legislation. These obstacles could also affect plans by
the President to activate a “criminological institute”
o investigate specific rightwing terrorist acts.

hat its first priorities would

include an investigation of the March 1980 assassins-
tion of Archbishop Komero, said by other

o have been authored by D'Aubuisson and
his backers.

Self · Imposed Constraints

In addition to changes in the military and judicial
systems, last year’s reduction in rightist violence is
also attributable, in our opinion, to s variety of self-
imposed constraints. Some extreme rightists probably
concluded that, in the wake of the visit by Vice
President Bush in 1983, at least a temporary tun
down in terrorist activities would be required to direct
the attention of the US administration away fram the
issue of human rights. Almost certainly, in our view,
the US Congressional focus on political violence in El
Salvador and the need for continued US military and
economic aid provided extreme rightists additional

‘Incentives to curtail terrorist operations.

The right wing probe biy also has been encouraged by
the upturn in government fortunes on the battlefield
since January 1984 and s commensurate loss in
political support for the rebel alliance. The far right
may believe that favorable trends in the military
situation have temporarily reduced the need for civil-
lan terrorist operations against insurgent elements.

The election campaign last year ironically also played
a role in reducing rightwing terrorism. It is our
judgment that many rightist leaders genuinely be-
lieved that D' Aubulsson and his ARENA party could
win the 1984 presidential elections. Hence, there was
an incentive for extremists not to undermine their
leader's public appeal with high-profile terroris: vio-
lence. Following the electoral defeat of ARENA,
moreover, the party became less cohesive ED

Extremist ele-
ments, therefore, may have been preoccupied less with
fomenting violence and more with sorting out their
options in dealing with the new Duarte government
and the scheduled Legislative Assembly and munici-
pal elections in March 1985. aa

“ethan

Some Prominent Cases of Righrwing Terrorism,
1980-84

Salvadoran Cases

¢ In December 1980, National Guardsmen killed

eight members af a rural cooperative in San Vicente
after they were denounced as subversives by the
local Civil Defense. Disposition: The Guard com-
mander who ordered the killings was trantſerred to
another department. The military promised finan-
cial remuneration to families of the victims.

in March 1980, Archbishop Oscar Romero was
assassinated while performing Mass ina San Sal-
vador chapel, presumably by right wing. Disposi-
tion. No government investigation or arrests.

During 1981, atrocities occurred in two wosking-
class neighborhoods of the capital. Some 40 sus-
pected leftists were summarily executed py ele-
ments of the Ist Infantry Brigade and Treasury
Police. Disposition. No investigations or arrests.

During 1981-82, some 30 peasants from Sonsonate
Department were abducted and killed by local Civil
Defense forces and their bodies thrown into a well
in the town of Armenia. Disposition: Government
investigation recently begun; three suspects
arrested.

In November 1982, Army troops stationed in Usu-
lutan abducted at least 15 youths from nearby
Santa Elena and murdered them. Disposition: No
investigation or arrests.

The fame month, Army and Civil Defense personnel
tortured and killed at least seven members af La
Florida farm cooperative in Santa Ana Department.

Disposition: No 8 or arrests,

5
bee

© In February 1983, berween 2D and 75 Indian farm-

workers from Las Hajas furisdiction af Sonsonate
Department were abducted and killed by Army and
Civil Defense troops commanded by Captain Figue-
roa Morales af the 6th Detachment. Disposition:
Figueroa was transferred, and three Civil Defense
suspects detained last May. No further
information.

in November 1983, Civil Defense forces tortured

and murdered nine peasant men and women in
Zaragoza hamlet in La Libertad Department.
: Army Lt. Col.

nis Moran—reputed death squad leader—or-
dered the killings. Disposition. No investigation
and no arrests. Lieutenant Colonel Moran recently
transferred ſo the Inter-American Defense School
in Washington, D.C.

© In February 1984, seven Civil Defense members

re on trial in Santa Ana for murders
committed over a four-year period. Disposition: No
information on the outcome.

© The April 1984 trial of motorious ex-Army Maj.

Guillermo Roeder—arrested in 1982 for crimes
ranging from embezzlement io murder was con-
sidered a key test af the Salvadoran justice system.
Disposition: Roeder was ecquitied af all charges.

© In November 1984, a Salvadoran Lutheran minister

was murdered by two Army personnel in San
Miguel. Disposition: The perpetrators confessed
and were remanded to civil authorities

Cases of US Citizens
© The murder of four US churchwomen in December

1980 was resolved in May 1984, when five National
Guardsmen were convicted by a civilian jury and
sentenced to 30 years in jail.

© The case of John Sullivan—a freelance journalist

abducted and killed by presurned rightists in De-
cember 1980---1s unlikely ſo ever be fully investi-
gated by the government investiga-
tlons have yielded no sotid leads.

. The case of two US labor advisers assassinated in

January 1981 remains tenuous. Two National
Guard triggermen confessed in 1982, but two offi-

cas · uubo ordered the killings and wealthy civilian
conspirators have escaped prosecution in civilian
courts. One of the officers was released from active
duty in December under arders from President

ie
