NIE 11-8/1-61: Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000139368, dated 3 July 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000139368).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

GUA Ad 2tye
due | 80

\U- OS 2 sagt

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
9 August 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Allan Evans, State (INR)
Colonel B. R. Brown, USA (ACSI)
Captain G. K. Nicodemis, USN (ONT)
Colonel F. J. Cole, USAF (AFCIN 283)
Colonel K. T. Gould, USA (J-2, The Joint Staff)
Colonel Robert P. Halloran, USAF, Director of
Operational Services, NSA
Mr. Randolph V. Zander, Defense (0SO)

SUBJECT: NIE 11-8/1-61: SOVIET CAPABILITIES FOR LONG RANGE ATTACK

i. The attached draft terrs of reference are forwarded
for review.

2. It is requested that your representatives meet with us
at 10CO, Monday, 14 August, in Room 115 Administration Building
to discuss these terms. Since most, if not all, of your repre-
sentatives for this meeting will be the same representatives who
will be here to discuss the draft Annexes of NIE 11-4-61, we in-
tend at this meeting first to diecuss these terns and then to
proceed with the discussion of the Annexes to NIE 11-4-61.

Wie lard © [et Yea
WILLARD C, MATTHIAS

Acting Assistant Director
National Estinates

DISTRIBUTION B
Plus GMAIC

Ant, Jon 1A CL

/. 0 /

xo
_ Latah 2, i,

ee APPROVED POR RELEASE

DEC 02 1997 op pS EES CL

sEgfer
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
8 August 1961

SULJECT: TERMS OF REFERENCE: NIE 11~-8/1-61: SOVIET CAPABILITIES
FOR LONG RANGE ATTACK

BAC KGROUND

1. On 5 July 1961 the USIB discussed the question of re-
vising NIE 11-8-61 and agreed that, in the absence of any request
for earlier revision, a formal re-examination of pertinent infor-
mation through the regular estimates machinery would begin about
September with a view to USI3 consideration of a possible revision
no later than 1 October (USID-M-162, item 11). The USIB discussion
centerea principally on the ICBM, IRBM, and MRBM estimates in
NIE 11-8-651,. These Terms of Reference are designed to initiate
reconsideration of those estimates and to schedule a supplement

to NIE 11-38-61 for completion in October.

2. At the same USIB meeting, the requirement to complete

the Military Annexes to NIE 11-h-61 in early August was reaffirmed

sig

(USTB-M-162, item 12). On the basis of subsequent discussion

with Gen. Collins, the Board of National Estimates has pro-
posed that these Annexes summarize anc upcate the long range
bomber, air~to-surface missile, and submarine-launched missile
estimates in NIE 11-8-61, but omit the ICBM, IRBM, and MRBM

estimates pending their reconsideration in the supplement,

3. The result of these two actions will be to bring the
bull of NIE 11-8-61 under review and thus permit the USI3 to
decide whether a fully revised version of NIE 11-8-61 is required
anc to set a cate for its completion, The task set by these
terms of reference is to review estimates in NIE 11-8-61 per-
taining to the IcaM, IROM, and MR3M in the light cf information

received since June 1961,
Procecure
roland cca

4. USB agencies and committees are alreaty undertaking cer-
tain analyses which will contribute to the updating of the ICDM,
IRBM, and MRDM estimates, Among other projects, GMAIC has scheduled
a review of ICBM cevelopment and performance characteristics and

a review of all evidence on ceployment, for completion in late

sygfler

softer

August, and CIA is calling a special panel of consultants to
review the same subject in early September. To take maximum
advantage of these and other projects, the following schedule is

proposed:

Priday, 1 September: Contributions to O/NE.

Monday, 18 September: Draft to Representatives.
Monday, 25 September: Representatives meetings begin.
Friday, 29 September: Clean-up session.

Tuesday, 3 Cctober: UID meeting.

5. The foregoing schedule will have to be met at each point
if the amount of work required is to be completed by the cate set.
It should be recognized that the scheduled relocation cf this
office to Langley in September may further interfere. To facili-
tate the work, it is requested that all contributions and drafts
te given simultaneous distribution by special courier to 0/NE.
USIB agencies, and interested interagency organizations (i.e., GMAIC,

JAEIC, SIC, NPIC, NIC).

suftsr

6G. As to format, it is proposed that the review of the new
evidence and the analysis of its significance for the ICBM, IRDM,
and MRBM jucgments in NIE 11-8-61 be incorporated into a single,
all-source Annex, This will include appropriate charts, maps, and

grephics.

7. It will be necessary that all Representatives and other
participants have all-source clearances. Names anc clearances
should be telephoned in advance to Mr. Henry Thomas, Code 163

x203L.
Topics to be Reviewed in the Light of Recent Evidences
_— TT

I. ICLM DEVELOFMENT AND PERFORMANCE
A. Pace of overall developmental effort as judged by
recent test-range construction and firing activities.
B. First-generation ICDM systen

1. Purpose, intensity, and resuits of firing
activity in 1961.

*Assignment of primary responsibilities for contributions on
these topics will be made at Representatives! meeting on T/R's.

-~h-

sigltr

sigfher

2. Relationship to space shots an’ special pur-
pose vehicles fired in 1961.

3. Current performance characteristice and
likely future improvements, to include
accuracy, reliability, reaction time,

possible improvements in guidance anc
re-entry vehicles,

C. Second-generation ICBM system

1. Intensity and degree of success of firing
activity.

2. Relationship to first-generation system,
special purpose vehicles, and 2,000 nm.
system.

3. Configuration, guidance, staging, size, pay-
load, and other characteristics insofar as
they are known.

4. Estimated date of availability for operational
use.

5. Performance characteristics at that date and
likely future improvements.

D. Evicence for and likelihood of Soviet development
of third-generation ICBM. Possible characteristics

of such a system,

E. Tyuratam activities summary and ICBM performance

charts (Comparable to those annexed to NIE 11-8-61).

-5-

ft

sigghtr

II. ICBM DEPLOYMENT coNCcErTS

A, Nature of launching facilities

i.

2e

Facilities required for handling and launching
first-generation and second-generation ICBMs.

Similarities and differences in required
facilities.

Feasibility and likelihocd of employing these
ICBMs at facilities resembling Tyuratam launch
Areas A, B, and C, and Kapustin Yar launch areas,

Feasibility and likelihood of employing these
ICBMs from mobile or hardened launch facilities.

Graphics (as in NIE 11-5-61, Figures 25 and 29).

Be. Nature of deployment complexes

I

Probable numbers of launchers or pairs; support
facilities; guidance, fueling, and handling
equipment; road and rail service; warheads and
their storage and handling,

Probable numbers of missiles, methods of check-
out and maintenance, capacity for reload and
the times required,

Flexibility of operations with respect to tar-
geting, salvo capability, sequential firing, etc.

Protection achievable by terrain, dispersal,
cefense,

Feasibility and likelihood of camouflage and
concealment -- methods by which this might be
accomplished,

Graphica,.

~6-

sy

Installation and manning of ceployment complexes,

1. Time likely to be required for (a) construc-
tion, (b) installation of equipment, and (c)
checxout, calibration, and achievement of
operational readiness,

2. Initial costs in terms of funds, materials,
and manpower,

3. Operating requirements in terms of personnel,
maintenance, logistical resupply, and costs.

h. Training required for personnel, both ini~
tially and periodically thereafter.

III. PRCDICZION AND DEPLOYMENT OF ICEMs

A.

Dao

Any new evidence on production, anc reconsiceration
of facilities, costs, and times involved in producing
first- and second-generation ICBMS,

Requirements for production of supporting equipment,
anc evidence thereon.

Review of the evidence on deplcyment complexes, to
include all those areas discussed in NIE 11-8-61

anc footnotes thereto, as well as additicnal areas
arising from more recent information,

Evaluation of tiis evidence as to probability that
complexes are operational or under construction, tim-
ing of the activity, and likelihood that one or more
complexes are located in a given area.

-7-

of

Ge

He

IV. SCALE

tle

Likelihood that these areas or complexes are for
first- or second-generation ICBM system.
Evaluation of our ability to acquire information
on the basis of past and present collection capa-
bilities -- examination of the significance of
negative information.

Any new judgments as to the regions suited to
Ceployment-of ICBMs.

Maps (as annexed to NIE 11-8-61).

AND PACE OF THE DEPLOYMENT PROGRAM

Re-evaluation of timing of initial deployment of
first~- and second-generation system.

Pace of the program from initial Geployment to the
present, and incications of change in pace, if any.
Estimate of present force level in operational
launchers and complexes, based on pace of the pro-
gram, evicence we have acquired, and Judgment as
to what we are likely to have missec,

Future pace of the deployment program,

1. Physical factors affecting future pace, and
present evidence bearing on the question.

-~ 3-

on

sug

2. Re-examination of Soviet programing decisicns
and pertinent Soviet statements,

3. Probable balance among forces for long range
attack, as affected by new evidence on ICBM
exOgras cS well as on bomber, ASM, and sub-
marine-launched missile programs.

4. Possible effect of suspension of force reduc-
tions and announced increase in military
allocations.

5. Strategic planning factors, as affected by
changes in US target systems anc forces.

6. Effects of technological change in both USSR
and West.
E. Probable force levels to 1963-196, and trends

to 1965-1966.
Ve. MROM and Ro

A. The specific topics under headings I through IV
apply in general, and should be used as guides in
analyzing the 700, 1,100, and 2,000 n.m. missile
programs.

Be Contributions should be made to maps and graphics

comparable to those requested for the ICBM seetion.
