EstimatedD Pub Date) Lebanon: the Prospects for Islamic Fundamentalism DeletedD
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000138966, dated 3 June 1987.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000138966).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

i od
Neds
ae A

. Directorate of Segft
PEA Intelligence :

ae ee The Prospects for
' ..- Islamic Fundamentalism ga

A Research Paper

aN

‘Apee roved far Beles3<

Date ‘Gety Ber 193 7

—_—

Directorate of 4

e Intelligence

Lebanon: The Prospects for -

re

Islamic Fundamentalism $2 eS:

A Research Paper

Reverse Blank ,

July 1987

Summary

Information availcble
as af 6 May 1987
was used in this report.

Lebanon: The Prospects for
Islamic Fundamentalism ges

Islamic fundamentalism its the newest and most dynamic force on the
Lebanese political scene, but the emergence of an Islamic republic is only a
distant possibility. Major opposition to an Islamic republic comes from key
militias including moderate Shias and Sunnis, Christians, and. Druze and
from Lebanon’s neighbors, Syria and Israe). Barring a full-scale Syrian
crackdown, the Islamic fundamentalist movement probably will succeed
only in cementing its hold on sizable parts of South Beirut, the Bekaa
Valley around Ba'‘labakk, and southern Lebanon over the next two years.

An Islamic fundamentalist movement probably would have developed in
Lebanon without outside support, but Iranian aid has been a major
stimulant. Thirteen years of civil war, government neglect of rural areas
and Shia interests, and repeated Israeli interventions laid the foundation
for a revolutionary Islamic ideology. The success of the Iranian revolution
and the resulting wave of Islamic militancy throughout the Middle East
fostered the spread of fundamentalism in;Lebanong

Radical Islamic ideology and political successes have proved to be potent
forces within the largely impoverished Shia community. The absence of
any hope for early political reform or a satisfactory end to the Lebanese
civil war is increasing the appeal of radical ideology among large portions
of the Shia and Sunni Muslim communities. The strong Islamic resurgence
is evolving into broad-based popular movements with effective networks of
followers committed to political and social change. The transformation of
the largely impoverished and once apathetic Shias into a dynamic, albeit
divided, community is likely to accelerate.

The key figure in the Islamic fundamentalist movement is Shaykh
Muhammad Husayn Fadlallah, who is considered by most Lebanese as the
spiritual guide of Hizballah—the most powerful radical group in Leba-
non—although he is not himself part of the organization’s Jeadersbip.
Fadlallah, the most revered Shia cleric in Lebanon, is determined to
maintain an independent Lebanese Islamic movement. His relationship
with Iran is ambivalent, and Tehran is wary of his influence. One key to
Fadlallah’s power is his control of the clandestine Da‘wa Party of Lebanon,
which has covertly manipulated the radical Shia movement.

Ideological differences within the Shia community and between the Shia
and the Sunni communities pose great obstacles to the establishment of an

i

ret

Islamic republic in Lebanon. The country’s Islamic fundamentalist organi-
zations are extremely fragmented—a condition that undermines their
strength. The Shia Hizballah and the Sunni Islamic Unification Movement
are both strong supporters of Iran. Other groups like the Muslim Brother-
ise are a ambivalent tow ard Iran. Te largest ene movement, Amal,

Lebanon's Christian community—traditionally allied with Israel—views
the growing power of the Shias and especially of Hizballah with alarm.
Christian hardliners are prepared to see Lebanon divided rather than give
in to Muslim political demands for a more equitable distribution of power
and believe that concessions would be construed by Muslims as a sign of
weakness. Druze leaders also oppose Islamic fundamentalism and Shia
domination.b 'e chosen to let others take the lead in fighting the Shia
extremists

ey
Syrian behavior, at least in the short term, will be thé key determinant of
Hizballah's prospects. Syria’s intervention in West Beirut in February
1987, which was intended to save Amal from defeat by Druze militiamen
and to bolster Damascus’s declining credibility in Lebanon, curtailed
radical Hizballah activities in West Beirut but did not affect Hizballah’s
stronghold in the southern suburbs. Should Syria decide to move against
Hizballah, Damascus has the strength to force the movement underground
and weaken it, but at a heavy cos

Israel] will confront an increasingly strong Islamic movement in the south
over the next few years. The absence of Syrian troops, the provocation of
Israel’s presence, and the cumulative impact of years of strife make the
south an attractive target for fundamentalists. The Israeli-backed Army of
South Lebanon already is locked into a confrontation with several groups,

but primarily with Hizballah Ba

For the United States, radical Shia growth means more terrorism against
Western and Israeli targets, enhanced regional prestige for extremism at
the expense of the moderate forces, and increasing opportunities for the
radicals to stage incidents that could spark a Syrian-Israeli conflict. Less
likely is the chance that the Islamic extremist threat sete set the stage for
a limited convergence of US, Syrian, and Israeli interes

Contents
Page
Summary iti
Islamic Radicalism in Lebanon—A New Force 1
Impetus for Lebanon's Islamic Resurgence 1
Fadlallab's Key Role 2
Hizballah’s Regional Successes 6
Obstacles to the Establishment of an Islamic Republic 8
Internal 8
Sunni-Shia Schism : 8
The Druze 8
: The Christians 9
a Amal 9
2 - Other 9
ae 7 External —_ 10”
woe ee ge i aa Syria ey ; 10.”
—_ Israel io
Outlook in
Alternative Scenario 12 _
Appendixes
A. Selected Sayings of Fadlallah 15
B. oo 17

Reverse Biank v of

5 +
Da Pn da manenls
SEM ASCE RISA Ess:

tn mirunities imto iess
entities. In contrast, before the o Ren of the cur-

renieivil warin 1975 Leoan 1on'’s diverse Mu

avehicie

aprentast
Gel y ee Se

PO et ey

a ponies svstem—ir. 2 coun- he triumpt e ‘Led ee Was. %S
in population—wes suscepi- fendamentalists with a model to
usiim challenge. A civil war in
t a pro Nasirite Muslim govern-
ment to power, and in 1969 clashes between govern- ebanon’s deepening social and economic crisis pro-
nent troops and oe -supported Palestinian fight- vide further impetus for the sharp rise in funcamen-
ers came close to toppling the government of talist practices as 2 means OF escaping the harsh
Christian President Helu. Both of these events cem- realities of the civi! war. Increasing numbers 0 of
onstrated the growing Muslim demand for political Lebanese Muslims have been joining fundamentaist
reform and increased pee | influence. The Chris- associations that Canoes network of Sauces elfare
: for fear of programs and educational assistance as

ah
ha
oa

against poince. social. caaee sgonomic c

*

At ihe beginning of the current civil war, the Musiim- Pp
hristian rivairy took on a left-nght coloration. The aimee hostile environm

Druze followers of warlord Kamal Junbiatt utilized GisaTection with Lebanon's tracitic
: : ; i ial tutions and leader
Fencameniziist leaders have

ef many Shigs—Lecanc:
i

ignt materia

eee YW Phe ‘ Cote Ae} anes

Monday F Aes Christ 341 pienso: ae

has Sear yemoved =< peace oe > 6 g, 7 / Og fie, (5

~ Toot he, ~ ae ve see -_
S ay 2 INGE BOSE :
“
eee the cop, Bie Rice

milies from the south to §

othe Bekaa Valley

t
¢ the radical, pro-
disaffected

the destruction of numerous Shia villages and count-

less homes, andthe displacement of thousands of
families

Israel’s invasion of Lebanon in 1982 and its continued
presence in the southern security zone are contribut-

ing to the radicalization of Lebanon's Muslim popula- §

tion. The plight of the population in the south is being
successfully exploited by both radica! Shias and by
Iran to enlist new recruits. A deep religious and
nationalist

and 2 willingness to suffer martyrdom are enhancing
Shias Bx

Fadlallab’s Key Role

Advocates of the Islamic revolution in Lebanon agree
on the need to establish an Islamic republic, but there
is widespread disagreement On a timetable. According
to their public comments, some Iranian-backed clerics
such as Sadiq Musawi, [brahim al-Amin, Abbas
Musawi, and Subhi al-Tufayli view the establishment
of an Islamic republic as an immediate objective. To
these clerics, an Islamic government is the only
acceptable alternative to the current political and
soci2! chaes in Lebanon

adlallah—the most important Shia cleric in Leba-
non—see the establishment of an Islamic republic as

y process. In interviews Fadlaliah ar-

he deep political and religious cleavages

Other clerics such as Shaykh Mubarmmad Husayn
F

ec Shia social and

inherent in Lebanese society prevent the near-term
establishment of an Islamic republic in Lebanon.
Fadlallah has repeatedly rebuffed lranian pressure to
call openly for the establishment of an Islamic repub-
lic because this would alarm the majority of Leban-
on’s sectarian groups who feel threatened by such a
proposal. He believes that any such advocacy would
only aggravate the deepening split in the Shia com-
munity and contribute to its isolation

Fadlallah views Iran’s political goals in Lebanon as
potentially in conflict with his perception of his role as
the leader of Lebanon’s fragmented Shia community.
He wants Hizballah to remain free of outside influ-
ence and under his direct control. Fadlallah prevented
Hizballah from following Tehran's order to attack
Syrian security forces following their occupation of
West Beirut last February & Seca:

Fadlallah seeks to remain independent of Tehran in
part by maintaining his role as the head of the Da‘wa
Party in Lebanon, another important Shia fundamen-
talist organization § =e

to

Radical Advocates of an Islamic Republic

: zee fechree i eat a :
i ! £ VWihorram ¢.- uses Sev
Is; rai pro-[ranic wont fundamen lerics Such

t

sired by the Iranian revolution,

Hizhallek’s foll

si
- . . ' . ° . wv

ment of [UM neighborhoods in Tripoli.¢
bon'
leadership in the
;

the northern Bex The Lebanese Muslim Brotherhood, increasingly ac-

create an [sian tive in the Beirutand Sidon creas, ts foremost emony

those Sunni proponents of an Islamuc renudlic that
Difering opporliuniies cnd problems influence Hiz- cre less closelv associated—bu! still in contact—with
Aaligk's eFort tu establish redical Istamic enclaves in Tran. The Brotherhood is a loosely structured clan-
the Bekac, in the south, and in Beirut. Although destine organization led by Sunnt scholars and jurists
Hizbollah's ultimate goal is the establishment ofan who maintain close ties to Hizballah. Hizballah
Islamic republic, more pressing goals such as ex; spiritual adviser Shaykh Muhammad Husevr Fad-
ne Israel from: the soutk, weakening Syric in the laliah regularly meets with Muslim Brotherkood

eka and in Beirut, and sighting secular Lebanege leaders to coordinale fundamentalist activities. The

Auslim Brotherhood also eP

foe =

militias throughout Lehanon take priority &

alestin-

The most important Sunni group is the Islamic

Unification Movemens TOM), an umbreiia organiza-

tion of several Sunni groups. It sought: to establish The strength of the Lebanese Muslim Brotherhood
Islamic rule on the Irenian model in Tripoli in 1984, depends upon its ability to align itse with other
but Syria and ifs surrogates pul an end to the Muslim Brotherhood branches in the Arab world.

attempt. Although the IUM's military activities have
been drastically curtailed, its leader Shavkh Saiid
Sha‘ban continues to call for the establishment of an
Iranian-style Islamic republic and seeks to strengthen
his ties to Iran as a hedge against the Syrian Damascus’s massacre of Brotherhood members in
campaign against him ond other IUM leaders Hama, Syria, in 1982 and blended into the middle-
and lower-class Sunni communities in Tripolt, Bei-
The success of the Islamic Grouping (4l Jama’a Al rut, and Sidon i ac
Islamiyah;—the strongest group in the [UA{—in . ”
establishing centers in Beirut and Sidon with Iranian The proponents of an Islamic republic in Lebanon are
backing indicates that Tehran is likely to continue linked through a complex but loose political, social,
using such front organizations fo advance its goals in and economic network. Hizballah maintains close
Tebanon. The group's leader, Abdallch Babati, visits relations with Sunni fundamentalist movernents in
the Iranian Embassy seexing assistance ren tei Tripoli, Beirut, Sidon, South Lebanon, and the Be-
os kac Valley. Heads of these groups meet 10 coordinate
# ies a Beas

NTT STA ee
at Peas =
é S738 Gini se

see
Brotherhood survivors fled to Le

Rot ate

Other Iranian-suppories organizations include the
Assemdly of Ulama—a Sunni ond Shia clerical [RS

consultative body—anz the Islamic Front headed by

a

Hizballak: Political and Military Organization

Hizdallah consists of a@ network of radical Shia

poranulifery groups that agree on major sirategic
goals such as the establishmen: of an Islamic repub- 1
lic but often diger on tactical or operational matters§
Hizballck's network includes Islamic Amal (a splin-§
ter Amal group headed by militant Shia operative
Husayn Musaw! and based in the Bekaa Valley), thek
Husavni Suicide Forces (led by a relative af Husayn§
Musawi, Abdallah Musawi), and the Muslim Stu-
dents’ Union (headed by Shaykh Fadlaliah

Hizbaliak's structure is geared to provide intensive
politica! and religious indoctrination as well as so-

phisticated paramilitary training. According to an of Al Ahad and A! Sabil. Both publications focus on
Israeli intelligence analysis, Hizballah has estab- Hizballah military operations and achievements and
lished regional organizations with several subdivi- highlight the notion af Islamic martyrdom by pub-

sions and a hierarchy. Each Hizbaliak regional

lishing photos and wills of Hizballak fighters killed
ter is divided into civilian and military sections

in action. They also publish interviews with Islamic
radicals throughout the region—such es one with a

The civilian sections are responsible for political leader of Egypt's Al Jihad group, which killed Sa-
indoctrination and training and instill in Hizballah dat—to underscore Hizballah’s regional goals. Hiz-
followers a strong sense af dedication to the organiza-  ballah operates a radio station in the Bekaa—the
tion. The civilian sections are also responsible for Voice of the Oppressed—which broadcasts anti-
religious indoctrination. Education—vased on the Christian, anti-Israeli, and anti-Western propaganda.

Iranian model—consists of intensive daily study of
Islamic political institutions and thought with em-
phasis on fihad or holy war. According to Israeli Hizballah has considerably expanded its military
intelligence, a complex network af mosques, religious organization in recent months. Israeli intelligence
meeting centers, and academic centers is used inthe states that Hizballah’s military force includes several
Hizballah-controlled villages and towns for political units designated as “brigades,” although they are
and military Indoctrination. probably smaller and less well equipped than West-

; ern-style brigades. The ‘‘brigades” contain engineer-
Hizballah mobilizes and recruits followers through a_ ing, commando, and civil defense units and are
well-developed propaganda program. The Propagan- stationed in major regional areas ¥ :
da and Indocrination Center controls the publication :

ne

incteate thar e sophisticated logistic and communica
tons network inxs Hizbaliah's centers in the Bexaagg
Beirut. end the south. Iranian Revolutionary Guard,
were trcining a Hizballah military unit this spring t
the upper Bekac Valley 3shi¥33

Btee dH iballah’s attacks on pro-Israeli

ns

militia positions in South Lebanon have been profes-
sional, well organized, and more sophisticated than
those of other Lebanese militias. Most Hizballah

soldiers have gained experience from fighting during
the civil wer, Hizballah’s soldiers are discipliged quay
deeply commitied to their commanders and #33 ee.
eteaderive Spiritual strength JrOmps
ors. Hizballah soldiers are &

reonized into cells af four or five men headed by a

commending oficer and named after ¢ martyr. Indi- 4
vidual cells conduct routine surveillance, and yaryin
numbers of cells participate in combat operations.
Hizballah has begun using military ranks for its

personnel as of last April. according to reliable

April, Hizballah leaders say Iranian personn
also permanently stationed in South Lebano

(meen
a we,

”~

Tranian Revolutionary Guard contingent in the Bekaa
Valley mirrors Hizballah’s ideological affinity with
Iran.» The Shaykh Abdallah barracks in the Be-
kaa—Hizballah’s most important facility, serving as
a primary garrison, base, and communications cen-
ter—is also the headquarters for the Revolutionary

eers

ay

3

allah secretariat is

press reports i
located in Tehran

ac his considered one of
arty’s founders. The Da‘wa Party was imported from
i lowers of its founder , Muhammad
Da‘wa activists originally 1
al-Sadr, Baqr al-Sadr’s cousin 21 nd Amal's
,and enon i al-Tufayli, 2 key Hizballah

from the

ance of Musa al-Sadr while on 2 visit to Libya in
September 1978, Fadlallah began pushing for an
independent revo elenobat Shia movement under the

informed of its positions. He lodged such complaints
By virtue of his status as the most important Shia with Tehran last February following the entry of
cleric in Lebanon, Fadlallah is Hizba!lah’s spiritual Syrian troops into West Beirut and shortly thereafter
Enice=-4 role that gives him significant religious contacted the Jranian Embassy requesting that he be

; @ included in the Svrian-Iranian negotiations on Syrian
troop deployments in Beirut’s southern suburbs. Fad-
lallah visited Damascus in April to hold his own talks
separate from Iran on Syrian‘troop dispositions in
Wrest Beirut

Fadlallab’s determination to be independent of Teh-

ran has been a source of continuing friction between

them. It has prompted Tehran to circumvent Fadlal- Hizballah’s Regional Successes

lah’s authority by dealing directly with Hizballah

officials through the Iranian embassies in Beirut and Hizballah has established what is virtually a radical

Damascus and through the Iranian Revolutionary Islamic canton in the Bekaa Valley, despite Syria’s
Guard contingent in the Bekaa Valley. Iran also military presence there. The areas under Hizballah
exerts influence through the Council of Lebanon, a control are subject to strict Islamic rules. Sale and
nine-member body that includes the Irantan ambassa- transport of liquor are prohibited, women are forbid-
dors to Syria and Lebanon, the commander of the den from interacting with men in public and must
Revolutionary Guard contingent in Lebanon, and adhere to a strict aress code, civil crimes are punished

prominent Lebanese Shia clerics. Three subcouncils—
the Council of Beirut, the Council of the Bekaa, and
tbe Council of the South—were also created by Iran
to strengthen Tehran's influence and to reinforce its
links to loca] Shia leaders. The councils meet regular-
ly—often with Iranian officia!s—to coordinate activi-
ties and to plan strategy

Faclallah engages in numerous informa! meetings izballah’s success in the Bekaa is in
with Lebanese Shia clerics and security ofmicials as a part related to its links to key Shia clans in the valley.
means of circumventing Tehran. Fadlaliak has been

displeased in the past that Iran has not kept him

et 6

Figure 2
Lebanon: Estimated Distribution of
Confessional Groups, 1975 and 1984

Percent
eS ; : ¥ 1975
SENS 4 ~ see = a.

PARTS ;
ereye

strategli

Je

Maronite
26

Amal appears to be losing its competition with Hiz-
ballah for the loyalty of the southern Lebanese Shias.
We believe that Hizballah’s success stems from its
ability to score direct—albeit small—hits against
Israel and the Isracli-backed Army of South Lebanon.
To survive, Amal is increasingly forced to compete
with Hizballah on the same level. The Amal leader in
Tyre, Da’ud Da’ud, imposed Islamic rule in areas Other

under his control—evidence that Hizballah’s drive to Catholic, Other
establish Islamic fundamentalism in the south is a oo ta
popular among the Shias. A revolt last March by 5 7]

Amal leader Nabih Barri’s former aide Hassan Ha-

shem sharpened Barri’s differences with two other Maronite
Amal leaders in the south, Da’ud Da’ud and Mabmud 16
al-Faqih

1984

Hizballah has proved to be the most important new-
comer on the political scene in Beirut. The US

peeeran-wcsae Ciizballab is the most dynamic
polituca Tmoverment 1n the southern suburbs, home for 27
some 600,000 displaced Shias from South Lebanon.
Until the Syrian troop deployment into the Lebanese
capital on 22 February 1987, Hizballah maintained
several well-fortified centers in the beart of West
Beirut, often rivaling Amal and other militias for
control of that section of the city

= Sabana

Hizballah lost these strongholds following the Synan
entry, forcing it to consolidate inside the southern

suburbs # ESS: izballah is

et

“a

Syria decide

Although Hizballah withdrew from West Beirut fol-
lowing the loss of its main interrogation center and
the Killing of at least 23 of its followers by Syrian
soldiers last February, it maintains a clandestine
presence. Syria views seriously Hizballah’s threat to
its occupation forces. The Syrian security forces in
West Beirut no longer venture into remaining Hizbal-
lah strongholds in the capital such as Ras An Nab, a
traditionally Sunni neighborhood on the Green Line.

Obstacles to the Establishment
of an Islamic Republic

Internal

The proponents of an Islamic republic in Lebanon
face major internal political and military obstacles.

et

As a result of their fears of the Shias’ numerical
majority, the Druze, Christians, and moderate Mus-

ni-Shia schism is a major 00
lists’ efforts to establish an Islamic republic in Leba-
non. Although Muslim leaders often quote the Koran
in exhorting Muslims to unite, they remain fragment-
ed. Religious and political divisions between the two
sects are so deep that they will almost certainly
prevent serious discussion of the nature and leadership
of a Lebanese Islamic republic.

The Druze. The Druze would view a significant
increase in Shia a threat to their enclave in
the Shuf, Druze relations with Hiz-
ballah have remained cordial only because Druze
leader Junblatt does not consider Hizballah a near-

bs

movement

“The Christians. Tbe Christians also fear the growing

numerica! and political power of the Shia community. ~”

They strongly oppose changes in the political makeup
of Lebanon that would deprive them of their tradi-’
tional preeminence : ced

»

‘Amal. Amal opposes the establishment of an Islamic
republic, even though leader Nabih Barri continues to
call for drastic politica! reform that would give the

Shias a greater share of the country’s political and

economic power. Barri continues to challenge Iranian
while Tehran has refuted Barri’s
the Lebanese Shia community.

| rate in Lebanon because of the country’s unique

Ir anian-dominated regime in Lebanon are adding to
the-»fragmentation-and potential radicalization of his - --
Y tT ae Raeee ae tyke. < wr)

ars

Barri argues that Islamic fundamentalism is inappro-

‘story and social character. Amal must continue to
cultivate its relationship with the Islamic government
‘of Iran, he states, but at the same-time it must strive
to avoid emulating the Iranian model in Lebanon.
Barri argues that the establishment of apn Islamic
republic in Iran had its own justifications, since the
vast majority of Iranians are Shia Muslims. Lebanon
differs drastically from Iran because it is composed of
competing sectarian groups, all possessing legal and
historical rights to exercise meaningful political pow-
er. None are likely to accept the hegemony of one
group without effective guarantees for minority ..

Other. Secular groups also oppose the growing power
of the fundamentalists. The Lebanese Communist -
Party and the Syrian Social Nationalist Party, two
Syrian-backed factions in Lebanon, have clashed with
Hizballah several times in the past year ;

et

VERT poe oats hale
successful in avoiding prolonged confrontations with
-yese and other factions, however, 2 factor that has
-ontributed to Hizballah's endurance and growth.

oS weens 3 Syria poses the greatest threat
-o an Islamuc fundamentalist movement in Lebanon.
Syria is not willing to clamp down on Hizballah and
ereby sacrifice its alliance with Tehran, but it is
aking an increasingly tough line toward the funda-
mentatists. Following a new wave of kidnapings of

and February, Damascus took limited steps to restrict

idizballah activities in the Bekaa. The kidnaping in
February of Jean Ubayd, a pro-Syrian former aide to
President Gemayel, was especially irritating to Syrian
President Assac. According to press reports, Syrian
security troops detained members of a radical Shia
family to gain the release of Ubayd.

The entry of Syrian troops into West Beirut led to
additional confrontations over Syria's determination
-o enforce a new security plan in areas under Hizbal-
tah’s control. beg fe :

Syrian security forces view Hizballab and its main
military backer—tbe Iranian Revolutionary Guard—
warily. Numerous clashes have taken place between
Hizballah and Syrian security officials and other
Syrian surrogates in the Bekaa during the past year,
e Revolu-
uonary if Sbaykh
Abdallah barracks has been occasionally harassed by
the Symans eae a

The Hizballah leadership has been {

If Syrian-Iranian relations deteriorate, Syria almost
certainly will tighten its grip on the Bekaa Valley in
anticipation of a major confrontation with Hizballah.
If Syria is forced to choose between accepting the
consequences of crushing Hizballab or accommodat-
ing its policy to the growing fuodamentalist influence
in neighboring Lebanon, we believe it would decide
reluctantly to crush Hizballah. If pressed, Damascus
would use the same brutal tactics it used to crush the
Muslim Brotherhood in Hama. For example, the
Syrians would shell Beirut’s southern suburbs rather
than engage in house-to-house fighting that would
result in heavy Syrian casualties but limit the loss of
life among civilian residents.

Israel. Israel is also an important obstacle to Hizbal-
lah’s success, but it has few options available to defeat
the fundamentalists. Israel seeks to counter Hizbal-
lah’s growing military capabilities in southern Leba-
non mainly by relying on the Army of South Lebanon.

Tel Aviv faces a cruel dilemma. Israeli efforts to
attack the Shias inside Lebanon would gain Hizballah
more supporters and further radicalize the Shias in
southern Lebanon. An Israeli withdrawal from the

naar : .
: destroy the remnants of Western influence in
Hizballak and Fatah bpOS LES Tea eae a

Hizballah hes forged a close tactical alliance with
Yesir Arafat's Fatah group. Each group sees the
other as a useful al[y. Hizballah assists Fatah’s
return 19 Lebanon ice Pee eee

eedeeia af any Hi 5
as f

en militants before the Israeli invasion in 1982.
Arafat and his top aides maintain personal ties to
selected Hizballah officials, although the relation-
ship combines Strains with solidarity:

* The PLO chairman has repeated!y complained
about editorials critica! of his handling of the
camps war in Hizballah’s mouthpiece, Al Ahad.
Tehran has accused the PLO of instigating the tl-
feted Sunni fundamentalist uprising against Syrian
troops in Tripoli, causing Damascus to react vio-
lently against the fundamentalist movernent there.

The Fatah-Hizballah relationship illustrates Hizbal-
lah’s growing independence of Iran. Tehran broke
with Arafat in the early 1980s over his support for
Iraq, but Hizballah remains close to Fatah. This
alliance is likely to last at least.as long as both see
Syria as a major enemy i

south, on the other hand, would be seen as a victory
for the radicals and their Palestinian supporters——a
move that is likely to swell their ranks. Meanwhile,
Hizballah’s policy of attacking the Israeli security

zone is adding to the group's credibility as a serious
ovponent of Israeli and Amal influence in the south,
in our view u

Outlook

The Lebanese Isiamic fundamentalists’ efforts to cre-
ate an Islamic republic will continue to create serious
difficulties for the United States. Hizballah seeks to

11

Be SP er ts

Dace

particularly the official US prese

The determination of Hizballah to strike at US
personnel and installations has clearly hampered the
conduct of US diplomatic, military, and commercial
~ representatives in Lebanon. The continued presence of

the US Embassy Annex in East Beirut spurs Hizba!-
Jah to increase its operations against US citizens.
Hizballah’s links to Sunni fundamentalist mavements
and to the Palestinians will ensure that these organi-
zations will have ample support to carry out terrorist
activities against.Western interests in Lebanon. For
Hizballah, these operations have helped swell the
ranks of the radical movements

If Hizballah succeeds in replacing Amal as the domi-
nant Shia organiZation in Lebanon—a more likely ©
outcome than the establishment of an Islamic repub-
lic-—Hizballah will increasingly turn its attention to
the pro-Western Chnistians and pro-Israeli Army of
South Lebanon. Increased attacks on Israel’s security
zone by Hizballah would force Israel to retaliate
harsbly against Hizballah’s Shia sympathizers—a
development that is certain to aggravate the security
problems in South Lebanon and de "s

Israeli retaliation would prolong th

tages’ captivity and threaten their physical safety.

Although we believe that neither Damascus nor Tel
Aviv is eager to engage the other militarily over
Lebanon, increased Hizballah attacks on Israel’s se-
curity zone could set the stage for fighting between
Israel and Syria. Israel would probably feel compelled
to retaliate with airstrikes against suspected funda-
mentalist tar
ries—tees Ne
bly provoking

Bog cae ere

Marmascus to Strixe Dack.

—

sracli troop buildup and an escalation of attacks

against Hizballah north of the security zone might

also prompt Damascus to mobilize its forces in the
kaa to cougter perceived threats to its presence

ies)
a
fs
pt

The potential exists for a convergence of US, Synan,
and Israeli interests in halting the growth of Shia

extremism in Lebanon. The key player is Damascus,
which is reluctant to break with Iran but may be
forced by events to do so Fim res

Alternative Scenario

In the unlikely event that an Islamic republic emerged
in Lebanon—perbaps because developments in Syria
forced Damascus to turn inward—the implications for
the United States are more grave

Establishment of an Islamic republic would under-
mine US interests in several moderate Gulf states

he Shig communities’ demographic and finan-
cial inuence is growing. Saudi Arabia's Eastern
Province, Bahrain, and Kuwait are most vulnerable io
pro-lranian Shia agitation. Kuwait, where 17 Shia

terrorists remain imprisoned for a series of attacks on
Western embassies and the attempted murder of the
Amir, is likely to continue experiencing terrorist
attacks instigated by Iran and by Lebanese Hizballah
relatives of the prisoners.

An Islamic fundamentalist success in Lebanon would
provide other Islamic movements in the region with
the impetus to challenge existing moderate Arab
regimes. The fundamentalist trend has been growing
in Egypt, Sudan, Tunisia, Jordan, and Turkey since
the success of the Iranian revolution. Although deep
ideological differences hamper Tehran's efforts to
unify the Islamic fundamentalist movement under its
banner 2a victory in Lebanon would
encourage £ Eastern fundamentalists to
adopt the Iranian_modg¢) as a vehicle for social and
political change.

The creation of an Islamic republic in Lebanon would
stimulate the political activism of Palestinians on the
West Bank and contribute to closer cooperation be-
tween fundamentalists and Palestinian nationalists.
Should the fundamentalists win in Lebanon, West
Bank Palestinians would be likely to turn increasingly

i
|
|

et

Baw 4

to Islamic movements to challenge Israel’s hegemo-

ins
ILOTIES

-—a development that almost certainly would

crease the spiral of violence in the occupied terr

ny

1 settlement.

itica

r

§ position on a po

’

den Israel

et

13

Reverse Blank

Appendix A

Selected Sayings of Fadlallah

No one bas a2 serious plan to solve the Lebanese
crisis... . All proposals for peace in Lebanon have so
far been either confusing or self serving. ... No parti-
tion, Muslim or Christian, could be viable in Lebanon.
Those who want to turn Lebanon into a Muslim state
are in essence fooling themselves if they believe that
such a state could survive. The governing of Lebanon
should depend on people, not sects... . Several people
object to the plan for an Islamic republic and accuse
its advocates of extremism, but they do not object to
the plan for a Marxist state, which opposes all
religions. Islam, in its political plan, does not contra-
dict Christianity, which does not have in its intellectu-
al base a political plan. Christianity is an act of faith,
for the kingdom of Christ is not of this world. BY

My relationship with Iran is one of independence. We
consult with Tehran but do not take orders from it.
The revolutionary circumstances in Iran are funda-
mentally different from those in Lebanon. fay -

We believe that war with Israel will necessitate the
destruction of many Arab cities and towns. But we
believe that, the more Israel expands, the deeper it
will sink in the mire and the closer it draws to defeat.
Hizballah’s strategy is a strategy of jihad that insists
that the presence of Israel in Palestine is illegal and
that it is an imperialist base representing a great
danger to the Arab and Muslim world. It must,
therefore, be removed from the map completely. This
is what the slogan of liberating Jerusalem means.

This Islamic revolution was able to create, in its
increasing activity at the frontline, a great deal of

Reverse Blank 1

in

Tet

Islamic political awareness both in thought and prac-
tice. The uprising of the Islamic movement in Iran
and Lebanon inspires the Muslim as to how Islam can
lead to freedom and progress. We believe that the
Islamic revolution has an important role to play in
achieving this Muslim awareness. The challenges that
accompany and confront this revolution also contrib-
ute to this awareness. ay

The Syrian presence here, I suspect, has to do with
their judging the international climate as conducive to
their imposing a security solution on Beirut... . Syria
itself is being used as a proxy on behalf of other
powers to apply pressure and to make other things
possible that have nothing to do with us. Bg

What is at stake is the freedom and right of the
mujahedin to continue their armed struggle against
the Israelis. Animprovement in security in the region
is not welcome if it results in restrictions on the
resistance movement.... By re-creating the spirit of
jihad we have been able to inflame the umma [Mus-
lim peoples] even in occupied Palestine. We see Israel
as a regional danger that must be confronted whatev-
er the cost. :

et

(a ges 17-18
Tenens a Full
SW) (4) (3)
