The 22 September 1979 Event-excerpt
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000037625, dated 6 November 1979.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000037625).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

pay)

NE aA
Yipee whe

1459 a
Pe a Vs

Ce

Nee Stas

CaN RT
‘

eG

eR

petsn re
i Recalt

bras

Ww

ead

*t

igre
ae

ah

ny gen epee
ee. Sonpire

C Sik cahes Lepeda bie Lol
: 3
oh Rey
Rene RED aie. fap

ea

Ada ast s
SSeS

=] Central

Director of

ati * | Intelligence

u

|

The 22 September 1979 Event

Interagency lutelligence \femorandum

Approved for Release
* JUL 1999

Tay ne as

LTS As

NG A ORS SS f

THE 22 SEPTEMBER 1979 EVENT
Information svatlsble as. of Deveraber 1474 was .
, used in the preparation af this nemerandiam

ae 7 \

PE an LAS LR Np EER Sey via Te TEs

fen ie ed De SOE EB Re NET SRT cto San FP Rees Be AL. Wa Det ta ee

pte Sahn ae r ph lB Seo renh iy 5 A
Seat ere ames MN SEM ire BA Shame ah

= SPORT
ee By
Wie Brae tak Bact

mere

£2)

aw,

LH?

FOREWORD

On the basis of available information, we cannot determine
certainty the nature and origin of the event on 22 September 1979

This memorandum was prepared under the auspices of the National
Intelligence Officer for Nuclear Proliferation in response to a National
Security Council request. It was coordinated at the waking level with

NFIB representatives in the Interagency Intelligence Working Group
on Nuclear Proliferation.

* ve

te

es

ra Ea
ee pear
Points PU at

Rei ert

iy

a preety a om mee = erry Tab eR = ’ 3 ou ur foarte Sete Te alent ats pt Ma ep ER tL oe
Saha lale tang ToS NS RRS Rare PANE are ROC EER Sette RGU rng SRS TAS moe USE FLOM Tea BSP gi ele ALTE eee

IE Ee ES ER RT Ea Rr RATA ee ee ae he Oe

pA Ba SU Rec Mie Ea ee LE OSE RT PSST RE IE aE Ee AE tag,

KEY JUDGMENTS

Bea AP ype

8 Fp
= ae

TKS

ENE

te,

oy

a

is

is

332 On

thes

if, 1. As requested by the National Security Council,

a3 this assessment is based on the assumption that the

ping event detected over a portion of the southern hemi-
ms sphere (see map on pase 12) by optical sensors on a

ed Vela satellite at about 0100 GMT on 22 September

fe 1979 was a nuclear explosion. Given the assumption

that a nuclear explosion occurred, the purpose of this
id pauper is to estimate what countries may have been
responsible for, or involved in, the event.

2. Technical information and analyses suggest that:

— An explosion was produced by a nuclear de-
vice detonated in the atmosphere near the
earth's surface.

— It had a yield equivalent ta less than 3 kilotons.

—It took place within a broad urea, primarily
oceans, that was generally cloudy

3. Various types of nuclear devices could have
: yielded the equivalent of less than 3 kilotons of high
ae
Le explosive. Such yields could have heen obtained either

: by careful design of a weapon with that sield, through
intentional reduction of yield of a higher yield device.
or by partial failure of a higher yield device. In
Practical terms, the testing of a nuclear device at sea
would not have needed to involve more than two or
three ships or aircraft, including several dozen crew-
men and technicians. Equipped with appropriate di-
agnostic instruments. they could have set up the test
within a few hours, detonated the device, obtained
required data within minutes after t! losion, and
dispersed within another few hours

RAN Abe ty FOB er Nig af oe

DISCUSSION

. The Defense Intelligence Agency believes, how.
ever, that if an atmospheric test were in the technical
interest. of the USSR. an anonymaus test near an
unwitting provy state such as South Africa could have
provided an attractive evasion method. The Depart-
ment ol Enerey believes that. while the Soviets have
had the capability to test clandestinely, they have
recently had no technical reason or motivation to do
so. The Department further speculates that such a test
could have been seen as serving Soviet political inter-

ests by disrupting peace efforts and further polarizing
moderate elements in southern sri

6. An unintended firing and near-surface detona-
tion of a nuclear weapon during a military exercise
could also have produced the Signals that were de-
tected.* The multiple safety measures that would have
had to be negated, however, and the absence of any
known weapons carriers in the area on 22 September
would hase made such an event quite unlikely. The
explosion uf a nuclesr weapon aboard a weapons
carrier would have been + -en less likely, because the
yield of an accidental aetonation almost certainly
would sot have been sufficient to produce the de-
tect d signals. Moreover, no nuclear weapons carriers
are known to have been missing and no associated

5

ia Rov:

i4eFhd

g

PE Me

Pe ESOT Mh

oh

Bi

7

J
ea

me

bah

tears

y
td

ey
ry
v

Re
Yet

ee ts 49
Kale

wah

wy.

search-and-rescue operations have been noted. Finally
it is very unlikely that any known subnationa! entity
could have conducted a nuclear explosion or would
have been motivated to do so? So the following
assessment considers the capabilities and motivations
of only those five “non-nucleur-weapon states” that
might have attempted to test secretly in a remote
ocean area of the southern hemisphere during Septem-
ber 1979

—)

A Secret Test by South Africa

S. In late 1977 the Vorster government apparently
suspended preparations to test. Strong US pressure and
other international reactions appeurcd to have de-
flected South Africa at | ast temporarily from testing.
The setback probably cumpelled Vorster and the key
officials in the nuclear weapons program to review
their whole approach toward weapons development
and testing, Statements made by the Vorster govern-
ment at that time did not permanently foreclose
future options for testing. Rather than completely
stopping their weapons program. the South Africans
could then have decided to prepare for a future
nuclear test more securely. In any case nuclear testing
was almost certainly not feasible until late 1975 at the
earliest, when sufficient quantities of highly enriched
uranium could have been expected to become avail-
able. In short, the Vorster administration may well

have al any decisions on whether or when to
test

9. Botha's Policy. Arcuments that nuclear testing
could make an important contribution to technical
confidence in and, to the extent it was disclosed,

WN Bina Av wd eT IE SAME INEE, Ye ft chen cine OUT OE,

foreign respect for South Africa's military strength in
all likelihood would have resonated with Prime Minis-
ter Botha and other South African officials, Botha had
overseen a substantial buildup of South Africa's de-
fense forces in the late 1960s and 1970s, following a
decision in the early 1960s to achieve self-sufficiency
in arms. Because of his personal convictions as well as
his official responsibilities, he has advocated more
than any other Cabinet officer the military compo-
nents of South Africa's strategy for coping with pos-
sible external threats. He has reyarded the West us
unwilling to support South Africa against foreixn
threats that he has perceived lo be growing. Moreover.
he has prebably sympathized with views that nuclear
weapons might ultimately be needed. However, he
probably has not foreseen any imminent military
requirernent for nuclear weapons or any political
advantages to disclosing particular elements of South
Africa's nuclear weapons apabilities at this tir.e.
Nevertheless, he may have been persuaded that unde-
clared but undenied nuclear weapons would have an
important psychological deterrent effect that South
Africa could better achieve through testin

1. If P. W. Botha had decided in favor of a nuclear
test, he would have evaluated alternative options for
conducting it in terms of their expected effectiveness,
risks, and eosts. To minimize adverse foreign reactions,
he would have had to assess both the chances and the
consequences of discovery. While an atmospheric test
over unfrequented international waters presumably
would have been seen to entail some risk of being
found in violation of the Limited Test Ban Treaty, to
which South Africa is a party, it also would have
offered a relatively quick. safe, and easy way for South
African weapons designers to prove a nuclear device
without creating unambiguous evidence that South
Africa was responsible for a nucleur explosion. In
contrast, an atmospheric or underzround test in South
Africa probably would have entailed higher risks of

Dra a he

Rey:

fae
Y?
a

a

SEES CFT ERT EEN RA Pt

_. prior detection and ultimate proof by foreign inteili-

*% gence because it probably would have required site
preparaticns and leit tangible indications of a nuclear
explosion. Botha’s security advisers might have warned
him that, if South Africa were discovered to lave
violated the LTBT, it mizht suffer more serious
sanctions than if it tested underground. On the cther
hand, they wouid have raised the possibility of ancther
international uproar and more serious threats if new
underground test prepurations were detected. am! the
likelihood of mere serious sanctions if South Africa
proceeded to test under such circumstances, fF hus,
Botha probably would have decided to minimize the
risks of prior detection and certain attribution by
testing secretly at sea rather than within South africa

12. As Defense Minister since 1966, P. W. Botha
very likely supported the development of -a nuclear
weapons progrim, inclucing military preparations for
nuclear testing. As Prime Mimster. Botha has retained
the Defense portfolio and has continued to keep cliser
counsel with senior military officers than with other
government official. We have no specific evidence
that senior military officers perceive any imminent.:
am eventually important, role for nuclear wes pon

aS Pip pe RE ata one IK, Et Of Pale hg ENE

CCP Fea 57? 36

ADD

3

ARE TEE

Ta Te

Dato e

APU RATT Se AMAT

Vs

te

DEI VEL

us

RY

3

‘ty

18. In September 1979 some special"securit y meas-
ures were put into effect which indicate that certain
elements of the South African Navy were exercising or
on alert on 22 September. The harbor and naval base
at Simonstown were declared, in a public announce-

“ment on 23 August. to be off limits for the period

17-23 September. The US defense attache gathered
from several reliable sources that harbor defense
exercises took place there during this period.’ Athough
such a closure might not be required for a nuclear test
at sea. it could have screened sensitive Ioading or
unloading operations as well as ship movements. Also.
the Saldanha naval facility, which includes a naval
search-and-rescue unit, was suddenly placed on alert
for the period 21-23 September. The alert was not
publicly announced, no explanation for it was given to
naval personnel, and no activity was observed in ar
around the port. While the Saldanha naval alert
appears unusual, we are unable to state with confi-
dence whether such an alert has ever happened
before. Furthermore, at the same time, General
Malan. Chief of South Africa's Defense Furce. was re-
ported to be touring South America, when he might
have been expected to be in South Africa or at.the iz

observation point during such an important event

19. Prime Minister Botha has avoided public com-
ment on the issue since the US disclosure of the Vela
indications. However, on 25 September—three days
after the nuclear event—he told a provincial congress
of the ruling National Party that “South Africa's
enemies might find out we have military weapons
they do not know about.” His enigmatic remark
prompted speculation in the South African press that
he had undeclared nuclear weapons in mind

at eg IN, Byte wets ee 8 Senet Or eee oh

20. On 24 October—before the US disclosures of
the technical indications of a test—the Prime Minister.
addressing-an anniversary dinner attended by past and
present members of the AEB as well as members of
the local diplomatic corps, reportedly paid tribute to
the South African nuclear scientists who had been
engaged in secret work of a strategic nature. He
reportedly said that, for security reasons, their names
could not be mentioned and that they would never
gain the recognition in South Africa or abroad that
they deserved

2]. South African Resvonses to Nuclear Tes?
Allegations. South African official commentary since
the United States disclosed the Vela indications of a
nuclear event have been consistent with Pretoria’s
longstanding practice of cloaking its nuclear intentions
in ambiguity—intimating a weapons capability with-
out sayme anything that would prove a case for

bi international sanctions aguinst South Africa.

22. Only one official has categorically denied South
Africa's involvement. On 26 October, immediately
following the announcement in Washingtun of the
Vela indications, Jacobus de Villiers, President of
South Africa’s Atomic Energy Board, told the press,
“If there was anything of the sort, my first reaction
would be that some other power tnisht fave under-
taken'a test, but it was definitely not South Africa.”
De Villiers, who had been directly involved in weap-
ons design work at the Pelindaba nuclear research
center before his promotion to President of the AEB in
July 1979, almost certainly would be witting if South
Africa had conducted a test explosion—and prepared

_ to parry press queries if such a test were detected. On
6 November. De Villiers issned a report of periodic
atmospheric samplings that had been conducted by
the AEB; the report concluded, “It is considered most

unlikely that an atmospheric nucle: t has recently
been conducted in this region. ;

23, On 25 October the Comrnander of the South
African Navy made allegations we believe to be false

ei et a a ee

ee eee ee ~

eh

FER BLS Cae dD et ae OS ale

EEA ee RE
j

ee
hits

; ;
that a Soviet nuclear submarine had been in the 3eyond this, the Israelis might
vicinity of the Cape in late September, implicitly have conceivably foreseen needs for more advanced
+ denying that the South African Navy was involved ina © weapons. such as low-yield nuclear weapons that could
nuclear test conducted at sea! be used on the battlefield. Or they might have consid-
: . F . ered desirable a small tactical nuclear warhead for
24. Foreign Minister Roelof Botha’s public state- : ‘ seating
: oe : Israel's short-range Lance surface-to-surface missiles.
ments have been especially ambiguous, For instance, . Aran yon ;
pets ea : Israeli strategists might even have been interested in
on 25 October he ridiculed speculation that South leantocs ne ae
: : developing the fission trivger for a thermonuclear
Africa had conducted a nuclear explosion, but also - :
; wo . weapon. [f they were to have developed reliable
declined under questioning to say unequivocally that iuclewk Wevioes tentang of thece Soudaniae witout
: South Africa nad not done so and that it did not intend ; ‘
: : access to tested designs, moreover, Isrueli nuclear
to acquire nuclear weapons. On 6 November the :
: ces ; ; 3 eis weapons designers would probably have wanted to test
Foreign Minister, in a discourse on South Africa’s : 5
: ; it : Prototypes. A low-yield nuclear test conducted clan-
foreign pulicy presented to all the foreign ambassadors .
. f : v inate destinely at sea could have enabled them to make
in Pretoria, said he was dismayed by allegations in the busic_meusurenients of the device's performan
UN General Assembly that South Africa had violated ‘ Ki
the Limited Test Ban Treats, and distributed the AEB :
report on atmespheric sumplings as evidence to the 27. However, Israeli authorities could not have
contrary. But he did not take the opportunity to deny ignored inevitable security risks. The dangers of being
that South Africa had a nuclear weapons program! discovered would have posed fer them serious lishili-
: F ties, particularly an adverse US reaction, which could
: damage the special relationship between Tel Aviv and
’ S
Aasecret Tes! by Israel Washington. The Israelis also would have had to take
account of possible Soviet reactions, inchiding stepped-
up military assistance to Arab states. the likelikood of
serivus damuge to the peace treaty with Egypt, and an
erosion of support among traditionally friendl, West
European states. The Department of Faergy believes
that for Israel to explode a device off South Africa's
shere and allw South Africa to take the blame is not
consistent with Israel's policy or atfitude toward Pre-
toria}

SEO ESN 2 PARE GM HAN or

ny

LSet AgUP
5

Vea

Tag

28, In short, Israel may well have had requirements
to test that have been in conflict with its basic policy
of avoiding any overt demonstration of a nuclear
capability. We believe this policy has been very
important to Israel, and we doubt that its incentives to
test would have been sufficient to overcome its disin-
centives as long as the leadership perceived any
substantial probability of unambiguous attribution to
Israel. However, this consideration would not have
ruled out the pessibility of a clandestine test conducted
in a remote ocean area. Indeed, of all the countries
which might have been responsible for the 22 Septem-
ber event, Israel would probably have been the only
one for which a clandestine approach would have
been virtually its only option

CUAISGN EPS tude all) WK eOrE eh in ae Roce aee cela

Y

TL a a a ae a ce ek dk Aad Sens Se

SERRA SMTP EAH RHE RR Te POH OS RY

FRM PIS MR

me
ve

STU

ae

ny

Sur a,

SRM EATS AY

A Secret Test by South Africa and Isreel

29. If the South Africans had considered testing
Israeli designs it excharuze for Israeli lechnical ussist-
ance, the benefits of cooperation would have been
carefully weigned by beth parties aguinst the security
risks inherent in such jcint operations. On the one
hand. the Israelis would have calculated that South
Africa, as a puri state in need of reliable friends.
wouid tiave had every reason to preserve security and
to remain silent in the face of inevitable speculation
about its cumplicity with Tel Aviv. The Israelis aiso
could have counted as a high probability that respansi-
bility for any nuclear test in the urea under investiga-
tion wonld be attrilirted to South Africa. On the other
hand, unless the Isrartis had offered advanced weap-
ons technology, South African weapons developers
would probably hase preferred to test their own
design. betore incurring security risks in’ testing. a
fereien design. The Deferse Inteiligence Agency be-
lieves that South Africa would probubly have had
enough coufidenc Israel: security to consider con-
ducting a joint test

30. Israelis have not onl, participated in certain
South African nuclear research activities aver the fast
few years, but they have also offered and transferred
various serts of arlvanced nomnuclear weapons tech-
nology to South Africa. So clandestine arrangements

between South Africa and Israel for joint testing
operations miht have been negotiable.

risks of detection, attribution, and sanctions by foreign
JOMETS

39° The Bureau of Intele. ce and Research, De-
‘while Ssuth Afcica is
in all probability embarked on a nuclear weapons
provrum, has by this time aceuired sufficcant fissile
tauterial for the fabrication of several nuclear devices,
and may be willimz to take the risks of testinas
eventually, there are sufficient political motivations to
deter the Botha government from undue provocation
of internaticnal criticism at this time The arguments
which the United States and other Western powers
advanced to deter South Africa from proceedinse with
construction operations at the Kaluhori site are. still
valid: unless South Aftica is willing te relingnish a
clandestine as well as overt nuclear weapons option, its
access to Western technotogy and uraninm enrichment
services might be termuaated

durtinent of State. believes t!

40 State INR cilfers particularly with the premise
that Brine Minster Botha’s sovernment has Leen
inere ready than ats predecessor to develep nuclear
weapamns Ft points ove that all South African govern-
ments have sousht this option, but that until recently
South Africa laced the relevant te chaolegy and fissile
materisl Even now, the political constraints would
outweagh technical incentives in South Africa's calet-
lanons. and therefare ic is unlikely chat South Africa
elected to test a nuclear device The ambizuity that
surrounds South Africa’s wiclear situation has pro-
vided! it with substantially the same benefits-— without
the opprobrium—as <f it had in ract tested. Elusiveness
serves South Africa best at thie juncture. and is in hae
with ats previous behavior—neituer to confiem nor to
deny allegations about it. nuclear-weapons-related ac-
tivities :

41. fn sara, State INR finds the arguments tht
South Africa cenducted a nuclear test en 22 Seplem-
ber inconclusive, even though, if a nuclear explosion
occurred on that date. South Africa is the most likely
candidate for respansbility.

$2 The Defense Intelligence Agency believes that
38. The purposes in conducting a test at sea under the availuble evidence is insufficient to estimate haw

ow | cover of clouds and darkness would have heen to — top Sonth African officials have balanced iY

P maximize pretest security and to reduce the presumed tives and disincentives regarding a nuclear test,

Lo

as
Se >

eo at SO AZ ah Ce be”

SoS

4
2
+

bs

meh reels, ae

Ae

ae
Meee ee

Sj ge
