Gary Powers CommentaryY on Powers Trial)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022335, dated 1 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022335).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

oe ERENT 149
. _ a ~Ml- *
3 ;

; BROADCAST REVIEW

Do ., (0800 GMP Aug. 19 ta 0800 GMP Aug. 22)

Soviet Spaceship!

r
: he successful recovery oF ao earth-orbiting spaceship is widely publicised
‘ in the press and ali radio services, Statecents dy puberous Soviet experta
ae stress the significance of the experinent for the launca-ng of 8 nansed
space Vehicle in the near future. Foreign reaction praising the experinens

ae & ocw success for Soviet sctence 18 pronineAatly fexturea, with tha’
at is

PRAVDA editorial, breadcast in the Lone service, noting that the fe
a “remariable expression of the advantages of the Sovieb socialist
system." The howe service also brasdcasts B PRAVDA article by Acddenicisn
Fedorov, who says that Soviet scientists appreciate the fact that space
exploration showld be the common task-of all nations. .

Powers Trial:

Commentators agree that Powers' sentence shoved the faimess and buraueness
of Soviet Justice, and coptime the main thene toat aggressive U.S. ;
policiés were om trial, TASS reviews o6 TAVESTIYA editorial which says
that Powers’ sentence serves as @ warning to those who pursue acgressive

{ policies and to all other Poverses vho might try, on orders of their
bosses, to undermine peace. A widely troedcast Viktorcy conmentary says

« tbe court spared Powers' life, which wag not worth & penny to those who

sent bin to commit his sinister deed. ve “Resse + tis

pee rem gt

President Eiscahover's reported comment on
. Ie attacked in home and foreign-languace services
home service otserver says the President did not take it 50 hard when

be ordered the infamous intrusion into the USSR. Gan tells North oes

Amevican listeners that "such monstrous pyprocrisy is yare." Senator
t ig widely reported.’ --

Fulbright's statement that the sentence was lenien

a are mpl aen ae sor a RS a NA SER SAR
.

the harshness of tbe sentence
ag bypocritical.. A-

| 2
Several _comentacies discuss the inplications of the trial for countries -:
having U.S. bases _ South Asian English listeners ere told- that the’ f° '<
trial offered further evidence that U.S. hases on alfen territory are.)
“strongholds, of espionage Ard ‘apavensionetive cj; 2h: DLT a eet

i
\
i
i

.

oe a foe a
: ri

AL Tear

Slut

 APAROVER OR
: phe 12S? Bes

a aber,

mae

we mee ere eC

a a ee ae ee

we
peer acer a ae

a: ame,

ae eel eee ae ree te

i £
; Nucleat Testa:

~ AR =~ . BROADCAST RevVIEV
Aug. 22, 1960

The Soviet threat of immediate reteliation agaiust offending bases are
uo faronly obliquely referred to. A Tolpovskly commentary to the United
Kingdoa notes the “tremendous danger" to countries providing U.S. bases
an adds that “it goes without saying that the country against which
the aggressive act 1a directed, namely the USSR, has every poral and
legal right to render these heses’ harmless.”

The failure of "US, advocates of espionage and aggression” to learn
arything from the Powers triel is the subject of several commentaries.

A widely broadcast Tolpovskiy commentary cites a Paris paper's report
that U.S, intelligence leaders are planning to Jaunck soy flights free
aircraft carriers in neutral weters and seeking to use civil air flights .
ever the USSR for photographic purposes. : E ;

TASS xeports that Grouyko has requested that "the threat to universal
peace created by U.S, aggressive actions against the USSR" be placed on
the egenda of the U.N. General Assembty. An accompar ying explanatory
note gives details of the U-2 and RB-4? flights.

Congo Crisis:

The hone service carries the text of a Soviet Government statexent oD the

Congo that accuses “responsible U.N, officials" of openly acting against
Security Council decisions. : .

TASS reports that Kuznetsov “strongly cbjected” to the actions of U.N.
forces agains t Congolese troops at Leopoldville airport, and that he issued
a statenent saying the Soviet Governnent believed the Secretary General's
plea for “eivilian measures in the Congo" te be unacceptable.
U.N, Deputy Secretary General Ralph Bunche has bees repiaced as head of U.N.
forces in the. Congo by Dayal of India, the hone service says, because « --
he vas "heavily, compromised” by his ties with the colonizers. -- —

Disannanent Issuer: : ‘oat, te ei ee

A comentary in Rumanian says U.S, diplomacy suffered the very defeat 2t -
hoped to avoid when the U.N, Disaamanent Commission edvised the coming °
General Assenbly to discuss the disanavent problem. A hone service
comuentary by Mnatsakanov represents the coumission’s decision as &
pergenal defeat for Lodge. .

A broadcast to Australia says the Anglo-U.S, talks im London vere snother
ettespt to torpedo the moratorium on nuclear tests and notes that the
United States is preparing a surface nuclear test in Alesika.

- engaged in "strategic weapons dcvelopnen

is]

- Ak 3- BROADCAST REVIEW
‘ Pier 223 198)

ents “

Bundeswebr Memorandum: ’
TASS corresponlent Borizov says the recently issued :
Bundeswehr emorandum calling for the nost up-to-date weapons for tbe
Sundesvebr ‘has caused alerm avong the Vest Geruan people. Home service
Listeners are told that the Bonn rulerg are pegotiating with the Perctagon .
for new weapons and’ edvocating stepped up war preparations egainst -
the socialict camp.°*°~ ~~~ ; ne ‘ =

Middle Eastern Affairs:

TASS reports that all"agreement ‘hag teen ¢igned with frag on the building
of a wide-gacge rail line from Baghdei to Easra. TASS reports that UAR

Vice President Rur ad-Din Hebbelab arrived in Moscow for talks on the

‘implementation of the 1957 Soviet-Syrian ag)

‘gerent of technical and
economic cocperations” eo! - Ste

ister Chen I arrived in Tashkent on

‘Far Easier Affairs
TASS reports that “CPR Foreign min
his way to Afghanistan on 6 official tisit. ;
A hone service commentary cites foreign press reports that a "bloody civil
war might break out in Laos ony minute” ard eccuses “American leaders" of
striving to plunge the country icto wir in order to yeestablish the
former colonial regime and liquidate the "dangerous neutrelity" policy

of the rev regine. , .

1°” SARELLITE.AND YUGOSLAV BROADCASTS = =

Soviet Spaceship: 2.72.5 eee :

Arena commentators unanimously praise the launching of the second Soviet
spaceship, steting that the Soviet Union is far ahead of the United _
States in scientific achievements and predicting the imminent journey :
of Soviet nen inte interplenctary space. According to Prague vadio, "the ~
sccialist triumph is all the greater because it is a victory which et the —
same tine eces not conctitute e defeat for the otber side.” The sane | .--
conmentator, stressing the theme reitereted in aincst all satellite °°”,
coment, regrets that American scientists cannot "fvlly Join" the competition
for the conquest of cosmic space because, he asserte, they ave too baisily’

t" and €evelopuent of "flying’  ¢ .
espicnage appliences.” Sea gs Ra SRT EE

Sey atm cps nena te tale ake

|
;
i.
J

he satellite radios and-press quote punerous stat

_and carefulness" of

faa - Aah - BROADCAST REVIEW
; : . Aug. 22, 1960

ements by scientists

apd putlic figures on the Soviet achievement. PAP describes & proadcest
by Folish Vice Premier Jaroszewicz who says that the Soviet achievement is
ulting from the |

neither an accident ‘por a‘miracte, ‘put “ea regularity res
character of the Socialist: system and communist ideology."

Powers Trial; 2 a

Comment on the Powers triel and verdict bes been monitored from 811

batellite transmitters, but so far only factual reports have been
ponitored from Yugoslav sources. Consentators contimie to stress that a
a that the verdict was just,

U.S. policy was en tris] with Powers and agre

although assessments 6&5 to the degree of its severity differ, ADN
correspondent Guenter Sienen calling it "severe," & PAP-revieved ZYCIE
VARSZAWY article terming it "relatively mild,” and Berlina radio correspondent
Leuschner assessing it as "truly lenient.” A RABOTNICSESKO DELO me ee.
editorial broadcast by the Bulgarian hove service calls tne verdict “an

act of magnanimity end justice worthy af @ great country like the Soviet
Union," a theme reiterated in several other commentaries. Polish home
service cormentator Kozlovski calis the sentence 6n example of socialist
bumnitarianism. Several ‘sources report that the U.S. ané Westera

press describe the sentence as light despite president Eisenhower's

assesszent of it @s severe.

Almost all cormentators regret that the U.S. leaders, described as

the real culprits, vere not seated in the courtroom peside Powers. -
An AGERPRES.- reported SCINTETA editorial, aaong other commentaries,

contenis that although they vere not in the courtroom they vere gimmitaneocusly
tried and condewned before world public opinion. A D2 TRNNIK LUpoy

article surmarized Dy PAP claims that “in slightly lesser degree" the

governments of those countries in which the United States has bases

were also on trial, @ ‘theac repeated in @ BASHKDT aditorial broadcast by °
Albayian bone service end in a commentary by Berlin radio correspundent

Leusciner. (os, ice er ees emer ame . ae ae

“ie Sd wae 7

rat a ewer wee owe Aen

I -" a : 7 a alts < 3 - c F
ADN ccrrespendent Siemund points ous the "dignity, patter-or-factness
the court proceedings - Bulgarien lawyers emphasize
e and legality of the Scviet court fron the point of

"the full competenc
und genoeratic character and

view of international law" and its "profo
huzaneness," BTA reports. “" 7° we eee y

- cc ths, ois ic uit Daa a ete og ae! aera

Sais

nev eee me Oe ee .

“consistent implementation of the U.N. decisions,

~ : 3

- RAS ~ : BROADCAST REVIEW
Aug. 22, 1X4

Whe triel has dezonstrated the "ineffectivenese” of the U.S. systen of
military, bases and blocs, according to Bratislava radio's Moscow. :
correspondent, Miroslav Motth, who avers that Powers “ig fully aware’ ie,
that if he retumed to the United States be would be tried for baving told
the truth.” The Bulgarian bose service reports that "in order to inspire
courage in the rest of its ageats”. the U.S. Government will continue to
pay Powers while be 16 in prison. .;. .-- ta: : :

Smee te
Peer

'
7 =: eae fl = _

eee
2. gee La

Congo Crisie:

friticiem of U.N. Secretary General Gercarskjoeld continues. Aibert

Reiss tells Deutschlandsender listeners that to belp the Congo Repudlic

"does not mean to bully it 4s. Rammarskjoeld is trying to do with his

U.N. Swedes and fanadians." A mayyuG-reviewed BORBA article, urging
deplores “atteapts

to inflate” the incident between Congolese ang Canadian soldiers at

the Leopoldville airport. rrleni Ue. OU eet

According to ADN, Katange opposition Yeager Shabani Mukelay told an

agency correspondent tbat if the Security Council does not bake
appropriate measures fio the province the opposition may ecll for heip ¢ -
from Soviet forces.

ADN reports the Congolese ‘atate secretary for economy 8S stating that,
contrary to natconalizing sil foreign enterprises, the Congolese Government
is willing to admit new foreign companies which are ibterested in the
country’s progress, - ee ie ae .

Bundeswehr Heworandum:
The Vest Gerwan Bundesvwebr meworandun concerning nuclear weapons is

“direct intervention by the West German soldiery in politicel affairs" “" -.
and reminiscent of the history of the Reichswebr defore 1933, says 8”

PAP correspondent. CIK reports that the menorandum bas caused anxiety .

in the SPD. The document is the “public program of German militarism

for accelerated and sll-out preparations for atomic war ageinst the GDR

- and its socialist neighbors," according to & lengthy NEUES DEUTSCHLAND

a; oon

paitorial transmitted textually by ADN. rut acta e-

Disarmement, Talk S:
poAS Scie i fede eadger et Je vedas te Daath we Bea es
dnanimously welcome the Disarmament Commission resolution, -
the Prague radio as & setback for the United -
had tried to avoid Giscussion of disarmament

Area sources
described by FAP, CTK, and
States which, they claim,
in the General Assembly. -

an bows

"a Ccechoslovak party-governnent delegation headed

| Ruranfan Affairs:

A long article, published voth in ZFRI I POPULL

canes BROADCAST REVIEW
Aug. 22, 1960
Bloc Felstions: ou nee +

eo a wee a ae Se ge Ne
Czech acd Polish sources report the conclusion of the fifth
the Folish-Czechoslovak economfé docperation cormittee And announce that
hes by President Antonin
Novotny will visit Polend in Septerber. According to ADN, the bioce
countries have agreed to abolish visas for bloc citizens traveling on
official business within the bloc and traveling on tours arranged ty

travel bureaus or youth tourist organizations.

session of -.

East Cerman Affeirs:. ee .
; EY coe wotassoe ba lee Sy es . a

fficulties, but meintain

that the harvest in the GDR is far ahead of that in Wess Germany. | :

x r clidiers and soldie.

According to

freedon

for West German trade unions ap
in West Germany." The GDR and Inicnes
ADY reports. - Pe ORES on as, Be

Polish Affairs: - Ue SS ee

A PAP-xevieved Catholic weekly erticle expiains that the Polish church

could not send a delegation to the Munich eucharistic congress because it :
feared abtendance might be taken as “silent consent" to Chancellor Adenauer's
policy. The agency reviews a GLOS PRACY article accusing the Vatican

ct ‘teupts to use the Olympic ganes for anticommunist propaganda.

AGERPRES and the home service report the Rumanian request that discusston
of iaprovenent of relations between re igrboring Buropear states be placed
on the General Assembly agenda. Sources report the closing of the Third
Congress of Working Youth. <0 OY te rs. 155

Yugoslav Affair te : ae a > 2 ao 4 a

iT? and BASH and --”

kw aeee ae co imebeeta Seo
broadcast by Tirana radio, accuses T
repression of communists opposed to
concentration cawps on the Nazi order, _
support his "coun ary terror.

Ve.
