Security Conditions in Uruguay
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013617, dated 4 February 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013617).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SNIE 98-67 e3
23'March 1967 |

‘CONDITIO!
Dae

: IN

od

" ie

 Conculved in by the

TELLIGENCE .

oy

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf

“39 mech 1967.

NOTE: This is the estimate. No further distribution will be made.

Authenticated:

: arlicipated in the
a pe
tn ;

he coe ne ligen Agenc ,

a prem “t Ae tek

ta ite ee UGG

‘intelligenc: 2 SR
Mr. George C. Denny,” Jee fork
“and R Research, Depa riment 0 plate

ae
irector,

ae
"St

Mr. ‘William’ oO. Crean’ :
Bureau tof Inve stigation

vores - | r rhe tc

oi sat

c ie

Ze Ponds fx: 3
the "Su

UTOMATIC AQUNGRADING
DECLASSIFICATION

within the meaning of the espio
mission or revelation of w

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
-3 Maxch 1967

SUBJECT: SNIE 98-67: SECURITY CONDITIONS IN URUGUAY

THE PROBLEM
To estimate the likelihood ef incidents which might endanger

President Johnson during his visit to Punta del Este or disrupt the

Summit Conference (12-14 April).

CONCLUSION

We believe that the risk to President Johnson during the course
of this trip will be slight =-- though greater than was the. case with
his visit to Mexico City a year ago. Uruguayan Communists, other
leftists, and perhaps a few exiles will probably succeed in carrying
out demonstrations on a considerable scale in Montevideo {some 75 miles
from Punta del Este). One or another of these groups may also attempt
terrorist acts, but we believe that they will be unable to create a

- situation of general disorder or to disrupt-the conference.

DISCUSSION

1. The political situation in Uruguay has improved in recent months ,
as a result of the constitutional reform strengthening the executive branch
of the government, but economic and fiscal problems remain severe. Govern-
ment tax, trade, and welfare policies have inhibited economic growth and
contributed to @ serious rise in the cost of living (nearly 90 senceneln
1965 and about 50 percent in 1966). Uruguayan Communists have used the
general dissatisfaction with this state of affairs to solidify their important,

and often-times leading, role in the major labor and student organizations.

2. The new Uruguayan Government is well disposed toward the US and is
anxious to prevent any untoward developments at the Summit Conference.
President Oscar Gestido, a retired air force general, who took office on
1 March, is in a position to carry out executive responsibilities more
quickly and effectively than the predecessor government. His administration
is still in its shakedown period, however; he has only a slim Congressional
majority and some of the representatives of his own Colorado party are

antagonistic to him and his above-party approach.

3. Uruguay's tradition of strict adherence to constitutional procedures
and protection of the rights of the individual also tends to complicate the
government's task in setting up security arrangements. Uruguayan security
officials would be reluctant, for example, to use the kind of extra-

constitutional methods which Mexican officials used in connection with

President Johnson's visit to Mexico City in April 1966, such as the detention
of potential troublemakers who as yet had committed no overt act. Nor can
the Uruguayan Government call on a disciplined official party, as did the
Mexicans, to get its members out to line the streets and preempt positions

from potentially hostile demonstrators.

hk. Organizations of the extreme left enjoy greater freedom of action
in Uruguay than in most Latin American countries. The Communist Party (PCU),
which is Soviet oriented and has some 15,000-20,000 members, has already
undertaken an intensive propaganda campaign against the April Summit Meeting.
A major theme, aimed at exploiting traditional Uruguayan sentiment against
military intervention, has been condemnation of the US role in Vietnam. The
PCU has denounced other visiting Presidents, but has focused its considerable
assets among labor unions, student organizations, and other groups in demon-

strations against President Johnson.

5. We doubt that the PCU leaders will risk their present favorable
position in Uruguay by sanctioning overt acts of violence against President
Johnson. In the 1966 national elections the PCU made small but appreciable
gains, heading an electoral coalition called FIDEL, which won some six per-
cent of the total vote and elected five members of the Chamber of Deputies
and one Senator. This representation provides the party with bargaining
power on closely contested issues in the Chamber of Deputies, where the

administration's majority is thin indeed. The PCU is also maintaining a

predominant position in organized labor by providing effective leadership

and support for labor on bread and butter issues.

6. There is a danger, however, that demonstrations organized by the
PCU could either get out-of-hand or be exploited by smaller but more militant
groups of extreme leftists, such as pro-Chinese Communists, Anarchists,
Socialists, or Castroites. The greatest danger in Punta del Este is that a
few members of the PCU's youth organization (UJC) might attempt violent action
on their own. Neither the PCU nor any other group is likely to be able to
organize large demonstrations there. ‘The threat posed by the extreme left
is substantially greater in Montevideo. Communist strength is concentrated
in the capital and fairly large demonstrations probably could be mounted
there. If the President should visit Montevideo, students from the National

University might attempt to mob his official car.

7. Most other elements of the Uruguayan population are essentially
favorable in their attitudes towards the US. Furthermore, the use of
violence for political purposes is not typical of Uruguay;.as a result
Communist-organized demonstrations are not likely to stir up or draw much
of the general ppblic. Uruguay is host country, however, for political
exiles from many Latin American countries, including Argentina, Brazil, and
Paraguay. One or another of these exile groupings may undertake demon-
strations or attempt a terrorist act against a visiting head of state.
Finally, we cannot entirely exclude the possibility eee pesteeinaniey

attempt against President Johnson, for example by a psychopath or extremist.

~he

om Military and police contingents designed to provide security for
the Summit pentevende are under the overall control of the regional military
commander, General Alfonso Gonzéilez. The police will have primary responsi-
bility for controling civil disturbances and demonstrations with the military
held in mobile reserve. Close coordination and liaison is in effect between
the security planning staff and US security specialists. The National Police
Force numbers an estimated 15,000 men, 6,000 of whom are normally stationed
in Montevideo. Of this number, the Metropolitan Guard (some 400 men) and the
Republican Guard (some 400), have riot control capabilities. In addition
the National Fire Department has 600 men with a considerable potential for
controling riots. The armed forces include 10,500 men in the Army, 1,875 in
the Navy, and 1,360 in the Air Force. In addition, the Maritime Police Force
(approximately 500 men) also has some paramilitary potential for riot control.
The Metropolitan Guard, the Republican Guard, and the Maritime Police have

received riot control training and eauipment through US aid programs.

9. Uruguayan police and security officials are already working, in
cooperation with US specialists, to ensure adequate precautions in the Punta
del Este area. The Uruguayan security forces have had experience in handling
numerous Communist-led strikes during the past few years, and have shown
themselves to be reasonably effective. In Punta del Este, the government
will probably be able to prevent demonstrations; elsewhere, particularly in

Montevideo, the security forces probably will try simply to keep them

orderly. Police officials and the Uruguayan President himself, while showing
confidence in the government's ability to take effective precautions for the
area in and around Punta del Este, have expressed concern about the risks of

a visit by President Johnson to Montevideo.

10. All things considered, we believe that the Uruguayan Government
will carry out safeguards adequate to protect President Johnson at Punte del
Este, at Carrasco airport (which is some 10 miles outside Montevideo in the
direction of Punta del Este), and in traveling from the airport to the
conference site. We think that the risk to the President will be slight --
though greater than was the case during his visit to Mexico City. Uruguayan
Communists, other leftists, and perhaps a few exiles will probably succeed
in carrying out demonstrations on a considerable scale in Montevideo, but we
believe they will be unable to create a situation of general disorder or to

disrupt the Summit Conference.

ci i i a ae

il. We have also been asked to assess Cuban capabilities and intentions
to interfere with President Johnson's aircraft on the way to or from Uruguay.
Cuba's surface-to-air missile system, which has a range of about 17 miles,
has a capability to shoot down aircraft over parts of the island and in

certain areas near its periphery. Cuban Mig-19s carrying extra fuel tanks
have a maximum range of about 1,000 n.m. (The similar range for the Mig-2ls
is 850 n.m.) We believe, however, that Fidel Castro would regard such a

provocation as suicidal.

ee
