The Postelection Outlook in Panama
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126967, dated 1 July 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126967).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a Ciassdanory pple 2 —NexKossigtnDisstiiie
ese # NL Ber
Document #_ 17> tp tein bal 4
PG forthe
Fyo- [iz fom
F f/— Jkt 1/7
‘
DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE ©
Intelligence Memorandum
The Postelection Outlook in Panama
:

7
= elease
5p eamea oe Re 5 August 1968
vata 1 0 NOV 1997) No. 0611/68

oo

Wikio

This docu fonal

‘ode, as amended.
its contents to or re-

hibited by law.

18, sections 793 and
Its transmission or reve

Se
a Tae

SEORET

“he Besefer-B+ssen

com

“ CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
os Directorate of Intelligence
5 August 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

The Postelection Outlook in Panama

Summary

Arnulfo Arias will enter the’ presidency on

1 October following one of the most vicious po-
litical campaigns in Panama's history. His vic-
tory over the government candidate resulted in
a prolonged legal struggle over the vote count-
_; ing for deputies to the National Assembly and

the composition of the assembly remains undeter-.
mined. Arias is trying to arrange a two-thirds
majority in order to give his National Union
coalition control of the assembly.

- . So far Arias has indicated a willingness to
tackle Panama's many problems. The unpredictable
nature of the man makes it difficult, however, to
determine whether he will remain reasonable once
in office or will return to the authoritarianism
of his earlier, short-lived administrations. Al-
though he appears anxious to maintain good rela-
tions with the US, and to have laid the groundwork
for close cooperation, his handling of the canal
treaty issue will be central to the course of
future US-Panamanian relations.

Note: Thts memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
Ba It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence
4 and coordinated with the Office of Nattonal Estimates,
the Office of Economte Research, and the Clandestine
Services.

2S

Aftermath of the 1968 Election

1. It is now all but certain
that Arnulfo Arias will assume the
presidency for a third time on 1 Octo-
ber. His victory in May followed what
is generally conceded as one of the
most -vicious political campaigns in
Panamanian history. The election it-
self was characterized by flagrant
fraud--exceptional even by Panamanian
standards--on the part of the govern-
ment. These tactics backfired, how-
ever, when criticism of election ir-
regularities and efforts to rig the
returns in favor of government candi- yt: ae
date David Samudio caused National Arnulfo Arias
Guard Commandant Vallarino to shift his support to Arias.

President-Elect of Panama

2. President Robles appears to have accepted Arias'
victory, but Samudio and his die-hard followers have not.
Thus far, however, their attempts to deny the legitimacy
of the National Elections Board's decision in favor of
Arias have done little more than prolong tensions; they
are unlikely to preclude installation of an Arias admin-
istration in October. Even if Arias is removed from of-
fice at some future date, those who control the power
levers are not likely to look to Samudio as a successor
regardless of what his legal claims may be.

3. The focal point of postelection political ac-
tivity has been the struggle for control of the Elec-
toral Tribunal, which is legally designated as the
final arbiter of electoral disputes. During the past
several months, National Union (NU) leader Arias has
used his majority on the elections board to stall the
vote count for deputies to the unicameral National As-
sembly while his supporters sought to gain ascendancy
on the three-member tribunal. The impasse was broken
on 23 July when the National Guard escorted an Arias
partisan to his seat on the tribunal, removing the
threat that it would rule for Samudio in any dispute
over the vote count. Arias has stated privately that
he is determined to arrange the "election" of enough
deputies to ensure future passage of his proposed legis-
lation. He reportedly has won a simple majority in the

assembly, and if he has his way, he may get a two-
thirds majority, or 28 of a total 42 seats.

4. Whatever the outcome of the current
legal imbroglio, the constitutional questions
surrounding the electoral controversy are likely
to provide contentious issues for months to come.
Samudio has still not given up, but he appears to
have exhausted most of the available legal chan-
nels. In view of Samudio's lack of popular sup-
port, however, efforts by his news media to
maintain the fiction of his "victory" are likely
to fare poorly. Most of the elite families of
Panama have demonstrated their willingness to
go to almost any extremes--they have already
formed an alliance with their old enemy Arias--
to keep Samudio from the presidency. The most
that Samudio can hope for is to win enough ad-
herents in the National Assembly to oppose what-
ever programs the Arias administration intro-
duces. Left-wing journalists aligned with
Samudio have already adopted the line that Arias
was forced on Panama by the US, in collusion with
the National Guard, as a means of ensuring adop-
tion of canal treaties detrimental to Panama.
While this campaign is in part an alibi for de-
feat, it may presage the opposition line for the
next assembly session.

Arias' Preinaugural Preparations

5. In what is ostensibly a vigorous and
sincere attempt to gear his prospective admin-
istration for a good start, Arias has begun to
lay the groundwork for a program encompassing a
broad range of economic, social, and administra-
tive reforms. His appointment of a number of
commissions to study problems such as unemploy-
ment, housing, education, agrarian reform, and
government reorganization seems to indicate a
favorable disposition toward the goals of the
Alliance for Progress. On the other hand, this
could be merely a facade to keep his followers
occupied and interested during the last days
of the lame-duck Robles administration. Arias
has asked for, and received, US Embassy briefings

-3-
SEC.

on the USAID program in Panama for his top-level
advisers.

1.5(d)
3.4(b)(6)

Although the president-
elect and his colleagues have indicated an inter-
est in moving rapidly to accomplish a great deal
during the next four years, Arias may well change
his posture according to his personal whims once
in power. It is much too early to predict whether
this enthusiasm will be translated into action
once Arias is at the helm, but a rapport has

been established that could provide a positive
basis for future relations with the US.

6. Arias has not yet disclosed his inten-
tions about cabinet appointments, presumably to
avoid strains within his coalition before the
inauguration. His current allies, represent-
ing a large segment of the oligarchy, have tradi-
tionally taken the lion's share of the spoils
of office and they are cautiously awaiting the
first move from Arias. They are probably count-
ing on substantial returns for their investment
in Arnulfo, and the bargaining over patronage
could be the first real test for the disparate
alliance. Since Arias is not known either for
his tact or ability to compromise, old suspi-
cions and animosities could be revived if a dis-
pute develops over the division of governmental
appointments. Arias apparently is aware of
this potential dilemma, and may exercise re-
straint in order to avoid the pitfalls of his
earlier short-lived administrations. In ad-
dition, Arias may have to rely heavily on
talent from other NU parties because of the scar-
city of experienced personnel within his own
Panamenista Party. It has been over 17 years
Since he was last in the presidency, and very
few new faces have appeared in’ the upper echelons
of the party during that time.

Canal Treaties Issue

7. Arias has generally avoided comment
on the canal treaties since the election, and
instead has concentrated on domestic issues.
Moreover, his advisers have given the impres-
sion that they do not expect an early conclu-
sion of treaty negotiations. It is possible
that Arias is reluctant to raise this sensi-
tive issue until he has had a chance to consi-
der it after he takes office.

Arias and the National Guard

. 8. Despite the surface rapprochement be-
tween Arias and National Guard Commandant Val-
larino, the president-elect continues to es-
pouse deep reservations about the loyalty of

the guard chief and his key officers. The
guard's ubiquitous role in the impeachment
crisis last March and subsequently in the na-
tional elections has intensified Arias' dis-
trust of the organization and concern over its .
position as final arbiter in Panamanian poli-
tics. While he is obviously content to let mat-
ters ride on this issue for the moment, there
are indications that he is considering a drastic
reorganization to give himself a firm grip over
the military establishment after he takes of-
fice in October. Without complete control,
Arias fears a repeat of the episode in 1951 when
he was removed from office in a violent confronta-
tion with guard forces.

9. Although it is generally accepted that
General Vallarino will have to resign or be
removed, many officers would balk at any whole-
sale overhaul of the guard. Even Arias' cur-
rent allies are keenly aware of their need for
guard support in the event that Arias returns
to the authoritarianism of his past administra-
tions, and they would probably look askance at
any arbitrary attempts to alter the command
structure. Such a move might spark a combined
attempt by the guard and the oligarchy to top-
ple Arias and replace him with the vice presi-
dent--one of their own; this scenario has been
used in Panama in the past.

-5-
BN pal 2 bi

SEORRL.

e  — siDRsy, €:

Social and Economic Conditions

a 10. The crisis surrounding the election has
had only a small effect on Panama's economy. Un-
certainty over the outlook for political stabil-
ity and the wait-and-see attitude with respect
to government policy under Arias have resulted

in some slackening in foreign investment, but
the rapid growth that has characterized the econ-
omy in’ recent years has not been seriously in-
terrupted. Predictably, the benefits of this
growth have been felt mainly by the wealthy
classes, although unemployment is not quite as
serious as it was several years ago. Rural
_ underemployment continues, however, to be a
7 problem. Efforts by the Robles government to
- attack urban poverty, begun in 1967, are only
beginning to be felt. Slum areas bordering the
Canal Zone have long been a focal point of so-
cial and political discontent, and efforts to
eradicate them are only beginning. Modest US
financial aid will probably remain essential
for rapid social gains under the Alliance for
Progress.

ll. President-elect Arias has promised
that his government will alleviate the socio-
economic ills that have plagued Panama's rapidly
growing urban population and the masses of near-
subsistence agricultural workers in the interior.
His ability to meet his political commitment to
raise living conditions--without reversing
Panama's positive growth trend--will depend on
the extent to which he can push reforms without
alienating his conservative partners in the Na-
tional Union and the foreign investors who have
fueled much of the recent economic boom. Arias
could find himself caught in the same situation
as incumbent President Robles, who was unable
to introduce needed reform measures because of
pressures from the oligarchy and the need to
reserve whatever strength he had in the legisla-
ture for treaty ratification. Although Arias'
campaign platform was moderate by Panamanian
standards, his administration may reflect the
unpredictable and contradictory nature of the
man himself.

-6-

“eet

Outlook

12. There are reasons for cautious op-
timism regarding Panamanian prospects over
the short term. Arias seems interested in
attacking Panama's myriad problems as well
as in maintaining close relations with the
US. He will probably face formidable dif-
ficulties, however, in keeping the National
Guard and the oligarchy on his side, and any
hint of a return to his earlier authoritarian-
ism would erode their support. Arias prob-
ably regards his election victory as a mandate
for improving the lot of the lower classes
and seeking a canal treaty beneficial to
Panama. His overwhelming concern now appears
to be the formation of his government and the
policies it will pursue, but he will probably
return to the dominant topic of a canal treaty
revision as soon as a new administration is
inaugurated in the US.

13. Arias will be 67 in August and pre-
sumably this is his last crack at the presi-
dency. He would like to be the president who
achieves abrogation of the 1903 canal treaty
and ratification of a new pact. Much will
depend, however, on what he demands from the
US in renegotiation and, if a settlement is
concluded, how well'he can mobilize something
approaching a consensus for enactment.
