Probable Communist Reactions to Certain US Actions
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014193, dated 3 May 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014193).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

—<——— rr SE
_ BS Te Pretend
_. JOr°SECREL, —
CONTROLLED DISSEM ae
Ley LisRany SENSITIVE a ie
»
Mandatory R eng 2 June eee
< # NU}
Documen: # a

SPECIAL NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS
TO CERTAIN US ACTIONS

This is the final version, no further
distribution will be made

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf
2 June 1965

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

AUGUST 1994

SNTROLLED DISSEM
SENSITIVE

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, Defense, and NSA.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 2 June 1965. Concurring were the Director of
Intelligence and Research, Department of State; the Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency; and the Director of the National
Security Agency. The Atomic Energy Commission Repre-
sentative to the USIB and the Assistant to the Director,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being
outside of their jurisdiction.

GROUP 1
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC DOWNGRADING
AND_DECLASSIFICATION

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage faws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

1. Qsee"5-E-0=Ke -T

SENSITIVE __.
Ts # 185858

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

2 June 1965
SNIE 10-6-65: PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO CERTAIN US ACTIONS

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the reactions of the USSR, Communist China, and North
Vietnam to US air strikes, including the use of heavy bombers, aimed at

destroying fighter and bomber aircraft and surface-to-air missiles in

North Vietnam.

THE ESTIMATE

1. Present Communist Reading of the Situation. In failing to make
any meaningful response to the “pause,” the DRV has plainly indicated that
it is prepared to accept not only a continuation of US air attacks on
military and transportation targets south of the 20th parallel, but also a
considerable risk that the US will extend such attacks northward. ‘The USSR,
by supplying limited numbers of fighters, SAMs, and light bombers to the

DRV, probably hopes to deter the US from air attacks in the Hanoi-Haiphong

GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic

EESRAE-T downgrading and

ENSITIVE declassification

T-0

area. The Soviets would not consider the actual combat capabilities of
these. weapons to be the primary deterrent factor; the deterrent effect
would rest more in the recognition by the US that to attack this element of
Soviet support for the DRV would risk involving Moscow even more deeply.
"In addition, the Communists may be testing US determination through intro-
duction of offensive bombers into the Hanoi’ 'sanctuary', and, if this
provokes no reaction, it may well be the Soviet /DRV intention to proceed
with creating a sizable abbaadese air threat capable of supporting a major
DEV thrust into South Vietman and/or Laos." Peiping's apprehensions
regarding an extension of US air attacks northward are evident in its
propaganda, its civil defense measures, and its public and private statements

to outsiders, but it is evidently prepared to accept this risk.
Probable DRV Reactions

2. In light of these circumstances, attacks on North Vietnam's
sétccapebie airfields and SAM sites would be read by Hanoi to mean that
military targets anywhere in the DRV were not safe from US attacks and
that the chances of future attacks on urban centers and/or industrial
targets. were greatly increased. The DRV leaders would almost certainly
believe that the US. was ready to apply substantially greater force if _

needed to attain its stated objective of stopping DRV intervention in

South Vietnam. It would also reinforce their concern that US objectives

7-0. pe CaRAE-T
a STTIVE

may not be as limited in scope as the US has avowed. They recognize the
vulnerability of their cities and industry to US or US-aided serial
bombardment and realize that their laborious efforts at industrisalization

over the past decade could be wiped out in short order.

3. Hanoi's decisions, however, probably have been and will continue
to be influenced by its estimate of the likely course of the war in the
South polstered by the memory of the Viet Minh victory over the French and
by its doctrinal conviction that its determination to sustain a prolonged
and grinding struggle will prove stronger than that of the US. It
probably thinks that, given present VC military strength and the political
fragility of the Saigon regime, Communist forces in South Vietnam are
moving toward victories which could crack their adversaries' will to
continue the struggle. If so, Hanoi might feel that punishment from the
air would be an acceptable price to pay for the achievement of its political
objectives, and the vindication of its doctrinal belief in the inevitable

success of a "People's War."

y, The present Problem postulates specified vehicles of attack,
i.e., B-52s, and precisely specified targets, i.e., the Soviet-supplied
SAMs and jet fighter and light jet bomber aircraft (IL-28s), the former

located close in to Hanoi, the latter located in the northerly areas of

North Vietnam, and asks our estimate of probable reactions under the

current political and military conditions. Our present estimate is
that the adds are. against the postulated US attacks' leading the DRV
to make conciliatory gestures to secure a respite from the bombing;
rather, we believe that the DRV would persevere in supporting the

insurgency in the South. *

* The Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF disagrees with
the judgment made in this paragraph. He would substitute the following
for the last sentence:

"Our present estimate is that the odds on the DRV making concilia-
tory gestures to secure a respite from further bombing will be markedly
enhanced by successful accomplisiment of the postulated US attacks,
which by eliminating any concept of an area 'sanctuary' in North
Vietnam will pose the added threat that urban/industrial targets
might be next. The selective and limited nature of US bombing target
selections to date may well have led Hanoi seriously to underestimate
the extent of US determination to exert the necessary power to force
discontinuance of DRV support for the insurgency in the south. A
Moscow/Hanot agreement on the requirement for a respite could provide
both countries an acceptable 'out' which they could justify for
‘tactical’ purposes within the tenets of Communist doctrine.”

5. If Hanoi did persevere, it would be unlikely to revise its
military strategy or basic timetable in response to the US strikes.
Nevertheless, for psychological effect on both Communists and anti-
Communi sts » Hanoi might order retaliatory Viet Cong raids, sabotage,
or sneak attacks on major bases or installations in South Vietnam.
For similar reasons, Hanoi oa perhaps encouraged by Peiping --
would.almost certainly re-examine the possibility of striking at
the US carrier. force in the Tonkin Gulf by sea or from the air
and would certainly study the feasibility of an air strike against
US installations in South Vietnam. Though Hanoi would probably
estimate that the chances of seriously damaging US forces were not
great, the effect of a successful attack would by psychologically so

advantageous that Hanoi might make the attempt if it had the capability.

6. If the US strikes had destroyed their air offensive capa-
bilities, the North Vietnamese might consider an overt invagion of
South Vietnam. Because of thé great risks of such an action, however,
we believe they would not do so, .Hanoi would certainly continue and,
to the extent possible, step up its support of the Viet Cong and would
almost certainly seek to inject. ab increasing number of North Viet-
namese line units into Viet Cong forces with little or no effort at
concealment. The fears engendered by the US bombings would probably
not destroy Hanoi's determination or loosen ee of the country.
‘Indeed, it might have the opposite effect of rallying the population

behind the regime.
ae ae

T-Q.P5>S8-E-C=ReB-T
SENSITIVE

Ave Probable Chinese Communist Reactions. Although the Chinese
Communists have professed to believe all along that the US would
expand its air strikes, the bombing of SAM sites and airfields north
of the 20th parallel would still be regarded in Peiping as a major
and serious development. However, the Chinese leaders probably are
more optimistic than Hanoi, and certainly more so than Moscow, that
the US is nearing a humiliating defeat in the South, and will urge
Hanoi to stand firm whatever the cost. The use of SAC bombers would
increase Peiping's concern that eventually these strategic forces
might be used against targets in China, particularly in nuclear
attacks against advanced weapons facilities. Nevertheless, the
Chinese would feel a strong need to do something more to help the
North Vietnamese, and to prevent Moscow from gaining more influence
in Hanoi and in the Vietnamese situation in general. They would
also seek to exploit the situation to further weaken Moscow's
influence in the international Communist movement and in the under-

developed world.

8. It is likely that Hanoi would request -- and that the
Chinese would provide -- additional support, e.g., ground equip-
ment and personnel for air defense purposes or engineering help
for constructing and repairing airfields. The Chinese probably

would also supply fighter aircraft units on request, providing

they could be based in North Vietnam. They would not wish to use bases
in China because of the risk of US retaliatory strikes against these
bases.* The Chinese might offer to send ground combat troops to North
Vietnam as an earnest of their commitment to defend their ally, but

we do not believe bombing of airfields and SAM sites would bring Hanoi
to the point of accepting such an offer by Peiping. Unless and until
Peiping concluded that the existence of the Hanoi regime was in danger,
it would probably not unilaterally send a "rescue mission" into North
Vietnam. Peiping might, however, make threatening troop movements

and additional air deployments in South China with the objective of

deterring the US from further bombings.
Probable Soviet Reactions

9. US bombings or airfields and SAM sites, especially by bombers
from the Strategic Air Command, would provoke a crisis for Soviet policy.
So far the Soviets have been pursuing three somewhat inconsistent
objectives -~ to compete with Peiping for influence over the DRV, to
contribute to deterring US pressures against Hanoi, and at the same

*% The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
believes that the assumed vigorous US air attacks on major DRV tar-
gets would probably evoke the employment over North Vietnam of Chinese
air defense from bases in China. Current deployment of Chinese air-
craft to South China, the apparent completion of an airfield just
north of the DRV border, and explicit Chinese statements alleging
willingness to accept US bombing of China, suggest Chinese readiness
to test US assertions that no sanctuary will necessarily exist should
Peiping provide important support to Hanoi.

time to avoid becoming overly involved in the present US-DRV confronta-
tion. As noted in paragraph 1, the Soviets may also be testing US
determination and be prepared, in the absence of a US response, to
further increase the DRV's offensive capability. They have apparently
hoped that, in view of the situation in South Vietnam, the US would
sooner or later have to negotiate its way out of the war. The post-
ulated US actions would strike a blow at such calculations and would
probably convince the Soviets that the risks and costs of their
involvement would be greater than they had assumed. In particular,
there would be a greater loss of prestige in ignoring any casualties
among Soviet personnel than might have been the case only a month

ago. .

1O. The Soviets would almost certainly feel compelled to comply
promptly with DRV requests to provide substitutes for those ‘weapons
systems destroyed by the US attack, though they might not again
provide bomber aircraft. It is also probable that more Soviet
personnel would be supplied to man such equipment. Moscow might
even acknowledge a Soviet presence in the hope of deterring the

US from further attacks, though this would risk a further loss of

prestige if deterrence again failed.

ll. The Soviets would clearly recognize the danger of continued
escalation, particularly since SAC had been employed. Hence, they
would probably urge Hanoi to open up political avenues for controlling
the conflict and would put pressure on the US to stop bombing and to
negotiate. Soviet pressures would be exerted in a variety of forums,
but the DRV's demonstrated unwillingness to involve the UN in Vietnam
makes it unlikely that that organ would become a major political battle
ground. US-Soviet relations would further deteriorate. If the crisis
deepened and Hanoi chose to continue the struggle, the Soviets would

face their most serious dilemma since the Cuban missile crisis.

12. If Hanoi stood adamant against negotiation, it is possible
that the Soviets, recognizing the growing chances of being forced to
confront the US in Indochina, would break with Peiping and Hanoi and
‘back. away from any ‘deeper commitments. Moscow almost certainly realizes
that the US enjoys a local military Eavatieans vis-a-vis the USSR in the
area. Nevertheless, we doubt that the Soviets would pay the political
price of backing down and thereby handing China a major political
victory and weakening its own prestige and influence throughout the

world.* .

% See Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF footnote to
paragraph 4, page 4.

13. Thus in the aftermath of the US attacks, we think the
Soviets would probably conclude that they had Little choice but to
increase aid to the DRV. If the war continued without the prospect
of US-DRV negotiations, the Soviets would probably extend new
commitments to Hanoi and level new pressures and threats against
the US. What precise moves Moscow would make in this direction
would depend greatly on Hanoi's demands, on the nature and degree
of Chinese involvement, and on how the Soviets interpreted US

actions and estimated US intentions.

-10-
