Shanghai - Counter-espionage Summary
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000112821, dated 2 July 1945.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000112821).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

\

SN a erate ro

ae

Eee

a

ear

4
i

eae ag

, a on Ay .* cae ' 3 J pyr pincer a. ecw
oh al . i
; a : ”
ai 4 : a { ae ey cg
rae : i" rt
- ~- * i” a:

. OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES ee
CHINA THEATER-APO 627 a eee. re:
X-€ BRANCH ; ree Leo 7 oe

MICROFILMED 7
: 4
SHANCHAZ - COUNTER-ES?IONAGE SUMMARY = *- ~
oe: } i :
12 fugust 1945 te Se SY

NOTE: The information contained in this
document should be made available only to
- AUTHORIZED American personnel. :

4, ry e ai . See Saar
. : ( bo STD 7 : ( " , ote
.
‘ #8
a =

| =, SqyTABLE. £22 RIGROFILMING - if.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

+ Page
Forward
I, Operational Data 3
Japanese Intelligence and Counter Intelligence e
The Gendarmerie in Shanehas.
Greater Eact Asia Cfficlaic in Shanghai 5
poe Japanese Consul}. in Shaughas, 5
Japanese Meiners of the China Maritime
Customs Sorrv2.ce 5
Pao Chia System in Shanghai 5
The Gestapo in Giina 5 4
Puppets in Saesaguel 6
Shanghai Fot'ce Systen 8
Shanghai Cninase Gerdarmes 9
It, Shanghai Propzgandists 10
ay tee dapanese Officiais 10
General 12 %
Newspapers 12
German Prepagandists in China 14
Radio Stations in Shanghai 16
American Propagaindists for the Enemy in China 20
Other Propagandists for theEneny 23
III, Enemy Agents 27
IV. Commerical Firms 33
Japanese Firms in Shanghai ar
Prominent Japanese Businessmen in Shanghai
Chinese Firms
Other Firms . 350
Ve Communications 36
Japanese Radiotélagraph Comminications 36
VI, Meeting Places 6 8 -
Japanese Gendarmerie Headquarters 36
Japanese Intelligence Activitics 36
Park Hotel 37
Meeting Places (General) and Tumortant
Addresses in Shanghai 37

- WOT SUITABLE Fea MICROFILMING

SHANGHAI » COUNTER-ESPIONAGE SUMMARY

This summary of intelligence of a counter-espionmage nature in Shanghai
-eovers information on the following subjects:

Operetional Drie

Snaaghat Propagsucists cans 6
Hesay Ayer as Soonghat MOT SUITABLE FOR MICROFILMING,
Meeving Plazes ve : ee

The material contecned herein has been obtained from many sources and 4
dates from the 1930's 19 tas present time. Nuch of the information is not
evaluated and some is noi cate’, The evaluation, where known, and the date
the information was reszived Ins been plaved at tha end of the particular sen-
tence, paragraph or subdivision to whieh the information applies,

vatdonal data, though somewhat geneval in nature, is Mmlted insofar
as possible to the Shanghai area; however, it Las bren mide as comprehensive
as possible for this area, . . :

Shanghai undoubtecly has been and is the center of propaganda for the

Japanese in Greater East Asia. This prepagenda has been disseminated by every
! conceivable mans, out particularly by press and radiog All the radio stations
and newspapers were either taken over by the Japanese outrignt or were talloved"
to operate under strict Japanese supervision to further the Jepancse props es
aims, Hany anti-Japanese journalists at the time of Pearl Harbor were at the -

of the Japanese hate lists while all too many have turned traitor to their
native lands and thave adhered to the enemy, These traitors together with their
known background have been set out, Heading tho list are 15 Americans, ©”

The Germans did not overlock this fertile, ficld of progagénda and had,” -
at the time of Pearl warbor, a radio station, magazine, daily néwspapor and tro
news agencies in Shanghai, together with at least 27 known agents engaged. pare
tially or wholly in propagands. There 43 no information as to the status of
these individuals and of their propaganda cetivities.after the ond, of..0)
an War, Information has Beon repeatedly received however, that ‘the .
activities of the Germans have at least, since the latter part of 1943, ‘beon
more restricted by the Japaneso ard closely supervised by them. Many umioubted-
\ ly have become propacenda agents for the Japancse, as same were already working .
_ dn a dual capacity for Germany and Japan, Ji information concerning the Ger~
mans and thcir propaganda activities is included from the 19303 to I9hS.

The Japanese use at least to general methods of supervising the press

: 4m Shanghai, The first is through the va ious officials of the Japanese. Gov~-
: ernment in the press sections of the Embassy, Army, Navy and Domei News Age:
The other vethod is through puppet press oz ganizations Which can bo easily

’ eontrolled by the Japanese, These organizations active in Shanghai are the

- China:Press Federation and the Shanghai Publicity Council. eee a

"NOT SUITABLE FOR MICROFILMING

Shanghai ~ Counter-Eepionage Summary (cont'd) ~ Page 2

Ne attempt has been made to set out under Enemy Agents the Japanese
Espionage System which applics to eithor sections of China or China as a
Whole, This will te made the suvject of a separate summary, Suspected enemy
agents which form the vast re.jurity of the information concerning enemy espion~
age activities arecBiso nos cc» icded as this too will be the subject of a
separata summary, ‘There is, howerer, listed the known enemy agents operating
in Shanghai, including German agents,

Under Commerfial "irms are listed the Japanese firms and the leading
Japanese business men together wits three important Chinese firms collaborating
with the Japanese, Collsabowationists gencraiiy will be the subject of a separate
SUMMATY »

Little is known concerning the commmication system in Shanghai since
communication, other than omen agent communication, is not strictly a counter-
intelligence phase of cporations,

All known mectirg pluces or addresses of importance in Shanghai that
have anything to do with tac phases of covysor-inte..igence dealt with in this
summary have been set wit urder the heeding "Meeniu, Phases", There is some
repetition in inclucing tis ss
been set out eisewhere in this
reference to important adoresse

ction since most o< these uddresses have already
sumury. This section is included to make ready
s easier,

Shanghai - Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) ~ Page 3

I, OPERATIONAL DATA : a
Ae Japanese Intelligence and Counter-Intelligence:

The Japanese military intelligence in China, as clsewhere, operates
under the intelligence neadquarters of the Imperial General Staff, Military
Police units are responsibie for field or combat intelligence, but they are
also engaged in a vericty of other activities, In addition, thero are vam
ious special dotachnents, come of which operzte under cover of ddepest
secrecy and watch over Japanese activities both at the front and in occupied
areas, Others specizltze in political terrorism, economic exploitation,
psychological wavfac, sabotage, surveillance of puppets, and a varicty of
gangster activities, IMany of the latter agents are 4s corrupt as they are
daring and fanatical, In the larger cities of China, notably Shanghai, the
MP (better known in thc Fav Hast as the Cendarncrie) and various "special"
units have readily allied themselves with the Chinese underworld the better
to profit from gambiing, the narcovic trade, kidnapping and other rackets,

Generally, the HP units in the field have 1 strength of about 375
officers and men, commanded by a colonel or lSew:s.ans colonél, These units
are highly trained, end have wide police powers; ‘ey make deemgoing inves-
tigations and exominations, searches ami se.suves, Their members are notor-
ious for their "toughness" and ruthlessness, and are mach feared by both
Japanese and Chinese civilians, They have charge of political prisonors
and Allied internees, who they maltreat and starve, They use the cruelest
forms of torture to wring "confessions" from those detcined, To show their
hardihood they will kill Chinese in public on the slightest provocation,
the officers using their samurai swords for this operation, Allied nationals
also have been dispatched in this fashion in cities like Hongkong,

The use of Chinese collaborators has been extensive, as witnessed by the
fact that WANG CHING-WEI's gangster establishment at 76 Jessfield Road in
Shanghai was situated within a block of Military Police Headquarters in the
years immediately following the fall of Shanghai in 1937, WANG had agents
planted in the International Settlement and the French Concession and his
men of course worked in close cooperation with Japanese intelligence, Other
Chinese underworld groups operated directly under the Japanese, such as the
groups headed by LI TU-CHUN and CHANG YU=CH'ING, CHANG, 2 300-odd pound
gangster, mide his headquarters in the New Asis Hotel in Hongkew, where he
used the bathroom for the devapitation of Chinese who refused to play ball .
with the conquerors and puppets, A Japanese agent named KONOMI was CHANG's
advisor and it is known that the notorious Gen, KENJI DOIHARA, chief
Japanese agcnt~provocateur, affectionately stylcd the "Lawrence of Hanchuria",
visited hime

The Gendarmerie is composed of regular officers andmen from military units
who, after their three years of basic training are detached for Gendarmerie
service, and who are Jater sent hack wo their respective units when their
serivees are no longer nceded. In some cases they serve permanently, There
are also specially trained mon whoserve the orgmization permanently, <All
Gendarmerie recruits are given special training, One Gendarmerie school is
in Nanking and in Shanghai there is a Gendarmerie school for the study of

Shanghai - Counter-Espionage Summary (conttd) = Pago

English, A surprising mumber cf the Gendarmeris in Shanghai speak both
Chinese and English 4s well 4s Japanese, Members of the Gendarmerio wear
army uniforms, Chinese gowns, oF wostorn clothes, depending upon the nature
of their assignments, Chinese nationals are said to be the main source of
agents for undercover operetions ju China, dut Irish, French, and Germans
were reported to ce uscd in Hong.onge

B, ‘The Gendarmerie in Shang wis

Four sections of she Gendarmerie in Shanghai have been set out under the
heading entitled “%ecting Places",

HSU T!EHeSHAW (21 TiSAN), &@ lanchurian Chinese who was cdusated in
Japan and is said to tisee things the Japanese way" is called the "cavisor"

to all four sections of the Gendermcric in Shaighai, It is scid tnat if
anyone is arrested in Shanvnai, HSU is the one to see about bribing him oute

LI HUO-HUA (LEE KOO-HWA) is the adviser ta Section Be Li was formerly
a Communist, Lecter he joined CHIANG KAT-SHitis "glue Shirts" and still later
he went over to the Japanese who sert him to toys for six months training.

(Barch 19h)

Tie American School which is the hoacquarters of Section C of the
Gendarmeric is now fenced in the back and his Gendarmerie guarding in the
front, (iy 1915)

The Gendarmerie contsols in the Shanghai area are very tight and restric~
tive at present, Pernits (resident) mst be obtained from the Gendarmes,
The Japanese search hotels, divide the city into areas and throw a cordon
around a selected area and conduct a search of it, thus checking individuals
one at a time, ‘They 41so send men, under cover, to tea shops where they
check on visitors, etc, In addition, the Jepancsehave used waiters to inform
on suspicious people.

To travel within Shanghai 211 one needs is a rosident permit, Visitors
to the city are ‘ssued a permit which is good for one month. A trevel permit
is not necessary for traveling within Occupied Chine; however, a travel permit
is required for travel inte gverriila country or to Free China, Chinese who
claim they are going to their homes in Free Chima sre not stopped from travel-
ing,

It is reported that the Chinese puppet sccret service is under TING MEI
CHUe ;

In the opinion of on informant recently out of Shanghai, the Japanese
Will leave agents behind, underground, in the cvent they withdraw from
positions they now hold. (way 1945)

Shanghai + Counter-Espionage Summary (conttd) — Page 5

C, Greater East Asia Officials : i Shanghai:
Minister Plenipotentiary ~ Shenghéi Embassy Branch « USAMI UZUIIKO
Consul - DWAI (Apri 19h)

De Japanese consai, in Shengh“is:
YANO SBIKI (SH0KI) (October 1944)

E Japanese _Membors of the China Meritime Customs Services Shanghni:

AKITA, Ye NeGISUT, Ks
BBL, Te NISHIDA, Ts
_FURUICHL, T. CRALOTO, De
HASHITOMT, Ke CKnsiWh, Yo
HIGUCHI, T. ste

ISh, Us ;
KISHOTO, He |

City Ts
KurcDA, T.

| TO a!
iTSUSHIL

ut OKA Se
NAKANO, lve -
F, pao Chia System in | Shanghai:

This system is an ancient Chinese system of expending units under which
the smallest unit, the family, ismade responsible to the head of a larger

unit, who in turn is responsible to the head of a ward, and so on up through
progressive levels of responsibility.

In Uccupied China the Jepancse heve taken over the opcration of the
system and make affective use of it in csnionage and counter espionage. In
Shanghai. ihe Pao Chia systen is run fér the Jenanese by LIN K'aiceHoU, an
underworld figure known 2s "The Strect Politician", (October 17hk)

On August }:, 1943, the Contr*l Press quoted the Centraa China Dialy News
as saying that since the rondition of the Intermtional Setticment to China
on hugast 1, 1943, the Pao Chia pody in the Shanghai area will undergo 4 re=
organization and will be placed under the direct supervision of the First
Police Bureau, SU CHENG-TEH will assume the dircctorts post in the newly
organized Pao Chia of Shanghai and one SHIGET. Will become his deputy-direc-
tore

G. The Gestapo in China;

The following are reportedly the agents of the Gestapo: MEISSINGER, Col. 3
VON MIORINI, Dre Albert; VOIDT, Dre

ee

Shanghai, = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont #4) = Page 6
The following | are suspected to be agente. of the Gestapo in China, Al

are in Shanghai; ba
¥oe maAvcAm, DR BRAHN, Cy
BEHNMEYER, Ay METER, Al.
ARDONI, Dr, i MEY Mi » Capt.
- BOISSERIE, Otto ‘No ORGUEIN (elo)
. XEBD Dy . ;
FISCHER” Consul-General
COREON, ‘Tony, :
HOVER, Jan SOAZFL, Major
KELLER, Wilhelm STENNES, Capt. Wy
— KNUTH, Ge TIVOLT; Baron
TADAR, Abe VIGORI, Drs
He Puppets in n Shanghai: ~ = ; _
Kiongsu Province Governor JEN yUAILThO , oa 19hh)
Mayor of Shanghai CHEN KUNG=PO February 1915)  F

The puppets in Shanghai may be divided rouge *rii- three classes:
(2) Publishers, writers, news cocrespondentis, ub .> 42) Bankers and’ men
of the financial circles; and (3) } gangsters and mor ot tne underworld.

(1) The publishers _ help in carrying out propeganda projects of and for
the Japanese by means, of the newspapers and magazines, The leader of this
circle, YUEN CHU § £ VR. )} leads - pores of the Japanese Intelligence

of the Japanese Embasey in Shanghai wth. he cooperation of the group
who were formerly under LIN sae R 4 aise ) in, the a of a
famous magazine "Winds of the Universe" ¢ ee ia }« YEN is the

present Commis ssioner of the Bureau of Education 3, Kiangsu Proviner, The
magazine des. ty Be gut tw be qiite a success, The puppet neepaner "Pecples
News" ( } ne, a 525 “under YUEN, 23 is the Peoples Nuws Fublica.ion
Service oe re Ahes BY 3) » we of TUES cou ts a Comex compasponient
aa 3 Zz a Lu me the American -cmmed Shanghad Evening Fost (-K, ii
Ar 1s monts name is LU<FENG, hers in this group cre CH
ura Th n fg pee. )y CHU PU ( (FY > s a? Editor a2 chief of the
puppet magdnin€ Tcktent ard Modern ( }, wouthpiece oF CHCW
FUtiAT, minister of Finance of the See oa and vicaminister of the
Executive Yor, LIV YO-SEENG ( 4 ay ! }, 3 graduate of ong Ha
University $i Shanghai, is ‘she MANE BLY ofthe Pacifie Publications Services
eae an, as the mesiing of the Greaver Tast Agis Qyiurc)
Society! ( { *: & peta +) held in Tchyo lest year (19h). LU FENG, KUAN
LU, 2 Ves ené LIU YU SHENG all wore eltected anc sent as
pee Mls ce et foe South Irina to zbterd the meeting, Constant contributors
to these vupnet eonuianan inelude such mums as: .
EG. 28

2). ow
MENG HOWYI( 7 Fo >)
oe >. 9

Shanghai ~ Counter-Espionage Summary xt ~ Page 7
Names of other editors and correspondents who speak for tHe Japanese

through puppet papers are °s follows: (The following participated in the
first inaugural.

CHANG JEH~KU ( Fe 5 ), formerly of the Shanghai Evening Post,
and now editor of the Cninese Edition of a Japanese newspaper
"Now Shanghai Daily" ( aH ? ;
’ f° Tt
HSU LI-CH'IU (AF JR, +) and YEN onl.-2io ( iA po 4B ), -
of the "China Daily News" ( 25 9 : oa -

: yo Hig : :
PAT, ( KZ . aN VEN- a zr ra
CHIN Sate te ), Cu TEN-LUH f 1) Oe }» ond

) of the "peace News"! :: :
CHEN PIN HO ( 7 PAR, Ka) of the "shenghai New

"( W gp).
. ak
CHU YUNG KtANG ¢ y a ¥., \, HSUZH CITH XING f Be &, sy, TSUA:
CHING TSE ( 3 4% FR 2 ond HO TE FU ( : aR ) of the
people's News ( we Fey ie re) A]?
7 : : 2, ~
WENG YUNG CH'ING, ( % KK ), Wms | KG), am
WANG PING (3% \ oe tte 3lew Uiina Newspaper" (Feb eR

+ wy. & 2
AKMATSU GSS ( / ii AL \@_) (Japanese) and HIPAA KIYOHARTOGATA
4 os te) (Japenese ) of tho New Shanghai News, Chinese

Editions .
| CHIYENG. CHUNG carn (A 1 HR) and CHENG HUNG YEN Cr iB)

a4 -4
qu prer ox AB 2) and wane HUT LANG (Api, FIZ) of the puppet
; "Central News agency" (ABP RAL eof As Fde ; ;
\ 2 | “ ~ 3 Sy P| iE :
YEN YUN PtENG 4 th ies ) of the "Allied News Ass'n" (44 ') HER

eo. zs pee :
TAO CHING SUN ak ow-4H. ) also of the "Shenghai News", he isa
fomous medical doctor brought up in Japan, ;
CHANG TSE-P' ING ( AC ¥ ) "New Shanghai News"; Jepuncse return
student, ?

(2) “Banktirs.andcfinencicrs, In the orgenization of the Central Reserve
Bank, financiers of the North China clique were made use of. Most of these
people were inembers of the Kincheng Bank system or had connections th. that
bark before, The former staxf of the Kincheng Bank of Dairon ( Ve LAN. 44);
mostly Japanese returaed students, who were olso wider the navthérn firincier
- CHOW TSO-JEN ( j5|#4@ 4= _) are now on the staff of the Central Reserve
Bank, Nemes are Us follows:

Lb
CHOW FU HAL a 7d)» governor of the CRB. (Not under CHOW TSO JEN;

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont a2) - Page 8 '

CHIIEN TA-KWIET BERK Ga ), Vice~governor of the CIE.

i
TAI HO-LU ( WF By igo, general manager of the CRB, a Japenese re~
sae student odets of Imperial University.

CHAO SHU-HuUA (#4 #t 4 } and Wane CHUGH 10 CZE4P ied ), tw
of the nee active members of he eight Assistant Hanagers of the
CiBe

= TAI has over two hundred men under hin all armed with Mauser pistols,
He was once a member of the Special Police in the Shangnai Muni.cine: Police
as active follower of C,C-PAN, TAL resides ab 14 CHUNG GHENT Fuck « ;
, %H ), Jessfield Road, Shanghas, pine license manber of his cur is Re
800, He now uses the name TAT YIN (= e ) instead of his oid name

Ss

Half of the staff of the CRB formerly bel onged to the Shanghod branch
of the Central Bani (Chungking), the. benk bal ‘dae at No, 15 Bund, Shanghai,
was once used as the offices af the CG, D«: formr new puilding’ of the
Bank of China, next to Sessocn House, is nov ting scccass of- the CRBs

HSU CHIEN PtiIne (¢ 25g A ) is now the Tea of the Pupyet Central
Trust. It is reported thet hots obs coe sc a the Changicing Govern-
ment, (February 1945) aro ,

I, Shanghai police System:

The mayor of Shanghai, CHEN KUNG-ro ( Ex re) is corcurrently Chief
of Police. The city goverment of Shanghaf is divided into eight districts.
There is a commissioner of police in every district, as follows:

Ast District is, or comprises, the formor International Sottlehent, The
informant is not sure of the respective nae % eo ia ie seven “ape

wut the districts B as foliows; Nanshih, aes (7 od ri
bane Shangha. ( Ww ), North ‘ty aA Mb ), Central’ \.€
( % 2] a Hongkew ( Si. ivi ), and & ch Concession (8th Distri ot).

There is a main police bureau over these 8 districts, a CHGN KUNG PO
as concurrent tead, Chief secretary is WU SUNG KAO (:3% vz% ), formerly
head of the Europe division of the Chunglcing 16 Winistry BF reign affairs in
Nenking, This man is a Goochownesr, very well educated, speaking English,
French and Geruar, When WW came back from Franck, he was cought in Hongkong
‘when the Japanase came in and was brought by the Japanese ‘to Shenghai, where
he took over this post, , While in Hongkong, he frequently ont Ce 4 to the
Universe Magazine ( ees eae , under the pen name of YI KUNG ( A) de
In his present post of Gene Secretary of the Police Bureau, Wis vory
important in the administrative and exceutive werk of the police Burcau,

In every district there is onc Police Headquarters, which controls all
other police stations in ita district, In the lst District, tha headquarters
is at the old Municipal Police Hq, on Foochow Road, The police stations of
the existing district are the same as those used by the uunicipal police

Shanghai ~ Counter-Espion2ge Summary (cont'd) = Page 9

before, 4The Commissioner of police of the Ist District is SU CH'ENG TEH (
eK. ), fivst graduating class cf the Police Officers! Training Co :

of er WLNG CHING “ir, 7 The Chic? Secretary is ZAN CHING HSIEN
( ), formerly stevacors head cf the Roosevelt Wharf, The assis-
tant SP CF Police of the Lunicipa?. Police Buresu is & Japanese who is con

- gurrently chief of the Detective Section of the oe District, There is also
a Chinese Detective Chief, rancd LIU WO -kWar (4) 4) 4% - +), who was
formerly assistans to LU L1-Ki'El ( FA BRE *Gmrio#id in 1939), the
chief of detectives under the forner Shaighad Mum.cipc Comeil, Tac Bue
of the Exccutive Departmont cf the 1st district is YAO TSENG MO (th WP “4

formerly Chirese Chief inspector of the Stanghei, Municipel volice, “Us chiar

of the Penal Department is LI SETE-YU (<— P# @p )s The pao ana {ic are
smaller units under the district, The h Hastof the Special Pullica oz the
lst District are WU MO ané LU CHIT, Ticse tro men are probably aeoors of

No. 76 dessficld Roac. (yanfHe Covermucnt's Bureau of Investigation and

Statistics of the ifiitery CounciL}, ~ s

8th District, Most of the pelice members of the Sth District (French
Concession) have stayed on, duc t) tho press) of th. Viery Govermicnt, It
ig said that when the: former hoacs cf the Frenn , signed their posi-
tions, they sold ali the prozesvy vider comsr7cd. a. ‘Gic Posice, including even
stationary, etc., dam to the pelico force, tue momice received fron these
transactions wemcquilily divides areng thet, :
,

The, Chinese Chic? Detective of the above district is nemed KWEI PAO CH'UEN
( 4 ! Es ib ), fornorly interpreter and dctecvive in the French Muricipal
Poliéeg “Although there are stil. sone Frenchwn in the present police force,
they have becn removed from positions of responsibility, and Chinese heads
have been installed in every department. wry

@ Comuissioncr of Police of the Nanshih District is nemed IU YING - |
( Ka )e LU had forrerty teen engaged in police work in this dis-
trict and his ‘ore authority in this district than she TANG CHING Wal nens
&s opposed to the Konkzy District, where there are more Jenancse members in
the District Folice Force, the Nenshih District Police, under I, are pre-
dominately Chinese, 321 followers of LU. former local petty gangs*cr. 1's
son is quite a fonous playboy in Shanghai now, a student of Fu Ten University
in Shanghai, ond roars “une town riding an a ToUpe> license No. 2- Tt was
reported ihat a certian Wet <uduced LU°s sen, ior political reasons, to come
into Free Cniri, [U!s son care as fer as Tac, in Anhvoi, but LU was able
te send men onc bring tie scn back, “<

\

Je Ghanghai Thinece Cendarnes: :

The main office of “ie Shuonghai Chinese Gendarnes is reported to be located
at'76 Great Western Roac. At tne vime ‘uformant left Shanghal the Gendarnes
were operating wuier Japanese supervision altnougn most oF shen were of Chin-
eso descecnt, S .

A mmber of plainclothes gendarmes wero known to be working out of this
office, but their identities wore urinowh, (16 ly 1945)

a als = ee
: ' ee. 5 &

Shanghai, - Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) - page 10

II, SHANGHAI PROPAGANDISTS

A. Japanese Officials:

i.

2e

3e

Ambassadorial Office:

KISHI, TIGHT
‘A Domei r2noct from Shanghai under the date of September 26, 19hh,
refers to MISHI IICHI as Press Chief of the Japanese Embassy Office
in Shancia’.. He was formerly chief of the 3rd Section of the Infor-
mation Bari of the Foreign Officc. Born - September, 1899 in
Tokyo, Faucation ~ Tokyo Imperial University (German Law) in 1923,
Empicymect ~ Eatered foreign serive. Chancellor Embass;; in London,
192, Eleve~sonsul at Sydney, 1927. Served in Asia Bureau, 19730.
Consul at Tientsin, 1935-28, Chief 3rd Section of Inform-tion Bur
eau of Foreign Office, 193¢, Departmer:t Head of Cabinet (September

19h).

LATSUDATRA, TADAHIKO

Subject has been referred to ia a Shergak broadcase in English
as the "Spokesman of the Sharvie, ‘:02s3 vcr al Office", He has
also been referred to as "Cates of Laformation Department of the
Japanese Embassy in Nanking", This iater was taken from a Chinese
netspaper article dited Merch 6, 19k, (Sept, 19ll).
Navy Press Bureaus
MATSUSHIMA, CAPT, KEIZO

Domei. in’an English broadease on August 30, 1944, referred to
subject as "a spokesman for the Japanese Navy iuy Shanghai", He has
also been referred to as "Chief of Press Section, China Fleet",
(April and September 19hh).

MATSUBARA, LT, S.

Ho is the Assistant Navy Press Bureau spokesman in Shanghai, It
is reported that he takes part in broadcasts over radio station
XVA in Shanghai, in connection with the secitious ‘Free Australia
Movement", (December 1943) 7

fixmy Press Section:

IZURUCHI, MAJOR ISAMU (1500)
Chier of the army Press Section in Shanghai. (March 19L4)

SHTONC, MAJOR
fy spokesman in Shanghai, (Avril 1lui)

MATSUDA, LT. MORITA

Assistant Japanese Army spokesman in Shanghai, In June 1942 he
gave a story to the press about the arrest by the Japanese Gendarmerie
of Britons charced with complicity in an espionage organization,

(December 1943).

Shanghai ~ Counter Espionage Summary (cont'd) = Page 11

he

NAKAGAW : :
Subject is referred to as "the mouthpiece of the Japanese Army in
Shanghai" ,

Domed. News agency:

The full dapanese name of the Domoi News Agency is "Domed
Tsushinsha, This agency has branches throughout the world and in
all the principal occupied citics in Chins and in Hongkong.

Prior %o Dezerber 7, 191, the Shanghai Branch caployed several
English ur, american journalists including Barbera LILLER; who gave
thes ancocvmasion: a Texan, nance unlcic™n; jimne SELIARDS of Los
ingeles; lr, ‘BitJCh, now wite the British [inistry of Information;
another Engiishman, name unknown; ir, GEATUART, who left Domei to
work for Ruyvors °nd later loft xeusors to work for Stefani, the
Italian news agencys

Domei supplied the United states with strictly censored photo-
graphs and feature storics. Journaitsis were taken on Japanese-es-
corted tours to occupicd areas bul, wer not periitted to visit Free
China, .

Other Japanese journelists in Snangaci before the war were
KUAYAIh, said now to be in Singapore; Frank HEDGES, ancimerican
pelioved to be deéetsed; and Henry KINNEY, an Englishman, "The
most corplctely doldeout of a11", now thought tc be somewhere in
the South Pacifice

The former China Manager for Domei was MATSUKAYA, who was trans~
ferred to lianchulmo because he was "too forcign".

The kmown members of the Domei staff in China other than the
officials listed above arc:

HISAKI (Swatow)

HOASHT, HASU (Centrnl China) -
HU (Canton)

SUMELL., KINKICHI (China at Large)

(duly 19b3)

TWhMOTO, KIYOSHT

Ho is in charge of the Donei News Service in Shanghoi, He lived
about five or six ycars in New York, THALOTO is well educated and
is very familicr with the United States,

MITA ALA
MURLYAMA is chicf (7) of the English Departnent of the Domet
Nows Agency in Shanghai. (Septomber 192)

ISHIWATA, DICK

DICK ISHIWATA is a Japanese who is said to have been born in
Japan but who was educated in the Unitad States. He may have been
in the Hissouri School of Journalism. Ho is the head of English

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Sumary (cont'd) = Page 12

Department (7), Donol News Agency, and a1s0 prosdeastacon tho radio.

¢

Bs General: v
‘l, Chim Press Federation:

The inuugexral necting of the Caina Press Federation was held in
Shanghai on September 26, 19uli, necording to a Domei report fron
Shanghai, ‘The Federation comprices forty--siz Chinuse and clevon
Japanese newspaper's and agencies throughout China, 2°" ee eT.

_ I S880--had, former Director General of Finence in: tho Poking
Goverment, wos elected president of the Federation, while HUA I-
HSIEN, XUO SIU-FENG, cnd CHEN PIN-HO wore clccted vice-presidents.

The mecting wes attended by LIN PO-SHENG, liinister of Publicity
in the Nenking Cabinct, KISHI JICHI, Japuncse Press Chicf in the
Enbassy office in Shanghai, chiefs of the Japancse Arny and Nevy
Press sections and more thin one sundred repzescntatives of various
newspapers in Chin, Follcwing the c1ection of officers a resolu-
tion was passed piedsing tc work for Sino-Japanese peace and at
the smc tine to help cach and cvcry nation uttain jts proper

Jace by liberating Greater Bast sia from the anglowuncrican yokes
Septenher 194)

2, Shanghai Publicity Council:

on July 10, 1944, 2 Publicity Council was formally opened din
Shanghai, Its object is to dofett Jnglo-imerican propaganda, dis-
sominate "correct information", end ascertain the trend of public
opinion, The schene Was orepared by the Japanese Exbessy, with the
aid of Japancse newsp2pers, ncws agencies, proadcasting stations,
cultural associations 4nd national policy socicites nd is supported
by tho press section of the Japanese forces. Tt witl cdonerate with
the Chinese Publicity Agency. (duly 19h) PS tere

C, Newspapers: a ee
(NOTE: ‘This does not purport to cover all newspapers in Shanghai, as
cenplete informmtion is not available.) 7

1. Shanghai Tines: ‘

The Shanghai Tines which hed long been 4 pro-Japanese paper
written in the English language after Decerber 7, 1942, becane 4 —.
_ Tokyo Foreign Office nouthpicee, Its Editor, EA. NOTTINGHAM, was
retained, NOTTINGHM for years had the reputation of being notor~
dously pro~Japancse. The newspaper, although retaining its British |
staff, becane a Japanese propaganda organ after Pearl Harbor. It
gupnorted the Japancse Gendarnerie'!s arrest and trial of one British
and two imerican erie on charges of esplonage.s (Merch, duly
and Decenber 1943) See NYOTTINGHAMN under "Othor Propagandsists iN
for the Eneny", ~ OP eA Sat ey oe ae a la te

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) = Page 13 -
the editorial staff of.the Shanghai Tunes other than NOTTINOHU
are Ps (a faesete ABE ee Sore to be a paid Japanese
agent), JULIUS KATti (a Polish rofugge OBGE LEO ‘ Le
Cr SRB AND Oct + Towne Oot ae eg le aia

2. Shangna 7 Post and ler DURIN

_. Prior to Lecerber 7, 19l1, the & j 3
was an Anericamowred nowsp2per edited by RANDALL GOULD, “> Tt re
publicaticn after Deconber 7 under Ja se control, -The naneger,
GEORGE C, BRUCK, Later dicd, THOMAS A.YBUTIER socaus the editor
This newspezcr owns radic station MHC cont: ‘

casting under Jepaneso auspices. ak» 3

KAZULRO UNO imerican-born Japanese and forner chief conso the

post is now (swly 79h) Chief of the Titi in see p.r6
4) See DAVID ZENTNOR under "Other S‘gandists for the Enemy" and
Gy Hanerican Propagandists for tho-fne:xy in China, ; -
THOMAS A, BUTLER, a oi@<zon of te Trish Tree Stato and an ox
Horine, is (Lay i9hh} nds editor of the Foet, He was repo

tuceso citizenship.” B
HS COnticn a7 the Post after
definitely tc hive cast his
pa. ved untrustworthy and the
ors Aievorber 19h)

YC Rat hKlo wr PP OGLABRATOR FET
BUTLER WAS widely identified with the Portugese CoMiunity
Shanghai, He claims both Free Irish and Portugese nationality, Ale
though it is Imowm that he cid considerably editorial writing for
the Post, he wrote under no by-line, His radio broadgasts up until
Hay 19) were primarily one o'clock sports roundaups, “it was gen-
erally believed that the former Portugese Consul General, RIBEIRO
DE MELO, sold him his Portugese passporte (tHerch 1945) 0 - =

BUTLER takes the pisition that as a neutral in the-present war
he can do pro-dananese newspaper work without incurring blame, He
will print any story, no natter how fantastic its pro~dapanese clains,
and write headlincs for it, so long as he ispaid for ite ‘He broad-
casts exclusively iocls news over KUHC but adds ro coments, BUTLE R
clains credit for contacting the Jepanese right after Pearl Herbor
so that publication of the "new type" Post could be arranged,
(March 19113) x

A jetter fron a fpymer resident in Shenghai reports that BUTLER
_was fired fron his position because in one headline he misspelled
the nate of the Japancse Emperor, ZENTNOR, above referred to, was
described as the "big boss", (February ighh) a, he oe

JOHN (JACK) JOH/WWASON, belicved to be a British citizen, 1s
the business manager of the POST, Le eee

to have taken out Por

Shanghai - Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) = Page an
3, Twenticth Century:

t German nonthly mage nce

a ust ore ‘

aa ra é ER? is the editor of i :
in Shangha.e Tcensorshin intercept ahich gave a resure of to

arc nro~German 4
bce - times antd.Pussion, RGKMNT was born of tussian parents 3
- Russia, attended school in Stuttgart, Gerrany, and s

nce be and anerican universities, participating ”

jurael and the J,S.f rT z srncational
— % epent his adult life largely in the Sovict Union and
f ara tas wife is 4 native of California.
ire in Sreden, ond he has a sumer cabin in Finland,

we J ——_ of the magorine indicated that the articles

ch wes subsidized b GOEBUELS. @

was disc fomayrly a professor in, the Uaiversity of, Hawaiie

C/TBO 6
Lie ath
DC

pubis) ve
he would “favorable

msiicred as pro—i

AXIS CROPACAKOR- 0K ‘

1 > but it is roported that
to tne United States so far as Japanese
fmerican relations are concerned. He has o wide
the USSie He might be of asvistance try sho Oricnt, so long

Toscow,

student organization

Subjcctis foster
LEHNERT

acouaintance with
as he

was not worlting darcetiy ageinse Germanys (Necenber 1943 to Fobruary

195)

le Sin Hen Pao:

Te "Gin Ven Pact gives 311 its coluins to the
economics to the exclusion of all other subjects.

a column of "eccrcaic review" to take the place of editorials.

paper circulates widely song the industrial

S, Shun Pao (Shanghai Daily):

Puppet CHHN PIN HO 45 now editor-in-chief of the

lated Shun Pao in Shonghai, He confines his

anternal problens of the puppet regine and entirely avoids such

topics as international problems anc Ware

6. Noon Extra: 2
» This is a Gernan-owne= Shanghai navspape
4 Le Mya anc the poniging circetor is Dre He
20 Cercon Road, Sth Fleer, telephone mombor

(SAPACOU}, o White iussian cartocnist for the

IEYe
13046.

discussion of
Tt has introduced

This

and cormercial worlds

widely circu-

editorial corments to

went to works fcr the Nocn xtra, producing 4 cartoon a day, He

he had no other means of ieking ©. Livelihood.

De German Propeg.nda in Chinas
1. General:
Gernan News agencies in Shanghai area;

1, DeNeB. (Head: Fe He GLIMPF)
2, Transocean (Head: HANS MELCHERS ).

r vthose 2ditor is Alfred

Tt is lootted at
SAPOJHIKOFF

North China Daily Nows,

goid

Shanghai. ~ CounterEspionage Suumary (cont'd) = Page at

Geruan newspapers and magazines published in Shanghai are:

1, Noon Extra (Daily; editor: ALFRED L. MEYER)
2, Twentieth century” (Monthly; editor; KBAUS LEHNERT)

German Redio Station
a. YHs
2e Cernan propagandists in Shanghai:

1. Li Btsox TRCRS)

2, WiLL. Gapt, (alias FRED WIEHL)
ee JERRLIR, HILAIE DU

e com, Dr FRITZ

4 f
Ge E30
BLOCKS TEGEL

| [: GUID, F. He Dy _
| 9s HOLLAND, JOHN (alias DAVID lyst oo
4D_-—HOLEINGSHORTH, TEGGIE (i-DKuBk ¢ (XM'S

n, at iiss (C268)

2

13s INEC ne i Tokyo

)_TesTen, DAVID. (alias Jo JOHN HOLLAND) -

e LEY, Dre He eer : ; poe Se
164 KLAUS . é ae.
Ve URLCHES, as

18, MEYER, ALFRED L,
19¢ HOY, fierbert (xers)
206 Ege » BARON —

21
22, SOkEL., ENE LE
Ae WALBSUER (posetnly eae HOLLINGSWORTH )
« WIEDEN, Capt, PRIcZ '
25, <iWIEHL, FREDERICK (alias GAPT, AWALD) we
265 WOLF~SCHENKE
27, ZENTNOR, DAVID

3e Officials:
CORT, Dre FRITZ

This nam is-p-ess attache of the mrad in Shanghai,
(1929) eqs, Z Bw OES ace >

Horner,

Subject is director _of Nagi oropaganda activities in China.
[Ted fra mn Lordon a ef

Shanghai ~ Counter-Espionage Summary (contid) + Page 16
fn intercepted telegran in German fron Berlin to Teutonia,
Shanghai, reads "serssee eDAy by ordcr of DNB C,i.2, dollars
1,000,000 DMB 211,470 Mesers, Glinpf your 10 pau 5,000 Becrcos"
(Vay 19h)

Tolegra in German frou Borlin %o Toutonia, Shanghtis
HOSULE usr CZ Csblars 1,000,000 DN@ special CIB dollar acccunt
292.664 F, G. GLINPF, oun by erder of DNB Berlin," Caolo fron
Reriiz t> Toatosi2, Shenghai; "OS7LL vey GiB dollars 346,0L2
F, Ee Cliwi sy order DUD ? (DIB)". (July 19h):)

FPUTTMALIER, Devcon

gomnan propaganda chief, (August 19) O> St

ote + Je

; COL.
hssxcxte ; HANS. ee mr ae CSOD _

To 1028, ERLCHERS wag_head of the Gorgaan Tra
Sorvine 2n ohanyhol., “Bt that tine Sion was
He was ono of Tren g ebar mon an Shcohade
ronth of arch, luk;
Saigon by Transccean.
interest in French Ipco Chains,
the Tokyo chief of Peunsoccon radiced Suif07 that WGorlin awaits
further renorss frof: WELUBEAS on hos tuip fron Bangkok to Saigony
ant the likcs" On/fifarch 22, UMLCHERS at Saigon rediced Trans-
ocean, Shanghai, | soyer took with him the lists, .HcwWever,
copies of the cntAre set of your eighty dispatches,..? ‘what is
the situation in/regard to that which was requested?" "Ninety~
five reports by fnow", "Too late. Try sconest (to reach ne)
hore," (ferch 1h) An interespted nessage fron Lerlin to
Toutonia, Shanghai, cated March 22; 19, ctates, Nol855 pay

Cx dollars 1,645,123, Hans Helchers, by order! gf. Trensccean,
(vexeh,19uh) “fn intercepted nossoge in German, deted hugust 3,
19, from Melphers, Shanghai, to Transocean, ferlin, reads:
uSpecial 78 wokr 132 friends ot this emi have not heard anything
while dixector fcr Eastern affairs in asia inforned friendly

ageney he would ‘sportly arrive from, Tcky

o ‘trith noy powers, of
attorney", C/FEO AM ONE GERMAN PO: PIPAN OFS 73
TA) te ALL cz ’

ROSS

a German Transocean News Service correspondent

Sup vas
eo He is apparently under HANS HELCHERS theres

jec
in Shangha.

Pech

B, Radio Stations in Shanghai:

XGRS
Gernen radio station. Frequencies: ll.7 HC. Hediun frequency
unimom, Pover: 1 XW on both mediun anc high frequencies.

XUHA
‘an dmerican station owmed by the HENNINGSEN interests before the
was, Frequencies; about 600 KG and 11,8 LC, Powers 1 KW on 600 LC;

Se) Kv on 11,8 HC, ae
ae ie

Shahghat:.~ Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) = Page 17

HC

owned by the Shanghai Fvering Post and Enreury. Before the war cn-
tirely American, nov operated by the Japancse=controlled SEPM, Fre-
quencies: about 700 KG, Powers 1 i,

Imssian Radio Staticn, Frequency; 1470 KC

FEZ

French Indio Station, managed by lines RIVIERA; chief engineer,
LOUIS FILIPZ™'T, whe sperating controls for this station are located
on Route Freinpt, Sometincs the call letters Fr%-1 are used ,

XGOT

There is no infomation available about this station except that a
Britishor nanci SiS Lady aid propaganda broadcasting for the Japanose
over it until ize midaio of 193.

1, Personnel of FGREs
FLICK-ST8Gak, CAnrl

FLICK is the managor of the Gurmin fadio Stetion AGRS in Shanghais

To is an ameviccen of Geran cxtractlon, pcm anc reared in Providenec,
Rele, where ue vas siaply Cah WLICK, oo returned to Germany same
years ago with his motacr and gather ond was for a tine connected
With the Berlin and Vienna cffices of Universal Nows Service (now
incorporated into INS)» Dre MiutZ corr is FLICKts boss, Policies
and plans of “£GRS are colored with a due regard, for the foclings of
the ‘local branch of the Nazi Party, which sonetines cannot keep up
with FLICK!s dashing ancrican way of petting things done and taking
the according; changes. (August 1943)

Source says FLICK claimed he hed becone a German subject. There was
heey lal about hin in "Tine" sonetine pefore Pearl Hrbor. (liarch
19h2

A Treisury Deprrtnent ronersndun dated June 21, 1941, entitled "Anti#
Anericaa Propaganda in Shenchai", calls subject CHARIES L, FLICK and
sas Sav be wes born in Tentsin of Cernan parentage but spent nost
of his Life in the U.S. where he attended Brown University and engaged
in norseazer work, Vor six yoars he was counected with the Hcarst
Bureau in Germany under PAL VON WEIGAHG, who is 2 close fricnd and
wag also ot thet tine in Shonghad,

SSOUAN, ROT
ene, ‘

ESSUYEN was born in Shhnchai of Jrnenian parentage. He was for
nerly a reporter on the China Presse The Germens paid hin ‘1000 4
nonth to work in the German Broadcesting Station ZGRS. (June 1941)

CTs UGE bee: lot

Hi. i 7, us Wr °
sata (oa) (FREDERICK STAHL) © gf Sfaeegeen’) Chena, LE
ial) is a Geman-inerican who is active for the Germans and _

JCyn~ .-
\

Shanghai - Counter-Lispionage Swamery (cont'd) ~ Pare 18

26

and Japanese, He renorts m the United States to Hoxico

“a sal). rutouetic pistcl snd keeps in constant touch with the Jananese

Gendarnes cnd pelies heads, 4.LD has many inforners working for hin
and is active in anti-U.3, sropagarda, He garries Basse
U.5., Gorman, and Peruvian, His wife ané tio children are in Serlin,
fae UrapaeLiy tc nuve gone to ferJin, according to his story,
His weekly broadcests uvor station XGiS arc enlled "Inside Aacrica",
cuphusizing she point of view of dnerican Lebor, which, he says, will
sone day overtiicow thepresent American Goverment, Hc is the author
of "Goniny imerican Rovcluticn", This bock allegadlzvis being re-
printed pyr him in Chinese, He also tricd to smuggle 300 covies via
end trip ot the "Grixyshein" and did give some copics versonilly to
pissengers thercon inciuding KARL VON WEIGAND. His stcry was that
the printers in the United States were waiting to renrint the booke
& radio hoclup with Tokyo is planncd by AVALD in créor that his vore~
paganda can be rebroadcast fron there to tho United Stetésa.

aNDERSON

He is beolioved to be 4 Shanghai British Furasian, He is one of
the worst arncuncers of all those on vhe Cesran radio Statican in
Shenchai, altnouzh he sisply announces vorep-red copy, he seems to
be thoroughly steeped in the Germunic there,

XGRS (General Dif ormation)s

This German station is considered the best end nost efficiently
run in the Oricnt.

Vorking for the station are the following:

ANDERSON HOW, liss .
Lica JOHNSTON, FRANKIE (alias par KELLY)
HOLLAND , JOUN HCY, HEMDenr

HOLLINGSWORTH, REGCIB WIGHL, FRED (alins Cart, GMLD) .—

Tike all the prenagunca offices of the Germans in Shanghal, XGRS
hes Mercy te burn", The stoticn represonts a part of the great
propagaida organisation wis.ch the Vagis set wp in Shanghai aimed at
the whole yacific, The sieticn is heard as far away as sustralla, ©

A&A Russien cirl arnouncer has recently (August 191) been heard
on XGRS,. She is believed tc have married an Americ2n sailor and to
have lived in Meanile prior to the war,

4 Russian station operated in the French Concession, fernerly
White Aissian but now belicved to be underwritten by the Sovicts,
tekes issuc with XG25 on the iusso-Gerzen ware (August i9hh)

The owner of this station is the Nazi Party, ‘The station was

first started in Shanghai in 1940 and operated first from the Inter~
national Settlenont, It was then moved into the German School, At

Shanghai ~ Counter-Espionage Sursary (cont td) ~ page 19

first it wos ontirely Yazi in operaticns but it is interesting to
note that as the war has ~rogressed the capanese have exercised
stricter control over the station and that since the fall of 19h2
the Japancse bensorsbipihas been very stricte No infornation is
= available as to the operstions of the station since the ond of the
Buropean Ware : ae eke ,
j Sree ys ae reraggece:
A northern Chinese girl nanog Miss Ot aces tho Chinese_annouhe=
ing over the stations + A. Saaccgha, Chie elt Ee se, = (CA:
= AVE — Seb?
recom! HOLLINGS ORTH who is bolicved tofbe a Britisher\arriv oe
in Shangnoz. fiom Japan during the pre-war Pritish evacuttion fron, *
therc, eke is one of rontasors cver station XGRS, ele puts
SEA Mord PareHow! type cf british a “prop Trenort has
cen PecoTwa thay HOLLINGSMONTH has divided his tine between sta=
tions XGRS and XiHh, ;

Aes

3. xPHA (General Infornctior)s

This station was owned by the HENNINGSEN intercsts. “The chief
proadcaster ig DON Cl SHO]. Ttgostaff ruclude:
SS

"AUNTIE G.ROL" TANK LORSE

DON CHISHCLH _ Piss C, Nuke

aL INIOOD JOE SATEHT

iss WYN. MAC DONALD ROY STH ERT (Progran Chairnan)
CAL HUkSCH ah : ADE LADILR

MHA was entirody Anerican-ownec and cperated until the beginning
of the wars Key personnel were the chief commer, HaiKSON, Gatch
ATCOTT ond Ur, HEALY, the station manager, HARKSON and = OTT are
now in arorica amt TEu.Li is probably interned’ dn Shanghosi. After
‘ oe the Japanese took over the operations of XIHA, DCH CHISHOLE becane
the principal eoanentator, ancther ngyspaper nan who joined the |
gtation after the war started was ‘Ane MADAR, a Shanchai-horn Jews *
He was ¢ actively cocporating with the Japaneses evens

known_to b
< petore fhe wars Pescrisem AS TAT PAP ARENT.

The studio, transreitter and power supply. are all loeated at LS
Race Course Rotd, (Octcber 19h; Se

ROY STEWART, the progren chairman on the staff of station XM,
- is revorted to have been connected with the seditious "Frec dustral-
4a Movenent", sponsored by the Japanese to broadease propaganda to
Australias ‘

he XC (General. Infornation):
This is the station of the Shanghai Evening vost and Mercury.

: NTt 13 allowed to operate with the Kind permission of the Japanese
' drny", and accordingly broadcasts all the propagenda the arny wants.

Shanghai ~ Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) - Page 20

TOM BUTTJBR is the news announcer and a Mrs, ROBERTSON does the
evening news anouncine and plugs for a German company's wine. Mre
PANDSLD GOTED, of the Shegehei. Evening Post and Mercury, was the most
impo: tant. person connected with this entircly Anerican-owned station
before the war, (CGsteber 19h ) ;

S» FEZ (Genera). Information)

This is a French station and one of the most important in Shanghai.
In addition to wae ratio station there is a radio~telegraph station
also uswg bie call letters FLZ or FEZ-1,

. This station is menased by a Mme.. RIVEIRA, It is located on .
Route Treluyt in the French Concession, One of the key men at this
station is LOUIS FILIPTITI, Informant, who has know this man for
Twenty yetcc, Lelicves that, although he has carried on his job since
the fall of srance, he is fundamentally loyal to France and sympa~
thizes with the Ailied cause,

The radio-teiegraph station is stili in eommmication with Saigon

and was in comariication with Vichy emsil che Allicd forces made this
impossible, (Cstober 194) -

F, American Pronagamlists For the Enery in China:
The following Americans (thore is a doubt about the citizenship of
some) arc propaganda agents of the Axis in China:

.

AWALD, Capt. (alias FRED WIEHL) TMAMOD, AL’.

BERRIFR, STTAIRE LU - MAC, DONALD, Miss WYN

BUTLER, TOMSS A, HORSE (s0ss} » FRANK™
CHISH3IM, Reset (DON) MOY, Herbert Erasmun

FOG! 1. BoB _ REVUAN, Miss 6, -

GER BL ; : ROBERZSOY, Mes, Ella ..
HIRGCI, WL “ * WRAL, FREDERICK (alias AWALD) .
‘HOWARD, Ji5K fi ne Be ;

Pixs: rose oo iy ,
d aN. be oe tie
nhs Pe CHISHOLM vas an American newspaner man in Shanghat, He was looked

mari: o7 the local british community, Since Pearl Harbor and at least

by, upon Ly; americans as their No, 1 vraitor. He published the weekly .~
wv shoppi tg res, liven before Pearl Haxbor it was full of critical re-
until. 191.2. he has broadcasting nigntly over Station XMHA between 10

poBgry and 19.20 P.k,, jong ard short wave. He reads the news that is given
Ae him, ther. coments, friendly to the Japanese, and extremely. unfriendly
‘Vodl wn to the I[ritish, He refrained from many anti-American comments for
= some time, sut tney began to increase in the spring of 19h2. ;
(March 39433) ; :

“ee

Shanghai ~ Counter~espionage Summary (cont'd) ~ Page 21

In the spring of 1943, CHISHOLM was picked up by the Javanese
and put in the Bridge House, He was there only a short time and then
released, He did not show any particular effects of being badly
treated on his release, A few dare later he was found at the foot
of the stairs in his house badly benged up and covercd with blood.
He explained that he had fallen down the stairs, After receiving
medical attention he was put in a c&st. He reported that his back
had been fractured, He was still in tho cast when the Tela Maru
sailed from Shanghai and had been in the cast for seven months, It
was stated by informant that there was a strong feeling that the
injuries were belicved by many to have been self-inflicted, and that
there was a possibility that a deal was made with the attending doc~
tor to contimuc keeping CHISHOI in a cast, The reason being that
CHISHOLM seemed to have taken a change of heart and did not cere to
play along with thy Japanese any longer and by remaining in the cast
would not have to work for them, and, of course, in the event that
he refused to work for them would not be molested,

CHISHOLH is about 38 years of age. He is lmown as a radical and.
reactionary with nasty pen and dispusiticn. It has been reported
that since his accident he nas applied to the Nanking government for
(puppet) Chinese citizenship, He hopes tc be repatriated, and ex
pects to "catch it hot", (December 1943)

CHISHOLM was.considered for repatriation in the last exchange by
virtue of his internment at the Haipong Road Camp from Noverber 192
until the spring of 1943, He was released from the camp with JAMES
IADD, Bitktish, and one other British national whose names is not knom,
In the absence of any specific request by the State Department for hi.
repatriation, his place was given to others whose cases were consider-
ed more deserving. CHISHOLM's present activities are not known but
he is reported to. have been re-interned in one of the other civilian
internment camps. He has not been officially reported to have been
detained at the dreaded Bridge House Gendarmerie Station but ia be~

lieved to be at the Hadpong Road Camp. (March 1945) ~ f WJ

e 7 : ? mm
2, Proseresoi, lites) mrieel CLF: CA! a Shaughary
RCE» Tocewacisy,

Known as "Robbie" to her radio audicnce, she wes retained by the
Evening Post for general utility duties round the station as well as
for news, She conducts 2 popular amateur program on Sunday nights.
When internment came in the spring of 1943, BUDDY UNO who was then
supervisor for the Javanese Press Bureau of the Post, intercedad for
her and effected her exemption from internment, The American Associa-
tion was notified officially by the Japanese Consulate that she was to
be exempt. Since, tlign, she has been employed by the Japanese-om cP

“ey Evening Post wht b samt operates, hadio Station 3H Mrs,
ROBERTSON was formerl: the owner of Radio $ en-EQHD which was
taken over by the Japanese aftor-Pearr Harbor, In pre-Pearl’ Harbor

days, she was on-the-pay-roll of the German Station KGRS to put
blr Tom AS ViT (ES AMD 40k DATA S#7- RI,

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) = Page 22

German propaganda material over as many outlets as possible, irs. ;
ROBERTSON's station had quite a following in Sharghai for her msical
library, and therefore was a good outict from the German noint of
view, HERDERT MOY is said to have been identified in some way with
the arrangement to transmit German naterial over XQHB.

As to Mrs, RCBERUSON's personal background; she is Burasian -
exact extcaccicn not knowa, She had a valid U.S. registration accord~
ing to U.S, Gonsular files now in Swiss Consular hands, She probably
obtained tor U:S, vitizenshin by marriage, Her husband was fornerly
an ex-servicencr, a motor mechanic, discharged from the LSth Usse
Infantry in the days when tais regirent was serving in Tientsin, He
met and uarried Mes, RCBERTSON there, After his discharge, he came
to Shangha. to establish a garage, but went bankrupt in the attempt.
He thon floated fra odd jobs to odder ones, In 1937 he undertook
to constrict a torped> to sink the Japanese cruiser ‘Tdgume" and was
Killed in the attempt, He was 4 mencer of the American Rifle Company
of the Snanghai Volunteer Corps curing <ho 3937 nobilization of the
Corps. He als had a son who was 4 nom zr of the same companys

The son, mentioned above, is heiicved -< uave gone to sea and
may possibly be found in the Merehocx, Mario: Seevice, The younger son
is still with lirs, ROBERTSON, So far as -s known, there were but the
two children, Mrse ROBERTSON now resides with a sister and her sone

He¥ advertising plugs over her programs are primarily for Melchers
California Wines, brewed in the Melchers Wineries in Taingtao, liel-
chers is an old-Uerman firm of many years standing in China, She also
plugs various other local lines, (Be2, 2 March 1945)

irs, ROBERTSON is tromendously fat, weighing approximately 250
aa She is about 35 years of age and has a dark conplexion,
Bel, 15 December 19h) :

y Ct: ? © Ob Sta WWI wce + KQUELELAN
3, VPockizr, Sop BSA? a ee
———— J ;

FOCKIER, an American citizen, was a trombone pla and \headed
the band at Denon! ts Del lionte Cafe un Ei Gd.» » Then he
obtaincd emloynent from HERBERT Moy and broadcast over the German

20 on r,° After Pearl Harbor he hoped

nent, but ws noverthclcss interned ot Pootung Men's Camp in the
spring of i943, That camp was shifted around after the second ex-
change bri it is bolicved that he is still interned. FOCKLER has a
cotmen=Law Russian wife whome he desired to marry after he was interne:
and for whom he applied to the Swiss Consulate for notarial. scrvices.
Investigation revealed that he aiready had a wife in the United States
The principal reason for wishing to legalize his relations with the
common-Lav wife was to make her eligible for financial assistance
granted at that time by the UeS» governnent to bona fide alien de~
perdents of interned U.S. nationals, (2 March 1945) :

poB-C 13 RAYMOND is a ae tEirted +o have been broadcasting fron

Shanghai = Countar Espionage Sumary (cont'd) ~ Page 23

AM undated report stated that FOCKLER had an armor body~guard

furnished by the Japanese.

Le F RAYMOND, ALLN

Shanghai to Australig in the interest of the Japanesese KF

He is chou 30 years old, and came to Hongkong four or five years

ago fron Snengnoi ani worked for a stock and share broker fs é
He was alsc an ameteur jockey and horse traincr, He was i
ful in the latter but beecane involvca in a case of sharp ofas05
race track reeling vb Uecao and was disciplined by the Hongkong

Jockey Civ) and “warned off" club premises. This applicd tp other
affiliated race tracks along the Ghina cuast, Tle left Hongkong (in

the summer of 19!) for Siagon and inoue inn. back to Shangh
nother was in Pongliong at the tine of the sur ener and was
at Stanley, She wis visited by daperss: suns and told thg
son was arranging for her tc be sent .o O.-dr wate “Vig

H.Ge¥. WOODHEAD, 14 Holuesdale Ro2i, Fox'illi-cn-Sea, Sus}

England, who is head of a newly-formed Fac Eastern Reference {®

in the British Hinissry of Information, wrote to RANDALL GOURR,'

Sth Aveme, Ney York City, and remarked: N,eeThe Quisling pf
Shanghai is going to cause a lot of trouble when this waris ¢

The Japs seom to have nobbled Nottinghan, Chisholm and an Ausie®

. naned Raymond and a number of otherSeseceel Was horrified até
one of Raynondts efforts in the paper, cnd I do not think Xd

been exactly serving the case of the United Netions." - gag

The Japanese gave much publicity and encouragen nt to th
movenent called the "Free Australia Lovenen "Thich Was ina
b igroup Of imepemdent—tinded Australicns" at_a moo a

19h2, Eris necting-was_organized and presided over © Md AYO

d to have ad

ip and its wit

drawal fron World War II and negotiate to conclude a separate peace

pd this meet~

ing: 1 dapanese, 1 Swede, I Englishman, and 8 Australifns, Newspaper
nuriber of

Ly
‘There onpears to have been sone diffidence in disclosing the nanes

of those supporting this seditious novenent, The newspopcrs reported
thet a "League Secretary was elected while Peter Petersen and John
Holland were given charge of vublicity, The Chairman, Mr, Alan Tay-
nond, was confirned as Treasurer. t RAYMOND thereafter gave seditious
proadzasts at frequent intervals over station XMHA, while "nightly
Roy Stewart pounds this new doctrine hore to Australians in Australia

an “hustralian stockbrcker from Sydney" and was repo: ud
ted resolutions to pronote the independence of Austra.
with dapan, Eleven persons are reported to have atte

roports lavor stated that at a second moeting. -wwice tha
Australions attended,

through the mecium of shortwave radio,"

e
Fo ee ae

Ge Other Propagandists for the Enony: eZ Y ‘ Chine UL
C/T: pee: THe Ja

E.

Shanghai -

“+H ne CUT: UK, 1
2 pee, Pars ¢ 7 PLLA BSRATOR ACT! VT leS. AND Ba

’ announcenents, his chfe

an.

Counter-Esplomage Swmary (cont'd) - Page Ay

** various Japanese, including Lt, S_ MATSUBARA, Assit, Novy Press
Bureau Spokesmen, ami _H, MASAXI, Secretary Interpreter of the Japanese
Enbassy, also took part In those shortwave proadtasts, and on at least
one occasion the speuker was a Chineses 0,0, LAT; who was described

as the director of the Shanghal office of the Central Press of China
and Adniristrative Director of the Chincse Goverment International
Publicity Board, These bredensts were clained to be heard in Aus-

tralia and the 0,5 Decerber 19h
Se (Deosber YN) Wf dex ww gers BEC, Bue
oa alae aa

t
Prior to Poarl Harbor LADD was , &
Company, Federal Inc. UeSele, & unit of the Jnternational ant, a }
and ee and eric on off hors at Radéo Station MEM, AL re
Pearl Haztor, he continued at his radio occupation, He is Jelieve :
tape ~ LADD is doout 26—88

> the sane tine as DON
7 orowdcasting for the
Japanese, ifter nis release fror Spas -v ue was seen calling at
the Swiss Consulate in order to Site 2 at--horeat to the effect that
he was doing work for the Japs under cotipassion, (R~2, March 1945)

ZADD did Japanese propaganda negscasting over station XGOI until
the middle of 1943 and then quit, (iugust 194k)

Hrrsgic, LIANC-LI C472 Cu  Touny <, Bina wok
zea 17 Clessape de> Tetutessy AYleuchatig Bavna we

oreign Bairs of the

nents, An cfficial statccent issued from the Nanking Goverment
Central Press Servian set\out that @ANnchad 2 wide acquaintanceship
anong Nazi officialdéon in Qernany and “is theariginator"of the move~
nent ageinst the American aggression in China," ‘The statenent said
that TANG "is known to have\very strong and definige views onc ertain
aspects of fercign relations\|as may be sauged fromhis pase o~
ications and stakenonts," BECe™ P MNBL TP Pelbreanee 2 PROCACAN, LA
ough of Giinese blood," TANG ‘7as born in whe Nether
Indies and was educdted in London and Vierma, Soma Time ago henade
a trip to Germiyy where he tcok a course in Nazi propaganda nethods
which he has tried to apply in his job as Chairman of the Nanking Gov-
ermment!s so-callea International Publicity Cormittec. In dune 191,
TANG took a trip through Japanese-qontralled torritery and organksed
so-called anti-imerican and anti-British propaganda committees in all
th leading cities, In soma places these committees have net been
active butemn others, such as Peiping, they nave bean quite active in
conducting anti-inerican propaganda...

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Sumnary (conttd) = page 25

TANG compiled a “black~list" for the Japanese which included
names of prominent American newspapertien and journalists in Shang-
hai as many Chinese. These were booked for evertual assassination.
His offici2i position is listed as liinister of Propaganda in Hankinge

(June 1941) ‘ of
be iar,, C. Gn CLT et. 1 Caefair Biba OCC: GON OO AL Xx

LAL is director of the Shanghai office o Cen Press of
ment iater=

China and Administrative Director of the Cninese .
4 . Ly, 4 shor

a1 Pedlioiy board, He is :
broadcasts 11 connection with the seditious ‘Free Australia vove-
ftent," (Decerber 193) RE! * :
ea

. Se MASAKI. H.

amend 7
KASAET is the Secretary-Inthroreter of the Japanese Embassy and
is reported to have taken part in chor,-wave broadeasts in connection
with the secitious "Free Australia Movers". (December 1943)

6 CASINO, VINCENES 2,

CASINO is a Filipino and is publicity oflicer of ‘the Filipino
Association of Shanghai, He left Sranghei May 2, 1942, for Hankow
and surrounding towns on a propaganda iecture tour, accompanied by
J. D. KOCHAR, amIndian, (December 193)

Te MAHTANI, Dre DAYA

KAHTANI was publicity officer of the Indian Independence League
when on February 18, 1913, he resigned to begin a Vy day fast in
thy with Gandhi ts fast, He ended his fast on March 3, the same
day that Gandhi ended hiss :

8, PETERSEN, PETER ; eS :

PETERSEN was a propagendist for the Japanese-sponsored "Free
Australia Uovement'",

9, Aaewrnor, DAVID our: Pele? ees: Sruenaussr a Sfkasegher, Gare wir Gera www
ww IL CO LLABORAT CON OALKG CUNO LET —

e report that DAVID ZENTNOR (claims Polish natio v
‘the editowal chis he New Shangnat Evening Dost is believed to be
tricy GSSRNICR expresses hinscif widely as being pro-Japanese and he
Was mich imoressed by Pearl Harbor, Manila, Singapore, etce He has
an amerioon wife, JEAN KaANG SRNTNOR, She was fornerly narried to
EDWR ANG, 2 Cantonese returned scucent fron Pennsylvania who is
now in the Ghungking Central Barite When they wore divorced, she left
the custody of her only son to her ex-husband, and floated around
Shanghai for sore tine ag a free lance writers She was interned at
Chayei Cagp in 19)3, but was later released on nedical grounds,

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) = Page 26

(According to her statenent ‘to Swiss officials.) She was keot fron
re~internnent through her present husband's Japanese connections,
clainin7 that according to Polish law, the wife of alien nctionality
automatically becones and assunes the mitionality of his husband,

Despite this, under the provisions set forth by the State Dept.
for the evacuaion of alien srouses (including even eneny alien
spouses) of bona fide U.S. citizcns, ZENINOR applied through his
wife to be evacuated to the Unitcer“States in the company of nis*
dnerican wite, Lirs, ZENTNOR's nationality status was established
and supported by consuler reristrations which are now in the Swiss
Govermment's haniss

TENTNOR works ‘under THOMAS A, BUTLER with whom he does not get
along, Both ZENTNOR and BUTLER fight for favors. fron KAZULARO UNO,
the knerican-sorm ¢upanese who is chief censor of the Post and an
erployee of the Japonese army Fress Burecn, :

In an intercepted lotter from Free Caine Gescribing conditions in
Shanghai, writer reports that THOMAS Bi "x vas decn fired and that
ZENTNOR lis the big boss now", Tae wrivor tise states that he has
heard that ZENTNCR ana nis wife are storing a Tiat with several
Japanese, souewhere near Jessficid Parke i§ February 1945)

This report states that ZENTNOR Prequentiy declares that the

Japanese Will be victorious, In spite of his Jewish back, ’
JENINOR wrote news reports for Transocean. (2 august 19)d)

- - cf 484 URNACLS
10, Asorrtncusu, a eke UK. ece + Pubes ie/Te

R Leia wwii : :
NOTTINGHAK is a British subjects (fc\ published the aS Times,
long _a pro~Japanese paer in sh go whic cge
receive, Japenese moncy, After Pearl Harbor paper becane’ frankly

pro-Jayanese and was far nore servile than the rost. In June, 192,
NOTTINGHAM was extremely unhappy about the Ngee not because the
their Ho, 1 traitor, but becuse a

British community considered
Jae editor e a an x: was eased

a
OUt,e , Shanghai Tines ran a dsily column of comments instead of an

editokiercoluen, .It wos frankly and bletantly pro-dapanese, and une
doubieNly was written by 2 Japanese, Recent reports indicate that

NOTTINGAM, BRUCE, and ROBERT CHISHOLM have been interned, possible
because Wey have outlived their usefulre ss to the Japaneses
(1? Warca\lybyy SE RITA. :

# . ese: weclto
ll. / PATENT, ae y 2 y) . *

= 7 oe) ead
Doe: <-F Po bez WA
OSs ——"— joe PATENT is a Shanghai, reared Russian Jew and Ta) married to an

hrabian jovess fron Bagdad,» His father is a tailor who worked for
Snb Boos, CCe in shanghai, He also has one sister, He is described
as 30 years old, 5’ 1"

» cark brown hair, and ¢ ed by 1
Bycxene und SET Moret 6 ott A: yi
Ja e~tox7TRogBoe Rave ae

Shanghai - Counter=esplonage Summary (cont'd) - page 27

Subject prior to Pearl Harbor was employed as accounting clerk
vy the Victor Talking Machine Go, of China, formerly known as the
RCA Veitor Co, of China, He absorbed much of his so~called Anecrican
accent from ascociationswith members of the lth Marines, In the
evenings he worked for radio station WHA, It was rumored that the
RCA Victor was compelled to yicld to the Japs following their occup®-
tion after the 193/ incident, and the Victor Talking Machino Co, of
China was generally considered Japanese controlled, In May 19hh,
he was still with the XMHA radio station and put on the stwbion com
mertials. He is acquainted with a mimber of Americans, some of athom
are promincnt, andhe is belicved to be essentially pro<Amew3.can in
his own feelings, The employment, by station MHA, is his only known
act of collaboration, (December 15, 19h)

IIT, ENEMY AGENTS dh
hoon ice ae: DoB:'17 CIE 2 OCR ~ tote! geek

BOON isgne the agents trained > iin Shanghai, He is a owimme
and an ex-champion for short distances. — a. ze years old, 2eoat ory,
speaks Cantonese, Hakka, Mandarin, Mataren ari 5 Zaiects, and looks like
2 Chinese, He gr: fig Oranges WinTeTulese eventually we:
to North China instead of South China as originaily planned, (C2; March 19)

H, CIE 2 BLE ToURNAST
B, (7FLICK-STEGER, CARL: ~~ 4 R Wbo

FLICK is an ex-irerican citizen f£ German ext¥action,,who has since
pelieved to have become jern ize He is mana, the German radio
jj in rai, He was educa the 0.5., was former] news
2 ies in Berlin @ e and"is a close friem 6f Karl Von, CAND and

worked umer in the Hearst Bureau in Gormeny before the war,- It is said7-
he now takes his orders from Dr. FRITZ ss Attache of. the German
Embassy in Shanghai, (i9u2) (For ato detail sce Section Tie, lL)

Ce GE "PTC! @ EUGENE NE HOVENS: .

HOVANS isYbelféved to be 1 Japanese agent in Shanghai, although a Russian
citizen, Ho was at one time an opera singer and musician, (26 November 19h3) -
Now connected with Japanese Naval Intelligences (2 dugust 19h)

De HSU IANG-HSI (2 LOONG-ST):

: HSU is a figvre in +he Shanghai underworld closely connected with the : i
Ss Japaneso, See HSU HSJ CHYENG and MING SUN TRADIUG COMPANY. o<e ZY
#6 fed UF lites » AN«. Wie ei

E. U TSEAT~CH ENG i r |
‘ oe

eget

now

7 . cal

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) - Page 28

‘

:

which delivers supplics to gucrillas around Shanghai, However, HSU (or ZI)
became a great friend of Generel HATA!s liaison officer and through hin was
able to get passes for free transpocvation of goods. So HSU pulled out of
MIN SUNG TRADING ©O, and want inic profitable business for hinsclf, He keeps
up his good standing wich the Japenese by supplying thom with considerably
more information than he gives to his boss, TU (DOO), in Chungkirg. His
groups's headquarters is in the Wasiington Apartments on Avenue Pevain,

Fe HUANG CHIN JUNG (WANG CHING YOUNC, IILLION BOLLLR WANG):

LO nae rca en rao ea ae

Shanghai's underworld, before the Japanese occupation, centerec An‘the
somcalled TSING Farty, headed by the coiorful triumverate of Wilt: CHING-YOUNG,
TU YUEH=SHENG (DOO YCHH-SUNG) “The Opivm King", and CHANG HSIAO-TL.IN (Fhe Salt
King), When the Jars took over the Settlement, only WANG remainca, Ts YUEH
SHENG had gone over to Chungking and CHANG HSTAO-LIN had been assassinated,
The Japanese had long before begun a campaign to make use of the Shanghai
underworld, They had done this through gaining the confidence of the gang~

- sters and learning details of who paid and otaer trace secrets of the gangs.
They had also coopertted with the gangs 1n settiiue wp gambling houses and
opiun dens, The dapancse, however, pretendet ic ~rlsin respeet for WANG ts

organization, WANG was reprced to have at, Least > wy 4000 pistols and

10,000 men’at his command and could cause a. ueer) elo. foree considerable
trouble. Upon the Japanese occupation of tre Settienent, Admiral YOSHIDA sent
his respects to WANG anc WANG feli in line with the flattery as the Japanese

had planned, A year later, the Japanese felt they had WANG's organizations

under firm control, Accordingly, WANG was summoned by the Japanese police
and ordered to comply with the personal and property registration formalities
imposed on all ordinary Chinese in Shanghai, WANG was outraged and filled in
the forms with false informition, The Japanese, however, already had his cor
plete dossier, According to the report “he went away 3 beaten min’, WANG
retired to his home near Longinva where the Japancse allow him to stey but

where he is kept under close observations (1943)

Ge "J.Ke" (name of agent unknown):
“J,K," and "X¥Z" are two of Japanfs most important agents.

"J,.Ke" was operating in Hongkong prior to December 7, 191, and at some
time before the middie of December he wis transferred to Shanghais

"In Shanehei, as head of a spy ring, "J,K." nad contacts with Chinese who
had Chungking scrnections, Chinese communists, and Russians attached to the
Tass News Agency, includicg its chief, ROGOFF, "J,K." bpp
finiShangial duving most of 1942, but nexbers of his spy ring were in the
south a& early as Feoruary T9146 :

In 192, "J.K." became interested in the establishnent of the GEA.
intelligence office at Kwangehwwven, and arranged with Consul TONEGI to send
espionage personne”, including PA TI +9 work out of Zwangchowwang In Lay
1942, "J,X." planned to naintain contact by radio with PA TI,

Shanghat - Counter-Esplionage Swumary (cont'd) = Page 29

"J,K," was working out of Kwangchowwan during the first months of 19):3
and he assisted in setting up a system of rircless communication between
herrea Chungking. He is rencried to have been back in Shanghai by

iP: 3e : :

ASIA BUDDEIST ASSOCIATION:

The East asia Buddhist Association, with head offices in Shanghai, re+
erults and treins priests for work of encouraging Thincse Buddhists to turn
traitor to theis country, At the same tine a mmbcr of eneny agents have
assumed the disgvise of priests and have rixed among the veonle in the
interior, The East Ssia Buddhist Association has been particularily active
in the Wu Tai Chan District in

Atom, wena 2. (oa;

ERBIN is of Cernan-justrial descent, He has the reputation of being a
Germin Gestapo agent in Shanghai and is descrised as a typical Hun, about h6
years of age with a duclling sear on itis fac? aré@ ‘tho mmnners of a Nazi
dog", He studied madicine in Vienna bubnover re ucivad pis diploma and was,
therefore, compelled to practise as a doctor's te. .stent, In Shanghai he
practised with Dr, AIRERT VON MIORTHI who iis cise au: Vileged Gestapo agent.
Dr, ERBIN resided in the U.S. for several years and toot a naturalized
citizen, He was at one tine ship's doctor on one of tho American~President
Liners,; however, in March 192, he was allegedly denituralized of his U.S.
citizenship, When war broke out he insisted that he should be interned with
the Americans in Shanghai but apparently he was nover actually interned in
any of the American camps, ERBIN was an american when it was to his best
interests to be one; otherwise, he was hoppy to belong to the Axis camp, He
was reported to be a key man in ono of the large onium smuggling rings in

ERBIN spent much of his timo associnting with the crow of the "President
Harrison", a7 ) a every way maan, unccoperative and Yaa harunc— causing
192)

Siew 7 fon. o)a3 . ocd» Dye Ogeek’
H ein Ogee ¢ Sut Poh C23 - >
Jo /JBWIS, OLIVIA, Wissy cS maby

asian offmixcd natiomlity, In 1939, she

“Miss IEWIS is a 22 ycar old
was involyed jn an armament racket in Shan together with other question-
DILLINI in a dea a

able characters. liss LEWIS assisted Mis
of the Chinese gucrvilla leadérs and ttrAm

portace erticn, “he plot wos uncovered by the Shanghai Municipal Police,
owever, and was uasuccessful, (1913)

Ke LE NIKE, iss;

Miss LI is a Korean, In 1939 her home address was room No. 8, No, 38
Hwakee Avenuc, Shanghai, _ Her room was a rendezvous for nerbers of the -
Japanese Special Service Corpse

el

Shanghai. ~ Counter-Espionage Summiry (cont'd) - Page 30

Le LIN K'aNG HOU (alias LING KONG HOW):

Underworld figure closcly conrected with ‘the Japanese, LIN is known as
"The Street Politician", He and his nen run the Japanese Pao Chia systen,

x, MauxssmUsKy, Ful C/T BSR? oce> Pokice a shanghai Ming MJT

MAKSSEVSKY is a Russian policcman vw aps co foynation
throughout the Scttiencnt and _hards over the information to tho Gendarns. - ue

uses dom-and~out foreipners 25 SDLCSs .
- z ” bar 22,22 Z

n Monme, arsuer ve VN. (Oe), SEE RIO atougber, cheiia WE site

ORINI has been yariously
Austrian, ° As a doctor who gr< i the Vienna nedica} s
ve rominent 3m Shanghai, bofore the war, «His assistant is Dr VETBIN, —
Gir work was 1o7go yg vencreal, and it is rumorcd they wore abortionists,
although HIORINI riasclt is » first class doctor, He lives with a Chinese.
Rurasian wonan kaom as Mcse EDWARDS, thrown #.cse social connections he
was able to got introdsecd to Neashy Chiares, Sour MLORINE and EFBIN are
Nazi Gestapo accnus, HOPING wos also odnioycd a sho Japaneso Snecia rvice
Section in Shaiznai in 173°, His work for “uu cniaracrie corsisted mainly
uring wealbiy Cries vO pitucr Wacre the Japaes? could kidnap ther’ and
hold them.for ransom, He eszicted Uust. KUMHA'TA in establishing a high -
class gembling dem for tois :urmose. HIORINI's last known acdress was Med-
purrt Apt., 934 Bucsiing Well Road, and his offices wore in the China United

reported, ag being a German-Italian And an

Building. (i943) the Z,
7 Cc a
Oo Musm, NATHAN Farman ics ENCwrt : : * A Laughs, Chua wie

RABIN is x Russinn Jew of a low type and wholly unscrupulous. He was born

in Russia, and Jnited States in 1928 under a non-qota vise which

entitled hin to remain therefor six nont! However, he ropginedapeL
mber 1932 when ho was coportods While there he resided in Detroit, RaBI
ved in Shanghai in 1932 and was crployed by various night clubs and gane

bling spo! he wag actively working for the Japanese Segret Service
Section j At that tine he Tived in an apartnent at ain Bway Hane

sions and neintained his office at 2h Haining Road, He wes often seen arned
and drunk, goliag doovt the Winter Garden boasting anc defying either Scttle-
nent or Frene stoi police to arrest hin-as he was carrying 4 specitl Japanese
passports de was anrelyed in a plct te lecate Ghincse guerrillas and turn
then oves to the Japanes2. Sone of RARLIfs cintacts in Shanghal. vere: Rudolf
‘MLZEP, imorican revetocuated Deceribe: 194.5, Ctto SCISSERIG, George HOSHTNOYS,
Dr, albert wen TiCQinT shina Harv BRODULLING, NISHITaBaT, I. OKURay Lies,
NaCl, and Cape. ¥, KUNAHR'TA off the Japanese Special Service Section, (1943)

Te is roperted tnat RABIN has mide considercble anounts of money and has
remitted certain funds for deposit ‘in the United States, (194.3).

RABIN‘s background has been further reported as follows:
He wa: Bin Geptonboh 2) 1909 at Kepul or Kowil, Tussiag (1939).

: a “

a fecdbes me

Shanghai ~ Counter Espionage Summary (cont "d) = Page 31
While in the United States, he lived with his parents at 3h Leceister
Court, Detroit, Michigan, Between Septerber 1928 and February 1931, he

attended Detroit City College as « part tine student whero ho stucied musics
He was deported fron Seattic on the SS “Princess jlice" in Novernber 1932.

RABIN's nother, Mirg RABINOWITCH, resides c/o iTS. Be (Bva) GUREVITCH,
1761 Sewerd Ave,, Detroit, Michigen, 4 brother-in~liw of Mra, GUREVITCH =
Mr, GUREVITCH = owns ShoursPhoruach, avarue Joffre, Shanghai, E, LVORF,

proprietor of Regs] Pharmacy, Suey ee fioad, is a distant relative of

RABIN's, ff ih A —
: 4. occ af.

Z ?
On arrival in Shanghal i rdovenber 1932, RABIN lived at Linda Torrace,
Ave, Joffre, {le was first employed by Joe BAPHEN ds a musician at th3
‘ Paramount Ballroon and later he wa%\employva it Cito's ant Littic Tum, He ¥)
at one tine tricd to etlin dmerican Chigensaip, saying hq wos bory in B :

Clty, Michigan, hut couldn't produce anpyoroofe PCs
BLINKS wit a

RABIN worked for the ,Janoneseiacr nice Sdetion,’ An March 6, 1939,

he brought about the St by the Japanes> SNor spis-relé Chinese, who had

net hin by-appoinimont ot the Weida Note, ig. dol reg ile ostensibly
negotiating an arms deal, He also mntactey Jina Mang CRODILLINI and got
ar to-arree to helo the Jtpaneso Locave cMmyWT SO tC UA so plierrills

A nits who wore oneraving in the Setuicnent > Frepeh Concession, liss
<7) ®RODILLINI was to pretend thé Had aris and crzmmnition to sell to Chinese
na guerrilla officers, and instesd turn the guerrillas over to the Japaneses

In order to get into the good graces of the Japanese SS, RABIN once
boasted that ho had formurly been "a Chicago gangster". (193) 5

i . Ci rid fo »
p. AMoumume of Patialn,{ Princess) Sons SP Or ae
[a ) gcc: Tu Ageet:
the sister of the Mehorajah of Patlalts, Sne is
narried a bhi wes le e is stronply believe
a Japancse + in Shanphoi, She was 2 friend of Tbrihike TLR who was
ornerly of New York and now is said to be a “big power" in Shengh°i, (1913)

Q TAI TSU NYES (7) (TAT TSUMAL 2s -

This Incian princessgis

a TAL TSJ«NaI and TROO Brothers conduct 4 seco hand bock androurio shop

: in the City of Chengshu, ‘They overste in plainclothes in the city and country

jon : districts of the county, They ave listed anong the natives cooperating with
the Japanese, >

Re Moan, GHATHXONG: e982 07/7 Cir: Ludonese ? ect: TAME y
aa [acer a en =

TAN is ope_of the agents trained b chon in Shanghai, He is described as
age, 28, height, $5", tuiid nediun, complexion, dark, tnd looks like a
Javanese,» He speaks Fnglish, Malayan lancerin with Javanese 2 and, ’

Widdie vewareay dialect, He reside in Hongkew and later in Yu Yuen Road,
fhI lived with a Songran Hongkew e : ee

fe

Shanghai » Counter-Esplonage Summory {conttd) = Page 32

Kors 07: Tudawsca? oe
Se MUN, SOON KEE: “prin tyr gees Take)

‘O", thin face, cormlecien, “
and specks English, iol

e Rae S)

4s locked up
‘op Arty ani cathers
orovacing the Jan a.uy vith
reports on public reactica to war n and poustical developments, TIBOLT
appears to be fed up with the Jap sc10re of things, A young Jewish cir, and
a young German Jaw nored Henry “erk cache seventh flocr of the Bhvay Lensior.
for hig, (duguct 1944)

locked up and. é nO: :
f a row with Pic HICVANS, @ He x

all kinds of petty amomavzon. Thi

~ U, TSER LU SUNG (7) (TSU_LU-SUNG 2):

‘ 4s 4 lawyer in Chongshe. Clty, Tov isco his nccttion to pees on infornaticn
obtained from his clisnts, He is 2isted ones Sho novives cooperating with
the dJapanesc, (1313)

Ve TUNG HSU AM:

TIUNG is possibly an espionage agent for the Japanese amd it is belicved
he has been in touch with the Japanese supervising cspionage in Shangiai in
Decertber 191. (193).

We WA

Wl. carried on espionage for the Japanese in Shanghai fron darmary through
May 1912, His contacts were chiefly in f.reign diplcastic circles, They
“4neluded Gernan officials and a confidential clork in the French Consulate
General, (1943).

X. WEN LAN THING:

Uniorworld figure in Shanghai clcisely cemiected with the Janancse, (19435
Xo YAH LION TO (YUEN LTEN TUNG):

Underworld fisure closcly ccmnectod with the Japanese. (1943)
Z. OHIFN CEN TST one CRN TAN:

Before tne foil of Shanghai there was one Shanghainese merchant who was

very active in ccilsborating with cho Jsparesc, This =an CHIEN CHEN TSIU
) Joined the Mlangsu and Chilkciang Provinces Puppet organization

aftar the fall of Shanghai in 1939, His son CHIEN TAN (° ) followed
his father in cooperating with the Jasanese and also worked as an agent very
secretly.

Shanghai ~ Counter-Esnionage (cont'd) - pase 33

«(eases 1 OK “Wa 2 CT: Chute
atl became very femoug and 08 active among all the vupnets, He
ith the punvet Chairwn WANG CHIN VET, On his roturn fron

head of the CHING SHAO Organization

and built it up.

for the
th: grow is
WikF Tir lives ab tis.t rlace

The purpose of this crrant
Japanese and to cngac> in es zionas

also. He is also known by the nicknane o
which means smll handsome fece,, (3=2, 3

IV, COMMERCIAL FIUS Glog
A, Jgapaneso Firac in Shanghas (Genural/s

Apri® 2yb3)

Firm

Mitaui

Central China Film Co.
Heng Chan Realty Co.
Mainichi News

Central Chenical Coe

Varroo Company sBavlli
Central China Development Co. UEDA (VeF.)
TiKaSIE (P)
Choko Transportation Coe oe Hideld
ISHAKU, Shimatani
. Asahi MOLDS
Kato Conpany
same as Ke neakasontet ion Coe
MARUL FUJITA, Yoshinasa
idzutana Conpany TaD y Jasayosht
TASUDA, Shoicht
MASURAGS
- HON
SHIRO.TZU, SeLuet
Nakashina Beer Dist, Assn, IULO, Poshiro
Liitsubichi. BLOW a. (2)
YOuOTR.A (7
Nozaki Industrial Co, POUT, Yamada
Litsud LSaiAnL
&D.CFl
Tak OTM
Oriental Cotton Co. Yar Linro
Shochusha Has SEGA li, Torao
Toa Marine Transportation ASAT, Hakoto
Yamashita Iadustry Terk
San Hsing Flour Co. MAXTHIKO, Jiro

aa

2 Sige S

Shanghai ~ Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) — page 34

Be

Ce

Prorinent Jananese Businessmen in Shanghai:
le AOKI SETSU

AOKI is fifty-two years old and was born in Saitama ken, Jan tn, He
graduated from Keio University in Tokyo, He is the Dircctor of the
Chamber of Commerce of Shanghai, Chinc, cmd vice rresidont of the Central
China Hydraulic Zlectric Co. (ifarch 1944)

2. KiWattina NISHIRO

KAWAURL is the manager of the Yokahamn Spceic Bank dn Shanghai,
China, He is fifty years old, In 1936, ho cradnated from tho Dinerial
University in Tokyo, Japan, He has been with the Yokahama Specie Daric
for twenty six years, ‘uring that tine, «x spent twelve years in Man
churia ard north Central China, In 1932, he beccme Asst, Mannger cf
the Yokohama Specie Bank in Shenguai for four years and was later pro= |
moted to Manager in the same bronech, (ievch 1949)

3e OLURO TATSUO

OMURO is the manager of the 'iteul. Procucus To, in Shanghai, He is
fifty two ycars old and was born in Hinvjc, Jeoun, in 19, heegraduated
from the Cormercizxl Colieze in Kcbe, Japan, He cutered the litsul Products
Coes Ltd., and renained with them for a nurber of yoars, During those
years he spent sone of this timo in Dairen, London, Batavia and Singapore
and in Nagoya, Japan. In Jomary 1913, he was apnointcd as the manager of
the iitsul Products Co., Ltd, in Shanghai, (arch 1945) oa

he YAJIMA YASUZO

YhJDA is the managor of the Nippon Yusen Kaisha in Shanghai and was
born in Tottori City, Jepan, In 1912, he greducted frem Mobn Comicrcial
College in Kobe, Japon, after ho graduated he jeined the Nipnon Yusen
Kaisha, Japan 1i1 Steamship Co, From 191) to 1910, during Vorld Wor I
he was stationod in Germany, after thet he spent tro years of lds tinc
in Hongkong and five years in Bornbay, (‘arch 195)

Chinese Firns;
1. lin Sung Tracing Company

TU YUEH SPENG, who is row in Chungkins, 21sec operates a quasi-underworl
mob in occvvicc. Shanghai, TU's mon arc divided into two camps, One foes
under the nance of the Min Sug Trading Co, and works directly for Chung~
king, Disgnased as morchents, iin Sung men deliver supoiics to guervillas
in the ocevpied a:cas behind Shanghai, Tiucethor TU men, while stiil take
ing orders fron TU in Chungking, are strictly vrofitevring or ccoverating
with the Japaneses (1913)

2. Sin Hua Trading Company

This company islocated at the foot of Szechuen Road, opposite Mark 5,

a ard
MOOS 2

Shanghaf = Counter-Espionage Summary (cont'd) ~ pase 35

Des

Moody, Its manager is ai, i, The company has been reported as
doing a large amount of troding with the Japsnese, particularly in machine
tools, metal parts, aircrafs parts, ote, It is reported to be onc of

the largest if not the largest compamics in Shanghwi that is working fcr
the Japanose, (Hay 19):5)

3. Ta Chung Bane

between the two, Ar. CHEN is the hank's manager, It 18 not
vhether he is the sano Lr, CHEN that is themenuger of the Sia uw
Co. (iay 1945)

Other Firms:
le Schnidt-Shoten
This firn has headquarters in Tokye

and Mientsin, It is susweted of beiny
Japanese ZOovermente

Shanghai, Poliny
agents of the

Source stated that while this finn reprocomtel itself as being a
German compaiy dealing in drugs und micraceopes. he het om sini
en crmortunity to see their products and ucver found aay Cermnuennde
goods but only Japanese preducts in steck, Furthermore, rvLouzh the
volune of business done was very small, the ccmpany appoarcd to be nalcing
a great deal of noncys

Source’s suspicions were confirmed when one aay in the headquarters
office in Tokyo he was kept waiting in a private office for sone little
tine befere being admitted to the office of the manager. Whilo wasting,
he saw a stack of phctographscn & teblo and took acva:taze of the cppor~
tumity to imrestigate then, Te found shat they were 211 photoyraphs of
British and ‘imozrican cormbracts but that instant corpsay was not nentioned
in any of the contracts, .

Source stated that he hed learned fren confidential sources that
Jepanese agents operate under cover in imerican, British and other foreign
companics doiag bus ness in the Orient, and that these agents make sinia.-
ture copes of -mportast documents and forward then to Schnict-Ghoten.s
Source believes bhat espicnay: is the primary ousiness of instant company.
The perzod coveved by this information is fren 1928 to 1932, The inforne-
tion was weccuved in Cetoboz Lule

2e Ls Rondon & Co.

This company, which has many Far Rastern branches, has headmnarters
in Shansnat, Ts is bellicved lo be Joing business “= with the Jona.ics2,
The Indo-Cnina branch under Pierre RANDOW was reorganized to do pusiness
with the Japanesc.e

*

Shanghai ~ Counter Espionage Summary (cont!d) = page 36

Ve COMMUNICATIONS

A, Japanese Radiotclerranh Corrminications in Shanghai:

The Central Ching Telocommmicacion Sormpary, 4 private concern subsidizer
vy the Japam:ce Covorme re, opcrescs WL radicwelegraph sexrice, poth Jonestic
and foreign, in Shagho1, ‘Their cen ca. office oad musincss ctficcs ary -
Sassoon House. Some of their transmtvers are lovated at Shenyu which was
the transmitting sistter. censtrented end foxneriy used by the Chinese Covern-
nent Radio Advtinie on, 4 Tunber of smilles transnitters ~ged in comestic
service are sovbueved around] Hougkey.s

Both Press Wireloss one Globe Wireless equinmen’, vers scazed by the
Japanese ancprobebly piaced 2m domestic serr:.ce, Several of Uw Frcas Wires
less operate::? and a7 “cast io Close Tveless cperators are Worl ‘
receiving station intercep ong inorican 2nd chinese radio wartic, 3
paste Phe Frou rediotelezvepa sbcbion, LOBESeG_O}., Route Frciups, is still

4

operation commacatin, with Saigon, (Oeseber 194k)
IV, HEETING PLATES

A, Japenese Condamneric Headdvarters in Shisrpat.

Gince the ent of 1943,
puilding has bean tne Jepuncee t& we
headquarters for +29 Wiser: sector cf shan,
9 rr ne Petain whichwas occupied by the Gendarn

}

Lecording to this roport, the Gondarnerie in Shinzhai is divided inte
four sections With neadquarters as follows:

53 in Shangiat, The

Section hi: Heedquartess in the Soscny Building, corncr of Szcclian and
Cantona Roals, This mrea, the Navy's area, includes the &ctvle~
nomt area fron the Bund to Yu Ya Sising itoad,

Section Br Yeadeariers ws No. 7 Great Bostern Hond, with branches at
Henconan’s house (formesi¥ the Hong Kont=Shangiat Bank), <% che
core of Forsy and Bavblirs Well Roz 35 anf at the Hardoun pace

,

Opens. Saeed) tncluges the Scttlenent arca
Eom Ye PR a 1G TKS

Suction Ci Tiseiq users at Sel LE Ba pores Revert and A Anevican Ecorse
preswoer School: on Pokain fFead, Tris aca includes Frerehtome

Section D; “ope a This area includes the

tre try

wee fotivitiess:

Bo Japanese Titel

The mummaindse of she gapunese foress in Central China ceccntly usde a

trip fron Namco tc Shanghai cor the parpose of estaplishing a Special

Shanghai = Counter-Espicnage Sunmary (cont'd) — page 37

Intelligence Bureau, This Purcau was placed in charge of ifjor General SHIGA
and has its headquerthrs at Noe 09 Lao Pa Tzu Road, Itis believed thot this
road runs cast of Hongkew Park, ‘he headquarters house looks like a merchant
shops Forty Japanese, dresced as Chinese and arned with pistols, have been
seen to come and go fron this house, One short-tave radio sct is located in
side the housc.

This intelligence bureau has branches at Chinsharmvrei , gone Fingm, Uai-

yen and Haining, This orgmnizations may be part of A he Kaikan (Ure Klean ?).
(June 19h5)

Ce Park Hotels

Tho Usth floor of the Park Hotel in Shanghai is tho rendemrors of -
Japanese officers, puppet officials,’ anc $$ men, Onl imy lun, one anriver=
sary of the Chincse studert movenont, 4 bod oxoledud on the th floor,
killing a nunber of Japanese officials, (hey 19h)

ae

D. Mecting Places (General) snd Tmortarh .decsseos in Shanghai:

1, 8) Noe 38 Hawakce Avene: (1937) Fut: x UF EIK Mey t4ss, She is
2 Morcont enuny agent, This vou. wes 2lso 2. rendezvou for
merbers of the Japsiucse Spx.ia. Corvice Corpse

2, 93h Pubbling Hell ucad, uedburrt apty; "onc of Dre Jibert von
iMCRINIe (1942) Eneuy agent.

3, China United Building: Office of Dr» iIORINI.

ll. Ewa Mou Hotel; Headquarters of CHIEN TAN, Enouy agent and CHUNG SHAO
{, Orgonization and underworld geng engaged in Japancse DN
ganda and intelligence, (april 1945)

5, 20 canton Road, 5th floors tNoon Fxctrat, Gernine-ormed newspaner.

6, Szechuan iioad: At the ene of the Szechuen Road onposite Mark 5S,
Hocdy is locatcd the Sin Hua "rating Ces & Chinese firn doing
a large enount of business with the Japenese in machine tools,
netal parts ond aircraft parts. § (isy 195)

7%e New Asia Hotcl in Hengkev; Headquarters cf CHANG YU CH'ING, <n under-
world lcader whose gang cooperates with the Jépanescs

8, sy Chung Cheng Tan;, Jossfield Read: Hore of SAT HO LU; important
finwacial cclicborater with the Tapsnece, Genero] Manager of
tne ventral Reserve Tank, hoving over two hundrod men under
hin arnec with Hauser pictols and at one tine member of the
special police of the Shanghai Municipal Police.

9, Foochow Road; Old unicipal Police Headquarters, Now headouartcrs
of the ist district of the Shanghai police syster, (Feb, 'h5)

Shanghai = Counter-Espionage Summary (conttd) — page 38

10.

i.

12.

156

No. 76 Jessfield Road; Headquarters of the Nanking Governnent
"Burcau of Investigition and Statistics of the Military
Concil" until 1943. imcwn as the Special Service Corps,
(1941 awit February 1945)

76 Great Westovn Road: Headquarters cf the Shcnghai Chinese Gerndarnes
who operate under Japanese aupervision, (July 19h5)

Bank of China Building: (next to Sassoon House) = Offices of the
Central Rescrvc Bank,

Sasscon Hous?: Central and business offices of the Ccrtra: china
Tellecormmunication Co,, Which company is subsidized by the
Japanese Governments

Rote Frelupt: Icsation of adic Station FEZ.

lS mace Course Realy Radic Station Ma,

Name

v Abachi

~ Akamatsn Naomasa

- Akita, Y

+ Alcott, Carol

- Allied News Association

v Anderson
v Aoki. Sotsu a. ;
/ Ardoni, Dre
. Asahara
- Asahi .
- Asai, Makoto
. Atachi
“ thuntie Carol"
. Avald, Capt 17, 20
- Baba, 1, ar
- Bohnmeyer, A. . 6 a
- Berrier, Hilaire du 15, 20
- Boisserie, Otto 6, 30
- Boon Kim Lin 2t OC
- Brahn, ; 6 oe
- - Brodillini, Jina Mary . 295 305
Bruce, George C, . 13, 26
Butler, Thomas A, 13, 20, 26
Casino, Vincente Z, 2
- Central Chemical Co. — _ 33
- - Central China Development Coe 33 a
. - Central China Film Co, > ee . a
, Central Nows Agoncy : ee ee
¢ Chang A4-Ling 6
., Chang Hsiao~Lin ; 28
. Chang Jeh-ku i Yor
« Chang Tse-p ting 7 7
wy : Chao Shu-hua 5
_ Ghang Yuech ting 3, 37
. Chen, Mr, 35
‘Ghen Ko i i
. Chen Kung-po , 8°
, Chen Pin-ho 7, 12, Wy
Chen Yen-yun ; 7 Side

, Chteng Chung-ch'uan 7

Cheng Hung-yen 4 ’
vy Chi Kucewan ; = . .
. Chien Chen Tsiu ; : 32 ;
iChiten Taslorlei 8

, Chien Tan

_ Chin HsLung-pai

Name .
+ Ching Shao Organization ““ ~
«Chisholm, Robert (Don) ee ae

; Choko Transportation Cos
‘Chow Fuehai
«Chow Lbayuan
«Chow Tso-Jen oe Re,
«Chu Yung Kang . yee
-, Chu Ph ,
¥ Chung’ Snao
WCordt, Frita Dr. ;
wa Dd. N»Bo : :
~ ae Beauciair ; mere
ide Melo, Ribeiro
+ Dome Tsushinsna .
{Doo Yoch-svag 7 % ae
. East Asia Buddhist Association
(Edwards, Mes,
Erbin, Herm: F,, Dr.
vEssoyan, Roy
» FEZ :

v Filipitii, Lovis
‘Fischer, Corsul-General
: FlickSte¢ gor, Carl
: Fockler, Bob
4 Fajita, “Yoshimasa
~ Furuichi, T,
, Gearhart
~G@linpf, F, He
«Gordon, Tony
» Gould * Randal?
Gurevitch, lire
sy “Barkgon.
. Hasegawa, Torso
«Hashitomi, K,
. Healy
‘Hedges, Frank
_« Heng Char Realty Co.
. Higuchi, T,
Hirayama, Yamada
¥Hirsch, Cal
4 Hisales.
~Hitaka Xz, cence
iHo Ti. Fu
-Hoasni, Hasv.
«Hollant, Jon’
iBollingsrewih, Reggie
Hoshi noyt., Georga
yHevay, can
ry Hovars, Sarge "Pict
vHovens, Fugenc-
J How, Miss

os

jt
~
~

ww

oF OBEK A 3!

=)
ww
»

he

PANO BENE HEU MERAH

.

»

SRE al

+t

A

«

29,30
17
20 ue

\

1?) 18, 27
20, 22°

i eee : a ea Oe eg: we ana pe as oe SY] _ abit te
‘ :

Tt . 7 baa s oo os
at : : : a ar
Rane
~Howard, Jack

-Hsiao bai Iien
‘Hsu Chiensp *ing
.Hsu Lang~hsa.
‘Hsu Li-ontiu
, Hsu TYich-shan
: ; Hsueh Chih Ying
y :
. Hua I-bsien
. Huang Chin dung
+ i Seu’ Heo
» Turoodg AL
‘Isa, U,
-Tshiwa tas Die
* Ito, NE. Chen ie ; a
. Tranoto Kyosht oa ¥21
viwaya : : 33
, Tnyby ychi, Uajor Isar Pg OREYOe es
, Mee? : EY . ~ 28, 29
¥ den Yuan-tiio 6
, dohnannason, John (Jack) 13
v dohnstor, Frankie - 715, 18
XK, Transportation Company eee -. 33 .-
Kain, dalivs 330
- Kan Ching-hsien “3.
* Kanshalksy Shimatand
iKato Company
» Kato, Ky
: Kewvauhara Nishiro :
. Kazumaro Uno ao
. Ka Iner, Wilhelm ‘
- Kinney, Henry
¥ Rishi, Tichi
. Kishimoto, He no : Oeste.
: Kleinecke . ; ee
+ Klige, Eugene se 23
. Kmuith, Gy
* ie Kocher, dp De
. Kodama, T,
v Konomi ws
. Kuen In
«Kubo, Tosti:iro
{ Kuo Sivefoeng
, Kurayana
Kuroda, ~
j Kuvonata, ee Capt.
‘Rwei, Poo-ch ’uen
. Ladar, Aue
’ Tadd,” James

nS £ ON

Poe
i)

a

Ls
VounRadiiv
“ « ate
‘
}

Es)
OR A rg OS

4

.
,

nosubh

B

Name
« Lad, 0605 é .
. Lee Koo-lara ; ie 8,
« leonof, George es
, Lester, Bavid
« Lewis, Olivia, Miss
, Leys He 2 Dre
it dn

« Lin Chao-levrfei
y Liu Ktang-hou
« Liu Po-sheng ©
, Lin Yu-Tang
_ Ling Kong How .
«Liu Yu-Sheng
, lv chti
as «Lu Feng
. Iv-1i Evtel
: lu Ying
sIwoff, E,
_ MacDonald, Wyn, Miss :
« Mainichi News
~ Mahtani, Daya, Ore
4 Makihiko, Jiro
¥ Hakssevsky
Marui j

-) Masaki, He

, Masunage
« Matsubara, Ses Lite
« Matsuda
4 Matsudaira, Tadahiko
/ [etoukaya .
' j Matsushima, Keizo,
J Matsushita, T.

Capt.

~\ay
/Hebnert, Klaus
i Hel chers, Hans =
2 i Meyer, Alfred Le.
i Meyer~Macer, Capt.
, Meissingor, Col,
“Miller, Barbara
a+ Million Dollar Wang
} Min Sung Trading Co.
i Miorioni, Albert von, Dr.

« Mitsui
iiitsubishi
s Hiyalki, Se.
+Hisutama Cos
Monju ; i

 yorimoto.

Mayer, nudolP a

eg
a

wmvwo8

BBS amo anda

he

~

rFS

so 4

30% Bree

we
ise]
a)

ry

ay ots

ee a ee |

i Name
- Morse, Frank
« Moy, Herbert

nae -, Nakano, A,

wf

! .Nakashina Beer Dist, Assn, 5

. :Negishi, K. ,
iNew China Newspaper
; Nemman, (,, Miss
‘Nishida, T,
. Nishitabei
. Nomura
a Nottingham, E, As
. Nozatci Industrial Cos
. Ohlwein (Tsingtao)
, Okamoto, De
. Osmra, I.
_Okamur=, Shentaro
. Okasava, Yo
1 Qmro Tatsuo
- Oriental Cotton Co,

. Pan, CeCo

- Park Hotel

B; Patent, Joe

‘ Petersen, Peter

"Police Officer's Training Corps .
. Puttkamer, Baron
"Rabin, Nathan

, Rabinowitch, Nathan
. Rardon, Pierre

F md, Alon
Riviera, imo,

~ Robbie

- Robertson, Ella, Mrs,
, Regorf

é Rondon, Tey & Cos

- Ross ~

‘Rowe, Jack R,

. San Hsing Wlour Co.
Sapojetaizot?

i Sansjou

, Sch. dt-Shoten

* Sciniit, Brick

7 i Scrita, ¢,

+Scllerds, Ame

x

: Skangra.. Evening Post & Mercury

i Shanghai Telephone Co,

“3 cere f

Bu

fa

REY oR S
a
.

RBS Hwo
‘ER

23 .

¥ oo ea ae fee ay
( : ( a
4 achat ak
Name Pege
!
’ Shanghai Times (fl2
‘ Shigeta 5 if
:Shiono, Major j10
Shiraishi, Ye id ' 8.
, Shiromizu, Seibel Z 33.-
. Shochusna 33 v
. Siemssen
, Sin Bua Trading Cos ah, 35, 37.
V Soalfi, Major ;
v Stael, *Rene de 15.
‘ Stents % Carte We eee meen 6 eas
Stewart, Roy : Wwe
~ Su ching ; 6:
« Sa Cheng-teh ; 55 9°
j Sumair of Patiala, Princess 31
wv Suniy, Kiztcl chi. i’
";Ta Chuag Benk , 35°
sTai Howiu : 8, 37:
. Tai Tsuxhai 31.
, Tai Tsv~nycs 31:
1 Tai Yin ; ea
v Takagisa a3
. Takashima (P) 33°
< Takctomi, Bs 5
. Tamiwa, Vacaichi 335 5
{Tan Gwat Yong 34
4 Tan Soong Kee 32 4
4 Tang ilang-1i ah .
« Tao Ching--sun q 4
+fTao Klangeteh 6.
«Tateichi, Te 5 +
. The Opium King 28 ~
v The Salt King 28 ~
. The Street Politician 304 a0
4 Tibolt, Baron ¢ b, 32% te
4 Ting ii Cau kh: E 2
4 foa Marine Transportation 33%
sTomizuwa, T. - y 5s »
« Troo Bre thers . 3% ee
aTser Li Sung : = 32° .
a eee ee Tse 2 RS ‘
Tu < S188 27, 28, 3h-
“pase, Benn 32. 0~«
Jean (VeP.) > . 334
Universe Laeazine 84
v Uno, Budd: 21:
J Usani, Brubilke Sy i
+ Uy, Convaco ; 134
iVewoo Company 33° :
»Vigortie O's . 6-

e Voitity Dre - me ; ‘ 5 N

: a S sake! 2h vee
- Mose os a
‘ . Wa 32°
_ Wada, Masayoshi : . 33
. Walbouer ee 15
. Wang Ching-wei : 35 9, 33
. Wang Ching Young 23
Wong Ping ~ z-
. Wang Chung-tlao 8.
. Watanabe, Hidekt 33.
. Weigand, ven, Karl 27.
« Wen Lan Tlirg - 32
. Won Tai-tao 6-
~ Weng Yung~ch ‘ing 7-

. Wiedman, Fritz, Capt.

15 .
. Wiehl, Fred 15, 17, 18, 20.
oie ns ere

« Wolf-Scheake 15.
4 Woodhead, Hy Co Vie 23 ‘
- Wa ho G.
~ Wa P’ei-chih 7
Wa Sung-kao p
,XGOI, Te
XGRS a5, 25, 38,
_ XUHA ds oo oe
. XH 13, 17, 19, 2°
. XRUN 1?
v YZ 26
Yagyn, He 5
Yejima, Yasuzo 3h
. Yamada, K, 5
« Yamamoto 33.
~ Yamashita Industry 33 .
. Yamasaki a
~ Yang Hut-lang 7- i et
- Yano Seduct ‘ S - :
. Yao Tseng Mo 7
- Yasuda, Shoichi 33
- Yen Chiaepao : 7.
« Yen Yunep‘eng : {- is
_ Yi K 8.
Yokota (7) 33
/ YOouSstA. R, 5
. Yuan Lica Teng 32 -
» Yuen Chu 6:
* Zentno>; Dewid 13, 15, 25, 26 .
> Zentnor » Jean Krrang 255 26

~ ZL Loose 2
. 21 Tih-stu
. ZL Tamang : 27
