Routing Sheet with Attached Report re K-program DeletedD) - First Meeting
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135917, dated 2 March 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135917).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

~ . bs Se
fe or SIGNAL UNL. Mee LYANY CUMTINCINE vies so AN Haeacnrng Coral NO, 30-15 foe the purs-
/ > of accusing this form to top ectret dn

F a soe

For the [nlraotee Use of OSO and OPC Only—as a Cover Attachment to Form Ko. 38-D gas

oe ee es ee ee ee =" FOR SIZED, BY
ATTENTION. —Accces (o top ecarct tpelerial le fisted to those Lidividuah whore offmial dulien re Cc “pe QS
control offcor wha rectives andjeur ccleawn the atiached top secret insterial oall siga this form and indica’) : or
ES who aces this top scaret document willenter date of handling and sign bis full aame io Une proper columas. Ofaer dcrizuations should bs used ia the “Tom onic:
> Ueder cach comment « oe should bc draen across shect and cach comacet suntasrcd to caressed with the ourmbes ja Unc “To” coluinan, Each ofScer sSouhd x:
Gre full name befoce further routing 2 Tot evel See meas . : 2 \ ; Af I et | N ae
iA *
Bz, : at CONTROL HO. --- Se ghee
(af : cee Neat. Te =

t

os Wig Seen ee oe
nue 7 OFFICER'S. FULL NAME .
5A eS ae

sity
Te
ahae

Hae

MOT

‘3

pas

7 j Total = CIA NSCS, HEREIN

Coacumeal He, 2

ita Chenze 9 Cisss im .

jaws
- Chasasd to: 7

SS i | |
ne pee esau Ll raog
[4 +4 8 6465

iz: RO SumQ p>

fr)
a
th

PLEASE METL
+ FORM TO ®
eed /

SeigS 36-134

ca
B

mel et, Sogn p Moov 4
Ww
re
Od
i?)
ora
t
ir
>
roael
or

LT COLA

chief of ( )

K-rrogram ( )

‘4 b First tteeting

ZI fe re reenag are

oe ANE

i Attached is the reyort prepared by ( )recarding anaes
4 meeting wit! ( )
z s

( )
4 May 34
Distribution:
2-LINC DLN
2-each
(

Z-riles

C )

PRCUCLIE: (eg eorrr

so 2 iO So

1. I have beon s@nt to yo. by @ & revittence TO rent, dedicutec to

27 kpYAL 198
deetroying communist influence in trie cuntry, Tt te tie omiy reeiertance

orgen{7zation of itskind,.

2, Yen and women from all waike of life, ail p ofessions, all oofal. 72) 2

strata, have sunk their personal, political and religious di‘fererces, for
the purpose of uniting under the leaderehip of X andy. The: nave rclegeted
ay doubts regarding the professionel comx tency ef X or Y in order not to
digsipate the strength of the G resistence potantial, Any eplit in leaderrehip
would dangerously weaken the G resistence potenti] and thereby play inte the
handeof communism.

5. XY exit Y ere being selped and advised by public ssirited, S‘nfluential
emi veal thy Americans «0 Co not hold office, Tnese Arcyicanseve not exsocieted
with busines 4nterests in 5. “They are peliticsily enc financially independent :
and heve no selfish pereawl etake in tbe future of GS. They are not oy rating

under U.S. Govt inetructions. It can be sxeumed, siovever, that the EQS. Sovt

12: OF HATE aA ted A en

wiich is firmly resolved to sce G communtiis Hestroved Ly |ll methods ehort

at

ay

of outripht interve:.tion, would nov aisavnrove oF weir ecuivivies af Long «5

fp. aod

St doesnot become invoived.

4, The junta etrives for one cblgective ana Te gudsetive only: tne de-
atruction of oommuniem in G&G. Tsere are no other objectives motivating ait.
; and ¥ have not been required by their smericen friends to make political or
economic concessions in exchange for fwerican nelp. Conversely, the Americans
pave not comiited tie ‘nited Ttatee Towt to any fr ecafie course of actior
once Cis frre erein. In ce rtieuter, tre F.5. cote not Etand coxemiiticd to
sapoort any politics) fection, tet giene & % individoais, in. weet for political

sower, The political complexion of G wii czve to be Getermined Ly the

Guaterelan people ana its chosen r epresentatives. The eene gepliee, without

res¢rve, to the treatment to be accorded to foreign. bond.

oe tena,

S. The junta ss beer planning ano .oe.aring for over a veer now. one

of its problers hae been to prevent wll-motivated O's from setriking preraturely

anu provoking 4@ eccand ‘slama., io far tte Junta has teen Jdeenee ‘in this”

end ite control over ail resietence eigrnants in G is rere divbdser “ty “the
day. The junta is deternined not to allow itseif to be rmisted or provoked
into amy ill-conceived ventures, he order to strike wid) te piven 46 £90n
ge chances of tuc:e:s Clearly outweigh prorecte of Pallure -- and not one dey

egoner, Tne junta is axious to avoid prolonsed blaodzhed endrelics upon the

impact of mmifest and overwnelsing power to enforce communist surrender.

6. I em not acquainted with the junta’s planning, md to ihe bert cf iy

s

knowle dge no cone inside G le, Tne Junte ie awere of the ucvards of jr emawre

leakage and hap taken elaborate preca tions to pravent it. i heen to know

that the so-called revelations of the nite Paper were not in any war related

to the ctivities of the junta, J seliso knox for a fact that the plans of the

ae

junta do not envisage an invesion of G which would undoubtedly raily all

nationalist elements - even troee wi:o ebhor comvunism -- benind the defause of

G roil,

7. j%mIn recent weees an increasing nurler of srawinent i.divicuals nown

“NS 4..
to be in the G povernment’s cazp, heve been a proacning tse junta in order to

protest their unswerving op. oeition to conmeinion anc to o fer t.eir

n€éip, There
o'fers in most inrtances ere Jikely to ‘sve veen prownzed b& a reciireation

tnat tue da, of reckoning say not be Tar off

3 CY sey wey lave heon ine tigaied
by the G poverament for nurguses of crevecition, the Junta is resolved not to

eccent any recent converts «xacse poairical pert etarpe them 46 rank on crtoniets

at best and comainist fellow-trea-eiler6é st «oret, in oeterzining «nere there
irdivicuals etand, the junta cepende upon the fudgwent of A and Y, Xo one wilt

ne accepted an an active collaborcter wiic dces ict enjoy their compile te trort.

.
‘
a

° i a Fi i aa - @
i Sy

sph Peete
g ee ee NOT A ee

8. The junts hes all aiong considered you : puseaetie to ite objestiv =
It 4s confident that in any emergency it can cali upon you for active help.
Your past is a matter of public record end fev Gts in responsible position have
been ae forthright and courageous in 6 texcing the communist tide, ap you have
been, Both X end Y share in feelings of the Highest je rednel wegerd fer ‘yous
The junta realizes tnat your range of scotivity in its behalf is of necessity
restricted, It wuld have been irresponsible to get you involved in conspira-~
torial stivities of a routine nature. The tine has now cone where the junta
may need your edvice and help and where unavoidable risks will bave to be teken.

@. The junta has instructed me to put to you the following question:
Are you prepared et this time to receive a personal representative

of X and Y in order to discws specific issues of great Lxportance on which the

junta requires your help and advice?

’

Brief nanded to ( )

oad

ny

In comoliance with LI wcLy inetractions, ( Jepon arrival

in Guatenala, took immedivie steps to contact ( ) The groundwork had

been isid by ou ele station a: de: sloping ( car the point wnere he

indicated litnese eS beis tus in “the - ‘development of this project. Without

(

operation

punetiate? cgavare and without the information he supplied, the

would have been franght with incalculable hazards, ve hae croven

a tighly intelligent, trasteorthy and courspeous companion, tué embodiment of

a type of ideologically motivated career agent of whom our ayency hae alas too

whose personal “roots are deep in the soil of his country { )

few, For aman

( ) ne has launched into this ree entrees in an impressive

spirit of self-abnepation. le trust tuat the agency, although no formal

ee eee’

commitments have been rade or requeeted, will tske cognizance of a moral

obligation toa shield nim md his farily againet harm and diecrimination,

2, The basic concept onderlying our resolve to contact ( ) ena,

if poisible, to enlist his suport in p.rsuit of the objectives of PB OME,

zted en conclysions deriyedc from 4 careful analycis of the escets

‘
wrienl )ciains to control dn Suacemala, shile tne debriefing of ( \

lent suetenance to ip PJ. hIS' clais to te in control of some of the military

sarrisone, it yet failed to provide a fizal and conclusive answer to our

quest for substantive information, °revailing conditions jin Guatenala city

fail to sugur for 4 ewift and vloodlers investzent of the capital, 20
cleims ~ave been xdvanced by “pf -Y5 Ud! vo the effect trat -e 18 in control

of any imoerient censent of its militsry establishment, Vor planning OVrpoces

fc mart therefare eff .:me trast tue ercnec forces will _ive comeat to me rise

gents, unless Factors can Le brougnt to beer, inducing tne Ary either to

Tee iv
& co

9 9

etand ts or to raliy to tne wprieging.

& It ig. believed thet_ the Strater of. Pb SUCCE:t _encomps sees tie

possibility: “of rt ,“prolonged- ~and sengiinary struggle for the capital, Its

cee TR a ne Rc ET Ne ee emes cn NE VE NT ee ee nee
Oe, re ee

rapid fall would no deubt clinch victory in the whole of Guatemale and
cexure one of our main objectiver - the radical elimination of the militant
functionsry corps of the Cr, An attenost hed tncrefore to be underteken to
bring under Junta control those Army units stationed in the City which must
be expected to serve as the gover ment 's chedient toole in quelling ary up-

rising: The Guardia de Honor, the unit stationed at Avrora Air Field and

the Base Militar, Yailing tnis, « further atterzpt had to be meade to enrol

ranking officers of the Arny High Command, on the assumption that they may

conceivably be in a cosition to countermand the ordere jssued by the
Preeident, or issue conflicting orders, or influence officere under their
command to rise in rebel:ion. A penetration of this level of the ermed
structure may now have been accomplishe d ae # result of cur Cealings with

( ps wll goes well, a faction within the highest level of the

Gusteralan officers! corp# ttationed in the city may align ilseif with the
uprising provided the initial jmoact of local successes, p. rticularly in

the vcrovinces, bids wore ten feir to icad to success, *e cannot, however,

hold out ruch nope, that svch a dis-ident faction will be prevailed upon to

coordinate its soves within the framework of re VeCalS ff

or reesons which wil

Lecome apparent in our eccount or wat ( J sec tosay. Any fopes ne

may entertain ¥i we

furtnersore cave to be based on tne expectation that

normal connand clannels within wie 4rmy wili not at the first sign of local

unrest be superseded by 6m emergenc) setup, shunting off Srom the cxercize

A>

of direct commurnd the very elerents on wnose fupport we ney Le counting.

4... As. an ettachment to this report you will find ~ritten inetructions
handed-to' (— ee ps a guide in hie first exploratory contact with( )
You will note that these instructions are substantially in line with thoughts
on the cubsect put forward by LINCuLN, iL wes our purpose to acgueint

( jin ae condensed and intelligible a form se possible with the salient

elements of PBIUCCEES without, on the other hend, giving away vital cecrets,

5. on determining what covld be conceded, we were influenced by 2
variety of factors, The circumstances in which the first meeting hed Been
eid on did net bear any of the halimarke of an anbueh, nor cid ( )
antecedents suggest Uivt be might Jend binself for thet purpose, There was
in our hands evidence, though incomplete, that his mind ‘ad for sone Line
been preoccupied with problems involved in unsesting the regime, In en 2t-
yosphere satureted with rumors of Jmperding revolt or invasion, eny presenta-
tion, in form or content reminiscent of urevcient ramore, or in nic wind

conjur ‘ng up the recollection of previovs false alarme or abortive coups,

je

4

might heve nipped our enterprise in the bud. TF-ie melyrie wes borne cut by
the genesis of our talks, inasmuch as ) -as jndubitably most impres:ed
by the fact that the uprieing wes yresented to tim as firmly planned, with no

major devietions acceptable and with inexoratie grive berind it,

6, In woe Jarht cf previous unconfirsned reports, de 2G pre, eisd
ourselves for exce:;tion being taten to the role tlaeved m Gas yA vhaet

we were not yepered for was the violence enc complete inflexibility with

a ten er rrr tere neo erm re

which thoce excevtions vere subsecuently voiced, “e did, novever, decide

ten ne Nt ee

(oo)

py FeO ay gee fee

“streseced that ( \was sble to read the stetenent verbatin,

hmerican individuals, pleying Uie roie of 2 court of apes

Lo meet theproblem frontally in order to iet no ricunderstanding com up 4&5
to the firmness of our resolve to hold on to CALIICERIS, (Any concessions
subsequently made in deference to ( J aroused. feelings, were purely

tactical and did not affect the substance of our rels (ionship with CALLIGFRIS. )

7, we further, as it tuned out rightly, anticipated that the questions
of CAIs IGEKIS personal and political ambitions wuld come up in one form or
another, The point vas therefore made $n-‘the strongest terms that no political
commitments had been asked of us, Jet alone had been proffered, Most of the

points reised by ( Jin his first talk with ( )ere self-explanatory

emi vill therefore be dealt with under subsequent heedinge. It should be
having briefed
binself previously on the exsct meaning of all technical imrcesions, £0 thet
for the purposes of your evaluation the brief cm be accested es having been

communicated in toto end underetood vy ( Xn all materiel cetail

8, In order to meet ( ) objections to CALL IEFRIS, we recorted
to the adoption of a terrinological distinction betreen “coneejo" and “Junta”
which may not have the merits of logic but which, we believe, wae of come help
fin getting away from personalities end focussing on the esseritiale of the
peoblem. The "consejo", a& we ex laned it ro( )in our meeting on

April 29th, is a super-council, compoeed only of four powerful

; independent

ay

Ye ne it were, and
sessing on all important decisions wits finality. &s distinct form the

“cavsejo", there le the "funta"™, composed of the came Pour Anerscans, pilus

Chis

IGES7E and ( } this time in capacity of co~cquals, Then itere is

*
¢
2

3 larre staff cf technical advisore, beth Aimcrican and Gu:temalen, which
give counsel to both the "consejo" and the "junta", CALLTULRIS thus occupies
a dval position: he ig a member of the "junta", one of cix nembere to be | ais
exact. And he fe Chief of Staff and senior military advisor eid planner (5-3),
serving under (not in) the "coneejo" and in 21] his moves Erin renig wo the
"eonsejo", “hile thie presentation of the erganizetional structure may in

one way cetract from the concept of a predominantly indigenous leadership,

surrounded by American advieorg and backers, it wasmeant to serve (and may
actually have scrved) as a device to plice CA IGERIS' position in 2 prospec-
tive more paletaole to ( jana ais friends, In theory at least Ure
tconsejo" would be in a position to curb CALLIGEAIS! political exbitions =
should he try to launch them in the vehicle of his military position, In

theory also the "consejo" could eetablish military and political contacts

jin the target area, without necesssrily cutting in the "Junta",

9. ( Joosition was explained tol Jin his first reeting with
4 ) us that of a representative of CAI: TAT: andl Jirplying
membership in the "junta". SuLseguently Lois version wes tacitly dropsed and
reslaced by a more convenient legend, making [- done of the meny technical
advisors with a soeciality in poliiical affairs, which turned o2t to be an

altogether eatigerfactory backdrop. The contradiction apparently « nt unnoted.
6b A PP a

In the end, with no noticeable transition, ¢ )energed ax g renresenvtarive
of the “conseio", waking @ comple -Lely independent approach, rus avoiding
all direet tie-in «ith either CA LT ch: er ) eo trust Uiat vbis

letter version will linger.

ore TER ARTEMIS BOLE Sr RIMRIE RE.
ete Te PRES aces VA Be sebekae 5 eae it

we

eT et a
. .

10, Terning to the actual course of events, short mention should be

made of a brief and distasteful interlude which breve % under -gonsideration
a NE ty SS COLT Be A

the use of ( )as_an initiel go-between. het weighed with us in this
choice was the certain though impounded, belief that ( din fesr of 2

- possible sovernment provocation attempt would immediately raise the issue of
authenticity and that the Sntercession of an individual known by( ) as
occupyi ng an official position would put to rest any apprehensions. We were
confident that this could be done without even by implication involving the
United States Covernnent (a carefully devised legend taking care of that
aspect), A brief prepared for( }excluded all retter Wilch could con-
ceivably ba considered controversial and a:1 doubts on that score had been
allowed for by emascvlating ( ) segend to the point where he had tittle
more to do than to introduce m American who dislikes communiem, This note:

withstanding { ) who hed roied a distinct chill in relations between hin-
re _

we eee tree

a

Felt and nis erstwhile ‘“Sriends" since he nad jJast visited the co ntry, bean

to develop cold feet -- « term which charity ratacr Lian accuracy ispels us
RAEI SaEOL Onan Eee
to select. Wot wanting tofeven the revote rick of loosing (C Jthrough

inept handling, we decided not to avail ourselves of ( ) services.

Since his usefulness to K-lrogrsm was considered ended, he was sped out of ine
country, Any blame, if it attaches, should go to ) whose acsersrent of
( ) opera tional yotertial turned out to te inaccurate. with ( j

having become evailetle we telieve t!.at fate wee kind when it eid us cack,

ll, The meeting between ( ) anc ( )on 27 April 1554 wes Jaic
on by ( ) after the idea had been oiscarded to venture «& comple tely
cold approach, { )is thus aware of the fact that there hes been a

6
aa.

SER ONE Se Se Pe Sao OES ASE Be RRS SCrR lf EN ee SS eS
rs » Et Sean LS Speke: gee “7 Teyte pie BE sy ee fans 46 SOS ox eae eee as Re ey

PS. Ee ee
o

= "AEE Sg Rare wera, Bebe Soci es Wn Ny oe a Se Deal ey CPS EE SPSS Ee. cd

U. tis a0 ve tei.) 2
meeting petwcenl jane ( Pout wnat transpired bee not been
vochsafed to him ~ at least not by ( oy. Tue es is- eatisfied that
( ) harbors genuine hostility against coamunten “aaa Bir ite ee :

and that he is not an instrument of deception or + SuNOSEL AGH Since he vas

all along the source of information concerning { ) we were in a position

to check on the eccuracy of his resorting and it is fair to etate thet “m had

been reporting the truth. He will of course infer that somthing is in the

wind end is Likely to probe for further information. "ie console ourselves

in the thought thst before this thing is over there ere liable we be other

a et et NC rage Sa Sh ASE 20

Noe a tga Oo og Seen oe STE Lo ete TT

end more cevestating lcake,

ng ee ne ted AP TE MOS BTID FT TR

12, The neeting between{ —) und ‘Jwas -cnedaled for 29 April
1954, As a meeting place the ( }town house of ( ), at
present unoccupied, was celcted.( )svent the night prior to the meeting

in one of Antigua's hotels and waepicked up in the 4-rrogram operational car

chauffeured by ( ) with Jsivting next to him in the front sect,

ifter a short introcuction, ( Jusing the name € »} the group pro-

ereded to the meeting plae, There were no tigns of hostile surveillance,

The conversation took place in € a,

C3

) The meeting
Jasted from 9:00 am, to 4 p.m.

ISa /started of f by telling¢ )that, following air invitation,

he vad cone to Cu.temala and thet ne considered 4 greet Honor indeed to neat

fece to face one of Guateralats staunchest aiti-communicte, ¢( Yedded that
there were a few persone in leading pos

tions in Guatemala woiese invitation

he woxld have accepted or whose invitation he would have con.idered an honor.

The preambular pert having Leen eettic d, ¢ Jlaunched into a concise decouree,

reiteratinz the substance of... wnst ¢ D)had already communicated to )

There were some ncicatione that the previous briefing nad sunk in and that

the ground had been well prepared, The iercue of accreditation never came up

oO ee a er

and rf ) enowed little nesitancy in cisclosing his deep and abiding

co
Te oe ee men a ete TN emer re ng ee, te ee te

nhoetility to the r-gime and hie deep resentment at the mesaliiance it had

FO ONE Be eee La ck bee tae,

entered with communism,

sae ( 7 . '

( ): streck { Jas “muy simpeticot, put hardly ecdowed
with superior brainpower, without Saving such background in tlzing up iatins,
( )would describe him as the typical “roduct of a militar; school, ridden

by the taboos and narrow jrejudices which such upbringing is bound to inculcate,
in a country where oslortanities Sor intellectual © elf-developnent are lind ted,
Thie netwithetanding, ( Jseence t2 ave undergone tre kind of political
echooling which the pectic nistory of midern Gun enala yrovicee for ail thoce

mo Lecone involved in politics,

1S, ‘vhile time did not permit to delve irto higperesnal and professional
cast, | ) inferred tia ) pia.ed tore: role in the conspiracy which
resuited in #0JCO's feii and which installed the quadrunvirate, Although
it is difficult to fatiiom the ideological roote of nir nelief, Ai: hatred
of dictatorship acuears to be stron: altao hoit ma not Le matched by an
equaity fervent cesire to see a parllarentars Jemocrac; installed in his
Country, There cen te ne doubt wnatsocver ai to ma€ Natred araingst com-urnisn

ang the public record of his part bear: wstimony to the fact tuat it is more

than ecademic. His falling out with ( } which 4s probably final

ta Rowe me

and irreparable, may not have been over the cormunist issue alone, Certainly

they may now be considered irreconcilable political mtegonists, with no

{illusions left on either side. (

16.. There can be no doubt that [ ‘wants to keep ( )

( >} close range (

cre ginremiiae peer:

it can

)

l ) his accers to classified information is limited to what

safely be assined that (

he can learn through his numerous close friends stili in responsible position.

17. %In order to size up ( ) properly and in order to determine his
potential in any conspirecy, it is important to view him. as a profeseiona.

officer first and foremost. We has risen in life with and thr -ugh the Arsy

HR 0 roa are aa nena aiS

4

and everything he has accomplished he owes to it. Onner of a( D)

he en ee

Lees we enh remmertmrmcennnmnann

r~

( Jicis bound to be a man of wealth who could live in easy cerfort

without -a position: in public life. Wheth. xr his ( i jie inherited, or

~ ‘whether - ert ‘EO. ‘many of lis Tellow-officers - _ he manaped to me a fortune

on the tice, wae not ascertained, being « capitatist of some consequence he
cannot poseibly view whe Gepracatione vf communist economic tneory «nc oractice

in Guaternala with equanimity.

18,- the basie for Jopoosition Lo conimunism must be looked for

in hie military upbringt.g which, even today, is the predominant environmental

4nfluence conditioning both thougnt and aetion, iv i: also docbtles:iy the

cause for a noticeastle ambivalence in his reasening if it comes to rationaliz-

“ing what he refers to the "conqueteria" of some raiking o ficers with communism,

and ezpecially if ne tries to explain the phenomenon of ARKend, There ts no

em et

doubt in his mind tret the ATW {and in the context of our ‘iscuseions this
eats oe

eee

term never connotes the enlisted ranks) is © edoninantd; anti-conmmunliet - 95h,

ee ne eee meet

zs ve repeatedly . tated. :ven tho:e rankiaf officers woom we Listsc . firmly
committed to the sup ort of the regime ere “anti-commnict", nereas( )
obviously recognizes LAC axrbiguous position in which t..e officers! corse nas
been oiaced as & regalt of communist penetration of the . overnmental st...-ture,
he ie inclined te look cor the root of the evil in rie acts and beliefs ~.ared

by at most four ranking o Sicers in key positions end he odviously rELErCS the
. ee eee we ee

Pre [vant #2 t+ fer to tne orotlem. ( Jsironcl. lmolicd t.st -e con-

sicers te overthrow of the regime, with tae Fre:ident firsdy in the seidle
and in @ vosition tc exercize efrective command over cue ermed forces ot ine
time of the uori:ing {en even tenporary absence from the capital sxovld in

Joyinion, afford him and his at.oclztes in uel )a

TO FOR 7

19

|

sufficient

/voreathing epell to wrest control from the President), wocld make prolonged end

bloody st uneyoideble, because ~ as he stated repeatedly - ARBENZ is going
iS eens rr,

-- to fight and will go doxn fighting. ©

19, While it is quite impossible to weave ( ) statements concerning
the fey anes a concistent andintelligeable pattern of predictable behavior,
certain of his observations evince that he has a shrewd and discerning mind
when it comes to fathom the motivation of eome of his friends end colleagues
and his analysis of the situation, while hardly a masterpiece of cogent
reasoning, deserves scrutiny. . .

20, By way of introducing the main topic of conversation, ( ) presented

rite the following estimate of the situation:

The "junta" believes that it is in effective control of a sufficient
nunber of garrisons to be able to launch a military uprising at any tine wi th
consigerable likelihood of success, The undertaking has been carefully planned
and nothing been left to chance, A massive and timely supply of material is
assured, The "junta® will have at its disposal a well-organized communi ations
net, independently of locally available communication facilities, Teams of
experts are undergoing training and will descend upon Guatemala at the appointed
time, to discharge a variety of functione, (In answer td )guestion
what percentage of the ranking officers in the various garrisons could be

considered 2s under "Junta" control, ( ) Senied any knowledge, but ventured 25

C5

21, It should be streesed that the foregoing presentation was not an

——e——eeee

“ &*- 3 CIALS ONLY & ft ee -

fectors., rrom a security point of view, it was felt that in case of

Gisclosure to unanthorizec persons, only the element of strategic

surprise coule conceivably suffer, the element of tactical surprise

being left unimpaired, Another factor, allowing consicerable lati-
tude in divul: ing the training of specialists for specific tasks,

was concitions by the realization that this phase of our srepprations
has already been subject to consicerable compreuise and that nothing
much would be added to what the sovernment already knows,

as
of 1954 the period during: which the Tunta would be striking, left the

fhe mention

actual date sufficiently vague and yet served the immediate * purpose
of {mbuing{ Jwith a sense of urgency. The mention of control
in the gsrrisons was an indisponsable prerequisite for entering into
any fruitful discuesion of substantive issues, euch as control over
the Army &s a Whole anc the role of Guatemala City and the Army units
stationed taerein. The cumulative effect of the disclosures, as far
as they went, was felt to se one o° counteracting the paralysis of
will whicn is known to hevs affected a :reat many militant anti-

comuunists as the result of too many futile hopes raised in the past.

{In this context, it ausears si. nificant, tuat( Jeeciinea_{ D)
invitation to talk things over, one of the reesons beirg that ne frankly

en ene er

Gishelievedé the account of scvents to come).

ee. From a psychological point of view, transcencing the tame-

Giste purpose of pettin: ( )to cooperate, the glar: in its above

version can therefore inflict but little hermn, should it be Givel.ed
to unauthorized persons, and ia ound to lift tre morale of those whom

it may concern, It is worth noting thet( ) in the course of the

conversation harked back et least four times to the emphetic statement

mace vy ( )tnet no circumstances known to the Junta could possibly

giv. 5 Oia: ONLY G

result in a postponement or abandonment of the

uprising, recvesting

eech time thst nis uncerstancing be confrirned. It {3 an impression,
| shered vy Jana ( ) tnat this one statement cid more to sway
( 2 than any other {ssue raised curing the conversation,

further illustration of the pivotal importance of this particular
4ssue is that ) suggested a meetin, netween Jane ( \
for the primary purpose of assuring, the latter that we were en,acged
tn serious pursuit and that our singleness of purpose would not te

deflected by any setbacks.

23, We had known from previous reports tha tl, vould not

be verty to an invesion of Guatesela. ive hed no difficulty-in con-

vincing him thui an invasion was not in the cards anc that tre casic
doctrine guiding our strategic plannins was inextricably linked up oo
with en overthrow of comounism through “uatcmalan effort. ¢ Janti-
cipated the raisin: of this issue ane etphaticaily ststed that an in-
vesion was bound to rally “us tetaiets best elements in defense of her
soiix, nullifying ali ove efforts to vitslizce nomegrown resistence and
tn effect naxin, -uva emala ripe for e@ major communist assault uncer

the ¢vise of cefendcing ner national interests against tue forelln

invacers.

24, It was felt thet the involvetent of Avericans in prominent

positions called for some explanation in order to reniove the sti.

of ancrican intervention, it cune as rather a surprise that¢ y,
himecll Gic not reise this point anc in fact cic noi seem to ray any
particuier atiention te this art of ocr cresentation. ‘n( )
case, at least, An.rican preoccupation with events Sa Guste-.ala did
not seex to cause any surprise or resentment wietecever. ( ) vy way

x8 FOR ey

EEG ES arr ee ae
> : F iat eon =
Ryeiey pao pigcee Pees Se ioe ese

Bay oe ERATE tors bers = °
Rae SBC Red ee oe RL aeceuees

Qu. s. 3 mals ONLY

of introducins the issue, referred (

resolution whiicn hac served the 6:4] pappose of rellyin, all member

nations Sehine a determined effort ty eas commntisn out of the ~~
¥ ce ae oa.

ee eee . -

hemisphere and of servin, notice taut the United” States would not

stand idly by shoulc such infection cone to pass, ( )pointea out
thict Cevelosmenta in ucite-ala” constituted e@ serious tinreat net only

to Date alan indesencence tut is .nited vbates security and tuat the
inited States, face@ with the erim prespect or involvement in a major
war could as e matter of elementary self-:reservetion not afford to-

«

ignere the inroads of communis= into tie Covernmental and aéministre-
tive structure of uets ela,

£. Goin: beyond this, [ Jstuted that the ‘nited states

woulé do everything in tis porer sy methods short of direct inter-

vention or short ef cconomic vressire, to helo the Suate-slan neople

to met ri€ cr its un 2..tecd locrers, the “conse fo" tlere Tore, thowh
Ocerztin, suisiva ile ar 38 2.7 Sires vernncatel contrel, was actinc

in the gure knsowliedé, 6 of tnole entin “nmitec

fn answer to «¢ Geestion put oy { ), (Eu aS -lvEen essurance chat
tre "conseso"” was not linkee with tha ~tete Cecartment ané in feet on

occasion ( Jad

Cisa reed with the ct--e Jeeert st ove. ssecific policies anc moves.

vhe «;roundwork “ovin, heen laie uv( Jin elaccraiin: on the rale
ave ely ovneg anc contiroileée in-

stitutions in tle yroe.tion 0° re lic causes (cacio “rec “urete, Sore

Vouncéation ete.},( piert ee wit te imorcssion tat ovr ex-
clenation was satisfactory to nic. The unssoken vuremise thai the

“consejo" while primarily Cevoting itself to promoting the cause of

ET
Sree

EE Ne a ON eS

=e

:an jJrrevoca>tle decision on the matter,"

@s. OL ge ONLY

GCuetemalan freedom, also consiéered.itself charged with the protection

of vital United Stat-s interests in seeing norwal conditions return

to Guatemala sa quickly es possible mus t have

( Jeonviction that the Are ricans:noan—business;~ a, ae

_fur ther r strengthened

26. As had been anticipated, the CAL: ICLPIs issus loomed large
in our conversation, In reporting on his first tel with r )
( Jhaeé sunied up his impression by stating tiet in his opinion
"the key to the whole situation was ( ) emotional Statement
that he woulé do anything if he could, vut. that it is imposaibly to

ally himself or collaborate with CALLIWRIS and that he had reached

In vdein. sti rong | detostation

<a Ny

of CAULEGERIS and in eect ani oe (any. ore Bed colleboretion with him

Ll SV EL pt, nguyen

ee eee

( ) claimed to be speaking elo in be behalf if of all the other

AST CATA OE te Ohne Oy,

officers whom he counts anong his friends and fellow-conspirators,

et a

27, It is not possible at this stage to convey to you a

very

clear picture of the strength of this grour and of whet level in the

military hierarchy is occupied by it.( ) was Surposely vague

in identifying his frienés and we for ouvious rezsons did not see fit

to press l.im st this stage. LZoth in nis talka with ( Jang with

( ) rece veiled reference to a group cf suatenmslan officers

wnd sre Sounc sy -mitual oath to strive only Sor tie geod of Siuetsr-ela.

in talkin, atout tris tol JYhe cointed with a crazxatic Eesture

to ris sete ane steted: "“thetr nhemes are in here.” ‘°e further stated

that this oath tounc each of tse7 to Ki]1 aay memver of the frou: who

violated it. He specifically mentioneé that. ANE=.2. nes not one. of
these who hae taken Ab te cath, ( Jaskec ( ) wever to mention
ee Se a a ees, .

to anyone the existence of this Frou nor the oatr that bound them,
¥ Ps ae

e presence

This notwithstanding, he brought up this subject again im. th

8 i ae
rr

off )this time in order to uncerscore the point that he could
not possibly be party to any plot involving tho necessity of liqui-

dating any,one member. -of tt this jgroup. He particularly stressed that

they were all united, An a. strong. feeling of anti-commmism, but evaded

answering tho question what would happen 1f one of them threw in with
commnisn, ( jconsiders it possible that ( ), in steting that
any collrboretion with CAL. IGESIS would, in the eyes of his "friends,®
make him a man without honor and that he would lose any influence
which he is still exercising among then, may have been referring to

the above-mentioned group. Fe did imply that ( )eotoms to it

A a te

end thet he shares his strong cislike of ofAb IGaRis.

ee NN ee = Ne ee

28. Prom stray remarks | nade vy L *) hove emerges a pattern
of conflict that 1s only too feniliar te stucents of the morphology
of personal strife/a tightly knit anc caste-conscious society, such
as a corps of prefessionel officers. Adccec to this in the case of
CALLIGESTS should ve the fact that tre formative years of his mili-
teary career fall into @ particuler turbulent area of Sus temalen his-
tory, Where violently and irreconcilatle enmities were the order of
the Gay anc hed to te Incurred as 4 srerequisite for colitical and
often nhysical survival, It may ce best to zresent to you a musber
of the reascns :;iven us sy ( } to explain why collatoretion with
CALLISERTS is out:

NSsax ‘BATTED
29, CALLIZ RIS associsted hinsel? with cvolenel A BA. Ay an officer

ey alte

whe had reached his colonelecy throush the renks, Sein, an officer of
abdeas

t-e line and not a graduate of the Iscuela rolitecnica, ARA A systenma-

tically degraded and insulted militery school officers, favoring and

promoting officers of the line. In this he was aided and acetted by

CALLIGERIS, a procuct and former super intendaaypet ca pie’ Poli-
16

TAS ONLY @ ;

tecnica himself. This threatened to cestroy the esorit de corps of
the officers. In this connection ( vith consicereble bitter-
ness, referred ty _the fact. tiat he and his fellow-offi cers had to

recognizé “as their-comnander-in-chief an olé man who coulé neither
read nor write, General reyes. )stated trast even today trere
4s a deen-seated struggle poin. on vetKcen vscuela Folitecnica gredu-
etes and line officers, witn tho former holcing the uprer hend and in-
tending to keep it, | Yobserved that CALLISH2IS! removal fron
the scene had been of ‘considerable help in assuring the supremacy of
rnilitary echooi clements. In speaking about ARara,( Yex-
pressed plaasure thit ne nad been “willed anc emphasized thet ARANA
was engaged ina conspiracy to cain power for himself.

30. ( )ila ime that he was almost the victime of a murder

plot, conceived by ARASA and engineered by CAL. TIGRIS, The reason

why it failed to come of f was that tie assassins ( ay,

| | io
( ) iecided t at caution was the
better part af valor. ( dis quite convinced that Jaclbsii3

wes behind this.

Bl. At the time CAwLITERIS leunched his attuck esp¢ainst tix

( y, tne officer in charge vas )
¢ ) ( D: his second in
COM IES C

). At tne time of the attack, C Dans
C nae to bear the brunt of the attack, aati known, &
terrific slaughter took piace anc ( )was wounded, What do
you this. ( ) would veC | Dresction

T

today were he asked ta make common cau Rs i gt BS IS?

oo oe ay gg cials ONLY
@ rin: Pop RET

}caciIGERIS,-:

) tated that he was striving for just one coal anc thet if
it with

there was a trench in front of him and ke would have to fil?
) vited this incicGent es an example

corpses, he would do so.{”
to underscore his contention that CALLICERIS would shrink from nothing

to achieve his ow personal encs in any contest,
a point of honor vas involved in

34, By way of explaining why
truck with Can Icents,( )elso brought

their refusal to have any
; court comnosed of the ranking officers of

a5 the point that en frmy

meet
\

concuct and hed de-

massed on CALLIcrelrst

the Army Pish Cormand had
Army. We

Oh OR say

an officer in the Guete salen

. clared him unvorthy to be
gether thet this point wasmade by ¢ Jto immly that et leest the
of honcr can terdly be exrected to eat

officers who mede up tre court
their own wores ss it were anc the Inad -4:. of eman whom
G strioned of military honors,

ne context of Ciscussing what contribution ( D)

tre fall of

they
aa 35, In
rencer in huathesrala

ene ris associrtes couls
City,¢ d)egain brovgnt un te problem of CALLTO MIL, askin
". —_ et pe FO ee a ee rr
le Ye given thit ence Uy .iecale uae firmly
b

we
in their hanéesa, SALLI TTT? would set -ecice t2 continre
Cn : : ,
Tact hat ( )uas convinced |
|

stbming btroug.t out the

S end the elements uncer his control woul proceed to
!

Purtier cue

that CALLIGIRI
occuny Guetemale City es the seat of ndlditical poorer, regardiess of

mais Se

. Se te ORLY |
& m er eET

whether ARBENZ at that time was still in effective control or in

the meanwhile had been ousted by Army elements, { jwas un=

impressed by the argument that the issue of political power and the

pelitical ambitions of CALLIG ERTS are completely beyond the pale of
Junta jurisdiction and that CALLIGENIS himself had never raised the

issue. ( Ivery exphaticelly stated that this proved nothing

and that he was absolutely sure thet CALLIGERTS was bound to be
harboring personal, ambitions. far. beyond. the.elimination. of cowmnism,
. eet ) pointed out that it was the considered policy of the
"consejo" to leave the choice of Guntemalats political leadership to
the Cuatevalans tnemselvos,. If in the free piay of political forces,
CALLIGERIS would come out on iop, the “conse jo" would certainly not
yous objections, this being a clear vindication of its own choice.

If, on the other hand, tie Guatemalan people decided not to elect

CALLIIERIS and

ts entrust tireir solitical fortune to someone else,
that was ell right too.& Gid stress thet the *tconsejo" was

eéamently osvesed to the cstablishment of a reactionary uilitary

Cictatorship, set toat GiG not m:aa that the “consejo™ would arrocate

to itself the right to dictate fuate.ala'ts form of -overnment.

37. ) stated as his own cersonal opinion, emphasizing again

that this matter had never been a topic of Cciscussion, that if it

should become clear that JALtI°E:IS was using his military vosition
to icnhuse himself uron Susterala as a dictator, not affordinz the
Suetetalen ceanls any opsortunity to «ease known its own mreferences,

some remedial action might possibly be tezen end coulée effectively

be taken inasmuch as the “consejo" was exercising lo, istical control.

7 @ ve ve ae asad @ ;
Howevor ,{ Jadded, in all our cealin,s with CALLIGtelS we had
never Giacerneé any symptoms of consuming political anbition which,
4f existent, it would be impossible to conceal completely. On the
contrary, wo had found CALLIGERIS at all times Sedicated to the sole 22
objective of eliminating communism in Guatewela.

38, In order to clarify ( ~ Dstand on the CALLIGERIS
fssue, hewas asked the followin: leacing qu stions:

—
A, Would he at this atage advocate that the “consejo" jettison

CALLIGERIS, even if this would mean abandonment of the whole enter-_
prise? Tho answer was that we could not very well be expected to do

so, although our choice was regrettable.

B. ‘hast would be his ection, shoule (as an academic example}
a garrison commander come to bim for advice on how tor eact to the
approaches of a CALLIGZRIS emissary, asking him to make common
ceuse with the insurgents? This ques tion ( ) refused to answer
outrizht, becevse ~ as he put it - a “point of honor" was involved.
Tne rebuttal that a “point of honor" could hardly arise as long as

the future of his country and the destruction of communism were in-

volved, Gid not appar to move him. This more than any other | in-

a rennet ens Eom

cident convinced ( ) and € ) thet the CALA IGERIS issue. is _s0_
eg I REN A ee TRE oe re on ee mee ws te te ee
joaded with irrationalism that ea man with ( )3 limited _capa-

city for self-enalysis. and for logical development of thought cannot
. ae A
possibly be expected to resolve it within himself.

39, In orcer to enable you to view in its true perspective

what effective contribution £ ) ang nis friends can render it

may be in order to set forth some of the ideas tha guided/ jin

Geveloping this aan ©) aie-oets point-olank whet he had to
offer, ( ) replied that he ena n Fiends" could get into the

on a

act only at the llth hour, 4.c. onliv after the uprisin, had started

end was showing, signs of success. In ottor words -( )stated -

we would be able to count on him once the revolution had succeeded,
He heatedly replied that he hac been scheming against: communism-long-- -

- ee taren eS

before ( yever appeared on the scene and that he cid not feel he

~ an

owed us apolozies, When presseé for a closer cefinition of "the llth

hour", he rather vacuely hinted that the ensuin: chaos might enable

hin and his friencs to wrest effective control of the ‘rmy from

ARBENZ and - more specifically - that they might be able to induce

certain Arny units in Guatemala vity not to quell a civilian uprising,

40, ( ) pointed out thet, whereas any contribution along those

lines would be most welcome, its prospect was much too vague to en-

trvuaet tho capture of Guatenela Vity to him and hig friencs. He es @

professional staff officer woule -ppreciate thet for the purposes of

strategic planning that kine of an offer might es well not be mede at

alli. ( ) further stated thet he dig not wish to conceal from ( >)

taat the problem of "Guaterala -ity" was 27 srave concern to the "“con-

sejo", because there vas at this sta:c¢ no assurance wreatsoever thet

the armed forces stationed in Sugte-ala ty woulc rise concurrently

with the cerrisons in the provinces, [In other worcs, we had not b--en

too gsecessful in effectinzs renetrations of the command of those frmy

z units on a sufficiently high level to warrant any optimism whatsoever

in sredictine whether they would throw tn tneir lot with the rest of

the Army,
i, )Geliveretely PBinted « éGark s ere of the militery

situation in Gusresele City for the purpose of eliciting/( J

military views on the situation ane XP 1§

ne CLR o -2n |

SE POV RETR SERRE ER Se

@ S. OLtggGPRTS OnLy 18 See

control over this situation they might be able to exercise,

It wag

felt that nothing woulé be piven aKa by such acuission, because

( ) cours be presumed familisr with conditions preval 7s 4n

the capital and might have been able to. show up. vnfounded | boaste.
Furthermore, this type of {nformation en getting into the wrong
hands would rcrely serve to lull the government in a false sense

of security as regards the situation in Guaterala Beinn @ )strove
to convey to ( )that the local situation in Guatemala City, and
more specifically the strong control exercised by ARBENZ and his most
trusted henchmen over the Army units stationed there, offeréd a wide
field of activity to him and his friends, but not on an ith hour
basis.

42.[( ) successfully erove home the point that the Junta could
only disengace itself from fmmediste concern with military conditions
4n Guatevtala City if there was some tangible assurance that he and
his friends were effectively engaring themselves in the defection of
those arsy units. in the absence of such intent or of success along
those lines, the Junta vould have to cope with the situation in Guate-
mala City in its own way, committing those, mostly civilian assets,
which it now has end ultimately investing Guatemala city by military
force brought up from the provinces. We were fally conscious that
the latter necessity might spell the prospect of prolonged and bloody
civilwar, with 4rny units firhting Arnay units, 2 prospect which we
are ceterminee to face without flin rching.& binaliy mentioned
that this solution woulé elso place CALLIGESis& in effective control
of all of uat mala, as far as we sre concerned 4 oo consi-

deration, but probably of a little more concern tc( jana his

friends. ie. go

; rs Te
OA TERE, SIE 4 WE TIONG S re sees Say
TONES ig ee Se SE a et PL a ay ee SRA SAY SOK

ie ea ge a a eee ere eee

ae UR me

Or ad al ent

U fod ever ou io Seat x ‘a

s ~s ‘wah a wy Le

@ @ ee
49. 4 J accee font be  scrsenally sin: sone cherit in the con-

corn excrcsnec py Pe ei TTS Se ee en treny. ROLLS

ticel astirstions, althoujh the “consejo" failed to s-are this view,

Pe thet as it may,( | was sure. pie ie | "eonse jo" woule not object

to an Army cou,. baetneaned: “by ( , Yana his friends, He should,

however, bear in mine that the mere replaogment of 6

Leena eT eee

we by a man

_—— wee eros pane

ike C ) with FO TPuny still lurking in the sntechamber,

Oar eee ree

would not be then consicered an accepteble solutic en of the commnist

problem end that our plans would tierefore haye to be implemented «és.

Pei a odd

scheduled, ( ) jeicakea alae he was in full agreemcnt with

this point of view. F
44, while ( Jrenecatedly tried to convey the impression

that “they" (meaning him and his associetes), hac a "plan", it can
be stated that they probably confined themselves to debating a nun-
ber of possibilities without ever reaching a firm conclusion, let
alone ever cettin;, to the point of tryin, something. ‘ %n the basis
of his talk with ¢ , ; ) Pe-eorwvedtee 422k a SYracigi tee
move on his cart nescé net be avprehendec, Decause tiere is at this
staze nothin. to move with. ft may help your own cvaluztion to be
aresented with some of the ideas which ( Jorou, ht up in the

course Oo: our conversations.

45, cian first asxed by ( Jio tell nim what sort of thins:
ne ted in siné to hrin, about the downfall of the overnzent, ( )

remarxed thes ceonenic ocreasure would co thu trick, b-catse tre

“eA! ag GEST. ee Se a ee SE ee Pe Pe ee ea OT
ee ON ee el ) gointed out the trouble with that arjument

“ .

yns thet the orice o7 coffee ec reacned such a high vcoint that not
3 & ‘

only would Gustenala prosper, »ut the government woulé crobatly collec

LS ONLY & So”

next year °25,009,30).9% in taxes as opposed to £&,090,905.90 last
yoer. Purthermore, tne .olc backing of the quetzal was so stron;

that the LOVEFREERS, without weakening - the internal value of the

currency, wesceapeble of arinting paper money egainst ita gold
reserves. “Therefore, while the basic idea was j,004, it simply did
not fit into the monetery situation of the eT rm | J in
commenting on economic pressure as a solvent of the situation,
pointed out that this would be tarfamount to an abandonment of the
policy of non-intervention and that once that decision had been
meade the ore effective remedy would be to send troups. This, how-
ever, would not be the kind of remedy the United Stetes iene It

would not serve to create me atmo spEsre in which each individual

feels Responsibility tn a local, national and world-wide sphere.
46, artor€ ) nad read tol )the statement dealing

with the inadvisability of an invasion,( J- while agreeing,
thet this was a point well taxen - stated that “they” hsd been
hoping an invasion would take place, because the Army could take
advantage of the ensuing chaos and take over the government. He
wes sure that the syndicates end camnesinos would step into the
breach, Ee conceded that an invasion (by an Arny of mercenaries)
appeared a rather fantastic notion, sut that tt impact, if tried,
micht propel the Army into action,

47, 4 more reslistic anproaci: to the over-«ll probdlen of

revolutionary strategy becane discernible after( dnd outlin ed -
to & ) the | basic concept of PESVICUSS C ) was. visibly

impr + assed by whet, he was told, especially by the stress placed upon

ee aR Se
~~ tn pee

winning over the ranking officers in the various garrisons and to

atart from there. Ee indicated that this,, in his opinion, was an

t,

= gps. GO: WY! g@

eminently soun! approxch, Once it hac sunk in that any realistic

contribution by him and his friends woulé of necessity have to de
conceived within the framework of the ris 5 EE3S concept, he dejan

‘thinking © along ; lines of practicable stratesy aoe more productive

- ie ie :
pet Since Be Bis lat ee ss vege ee
ab

vee

vistas “of P fruitful ‘a1 collaboration began opening up. hat developed
will ve At sewaeea under the heading of “Guatemala cLtye"

48, ( ) repeatedly atated that a cefection of the comnand
of the army units stationed in Guatewala vity would meet with the
ereatest asfftoulties, the reason being that the key positions are
occupied by officers irrevocably comultted to upholdin;, the ARBERZ
regime against all comers. Both ( ) ho stated,
had been given assurance by the res icent that he woulg support. toeir

- presidential’ aspirations ~ With this carrot ‘dan lin: before then, it
was out ee uns question that they would jeopardize their political
future by entering into any kine of conspiracy. Geen iis a a”

turn were in cahoots with the _conmanéing . orficer oe

em ee Oe ee ee

Ds who with either

C ) in tre presidency coulé count on advancing into the
position of Chief of the *rned Forces and Chief of Staff, respectively.
( | ) repeatedty emphasized that the defection of the aforementioned
ofr: comple’ out |

fficers was completely out of the cuistion anc that no inéucement,
Se an

eee rein fe

ee Qe

SE en ee ee eS ee

material or otnerwise, could possibly ‘sway thom in their cetermination

to obey the cGemands of the Fresicent. < YC | )
Jcontrols also the ‘uarcia Civil through his
henchman Cclonel vnva ers “ve Glad not Giscuss tne position of the

Base “ilitar although « resark made by ( . )( tae exact contents of

which we fail to recollect) leads us to believe thet one of its ranking

officers may belong to the circle of | Jtrusted friends.

Cette we. Aalst ath ik 8 So og eens nati rae PUL GI ER ESET eg LTE
es *
Eee ee i tot 2%. 3 et

“er AS

5, ee.

ane Peace ues SJootia. absolutely depend upon’ tne Bi ee

that there were three of whom two were absolutely safe, Without
suhtine to ddentiry who they are, he steteed that they shoul ob-
viously not de looked for anong the aforementioned grouy of
officers and that only one of then Per elaes: troun command. In-
“asmch aa ‘one of: ‘the three ts undoubtedty(*: 7 ieee sei
two inddentifica, It should be ee in this context that

we were only talking 2bout officers stetionee in Guatemala Jity,
nok below, the rank of regimental | cComnander ; ,or deputy: commander

ane of the Army High Command, There cana be little doubt that

anong the officers bound by a common oath there ms t be many

more whom he could ;:oint out to us as defectible,

SO, Tre whole sroblem of what to. cdo about the Army in Cuatenale City

is in( )s mind tied up with the Homanenedey of the Amy command ad
with the fact that in his opinion ‘the Army is 95% anti-communist, The thought
‘therefore that’ any qipristne way onterk auternecixs strife, with Army units
fighting eech other and with eubordinate officers aeseseinating their sup riors
(some of whom may be the very officers commited by epecial oath to defand
Guatenale), is clearly «bhorrent to them, se repeatedly tried to elicit
{nformation_as. to, how the, "junta" proposed.to cope with that:contingency and--
whether our, plans rere for the Syétematic elimination of certain officers

believed unsympathetic, Back of his mind may be lurking the suspicion Anat.
rte

a

uncer the pretext o! of enlisting the Army. Eupport, _CALLIGS mIS is planning to

ee ee a me.

; ‘canduot a” “private” te purge on she xide,; elininating all’ Atmy officers who could
conceivably stand-in the way of his political aépiretions.( stated that”
he was not aware of any such places and that ehile in some instances ofticers

may have to be renoved, this would mort Likely be the exception rather than

the rule, Most of them, |( dues Bure, Koulc be swept along by the momentum

of the revolution,

Sl, ( ) position vie a vie AREnNZ is a highly conolex one,
. 7 Yclains that

at H-hour in 1944, ARohk2 was two hours letle and CAL. IG*SRIN left town thet

ne ee

OO te ey ey ere se

day, fight men were involved in the conspiracy, ( j

;

- <
he hae etill come affection Left Lor ARsENZ. About six months ago (
a

\asked him to chair a commi.seLon\

_ )

IN™~ NNANPO'
Qe

) cereal Nind eked him
to infom ’ 5 ke would not s¢cent tie position Geca:.se he wuld /..
not work with conmuni:ts. € | )
52. zoth { ) and ( ‘ are of the opinion that ( Jnas been

driven into a state of utter exssereraticn and unst nis friendship for tne Fresi-

Gent tas sxern thin Aeaic, novever, it uses not aucear tnat nas thought
? € 3 3 - E

out the vrovlem to its logicel conclusion, <i wc one sianG ne argued very

forcefully tiat khek the pnysical presence of aiurZé in Cuatenalz City was

bound to militate apei:st « dloodiese caovp. on the other hand .e very in-

eistently tried to elicit fron ( J what plane if any nad Wen laid to Gispose

of the ARB NZ i cue(

x

J evaded A etraisat reply W pointing cut this vroeblem
was closely tied up with the overall problem of burenala City and, after all, it
wes the uncerlying ourpose of the “consejo tea anivaca wo JYto learn
woat ne and nis arsociates were thinking «tot ital ) acGed tre

a Guateralan, Mm eznsecr to ¢ ys qeestion would nol ceuse nim anv a rticulaer

qualne.( ) svecifica:ly Etaied that to tie best of his knowledge tic issue

ARBENZ nad not co fer been texen under advieenent by the “consejo” and ue was”
under the impression that, in te absence of ail indications to the contrary,

squisite for suc.:e&s,

its solution one way or the otcer was not cduGayisre a

53, ( considered it inadvisable to disouss the problen-1n-cénérete ~

terms for a variety of reasons:

ee

, A, This ha:pened to be one major itsue not included in the cuidance
provided by LINCOLN for our deelings with ( >

B, The breach between ) and ARBENZ at this stage may not,

have fully crystallized and eny indication that the. Presidentis
phreical elimination ispart of the *juntats™ plans (associating thie a
in ( ) mind with CAL IGERIS' pereonzl intentions), might

wesken hie resolve to fully se.ociate himself with our cause, ~~~

S4, Thore can be little doubt that, the woseseination of ARBRNZ fis Jo4"*
been a subject of discussion between ( ) end his friends, From his
remarks it wee imposcible to draw any inference as to the conclueion they
eventually reached, ( ) statement: “You of course realize that

without ARUENZ there would be no commniet problem in this country", may

have been meant to furnish the cue, <

UAL DIA rg SRST IY

aes

et I

Sy

at

y tenant

iets,

ssid

sepa

© &>
U.S, pas evay

S55. ( ) strong feelings in regard to what ho referred to as the
“dignity of the Army" cere out when C _ detated thet the part of the poets
feels that the Army should do something. about. the.present situation, even if
this involved giving up its special privilegee, rather then waiting to get in
on the spoils of a {nevitable uprising. ¢ ) ensver was that the Amny,
except for a few, were among the most eelflecs cervants the nation nse, Their
salaries had not been raised in spite of the rising cost of living and the
majority sre living fron hand to mouth with no reserves Go draw on, In this
connection )rery heatedly comzented upon scurrilous attedee launcied
by an Army paper, put out by a proup of political refugees in Uonduras, attecking

the Army in a manner designed to destroy the faith of the pudlic and to weaken

the control of the officers over the ranke,

S6, Only passing references ware made to the existence of a civilian
resistance organizetion in Guatensla and particularly in the capital, | )

eseured. \ chats there 1 was a powers Pal eng numerovs res Letance orgenivation,

dei pocee et ae ns mare 8

the strength of which at Wes 2 impoesi' Dle to estimate, the reason ceing that itis

cee a TO No es

Hoe too well Orpente ee. as set, Ls ) proceeded to state that big strides were

bane made by ste Guatemalan icaders to tighten up the internal eecurity and the
discipline of the individuals as: ociated with it. The “junta was confident
that the civilian undergound would give an excellent account of iteelf during
he uprising. Ouite likely St would be the initiel ageault by civilian elenenis
in Guatemala City putting the epark to the powder keep, From all availabie
indicziions tnuere would te an uprising the like Guatemsla had never witnessed
jn its history end ite very impact m: ight conceivably suffice to convince ARBE

that the game was up.

57. ) avert at length upon the importance of bringing all public

8 @
Ue Or: ONLY

life to ae compl te stundstili ex an effective reans of forcing ¢he resignation
of the poverment. ve intimated thet this wos another aspect which he and his
friends had been ¢iving considerable thought. Rspeotelly the paralysis of all
means of tranzportstion would render a decleive contribution to bringing dowm

the government, Again( Jerotested ignorence of wiet had been planned along
those lines snd reiterated thet the nein emphaeis of the “funtetsn Plans vas on
military kotion, with ell other considerations beiny subsidiary; 4£ he and his
associates could sae any « ffeative means of bringing about euch a paralysis of

the trane portation syttem, -he “consejo® would be nore tha happy to take tietr

pims under edvisexent,

sa.( ° ) eteted that the earzing of the Canpesinos and of the eundiceteg

caused him end his friends considerable alarm, Se olained that a recent trial
mobilixation in Fsquintla proved that the communiste might be able to rally on
very chort notice in that area alone es mary eS 12,009 armed caxceeinos, He
Waé sure thot these foroce would be sotilized end comaitted chould there be
an internal utrising or am in ast on would beyond the BueCcow of w doubt join in
the fracas, ( J asked ( Jerat Crovisione the "dunat"™ nad made to cope
with that contingency. ( ) reiterated tnzet ne had no knowledge whatsoever of
any tactical moves thet may te contemplated by the “gunta", se osuld not
imegine,( ) averred, that the “junta” hei faile@ to make the necessary
provisions to thwart tue effective courdiment of reranili tery effectives in
Guatemala City or in any other strategic area, Streceing teat tin Sollowing
question was 2 ttrictl, acadenic one, 2G no manner reflecting zcteel sr furmiced
Dienning-of the "dunte", ( jasced netrer a etrafiny etteck by ple es against

the trueke and railroed Care cerrying caxpesinos to Gaatemala City would not

e a. .
, ® GP ET
ut. 3 2hALS ONLY , 4

with a einisunm loss of lives prevent the effective oonnitaent of these

pertisens. (—.. ) thought that et least it night result in their tenporsry

depersel. =~

59. ( ) in the course of our converzetion, breached the queation
whether any menber of the U. S. diplomatic establishment in this country vas

cognizant of the "junta's™ plans and euthorized to s pesk in the “Sunta tot

behalf. (. . ) 2irmly and emphatically denied this, adding that At wuld be vice

tor ery Guatemelan «ctively engaged in conspiratorial cotivities to Jo_pve the

ON a

American Embassy snd its werbers ¢ 3ide.berth, The basic policy decieion,

A te ae OO ge tg

however, plecing the United States into unyielding op;-ceition to Custenela's

aoe

cormminisn and the firm recolve not to sliow this cancerous growth to keep
festering was known to the Amerioan Anbaesador and,(  ) was cure, was known

to the Cuatemalen Government.

60, In discussing waye and means of fitring ( ) and nis eezociates
into the framework of the conepirecy, ( ) race the following etaterente,
pointing out thet the represented the conzidered policy of the conse sons

4, The "“juntate: basic strategic conept on how to bring about the
Liquidation of comrunism in Guztenale would under 20 circunstences

be eubjected to material chegges. Too much work nad gone into it,

too meny conritnents hud been mede, too many freparatory steps hed
been taken -- beeides time was running chort. No vrecticable
alternative had been suggetted wiiich could assure wie padtosl
elimination of communism down to ite grecesroote,

Ke Th re could be only one satretexy with the coroilary of centralized

control, All diversity of efforts FL, ungoordi nated noves, w ould

o
gery

merely play {nto comvunirt hands, The "“coneejo" could therefore

not lend support to any endeavor outeide the framework of the “Suntets*

strategic plano, For that reason cleo the “sonsejo" was unprepcred
to countenmice lat alone actively Eupport two independent revolutions ’

ee eee

ons in the provinces and one in the carital city.
\ C., Without wanting to comit the “consejo" to any evoh fFolution, en
arrangerent could porsibly be worked out whereby(’ ) ndrte
group would be brought into independent sontect with the *consejo®
rather than placed under the direct control of CALLIGBRIS., ; A

recommendation Along those lines would be eubsitted to the “consejo™

etrong objections to becoming esvociatad with CALLIGERIS.

D. If the "consefo" &oprover, @ permanent rupresentetive in Guatemala

i

{

{

\
| && the nost effeative and probatly only means of ncating ( )
f
‘

wii be designated who will ne charged with the conduct of all further

transactions between "conse jo" end ( ).

we Fy ( ) rill be expected to firm up hie personal contacts in the
militar) estahlishxent as emoditiously as norsible and to nuke

evellable to the “consejo" ali irforsetion thet hag @ bearing on our

joint enterprise,
F, The "consejo* in turn through ite reprecentative will rake

available to ( ) and hie assoctates all eequisite infomation

of a tecticad nature, needed to enable them to coordinate the nature

Lied Sit al weer ha Lead

and whe timing of their moves with the overall pian of the “funta".
Yt will, whenever thie apixnsre appropriete, pat ( yi, in touch
with other collaborators of the “junte",

El. A furtie r neeting boturen( — )and ( ). with( attending
pe =

and interpreting, hes been scheduled fof vay Sth. At this meting it is
proposed to rezd to( je formal bse enor ail the points at-fiveue on
“Wich it is believed an understanding hes bean reached. ) A be
reqasted to re~confirm our understéending of his Ww llingness to give tde full
eupport to our endeavor, under the aegis of the “consejo" and subject to its
orders, ce will further be given an oral message to be parced to _)
to the effect thet the “cansefo" evpreciates the reasons for his unwillingness
to ee to ea direct meting with its representative and fe loath to endanger
his personal security unnecescarily. on ihe other nand, the *consejo® counsicera
him and has coneidered him sll along en active simmthi-er of the movement end
will sttempt to keep in touch with him vial ) The “conzejo* trusts that
any doubts regarding the genuineaneee of our effort ek he may ctiil be harbor-

ing, will be taken care of by the courre of events,

62, The next meeting is likely to change and to cone extent nouify sane
of the fmpresrions gained thue fer, and a cunclenentary report will be subsitted
to you, In view ef cove of the lesues raised in thie report, it exe found

advieable, however, to eend it forward in ite present raw form,
