Meeting no 35 - 27 September 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012415, dated 3 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012415).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

VERTING NO» 35 ~ 27th SSPTEMEFR, 1951.

‘

.

In following the plan as laid out in the ace meeting, Noo. bh, a
of the 26th September, for the day of Septenber o7th, it had been arranged
with subject to moet on September 23th by being Jenean up at RV point Nos 1
as 2000 heurc. In addition to aobsiofing subject on the events of September
27th end advising him regarding his future course of act tion, it vas also
plesned to heve an operational meeting Sactney with subject and Janet to
inelise LOScoW contact ‘arrangements for the balance of 1961. However, due
to ‘Liw Wueingected requixement for Janet to be in LONDON by 1500 hours on
28%h September, in order to execute this part of thé sess ional plan it vas

o | @sciéed to instruct subject throurn HINNE te be picke cd up at 2100 hours at

RV point Noo 1 om the 27th Sivtocbes, Moic meeting also tould have the
“4
E advantage of chocizing more closely % th subject Sige sroenats of the very full y

Gay, Accordingly cubjeet was co instructed end wag picid up at RV Point No. 4
at 2100 hours by H,. and Ge with Roger checking for purvoillance from another
vehicles Subject arvived at vhe safe apa partment at 2425 hourde

Go: Our friend mentioned in the car that there are unpleasantnesses | |

'

with WYNNE and he wonts to give us a full report about it, (Roger was called
in to Liston to subject's versione? the difficulties and G, translated for
Roger points that were unclear.) S.: As soon as Roger is ready we will

consider the Boss problem, WHS is woiting ot his hotel now, (Subject
stated that WYNNE's Gispositicn is extremly bad and that he would attempt to
portray his version of the facsu cad we eowld make cur ovn conclusions and “|
enalysis, Subject coid that VUNHE did nov weme to work with him or with us
any Loncor because Sirss of ail WEEE folb insecun, ith respect to his
Arburo exm@ vos olscys siven a uadting emewsr so that (., did not know where
ke stood, isa adled thot he felt he twas doing important work together with .

us but he insisted on having his future scoured and usless it is so secured

he would rathe: not continus to work with us and was planning to retum to

’

London / : =

~~,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE _ =

g i MAR 1892

Dun
LONDON the next day. WYNNE afZcod that he ranted to acquaint him with certain
facts even thouch he ves Porbicdon by us. to do 50. Subject reminded WYNNE
shot he would report this to us because ho mist and WINE agreed, WYNNE was
unhappy because his wife had been trice con, xtactod by ica ec in LONDON by
Bencone Who onquired when UYNSS would so to FSLGRADE. ‘This disturbed her ond
she in turn called her huszand in PARIS end he vas further dig turbed becauss
mie was contacted and even thet niciys walle WYNNE and subject were having dinner,
cftcr subject had mot HOOK, WiNNE called his wife egsin in LONDON, | ‘then
subject asked WYNNE way he was so ecncerned about BELGRADE 7 BYNNE confessed

sO Eubject that nothing had been prepared properly for the HELGRADS os

ie

Wael recoscs to the necessary aprointrexts and business details for

ny

negoviaticns there on behalf of the Enelich fins represented by TYN

WIETS tol a hive thet he vas prevented from malting cédocuste preparations and

~ te ct
ATMA Gon Gs dus

nd on subject's behalf, but

ch -
1)
cr
&
cr
A
(7
ry
QO
iD
f
U

fu
g
a
3
ch
o
a.

2a subject's’ opinion this WaS cntirsiy duc to WENE’s ora fault in doing
noch! 5 in the frea tine he had when cubject's interests Gi not require
handling, Subject then stated that emothor basie reaten for TYNNEts
Clogmmticd fecling ws thet WEA was Ciccatisficd with the finencial .

aurangemonts end when the figures and ecenéitiens were renticned by sudjeot,

cllersdly as rerorted to hin by ES > they were in comlete error as Harold

~

ers.loined im dotail, Either Fin f44 not tell subject the truth or subject
caxblicd tho facts or WIENE hinsel? wes mder a misapprehension or possibly
WEAR Was cloverly Laying the srounéwork for additional futuro dorsnds, ‘
Tots Luscher ae Go susject that he was unclear as to his future because |
he had to spond co mich tins cn the operstion that he tas gradually losing the
conticsnce of th: Piras he represonts Walch will drep off from him and that is

Vay mow no is unprepared to go to ESLGR&DS and plens to return to LONDON. In

addition + ccmplained that ha would mot receive a Cecoration about waich he
Wau told true the eccncents emnnated 2non subject ts imavinosion and subject

confeszed that he G1d infer this to TYENE 2 cng ago in MOSCOW and WNNE ws
furcher Cisgruntled allegedly becsucse ke coxtdé discuss not thing with subject

, oven thous they were closely bound together in work, Subject stated further

that /

that with such an attitude he did not necd TYNNE to work with and added thet
since MONS hed done everything fox ua thet was roquired of him and was woll
paid for ib and also performed his work jin a comrendable vay as a potriot he

should be ~eleasca if he feels thet vay, But subject continued with the

ame breath, and in fact in the sara contence, adding that Mucthermore he

af

en
ck
y
po
MQ

px

Slegotiion to KMOSCOt. Subject felt that the basis for WYNNE's attitude
was entirely monetary, As a parting chot subject said that he did not need .
watco 2n PARIS, however it would be well if WERNE woulda return to PARIS just
price to subject's. departurs, so that he could .notionally deliver brochures

vo subject and see him off to his plane as a farowell’ gestures

34 . (Alshougn these apparone Clisgrustlements had to be considered in a

serious lights because of the cverall importance of the operation, they did in
fact, aS wo euspsoted, tura cws te be a tomisest in a teapot. That very evening

d@ to Roser that he wished to ctop work and furthermore he did in

whem ete

bE .
Ps
fi
ey
fas

foot of his om volition go to ES7GRIDES cn the following Gay. All misunderstandings

of course con und will be recolvod and the situation develored to the point.
that Lt did purely ag the result of strained nerves. There is no question that
subject both wittingly and cupenls: con be most trying in. his often
capricious Cemands and handling him on the part of all concerned requires

gress patience even if understanding is not always possible,

iiile Roger was still present subject was requested to report on his

contact with 30 thet Roser would be in cossession of those facts prior to
we r 4 3

talking to TEENE later thet eveninz, As a further ssquel to the above
s
eissraatlemens ca the part of TYNNG, it should be steted here that that same :
~ ar >

evening as abort 23C0 hours WANS called to Estermine vhether subject vanted to

go owe wivn bim cn the toun that night which was impossible and conssquently °

%, On the other hand gust prior to WYHNE's departure for

as on the Pollovwiny duy, socbjeet called TYKKS and expressed his
re . a

“Cnonks and gratitude to WINNS for his many services and kindnesses to subject

onc addsd a phrase to the effect that he had spoken to his friends on behalf of

Wena and that they had agreed to take care of WYNNE's problems and demands, ‘

5. / ) a ae

ky With respec’ to the contact with MF subject said that as ‘per .
plan he vas in his hotel at 1500 hours and WINNE called him at’ 1500 hours |
to advise hin that inmediately after the close of ‘business at about 4830

or 1900 hours, WYNNE would contact subject again for a possible incoting vith
@& man,. He did this at 4745 by phone and instructed subject to coms inmediabely
to his hotcl, Subject vas there in one helt hour and picked up “YNNE at his.
hotel and proceeded in the ‘same taxi to the George’ V Hotel vhere they went to
the bar. lr. ‘Silkaggygellli met them in the lobby. at which point ‘subject wats
introduced to QM and when they went to the bar WWNNE went to order the
drinks while subject .and (gM had the opportunity of, discussing everything :
necessary clone, © Subject was extremely pleased with ah, both with respect ;
to his personal ity and the way he understood everything subject had to say and
sudject on his pars understood everything @gl had to say. Subject told saan

_ about the four main points of technical interest thet he had and that subject
had been 0% the Exposition and had been asked abou. Siuse items by Soviet
experts and subjects further asked for assistonce to visit certain types of ;
plentse QgglP carefully fZotted down all this dota and explained that he was —
going on a short trip on Thuresdey, the following day, and would return on the
4th or 5thn of October. Upon his return he promised to call subject at his —
hotel, the nurber of which he gave hin, at 0800 hours ‘and arrange a meéting
with subject at which everytning could be discussed further, He ‘also asked hin
for brochures as well as to arrenge visits to plants, Subject vas impressed, :

with Ty s co-operation and added that when these recontact arrangements

were made, WYNNE was not present. G. asked subject if subject considered |
WINNE's performance in malcing the introduction and setting up the contact * :
was satisfactory, and subject immediately replied that WYNNE had done a first _ 7
rate job end that in goneral WYNNE des erved nothing but praise for his:

operation xoL support work in general. He further added that he: forgot to

- mention that ene reason for TNEt s being upset was that his wife told hin . |

thet all was not going on emoothly with the reccnstruction job of WYNNE! s

hom: in LONDON. Obviously this is another actual factor for WYNNE to be

in'a more nervous state of mind then usual. At this point Roger departed to

consult with WAM on his side of the story.

*

t iy Fi ie ‘ ‘ . + ra Sue
Sole : . Hs : Ye eee HB So

~5-

-G. enquired if subject had in fact consulted with CHEREDEYEV about ae

the clearance for malting a telephone approach to TARASSOFP » and subject = : a
cplicd that he could not see the Rosident that morning although he ves ab

the Exbassy at 0900 hours, because the Resident was completely tied up whi

Eubassy matters involving his covor poniticon as Céunsllor, because they -
expected a visit from the Premier of Frence to the Exposition on the following ©
Gey end a visit by General de GAULLE ca the day after that, This, of course; “3
involved trerendous preparations on the part of the Embassy and extreme - es
confusion, Therefore he could not see the Rezident but spokes to his coputy
ANAWYEV about the brochures given 4 subjech by WYNNE. ANANYEY, being en. |

engineer, examined these brochures and gave a favourable evaluation, He vert. se hae

_ them at the Rezidentura for further analysis to decide what to send to GRU

~~,

and what to send to the Committee, Subject merely mentioned ‘thet he was

busy making contacts end would devise a plan after he had everything otgatiiced ©

and Lined up end would present it later with his proposal as to. how to precesa,
Ho said everything was fine at the Embassy and that he had then gone to t

Exhibition wnere tha cotopred ctedroace Was being repaired for the following
day, Subject stated that he did not call TAaRASSOFF that dey because’ he had

promised us to first sos ebout i¢ with the Rezider Prior to discussing

=

‘

TARASSOFY further, ject confosecd that there were two reasoas why he cams

vith such reagro, if any, preparaticns from his end in MOSCO7 concerning :
sontacts with French businessr2n vio had visited MOSCOW. The first reason
he gave was that he had completely over-estimated our capabilities for having

-

incor tins in PARTS. Ee understood clearly vhy this

ae)

such contacts at our
a8 not the case now.and admitted his serious error in making this assumption,
Tho second reacen, which was interwoven with the fi rst »y was that he’ in fact was_
not sure thet he would be sent to PARIS et all at the time uhen the French
Exposition tas running in MOscoW, so he made litsle effort to establish the
groundwork for this possible trip, not having much faith in his chances of
coming here. Only after the French Exposition was his trip to PARIS formated,

end it was tco late to do what he should have done earlier, Subject also-

emphasised /

emphasisod that he was reluctant to seck French contacts in MOSCOW in view

of the intensive effort maids by ‘the KGB to ao just that and he did not want -

to mm into their interests, Subject further emphasised that ‘alt Prenchnan”
having Russian namos or known to be of Russien extraction are prime targets -

of KGB interest, In this connection subjects wos not referring to TARASSOF?,

abouts whom he ras unwitting at the time » but to onother Frenchitan with

Russian name ebout whom he had learmed in the notes on the Frénchwoman

terpreter which were , given to him by LOPATENKO and which he haa shown to
. He was afraid of contacting this man or any other Frenchman to vinom he - : i ‘ae
hed only a tenuous introduction, because of fear of running into the wrong . —
perscn and he agsumed that we hed the capability in PARIS of nelecting a” | oo . : . "
“reliable. person, in this respect subject candidly stated that he wanted to | ° a
be honest with us otherwise - we would have grounds to assume that he was doing “
nothing to further his om cause end was as lazy as TNHNE. Subject continued . | . a :
by saying that he now felt confident something very tangible would emsrgs | a oe my
from his contact with Wael end nov there vas a firm basis with which to wok - .
to accomplish his mission, fre nespect to TARASSORS , hé said: that thet man
vas most attractive with respect to his position but requested additional
checks made cn our part prior to his contacting TARASSOFP because of a feeling

~pubject..had,.that, possibly the KGB had contacteds-df-nobrreorudtadgeLARA SSOFF .

FT re gree RATE OH TR ERIE AY

in ID SCOW, Srahe,could run into serious trouble.-because,as,,806 the name would

eee To SOEUR S LEKI e FINE PIER INE VEE TT

be traced with the KGB, they would £2 2c that uoject, as the son of a White
Le adaniteniendeieihdadeihiaehaciad eke eT atti aiid

Axay officer, had been dravm as by a magnet to another Thite Russian and. that
would be the end fox hin, Therefore, bate) matter how strong ‘the temptation’ had . ae
a aia oo omens so :
been and still was to contact this man, subject was very glad that he had the |
opportunity cn this day to consult with us about the cssirability of his maxing |

this contact and he desired our confirmation and approval that he should do -

£0, ALL ecreed that in view of this most serious consideration and in

addition to the obvious fact that the KCB in HOSCOW would have an extensive ~ |

dossicr on TARASSOFF at the very least

Ce ean ere ee Sree oe ees m After further 7 a |
‘gclibe: ration and telling ¢ subject that we would sonatas this, he returned _ ~
Sia/notas given to him the day before by G. on TARASSOFF and we further veh oo
decided later that this operational lead would be discarded. | subject | also -
stated that el thoes CHEREDEYEV may approve. the contact, with no consultation . se
with the Local KGB since GRU end. KGB are in a sense “competitors for Western
contacts, and though CHEREDEYEV knows nothing of subjectt s White Arny tothe - ae ‘ :
background and neither do the local KGB, still if and when the time comes for
further operational activity with TARASSOFF the inevitable KGB hime trace ab . a
the LOScow eve undoubtedly bring out the very dangerous allegation oe
referred to above. / Subject of course did not mention anything about this to
“ANANYEY since ANANYEV isnot in position of authority to make any decision
and secondly it would be strictly none of ANANYEV's pasinseay In addition
subject must make a report on this in MOSCOW, as an operational accomplishment,
of his, irres spective of how the matter is handled in.PARIS end there ain | MOscorr
that inevitable KCB trace request could cause considerable danger to subject.
Subject even suggested that as a third possibility he contact the mari without -
reporting to either the PARIS Rezidentura or to MOSCOW and obtain material °
from the contact alleging it to come from another SOUrCes This’ was completely =
discarded and ‘although subject was told we would consider this individual eae
further we had decided amongst ourselves ‘to apes TARASSOFF completely end Look i |
for someone else if oot dass : ~

Subject then displayed the 3 issue, 2 of weravdat.. son a26th, Se popeciber and’
SRM mona *

PEPPER n BERN, 9 THR Tae
pointed out that the Soviet Government had officially announced the fortnooaing:

military large-scale manoouvres. Subject particularly stressed that the
CLAN T pormeectemry

ONE FEET CHUTE TR PERRI,

announcement stated. that the manoeuvres were planned for the months of otober rs)
caliente niaaseaall

VARENTSOV and otnsxe » that the manoeuvres, mould daeties a month wv with, 2. short

possible extension, in subject's view is a bold admission on KHRUSHOHEV *s part, af 8 x
that he will continue to puila up and develop his armed forces in these :
menosuvres to cover the entire period after the Party Congress, the signing

“8

; Gory of / 38

mand Novermbers This fact to supplement sub Jcen' & own report as learned. from — =
|
|
)
|
1
I

vhis, political moves with, ‘the: mageinnum conbat-ready forces. of. COUrES freee,
SO CA RE ERENT I CIEE ore Hoey meee meaeratereToE REPT tt eee

Vagey <% | . a
of the Peace Treaty end. the ho November er holidays to be in 1 post tion re intivencs, > a

“UPTON P Rr RTY Fm DEE TE . yor

other consequences, namely the purpose for having this apie available, ’ iii ce a

not mentioned in the paper, said subjects a oo

At this point Janet ontered and was Seay greeted by pieone ‘ghis ane

event was described to subject as the surprise of the evening and it was hela
at this time because Janet had to retum to Hondon on the Fol bowing aaye
“After Lengthy discussions concerning subject's schediile for his leave of it
35 days of vhich he. would take 16 days at a sanatorium at KISLOVODSK' and

the’ remainder he would spend working for us in MOSCOW, and after Janat hea
described fully her normal pattern of novenents on Mondays end. Fridays: te ths |

Arbat area, the following schedule was established’ +o cover the balanse of the 00°

month of Oct tober, the month of November and the month of Decenbers Subsequent - .

“contact Serangemenes would be established in early December based on. bubject! s ies
information cn his own plans and subject to our concurrence, The October.
schedule would begin on Friday the 20th October, Vhich would be & persénal
meet at the Comnission store on the Avbat at 1300 hours. For every Friday’

beginning with the 20th October and running through until the end of Hovembery P “

this site’ and time would be considered as the bastio meetings Every Monday
following the Fridays above and thus beginning with Monday the 23rd October, - -
would be considered to be the alternate meeting for the preceeding Friday»
The place would be the left hand store on the second floor of the Praga

Restaurant and’ the time vould also be at 4200 hourss Only. in the event ae
that no mecning takes place on a Friday would Janet appear on the fellowing - - |
Londay. Hoever, if a meeting took place on Monday she would still appear oe:

on the following basic Friday meeting site. The schedule for Decéitber': Ne pike in

be reversed in some respects as follows. The basic meting ee — be is
ca Fridays and it would take place’ on the ist December, but the site would” ot ‘

_ now be in the park at 1600 hours, -The alternate meeting would still be on .

Mondays following every Friday at 1300 hours at the store above the Prag,

The one exception would be that Monday, Christmas Day, is omitted as an stternate

meeting time, The above is the exact and sinple See to cover the

balance of 19616

+

aa

So ag ee a a

. ag war . y

; Subject’ mentioned that his own schedule would be as eatee te = a
would leave PARIS on the 15th October} he would, need about. fave. anys to . i
sonpuees all of his official reports and submit them to both the GRU aha es Sa Ut;
the Committees .Then he would ‘request his leave to begin between the 20%”
and 25th October and the normal tha iy Ange leave allowance would be Anewicased
to thirty-five days to include allowable travel ims, Thether! he tote his’ _
sixteen days rest cure at the RISLOVODSK sanatorium during the fizst half
of the 35 day period or the second half of the. period would depend on his,
‘success in obtaining his putevka (booking) for the first half, At any rate
subject stated that he would definitely meet Janet on ue fivet ‘schedules of ! ‘sy

et

' Inseting of Friday Ostober 20th and give her a note with wwrkbten eipLanation: }
- as to his leave tine schedule and his date of return to “yelieve’ her of. the -. ed
ees of going to the meeting pinsed unnecessarily during that “times” Further 7 : ‘ ;
more it was pointed out that with the exception of the sealed cassette . 4 : : :
packages containing undeveloped film Janet should exemine any Lodse material | Pi
to see if it dees not contain a message fox her. Similarly Janet was warned." ee
by G. that in some distant phase of the operation it may be possible, ever a
though not contemplated for this current phase of scheduled meets » thet subject : e.

may include whet appears to be a blank piece of foldea papers ‘This yess

should never be discarded since it may Sauceih secret eriting, “The overall) |
plan vas Clearly understood by all concerned, | | hy
At first there was a discussion about using a number of telephone’ : . hc
rings by subject to signify that he was going on leave on the following dayy
but since he will already know by the 20th October and will so inform Janet - :

in a note, the concept of of using telephone 9 xings was Garpted over to duiotay a:
AYRE NET OEE IT COPE: MAN Neer ppNe e p ‘temmereroeeicremenetrtnereeresnner ee tA ee ny
plan which involved the most Brent type of message passing on the part of‘
Reh mecnnieiewinrneees, ee RTO I OLE ET rere renee cere mt re eR tetra ry spermine,
subject under conditions of of ‘orisis Ls which would be included together with a

ee
re 9 pire are weet

signalling plan and a dead-drop_ 288 the concept vas aiscussed at length th ee
nna eeneeeseaineeiiaiiaitel ;

bel PONY Tm

“3 Eontative plen established at the end of the meeting after Janet's aeyartuns, - :

‘since it aia not consern her’ eotions in any Way Cas,

- ys

as well as persons since he vas @ tneniber of the Comittee. . a ‘BO happened

re

-10— a

(+) With respect. to Janet one additional important consideration was " :
resolveds This was to smoothly effect: en actual official meeting between: |

Jenes and subject ata reception edther at an Enbassy or ab a private aa Bes fe

residence to which logically arid officially both could ‘be invitea guestes oo _ aes

Subject reviewed all of the official receptions at Enbassies ana ‘private an

homes that he had been invited to on an official basis by dates and places”

that both were invited to the home of Hilery KING, subject once and Senet
numerous times, It also appeared that from their respective recollection

of the persong, present that they both had been there already without being

introduced, to each other at the party at Hilary KINGts first residence on, the :
Prospekt MIRA near the RIGA railroad station on one of the “days between the”

8th and 40th December 1960, At any rate for chance queries both subject. ond

" Janet could conveniently use that place and date as a Legend for heving tot ae : ve ;

ach other as an excellent cover for an unexpected meeting and greeting | in”

é ie :

MOSCOW should any question ever arise on the part of KGB or whomsdevers vin “ _

-the meantime an: actual meting would be arranged between the two, at a reception a -

to be ‘given by Dr. SENIOR, the Soientific Attache at the British Embassy s _ ae
Subject interjected here that when people have once met officially, sibaequent
contacts are perfectly normal and. approveds As an example he said that . a
GVISHIANT has & good friend, an Ttallen, vhose name is MARINOPTI. This man- 2 7 a - 7 ee
hes been living in MOSCOW for. six norths now in a very fine room vhich he 7 |
uses as aft office, in the Hotel National, which GVISHIANI has arranged for bits oe to
The man seems to be of considerable value to GVISHIANI and they are dloss | o
friends end go out together to eat and drink, ete, end in addition the realion = ve
alvays brings GVISHIANI fine giftss The Italian often goes to LONDON; NEW ..
YORK and WASHINGTON, Subject was involved in reconciling the mandatory ~"
request by IONOV the Chief of all hotels in MOSCOW to remove the Italian from.

his room during the tima that the various delegates to the Party Congress «~*~
would be in MOSCOW, This was en order from the Supreme Soviet. GVISHIANI -
aia not vant the Itelian removed y ‘but 3% was BO arranged that the Italients ue
office with all of his “paraphanalia was locked Up in the Italian's ,room

while the Italien himself planned to go on leave to Italy during the period

of the Party Congress, This satisfied everyone. Subject used this interesting

ae relationship /.. oe eR

aod dos

relationship as an SonEtS of approved contact vith roretenels ‘by Soviets

Getting back to his own contacts subject stated that he had first met icine
at a reception at the Hotel National dining room when the mye dele gation fiat
arrivod in MOSCOW ana later KING invited him to his homs rox ‘a reception on ths
Prospekt Mira. The date wep about the Sth~toth Decenbexr and the whole delegation
of thirteen : persons from England were there , ana from the Committee 5 in addition
i sca LEVIN > LOPATENKO, POLYAKOV and SIVARTS were there and many other. oe a
s including numerous people from the British feat Subject Was tela,
Lut . ue above would be used as a legend and an _ actual reception where both ”.
would meet vould be planned for the time after he returns from his Leave
because there would not be sufficient time to do it paviier,. Subject - stated |
‘that bie had also met Dr. SENIOR the Scientific Attache at KINGts reception
in Decenber 1960, but he. had never met him at the Committee offices although
he lnows that ‘SENIOR comes to the Committee at least once every meer wines,
it was pre ferable » on the basis of personel security, to meet at. a reception
ot Dr. SENIOR's house, instead of at KING's,. Subject was asked whether it.
would be normal for him-to be invited by Dre SENIOR, to which subject replied
that a% certainly would be logical and in fact ‘BERDENIXOV, | who knows Drs SENTOR
well personally, had called him on subjectts behalf when subject Was BUbenpeEng
to get his visa quickly to go to LONDON ‘Subject stressed that at this time |
it would be very desirable for hin te be invited to the British, French and-
Canadian Embassies and 6 any receptions held elsevhere by the English ,. Canadiaus |
or French, to which foreigners are normally invited, He also is concerned vith
the Americen Enbassy, although up to now in a passive roles He had alieady
received an American delegation at the Committee who came regarding nabters Of |
ents and licensing. Subject said that the chief was FRIEDMAN and all the
other members were also Tews Subject met enethee American who was in woscow
ag a touri st sua whose visa he had extended for him twice for ten days’ each -
at the Americants ‘request. Subject flew to PARIS in the saine plang as this *
fusrican, bus only ‘bumped - Ante him at ‘LE BOURGET, The American's name was’
UcKELLAR, or something similar, ie : -

12, / . a ah a

vow :
a” ‘ . 4 . 5 r . + %
oa ‘ ; . a 2 1 UO Bi ey og
. - ‘ ‘ ea as oat et
a . . 7 as ee ang th ye :
a . a inet oa ; 7 wres

ee AD |
20 Subject remarked that anyone who has official dealings ‘with the ;
GEaretes can invite him with other members of the Committee te Embassy’
receptions, to private homes of those Embassy officials and even to restaurants
vhich often have been used for receptions in case more room’ was required,
130) kb this point Janet left since the schedule for the balance of 1961 :
vas established,. Subject was again reminded to submit his meting ‘proposals —
for January and beyond in early Decenber. In addition he was reminded to be
sure to carefully document his future information reports with a sub-source ; 3
date and circumstances a |
Gi.) ‘The MOSCOW sional ries ats then taken up. Subject was shovn
photograrhs of every site and they were oriented on the map of MOSCOW. After
lengthy discussion as‘to how ‘and when these could bé aned, subject selected in .
order .of preference Noe 3, then Noo 1 and last Nop 2, The purpose of ths
signal was to call the observer to the dead drop at once since this coummnication
system vas to be used. enly in the case of extreme saaeenae:
; Aft er much discussion regerding ne way to secure the dete aes
procedure in terms of minimum tims that material, would remaizi therein itwes .°
tentatively decided that a signal placed on the adopted site during the night
would mean that the DLB would be loaded at 0900 on the following mornings |
The observer would unload it as quickly as possible. That. same evening subject
would receive a telephone call, at a time to be set, in the form of a signal
of so many rings, This would confimn' that ths DLB had been cleared, Any
other signalling method. indicating clearance of DLB such as placing a savaitohs
ma the radiator or signalling again eleewhere would require subject to reappear eo ae
at the DLB ‘site or the signal site a second time » which is undesirable, Thus .
at this meeting the concept was established and the precise mechanics will be ae
adopted prior to subject's a dere | | . = a
ae Ce) He Left at 0045 hours on 28th September and was cropped off 3 a few

blocks from his hotel by Roger ana J o without incident, rs oe
