Soviet Spending for Defense: Trends Since 1965 and the Outlook for the 1 980'S
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028136, dated 3 September 1979.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028136).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

— : tee fa 4 Meo 5 Ata . ae en 5 es

os National

f,
‘ a6 ¥, Foreign

“i wf

wy Assessment

Center . .

‘ Soviet Spending for Defense:
Trends Since 1965 and
the Outlook for the 1980s

An Inteligence Assessment

a

Apprgucil for Woda ®
Data 90 SEP. 1984. -

SR 79-1014?
October 1979

Copy

ge

National Security Unauthorized Disclosure
Information Subject to Criminat Sanctions

National

Foreign

Assessment ° ‘
Center

Soviet Spending for Defense:
e Trends Since 1965 and
- the Outlook for the 1980s (v)

An Intelligence Assessment

Information available as of 10 October 1979
was used in the preparation of this report.

a dee

This report has been coordinated with the Offices
1 of Economic Research, Imagery Analysis, Political
Analysis, Scientific Intelligence, and Weapons
Intelligence. It has also been reviewed by the National
: Intelligence Officers for General Purpose Forces,
Politica! Economy, Special! Studies, Strategic Pro-
grams, and the USSR and Eastern Europe. (u)

D147

October 1979

Key J udgments

Soviet Spending for Defense:
Trends Since 1965 and
the Outlook for the 1980s (vu)

Trends in Defense Spending and Programs

When the current Soviet regime took power in the mid-1960s it continued 4
policy, which probably had begun in the late 1950s or early 1960s, of
increasing the commitment of resources to the military forces. Since 1965,
Soviet defense expenditures in constant 1970 rubles have increased at a real

_ average annual rate of 4 to 5 percent. Because defense spending grew at

about the same rate as the economy as a whole, these expenditures absorbed
a relatively constant 11 to }2 percent of the Soviet GNP, This figure reflects
defense as it is defined in the United States; under a broader definition,
which the Soviets may use, the defense share of GNP was about 1 percent
higher.' (vu)

The increase in Soviet expenditures on defense between 1965 and 1979
resulted from both a substantial expansion of Soviet military forces and an
across-the-board improvement in the quality of weapons and equipment.
Total Soviet military manpower increased by 30 percent during those years.
The most significant increases in force size took place in Frontai (tactical)
Aviation and Ground Forces-—especially those along the Sino-Soviet
border-—and in strategic missile forces. All of the Soviet military services
benefited from the introduction of successive generations of major wcapons
and support systems. (U)

Outlook for Future Defense Spending

Changing economic and political factors make it difficult to forecast Soviet
defense programs and expenditures in the 1980s:

® The rate of Soviet economic growth has been slowing and has recently
fallen below the rate of growth that we estimate for defense expenditures.

e Energy problems and demographic problems are likely to lead to a further
economic slowdown in the 1980s, so that defense activities could begin to
consume an increasing share of Soviet resources.

‘This estimate is presented in ruble terms to reflect the cost cf military programs and
activities in the USSR. For an alternative measure that reflects the cost of reproducing Sovict
military activities in the United States, see A Doflar Cost Comparison of Soviet and US
Defense Activities, 1968-78, SR 79-104 30, October 1979, Secret. (U}

iii

ar |

aed

e A political succession is imminent, and the potential candidates for the top
positions appear to hold differing views on resource allocation issues. 8

* Arms control negotiations now under way could affect the future
composition of Soviet military forces and expenditures.

These factors take on particular importance in the light of decisions that the
Soviet leaders are making now an economic plans for 1981-85, (u)

_

n the basis of this information, we believe that Soviet defense spending will
continue to increase in real terms at feast through [985. The available
evidence indicates that, if the Soviets do not alter their current plans,
defense spending probably will continue to grow over the next five years at or
near the tate of the past 15 years. If economic pressures became particularly
severe, however, the Soviets could moderate the rate of increase in defense
epending by economizing in ways that would have only modest impact on the
modernization of their forces—by stretching out selected weapon programs,
for example, or by taking advantage of the limited direct savings made
possible by arms control agreements. (vu)

In the longer term, growing economic difficultizs may push the Soviet

leaders to reexamine their plans with a view to reducing the growth of

defense spending. But they will have to weigh their economic concern

against their perception of future military requirements and their strong :
sense of the utility of military power in advancing Soviet policy objectives.
Whatever choices they make with regard to defense spending, we think it
highly unlikely that, even in the fonger term, economic difficulties will force
a reversal of the Soviet leaders’ longstanding po‘icy of continuing to improve
their military capabilities. (uv)

.

“fd

Contents s B) ey

a

Key Judgments : ili
~~ Tatroduction '
Ee ae ; a } Pere
io The Announced “Defense” Budget 1
2

Defense Spending as Defined in the United States

Patterns and Priorities Revealed by Analysis of Expendicures

Analysis of Expenditures by Resource Category: 3
Measures of Force Expansion and Modernization
Operating Expenditures 3 =
RDT&E 4
Investment 4...
pa Major Procurement Programs: the Drivers of Defense Spending 4
~~ Expenditures by the Military Services: Insights 6
into Changing Institutional Priorities
. Air Forces _ a oo
Ground Fores og
Navy te "
National Air Defense Forces - ll
National Command and Support Activities 44 i=
Factors Affecting Future Defense Expenditures 14
4. -! Economic Considerations 14
waa Political Considerations i6
Requirements for Future Military Forces 16
~ ' Arms Control Agreements 16

The Planning Process : 17

Through 1985 20 ;
Longer T crm Considerations 21
Defense Spendiag Priorities in thé 1980s 22

_ ae . Impact on the Military Services 23
. 4 me
Appendix :
Methodology, Concepts and Confidence in the Estimates - 27
Figures
: Estimated Soviet Defense Expenditures, 1965-79 2
2. US Defense Expenditures, 1965-78 2
3. Shares of Estimated Soviet Investment
Services

nd Operating Expenditures for Military

3. Comryarison of Western and Soviet Measures
of Soviet Economic Growth

*

r f#,

Soviet Spending for Defense:
Trends Since 1965 and

re the Outlook for the 1980s (vU) oo
Introduction
Sinte the accession to power of the current Soviet The estimates are based for ihe most part on a detailed
regime in the mid-1960s, the USSR has carried outa identification and direct costing of the activities and
major expansion and modernization of its military components that make up the Soviet defensz program

establishment. This effort—which began before the for each year. We have greater confidence in the

present leaders assumed office--has paid substantial —_ estimates of tatal expenditures than in those for lower

dividends in military capability and political prestige. ievels of aggregation. We also have greater confidence

But the cost has been high: the effort has directed in our estimates for past years than in our projections

toward the Soviet military a growing infusion of scarce of future spending. A more detailed description of our

human and technical resources and raw materials. (u) methodology, our concepts, and our confidence in the
estimates can be found in the appendix. (u)

Gne way in which the US Intelligence Community
measures the Soviet commitment of resources to its
military forces is to estimate the annual ruble expendi-
tures for defense. This report analyzes the level and
trend of these expenditures over the last 15 years, heir
distribution among resource categories and military
services, and the major weapon procurement programs
that have provided the principal impetus for their
growth. It then evaluates those defense spending trends
in che light of a projected transition from the generally
steady economic growth and political stability of the
past 15 years to a decline in that growth and the
instability of a political succession. Finally, on the
basis of that evaluation, we dltempt an assessment of
future Soviet defense programs. (U) The Announced “Defense” Budget

In the publishzd state budget, the Soviet Union
The estimates p-esented in this report are expressed in annually includes a single-line figure for “defense,”

rubles to reflect our unde-standing of the costs of which is expressed in current prices. The definition of
military equipment and activities in the USSR. Such defense—what activities are included in this figure-—.
estimates help us assess the resource considerations has not been rublicly released. Announced Soviet
confronting Soviet defense planners, the relative defense spend.ng was 12.8 billion rubles in 1965. It
priorities assigned to the forces and activities that increased in the late 1960s and remained stable at

make up the defense effort, and the impact of defense about 17.9 billion rubles in the early 1970s. Lt fell to
on the Soviet economy. We use constant prices so that 17.2 billion rubles in 1977 and has remained at that
the estimates reflect real changes in defense activities level ever since. (v)
rather than the effects of inflation. The use of 1970
prices permits the comparison of estimated defense

expenditures with other Central Intelligence Agency 1
estimates of Soviet economic performance, which also fq
use that price base. (v)

Estimated Soviet Defense Expenditures, 1965-79

Billion rubles

20
we Announced defense expenditures

(current prices)

1965 67 68 $71 #73 #75 77 78
as: Defense spending as it might be
Pores Gefined by the Soviets.
IWS Defense spending as CIA defines it for
comparison with US accounte.
Unclassified
580619 10-78

we

US Defense Expenditures, 1965-76

Billion 1976 dollacs
160

Unclassified
580620 S

The relatively low level of the announced “defense”
figure, coupled with its remarkable stability in recent ..-
years, suggests that if it reflects any set of actual
expenditures at all, the set must be only a portion of the
total. If the Soviets base their figure on an actual
inventory of defense activities, then over lime they
have apparently changed its scope; this would enable
them to manipulate the announced figure for political
purposes while at the same time enlarging their
military effort. (v)

Defense Spending as Defined in the United States
Several definitions or ways of measuring defense
expenditures are used in the United States. Probably
ihe most common is the one used in the annual budget
of the Department of Defense (DoD). This measure,
however, includes funds for some nondefense activities
that the Department administers and excludes various
defense-related expenditures administered by other
government organizations, In the US gross national
product (GNP) accounts, the Department of
Commerce uses a broader definition, intended to cover
all government purchases of defense-related goods and
services. The CIA, in its comparisons of the dollar cost
of US and Sovict defense activities, uses yet another
definition. This is similar to the definition used in
GNP accounts, but it excludes some activities—such
as net expenditures on foreign military assistance—
whose costs Jor the USSR cannot be estimated with
confidence. It includes—for the United States—
national security programs carried out by the Depart-
ment of Defense and the defense-related programs of
the Department of Energy, the Coast Guard, and the
Selective Service Commission and—for the
USSR—equivalent Soviet activities. (U)

According to this CJA definition, estimated Soviet
defense expenditures in 1965 were about 31-36 billion
rubles (measured in constant 1970 prices}. They have
increased since then at a real average annual rate of
growth of 4 to § percent, and we estimate that in 1979
they will reach $8-63 billion rubles. Growth rates
varied from year to year, primarily in response to
fluctuations in the procurement of strategic missifes
and aircraft. The continuing increase in estimated
Soviet defense expenditures is in keeping with observed
trends in Soviet military activities. The trend in US

1Sce A Dollar Cost Comparison of Soviet and US Defense
Activities, 1968-78, SR 79-10130, October 1979, Secret. (u}

2 *

rt

ay

bedi

defense expenditures is in marked contrast, From the
Vietnam peak of 1968, US defense outlays declined
through 1976. They increased slightly in 1977, how-

ever, and by a larger amount in 1978. (vu)
—

Patterns and Priorities Revealed by Analysis of
Expenditures

The “direct-costing” methodology for estimating
Soviet defense spending makes it possible to analyze
expenditure patterns ina number of ways.‘ Analysis by
resource category provides a measure of Soviet force
expansion ard modernization; analysis of major pro-
curement programs reveals the principal determinants
of defense spending: and analysis of expenditures by
the individual services provides an insight into chang-
ing Soviet military priorities. (U)

The analyses of expenditures in the sections that follow
are based on narrow definition of defense, correspond-

ing to that used in the CIA comparisons of US and
Soviet defense activities. (U) oo

* See appendix for a discussion of direct costing.

Analysis of Expenditures by Resource Category:
Measures of Force Expansion and Modernization
One breakdown is in terms of three principal resource
categories—operating. RDT&E (research, develop-
ment, testing, and evaluation), and investment. The
operating category includes expenditures for personnel
and for operating and maintaining current forces.
RDT&E expenditures are used for exploring new
technologies, developing new weapons and improving
existing weapons. Investment expenditures are those
associated with the acquisition and capital repair of
weapons, equipment, and facilities. (u)

A breakdown into these categories reveals that Soviet
military planners devoted about 30 percent of totat
defense expenditures over the 1965-79 period to
operaling expenses and about one-half to investment.
The remaining one-fifth appears to have been allocated
to RDT&E. Expenditures for all three resource
categories increased between 1965 and 1979. We
estimate that spending for RDT&E grew more rapidly
than operating or investment expenditures. While this
estimate is subject to particular uncertainty, its rapid
growth suggests that qualitative improvement is be-
coming increasingly important in shaping Soviet de-
fense spending. (v)

Operating Expenditures

The operating category includes expenditures for
personnel—pay and allowances, food, personal equip-
ment, medical care, and travel—and for the operation
and maintenance (O&M) of aclive forces. Between
1965 and 1979, personnel expenditures (except pen-
sions, which are excluded from this anatysis) ac-
counted fer about 15 percent of total Soviet military
expenditures and for over 50 percent of operating
expenses. There was an increase of over 35 percent in
personnel costs over the period, resulting mainly from
an increase of } million men in Soviet active military
manpower. Most of the growth in manpower took place
before 1972, reflecting primarily the growth and
modernization of the Soviet Ground Forces. (v)

5

e

ct ae

*

In the O&M part of the operating category we include expenditures in the inveslment category and over 45

our data on Soviet expenditures for the maintenance of percent of total expenditures. Construction received a.
equipment and facilities, for petroleum products, far smaller share than procurement. (U)

ulilities, and civilian personnel, and for the leasing of

communications. Between 1965 and 1979 these costs © Spending for the investment category as 8 whole grew
accounted for about 15 percent of total defense at nearly the same rate as total defense spending
expenditures and for almost one-half of the expendi- during the period, although its growth rate varied from
tures in the operating category. O&M expenditures year to year. The growth pattern for investment was

almost doubled during this period, largely because determined, for the most part, by procurement cycles
more (and more sophistica‘ed) weapons require more _ for aircraft and missiles. (v) :
(and more costly) maintenance. (uv) , 3 = se byt op
: _ 4 aes 4,
RDT&E Major Procurement Programs: _ , te

Wre consider the estimate of Soviet RDT&E outlaysto the Drivers of Defense Spending  __,

be less reliable than the estimates of operating and : Megee UP O
investment expenditures, Nevertheless, information is When we analyze Soviet defense spending between
available on some particular RDT&E projects, and we 1965 and 1979, it becomes apparent that the procure-
have access to published Saviet statistics on science ment of new weapons and equipment was the major
and to statements by Soviet authorities on the financ- Factor driving it upward. Procurement accounted for a
ing of research. These sources indicate that military large part of the increase (more than either RDT&E or
RDT&E expenditures are large and growing. This operating costs) and alsc accounted for its variations:
indication is reinforced by evidence that the Soviets the initiation and complction of major procurement
have increased the manpower and facilities devoted 10 programs was primarily responsible for the cyclical
military RDT&E programs. {u) fluctuations in the rate of growth of the total. (u)

Our estimate suggests that outlays for RDT&E
accounted for about 20 percent of total Soviet military
expenditures during the 1965-79 period. The estimated
share has increased over time and this year probably
will reach almost 25 percent of the total. We believe
that the growth in Soviet spending for the RDT&E
category (as for the investment category) varied from
year to year with the initiation and completion of
individual development programs. (v)

Because our calculations are based on highly agere-
gated and uncertain data, we cannot speak with
confidence, nor in detail, about the allocation of
RDT&E spending among the services or among
military missions. (U)

Tavesiment

The investment category is divided into two compo-
nents: the procurement of weapons and equipment and
the construction of facilities.’ During 1965-79, pro- en we discuss procuremer-t expenditures at this level, we include

curement accounted for over 90 percent of the only the purchase of the weapon itself and th ‘nitial spare parts. We

: : are less confident in our estimates of defense expenditures at the
For the purpose of this study we have defined both procurement and individual program level than in those at higher levels of agerega-

construction to include a portion of the spending for capital repair tion, (U)

and for the recurring purchase of spare parts. This is consistcat with

our undcrstanding of Soviet accounting practice. (U)

+
.

teh

ES

Shares of Estimated Soviet Investment end

ae
i Operating Expenditures for Military Services
“hoc Strategic
Porcent “Rocket
‘* Forces
tl National
Air Defense
.t Forces
~ Navy
rs :
be : Air Forces
be Expenditures by the Military
os Services: Insights into Changing ‘ Gr sued
ec. Institutional Priorities Forces
vir. The Soviet armed forces are organized into five major - | pee
ne service groups—Air Forces, Ground Forces, Navy, and support
or Nationa! Air Defense Forces, and Strategic Rocket 1965 288
Forces (SRF). Using the direct-costing approach, we — Calcutated on basis of data in 1870 rubles,
oe can form a reasonable picture of the allocation of most Ynctassitied ~ < :
1. defense spending among these services and gain So ee ee
o, insights into trends in Soviet priorities for allocating -’
eae defense resources among competing claimants. The ~
* spending that we cannot confidently allocate in this -
ee way includes the costs of RDT&E and of certain
: national command functions and rear service and other The Air Forces and Ground Forces each claimed over
support functions. Therefore the analysis that r/tlows one-fifth of investment and operating expenditures
e “: will examine the investment and opera‘ing expendi- during }965-79, The Ground Forces share remained
a0 3¥ gures of the services but exclude their expenditures on relatively constant throughout but increased slightly
RDT&E, and it will treat the nationaLcommand and — from 1965 through 1972 as a resull of the Soviet
‘ *- - support? functions as a category separate from the buildup along the Sino-Soviet border. The Air Forces,
me various services. (u) ee on the other hand, experienced significant fluctuations
me : in its share. (u)
a oe ; The Navy share, which declined slightly, accounted for
ee about one-fifth of total investment and operating
“3 a % spending for the period as a whole. After peaking in
Tei, oye 1969, the National Air Defense Force share declined
eS x, in the early 1970s and has fiuctuated in recent years. 11
ae re accounted for less than 15 percent of investment and
eg operating expenditures during the entire period. The
; 44 SRF share, which rose and fell depending on the
pet deployment cycles of new missile systems, accounted
ia ae for less than 10 percent of total investment and
A an 75 Vand Gi spur celeeory ical d act be confused with operating expenditures during the 1965-79 period. The
= aa * gommand, control, and communications, the costs of which we have national command and support share averaged less
. 2 SS" - allocated among the categories analyzed in this section. {v} than E5 percent of investment and operating expendi-

tures during the period and increased slightly. (v)}

6 %

. td

vate al de

vale
ahs

”
Bigpag pa
Be ge

‘e

Air Forces i 2 ee
. The Soviet Air Forces includes three components:. ¢
Frontal (tactical) Aviation, Long Range Aviation *3
(LRA), and Military Transport Aviation. Frontal a
Aviation missions include counterair, ground attack,
reconnaissance, electronic warfare, and helicopter ~ A
ground attack and troop lift. The primary missions of
LRA are intercontinental nuclear strikes and conven-
_ tional or nuclear strikes in support of theater forces.
Military Transport Aviation is responsible for the

transport of airborne assault forces. (U} Frontal Aviation. Within the Air Forces, Frontal

_ Aviation has consistently absorbed the largest share of
spending, and during 1965-79 it was responsible for a
major shift in defense resource allocation. Its expendi-
a “tures more than doubled during the period and
i ae
accounted for over 70 percent of the investment and
, Operating resources going to Soviet Air Forces: (u)

.

se :
Myo pe eS » gist
vo Rei ON ae, *

The remaining $ percent of Air Forces investment ag
operating expenditures were for command and gener
support of aviation forces and cannot be allocated
amone the three force components. (uy ;

eof

A

te
*
Ground Forces = S

Ground Forces military manpower increased from

A 1.3 million men in 1965 to almost 1.8 million men in
1979. More than half of this increase resulted from the
buildup of Ground Forces along the Sino-Soviet
border, where the number of divistons more than
doubled and manpower more than tripled between the
mid-1960s and mid-1979. (U) .

“4

=

Navy

Over the last 15 years, the Soviets have undertaken
programs aimed at acquiring naval forces with im-
proved capabilities for both conventional and nuclear
war. They have iavested most heavily in strategic and
general purpose submarines but have also increased
expenditures for surface ships and naval aircraft. They
have also increased the peacetime operations of their
ships away from home waters. Asa result, annual
expenditures by the Soviet Navy have grown substan-
tially and probably will be about 50 percent greater in
1979 than they were in 1965. (u)

During 1965-79 the Navy consumed approximately 29
percent of Soviet military investment and operating

expenditures. Investment programs made up over The Soviet Navy's operating expenditures increased by
three-quarters of ihe total naval expenditures, and almost 40 percent between 1965 and 1979, primarily
procurement of ships, aircraft, weapons, and equip- as a result of the increasing costs of maintaining

ment accounted for nearly all of this share. Total Navy complex ships and aircraft. (vu)

expenditures fluctuated in a pattern corresponding to :

the fluctuation of expenditures for the major ship National Air Defense Forces

procurement programs. Ship procurement * accounted The Soviets have traditionally placed great emphasis
for about 60 percent of overall naval procurement, and on strategic defensive forces. These are under the
ballistic missile ard attack submarines accounted for jurisdiction of the National Air Defense Forces.

over 70 percent of total ship procurement. (Most of During 1965-79, expenditures for this service reflected
these submarines were nuclear powered.) Missiles and continuing concern about the threat from manned
aircraft each accounted for about 15 percent of overall aircraft and about the deployment of antiballistic-
naval procurement expenditures. (U) missile (ABM) systems—untit the costly ABM compe-
tition with the United States was constrained by treaty
Fin 1972. Recent Soviet procurement programs show a
continuing emphasis on countering manned bombers,
especially those capable of penetrating at low altitude,
and a new emphasis on meeting a new Western
strategic threat, the cruise missile. (u)

Soviet expenditures for the National Air Defense
Forces rose in the late 1960s, peaking in 1969 at a
level 50 percent higher than that of 1965. This
eflected primarily the.rapid and costly deployment of
the Moscow ABM system and the procurement of the
SA-5 SAM. Expenditures fell until 1974 and have
fluctuated—bui generally increased—ever since. Pro-
curement of new third-generation fighter aircraft has
been an important influence on spending in the 1970s.
) j
* Major‘surface combatants are defined as those with displacements

* Ship procurement, a5 defined here, includes the ship and its initial of 3,000 tons or more. {u)
outlfitlings but excludes missiles, torpedoes, and other ammunition. ca

(vu)

Ho,

' Ae ee

The deployment of new-generation strateg Tssiles is
clearly reflected in the trend of total SRF expendi-
tures. They peaked in 1967 with the deployment of
third-generation SS-11 and SS-9 ICBMs and fell
through 1972 as that deployment was completed.
FY Expenditures then increased throughout the remainder
L* of the period, reflecting the addition of fourth-

|

.

generation SS-17, $S-18, and SS-19 ICBMs and the
SS-20 IRBM tothe force. The SRF was the only
service to experience a decline in operating expendi-
tures. This resulted from the deactivation—influenced
in part by strategic arms limitation (SAL) con-
straints—of older missile systems with high personnel
and O&M costs. {v)

al

National Command and Support Activities
Expenditures for national command and support
climbed during this period and are expected to be over
twice as much in 1979 as they were in 1965. The
increase in support costs reflects an increase in the size
of the Soviet armed forces and of the central Ministry
of Defense apparatus, as well as the increased com-
plexity of the task of controlling and supporting the
more advanced weapon fy stems. (t)

gore

nA
Factors Affecting Future Defense Expenditures

We have less confidence in our projections of future
Soviet defense expenditures than in our estimates of
past spending. This is chiefly because-of uncertainties
about how the Soviet leaders will weigh military,
political, and economic factors in making their deci-
sions on future military farces. The economic and
political environments, in particular, aré becoming
increasingly complex. Although Soviet economic
growth has been slowing since the 1950s, its rate has
only recently fallen below that of defense spending.

Similarly, the advancing age of the top political feaders
and the poor health of many of them make the coming
political succession increasingly relevant to the ques-
tion of future defense activities. We review below some
of the major forces thal are likely to affect Soviet
decisions on military programs and expenditures
during the period between 1980 and 1985. (vu)

* . ears 7 . oo
Economic Considerations a '
Past Trends. Before we can consider the fulure
relationship between the general Soviet economy and
the defense effort, we must examine the past relation-
ships. The defense effort of the past 15 years has had a
substantial impact on the economy, but there is no
single measure that adequately describes this impact
or how the Soviet leaders and planners might perceive
it. The discussion that follows presents several alterna-
tive measures of the relationship between Sovict
defense expéndjtures and economic growth during
1965-78. (u)

Soviet defense spending (as defense is defined in the
United States) consumed about 11 to $2 percent of the
Soviet GNP at factor cost between 1965 and 1978."
Because defense spending grew at about the same rate
as the GNP, there was little change in its share
between 1965 and 1978, (There were minor shifts in
the share from year to vear because of fluctuations in
GNP growth and the cyclical behavior of defense

spending.} (uv) <=

If we consider only the nonagriculturaf sectors of the
Soviet economy, we see that they generally have grown
more rapidly than GNP as a whole and more rapidly
than defense spending. The defense share of the
nonagricultural GNP averaged some 14 to 15 percent
during the period but was slightly lower in 1978 than in
1965, The growth of the final output of Soviet
industry—and of the final output of the machine
building and metalworking sector (which produces
civilian investment and consumer durable goods as
well as military hardware)— were also higher for the
period than the growth of defense purchases from these
sectors. Defense programs consumed on the average
nearly 15 percent of the finaf output of industry in
general and over one-third of the final output of

* Under the broader definitian that the Soviets may use, the share
was about 12 0 13 percent. See the appendix for a discussion of the
factor cost adjustment. (u) ; pele

om ae a ;

4

‘

wd, af

machine building in particular. In each category, the
defense share was lower at the end of the period then at
the beginning. fu)

The above discussion of alternative measures of the
defense “burden” understates its impact on the Soviet
ecohomy to the extent that it fails to take into account
qualitative considerations and the effect of defense
programs on key sectors of the economy. Defense takes
a large share of the nation’s best scientific, technical,
and management talent and draws heavily on the
output of science and of high-quality components and
equipment. In eddition, defense programs take sub-
stantial portions of the output of important industries
such as steel and electronics. (U}~

Moreover, these four quantitative measures of the
economic impact of defense are based on Western
estimates of Soviet economic performance. It is diffi-
cull to determine how the Soviets perceive this defense
impact.” Our information on their view of their own
economy is indirect—it consists mainly of gencral
statements by Soviet leaders and our analysis of their
actions. (v)

Economic factars do not appear to have limited Soviet
military programs by much, over the past 15 years. In
the USSR the military sector has a priority claim on

scarce resources, and this claim is institutionalized in ©

the Soviet administrative systems for economic man-
agement, material supply, and the supervision of
production. Soviet leaders have funded the defense
programs well, even during periods of lower than
average economic growth, and the follow-through on
key programs has been strong. (v)

Recent Developments. In recent years the rate of
growth in all four of these measures of economic
performance has declined. The primary cause of this
slowdown has been declining growth in factor

.., productivity—inefficient use of labor, capital, and
- natural resources. But Soviet leaders also have to cope

with a tightening labor supply and with natural
resources that ere less accessible and more expensive
than in the past. In 1978, Soviet industrial employment

‘grew by only 1 percent, the lowest rate in over 29 years,

and the increase in Soviet oi} production in that year
‘was the smpatiest in the postwar period. Statistics for

= See the appendix for a further discussion of this point. @

“435

the first 6 months of 1979 indicate that the Soviet
economy is headed for one of the worst years in almost
three decades. (u)

Defense spending has grown at a slightly lower than
average rate For the past several years. This appears to
reflect cycles in procurement (as several major weap-
ons programs reached a low point) rather than
signaling a new trend. In fact, our observations of
Soviet military programs in 1978 and the first half of
1979 suggest that in defense spending the rate of
growth is beginning to turn up again. The defense
share in three of our four measures—GNP, non-
agricultural GNP, and the final output of industiy—
has been fairly stable since the mid-3970s. Defense
purchases of machinery, however, have continued in
this period to grow more slowly than ine: finat output of
machinery. (U) 4

Prospects, Over the next several years, developing
demographic and energy problems will combine with
the difficulties of longer standing to cause an even
sharper decrease in economic growth. Recent informa-
tion on Soviet.economic performance in 1978 and the
first half of 1379 suggests that our 1978 forecast of
Soviet economic growth during 1981-85 (3 16 3.5
percent a year) may have been‘ overoptimistic. tt now
appears that during the early 1980s the average annual
rite of growth may not be more than 2 percent. If
defense spending returns to its long-term trend—
growing at 4to 5 percent a year—it will consume an
increasing share of Soviet resources. In 1985 the
defense share of GNP (as defense is defined in the
United States) could be as much as 13 to 45 percent,
rather than the current 83 to 12 percent. (uv)

Recent Soviel statements indicate increasing concern

over declining economic growth, Some Soviet officials
have linked economic problems directly to the costly
defense effori, and recent speeches by the top leaders
suggest differences over the relative priority to be given

to fulure defense programs. As the economy slows, the —
level of defense spending is likely to become more of an .
issue for the leadership. (u)

Ts Shy

+ oe
r a at
A '

sess : tee Bes ; ‘ oe oe

: [aay

«

Political Considerations

Over the past year there Fas been increased evidence o
political maneuvering in Moscow in preparation for the
departure of Brezhnev fram the scene, but we have too/}
little information to predict the makeup of the post-
Brezhnev leadership or its Hikely policy preferences.
The dissatisfaction of the political leaders with the
performance of their ecor omy has increased, and
differences on questions of resource allocation and
economic management are becoming more clear. We
cannot determine how they will be resolved, but we
anticipate that they will tecome increasingly politi-
cized—providing the potential for an adjustment
(perhaps even a reduction) in planned defense spend-

ing. (vu)

lAteost all of these problems require costly high-
technology solutions. They demand the continual
upgrading of current w2apons and the development of
new systems and thus directly affect future investment
and RDT&E expenditures. {u)

Arms Control Agreements

The USSR is currently engaged in a number of arms
control negotiations that could provide opportunities to
moderate the growth oi defense spending. Although
past agreements have not apparently caused a reduc-
tion in defense spending, current economic develop-
ments could encourage the Soviets to pursue the
potential economic benefits of arms control, We have

Requirements for therefore analyzed in detail the potential impact of
Future Military Forces SALT and MBER on Soviet defense spending and
Although the Soviets have made substantial improve- studied briefly the possible economic benefits of other
ments in their military capabilities in recent years, negotiations. (u)

they continue to perceive important deficiencies in
their forces. These take on increased importance in the
context of the improveme rts in Western and Chinese
military forces that Sovie: planners undoubtedly
project. (uv)

The Planning Process

Soviet econonic plans provide the fundamental
directions for industrial activity in both the civilian and
the defense sectors. During plan preparation periods,
the Soviet feaders project the future environment and
arrive at a consensus on national objectives. Plan
targets can be modified after they have been
established—adjustments are constantly needed —but
cach change creates complications, and their reverber-
aling impact creates a strong aversion to plan modifi-
cation. (U)

ve

Treads in Costs af Weapons ‘ *
The consistently high levels of weapon production
and development—-coupted with rising weapon costs—
a portend a further increase in Soviet expenditures for
fm weapons procurement. The production of advanced

weapons is relatively expensive in the Soviet Union. As
Soviet mifitary programs have shifted mor¢'and more | _
toward advanced technology, the costs of new genera-
tions of wéedpons have increased steadily. Quir projec-
tions of the cdst of future weapon systems indicate that
this upward trend in unil procurement costs will
continue. The increasing complexity of the systems will
also require an increase in maintenance and support
costs, which further adds to the tota! cost of military
programs.(U) °°) Bey ye

Preee oot cos
Outlook for Defense Spending am
Fa poh a. Ay re AE ean = rt “*
Through 1988 > FO ae

On balance, we believe that Soviet defense spending
will continue to increase in real terms at least through
1985. Evidence on specific défense activities now under
way indicates that the Soviets have not yet aftered
their defens? programs in response to economic
difficulties. Hf they do not alter them, defense spending
probably will continue to grow over the next five years
or so at or near the historic fong-term fate of 4.10 5
percent a year. (U) ct te PRS
boget Pte 5 : + are

20 >

a?

Continuing economic difficulties probably will give the
Soviet leaders an increasingly strong incentive to
reexamine these plans with a view to reducing the
growth of military spending in the long run. They
might well be undertaking such a reexamination in
conjunction with the major choices to be made on the
allocation of economic resources in the 11th Five-Year
Plan, and it is possible that the coming political
succession will affect these choices significantly. (vu)

However, Soviet military expenditures over the next
five years—-and even beyond—-are already determined
toa large extent by programs now in production or in
Jate stages of development. The decisions that set these
programs in motion were made some time ago. They
reflect agreements already reached between Soviet
political and military teaders on defense requirements
for the 1980s, and sizable resource commitments,
including expansion of defense industrial capacity,
have already been made. It is possible that the leaders
could reverse a number of these decisions and thereby
slow the growth of defense spending significantly. But |
we think they would be more likely 10 limit their
alterations of ongoing programs to reducing produc-
tion targets, stretching out some weapon programs,
and possibly teking greater advantage than in the past
of the limited direct savings permitted by arms control
agreements. The Soviets might also intensify their
efforts to improve efficiency and lower production

21.

costs in the de“ense industries and to improve their
analysis of military force requirements. These meas-
ures could moderate the rate of growth in defense
spending through 1985 and would be of some benefit to
the economy. Moreover, they would not in themselves
slow the modernization of the Soviet armed forces
significantly. (vu)

Longer Term Considerations

The Soviets themselves probably do not know what
additional steps they might take over the longer term.
However, from now on their decisions regarding new
military programs and future investment in the defense
industries may reflect a greater concern for the impact
of military programs on the economy and for the
implications that the declining rate of economic
growth will have for the capabitity of the economy to
support the defense establishment. Because military
programs have long lead times, most current decisions
would not begin to affect defense expenditures until
the late 1980s. 11 is possible that the Soviets will soon
make decisions that attempt to reduce the growth of
military spending in the late 1980s. Such decisions will
depend on how the leaders weigh the potential
economic savings against their forecast of the strategic
environment of that period and its military Tequire-
ments, as well as on their perception of how their
military effort enhances their security and advances
their foreign policy goals. The decision will also jepend
on the defense and foreign policy actions of their
potential adversaries, and perhaps on progress in arms
contro! negotiations. (U)}

Whatever decisions the Soviet leaders make for the
longer term, it is highly unlikety that economic
difficulties will force a reversal of their longstanding
policy of continuing to improve their military
capabilities. A reduction in the rate of growth of
defense spending in the late 1980s could delay force
improvemens in some areas and could pose difficult
choices for Soviet defense planners. However, the
present level of Soviet military investment is so high
that even with a reduction in the rate of growth—or
indeed with no growth at all—substantial moderniza-

- tion of the Soviet armed forces as a whole would

continue. (Ub i a a ee

i ee an thee ene mee TENE OE EU UTEP HS TNE *

Defense Spending Priorities in the 1980s
: -~

on Within the context of the projected continuation in the
growth of Soviet defense spending, we have examined
the major military programs and activities that the
Soviets are likely to undertake through the mid-1980s.
If the SALT Jl Treaty enters into force they would
probably give slightly less emphasis in expenditures lo
: intercontinental attack forces and slightly more to
oo conventional, theater nuclear, and (especially) strate-
a gic defense forces. (u)

Qualitative factors are likely to become much more
important in shaping Soviet defense spending in the
1980s than they are now. The Soviets will face
demographic problems that probably will limit in-
creases in force size, and the rate of growth of
operating costs during 1980-85 probably will be lower
than it was in the past. The requirement for high-
technology remedies for current deficiencies, however,
indicates that force modzrnization will continue to be
rapid. The decreasing availability of manpower could
also spur the Soviets to seek more capable, fess
manpower-intensive weapon systems. Military invest-
ment and RDT&E expenditures, therefore, probably
will show increased growth. (v)

Tmpact on the Military Services © ~ *

Changing Soviet priorities and the constraints of
SALT will alter the distribution of investment and
operating expenditures among the services in the
1980s. The average shares of these expenditures
devoted to the Navy, Ground Forces, and Air Forces
during 1980-85 probably will be about the same as
their current shares. Under a SALT II agreement, the
share allocated to the SRF probably wilt fall slightly
from its current level, along with the share allocated to
national command and support. The Nationa Air
Defense Forces, however, are likely to take an increas-
ing share of investmer( and operating expenditures in
the early 1980s. (u)

Air Forces. Expenditures for the Air Forces are
projected to increase at about the same rate as fotal
defense investment and operating spending Only

minor shifts are likely in the allocation of resources
among the three components of the Air Forces. (U)

“i The listing of programs given here is based on the assumption that
a SALT H agreement will be in effect in the 980s. Without such an

agreement, most of the intercontinental attack programs would have
a higher rank. (u}

22 *

Expenditures for Military Transport Aviation prob-
ably will increase as the force is modernized with
newer aircraft—-especially the IL-76 Candid. The size
of the force probably will not change significantly, but
its lift capacity will increase. (v) :

= +

”

Sy ee tale are

ye ae ee

ween ae yee te

t
.+
at
BY
a)
*
er
1
pe
4
*
od
-
*
‘
4
'

National Command and Support. National command
and support expenditures probably will continue to
increase through 1985, as the increasing complexity of
the Soviet forzes requires a larger and more costly
infrastructure. Major command and support programs
of the early 1980s will include the continued upgrading
of national-level command and control facilities and
systems and the introduction of new space communica-
tions and reconnaissance and support systems. (U)

25.

ay NESE Ee = EON

. +
*
. Appendix
2 = Methodology, Concepts and om
Ss - Confidence in the Estimates
Methodology mee ae

CIA's estimates of Soviet defense spending are based — this approach to the third calegory RDT&E. The
primarily on direct costing—that is, first identifying cost of military RDT&E, which is the wekeet part of

v.

? 7 aa . -: . * Py
“ individual components of the Soviet defense cffortand our estimate, is derived by ano her methut - gnalysis
a7 then calculating the costs of each. From all-source of Soviet infermation on expe. ditures for science. (v)}
7 intelligence and from US Intelligence Community, gut

judgments (presented in National Intelligence Esti-
mates and other publications) we compile a detailed Concepts
ae list of the activities and physical components which a
make up the Saviet defense program fora given year. Our methodology is intended to provide an estimate of
. This list includes data on order of battle, manpower, the level of, and an indication of the reat trend in, the
+> production of equipment, construction of facilities, and annual Soviet resource commitment to military forces.
operating rates for the Scviet military forces. (v) We use ruble prices to reflect as accurately as possible
ee the relative prices of military programs and activities
within the Soviet economic system. The estimates can
be used to assess the resource constraints confronting
Soviet military planners, the priorities they assign io
the components of the defense effort, and the impact of
defense programs on the Soviet economy. (v)

ec 4

For assessing the trends of the Soviet defense effort
and the prio-ities of the various cothponents within
that effort, we use estimates of “established
prices”-—the actual prices paid by the Soviet Ministry
of Defense for goods and services, For example, our
estimates of total defense spending and of spending by
the individual military services are based on estab-

| fished prices. In the Soviet economy, however, prices
are established administratively, not by market forces.
Consequent’y, they are tess accurate in reflecting
relative scarcity and value than prices in a market
economy would be. Asa result, these established prices
give a misleading picture of the real economic impact
of Soviet defense activities. (U)

In order to improve the validity of ruble prices for
economic analyses-—for example, in calculating the
defense share of GNP—we adjust our established-
For two of the main categories of defense spending price ruble valuations so that they more nearly reflect
investment ard operating expenditures—prices and ihe reat allocation of resources in the Soviet economy.
quantities are estimated separately for each major ;
activity and component. We cannot, at present, apply

ee PIT

27

wae?

&

Tene mn EE AIR SO ERI RS SITE

a? a

fone

This procedure is called a factor cost adjustment.” prices and often display quite different growth trends."*

When the direct-tosting es-imate ofdefense expendi- (v) bts
tures has been adjusted to factor cost, it can then be

compared with other estimates of Soviet economic Thus, the perceptions the Soviets draw from theis own
performance made in factor cost terms. (U) data may differ from the analysis in this paper in ways

that are hard for us to determine. We do know,
however, that although their measures of overall
economic performance differ from ours in concept and
price base, they too perceive a slowdown in their
economy (see table 3). Similarly, Soviet perceptions of
the economic impact and priorities of their defense
programs probably differ from ours in detail. But the
planners clearly are aware that the defense effort has
had a substantial effect on their economy and that this
effect is likely to increase. (v)

Second, and more important, Soviet planners would
usc a different price base. The Soviets present their
economic data either in the prices prevailing in each ©
year (current prices) or in what they call comparable
prices for a given year. The Soviets’ comparable prices f
are intended to show trends in real terms, but they are §
constructed differently from Western-style constant

" For a detailed discussion of the procedure, set USSR. Gross

National Product Accounts, 1970, A (ER) 75-76, November 1975. or a discussion of Soviet pricing concepts and changes in prices

tv) aver time set Inflation In Soviet Industry ond Machine-Building
and Metalworking (MBMW) 1960-1975, SRM 78-10142, July
1976. (v)

28 ss

Ting

a

Table 3 -

Comparison of Western and Soviet

Measures of Soviet Economic Growth

Western Measures

(based on CLA estimates
in constant 1970 prices)

Gross national product

(factor cost) *

»

*

™~

Final output of industry? .'2°

Final output of machine building

and metalworking 7

"On the difference bet

‘ +4 i iz
; se
7 Jaa 4 ae st ; ae

Average Annual Soviet Measures Average Annual

Rate ofGrowth ~ (based on Soviet data Rate of Growth

(percent) é in “comparable™ prices) (percent)

1965-75 1975-78 1965-75 © | 1975-78

46 36 Nationa! income p-educed ' . 6.7 3.1
‘61° 38 Gross value of output of industry * $.0 $1

16 $9 Gross value of oulput of machine uh? 9.1

building and metabworking *

ween GNP and national income, see USSR:
Toward a Reconciliation af Marxist and Western Measures af
National Income, ER 78-10505, October 1978. :
2 The Soviet gross value of output for any given sector differs from, a

the Western final outpul by including the sector's sales to itself, :

w+ This table is Unclassified.
