Deny Cover Sheet in toto citing FOIA exemptions (b) (1) (b)(3).


7 are a b3


The Director of Central facil pene


Vabeges OC MM


National Intelligence Council 3 October 1986


Vice Admical John M. Poindexter
Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs
PROKDS chartes E. Allen
“ Let Na tional Intelligence Officer for Counterterrorism
: Director, DCI-Hostage Location Task Force
SUBJECT: DCI-Hostage Location Task Porce Report


Attached is my report for the week 27 September-3 October 1986 on the
status of US hostages in Lebanon. Key points in this week's report are:


- Using the news media to appeal to the American public, the
hostage captors have intensified their efforts to pressure the US
Government. On 3 October, they issued their second statement in
less than three weeks. This was accompanied by videotaped
appeals by David Jacobsen and Terry Anderson, contrasting their
long captivity with that of Nicholas Danilott, interpreting his
speedy release as evidence of US negotiations with
"hostaqe~takers® and urging similar consideration.


a


See J &3


4

ae

gol
o


P

a

ge

(s
)
A
4 7
: ;
re
d
e
a
ied
in
to
to
cit
in
g
FO
LA
ex
xemp
ti
ons
(b
)¢
1)
(b
)¢(
3)


-


SUBJECT:


pea/NrO/CT/ CA) Jen


eetiora sore


Distr ipat oh
CopyaleasVADK


a,
hnek


: \eHie3 Poindexter, NSC
BES irc oi Wag Orth, NSC
ah - COMJSOC


10 ““Nloscoe
ll - DCI/HLTP
12 - DCI/HLTF


DCI Hostage Location Task Force Report


Je: October 1986)


b>


uu


b


3


(0) Q)


eee 5 :
63


Directoge sentral intelligence
; al


HOSTAGE LOCATION
TASK F FORCE"
REPORT


SPECIAL ACCESS REQUIRED


NOMORN=NOCOK OR COKE J b3
‘ TOP -6 Fe Reee


US ROSTAGES


New Statements hy Kidnapers and Hostages
NG A> A pe ily.


A fypenk Lt Cen vatatement by the Islamic Jihad Organization (1J0) and
videokapedzappeals;b aS hostages David Jacobsen and Terry Anderson,
delivere on 3 Oct DEL © an international news agency in Beirut, clearly
were. conceived and timed by the captors to take advantage of publicity


generated by the Soviet detention of US newsman pESnaeS Daniloff. (See


&: fats ;
Annes B, 9, and 10 for transcripts.) (5S, ia es


Saree


et os Us ect oat

‘ASRinvthe casezOfsthe Jacobsen videotape of 20 September, which we
have “Just received: nvtts entirety (text at Annex 11), the newly released
statements contrast, the hostages’ continued Captivity and plight with
Daniloté 'S“eémpatStively rapid release and question the United States'
refusal to negotiate in a similar manner for their release. All four
statements strongly condemned the US Government for allegedly failing to
work for the release of the hostages as well as its alliance with
"enemies" of the Arabs in the Middle East. we believe this new spate of
statements and hostage videotapes is a renewed attempt by the captors to
bring maximum pressure on the US Government through media appeals to the


American public. a


b-3


The captors' statement reiterated that its demands are clear and well
known to Severyone.* According to the Statement, the release of Pather
Jenco will be the captors' last act of mercy. All future actions to
resolve the hostage situation, they state, are in President Reagan's
hands, with the ultimate responsibilty for rectifying this "irregular
situation" belonging to the American people. | Cc ,. %


-


David Jacobsen, who looked better on the 3 October videotape than on
previous tapes, presented a well-written brief questioning why the
Acministration had acted so quickly in the Daniloff case and yet shows
“little or no concern" for the hostages in Lebanon. Jacobsen mentions
that the President made his *first mistake" in the hostage crisis and
*Buckley died*® and he asks "Mr. President, are you going to make another
Mistake at the cost of our lives?" . ost’ of Jacobsen's statement wagner pay 3


an.


appeal to the American people to actionebehalft of the hostages. (


Terry Anderson, making his first videotaped statement, also Pleaded
for the US Government and the American People to take steps to gain the
telease of the three hostages. Anderson blamed anti-American actions in
the Middle East on American Middle East policies and intimated that the
American people were unaware of this linkage. We believe the kidnapers
may have been able to persuade Anderson that there were similarities
between his captivity and that of Daniloff and thus convince him to make


C ss C Pees


1
, NOFORN wise ie J £3
moe acct


ale


a)
‘
wy


“tpn woe Shoe, x b3


BOP Je ce


Statements similar to those of Jacobsen. We do not know why there was no
Statement from Thomas Suth and, Dean of Agriculture at American
University Beirut. (— b3
The Jacobsen vidéotape of 20 September disclaims any attempt at
Passing a secret message in his letter of 16 September. The press, which


e-letter, as containing misspellings and being poorly written,


ret rte A
AE Was “therefore an attempt to pass a ‘secret* message.


GORENG ett eaten Sy
Jacobs ni efaimed: he-mistakes were from ‘dictation* and that he was
emo fpay upset Patuer stress, and in a bad psychological mood when he
wrotethe letter. We are not sure who was dictating to whom, however.
In:thisvlatest statement, Jacobsen also attacks the US Government for its
actLohssin the Daniloff case--versus its ‘indifference’ over the

63


hostages-~and Claims. that his captors do not want to eas ge with the


uni€ed States becalse it is allied with Israel.


Pier 8 ‘roe.
Although the statements by both hostages appear to be fairly
well-writteng=thete is reason to believe that the basic substance was
drafted or dictated by the captors.. The statements, however, may not
have been delivered unwillingly--Jacobsen and Anderson did not appear to
be unduly under duress on the latest videotapes. The two hostages
apparently interpret the action by the Administration on the Daniloff
case as being in direct contradiction to its statements tegarding refusa)
to negotiate with hostage-takers. Frustrated and angry, Jacobsen and
Anderson may believe that, unless they present a strong case for the
Administration to act and the American erg to demand action, nothing


will happen to get them released. ’ £3


No Evidence of Physical Abuse on Videotapes
Cc Li
b3


’


-


2 43
b1
Libya Reportedly Involved in Reed, Cicippio Kidnapings


- 2


&) 6) 2 ae 3 Ley


amas Saeed,
NOCCR, NOGEN- ORT.


bth:


NOFORN NOCON Ogee


— Top yoorrs BI |


re


(6) Q)


Page (s)5, 6 are denied in toto citing FOLA exemptions (b)(1) (>) (3).


HOPORS NAL. on J bo
Tap gone


[ oxner Reports on Possible Hostage Locations


B) 2.)
(b) 6 ; b- 3
ROPORN 4OCON ORTON (~


Top SEARES


Page (s) gf are denied in toto citing FOLA exemptions (b)(1)(b) (3).


bf L
b3


Lhod J


Bony Ne sLteant


“The WPrench Ambassador to Syria told us Embassy officials that Paris


belleves? syria fs not doing all it can to curb LARP activities. He noted that
Sytian military intelligence chief in Lebanon Ghazi Kan'an had organized the


Abdallah ‘brothers' ress conference in Lebanon, where they denied being in rE
-Frangeyapit he ti mag
Sytia ESTE:


Corp


ve


qi kotse bombings. On 27 September, Kan'an promised that
Ssawould, make every effort to find the foreign hostages held in


Lebanongs, See yrian Commander Promises All-out Effort To Free Hostages* in
the 0S Boskhgeaieatt don for an assessment of Kan'an's statement.) According
to a fairly reliable Source, Joseph Abdallah is concerned that Prance will
Strike a deal with Syria to crack down on LARP members living in Syrian-


controlled territory. AS<NP-Newoey


Cc


b1b3


a
() Gl 10 C j


a4


Page (s) “/ ate non responsive to the request.


Page


12 denied in toto


(hy (1), (b) (5)


NCPORN NCTON .oR nN C


acu TOP Toe


holt


het, 4
b3


NA


WR


J
b}(3)
( G NCEORN- NACAN Pear C J L-3


7S
Page (s) /7 fe non responsive to the request.


2” 2° “a age eof a7 ; ' ¢
supe ds hele LCstaun 9% Py ae
. ANNEX /, PO ILRE 2. 7 li nae SO, Li ost ? . Li Reis


Page (s) are denied in toto citing FOIA exemptions (b) (1) (d) (3).


ANNEX


Deny page (S), in toto citing FOIA exemptions (b)(1) (b)(3).


Page (S) 2 mups are denied in toto citing FOIA exemptions (b) (1) (b) (3).


NCPORN NoQcan=orteN CO J b 3
"TOP fe


Annex 8


Oncé again American falseness comes to the open. It is clear more than
ever Aveta Reagan and his ignorant government are working for their own
ends a ddexXposing to Mange? the lives and interests of the American people,


+ ean ey wat th
Aga Mee Brey, 30 to freedom-fighters to persist in martyrdom


until earth.is void and purified of corruption and the rule of justice and
equality--God's rule-~is established throughout the world. We thus declare


the following:


1. What the Reagan administration has done concerning the Daniloff case
does not require any explanation or comment, and is not alien to Reagan and


his administration.


2. Our demands are clear and known to everyone, and their realization
means setting the hostages free. Anything beyond this is a mirage.


3. Reagan and his administration shoulder responsibility for the delay
and any negative action that may take place. This is because resolving this
case, aftec the release of Father Jenco, is in the hanés of Reagan and his


administration.


4. What the hostages are saying now concerning what happened is an
example to the American people who are facing danger because of the policy
followed by Reagan and his government towards oppressed peoples.


5. Rectifying this irregular situation is the responsibility of the
Amecican people as a whole. Let the American people shoulder their
responsibilities and recover their freedom and dignity.

ai


6. The vain belief of Reagan th in his abortive power and false
promises to the American people and to the hostages! families will only reap
utter suffering and loss.


Islamic Jihad organization, October 1986


,-? :
J
anenay.nncon A328 J 63


wmescrs TAREr ger


b&°%


AC


ok (re


FORTH:


Annex 9


Text of David Jacobsen Remarks on Videotape Delivered on
3 October 1986 to International News Agency in Beirut


To the Ame pn people on the second day of October 1986.


AD
ete tn


nditions of our captivity are very bad. They are far worse


Th
than Shen Pather Jenco was with us. Truly they are bad. That is how we
have: Sef iving every day, minute by minute for a year anda half. The


pain eB rehl and everzpresent 24 hours a day. Sleep provides no relief.


Anoth¥kchurpeovewtthan captivity is the fact that our government


refuses to help us. Being ignored is the worst pain. Why does the
government increase “our suffering by ignoring us?


I thought Americans were to be protected by our government and not
hurt by it. Days, months and years are passing by and there is no end in
sight for our situation.


This nonsensical situation is being continued by the American
Government. The Government has made no serious efforts to verify our
health, treatment or conditions of captivity. The Government does not
Know when they might hear of our death. They apparently don't care,


For example, when they heard of the murder of Buckley what did they
do? More quiet diplomacy and silence,


When Daniloff was arrested by the Russians his situetion was
immediately known by the Government. Everyone in the Government and the
press reacted to the situation just like a Natural disaster or an
earthquake, :


Everyone was interested. paniloff became the number one topic of
conversation. The American government reacted immediately to free
Daniloff because the respect and honor of the United States would be
damaged if the Government had not acted quickly.

bs td


President Reagan made his first mistake in the hostage crisis and
Buckley died. Mr. President, are you going to make another mistake at
the cost of our lives?


It seems you are continuing to make mistakes in our situation. pon'tt
we also deserve the recognition, respect and honourable treatment by the
US Government?


3 tee C 5


man afrne-


ee ae C ) 6:3


‘
py
ha


AOirk


NCPoRN oCcoN ney C ae £3


Rt, am vv iy Lars
ee ap ccfge


Don't we deserve the same attention and protection that you gave
Daniloff? Daniloff was not the only journalist taken prisoner. What
about Terry Anderson, a journalist with the Associated Press? He was


taken captive over a year and a half ago.


Did peas better treatment than Terry Anderson? He is a
Egers


good nagfan nd: debe
he hasfreceived,


Bow: “much longer do we have to suffer? How much longer are we to be
held eat tive? Is this captivity only for us? Until what time will we be


separ SPeas from our loved ones and friends?
bn lew
As Americans, does a continuation of this hostage crisis give you
gratificat fe: rH If the answer is yes that would be a bad mark
in .the United States history and it would be a third hurt.
wea titctehenn*


We believe that you will not accept that situation.


B)


(Ore aac =
NOFONN- NOOR jc b-3


on


NOPLSe Lawes eek Le J b?


2 tap Pact
Annex 10
Text of Terry Anderson Remarks on Videotape


Delivered 3 October 1986 to an International
News Agency in Beirut


My nanéis<Terryjanderson. I would like to send my thanks and those
of my fellow priséners to all those in America who are praying and
working for our release.


fee Teka
{y.special thanks and love to my sister Peggy and Father Martin
Jenco, also to Ben Weir and Jeremy Levin for their efforts.

ae thust ask youraly and my government how long our suffering and
that of our family will continue. We and our families cannot fail to.
notice “Che Vilywereanasant air treatment our situation bas been given by
the American government, a government that should be caring for all its
citizens, preserving the dignity, freedom and human rights of all.


After two and a half years of empty talk and refusal to act on the
part of the Reagan administration, it hurts to see the propaganda and the
bombast with which that administration solved the problem of Mr.
Daniloff, a citizen like us, who was in prison only a short time.


How can any official justify the interest and attention and action
given to that case and the inattention given ours?


Do the American people know why we are in captivity? Why the marines
and others were killed in the bombing of Beirut aicporc and the embassy
building? Why we can't move freely about in the Middie East without
always in danger?


All this is the result of Reagan's policy, a policy against the
people of the Middle East.


Our captivity is the result of one part of this policy. William
Buckley's murder and the killing of many, many others is another part.
Your lack of freedom to travel is another result of that policy.


We are not surprised that Mr. Reaganyts not paying attention to our
case. More than 400 Americans were in Beirut without causing him
to_feel any responsibility or to change that policy.


We are surprised that the American government has put pressure on
Arad and European governments not to negotiate in such cases as ours, but
surrendered itself in the Daniloff£ case, releasing the Russian spy
Zacharov who was working against our people.


J


b)@)
t ¢ NCFORS NOCONERTON C J 6°3


mo
co
{

¢


bars AC: ee oe Ge ~ b+


We are more surprised that the American people still listen to what
Reagan says. How long must we stay in captivity? How long will the


American government not pay attention?


You paid


es re that what Hr. Reagan said yesterday is not correct. I am
sure Cnet knows v Well how to solve the problem, even though he has


nany chances


missed f man


rm “do. so.


If oubscaptere di “not allow us to send these messages we would soon
be coeget tex EBT Cue our families. Por this, we thank then.


J


NOFORN noconSncon 7


TOP SERET
eZ 4


(3st
cy


Reyes - b3


Annex 1]


Test of David Jacobsen Remarks
on Videotape Delivered on 20 September 1986


; en. When I wrote my letter two days ago I was
ina pad “paychologicdls mood and I was emotionally upset because Daniloff
had bbeRiek changed for the Russian spy who was working against the

Ameri Ganzpeople and that I was still a captive. The second thing that
also makeS.me feel bad is the interest President Reagan and his
Adminigt¥ ation in th spanizoft case but no interest in my case.
Anerican Government & not doing anything in my case to solve my problem
except OR ae: Sort CgePchey tespond to a letter or a message. The
American Gove ment !5: fanswer is always we are doing something for them,
we will not feqoerite. We will not renounce our position. Why did
Reagan surrender in the Daniloff case? I read his statement saying that
we wish to negotiate with the captors, but that we will not renounce our
position or accept their demands. Hr. President, if that is your
position, what have you done for us? My captors do not like to negotiate
with the American Government because it is against their principles to
negotiate with the allies of Israel which is responsible for killing
innocent people in Lebanon, and especially in the south. My captors want
only to satisfy their demands that are known to the American Government.
It would be easy to. satisfy the demands if Reagan wants to. If as
Schultz said do not distinguish between Daniloff and our case then why is
Daniloff free and we are not? why are you not solving our case as
quickly as you solved Daniloff's case. This is unfair. Why all ‘this
talk about what I wrote in my letter, that there were dictation mistakes,
that I wrote the letter under stress and that the letter was not my
opinion. Everybody had to understand that what I wrote is true and that
it was my opinion and also the opinion of Tom Sutherland and Terry
Anderson. This truth is known to Reverend Weir, Pather Jenco and Hr.
Levin. 1 request from my friends who got their freedom, to continue
their efforts to get our release and explain to the American people that
the American Government must change its policies in the Middle East. Hy
problem is the result of this unfair policy. President Reagan must note
that we are American citizens and thatiweiape working for the American
people. We deserve to be free and to Bis in the benefits of freedom.


The


»)


OR YAO Y


3B


bl
. fae


'
(WY 22


cic de len acre
SETRL ay nucuany RoCUny CROON/ C J b 3
= 7 a9
eae Cae
eae: :
The Director of Central Intelligence wy?
Sauiuge DC Ev!


7 October 1986


4 POR: VADM John M. Poindexter
Assistant to the President for Nationa] Security Affairs


. Allen
Intelligence Offices for Counterterrorism


SUBJECT: Prench and Amezican. Hostage Developments (U)


1. The Mughniyah faction of daizballah which holds American and
Prench hostages 4s accelerating its efforts to enlist public opinion to
wrest concessions from the US and Prench Governments on the hostage
fssue. DO eres ene Gea ee acy WT hg Rega teey ge a


", eo eee


bLb-3


J


2. The Nughniyah faction, using herrove: nane Isiamic Jihad


Organization, on 6 October issued rae. Str 8h d public statement in as many
‘.


weeks. The captors, addressing the Beni hc © to ‘world opinion,* the


Prencnh people, and hostage familtes MxAgnt hese points:


= the Chisac Government must {ts policy {n the Middle East.


- "Effective action" is neede e 17 Da'wa prisonezs held in


Kuwait.


- France must divorce itself from the policies of the "big devil,*
meaning the United States.


~ The Prench public should "shoulder responsibility in this
matter." C NE-NCAO¢
SHES bas


The captors also alluded in the statement to the three French hostages in


their ‘custody’--Marcel Carton, Mazcel Pontaine, and Jean Paul Kaufmann.
They provided a 28-ninute videotape of the three in which each makes an


ce ge RD :
“SECRET NOPOHNEHAPARTB SCA C.


scape OB


appeal for actlon--much {in the manner of the Terry Antezrson and David
Jacobsen tape of J October, (U}


£


b\
aS)


L Ue


a)
are denied in toto citing FOLIA exemptions (b) (1) () (3).


Text of Islamic JihaZ Statement Delivered on
6 October 1986 to an International
News Agency in Beirut


To world ae opinion
; eople
To thd 5 geainfamilies


opteva fin, vevsendto you some views of Prenchmen in ous custody
(Jean- Paulesauftmann, Hatce) Carton, Marcel Pontaine) explaining much of the
facts a Full freedom and at theirs request to remind the French people and
governfrenttof their case now more than 500 days old.
NE


On: ithis occasion, Wei sh to explain the following:


eek


rect: cicattaiate Srréc’s ‘committed by ‘the forme: government, such a “cetus ning
the two ir St went s, contains certain positive factors but is not
sufficient unless the French government reshapes its policy in che segion.


2. we are still awaiting effective action by the French government on
leasing the 17 freedom-fighters held in Kuwait. French policy linkec to
hat of America and backing iszael (during and afters the israeli invasion) is
main cause for the detention and imprisonment of our freecon-fights.


At the same time, we are fully aware that France is capable of
sclving this problem and achieving vhat it wants from some countries in the
region, leading to the release of the three Frenchmen in ous custody.


This will cemain our stead until he iChisac) preves his concern
ascut the French people ane interests that can only te realized throuch
keeping away from the policy of the biggest cevil towards the segion and the
Oepressec peoples in the world. :


4. We are not peoples' enent es, bibspnentes of the unjust policies
towards humanity. We will continue spl t and fight all these governments
antil they adept a just policy towards peoples in the reg: -On. ak Psench
people should also shoulder responsibility and seek to regain thei
independence, freedom and dignity.


Islamic Jihad Organization - October 1986.


we cernsicers Cri anc. che new government ressonsitie for reccifvine

zs mistanes cor ec ant still beine committed oy Mittessand anc his

WSTRGeAs anon brouche 2 lot of woes ani lel ce the kiiline of
neh nationals and soidiers in FRance, Lebanon anc otner places.
