Manual for Physical Security Standards for Sensitive Compartmented Information
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000104907, dated 1 January 1994.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000104907).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR
OF
CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE
DIRECTIVE
1/21

Manual for
PHYSICAL SECURITY
STANDARDS FOR
SENSITIVE
COMPARTMENTED
INFORMATION
FACILITIES (SCIF)

EFFECTIVE 30 JANUARY 1994

I

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

PREFACE:
DCID 1/21, Physical Security Standards for Sensitive Compartmented Information
Facilities (SCIFs) was approved by the Director of Central Intelligence (DCT) on 30 January
1994.

A complete copy of DCID 1/21 consists of the basic DCID and annexes A through G.
The annexes areas follows:

Annex A - SCIF Checklist (approved 27 May 1994)
Annex B - Alarms (approved 27 May 1994)

Annex C - Tactical Operations/Field Training (approved 27 May 1994) Part I -
Ground Operation Part II- Aircraft/Airborne Operation Part III - Shipborne
Operation

Annex D - Prohibited Items (approved 30 January 1994) Part I - Electronic
Equipment in SCIFs Part II - Disposal of Laser Toner Cartridges

Annex E - Acoustical control and Sound Masking Techniques (approved 30
January 1994)

Annex F - Personnel Access Controls (approved 30 January 1994)
Annex G - Telephone Security (approved 29 July 1994)

Ill

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DCID 1/21
Table of Contents
PREFACE
1, POLICY AND CONCEPT
1.1 Policy Statement
1.2 Concept
1.3 American Disabilities Act (ADA) Review
2. GENERAL/ADMINISTRATIVE

2.1 SCI Facilities (SCIFs)
2

2.2 Physical Security Preconstruction Review and Approval

2.3 Accreditation

2.4 Co-Utilization

2.5 Personnel Controls

2.6 Control of Combinations

2.7 Entry/Exit Inspections

2.8 Control of Electronic Devices and Other Items

3. PHYSICAL SECURITY CONSTRUCTION POLICY FOR SCIFs
3.1 Construction Policy for SCI Facilities

3.2 Temporary Secure Working Area (TSWA)

3.3 Requirements Common To All SCIFs

4, CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS

4.1 Vault Construction Criteria

UNCLASSIFIED

12

12

UNCLASSIFIED

4.2 SCIF Criteria For Permanent Dry Wall Construction
4.3 SCIF Construction Criteria For Steel Plate

4.4 SCIF Construction Criteria For Expanded Metal
13

4.5 General

GLOSSARY

UNCLASSIFIED

13

13

13

14

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21
(Effective 30 January 1994)
1. POLICY AND CONCEPT
1.1 Policy Statement

1.1.1 Physical security standards are hereby established governing the
construction and protection of facilities for storing, processing, and
discussing Sensitive Compartmented Information (SCI) which requires
extraordinary security safeguards. Compliance with this DCID 1/21
Implementing Manual (hereafter referred to as the "Manual") is
mandatory for all Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities
(SCIFs) established after the effective date of this manual, including those
that make substantial renovations to existing SCIFs. Those SCIFs
approved prior to the effective date of this Manual will not require
modification to meet these standards.

1.1.2 The physical security safeguards set forth in this Manual are the standards
for the protection of SCI. Senior Officials of the Intelligence Community
(SOICs), with DCI concurrence, may impose more stringent standards if
they believe extraordinary conditions and circumstances warrant. SOICs
may not delegate this authority. Additional cost resulting from more
stringent standards should be borne by the requiring Agency, Department,
or relevant contract.

1.1.3 In situations where conditions or unforeseen factors render full compliance
to these standards unreasonable, the SOIC or designee may waive specific
requirements in accordance with this Manual. However, this waiver must
be in writing and specifically state what has been waived. The Cognizant
Security Authority (CSA) must notify all co-utilizing agencies of any
waivers it grants.

1.1.4 All SCIFs must be accredited by the SOIC or designee prior to conducting
any SCI activities.

1.1.5 One person is now authorized to staff a SCIF, which eliminates the two-
person rule (the staffing of a SCIF with two or more persons in such
proximity to each other to deter unauthorized copying or removal of SCI).

1.2 Concept

1.2.1 SCIF design must balance threats and vulnerabilities against appropriate
security measures in order to reach an acceptable level of risk. Each
security concept or plan must be submitted to the CSA for approval.
Protection against surreptitious entry, regardless of SCIF location, is
always required. Security measures must be taken to deter technical
surveillance of activities taking place within the SCIF. TEMPEST
security measures must be considered if electronic processing of SCI is
involved.

1

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

1.2.2 on military and civilian compounds, there may exist security controls such
as identification checks, perimeter fences, police patrols, and other
security measures. When considered together with the SCIF location and
internal security systems, those controls may be sufficient to be used in
lieu of certain physical security or construction requirements contained in
this Manual.

1.2.3. Proper security planning for a SCIF is intended to deny foreign
intelligence services and other unauthorized personnel the opportunity for
undetected entry into those facilities and exploitation of sensitive
activities. Faulty security planning and equipment installation not only
jeopardizes security but wastes money. Adding redundant security
features causes extra expense which could be used on other needed
features. When security features are neglected during initial construction,
retrofitting of existing facilities to comply with security requirements is
necessary.

1.3 American Disabilities Act (ADA) Review

1.3.1. Nothing in this manual shall be construed to contradict or inhibit
compliance with the law or building codes. CSAs shall work to meet
appropriate security needs according to the intent of this Manual at
acceptable cost.

2. GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE
2.1 SCI Facilities (SCIFs)

A SCIF is an accredited area, room, group of rooms, buildings, or installation
where SCI may be stored, used, discussed, and/or electronically processed.
SCIFs will be afforded personnel access control to preclude entry by
unauthorized personnel. Non-SCI indoctrinated personnel entering a SCIF must
be continuously escorted by an indoctrinated employee who is familiar with the
security procedures of that SCIF. The physical security protection for a SCIF is
intended to prevent as well as detect visual, acoustical, technical, and physical
access by unauthorized persons. Physical security criteria are governed by
whether the SCIF is in the United States or not, according to the following
conditions: closed storage, open storage, continuous operations, secure working
area.

2.2 Physical Security Preconstruction Review and Approval

CSAs shall review physical security preconstruction plans for SCIF
construction, expansion or modification. All documentation pertaining to SCIF
construction will be appropriately controlled and restricted on a need-to-know
basis. The approval or disapproval of a physical security preconstruction plan
shall be made a matter of record.

2.2.1 The requester shall submit a Fixed Facility Checklist (FFC, Annex A) to
the respective CSA for review and approval.

UNCLASSTFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.2.2 The Checklist submission shall include floor plans, diagrams of electrical?
communications, heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC)
connections, security equipment layout (to include the location of
intrusion detection equipment), etc. All diagrams or drawings must be
submitted on legible and reproducible media.

2

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.2.3 The CSA shall be responsible for providing construction advice and
assistance and pre-approving SCIF construction or modification.

2.3 Accreditation

The CSA will ensure SCIFs comply with DCID 1121. The CSA is authorized to
inspect any SCIF, direct action to correct any deficient situation, and withdraw
SCIF accreditation. The procedures for establishment and accreditation of SCIFs
are prescribed below:

2.3.1 The procedures for establishment and accreditation of SCIFs from
conception through construction must be coordinated and approved by the
SOIC or CSA.

2.3.2 SCI shall never be handled, processed, discussed, or stored in any facility
other than a properly accredited SCIF unless written authorization is
granted by the CSA.

2.3.3 An inspection of the SCIF shall be performed by the CSA or appointed
representative prior to accreditation. Periodic reinspections shall be based
on threat, physical modifications, sensitivity of programs, and past
security performance. Inspections may occur at any time, announced or
unannounced. The completed fixed facility checklist will be reviewed
during the inspection to ensure continued compliance. TSCM evaluations
may be required at the discretion of the CSA, as conditions warrant.
Inspection reports shall be retained within the SCIF and by the CSA. All
SCIFs shall maintain on site, current copies of the following documents:

(a) DCID 1/21 Fixed Facility Checklist

(b) Accreditation authorization documents (e.g., physical, TEMPEST,
and AIS).

(c) Inspection reports, including TSCM reports, for the entire period of
SCIF accreditation

(d) Operating procedures, Special Security Officer Contractor Special
Security Officer (SSO/CSSO) appointment letters, Memoranda of
Agreement (MOAs), Emergency Action Plans, etc.

(e) Copies of any waivers granted by the CSA.

2.3.4 Inspection: Authorized inspectors shall be admitted to a SCIF without
delay or hindrance when inspection personnel are properly certified to
have the appropriate level of security clearance and SCI indoctrination for
the security level of the SCIF. Short notice or emergency conditions may
warrant entry without regard to the normal SCIF duty hours. Government

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

owned equipment needed to conduct SCIF inspections will be admitted
into SCIF without delay.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.3.5 Facilities which are presently accredited, under construction or in the
approval process at the date of implementation of this Manual shall not
require modification to conform to these standards.

2.3.5.1 Facilities undergoing major modification may be required to
comply entirely with the provisions of this Manual. Approval for
such modifications shall be requested through the CSA and
received prior to any modifications taking place within the SCIF.

2.3.5.2 In the event a need arises to reopen a SCIF after the accreditation
has been terminated, the CSA may approve the use of a previously
accredited SCIF based upon a review of an updated facility
accreditation package.

2.3.6 Withdrawal of Accreditation:

2.3.6.1 Termination of Accreditation: When it has been determined that a
SCIF is no longer required, withdrawal of accreditation action
will be initiated by the SSO/CSSO. Upon notification, the CSA
will issue appropriate SCI withdrawal correspondence. The CSA
or appointed representative will conduct a close out inspection of
the facility to ensure that all SCI material has been removed.

2.3.6.2 Suspension or Revocation of Accreditation: When the CSA
determines that there is a danger of classified information being
compromised or that security conditions in a SCIF are
unsatisfactory, SCI accreditation will be suspended or revoked.
All appropriate authorities must be notified of such action
immediately.

2.4 Co-Utilization

2.4.1 Agencies desiring to co-utilize a SCIF should accept the current
accreditation and any waivers. Any security enhancements required by an
agency or department requesting co-utilization should be funded by that
organization, and must be approved by the SOIC with DCI concurrence
prior to implementation. A co-utilization agreement must be established
prior to occupancy.

2.4.2 Special Access Programs (SAP) co-located within a SCIF will meet the
physical security requirements of this Manual and DCI Special Access
Programs (SAP) Policy, January 4, 1989.

2.5 Personnel Controls

2.5.1 Access rosters listing all persons authorized access to the facility shall be
maintained at the SCIF point of entry. Electronic systems, including

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

coded security identification cards or badges may be used in lieu of
security access rosters.

2.5.2 Visitor identification and control: Each SCIF shall have procedures for
identification and control of visitors seeking access to the SCIF.

4

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.6 Control of Combinations

2.6.1 Combinations to locks installed on security containers/safes, perimeter
doors, windows and any other openings should be changed whenever:

(a) A combination lock is first installed or used;

(b) A combination has been subjected, or believed to have been subjected
to compromise; and

(c) At other times when considered necessary by the CSA.

2.6.2 All combinations to SCIF entrance doors should be stored in another SCIF
of equal or higher accreditation level. When this is not feasible, alternate
arrangements will be made in coordination with the CSA.

2.7 Entry/Exit Inspections

The CSA shall prescribe procedures for inspecting persons, their property, and
vehicles at the entry or exit points of SCIFs, or at other designated points of
entry to the building, facility, or compound. The purpose of the inspection is to
deter the unauthorized removal of classified material, and deter the introduction
of prohibited items or contraband. This shall include determination of whether
inspections are randomly conducted or mandatory for all, and whether they
apply for visitors only or for the entire staff assigned. All personnel inspection
procedures should be reviewed by the facility's legal counsel prior to
promulgation.

2.8 Control of Electronic Devices and Other Items

2.8.1 The CSA shall ensure that procedures are instituted for control of
electronic devices and other items introduced into or removed from the
SCIF. See Annex D for guidance.

2.8.2 The prohibition against electronic equipment in SCIFs does not apply to
those needed by the disabled or for medical or health reasons (€.g.
motorized wheelchairs, hearing aids, heart pacemakers, amplified
telephone headsets, teletypewriters for the hearing impaired). However,
the SSO or CSSO shall establish procedures for notification that such
equipment is being entered in to the SCIF

2.8.3 Emergency and police personnel and their equipment, including devices
carried by emergency medical personnel responding to a medical crisis
within a SCIF, shall be admitted to the SCIF without regard to their
security clearance status. Emergency personnel will be escorted to the
degree practical. However, debriefing of emergency personnel will be
accomplished as soon as possible, if appropriate.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.8.4 Equipment for TEMPEST or Technical Surveillance Countermeasures
(TSCM) testing shall be admitted to a SCIF as long as the personnel

operating the equipment are certified to have the appropriate level of
security clearance and SCI indoctrination.

5

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3. PHYSICAL SECURITY CONSTRUCTION POLICY FOR SCIFs
3.1 Construction Policy for SCI Facilities

Physical security criteria is governed by whether the SCIF is located in the US
or not, according to the following conditions: closed storage, open storage,
continuous operations, secure working areas.

3.1.1. Closed Storage
3.1.1.1 Inside U.S:

(a) The SCIF must meet the specifications in Chapter 4
Permanent Dry Wall Construction).

(b) The SCIF must be alarmed in accordance with Annex B to this
manual

(c) SCI must be stored in GSA approved security containers.

(d) There must be a response force capable of responding to an
alarm within 15 minutes after annunciation and a reserve
response force available to assist the responding force.

(e) The CSA may require any SCIF perimeter walls accessible
from exterior building ground level to meet the equivalent
protection afforded by Chapter 4 (Expanded Metal)
construction requirement.

3.1.1.2. Outside U.S:

(a) The SCIF must meet the construction specifications for SCIFs
as set forth in Chapter 4 (Steel Plate or Expanded Metal).
SCIFs within US Government controlled compounds), or
equivalent, having armed immediate response forces may use
specifications indicated in Chapter 4 (Permanent Dry Wall
Construction) with prior approval of the CSA.

(b) The SCIF must be alarmed in accordance with Annex B.
(c) All SCI controlled material will be stored in GSA-approved
containers having a rating for both forced and surreptitious

entry equal to or exceeding that afforded by Class 5
containers

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

(d) There must be a response force capable of responding to an
alarm within 10 minutes and a reserve response force
available to assist the responding force.

1A controlled building or compound is one to which access is restricted and unescorted entry is
limited to authorized personnel.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.1.2. Open Storage

3.1.2.1 INSIDE US: When open storage is justified and approved by the
CSA. the SCIF must:

(a) be alarmed in accordance with Annex B;

(b) have a response force capable of responding to an alarm
within 5 minutes and a reserve response force available to
assist the response force; and

(c) meet one of the following:

(1) SCIFs within a controlled US government compound or
equivalent may use specifications indicated in Chapter 4
(Permanent Dry Wall Construction): or

(2) SCIFs within a controlled building with continuous
personnel access control, may use specifications indicated
in Chapter 4 (Permanent Dry Wall Construction). The
CSA may require any SCIF perimeter walls accessible from
exterior building ground level to meet the equivalent
protection afforded by Chapter 4 (Expanded Metal)
construction requirements; or

(3) SCIFs which are not located in a controlled building or
compound may use specifications indicated in Chapter 4
(expanded Metal) or (Vault) constructions requirements.

3.1.2.2 OUTSIDE US: Open storage of SCI material will be avoided.
When open storage is justified as mission essential, vault
construction is preferred. The SCIF must:
(a) be alarmed in accordance with Annex B;
(b) have a response force capable of responding to an alarm
within 5 minutes and a reserve response force available to

assist the responding force.

(c) have an adequate, tested plan to protect, evacuate, or destroy
the material in the event of emergency or natural disaster;
and

(d) meet one of the following:

(1) The construction specification for vaults set forth in
Chapter 4 (Vaults); or

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

(2) With the approval of the CSA, SCIFs located on a
controlled US government compound or equivalent
having immediate response forces, may use expanded
metal, steel plate, or GSA approved modular vaults in
lieu of vault construction.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.1.3 Continuous Operation
3.1.3.1 INSIDE THE US:

(a) The SCIF must meet the construction specifications as
identified in Chapter 4 (Permanent Dry Wall Construction).
An alert system and duress alarm may be required by the
CSA, based on operational and threat conditions.

(b) Provisions should be made for storage of SCI in GSA
approved containers. If the configuration of the material
precludes this, there must be an adequate, tested plan to
protect, evacuate, or destroy the material in the event of
emergency, civil unrest or natural disaster.

(c) There must be a response force capable of responding to an
alarm within 5 minutes and a reserve response force
available to assist the responding force.

3.1.3.2 OUTSIDE THE US:

(a) The SCIF must meet the construction specifications for
SCIFs as set forth in Chapter 4 (Expanded Metal). An alert
system and duress alarm may be required by the CSA, based
on operational and threat conditions. (b) The capability must
exist for storage of all SCI in GSA-approved security
containers, or the SCIF must have an adequate, tested plan to
protect, evacuate, or destroy the material in the event of
emergency or natural disaster.

(b) SCIFs located within US Government controlled
compounds, or equivalent, having immediate response
forces, may use the secure area construction specifications as
listed in Chapter 4 (Permanent Dry Wall Construction) with
prior approval of the CSA

(c) There must be a response force capable of responding to an
alarm within 5 minutes, and a reserve response force

available to assist the responding force.

3.1.4 Secure Working Areas are accredited facilities used for handling,
discussing, and/or processing SCI. but where SCI will not be stored.

3.1.4.1 INSIDE THE US:

(a) The Secure Working Area SCIF must meet the specifications
set forth in Chapter 4 (Permanent Dry Wall Construction).

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

(b) The Secure Working Area SCIF must be alarmed with a
balanced magnetic switch on all perimeter entrance doors.

(c) No storage of SCI material is authorized.

8

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

(d) There must be a response force capable of responding to an
alarm within 15 minutes after annunciation, and a reserve
response force available to assist the responding force.

3.1.4.2 OUTSIDE THE US:

(a) The Secure Working Area SCIF must meet the construction
specifications indicated in Chapter 4 (Permanent Dry Wall
Construction).

(b) The Secure Working Area SCIF must be equipped with an
approved alarm system as set forth in Annex B.

(c) No storage of SCI material is authorized.

(d) There must be a response force capable of responding to an
alarm within 10 minutes, and a reserve response force
available to assist the responding force.

3.2 Temporary Secure Working Area (TSWA)

3.2.1 A Temporary Secure Working area is defined as a temporarily accredited
facility that is used no more than 40 hours monthly for the handling,
discussion, and/or processing of SCI, but where SCI should not be stored.
with sufficient justification, the CSA may approve longer periods of usage
and storage of SCI for no longer than 6 months.

3.2.2 During the entire period the TSWA is in use, the entrance will be
controlled and access limited to persons having clearance for which the
area has been approved. Approval for using such areas must be obtained
from the CSA setting forth room number(s), building, location, purpose,
and specific security measures employed during usage as well as during
other periods. TSWAs should be covered by an alarm system. These areas
should not be used for periods exceeding an average total of 40 hours per
month, No special construction is required other than to meet sound
attenuation requirements as set forth in Annex E, when applicable. If such
a facility must also be used for the discussion of SCI, a Technical
Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) evaluation may be required at the
discretion of the CSA, as conditions warrant.

3.2.3 When not in use at the SCI level, the TSWA will be:
(a) Secured with a keylock or a combination lock approved by the CSA.

(b) Access will be limited to personnel possessing a US Secret clearance.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.2.4 if such a facility is not alarmed or properly protected during periods of
non-use, a TSCM inspection may be conducted prior to use for discussion
at the SCI level.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.3 Requirements Common To All SCIFs; Within The US and Overseas

3.3.1 CONSTRUCTION: The SCIF perimeter walls, floors and ceiling, will be
permanently constructed and attached to each other. All construction must
be done in such a manner as to provide visual evidence of unauthorized
penetration.

3.3.2 SOUND ATTENUATION: The SCIF perimeter walls, doors, windows,
floors and ceiling, including all openings, shall provide sufficient sound
attenuation to preclude inadvertent disclosure of conversation. The
requirement for sound attenuation are contained within Annex E.

3.3.3 ENTRANCE, EXIT, AND ACCESS DOORS:

3.3.3.1 Primary entrance doors to SCIFs shall be limited to one. If
circumstances require more than one entrance door, this must be
approved by the CSA. In some circumstances, an emergency exit
door may be required. In cases where local fire regulations are
more stringent, they will be complied with. All perimeter SCIF
doors must be closed when not in use, with the exception of
emergency circumstances. If a door must be left open for any
length of time due to an emergency or other reasons, then it must
be controlled in order to prevent unauthorized removal of SCI.

3.3.3.2 All SCIF perimeter doors must be plumbed in their frames and the
frame firmly affixed to the surrounding wall. Door frames must be
of sufficient strength to preclude distortion that could cause
improper alignment of door alarm sensors, improper door closure
or degradation of audio security.

3.3.3.3 All SCIF primary entrance doors must be equipped with an
automatic door closer, a GSA-approved combination lock and an
access control device with the following requirements:2

(a) If doors are equipped with hinge pins located on the exterior
side of the door where it opens into an uncontrolled area outside
the SCIF, the hinges will be treated to prevent removal of the
door (e.g. welded, set screws, etc.)

(b) if a SCIF entrance door is not used as an access control door
and stands open in an uncontrolled area, the combination lock
will be protected against unauthorized access/tampering.

3.3.3.4 Control doors: The use of a vault door for controlling daytime
access to a facility is not authorized. Such use will eventually
weaken the locking mechanism, cause malfunctioning of the
emergency escape device, and constitute a security and safety
hazard. To preclude this, a second door will be installed and

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

equipped with an automatic door closer and an access control
device. (It is preferable that the access door be installed external to
the vault door.)

2 This requirement does not apply to the GSA approved Class 5.6~ and 8 vault doors.

10

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.3.3.5 SCIF emergency exit doors shall be constructed of material
equivalent in strength and density to the main entrance door. The
door will be secured with deadlocking panic hardware on the
inside and have no exterior hardware. SCIF perimeter emergency
exit doors should be equipped with a local annunciator in order to
alert people working in the area that someone exited the facility
due to some type of emergency condition.

3.3.3.6 Door Construction Types: Selections of entrance and emergency
exit doors shall be consistent with SCIF perimeter wall
construction. Specifications of doors, combination locks, access
control devices and other related hardware may be obtained from
the CSA. Some acceptable types of doors are:

(a) Solid wood core door, a minimum of 1 3/4 inches thick.

(b) Sixteen gauge metal cladding over wood or composition
materials, a minimum of 1 3/4 inches thick. The metal cladding
shall be continuous and cover the entire front and back surface
of the door.

(c) Metal fire or acoustical protection doors, a minimum of 1 314
inches thick. A foreign manufactured equivalent may be used if
approved by the CSA.

(d) A joined metal rolling door, minimum of 22 gauge, used as a
loading dock or garage structure must be approved on a case-
by-case basis.

3.3.4 PHYSICAL PROTECTION OF VENTS, DUCTS, AND PIPES:

3.3.4.1 All vents, ducts, and similar openings in excess of 96 square
inches that enter or pass through a SCIF must be protected with
either bars, or grills, or commercial metal duct sound baffles that
meet appropriate sound attenuation class as specified in Annex E.
within the United States, bars or grills are not required if an IDS
is used. If one dimension of the duct measures less than six
inches, or duct is less than 96 square inches, bars are not
required; however, all ducts must be treated to provide sufficient
sound attenuation. If bars are used, they must be 1/2 inch
diameter steel welded vertically and horizontally six (6) inches on
center; if grills are used, they must be of 9-gauge expanded steel;
if commercial sound baffles are used, the baffles or wave forms
must be metal permanently installed and no farther apart than six
(6) inches in one dimension. A deviation of 1/2 inch in vertical
and/or horizontal spacing is permissible.

3.3.4.2 Based on the TEMPEST accreditation, it may be required that all
vents, ducts, and pipes must have a non-conductive section (a

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

piece of dissimilar material e.g., canvas, rubber) which is unable
to carry electric current, installed at the interior perimeter of the
SCIF.

11

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.3.4.3 An access port to allow visual inspection of the protection in the
vent or duct should be installed inside the secure perimeter of the
SCIF. If the inspection port must be installed outside the
perimeter of the SCIF. it must be locked.

3.3.5 WINDOWS:

3.3.5.1 All windows which might reasonably afford visual surveillance of
personnel, documents, materials, or activities within the facility,
shall be made opaque or equipped with blinds, drapes or other
coverings to preclude such visual surveillance.

3.3.5.2 Windows at ground level 3 will be constructed from or covered
with materials which will provide protection from forced entry.
The protection provided to the windows need be no stronger than
the strength of the contiguous walls. SCIFs located within fenced
and guarded government compounds or equivalent may eliminate
this requirement if the windows are made inoperable by either
permanently sealing them or equipping them on the inside with a
locking mechanism.

3.3.5.3 All perimeter windows at ground level shall be covered by an IDS.
4. CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
4.1 Vault Construction Criteria

4.1.1 Reinforced Concrete Construction: Walls, floor, and ceiling will be a
minimum thickness of eight inches of reinforced concrete. The concrete
mixture will have a comprehensive strength rating of at least 2,500 psi.
Reinforcing will be accomplished with steel reinforcing rods, a minimum
of 5/8 inches in diameter, positioned centralized in the concrete pour and
spaced horizontally and vertically six inches on center; rods will be tied
or welded at the inter-sections. The reinforcing is to be anchored into the
ceiling and floor to a minimum depth of one-half the thickness of the
adjoining member.

4.1.2 GSA-approved modular vaults meeting Federal Specification FF-V-2737,
may be used in lieu of a 4.1.1. above.

4.1.3 Steel-lined Construction: Where unique structural circumstances do not
permit construction of a concrete vault, construction will be of steel alloy-
type of 1/4" thick, having characteristics of high yield and tensile
strength. The metal plates are to be continuously welded to load-bearing
steel members of a thickness equal to that of the plates. If the load-
bearing steel members are being placed in a continuous floor and ceiling
of reinforced concrete, they

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3 This should be interpreted to mean any windows which are less than 18 feet above the ground
measured from the bottom of the window, or are easily accessible by means of objects directly
beneath the windows, (e.g. electrical transformer. air conditioning units. vegetation or landscaping
which can easily be climbed, etc.).

12

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

must be firmly affixed to a depth of one-half the thickness of the floor and
ceiling. If the floor and/or ceiling construction is less than six inches of
reinforced concrete, a steel liner is to be constructed the same as the walls
to form the floor and ceiling of the vault. Seams where the steel plates
meet horizontally and vertically are to be continuously welded together.

4.1.4 All vaults shall be equipped with a GSA-approved Class 5 or Class 8 vault
door. Within the US, a Class 6 vault door is acceptable. Normally within
the United States a vault will have only one door that serves as both
entrance and exit from the SCIF in order to reduce costs.

4.2 SCIF Criteria For Permanent Dry Wall Construction

Walls, floor and ceiling will be permanently constructed and attached to each
other. To provide visual evidence of attempted entry, all construction, to include
above the false ceiling and below a raised floor, must be done in such a manner
as to provide visual evidence of unauthorized Penetration.

4.3 SCIF Construction Criteria For Steel Plate

Walls, ceiling and floors are to be reinforced on the inside with steel plate not
less than 1/8" thick. The plates at all vertical joints are to be affixed to vertical
steel members of a thickness not less than that of the plates. The vertical plates
will be spot welded to the vertical members by applying a one inch long weld
every 12 inches; meeting of the plates in the horizontal plane will be
continuously welded. Floor and ceiling reinforcements must be securely affixed
to the walls with steel angles welded or bolted in place.

4.4 SCIF Construction Criteria For Expanded Metal

Walls are to be reinforced, slab to slab, with 9-gauge expanded metal. The
expanded metal will be spot welded every 6 inches to vertical and horizontal
metal supports of 16-gauge or greater thickness that has been solidly and
permanently attached to the true floor and true ceiling.

4.5 General

The use of materials having thickness or diameters larger than those specified
above is permissible. The terms "anchored to and/or embedded into the floor and
ceiling” may apply to the affixing of supporting members and reinforcing to true
slab or the most solid surfaces; however, subfloors and false ceiling are not to be
used for this purpose.

13

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21

Access Control System:

Accreditation:

Acoustic Security:

Astragal Strip:

Authorized Personnel:

Balanced Magnetic

Switch (BMS):

Break-Wire Detector:

Closed Storage:

Computerized

Telephone System
(CTS):

Cognizant Security

Authority (CSA):

GLOSSARY

A system to identify and/or admit personnel with properly
authorized access to a SCIF using physical, electronic,
and/or human controls.

The formal approval of a specific place, referred to as a
Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF), that
meets prescribed physical, technical, and personnel security
standards.

Those security measures designed and used to deny aural
access to classified information.

A narrow strip of material applied over the gap between a
pair of doors for protection from unauthorized entry and
sound attenuation.

A person who is fully cleared and indoctrinated for SCI, has
a valid need to know, and has been granted access to the
SCIF.

A type of IDS sensor which may be installed on any rigid,
operable

opening (i.e. doors, windows) through which access may be
gained to the SCIF.

An IDS sensor used with screens and grids, open wiring,
and grooved stripping in various arrays and configurations
necessary to detect surreptitious and forcible penetrations of
movable openings, floors, walls, ceilings, and skylights. An
alarm is activated when the wire is broken.

The storage of SCI material in properly secured GSA
approved security containers within an accredited SCIF.

Also referred to as a hybrid key system, business
communication
system, or office communications system.

The single principal designated by a SOIC (see definition of
SOIC)

to serve as the responsible official for all aspects of security
program management with respect to the protection of

UNCLASSIFIED

Continuous Operation:

Controlled Area/
Compound:

Controlled Building:

Co-Utilization:

UNCLASSIFIED

intelligence sources and methods, under SOIC
responsibility.

This condition exists when a SCIF is staffed 24 hours every
day.

Any area to which entry is subject to restrictions or control
for
security reasons.

A building to which entry is subject to restrictions or control
for security reasons.

Two or more organizations sharing the same SCIF

14

UNCLASSIFIED

Dead Bolt:

Deadlocking Panic

Hardware:
Decibel (db):

Document:

Dual Technology:

Expanded Steel:

Guard:

Intelligence Community
(and agencies within the

Intelligence
Community):

Intrusion Detection
System:

Isolator:

UNCLASSIFIED

A lock bolt with no spring action. Activated by a key or turn
knob and cannot be moved by end pressure.

A panic hardware with a deadlocking latch that has a device
when
in the closed position resists the latch from being retracted.

A unit of sound measurement.

Any recorded information regardless of its physical form or
characteristics, including, without limitation, written or
printed matter, data processing cards and tapes, maps,
charts, paintings, drawings, photos, engravings, sketches,
working notes and papers, reproductions of such things by
any means or process, and sound, voice, magnetic or
electronic recordings in any form.

PIR, microwave or ultrasonic IDS sensors which combine
the features of more than one volumetric technology.

Also called EXPANDED METAL MESH. A lace work
patterned material produced from sheet steel by making
regular uniform cuts and then pulling it apart with uniform
pressure.

A properly trained and equipped individual whose duties
include the protection of a SCIF. Guards whose duties
require direct access to a SCIF, or patrol within a SCIF,
must meet the clearance criteria in Director of Central
Intelligence Directive 1/14. CSA will determine if
indoctrination is required.

Refers to the United States Government agencies and
organizations

identified in section 3.4(f (I through 7) of Executive Order
12333.

A security alarm system to detect unauthorized entry.

A device or assembly of devices which isolates or
disconnects a telephone or Computerized Telephone System
(CTS) from all wires which exit the SCIF and which as been
accepted as effective for security purposes by the Telephone
Security Group (TSG approved).

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Key Service Unit (KSU): An electromechanical switching device which controls
routing and operation of an analog telephone system.

Line Supervision:
Class I: Class I line security is achieved through the use of DES or
an algorithm based on the cypher feedback or cypher block

chaining mode of encryption. Certification by NIST or
another independent testing laboratory is required.

15

UNCLASSIFIED

Class II:

Motion Detection
Sensor:

Non-Conductive Section:

Non-Discussion Area:

Open Storage:

Response Force:

Secure Working Area:

Senior Official of the

Intelligence Community
(SOIC):

Sensitive Compart-

mented Information

(SCD):

Sensitive Compart-

UNCLASSIFIED

Class II line supervision refers to systems in which the
transmission is based on pseudo random generated or digital
encoding using an interrogation and response scheme
throughout the entire communication, or UL Class AA line
supervision. The signal shall not repeat itself within a
minimum six month period, Class 11 security shall be
impervious to compromise using resistance, voltage, current,
or signal substitution techniques.

An alarm sensor that detects movement.

Material (i.e. canvas, rubber, etc.) which is installed in
ducts. vents, or pipes, and is unable to carry audio or RF
emanations.

A clearly defined area within a SCIF where classified
discussions are not authorized due to inadequate sound
attenuation.

The storage of SCI material within a SCIF in any
configuration other than within GSA approved security
containers.

Personnel (not including those on fixed security posts)
appropriately equipped and trained, whose duties include
initial or follow up response to situations which threaten the
security of the SCIF. This includes local law enforcement
support or other external forces as noted in agreements.

An accredited SCIF used for handling, discussing and/or
processing of SCI, but where SCI will not be stored.

The head of an agency, of fine, bureau, or intelligence
element

identified in section 3.4(f) (I through 6) of Executive Order
12333.

SCI is classified information concerning or derived from
intelli-

gence sources, methods or analytical processes, which is
required

to be handled exclusively within formal control systems
established by the Director of Central Intelligence.

An accredited area, room, group of rooms, building, or
installation

UNCLASSIFIED

mented Information
Facility (SCIF):

Sound Group:

Sound Transmission

Class (STC):

Special Access Program

(SAP):

UNCLASSIFIED

where SCI may be stored, used, discussed and/or
electronically
processed.

Voice transmission attenuation groups established to satisfy
acoustical requirements. Ratings measured in sound
transmission class may be found in the Architectural
Graphic Standards.

The rating used in architectural considerations of sound
transmis-

sion loss such as those involving walls, ceilings, and/or
floors.

Any approved program which imposes need-to-know or
access

controls beyond those normally required for access to
CONFIDENTIAL. SECRET or TOP SECRET information

16

UNCLASSIFIED

Surreptitious Entry:

Tactical SCIF:

Technical Surveillance
Countermeasures

(TSCM) Surveys and
Evaluations:

Type Accepted

Telephone:

Vault:

Waiver:

UNCLASSIFIED

Unauthorized entry in a manner which leaves no readily
discernible evidence.

An accredited area used for actual or simulated war
operations for a specified period of time.

A physical, electronic, and visual examination to detect
technical

surveillance devices, technical security hazards. and
attempts at

clandestine penetration.

Any telephone whose design and construction conforms with
the

design standards for Telephone Security Group approved
telephone sets. (TSG Standard #3, #4, or #5).

A room(s) used for the storing, handling, discussing, and/or
processing of SCI and constructed to afford maximum
protection against unauthorized entry.

An exemption from a specific requirement of this document.

17

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21

ANNEX A
(Effective 27 May 1994)

SCIF ACCREDITATION CHECKLIST

Table of Contents

Section A General Information

Section B Peripheral Security

Section C SCIF Security

Section D Doors

Section E Intrusion Detection Systems

Section F Telephone System

Section G Acoustical Protection

Section H Administrative Security

Attachments

A-l

UNCLASSIFIED

om

UNCLASSIFIED

DATE
FIXED FACILITY CHECKLIST
[ ] PRECONSTRUCTION [ ] NEW [ ] MODIFIED FACILITY
Section A General Information
1. SCIF Data: Organization/Company Name:
SCIF Identification Number (if applicable):

Organization subordinate to (If applicable):

Contract Number « Expiration Date:
CSA:
Project Headquarter Security Office (if applicable):
2. SCIF Location:
Street Address:
Bldg Name/#: Floor:
Room(s) No:
City: State/Country:
ZIP Code:
3. Responsible Security Personnel:
Primary: Alternate:
Commercial Telephone:
DSN Telephone:
Secure Telephone: Type:
Home Telephone:

Fax No: (specify both classified and Unclassified)

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Classified: Unclassified:

Other:
A-3

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Accreditation Data:
a. Category of SCI Requested:

Indicate the storage required: Open Storage Closed Storage Continuous
Operation Secure Working Area Temporary Secure Working Area

b. Existing Accreditation Information (If applicable):
(1) Category of SCI:

(2) Accreditation granted by:
on

c. Last TEMPEST Accreditation (if applicable): Accreditation granted
by: on

d. If Automated Information Systems (AISs) are used, has an accreditation
been granted? YES NO

Accreditation granted by: on

e. SAP co-located within SCIF? YES NO
(If Yes, Classification:, and provide copy of Co-utilization Agreement for SAP
operation in SCIF.)

f. Duty Hours: hours to hours, days per week.
g. Total square feet SCIF occupies:

Construction/modification: Is construction or modification complete?

YES NO N/A (if NO. expected date of
completion)
Inspections:
a. TSCM Service completed by on
(Attach copy of report)
Were deficiencies corrected? YES NO NA (If NO, explain: )
b. Last Physical Security Inspection by on
(Attach copy of report)

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Were deficiencies corrected? YES NO NA If NO ,explain: )

c. Last Security Assistance visit by on

A-4

UNCLASSIFIED

7.

UNCLASSIFIED

REMARKS:

Section B Peripheral Security

8.

10.

Describe building exterior security:

a. Fence:

b. Fence Alarm:

c. Fence lighting:

d. Television (CCTV):

e. Guards:

f. Other:

Building:

a. Construction type:

b. Describe Access Controls:
(1) Continuous: YES NO
(2) If NO, during what hours?

Remarks:

Section C SCIF Security

11.

How is access to the SCIF controlled?

a. By Guard Force: YES NO

Level:

b. By Assigned Personnel: YES _ NO

c. By Access Control Device: YES _ NO
If yes, Manufacturer Model No

UNCLASSIFIED

Security Clearance

12.

UNCLASSIFIED

Does the SCIF have windows? YES NO

a. How are they acoustically protected? (If applicable)

A-5

UNCLASSIFIED

13.

14,

UNCLASSIFIED

b. How are they secured against opening?-
c. How are they protected against visual surveillance? (If applicable)
Do ventilation ducts penetrate the SCIF perimeter? YES NO

a. Number and size (Indicate on floor plan):

b. If over 96 square inches, type of protection used:
(1) IDS: YES NO Describe in Section E)

(2) Bars/Grills Metal Baffles: YES NO
OTHER - Explain:

c. Metal Duct Sound Baffles: Are ducts equipped with:
(1) Metal Baffles: YES NO
(2) Noise Generator: YES NO
(3) Non-Conductive Joints: YES NO
(4) Inspection Ports: YES NO

If YES, are they within the SCIF? YES NO___sIf they are located
outside of
the SCIF, how are they secured?

d. If TEMPEST accreditation authority requires; are pipes, conduits, etc., penetrating
the SCIF equipped with non-conductive unions at the point they breach the SCIF
perimeter? YES NO

Are they provided acoustical protection? (if applicable) _ YES NO
Construction:
a. Perimeter walls:

(1 ) Material & Thickness:

(2) Do the walls extend from the true floor to the true ceiling? YES
NO

b. True ceiling (material and thickness): _

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

c. False ceiling? YES NO ifyes:
(1) Type of ceiling material:
(2) Distance between false and true ceiling:

A-6

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

d. True floor (material and thickness):

e. False Floor? YES NOifyes:
Distance between false and true floor:

15. Remarks:

Section D Doors

16. Describe SCIF Primary Entrance Door (Indicate on floor plan):

Is an automatic door closer installed? YES

NO If NO, explain:

17. Describe number and type of doors used for SCIF emergency exits and other perimeter

doors (Indicate on floor plan):

Is an automatic door closer installed? YES NO If NO, explain:

18. Describe how the door hinges exterior to the SCIF are secured against removal (if in an

uncontrolled area):

19. Locking devices:
a. Perimeter SCIF Entrance Door:
(1) List manufacturer, model number and Group rating:
(2) Does entrance door stand open into an uncontrolled area?
YES  NOJf YES, describe tamper protection:
b. Emergency Exits and Other Perimeter Doors:
Describe (locks, metal strip/bar, deadbolts, panic hardware):
c. Where are the door lock combinations filed?

20. Remarks:

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Section E Intrusion Detection Systems

21.

23.

24.

25.

26.

Give manufacturer and model numbers in response to following questions:
Method of Interior Motion Detection Protection:
a. Accessible Perimeter?
Storage Areas?
b. Motion Detection Sensors (Indicate on floor Plan):
Tamper protection: YES NO
c. Other (e.g. CCTV, etc.):

Door and Window Protection (Indicate on floor plan):

a. Balanced Magnetic Switch (BMS) on door?:
Tamper protection: YES NO

b. If SCIF has ground floor windows, how are they protected?
c. Other (e.g. CCTV, etc..)
Method of ventilation and duet work protection:
Space above false ceiling (only outside the United States, if required):

a. Motion Detection Sensors:
Tamper protection: YES NO

b. Other (e.g. CCTV):
Space below false floor (only outside the United States, if required):

a. Motion Detection Sensors:
Tamper protection: YES NO

b. Other (e.g. CCTV):
IDS transmission line security protection:

a. Electronic line supervision (Manufacture and Model):

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

If electronic line supervision. class of service:
b. Other:

A-8

UNCLASSIFIED

II

UNCLASSIFIED

27. Is emergency power available for the IDS? YES NO
TYPE: Battery Emergency Generator Other

28. | Where is the IDS control unit for the SCIF located (Indicated on floor plan)?

29. Where is the IDS Alarm annunciator panel located (Indicate on floor plan, Address)?

30. IDS Response Personnel: Describe:

Response Force Security Cleared: YES NO
Level:

b. Emergency Procedures documented? YES NO

c. Reserve Force available? YES NO

d. Response time required for alarm condition: minutes.

e. Are response procedures tested and records maintained? YES NO
If no, explain:

31. Is the IDS tested and records maintained? YES NO
If no, explain:

32. Remarks:

Section F Telephone System
33. | Method of on-hook security provided:
a. TSG-2 Computerized Telephone System (CTS)? YES NO
(1) Manufacturer/Model:

(2) Location of the CTS:

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

(3) Do the CTS installers and programmers have security clearances?

If yes, at what access level (minimum established by CSA):

If no, are escorts provided?

A-9

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

(4) Is the CTS installed as per TSG-2 Configuration Requirements?
YES NO

(a) If no, provide make and model number of telephone equipment, explain
your configuration, and attach a line drawing?

(b) Is access to the facility housing the switch controlled? YES NO

(c) Are all lines between the SCIF and the switch in controlled spaces? YES
NO

(5) Does the CTS use remote maintenance and diagnostic procedures or other
remote access features? YES NO

If yes, explain those procedures:

b. TSG-6 approved telephones?
(1) Manufacturer/Model:
(2) TSG number:
(3) Ringer Protection (if required):

c. TSG-6 approved disconnect devices?
(1) Manufacturer/Model:
(2)TSG number:

34. Methods of off-hook security provided:
a. Is there a hold or mute feature? YES NO

(1) If yes, which feature , and is it provided by the: CTS?
or Telephone

(2) If no, are approved push-to-operated handsets provided? YES NO
Describe:

35. Automatic telephone call answering:

a. Is there an automatic call answering service for the telephones in the SCIF?
YES NO
If yes, provide make and model number of the equipment, explain the
configuration, and provide a line drawing.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

Section G Acoustical Protection
40. Doall areas of the SCIF meet acoustical requirements? Yes No

If no, describe additional measures taken to provide minimum acoustical protection
(e.g. door, windows, etc)

A-10

UNCLASSIFIED

41.

42.

43.

UNCLASSIFIED

Is the SCIF equipped with a public address, emergency/fire announcement or music
system? Yes No

If yes, describe and explain how protected?

If any intercommunication system that is not part of the telephone system is used,
describe and explain how protected:

Remarks:

Section H Administrative Security

45.

46.

47

Destruction Methods:
a Describe method used for destruction of classified/sensitive material:

Manufacturer: Model:
Manufacturer: Model:

b. Describe location of destruction site(s) in relation to the secure facility:

c. Have provisions been made for the emergency destruction of classified/sensitive
program material? (If required): YES NO

If YES, has the emergency destruction equipment and plan been coordinated with
the CSA? YES NO

If reproduction of classified/sensitive material takes place outside the SCIF, describe
equipment and security procedures used to reproduce documents:

Remarks:

A-11

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21

ANNEX B
(Effective 27 May ] 994)

INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEMS

Annex B sets forth the requirements and establishes the standards for intrusion
detection systems for all SCIFs throughout government and for government-sponsored
contractor facilities. Compliance with these standards is mandatory for all facilities
established after the effective date of this annex, including any major renovation of existing
facilities insofar as the renovation will permit reasonable and practical upgrading, as
determined by the Cognizant Security Authority (CSA).

1.0 CONCEPT

An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) must detect an attempted or actual human entry
into the protected area. An IDS complements other physical security measures and consists
of three essential components:

1,1 Intrusion Detection Equipment (IDE).

1.2 Security and response force personnel.

1.3 Operation procedures.

2.0 OPERATION

2.1 IDS components operate as a system with four distinct phases:
2.1.1 Detection.
2.1.2 Reporting.
2.1.3 Assessment.
2.1.4 Response.

2.2 These elements are equally important, and none can be eliminated if an IDS is
to provide an acceptable degree of protection.

2.2.1 Detection: The detection phase begins as soon as a detector or sensor
reacts to stimuli it is designed to detect. The sensor alarm condition is
then transmitted over cabling located within the protected area to the
Premise Control Unit (PCU). The PCU may service many sensors. The
PCU and the sensors it serves comprise a "zone" at the monitor station.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

This shall be used as the definition of an alarmed zone for purposes of
this document.

2.2.2 Reporting: The PCU receives signals from all sensors in a protected area
and incorporates these signals into a communication scheme. Another
signal is added to the communication for supervision to prevent
compromise of the communications scheme. This supervised signal is
intended to disguise the

B-l

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

information and protect the IDS against tampering or injection of false
information by an intruder. The supervised signal is sent by the PCU
via the transmission link to the monitor station. Inside the monitor
station, either a dedicated panel or central processor monitors
information from the PCU signals. When alarms occur, an annunciator
generates an audible and visible alert to security personnel. Alarms
result normally from intrusion, tampering, component failure, or
system power failure.

2.2.3 Assessment: The assessment period is the first phase that requires
human interaction. When alarm conditions occur, the operator assesses
the situation and dispatches the response force.

2.2.4 Response: The response phase begins as soon as the operator assesses an
alarm condition. A response force must immediately respond to all
alarms. The response phase must also determine the precise nature of
the alarm and take all measures necessary to safeguard the SCIF.

3.0 REQUIREMENTS

3.1 As determined by the CSA, all areas of a SCIF that reasonably afford access to

3.2

the SCIF, or where SCI is stored, shall be protected by an IDS unless
continually occupied.

Acceptability of Equipment: All IDE must be UL-listed (or equivalent as
defined by the CSA) and approved by the CSA. Government and proprietary
installed, maintained, or furnished systems are subject to approval only by the
CSA.

3.3 Vendor Approval Procedures: Vendors may submit their IDE requests either

through a Special Security Officer/Contractor Special Security Officer
(SSO/CSSO) or directly to the CSA. Vendors should provide a UL certificate
for installation and service (UL 611, 681, 1076, and 2050 apply) directly to
the SSO/CSSO or CSA for acceptance. With sufficient justification, the CSA
may waive this requirement and waivers must be documented. All requests for
acceptance must describe the IDE fully and include the results of testing by a
listed independent laboratory. An independent laboratory evaluates the
manufacturer's compliance to performance specifications. A request for
acceptance of line supervision using Data Encryption Standard (DES) must
also include validation from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) or another independent testing laboratory recognized by
the CSA. The description must identify the manufacturer and model of
equipment and show how the IDE meets CSA and/or UL standards.

3.4 Preinstallation Approval of IDS: The CSA will approve a proposed IDS before

its installation within a SCIF as part of the initial SCIF construction approval
process. A proposal for an IDS will be examined for the type and employment
of accepted equipment. An IDS proposal will be submitted as part of a
preconstruction approval process.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.5 Equipment:
3.5.1 Transmission Line Security: When the transmission line leaves the SCIF
and traverses an uncontrolled area, Class I or Class II CSA accepted
line security shall be used.

B-2

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.5.1.1 Class 1: Class 1 line security is achieved through the use of DES
or an algorithm based on the cipher feedback or cipher block
chaining mode of encryption. Certification by NIST or another
independent testing laboratory is required. The certificate must
be retained by the CSA for the duration of operation of the
SCIF.

3.5.1.2 Class II: Class II line supervision refers to systems in which the
transmission is based on pseudo-random generated tones or
digital encoding using an interrogation and response scheme
throughout the entire communication, or UL Class AA line
supervision. The signal shall not repeat itself within a
minimum six-month period. Class II security shall be
impervious to compromise using resistance, voltage, current, or
signal substitution techniques.

3.5.2 Internal Cabling: The cabling between the sensors and the PCU should
be dedicated to IDE and must comply with national and local code
standards. If applicable, the cabling must be installed in accordance with
TEMPEST and COMSEC requirements.

3.5.3 Restriction on Integration of Access Controls into SCIF IDSs: If an
access control system is integrated into an IDS, reports from the access
control system should be subordinate in priority to reports from intrusion
alarms.

3.5.4 Maintenance Mode: When an alarm zone is placed in the maintenance
mode, this condition will be signaled automatically to the monitor
station. This signal must appear as an alarm or maintenance message at
the monitor station, and the IDS shall not be securable while in the
maintenance mode. However, the alarm or message must continue
visibly at the monitor station throughout the period of maintenance. A
standard operating procedure (SOP) must be established to address
appropriate actions when maintenance access is indicated at the panel.
All maintenance periods will be archived in the system. The CSA may
require that the maintenance Personal Identification Number (PIN) be
established and controlled by the customer. The IDE will not contain any
capability for remote diagnostics, maintenance, or programming, except
for an alarm remote test feature at the monitor station. A self-test feature
will be limited to one second per occurrence.

3.5.5 Annunciation of Shunting or Masking Condition: Shunting or masking
of any internal zone or sensor must be appropriately logged or recorded
in archive. A shunted or masked internal zone or sensor must be
displayed as such at the monitor station throughout the period the
condition exists when-ever there is a survey of zones or sensors.

3.5.6 Alarms Indications: Indications of alarm status shall be revealed at the
monitoring station and optionally within the confines of the SCIF.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.5.7 Power Supplies: Primary power for all IDE will be commercial AC or
DC power. In the event of commercial power failure at the protected
area or monitor station, the equipment will change power sources
without causing an alarm indication.

B-3

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.5.7.1 Emergency Power: Emergency power must comply with UL 603.
Emergency power may consist of battery and/or generator power.
When batteries are used for emergency power, they will be
maintained at full charge by automatic charging circuits. The
manufacturer's periodic maintenance schedule shall be followed
and results documented.

3.5.7.2 Power Source and Failure Indication: An illuminated indication
will exist at the PCU of the power source in use (AC or DC).
Equipment at the monitor station will indicate visibly and
audibly a failure in power source, a change in power source, and
the location of the failure or change.

3.5.8 Tamper Protection: All IDE within the SCIF with removable covers will
be equipped with tamper switches. The tamper detection will be
monitored continuously whether the IDS is in the access or secure mode
of operation.

3.5.9 Prohibition Against Fortuitous Conduction via IDE: No IDE will be
employed that allows audio and intelligence-bearing signals to pass out
of the SCIF in any form.

3.5.10 Safeguarding IDE:

3.5.10.1 In areas outside the United States, IDE must remain solely
under US control, or as otherwise authorized by the CSA.

3.5.10.2 Key variables and operational passwords will be safeguarded,
disseminated, and controlled as determined by the CSA.

3.6 Installation:

3.6.1 Independent Equipment: All SCIFs will have intrusion detection
equipment and zones independent from other protected sites. When many
alarmed areas are protected by one monitor station, audible and visible
annunciations for SCIF zones must be clearly distinguishable from other
annunciations. All sensors protecting the SCIF will be installed within
the SCIF.

3.6.2 Access/Secure Switch and PCU: No capability will exist to allow
changing the access status of the IDS from a location outside the SCIF
unless performed by a properly accessed individual. All PCUs must be
located inside the SCIF and should be located near the SCIF entrance.
SCIF personnel must initiate all changes in access and secure status.
Operation of the PCU will be restricted by use of a device or procedure
that verifies authorized use. In the secure mode, any unauthorized entry
into the SCIF shall cause an alarm to be transmitted immediately to the
monitor station.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.6.3 Motion Detection Protection: All areas of the SCIF that reasonably afford
access to the SCIF or where SCI is stored shall be protected with motion
detection sensors, e.g., ultrasonic, passive infrared. etc. use of dual

B4

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

technology is authorized when one technology transmits an alarm
condition independently from the other technology. A failed detector will
cause an immediate and continuous alarm condition. Detection equipment
must be installed in compliance with UL 681 and 1076.

3.6.4 Accessible Areas: Within the United States, alarms are not required
above the false ceiling or below the false floor. Outside the United States,
such alarms may be required by the CSA.

3.6.5 Protection of SCIF Perimeter Doors: Each SCIF perimeter door will be
protected by a balanced magnetic switch (BMS) that meets the minimum
standards of UL 634. The BMS must be installed in such a manner that
an alarm signal will initiate before the nonhinged side of the door opens
beyond the thickness of the door from the seated position. Emergency exit
doors equipped with integrated life safety hardware may have the life
safety alarm component integrated into the SCIF IDS as an additional
detector. Emergency exit doors will be monitored 24 hours a day to
provide quick identification and response to the appropriate door when
there is an alarm indication

3.6.6 windows: All readily accessible windows will be protected by an IDS,
either independently or by the motion detection sensors in the room, as
determined by the CSA.

3.6.7 IDE Installation Criteria: All IDE will be installed in a manner to prevent
access or removal from a location external to the SCIF and in compliance
with UL 681 for "Installation of Burglar Alarm Equipment."

3.6.8 IDS Requirements for Continuous Operations Facilities: A SCIF
accredited for continuous operations may not require an IDS as
determined by the CSA. This type of SCIF will be equipped with an
alerting system if the occupants cannot observe all potential entrances
into the SCIF. The system alerts occupants to an intrusion into the SCIF.
An alert system will consist of BMSs or other appropriate sensors. None
of the IDE or cabling associated with the alert system will extend beyond
the perimeter of the SCIF.

3.6.9 False/Nuisance Alarm: Any alarm signal transmitted in the absence of a
detected intrusion is a false alarm. A false alarm becomes a nuisance
alarm when the effects of environment, equipment malfunction, operator
failure, animals, electrical disturbances, and known effects cause the
alarm indication. All alarms shall be investigated and the results
documented. The maintenance program for the IDS shall ensure that
incidents of false/nuisance alarms will not exceed one in a period of 30
days per zone.

1 This should be interpreted to mean any windows which are less than 18 feet above the
ground measured from the bottom of the window, or are easily accessible by means of

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED
objects directly beneath the windows, (e.g. electrical transformer, air conditioning units,
vegetation, or landscaping which can easily be climbed, etc.).

B-5

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.7 Personnel:

3.7.1

3.7.2

IDE Installation and Maintenance Personnel: Alarm installation and
maintenance will be accomplished by US citizens who have been
subjected to a trustworthiness determination (e.g., NAC with no clearance
to be issued). Use of foreign nationals or other personnel for this purpose
must have prior CSA approval.

Monitor Station Staffing: The monitor station will be supervised
continuously by US citizens who have been subjected to a trustworthiness
determination (e.g., NAC with no clearance to be issued). Use of foreign
nationals or other personnel for this purpose must have prior CSA
approval. The duties of the monitoring operator will be documented and
will entail observing monitor panels for reports of alarms and changes in
IDE status, making accurate assessments of these reports, and dispatching
the response force or notifying the appropriate authority in the event of an
intrusion alarm. The operator will have no duties that interfere with the
primary functions of monitoring alarms and dispatching the response
force. A documented chain of authority will exist for use by security
personnel during unusual situations. The operator will be trained
sufficiently in the operation and theory of the IDE to properly interpret all
incidents generated by the IDE. This training must also include all
actions to be taken on receipt of an alarm activation.

3.8 Procedures:

3.8.1 Testing: SCIF IDS sensors will be tested semiannually. A record of IDE

testing will be maintained at the SCIF that reflects: testing date,
individuals who performed the test, specific equipment tested,
malfunctions, and corrective actions taken. Tests of the response force
will be conducted semiannually. A record of response force testing will
be maintained.

3.8.2 Safeguarding IDS Plans: Details of installed IDS shall be controlled and

restricted on a need-to-know basis.

3.8.3 Operating Procedures: A written support agreement must be established

3.8.4

3.8.5

for external monitoring and/or response.

Monitoring Station: Where there is an operations security concern, the
alarm monitoring panel shall be designed to prevent observation by
unauthorized persons.

Alarm Condition Response: Every alarm condition will be treated
initially as a detected intrusion until resolved by the response force. The
response force will investigate the source of an alarm and will notify
SCIF personnel. The response force will take appropriate steps to
safeguard the SCIF and prevent the escape of an intruder from the SCIF

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

as permitted by SOP, local law enforcement, and circumstances until
properly relieved. Response time to an alarm will not exceed.

3.8.5.1 Open Storage Area five minutes
3.8.5.2 Closed Storage Area 15 minutes

B-6

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.8.6 Catastrophic Failure: If the IDE suffers catastrophic failure, or loses
primary and emergency power, SCIF-indoctrinated individuals must
provide security by physically occupying the SCIF until the IDS can be
made functional. As an alternative, the outside SCIF perimeter may be
continuously protected by the response force or as determined by the
CSA.

3.8.7 IDS Logging: The IDS will incorporate a means for providing a historical
record of all events, either automatically or through the use of a manual
log system. If the IDE has no provision of automatic entry into archive,
the operator will record the time, source, and type of alarm, and action
taken. Results of investigations by the response force will be maintained
at the monitor station. The historical record must be routinely reviewed
by the responsible security officer. Records of alarm annunciations shall
be retained for at least 90 days or until investigations of system
violations and incidents have been successfully resolved and recorded.

B-7

UNCLASSTFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE 1/21

ANNEX C
(Effective 27 May 1994)

TACTICAL OPERATIONS/FIELD TRAINING
This annex pertains to specialized Sensitive Compartmented Information Facilities
(SCIFs) deployed in a tactical operations or field training environment. It is divided into
three parts to reflect the accepted modes of tactical operation:
Part I - Ground Operation
Part II - Aircraft/Airborne Operation
Part III - Shipborne Operation

C-l

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DCID 1/21,

Annex C
Table of Contents

PART I GROUND OPERATION

1.0 PURPOSE

2.0 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

3.0 RESPONSIBILITIES

4.0 ACCREDITATION OF TACTICAL SCIFs

5.0 PHYSICAL CONFIGURATION

6.0 TACTICAL SCIF OPERATIONS USING VANS, SHELTERS,
AND VEHICLES

7.0 TACTICAL SCIF OPERATIONS WITHIN EXISTING PERMANENT
STRUCTURES

8.0 MOBILE SIGINT SCIFs

9.0 SEMI-PERMANENT SCIFs

10.0 ELECTRICAL POWER

11.0 TEMPEST REQUIREMENTS

12.0 TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT

PART II AIRCRAFT/AIRBORNE OPERATION

UNCLASSIFIED

—

—

—

UNCLASSIFIED

1.0 PURPOSE

2.0 APPLICABILITY

3.0 RESPONSIBILITIES

4.0 ACCREDITATION OF AIRCRAFT/AIRBORNE FACILITIES

5.0 POST AND PATROL REQUIREMENTS

6.0 ENTRY HATCHES

7.0 TEMPEST REQUIREMENTS

8.0 UNSCHEDULED AIRCRAFT LANDINGS

9.0 VOICE TRANSMISSIONS

10.0 DESTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS

PART III SHIPBOARD OPERATION
1.0 PURPOSE

2.0 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

3.0 TYPES OF SHIPBOARD SCIFs (S/SCIFs)

UNCLASSIFIED

—

—

—

—!

UNCLASSIFIED

4.0 PERMANENT ACCREDITATION

5.0 STANDARDS

6.0 INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM (IDS)

7.0 PASSING SCUTTLES AND WINDOWS

8.0 LOCATION OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT

9.0 SECURE STORAGE CONTAINERS

10.0 TELEPHONES

11.0 SECURE TELEPHONE UNIT-III (STU-III)

12.0 SOUND POWERED TELEPHONES

13.0 SCI INTERCOM ANNOUNCING SYSTEM

14.0 SUPPORTING INTERCOMMUNICATION ANNOUNCING SYSTEMS

15.0 COMMERCIAL INTERCOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT

16.0 GENERAL ANNOUNCING SYSTEMS

UNCLASSIFIED

eo =— ore

—

Oe

—

—y

UNCLASSIFIED

17.0 PNEUMATIC TUBE SYSTEMS

18.0 DESTRUCTION EQUIPMENT

C-3
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

i)

UNCLASSIFIED

19.0 EMERGENCY POWER

20.0 SCI PROCESSING SYSTEMS

21.0 TEMPORARY ACCREDITATION

22.0 TEMPORARY SECURE WORKING AREAS (TSWAs)

23.0 EMBARKED PORTABLE SHIPBOARD COLLECTION VANS (PSCVs)

C-4

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

PART I GROUND OPERATION:
1.0 PURPOSE:

This Annex prescribes the procedures for the physical security requirements for the
operation of a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) while in a field or
tactical configuration, including training exercises. It also addresses the standards for truck
mounted or towed trailer style shelters designed for use in a tactical environment but used
in a garrison environment known as a Semi-permanent SCIF (SPSCIF).

2.0 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE:

Recognizing that field/tactical operations, as opposed to operations within a fixed
military installation, are of the type considered least secure, the following minimum
physical security requirements will be met and maintained. Situation and time permitting,
these standards will be improved upon using the security considerations and requirements
for permanent secure facilities as an ultimate goal. If available, permanent-type facilities
will be used. Under field or combat conditions, a continuous 24-hour operation is
mandatory. Every effort must be made to obtain the necessary support from the host
command (e.g., security containers, vehicles, generators, fencing, guards, weapons. etc.).

2.1 The Tactical SCIF (T-SCIF) shall be located within the supported headquarters
defensive perimeter and preferably, also within the Tactical Operations Center
(TOC) perimeter.

2.2 The T-SCIF shall be established and clearly marked using a physical barrier.
Where practical, the physical barrier should be triple-strand concertina or General
Purpose Barbed Tape Obstacle (GPBTO). The Tactical SCIF approval authority
shall determine whether proposed security measures provide adequate protection
based on local threat conditions.

2.3 The perimeter shall be guarded by walking or fixed guards to provide observation
of the entire controlled area. Guards shall be armed with weapons and
ammunition. The types of weapons will be prescribed by the supported
commander. Exceptions to this requirement during peace may only be granted by
the T-SCIF approval authority based on local threat conditions.

2.4 Access to the controlled area shall be restricted to a single gate/entrance, which
will be guarded on a continuous basis.

2.5 An access list shall be maintained, and access restricted to those people whose
names appear on the list.

2.6 The Tactical SCIF shall be staffed with sufficient personnel as determined by the
on-site security authority based on the local threat conditions.

2.7 Emergency destruction and evacuation plans shall be kept current.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.8 SCI material shall be stored in lockable containers when not in use.

2.9 Communications shall be established and maintained with backup response forces,
if possible.

C-5

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.10 The SSO, or designee, shall conduct an inspection of the vacated Tactical SCIF

area to ensure SCI materials are not inadvertently left behind when the T-SCIF
moves.

2.11 Reconciliation of T-SCIF activation and operational data shall be made not more

than 30 days after SCIF activation. Interim reporting of SCIF activities may be made
Mthe CSA.

3.0 RESPONSIBILITIES:

The Cognizant Security Authority (CSA) is responsible for ensuring compliance with
these standards and providing requisite SCI accreditation.. The CSA may further delegate
T-SCIF accreditation authority one command level lower. The Senior Intelligence Officer
(SIO) is responsible when a temporary field or Tactical SCIF is used in support of field
training exercises. During a period of declared hostilities or general war, a T-SCIF may be
established at any level of accreditation upon the verbal order of a General or Flag Officer
Commander.

4.0 ACCREDITATION OF TACTICAL SCIFs:

4.1 An Accreditation Checklist shall not be required for establishment of a T-SCIF.

4.2

Approval authorities may require use of a local tactical deployment checklist.

The element requesting establishment of a T-SCIF shall notify the CSA, or
designee, prior to commencement of SCIF operations. The message shall provide
the following information:

4.2.1 ID number of parent SCIF.
4.2.2 Name of the Tactical SCIF.
4.2.3 Deployed from (location).
4.2.4 Deployed to (location).

4.2.5 SCI level of operations.

4.2.6 Operational period.

4.2.7 Name of exercise or operation.

4.2.8 Identification of facility used for T-SCIF operations (e.g., vans, buildings,
tents).

4.2.9 Points of contact (responsible officers).

4.2.10 Description of security measures for entire operational period of SCIF.

UNCLASSIFIED

4.2.11 Comments.

UNCLASSIFIED

C4

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

5.0 PHYSICAL CONFIGURATION:

A T-SCIF may be configured using vehicles, trailers, shelters, bunkers, tents, or
available structures to suit the mission. Selection of a T-SCIF site should first consider
effective and secure mission accomplishment.

6.0 TACTICAL SCIF OPERATIONS USING VANS, SHELTERS, AND VEHICLES:

6.1 When a rigid side shelter or portable van is used for SCI operations, it shall be
equipped with either a combination lock that meets all requirements of Federal
Specification FF-L-2740 or other CSA-approved lock. The combination to the lock
or keys shall be controlled by the SSO at the security level for which the T-SCIF is
accredited. The shelter or van shall be secured at all times when not activated as a
SCIF.

6.2 The SCIF entrance of a radio frequency shielded enclosure designed for tactical
operations may be secured with the manufacturer supplied locking device or any
combination of the locking devices mentioned above.

7.0 TACTICAL SCIF OPERATIONS WITHIN EXISTING PERMANENT
STRUCTURES:

7.1 A T-SCIF may be operated within an existing structure when:
7.1.1 Location is selected on a random basis.

7.1.2 The location is not reused within a 36 month period. If reused within 36
months for SCI discussion, a TSCM evaluation is recommended.

7.2 There is no restriction over SCI discussion within a T-SCIF during war.
8.0 MOBILE SIGINT SCIFs:
8.1 A continuous 24-hour operation is mandatory.

8.2 The T-SCIF shall be staffed with sufficient personnel as determined by the on-site
security authority based on the local threat conditions.

8.3 External physical security measures shall be incorporated into the perimeter
defense plans for the immediate area in which the T-SCIF is located.

8.3.1 A physical barrier is not required as a prerequisite to establish a mobile
SIGINT T-SCIF

8.3.2 External physical security controls will normally be a function of the people
controlling the day-to-day operations of the T-SCIF.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

8.4 Communications shall be established and maintained with backup guard forces, if
possible.

8.5 Emergency destruction plans shall incorporate incendiary methods to ensure total
destruction of SCI material in emergency situations.

C-7

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

8.6 A rigid side shelter or a portable van are two possible configurations that may be
used.

8.6.1 When a rigid side shelter or portable van is used, it is subject to the following
additional restrictions:

8.6.1.1 if it is a shelter, it shall be mounted to a vehicle in such a way as to
provide the shelter with the capability of moving on short notice.

8.6.1.2 A GSA-approved security container shall be permanently affixed
within the shelter. The combination to the lock will be protected to
the level of security of the material stored therein.

8.6.1.3 Entrance to the T-SCIF shall be controlled by SCI-indoctrinated
people on duty within the shelter. When situations occur where
there are no SCI-indoctrinated people within the shelter, i.e., during
redeployment, classified material shall be stored within the locked
GSA container and the exterior entrance to the shelter will be
secured.

8.6.1.4 Entrance to the T-SCIF shall be limited to SCI-indoctrinated people
with an established need-to-know whenever SCI material is used
within the shelter.

8.6.2 When a rigid side shelter or portable van is not available and a facility is
required for SCI operations, such as in the case of a soft side vehicle or
man-portable system, it is subject to the following additional restrictions:

8.6.2.1 Protection will consist of an opaque container, i.e., leather pouch,
metal storage box, or other suitable container that prevents
unauthorized viewing of the material

8.6.2.2 This container shall be kept in the physical possession of an SCI-
indoctrinated person.

8.7 The quantity of SCI material permitted within the T-SCIF will be limited to that
which is absolutely essential to sustain the mission. Stringent security
arrangements shall be employed to ensure that the quantity of SCI material is not
allowed to accumulate more than is absolutely necessary.

8.7.1 All working papers generated within the T-SCIF shall be destroyed at the
earliest possible time after they have served their mission purpose to
preclude accumulation of unnecessary classified material.

8.7.2 if AIS equipment is used to store or process SCI data, a rapid and certain
means of destruction shall be available to AIS operators to ensure the total
destruction of classified material under emergency or combat conditions.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

8.8 Upon cessation of hostilities, all classified material shall be returned to the parent
element of the SCIF for reconciliation of records and destruction of obsolete
material.

C-8

UNCLASSIFIED

nL

UNCLASSIFIED

9.0 SEMI-PERMANENT SCIFs:

9.1 Vehicles with mounted shelters or towed trailer type shelters, designed for field or
tactical use, that are employed as tactical SCIFs when deployed may also be used
as a SCIF in nontactical situations if the SIO determines there is a need for more
SCIF area and time and/or funds are not available to construct or enlarge a
permanent SCIF. These types of SCIFs are SEMI-PERMANENT SCIFs
(SPSCIFs).

9.2 The SPSCIF shall be accredited and operated in the same manner as a permanent
SCIF. Requirements for TEMPEST and AIS accreditation apply as well.

9.3 The SPSCIF must be of rigid construction similar to a van, trailer, or transportable
shelter. The construction material must be of such composition to show visible
evidence of forced entry. Vents and air ducts must be constructed to prevent
surreptitious entry. The doors must be solid construction and plumbed so the door
forms a good acoustical seal. If installed, emergency exits and escape hatches must
be constructed so they can only be opened from the interior of the SPSCIF.

9.4 The SPSCIF must be placed within a fenced compound on a military installation or
equivalent, as determined by the CSA. The fence must be at least ten (10) feet
from the SPSCIF and related building and equipment. The distance from the fence
to the SPSCIF may have to be greater to provide acoustical security or to meet
COMSEC or TEMPEST requirements. Access control to the fenced compound
must be continuous.

9.5 All SPSCIFs must have a combination lock that meets all requirements of Federal
Specification FF-L-2740 or other CSA approved lock. (NOTE: Just as with
combinations, keys require protection equivalent to the information which they
protect.)

9.6 SPSCIFs do not need any additional security measures if one of the following
exists:

9.6.1 Continuous operations. Continuous operations exist when the SPSCIF is
occupied by one or more SCl-indoctrinated persons 24 hours a day. When
there are multiple vehicles/shelters within a fenced compound, only those
occupied by one or more SC]-indoctrinated people qualify as continuous
operations facilities.

9.6.2 Dedicated guard force who have been subjected to a trustworthiness
determination (e.g., NAC with no clearance to be issued). The dedicated
guard force must be present whenever the SPSCIF is not occupied and must
have continuous surveillance of the SPSCIF entrances. The guard force must
check the perimeter of the SPSCIF at least twice an hour at random intervals.
Guard response time will be five minutes or less.

UNCLASSIFIED

ner A
UNCLASSIFIED

9.7 SPSCIFs not storing classified material and not meeting one of the requirements in
the above paragraphs may be required to have an Intrusion Detection System (IDS)

as prescribed in ANNEX B as required by the CSA.

9.8 Requirements for storage when unoccupied:

9.8.1 SCI material will not be stored in a SPSCIF except when removal is not
feasible, i.e., computer hard disk.

Cc-9

UNCLASSIFIED

ee

UNCLASSIFIED

9.8.2 Storage in the United States and Outside the United States. If the SPSCIF
does not have continuous operations or a dedicated guard force, an
combination lock that meets all requirements of Federal Specification FF-L-
2740 or other CSA approved lock and an IDS for the SPSCIF interior is
required. The interior SPSCIF IDS must be as prescribed in ANNEX B. The
CSA may require exterior compound IDS.

10.0 ELECTRICAL POWER:

Electrical power supplied to T-SCiFs may be furnished by commercial or locally
generated systems, as follows:

10.1 Tactical generator with access controls, including guards or surveillance of the
generating equipment.

10.1.1 The generating equipment shall be located within the protected perimeter
of the organization supporting the T-SCIF. The generator shall not require
location within the SCIF compound perimeter.

10.1.2 Generator operator and maintenance people shall be US citizens.

10.2 in general, RF filters or isolators are not required for TEMPEST protection of
commercial AC (alternating current) power lines used for SCI processing
equipment in a T-SCIF

10.3 Filtering and isolation generators (an electrical motor coupled to a generator by
non-conductive means) may be used to provide isolated electrical power to the
SCIF. The motor generator location shall be within the SCIF compound
perimeter.

11.0 TEMPEST REQUIREMENTS:

Authority for TEMPEST accreditation of all compartments of SCI processed in a
Tactical SCIF is delegated to the CSA based on review by the Certified TEMPEST
Technical Authority (CTTA).

12.0 TELEPHONE EQUIPMENT:

Telephone instruments used within a T-SCIF shall meet requirements outlined in the
Telephone Security ANNEX. Restrictions contained within the Telephone Security
ANNEX pertaining to SCIF telephone services do not apply to T-SCIF operations during

war.

C-10

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

PART II AIRCRAFT/AIRBORNE OPERATION:

1.0 PURPOSE:

This annex prescribes the physical security procedures for the operation of a Sensitive
Compartmented Information Facility (SCIF) for aircraft, including airborne missions.

2.0 APPLICABILITY:

This annex is applicable to all aircraft to be utilized as a SCIF. Existing or previously
accredited facilities do not require modification to conform with these standards.

3.0 RESPONSIBILITIES:

The CSA is responsible for ensuring compliance with these standards and providing
SCI accreditation. The CSA may delegate aircraft/airborne SCIF accreditation authority to
the major command level
The major command/organization Senior Intelligence Officer (SIO) is responsible when an
aircraft is used as a temporary SCIF in support of field training exercises. During a period
of declared hostilities or general war, an aircraft/airborne SCIF may be established at any
level of accreditation upon the verbal order of a General or Flag Officer Commander. The
major command/organization is responsible for ensuring compliance with this annex.

4.0 ACCREDITATION OF AIRCRAFT/AIRBORNE FACILITIES:

4.1 An accreditation checklist will not be required for the establishment of an aircraft/
airborne SCIF. Approval authorities may require use of a local deployment
checklist, if necessary.

4.2 The element requesting establishment of an aircraft/airborne SCIF will notify the
CSA prior to commencement of SCIF operations. The letter or message will
indicate the following information:

Name of aircraft/airborne SCIF

Major command/organization

ID number of parent SCIF, if applicable

Deployed from (location) and dates

Deployed to (location) and dates

SCI level of operations

Name of exercise or operation

Points of Contact

Type of Aircraft and area to be accredited as a SCIF

Description of security measures for entire operational period of SCIF (SOP)

4.3 The SCIF will be staffed with sufficient personnel as determined by the on-site
security authority based on the local threat environment.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

4.4 SCI material will be removed from the aircraft on mission completion or at any
landings, if feasible. When removal is not possible, or when suitable storage space/
locations are not available, two armed (with ammunition) SCI-indoctrinated
personnel must remain with the aircraft to control entry to the SCIF. Waivers to
the requirement for weapons and ammunition may be approved on a case-by-case
basis by the Commander.

C-il

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

4.5 The SSO or senior SCI-cleared person will conduct an inspection of the vacated
SCIF to ensure SCI materials are not left behind.

4.6 Aircraft that transport SCI material incidental to travel between airfields do not
require accreditation. However, compliance with directives pertaining to security
of SCI material and communications is mandatory.

5,0 POST AND PATROL REQUIREMENTS:

Accredited aircraft require perimeter access controls, a guard force, and a reserve
security team.

5.1 Unless protected by an approved IDS, hourly inspections will be made of all
hatches and seals (including seal numbers).

5.2 A guard force and response team must be provided, capable of responding within
five minutes if open storage is authorized. or 15 minutes for closed storage.

5.3 When aircraft are parked outside an established controlled area, a temporary
controlled area must be established.

6.0 ENTRY HATCHES:
6.1 The aircraft commander or crew members will provide guard force personnel who
have been subjected to a trustworthiness determination (e.g., NAC with no

clearance to he issued) prior to departing from the immediate area of the aircraft.

6.2 All hatches will be locked to prevent unauthorized access. Hatches that cannot be
secured from the outside will be sealed using serially numbered seals.

7.0 TEMPEST REQUIREMENTS:

Authority for TEMPEST accreditation of all compartments of SCI processed in an
aircraft/airborne SCIF is delegated to the CSA, based on review by the Cognizant Certified
TEMPEST Technical Authority (CTTA).

8.0 UNSCHEDULED AIRCRAFT LANDINGS:

8.1 US Military Bases: The local SSO or base security officer will be notified of the
estimated arrival time and security protection required.

8.2 Other Airfields:

8.2.1 Within the United States, the local Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
Security Officer will be notified of the estimated arrival time and security
protection required.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

8.2.2 on arrival, the senior SCI-indoctrinated person is responsible for controlling
entry and maintaining surveillance over the aircraft until all SCI material is
secured in an accredited SCIF or the aircraft departs.

C-12

UNCLASSIFIED

i

UNCLASSIFIED

8.2.3 Any properly accredited US Government scir may be used for temporary
storage of materials from the aircraft. If the facility is not accredited for the
level of information to be stored, the material must be double wrapped with
initialed seals and stored in a GSA-approved security container.

8.3 Unfriendly Territory:
If an aircraft landing in unfriendly territory is anticipated, all SCI material will
be immediately destroyed, with the destruction process preferably taking place
prior to landing.
8.3.1 When flights are planned over unfriendly territory, SCI to be carried on
board will be selected by the intelligence mission personnel and consist of

the absolute minimum required for mission accomplishment.

8.3.2 All personnel will rehearse emergency destruction before each mission.
Such emergency preparation rehearsals will be made a matter of record.

9,0 VOICE TRANSMISSIONS:
SCI discussions will only be conducted via appropriately encrypted aircraft radio.
10.0 DESTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:

10.1 An Emergency Action Plan (EAP) will be written that provides for the
evacuation and/or destruction of classified material. Evacuation plans and
destruction equipment must be approved by the CSA and tested by mission
personnel 10.2 Emergency destruction and evacuation plans will be kept current.

C-13

UNCLASSIFIED

a ee

UNCLASSIFIED

PART III SHIPBOARD OPERATION:

1.0 PURPOSE:

This annex specifies the requirements for construction and security protection of SCIFs
located on ships. The SCI accreditation checklist for ships may be obtained from the
Director, Office of Naval Intelligence, 4301 Suitland Road, Washington, D.C. 20395.

2.0 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE:

2.1 This annex is applicable to all new construction surface combatant ships. The

2.2

application of this annex to surface non-combatants or sub-surface vessels will be
referred to the CSA.

There may be instances in which circumstances constitute a threat of such
proportion that they can only be offset by stringent security arrangements over and
above those prescribed in this annex. Conversely, there may be instances in which
time, location, mission, and/or condition of use of materials would make full
compliance with these standards unreasonable or impossible. Such situations will
be referred to the CSA for resolution on a case-by-case basis.

2.3 Existing or previously approved facilities do not require modification to conform

with these standards

3.0 TYPES OF SHIPBOARD SCIFs (S/SCIFs):

3.1

3.2

Permanent S/SCIFs: An area aboard ship where SCI operations, processing,
discussion, storage, or destruction takes place. The area will have a clearly defined
physical perimeter barrier and continuous physical security safeguards. The area
may contain one or more contiguous spaces requiring SCIF accreditation. This
type S/ SCIF is routinely used during deployment and import operations.

Temporary S/SCIFs: An area aboard ship where temporary SCI operations,
processing, discussion, storage, or discussion takes place. The area will have a
clearly defined physical perimeter barrier and continuous physical security
safeguards. The area may contain one or more contiguous spaces requiring SCIF
accreditation. It will be continuously manned with sufficient SCI-cleared and -
indoctrinated personnel, as determined by the on-site security authority based on
the local threat environment, when SCI is present within the area. Temporary
shipboard SCI operations will he limited to:

3.2.1 A single deployment that will not exceed 12 months.

3.2.2 A single mission requiring SCI operations that cannot be defined in length of
operational time.

3.2.3 During the period immediately preceding relocation of the ship to a refitting
facility where the Temporary S/SCIF is scheduled for renovation and

UNCLASSIFIED

ec
UNCLASSIFIED
compliance with this annex. There will be a schedule established for

renovation of the S/SCIF with confirmatory reporting of such to the CSA.

C-15

UNCLASSIFIED

a

UNCLASSIFIED

3.2.4 Temporary Platforms: A mobile or portable SCIF may be temporarily placed
aboard a ship. Such platforms will be accredited on a temporary basis for a
single deployment mission. The platform will be manned 24 hours a day by
sufficient SCI-cleared and -indoctrinated personnel as determined by the
on-site security authority. At the completion of the mission, the
accreditation period will end and the CSA notified that the platform is

certified clear and free of all SCI materials.

4.0 PERMANENT ACCREDITATION:

Ships requesting permanent accreditation status will provide to the CSA a complete
inspection report and the Shipboard Inspection Checklist, certifying compliance with this

Annex.

5.0 STANDARDS:

The physical security criteria for permanent S/SCIFs is as follows:

5.1 Physical Perimeter: The physical perimeter of an SCI space will be fabricated of
structural bulkheads (aluminum or steel) with a thickness not less than 0.125 inch.
Elements of the physical perimeter will be fully braced and welded in place.

5.2 Continuous SCI Spaces: Where several SCI spaces are contiguous to each other in
any or all dimensions, the entire complex may be enclosed by a single physical
perimeter barrier conforming to this annex.

5.2.1 Access to the SCI complex will be controlled by a single access door
conforming to this annex. Each compartment within the complex may have
a separate access door from within the common physical perimeter barrier.
Such interior access control doors do not need to conform with this annex.

5.2.2 Access procedures will be established to ensure against cross-traffic of
personnel not holding appropriate SCI access.

5.3 Normal Access Door: The normal access door will be a shipboard metal joiner door
with honeycomb-core and fitted as specified below:

5.3.1 Where the normal access door is in a bulkhead that is part of an airtight
perimeter, the airtight integrity may be maintained by colocating the
airtight door with the metal joiner door, or by adding a vestibule.

5.3.2 The metal joiner door will be equipped with a combination lock that meets
all requirements of Federal Specification FF-L-2740 or other CSA approved
lock.

5 3.3 in addition to the lock, the door will be equipped with an access control
device

UNCLASSIFIED

ie ee ee

UNCLASSIFIED

cted in a manner that will preclude unauthorized

5.3.4 The door will be constru
removal of hinge pins and anchor bolts, as well as to obstruct access to lock-

in bolts between door and frame.

C-16

UNCLASSIFIED

a rin

UNCLASSIFIED

5.4 Emergency Exit: The emergency exit will be fabricated of aluminum plate or steel

5.5

in accordance with this annex. The exit will be mounted in a frame braced and
welded in place in a manner commensurate with the structural characteristics of
the bulkhead, deck, or overhead in which it is situated.

Restriction on Damage Control Fittings and Cables: Because of the security
restrictions imposed in gaining access to these spaces, no essential damage control
fittings or cables will be located within or pass through an SCI space. This
requirement is not applicable to damage control fittings, such as smoke dampers,
that may be operated by personnel within the space during normal manning.

5.6 Removable Hatches and Deck Plates: Hatches and deck plates less than 10 square

feet that are secured by exposed nuts and bolts (external to the SCI space) will be
secured with externally attached, high security padlocks (unless their weight
makes removal unreasonable). The padlock keys will be stored in a security
container located within a space under appropriate security control.

5.7 Vent and Duct Barriers: Vents, ducts, or other physical perimeter barrier openings

with a cross-sectional dimension greater than 96 square inches will be protected at
the perimeter with a fixed barrier or security grill.

5.7.1 The grill will be fabricated of steel or aluminum grating or bars with a
thickness equal to the thickness of the physical perimeter barrier. If a
grating is used, bridge center-to-center measurements will not exceed 1.5
inches by 4 inches. Bars will be mounted on 6 inch centers. The grating or
bars will be welded into place.

5.7.2 This requirement is not applicable to through ducts that have no opening
into the space.

5.8 Acoustical Isolation: The physical perimeter barrier of all SCI spaces will be sealed

or insulated with nonhardening caulking material to prevent inadvertent disclosure
of SCI discussions or briefings from within the space, taking into account the
normal ambient noise level, to persons located in adjacent passageways and/or
compartments.

5.8.1 In cases where the perimeter material installation does not sufficiently
attenuate voices or sounds of activities originating SCI information, the
ambient noise level will be raised by the use of sound countermeasure
devices, controlled sound generating source. or additional perimeter material
installation.

5.8.2 Air handling units and ducts will be equipped with silencers or sound
countermeasure devices unless continuous duty blowers provide a practical,
effective level of masking (blower noise) in each air path. The effective level
of security may be determined by stationing personnel in adjacent spaces or
passageways to determine if SCI can be overheard outside the space.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED
5.9 Visual Isolation: Door or other openings in the physical perimeter barrier through
which the interior may be viewed will be screened or curtained.

C-17

UNCLASSIFIED

rec LN

UNCLASSIFIED

6.0 INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM (IDS):
The S/SCIF access door and emergency exit will be protected by a visual and audible
alarm system. The installation will consist of sensors connected at each door and alerting

indicators located at the facility supervisor's position. The normal access door alarm may
have a disconnect feature.

6.1 Emergency exits will be connected to the alarm system at all times and will not
have a disconnect feature installed.

6.2 The IDS will be connected to a remote alarm monitor station, which may be
colocated with other IDS, and located within a space which is continuously

manned by personnel capable of responding to or directing a response to an
alarm violation at the protected space when it is unmanned.

6.3 Primary power for the IDS will be connected to an emergency lighting panel
within the space. SCI spaces that are under continuous manning will be staffed
with sufficient personnel, as determined by the on-site security authority based
on the local threat environment, who have the continuous capability of detecting
forced or surruptitious entry without the aide of an IDS.

7.0 PASSING SCUTTLES AND WINDOWS;:

Passing scuttles and windows will not be installed between SCI spaces and any other
space on the ship.

8.0 LOCATION OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT:

On-line and off-line cryptographic equipment and terminal equipment processing SCI
will be located only within the S/SCIF.

9.0 SECURE STORAGE CONTAINERS:

SCI material will be stored only in GSA approved Class 5, 6, or 7 security containers.
Containers will be welded in place, or otherwise secured to a foundation for safety.

10.0 TELEPHONES;:

Telephone instruments used within a S/SCIF will meet the Telephone Security Annex
standards.

11.0 SECURE TELEPHONE UNIT-III (STU-IID:
The STU-III Type I terminals may be installed within a S/SCIF.

12.0 SOUND POWERED TELEPHONES:

UNCLASSIFIED

of ee

UNCLASSIFIED

Where possible, sound powered telephones will be eliminated from S/SCIFs. Sound
powered telephones located within the S/SCIF connecting to locations outside the S/SCIF
will comply with the following

12.1 The telephone cable will not break out to jackboxes, switchboards, or telephone
sets other than at the designated stations. The telephone cable will not be shared
with any circuit other than call or signal systems associated with the S/SCIF
circuit.

C-18

UNCLASSIFIED

nn

UNCLASSIFIED

12.2 The telephone cable will be equipped with a selector switch, located at the
controlling station, which is capable of:

12.2.1 Disconnecting all stations,
12.2.2 Selecting any one station and disconnecting the remaining stations, and
12.2.3 Parallel connection to all stations.

12.3 Other S/SCIFs located aboard the same ship, which have sound powered
telephones not equipped with the required selector switch, will have a positive
disconnect device attached to the telephone circuit.

12.4 Sound powered telephones within a S/SCIF that are not used for passing SCI
information will have a sign prominently affixed to them indicating that they are
not to be used for passing SCI.

12.5 A call or signal system will be provided. Call signal station, type ID/D, when
used for circuit EM will be modified to provide a disconnect in the line to
prevent a loud-speaker from functioning as a microphone.

13.0 SCI INTERCOM ANNOUNCING SYSTEM:

An intercommunication type announcing system processing SI that connects to or
passes through areas outside the S/SCIF must be approved by the CSA.

14.0 SUPPORTING INTERCOMMUNICATION ANNOUNCING SYSTEMS:

Intercommunication-type announcing systems installed within an S/SCIF that do not
process SCI information will be designated or modified to provide the following physical or
electrical security safeguards:

14.1 Operational mode of the unit installed within the S/SCIF will limit operation to
push-to-talk mode only.

14.2 Receive elements will be equipped with a local amplifier as a buffer to prevent
loud-speakers or earphones from functioning as microphones.

14.3 Except as specified, radio transmission capability for plain radio telephone
(excluding secure voice) will not be connected. Cable conductors assigned to
the transmission of plain language radio telephones will be connected to
ground at each end of the cable

14.4 Equipment modified will have an appropriate field change label affixed to the
unit that indicates the restriction. Additionally, the front panel will have a sign
warning the user that the system is not passing classified information.

UNCLASSIFIED

a
UNCLASSIFIED

15.0 COMMERCIAL INTERCOMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT:

Commercial intercommunication equipment will not be installed within a S/SCIF

without prior CSA approval.

C-19

UNCLASSIFIED

ec

UNCLASSIFIED

16.0 GENERAL ANNOUNCING SYSTEMS:

General announcing system loudspeakers will have an audio amplifier, and the output
signal lines will be installed within the S/SCIF.

17.0 PNEUMATIC TUBE SYSTEMS:

Pneumatic tube systems will not be installed. Existing systems will be equipped with
the following security features:

17.1 Locked cover at both ends.

17.2 Capability to maintain the pressure or vacuum and capability to lock in the
secure position at the initiating end.

17.3 Direct voice communications link between both ends to confirm the
transportation and receipt of passing cartridges.

17.4 Special, distinctive color for SCI material passing cartridges.

17.5 Pneumatic tubes will run through passageways and will be capable of being
visually inspected along their entire length.

18.0 DESTRUCTION EQUIPMENT:

A CSA-approved means of destruction of SCI material will be provided for each
S/SCIF. Non-combatant surface ships that transit hostile waters without combatant escort
will have appropriate Anti-compromise Emergency Destruction (ACED) equipment on
board and such equipment will be prepared for use. The ACED will be dedicated to SCI
destruction. SCI material will not be destroyed by jettisoning overboard under any
circumstances.

19.0 EMERGENCY POWER:

A S/SCIF will have emergency power available that will operate destruction
equipment, alarm systems, access control devices, and emergency lighting equipment for a
minimum of six hours.

20.0 SCI PROCESSING SYSTEMS:

A S/SCIF that processes SCI electronically or electrically should be provided a
TEMPEST evaluation prior to activation. All computer and network systems that process
SCI must be accredited or certified for operation by the cognizant SCI AIS Accreditation
Authority.

21.0 TEMPORARY ACCREDITATION:

UNCLASSIFIED

Se

UNCLASSIFIED

tation status will be processed for accreditation upon

Ships requiring temporary accredi
spection and certification of compliance with the

completion of a physical security in
following security requirements:

21.1 if the space is used to electrically process SCI information, the CSA will make a
TEMPEST evaluation based on threat.

C-20

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

21.2 The physical perimeter barrier will consist of standard structural, nonsupport,
or metal joiner bulkheads welded or riveted into place and meet the acoustical
isolation requirements of a S/SCIF.

21.3 Doors will be at least metal joiner doors equipped with door closures and
capable of being secured from the inside. Dutch doors are not acceptable. If
cryptographic equipment is installed or stored within the space and the space
will be temporarily unmanned while cryptographic key material and/or SCI
material are stored else-where, the door will be equipped with a tamper-proof
hasp and combination pad-lock.

21.4 Doors and other openings in the perimeter that permit aural or visual
penetration of the internal space will be screened. curtained. or blocked.

21.5 An effective, approved secure means of destruction of SCI material will be
readily available in the space or nearby in general service spaces.

21.6 Cryptographic equipment used to process SCI information will be located in the
SCI space or, if located in a secure processing center other than that accredited
for SCI, will be electrically configured so as not to be compatible with the
secure processing system of that secure processor.

21.7 All telephones (to include STU-III instruments and sound powered telephones)
will be as specified for S/SCIFs.

21.8 Processing of SCI via AIS will be as specified for S/SCIFs.
22.0 TEMPORARY SECURE WORKING AREAS (TSWAs):
Ships requiring TSWA accreditation for "contingency" or “part-time” usage will be
processed for accreditation upon completion of a physical security inspection and

certification of compliance with the following security requirements:

22.1 The physical perimeter barrier requires no special construction, provided it can
prevent visual and aural access during all periods of SCI operation.

22.2 Doors will be capable of being secured from the inside.

22.3 Provisions will be made for posting a temporary sign that reads "RESTRICTED
AREA - KEEP OUT - AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY" .

22.4 When SCI material is to be stored in the space, a secure storage container will
be provided. Security storage containers will be welded in place, or otherwise
secured to the foundation for safety and to prevent rapid removal.

92.5 The electrical security requirements for a shipboard TSWA will be specified by
the CSA.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

C-21

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

23.0 EMBARKED PORTABLE SHIPBOARD COLLECTION VANS (PSCVs):

PSCVs are vans that are temporarily placed aboard ship and not part of the permanent
structure of the ship. Ships requiring accreditation of embarked PSCVs must be annually
accredited by the CSA and may be activated upon certification to the CSA of compliance
with the following security requirements:

23.1

The exterior surface of the van will be solid construction and capable of
showing evidence of physical penetration (except for intended passages for
antenna cables, power lines, etc.)

23.2 The access door will fit securely and be equipped with a substantial locking

device to secure the door from the inside in order to prevent forcible entry
without tools.

23.3 Adequate security measures will be established to preclude viewing of classified

23.4

23.5

23.6

23.7

material by uncleared personnel.

Adequate provisions will be established to control the approach of uncleared
personnel within the vicinity of the van. These measures will consist of
instructions promulgated by the station (ashore and afloat) in which the van is
embarked, prohibiting loitering in the immediate vicinity of the van, and will
include periodic visual security cheeks by appropriately SCI-indoctrinated
personnel.

Adequate destruction equipment will be available and effective procedures
established to ensure rapid and complete destruction of classified material in
emergency situations.

All SCI material will be stored within the van and continuously manned by
sufficient SCI-indoctrinated personnel as determined by the on-site security
authority based on the local threat environment, when activated for SCI
support. If SCI material is to be stored outside the van, the space must be
accredited by the CSA and be in compliance with the above S/SCIF criteria.

The electrical security requirements for a PSCV will be as specified by the
CSA.

C-22

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE 1/21

ANNEX D
(Effective 30 January 1994)

PART I

ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT IN SENSITIVE COMPARTMENTED FACILITIES
(SCIFS)

1.0 INTRODUCTION

It is the policy of the Director of Central Intelligence and the Senior Officials of the
Intelligence Community (SOICs) that personally owned electronic equipment that has been
approved for introduction into a SCIF should not be routinely carried into or out of the
SCIF due to the possibility of technical compromise. It is also their policy that electronic
equipment that is introduced into a SCIF is subject to technical and/or physical inspection
at any time.

2.0 GUIDANCE

The following guidance is provided concerning the control of electronic equipment.
SOICs retain the authority to apply more stringent requirements as deemed appropriate.

2.1 DOMESTIC UNITED STATES

The following personally owned electronic equipment may be introduced into a
SCIF:

2.1.1 Electronic calculators, electronic spell-checkers, wrist watches, and data
diaries. NOTE: If equipped with data-ports, SOICs will ensure that
procedures are established to prevent unauthorized connector to automated
information systems that are processing classified information.

2.1.2 Receive only pagers and beepers.

2.1.3 Audio and video equipment with only a "playback" feature (no recording
capability), or with the “record” feature disabled/removed.

2.1.4 Radios
2.1.5 PROHIBITED EXCEPT FOR OFFICIAL DUTY

The following items are prohibited unless approved by the SOIC for conduct
of official duties:

2.1.5.1 Two-way transmitting equipment.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.1,5.2 Recording equipment (audio, video, optical). Associated media will
he controlled

2.1.5.3 Test, measurement, and diagnostic equipment.

D-i
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.1.6 PROHIBITED IN SCIFs
The following items are prohibited in SCIFs:

2.1.6.1 Personally owned photographic, video, and audio recording
equipment.

2.1.6.2 Personally owned computers and associated media.
2.2 OVERSEAS

The provisions in paragraphs 2.1.5 and 2.1.6 above apply in the overseas
environment with the exception that all personally owned electronic equipment
may be introduced in the SCIF ONLY with the prior approval of the SOIC and on-
site security representative, based on local threat conditions.

D-2

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE 1/21

ANNEX D
Part II

DISPOSAL OF LASER TONER CARTRIDGES
1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Director of Central Intelligence and the Senior Officials of the Intelligence
Community (SOICs) hereby establish the policy and procedures for disposing of used laser
toner cartridges and drums. The policy established herein is based on the fact that
exploitation of used toner cartridges is considered to be unlikely at this time; therefore, the
expense of destroying toner cartridges is not deemed to be justified. SOICs are responsible
for implementation of this policy within their respective department/agency. When deemed
necessary and appropriate, SOICs may establish additional security measures.

2.0 POLICY
2.1 WITHIN CONUS, ALASKA, AND HAWAII

Used toner cartridges may be treated, handled, stored, and disposed of as
UNCLASSIFIED, if, at a minimum, at least five full pages of Unclassified,
randomly generated text are run through the machine before the cartridge is
removed. These pages should not include any blank spaces or solid black areas.

2.2 OVERSEAS

In addition to the sanitization measure described in paragraph 1, the drum must be
adequately scored with an abrasive substance, e.g., sandpaper, to further reduce the
opportunity for image recovery by rendering the drum unusable.

3.0 DENIAL OF ACCESS

3.1 The most likely avenue of technical penetration of reproduction equipment is
through uncleared personnel. If exploitation of equipment is of concern to a
SOIC, it is recommended that maintenance be conducted by appropriately
cleared individuals. If this is not feasible, maintenance workers should be US
citizens or be escorted and closely monitored by knowledgeable personnel.

3.2 In keeping with Environmental Protection Agency policy,
agencies/departments are encouraged to establish procedures for recycling
properly sanitized toner cartridges.

D-3

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21

ANNEX E
(Effective 30 January 1994)

ACOUSTICAL CONTROL AND SOUND MASKING TECHNIQUES
1.0 Basic Design:

Acoustical protection measures and sound masking systems are designed to protect SCI
against being inadvertently overheard by the casual passerby, not to protect against
deliberate interception of audio. The ability of a SCIF structure to retain sound within the
perimeter is rated using a descriptive value, the Sound Transmission Class (STC).

1.1 The STC Rating: STC is a single number rating used to determine the sound
barrier performance of walls. ceilings. floors, windows, and doors.

1.2 Use of Sound Groups: The current edition of Architectural Graphics Standards
(AGS) describes various types of sound control, isolation requirements and office
planning. The AGS established Sound Groups I through 4, of which Groups 3 and
4 are considered adequate for specific acoustical security requirements for SCIF
construction

1.2.1 Sound Group I - STC of 30 or better. Loud speech can be understood fairly
well. Normal speech cannot be easily understood.

1.2.2 Sound Group 2 - STC of 40 or better. Loud speech can be heard, but is
hardly intelligible. Normal speech can be heard only faintly if at all.

1.2.3 Sound Group 3 - STC of 45 or better. Loud speech can be faintly heard but
not understood. Normal speech is unintelligible.

1.2.4 Sound Group 4 - STC of 50 or better. Very loud sounds, such as loud
singing, brass musical instruments or a radio at full volume, can be heard
only faintly or not at all.

2.0 Sound Reduction for SCIFs:

The amount of sound energy reduction may vary according to individual facility
requirements. However, Sound Group ratings shall be used to describe the effectiveness of
SCIF acoustical security measures afforded by various wall materials and other building
components.

2.1 All SCIF perimeter walls shall meet Sound Group 3, unless additional protection is
required for amplified sound.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED
2.2 If compartmentation is required within the SCIF, the dividing office walls must

meet Sound Group 3.

E-1

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

3.0 Sound Masking and Stand-Off Distance:

3.1 When normal construction and baffling measures have been determined to be
inadequate for meeting Sound Group 3 or 4, as appropriate, sound masking shall
be employed. Protection against interception of SCI discussions may include use of
sound masking devices, structural enhancements, or SCIF perimeter placement.

3.1.1 Sound masking devices may include vibration and noise generating systems
located on the perimeter of the SCIF.

3.1.2 Structural enhancements may include the use of high density building
materials (i.e. sound deadening materials) to increase the resistance of the
perimeter to vibration at audio frequencies.

3.1.3 SCIF perimeter placement may include construction design of a stand-off
distance between the closest point a non-SCI indoctrinated person could be
positioned and the point when SCI discussions become available for
interception. Use of a perimeter fence or protective zone between the SCIF
perimeter walls and the closest "listening place" is permitted as an
alternative to other sound protection measures.

3.2. Masking of sound which emanates from an SCI discussion area is commonly done
by a sound masking system. A sound masking system may utilize a noise
generator, tape, disc or record player as a noise source and an amplifier and
speakers or transducers for distribution.

4.0 Placement of Speakers and Transducers:

To be effective, the masking device must produce sound at a higher volume on the
exterior of the SCIF than the voice conversations within the SCIF. Speakers/transducers
should be placed close to or mounted on any paths which would allow audio to leave the
area. These paths may include doors, windows, common perimeter walls, vents/ducts, and
any other means by which voice can leave the area.

4.1 For common walls, the speakers/transducers should be placed so the sound
optimizes acoustical protection.

4.2 For doors and windows, the speakers/transducers should be close to the aperture of
the window or door and the sound projected in a direction facing away from
conversations.

4.3 Once the speakers or transducers are optimally placed, the system volume must be
set and fixed. The level for each speaker should be determined by listening to
conversations occurring within the SCIF and the masking sound and adjusting the
level until conversations are unintelligible from outside the SCIF.

5.0 Installation of Equipment:

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED
5. I The sound masking system and all wires and transducers shall be located within
the perimeter of the SCIF.

E-2

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

5.2 The sound masking system shall be subject to review during TSCM evaluations to
ensure that the system does not create a technical security hazard.

6.0 Sound Sources:

The sound source must be obtained from a player unit located within the SCIF. Any
device equipped with a capability to record ambient sound within the SCIF must have that
capability disabled. Acceptable methods include:

6.1 Audio amplifier with a record turntable.

6.2 Audio amplifier with a cassette, reel-to-reel, Compact Disc (CD), or Digital Audio
Tape (DAT) playback unit.

6.3 Integrated amplifier and playback unit incorporating any of the above music
sources.

7.0 Emergency Notification Systems:

The introduction of electronic systems that have components outside the SCIF should
be avoided. Speakers or other transducers, which are part of a system that is not wholly
contained in the SCIF, are sometimes required to be in the SCIF by safety or fire
regulations. In such instances, the system can be introduced if protected as follows:

7.1 All incoming wiring shall breach the SCIF perimeter at one point. TEMPEST or
TSCM concerns may require electronic isolation.

7.2 in systems that require notification only, the system shall have a high gain buffer
amplifier. In systems that require two-way communication, the system shall have
electronic isolation. SCIF occupants should be alerted when the system is
activated. All electronic isolation components shall be installed within the SCIF
as near to the point of SCIF egress as possible.

E-3

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21

ANNEX F
(Effective 30 January 1994)

PERSONNEL ACCESS CONTROLS
1.0 Access Controls:

The SCIF perimeter entrance should be under visual control at all times during duty
hours to preclude entry by unauthorized personnel. This may be accomplished by several
methods (e.g., employee work station, guard, CCTV). Regardless of the method utilized, an
access control system shall be used on the SCIF entrance. Persons not SCI-indoctrinated
shall be continuously escorted within a SCIF by an SCl-indoctrinated person who is
familiar with the security procedures of that SCIF.

1.1 Automated Access Control Systems: An automated access control system may be
used to control admittance to SCIFs during working hours in lieu of visual control,
if it meets the criteria stated below.

1.1.1 The automated access control system must identify an individual and
authenticate that person's authority to enter the area through the use of an
identification (ID) badge or card, or by personal identity verification.
Automated identification of individuals exiting the area is desirable.

1.1.1.1 ID Badges or Cards. The ID badge or card must use embedded
sensors, integrated circuits, magnetic stripes or other means of
encoding data that identifies the facility and the individual to whom
the card is issued

1.1.1.2 Personal Identity Verification. Personal identity verification (Bio-
metrics Device) identifies the individual requesting access by some
unique personal characteristic, such as:
(a) Fingerprinting,
(b) Hand Geometry,
(c) Handwriting,
(d) Retina, or
(e) Voice recognition.

1.1.2 in conjunction with 1. above, a personal identification number (PIN) is
required. The PIN must be separately entered into the system by each
individual using a keypad device and shall consist of four or more digits,
randomly selected, with no known or logical association with the
individual. The PIN must be changed when it is believed to have been
compromised or subjected to compromise.

UNCLASSIFIED

a ee

UNCLASSIFIED

Manufacturers of automated access control equipment or devices must assure in writing that their
system will meet the following standards before CSA's may favorably consider such systems: Chances
of an unauthorized individual gaining access through normal operation of the equipment are no more
than one in ten thousand; Chances of an authorized individual being rejected for access through
normal operation of the equipment are no more than one in one thousand.

F-l

UNCLASSIFIED

oe ee eee

UNCLASSIFIED

1.1.3 Authentication of the individual's authorization to enter the area must be
accomplished within the system by the inputs from the ID badge/card or the
personal identity verification device or the keypad with an electronic data
base of individuals authorized into the area. A procedure must be established
for removal of the individual's authorization to enter the area upon
reassignment, transfer or termination, or when the individual's access is
suspended, revoked. or downgraded to a level lower than required.

1.1.4 Physical security protection must be established and continuously maintained
for all devices/equipment that constitute the system The level of protection
may vary depending upon the type of devices/equipment being protected with
the basic intent of utilizing the security controls already in effect within the
facility.

1.1.4.1 Locations where authorization data, card encoded data and personal

identification or verification data is input, stored, or recorded must be
protected within a SCIF or controlled by SCI indoctrinated personnel.

1.1.4.2 Card readers, keypads, communication or interface devices located
outside the entrance to a controlled area shall have tamper resistant
enclosures, and be securely fastened to a wall or other structure.
Control panels located within a controlled area shall require only a
minimal degree of physical security protection sufficient to preclude
unauthorized access to the mechanism.

1.1.4.3 Keypad devices shall be designed or installed in such a manner that
an unauthorized person in the immediate vicinity cannot observe the
selection of input numbers.

1.1.4.4 Systems that utilize transmission lines to carry access authorizations,
personal identification, or verification data between devices/
equipment located outside the controlled area shall receive a
minimum of Class It line supervision, as described in Annex B.

1.1.4.5 Electric strikes used in access control systems shall be heavy duty
industrial grade.

1.1.5 Access to records and information concerning encoded ID data and PINs
shall be restricted to individuals appropriately indoctrinated at the same level
as the information contained within. Access to identification or authorization
data, operating system software or any identifying data associated with the
access control system shall be limited to the fewest number personnel as
possible. Such data or software shall be kept secure when unattended.

1.1.6 Records shall be maintained reflecting active assignment of ID badge/card,
PIN, level of access, access, and similar system-related records. Records
concerning personnel removed from the system shall be retained for 90 days.
Records of entries to SCIFs shall be retained for at least 90 days or until

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED
investigations of system violations and incidents have been successfully
resolved and recorded.

F-2

UNCLASSIFIED

1.2

UNCLASSIFIED

1.1.7 Personnel entering or leaving an area shall be required to immediately secure
the entrance or exit point. Authorized personnel who permit another
individual to enter the area are responsible for confirming the individual's
access and need to know.

Electric, Mechanical, or Electromechanical Access Control Devices. Electric,
mechanical, or electromechanical devices which meet the criteria stated below may
be used to control admittance to SCIF areas during working hours if the entrance
is under visual control. These devices are also acceptable to control access to
compartmented areas within the SCIF. Access control devices must be installed in
the following manner:

1.2.1 The electronic control panel containing the mechanical mechanism by which
the combination is set will be located inside the SCIF. The control panel
(located within the SCIF) will require only a minimal degree of physical
security designed to preclude unauthorized access to the mechanism.

1.2.2 The control panel shall be installed in such a manner, or have a
shielding device mounted, so that an unauthorized person in the
immediate vicinity cannot observe the setting or changing of the
combination.

1.2.3 The selection and setting of the combination shall be accomplished by
an individual cleared at the same level as the highest classified
information continued within. The combination shall be changed as
required in Chapter 2.6.

1.2.4 Electrical components, wiring included, or mechanical links (cables,
rods and so on) should be accessible only from inside the SCIF, or if
they traverse an uncontrolled area they shall be secured within a
protective covering-to preclude surreptitious manipulation of
components.

F-3

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE DIRECTIVE (DCID) 1/21

ANNEX G
(Effective 29 July 1994)

TELEPHONE SYSTEMS and EQUIPMENT

1.0 PURPOSE

This Annex specifies the requirements and procedures for systematically incorporating
Telephone Security Group (TSG) approved telephone security measures into the planning,
installation, maintenance, and management of telephone service for SCIFs within and
outside the United States.

2.0 DEFINITIONS

2.1

ADMINISTRATIVE TELEPHONE. A telephone intended for Unclassified
conversation. This designation specifically excludes secure-voice systems unless
they incorporate a non-secure mode of operation.

2.2 DISCONNECT DEVICE. A device that [1] inserts a break at some point in the

normal hardwire conduction path that exists between a telephone and its
telecommunications medium, and [2] only when the telephone is in the in-use (off-
hook) state, establishes a temporary metallic connection across that break.

2.3 ISOLATOR. A device that [I] inserts a break at some point in the normal hardwire

conduction path that exists between a telephone and its telecommunications
medium, and [2] only when the telephone is in the in-use (off-hook) state, provides
a temporary communication channel across that break without establishing an end
to end metallic connection.

2.4 OFF-HOOK. A terminal is off-hook when its signaling protocol to its network

2.5

2.6

controller specifies that there is an intention to initiate, accept, or maintain
communications with some other terminal.

ON-HOOK. This condition refers to a network communications line and
simultaneously to all the terminals connected to that line. A terminal is on-hook
when it is not off-hook; its signaling protocol to its network controller specifies
that there is no intention to initiate, accept, or maintain communications with any
other line or terminal. For a telephone to be considered on-hook, the handset must
be in the handset cradle and all speakerphone and hands-free functions must be
turned off.

TECHNICAL SURVEILLANCE COUNTERMEASURES (TSCM). Techniques
and measures used to detect and nullify hostile penetration technologies, which are
used to obtain unauthorized access to sensitive information. TSCM also includes
the development and use of protective systems to detect and/or deter hostile
penetration attempts and the hostile exploitation of naturally occurring hazards.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.7 TELEPHONE SYSTEM. The telephone installation that provides service to the
SCIF, and includes but is not limited to: all equipment, hardware, wiring, features,
software, and supporting systems.

G-l

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

2.8 TSG. The TSG (Telephone Security Group) is the primary technical and policy
resource in the National Advisory Group/Security Countermeasures (NAG/SCM)
structure for all aspects of the TSCM program that involve telephones or telephone
systems.

2.9 TYPE-ACCEPTED TELEPHONES. These are specially configured telephone
models that are warranted by their manufacturers to incorporate specific TSG-
mandated security measures. On-hook telephone security protection is an intrinsic
property for TYPE-ACCEPTED TELEPHONES and they may be installed without
ancillary isolation or disconnect devices. (See Standard 6.)

2.10 UNATTENDED OFF-HOOK AUDIO SECURITY. Security measures intended to
prevent the compromise of background conversations when the user temporarily
leaves the instrument off-hook. (See Standard 1.)

3.0 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE

3.1 Administrative telephone system installations must include security measures that
balance the vulnerabilities of the system against the technical threats of its
environment.

3.2 This Annex is compatible with but may not satisfy requirements of other security
disciplines such as COMSEC, OPSEC, or TEMPEST.

3.3 The telephone security measures of this Annex apply to any telephone system that
provides service to a SCIF.

3.4 This Annex does not apply if the SCIF is declared a "No Classified Discussion
Area" and warning notices are posted prominently within the SCIF.

4.0 REFERENCES

The below-listed TSG standards are available to all members of the United States
Intelligence Community from their respective cognizant security authorities (CSAs).
Individual standards may be released to non-government personnel following CSA
determination of the need. Any such release is to be accompanied by a letter identifying the
standard as an of official US Government document that may not be disseminated further
without specific approval of the issuing agency.

4.1 Standard 1, Introduction to Telephone Security. Provides telephone security
back-ground and TSG-approved options for telephone installations in US
Government sensitive discussion areas. For use by all personnel concerned with
telephone security.

4.2 Standard 2, TSG Guidelines for Computerized Telephone Systems. Establishes
requirements for planning, installing, maintaining, and managing a CTS. For
personnel involved in writing contracts, planning, installing, maintaining,
inspecting, and system administration.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

4.3 Standard 3, Type-Accepted Program for Telephones Used Edith the
Conventional Central Office Interface. Identifies a program that outlines
specifications for design and manufacture and procedures required for type-
acceptance. For personnel involved in writing contracts, manufacturing, and

inspecting.

G-2

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

4.4 Standard 4, Type-Acceptance Program for Electronic Telephones Used in
Computerized Telephone Systems. Identifies a program that outlines specifications
for design and manufacture and procedures required for type-acceptance. For
personnel involved in writing contracts, manufacturing, and inspecting.

4.5 Standard 5, On-Hook Telephone Audio Security Performance Specifications.
Specifies the amount. of audio leakage allowed in the on-hook condition of
telephones without disconnects. For personnel involved in writing contracts,
manufacturing, and inspecting telephones such as STU-IIs.

4.6 Standard 6, Telephone Security Group-Approved Equipment. Lists TSG-approved
equipment. For all personnel concerned with procurement and use of TSG-
approved equipment.

4.7 Standard 7, TSG Guidelines for Cellular Telephones. Provides guidelines for the
manufacture and use of secure and non-secure cellular telephones in US
Government sensitive discussion areas. For personnel involved in writing
contracts, manufacturing, inspecting, maintaining, and using cellular telephones.

4.8 Standard 8, Microphonic Response Criteria for Non-Communications Devices.
Specifies the maximum audio response allowed for isolation devices and other
non-communication equipment used in US Government sensitive discussion areas.
For personnel involved in writing contracts, manufacturing, installing, and
inspecting telephone-related equipment.

4.9 Standard 9, TSG Approval Program for Secure Telephones and Equipment That
Connect to the Conventional Central Office Interface. Specifies TSG requirements
for secure telephones and equipment interfacing with the conventional central
office. For personnel involved in writing contracts, manufacturing, and inspecting
TSG approved telephones.

5.0 RESPONSIBILITIES

5.1 TSG: The TSG is responsible for evaluating vulnerabilities of telephone systems
and identifying security countermeasures.

5.2 CSA: The CSA is responsible for selecting, implementing, and verifying security
measures to balance the vulnerabilities of the telephone system against the

technical threats of its environment. This requires the CSA to:

5.2.1 Assist Special Security Officers (SSOs) and Contractor Special Security
Officers (CSSOs) in selecting the most cost effective countermeasures.

5.2.2 Maintain a current set of TSG standards.

5.2.3 Provide written waivers to any requirements of this Annex and TSG
standards. In granting waivers, the CSA accepts full responsibility for the
associated risks

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

5.2.4 Request technical surveillance countermeasures (TSCM) inspections as
conditions warrant to prevent the loss or compromise of intelligence sources
and methods, including sensitive compartmented information, through
adversary use of technical surveillance.

5.3 SSO/CSSO: The SSO/CSSO is responsible for requesting CSA approval for new
telephone systems and major modifications to existing systems by:

5.3.1 Submitting necessary documentation on new systems and any changes to
existing systems to the CSA for evaluation.

5.3.2 Maintaining the documentation on-site.
6.0 REQUIREMENTS
6.1 ACCESS CONTROL: Installation and maintenance personnel will possess the
appropriate security clearance as determined by the CSA. Uncleared installation

and maintenance personnel given access to the SCIF should be US citizens and
will be monitored by escorts.

6.2 CABLE CONTROL:

6.2.1 All telephone wire and fiber optic (fiber) conductor cables should enter the
SCIF through a common opening.

6.2.2 Each conductor should be accurately accounted for from the point of entry.
The accountability should identify the precise use of every conductor
through labeling, log, or journal entries.

6.2.3 Unused conductors will be removed. If removal is not feasible, the CSA
may require that metallic conductors be stripped, bound together, and
grounded.

6.2.4 Unused fiber conductors will be uncoupled from the interface within the
CLEF

6.3 ON-HOOK SECURITY:
Approved points of on-hook isolation may be provided by any of the following:

6.3.1 The telephone, disconnect, or isolator, if TSG approved. Standard 6,
available from the CSA, lists TSG-approved equipment and ordering
information.

6.3.2 The telephone switch, if it meets the requirements of Standard 2.

UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED

6.3.3 With CSA approval, isolation may be provided by the telephone switch not
meeting TSG Standard 2 provided that:

6.3.3.1 Access to the facility housing the telephone switch is controlled.

G-4

UNCLASSIFIED

ee A

UNCLASSIFIED

6.3.3.2 All communication fines between the telephone switch and the SCIF
are in controlled space and inspectable by government or contractor
security personnel and technically qualified telephone personnel

6.3.3.3 No SCIF telephone or other device with a speaker can be forced
“off-hook-' via a software command from the telephone switch or
forced to remain “off-hook" after a user has terminated the
conversation.

6.4 OFF-HOOK SECURITY:
Unattended off-hook security may be accomplished by one of the following:

6.4.1 Use of a hold or mute feature that does not allow audio from the telephone
to leave the controlled area

6.4.2 A push-to-operate handset will be required if an appropriate hold feature is
not available. (See Standard 6.)

6.5 RESTRICTIONS.

6.5.1 Personally owned equipment that can interface with the telephone system is
prohibited.

6.5.2 Speakerphones are designed to pick up and transmit nearby conversation
when they are in use. Therefore, speakerphones are restricted from
common-use office areas where sensitive conversations might be
unknowingly intercepted. Prior CSA approval is required for
speakerphones in sole-use offices.

6.5.3 Telephone Answering Devices (T ADs) may have features which are
security vulnerabilities, e.g., remote room monitoring. Prior CSA approval
is required for TADs.

G-5

UNCLASSIFIED
