The Situation in Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000027105, dated 1 October 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000027105).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

APU CED LE Pehle ees DE De eer Spa te BB be any nig
AS Papers mre oM abet

mi PERTAIN! BS SU BH
PRAT Ma ae © ph ten eee es
eer een “ta 2 wees Sie eee os Aiea Be pecetstaete!

fe
c]
S tha} FY
wee
3 hey

Mae eee big - ® ? 8502 SNTE 85-58
_ a 24 November 3958
. a ak SENOV ISSR

ae ene et ee eS a Oe
eas i : a he

a bi . _?
oo a28 SPECIAL a? 2
tet NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
4+ « 4 NUMBER 85-58 -

ae,

ah

"a “
r, ad ie & he 4 Law
* s Fy s ; -

BA THE SITUATION IN CUBA”

= z “4 ° © wi
" ) Sudmitted by tre
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
-s The following intellipence organtzations participated tn the

<4 _ preparation of this estimale: The Central Inteligerce Agency
me and the fiielligence organizations of the Depcriments of
Spree ee ; - State, the Army, the Navy, tie dir Force, and The Jotnt &taZ.

vee sis on Concurred in By the
ei : e. UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

eS on 2¢ November 1058 Concurring were The Director of In-
“ey  felligence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant
ces Chie! of Biafl for Intelligence, Department of the drmy; te
s Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelliger.ce, Depart-
. ment of the Novy; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence,
te USAF; the Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff; the
ee .  Aasistant to the Secretary of Defense, Bpecial Operations;
—— and the Director ef the National Security Agency. Tae
ate Atomic Enerpy Commission Representative to the US/B and
ee “8s 5 the deststant Director, Federal Bureau of Investipation, ed-
aa "= “stained, the ewbject Being outside of their Jurisdiction.

Sabet . . a Ye rR - : ;
Ss 7 see * 2 os rs iss *, ee 4 ! ar & i t oro
bt on ‘

i a! Oe

‘. aes ee a 7

tag . ’ ial ;
thee. a7ot, a. ai- ce: me Se
anor - way, “ES ve e

wa ‘ re) ao F Foaow.
Sie. ee de wee 8 | tqr Reigas®
te Mere eee ae ; Appoowg 1 OC1 28! ff Por ok

als + it i i 2 at} Bova : pete
ee - f , or
=
ete | ee
wu Tae a
for PRI Oe

woe Fe ee ae! as

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY mee

+
PF eaeiell

e8e ere DISSEMINATION NOTICE 0 «Oe es
) .. - aa: . me Pol gt ¢
1. This estimate was disseminated by the Cexsiral Intelligence Agency. This copy

is for the information and use of the recipient indicated on the front cover and of Fer-

| gons under his furisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination

inay be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

&. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
c. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, for the Department of
the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Alr Force
@. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff
#. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FEI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
h. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, for the Depart-
ment cf Defense
A Director of the NSA, for the National Security Agency
§. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CLA, for any other Department or
Agency a
2. This copy may be retasned, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appu-
cable security repulations, or returned to the Centra) Intelligence Agency by arrange
twoent with the OCffic2 of Centra) Reference, CLA.

8. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one sear. At the end of this period, the estimate should
ejther be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission ahould be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with 1AC-D-49/2, 22
June 1853. Sof

4. The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, ahould be classified:
| FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WARNING
This materia! contains information affecting
the Nationa) Defense of the United Btates
within the meaning of the esplonage laws,
Title 18, DSC, Becs. 793 and 764, the trans-
(i+ @ "ro" entssion or revelation of which in any manner
ees to an onautborized person ts prohibited by lew,

as 8 “~ wey.
= oa es! 4 roads ¥ ; “ * 4 ’ f pe * ; ‘

tr =
. * 7 * ’ - aft.

DISTRIBUTION:

White House 7

National Becurity Counce) .
Department of Btata ..-. At. te: ; ee Se a a
Department of Delenne

Operations Coordinating Board . .

Atomic Energy Commiasion :

Federa) Bureau of investigation

he ye me weep: “

THE SITUATION IN CUBA’

THE PROBLEM
To analyze the present situation in Cuba and to estimate probable developments

for the next few months.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The 3 November national elections and
the prospective {nauguration of Rivero
Aguero on 24 February have had little
effect on the political and military im-
passe in Cuba. Rebel leader Fidel Castro
fs continuing his guerrilla warfare cam-
paign, but his movement, in combination
with other existing opposition groups,
probably cannot overthrow the govern-
ment in the next few months. On the
other hand, the Cuban armed forces can-
not suppress the guerrilla roovement
unless they become better trained, sup-
plied, and equipped, and more strongly
rootivated, ard unless the rebel forces are
effectively isolated from externa! supply
sources.

2. The Cuban armed forces remain, how-
ever, the most important element capable
of breaking the political deadlock, by de-
posing the regime and establishing a
junta. A group within the military would
be likely to take such action if there were
@ sharp increase in popular or labor op-
position to the regime. A military-dom-

*Title of this estimate when wed alone ebould be
“Tor Official Use Only.”

inated junta almost certainly could not
restore peace to Cuba within the period
of this estimate unless its membership

and actions were such as to convince the .

revolutionary opposition that it was pre-
pared to accord it @ significant influence
in the provisional government.®

"The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army, and the Assistant Chief
of Gta, Intelligence, Department of the Alr
, Force, Would have conclusion 2 read:

: “The Cuban military remains the most tm-
portant element capable of breaking the po-
Dtical and military deadlock and restoring
order in Cuba. Politically (Au mipht require
Geposing the regime and establishing a funta.
A group Within the military would be Likely
te take such ection YW there were a aharp tp-
crease in popular or labor oppodtion to the
regime. Bacepi through military operations,
which would require early receipt of extensive
military aid and aasistance, @ milltary-dom.-
in.ted junta almost certainly could pot re-
glove peace to Cuba within the period of this
estimate unless its membership and actions
were guch 6s to convince the revolutionary
opposition that it was prepared to accord it
6 significant influence in the providonal gov-

~~?

DISCUSSION

A. The Strengths and Weoknesses of Fidel
Costro’s “26 of July Movement”®

8. To date, Fidel Castro bas been wneble to
arouse sufficient popular support to overthrow
the Batista regime, but the regime has itaelf
been unable te prevent the expansion of Cas-
tro’s guerrilla operations. The 26 of July
Movement now dominates most of the rural]
area of the Orlente Province and gmal groups
of rebels also operate in other puris of the
island. Since 1956, Castro’s armed forces have
grown from @ handful] of Cuban dlibusters to
their present estimated strength of upwards
of 5.000 men. Although still unable to cha)-
lenge the army in sustained combat in open
terrain, they have performed effectively as
guerrillas. They have virtually paralyzed Jand
transport within Oriente, including an effec-
tive land blockade of Santiago, the second city
of Cubs. They have aiso held smal} towns in
the province for c* wt periods of time. In
the neighboring pro.sce of Camaguey, the
rebels control some rus #reas and have in-
terfered with transportatios. The activities
of the movement are being ex; anded in the
central and extreme western provinces. A
rebel underground organization operates in
many cities and acts as Uaison with other op-
position groups, both in and outside of Cuba.
The movement has supporting organizations
in the US and in severa) Latin American coun-
tries, notably Venezuela and Mexico, from
which it has received significant financla] and
logistica] support.
4. In July 1958 there was formed in Carecas
the Frente Civico Revolucionario (FCR) com-
posed of representatives of al] revolutionary
groups opposed to the Batista regime except
the Communists, who were deliberately ex-
eluded. Its purpose was to unify revolution-
ary efforts. It has engaged primarily in prcp-
aganda and procurement activities outside of
Cuba.

® The Movement Cerives ite name from the date of

Castro's abortive attack on the military barracks
in Gantlago in 1658.

5. Castro's lack of clarity about his objectives,
beyond the elimination of Batista, has ralsed
doubts about his long-range intentions araong
many Hon-26 of July opposition leaders who
et the moment support him. Castro’s infre-
Quent pronouncements refiect no well-<devel-
oped program, although they indicate definite
concern for agrarian reform and the regula-
tion of public utilities. He has stated that if
successful he would initially replace the Ba-
tista regime with e provisional civilian gov-
ernment headed by Dr. Manuel Urrutia Lieo
and including representatives drawn from
most political groups in Cuba* He epeaks
of the restoration of democratic government
following a transition period. There are no
indications of the role Castro would seek to
play in a new government, but It is likely that
be would expect to occupy a position of major
influence.

9. Although Castro has attracted a widely
varied following — including some respected
Cuban elvic, business, and religious groups —
he, unlike the revolutionary Junta Patriotice
in Venezuela, has not been able to gain wide-
spread popular support. Twice his attempis
to call a naticnwide genera) strike have falled,
largely because of inability to obtain support
in the capital city of Havana.

7. Castro bas falled to convince the majority
of the Cuban people that his personality and
program, In preference to Batista’s, are worth
fighting for. Cuba continues to enjoy relative
economic prosperity, and e@ large part of the
population, probably concerned that revolu-
tion would jeopardize thelr well-being, appear
to hope that there can be a peaceful tranaition
from authoritarian to constituNional govern-
ment. The Roman Catholic Chirch, al-
though apparently becoming increasingly
anti-Batista, continues officlally to support a
peaceful change of government. Organised

* Dr. Urrutia Lieo is a respected bet Hte known
former magistrate of a Santlago cowt who is
pow in exile. He lg generally conaidered to have
Httle political acumen.

labor hes not been willing % oppose the
Batista regime under which it has received
important benefils. In spite of general dislike
for Batista, Mttle popular enthusiasm has
been engendered for Castro outside of the
province of Oriente, at least in part because
his operations have been marked by destruc-
tion of property and irresponsible acts of
violence.

8. In its inception, the 26 of July Movement
was not anti-American. Until last summer,
it sought to cultivate US good will, Since
then, however, rebel propaganda has stressed
the supposed US picic:ence for eictatorship
in the Caribbean area and has charged that
Batista, with the cooperation of some US off-
cials, was scheming to bring about US mill-
fary intervention agelnst the rebels. This
propaganda line exploits widespread Latin
American sentiments regarding dictatorship
and intervention, and, indeed, fs a line Radio
Moscow has utilized frequently in ite broad-
casts calling for support to the anti-Batista
forces. Recently, however, Castro's propa-
ganda bas again evidenced a desire for US
understanding.

B. The Role of the Cuban Communists

®. In contrast to the situation in Venezuela,
where the Communist party played an &n-
portant role in the revolution against the
Perez Jimenez dictatorship und the: eby gained
@ privileged politica) position, the Cuban Com-
munist Party (PSP}, as such, has been ex-
cluded from both the 26 of Jwy Movement

ard the Frente Civico Revolucionario (FCR),

despite its recent strenuous efforts to get in.
In Caracas, the Venezuelan Communist Party
bas actually hindered FCR activities, in order
to compe] the FCR to admit the Cuban Com-
mounist Party.

ung guerrillas is not 8o firm that he can
prevent Communis: mfiliration even if be

should po desire, A ew alleged Communist

sympathizers hold moderately important posi-

tions in the movement, especially among the
troops led by Raul Castro. Some Communists
have undoubtedly penetrated its lower levels
and its organization in Mexico. Morsorer, the
nationalistic and anti-dictatorship line of the
movement is a horse which the Communists
know well bow to ride (e.g., Venezuela). Hf
the revolution fails to make headway agains?

the Batista regime, both Castro and the FCR

will be under increasing preasure to accept
any help they can get.

C. The Role of the Cuban Military

11. Tne continued support of the Cuban
armed forces is the chief factor in the Batista
regime's retention of power. The principal
military leaders are almost certainly con-
vinced that a Castro victory would adversely
affect thelr military positions and personal
fortunes: even the Uves of some of them would
be in jeopardy. By committing s large por-
tion of their forces in eastern Cuba, they have
been eble to retain contrcl of the urban areas.
However, it bas been necessary to retain the
tnost reliable and effcctive Army units in
Havana to protect the regime. The farces
committed against the guerrillas in the field
have been composed largely of conscripts fram
urban areas not readily adaptable to the hard-
ehips of anti-guerrilla operations. These
forces are inadequately led, trained, equipped,
and supplied for the operations required to
root out the puerrillas. Thelr chief deficiency,
however, is that, compared to the strong mo-
tivation of the rebels, they lack the will to
ght. Consequently, the Army's combat oper-
ations in the Beld have been ineffective and
in Oriente Province there have Deen some re-
cent defections to Castro's forces. Moreover,
the Cuban naval and eir forces have been
unable to prevent the rebels from receiving

~ mpplies from overseas by sea and alr.

he D. The 3 November Notional Elections

i492. Faced with continued violent disorder pro-

Fidel Castro's control over his. " moted by the growing opposition to his regime

throughout Cuba, President Batista bas sus-
pended constitutional guarantees for moet of
two years and has resorted increasingly to
@uthoritarian measures. Nevertheless, he de-

—

Peabo ep ag ed Saye
° what at teeth aed

wy
Peey

elded to go through with national elections
on $3 November and has declared that he wil!
install the newly elected president on 24 Feb-

ruary 1059.

13. Batista permitted political parties to cant-
paign, but since constitutional guarantees re-
mained suspended, electoral activities were
minimal and the public was generally apa-
thetic even in those places where the rebels
were unable to interfere with voting. Andres
Rivero Aguero, Batista’s band-picked succes-
gor, was duly elected, and the government
coalition won a lage number of congressional
geats and other offices. Although Rivero
Aguero could probably have won a completely
free election because of the strength of the
government's politica] machine and the lack
of unity among the weak nonrevolutionary
opposition, his election under the present
chaotic internal conditions can seem Utde
more than a sham.

E. The Outlook for the Next Few Months

14. We believe that the elections ard any
subsequent efforts by Batista to withdraw
from the limelight probably will bave little
effect in resolving the politica) impasse in
favor of the government, Even if Batiste
ahould leave the country — contrary to his
recerit statement of intentions — the newly
elected government would find it dificult to
convince either Castro or the Cuban people
that it was no longer controled by the forces
and interests which had kept the dictator In
office. Moreover, economic difficulties are
goon likely to be added to the government's
other problems as a result of the continued
disruption of production and transportation
fn Oriente Province and of beavy military
expenditures.

15. Castro will almast certainly continue his
guerrilla warfare campaign. While be will
probably gain some additional strength, there
is little to indicate that important military or
Iebor elements are about to shift thelr alle
giance to him. Similarly, the general public,
despite the sham elections, does not appear
on the verge of giving active support to Castro.
Continued terrorist activities wil almost cer-

tainly antagonize business interests in Cuba

oF

. er as
ye WA RAT BR DPE. rh SOIC ERE E. ay’ es a
pre APOE AMER TW AGEAHTES, Sag erp a ee eg PR Bn PE ET Teh Mh ante cali hig ete RE a MCA Gal ei tice meant a SRS moneda Seedy eee eit oi ae pee pera et Rate eae erie pe Mae Ome

ne aaa * 7 : aioe

ET | 4
and elsewhere. It ts therefore unlikely tha

Castro will te able to overthrow the regime
prior to the inauguration of Rivero Aguero.

16. A prolongation and further intensification
of widespread guerrilla warfare would further
reduce the Cuban Government’s ability to af-
ford adequate protection for American lives
and property. OS private Investments in
Cuba amount to $850 million, more than in
any other Latin American country except
Venezuela and Brazil. The rebels’ method of
exerting pressure by the destruction of and
levies against property, regardless of the na-
Wonality ef ownership, wll certainly cause
further damage to US Interests, since US prop-
erties in Cuba are #0 numerous and wide-
spread.

37. A military polution of the guerrilla prob-
Jem cannot be achieved without extensive im-
provements in the military posture of the
Cuban armed forces. To overcome the defi-
elencies described in paragraph 11, there
would be required: (a) a steady fow of arms,
equipment, end ammunition for sustained
combat operations; (b) a rigorous training
program to improve the genera] physical con-
dition of the troops and to instruct them in
guerrila, antiguerrilla, and mountain war-
fare; and (¢) development of the professional
competence and standards of performance of
the leaders to a degree which would inspire
the confidence of their men. Such a@ trans-
formation could not be accomplished within
the period of this estimate. In eddition,
means would have to be provided to cut off
the jogistical support which Castro now re-
ccives by see and air from overseas. External
military aid on the scale indicated would be
popularly regarded in Latin America as for-
eign miliary intervention in Cuba, with con-
gequent politica] repercussions extending far
beyorud Cuba

*The Assisiant Chief of Stall for Intelligence, De-
partment of the Army, and the Assistant Chief of
Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Alr Force,
t& view of the probability that popular and other
reactions wbder such eircumstancea ore Mkely
to be both favorable and unfavorable, would
delete this sentence es being Incomplete and in-
gonclualre.

BA CRET

18. The Cuben military remains the mest im-
portant element capable of breaking the polit!-
cal deadiock by means other than combat
operations. Should the milltary conclude (as
in Vererucla) that the effort recuired to main-
tain the regime in power is more than that
object is worth, they have the power to de-
pose it and to establish a military junta for
the purpose of bringing about a political get-
tlement. We are unable to estimate the pre.
else circumstances in which the military
richt decide upon this customary course of
action. The likelihood of their doing so would
be increased if there were @ aharp upsurge in
popular or labor opposition to the regime.®

10. After the military, the most important
element of support for Batiste has been the
powerful Cuban Labor Confederation (CTC)
which is tightly controlled by leaders who
have so far held it in line and have twice re-
Fused to heed Castro's calls for a general strike.

.°The Assistant Chief of Btaff for Intelligence,
4 Department of the Anny, and the Assistant Chie?
1 of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Alr
A Force, would Losert the following paragraph fol-

slowing paragraph 1
4 & “Leadership potenth ‘thin the army bo orver-

9 Throw the regime gol... own quantity. The

S principal personalities reporied in rumors of
i possdble coups have been Major Cenerals Diaz-
2 Tamayo, the Army G-3, and Cac tillo-Porras,
f the commander of the government forces in
f Oriente Province. However, both may be
p mcbedwed for early reilrement. It ie more
Mkely that In any coup attempt the keadershi]
would come from office ee

+ ER ET &

Tlowever, the nature of the Cuban labor more-
ment and ite notoriously calculating leaders
is such that, Uf the tide appeared to be ehifting
in favor of the opposition, the CTC might par-
ticlpate in a genera) strike against the gor-
emment. Should this happen, the military
would be faced with the choice of firing upon
mobs in Havana or of calling upon the gov-
¢emment to resign. In such a@ situation, the
military would probably choose the latter
course,

20. A military funta by itself would not be
@ble to reestablish political stability, particu-
Rarly if the Junta included many of the present
top military Jeaders who are closely associated
With Batista. It would not be recognized by
Castro or by the majority of tne Cuban people
as & significant change. However, if, as in
Venezuele, a junta were subsequently to purge
ftself of the more objecHonable initial mem-
bers, replacing them with younger and less
vena} officers, its chances for breaking the
political impasse would substantially be tm-
proved. The situation would become even
more favorable if such & modified junta were
success7ul in convincing the public of its tn-
tentions to restore democratic proceases. It is
possible that puch success by the Junta would
cause the Castro movement to lose momen-
fum. On the other hand, if tae Junta desired
to end civil etrife quickly, it would probably
have to open direct negotiations with Castro.
The latter's €ecision to come out of the hills
would depend on the junta’s ability to can-
vince him that he and his men would be aafe
from reprisals and that they would be able to
take an active role in national politica] life.
