Short-term Prospects for Brazil Under Goulart
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008146, dated 4 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008146).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

deggie cate PoP tad aig inte! do Oo mee BF wee aes Faas 0!

}

RECEIVED

WS. C.

Beeld A zoill"el

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE —

_ SPECIAL

NUMBER 93-2-61 -

‘WNDER GOUTART

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The fQ@lowing intelligence erguntzations participated in the
preparation of this estimete: The Central Tutelligence Agency

_ end the intelligence organizations ef the Departinents of

State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, The
Joint Stag, and NSA.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 7 December 15961. Concurring were The Director of Intel-
lgerce and Research, Department of State; Director, Defense
Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief of Stag for Intel-
ligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant Chief of
Navel Operations Untelligence), Department of the Navy;
the Assistant Chief of Stag, Intelligence, USAF; the Director
for Iulelligence, Joint Stag; end the Director of the National
Security Agency. The Atomle Energy Conuaission Repre-
sentative to the USIB, and the Assistani Director, Federal
Bu eau of Investigation, ebsiained, the subject being outside
of their jurisdiction.

Declassifisd Ey OSs
data 4.2.

SECRET N?

es a 4

Bae

| tt Wy, Gebheetape
:  SNIE 93-261
; 7 December 1961

SECRET an ety -199
#z

SHORT-TERM PROSPECTS FOR BRAZIL

15

EEE AOI NERRORAREE ARERR OOH TON “NP ARRAS REINER REEMA HCUIS

aby oni ot: ott sar wel nara aiata sie anmn ano intimendh men acsneene 1H

Ee EIN: OF OO EE OL AN OT

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
a need to know basis, Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by ue
following officials within their respective departments, :

a, Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Departinent of State

b, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

ce. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chicf of Naval oes ations for Intelligence, for the Department of me
Navy

e. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department ‘of the Air Force

f. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staif, for The Joint Staff

gf Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

h. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

i. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

j. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency."

2. This copy may be retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable

security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrangement with
the Office of Central Reference, CIA,

3. When an estimate is disscrninated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it

for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
cither be destroyed, returned {o the forwarding agency, or permission should be requested
of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953,

4. The title of this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified:

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

WARNING

This material cdxtains inforgpffion affecting
the Natlonal Defehge of the United States
within the meaning | see espionage laws,
Title 18, USO, Sees, 793\and 794, the trans-

mission or revelation ef which in any manner
to an unsuthorley frson is\prohikited by law.

DISTRIBUTION;

White House

Natfonal Seeurity Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Fnergy Commission
Federal Burcau of Investigation

SHORT-TERM PROSPECTS FOR BRAZIL UNDER GOULART

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the outlook for Brazil up to the October 1962 elections, with special

_ reference to the orientation and prospects of the Goulart government.

CONCLUSIONS
‘x

1. The constitutional compromise which
enabled Goulart to succeed to the Presi-
dency after Quadros’ resignation in Au-
gust 1961 has le‘t a confused atmosphere

~ in which the locus of executive power is

uncerfain. Nevertheless, Goulart has
emerged as considerably more than a fig-
urehead President and his principal con-
cern will be to maintain and, if possible,
to increase the prestige and power of the
Presidency and of nis Brazilian Labor

Party (PTB). To this end, he will exploit

his influence in labor and leftist circles
while seeking to avoid undue offense to
conservative elements, particularly the
military, who continue to view him with
suspicion because of his long record of col-
laboration with the Communists. Mean-
while, the various political forces will be
jockeying for control of the executive

_. power and for victory in the October 1962

elections. (Paras. 5-11, 15-16, 19, 23-24)
2. In these cireumstances the short-

_ range prospects for the growth of Com-

munist influence in Brazil are favorable.
The Communists will benefit by the toler-

ance not only of Goulart but of many
other Brazilian political leaders. ‘They
will probably encounter little effective
competition or governmental restriction
in their efforts to entrench themselves in
areas where agrarian and social unrest is
most acute and will also benefit to sore
extent by the entry of additional party
members or sympathizers into the bu-
reaucracy, However, it is unlikely that
Communist infiltration of the govern-
ment will go so far as to give the Cornmu-
nist Party a significant influence on the
formulation and execution of policy with-
in the period of this estimate. (Paras.
12, 18, 25-26)

3. The initial indecisiveness of the new
government and the blow to national con-
fidence engendered by the succession
crisis have caused a new decline in Brazil’s
economic and financial situation. Never-
theless, given the continued disburse-
ment of the credits called for in the May
1961 aid package, the government can
probably keep going financially until the
fall of 1962, though no substantial im-

SECRET 1

SECRET“ 2

provement in the basic causes of the
country’s financial disequilibrium is
likely. Although legislation on the re-
forms promised by Quadros and espoused
by the current administration will prob-
ably be enacted, it is not likely to be suffi-
cient to assuage popular discontent.
Thus the regime is likely to be plagued by
recurring political crises and possibly by
breakdowns in public order. On balance,
however, we believe that Goulart and the
present constitutional system will prob-
ably survive up tc the October 1962 elec-
tions. It is less likely that the present
Council of Ministers will last that long.
(Paras. 20-22, 27-293) ‘

4. The present government will continue
to emphasize the “independent” charac-
ter of its foreign policy, but the need for
US financing, as well as domestic political
considerations, will probably render it less
truculent toward the US than was the
Quadros administration. Although Bra-
zil has already re-established diplomatic
relations with the USSR, development of
diplomatic and economic ties with Bloc
countries will probably not go much hbe-
yond the existing framework. Brazil will
almost certainly continue to oppose sanc-
tions against Castro, though if most ma-
jor Latin Arnerican states were disposed
to take some limited action, it would prob-
ably go along. (Para. 31)

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

5. The sudden resignation of President Janio
Quadros on 25 August 1961 plunged Brazil
into a constitutional crisis. Although Brazil-
jans take considerable pride in the fact that
the crisis was resolved without bloodshed,
Brazil did suffer a serious national setback,
the effects of which will be felt for some time
to come. Abroad, Brazil's ability to enlarge
its role in international affairs has been re-
duced, at least for the time being, and inside
Brazil the prestige of the armed forces—the
traditional guarantors of constitutional
order---has been diminished. The political
crisis occasioned a loss of public confidence
which undermined steps taken by Quadros
toward greater financial stability through
budget cuts, elimination of import subsidies,
and similar short-run reforms. Occupied
since it came to office principally with adjust-
ment to a new form of government and a re-
alignment of pow  qroups, the present ad-
~ ministration has no. ioved decisively regard-
ing the array of basic reforms which Quadros
~ promised but was unable to implement. In-

flation is again on the increase and political
tensions are rife.

6. Quadres’ resignation after only seven
months in office appears to have been the re-
action of an unstable personality, ambitious
for power, but frustrated by the difficulties of
coping effectively with Brazil’s chronic prob-
lems. Some of his reforrns had damaged in-
fluential special interests; Congress and poli-
ticians of all stripes had become disturbed
over his growing tendency to centralize power
in his own hands; and the normally easy going
Brazilians began to resent his efforts to apply
stricter moral standards to many aspects of
public life. He came under increasingly
heavy fire from the rnilitary and other con-
servatives over what they regarded as his
partiality for the Bloc and Cuba. Thus, al-
though Quadros had come to office with a
popular raandate and great hopes, he found
himself laboring in an atmosphere of criticism
and obstruction. Always emotional and
sensitive, Quadros quit, probably counting on
being recalled immediately with strengthened
powers. However, to his apparent great sur-

SECRET

eevee eerie HH a | ina

+ SECHKET- 3

prise, Congress quickly accepted his resigna-
tion.

7. In the ensuing political strugyle between
those who favored constitutional succession
and those opposed to Vice President Joao
(“Jango”) Goulart, civil conflict seemed near.
The Ministers of War, Navy, and Air strongly
opposed Goulart because of his long record of
collaboration with the Communists in labor
and politics. Most of the armed forces re-
mained loyal to their ministers. A major ex-
ception was the powerful Third Array in Rio
Grande do Sul, which supported Governor
Leonel Brizola’s' campaign on Goulart’s be-
half. Additionally, there were manifestations
of indiscipline in other military elements.
Over several days it became apparent that
both public and congressional opinion backed
a solution along constitutional lines, even
though Goulart himself was not notably popu-
ler, hese pressures, combined with divisions
within the military, forced the military leaders
to accept a compromise.

8. This compromise was ernbodied in a hastily

drawn constitutional amendment which st=b-
lished a parliamentary form of government,

"patterned along European lines, in place of the

traditional Brazilian systern in which the

~ Presidency has been predominant. Presi-

dential powers were drastically curtailed and
executive power was placed In the hands of a
Council of Ministers responsible to the
Chamber of Deputies.. Goulart accepted this
arrangement, and was installed on 8 Sep-
tember 1961 to serve until 31 January 1966.
Taneredo Neves, a member of ex-President
Kubitschek’s Social Democratic Party, be-
came President of a Council of Ministers in
which ali major parties were represented in

_ proportion to their strength in Congress.

*Goulart’s brother-In-lay and Governor of Gou-
lart’s home state of Rio Grande do Sul. Brizola---
heretofore unimportant as a national figure—has
long been a supporter of Jeflist and ultranationalist
cases.

‘Brazil's three principal parties are the Social
Democratic Party (PSD), the Natfonal Democratle
Union GU DN), and the Breailian Labor Parly (PTB).
These parties are heterogencous in makeup and
ideology, and party discipline is notably lacking in
each.

H. THE CURRENT SITUATION
A. General

9. In the first two months after Goulart as-
sumed office, the Council of Ministers and the
Congress were occupied with adapting to un-
familiar roles, and the President was explor-
ing the reorganized system of relationships
among the various governmental powers,
During this difficult period of adjustment, the
new administration as a whole was faced by
the sarne political and economic obstacles
which had frustrated Quadros’ efforts to
tackle basic social and economic reforms. In
addition, it was handicapped by Jess popular
confidence and less clear lines of authority
than the preceding administration. The re-
sulting lack of action has contributed to a
pervasive atmosphere of political uncertainty
with particularly adverse effects on the eco-
nomic situation, However, during the past
month there have been sore indications that
the Council of Ministers may be coming to
grips with the most critical immediate prob-
lerns, notably inflation.

B, President Goulart

10. Goulart has emerged as considerably
more than a figurehead President. His ability
to use his appointive power has been rein-
forced by his position as head of the Brazilian
Labor Party (PTB). He has been aided by
the fact that Prime Minister Tancredo Neves
has not chosen to engage in open dispute on
the issue of executive powers. Neves is a
relatively colorless example of an old-line op-
portunistic Brazilian politician,

11. There are significant perscnal as well as
constitutional and political limits to Goulart’s
influence and freedorn of action. In part
these restrictions stem from his character and
reputation. A confirmed opportunist even by
Brazilian standards, the wealthy Goulart has
yet to reveal any strongly-held political or
economic philosophy, and has been frequently
linked with corruption. He owes much of his
rapid political rise to former dictator Getulio
Vargas, who permitted him to build a personal
following in the important PTB by the use
of government funds and patronage. Even

SHGCRET:

trnyieeteshenileh nt naphiicesiiapentenmeaettein re cand

ate ern remanent

though Goulart still heads the PTB and has
-peen vocal on behalf of ultranationalist and

' popular reform issues, sor.2 leftist elements

. continue to suspect his motives.

"42. Goulart is not known to be a Communist,
‘put he has a long history of secking and re-

ceiving Communist support, and has given
the Communists considerable freedom of ac-
tion within the labor movement in return for
electoral backing. His recent appointments,
although designed principally to entrench
himself and his party, have included a num-
ber of other figures frequently associated with
pro-Communist fronts or causes. He has ap-
pointed as his own private secretary an
avowed Communist, Raul Ryff. In the eyes
of conservatives and most of the military,
these appointrnents justify the deep distrust
with which they view Govlart, and reinforce
their conviction that they must keep a close
watch on him.

13. Despite these limitations, however, Gou-
lart has over many years demonstrated a
capacity for political survival, shrewd judg-
ment, and expedient action, motivated by
strong personal ambition—formidable assets
in the arena of Brazilian politics.

C. Political Considerations

14. Any Brazilian administration confronts a
wide variety of entrenched interests working
at cross-purpases on both the national and
state levels. Thirteen heterogencous political
parties, as well as powerful agricultural, com-
mereial, industrial, labor, military, and
Church interests, compete for power and in-
fluence. The situation is further compticated
by the existence of strong regional interests
and loyalties which often conflict, notably as
between the backward agricultural north and
the modern industrialized south. Under the

SHERET™ -— 4

15. Conditioned to Brazil's former system of a
strong Presidency along US lines, Congress
has not yet established the irnplementing
rnachinery for parliamentary government en-
visaged in the hastily devised constitutional
amendment. Nor have Neves and the Council
of .ainisters as yet faken any major initiative
in the exercise of their newly won executive
power. The Council was selected to provide a
broad representation of the political parties in
Congress, and has thus far shown little ability
to undertake strong action on its own initia-
tive. In these circurnstances, neither the
Congress nor the Council of Ministers appears
eager at this time for an open test of strength
with the President,

16. The constitutional amendment of Sep-
tember does not clearly spell out the lines of
executive authority and this has intensified
jockeying along traditional party and special
interest lines. Even were the locus of aunthor-
ity clear, the administration would be unable
to count on a stable parliamentary majority.
For the rnoment, an arrangernent between the
PSD, of which Neves is a member, and the
UDN provides the required majority. How-
ever, strong conservative elements in these
two parties are particularly unhappy about
Neves’ apparent submissiveness to Goulart.
Meanwhile, the more leftist PTB, apparently
taking its cue frorn the President, has reserved
its position toward the Neves cabinet (al-
though supplying two ministers) in order to
escape blame for current difficulties.

17. With the approach of the campaign for
the October 1962 election, the government has
come under increased political sniping from

* PRESENT COMPOSITION OF THE BRAZILIAN
CONGRESS
(Party discipline is poor and changes In parly affilia-
tion are frequent during parliamentary sessicns.)
CHAMBER OF

Brazilian federal system, considerable power Party Dervires SENATE

remains in the hards of the State Govern-  Secial Democrats (PSD)... 114 20

ments. ‘The controversial personality of the POnOtr i abor Party (FEB). ) a a

new President has tended to exacerbate the social Progressive Party (PSP). | 9g i

friction with these powerful interest groups 9 MmorPartles 00. 60 0G ccc e ees 50 6

and to restrict Goulart’s authority. MOtAlss tates Gece: , “Suet 326 63
“het elie

SHERET™ 5

‘all sides. The entire lower house of the legis-

_ Jature, two-thirds of the Senate, and half the
State Governors are te be elected. Already,
ultranationalists and confirmed Jeftists, led
by Brizola, Governor Borges Teixere of Goias,
and the Communist Mayor of Kecife, Migue!
Arraes, have formed the extremist National
Liberation Front to unite the forces of radical
nationalism behind a program for imraediate
and far-reaching social and economic reforms
in an effort to win control of Congress, Mean-
while, former President Janio Quadros awaits
an opportune time to return to national po-
litical life, possibly in alliance with these
leftist forces.

18. The present situation offers increased op-
portunitics for Comraunist advances. In as-
sociation with the National Liberation Front
and the Peasant Leagucs of the northeast, the
PCB is in good position to exploit popular dis-
content over current economic hardships.
Meanwhile, the PCB is moving ahead with iis
eampaign to re-establish itself as a legal party.
The PCB has attacked Goulart in terms
similar to those used against Quadros
(“enlreguista,” or one who hands over the
national patrimony to foreigners).

D. The Armed Forces

19, The armed forces remain an important
political factor despite serious internal divi-
sions and loss of prestige as a result of their
leaders’ abortive effort to bar Goulart from
office. The military leaders have accepted
Goulart as the President, but Uhey still mis-
trust him, and he knows it. Thus, they con-
stitute @ major check on any Goulart dispesi-
tion to swing Brazil significantly to the left in
domestic or foreign affairs. Goulart has been
— careful to refrain from antesonizing the mili-
tary. Although he has reancved officers hos-
tile te him, he has been careful to replace
them, in almost every case, with competent
professional officers acceptable to their peers.
Nevertheless, military focs of Goulart, includ-
ing the recently resigned Ministers of Air and
Navy, are actively plotfing against him and
are seeking civilian backing.

E, Economic

20. The serious econornic and financial diffi-
culties which had been building up in Brazil
over the last few years were abated to some ex-
tent in mid-1961, primarily through the
negotiation of a $1.3 billion foreign aid and
debt extension package in May. However,
the political crisis precipitated by Quadros’
resignation led te a new decline. Inflationary
pressures, reflected in cost-of-living increases
of 39 and 30 percent in 1959 and 1960, respec-
tively, have sharply revived. Over the past 12
months price indexes have risen by 35 percent.
Prices on some staples have risen as much as
38 percent since late August, partly in expec-
tation of increases in the minimum wage,
which were approved in October, Workers
already receiving above the minimum wage
have meanwhile struck for commensurate in-
creases to maintain their relative incomes.
In the wake of a flight cf capital during the
crisis, a gold-buying spree, and continuing
speculative pressure, the eruzeiro has dropped
fromm 260 to about 350 to the US dollar, The
cruzeiro remains under pressure despite im-
provement in the basic trade position and the
inflow of financial aid under the May 1961
agreement,

21. Neves and the capable Minister of Finance,
Moreira Salles, are encountering substantial
political obstacles in their efforts to control
inflation. They have felt impelled to grant a
49 percent increase in the minimum wage,
but even this may not suffice to hold down
labor demands. Curbs on easy bank credit
are politically difficult to impose and enforce.
The monctary authorities have taken some
steps to Hmit money issuance until the end of
the year, and new exchange regulations have
been issued to curb financial speculation and
the depreciation of the currency. Jfowever,
the modification of the free-exchange system
which Quadros had instituted may open the
door to a return of the costly import subsidies
which are popular with the public at large.
In addition to keeping eredit expansion under
control and restraining speculation, the goy-
ernment is secking to reduce the budget
deficit. It is also pressing for continuation of
external assistance under the May 1061 agree-

‘,
3

ment—principally frorm the US. The situa-
tion is complicated by the fact that since June
Brazil has not met some of the conditions laid
down by the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) in connection with this agreement.

22, It is still too early to assess the effective-
ness of the government's emergency measures,
There is a continuing threat of strikes for
higher wages, and public dissatisfaction over
the current high rate of inflation persists.
Meanwhile, ambitious plans for putting
through agrarian, tax and banking reforms,
antitrust and banking legislation, and other
measures designed to correct basic weak-
nesses in the Brazilian economic and financial
structure have bogged down as a result of the

On the other hand, the government is press-
ing Congress to enact a new tax program and
is making progress on a_constructive coffee

policy. The task of remedying traditionally

inflationary credit practices, annual budget
imbalances, and yearly trade and balance of
payments deficits is so large as to presage a
long period of continuing economic difliculties.

NL THE OUTLOOK

23, President Goulart is a shrewd and flexible
politician who is intent on remaining in office
and would like to expand his authority. Al-
though his tendency to rely on political agility
as a substitute for policy is ikely to handicap
him, he can marshal an irapressive array of
assets. His long identification with organized
Ixbor will continue to make hima highly ac-
ceptable to the left gencrally—and will also
provide him with some leverage in dealing
with Tabor demands. ‘Phe vultranaiionalist
stand he has taken on such issues as public
ownership of key industrics and utiitles is
well-known and popular. He has been largely
successful in disclaiming responsibility for
Brazi’s curren? difficulties and will bencfit

from the widespread desfre of most Brazilians

to avoid another national crisis.

24. Goulart’s reputation for leftward proclivi-
ties Is a lability both in many influrntial
cireles and in his relations with other coun-
trics Important to Brazil, notably the US.

However, he is well aware of this impression
and is makiag some efforts to dispel it. Al-
though the armed forces will continue to
watch him closely, the military, for the raost
part, appear ready to permit Goulart to re-
main in office so long as he respects the
present constitutional limitations on his ex-
ecutive powers and avoids extreme leftist in-
trigues and alliances,

25. Goulart will probably avoid associations
with the Communists or other ultraleftists of
a kind likely to stir up strong opposition on
the part of the military. By the sam. tcken,
however, he is unlikely to have any qualms
about cooperating with the Cornmunists or
their sympathizers when it appears to serve
his purpose. His appointments will probably
continue to Include some individuals who have
records of sympathy with the Communists.
Despite the criticism now being leveled at him
by PCB spokesmen, he will probably continue
to take a generally tolerant position toward
the party and, where local circurnstances
justify it, his PTB will continue to work with
the Communists in particular elections and
on various issues. On occasion, Goulart is
likely to advocate policies also endorsed by the
Coramunists, arguing that they should not be
allowed to assume leadership of the reform
movement by default.

26. Thus the short-range prospects for the
growth of Cormmunist influence in Brazil are
favorable. The Communists will benefit by
the tolerance not only of Goulart but of many
other Brazilian political leaders. They will
probably encounter little effective competition
or governmental restriction in their efforts to
entrench themselves in areas where agrarian
and social unrest is most acute and will also
benefit to some extent by the entry of addi-
tional party mernbers or sympathizers into
the bureaucracy. However, it is unlikely that
Communist infiltration of the government will
go so far as to give them a significant influence
on the formulation and execution of policy
within the period of this estimate. Moreover,
the PCB still labors under the handicap of not
being a legal paity, and though efforts are
being made to secure official recognition, it is
unlikely that the legal obstacles can be over-

SECREX

Ce a a et enn nnn ea mramammemeaamenmeanaanl

2 oom sola

‘ome in time for the Communists openly to
um their own candidates in the 1962 eiec-
Jons. They will offset this handicap, as in
che past, by some infillration of the slates of
egal parties and by political hargains with
ypportunist non-Communist elements, The
tommunists have probably achieved some
senetration of the armed forces, principally at
‘he noncommissioned officer level, and this
night prove to be a useful asset under con-
litions of major civil disturbance.

27. In view of the central importance of the
sconomic situation in influencing popular at-
situdes, rauch will depend on how much suc-
sess the government has in obtaining credits,
Jevelopment capital, debt postponements, and
' >ther forms of external assistance for Brazil.
Siven the continued disbursement of the
eredits called for in the May 1961 aid package,
the government can probably keep going
financially until the fall of 1962, though no
- substantial flaprovement in the basic causes
of the country’s financial disequilibrinin is
likely.
28. Although legislation on the reforms
promised by Quadros and espoused by the cur-
rent administration will probably be enacted,
it is not likely to be sufficient to assuage popu-
lar discontent. Powerful special interest
groups will oppose significant reforms or any
far-reaching attack on the root causes of
Rrazil’s ceonomic difficulties. Thus we be-
licve that the regime is likely to be plagued
by recurring political crises and possibly by
breakdowns in public order.

29. In such crisis situations, Goulart’s actions
would be of major importance. His first in-
clination would be lo ride out the storm, tak-
ing no action that would jeopardize the elec-
toral chances of his partisans. If he felt
compelled to take affirmative action, he would
probably be disposed to press for increasingly
leftist solutions and to seck greater Presi-
dential powers. He would nevertheless, prob-
ably attempt to work out with the military
leaders some sort of agreed action, thus
minimizing the risk of a military ta <eover.
He might, theugh we consider it unlikely, re-
sign, castigating conservative opposition and

Congressional inaction. On balance, we be-
lieve that Goulart and the present constitu-
tional system will probably survive up to the
October 1962 elections. It is less likely that
the present Council of Ministers will last that
long.

30. The present regime will face its first elec-
toral test In the October 1962 elections for
Congress and for State Governors. Given the
raultiplicity of political parties and interests
in Brazil, the results are likely to be incon-
clusive. It is possible that the elections may
provide opportunity for a political comeback
by ex-President Quadros, who could legally
because Prime Minister if his supporters con-
trol the new Congress. Despite the bad taste
left in many mouths by his sudden resigna-
tion, Quadros has apparently not completely
lost the magnetic appeal which swept him into
office in early 1961, Ex-President Kubitschek,
who has retained his personal popularity, is
now a Senator and seers to have his eye on
the Presidency in 1965 with restoration of full
powers. Goulart might also emerge in a sig-
nificantly strengthened position, especially
since the growth of pressure for social and
economic change reight result in election of
a new Congress considerably more leftist in
orientation than the present one,

31. During the period of this estimate Brazil-
jan foreign policy will probably be less ven-
turesome than it promised ta be under
Quadros. At least until the October 1962
elections, the necd for large-scale US financial
assistance will pose sore restraint on Brazil-
ian policy. For this reason, and because of
domestic political considerations, the present
government will probably not have as trucu-
lent an attitude toward the US as did Quadros.
Although Brazi} has already re-established
diplomatic relations with the USSR, develop-
ment of diplomatic and economic ties with
Bloc countries will probably not go much be-
yond the existing framework. Brazil's aspira-
tions to great power status have obviously
been set back, at Jeast for the present, and
the problem of geiting along with Brazil's
Latin American neighbors will loom larger in
Brazilian thinking. Nevertheless, Brazil will

on ms

SHER Er &

wobably continue to emphasize the “inde-
yendent” character ef its foreign policy. For
hese reasons it will almost certainly continue
© oppose sanctions against Castro, although

1 ee a Bae ae

fe Aa RNY NE Re a

kept,

it would probably agree to some kind of
lmlled action if it scerned certain that most of
the major Latin Armevican states were dis-
posed to take such steps.

Eo
