The Ussr's International Position After Czechoslovakia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126874, dated 4 August 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126874).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LB] LIBRARY —NerKoreigrBisem==

. “ oe
Mandatory Review b a
Case # NLL ATI |
Document # — Lt. fds hut }
7 27— Qa weS

ere

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE

Intelligence Memorandum

The USSR’s International Position
After Czechoslovakia

~~ 26

19 September 1968
APPROVED FOR RELEASE No. 0623/68
0 NOV 4997

WARSENG

ent contains information affectj
defense of the "thm States, withieeffie meaning of Title
18, sections 793 an » US Code, as amended.
Its transmissieror revelation o ‘nts to or re-
cej yan unauthorized person is prohibitec

( « _CONBREeeT™ (

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
19 September 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

The USSR's International Position
After Czechoslovakia

Summary

Moscow intervened in Czechoslovakia because it
feared for its hold over Eastern Europe. Calcula-
tions of profit and loss with respect to Soviet in-
ternational policy in general were secondary. The
decision to invade meant that the Soviet determina-
tion to preserve the status quo in Eastern Europe
overrode any urge that Moscow might have had to seek
advantage in limited accommodations with the non-
Communist world. In this sense, the Soviet leader-
ship behaved characteristically. Intervention was,
at the same time, the most difficult decision ever
made by the Brezhnev-Kosygin regime and may turn out
to be its most fateful one.

Although the Soviets would like to regard the
Czechoslovak affair as essentially internal business
and to have the rest of the world so regard it, the
issue inevitably raises additional issues for them:
relations between East and West and between Commu-
nist parties, the trend of Soviet defense spending,
the development of the Soviet economy and internal
discipline. Only time can tell whether the Soviets
were right in concluding that intervention was the
lesser of two evils. It will depend, among other
things, on whether and for how long the pressures
for reform in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere in the
Soviet bloc can be contained; whether the collective

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
Tt was prepared by the Office of Current Intelltgence
and coordinated with the Office of National Esttmates.

leadership can master its own internal conflicts,
and how the policies of others, especially the US,
are influenced by what has happened in Czechoslo-
vakia.

Increased distrust of the USSR in the US and
Soviet defensiveness and insecurity revealed by the
invasion do not bode well for US-Soviet relations in
the near future. The possibility should not be ex-
cluded, however, that Moscow will see some need after’
Czechoslovakia for taking steps to keep US-Soviet
relations from settling into a total freeze. There
is, at any rate, no present indication that Moscow's
interest in missile talks with the US'is less than
before.

reign Di
C

1, It will. be months before the "fall-out"
from the invasion of Czechoslovakia has settled to
earth. What this does to Soviet policy will have
to be seen. It seems almost certain, however, that
Moscow did not mean its intervention to mark a turn-
ing point in its policies generally. The Russian
leaders would prefer to think of it, and to have
others think of it, as a regrettable but necessary
disciplinary action within its own family.

2. Intervention was the most difficult decision
made by the Soviet collective leadership during its
four years of rule, and probably its most fateful
one. Moscow invaded Czechoslovakia because it was
afraid not to. The signal to intervene was given
because a conclusion had been reached that the cost
of nonintervention was unbearable. It presumably
also reckoned that, though there would be damage
from intervention, it would be damage which could
be tolerated. The decision stemmed from anxiety and
insecurity, but it also rested on the rational cal-
culation that there was virtually no risk of nuclear
confrontation. Whether, in fact, the Soviets chose
the lesser or the greater of two evils will only
become evident in time. It will depend on several
unknowns: if and for how long the pressures for
reform in Czechoslovakia and elsewhere in the Soviet
bloc can be contained; whether the collective lead-
ership can master its own internal conflicts; and
how the policies of others, especially the US, are
influenced by what has happened in Czechoslovakia.

3. The occupation of Czechoslovakia reveals
that Moscow is not ready to tolerate anywhere in
Eastern Europe a weakening of the system of central-
ized, one-party rule it practices at home. It can-
not permit the lesser states in the Warsaw Pact al-
liance to come .to think that they can devise their
own blueprints for the reform of the Communist sys-
tem or that they can serve as pathfinders in a
search for a reconciliation of the opposing systems
in Europe. The Soviets' anxiety about their secu-
rity in Eastern Europe is all the greater because
of their uncertainty about the security~-in both
political and physical terms-~-of their other flank,
on the Chinese side.

-3-

4, For a dozen years--ever since Hungary--
the Soviets have been groping for a means of ensur-
ing a more or less voluntary acceptance by Eastern
Europe of their leadership. The goals of a "social-
ist commonwealth" and of a reconsolidation of the
Communist movement around Moscow on the basis of
common interests were probably never attainable on
Moscow's terms, but these were more than just propa-
ganda slogans. Although the goals are a shambles
now, the tortuous course followed by the Russians
before intervention and their backing and filling
since then both suggest that they do not want to
have to hold Eastern Europe down solely by force if
there is any other way. As soon as Czechoslovakia
is “normalized," the Soviets must begin again the
search for a non-Stalinist dispensation for Eastern
Europe.

4. There is every reason to suppose that the
Soviet leadership will remain preoccupied, and
painfully so, with the problems of Eastern Europe
for some time to come, as it has for the better part
of the last nine months. And with the problem of
Czechoslovakia there arise such attendant questions
as the future of relations between East and West
and between Communist parties, defense spending,
the development of the Soviet economy, and internal
Giscipline. It would not be surprising if the col-
lective leadership failed to weather in its present
form the conflict which these issues seem likely to
produce.

6. Intervention need not, and probably does not,
mean that a faction of “hawks" has got the better of
a faction of "doves" in the Politburo. From its
first days, the present ruling committee has consist-
ently shown more concern for the Soviet position among
other Communist parties and within the Warsaw Pact
than for "detente." While caution and compromise
have been the most notable characteristics of the
collective leadership's behavior, its alarm about
the spreading diversity in Communist ranks and the
flouting of Moscow's authority within its own orbit
have been apparent. Also evident, side by side with
a recognition of the indispensability of “peaceful
coexistence," has been a constantly rising alarm

-4-

ign Dj
C

( FIDE (

No n Dissem

over the hazards for the USSR of exposure to outside
influences. With Czechoslovakia, this concern rose
to the level of fright. The decision went finally in
favor of a primitive, neo-Stalinist attitude which
has never, in the past four years, been far from the
surface. What is not known, and may not be known for
some time, is to what extent this attitude will color
Soviet behavior elsewhere.

7. Moscow is now playing for time--time, in the
first place, to assure itself that Czechoslovakia is
safely back in the fold; to absorb, if it can, the
impact of intervention on its own leadership; to
sort out the effects on the Soviet position among
foreign parties; and to assess the consequences of
intervention for its international objectives. It
has probably already offered the non-Communist world
the only justification it intends to give for its
invasion of Czechoslovakia, namely, that Moscow con-
sidered its national interests to be threatened and
that, like it or not, the world must accept its de-
cision. Foreign Communist parties were clearly ex-
pected to respond to the cue of “counterrevolution,"
but the great majority have not done so. They have
seen instead that where Czechoslovakia was concerned,
the USSR put its own interests first, and that is
what most of the parties have themselves done. The
November conference of Communist parties, if now it
takes place at all, cannot possibly do what the So-
viets intended it to do: develop a new pro-Soviet,
anti-Chinese front of Communist parties. Having
discovered this, Moscow is likely to value all the
more loyal allies like Ulbricht and to consider it
all the more necessary to remain sturdy in its
support of North Vietnam.

8. There is, in addition, some obvious damage,
in the short term, to goals Moscow was pursuing
beyond the frontiers of the Communist world. A
brake has been put on the momentum which the USSR,
together with the US, had succeeded in building up
behind the NPT, and considerable diplomatic effort
will have to be spent in restoring it. It remains
to be seen whether Czechoslovakia has breathed new
life into NATO, but the Soviets must now reckon with
this possibility. In general, however, the main ef-
fects will be in the “psychological” realm and will

No eign Di

C Yoeapemer ¢

depend on whether and how soon Moscow can persuade
others to think of Czechoslovakia as an unfortunate
episode. In concrete terms, the direct consequences
will be slight. Moscow's recurrent expressions of
interest in multilateral projects looking toward a
lowering of the barriers between East and West in
Europe, such as a European security conference, have
always seemed more propagandistic than genuine, and
it will be no catastrophe for the Russians if these
projects are pushed further into the future. Moscow
has all along been following a policy of expediency
toward Western Eruope, hoping that, with some en-
couragement, the Western alliance would begin to

come apart while its own alliance was still more or
less intact. But the Russians have always been more
concerned with preserving the status quo in Eastern
Europe than in undermining it in Western Europe.
Moscow would no doubt have liked to have had it both
ways, but Czechoslovakia has made this more difficult.
Soviet influence in Western Europe is bound to recede,
temporarily at least. But as between the two--influence
in Western Europe and authority in Eastern Europe--the
Kremlin decided it had only one choice.

9. West Germany is a case apart. Moscow depends
on a fear of resurgent German power in Europe--to which
it is itself far from immune--to help hold the Warsaw
Pact together. It realizes, at the same time, that
Bonn will have some say about the shape of a future
"European settlement." The Russians have wanted to
be able, until that time comes, to keep open a line
of communication with the West Germans in order to
influence their views on a settlement. They have
dangled the prospect of a brighter future before them
in private, while inveighing against them publicly.
The use of this tactic is now temporarily denied the
Russians, and it may turn out that, partly out of
their own fear of the impact of Bonn's Eastern policy,
they have revived fears in West Germany which will
be slow to subside. If this has happened, it will
complicate Western pursuit of detente after the Czech-
oslovak dust has settled.

10. Against the background of heightened Soviet

concern for the preservation of the status quo in
Eastern Europe, the issue of Berlin will remain a

-~6-

gn

sensitive one.. Moscow is aware, however, that Berlin,
unlike Czechoslovakia, could readily become the scene
of a dangerous East-West confrontation. How the
Russians deal with the problem in coming months--
when there will be occasion for a test of the posi-
tions of East and West in the city--could be a good
gauge of the USSR's intentions in general.

ll. The Soviet action will have the least im-
pact in the nonaligned world. The USSR may be dam-
aged in those places where its standing has depended
to some extent on the validity of its “anti-imperial-
ist" credentials, but those places are probably few.
In the Third World, the Soviet position is not likely
to be much weakened where it is now strong, as among
the Arab states. By and large, the leaders of the
nonaligned nations will want to treat the Czechoslovak
issue as none of their business. The abstention of
India, Pakistan, and Algeria in the vote on the Czech-
oslovak question in the Security Council is a good
sign that recipients of Soviet economic and military
assistance will not want to deny themselves future
benefits for the sake of what they are likely to
think of as a remote and largely irrelevant issue.

12. Finally, where the future of US-Soviet re-
lations is concerned, the outlook depends to some
degree on the US attitude. It will probably cause
the Soviets little pain if the US cuts back on cul-
tural exchanges, for which they had no great en-
thusiasm anyway. The idea of a mutual reduction of
forces in central Europe, as a first step toward a
solution of the problems of European security, is
already a casualty; but this will be regretted more
in Washington than in Moscow. Such hopes as there
were for cooperation between the US and USSR in re-
moving some of the sources of tension in the Middle
East seem dimmér, although it may be all the more
in the USSR's interest to see that the conflict
there remains mainly in the political arena. Moscow
seems likely, moreover, to be more determined than
ever to remain strictly in line with Hanoi with ©
respect to the Paris negotiations. But, on the
question of the Soviet position on nuclear weapons
control, it cannot be said with certainty what So-
viet behavior toward Czechoslovakia portends. The

-7-

present indications are that Soviet interest in
discussions has not been diminished by Czechoslovakia.
It may be that the economic and technological argu-
ments for an agreement with the US are apparent to
one or another degree across the whole spectrum of
Soviet opinion, from militant to pragmatic. Not to
be excluded also is the possibility that Moscow will
see the need as greater after Czechoslovakia for
offsetting steps to keep US-Soviet relations from
settling into a total freeze.

13. US-Soviet missile talks, however, have
all along promised to be difficult. Distrust of
the USSR in the US, which is bound to grow as a |
result of Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia,
combined with the defensiveness and insecurity on
the part of the Russians which that action repre-
sented, may mean that any talks will now face still
harder going.
