Meeting no 11, London, England, 1 May 1961REGARDING Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012399, dated 1 April 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012399).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Meeting ll, Londen, Fngland, 1 May 1961

(Subject arr’ved at Poom 60, Mount Feyal Hotel, London,
at 1672 hears cn 1] May 1961, Immediately upen entering Cubjret
faw the medic ral prerarations op the table which had beer
mequired by the doctor fer Subject.) Gr Theen sre your medi-
t cines, hut we will chang the labels co that n~ name will appear
|! thereon. ‘°: Why can't I simply say that J beught ft at the
pharmacy? Can't I sav that? Gs: No, because ‘t ‘© a prescription.
te And If Io ocky the whole thing £f7 Gs: No, we will take care of
It, then give ‘t to you. sh: So this is the ¢ituation. Business
first. G: Not te get these medicines mixed up. oS: Very well.
(All laugh.) G: You must “row which one Js the tranquilizer, £1
Okay.
fe soy Yes day there was a clesed party fust for cur Soviet
people, a small as This morning ter schedule, up to 1500 hours
at the prem ses cf the Tenupredstve -- I have never heen ae re; it
fs “np another section of London -- they will have childrens! plays,
; erorts and dancing. There wontt be anything elses teday. We will
werk teday If yeu wish. Today is the first of May, a hal'day, so
we have to werk, owas told that the parade was very pempous; they
shawed rockets, Onc was a large reeket from which s,ace men jumped
ut, and then the other rockets. They say a lot of reekets were
shown, but I thir! nething new was shown. That's what I was teld,
| but it hae to be cheeled, as I did met see ‘tt. Ge We may be able
; to show yeu same photo shots that were made from the TV preosenta-
| tton. “t Good. as a cheek, IL will tell you £ there was something
new, or Foaverything was cld. Tomerrew at 2000 hours, a mov e

>
“The Blind Mus cian’ will be shewn at the Embassy and at 190°. hours

'

thers © an exeursicn te the Londen Museum. We wontt ge oto the

museum, because we have work to do w th the delegation, So we will
work @ little earlier,

3, Nt Now the day afte: tomorrow, the 3rd, Tam meeting the
PEZIDENT ~~ To dert't know exactly when but Towill find out tomorrow.

|

He will set the time. PAVLOV flfes cr the 6th, not the Sth, and

| we return on the same rlane. we take off at 1235 heurs London
time, We leave the hotel at 1100 hours on the Gth. L will be tn
| Moscow at 1€05 hours. In fioscow, wethin an hour, I can call and
report on my Flight there and ean ince H: Yes, S&S: There fin
Moscow -- leave the things on Saturday and go for a walk, I won't
| use my telephone at home. H: Chay.
|

St Ths new hard Line America os taking towards Cuba has
evertefie talking at the Fmhasry, Thy are alarmed by itl They
gay if America undertakes anything on her cwn, net using the
Cubans ‘n the USA, then we w ll be tn a a‘fffeult position, Why!
acause we cen only tand fead, weapons end gold. There are no

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 1, MAR 4992

bal . |
> . :
. -
'
,

ll

i
ment If we g ve_them_reckets then there will be a war. 1 spole |
to thr Counsellor, people from the office -f the Military Attache |
Their thinking Is -- It seems that the Americans will adept a very
fevere course of action and we wlll be Ina very difficult pos!-~
tion because we will have to do something. Tomorrow I promise to
find cut something from SHAPCVALOV about the report. 1 won't ferce
j hom: i wouldn't seem normal. But I will get at least a slight
report,

S. oS: I propose that we work tonight: I can be free at 2100
hours ton'ght, but tomorrow, nol Gt Fine. &: Tomerrow poss thly
during the day, ‘f we leave Ferrant’ early ..«. By the way I called
tcday at about 1400 hours and no one answered, Gt Strange! You
weren't connected? We were sitting here. {: No, I said "360".
But when I called te tall yeu about the TV prasentation, I was con-

. nected at cones. Cnly at this t'me fn the morning did 1 realize
that ‘t was necessary to go there, back at once to the Embassy.
Now, 1 had thfs Sdea, Think about this. There fs an awfully large
number of persons at the “mbassfes ‘n Amer ca, Great Britain and
th: other Weetern countries. We can make great diff'cult’es for
the Soviets, start'ng with the MID, the KGS, and our Strategic
Intelligence. This should be checked to see !f ‘t Is pract’cal --
te have only one Counsellor, one Ist S2eretary, one 2nd Secretary:
to cub them down and cut down the number stat oned on Moscow ‘f it
ts posstble. I dontt Pnow all the existing problems. This [s net
my task. My task is te offer suggestions based on the actual e
s'tuation. There {s a huge number -f people -+ Look at London! ~
why are so many people kept here? And I think theré are more
Soviet representatives here than (Western) representatives fn Mos-

te cow. Gtr So what te your schedule forttomorrow? When will you be
"at the Pmbassy? St Tomorrow even’ng at 2000 hours, there ‘8 &
movie there but, of course, 't ‘s necessary tr go there at 1900

hours. G: Of course. Ss: During the day we w'll go to Ferrant’.

“Gs Okay.

oy 6. S¢ And tomorrow I want to contact MERRIMAN. Gt: Very

. +, well, S&S: To prepare everything with MERRIMAN, FE will write down
everything that you prepared. H: He ought to try and do this,
because METRIMAN is a very busy man. He sheuld ring MERRIMAN
about 0900-0915 hours tomorrow morning. Gr Tomorrow, call MERRI-

MAN at 0900-0915 hours. Write down everything. 1 will give yeu all

" “the ian 1 have all the {nformation.. Write down as much as

you wish.

7. Sr Letts f'n sh the other thing. It is necessary to check

em the dé plomatic channels. If we have fewer representatives 'n
Moscow then, through proper channels, we ask why they have more than

~am

|
f11

we do? But not remove the low rank ng persons (DVORNIKI), but the
others, This would create a very difficult situation, who wi tl

be removed? Everyone fs ether connected with fometh'ng or has
special ass'gnments, A strugcle for supremacy w'll commence. Letts
el'minate from the Strategic Int-lligence, The KGB will apply pres.
Sstre and SHELEPIN will ask KHRUSHCHEV to leave his men. We, in
turn, w'll tien} Pressure and will ask that our men be left. If the

(representation) ‘s not equal, then this should be done. If the
(representation) te equal, !t may be possible to remove one section,
We should say, "Letts discuss this. Why should we have so many
representat!ves,. both yours ‘n our (country) and curs tn your.
{country)." If this won't do us any harm... (Present) it in this
way. G2: Very well, we wll consider this,

7. Cr Here 's the information about MERRIMAN., Se Okay. I
Wlll write 't dowd -- MERRIMAN, What ‘s h's name and patronymic?
Gt Arthur Douglas. Age 69. Wife and two children ~- son and
daughter. St That ‘s not’ necessary, Two children ‘s encugh., Gt
Yer, He Ifkeos hie little arandch'ld (girl) who Lives 'n Ként and
whom he visite often, S¢ That ‘s not necessary, Gt Educator: |
Secondary schol in Manchester. Then he attended two univers’tfes
~~ Cambridge and. Durham. £2 “oe he has two higher educations? Ge
Yes. Mext he has awards and honors, 8&3 How many awards? The
mames ara not needed, G: He has two of the h'ghest awards. The
George Cross, M: T-11 him what he got 't for. @: He got ft -for
~~ he fought fn the Army dur'ng World War 1 (191h-1918).° Ss) Such
dates are notinecessary. Gs And the Order of the Britich Emrire
in 192, He aot the George Cross for'‘dismantling the first German
magnetic mine. S: Is he an engineer by rrefession? G: Later he
Wat a consultant for all types of mines far the durat'on ef the
“WOrs, The disarming cf all kinds of new mires. He {S a spec’alfst,
SS: That {s clear. G: -His military services During World War 1,
he was in the Royal Army Grdinenee, cy This fs not necessary, -
He part‘clpated ‘n World War 1. Gt In 1939-19h5 he was in the
British (Army) Engineers. He visited the USSR In 19kk, as Scten»
t'flc Advisor to General ALEXANDER. This '? spertant because they
can check this and find cut about him. “5S: Ie he Lord ALEXANDER? _
H: Yes. He !s a Lord now, He was not a Lord at the time, G: - You
have h's positions «. the first t'me he was connected with milftary
erdnance: and the second t'me with the engineers. Now his educa-
tlon.es St Two unfiversittes and secondary school. G: Now the
ranks he recefved and what famous crgantzations he belongs to, 53
The crganizations are not necessary, G: Let me give you an example.
He ts a Fellow tn the Royal Soctety of *dinburg, Companton In the
Institute of Mechanica} Engineers, a Doctor of SClence, ff A
highly educated person! G: He has a third degree. S$: A Doctor of
Scfence. G: In the city of Lisle, S; The city Is not needed -.
& Doctor of Technical Scimnces. Gt He ts also @ Master «f Arts and
he ‘s a Compan'on of the Inst tute cf Techneiogical Engineers, S$:

os] sacl

#11

So by education and work experiences, he {s an eng'neer: he ts a
member of prem'nent engineer'ng crganiezations, Does he have any
Inventions? G: Letts see. Also, he was w th General FAVELL;: he
was his sc'entifie advisor. He does have ‘inventions, Write this,
“! This is very good, We never give tt so completely. Gr Ha
invented a process by which he can Silverplate objects ‘n such a
manner that they wontt tern'sh-or-corrode. He Won't sell this
patent and keeps ft fer himself. He ty very ;roud of the fact ‘that
he plated a small sh’p, that belonged t- the Duke of Fdinbergh, In
such a way that it does not tarnish. Before this {t was ‘mpossible
to clean alk the small parts of the ship. Now t stands 25 an
example of setentt#fic achievement. ££: Preserved {t for ages, G: ..
This !s an example. St J understand,

9. Gt Now a personal deser'rtion, S: Now mere about him,
G: Cf cours: ycu can descr’be h’m. He is short, wears Classes, a
bit fat -- you tnow this yours@1f£, St I knew thie .- bald,
lasses, G: He fs a member of the oity Delivery Company. 1s that
transportatl on delivery? Hs Ne, no, ow can explain that in

-.any Sther language. This !9 one of the old city Ccompantes, J don't

know how you can explain this, Gr What does 1% do? Hr It doesnt
do anyth‘'ng, This ‘s a sort of honor. There are a lot of e‘ty
guilds and things In the City. Gt Oh, 1 sre. A member OF the
London Council. S: of the Deputies of the Workerge (laughs). Me

It {© an henor to he elected to‘one of these city compan‘’es, Gy
You understand, !t fs a special recogn’tion, H+ ft {s not public
@t all, G: It fs an honer for his accomrlishments. =f Ahf An
honorary member rf the London Council. G+ By character, he thinks
a lot of himesif. Ne knows what he knows and wants to convince
“thers, You knew he thinks a ist of himself. 5: Yes. Gt He

If' 2s to talk pbout all the ‘mportant persons he knows, St So he
has @ wide clrele of friends and Itkes to talk shout them. G+:
Exactly. J: That fs an important pointl £: Wide Cfirele of cone
tacts and friends. 4: And wants to enlarge this circle, and to
‘mprove himself technically, S: In ether werds, he continues te
work! G: And wants to. go further, 5S: Yes, further ... Gs: And
he has plenty of in'tiative. SS: And fs highly loyal to the Soviet. -
Union. Can ] say this? (Lauchter). q: He ts the author cf many
beeks and technical rublications. S: He ts the author of many
technical publ'eations. The subjects are not needed, This is very
detafled, They wil} say you knew Wim Ike your father. .

10. Gi Recently he publ ‘shed A Metallurg cal Dictionary. 5S;
Author cf a Technical Dictionary cn Metallurgy. Gr It te mere Ife
& textb-ok than: a dictionary. 5: Metallurcy., Very goodi Very
geod! They will show ntereast 7 this at once, They will say,
"Give us the address! How fs the address written tn English?"

~h

, 6h
#11

Becouse there 's Chelsea .sessselike the calling card? G: Yes.
St -I left the calling card ‘n Moscow; I have his calling card.

G: And all his t'tles are printed on it. $1: They are all
written there, Gs: And y-u wlll be able to explatn what they are
because you now Know. The first is an order, GC; the second, an
“rder: then the medals. G: C,8.E. is the Order of the British
Empire. St Get his enlling card, H: Okay. St The RE?1IDENT
wll ask me for ‘t because he will be considering this fn terms uf
whe to ass'gn to contact him. G: Now the last-« this might be
Important. S$: fe I] wrots the address, I will put a colon and you
weir gtve ot’ te me in addit!on.:

fl, @: There ‘s only cne more detail about h'm. Despite

all h's ‘mportant achievements end friends he still lives very
timply, out cf trwn, In a modest apartrent that leoks cut on rafi-
read tracks. St Not {na fash'onable ne'ghborheod -- very
modestly. Gt Very. Not far from Streatham Hill Station. S:
Please gi ve me the address, | have his telephone but I can't ask
him for hts address because I will be all mixed up. Gt How do you

e there?) You see there 's this railroad station...5.. H: So he

ives by Streatham HII] Station on the District line. S: Fine,
new T have something to talk about. Gs: Is ft enough? S: Yes.
Plenty.

\

(2) St L want to report to you what 1 did today. Mr. and
Mra. TE and I went to Harrods where we spent three hours. G&P:
Ahat S: The best! J consider that it was r'ght that KHRUSHCHEV
wos net taken there when he was ‘n London. He should look at the
garden, singing birds, the fountains! I was eorry I couldn't take
VARENTSOV with me: he would have bought sll the roses. (All
lauch.) I should have loaded up a car and sent ft. We looked at
everything. Things are expenstve there. Mrs. WYNNE helped me
greatly and I mads a decision and bought her a sult fer 2h pounds
as a g'ft. She was delighted, Brcause she helped; So] am m'nus
ah pounds. WYNNE has all the bills and rece!rts. Gr We don't
need the receipts. S:!. No? So that you can check? Gt Who cares.
if “t is more cr less. S: It fs Just that one of your people
might think that I tool more pounds than necessary. 1 have three
peunds left. Hr You have threa left? That Is good. St I didntt
buy much.’ 1 hought my wife a regular Spring-Autumn coat, @ ccat
for my ddughter, a suft for my wife -- like the one 1 bought for
Mrs, WYNNE, the same price, quality and color «=» salad color. 1
beught cne wh'te blouse, bathing sult and bathrobe for my daughter
~~ two kerchiefs, two bottles cf perfume, feur 1 psticks. 1

bought some after-shave Iot'on for myself. But things are
expensive, Coats 25-26 pounds: suits 2h pounds; a few other minor
things and three pounds remain. Please take tome meney from my
account and give ‘t to me. I have net bought the watch or the ring,

~Ge.

a ; : ° , |
' ;
, ‘
,

fii

not a single pair of shoes cr the purse for my mother. G+: But
you did get a s'reable percentage cf the things. ©: Yer. G: At

least In quantity. &: WYNNE has everything. 1 did net bring
anything here,

Gt How will WYNNE carry this fer you? It {fs dangercus.
fe ro whom? For WYNNE? Gt Yes. He can be seized as a specu-
later.” St Who will se'zge him? G: ‘At Customs. $: 1 can
guarantee that WYNNE won't have his luggage Inspected, G: How?
fi Twill meet him. G: He won't go through Customs? S: No, his
suttcase will go through Customs, however, they dontt Ino, Thry
have never ‘nspeeted his luggage during three years of his travéls

| -Le the USSR. Gr: What would happen !f they looked? St If they
opened it?) Bringing various things fer friends. A speculator {fs
uevfhe whe brings twenty sweaters -- then !t fs for speculation. When
Ht is two, three things -- 9 coat, shoes, handbag -- he ‘8 bringing
‘things for lis froends on the Londén Embassy. 1 am 100 percent
- Sure they won't cpen 't. If they crack me, then {t will be had for
wt WYNNE also. But fo am met afraid -- I am a brave worker, G: But in
case you don't meet him for some reason? $+: This cantt happen,
.- i'm not going cn TDY any place. G: No. We know that. $: Nothing
os will happen to him. They ary nice to WYNNE. He has not compro-
ae mised himself 'n any wav, ‘Gr But at Customs they might make him
ray duty, This can happen, no? $2: He rhould say, "1 an bring’ ng
things from London to peofle at the British Embassy ‘n London +=
the’r things. A handbag for one, shoes for another, ete.” Gr And
if he is asked for his courter documents? Or something? 1 Just
want to make sure that we dontt havea any trouble. %: Heaven for-
b'dt What courter documents?

bee

Ga) Gi If he appears wth sultcases and your su'tcase, how

wll Pf give the things to you later? S+ Very simply. He will
travel wth his one sultcase -- one with two compartments, a
standard ene. IJ have seen it twiee Already. That {s all, A reine
ceat on his arm. G: So you take the suitease..sesese St! NO. The
perters take ft. J mebt him at the plane. The porters take every~

= thing there. I go to the certain on duty there and ask him to Fass
this man quickly. He will answer, "Yes etri". 1 wtll present my

‘ tocument from the Committee. The second captain checks entry decu-

ments and stamps them. I will ask him te hurry him through. Jo will
say the car fs walting. J will take a car, not from the Committe e,
but from one of my many friends with cars. Lo will drive him te the
hotel. He will enter with h’s suitcase and m ne wll be left in
the car. Hr That's not t:o bad. Gt No. Itts @iricht. But we
must check this cut. £1 Thank yeu. Thant y°u for worry'ng so
much but Lf will werk well for another two-three years, Then I will
run (defect). Gt: Se “t would be better f you took less and WYNNE
took more? S&S: One sultease will be taken by WYNNE and one by me.

wee

#il

Cs, S$: Now another thing -- I have another legend. Many In
the assy are ask’ ng me te take packages to the USSR for them.

Of course I will take two, three, but will refuse the cthers. I
will take the REZIDENT's, SHAPOVALGV's ~+- SHAFOVALOV has a mother-
in-law, a mother and sick father that he sends medic’nes te.

These I] will take, but to the others I will say, "I have one su't-
case filled with my th'ngs and the ether will be full of packages
from here.” JI have already prepared them for this. They know
already. Who wlll fnvestigate cr what will my delegation think?
They will not come again ‘n October. I won't come again either. 1
have them all bought (the delegates). Otherw'se, in October none -f
them will come. Hr That's a pretty geod ‘dea. S$: Departure by
afr ts at 1235 heurs; at 1805 hours I wlll be in Moscow. Prepare
seven shillings and s{x pence per person for airport tax. Every-
thing !s written dewn. The tickets are ordered. Hr He will need
more money te complete his purchaser so we had better give him ecme
more. &¢t The watch that I will buy will be in my pecket. Gs

That Is no problem. &: If they touch my clothes then ¢rect a
monument te me. Ge What 's ‘n the pocket ‘s chay. ©: We will
Work some more, then we will die.

$2 You told me 2 geod th’ng yesterday -- "If you have tc
run rrun without suitcases and other preperty™. Gr You know
"t Isa long way tc runt (All tale.) He What was that? G: He
satd, "If I have t+ run, where the hell do 1 go «-- te the US or
British Embassy?" I told him tn that case, run te the nearest one.
(All laugh.) S: I will go have dinner with the delegation new.

I haven't drunk a drop cf wine or vedka -- nothing. have ‘n mind
the occasion of our celebration. G: You have a good percentage cf
your shopping done. &: About one~half. G: Well, that's not bad.
I'm surprised you had time to do that much, St We did it fast.
Mrs. WYNNE wants to spend a lot of time pieking things’ out. WYNNE
only has the b'lils/recefpts. He has a whole stack of bills; he will. -
submit them later, so that yeu knew that 1 have done it properly.
G: Well we are not arguing abcut that. $: If I needed money I

“ wenld need Soviet money, cr things that I can sell te friends for

soviet ‘rubles. 1 don't have the right not t> bring Someone a
sweater, for example, to the wife of Genefal VARENTSOV. Perfume --
f'¢ perfume I can take meney. Il will let them pay me the price cf
the article ‘n the Commission stores, about 50-60 rubles -« S00-600
rubles according tc the old system ~- that's what: they cost (n the
strres,. Gr: I see. —

G: There Js 100. Sr So you gave me 150 and here fx |.
LOO7T\ GY 250. S: Should I reer’ pt fer thie? Gt You are cur con
worker, not an agent. With agents, you have receipts, ete. St
No, we take fece pts from agents. Gt From agentsy yes -- hut you

~7T-

t

fll

are "nha different catesory, St As long as yeu have reminded by
of money, I would Like to. state my cpinion and then we won't return
te this subject. Inasmuch az you have made such e@ decision, or {t
is not made but yeu have a plan, I can flee unexphctedly with the
family and leave »verything, Leave thinas worth many thousands.

The hell with them! Let them choke on them, You erns’der my EOD

(1 April 1961), but I have been wort-ng for you much longer. My ‘
thoughts and opinions have spl't away long age, Just to work with
yu. But many Soviets have ‘deas who would Itke te (work) for yw,
But Ideas are nothing: ft f* only a bluff, Action is Important. J
started work'rg.esesoeby the way, trday ‘t Is two years since]

f nished there coursas, the ist of May 1959. At that t'me I started
rrepar'ng the mater‘als, all this, all other matters. Almost two
years have passed end I hav: had th’s tn my pecveat. J wanted te
ae work'ng for you actively ¢ ght menths age. You knew this very
We r

st Since there is this syetem of document evaluation,

and ‘Mts Important for me, 1 want to lve well duringfthe pertod
that fate will have me live ‘n the Free World. G: Of course, We
understand. St J would Like to state my cpinion again. Inasmuch
as I don't have diamonds -~ my father did net leave me anything: In
the “nglish cr American banks +- I can defect to you fn six te
eight months, In a year. I want to (def-ct) tn two-three years,

in erder to do more with my peeftion tn the General Staff and my
poe staticned and working “tn Moscow. But ft mfiuht happen that J
TTT comette you earlier, Gr Of course. St I would like t-
request the follow'ng: That all my materfals be evaluated
seperately. How? In any way! Gi Okay. St Considering of
course, that I have already been given sums by you already. @: Cf
coursed Cf course! St: It has te be done very honestly. What cn-
has earned, {!* what he should have, A personts ability determ'nes
what he has on the Free “orld. The stupid one Js the street
Cleaner: the smarter one has h's Little thep. This fs the way it
Sune to me, nbje:tively. <A (person) should get what he cerns. Gt

THe

: 53 The work that 1 did in advance dur ng this period, 1
cons tered

Important. Lo strived for ‘t. J attained ‘t, I did

everything I could regarding these matters. Now I will work on ny
| hew ass'gnments and yeu will get (reports) from there. 1 will

wark actively 'n all ways and et a daeper Leval cf comprehens ‘on,
That {ts why I reauest -- {tf yet cons der the material to be ef no
value or Jf it ts only average, this is a d'fferent matter. But if
some of them have a certain value sees. ! recently read ‘n the
papers thet the Americans pafd «ne millton for w& file, a dosster -f
some sort cn Brae!! or some southern country. We heard this. A

. Pe oe

‘ot

fil

milifont Now you will recefve f'fteen recru‘ted agents who are
recru'ted and working, This also has some value te Mm&, aS &
worker, @: Yes. S: If 1 must come te you in eight months, then
Lwill have $8,000. in my account. G: No! No! This ts not the
way it works. S$: This will not satisfy me! That is not enough.
I'm telling you this. G: You do net understand. §S: 1 am telling
you honestly. Gt Of course not. We are talking about a genera}
princ' ple,

St I thought this through dteply teday when 1 prepared.
this. eu are work’ ng with me now, but In a year or two you may
get a promotion. New people, whom I don't know, will contact: me,
They won't know me, or will only know about me from what yeu tell
them, This fs Just an example -- suppose yeu get & premotion eat
work. Ht I think you better tell him that white this goes on we
shall stay, Gr: We will be working with yru permanently. $¢ And
if you gat a high pesition? G: No. This wontt hearpen. $: Then
i will have to start rreving everyth'ng again. G: Nol Nol Sz:
We have become acquainted, I confessed everything to you as one
should. Gt We understand your pred/cament, and we. beth veuch that
we wll work woth yeu permanently. S: Thank yru, 7 i

@) St Now the last thing -- despite the greed of FHRUSHCHEV, ©
we are Wery Limited in cur payments te persons who helpvus. If 1
ever grt something of value for yru about rockets, please psy the
Fersons who have helped me «- that fs ell. That ‘s all that 1 will
say about the subject. I came to you because of political convic-
+ ont. I started work'ng fer you in Turkey. Check all the f'les,
my anonymous telephone calls against IONCHENKO, against the Genzral
and against the regime. Was I not ready morally? Yes 1 was! @:
All this will be considered, S: I should be considered tc be one
ef your soldiers, frem that t'me on. G: This will be considered:
aon't worry, St Cheek. I am sure the Turks have ail this
recorded, They understood me accurately. I was. very nice tx them.
This strengthens my case, It helps me convince you, and it helps
‘eur hicher authorit‘es to understand that from that perfod on 1
switched frem-uncertainty t~ defin'te actions. ‘I was afraid, of
course, and uncertain many t'mes. But 1 was on your side, Ge: This
WiLL all be censidered. $: I uncovered ICNCHENKO to the Turks. 1
called frem the telephone becths. Some meetings were postponed,
Later, at the command of the General, I supported the meetings with
the Turkish agent. I saw the surve!lianes, All this bufit up and
ICNCHENKOG was expelled 'n three months. Who gave the leade? 1 d‘dl

*
oR at

St Before my departure on hy November I telephoned that
the murntal was stolen. Was there such a call? The Turks know. It
was reesrded, You knowl Let them tell yeu that there was a cat
on November. I was teld (In English) when IJ celled, "Mister,

~Se

ae
#il

please come 'n and we w'll talk with you. (In English) I sald,
“Okay, okayl", but I had @ ticket in my pecket already. 1 Left

‘ via the East. If PEEKE had been there at the time (1 would have

vibe

contacted him): 1 was afraid t- talk to the ether one. . The

Amerfcan Alr Attache was new, 8 Colonel, and I was afrald te talk
to his assistant, despite the fact that 1 had geod relations with
them beth. lo was afratd. JI trusted PEEKR. If PEEKE had been -
there then, and In charge, 1 would have asked him to ‘give ma the

Pn

address for future contact”.

G3) St Later when I knew everyth'ng that was harpening fn
the Kiefilin, Io went cut toward the BALCHUK. For some reason. 1 was
drawn there. I head the !ncl'nation to spprceach the West. I knew
forefgners who were stay'ng there: that fs tcurlsts., I thought 1
would stop them and tell them what the situation was in the Kreme
ling What was happening! What a struggle! G: You can be sure
that everything that happened before will be taken inte account,

2) S: When I com? over to you, I would L'ke to live

decen » WHll LT have the right to live my last years ‘n such a
manner? G1 What {8 even mere ‘nportant you will. have a financlal
base with which to provide ycurself w’th a house, car, etc. More
important, you will have a good, honest, and worthwhile work with
us, $2 I will give all my strength te this, all my faith. If
¥ou have this system of payment, then consider that J have worked
actively for you for two years, for twe years. Then allocate my
earnings fer two years at the monthly rate. Everyons must have his
ewn, if J had savings ‘n the bank then 1 would say that 1 dontt
need anything,

ind

St Thin ts secondary to me, belleve me, but L also have
te provide f-r my family and myself. All I sm ceneerned with fs

| Whether 1 shall be able to do this?) G: We understand and -

' my brain, my heart -- that you will

sympathize with your views. S¢ I want to earn this: I don't want
a gift. Dontt say that (Subject's true name) Is a good person,
lot's cive him .o.” whatever {ft fs. I dontt want this. I want to
varn what I get. Hr Very well. Se oT did notrsay ta you -- Here
fs one recket, twe. This f* = cede. This ‘s something else. 1
gave everythirgl To am willing te werk with my heart, scul, head,
health and strength. G,H,&J: We understand your views. St These
are my views on the matter. Plemse excuse me for putting [ft this
way. Hz It ‘s sirfcht. S: J am thinning of my future. You are
very nice now while talking to mr, but maybe you wentft he here,
That {* what I am afratd cf -~ maybe you will be transferred. Ht
No, this won't happen. Never! Gt This will not be. S! Then I

WILL not detain you. Iwill go to dinner, Am 1 In yeur geod

regard now? G: Yes. S¢ JI swear gs my mother, child, conscience,
ave an even h'gher opinion of
me -= ahout ten t mes hicher. G: Then you will be here at 2100

~10»

fil

hours. St Yes, and we shall work. But Io am not saying gcodbye.
- (Subject Left at 1545 heurs on 1 May 1961.)

~t]-
