The Current Political Situation and Prospects in Tropical Africa
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008136, dated 5 April 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008136).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL TNTELLIGENCE AGENCY

20 May 1966

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 8-66

SUBJECE: The Currerh Political Situation and Prospects in
Tropical Africa : ;

SUMMARY

. Africa today 1s groping for new answers and reassuring guide-
ines. O14 rostrums such ag Fan-Africenism and one-man, one-party
rule have failed to deliver prosperity or dislodge white regimes
in southern Africae Radical natioaalists such as Wscumah, who
oace seemed to be the wave of the future, have proved to be poor
managers, and enthusiasm for their brand of militant chenge hes
lost steam. But moderates Like Balewa egually have been, turned
out of office. The military are increasingly becoming the
decisive power group, but they lack Ideas end stature. During
recent political skizmisning both Moscow and Pelping suffercd
notable setbacks.

We think current politicel floundering will contimue for some © “"”*

considerable time without any African or external force or ideology
becoming deminant. If anything, Africa's problems are likely to v
gpread. For example, frictions be ‘een Arabs and Africens seem
@radually to be emerging in countries on the fringe of the Sahara.
There ts also en increasing Taiiure to meet current food require-
nents.

Africa's mood of the moment 1s lergely cne of drift ond doubt,
and intractable econemic problems will contimue to trouble nesxiy
all African leaders. But the entrencred white regimes will provide
a@ convenient target for those Africans who wish to divert attention
from their internal difficulties and to restore thelr political,
Co

SehoLe how lie

Zebrodactlon ;

. 1. A nuchex of recent evanbs have ckheken Atricen selt-
confidence. A rash of coups tes toppled radieal and moderate
regimes. Rvidence hes come to light which is disiliusioning those
who ‘believed that the USSR end Ching were merely disinterested
providers of ald. The staying power of white Rhofesia is en en~
barrassing contrast to the stagnation of black "“Wtberation movax
ments", For mich of the African political elite, it seems to be a
tine of subdued reappraisal.

She Current Situation

_@e bn amportant resuti of the recent political upheavals
was, of course, to dramatize the fragility of Africa's political
institutions and regines» Thiet was reflected in the recent con-
ference of 12 East and Centro! Afrleen states, during which they
tacitly agreed to cease interfering in the effairs of notghboring
states end to curtail. the political activities of xefugees Zrom
other Buack African states. There are some who are evading this
agreement, @.G+, the Somalis in Kenya, and others who are unable
to control all refugee activity, eG+» Burundi, but by ond large

there is a stronger Aispositicn on the part of a aunber of Africen

» Bu

govermenis nob to da unto others What they would not want done

to themselves,

3. Recent political developments represent a setback’ for the

proponents sf African "rsdicalism”. Many Africans, yarbicularly
the young educated slite, set considerable store ‘by the maxing

of political showmen such as Nkrumah end Toure. ‘hese Inaders
succeeded an representing their brand of radicalism, including .
nllitency, Yepld change, and close links with ‘the Communist povers,
as the wave of the future. Riding the political crest » they
carved out a role in Afro-Asian circles di proportionate to ‘their
countries’ power. Then the radicals suffered a major setback

with the humiliating &i seppearance of their colleague Ben Bella.
Nov, Mrumsh's ouster, Toure's troubles, the near economic Denke

ruptoy of all the radical regimes have at Least temporactly sapped J

much of their political appeal. won neneeaeene

4, However, the radicals retain a considerable potential .

for trovblemaking. Indeed, they still dominate regimes in Guinea,

Mali, Congo (Brazzaville), and Zanziber, among others. Figures

“COPY:

woo 3AINES ES JOHNSON

weSial aCaBablaD ny

such as Bubu end Odinga are not without influence and funds ”
Another distuxbing factor is the crewing aurber of nxmed exiles,
aspeelally in Bast and Centrel Afelea, many of them extranely :
prinitive and beady ere) hitch on to any cause. More importeuntiy,
there remain substantial numbers ef discontented intellectuals and
youth even in uoderute states such as Senegal end Nigeria. But
the polities image, so eruelal. dn Afvlea, of radical notables
has suffered grievous domage » ead Lor the moment the radicals seen
wngdle to fire Africa's imagination or to marebal mch in the way

of political backing.

5. At the same time, so-called "moderate" ox "consexvative!!

goveruents have encountered a full measure of trouble. Balewa's

assassination, the ouster of Presidents Dacko (Central African

Repubiic) and Yemeogo (Uppex Vote), and growing preasure on Eatle
Selassie are manifestations of verious kinds of discoutant arising

from various causes. Ta some places, goveraments have been

 mukanmeneiatenamatonenl

® Their edherents and other like-minded extremists recently
formed the Loogely-orgunized and Commaist-financea "East

_ African Front", designed to promote mutual, Interests in
trade unions, youth groups, and women's organizations, and
to prouote radical policies in the Orgenization of African |
Unity (OAV) and Afro-Asien orgatizations.

wha

" overbirned because of beleted attempts to impose a little

“susterLty"; in others appexentiy because of extravagance and

misnsnageneut In some instances, trival end regional cousidera-

tions have probably. played a major role; elsewhere they seexi to

have had little effect an setting political forces. in motion.
IncGeed, in moderate as im radical states, as often as not potite
cal. change occurs when growing disillusion with ‘the eae leader
eoncerts with the disposition of a snail organized group «= usually
militery or labor -- to take action.

6. Although military leaders have deuonstsated a growing

eS ERE ga en rch eer tee ns os Lanes

siiatoanees to take power, it is doubtful whether military eeansesd
offer a panacea for Africa's problems. Probably the lees sophisti«
cnked. amy leaders are closer to the simple Pecgle in the ‘bush
then are the Western~educated prcrereicoey politiciens, who now

constitute something resembling a "class" of their ow. But the scauate
thin layer of military leadership is i211 at ease with the “eauented 4,
- elite" and the bureaucracy, though they diet @epend upon them (ana

the bureaucrats so far find it adventégeots to go along). mn

those eases where the military has chosen to return nominal. power

to eivilien authority while retaining its essentials, e.g., Togo,

Dahomey, the politicians have again become quickly mired in

ee es

COPY:

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON |

familiar aifrieultios. Waon the wilitary chooses to hold on to 7
power, other preblens come into focis. the exes , Like the — :
politicians, are frequently beset by tribaliaa, ¢ O87 Migeria,
and corruption in thelr ranks is nou unknown y C-Bes Ugenda. .
7 Discipline is often lax, and they tend to deal harshly with the
populace, es in the Congo. Also » milttery figures sich 2s ,
Colonels Lamizans (Upper Volta) oz Bokassa (Central Africen Re~
public}, or slighty more impressive individtals such 26 Mobutu,
simply lack the steture and skits to do mach more ‘then keep their
tedioas limping aloxg. . As a whole, the African military extablish«
nents display little of the administrative and organizational
talens: for nation-building apparent im same military regimes else-
where,’ Bay, Pekistan, or some of the better examples in Letin

_ Americas

Te In geueral, the lusty coufidense and assurance that
marked African polities in the wake of independence has eroded,

to be replaced by something of a "morning after” syndroue. Afri«
can political situens and institutions no Longer seem to generate
mich excitement. Pan-Africanisn is in the doldrums, end "Negri- v
tude" failed to eatch on. Even the one-man, one-party nyeten
often eleimed by Africans to be their unique contribution to the

née

of goverment, 1s increasingly on triel as it appears that

these parties are used as a mechanism. to control or indoctrinate

Ye the: ‘populace as in the ease of Mownsh's Convention People's

e : ‘Perky. Meanwhile 2 titre-African cooperation bas been slight in

eS ‘nearly every field, though it is always possible to get a measure

oe or. agreement on anticolonial ismes. ‘he most. generous view of

| ‘the OAU is that it has held together. me Organisation Commme

| Africaine et ‘Malgache (ocam) end its predecessors have been
slightly more effective in practical tems, but this has ‘been due :
chiefly to Houphoust -Boigay's subsidies and interest. Finally, |
‘the only regional. organization Which ‘has ‘worked in the past, end

‘ which ‘was set up. under British rule,. the East African Common Ser-
vices’ Organization, shows = ‘signs of breakup.” ,

8. At the same tine, the "Laberation movenent's” seeking .
political change in southern Africa have come nearly toa FO
stop. ‘he African Liberation Committee (axe), effiliatea with .
the OAU, has been an acknowledged fatlure. It is short of funds,
end several states have indicated a desive to pull out. The |
guerrilla movements im Angola and Mozambique also have failed to %
flourish, though they continue to tie down large muibers of Porte-
Guese troops. Nationalists in Rhodesia are ineffective, end those

in South Africa have been forced into trifling clandestine activity.

=Te

y
j
t
FT
4
é
H
i
i
t
4
if
4

" activity throughout the continent, aud in Kenya. the depth of

9» The Communist powers have also suffered some political
setbacks in Afvica recently, The most important of these undoubt-
edly were in Chana, where Moscow and Peiping seperately had
established close Links with Niruzah’s clandestine operations

and were Ja a good position to abet subversion and guerrilla

Communist involvement in Hhewe matters is now widely publicized
an Africa. However, Communist setbacks are not due merely to"

exposure of clandestine cperetions, but are in large part caused .
by the every day hazards. of the African scene. , For exemple, .
despite suv: stantial ecoammie end ndlitary aid, events continue to
go badly for the Soviets in Saselia, and the Chinese have lost
Ground with the mercurial Toure and, momentarily perhaps, in Mali.
However, this is a continually matting situation, ond as against
these difficulties, the Soviets seem to be improving their position |
in Uganda and the Chinese are apparently ‘becoming even more deeply °*

entrenched in. Zanzibar,

10. As they contemplate the larger world scene, many Afri-
cans have had to recognize that their influence on international
politics is. not going to measure up to their earller extravagant
dreams, They have succeeded to a large extent in remaining outside

-~8.~

rwttn uehimxenteaaee™

the Cold War. But they have not Imposed a nen normality on the
bad old powers, nor have they become a decisive factor in extra-
African effeizs. Adjustment te these facts of life has been going
on slowly for some time; the recent troubles within Africa itself?

have probably brougitt the process slong a little further.
‘Prospects

11. These developments could be healthy if they encouraged
Africen states to turn to the work of internal cevelopuent, to,
atop meddling in thelr neighbor's affairs, and to cease their
international posturing. The record of upsets, frustrations, and .
Aisiliusiomments should constitute a strong case for discarding —
the sloganeering and the cliches in favor of a pragmatic cone

centration upon the enormous tasks at home.

22. ‘The recens decline of some of the radicals will provide
a@ breathing spell fox the West end additional time for moderate
Africans to work for economic end social progress under somewhat
tess politieal pressure. But this atmosphere is partly conditional
on a modicum of economte progress, a "sense of success". For the
attraction for grand preseriptions Is far from dead. It is hard

to see where new ones will came from; Kouphouet-Bolsny’s economic

~9-

Subueneae?

| “COPY-.
LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON

Liberelism, despite acknowledged achievements, is not exciting
‘enough, and the military regines ere welahely to ereate poplar
concepts, aus uncertainty, floundering, and apathy will, almost
certainly combinue to be the hallmerks of African politics for

_ bone time to come.

13. This is not to suy that extremist and radical. figures
may not come to power or prove to be very troublesome from time
to time, : This eventuality seems almost certain to recur in a.
region with #0 matty weak, one~nen shows. Additional military v.
coups, particularly in the extremely backward states of ex-French’
West Africa, are likely. As the military regimes fet to make .
headvay on fundamental national problems, factiosalization and VW
internal. conflicts within the African armed forces probsbly will
grow. It is worth noting that three large Atricen countries | an
which the US feels @ considerable stake, 1,e., Ethiopia, Wigerta,
and the Congo, are among those beset by major problems which in
large part Involve the loce!. <tlitery establishment.

14. Moreover, serious new probes are just ahead. Most
African countries traditionally have been self-sufficient, but
there is a prowling trend toward dependence on imports for staple v
foods. This is already apparent in Ghana, Guinea, Sierra Leote,

~ 10 ~

ven

COPY: -

LYNDON an INES JORNSON L

“Idberia, Senggai, aid Meta. Prolonged droughts have also caused
food shortages throughout mach of east and southern Africa, but
may eso conceal more fundamental egriculturel problems. De~
elining per capita food production is due to a host of economic ;
and social conditions, including among others, rapid urbanization,
poor distribution, and ml snqnagenent end neglect of national ‘agri ; |
cultural, resources, In any case, the increasing fellure cf Afri-~
cans to meet taeir focd requiz wenents aggravates other troubles

as the military goverment in Nigeria is now Giscovering. Food

pic aateteme ela

shortages and high prices contribute to Ieberit urban discontent,
ana drain off funds requixed for capital Gevelopmient. Pertaps ~
most Srportant y the failure to develop a CES CR INS agrarian
. popvlation Limits the nat sional ‘tax base and economic aeyelrment
prospects generally.

15, Purtaermore, we believe that Arab-Afvicen relations in -
fropicel. Africa are gradually moving into a troublesome stege. , jects
Mese difficulties will be particularly severe in the states in- =
mediately south of the Sahara, where there exe large mumbers both
of Africens and Arcbs, but they will. also affect the Horn, and
Africe, generally. Racial and religious aufterences ‘wake could

.

lead to civil strife are already agparent = Blogta, Mauritanie, :

“COPY-

LYNDON 3AINES JOHNSON

end Chad and Jie just beneath the surface in Mali. and Mgeria.
1 Mesnvnile, Sudan's efforts to deal with black dissidents in its

southern provinces have caused an outflow of refugees and attend~

ant political problems in Congo (Leopoldville), Uganda, and Ethi«

‘opla. Somali-~backed insurgency in Ethiopia end northern Key
remains a chronic irritant in African circles. in general, we
‘expect a fairly high incidena’ of quarrels, coups, and political
upheavals of one sort or another. They will stem from 8 variety

' of causes, primarily local, end it seems clear that they will not

Lead to the domination of any single force or ideology, either ,
African or external.

26, Tn this sebtirg, Moscow and Peiping will contime tobe
attracted by the prospect of quick political gxins on the cheap. ~
But the USSR, at least, seems to have a good understending of the
Limits of politicel opportunity in Africa. Moscow evidently ex= —
pects to win a few and lose a few, recognizing at Stnee that this
is not ‘the ‘proper historical era for traditional Soilettan: fa
Ghana, for example, the USSR is calmly trying to weather the
storm, taking « beating for the present in hopes of staying in
place while avaiting better days. Chinats policies still seem

less realistic, and there may be additional setbacks in store for

Pelping« .
| _ 12 -
| LYNDON 2AlNS JOHNSON.)

17. In sum, the prospect for Africa is for continued, probe
ably cven more frequent, sudden politieel upheavals. ‘Indeed,
Afxicen political dingtitutions have yet to esteblich sufficient
vitality to permit constitutional succession or change. In almost
every country the situation is complicated py growing and intract«
able economic problems. At the same time, the white-dominated
regimes in southern Africa provide en attractive target for those
Africans who wish to divert attention from their intexnal. troubles ©
and to restore their political standing. —

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES: :

SHERMAN KENT
Chaixman.
