Meeting no 21 - 24 July 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012408, dated 1 June 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012408).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

by rk

wm net

Hestin: Ne
iv :
(Om spinal
da ailver pho det ogl Mra ei arvived at 2975 howm.

wosting £22

; Subject agreed.

e Pubjeat

to bring trek roquires further |

not ennughe nd TUORY, both Pcovs and eee Wish he ms aehed
He ALL wight wo will get ‘MEN. Bg The to sete are

se ly ve

After visitdn,
morning, I then went on to the Fah Coat

he had hewd fron ¥

Ant wie hed ow ce ee ms firet on the 14-4 --

be BE Ensures rr Lee tor news of the cachines I had promos’ %
tain, 1 told pAvIoV that I had alre:dy spoken both to WIKHE and MELE
about both monines and that Were, as going to txiy one in his own meme and
then hani it over to the Soriste whe wrsld yay the bill. The bill will
then hari it over 10 SnAg en an official invoice to justify We oonts
Thet TALL engine will be delivered this week on Saturdays ‘8 regis the
other ANITA engine, honever’s I plan to send MEPEV a telegram tonorrom
(25th) stating, that since the finn abealutely refuses %7 ecll the Jovicts jlom
than 100) mabines en bieo, the Pritich specialist who me been in froquarit
contact with GNIK, Ind agreed to the ATI in his ow mime and eq

P : arn 7 whi

in C08 as ry potential oontacts for elose stily, ami further use. =6It
would be moat advientle for re to nerd wah 8 telegram tonvcTTy,» to justify nv
atay in the J. during the post ee ahat I need in tw price ao tT oan
report it even though livery my be laters tly t will fizvl out to~

guapioion ne to why he looks his
oma, (8 The photesmyhy instructor ns boo scheduled te oon here
20

probl
on tednesday anf

CIARUIN, whe da the axief of Ind Hapravierdy® of the sth Directomte, and
RAW, who te the heed of the §rd Mapenvienise (in tre same Preatom te ):
, I suwcoeied fn photogra phins, then while PLANTIN was auny sick and

Je ay The interml extensions in exch deyartment of the & norber
r eten onn be obtained then ringing fram an outeids telepnwe

a. /by

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 1MAR 1992

i)

¢.

ft
t.

i
a
{

|
al

(er Y '
: we

' aie F ‘ te
aA

,
?
A
nf;
3°

'
‘
oY

ty profecing thom sith the prefix {<2 An:tend of going ghrougs the neds
(Grd) exchange no» "95 HPO) for invtessos. K@ is the autamtse prerix
enich connects one to the intern] satinnge: Thie 18 On et rather serndi~

Be re peoetne, wars thon areansenoe 00 faa RAE TUDORS oon Ge
coms across an entry giving his hans cotortene ranber and sxying he On 8
found thrann WILADV, Ameeld Lvancvitty sybjeat goss on to explain that
SHIXOV was one of DY Arm Ter gn, the tah Darectorate, NETS TES
IAT Mee Oy cat An harpe an estsont 8 Dest oN other are
sonaduled to take place in the ath barestorats noon as follocst On SIDI’ 6
depirture, HUW will be pesmoted ead of the rapeavlemase to replace
Colonel 7708 “4 Corewr Resident’ in TAN and the present Read of the

pen’ .

vead of #26 Térectom te an AUTH @ Gepartut,s although the post ac
carrion a General's rank, Wereas pid ie cally & Colomele oS: We will
return to this in Gavadl ister.

Je 3, As sends the Aentery of £ directory, tria {rn luise
reams of te wuy nti ats motisess for georet
geforce projects rookste, exylosi.ves, hype peoples’ Haase

ssoret anyway, 1s 2% would have ares the quapdedon of the other saienti sts

Georat egy n8 8 PU ee roe par Teens ae cm Wel

nobility «© gntelLisctuml ferdlioa. - Lf these Aeatenioinee’ mows
mee bev, mumly east 9° tye Fanioter of Pornoe «= th "=.

-_ G) hy tow last tire spoke af the SPH, & 2} Takats, Ortails
lon have alrendy liated. I hive ne ¢rether eee on we first

5s
wo Dat would Like t strens tt ona is 8 earpletely different weapon by
arte * their aigferent Franget, earnmrtirs and utilisation. the details
eirtin of Wiehe Eee an ommeation With Some OT a Sem
and land Coretm. I obtained this from PATTER who had just
from a course at the jentor ‘etillery officers military fheadengy in TETINCOAD 9
ghee he had boen stulying theses weapons at a VAR

“(@) _S3 Ag vegards the <g, i nctantdy en thio age rosea, th 5
| eyes and even toushed i* © ie we instantly comme, St a larg?

rey, oa SY enn wn OMT ST Force om
enpeai ties for the profuation ot « greater jet propulsion force j"reaktivnos
eily” « - ,

R- ss 8 reparis thee Aare Lone 8, PARSE NED as & wee
experience’ ‘ytillery officer ormentes “hat Ut in A P- ‘le ¢
by peohanical Beans the gat. propulsion force ever further as

13. 7 4g sna sane to ewritaon acon about the TATGTNEY JAAS
mses on TT} fy oveenly rem as *eroichatin" » end exalain that this
Rechangs perves the Hird ster nawelf, as woll az all the TwLrectcentss »
demrtamts and Institutes oring wer his jock etLotion = i.% in cereral
staff of the Hintetry of f YAPEHT VN to Cen T4mwotocate however

a referee.
goos not form prst- of (eae unter) the Genemel sere of the Hinietry of
dove rot form aret, Of SSETS Gerontae of the Grom) forsee wish £9 0 _

oon /ortaraly

eke

“N with the Miniatry of Defence and ita General Staff via the F Fut 1 ne
“¥remleyia”, which is ealloceted to all military “gukovodyashchiy sostay”
(es), for imrortant conversations.

2, St The reason why the Directory, in listing 3° RV for instance, —

Gy does mt give his initials - as ia the rule for the majority listed in the
Dirnctory - is that SRW being quite a cowon nam, 4t waa thought this
wold avoid people guessing that the present head of GRU is identical with
PERIYA’s 014 deputy.

2le Subject aleao reqeste that he be allowed to buy the latest mxiel of
the American 2°NIT" wireless receiver, which having eight wave-Jengths
bands, Subject could also use an an alternative set to receive meanages.

fle intents installing it in his “dachn” as he considers it would be simpler
af he could alno listen t music on it. He hae no retic at home at al
exoe;t the transistor we gave hic. Besides he wants t> improw: his

English by listening to the PRC. After much Alamineion regariing the
security factors the request Was held in abeyance for further consideration.

a ae G: /let us work now on our agenda questions. First of all. we
ae to clarify some points on the Berlin questicn. You said that
ansuming the roads were blookea’ - the Allies press on notwithstanding
; an _ and send through trensport planes to Berlin - these planes will be
F .% shot at. Who tolA you this’ S: Firstly, this was told to re by
1) VAREVTSOV.  Seoondly, 1¢ wae confirmed by Volodya FEDOROV when he was
"ab passing through with his battalion. Thirtlv, by herds eenLays who
"| Gdn the Chief of Staff of Artillery in the Tank Army, “B°SUEN umier 7U IP
j and who was previously a brigaie cormarter of Arti lery, b t conventional
Artillery, unlike FEDOROV (who is Rocket Artillery). |

es St PLORCGATI OV was in MTC on leawe but was reonlled back a
cay teftnight sarlier than thw date originally fixed for his return. Not-
= withstaniing, he found time t- ring me and arrange to meet. #e went to
‘ie the Dinam Reataurant where, amongst other things, he told me (as I have
t-' alveady reported to you) that “the Germans wil? make a real hash out of
“; ual So T asked hin "Put what will bar en" and he replied “this is
f - what we are being tol’, ami this is whit i ourselves (will bapren)
z{e' ani whet J, as a Chief of Staff enn tell ym (41! haprendeses” ani then
is he (PRON OV) went on to confirm much of what J had alrea y hearies.
(as follows: ).

@ S: As soon as the agreement (with GOR) fe signed, a state of

\ wrt ('trevoga') will be declarsd immediately, putting all the Gh? forces

i on the alert for the take over of ecntrol in al] cheek-reints = the defence

2 end enntrol of which in future will be their entire responsibility. Mean-
while, the Soviet trocps will be kept Jn readiness | ‘ne Iugotove'g : the

} rlan being that they should «t come out at onoe to occupy these roads,

| sinoe this woulda then mean proweation to be followed by bicodshel...

i “hat wil? harpen is that the “est will be tol: “americans, British and

\ French, please, you are still free to go to RES]4%, but you mit now deal with

\ the Gon (ror passes )jeo.s0r if you wish to fly along the Corridor at the

\ i agreed height and on the agreed oo rae, please de ao, but you must a proach

thy SDs who new contro? all flights and grant the neoesnary permission

' acooniingly for a cartain time-table ami number of flights...eimilerly for

ALLWAYS. cece
\ F .
, & St If however th: Americans, Pritish ani French refuse to deal

with the GDRs ani try to force their way through, then the Genmns will start
a ty ve And eines the QDR forces arz evitently not strong enovgh, then
- the Soviet tants will come ovt ami a‘tack the forces with which the (the

Went) tried to ram their way through to RORLT.

~, Ct Therm is a amell non-sequitur heret although one ean block

eee /OfTt

o 5 «

off a rovd or milwy, on: cannot do so in the air. Consequently, this
means that the CM? air force will have te shoot dom the trunepert pions
of the sestern ilies ~ that ia fire the firet shot. 3: If the vest do
not apply for permission or give notige of intention to fly to LWRLIn since
they do not wish to deal with the Co ani just mend off a plone ( ithout
prior notifiention) then the Cermnns will fire at this plane (fron the
ney or order their own plones into the air (toa tteak tee. although
their (s0@) planes are in fact Soviet planesece Yes, but the first shot
will be fired by them? s: Yes, (the first shot will be) theirs!

“ Gr. ty Rut wnt happens on the roads? cho will fire firet? = v2ll |

“y

(i. :

we r
ef

ata anct. 2

‘“ (rrot_be the other my rowd? 5: Noita minute! Let us say tmnt the

eoheduled plane didn't fly throuwh sine the Germns started firing at it.
30 then you qo along the road = not dn tanks or armed care = Just in
ordinary ors or lorries carrying poople and fowlemipplies. You are
stopped, but since you do not wish to have any denlines (diecussions) with
the (Us, you presa on = #0 they start firing first at you, ie@. "Af thay
(the Went) do not recognine our rights - then fire... arrustecedentroy then!”
Tyen though the “eat had not yet sent in their tanka...The est won't be the
first to fire, they won't start firing t121 the others fire first, I fully
underatani that. But things will heppen as I have just told you « this

ga absolutely certain and cast-iron. I heard this from WMH ROT himeelf -
“ar they (the :eat) refuse to talk with the OM and try ta presa on to
PERLIN reguviless, then they will be kicked in the teethi* voush for
this with my life that I am telling the truth! And if the estern Commend
then decides to senf in their tanks #6 a8 to clear the wy through, then
they will also eend in their (GIR) own tanks!

Gg Whe wia the sources of the statement that 4f KUCURHCHET renlines
> there will be tremendous solid apposition from the vest, then he will
stop and not sign the treaty’ Ig this an opinion held ty you or held by
others or is it a frot tuesd on poliay that someone my have hoard at ey,
a meeting of the ‘tupreme Soviet or sone other sueh meeting? 5: This is an
opinion held by us all ond 4% win oxpressed to me firstly by Cenorsl
PyTOVWYY as well as by rnany ather officern, PRDITOV amon, then. “tat

SQUNTUOV said wma as follows: “we sre going atend ina very risky ranble
jidem na bolshol risk Jeoeve are going to show absolute firmness bemuse,

go they sx, history will not forgive the leaders ¢ the coviet Covernment
and Comminint Party, if once agin they postpone mtters ani once agnin do
not. sign the agreement (mith CIR )eoe™ Sot mid " hot do yrni mann We are
going in ona risk - how #0, Nengey Sergeevich?" and VAeerteW replied:
rigenttee Lf they (the est) refuse to talk to the Cermns, and the Seman
(sentry) will mar the my and my “rive se yrur propusk" ard then the
amerLoans Will get excited and s0 the fighting will begin..." I mean
local fighting... (deep wigh)e..And “any my Cmbat nonsonee - what fo",
and all of then confirmed this to m, PET alapeee In '0:COr thie isa
well inom fact, the people in feneral «taff 1 Imew all this and visualise
how it is All goiny: to happeness after all we are constantly breathing that
atmosphere... And when 1 name te you my wmrinun SOUTOEA, L only give the
mmes of people whe are mown to you and who are aotimily concerned (take
an netéve mrt) in all this. ‘ecause at ( heer something from sme EVAKOV
or ET’OV there ta no point in telling you about it ani even L myself Corget
about it by next day since these people man nothing te you OF me.

(Gy -¢ 4@ soon as the agreenent (with TR) is signed, a tattle alert
1

he instantly decinred in the ApR,.eand for what purpose’? For the
purpore of countering Any, 58 they (the Vovieta) sy, 'ghildish’ gesture on
the part of the \estern Military eomondera, the Seatern representatives
in Cernmny as well as on the part of the Pro Germans themselves. Ani since
their (108) forces ara not awficiently strow,, consd)ently they are poing
to be supported by the ‘oviet forces in Germny who are being put on battle
alert, in position of tmttle-rendiness fin. lecssetni this Mttle alert will be

ee o/eoheloned

TIO OO TO TOT 1
ws eoheloned ok to the forces on tine territery of tee Greve”
: as thane stitionsd om territories of vatellite oon! ries

al (22 ny (reqnuse they are enviraging the fallen) 74 wrt if the

: eins aivnld mdidenly gend in several thoumnd tanks span to unite

| the two Nermanics - then battle will oorrsencs. » eanat port of wattle? A

|  Lecal tattlelece mi to wat dapth of front will it extend? To the

4 d of the territory om which these troops will be lomted f.e. there will be

1 no attack (by the Joviet foress) on the rear, Oo” ather eountrics where Our

de (: eatern) troops are concentrutede.« There will be m nun attacks « eeanuse

uth  eney (the roviets) want everything to be decided in this portioulnr Seotors

the area wherein the highways are and the radlrosds and in the a itessls&e

in the vestor were it fa expected that the seat WALL show, as they the

Soviets) BAY, ‘disrespect’ tomris the cTRe, were (the seat wALL my to the

am ¢entry) go to hell, t wan't show youl Wy propustess! os

vest send out their tanks, then the Soviets will
out their tants in gupportescrnd #0 they will begin firins at

t there an nothing SLiaay 27 repens to, you, west oy om EA TAT Cad

only show force and bar the my (to the seet) anly in the event that the
vest will refuses to talk to them (the GIFs ees ami not that, say for in-
atanee tht as soon 78 the Cerne ill tare uP fronties control positions
and the -ent eese them, the “eet will start firiry, at them at Onasecse
Reither (is 4t envimiged) that as goon 68 the ovints will see the ‘eastern
forces, they will start firing at them «fut they wALL my “and on wnt
grouyis are yo) trrvelling on this territory? Aganrding to the

\ you have per eh BELO Cron the Goverment of the apn te ake flisht at
| ayon and sush a tine, then pleare ahendl cee”
Kyyusit o@e oe Ubacds + GrsTewesr

re A, 0 and this is where FF ay, UT ard COTHAUL are
we ng soclever. for they will my: "hd are mt Lrdting the entry of
wv mepionunsa, 'ratish and frenwh (inte PLN Joos Hut nel forbid that tis
iets ; ahould luli the rest inte a feclin; tmnt there is mm GATEET s oo DETAIIC this

a only fne firet atep, det. once the tire-tnble of mnverente (and permission

for e@esoh arenmts) is in the ome hervis, then they om Aictate the Fules of
, the mre, and contime ty press through with their onn vill.

Se ds perfectly clear to vs ard we wiierstand perfectly well
{ the -oviet tavernment hes Bo right to sign an agreement with the
: cerns, bab they are tryin: to eupport this aotion with armed etrongt ices
wh And (it de planned that should the ‘sericans, British, vrench and the FUR

ve cermns refuce to talk and negotiates with the OR ooneerning regula tions
a” foe future use of owemmiont ions with ‘71LIN, than they will be told: “No,
atop, Wwe mist defent our rights agosrdingy ta the agresewnts.« the Goviet

authorities have go08 and we are therefore & _qvereign power in ends

- territoryses” Hut the covet forces will mot lenve, tity will just retreat

aces dist nes neerbyeesand then, #8 the “ermn (Gon) forces are weak = thay
naventt sot anything, arch asa mtter ot fact 1 emtlé. tell you about at

[ i ginoe I personally lnow mm ac lens wmt they ve 20 ante this Jector,

into this Zone, dete Over the Cerna territery as 8 7 1a Tmt ie how the
j ‘eviets mnt it for the moment, they do not wnt to
i hostilities, they 4 not wnt to t2n $t anto not
| fa the oviet plan ard thin is where the garhle ®
4s the risk YACReTSOy War taliciry; aboute

-) Lola hove easily proved all Ais to you 47 1 ood have
ordea all such yernrkn ae ard waen mde Eo THe ma © deen aup Lied with &
ae pocket recorder. {ut thin should be x excellent pniity, ae apparently
Me the ‘< tevdel ia drendfitl aml meauker
: quently not being used ty “ovdet Int

V (3) §: his da wrt the 7 etn are propardiy for “nd that de why

ee,

A ar I the Seyiet tanks ani artillery will. be throm in - in great strength -

yf
Pm ;

ei
*

Oy a

_ AT all cnoeuvres ant training is being Gone one jcint trais with al] the

WATAAT Peat oowtries, thit ds why thers is urgent demni for equipment
far tanke..cennd espeaially the tanks are being givon partioular exrasis
The extern Commis should never esffer trom the maive illusion tint the
Soviet Military and Gevernsent Organe have stopped Gaveloping tank foross.
ng have already spoken in ‘prilday thst what ds taking place in the OT

fig I will try to find art further detain on this quratica, .ethe
vital mrerntess tart FTV Ins alrendy told ce tint be is takin bie
farily out of © in Jepgtenber nuvi all Peavy ots off oar ave going

ooasdes ty
dees by starting Siro, Dlowving wo ronds, COVER ACACRY » AECreve It wees
be Like a mouse-tmp than, ami the aviok fowors WALL then start mening
roy in ciroles arr! hy the time they e1ll start firing it will then te tos
lnte.e) «tnd Af they are too Inte, with God's help the adwmntage will be
GurBese Rocnues thin is wat thay lene orieta) are frightened of ined
why are they 90 Crightened’ Reames thay enow Pall well wnt the
atmosphere is, hos tc Cermns Josk upon them, bor ths Cerinns hate thers ces
and they kv full well tit as eom as any skirmishing begins, the Semnns
will etart throwing tomes at then, beating thes with eticks or gms © $f
they wen theese

3e ca Ana goet in: that will happen than FOreov tes all
material in his brigde - PER a two omplete firirg unite: one
already fitted with rockets mndy to fire and the others ace kept in the
Pripade roar arene “he tieiande astunily hie four firing unites in alt
allomted for Ste initial mission althayh in feet there aixyild be twelve
in all npread oxt in depth, eo tet 46 4s knvn tint to a Gerth of eevoral
huntred kilowtres all these rotets are going to YPDNCT's reigede onlyees
2g tmt if his depota are est on fire, sevemtl huntreds of his prapls
copped up, fint dengine the Fanic Everybody raring in all directions
at once. where WLI te mm longer a mified brigads, my argniand Miringecs
And onos thay axe out in tm fiald they will stort firing at ome in ail
directions and at the OTR Nerane, ani at the 7™ Comnana, end at the AlMod
forces = nll at cose on a cirolnr front @ #9 thay myl Oneo thay are in
combat deplagment that is bad for our side.o05e it ensertinl mst to

rvver forvhve of for niseing this
opportunityli¢ we(the sest) my: ell right, Int @5 do dt recording to tte
rule, mit for then to taks up owtnt pool! and then start rizing!

390 Sy Siniltancously orminiee diversiomry groupa eoas to dectruy
ne mah as preibdle ae quickly as poasible..eand then it would take the

ooo fi eimnde

-G§ «

equi
(for the ‘Yest) to echievel Pemuse if sone bold ani dealsive action is
= taimn here, an awful lot of destrustion oan be achieved!

Gs another item .fors olarifiation. You remeber you muntioned
: existense of anti-miszaile missiles. fnve you heard shether in this
_ oonnectiion there exiate sane progr unier MOOCAANEL's Airection fete
Pl{ Inetitutes, Mreteries, tmining courses comsentmting on antiarccket detenge
with rocteteess [2 I Inve trker a grest interest in thin myselr and I
know that wint L ns told 42 corroct ant tint I hve underatesd the
aitintion correctiy as follees. No Gevies aet-mlly exists that is in fot
' a mnlistic, cempleted, weindle devier agrinst a rocket attiek. =A
' and considerable mnowit of wark however is boing dene on these Lines. tut
this wrk whith is mrried ont an the Cedetificsenorch Inetitutes, tt
MIL3, not those unier the juctilintion of MISE or VATTAOV, bat thees
under the Mints try of Defoe iteslt. ‘These Institutes are auitrolied ty
Special Technion) My-imering Mrecterstes in the Hintstry of lefence ar
In Cleese’ anful let of benineestmucting work hee been chew on this
prodles, but still mm stable devies that avila be pat into ane as an arti~
rocket has been worked wit as yot. Sore of course h ve boon tested, =f
can absolutely wah for thet, ‘ml sinve the Peakeat te Device Mad, thts
wrald bo Nevios Noe? «an antleronet, Int a7 eh dovice Ine been ge
yet, although tremendous work ani reemren ie bein dan on tis. Cone
aidermble suns of mony Inve been allomted, qmntitics af salenticie
experts mbilined for this pues in onfer to eleiinte the amet trajectory
4 a8 to mrret the omoning ronket with an repletion tint wuld dentroy Lt

hy But coud they adnct for instaness, the V?h oe other M5
yAY ote for this purp7es and if so ore anya ttenpts alswdy being andes ott
lin-s? + Yes, of oowee, they ond adjust it, but 0 far ths
hns oot been worked out or apprcved. cca covree, thoy owl nines they alirendy
_ have rockets for muah a height, a reeiket that oan be porfeatiy controlled by
Mfeces HY? not explode it on the tmifjestery of the onmering roaret. Frat
the whole eanilexity of the mtter lies in the emet oloenletion mw the
amet ment of ou firing of or rooket and to osapite electroninally oil
dataila detemining height ot witch te other missile is travelling in onvier
> to be able to hit ite wen $f they knov the ewet mrme:t the enon missile
| de fired they haven't got the mans for wekin: ot the tmijectory. Ona
oan’t rly sdapt the method of firing aguinat all poasdble tr jectaries
| far one given missile. it’s too expensive, That is a qiention whieh
dia being atudied very seriviulye

INCA he (4 Deo they bry anything abork mand tents at MAP TIP oF tn
: WAZA CH TYAN: 4 Tie now ine tals m: anrthing abndt thie. Tou see, — .

~ fy | -APUCTLA YAP and ebimiler ranges in the O23 Military District = I am sare
there mvt be other ranger, we just Inven't discovered yet, thay are 80

itnar|  georet « any way AL}. these placer aro use for testing optiusent wirioh ts

° protimlly rendy for feew to tron, of else epripeont elemdy in use

which ie being perfestet. Ft 4s sien wed asa testing gest hy
Institutes. FAITE TIN YAT de no! eanested in this mtter you are ageing
about.

a gear pmermtmiger
em ee aay

45. Gq Con you tell ua ehother there is a prasorms for entl-
Ate ballistic missiles? To they expect to have thes within a your, “Oo yaar’
. Sy I oan tell you ‘tat it 1 not bs sooner ttor fro one to twee yeorve

Put they aro worfcing hard on it. fares ama are beine epent. The fovies
doctrine in penernl assun's tint for oad: my wosTon & ovinter=rnpon ia to
be found, once they bald a tank thoy iendictely exmte an anti-tank wonpor)
having ore ted rockets thoy are noe worteing on antiemoc: wns. They
nleo knew that the enagy is working on the sane Llints. A the Criots
aseuns thit in view of the eneny's high-level of electromia-omn

i piques thsy ore shead, Put the intelLivence people onn't find out the

exnct derree.

vy (e) Ce tas Sorney Serreyevioh anid anything to you about thie? ee

ooefls

=

All he has mid wis that we (the Soviets) are waking on At. He has mt
Aid anything definite. “erey Sergeysvioh is werying Mineself aiak on
asoount of the lack of triined personel anf the low level of conprting
technicese i'2) nak hin about this and you wn listen to hin reply.

Se Gr Asmuming Gat the ADM system exists, would it be in ths

hands of :T) A.A. doferwe or would At have an indspeiont ‘oe nib “| PY
wold hove it peimardly. ihedr troop: are Mined for this, There is no
point in giving it to Vista. It has 40 be monr the frontier.
iefinitely At would be umber the VO.

= (1.6) Sy Vint other socket, besides the V7) ea arom at the
ie f "My Day Pemde? twa were shown = Gr ins the secon ona ales a fUri?
“1S T Ge Yom, A LUT. 83) Bog Thaven't beard anything. Anymy 2 was here at
ver adkt the time. han they told ae about the pamds they did not mya nything
about a nea roorete “ertape it is another types of rosvet, mrt a zfs. “12
- 1: wheht, 1°21 cheek. Gs 8 you attended lectures at the ‘ondeny on the V-75,
i does this man th ¢ ide rocket will be issued to troog for their os
| @afenoce? 5s Yes. shen you'll get the atetchwe you will ave tmt it is
| used for defence of troops. This isso mentionsd in the 1959 murni I
ae gave you, but the exmot type of ronket is not rentionsd. the
i

fhe fallonisy:
troops are covered; Jarye 2nd oohelon troop omoentrations, Army front 127,
Sroope preparing for attagk. usher trooge, if aoans are available. The
wane aystes: which wis applied during ‘orld tar ile

&7e cg In he ones of iaproved types of the eaune rockets, would the

a TVD be the Cirss to get thew: 3; Yea, of oouras. ‘Thay have almys tre

Pye first priority. Mergel of ridliery, aaQuv, Cocrmnder of 79 ground

forves, hie people are equipped for the defaes of trosge bs Ins rifled
SeAe woaponn, ho haw ses adromsrt, e 4 he will get the V«73 an avi wren at
is prodwed. fo ,cousbly ne som already, 1 feel sur ho hans

oe t Be Cp You add you wore toll at the Lecture thet you enn hnve the
an rocvetes opormte at 3,050 mstres and wp to 2) Bline-tres. oss Unde mean
rae | Fou can't oormte at lever Levels? “°; fou use other ailibews for low
moe levels. "39 nvckets davelopad velocity most bo anployed) at high altitaies.
. At loser levels Myhters or A.A. are used, 1990 alsosdy told yr all about
fere’ it.

tas | &%e (gy The other thing I'we given you is the rocket Inunthed from
— oanairon: ft. “here are 4, rockets carried by the plane
“le ty) There ds one thing thet ds wt clens, hen thay my thst the
- omnge of the roacet de 49 las, the gubinnoe Ls 10 to 3) Am, sidgh mans that
' €t aen fly ansther 2) low after the 7 noconia, hew ds i! guided then singe
If * gt nee been cut off from ground sontrel? i; Let m refer to the mterinis
- ; (U%e ds shon Me motes). chich mnge are you referring te, horisontal or
jf:4¢ [ vertioal> “he seoontentage aseerblies of the rocket give you 4 km, the
| guiding cris after 2) im, as At 4c ermaldered that after this height it
WLU. continw alone: the fixed trajeetony, amd it onn be explaied hy a special
| onplorive ceview my nt 25 km no that St flies 3 lon without any guidinos.
{ ge etl fly for tose extr 5 lam Af 25 48 sets or 1) lene dt 3) ds ast
elon: the &lrection in whieh it hid been aud.

x 5h 33 In tide wy by using the pxwsibility of the t of rooket
lot ¥e75 far ap im, the trospn using it for firing my at & het of 25 kt.
'  agcalernte it to the Limit of oontrol for Bim caloulating that the control
Hoe) UP to >) im will givo absolutely accurate flight in the sume direction far
: the reminier of 5 kw with the halp of rudders, the correcting assemblies ete.
will ox ints agtion, 1¢ on qumte at 29 and #) em = hat in why it is
exmidere’d that @ imortant thin: with reenmi to this rouket ia to keep it
unior control for those 2) km

dliteng tan O28 G: It dea wry da etant to ino wet heppens wan it explodes,
; ey) ites written you in aeoumte detall about thie. The only thin: I have

VY forgotten to tell you :r the depth of the grooving (x the fmgzents). Thow

ve »/froorws

{~

us

3 aan be aniier and decpor, they @on't all bv the arms Gapthse
tt da mther ike jeweller wrk. ner the prosres 6Fo emiier it «1k

pyranching enarmet. |:

the bursting angle of the whole 36 wee. «This ds ail wit

: s is at a cdistaree of 3) metres ghey

ean pleres ateel Arcee pe aistanes Le onioulated of

core. 1% is alenye dire straight apeste (-pjeot given © domme
daring ©

She Gy tas the €<75 F an ators mrs! Bt sto, ash ey
aon't onal der Le mmcenmary for it to hw ree | OY oonaiaee ta
wun: too axpensi vs entortabment gust for one eirorefte

ot mevelored. it .
ful and they BAY ap beet. tote = aR es yore they have 60 many wari ntionte

ibe mg fall they gnvelop ciasiies for low lying ngremre? 53 ur
man rosettes the anewer 18 re «= They pelieve tret the oreny

not risk expensive new aiveraft on 8 plite to the opposition (: oviete)
ty flying lon and expoainy, at to growl fires

be

airomft with & geiling of §) tan, those airorert can onrry rooxets wrd.on

will add another &< im «OE oT 4t wyild te nice to develop and have

them, but yon can’t Ap everything at oreo

50. Os ong ge eshte 2 Sei
‘eae. «HAF poem “head wet Todkatss are Dery wel The

ene principle. 131 find aut about Ge abmriys Tor you it has

just not ean one of ere eb jects 1 nve Aes with at leqturses ow anye

anere 0156 2 a wt we there it £m wor

eas (‘.) qy mid they give the y¥a75 to the gabeLiates Heanase thay hare
rears and ren?

nna Digger thearwel Gy The cha reancn wy wry bow’
been :aven the ° 75 is deanna TT {RECTEV Was dacide’ it As tire Vy
been an te foe paver oe ecto, TPO

pore anythin tor, | TOY it me sol yea
that they only yo very 1ittis to ene Saterriten ALL tit as ba
an tint this reoket is 4{eoued tO the wrict troupe Orne, grees
oountrisie put they © train the ratserlites in tre vee of the Anyeay
ehey don't give then ali the rowrets: “hye ewe porerfal and Log TAeCe
ams thay '86D for theselvess gyine thst trey will bs iced fron toviet

(623 My. MAshe-gridad arte ( I:0y Sener eee ny re Pak
aang Vory many A.A. guided miondile (: tr Gefencen,. Fut thay appr
be a mw type of defence not like the Y«/5 instalistion, Could you tell
Us anything abot this? 1, I thir: that your inforntion tint there are
other types of rockets there is inoorrect, The budiding is all deme fer
the V=75 but also inslutes shelters, yates Stamge arena and plat-
: forms. IANINGRAD is not the only aity

“75 | will be also built rear ‘rd0m, and other industrial oontros,politioad

centres, etc. It ts all done for the ¥<75, Of courwe, it is possible
that it will Inter be wed for other rosete, ZT ales fixdt tint any-
one Could have seen either the WO75 or any other rockete. who ever gave
| you the informtion made a mintoke, probably dustin the tact tmnt he is rot
+ & rocket eert. :

G , 62 Gg Could you get us some monet designs: <3 Yes, of soures,
the instruction mnie fad hoe<wrints attacred. I had antes
aD oe then as I told you in the pting, but { didn’ hawe the tine to do it 1.
; Sieo thowht that if i gave you all the figuren you wold be able to to a
Cheung ketch, 1°12 keep tris dn mind for the future, All you need to de ds

Will do this. ‘here are aketches folded in all rocket mterial, : talkie

Vig" 63. (i ben you gve us thoes figures for fuel pressure po ming
fen. pr | tons nt a tenpersture of 59°. and fer 27 tons a tenpernture of 67, aid
“TNT you man this to be minus 49 7 tp whl hak looks at his notes).

| Tos, Of course, it should be mins. fiow oun euch a huge thrust diffe.
rence ooour at only a 10° change.

= Glee Cr No you know what 5. 75 mans? Tia phar to the mdar
uetanovin | but here it ds written molet "aiming atation’ | mtantater

‘Te mavedeniyaj (mde station). In this ose %.7,., 5, is the aiming sti

. tion for rocket V=75. his 4s osnmected with the WAT

tat? onursen. ey would oni: hove given ms dintarsers, Carint yoest

\V- 65. Gy dd thay corymsw the 7-75 te the “astern AA, ed min~
siles? S: Ne Thay only had gram review lectures, % at the
Flay | on merican, French, ‘mglich and Cerwin rosiste, it told

titer | very little informtion on *eatern rockete. mI on jive by the ag~
te given to the feaidentums that we have Little inforration,

A ee 7 Sow, we have finished the chapter oan ¥<75. #¥e will now ge Q 34 :
to unvenvention 2 weapons. lave you heanl anything about this new :

wonderfil
atm powrel engine? 4; Ro» Tint is the only thing he could mw nant.

ceo/ italy

ee ee es 3

a_

—

| MK

4

,
Ao mtn ceernenes froseseres airs

e312 -

Staff officer. Te hes in mint atenic and hytragen bali, new typos of

aisomft, rookcts which h-ve nlrord, been approved, thin he considers

sufficient to brag about. Mut 16 ic all wry thinly eprmd., Fok mesed

ani directed aginst one tarvet it omdd of corre te effective. tut he

h-s oo arena of hitting mry tersete. © he is yelling fer’ pence te \

(83 Gy Kaa he got tacterioletonl weapens? it: Yes, he ine.

Can we have any details about trde? | mt types? ethos of eninge
ment? Ctomge depots? _%; There ie a mmr dealings with ebecionl wre
fare, it my te dated 1959, but 1 will ret 46 for you. I teliew this is
the Inteat. Ge flave you heard whet. er i¢ is the coviet intention to ues
these weapons” @: = i've already told you anf am repmting, there is a
speaind idirectorate dealing with tris matters there are chesioal troops,

dating
to disrupt everything, to prevent recsiving a doaisive hit frum the enog
1 throw dn chanio.l and tneterlologionl ssaponn. A
lot is being gremred. You -an't diere@mrd thie in your plonning,

3. Ge Ming the Jnst wrld eer tho Cerunns and the other oor

TRUST OT fas these, Thire are Ind somtninern foe fitting to tive wage

és) ig Rave you herd that the Spatniies onn be weed not only for
Rivtary pucposes but also can be used as an atemde weapon? 8; 1 hawe
ot heart this. Fut lh we heani that it is vory diffioult to adupt the
sputniks for correoting the aiming of atcedo wapoms, ae to the comic
speed at which the aputnik travele. I lem that thay are working on thia.
CAP RIN hae mde his fifeht on which he took photagrayhs of certain ecsctors
lotsechki], although they aid there sere 7 camems installed. There ms
a conslex of various types ani elses of c.uneme, wrich he svitehedl on
automtionlly.  RRRUSICEV and the press lied when they mid at the tine
we Inunmched the mn that nothing ms photarrephed an’ no informticn sol-
lected. U0: who told you this %: ‘ musber of people told me: that on
thio -putnix, and in fost on every ‘iputnik, they try to ireteal all sorts of
optional instruments, photegmaphic dnatruxnts, for taking yhe.
GARGARLH we given all egsipment. ly the wy, I muisrt you tat Ceneral
Staff we livid when thay learnt thet the ‘or: ne hed Jauncthed a Sputrdik
travellin; over iovict territory. They said tmt this mse fpriputaike

oe o/ hey

sa!

c-Met

wig

e@ lb «

areas in the munteins, were teste are being prepared, tat thay have
m concrete inforratios that barbs het? netrily been tented in these

?
3) kilotons. 3 Yes, They have thes. have fired thany (simile

“hese weapons are for use with rosrts, for "Ea" and "Heli. Por

aicalc gure they used 5 kiloton shells. There were mo 3) yalioton

ahellr centioneda, yt o (. whjeet mes A Growin: eying where the
pat

“7Be Gy ore great nunbers of thess atonic gunc in opem tion

use? ot You. «Gy fave they got them dn Clr? tg L Shink so

1 don't trees | cobtain, bat there are a great mbar of there Deane
produced. J: See all your troops wane, > Sy Yen, & tirink a6
dy Ma Evixs'OW Cobh you wother there are euch curt thee 35 2
gidn’t asx him, you badn’t told me you want to kw (joing). “1
Under whooe eonman! 60 they eons’ iis teder VATEPTSOV, ‘They are tives
Ot) reserve (ROA) for ground foroes, = FOr am they are in FROLV' s
paris, but FOOLY fe subordiinnte te WRDAIN. TARENTIOV
knows these guns ant hoe told me be believes in thes, they ars gov
guns. Wea me been giren the J<ton aeade mee = Tt Osn % think

thay have been teatel with fain omgien $e sheiis, pretendires they were
atomic onen. er h-ve thay ven thes for pvertart.

@:) or) Mow @ they knot tint the gia eonté Blow up thon they 90
a

tonic sells wmlees 4t is tested: 8 ‘el, thoy heve prio all
the mloulntions,  ("uject popenta vebenenbly 4 rerber of tires thet
he atoric sholie Inve bean fired. le had anked dnvtrunters arr
cermin Che thins), fo has worted im Ai )e  %t The task waa to
tost the gun and ites yolisti lity usiw Hips “splandve apalis. ‘thay
hive h-d other trotyl eprivalent tes’, bat not by webs ee and mt
tars. ‘They have there bords fron atroes, very eceuretely, a8
the trajectory ms commeted from the proand, attier relmes, i've
told you about thise J will check on thie: you hnve confuesd me, ai ~

1 Jast mi.

the ntanis ones. «56 OTe show films donling with noviet atom teates
ALL serth of etructurss, animis, vonicles cto, wre pleesd at various
Aletrmges to test Aestractive efreots. vressuren developed @ring ai
ateio explosion were reoortied ty 4 steel aosenbly 7:0 in tho fora of

a oteal shaft, a steel pad and a wenbrane which rooms by grooves oft
the wrtale bose groows gocietos the pressure» any « hundred thousand
kL 1086

We Gy dhat te the ratio of lish Puplosive to mlear neresds
for “H-1", "Ne" and Oeli'? ae Leantt give you the exact ratio, but
tots is the pwineiple they work oi Rverything me iret got té be ixve
for th» gonvent » High “geplon$we wartvanlte If a erisis arioss
ani they deaids to bury Capiialian, then the lot will be transferred to
stannic wartentee Ie the mr is a oblwirows one, mot nna tonis of
hyérazen one, then ghe rocksta wild, carty High =xplosive rarhendéa, tretyl
carddl, otce 1 dm't vw the mot Siguces, tut T think <mt the
ratio is foe may 100 mokets, you WALL have 10 atornic vmarhends for %)
(igh “mplosive warhenda. . “bis ia iat T patcered Crom Jacturss, al-
though no scectisc ficures wore given. The atasio wurbeds are rank
facture? and stored gsm aly. Of conces, tent on happen da tint thoy

only conjecture; thia mast bo quastiansdé,

81. C: tho de din charge of the dintedination w noir weuchends?
AQ wnt Level? oo tr. CAT eontrols their orodustion, avi eteces thes, The

soe/feert

=l7 «

yor attention nox in tint 1¢ de pmstble

i will te loving the Committers in a fer martha thes, Sint fe wy
Saban tant for wm to have fim foreign nopnintuwwehion se
tablished with whee 1 Gould continns werking, =ith the kmwledge
Teds ptione Ce eight in the Lins of ay work for the Comaltves,
Teseptiona to which I would 99

qguage®
td
HAN
Ae
fh
ig

j

Affe
BLS
si j
fi a
EE

you the comin, 1 wll tell you how wo are inetructed in this, ana
Tint ia rejuired of us, 7Oll, i have beowm sopmintet with a mn
at a receptions I've mot him once or trios. i tmve alroody reported
th t I am acquiinted with hin Re appre to be 4 apathetic dniic
Vid] to whee 4% is worth paying attention, This fe already the
art of the intelliconse otTicer, whether it in wrth cultdmting tim
for three mmtha, eiz ora year. After a few mmotings he (the

toa Celebration, my the birththy of sontict's Wife. ‘Thay are
interested in the mn, eo he eos. = =6Or J omnaak for official funta
to entertain the mn inn festaurnnt, in order to est to bye him
better, dees I aan beep clover contast on wy om inttintive with e
man om whoa 2 am mom to bo working.

Be Js Pleo Shap Of ‘enrtoans oF Aritish ina me
taurant, my dinlamts, you aeqnintanse

By Srila not be wall Lonked upan if T had never met then before,
#8 ADS not posras tted te aneontate with people 4f we are not agqunine
ted with them, i.e. mo pick ups with foreigners.

Fe Re If after propor introtwtion, I were te my tint 1 think

it OF dt ecoee ate $0 SrEnd aw tine ch a foreigue, who mit

be of 4merest anf me, t wnild bs told to pp alemd, aa this fe ny

S0°1vo indtintive, YX med fira aeoTintaremahios af thin sort on

Wich I can be rotively working in view of my ponaible cine af sco.

tion tls eutum, -fter ry boli‘mys.  Offtioers w- in RU as _
invite Oiploeméts to rectatrante, as for anetonge, the Lert Spare tary —
of the ifoon ‘tineay wis invi ted, ari otiers, “IL‘OV, for instance,

* 6<0/hO

- 29 -

ww, Or Let wi ator on the i'n towtay, 7 will oontime te-
morrow. f12 Se &t was a good idea to have photographed this?
f&: Yes, of courses

1fs. a: In there a MAGA TY ther: in vedres? G2 Indeed he is
Nobel LAAT Ve

Wy. Sr PPRAOV dis t got: the ist 'Otdel, he has been
provoted Colonel, while 1A V is probsb!) there te.

2185. Gt fe you rember AvH? Sr 0, I can't.

1R6e of: Do you have a CVCNTTHY'V there, he has Rold tecth, he
in aColnnel. “Yes, 1 nx: hi: avd Ineldentally how about my
dentist? 0: To=day an aprointment ts being booked for yous

Subject makes his request for ta:¢ reoorter, including a
font widel, eto. Shdbject says he in free when he murte to bo free
in reletion to his missicns. If he oan fin the "ANTTA® matter ur
quickly, he'll ‘spit’ on then! He arrives at the Hrba«sy evry
corning at 9, ‘he’ sees bin, at ten to ten he has fintahed breakfast
ant goes out for ten mimites. At the Mebasay he has dleossions,
answers any questions they ma; have for hin, drops in to sen then
fro time to time, ete., site there for & time, but after thst be
has his om tysinece to attend to, both the Committee's business and
nuti's business, after all, he has to take care of his micasions.

Shject list his Jocal program %, rurohasess he wiahes to make
. fwbject says he wil! be free arytine during the sfternomn the

nert iin sea the Doctor. fabiect Jert at 191% hours on 74th
Tuty, 1351.6
