Scientific Intelligence Report -- the Soviet Space Research Program: Monograph Iv Space Vehicles
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124247, dated 26 February 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124247).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE REPORT

THE SOVIET SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAM

ne

MONOGRAPH IV
SPACE VEHICLES

A
.

1
woe

Sez Ser hae OF,

. das ls tes 9g February 1960°

CENTRAL. INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE Gee

+8
uo
ieee

cr

Scientific Intelligence Report

\

S.
~

THE SOVIET SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAM

MONOGRAPH IV
SPACE VEHICLES

26 February 1960

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE

CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE... . 1 1, rr
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. . re at hy by tees “Fp
DISCUSSION . os 2
introduction 2
Satellites and Space Probes . 3
Launching Vehicles . 4
Materials of Construction and Fabrication Technology . 7
Plastics and Rubbers . 8
Metals and Cermets . 8
Fabrication Technology . 9
Radiation Shielding Problem . 10

Vertically Fired High-Altitude Space Research Vehicles. 11

Re-Entry Capsules and Winged Space Vehicles. . . . 14
TABLES
1. Soviet Satellites. 2. 2 |. |, Pod. MOMS ioe 2) ih ah
2. Soviet Space Probes. 2 2 | 7... we eS edie > OS
3. Approximate Vehicle Velocities for Typical Missions. . 5
4. Physical Characteristics of Soviet Satellites and Carrier
Rockets . . eae 4 gyre, Boa, 8
5. Approximate vee caper of Lunik Launching
Vehicle . . ESE es veer doee e. G4 ca AE,
6. Maximum Equilibrium Temperatures Reached cae
Various Types of Atmospheric Penetration. . ee 8
7. Soviet High-Aititude Research Vehicle Launchings . . 12
8. Nose Cone Weights for Vertically Fired Rockets. . . . 12

9. Estimated Characteristics of Ballistic Missiles Used in
Soviet High-Altitude Research Shots. . . . ed a we 13

O4IV eae v

vi

OOM PR wo

Photo
Photo
Photo
Photo
Diagram
Diagram

Diagram
Diagram
Diagram

. Diagram

. Diagram

Photo
Photo
Photo
Photo
Photo

Diagram

FIGURES

Following Page
Replica of Sputnik I . 4
Reproduction of Sputnik 0. 4
Replica of Sputnik OT. 4
Model of Lunik I Instrument eontince. 4
Possible configurations for the Soviet ICBM 4
Cross Section of Lunik I Final are
Vehicle ». 6
Lunik I Last — Vehicle, SideI . 6
Lunik I Last Stage Vehicle, Side IT 6
Lunik I Last Stage Vehicle, Exploded View. 6
Cross-Section of Radiation Bands Sur-
rounding Earth . 10
Hypothetical Diagram of Solar Flare Ac-
tivity . ‘ en S Oe x. 710
A-¥ Nose Cone 12
A-2 Nose Cone 12
A-3 Nose Cone 12
Surface-to-Surface Missile (Shyster) 12
Surface-to-Surface Missile (Scud) 14
Characteristics of Soviet A-1, A- 2, A-3, and
A-4 Rockets 14

TH

1. The Soviets ;
ing and developj
space vehicles ar]
materials problem
earth satellites du
mid-1961. The Sc
in the penetration
clude a powerful |
permitted the pay
hicles and space
conventional airc
readily available 1
Furthermore, the §
develop miniaturiz|
clear program will
shielding support.

2. The Soviets hi:
unmanned earth ;
using existing bal]
vehicles. The excc
ing vehicle, as dem
load weights of S
missions, indicates
consisted of a basi
ballistic missile (:
pulsion, control, a
oped for military
US. telemetry in
and launching ve
powered-stage in
probably are ident
similarity in annc
Lunik final stage

THE SOVIET SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAM

MONOGRAPH IV
- SPACE VEHICLES

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

1. The Soviets are fully capable of design-
ing and developing significantly advanced
space vehicles and will probably solve the
materials problem for the re-entry of manned
earth satellites during the period mid-1960 to
mid-1961. The Soviet Union’s achievements
in the penetration of interplanetary space in-
clude a powerful launching vehicle that has
permitted the payload of earth satellite ve-
hicles and space probes to be constructed by
conventional aircraft.techniques and with
readily available materials and instruments.
Furthermore, the Soviets can, when necessary,
deveiop miniaturized structures and their nu-
clear program will probably provide radiation
shielding support.

2. The Soviets have developed instrumented
unmanned earth satellites and space probes
using existing ballistic missiles as launching
vehicles. The exceptionally powerful launch-
ing vehicle, as demonstrated by the large pay-
load weights of Sputnik IT and the Lunik
missions, indicates that the vehicle probably
consisted of a basic military intercontinental
ballistic missile (and most certainly of pro-
pulsion, control, and guidance systems devel-

poses). Similarity of
mae Or Soviet ICBM'’s

coe “stage indicates that the vehicles
probably are identical or very nearly so. The
similarity in announced weights of the three
Lunik final stage vehicles, and the similarity

a the launching boosters
ed for these shots also indicate that the
three Lunik final-powered-stage vehicles are
probably identical or very nearly so, except
for the difference in payload weights. Based
on the gross weight of the Lunik I final pow-
ered stage, the launch weight of the complete
vehicle is estimated to be about 500,000
pounds. The launching thrust-to-weight
ratio is about 1.5 to 1; thus, the launching
thrust of these vehicles is about 750,000
pounds. It is estimated that current Soviet
launching vehicles of the Lunik type could
fire a 5,000- to 10,000-pound earth satellite
into a 100-150 nautical mile orbit.

. 3. The large payload capability of the
launching vehicles has enabled the Soviets to
use readily available materials and instru-
ments in space vehicles, but they can develop
lightweight, miniaturized structures for com-
plex space missions when necessary. They are
capable of solving current problems concerned
with materials of construction and fabrica-
tion technology for space vehicle launchers,
instrumented satellites, and space probes.
They can design and develop high-strength,
low-weight structural materials, including
ablating, refractory, and other types, for solv-
ing the aerodynamic heating problem involv-
ing re-entry vehicles (recoverable satellites,
satellite capsules, and space probes). The
exhibited model of the Lunik I final-powered-

stage vehicle shows conventional aircraft

tructural technique and use of aluminum 4s

the material of construction; this fabrication
technology is considered to be typical of cur-
rent ballistic missiles utilized as launching
vehicles for Soviet space vehicles (satellites
anc lunar probes).

4. Soviet high-altitude research vehicles
have yielded a wealth of important-scientific
data for the design of space vehicles, espe-
cially the structure of re-entry capsules. So-
jet ballistic missiles fired down range will
probably be used as test beds for studying
problems of re-entry and recoverable capsules.
It is estimated that the Soviets will solve the

terials problems for the re-entry of a
manned earth satellite in the period mid-1960

5. There is no evidence of Soviet research
cifically directed towards the radiation

ui
ue)
ig

D

shielding problem as it applies to manned
space flight. The radiation shielding research
that is conducted as part of the Soviet nuclear
energy program should contribute to the solu-
tion of this problem, but there is no direct
intelligence information to confirm such
support.

6. Payloads larger than those estimated for
currént capability will require the develop-
ment of launching vehicles specifically de-
signed for the Soviet space program, which
when available will end the apparent depend-
ence on ballistic missiles except for adaptable
propulsion and guidance components. The
size of these vehicles will be determined by the
mission, payload and propulsion systems avail-
able. Nuclear propulsion, which would mate-
rially reduce the launching-vehicle size for
large payload weights, may be available by
the late 1960's.

DISCUSSION

INTRODUCTION

cucture and configuration of space
are coincident with that of the air-
-olved — the overall structure that
ns the propulsion system, guidance sys-
d payload. The airframe must be
_ Uightweight, and capable of resisting
zmic heating. The payload, whether
pace probe or a Satellite, has its own
that must have similar airframe

aa
iow
or

payload into the earth’s atmosphere. There-
fore, basic research and development are di-
rected toward the production of strong, light
weight, heat resistant materials and refrac-
tory,* ablating,** heat sink,*** and transpira-
tion cooling **** materials for special pur-

* Refractory materials are those capable of
withstanding high temperatures without loss of
their desirabie properties.
*¢ Ablating materials absorb heat by vaporizing
or by melting and sloughing of the melt.
*** Heat sinks absorb heat in a large mass of
material having a high thermal capacity.
«e** Transpiration is the dissipation of heat by
evaporation of Uquids forced to the surface through
a porous medium.

pose applications on re-entry vehicles. Addi-
tional requirem.nts are imposed by the bands
of harmful radiation surrounding the earth,
solar eruptions, and cosmic rays in space;
these conditions present a major shielding
problem for most manned satellites or space
probe missions.

Test vehicles for investigating these prob-
lems and for developing re-entry vehicles may
take the form of vertically fired high-altitude
rockets, long-range ballistic missiles fired
down range, and rocket-powered aerodynamic
research vehicles.

In the Soviet space research program, exist-
ing military and scientific missiles and equip-
ment have been utilized insofar as possible for
launching vehicles, satellites, and space
probes. Relatively heavy, unsophisticated
space vehicles with large payload capabilities,
which have performed well and collected con-
siderable data of various types have resulted.
To fulfill increasingly difficult missions, So-
viet scientists and engineers are expected to
develop more refined and specialized space
launching vehicles. The modified military
ballistic missiles now used as launching ve-
hicles will have to be replaced with larger pro-

2 a

inned
earcn
iclear
solu-
direct
such

2d for
velop-
y de-
which
pend-
- ytable
The
yy the
avail-
mate-
re foi
tle by

RAC IARE ARE 6

eee eee Een anne ailment tint ental ee ret a ceRUAESES ls Le

puision units designed to. meet the needs of
interplanetary and manned space missions.
Nevertheless, Many components of military
equipment will continue to be used in the
space program.

The development of military missile air-
frames and their modification for space flight
is probably supervised by the Chief Artillery
Directorate, the principal ordnance organiza-
tion of the Ministry of Defense. Scientific
aspects of the space vghicle program are SUu-
pervised and coordinated by the Interagency
Committee on Interplanetary Communica-
tions under the direction of Professor Dr. L. L
Sedov. Basic research and development re-
lated to vehicle structural materials are most
likely performed by appropriate institutes of
the USSR Academy of Sciences.

The military ballistic missile program and
its scientific space portion are large scale
efforts which involve thousands of scientists,
engineers, and technicians. It is evident that
the best Soviet talent is being utilized in con-
nection with these programs. One cannot at
this time estimate the number of persons in-
volved but there is no evidence of any quanti-
tative shortage of personnel. In view of ac-
complishments to date it would appear that
these personnel are being effectively utilized.

Ballistic missile research and development
is centered in the Kaliningrad area some
twenty miles northeast of Moscow with flight
testing in the Kazakhstan area. In the Kalin-
ingrad area of some eight square miles are
located the Central Artillery Design Bureau,
Scientific Research Institute/Plant 88, Scien-
tific Research Institute 4, and static test facil-
ities at Plant 88. The resources of this area
have been expanded in the post-war period
and further expansion is feasible. Itis believed
that numerous facilities of the State Com-
mittees for Aviation, Shipbuilding, Defense
Industry, and, perhaps, others are directed
and coordinated from the Kaliningrad area
in the creation of both the ballistic launching
vehicie for space flights and the space vehicles
themselves. Facilities suspected of contribut-
ing specifically to the space vehicle airframe
development program are Scientific Research

Institute 88, Kaliningrad; Plant 8, Sverdlovsk;
Automobile Plant 186, Dnepropetrovsk; All
Union Institute of Aviation Materials, Mos-
cow; and Plant 82, Tushino.

SATELLITES AND SPACE PROBES

The immediate problems concerned with
the structural design of an instrumented
satellite or space probe have been to build a
minimum-weight structure that will with-
stand the aerodynamic heating and accelera-
tion stresses. Soviet satellite and space probe
achievements to date attest to the fact that
currently available materials were satisfac-
tory. Future materials research and fabrica-—
tion technology will be directed towards mini-
mizing the structural and component weights
of proposed space vehicles. A recoverable sat-
ellite or space probe has the additional prob-
lem of providing for re-entry of the vehicle,
the instrument container, or at least a por-
tion of it such as a photographic film package.
The re-entry structure could be a winged
space vehicle or a capsule fitted with retro-
rockets to slow it down with final descent
made with the aid of a special slotted para-
chute designed for opening during rapid de-
scent in a rarefied atmosphere. These same
problems would apply to an instrumented
space probe designed for exploring the atmas-
pheres of other planets or for a soft landing
on them. For a soft landing on those planets
without an atmosphere or for a lunar soft
landing, the vehicle must include retrorockets
to slow the structure down so that the vehicle
is not destroyed on impact. The lack of an
atmosphere for braking the vehicle's descent
makes a soft landing on these non-atmos-
pheric bodies a major design problem.

Additional problemis become apparent when
one considers the design of a manned satellite
or manned space vehicle. The primary con-
sideration here is to provide for the internal
environment of the vehicle: composition and
pressure of the atmosphere, gravitational
forces, deceleration and acceleration effects,
temperature, protection from meteorite im-
pacts, radiation shielding, waste disposal and
nutritional requirements are the main prob-
lems.

ysis of published Soviet photographs
(see Ggures 1 to 5) and data (summarized in

nd 2) on satellites and space probes
has not disclosed any significant discrepan-
cies from the announced dimensions.’ * The
repulsion stages (carrier rockets) of
Sputniz I and Il separated from the satellite
after thrust termination and orbited inde-
pendentiy of their respective payloads. The
final propulsion stage of Sputnik II did not
separate from its payload capsule. The pay-
load and final-stage empty weight for the
Lunik 1 were announced as totaling 3,245
pounds and the final propulsion stage report-
-ated from the “artificial planet No.
e payload structures are constructed
“uaminum alloy and are rugged in com-
. with U.S. satellites; the Soviets have
-escded to utilize the many weight-saving

ay

oo

use of the large payload capability
ning vehicle, the Soviets used the
ont materials, technology, and in-

LAUNCHING VEHICLES

Launching vehicle requirements are gov-
erned by the theoretical velocities necessary
for various missions (see table 3) and by the
payload. Calculations show that most of the
current Soviet satellites and space probes are
impractical if not impossible for @ one-stage
vehicle using conventional propellants. All of
the space missions are attainable with multi-
stage vehicles; ie., staging using two or more
rockets. In the configuration called tandem
staging (stages stacked on top of one another
and fired successively) the payload for any one
stage represents the gross weight of the subse-
quent stage(s). The last stage is the smailest
and carries the useful payload (satellite or
space probe). As the propellant is consumed
in each stage, this stage is dropped from the
vehicle and the operation of the propulsion
system in the next stage commences. Each
stage imparts a velocity increment to the
space vehicle; the final velocity of the space
vehicle is the sum of the velocity increments
for each of the stages. The size of the vehicle
and the number of stages and their arrange-

TABLE 1

SOVIET SATELLITES

secTyik Of spoTnix I
3 Nov 57 15 May 58
14 April 58 (still tn orbit)
542 months est. 142 years
unknown 2,926
1,120 ** 2,134 °*°
spherical conical conical
19 65x 3.3 W.7x5.7
=] 26,200 26,950 26,950
Exper ts conducted Internal and ex- | Internaland external tem- | Earth's magnetic fieid, pri-
terna! tempera- | peratures, internal pres- | mary gamma radiation,

tures, meteor im-
pacts, pressure

sure, cosmic radiation, ul-
traviolet and X-ray radia-
tion, meteor {mpacts, blo-
logical experiment (dog)

solar radiation, earth’s elec-
trostatic field, heavy prima-
ry cosmic radiation, concen-
tration of positive lons, in-
ternal and external temper-
atures, meteor impacts

* Dimensions given are exclusive of any final rocket stage.
** Total weight of instruments, animal, and electric power source.
see Weight of scientific research equipment, radio equipment, and power supplies.

4 ed

eld, pri-
liattion,
wh’s elec-
y prima-
concen-
fons, in-
temper-
vacts

Figure L. Replica of Sputnik I.

al
z=
=
~
a
=

~s,

Airtight cabin near base, sphere

Figure 2. Reproduction of Sputnik Il.
containing transmitters and instruments just above, and solar
radiation apparatus near top.

°
COS g

oe

Figure 3. Replica of Sputnik 1,

ner taken up by the Soviet rocket, Lunik I,
d to have become artificial planet No. 1

e 4. Mode! of the instrument contai
on 2 January 1959, and claime

Figur

Nose Cone
Nose Cone

Second Stage
Sustainer Stage

/
; Sustainer Stage
| Booster
; Stages
(engines,
tankage,
and
structure)
First Stage
4
Boosters
(engines only)
sy es

2-Stage Tandem: 2nd stage fires ity, Stage Partial; All engines fire at Parallel: AN engines fire at launch;
only after Ist stage separates. launch; booster engines jettisoned vooster stages jettisoned prior fo sus-

prior to sustainer stage burnout. tainer burnout.

Figure 5. Possible configurations for the Soviet ICBM

30905 2-60

umn

TABLE 2

SOVIET SPACE PROBES
oe Se a So
LUNTK III

CHARACTERISTIC

Launch date ......---.---55-: 2 Jan 59
Empty weight of final stage (Ibs.) { 3,245
Estimated gross weight of final

stage (Ibs.) 00... - 62 e ee 18,000
Length and diameter of last stage

(1E.Y 0 rg cece bet wees 17.3x85
Total payload weight (ibs) .... 197
Structure weight minus payload

IDS). Gana ee Bie a eee 2,448
Gross weight of separating in-

strumentation probe (lbs.) .... | 397

Estimated Instrumentation weight
remaining with powered final
stage (1DS.) ©... 2... cee 400

Increase in payload weight over
Lunik I ibs.) ......--.6-- 25 e-

Diameter of instrument capsule
(EEO) tote es esate. 2.7

Shape of instrument capsule spherical

Known experiments conducted .

Luntk I
(Artificial Planet No. 1)

LUNTK IT
(Lunar Impact) Reieeuenuees
12 Sep 59 3 Oct 59
3,332 3,424
\
~ unknown unknown
unknown unknown
B60 959
2,472 2,465
unknown 613 =
unknown 345
53 162
unknown unknown
spherical cylindrical

Internal temperatures and Cosmic rays, micromete- | Photograph of
pressures, micrometeorites, orites, earth’s magnetic | backside of moon

externaltemperatures, | field, interplanetary gas
earth's magnetic fleld, so- | components, moon's
lar corpuscular radiation, magnetic fleld, sodium
primary cosmic radiation, | vapor cloud, radfation

interplanetary gas compo-

belts, primary cosmic ra-

nents, moon's magnetic | diation
field, sodium vapor cloud

TABLE 3

APPROXIMATE VEHICLE VELOCITIES FOR
TYPICAL MISSIONS >

THEORETICAL VELOCITY, °

MISSION
FT/SEC

5500 n. mile ICBM é 23,000
Satellite orbit around earth

fno return) : aries 26,000 to 35,000
Escape from earth (no re-

turn) he : F 36,700
Lunar missions, approx. ... 35,000
Mars/Wenus .........-- 5005 37,000

« Neglects air resistance, navigational corrections,
and gravitational losses (variations in gravitational
forces with increasing distance from the earth’s
surface).

ment is dependent on the mission, payload
weight, specific impulse of the propellants,
fabrication techniques, materials of construc-
tion, and weights of component systems (pro-
pulsion, guidance, auxiliary power, and so
forth). Different types of staging are illus-
trated in Figure 5.

A few days after the launch on 4 October
1957 of the earth's first man-made satellite,
Sputnik I, Nikita Khrushchev, the First Sec-
retary of the Central Committee of the Com-
munist Party of USSR, stated that the USSR
can launch satellites because it has a carrier
-for them, namely the ballistic missile.‘ Later
statements by Khrushchev further implicates
the Soviet ICBM as contributing in some way
to the launching vehicle for the Sputniks.
Academician Leonid I. Sedov, Chairman of
the Soviet Interagency Commission for Inter-
planetary Communications, in October 1957
said that the Soviet satellite program was
based upon available military hardware from
the start. V. P. Petrov in his book stated that
it is only necessary to replace the hydrogen
warhead in the nose of a Soviet ICBM with
suitable instrumentation to produce an arti-
ficial earth satellite. Soviet Defense Minister
Rodion Malinovsky stated in a special speech
given 3 February 1959 to the 21st Congress of
the Soviet Party that the intercontinental

'
'
'
{

pallistic rocket launched the Mechta space
probe (Lunik I).7 These statements by eu-
thoritative Soviets strengthen an already firm
conviction that the current Soviet space pro-
gram is built on the experience gained in
their military ballistic rocket program and
that the vehicles utilize at least major com-
ponents of their ICBM hardware. ~

Photographs of the orbiting carrier rockets
for the three Sputniks show that a different
launching vehicle was used in each case. (See
table 4.) It is believed that the vehicle used
to orbit Sputnik III was a Soviet ICBM. The
similarity of ICBM and space probe launch-
ing vehicle telemetry formats indicates that
the ICBM was utilized to launch the final
powered stage for Soviet space probes. Te-
lemetry evidence also supports a parallel or
partial stage ICBM. Thus, on the premise
that Sputnik III was launched by an ICBM,
the Soviet ICBM is a parallel or partial staged
yehicle approximately 91 feet high and 10
feet in diameter. Calculations based on the
Lunik I final stage estimated gross weight of
18,600 pounds show that the Soxiet ICBM
has a gross launching weight of about 500,-
c00 pounds.' evidence shows that
ihe thrust to ratio for the Soviet

TABLE 4

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS OF SOVIET
SATELLITES AND CARRIER ROCKETS *$

LENGTH | DIAMETER | WEIGHT
AIRE AEE: (Ft) (Ft) (Lb)
SputnikI (carrier) 5425; 823 —
SputmikI- 0 nce spherical} 2.3 185
(total
weight in
orbit)
Sputnik 0 (carrier) 70-5} 843 fF —
Sputnik 1 het 6 3.2 1,120
{instru-
mented
payload)
Sputnik LI (carrier) 9125 |103 420; ——
Sputnik WE......... 12 5.7 2,925
(tota!
welght in
orbit)

‘The physical data available come from Soviet
announcements (welghts) and from photo intelli-

gence.

ICBM is 1.5; therefore, the launching thrust
is about 750,000 pounds. Evidence on the ma-
terials of construction, airframe and staging
technique is totally lacking.

\.

Soviet press releases have revealed a lim-
ited amount of information on the Lunik final
stage vehicles (reviewed in table 2). In July
1959, the Soviets exhibited a model of the.
final-stage vehicle (minus rocket engine) and
listed the spherical instrument package which
separated to become “artificial planet No, 1”
as weighing 397 pounds. The final stage was
approximately 8.5 feet in diameter and had a
height of 17.3 feet. Propellant tankage indi-
cated a liquid propellant system.’

A completely reliable source has produced
additional information on the Lunik I final
stage vehicle, including the diagrams shown
in figures 6 to 9 and information on construc-
tion details. The internal arrangement of the
tankage is such that the rocket engine (not
exhibited) is positioned in the hole created by
the toroidal tanks. The top tank is made of
aluminum, assembled from sections by weld-
ing. Its volume is 150 cubic feet. The top
tank is fueled through a filler pipe attached
to the bottom of the tank. The bottom tank’s
inside and outside diameters are the same as
those of the top tank but it is a true torus
with a volume of 93 cubic feet. The bottom
tank is fueled through a spring loaded nozzle
located on the opposite side of the one for the
upper tank.

Figure 9 shows an exploded view of the en-
tire final stage vehicle illustrating the prob-
able manner of assembly. The nose cone tip
fits over the forward section of the two coni-
cal half sections. At the proper time, the nose
cone tip is ejected, the clamps holding the
two half sections together are released, and
the nose cone breaks away from the vehicle.
The spherical instrumentation package is
ejected by some undisclosed method at the
end of powered flight. The forward reinforced
section which supports the nose cone is at-
tached to the curved section of the upper tank.
The forward tank and aft body section are
joined together to form a continuous cylinder.
An aluminum circular heat shield goes around
the external surface of the top tank. Thus,

6 eee eae

Figure 6. Diagram of Lunik 1 last stage vehicle

30906 2-60

Scale
.46 inches equals 1 foot

_

s 8.5 ft.
Figure 7. Lunik 1 last stage vehicle, side 1

30907 2-60

Scale
.46 inches equals | foot

aaa - strtenenseiaarsnsnuetayaamertinnintyh tempts ease esarslaian asi fc iON A at ema ns amen 7
haan tment UR MIDE AIR ANA:  aE

Figure 8. Lunik 1 last stage vehicle, side 2

30909 200

. Nose Cone Tip
. Nose Cone Half Section
. Lunik Payload

. Nose Cone Support Structure
. Heat Shield

. Lox Tank

. Main Body Section

. Fuel Tank

Base Pilate

Figure 9. Lunik 1 last stage vehicle, exploded view

A

'
i
}
i
|

i
|
|
|
{
{
j
}

|
|

the upper tank most Likely would contain a
eryogenic liquid believed to be liquid oxygen
(lox). The bottom tank is attached to the
cylindrical body section which is made of
heavy gauge aluminum alloy. The volumetric
ratio of the two tanks indicates that the pro-
pellant system is lox-kerosene and on this
basis, the total weight of propellants is ap-
proximately 15,000 pounds.

The design and fabrication of the Lunik I
final stage vehicle follows conventional air-
craft construction practice. The integral lox
tank is pressurized to carry body shears, bend-
ing moments, and axial loads. The axial
force generated by the preceding powered
stage is distributed to the skin-stringer struc-
ture of the final stage vehicle by eight neeNy
externally mounted lugs.

The design of the Lunik final stage vehicle
shows that no concerted effort was made to
save weight. Reliable intelligence indicates
the total structure weight less propulsion sys-
tem to be 1,760 pounds. Aluminum was the
material of construction. The Soviets utilized
modern manufacturing techniques, unusually
careful workmanship, and extensive auto
matic machine welding in its construction.
Use of heavy forgings and stampings are also
im evidence, &

The Soviets have ample capability for im-
mediate space missions with their Lunik
launching vehicle, which has the capability
for a manned satellite mission when the So-
viets have solved the re-entry problem. The
launching vehicle has estimated payload capa-
buities for specific missions as shown in table
5. For a 7,300 nautical mile earth satellite,
the payload capability is the same as that for
any lunar mission except a soft landing.

TABLE 5

APPROXIMATE PAYLOAD CAPABILITY OF
LUNIK LAUNCHING VEHICLES

ORBIT WEIGHT
parataad (Ctreular) (Lbs.}
Earth satelite .......... 100-150 n.m.| 5,000-10,000
Earth satelite .......... 7,500 n.m.} 1,000
24-hour equgtorial earth
satelite ooo... ee. 20,000 nm.} 550

The USSR is not expected to be dependent
for long on military developed missiles for the
Soviet space program. Soviet development of
jarger vehicles specifically designed for space
missions is most likely well along. The Soviet
Space program we envision for the period
1959-74 requires the development of these
Much larger vehicles and of associated pro-
pulsion and guidance systems. Estimates
show that the Soviets, for every payload pound
put into a satellite orbit, required approxi-
Maately 150 pounds of launch weight and that
each payload pound of the Lunik vehicle re-
quired about 500 pounds of launch weight.
These ratios will naturally become less as the
Soviet state-of-the-art improves, but even if
the ratios were to halve, the launch weight
of future Soviet space vehicles must be esti-
mated at a few million pounds.

The appearance of these future gigantic
vehicles is at best only a guess. They will be
a few hundred feet high and consist of sev-
eral powered stages. High-energy propellants
will be utilized. In the latter part of the
period 1959-74, when nuclear or exotic pro-
pulsion systems may be a reality, the number
of stages may decrease to two or three and
vehicles may be short and thick. During the
period of this estimate, Soviet vehicles will
probably be developed capable of orbiting
large manned space stations, making manned
lunar soft landings, and placing instrumented
probes into outer space.

MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION AND
FABRICATION TECHNOLOGY

The construction materials and fabrication
technology for space vehicles must produce
strong, lightweight, and heat-resistant struc-
tures. The need for strength and lightness is
merely an extension of aircraft requirements,
but recoverable space-vehicle heating prob
lems are of a different magnitude. Steady
state heating, as in a propulsion system, must
be handled differently from the transient
heating of a re-entry vehicle. The extremely
high temperatures (caused by aerodynamic
heating) estimated to be encountered by a
re-entry vehicle for specific planets is sum-
marized in table 6 for various re-entry tra-

jectories* Few of these temperatures are
within the performance limits of current
materials.

In their efforts to develop structural and
other materials for future space vehicles So-
viet scismiists are undoubtedly investigating
many substances, including metals, plastics,
ceramics, cermets, and other chemical com-
pounds. There is no evidence to show that
the Soviets have materials research and de-
velopment programs which are directly con-
nected with space flight projects but such
projects probably exist and probably are
highiy classified.

Plastics and Rubbers

Soviets will probably use plastics in

flight structures primarily as compo-

nents of major equipment units (rocket en-

gine throats and nozzles), for housings and

lightly loaded structures, as insulating mate-
is, and as ablating material for the nose

oviets have the capability to use exist-
bie and readily available plastics such
cs, acrylates, and polystyrene for
t applications. The Soviets report-
now using plastics fairly extensively
satellite and space vehicle programs.
id lignter weight components pro
om plastics will see greater utilization
in future Soviet space vehicles.

Metais and Cermets

is no evidence of metallurgical re-
or facilities for such research in the

meeting space vehicle materials requirements.
However, the USSR is engaged in an extensive
metallurgical research and development pro-
gram which includes studies of high tempera-
ture alloys, cermets, and refractory metals of
potential importance to space vehicle con-
struction. While much Soviet work is un-
doubtedly classified, the quality of present
known Soviet metallurgical science and tech-
nology is uneven and in some areas generally
equivalent to that of the West. Published
Soviet work on theories of strength and ele-
vated temperature properties of metals and
alloys reveals that, whereas a great amount
of data and correlations have been produced,
the Soviets are now no nearer a satisfactory
understanding of these factors than before.

The USSR produces a variety of ferrous and
nonferrous metals, including several high-
temperature alloys similar to those available
in Western countries. Soviet specifications
for a nickel alloy similar to Inconel X for use
in gas turbines have been found. Inconel
X is being used in the construction of a space
flight vehicle (X-15) in the United States.
The Soviets have made no mention, however,
of the heat emissivity characteristics of nickel-
based alloys which would provide a more posi-
tive indication of interest in employing these
alloys in space-vehicle construction. The ad-
vantage of Inconel X is its high temperature
strength (to about 1600° F); a feature of ob-:
vious significance to space vehicle design.
Similarly, cobalt-base high-temperature alloys
of a composition equivalent to the Western
alloy Vitallium are produced in the USSR for
aircraft engine applications.

TABLE 6

MAXIMUM EQUILIBRIUM TEMPERATURES REACHED DURING VARIOUS TYPES OF
ATMOSPHERIC PENETRATION

DIRECT ENTRY AT

DIRECT ENTRY AT

ENTRY BY
apxter ESCAPE VELOCITY ORBITAL VELOCITY GEeAt PRO
!
| 5° 20° 0° 5 20° SATELLITE ORSIT
Earth | 5000 5900 6800 3900 4600 3600
Venus 4700 ** 5500 6300 3600 4200 3400
Mars | 2400 2300 3200 1900 2200 1900

+ The re-entry angle.

** Temperatures are given in degrees Rankin (R* = F* + 460).

8 aaa

gc
re

i

Internal structural members and fittings
within a space vehicle, although not subject
to direct heating, will be subjected to rela-
tively hign temperatures and to rapid tem-
perature changes. With suitable design, and
possible cooling, the anticipated service tem-
peratures of internal components may be suf-
ficiently below the skin temperature to per-
mit the use of more conventional alloys of
construction such as stainless steel or tita-
nium alloys and even certain of the aluminum
and magnesium alloys. The USSR produces
a variety of stainless steels similar in com-
position to those produced in the West. So
viet titanium technology is also similar to
that of the West and a number of alloys are
being produced on a limited scale. Alumi-
num and magnesium alloys are also produced
in the USSR in a variety of compositions.
Observations of models of Soviet satellites
and the Mechta space probe and its carrier
rocket indicates that aluminum is the pre-
ferred material of construction. Reports on a
Soviet missile production facility, Plant 82,
Tushino, claim that duraluminum and stain-
less steel sheets have been used for missile
skins and stainless steel for the nose cones.!¢ "

The refractory metals (primarily tungsten,
tantalum, molybdenum and columbium) offer
strong possibilities for the solution of ex-
tremely high temperature problems encoun-
tered in some propulsion systems and in some
components upon re-entry. Research investi-
gations on these metals are in progress in the
USSR. The biggest barrier to the use of these
materials, however, is their low oxidation re-
sistance. Some form of coating must be de-
veloped before these metals can be success-
fully employed in space vehicle components.
USSR studies are also being conducted on
cermets, silicides, nitrides, borides and car-
bides; however, there are no indications that
these investigations have resulted in signifi-
cant advances. Related Soviet developmental
research in powder metallurgy is comparable
in quality to that currently being conducted
in the West.

The quality of Soviet metals research is
good, but there is no evidence that this native
research will provide new or significantly im-

proved materials for use in space vehicles in
the near future. It is estimated that, for the
next several years at least, the Soviets will
continue to follow Western metallurgical re-
search for indications of improved materials
or promising research which could be adopted
or further developed for use in space vehicles.

Fabrication Technology

Estimates on Soviet fabrication technology
for space vehicles are based on USSR exhibits
of models of the Sputniks and the Lunik I
space probe and its carrier rocket, on mae two
ballistic ee exbibited) is :
i ; z MM and on aircraft
atructiire technology. Soviet space vehicles
thus far constructed have utilized conven-
tional aircraft fabrication techniques and are
rugged structures; that is, the Soviets have
not emphasized weight-saving designs.

“For the past 50 years, Soviet workers have
been making important contributions to
structures technology, especially in the fields
of structural mechanics and vibration analy-
ses. World War II developments and subse-
quent work have been consolidated by the So-
viets in a number of good texts and mono-
graphs.'? An examination of Soviet capabili-
ties in structural design indicates that they
have the ability to solve the structural prob-
lems associated with space vehicles, including
re-entry vehicles. ;

In some aspects of structural theory and
analysis that would be directly applicable to
the design of a space vehicle, such as design
of thin-walled structures, theory of elasticity
and possibly creep analysis, Soviet work may
be slightly better than that of the West. Al-
though the Soviets are doing good theoretical
and applied work in vibrations, the West ap-
pears to have taken a slight lead in the asso-
ciated field of flutter.

Soviet metallurgists have adequate experi-
ence in complex metal forming, welding and
forging techniques to permit the construction
of space flight vehicles using presently known
materials of construction. It is believed that
as new materials are developed only the mini-
mum time lag will be involved in applying
these materials to space vehicle needs.

RADIATION SHIELDING PROBLEM

In 1938, L. L. Sedov acknowledged that radi-
ation shielding poses .a major problem for
manned space flights.

Of immediate concern for any manned space
yehicles are (i) solar flare radiation (which
may maintain the radiation levels in the Van
Allen bands), Gi) the radiation (Van Allen)
bands above the earth’s atmosphere (see fig-
ure 10), and (iii) cosmic radiation (extremely
energetic charged particles such as protons,
alpha particles and nuclei of some elements).
Any.of these types of radiation may increase
markedly in amount during solar eruptions,
but will not change markedly in character.
(See figure 10B); the Van Allen bands will
extend somewhat further out during such
solar eruptions, and will be more intense by
up to several orders of magnitude. When
nuclear rockets are developed, possibly in the
period 1967-74, it will also be necessary to
shield personnel from the nuclear reactor.

Soviet and U.S. satellites and space probes
nave yielded information on the earth’s radia-
tion bands and cosmic radiation. However,
ne knowledge gained thus far on this
radiation, solutions requiring little or no
hielding are possible for periods when there
no solar eruptions. Unfortunately such
solar fares are not predictable at present. The

arth’s radiation bands are toroidal shaped
layers above the earth’s atmosphere with
traces of radiation extending out as far as
30,000 miles, or over 50,000 miles during solar
eruptions. The bands are shaped by geomag-
netic forces (are latitude dependent) and are
not present at polar latitudes. Therefore, one
solution would be a trajectory providing for
a polar exit and re-entry. An unshielded
manned satellite must orbit below 400 miles
or above 30,000 miles from the earth in order
to avoid the high-intensity harmful radiation
bands.3 For periods of solar quiescence, a
possible solution would be to use unshielded
manned lunar or space probes and to pass
quickly through the radiation bands; there is
a possibility that in this manner the dosage
received might be less than the maximum
permissible dosage. The Soviets have indi-

pw
*y
eg
3
2 Oo

a

cated a willingness to do this as a calculated

risk.“ '§ Cosmic radiation appears to be a
lesser problem than the Van Allen type of
radiation.'*

To shield out the earth radiation bands
would require on the order of 10 cm of lead.
Part of this shielding is needed for protection
from radiation produced by the high-energy
electrons striking the vehicle structure. How-
ever, if one used this amount of lead in the
vehicle, there would be a higher dose contri-
bution from the radiation produced by cosmic
rays hitting this shielding. Thus, conven-
tional shielding is not entirely satisfactory
for a space vehicle unless cosmic rays can be
completely blocked or the radiation produced
by them can be completely absorbed.

The basic problem of keeping radiation in-
side a reactor is much the same as keeping it
out of a manned space ship. However, the
shielding currently used for nuclear reactors
would impose a tremendous weight penalty
when used in a space ship. Soviet research
is estimated to be underway in a search for
lightweight shielding materials which pro-
duce a minimum amount of secondary radia-
tion on interaction with primary cosmic radi-
ation. This research is probably conducted
at Soviet nuclear energy research installations
although there is no evidence of a specific re-
search program. From the small amount of
Soviet published material on this subject, it
seems apparent that the USSR is now using
Western research results and proceeding along
parallel lines. Some data indicate that the
Soviets are investigating the rare earth gado-
linium (Gd) for its neutron-absorbing proper-
ties. They also have shown interest in alter-
nate layers of boron-impregnated lead (Pb-
B') and water-boron salt solutions.” Both
of these studies would be applicable primarily
to nuclear reactors and other neutron sources.
Other Soviet research includes work on radia-
tion attenuation by the usual types of shield-
ing materials.'*'° This Soviet work is not
currently applicable to the space flight prob-
lem, but it will be important for the develop-
ment of nuclear powered aircraft and space
vehicles.

10 Petre sak

North

South ,

"Dx d :
Figure 10a. Cross section of radiation bands surrounding the earth

Cross Section of radiation bends surrounding earth is shown by contours of
radiation intensity. Contour numbers give counts per second of charged particles;
horizontal scale shows distance in earth radti (about 4,000 miles) from the center
of the earth. A relatively radiation-free zone exists over the earth’s polar regions.
Shaded portion shows the two high-intensity radiation bands which circle the
earth. BEY,

ie)
a L 30910 2-60

£

octamer. nian ail it!

Earth and Radiation Belts

-

This simplified diagram represents solar flares of charged particles which carry
along their oun magnetic fields in which the solar charged particles oscillate.
When the solar particles and magnetic fleids reach the vicinity of the earth they
deform and reinforce the Van Allen belts but they also flood the solar system
with intense radiation in much the same manner that the Van Allen belts affect
the relatively small area around the earth. Such solar activity ts quite possibly
a mechanism responsible for the maintenance of the Van Allen layers.

Figure 10b. Hypothetical diagram of solar flare activity

30911 2-60 : py Re

The Soviets wil] attempt to determine the
qualitative composition (protons or electrons)
of the raci:tion bands, either independently
or by using U.S. data as it becomes available.
A scientific breakthrough could eceur which
would yield a method of controlling the radia-
tion bands and cosmic particles such that
shielding from these would not be necessary,
for instance, a new type of electromagnetic
field has been proposed as an explanation of
gravity and a potential idea for controling
other electromagnetic fields. In lieu of this
and during the interim period, the Soviets will
probably take this radiation as a calculated
tisk and make no attempt to shield their first
few “astronauts.” There seems to be little
likelinood that the Soviets (or anyone else)
will have made any major advance in shielding
within the next ten years.

VERTICALLY FIRED HIGH-ALTITUDE SPACE
RESEARCH VEHICLES *

Analyses of Soviet near-vertical firings, in
addition to their announced and confirmed
Successes in space launchings, have provided
a significant insight into their space research
program. Particularly, these analyses have
disclosed important information concerning
the vehicles being utilized for this research.
This information has a direct application to
their military capabilities. The Soviets have
made no secret that their space research Dro-
gram is based on military facilities and ve-
Ricles; however, they have never specified
which missiles were actually being used, ex-
cept for their ICBM.°°

The USSR began high-altitude research at
least as early as 1949 and has achieved a
unique advantage over the West. The Soviets
have concentrated on a continuing program
of research which to date has permitted them
to attain ever-increasing altitudes with their
vehicles, carrying heavier and more varied
payloads than the West. As a result, they
have accrued considerable data of major im-
portance to the Soviet space program.

* High-altitude space vehicles considered in this
report are instrumented ballistic missiles fred vertl-
cally for exploring the earth's radiation bands, cos-
mic radiation, biological conditions tn outer space,
Te-entry phenomena, and especially for the testing
of re-entry vehicles.

ee | These pr

Since May 1957, the Soviets are known to
have fired at least 18 near-vertical high-alti-
tude research vehicles from the Kapustin Yar
Missile Test Range (KYMTR); see table 7.
There is no doubt that other undetected and
unannounced vertical firings have occurred
on the KYMTR and elsewhere in the USSR.
The 12** with RADINT-confirmed altitudes
(16“May 1957 to 10 July 1959) range from
about 90 to 255 nautical miles maximum
height and probably represent the major fir-
ings from the standpoint of altitudes attained
and experiments related to vehicle re-entry;
for example, vehicle design, construction ma-
terials, methods of re-entry, and related sclen-
tifie and biological factors. Specific Soviet
announcements concerning these flights have
been limited to the firings on 24 May 1957, 21
February 1958, 27 August 1958, 2 July 1959
and 10 July 1959.21 22

These 12 RADINT-confirmed upper-atmes-
phere and space research firings appear to
fall within two distinct groups according to
altitude. The lower group of firings attained
altitudes of 90-125 nautical miles, whereas the
higher group of firings reached altitudes of
240-255 nautical miles. Additionally, the So-
viets announced at a TsAGI (Central Aerohy-
drodynamics Institute) meeting in 1958 that
during the period 1949-52, twelve dog-carry-
ing vehicles were launched to altitudes of
about 50-60 nautical miles. Similarly, begin-
ning in 1953, about 18 additional test firings
with dogs occurred to about the same alti-
tudes. The payload weights have never been
published nor has it been possible to confirm
the altitudes. On 23 and 25 December 1958,
possibly two additional near-vertical firings -

way

e-1957 firings (over thirty)

possibly could represent a third grouping by
altitude and probably were accomplished
using the Soviet nominal 200 nautical mile
ballistic missile.

TABLE 7
SOVIET HIGH-ALTITUDE RESEARCH VEHICLE LAUNCHINGS

ALTITUDE

Cen ONOUOe (Nautical miles)

(12 launchings)
1953-56
(18 launchings)
16 May 1957
24 May 1957
25 Aug 1957
31 Aug 1957 .
9 Sept 1957
21 Feb 1958 .
2 Aug 1958
13 Aug 19338
27 Aug 1958
19 Sept 1958
31 Oct 1958 .
23 Dec 1958
25 Dec 1958
2 July 1959
10 July 1959
21 July 1959
21 Juiy 1959
28 July 1959 ton Sete ee
: Bey. to letters appearing in Columns 4 and 5.
M — Meteorological
R—RADINT

sical
ec date not announced, but this shot
nis included in text.

Al the USSR National Economy Achieve-
ment Exhibit, Moscow, February 1959, the So-
viets displayed some of the nose cones

launched wad recovered from vertical firings
to altitudes of 60, 115, and 225 nautical miles.
The displays also indicated the existence of
five basic rocket-launching vehicles identified
as A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, and MR-1. (See table
8.) The latter two were used principally for
meteorological investigations. The A-1, A-2,
and A-3 (see figures 11 to 13) were used for
sending animals to high altitudes. Frag-

ing

mentary data on the A-1 identifies it as pro

by i 52, aD
identifies the A-2 as probably an elongated
V-2, possibly the extended-range vehicle (300-

350 nautical miles) known as the Korolev
igsile. :

Similarly, by,
‘the A-3 rocket is identified as the
R, the ballistic missile exhibj

PAYLOAD
(Pounds)

PURFOSE bd SOURCE *

o

n

A

o

a
n
»

”

te bo
a

POOH
ORK a
DDB) by b> bd bt bt > on
2D wa
ie]

y

111%
ra

bd td od tel bt bd bt ps
aa

S — Stabilization, and/or Re-entry, Recovery

inferred trom the nature of the experiment conducted.

Calculations show that the nominal 1700-
nautical mile ballistic (SHYSTER) missile
could achieve the group of firings to 240-255 ©
nautical mile altitude. In addition to the in-
strumentation, the rocket used in these firings
was equipped with a parachute recovery sys-
tem for returning to earth a capsule contain-
ing the two dogs carried by it.**

TABLE 8

NOSE CONE WEIGHTS FOR VERTICALLY
FIRED ROCKETS

ROCKET VEHICLE NOSE CONE WEIGHT

(Pounds)
Ask eo ches sakes secures 1618
m2 in a Sey hats de ee gists ad 4840 °
ARS as Salaai Gedo ste 3344
A=4l Mo ovnss ue ones anche 825

“Total welght which equals sum of nose cone
weight of 3250 pounds and the weights of the two
instrument pods (795 pounds each) attached to the
center section of the missile.

xhibited
ose cone
49 Ft
39 ft.
= Ean
Ballistic Missile ,
ticed Scud V.2
Nose Cone Type = A-4 Al
Altitude attained =SGn.m. 60n.m
Nose Cone 825+lb. 1618 1b.
Weight
Figure 16.

30912 2-60

exhibited
‘nose cone
2

n

ih

Elongated V-2
A-2
12linm
4850 Ib.

Characteristics of Soviet A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 rockets

Shyster
4-3
243 nm.

3340 |b.

so igi

LY

1 aose cone.

A-

Figure Il

<n + eaten ivaNtT ET nae th TPN

Figure 12. A-2 nose cone.

Thetbrnar rote:

TRS TRIN? Sem © meen een HE

oo ta nee em ep ne anes etnr—tininintaseet nS ER Ah CPI HS

‘9@u0o 980U E-Y ‘ST 9NSIT

as

ate ATK,

*(39784YS) Ipssps aovzsns-07-JIaeJINS “PY sNIy

i i a] ~.
7 Z agg . ck Me wo . f
Sree ores. a
t : CO IED rem tees, nuns ne ates ca tan oor a ®

A

WILNAGISNOD

The altitude performance (55-60 nautical
miles) and a cross-sectional diagram of the
4-4 nose cone suggests that the A-4 rocket Is
the short-range missile called the SCUD (see
figure 15), which was also displayed_in the

' Esti-
mates of the altitude and payload eapability
of the various Soviet ballistic missiles that are
believed to have been used in vertical shots
are shown in table 9. Vehicle configurations
and heights are shown in figure 16.

From the foregoing it is evident that the
USSR has the necessary launching vehicles
for conducting a systematic research program
at altitudes well beyond the earth’s atmos-
phere. The vertical shot vehicles used to date
have carried geophysical, meteorological, and
biological experiments as well as furthered
studies of the technical and material prob-
lems involved in stabilization, re-entry, and
recovery of the payload package from verti-
cally fired rockets. Payload weights up to
about 5,000 pounds have been used in these
studies.** *5 These experiments and feasibility
studies are contributing substantially to the
Soviet development of equipment for recov-
erable animal and manned space Hight.

The Soviets have utilized their KYMTR
facilities for conducting these high-altitude
explorations. This has permitted continuous
Soviet monitoring of the performance of the

booster vehicle and the instrument package
during flight. Moreover, the re-entry and re-
covery tests of payloads from near-vertical
firings occurs at pre-determined points mak-
ing Teliable location and subsequent exploita-
tion possible.

The USSR is expected to continue high-
altitude firings, using existing operational
ballistic missiles, particularly those of nom-
inal 200, 350 and 700 nautical mile ranges.
Additionally, as inventories of the nominal
1100 nautical mile range ballistic missile per-
mit, the Soviets are expected to divert some
of these vehicles to the high-altitude and space
research program. The propulsion stages of
Soviet ballistic missiles supplemented with
additional burning stages provide the USSR
with the capability of exploring the earth’s
radiation bands and spatial radiation.

In down range firings, Soviet ballistic mis-
siles have most likely carried instrumentation
for investigating the missiles’ environmental
conditions and re-entry performance charac-
teristics. If the Soviets have not already used
some of these down range shots for testing re-
entry space vehicles, they are expected to do
so soon. All of these missles give the USSR
an early and distinct advantage over other
nations in the testing of large re-entry re-
search vehicles.

TABLE 9

ESTIMATED CHARACTERISTICS OF BALLISTIC MISSILES USED IN
SOVIET HIGH-ALTITUDE RESEARCH SHOTS

VEHICLE

Nominal horizontal range (n.m.)
Propellants 0.00... .. cece eee eee eee ete tes
Specific Impulse (seconds) .
Thrust (pounds 0.00.00 eee nett tees
Diameter (feet)
Length (feet)
Warhead wt. (b.) ° .
Nomina! peak altitude (nm.) **

sociated fuzing and firing mechanism.
rial for the nose cone and any adaptation kit are not

** The nominal peak altitude of a ballistic missile

* Warhead weight Is as given and defind in NIE 11-5-59 and Includes the ernie device and {ts as-
The welght of the nose cone structure, t

included.

fired on a near-vertical trajectory is on the order of

KOROLEV

scuD y-2 SHYSTER
MISSILE

75 200 350 700
(Storable) Lox-Alcohol| Lox-Alcohol] Lox-Alcohol
210 210 220 220
20,000 55,000 75,000 75,000-88,000
27 5.4 5.4 5.3
33 46 _— 67
1500 2000 2000 3000
35 50-75 110-125 240-260

e heat protective mate-

40 percent of its horizontal range for the same warhead welght.

TLL 13

RE-ENTRY CAPSULES AND WINGED
SPACE VEHICLES

though there is no direct evidence to sup-
port a Soviet manned winged space-vehicle
research program, the Soviets have the capa-
bility to build a winged space vehicle and put
it into orbit. Such a winged space vehicle is
one method of recovery of man from-a space
mission. A manned glide-type winged vehicle
using aerodynamic control surfaces can be
guided into a shallow glide path descent which
is accompanied by a low deceleration rate. It
also has the potential capability of selecting
jts’own point of landing. But reentry
(winged or otherwise) raises two major prob-
lems: (1) aerodynamic heating and (2) high-
speed stability and control of the vehicle. In
addition, there are many other problems con-
cerning fabrication techniques, pilot escape
provisions and the choice of a launching ve-
hicle if a space vehicle is air launched.

The Soviet investigations on materials of
construction could resolve the aerodynamic
heating problem for a re-entry capsule and/or
winged space vehicle. Solutions to the sta-
bility and control problems have alréady been
ived at theoretically by the Soviets; some
been published in the open literature.
stability and control will probably
r problem for the Soviets. Evidence

on Soviet fighter aircraft indicates that the
Soviets have had difficulty in translating the-
oretical solutions of stability and control prob-
Jems in transonic and supersonic flight into
operational hardware and apparently are still
having difficulties.

A winged space vehicle program is not man-
datory for a man-in-space program. The
alternative is the use of a re-entry capsule
which can be slowed down by drag brakes or
retro-rockets, with the final descent made by
parachute. The Soviets have utilized drag
brakes and parachutes for the recovery of nose
cones fired in vertical shots to high altitudes.
A Soviet scientist claims that they have found
this method to be inadequate for recovering
a@ manned satellite and that a glide type ve-
hicle is necessary.*¢

The various high-altitude vertical nose
cones exhibited by the Soviets in Moscow, Feb-
ruary 1959, are shown in figures 11 to 13.
The nose cone structures appear to be con-
structed of aluminum. Drag brakes will be
noted on the A—1, A-2, and A-3 nose cones.

It is estimated that the Soviets will have
solved the manned earth satellite re-entry
problem during the period mid-1960 to mid-
1961.

yo

7

aS)

Figure 15. Surface-to-surface missile (Scud).
