Chronology of Salvadoran Guerrilla Human Rights Abuses, Terrorism, and Urban Vi
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049377, dated 3 October 1988.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049377).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Directorate of Intelligence
Office of African and Latin American Analysis

30 November 1088

Mr, sevin Whitaker
Office of Inter-American Affairs
[epartment of State

vear Mr. Whitaker,

Enclosed is the chronology of Salvadoran
guerrilla human rights abuses and terrorist
incicents you requested on 16 November.

Reflecting our tehephone conversations a7 ®
with you, the chronology is presented in k
raw data format. Each entry is classified Oe a te
and sourced to facilitate extracting
unclassified data or pursuing
seclassificatign as your needs dictate.

Please let me know if you have
questions. I can be reached on rs

Sincerely,

Qrier,

Enclosure

.

Directorate of Intelligence
Office of African and Latin American Analysis

30 November 1988

Mr. David Pacelli
Director, Latin American Affairs
National Security Council

Dear David,

Enclosed is a Chronology of Salvadoran
guerrilla human rights abuse and terrorist
incidents in raw data format.

The chronology was prepared at the
request of State, but we are forwarding
it to you as a supplement to our recent
typescript on RMLN Strategy and human
rights abuses.

Enclosure

“®pproved for Relaneg’>

NOV 1993

CHRONOLOGY OF SALVADORAN GUERRILLA HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES,
TERRORISM, AND URBAN VIOLENCE, 1988

3 Jan: A group of armed men, who identified themselves as
members of the FMLN, kidnaped incumbent Mayor Jesus Israel
Santamaria of Aqua Caliente, Chalatenango Department and

mayoral candidate Jose Francisco Echeverria of the same
town. The two men were released on 8 Jan. ay

10 Jan: Suspected FMLN guerrillas abducted Mauricio Ortiz

Mejia, one of the Central Elections Counc elegates in
Cuscatlan Department.

14 Jan: A vehicle of the US Embassy's contract security
guard company (Wackenhut) patrolling in San Salvador was

fired upon by two susapecte d M-16
and G-3 rifles.

24 Jan: QQ unit of the FPL--one of the five factions
of the FMLN--entered the refugee camp in
onduras and ive FPL deserters.

26 Jan: FMLN guerrillas in Morazan Department executed two
peasant brothers, Juan Martinez Portillo and Ismael
Portillo, in front of their families and neighbors.
Witnesses say the two were killed because--despite guerrilla
warnings--they had obtained their “voting carnets" required
to vote in the March 1988 elections. After killing the
brothers, the guerrillas stuffed the carnets into their

mouths and warned the fam es that they too would be killed
a Sy

11 Feb: - FMLN querrillas set off a bomb in a Health Ministr
office in the capital; no one was injured. _ ae

12 Feb: A US Embassy (Wackenhut) patrol vehicle operating
in the capital was fired upon by two s cted FMLN

timer armed with a revolver.

* * *
* Incidents e have been reported either through
official channels or in the open press.

Instances of urban violence directed against the Salvadoran
Armed Forces specifically have not been included.

eaiesssr

19 Feb: EMLN guerrillas kidnaped Manuel de Jesus Guardado

Mendoza, PDC mayoral candidate for Alegria, Usulutan
Department. ia eS

19 Feb: FMLN guerrillas abducted Ricardo Battle Araujo,
bill collector for the local electric and water companies,
from his home in Alegria, Usulutan Department. Cae
19 Feb: FMLN guerrillas unsuccessfully attempted to kidnap
Gerardo Salvador Mejia Martinez, ARENA mayoral candidate for
aie Usulutan Department. [Eee

19 Feb: FMLN guerrillas unsuccessfully tried to kidnap

Francisco Rodriguez ostmaster for Alegria, Usulutan

19 Feb: Senior FMLN Commandante Roberto Roca stated in a
Radio Venceremos broadcast that US military and civilian
a ow le ate of the FMLN.

20 Feb: Following a firefight with FMLN guerrillas,
Salvadoran Army troops statiéned near the capital recovered
four explosive devices conc es.

22 Feb: Four young women--Xenia Marisol Lopez Molina, 19,
Custodia de Jesus Rivas Castro, 22, Rosa Candida Martinez,
22, and Celia Marroquin Lopez, approximately 20--were killed
when guerrillas machinegunned a bus carrying 50 textile
workers. The bus was hit by over 50 rounds of automatic

weapons fire. The incident occurr dur an
i _ campaign.

24 Feb: Sa +: that the FMLN
leadershi orders to identify US military and

civilian advisers for ation by FMLN

4 Mar: A US Embassy (Wackenhut) patrol vehicle operating in

the capital was attacked a suspected FMLN guerrilla us

11] Mar: FEMLN guerrillas detonated two car bombs in the Zona
Rosa district of San Salvador, ‘children. i damage and

ase minor ae on two children.

15 Mar: FMLN guerrillas detonated seven bombs directed
against telephone junction boxes and power poles in San
Salvador.

16 Mar: FMLN guerrillas detonated a bomb in the lobby of
the Vieytez Movie Theater in Sa alvador, destroying one
wall of the

17 Mar: EMLN guerrillas kidnaped and later killed Sergio
Romero, mayor of Azacualpa, Chalatenango Department and
destroyed the town hall. In San Miquel de Mercedes,

Chalatenago Department, they burned the town hall

14 Apr: Guerrillas abducted and killed Pedro Ventura, ARENA
mayor-elect of San Isidro, Morazan Department. Several days

later, the FMLN admitted to the killing during a radio

23 Apr: A US Embassy patrol vehicle reports it “may have"
been fired upon b © occuparits of a passing vehicle. Gi

26 Apr: A car bomb exploded near a movie theater in San

Salvador. Police disco ed other explosive devices near
the Sheraton Hotel. Chinese

27 Apr: Police discovered and deactivated an explosive

device in a vehicle fie = a San Salvador reataurant.

1 May: Police discovered and deactivated an explosive
device concealed in a stolen vehicle parked near the armed
forces commiasa in San Salvador.

1] May: First Military Court Judge Jorge Serrano was shot
and killed outside his home as he returned from taking his
children to school. Serrano had been reviewing cases

against peal extremists and FMLN guerrillas. Gin

11 May: FMLN guerrillas assassinated Terancio Rodriguez,

the ARENA as s — in, Morazan Department. born 4S!

c. Jun: FMLN guerrillas assassinated Jos@*Abraham Rivera
and Quijano, both students at the University of El Salvador,

for suspicion of spying for the US. guerrillas
unitive

wae

c. Jun: FMLN Commandante "Rey Pony" killed two civilians
accused of collaborating with government forces in Usulutan
Department. The bodies were left on public display

—_— - a a to “ ee co)laborators.

13 Jun: FMLN guerrillas publicly executed 23-year-old Noel
Campos Moreira, an ex-asoldier, following an FMLN-conducted

"town — in San Jorge, San Mique] Department. .

14 Jun: FMLN guerrillas broke into the home of Apolinario
Hernandez Rodriguez, Justice of the Peace for Carolina, San

Miguel Department, and shot and killed him in front _o
nine-year-old daughter.

21 Jul: Six well-planned and coordinated pro-FMLN
demonstrations in the capital turned violent, leaving six
demonstrators and eight policemen injured, 1] vehicles

burned, and several businesses. Some demonstrato
exchanged gunfire with security police. a]

25 Jul: Suspected FMLN guerrillas took over a San Salvador
bowling alley, robbed the patrons, e building on
fire.

21-22 Aug: Guerrillas kidnaped, severely beat, and later
executed Dolores Molina, PDC mayor of Lolotiquillo, Morazan
Department. The took credit for the killing ina

— us Venceremos radio —_ broadcast. a

25 Aug: Two National Police bodyguards for retired Colonel

Majano, a’ noted leftist, were assassinated as they drove the
colonel's car through San Salvador.
later admitted that his FMLN urban ce was reapons e for

the killing, and described the pla Ng and preparation for
- crime in detail.

4 Sep: A bomb exploded at the YKK zipper factory in
zacamil, near San S uWin
building.

the

6 Sep: Two car bomba were detonated and a third deactivated
in front o e Mini in downtown San Salvador.

13 Sep: Rro-FMLN demonstrations in San Salvador and Santa
Ana turned violent, ag demonstrators in both cities directed
gunfire at security police. In San Salvador, one policeman

Seer

was killed and three were wounded; in Santa Ana, four
members of the armed forces and one civilian child were

wounded. Police confiscated firearms, grenades, molotov
cocktails, um mais ae from marchers. Re dee so

27 Sep: FMLN guerrillas kidnaped two Salvadoran employees
of World Relief, a private voluntary organization that

assists displaced persons. te of the aie was

released later that day.

27 Sep: FEMLN guerrillas seized and destroyed the
Administration for Telecommunicationsa (ANTEL) office in
Antiguo Cuscatlan, near the capital, in the fifth successful
attack on a
a month.

Office by the guerrillas in the course of

guerrillas in San Miquel Department killed a
family of four--Esteban Martinez, 34, his wife Santos
Angelica Alvarado, 28, and their daughters Reyna Martinez
Alvarado, 12 and Ana Graciela Martiner Alvarado, 9--for

acne to cooperate a ee Sass

5 Oct: Members of an FMLN student front group beat another
student to death on the campus of the National University.
The victim was accused of being a police informant. They

later wrapped the body in a plastic bag and d ed it along
a street several ules ae eee

6 Oct: Suspected FMLN guerrillas fired an East-bloc RPG-2
at an entrance to the Legislative Assembly Building in San

Salvador. FMLN “urban commandos" eric ed credit for
the incident.

7 Oct: - Suspected FMLN guerrillas in the capital attacked an
administrative vehicle belonging to the Wackenhut
Corporation, which provides additio

nal security guards for

c. 9 Oct: FMLN guerrillas executed Ricardo Soto, a PDC

official in as sii bid a aa
12 Oct: FMLN bombs damaged the La Torre de Cristal building
in San Salvador.

qe

12 Oct: FMLN guerrillas blew up the administrative offices

‘ a_seaside resort in La Paz Department.

14 Oct: A group of 40 FMLN guerrillas in Morazan Department

en * ten ene a aces labor in earls =

14 Oct: Men dressed in camouflage and claiming to be
members of the lst Infantry Brigade forcibly removed four
male civilians from their homes north of the capital and
executed them with pistol-fire. Cartridge cases found at
the scene indicate that the murder weapon was a Soviet-
designed Makarov pistol. The lst Brigade launched an
investigation, as did the Catholic Church. On 23 Oct,
Tutela Legal, the Catholic Archbishopric’s Legal Aid and

15 Oct: FMLN guerrillas informed the civilian population in
Perquin, Morazan Department that all men in the area between
the ages of 13 and 35 would begin receiving military
training immediately. The guerrillas also forced local

residents to purchase various materials used for the

17 Oct: At least seven people were injured when an

explosive device was thrown at ejicanos ‘
located north of the capital.

17 Oct: A bomb was detonated at the ARENA party
headquarters in Santa Tecla, on the outski San
~ . A security guard was wounded.

18 Oct: Government security forces discovered and
deactivated two bombs placed in cars belonging to the
Ministry of Public Works. The cars were parked in front of

the pais oe 7 re Salvador.

18 Oct: A bomb went off outsid@ a bakery in northern
outskirts of the capital. The explosion resulted in

beiiaes pie “¥ no injuries.
care

18 Oct: A bomb destroyed a van parked in the capital, about
one lf m or the US Embassy.

tne

18 Oct: Police deactivated a bomb found approximately one
mile from the US Embassy; the bomb reported] ad bee

oat from a passing bus.

18 Oct: Suspected FMLN querrillas detonated two car bombs,

that left nine people injured and damaged a restaurant and

19 Oct: FNLN Commandante GP oreeres families in QD
pa

Chalatenango De to leave eir homes
or face execution. The families' names were

on a st of suspected government collaborators or those
deemed anti-FMLN. guerrillas killed a
farmer who defied 6 er; dur e month of October, at

least five other civilians were ki db errillas for

21 Oct: Police deactivated an explosive device located six

blocks south of the US ice @ cad fe i

were found near the device.
25 Oct: FMLN guerrillas abdicted and killed Lucio Salvador,

the physically-handicapped ARENA mayor ciedad, Morazan
Deparcnent. Qiiaiaiaeeeeessiseelieeemememae
27 Oct: The US AID building in San 8 @ struck by a

30 Oct: FMLN guerrillas abducted Jose Alberto Lopez Lopez,

PDC mayor of ‘ee cone tai ii later |

executed hin.
31 Oct: FMLN guerrillas assassinated Jose Ulises Hernandez
ARENA mayor of Nuev a tan Department.

1 Nov: Suspected FMLN guerrillas bombed the ezaltepeque
chapte eadquarters o PDC.

3 Nov: Two people were injured’ By shrapnel from an FMLN

queiabe, " electrical power station.

5 Nov: Suspected FMLN guerrillas fired w°tS-made M-72 LAW
at the Sheraton Hotel in San Salvador, site of the OAS
General Assembly meeting Nov 13-19. The rocket struck a
service area on the second floor; at the time, over 1,000
people were attending receptions in two ballrooms located

below the point of impact. There were no reparts of

19 Nov: FMLN attacks partially destroyed the mayor's office

and the _— exchange in San Buenaventura, Usulutan.

22 Nov: During an attack on the town of Colon, La Libertad
Department, FMLN guerrillas destroyed the mayor's office
telecommunications office, and a gas station. Gu

24 Nov: Suspected_FM fired on the US AID building
in San Salvador. Gils

24 Nov: A civilian, Orlando Guillen, was injured by the

impact of one of three pr da bombs planted around San

24 Nov: FMLN guerrillas used bombs to destroy six

government cars parked in a San Salvador gara The owner

of the garage was injured in the incident. Gna,
- The FMLN took credit for n a

_ radio propaganda broadcast.

25 Nov: Three people were wounded in a bomb attack on the

home of Daniel Antonio Rive e mayor of Mejicanos,
a suburb of San Salvador. Gili

26 Nov: The daughter of an official of the National
Conciliation Party was wounded when suspected FMLN
guerrillas threw four grenades as they drove through a San
Salvador neighborhood. One grenade exploded near the US
Deputy Chief of Mission's home. Remnants of the grenades
r day indicate they were Soviet-made.
