The Probable Outlook for Indonesia Through 1954
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000108156, dated 3 April 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000108156).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ie uw Sy
eee ..
¥

PB OUGHT eR
Pt SOyT A PLiCED pred
Spe z ption
npeuioes anor
+

THE PROBABLE OUTLOOK FOR INDONESIA
THROUGH 1954

THE PROBLEM

To assess the political situation in Indonesia and to estimate probable political
developments in that country through 1954.

CONCLUSIONS

1. At least through the period of this esti-
mate, political developments in Indonesia
will probably continue to center around
efforts of the Nationalist Party (PNI) to
retain and consolidate control of the gov-
ernment. To maintain its majority in
parliament, the present PNI coalition
government depends on the support of
Communist votes. If the PNI moves too
rapidly in its efforts to build up its posi-
tion or goes too far in its acceptance of
Communist support, it runs the risk of
being overthrown, either by a military
coup or by parliamentary action. How-
ever, the PNI apparently recognizes this
danger and, moreover, will probably con-
tinue to have the strong support of Presi-
dent Sukarno. The disparate elements
which make up the opposition are so far
only loosely aligned with one another
and have not coordinated their efforts
to any degree. AS a consequence, we be-
lieve that the PNI has a better than even
chance of retaining power through 1954.

- 2. Continued rule by the present govern-
ment is likely to be marked by some fur-
ther deterioration of the internal security

and economic situation, but it is unlikely
that a serious threat to the stability of
the country will emerge during 1954 asa
result of these trends.

3. The Communists will probably con-
tinue to gain in strength and prestige
during the period of this estimate as a
consequence of continuation of the pres-
ent government in power. However, it
is extremely unlikely that the Commu-
nists will be in a position to gain control
of the government, legally or by force,
during 1954. It is also unlikely that
acknowledged members of the Commu-
nist party will be brought into the pres-
ent government, because such a move
might cause significant defections from
the coalition, perhaps even within the
PNI itself, and might provoke violent ac-
tion by opposition elements.

4. While the effects of military and politi-
cal developments in the Associated States
of Indochina may eventually force Indo-
nesia to abandon its present self-styled
“independent” position, it is unlikely
that this will come to pass within the
period of this estimate.

aa eT 1

ay

’

eE-Cee 2

5. Should a weakening of the opposition
enable the present government to retain
office for a protracted period beyond
1954, the Communists’ capabilities for
ultimately dominating the government
would greatly increase, and could lead to
a situation seriously prejudicial to US
Security interests in Southeast Asia?
Loss of Indonesia to the Communist Bloc
would pose a distinct threat both to the

Philippines and Australia, and would
provide the Communists with ready
access to important sources of petroleum,
rubber, tin, and mica. From a Strategic
point of view, Indonesia would then be
available for the establishment of Com-
munist advanced naval and air bases
which could dominate and control the
Sea and air lines of communications of
this vitally strategic area.

DISCUSSION

I. PRESENT SITUATION

6. The political situation in Indonesia remains
unsettled. No national elections have ever
been held, and the present provisional parlia-
ment lacks a popular mandate. Partly in
anticipation of elections now scheduled for
early 1955, and partly in reaction to Commu-
nist support for the government, an increas-
ingly wide division has developed between the
incumbent Nationalist Party (PNI) and its
moderate rivals, the Moslem Party (Masjumi)
and the Socialists. The condition of political
instability has been intensified by the involve-
ment of the political parties with factionalism
in the armed forces. The Communists have
gained substantial opportunities for expand-
ing their influence. ;

7. Until mid-1953 Indonesia had, with one
Short-lived exception, a series of coalition gov-
ernments including representatives of both
the PNI and the Masjumi. Signs of an im-
pending breakdown in this coalition system
appeared in the so-called 17 October affair of

1952, when the PNI Sponsored a motion which

*The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Intelligence,
Department of the Army, would substitute the
following for the above sentence:

“The increase in Communist strength and pres-
tige as a consequence of continuation of the pres-
ent government in power is detrimental to the
Stability and present orientation of Indonesia. It
is considered unlikely that positive counteraction
will be taken by the opposition to check this
trend. Therefore, it is likely that the progressive
development of this trend could eventually lead
to a situation which would seriously jeopardize
US security interests in Southeast Asia.”

was critical of the Minister of Defense and was
aimed at blocking government plans for re-
ducing the army to a more compact and pro-
fessionalized force. A faction of the armed
forces came near to revolt and demanded dis-
Solution of parliament and immediate elec-
tions. The intervention of President Sukarno
resolved the immediate crisis. However, PNI
sniping at the coalition continued, and on 2
June 1953 the government finally resigned
rather than face a PNI-supported no-confi-
dence vote. Nine weeks later, after four pre-
vious attempts to form a cabinet had failed,
President Sukarno finally accepted a PNI-led
cabinet from which members of the Masjumi
and the Socialist Party were excluded.

8. The Ali government which took office on
30 July 1953 is the farthest left of Indonesia’s
cabinets to date. Ali himself is generally con-
Servative in outlook, but seven members —
Defense, Justice, Labor, Finance, Agriculture,
Education, and Foreign Affairs — are men of
leftist background, None, ‘however, is an
avowed Communist, although two — the Min-
isters of Defense and Labor — have comported
themselves as though they might be fellow
travellers. Since assuming office, the Minister
of Foreign Affairs has been markedly coopera-
tive with the US Ambassador, and the Minis-
ters of Agriculture, Finance, and Education
have also tended to cooperate with American
official and business representatives in Indo-
nesia. However, in order to maintain a parlia-
mentary majority, the government depends on
the 19 votes of the Communist party and the
Communist-run labor federation, SOBSI.

reat

Say 3

9. The Ali cabinet has the support of Presi-
dent Sukarno, who remains Indonesia’s
Strongest and most influential figure. Su-
karno’s motives in backing the present Bov-
ernment are not entirely clear. He may have
done so partly in an effort to reduce Masjumi
influence, fearing that a Masjumi victory in
the planned elections might result in greatly
increased Moslem influence, possibly including
a Moslem constitution for Indonesia. He may
also have done so partly in an effort to reduce
the influence of the military group which led
the 17 October affair. Finally, he may have
regarded acceptance and support of the Ali
cabinet as the only alternative to an “execu-
tive” cabinet in which he would either have to
take personal responsibility for day-to-day
governmental operations or turn matters over
to Vice-President Hatta. Whatever Sukarno’s
motives, his support of the Ali cabinet and his
efforts to aid that cabinet have caused him
to become increasingly identified in Indo-
nesian eyes with the PNI, and his unifying
influence as a purely national figure above
party politics has somewhat diminished.

10. Since taking office, the Ali government
has concentrated on strengthening its own
position and weakening that of the opposi-
tion. It has removed some Masjumi and
Socialist sympathizers from key positions in
the provincial administrations and in the
various ministries, and is continuing its
efforts in this regard. In preparing for the
national elections, the government has tried
to rig the electoral machinery. Masjumi and
Socialist representatives were completely ex-
cluded from the central elections committee
set up by the government. Following Masjumi

protests, however, representation was granted.

on the subordinate regional committees that
were later established.

11. The government has also strengthened its
hold over the armed forces. Defense Minis-
ter Iwa Kusumasumantri has indicated that
he wants control of all military appointments
down through regimental level. He has suc-
ceeded in transferring to his own staff virtual-
ly all the powers of the Armed Forces Chief
of Staff. Several army officers of Iwa’s own
choice have been named to high staff posts

without the consent of the Army Chief of
Staff.

12. The efforts of the government forces to
weaken the political opposition and to con-
Solidate their control over the armed forces
have met increasing though not always effec-
tive resistance. In December 1953, feeling
against Iwa’s actions came to a head among
army lvaders, and there were rumors of a
coup. The Army Chief of Staff submitted
his resignation, and four out of the seven
Territorial Commanders joined in a demand
for Iwa’s resignation. A serious crisis was
averted through a compromise personally
arranged by President Sukarno. Iwa’s ac-
tions were allowed to stand, but the Army
Chief of Staff retained his post and Iwa un-
dertook to make no further appointments
without consulting him. More recently, the
parliamentary opposition, which rallied to the
support of the dissenting Territorial Com-
manders in December, has become more out-
spoken against the government and its poli-
cies. On two recent occasions the Masjumi
Staged mass demonstrations in protest
against PNI and Communist propaganda at-
tacks on it.

13. However, a unified opposition, prepared to
take the initiative against the government,
has still to emerge. The government’s mili-
tary critics, who probably still hold more
than two-thirds of the key field commands,
have made no effort to obtain political back-
ing and have actually done little to band
together among themselves. The political
parties opposing the government in parlia-
ment are divided on many issues and have
thus far made no serious coordinated effort
to drive the PNI from office.

14. The actions of the Ali government and
the PNI since coming into power have been
marked by continuing close collaboration
with the Communists. The willingness of the
government and the PNI to work with the
Communists probably derives from belief
that the Communists can safely be used to
help forestall Masjumi domination of Indo-
nesia, rather than from a desire to help the
Communists to implement their program.

eT

a 4

However, some government policies to date
have been to the advantage of the Communist
as well as the PNI position. Both have bene-
fitted from the weakening of Masjumi and
Socialist influences in the civil service and
the army. There is no evidence of direct
Communist control over government policy,
but on occasion both the government and the
PNI have taken action specifically beneficial
to the Communists alone. The government
has shown partiality toward SOBSI, the Com-
munist-controlled labor federation in its dis-
tribution of Ministry of Labor patronage. On
the other hand, the government has thus far
resisted the Defense Minister’s efforts to arm
PERBEPSI, the Communist-dominated vet-
terans organization, and has refused to allow
continued occupation of estate lands in Su-
matra by Communist-led squatters. Never-
theless, the prestige and influence of the Com-
munists have been enhanced by their close
association with the government.

15. The principal Communist threat in the
present situation derives from the govern-
ment’s acceptance of Communist support.
Communist party membership is estimated at
less than 100,000 out of a population of about
80 million, and Communist military strength
is still limited to a few guerrilla bands in
Java. However, by successful exploitation of
a “united front” policy, the Communists have
achieved PNI acceptance of their support,
thus enhancing Communist prestige and in-
fluence, and have been able to infiltrate gov-
ernment machinery and non-Communist po-
litical organizations. In addition, the Com-
munists have considerable potential to fur-
ther their aims through their control of
SOBSI, whose estimated 800,000 members
make up the bulk of organized labor. A
SOBSI general strike, by disrupting estate
production and transportation, could at a
minimum seriously embarrass the govern-
ment.

16. The government has made little progress’

with the major problems of establishing law
and order throughout Indonesia. No effec-
tive steps have been taken to quell dissidence
in south Celebes, and disorders have broken
out among the Atjehnese of northern Su-

matra. The activities of the fanatic Moslem
dissident group, Darul Islam, continue.

17. Indonesia’s economic position has con-
tinued to deteriorate during the present goy-
ernment’s tenure. A drastic drop in world tin
and rubber prices has created a serious deficit
in balance of payments, and foreign exchange
reserves have fallen to within four percent of
the minimum 20 percent reserve requirement.
The government deficit has increased. The

. government has done little to solve any of In-

donesia’s economic problems, though it has
made a few bilateral trade deals in an effort
to obtain markets for its tin and rubber.

18. The Ali government has continued the
Indonesian foreign policy of “independence”
in the East-West struggle. Relations with
the Communist bloc have been strengthened
by sending ambassadors to Moscow and Pei-
ping and by opening trade negotiations with
certain Bloc countries. At the same time,
relations with the US, which had deteriorated
during 1952 and 1953, have recently shown
some signs of improvement. A request has
been made for US assistance in national police

‘training, and the Foreign Minister has ex-

pressed a desire to proceed with a Treaty of
Commerce and Navigation. Although Indo-
nesia’s “independent” and “anticolonialist”
policy frequently leads it to be critical of
Western actions in the present world situa-
tion, Indonesia’s economic and political ties
continue to be predominantly with the West.

Il. PROBABLE POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS
THROUGH 1954

19. Political developments in Indonesia will
probably continue, at least through 1954, to
center around the efforts of the PNI to retain
and consolidate its control of the government.
The PNI recognizes that its chief opponent,
the Masjumi, appears to be politically strong
throughout Indonesia and might even win
a majority in an honest election. The PNI
is also aware that many military leaders are
opposed to the present government’s policies
with respect to the armed forces and are in-
creasingly critical of government collabora-
tion with the Communists. However, if the
PNI attempts too blatantly to rig the elector-

SEH T

pe aon

terme

__ pee . 5

al machinery, appears to be unduly delaying
elections, or goes too fast in attempting to
consolidate control over the armed forces, it
runs the risk of being overthrown either by
a military coup or parliamentary action.

20. If the present government should fall by
parliamentary means, the successor govern-
ment would probably be headed by the Mas-
jumi and be drawn from the present opposi-
tion and from minor parties now in the pres-
ent government. If the present government’s
downfall resulted from PNI refusal further to
cooperate with the Communists, the new
coalition might also include PNI representa-
tion. Under the new government, efforts
would almost certainly be made to circum-
scribe the activities of the Indonesian Com-
munist Party, but it is unlikely that the
party would be formally banned. However,
there is some chance that an “executive cab-
inet” pending elections under President Su-
karno might take over. In any event, the new
government would probably concentrate on
preparation for elections.

21, Any attempt to overthrow the present
government by force would probably involve
the Masjumi leadership and Vice-President
Hatta. The latter is known to be concerned
about the Communist problem and the pres-
ent government’s military policies, and is re-
currently reported to be at odds with Su-
Kkarno. Even if the military leaders took
action without securing prior political cooper-
ation, they would almost certainly welcome
any support they could get from opposition
political leaders. Those Territorial Com-
manders who are in opposition to the govern-
ment’s military policies and collaboration
with the Communists appear to have the
preponderance of military strength under
their control. Most of the military units in
west Java (site of the capital), central Java,
north Sumatra, and Borneo— about 85,000
troops, would probably side with the opposi-
tion, as would a substantial proportion of the

'17,000-man Police Mobile Brigade. Many of

the remaining units of the National Police
Force scattered throughout Indonesia would
probably also be sympathetic to a coup.

22. However, the success of any coup would
require a considerable degree of coordination
among a number of disparate elements which
are so far only loosely aligned with one
another. Moreover, unless a revolt scored
overwhelming initial successes, there would
almost certainly be resistance by some pro-
government forces in Java. Under such con-
ditions, the coup leaders would pr.bably have
to secure the cooperation of President Su-
karno to prevent a long-drawn-out civil war
from developing. °

23. We believe that PNI has a better than
even chance of retaining power through 1954.
Because of its awareness of the hazards of
moving too fast, it will probably yield on
Specific issues when confronted with strong
opposition. Moreover, it will probably con-
tinue to have the strong support of President
Sukarno, who in response to the threatened
withdrawal of one of the smaller government
parties reportedly threatened to dissolve parli-
ament and to retain Ali as prime minister.
Some influential members of the PNI have ex-
pressed dissatisfaction with party acceptance
of Communist support, and there are unsub-
stantiated reports of PNI attempts to reach
a working agreement with the Masjumi and
thus reform the coalition on which most pre-
vious governments have been based. How-
ever, a PNI-Communist split, which would
bring down the government, does not appear
likely to develop at any early date, because
both sides profit from the present arrange-
ment. Meanwhile, the military opponents of
the regime, who apparently have no political
ambitions of their own, have displayed little
inclination, except as a last resort, to take
up arms against a legally constituted govern-
ment enjoying President Sukarno’s support.

24. Continued rule by the PNI and its present
allies will probably be marked by some fur-
ther deterioration of internal conditions in
Indonesia. Little progress is likely to be
made in suppressing dissidents. There will
probably be some further weakening of the
effectiveness of the armed forces as a result
of the government’s efforts to reduce the
strength of the 17 October element within the

oe oe ae

>a 6

armed forces. However, it is unlikely that a
serious threat to the stability of the country
will emerge during 1954 as a result of these
trends. Although the government will prob-
ably have little success either in solving its
fiscal and foreign trade problems or in at-
tracting foreign capital during 1954, the ad-
verse effects of continued economic drift and
depression will probably not become acute
during this period.

25. Continuation of the present coalition in
power will provide the Communists with fur-
ther opportunities for building up their popu-
lar strength, infiltrating the government ma-
chinery, and pushing for adoption of policies
favorable to the Communist cause. As a con-
sequence, the Communists will probably con-
tinue to gain in strength and prestige during
the period of this estimate. It is extremely
unlikely, however, that the Communists will
gain power, legally or by force, during 1954.
It is also unlikely that acknowledged mem-
bers of the Communist party will be brought
into the present coalition government, because
such a move might cause significant defec-
tions from the coalition, perhaps even within
the PNI itself, and might provoke violent ac-
tion by opposition elements. Moreover, until
conservative influence in the armed forces has
been eliminated or greatly weakened, or until
Communist guerrilla strength has been devel-
oped to a far greater extent, the Communists
will remain incapable of seizing control by
force.

26. Should a weakening of the opposition en-
able the present government to retain office
for a protracted period beyond 1954, the Com-
munists’ capabilities for ultimately dominat-
ing the government would greatly increase,
and could lead to a situation seriously pre-
judicial to US security interests in Southeast
Asia.?_ Loss of Indonesia to the Communist
Bloc would pose a distinct threat both to the
Philippines and Australia, and would provide

the Communists with ready access to impor-
tant sources of petroleum, rubber, tin, and
mica. From a strategic point of view, Indo-
nesia would then be available for the estab-
lishment of Communist advanced naval and
air bases which could dominate and control
the sea and air lines of communications of
this vitally strategic area.

27. The self-styled “independent” foreign pol-
icy of the present government will probably
remain substantially unchanged during the
period of this estimate. The government will
probably continue its efforts to develop its
relations with the Communist world. Im-
pending negotiations with the Netherlands
are likely to result in the dissolution of the
Netherlands-Indonesia Union. The Indo-
nesian request for reinitiation of talks with
the Netherlands on the future political status
of Western New Guinea (Irian), which was
left unsettled at the time of the transfer of
sovereignty to Indonesia, is unlikely to be
granted. Indonesia’s diplomatic actions will
probably include attempts to win support for
the Indonesian position on New Guinea from
other members of the Asian-African bloc.

‘28. While the effects of military and political

developments in the Associated States of In-
dochina may eventually force Indonesia to
abandon its present self-styled “independent”
position, it is unlikely that this will come to
pass within the period of this estimate.

*The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Intelligence,
Department of the Army, would substitute the
following for the above sentence:

“The increase in Communist strength and
prestige as a consequence of continuation of the
present government in power is detrimental to
the stability and present orientation of Indo-
nesia. It is considered unlikely that positive
counteraction will be taken by the opposition to
check this trend. Therefore, it is likely that the
progressive development of this trend could
eventually lead to a situation which would seri-
ously jeopardize US security interests in South-
east Asia.”

Soteet eee eee ee ee ae me teen Lente sete toes ee eli

Hien ee 4 6 | mane = ne: nae: yan otter tli Maaataahae ePentEy

rk
Areal comparison
©" with the United States. |
: ‘

PHILIPPI

JAVA

ESIA

13279 CIA, 5-54
