NIE 11-4-61: Main Trands in Soviet Capabilities and Policies 1961-1965, Annexes
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000139369, dated 3 May 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000139369).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

6442392 Heyy
[Wr asa Soper

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

7 June 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: Mr. Allan Evans, Stato (INR)

Colonel B. R. Drewn, USA (ACSI)

Captain H. W. McElwain, USN (ONI)

Colonel F. J. Cole, USAF (AFCIN 233)

Colonel K. T. Gould, USA (J-2, The Joint Staff)

Colonel Robert P. Halloran, USAF Director of
Operational Services, NSA

Mr. Randolph V. Zander, Defense (USO)

SURJECT= NIE 11-l-451: MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES
AND POLICIES 1961-1965, ANNEXES
A AND 5

l. The attached terms of reference are forwarded for review.

2. It is requested that your representative meet with us at
ihee;—Merteay;T2 June in Rocm 15 Administration Duilding to dis-
cuss these terms.

J 000 , Wadi sf Fare at
; 7 Ureilacd C Latha) Ey
cae WILLARD C. MATTHIAS

4 Acting Deputy Assistant Director
NSO Naticnal Estimates

DISTRIBUTION "3"
Plus GMAIC, JABIC, and SIC

wo ER
b a TON

sa eeqgn seers sgt [HG A

wt APPROVED POR RELEASE

vy DEC 02 1997 ae pg Se/CR

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

7 June 1961

SUBJECT: TERMS REFERENCE, Ammexes A and B, NIE 11-4-61:
ho

R
MAIN TRENDS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND POLICIES, 1961-1966

THS PROBLEM

To estinate the strength, composition, and general
capabilities of Soviet uilitary forces as of uid-1961, anc

sain trends in these forees and capabilities over the next five

SCOPE AND METIIOD

This estizate will revise and bring up to date the following

portions of NIE 11-4-60: Annex A, Soviet Military Forces and

Capabilities; Annex B, Tables of Sino-Soviet Bloc Military Forces.

fl:

Insofar as possible, the presentation will fcollcv the format
developed over the past few years anc employed in the Annexes
to NIE 11-4-60. Contributors are therefore requested to key
their cortributions to pertinent sections and peragrephs of

NIE 11-4-60.

Detailed questions for a stucy of Soviet nilitary
expenditures are also attached. These are cesignec to support
the study of Soviet nilitary costs which hes been carries on fer
several years. In view of the charges being code in the
structure of Soviet forces, this study should continuc to be of
ereat interest as a contribution to both nilitary ara econouic

io~

estinates.

QUESTICHS AND PRIMARY COHTRIDUTCRS

Changes in the Size and Composition of the Soviet éruec Forces

Provide contributions to an updating of the text on this

subject (see paras. 1-9 of fmnex A, NIE 11-4-60), estinating

to what extent and to what pace the announced persomel recuctions

have been carrie? out to date, the prospects for their full

ore

sult

sf:

accomplishment on schedule, anc their likely impact on Soviet forces.
The contributions should be accompanied by a summary of the evidence
on this subject since Janvary 1960, and by detailed material on the

alterations in force structure and equipment strengths.

Contributors: All agencies within their competence. NSA is
requested to update the review of changes in status of units and
levels of activity of forces which it contributed to NE 11-l-60.
Within CIA, a joint contribution by ORR and OCI is requested on

force reductions to date and personnel strength as of mid-1961.
Soviet High Command Structure (paras. 10-11)

Contributors: All agencies within their competence. NSA is
requested to make an all-source contribution as back-up to the

discussion on this sudject.

Forces for Iong Range Attack (paras. 12-38)
This section will be derived from the forthcoming NIB 11-8-61.

No contributions required.

Air Defense Forces (paras. 39-68)
This section will be derived from the forthcoming NIE 11-3-61.

No contributions required,

ne ee

S

suf

Theater Field Forces (paras. 69-82)

In addition to reviewing and updating the text in NIE 11-l-60,
contribute to additional paragraphs on the following related sub-
jects: (a) mid-1961 strength, composition, and equipment of Soviet
forces available for employment against NATO, giving particular
attention to Soviet forces in East Germany; (b) likely trends in
these forces resulting from force reductions, reorganization of
the military establishment, and introduction of new equipment;

(c) the cortribution of Fast Eur ocean Satellite forces to Bloc ca-
pabilities against NATO. In addition, contribute to an assessment
of Soviet tactical ee especially in the European
area, and to an oes of paragraph 82 to cover theater field
force capabilities for limited nuclear and nonnuclear warfare as
well as for operations in a general nuclear war.

Contributors: Services, GMAIC, SIC, JAEIC

Naval Forces (paras. 83-97)

Contributors: Navy, GMAIC, SIC

Special Weapon Developments (paras. 98-99)
Nuclear. This section will be derived from the forthcoming

NIg 11-2-61. No contributions required,

oe ae

a

SEgret

CW, EW, and Electronic Warfare (paras, 100-1C))
nme anette ee

Contributor: SI¢

Guided Missiles
Contributor: GMAICG to provide if new evidence or analysis
Senne ee

warrants,

Military Relationships with other Bloc Nations

Describe the military relationships between the USSR and
Commmist China -- assistance in training programs, provision of
weapons and equipment, sharing of facilities, joint exercises,
command relationships. Evaluate command and support relationships
within the Warsaw Pact,

Contributors: All agencies within their competence.
ca,

Capabilities for Distant, Limited Military Actions

Contribute to the updating of paragraphs 113-11) of NIE 11-h-60
from the standpoint of Soviet naval, merchant ship, and military
and civil air transport and supply capabilities. Discuss any indi-
cations of the preparation of special units for this mission.

Contributors: All agencies within their competence.

~S-

sight

Tables (Annex 3)

Tables will be identical with those in Annex B of NIE 11-l-60,
with the following excentions:

Tables 1 and 3 should include estimates for l January 1960,
mid-1961, and mid-1962.

Tables 2, h, and 6 should comprise estimates for mid-1961.

Tables 5, 10, ll, and 13 should include mid-year estimates
for 1961 through 1966,

An additional table should te provided giving Soviet military
aircraft strength by area in mid-1961. Such a table was included
in NIE ll-l, in previous years, but was omitted in 1960 because of

reorganization anc reductions.

spl

ATTACHMENT &

Proposed Supplementary Terms of Reference
For Study of Soviet Military Expenditures,

1958-1966

SUBJECT: NIE 11-h-61: Supplementary Terms of Reference:
STUDY OF SOVIET MILITARY COSTS,
1958-1966

THE FROBIEM

To prepare an overall systematic costing of estimated Soviet
military programs 1956-1966, with a view to improving our estimates
of: (a) Soviet military expenditures; (b) Soviet military programs}
(c) Scviet economic capabilities to meet these programs; and (d)

the impact of such programs on Soviet economic growth.

BACKGROUND

These terms are substantially identical with those which have

been issued in the past. Some items have been eliminated however

a)

sig

and acCitional details are being requested in order to maintain
the mission-oriented basis of the 11-l series which has been . ..

Ceveloped over the past several years,

OUTLINE OF STUDY

I. DImopccriog
LL, ESTIATED SOVIET MILITARY EXPENDITURES , 1958-1966

Aw ay Object
1. Personnel
2. Procurement
3. Operation and Maintenance
h. Facilities
5. Other

B. By Mission
1. Long Range attack
2. Air Defense
3. Theater Forces
li. Naval Forces
5. Command and Support

6. Resicual

III. IMPACT ON THE SOVIET ECONOMY
A. Gross National Product (GNP)
B. Machinery Production
C. Electronic Production

IV. COMPARISON WITH US EXPENDITURES
GUIDE FOR CONTRIBUTIONS

The study will be based on materials from all sources, Con-
tributions should, wherever possible, consider the period beyond
1966 in order that preliminary expenditures associated with pro-

curerent programs after 1966 can be adequately reflected.

Contributions should cover the entire period year by year.
Supplementary contributions may be required as a result of new
information and review, In all instances sources, methodology
and margins of error should be attached to all estimates in order

. to permit assessment of reliability.

The remainder of this guide is devoted to a categorization
of the desired coverage. It is divided into two parts: (1) phys-
ical cata; and (2) financial, including price data, Category (2)
will be treated by ORR, whereas category (1) covers the bulk of
the information required from the various organizations with pri-

mary responsibility.

syflir

SEgret

I. PHYSICAL DATA (For an expansicn of this section, see
Detailed Requirements below)
A. Procuetion and/o» procurement of major items of euu'pment.
Estimates of the production of unique military equipment

and of the prccurement of other major equipment (trucks, transport
aircraft and so forth) should be provided ty model for each year,
(Where the sare model of major item is prceduced in more than one
plant, the production should be furnished by plant). For those
items estimated to be still in production in the period 1958-1966,
but for which production began prior to 1958, cumlative production

through 1957 should also be indicated.

By. Order of Battle. Statements of Order of Rattle in terms
of units, personnel strength, and major equipment should be fur-
nished. The format for this requirement is incicated in the

Detailed Requirernents below.
II. FINANCIAL DATA

A. Prices. For all goods and services purchased ty the Soviet

military.

B. Budget. Delimit the announced defense expenditures as to
military activities covered, and determine military allocations

under other budget categories.

-~h-

So

C. Econcmic requirements, Research end development and ‘nuolear
energy programs, At this juncture the state of the art precludes
the detailed building of aggragate estimates for Soviet research
and cevelopment and nuclear energy programs, To the extent that
the SIC stucy on Science and Technology, and NIE 11-2-61, respect-
ively, provide suitable aggregates for these programs they will
be usec in the study. Should they not be forthcoming from these

sources, approximations will te made,
DETATLED REQUIREMENTS

I, FRODUCTION OR PROCUREMENT OF MAJOR EQUIPMENT

To the extent possible, production or procurement estimates
for each year 1958-1966 for major items of equipment in the Soviet
Union should te submitted by model using last years! format for
NIE 11-4-60, However, a column should te added for entering the
cumulative production as of 1 January 1958 for those iters for
which production had begun prior to 1958, Estimates should te
by mocel or class within each category of weapon or equipment.

Estimates are desired for the following categories:

~S-

sagt

sgfic

A. Aircraft (number by mocel under each of the following
categories ) Where the same model of aircraft is procucec in more
than one plant, the production should te furnished by plant.

1. Fighters

2. Bombers

3. Antisubmarine aircraft

lh. Trainers

5. Trensports for military use
6, Rotary Winged

7. Utility-Liaison

B. Weapons (number of weapons by model under each of the

following categories)

1. Small Arms

2. Machine Guns (Specify models used in AA role.)

3. Artillery

. Antiaircraft Artillery

5. Mortars

6. Rocket Launchers

7. <Antitank Weapons

8, Other

C. jaxmorec Force Vehicles (number of vehicles uy model -under

each of the following categories),

ae
24
36
u,
De
6.

D. Ammunition (mumber of rounds or other appropriate unit

and weight per round for each type under the following categories).

I.
Oe

3%

Tanks

Self-propellec Guns
Armored Personnel Carriers
Amphibious Vehicles

Prime Movers

Other

Small Arms
Artillery
Mortars
Rockets
Pyrotechnics
land Mines
Demolition
Grenades
Naval Mines
Torpedces

Depth Charges

-7-

sraglht

12. Aerial Bombs

13. Other

E

eo

Automotive Vehicles (number of vehicles for each model

under the following categories)

1.
2.
Be
kh.

F.
of each c

1.

Trucks

Tractors

Trailers

Special Purpose (e.g., gasoline trucks, mobile repair

shops, etc.)

Naval Vessels by Class (number of vessels and displacement
lass of vessel).
Cruisers
Destrcyers
Destroyer Esccrts
Submarines, Conventional Long Range
Submarines, Conventional Medium Range
Submarines, Conventional Short Range
Submarines, Nuclear
Submarines, Missile
Mine Vessels

Patrol Vessels

sglls

11. Other (e.g., submarine tencers, floating crydocks,

auxiliary vessels by major types as appropriate)

i.

Guided Missiles (number of missiles for each model)

Noncommurications Electronic and Electrical Equipment
(number of units for each model under the following
categories)

Ground Radar (except ECM)

a, Battlefield Surveillance

b. HN/GCL

c. Heightfinders

Ca GCA

e. IF

£. Fire Control

Ground ECM

Ground Infrared

a, Sniperscozes

>. Tank Viewing Devices

c. Amtitank Detection Devices

G. Other

Névigation Aides (ground based)

G€nerators, Batteries

Proximity Fuses

Other

Sit

I. Commmicaticns Equipment

1. Tactical Radios

2. Fixed Communications Equipment
If. ORDER OF BATTIE

Estimates of the number of regular military personnel and the
distribution of these personnel among the units specified below
are required, Mid-year figures are preferable. If the beginning

of the year is selected, 1957 should be included.
Ae Army

Iast year's standard "bedsheet" format should be used
including indications of the average strength of the unit. Uncer
each type of line division (e.g., motorized rifle division) there
shoul be a breakdown by strength category. (a,b, v). Only

changes in the Tables of Equipment need be furnished.
Be Air Force

The AOB for each year from 1958-1966 should be allocated
among the major components using the format appearing in Table 6,
(page 60) cf Annex B to NIE 11-h-50. Each entry in the table, how-

ever, should include the number of regiments (or other relevant

Pas sae

sy

units(, and the number of personnel accounted for ty these regi-
ments as well as the number of aircraft by model. In addition,
personnel within each component assigned to air corps or air
army headquarters and air service detachments should be listed

separately.

For the air forces as a whole, as was done last year, the
alr force personnel assigned to preoperational aviation training,
to draft boards, as attaches, as factory representatives, to
research and development, and to the Moscow Headquarters of the
Ministry of Defense should te estimated for each year from 1958-
1966,

C. Navy

Estimates of the naval 0B should include for 1958-1966
the numbers of each class of vessel and the personnel afloat as-
Signed to each class of vessel, The major types of auxiliaries
should be differentiated. The OB breakdown for the forces afloat
should correspond to the procurement breakdown requested under
Section I, F, above, The OB should indicate and distinguish
the ships and personnel in the inactive fleet. In addition, the
number and organizational breakdown of shore-based personnel in
support of forces afloat, the personnel assigned to coastal de-
fense, the personnel in naval AAA, in training, and the naval

personnel in Moscow headquarters should be listed separately.

-~-ll-

ye:
