The Significance of the New Indonesian Government
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000108154, dated 5 August 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000108154).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COPY NO.3
FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE

Fe

ee we
SPECIAL ESTIMATE ia

eR

SECURITY INFORMATION bo2d-88

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NEW INDONESIAN
GOVERNMENT

SE-51
Approved 15 September 1953
Published 18 September 1953

The Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this
estimate on 15 September 1953. The FBI abstained, the
subject being outside of its jurisdiction.

The following member organizations of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intel-
ligence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

_ Shes.

ia i iar en eee yo e
estes ‘ *
Approved for Recess —~ q g)
3A
a

Nata peer oh + i
a < e NND 921047 .2S'¢/

THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NEW

INDONESIAN

GOVERNMENT °

THE PROBLEM —

To estimate the significance of the newly established government in Indonesia
with particular reference to indications of probable future trends.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The Indonesian cabinet which took
office on 1 August 1953 is more leftist than
any preceding Indonesian government.
Although there is no evidence to indicate
that any of the ministers are subject to
direct Communist.discipline and control,
eight important ministries of a total of 20
are held by individuals who will probably
respond on many issues to Communist
influence.

2. The new cabinet’s program follows
closely for the most part programs pre-
viously supported by more conservative
elements in Parliament. We believe that
the cabinet will proceed cautiously with
its moderate program and will avoid the
adoption of radical policies.

3. We believe that the present cabinet
will remain in office for at least six
months. However, as time passes, the
tenure of the cabinet will become consid-
erably more uncertain because:

*This estimate addresses itself solely to the sig-
nificance of the Indonesian cabinet which took
office on 1 August 1953. For an estimate of the
general course of Indonesian developments, see
NIE-77, “Probable Developments in Indonesia,”
which was published on 11 June 1953.

a. The pro-Communist inclination of
certain members of the cabinet and the
tendency they will have to place their
supporters in key positions in the bu-
reaucracy, the armed forces, and the po-
lice will probably aid the anti-Communist
opposition in its present efforts to solidify
and may cause conservative members of
groups now represented in the govern-
ment to recognize more clearly the Com-
munist danger.

b. The present cabinet must sooner or
later cope with controversial issues such
as economic problems, internal security,
foreign policy, and army reorganization.
In view of its slim majority in Parliament,
the government will run the risk of in-
curring an adverse vote which would
cause its fall any time it seeks to deal with
these issues.

c. Kither through inexperience or left-
ist pressure, the present government
might not deal effectively with developing
economic problems. Failure to halt ad-
verse economic trends could cause the fall
of the government.

a 1

'ONND 921047 27500

a oe ee 2

4. On the basis of present indications, we
believe that the Communists will increase
their influence in Indonesia as a result of
the tenure of the present cabinet; we do

not believe that during the next twelve
months they will achieve a dominating
position either through armed force or
political action.*

DISCUSSION

Formation and Position of the New Cabinet

5. On 2 June 1953, the Indonesian cabinet
resigned. This action was largely the result
of an intensification of the political conflict
between the two major Indonesian political
parties, the Nationalist Party and the Mas-
jumi, both of whom were represented
in the cabinet. To help counter the popular
strength of the Masjumi, the Nationalist
Party had for some time cooperated with the
Communist Party. On the other hand, the
Masjumi, alarmed by this growing coopera-
tion, sought to relegate the Nationalist Party
to a less dominant position in the new cab-
inet. This struggle for power delayed the
formation of a new Indonesian cabinet for
nearly eight weeks, during which time the
Nationalist Party sought to achieve a dom-
inant role in the new government in order
to enhance its political position before na-
tional elections were held.

6. The Nationalist Party won the struggle on
1 August when the President accepted a cab-
inet list headed by the Nationalist Party.
More leftist than any preceding government,
the cabinet is dependent on Communist votes
for a Parliamentary majority. Eight impor-
tant ministries of a total of 20 are held by
individuals who will probably respond on
many issues to Communist influence. How-
ever, there is no evidence to indicate that
any of the ministers are subject to direct
Communist discipline and control, and there
are no known Communist Party members in
the present cabinet. For the first time, an
Indonesian cabinet does not include the Mas-
jumi, the party with the most Parliamentary
strength and the greatest public support.

7. The Prime Minister and _ the Minis-
ters of Foreign Affairs, Economic Affairs, and
Finance are members of the Nationalist

Party. Except for Prime Minister Ali, all
these ministers belong to the Party’s left
wing. The Ministers of Defense, Finance,

Labor, and Agriculture will probably be will-

ing to work with the Communists on many
issues. The Ministers of Foreign Affairs,
Justice, Communications; and Education
will probably work with the Communists
from time to time. However, the pro-Com-
munist tendencies of these 8 cabinet members
will be held somewhat in check by the Prime
Minister and the other 11 members of the
cabinet, who can exercise considerable influ-
ence by threatening to resign. Such resig-
nations would probably cause the fall of the
cabinet. Under these circumstances, there
appears to be no immediate possibility that
the Communists will attempt to use this cab-
inet to force adoption of radical policies.

8. The parties represented in the cabinet
have a total of 92 votes out of 210 active
Parliament members. Votes of the opposi-
tion parties — Masjumi, Socialist, Christian,
Catholic, and Democratic — total 80. Eight
out of 15 independent votes will probably go

*The Special Assistant for Intelligence, Depart-
ment of State, considers both the scope-of this
estimate and the evidence presented insufficient
to permit the assessment here made of Commu-
nist capabilities in Indonesia over a twelve-
months’ period. The Special Assistant considers
the following assessment of Communist capa-
bilities in Indonesia to be more in accord with the
subject and scope of the present estimate:

As long as the present cabinet remains in
power, the Communists will be in a position
gradually to increase their influence. On the
basis of present indications, the Communists are
not likely to achieve a dominating position in
Indonesia during the expected Ufe of this cab-
inet, either through armed force or political
action.

* Since IAC action on this estimate, Mr. Abikusno
resigned as Minister of Communications.

SECT

to pwp 921047 th.

Selle 3

to the government, giving the government
parties 100 votes, 6 votes short of a majority.
The Communist Party of Indonesia and
the Communist-dominated labor federation
(SOBSI) have already indicated that they will
support the government with their 19 votes.
Thus, the cabinet must rely on Communist
support to win Parliamentary approval of any
controversial measure. The Communists,
while unable to insist on all measures which
they may desire, probably will press for poli-
cies and conditions conducive to expanding
their influence while avoiding any radical
policy which might split the cabinet and
cause it to fall. Parliamentary support for
the cabinet is uncertain due to the lack of
party discipline, although political oppor-
tunism and a desire to remain in control of
the government may tend to tighten party
obedience. It is quite possible that the op-
position might gain sufficient votes to cause
the government to fall.

Policies of the New Cabinet

9. The program announced by the new cab-
inet is similar to the programs of its predeces-
sors. The program stresses domestic secu-
rity, the importance of holding general elec-
tions, an economic policy based on the wel-
fare of the common people, an independent
foreign policy, and a revision of the relation-
ship between Indonesia and the Netherlands.

10. First place in the government’s program
was given to a pledge to settle the internal
security problem along military and political
lines. The government’s statement con-
demned all armed dissident groups and prom-
ised quick action so long as it had the support
of the people. However, it is likely that only
limited action will be taken against any armed
dissident groups because: (a) an all-out cam-
paign would cause further strain on the gov-
ernment’s economic resources; (b) the ques-
tion of whether or not to take drastic military
action against the principal armed dissident
group, Darul Islam, is an extremely contro-
vyersial political and religious issue.

11. The program calls for the holding of gen-
eral elections for Parliament and for a con-

stituent assembly in accordance with the elec-
tion law passed by Parliament in early 1953,
and the government presented a timetable to
enable the elections to be held by May 1955.
In the meantime, attempts are likely to be
made by various political parties to establish
control of election machinery.

12. The cabinet’s announced economic pro-
gram provides little definite indication of the
government’s intentions. Little change is
expected in agricultural policies. No definite
statement was made regarding foreign in-
vestment or nationalization of estate or other
foreign holdings, but the new government
will probably follow a policy less favorable to
foreign investors, particularly with respect to
labor legislation. Certain government an-
nouncements indicate the possibility that the
previous cabinet’s stringent import regula-
tions, designed to conserve foreign exchange,
may be abandoned and that further priv-
ileges and further credit facilities may be
made available to Indonesian businessmen.
These policies could lead to a larger balance
of payments deficit and to inflationary
pressures.

13. The new government has indicated that
it will in general follow the existing foreign
policy but will give even greater emphasis to
Indonesia’s “independent” position. Stress
has already been laid on the importance of
establishing closer relations with the Soviet
Bloc in order to counterbalance those now
existing with the West. Arrangements will
probably be made soon to open an embassy
in Moscow, an action approved by the Parlia-
ment under the previous cabinet. Attempts
will probably be made to increase trade with
the Soviet Bloc, but significant results are not
likely. Concerning US aid, the foreign min-
ister has announced that the agreement to
receive technical assistance will be continued
but will be reviewed in order to determine how
advantageous it is to Indonesia. Other for-
eign policy objectives are likely to be: (a)
the negotiation of a bilateral treaty with
Japan to supplant the San Francisco treaty
which the Indonesians signed but did not
ratify;:(b) a revision of the relationship be-
tween the Netherlands and Indonesia, dis-

ea

TRAD OMNMLT dea

See P-

solving the Netherlands~Indonesian Union
and replacing the existing Round Table Agree-
ments of 1949 with normal international
treaties; and (c) a renewal of demands that
Western New Guinea become part of Indo-
nesia.

Probable Developments

14. The new cabinet’s program follows closely
for the most part other programs previously
supported by more conservative elements, in
Parliament. We believe that the cabinet will
proceed cautiously with its moderate program
and will avoid the adoption of radical policies.
Its Parliamentary support is too uncertain to
risk quick or decisive action on long-standing
controversial issues, such as action against
dissident groups, armed forces reorganiza-
tion, and implementation of the election law.

a. An all-out attack on the Darul Islam,
would probably have some support from the
public, the armed forces, and those political
groups represented by the Nationalists and
the Communists. However, such action
would probably cause the Moslem representa-
tives in the cabinet and their parties in Par-
liament to withdraw their support of the
government, thus precipitating its overthrow.
It is probable therefore that only limited mili-
tary action will be taken against the dissident
groups in general while attempts to negotiate
an agreement with the Darul Islam may be
made in order to mollify the Masjumi
opposition.

b. The present government will avoid tak-
ing decisive steps to resolve the controversial
issue of reorganization and modernization of
the armed forces. Any sweeping changes in
the armed forces command, particularly if
they involved appointing Communists or
Communist sympathizers, would probably be
strongly opposed by the bulk of the armed
forces and the National Police Mobile Bri-
gade. It is probable, however, that the gov-
ernment will attempt to make gradual
changes in the leadership of the armed forces
and will probably be successful in weakening
opposition elements therein.

c. Although implementation of the election
law is promised by the cabinet, we believe that

mid-1955 is the earliest date that the election
could be held. Attempts will probably be
made during the tenure of this government to
establish control of the election machinery to
enhance the prospects of government parties
in the elections.

15. We believe that the present cabinet will
remain in office for at least six months. The
opposition in Parliament does not have suffi-
cient strength to defeat the cabinet, particu-
larly so long as the Communists continue to
support the cabinet. The opposition is in a
particularly difficult position because it has
supported a similar program and where it does
disagree with the cabinet, it is advocating
policies which have little popular support, i.e.,
measures to attract foreign investment and
increase economic austerity.

16. However, as time passes, the tenure of the
cabinet will become considerably more uncer-
tain because:

a, The pro-Communist inclination of cer-
tain members of the cabinet — and the tend-
ency they will have to place their supporters in
key positions in the bureaucracy, the armed
forces, and the police — will probably aid the
anti-Communist opposition in its present ef-
forts to solidify and may cause conservative
members of groups now represented in the
government to recognize more clearly the
Communist danger. Internal dissension in
the cabinet, a split in a government party, or
an adverse vote in the Parliament might then
cause the government to fall. It is also pos-
sible that a coup might be undertaken by op-
position elements in the bureaucracy and in
the armed forces.

b. The present cabinet must sooner or later
cope with controversial issues such as eco-
nomic problems, internal security, foreign
policy, and army reorganization. In view of
its slim majority in Parliament, the govern-
ment will run the risk of incurring an adverse
vote which could cause its fall any time it
seeks to deal with these issues. Moreover,
prolonged inaction in handling these issues
would probably also lead to the fall of the
cabinet.

Teller)

gq

' NND 921047 Aero

ne

SESSENS

seer 5

c. Indonesia’s economy is in precarious
condition at present. Hither through inex-
perience or leftist pressure, the present gov-
ernment might not deal effectively with de-
veloping economic problems. Failure to halt
adverse economic trends could cause the fall
of the government.

17. As long as the present cabinet remains in
power, the Communists will be in a position
gradually to increase their influence. They
will continue their attempts to strengthen
their position by (a) increasing their influ-
ence in the Nationalist and other parties
represented in the cabinet; (b) placing Com-
munists and Communist sympathizers in im-
portant positions in the various ministries and
in the armed forces; and (c) improving their
chances for popular support in the forthcom-

‘The Special Assistant for Intelligence, Depart-
ment of State, considers both the scope of this
estimate and the evidence presented insufficient
to permit the assessment here made of Com-
munist capabilities in Indonesia over a twelve-
months’ period. The Special Assistant consid-
ers the following assessment of Communist capa-
bilities in Indonesia to be more in accord with
the subject and scope of the present estimate:

ing elections. .The Communists will be able
to exert considerable influence over the cab-
inet because of the latter’s dependence on
Communist support in Parliament. However,
we do not believe that through such measures
the Communists will be able to gain control
over the government during the expected life
of this cabinet. On the other hand, if this
cabinet remains in power for an extended
period of time, the Communists may ulti-
mately be in a position to dominate Indonesia.

18. On the basis of present indications, we
believe that the Communists will increase
their influence in Indonesia as a result of the
tenure of the present cabinet; we do not be-
lieve that during the next twelve months they
will achieve a dominating position either
through armed force or political action.*

As long as the present cabinet remains in
power, the Communists will be in a position
gradually to increase their influence. On the
basis of present indications, the Communists
are not likely to achieve a dominating position
in Indonesia during the expected life of this
cabinet, either through armed force or political
action.

Saar

'oNND 921047 3°
