Memo from Richard Helms to Director DIA Concerning Military Thought: 'a Turning
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012296, dated 4 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012296).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY | 1.3(a)(4)
WASHINGTON 235, D. C.

7 DEC i301

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "A Turning Point in the
Development of Soviet Military Art", by
Colonel-General Ye. Ivanov

1. Enclosed ig a verbatim translation of an article titled
"A Turning Point in the Development of Soviet Military Art", by
Colonel-General Ye, Ivanov, which appeared in a special TOP SECRET
issue of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Military
Thought).

2. Requests for extra copies of this report or for utili-~

zation of any part of this document in any other form should be
addressed to the originating office, .

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

RICHARD HELMS
Enclosure - es 1.3(a)(4)

as
a 0

’ 4.3(a\(4}

APPROVED FOR RELEASE » o su 1x

ces

Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Starr

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

1.3104)

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4)

' L.Sfayd

COUNTRY : USSR
SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "A Turning Point in
the Development of Soviet Military Art",
by Colonel-General..Ye. Ivanov
DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article
titled "A Turning Point in the Development of Soviet
Military Art", written by Colonel-General.ve. Ivanov.

This article appeared in the 1961 Second Issue of
a special version. of Militar -oouabe which is classi-
fied TOP SECRET by. the Sovters and..is issued.irregu-
cre The 1961 Third Issue went to press.in July
1961.

=. 4.3fa)(4)

1.3fa}(4)

A TURNING POINT IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF SOVIET MILITAR

Colonel-General Ye. IVANOV.

The discussion which has unfolded in the pages of
the special Collection of Articles of the Journal ;
"Military Thought" concerning the most important ques-
tions of military theory, is a notable and, in its
significance, a very important, event in the military-
scientific life of the Armed Forces.

This article also intends to present certain
considerations on the essence of a series of ques-
tions, the examination of which, in our view,
provides interesting topics for further broadening the
discussion.

A CRISIS IN MILITARY ART OR A TURNING POINT
———IN_ITS DEVELOPMENT? = = —™

In the recently published articles of certain

authors, the question is posed that there have been no .

serious changes whatsoever in Soviet military science
since the end of World War I1, and that in essence it
is undergoing a crisis. :

"Dropping curtsies in the direction of missiles
and introducing some minor corrections in the theory
of military art, we still hold in practice to the old
positions existing at the end of World War II. Past
experience, traditions, and habits taught to us for

decades, tenaciously hold us back and prevent the same

kind of revolution in military art which nuclear wea-
pons and missiles created in the sphere of armament"l,

- states Colonel-General Gastilovich. He, like certain

Ispecial Collection of Articles of the Journal "Mili-
tary Thought", first issue, 1960, page 6.

2

4.3f2}(4)

ay 4:3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

4.8(a)(4)

other authors of articles published in the Collection,
adheres to the view that the question is no more than.
one of adapting old forms and methods to new condi-
tions. “

It is quite obvious that such a presentation of
the question is far from an objective evaluation of
the state of development of Soviet military art.

Military art, being a category of history, is
subject in its development to'the general laws of
Marxist dialectic. Therefore, it is subject in the
fullest sense to the general dialectical law of
development, expressed as a transfer from quantity to
quality. It manifests itself in all the processes of - '
nature, society, and thought - everywhere, where the
change from old to new is under way, including the
development of military affairs.

‘With the appearance of nuclear weapons, it has
been, of course, more or less clear to everyone that
they constitute a new and extremely powerful weapon,
heralding the beginning of a revolution in the means
of armed combat and the ways of conducting it. This
revolution is going on gradually and in accordance
with the development of the means of combat. It is
impossible to accomplish it in a limited period of
time.

Therefore, there is nothing surprising in the
fact that five or six years ago, when our delibera-
tions on the conduct of operations were based on two
or three dozen nuclear weapons which could be
delivered to their objectives only by aircraft, the
discussion obviously could realistically concern only
a partial "modernization" of certain aspects of
_ military art, because many facts which only became
known later were lacking for another approach.

The appearance of new means of combat, as the
experience of military history testifies, only brings

ii,

about radical changes (a revolution) in military art
when these means are introduced into the armament of
troops on a mass scale, and when by these means it
proves possible to accomplish a majority of the tasks
arising during military operations, but this always
required time. Fundamental changes in military
affairs have never been accomplished with lightning
speed.

»

_ In this regard it should not be forgotton that
throughout the entire history of class society, the
equipping of armies with new types of armament and
combat equipment has, in all countries, come up
against the definite limits of their economic poten-

tial, and therefore, notwithstanding the great desire: -

of certain military figures, the process of transfor-
mation from old means of combat to new has been
accomplished gradually over a definite period of time
whose duration depended primarily on the productive
potential of the country concerned.

In this connection, along with new means of
combat, the old means continued to be used as well,
from a necessity dictated not only by combat but
also by economic factors.

Therefore, one should not be surprised by the
fact that along with newly formulated views of
military theory, the old naturally also continue to
exist for a definite period. In the postwar period,
a constant process. of perfection of conventional
types of armament, as they have now come to be
called, was carried on in our armed forces. ‘The
advent of nuclear weapons and the improvement in
their combat characteristics, together with the
yearly increase in their scale of production,was a
constant process of accumulation of qtialitative and
quantitative changes in the means of armed combat and
consequently in the methods of waging it. ,

This process of development is not only as yet
incomplete, but on the contrary, embraces an ever

pn 1.3(a)(4)

growing field and continues to bring about ever-newer
situations in military art. Nevertheless, this does
not mean that certain views have not already been
formulated on specific problems. It should be noted
that in recent times, on the basis of theoretical
research and general’conclusions from the practical
experience of troops, we have developed and put into
effect new field service regulations, combat regula- ;
tions for the various arms of troops, and instructions
on the combat utilization of special troops. A great
deal of work, which has on the whole been a positive
contribution, has been done in examining questions of
the conduct of combat and operations, especially

during the initial”period, employing new means of ys
combat. During this time, our industry, on the basis.
of principles developed scientifically and confirmed

by the Party and the Government regarding the future
structure of the armed forces, and in accordance with
these principles, was given the means to undertake on _ -
amass scale the equipping of troops with missile/
nuclear weapons. To fgnore all this and.to write

about a "crisis" is to ignore all those progressive
changes which have taken place and are taking place in.
the development of Soviet military art.

“All that has been said, of course, does not mean
that our military theory has already fully resolved
all questions and that we have avoided all miscalcula-
tions.

Marshal of the Soviet Union Malinovskiy, ina
speech at the All-Army Conference of Secretaries of
Primary Party Organizations, said: "We must say
directly, that in a whole series of questions we have
not shown the necessary creative power, scientific
daring and boldness, if you will, but. have.long.been
marking time". . .

Therefore, in the interests of the work itself we

must talk not of a crisis in. military art, which we
absolutely do not and cannot have, but of those weak

4.3{a}(4)

4.8(a}(4}

points in military theory which are in fact at the
turning point in their development.

FOR WHAT TYPE OF WAR MUST WE BE PREPARED?

One of the most important questions raised in the
pages of the Collection, is the question of Soviet
military doctrine, The increased interest in its
development is completely understandable. At the
present time our armed forces find themselves at the
turning point of their development; therefore, a
further intensive analysis of military doctrine
naturally assumes paramount ‘significance.

M.V. Frunze, defining the concept of "a unitary
military doctrine” pointed out that it is a "syllabus
adopted in the army of a given state, which estab-
lishes the nature of the structure of the armed
forces of that country, the methods of combat training
of troops, their leadership on the basis of the pre-~
dominant views in the state on the nature of the
military problems facing them and the means for
solving them, and which emanates from the class nature
of the state and the computed level of development of
the productive forces of the country",

From the definition it is apparent that M. V.
Frunze places prime importance on the question of the
nature of the structure of the armed forces, which
depends above all on the level of development of the
productive forces of the country, on its economic
potential. The question of the economic potential of
our country arouses’no doubts“in any of us. ‘Our ~

1 M.V. Frunze. Collected Works. Vol. Il.
Military Publishing House, 1957, page 8.

a ...

he

£.3(a)(4)

socialist state is in a position to provide the armed
forces with all presently known means of armed combat.

However, there are examples in military history
when economically strong countries, not lagging
behind their adversaries with regard to the equipping
of their own armed forces with weapons and combat a
equipment, have yet suffered most devastating defeats.

Why? In a number of cases this occurred because
military-theoretical thought in the prewar years could
not correctly resolve the question of the type of war
for which its armed forces should be prepared.

For example, prior to World War II the armed
forces of France and fascist Germany had approximately
the same level of equipment in aircraft, tanks, and
artillery. However, France suffered a swift defeat in
the war. Among the host of reasons which brought
about her capitulation to fascist Germany, of no
small significance was, as is known, the fact that
French military doctrine was based on the principles
of defensive strategy, but the German, on offensive.
Subsequently, as is known, fascist Germany also
suffered defeat, while having as the basis of its
military doctrine the adventurist idea of waging a
blitzkrieg. : :

Consequently, to resolve correctly the question
of the character of the structure of the armed forces,
scientifically based recommendations of military
theory are necessary, especially on such questions as
the character and possible duration of a future war
and also the methods of waging armed combat, which
arise from the aims and objects of war as~defined by
the political leadership. |

During the past few years, these very questions
have been the subject of heated controversy.

ihe 1.3(a){4)

1,3fa){4)

What conclusions, for example, are to be drawn
from the ideas of Colonel-General Gastilovich on the
nature of a future war, its duration in general, and
its initial period in particular, "There is no need to
fear the term 'blitzkrieg! .... Under the conditions
of nuclear war only ‘blitzkrieg! operations can
promise victory." "Under present conditions the
possibility of victory must be assured by the readi-.
ness, the capacity, and the capability of concluding '
the war in the shortest possible time. The theory of
a prolonged war is more acceptable at present to the
monopolistic circles of the West..." "Taking over
the border zones and the zones of total destruction and
radiation .. will not at all necessitate multi-million
man armies", So writes Colonel-General Gastilovich.®* ©

In almost the same spirit General Goryainov
writes: "The missile/nuclear weapon has become (or
can become) a mass weapon and its destructive and in
particular its radiological qualities ( a reference to
megaton bombs - Ye. Ivanov) are actually capable of
creating conditions in which the fundamental object of
war - the destruction of the enemy - can be accom-
plished technically in a short period of time and with-
out over-taxing the economy of powerful industrial
countries".."just a few hundred powerful nuclear
bursts will be the primary and decisive factors
affecting the outcome of the war .. the initial period
of a war becomes its decisive period,"2

1 Special Collection of Articles of the Journal .
"Military Thought", first issue 1960, pages 9,10.

@ Special Collection of Articles of the Journal
"Military Thought", second issue 1960, pages 97;101.

a. cee

Om

1,93(a}{4)

If one were to summarize briefly all the quota-
tions mentioned above, having cast aside certain
reservations which the authors occasionally make with
regard’ to ground troops and other types of armed
forces, they could be said to be, essentially,
exponents of an “atomic blitzkrieg". They consider
that a future war will have a rapid, blitzkrieg
character; its outcome will be decided by the first .
missile/nuclear operations for which only some few *
“hundred thermonuclear warheads need be expended; that
it is not necessary to have a multi-million man army
for waging war, and the basic function of the small
number of ground troops in a war should be confined to
the occupation of enemy territory.

What would happen if these views were to be
legitimized and raised to the status of fundamental
principles of our military doctrine? First, our armed
forces would be subject to one-sided orientation in
their development, with all the consequences resulting
from this, and secondly, in essence, we would be
forced to abandon that versatile training of the
troops which we now conduct, counting on a fierce and
relatively extended armed conflict with the powerful
coalition of the imperialist countries. Such an.
approach to the organization of the armed forces and
their military training would be one-sided.

A future war in its political essence will be a
decisive armed conflict’ between two world socio- —
economic systems - capitalist and socialist. A ;
struggle between them will involve two of the most ~
powerful military coalitions, armed as never before and
possessing colossal material and manpower resources.
Therefore, no matter what losses single governments
would suffer in the beginning of the war, serious con-
sideration must be given to the fact ‘that ‘a’ coalition
of nations as a whole can prove capable of waging

armed combat over a considerably protracted period.

Without a doubt, massive missile/nuclear strikes
of a strategic nature in the very beginning of the. war

RE 2.

4.3{a}(4)

T.3(a)(4)

will create conditions for the accomplishment, in the
initial period,of results that bear no comparison
with the results achieved during the initial periods
of previous wars. Naturally, this will have a very
great influence on the conduct and the general dura-
tion of the war,

However, to orient oneself in building the armed
forces and preparing the country for a war in which
the initial period will be decisive for the achievement
of the ultimate goals of the war, would be completely
unfounded.

Indeed, Comrade Goryainov admits to the possi- ;
bility, and with this one cannot disagree, that once a
war has begun, the situation could arise where the
strategic missile troops of both sides, for a number of
reasons, might be only partially successful in their
aims and not achieve a decisive effect. For my part I
will add: One cannot base one's estimates in war only
on the availability of one's own means of destruction
and not consider the means of destruction and counter-
action open to the enemy, particularly the means of
antimissile defense which are now being developed
rapidly. We may guess at the enemy's plans, but it
is he who carries them out, and his actions, as the
experience of all wars can testify, usually introduce
substantial changes in our plans. Therefore, in the
evaluation of the initial period of a war and conse-
quentiy of the direction of organization of the armed
forces, we should not in principle base our ideas
only on the possible decisive role. of this period, but

must be prepared for the continued conduct of numerous
operations with all types of armed forces even in the
ensuing periods 0 tne war.

At the same time we certainly must not under-) «|.
estimate the definite role, in the light of known Ne
conditions, of the first operations of the initial
period of the war and the possibility of destroying

the aggressor in a short time.

2166

1,3{aj(a)

t.3{a}(4}

To deny this would be to stand out against a fully
comprehensive approach to the preparation of our armed
forces. In these questions there should be no extreme.

The Minister of Defense points out: Havin
ensured the security of our Motherland, we must develo
and perfect the means and methods of armed combat with

a view to achieving victory over the aggressor above.

all in the shortest seeTbte time, but at the same time
we must seriousl repare for an extended war, and this
determines the atrbcticn of our military organization. 3
‘Such fs the only kind of approach to this question that

we too can consider legitimate.

The basic content of the initial period of war
can consist of: the disruption and repelling of the '
first blow of the aggressor on the ground, in the
air, and on the sea; the inflicting upon him of a
shattering blow designed to disorganize the govern-
mental and military leadership and also the destruc-
tion of the most vital economic targets, especially
industrial enterprises connected with the production
of means for nuclear attack; conducting initial
operations with all types of armed forces in close
coordination in order to accomplish the most imme-
diate military-strategic tasks and the early seizure
of the strategic initiative.

The fulfillment of these tasks will doubtless
create the necessary prerequisites for the swift
conduct of the war and the achievement of final
victory. But the prerequisites are not victory.
itself. Military history indicates that armed forces
which have successfully started a war can in the
final analysis end up vanquished, and the first blows
suffered by an army at the beginning of a war still
do not signify final defeat.

| Consequently, it behooves us to take as our
starting point the fact that for the successful con-

duct of, and final victory in, a war, colossal
efforts of the armed forces and the entire state as a

x 1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4)

4.8{a}(4)

whole may be required. Massive armies and the
mobilization of all the moral and physical strength of
the people and of the economy of the country will be
essential.

A position in which the decisive role for the
achievement of the primary objectives of the war is
delegated to missile troops of strategic designation
certainly does not mean a reduction in the utiliza- *
tion of ground troops, but on the contrary indicates
a more important need for them on the basis of their
potential capabilities.

It is incorrect to count on their being, as a
result of the extensive utilization of missile-nuclear -
weapons on the field of battle, a completely dead
zone, and that there will be nothing left for our
troops to do but to move effortlessly into the heart
of the enemy countries to carry out occupation func-
tions. a

For the final defeat of an _enem and the seizure
of his territor Tollowin nuclear SrT Kes by missile
Toops of strategic designation, regar ess 0 OW

oweriu e strikes m e@ Ww always be
necessar o DSrin na su cient arge n er of

groun TOOpS. ou Sy wou e cult to
predict the possibility of concluding any Kind of war.

Therefore, a very important role will belong to
the ground troops in the attainment of the final aims
of a ware They have all that is necessary to carry
out this role. Their firepower and striking force,
together with their supply of missile weapons with
nuclear warheads, the full motorization of troops, and
the growth in the relative importance of the tank

troops have increased sharply and in consequence their
significance in the light of the new conditions of .

armed combat has not diminished.
ais

1,3(a){4)

THE USE OF MISSILE TROOPS OF STRATEGIC DESIGNATION

Prior to the placing of missile/nuclear weapons in
the hands of the strategic leadership, there existed,
in fact, no means by which the progress of a war could
be quickly and decisively affected. Even in World War
II, although our bomber aircraft could already deliver
bombs of rather significant force, these could not bé
sufficiently powerful to have a swift and direct
influence on the outcome of the war. Therefore,
strategy achieved its goals through the successive
waging of many battles, engagements, and operations,
all leading, in the aggregate, to a specific strategic
result. as

An entirely new factor under present conditions
is that such powerful means as various forms of
missiles, among them intercontinental ones with ‘
hydrogen warheads, are in the hands of the strategic.
command. With the assistance of such means, the
strategic command has the capability to fulfill
directly and independently (and not only by protracted
engagements and battles between ground troops as was
actually the case in the past) in the very shortest
period, exceptionally important missions, even to the ‘:
destruction of a number of countries of our probable j
enemies, along with their armed forces, in any part 4
of the globe. So

Consequently, under present donditions, in order
to decide correctly questions about the nature-of
operations and to determine the methods of combat
operations of the troops in an operational element, it
is necessary to clarify *undemental principles regard= \
ing the use of the strategic ng forces - the
missile troops of the VGK (Supreme High Command). a

coo"

on Rhee ee ene ree 7

Missile troops of strategic designation are the
decisive striking force and the wielders of the

strategic power of our armed forces. They will carry
out the most important tasks in the disruption -of the

ey

1.3(a)(4)

enemy rear, his economy, and systems of governmental
control by destroying his strategic means of armed
combat.

Given these capabilities, it may be assumed that
they can be used suddenly, in mass, against the main
enemies, with the intention of achieving a strategic
result in a short period. In this sense, the most
important objectives for strikes of the strategic i ..
missile troops will be the enemy's means of nuclear
attack, against which it is primarily necessary to
launch missiles of: intercontinental and intermediate
(srednyaya) range types, and also his strategic ee
aviation, centers of governmental and military control, the
most’ important economic objectives, especially those
connected with the production of nuclear weapons, and
other important aspects of his war potential.

The decision regarding the question of objectives,
the timing and force of the strikes of the missile
troops of strategic designation, is entirely and com-
pletely the prerogatbve of the Headquarters (Stavka) of
the Supreme High Command, and will depend on the
capabilities of the country to adopt missilefnuclear
strategic weapons and also on the concrete conditions
of the situation, of which the political factor will be
the decisive element.

It is not the intention of this article to analyze
the possible role of the High Command with missile
troops in the organization and execution of the strikes
which have been decided, but we would nevertheless like
to emphasize that this role, in our view, should be
‘kept within firmly defined limits, since every such
strike is a most important factor of policy and
strategy, and accordingly should be carried out in all
its details on direct orders of the Supreme High
Command. ; :

In our theory, the question frequently arises of
the participation of ground troops or their missile
large units with the advent of war in "missile opera-
tions" of the strategic missile troops and, conversely,

a 1.3(a)(4)

1.3{a)(4}

LE
of the participation of the missile troops of strategic

designation in the operations of ground troops, The
posing of such questions has no sound basis.

Indeed, military-industrial objectives, the
largest administrative-political centers, and the
strategic means of nuclear attack of the imperialist
governments, all of which are designated for
destruction by the missile troops of strategic designa-
tion, are deployed over a great expanse of the globe. N
‘They are located in Europe, Africa, Asia and America,

In turn, our missile troops of strategic designa- \
tion are also deployed over an enormous area,

Therefore, under these conditions there is hardly any. -
sense in speaking of the concept of direct coordination

‘and execution of joint strikes by the strategic missile a
troops and missile large units (units) of the ground
troops. We can only say that the successful accom-
plishment of their basic missions by the strategic Ms
missile troops will create favorable conditions for f-
vigorous and decisive operations by all the other

types of the armed forces, including the ground

troops.

It is true that observations have been made to
the effect that together with the execution of the
missions enumerated above, missile troops of strategic
designation will also be used for the accomplishment
of such missions as the defeat of groupings of ground
‘troops in a theater of military operations, the destruc-
tion of the enemy's‘ operational means -of -nuclear attack,
and other objectives. And in light of this, an attempt
is made to analyze the bases of coordination between —
missile troops of strategic designation and missile
large units of ground troops. It appears to us that
such a presentation of the question is also devoid of a
realistic base, rs

The efforts of missile troops of strategic

designation should not be dissipated over numerous tar-
gets, just as in the years of World War II it was

: | ie

1.3(a}{4)

considered irrational to use long-range aircraft for
strikes against operational objectives. If we did so
at times, then it was a case of extreme necessity
because of a frontts lack of aircraft.

To plan beforehand for the execution of opera-
tional missions by the strategic missile troops is not
expedient. For this reason, the missile troops of the
ground troops, continually being supplied with more
highly perfected types of missiles, will be able to
destroy enemy objectives to a greater depth than is
now possible, and this will ensure the successful
execution’ of front operations without the involvement
of strategic missile troops.

The strikes of the strategic missile troops must,
in the final analysis, predetermine the attainment of
the principal goals of the war -= in this lies their
fundamental purpose. Their basic efforts must be
focused on the attainment of these goals.

ARE THE DISTINCTIONS BETWEEN OFFENSE AND DEFENSE:

BEING OBLITERATED?

If one were to analyze carefully the judgements
of General Gastilovich, then it would not be difficult
to come to the conclusion that defense as a form of
armed combat has disappeared or is on the threshold of
disappearing because it has somehow lost its inherent
characteristic -- to hold designated lines or areas
with the object of inflicting maximum losses upon the
advancing enemy and, in doing so, to create the
necessary conditions for a transition to a decisive
offensive. He sees the distinction between defense
and offense only in the number of nuclear weapons, of
divisions, and the composition of echelons. As to the
means of conducting combat operations, they are, in

4.a(ay(é

his way of thinking, the same in offense as in defense.

i,’

4.A(a}{4)

1.3(a}(4}

"In offensive as in defensive operations of ground <
troops, the basis of their operations is nuclear

Strikes, swift maneuvers and short assaults with tanks

and manpower",!

If one is guided by the materialistic dialectic
and also proceeds from the actual relationship of the
strength of the opposing military groupings, then it
is obviously impossible to agree fully with these
assertions,

We all acknowledge that offense will be the basic
form of combat operations of our troops in a future
war. But in acknowledging offense, we cannot deny the
necessity for defense as one of the possible forms of - ;
armed combat, because if there is no defense then ,
there is no'offense. Offense is so called because it
is waged against a defending enemy. Without the
presence of a defending enemy the troops would
execute a normal march. Offense and defense are two
‘inter-related and interdependent forms of armed
combat, and one cannot exist without the other. Such
is the dialectic’ of this question.

In the judgements expressed above, it appears
that consideration has not been given to the capabili-
ties of our potential enemies.

Actually, the countries of the Socialist. Camp are
militarily, politically, and economically strong as
never before. However, in preparing for war and
exploring new methods of armed combat, we cannot assume
that our probable. enemies are not technically armed, as
they say, to the teeth. They have multi-million man :
armies, they possess enormous stocks of nuclear weapons
and modern means of delivering them to their targets.
Therefore, to consider that we will not encounter
serious counteraction from their side is a fallacy.
Moreover, a new world war can only be unleashed by the
imperialist aggressors, primarily by the Anglo-American

. Special Collection of Articles of the Journal

"Military Thought", first issue, 1960, pages 12, 13.

mi. °°’

4.3{ay4)

BR

imperialists and the West German revanchists. Conse-
quently, they will be the first to try to carry out a
massive missile-nuclear attack which will be followed
. by an invasion of ground troops. The effects of a
missile-nuclear strike can be very tangible not only
for our country but for the entire Socialist Camp as
well. The enemy can take the initiative in his hands
in specific sectors of a strategic front and compel
our troops to resort temporarily to defensive opera-
tions. Not to consider this and to reject completely
the possibility of such a development in specific
directions -- means to close one's eyes to reality, to
indulge in "counting one's chickens before they are
hatched" (shapkozakidatelstvo).

Sf
f

We maintain that a future war will have not only
an all-embracing, but a many-sided character, with
varied forms of armed combat. Consequently, our
task does not consist of artifictally simplifying
them but of thoroughly studying currently existing
methods of combat, of evaluating them objectively and
correctly, and of devising new ones.

The more versatile. the preparation of our armed
forces from the point of view of their mastery of all
possible forms and methods of armed combat, the
higher will be their combat readiness and the greater
will be our guarantee against any type of surprise or
incident in the course of a war. Such is our under-
standing of this question of the plan for waging war.

But how does this question fare within the
framework of an operation? Under modern conditions,
defenders who are launching massive missile-nuclear
attacks on an advancing force can in a number of
‘cases change decisively the correlation -of -forces to
their own advantage and force it to turn to defensive
operations, and sometimes to retreat.

In: this connection one of the characteristic

features of an offensive operation in depth under
conditions of mass use of missile/nuclear weapons is

a, 1.2fa)(4

1,3(a)(4)

the variety of forms and methods of waging it and also
'. the dynamic nature of their change: swift pursuit
and solid, vigorous defense, meeting engagements, and
retreats, combat under encirclement and disengagement
from combat -- such is the possible general picture of
development in a modern offensive operation. Every
form and method of armed combat has characteristics,
peculiarities, and modes of conduct which - are inherent
to it alone. Therefore, the mission of military art’ is
not confined to the artificial elimination of distinc-
tions among them, nor to the forcible abolition or
coalescence of methods but to developing a theory for
their organization and conduct under conditions of-a
missile-nuclear war,

Much attention is devoted by certain authors to an
examination of the methods of conducting defense.
They consider that to defend oneself now is senseless,
Nuclear weapons overwhelm and destroy everyone every-
where; it is unnecessary to hold areas and positions,
just as it is impossible to maintain their stability.

In our opinion, defense on an operational as well
as a tactical scale must be able to withstand enemy
missile/nuclear. strikes and the subsequent tank
assaults to preserve to the maximum possible degree
one's own personnel and equipment, to inflict the
greatest destruction upon the enemy, and to create the
necessary conditions for going over to the offensive
and the final destruction of the enemy, even itn a
Situation where the defending troops employ Limited
forces and weapons. “Such a mission for defense under
modern conditions is typical, the more so because the
attacker will not always and everywhere have the
capability to overcome the defense by massive nuclear
strikes,

Can one, under current conditions, argue strongly
for a defense based only on maneuver and strikes by
forces located in the zone of the interior? Our reply

to this is in the negative.

4.3{a)(4)

a f5e

rr —

Defense, with its inherent peculiarities and
methods of conduct under modern conditions, must be
built on a skillful combination of firm holding of -
definite areas of terrain together with maneuver and
strikes by troops from the zone of the interior.
Maneuver must be utilized mainly for the preservation
of one's own limited forces and weapons, the creation
of a firing line which is invincible to the enemy in
the primary directions of his offensive and also for’
the launching of fire strikes and the execution of
counterattacks and counterstrikes.

To relegate "stability of defense -to .the
archives" as General Gastilovich proposes -- means to
deny that premise on which is based the modes and
methods of operations by troops in defense.

Such an assertion is all the more untrue if one
keeps in mind that stability of defense is not
exhausted by the creation of defensive positions and
zones by the organization of terrain by engineer work.
This is just one of the factors upon which stability
depends. Stability of defense must be achieved by
other factors as well, foremost by missile~nuclear
strikes, strikes by troops and an extensive system of
obstacles. Even formerly one could not talk about any
sort of stability of defense without maneuver, fire
strikes, and strikes by troops.

Missile/nuclear weapons in the hands fof defensive
troops affords them the possibility 9f7 completely
frustrating [the enemy (8 of end ivec/ . "But this possi-
bility in no way denies the necessity for the formation
of defense according to a definite system. The
deployment of troops in tactical as well as in opera-
tional elements must be subject to definite requirements
and must guarantee not only the accomplishment: of

. Maneuver, but also the holding of basic areas in the

probable directions of the enemy's offensive.

: Headquarter's Comment : Portion in brackets missing
from the original and reconstructed by translator.

i,’

—-1,3fa){4)

-20-

1.3(a)(4)

Today there is a series of "weak spots" in our
defense. Basing its organization on defensive zones and
positions, to a large extent it retains a linear con-
cept. The deployment of forces and weapons along solid
frontal positions and zones gives rise in a number of
cases, aS experience in exercises demonstrates, to the
desire to close the gaps and breaches which leads to the
linear deployment of forces and the establishment of;a
continuous front.

As a result of the radical changes which have
taken place in the means of armed combat and also in
the methods of our probable enemies in conducting an
offensive, the necessity for a reappraisal of the .
forms of organization of a modern defense has obviously
arisen.

A defense strip (zone) of an army must obviously
have a system of organized areas capable of with-
standing massive enemy tank attacks, of disrupting the
efforts of his ground troops, and of creating
favorable conditions for inflicting on them not only
nuclear strikes but also counterstrikes by our own
forces from the zone of the interior,

Within a defense strip (zone) of an army, which
. 2 can reach 150-200 kms and more along the front and
150-200 kms in depth, it is expedient to assign to
divisions defense areas which embrace the basic direc-
tions of the probable offensive of the enemy.

In the defense’strip (zone) of an army the
following must be prepared, siting areas for missile
large units, areas of defense for divisions; siting
areas for units of PVO troops, areas of disposition
and lines of deployment of large units of the-.second 2. wu.
echelon and reserves; control points; a road network,
and a system of obstacles set up by the engineers.

The area of defense of a division must also be a
system of organized areas of defense for units deployed

along the front and in depth along the most important
directions, The size of the area of defense for a

division can vary.
iis 1.3(a)(4)

4.3{a)(4)

ee
ee )

Within the area of defense of a division there
must be organized siting areas for missile and anti-
aircraft missile units, areas of defense for regiments
and battalions, artillery fire positions, control
points, and areas of disposition and lines of deploy-~
ment of second echelons and reserves, —

The area of defense for a regiment under these >
conditions can reach 10-15 kms along the front and 10
kms in depth, and for a battalion, from 3 to 5 kms
along the front and 2.5-3 kms in depth. All areas of
defense must be adaptable to perimeter defense,

The basis of organization of areas by engineer |
work should be primarily construction for fire means,
cover for personnel and combat equipment, preparation
in the antiatomic sense in combination with obstacles
and roads in order to support a troop maneuver, and
not the construction of a solid trench system. Sec-
tors of trenches and connecting trenches can be
established only in the areas of defense of subunits,
and even there only if time is available. The inter-
vals between areas of defense must be covered by fire,
obstacles, and, on the most important directions, also
by missile/nuclear strikes,

The organization of the defense must be begun
with the organization of a system of fire which must
guarantee: the destruction of the enemy's means for
nuclear attack as they are discovered; the destruction
of his troops and*areas of deployment ‘at ‘the time -of -
advance, deployment and, transition to the offensive;
the repelling of massed attacks by enemy tanks and —

infantry; destruction of scattered enemy groupings;
destruction of control points and his radiotechnical
equipments; covering with fire the obstacles.and areas
of chemical contamination, breaches, open flanks, and
areas subjected to nuclear strikes; the support of
troops launching counterattacks and counterstrikes;
the capability of concentrating fire in a short time

in any threatened direction.
Sin 1.9faya

1.3(a){4)

ZOD

It is essential to plan beforehand the areas of
destruction by enemy fire both in the remote approaches
and the main line of resistance, and on the flanks and
in gaps, and in the depth of the defense, and also to
prepare artillery fire for separate sectors.

CONCERNING THE COMPATIBILITY OF MISSILE/NUCLEAR STRIKES
AND O IONS OF

Nuclear weapans are the main, .most powerful, and
most effective means of destroying an enemy carrying
out any type of combat operations, Naturally, there-. .
fore, the results anticipated from their use must be
the basis for solution of the question of using com-
bined-arms large units.

However, missile/nuclear strikes in their turn
should be carried out with the aim of creating more
favorable conditions for troops to accomplish the
final crushing of the enemy and to seize those areas
and objectives which are designated as the aims of
the operation. The troops must be prepared in such a
way, and occupy such an operational position, as would
permit them to utilize to the greatest extent the
results of missile/nuclear strikes.

In this connection, we consider it necessary to .
dwell on the question of the selection of the direction
of a strike by troops and of determining the timing of
-nuclear strikes, ; oe

The main efforts of combined-arms large units under a
modern conditions need not always focus only in those
directions where the main bulk of nuclear. weapons.is
employed. The concentration of the main efforts: of the
troops in the direction of the employment of the main
bulk of nuclear weapons, in many cases, will not permit
the speediest and most complete exploitation of the
results of the action of all the destructive factors of
nuclear strikes and the achievement of the maximum des-

truction of the enemy.
=

1 3(a)(4)

4.3(8}(4)

Thus, during a breakthrough in the prepared
defense of the enemy, with the objectives of
achieving the maximum destruction of defensive
installations, the destruction of combat equipment
and personnel, the creation of high levels of radio-
activity to impede the establishment of defense and
the introduction of fresh forces, it can be incom-
parably more.advantageous to employ surface or low °
altitude bursts. Under these conditions, the main
efforts of the advancing troops will be more
advantageously concentrated by bypassing the areas
which have undergone a massive nuclear strike.

The concentration of the main efforts of
troops in the direction of nuclear strikes can also
prove inexpedient during an offensive through
heavily wooded areas. Fires, log obstacles, the
retention /two or three words missing/ of the fone
word missing/ time of choosing /part of line
missing7 of troops in the areas of nuclear bursts.
In these cases, if only the possibility of envelop-
ment exists, it is essential to use it decisively,
and to effect the destruction of the enemy in the
forest with powerful nuclear strikes.

A somewhat similar situation can take place
if the attack comes through areas with large cities
where the operations of troops after nuclear strikes
couse prove very: difficult. |

The direction of the concentration. of the aati,
efforts of combined-arms large units and of missile-
nuclear weapons can also differ owing to the delinea-
tion of the line of the front. When a flanking posi-
tion has been taken. up in relation to the main enemy
grouping, it will often be more expedient to concen-
trate the main efforts of the missile/nuclear weapons
. directly on this enemy grouping and to launch the
Strike by troops in an enveloping movement -- on the
flank and rear,

There can be other conditions of the situation
when the direction of the concentration of the main

1,3(a}{4)

<2lis

efforts of the troops will not pass through areas of
employment of the main bulk of missile/nuclear weapons,

Consequently in this question we are faced with a
new law in military art tHe essence of which consists
of the fact that modern means of combat not only allow
but very often obligate the se aration, in relation to
space, of the strikes launched by nuclear weapons and

y_ troops.

This necessarily applies to considerations of the
antiatomic protection Gf “all “forces ‘and -weapons
designated for an offensive, as well as to considera-
tions of the most effective use of all the destructive -
factors of nuclear weapons,

In determining the timing of launching nuclear
strikes, we shall also encounter a new situation which
cannot be ignored. As is known, in World War II, we
did not usually begin artillery and air preparation if
the troops were not completely prepared to advance,
And how must we resolve this problem under present
conditions?

In principle, it is desirable that the time for
the launching of missile/nuclear strikes be determined
after a consideration of the operational situation and
of the readiness of the troops for the most effective
utilization of the results of these strikes. This,
however, is only in principle. If there is reason to
assume that the enemy can effect a preventive Strike,
then it is essential to launch one's own nuclear
strikes against him without delay, not waiting for the
compliete readiness of all the troops predesignated for
the offensive, because every deldy in the missile/nuclear
strike in the beginning of the operation is: fraught--with
the danger of its frustrating the offensive. °

Tek

In conclusion, we consider it essential to empha-
size once again that at the present time it is our deep

Mn 1221:

oBE =

1.3{a)(4)

nee fas

conviction that Soviet military theory is passing not

through a period of crisis, but through a turning point
in its development.

In the light of this situation, as it appears to
us, it is also necessary to conduct a further elabora-
tion of military doctrine, of the theory of military
art, and of other questions of military affairs.

r

nye

ques .;.,,,
