DocC Undated-pub Date Est) Titles of Articles and Cs Report Numbers for Issues
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012257, dated 5 January 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012257).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

, —
of

Titles of Articles and CS Report Numbers
eS Se Report Numbers
for Issues of "The Special Collection of
Military Thought" Provided by. Penkovskiy

(Top Secret) 1960 Insues 1.5
“Editorial Notes: Tables of Contents"

"The Theory of Military Art Needs Review", Colonel ,
Generul (Combined Arms) Anton losifovich Gastilovich.

"Some Problems of Modern Operations", by Liewtenant
General (Coubined Arms) Yllarion Aviisenteyevich
Tolkonyuk. ?

“New Davelopnents in Operational Art and Tactics", by
Lieutenant General V. Baskeloy, vi ace

“Tne Suitability of Modern Means and Methods in the
Conduct of Operations", by Major General I. Zavyalov.

"Intelli genee-to the Level of Mogern Tasks", by Marshal
of the Soviet Union V.-Chuykoy.

"Questions of the Control of Missile Units in an Offensive
Operations", by Major General §. Kuznetsov and Major
Generel A. Tikhomtrov.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

1.3{a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

ey

(Sop Seere t) 1960 Secon Issue)

"Oe Nature of Modern Combat ani the Role and Place in Yt
of the Various Branches of the Arma Forces", by

Generel of the fomy (Combined Arms), Vavel Aleksundrovich
Rurochhin,

"Sore Factors Affecting the Planning of Nogern Offensive
Operation", by Colonel General (Combined Arms?) Ye,
(Yevgeny Vasilevich) tvanoy. oe. of

"A Front Offensive Op2ration Conducted Under the Condition
of the Initisl Period of a Kuclear/iMiestle War", by
Colony tt Cenerae], (Combinea Avr ) Georgs. Ivanovich

-Khetaguroy, .

"Soma Conclusions on the KAD /omea Forces! Exercise
Side Step", by Colonel Generar 8S. Ivanov,

"te Use of Raval Forces in Closed Sen taeaters in the
Initial Period of o War", by Adair) V. Kasatonoy,

"Some Problems in the Preperation of the Rear Area for
Support of the Ave2a Forces in the Initial Period of
.& War", by Colone2 General F, Malykhin.

"Ruclear/Missilé Armmnent and & me Principles of Military
Doctrine", by Ea jor Generel of the Engincering
Techuical Service Haler Pedvovich Gorystnoy,

"Elimination of the lag ino MSretionsl and Tactical
= ww
Intelligence", by Lieutenant Genera) M, Kochethoy,

"Perfecting the Methods of Operational Training of
Generals, Senior Officers, end Storrs" » by Major
General M. Ivonoy end Lieutenant General Pp, Chirkoy,

1.3(a)(4)

t

(Lop Secret) 1950 fiivd Issue

"the Nature of Modern fArined Coxnbat", by General of the
Arny ( Consabined Arns ) Aleksandr Vaselevich Corbatoy,

"Some Questions on the Theory of Military Art", by
Colonc) General (tank froops) Tosir irakhiyevich
Gusekovskiy.

"Yo Nevelop the theory of Soviet Hllitery Art", by
Adniival Vledinixy Flippovien eivuts.

“one Influence of huclear Weapons on the Prineiples of
the Offensive Operations of & Front", by General of the
Aray V. Kurasov, am fa aE F

"the Strike Groupings of a Front", By Mejor Gencral of Tank
Troops A. Shevehenko,.

"The Air Forces in the New Stase of Development of the New
Sovict Armed Porces", by Lieutenant’ General of Aviation
S. Sinipkov and hin jor-General of Aviation H. Koz: evwnikov.

"She Role of Aviation in Ministry Operations at Seat! by
Rear Aduiral vy. DPogolepov. .

"Rear Services Support of Missile. Troops in en Offensive
Operation of a Feont", by Licutenent General M. Novikoy.

"The Problem of Transportetion in Modern Warfare", by
Lieutenant General af Technice) Troops I, Kovalevy,

Colonel General of Technical Troops P, Bakerev, end
Colonel K. Pavlovich, : c

"Intelligence-to the Level of Modern Jesks", coment by
JAieutenant General of Aviation P, Dankevich on Mh: rshol
Chuykov's article « saue Title, ;

1.3{a)(4)

(Sop Secret) 105, Pirst Tesue

mene eee eee coe

“She Initial Period of a Puture Var and the Special
Features of the Conduct of Military Qperations During
This Perioa", by Colonel-General RK. Pavlovslkiy.

"She Paths of Further Developuent of the Tank Troaps of the
Soviet femy," by Marshal of Armored Troops F. Rotnistroy.

"The Nature of Modern Warfare," by Colonel General (Acnor)
Amanasp Khnachaturovich Pabadchanyan.

“Ways of Further Snercasing the Combat Readiness of Troops ria
by Major General G. Semenov.’”

“Certain Problens in the Orgenization end Conduct of Modern
Operetional Defense", by Lieutenant General P. Igolkin
and Major General S. Buryek.

“Increasing the Stability of Control of The Troops of a
Front (Arny)", by Hajor General M. Ivanov.

"the Utilsazation of the Forces of the Navy in a Missile/
Ruclesx Wer", by Rear fdmirel V. Lisyutin.

“Intelligence - to the Level of Mogern Remands", by Major
Geneval Ya. Malukhov.

"Te Most Urgent Problems of Training Coumnsnd Personnel
and of Increasing the Combat Readiness of Dorder
Militery District Staffs," by Major Generel A. Khynkenov.

Ht

1.3(a)(4)

esl :
”

(Hop Secret) 3951 8 2 Issue

ae On Rane teen

“Pronis in the Hevelopugut of the aus froupa of the Soviet
Arny", by General of the Avmy 4. Zyedov.

“Perspzetives of the Devel, opment of Missile Arxanent of Ground
Groups," by (Chief) Marshal of Artiliory S. Vorentsov.

“A Turning Point in the Nevelorment of Soviet Milster y fre",
by Colon2l Gencrel Ye. (Ye Yoenty Vasilevich) Ivanov.

"Te Deployment and Yorvard raven of a Cambined-Arins
Army of a Pordor Military Distries in the Tattdel Pe am Revd
of a Ver," by Ideutenant General 8S. Andy yuchchenko.

“Anti -lis pile pefense of Troops of a Front," by Lieutenent
Genern), ¥. Mikhaylov.

"“Cortain Questions of the Con ceor o> ‘troops in Modern
Operations," by Major Ceneral. A. Mor 20V,. Lieutona phe :
Genorel N. Lyashchenko, and Jaeutenant General of @

Troops V. Arkiniipov.

“ihe Missions of the Navy and Methods of Carrying Then Our",

by Acuniral VY. Platonaov.

“Joe Use of Surface Vessels in Modern Havel VWerfore", by
Rear Admaival MN. Zvyagin.

"Reay Area Support of Issile Peoops in Front Offensive
Operations," by Colonel General of Artillery G.F. Odintsov.

as s*

(Top Secret) 1961 sirird Tasuc

"Support of the Strategie Concentration and Yeployinent of
the Avieed Yoreas in Respect to Trauspart »". by Hagjor
General of Technical Troops Ya. Shehspennikove

“oe Question of Increasing the Stability of Treop Control”,
py Major-General of Artillery V. Tlingkh end Lieutenant
General of Cossunications ireops Pavel Alelsandrovich
Kurochiin.

"Urgent acks for the Inmprovenent of Aerial Reconnaissance
Unter Kodern Conditions", by Colonel Ceneral of Aviation
S. Mironov cond Major-General of Avistion M. Mukhin.

4,3(a)(4)

"Planning the Ubilazatioa of Kuclear/Hissile Weapons in 6
Front Offensive Operation". by V. Chivh.

.

Offensive Operations", by Colone]. Gencral (Arnor )
Anazasp Khacheturovich Pabadchanyan. ;

“Sone Questions in the Furthe: Developzsnt and Inurovement
of the Ground ‘trcops", by Colonel General of tne Tank
"Troops P. Poluboyezvov.

"ULGligation of the Missile Troops of a Beont (Army) in an
Offensive Operation", by Colonel Genersl P. Koshevoy.

the Subazrine Operation of the Navy - the Haval Operation

of the Future", by Admiral Yu. Panteleyev.

"Sone Questions jn the Preparation and Conduct of Initial aa
"the Organizational Structure of Field Command of e Front", ee
by Colonel K. Peshuk.

"Phe Fundamental Scheme of a Front Offensive | ;
Operation", by Lieutenant General .V. Baskakov.

mm”

(‘fop Seeret) 1961 Yourth Wcsu:
"Tditevie. bot e7 Veble of Contents".

Mire Question of the Organiaation of the Organs of Troop
Contre L", by Igor General HN. Reut.

"The Wrobles of the Orgenivational Structure of Front and
hey Ficla Conssnis", by Ideutenent General FE. VoLolin.

“ime Prospects of Develoyaant of fomored Combat Vehicles",
by Es.jor General of EBogincer Geelmical Services L.
Sergeyev.

“A Mew Combat Vons ele" s by Tdieutenant Gonexal. hk. Schevehs niko
"Questions of the Develoyncart of the Ox sganinnt jonal

Structure of the Weak Teeors", by Major General of Tank
Troaps G. pve tes:

1.3(a)(4)

"Sosa Problems in Destroying Targets with Nuclesr Warheads",
“by Chief Marshal of Artillory &. Verentgov.

"ohe PATMEX-CO" Maneuvers of the Agere Forces of the IA
Ageressive Bloc", by Colonel General §. Ivanov.

"Preperation and Con Auct of a Front Offensive Operation on
a Kovitine Axio im the Initdel Periecd of a Var", by
Colonel General (Combined farms) Georgi ‘Tvanovich

‘Khe tesvrov.

ro eey

"Corbet h weinst Enesy Missile Subrarine", by Rear Aamire.
QO. Zuvrovaziy.

"On tho Problem of the fasls of the Favy ond Methods for
Accomplis ni ng Then", by Adsiral V. Kusatonov.

itl Th Vil

“Clespical Militery Art end KRuclesv/itissile Varfare", by
fajor General of Artillery I. Dzhordzhsduc

(Top Secret) 1962 First Issue

“Tditorial. Notes; Table of Contents."

“Sone Thoughts on the Nevelopnent of the Soviet Arny Tank
ell

Proops”, by Marshal of the Soviet Union R. Halinovsky.

"the Fundawaentals of Antiwissile Dafense" » by Colonel
General of Aviation J. Podgornyy.

"The Organization of Antinissile Refensze", by Colonel
N. Maksirov, and Colonel V. Sevko.

"Several Questions on Evnluating the Effectiveness of the
Basic Means of Antinir Defense of a Front, and Its
Organizitioual Structure", by Colonel Generel of Aviation
S. Mironov.

"Ihe Tasks of the Navy and the Methods of Performing Them",
by Adiwiral He Kharlamov.

1.3(a)(4)

“The Questions of the Organizational Structure of Kissile
Troops of Operational-Tketical Designation", by Major
Gencral of Artillery M. Glushkov.

"Defense of the Operational Kear", by Kajor Generel Yu.
Kovikov.

“She Role of Spece Weapons in a Future Wee", by Ldeutenant
Generel NH. Korenevshiy.

“Anerican Wilitary Technicel Means of Combat in Spucea", by

Major General of the Engineer Technical Sarvice P. Vysotskiy.

“On the Question of the Teske » Organization end Planning ~
of Military Scientific Work", by Rear Admiral V. Bagolepov.
"Problems of the Strateric Developzent of Armed Forees in
© a 2
Modern Warfere", by Major General Kh. DzhSlaukhoy.
a OY bag .

"Problems in the Devclopnent of Antinir Defense of the Ground
Troops end Ways to Resolve Then" » by Colonel V. Zemskov.
