Meeting no 5 in Leeds, 24 April 1961REGARDING Penkovsky PagesS 2, 4-11, 14-17,
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012395, dated 1 March 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012395).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

(Subject entered at 205 hours, having been met by G
in tire“lobby of the Hotel Metropole. He salt n 1a
they had visited the firms of Westall and Marshal and that
WYNNE was new in the hotel shaving and getting himself ready
to go dancing.) G: How about the other members of your dele-
gation? S: Even on the 2lst of April when I went to the
Embassy and then met with yeu, the members cf my delegation _
knew that I had intelligence misston assignments. In fact, it

“would be very aviward Tor-then even tease me there T an
going. They also knew that I am going to write up an effi-
cflency report en them when I return and make my report on the
trip. They even report te me. For example, when they were

- walking down the main street of London, Oxford Street, they

~~ saw WYNNE's wife walking {n the company cf a young man.
Earlier when WYNNE had arranged the Initial reception for us,
his wife was present so my people had met her. They told me
that I should know, and I told them that {it's none of their
business and none of my business. I recall that when I was
Sitting at the table with her she mentioned that she had two
brethers. G: Very likely she was with one of her brethers,
and I don't think you should pay any attention to that. S:
Well, I thought I should report it to you. I didn't bring
any notes because I had no chance to write anything this morn-
ing. I came to you now right after 1 washed up.

E> “: However, jet me begin by telling you what's on my
mind ore I forget. First of all, in the Ministry cf
Defense there are twenty-eight thousand employees. In general
they are distributed as follows: The General Staff on the
Arbat, the three buildings on the Frunzenskaya-Naberezhnaya,
the second house on Red Square, and the Air Force Headquarters
en the Bolshaya Pilrogovskaya. This complex has twenty-eight
thousand persons, including officers and civilfans (VOLNC-
NAYEMNYKH). Of the latter, by my estimate, there would be two
and a half to three thousand. This would inciude Cleaning and
household personnel, as well as stenographers and civillantzed
officers, ;

o) St: Many GRU officers who still have potential value

have been retired at 4O to 50% pension pay, depending on their

calendar length cf service, and they are hired as coe lens > — he

For example, 1 have twenty-four calendar years of service with prfereen Aa

including my officer training time, but my total service cere
|

(L'COTNYYE) Is twenty-seven years because my war service fn
the Finnish War and {n World War II are given double value.

ae)

PPROVED FOR RELEASE

g aMas So

mF
OS

vt at oe

gd of pass, except that the cachets vary in terms of the pass
armission to go into specific General Staff buflidings. With
“ny pass I can enter all the buildings. But !n the First Direc-
torate 1 have to be escorted from the reception desk, and for
the Tenth Directorate I must make my appointment by telephone

ed

before | arrive,

(7) S: Now, before I forget, the KGB complex at the

Dzer nskiy Square Including the large bullding above the

_GASTRONOM -- and this includes the personnel of the First Direc
torate there which keeps track of us -- I would say that
together with civilian employees, they have between five and a
half thousand and six thousand workers. This ts not an exact
figure, but I think it is a good estimate,

tar 8. S$: Now the AFPARAT of the Central Committee has
' expanded considerably and it Includes all kinds of sections,
They have independent sections of lSght industry, heavy.
aor, industry, military and administrative sections seoeoslet me see,
— their exact title {s sectors. That jis what they are called.
There {s one for agriculture, electric power, and there {s even
a commission which handies all personnel who are being sent

abroad. I was also interviewed by the duty officer there before

I could go to England. Although the Committee {s large, one,
two or three Interviewers question a particular prospective
traveller, depending upon the importance of the Iindjvidual and
the missfon. They brief people on behavior abroad and question

Zon o

form.

QD S: The first page of this form is a declaration which
I s fgn. It reads something like this, "I, (Subject's true

name), about to go ebroad, promise to maintain the dignity of
the Soviet Union asithe representative thereof, promise not to
enter into any contacts or discussions which are not authorized,
and to maintain state secrecy." On the opposite page are all
vital statistics on the individual. This includes his Party
record. The whole document is Top Secret. The reason js that
according to our adveriised democratic principles, this type of
treatment would be improper, sc they make it Top Secret. The
pretense jis that a specific ministry simply sends someone and
the Central Committee has nothing te do with ft. But this fs
absurd. Of course, a ministry may nominate a person to go
abroad, but then everything {s checked minutely by the KGB.
When their acquiescence is ebtained, the Central Committee
commission takes this Top Secret obligation from the individual
and then permission is given for the issuance of a diplomatic
passport by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs,

them on what they expect to do. Then they f111 out a Top Secret

-12~

pent times -- has at least 5,000 yersons Inelud'ng
fyfans. wee

St The other OBLAST headquarters and the agrouys of

yorceSs may number up to h,O00. This also !ncludes the head-
quarters security battalion which guards all. entrances, safes, tie*
etc. cf the headmasters. This also t{ncludes the headquarters bf r
service company and cuartermaster elements serving the head-

auarters ‘tself. We have etchteen to twenty-two military dis. ©
tricts, say twenty for an average. Therefore there would be

abeut 100,900 jn all of the OBLAST headquarters together with

the greups of forces. Let us now check the ffcures I have here: y
The General Staff «f the Ministry cf Defense - 28,000: the 4
Central Committee of the Commun{st Party -f the USER - 5,000:
the KGB - between 5 and 6,000./ Also add tn thts the nava _
orces an PP OGAU since T did not Include them tn the 28,000,
At any rate for an average of this total crour tn Moscow, Lum:

it tecether at 50,000. Therefore this tetal of 150,000
experienced generals, offfcers, and men af the heedcuarters tn
the USER must he destroyed, acerrdinu te the plan which I have
Proposed,

St Please cons'der mi pian and report it to your
headquarters. Mo doubt destruction has been considered by them
asan inevitable acticn fn case ef war, Perha;s my cras; of the
whole prohlem may be {inexact and requires much adjustment and
recrientation., Jo am ready te acer; t any assignment te blow uy:
what I can In Mescow (any acsignment which may be gfven t- me).
Wiser and more expertenced heads will prebably come up with a
hetter sclnt‘on then I have effered,

- Ss Towould lite to sugcest enother rossibilityv. This
{s somm@®thing that should be trepared sctentifically. Your
sclentists may cons'der this. The mines with INT atemic equiva-
lents shruld be concealed tn a device {rr example, such as the
Standard Moscow refuse cens which can be found ‘n every house
entrance. A false bettom sheuld be treyared tn this. JI sheule
he able to set a time mechanism frr the desired detonation time
at the bottom of such a can which Js leaded with an atomic mine,
The materials should be obtafned tn a Sovfet store so that these
cans resemble Soviet cars. Then the [repared materfal can he
sent by menns -f heavy d'y lomatic packages and passed to me
threugh dead dre;s. Then assume that I can concentrate all thts
fn the basement of my DACHA. These cans or spittoons I can haul
either in sultcases er better yet [ro the trunk ef my car.

e N3. SS: If J were assfgned the misston «f£ Dlawinu ul seven
targets, thfe may reculre some f'fteen mines. 1 ceuld run
around and cet all these fn the yreyer places. It may renutre
Severél trips ta cet thes all placed. But 1 could run bact:

~J]3-.

4 forth as if I am shopping. I could even have some items
jpiaced in the suitcase. These J] could leave at the baggage
storage area I] described to you or In the Proper driveways --
with everything set by a time mechanism. This fs what ccecurs
tc me. Maybe the whole scheme {s very primitive fn your eyes,
but to me this seems to be one ofthe first essentials of cur
common mission. Gs: Your f{ntentions are very fine and when
the time comes to consider this, your proposition will not be
-dgnered..- ---- a ee
Gi) S: The destruction of such a group of military and
Party leaders as are jncluded !n the 150,000 1 mentioned, would
cause immedtate capitulation. of wie this may net get
KHRUSHCHEV who may hte at a DACHA of his. He has three., One ts
near the Moscow University, another {son the Rublevsk eShosse
beyond Kuntsevo, and the third one is near Dmitriyevo. At any
rate, the whole Party APPARAT and the General Staff can cer~
was wtainly be destroyed. The Praesidium {s in session all the ~-
time, Irrespective of where it sits. I wil et you aco of

this internal telephone directory: I_ have tt at home already.

Even though you are interested In names and patronymics, at

least you will have all the initials here,

C3) G: We have a lot of questions here we would like to
ask You. Even though you may not answer all of them, just
explain whatever you can, S: Very well, but first let me
answer the two questions asked me yesterday which I did not
answer. Yesterday you asked mc about these nozzles or fuel
injectors (FORSUNK(). In my report I wrote up very carefully
and exactly in engineering terms everything there was about ‘t.
I don't know if you're testing me about this item, but all I
can say about them is that the principle involved fs for these
types of nozzles -- which by the way are considered tc be very
Tellable -- to feed the exact mixture cf fuel ingredients into
the combustion cha.iber of the rocket. These nozzles must feed
in such an exact way that no overheating occurs which could ___
cause premature ignition prior to getting the precise feed into
the combustion chamber, that Is, to permit the exact per second
quantum of fuel to enter the combustion chamber. Failure to do
this will cause an incorrect thrust throughout the ac ve
perfod of the rocket trajectory, Yesterday I didntt understand
what you were asi:ing me about exactly. But this is what I
know, and further than that I cannot g've scientific data since
I am not an engineer. G: You explained this well, but yester~
day all that was asked of you was to describe a type of fuel
Snjector which was the ball-type and you did that clearly.

. -18.
a

a

yoordinates of the target. In the past {ft would take ys

“span six days to complete this but now they have developed

Aniques for completing the topographic Survey in two days,

“, second most Complicated process T¢ to test and check the
onets 80 that they wi1] follow the indicated trajectory,

/ qnere are four basic tests, horizontal tests, In the test area

“ and then additional tests on the launching pad itselr,

ae 62.—G:--Were there any naval officers or afr force off!-
“! cers tn your class? 5S; Yes, there were, G: What would be
the Proportion of these to others in the army? S; They were

imeey fewer. There were ejther eight or ten air force officers and
aide there were Only a few naval men, But there were also engineers
ar from the Kuybyshev Academy which is also tn Moscow, not far
hootdey, from the artillery academy. The engineers are responsible for
ae construction of shelters and protective Partitions at the launch-

ing sites. But there were only a few engineers fn this course,

G: Would you call this a General course? 5, Yes, G; Can't
you remember any of the names of the faculty Chiefs? Ss I'l]

write this al} Up, bot Jt1) try to tel1 you now these that I

‘can remember, Jy Suggest that you give me the names of all Soviet

artillery men in the DDR and 1171 tell you whom j know,

Vaiatas. | 63. Ss Yesterday I tojq you about GRYZLOV, a Colonel who
J*) ; 4s there now, There are Several Soviet armies in the DDR. One
. army 1s composed of armored forces. The commander of each arm

of rifled artillery which is stil] retained, Hero. of the Soviet
Le Union, Gen, Mayor of Artillery Ivan KUPIN at one time was the
deputy to the Chief of Ar ery in Lvov, the Sub-Carpath!an Milj-
Ida of artillery of one of the armies Stationed fn the DDR, That was
j deputy to Gen. Polk, FROLOV who {5 the Chief of a}y Soviet arty).
fealav, GSFG, in the Jeld there ts no such sub-divis{on
as chief of eCCOmmaad Hey. of Convent Jonal -artTiiese It fs

‘Tanges, ordnance shops, etc. and he has his own GAU for operat.
ing all this,

| Gt: When you mentioned GRYZLOV who wes sent to the DDR

> to orgenize these new rocket units -— to. whom wil} they be sub.
nonu erdinate? wi41 they be under FROLOV, or will they be turned
4 ! ay)

ever to the Germans? S: No, the Germans are recefving reckets

-~]9—

he Germans have their cwn artillery personne]
s. We are training them, but the Germans will
own tactical rocket units. We have been training
a long time now, and now they are receiving rockets,
wader States that they should have rockets !n their hands
vene end of 1961. There are four groups of forces of ours,
vid there are many countries of Peoples! Democracies, We
whave advisors tn al} headquarters cf the armies ef the countries
“ of Peoples? Democracies, but ] do not count these, Special
( training unfts for rockets are being trained by our people, wk t

- ~~: oT r
Sp pon s&) ~S2 -l know that in cur Soviet forces of the GSFG, er: um
8 e@ exactly four brigades of rocket artillery. Two of cer

Sive. This {fs tn Soviet hands and wil] not be given to the
Germans. But the countries of Peoplest Democracies wjl1 have

rockets, that is, with the exception of Albanta. Posstb}
CASTRO has received some rockets so, but fo) _
Ur Do the street Vie UPS of Forces have rocket brigades
of this type or-not? 5; They do, but to & lesser degree,
I don't know to what extent. I am glad you ask these questions

Since you are teaching me what is of importante for me to find
cut about,

. : 9 *

NM bo' 66. G: Can you tell me what type of rockets were given
to the Germans? St Yes, 1 can. The R-1l, and now they are
giving the SP-5, and tn add‘tion, all types of free reckets

-; such as LUNA, MARS, KCRSHUN, etc... G: They already have these

f such as the 3R-1, 5R-3, 3R-3 and BR-77 SS? Yes, they have all

, these, possibly as many &S 10 types, but J don't know fn what

quantities. They are preparing tactical launching sites and

they have already trained cadres to whom live rockets are being

Given. G: How about atemi¢ warheads? s+ NO. These are not

given. All we have there are these two atomic storage depots

for our two brsgades, whtch are hidden somewhere and are under
the control of GRYTLOV,.

WAS a-senfor lecturer at the Dzerzhinskty Artillery Academy,
in the tactics department. Now Il have heard that he fs the

V7 7. Ss Anyway, the situation there {S very unpleasant
“ror our forces, For any relation with a German girl, a soldier
ae gets shirred home at ence and Js punished. In addition, they
eae have cut down the monthly allotment of marks given to officers,
“work When J was ih Turkey and was eltotted 2,000 lfra per month, J
a ; Would buy all kinds of things, which I did, J brought them home,
' seld them and traded them, Although there are aj} kinds of goods
' tn the DDR, the new reduced allotment in marks permits the officers
_ to buy very little of value, Anyway, these are mz friends who
—-tell me of these Ccond}tions,

_ S$! They always call me when they come.to town,

Gen, IN stays at VARENTSOV!'s house when he comes here. His

daughter has now Given birth to twin beys so VARENTSOV {5 the

}roud arandfather of two five-year «14 boys. I alsa have to

bring them little Gifts. This ts a must because when Gen. KUPIN

Gees to Germany he brings back a toy for my daughter, VARENTSCV's

third daughter fs Natasha. She {ts jn the third grade with my - -
«daughter, Galfna, who js about two months Older than she is.

_ &) Yerlena's husband, Leonid, is a cartain and he js news
'ng from the Command Art{ ery Academy at Leningrad. Prior.
to that he had served In the DDR as a lieutenant. VARENTSOV ar-

The boys are named Sasha and Serezha, The marshal lets them stay
at his DACHA with his wife (grandmother), and when they gn to
Leningrad they stay at a common partment, The marshal has two
Servants, flower gardens, and his own Fersonal car,

who died of tuberculosis, Later he married his present wife,
Yekaterina KARPOVA. He whisked her away frem a Leningrad doctor
to whom she was married at the time, It was when VARENTSOV was
recuyerating and KONEV was demanding his earliest return to the
Front, the First Ukrainian Front, as chief of artillery, that

' Ninats husband was shot together with two others who were en-

| 9aged !n black marketing tn Lyov, It was proven that VARENTscy

; had no Frersonal {interest ty the black market deal whatscever,

but he was accused of palitica] Sherts!ghtedness in allowing this
t™ go on under his nose. He Was called before the Minfster of
Defense who rer:'rsmanded him, However, the Minister Said, "Let

us forget this whole matter: gn back tc the front." Three months
later VARENTSOV received the Hero of the Soviet Unfon,

1
{
t
:
!
i

~2Z2»

*
“s) St When he was going to the front by rall ] accom-
aed him, and it was then I told him about the unfortunate
atuation with hfs daughter. He was emotionally upset. When

‘we arrived in Kiev we learned that CHERNYAKHOVSKIY had been
killed at the front. He was one of the army commanders of the
First Ukrainian Front. He was a very close friend of
VARENTSOV's. This was fn March of 194. When we arrived tn
Lvov he visited ‘the cemetery once and never returned. Later he
gave me five thousand marks and Said to order the best possible
monument in Vienna to:place on her grave in Lvov, Anyway, that
Is the story of a good friend of yours, that Is, he is a good
friend of yours indirectly, through me. I am going to buy him
an expensive watch and inscribe it from my wife and myself, I
can photograph this watch and send you a picture,

; Gr: Now we heve some questions based on the !nforma-

“tion You gave us that we would like to clear up. S: J] tried
to present everything as honestly and Completely as I could,
Let me finish one other question. You asked me how ] got into
GNTK. I finished everything on VARENTSOV.

Chief of GRU Personnel) called for me. He Said, "Here ifs

not be difficult to have escaped from there to Taganrog. Gr: We
will run a check. §: Secondly, possibly through your !nforma-
tion channels you may find out if anybody had reported on me
about my father, Thirdly, you may knew that there were some
records jn the German archives which fell into the hands of the
KGB and which they have been analyzing for years, Our people
don't know what to do with me about this matter, They can —
openly discuss me without arresting me but {if they dtd not give
me a passport to come here now 1 would have made a run far it
Somewhere, possibly to your Embassy. G: If your father is
alive and js efther tn the US or In England, thts can be
quickly checked. S: J] don't believe that he Is alive but
please check anyway and also let me know if you find out who
ceuld have reported on me.

Anyway SHUMSKIY called me and said, "Your father was

© Army cfficer end had a higher education and your:
grandfather was a nobleman, a Judge fn Stavropol." My uncle,
once removed, was also mentioned. He was once a commander of a
PVO regiment In the Far East, and at one time he was also jn
Prison because of his background. His name {$s Valentin

#5 -23-

Antonovich (last name same as Subject's). After he was released
from prison he was then the Chief cof Staff of the 2lst Army dur-
ing the war. Then he was the ef of Start the 6th Guards Army. MO
Then at the end af the war he was sent to the Far Fast and he
_participated in the campaign against the Japanese Kwantung army.
He remained there after that and became the Chief of staff under
MALINOVSKLY. When MALINOVSKILY finally was brought in to replace
ZHUKOV as the Minister of Defense he left my uncle out in the

Far East since he knew the area well. He avoids contacting me

and J] do the same since we do not wish to contaminate each other

79. St when SHUMSKIY confronted me with all this he
_erdered me to write up my version of it. 1 told him that 1
could only write what I had always written before about my back-
ground but possibly my mother could add some supplemental infor-
matjon. My mother wrote a statement and 1 submitted it but ~
they {mmediately stopped my processing to go to India as the
REZIDENT. 1 should have gone as the military attache but
instead they sent some general who has no diplomatic or other
background. He has no higher education but he has a good war
record. When this was done 1 had no assignment for & month,
then two, and I was worrted -- I was'the GRU reserves. This all
happened after 1 had finished the advanced rocket course. It
was very lucky that I had been to these courses, otherwise I
could never have gotton this information for you. You would
have had information only about the GRU.

S: 1 was sitting worrying during these two months
and elt that the b!g preak in my life was going to take place.
[| had already stolen or copied the material from the academy.
The reason I had done this was because I was already distrusted.
They would not return me to my post in Turkey after I had this
affair with General SAVCHENKO who had also made charges against
me. 1 felt insulted by this and wanted to go to Turkey very -
padly since I had a wide circle of acquaintances, including
Colonel PEEKE, within the diplomatic colony. 1 had already made
up my mind to approach you, put was biding my time because I was
taught to he careful. So lt wanted to collect this material
because I thought it would be useful-in the future when I had
the opportunity ef approaching you.

@) S: I became the sergeant major of the class since 1
was the sentor colonel. There were six or ejght other colonels
In the class. The rest of them were Lseutenant colonels,
majors, and there were a few captains. 50 1 copied everything
word for word but had to use abbreviations. Later at home 1

#5 bal

Opie f wrote out all abbreviations so that you would understand them.
The only place where I] did any short-cutting was in describing
certain launching site equipment because after describing one
in detafl the other types were similar.

8 ee oem ee

C2) s: “Anyway, I was doing this for almost a year, and
‘then de day when I was the duty officer, the PCWERS Incident
took place. 1 told the students about this. When I was the
duty officer I had-a11 the room keys but not the safe teys,
because the safe keys are submitted and placed jn a sealed box.
At that time I wasn't thinking of opening safes, but now if
you can prepare me a similar seal I can open safes. That night
I made my rounds and took turns with my assistant, sleeping.
_ During this time I had some blank cable paper and I copsed down
‘Git 14 the code names from the Red Book, Later at -home I typed them
dws up in the form In which I gave them to you. Of course they
an “coyld. trace me by my typewriter, but if it went to that extent,
~-- Prould be shot anyway. I was: nervous while copying theugh I

[oroivs .

a ee eo

with Information about your overflights. I knew when your
planes were over Kiev.

i
LZ &) S: Anyway, I was the duty cfficer during the night
eo: from e first of May to the second of May. The tour begins at

1500 hours. No sooner did 1 accept the duty when in came the
an 3: communication seying that an American pilot had been taken into

_ custody from a knocked-down U-2, and they described the circum-
7]. stances which 1 know exactly. When POWERS was flying near

| Sverdlovsk, the poor fellow had the misfortune of running into

; a battalion of V-75's. He did not fly directly over the

: positfon, but slightly to one side of it and was already being

i followed by a MIG-19. The pilot was a lieutenant. The ;

| battalion on the ground was on an alert because of the holida
and they opened fire. They were firing a defensive barrage
since they were alerted that a host'le aircraft was flying
overhead, ‘

S: No direct hits were made, but only a slight

7 i damage~to the tajl and wing assembly. The damaged parts were
kiko, | not shown at the Moscow exhibition and your tntelligence
Fersonnel should have spotted that. He was within the radius
of explosion and as the result of the shock wave from the
explosion, the plane was damaged and poor POWERS sustained a
concussion, I don't know what he reported to his parents or

; ' others, but while falling he hlacked out several times. He was

on him was Sefzed, The claims of a afrect nit were, of course,
absurd, 7 reported this to you already on the twelfth of
August of last year, @8 well as on the RB-l,7,

65} St . FOWERS was brought to Moscow by plane an
at th cment dldn't have an English interpreter, I was’ sup- .
Posed to tal; fe) m since WwW . One eround who had
EEGIS mecrhagis ob tear Meateed ate
. the incident to Some generals, If they had not found a KGB

interpreter at the last minute 7 would have been the first one
to interview POWERS, They called up that 7 wasn't needed and the
KGB chief, this young fellow who was the KOMSOMOL Chief, and who

personally, So he got an interpreter and picked POWERS Up. But
military People knocked POWERS. down and POWERS wascconsidered to
be a military man, Therefore, he should have been turned Over to
us, the General Staff, But the’ KGB Selzed hin, took him to

a =<.Dzerzhinskty Square, and made their own report, He was being
~ treated medically Since he was Sti1l tn Shock. Yoy Could have
traded POWERS for this MELERH whom you were if’ such a hurry to

So Il am glad tc have the Opportunity of telling you the true _
—{ Stor about POWERS, If he had arriveg in Moscow @ half hour ~
earlier, would have been the one to interrogate him, even a

»
- S$: SHTEMENKO dta @ great dea} when he was Chief of
intelligence, He made a lot of Wise reforms, ws even had an

#5 ~26-

| elevator installed, However, he was a disagreeable man and was
f not Generally accepted by other members of the General Starr

"third star. of course he was a good administrator and he dtq
set up this sabotage school. ‘Under SEROV, the directorate and
k

“ possible flap. At that time I was running an agent about whom
I will tell you everything. He was obtaining data on electronic
computin machines through & third party ana we were ge ng e
‘material via dead drops. J had to stop this. . There were man
- protests about dropping scheduled meetings and other contacts,

but ft had to be done. The REZIDENT tn Pakistan decided on his

leaded In order to avoid possible Compromise to the agent. He
djd this but was Severely reprimanded! by his supertors at GRU,
even though he did the right thing. Thus KHRUSHCHEV ordered

to capitalize on the POvERS Incident despite the damage it aid
to the agent nets. Thatts ai] I have to Say. I am ready to
answer your questions,

G: Are the 3BR-1, 3R~2, 3R-3 and 3R-7 now tn serfal
Pea Frod on: Ss Absolutely, and tn addition, they already have
(rupee | atomic warheads developed for them, G:. Were all these shown in
a the Moscow Parade of 19607°S: No, not al} of them. 1°21) tell Y/Y
AN you which snes They were the 3R-1, the V-75, the R-2, the R-1T) —X
A) | and the GR=72 I am checking these from the pictures .s Hy; HS
about the P-57? “S: This was not shown in the parade. G;: Were
(vy you ever at the Parade? S; No, but I was at the training areas

where everything ts Prepared for participating in the parade in
Proper sequence, This fs off Leningradskiy Shosse, The whole
Farade fs rehearsed by sections under the direct command cf the

j; unit commanders. G: How long has it heen Since these rockets

! were Placed In the hands of the troops? §: The R-2 existed

j even in STALIN's time, but it was not fully developed nor was

i it in mass Production. These Others have been in production
relatively recently. I would Say that they began to give them

to troops about four or five years ago,

f

he

“y G: What is the rrinetpiejaltocation of these
| Tocke®s? Is jt to the front or the army, or what unit} S$:
ne OS dat fe tin frat
Porter poe bee on

i In case of war, the units which operate rocket artillery of large

: caliber, long range, i.e. the battalions which are part of brigades @
ph <7 similar to those now deployed in the woods near Moscow, not the PVO,

bt fhe strategic long range rockets, will be commanded by the Chief
phY |! of the rocket forces of the General Staff, as is now established.

abe These tactical weapons will be in the hands of the ground forces
be

a as a Front, like FROLOV'’s in Germany and his artillery of the front
4 then the artillery of the army. The battalions will be parts of
ne" . regiments which in turn will be part of a brigade. In case of war,
a the army artillery will have these weapons under its command. How

employment of atomic weapons will be the decision exclusively of the
, Central Committee of the Communist Party through the Ministry of
i Defense, The atomic weapons will be deployed in such locations that

- § the units which could employ them,

wrteat |... 92, G! The next question of course will be difficult for you —
| to answer, but it states, Do you know of any actual’ locatiom where
invA" | nuclear warheads are stored, or do you have any knowledge where pro-
O: duction centers are located? 8: Of course I do not know and one
Cighriy can find out only by chance conversation. There are, I have heard,
us assembly points for atomic warheads in the Klintsy area, but where
nee I do not know. Generally, the hollow rockets are stored separately
re in entirely different arers and only when they are to be used with
ro atomic warheads are both they as well as the warheads brought to
_ some forward assembly point.

% 93. G: In your course at the artillery academy, were the P-5

daz and the SP-5 studied or were they merely referred to? 8: I wrote
BO about this as a supplement. We saw a model of this rocket, but it
b _ | ¥&S not in a cross-sectional form. The data I wrote about was given
tbe? ¢-7 to me by BUZINOV. G: However, are they included in the five-year

_ course? S: Yes, they certainly are. G: Did you ever see the R-5?

rhe Bi: Yes, I have, and it is not in serial production. It ig mounted
“27°, in our laboratory and I have seen it ina Canvas cover. I measured

Rs it by pacing and I estimate it to be between 16 and 18 meters long.
>

This is a bigger rocket than the R-2 or the R-11. -G: -What unit will
these rockets be assigned to? 8: Will they be in brigades just like
the other rockets? G: Were these shown at the parade? 8: No, they
were not. Just an old experimental model of the R-2 was shown. The
largest test area ig in south Siberia. The center is Kapustin Yar,
and the impact is Kazakhstan.

[ i S: I have an excellent source of information on this area
iL: i a captfhin who is a friend of mine. Y met him in the following way.
| The man’s wife came to VARENTSOV's aide-de-camp and said that her
i

husband had graduated from the Deerzhinskiy Artillery Academy and

was being assigned to Kapustin Yar. fe had served there in a junior .
officer capacity prior to having attended the Academy. The woman

was a student at a medical school and wanted to remain in Moscor to
finish her studies, In:

addition, she would have to g!ve up her room which was a nice
cne, since this was allotted to the family while the husband

‘was‘at the academy. Her request was for help Jn getting her

husband transferred ta Moscow. His name {s Viadimir KASHIN.
He Is an engineer-captain,

7 Gs) 51 Well this BUZINOV, It seems to me, took a liking
to thetady. He already had treuble fn this direction once
before, He flirted with some officer's wife tn Leningrad, and
the husband made a scandal as the result of which BUZINOV
received a Party reprimand. If ft weren't for VARENTSOV he
probably would have been thrown cut. Well anyway, I don't know
how far his Interest itn thts lady went, but !t fs common prac-
tice that all generals have girl friends, even Gen, Leyt.
SMOLIKOV of GRU.

—e St He came to me and said that this captain should be
helped?

=

RIES l .

At that time I was working as the chief of this accep-
tance commission fer the Incoming class of the MDA. 1 saw his
personnel file and {St was very outstanding. As a student at
the academy he had even Invented some device which was of
value. To take a Graduate of an academy who has specialized
knowledge Into the MDA where he would merely study languages
and !ntell'gence matters would be a very desirable thing to do,
This !s far better than to take an intelligence officer and try
to make a specialist cut of him fn a fietd in which he could he
given an Intelligence mission,

tive and housekeeping support. There are generals there who are
in rocket testing In various categories. There are specialists
who check vartous instruments -and KASHIN, who {s-an engineer, js
in charge of a small section there. Of course he knows what
happens when they test rockets. 1 Invited him to my home and
found him to be a very fine officer, He asked me to help and I
asked him 4f he wanted te be an intelligence officer, He said
he wanted to very much. So new he fs a candidate for' the
school. Whether he will be accepted or net, I don't knew. I
also told him that !f he were not accepted in the MDA, I could
jget him an assignment fn the laboratory of the Dzerzhinskly
Artillery Academy. 1 think that he wi I probably be accepted by
the MDA since h!s record {fs good.

C8. St In my discussions with him about what Is gefng on

re est in Years he told me how often the guided missiles tested
were way off their planned course, In e future I will know

yheylovichs but Tam not sure. Tt tg hard to say where he”

Will dows the most good. At the MDA he can't tel} me very
j much except the names of some of his Classmates and | can get

information on the GRU myself. At the Dzerzhinsktfy academy he
may be able to tell me of hew rocket developments, ‘Anyway, so
much for that, iain ee

59. Gt: Letts check the time, It may not be good for you
to go home too late. H: Ask him {f there were many people on

_ the streeet when he went home last night. The question {s srs
~~going tn and out of the hotel. G: You may be conspicuous ff
you come home late, What fs your program for tomorrow? Will

you have time for a meeting with us? S: Tomorrow we're going
to look at a machine factory, but then we have a program in the

Birmingham. wil] you have time for a short meeting tomorrow?

S: I can meet with you tomorrow during the day. G: At what
time? S: Just a minute. Let me figure tt out, (Note: Sub Ject
Studies his schedule.) 5; The more often we meet.the better
Since we can work out all kinds of detatis that need clarifica-
tion. I want to know your views because that {fs important for me.

. 100. G: Plan {t to be secure because we don't want you to
do anything risky. S: JY don't want to tale any chances either,

“Even if yeu give me the assignment to blow up the Moscow Military

District headquarters, I must make Plans to move my family and
whatever Junk I own out cf the area because J Live SO close, We
must meet tomorrow before the delegation group returns for the
evening schedule, I will come here at exactly 1600 heurs, G;

- Very well, and we will not detain you very long since you must

get back tn time to have dinner with them. 7 have a little time
now yet. We dont¢ want to keep you very long. You have answered

a lot cf these questions Systematically, Let us just finish the
few we have left.

G: Now with respect to the rockets R-2, and R-1l,
Are these rockets already issued to your troops”

give all kinds oF rockets £4 Satellite countries by the end of

Pia ; _ ~30-

1961. Gt: How long would you say that these rockets have been
“—Tssued to troops? S: After their final tests at Kapustin Yar

and the last modifications were completed, they went into mass

fh. production. I would say that the R-2 first went into mass
production three years ago and these have been issued to troops

Rit Since then. The R-11 is more recent. I would say about two
years ago, about the time when KHRUSHCHEV first bragged about
them to NIXON. -G: This 1s fine. You have answered the other
questions on VARENTSOV earlier.

102. S: I would like to ask yeu !f prior to my departure
you will have worked out the role WYNNE will play and the
various ways I should make contact at receptions Jn Moscow?

G: All this Is now being worked on and we certainly will have
.& completed plan for you before you leave.. St When will we.
meet {n London again? G: We will have this short meeting
cont tomorrow as planned. The day after tomorrow we will all be
-~. travelling In different directions. On Thursday, we will be
all in Birmingham. We will stay In a hotel near yours end will
give you the details tomorrow and we will set the time for a
meeting in Birmingham. On Friday we will: all be back !n London
and we will meet there at the Hotel Mount Royal. J: If case
for some reason he can't make ft tomorrow, should we not g!ve
chim the detalls on Birmingham? H: That's alright. If he
misses tomorrow, I can pass him the information on Birmingham
through WYNNE.

S: Mr. Harold, what js the status of my request to
formatty meet a government representative? 1 want to present
myself officially. It doesn't have to be a specific lord, and

I_don't expect to meet the Queen. G: Be assured. This ts

S: Also, I will need some more money. The fifty
pounds you gave me jis not sufficient. I haven't spent them yet,
but I know I will need more since I have many things that I must
purchase. G: Do you need the money right now, or do you need
tt temorrow, of do you want to waft until Zou return to London?
S: It can wait until 1 get te London. I have already noted
quite a few items there that my wife asked me to get. I want
you to realize that all of these Items I plan to purchase are
perfectly logical for me to have. In fact, they can be
obtained through cur commission stores in Moscow, but at a very
high price, In my status /t 1s entirely proper and normal for
me to have certain thinus, {n fact, on a representational basis
it !s mandatory. Even when I returned from Turkey I had a
large sustcase full. of things. Nothing was said at:all, and
there was nc customs check. Now I am returning officially with
the Committee and there will he no treuble at all. (Note:

-31-

2 listed a long Itemized group of purchase requests. In
~ze had a small notebook full of them Including outlines of
ayizes of his wife and daughter.) G: Do you plan to buy
thing here?’ S: Yes, 1 can go out with WYNNE. They have
-d things here and they are much cheaper. G: How much do you
wed now? S: Do you have fifty pounds with yeu? (Note: H.

_wassed Subject fifty pounds.) Sz: Please decide this question

regarding WYNNE, and think of the other requests I have made.

St: Are you considering my DACHA? G: We are con-
sidering all your requests but whether it's purposeful for you
to have a DACHA now or not {is not so evident. S: 1 would like
to know what value is being placed on the material that I have
submitted, Each one should have what one earns. You told me
that you have established a monthly salary for me for which.I am
very grateful. If you had.set it at half that figure, I would

“not have complained. I am not a tradesman, to bargain. ~Every- .

one must try to attain something. I am sure that you are in the
same situation.

St I am thinking that everyone may have a black day.
For example, I was think!ng cf this when I was ill yesterday. It
could even happen that I could have died, and jin the future I may
perish in some way. In such a case I request that my wife and
mother be approached, but {in only one way since they have no
inkling of what I am doing nor have I established any plans
through any border for their defection, Simply say that I have
withheld one fact from them. Say that prior to the death of my
father, he had set up either a trust fund or left valuables in a
foresjgn bank and since I am no longer among the living this sum
cf money is available for my wife. At least this way my daughter
may have some subsidy until she fs grown up. H: We will do
this. S: My wife !s totally unwitting of what I am doing and
she has been brought up under comfortable circumstances as the
daughter cf a general. However, she knows what deceft and lies
exist in our way of life, and she was very much impressed by
Western life when she was in Turkey. She filled out this whole
notebook with purchase requests,

107. S: By the way, please prepare everything as Jf I am
to leave on the second of May. I have not yet received the
authorization for extending our trip so we must play safe. I
will know the answer as soon as we return to London. 1 request
& Minox and I want yeu to plan on possible radio contact. G3:

We have planned all this and we will have a specialist there who
not only will train you jn using the Minox but will even check
the actual frames that you take. S: To be honest with you, the
last time I used a Minox was when I was in Turkey and that was
five years ago so I don't feel sure of myself,

#5 ~32-

108. S: We must work out plans on how to maintain contact
in case WYNNE does not recefve a visa to go to Moscow. Then
there may be a possibility that I may be dismissed from the
Committee. This is not likely, but it must be considered as a
possibility. Then, what do we have? We have this good-looking
lady with the children walking through the park. We already have
agreed on the use of the telephone. G: All this will be pre-
pared and worked out with you in London. We will not wait til
the last day, either. S: I hope so much that they extend my
leave until the s{xth, since it is an advantage to stay longer
in London and have more meetings together to work things out.

In the meanwhile when WYNNE arrives you can either send anything
~with him or not, as you see fit -~ I] mean a message.

109. S: JI have already prepared material at home to give
_to him which Includes the details of the whole agent net which |
I once ran. But I ask you please not to take action against
them because it will reflect against me at once, particularly
this corporal in Ceylon. Gs: To hell with him! Don't you
realize that we would not risk your security for something that
is relatively worthless like that? We will tcuch no one. S:
However, he should be made ineffective. Maybe you could have
him transferred to some other place under some legendary pretext,
possibly as if there !s a threat to his wife or children. G: We
are not going to fool with this and invite any risk to you. S:
Of course if he fails to appear at a scheduled meeting with our
case officers, they may think that something is wrong.

110. Sri'iwWrite this down, Colonel GRECHKO, with cover as
an engineer, is the REZIDENT in Ceylon. He was formerly tn the
GRU Personnel Directorate and somehow he wormed his way into this
Job. He is a complete fool. He does not know English. I don't
know the name of the second case officer who is there now, but
he !s the one who replaced ALEKSANDROV, the former tase officer,
He had been the Second Secretary in Ceylon, but now he fs working
in the Fourth Directorate in the Direction of Ceylon working
group for officers where he is an ordinary officer. If this
corporal did. not show up as scheduled, or a threat to him were
detected, SEROV would demand that the agent's personal file he
examined. My name would show up at once as having been a former
directing case officer at headquarters. G: Stop worrying, We
are not going to get you into trouble. Ss: You see, I want to
help you, and at the same time I am afraid of this. For
example, if the whole agent net in India were surfaced, it
would -dlienate our government's relations with NEHRU. But give
me a chance to get out of the country before this is done and
I will show you how to do it. G: After you are in a secure
position abroad, then we may consider doing something and we
will do this with your advice,

#5 ~33-

111. S: I have thought a great deal about our illegal
REZIDENTURA which {fs located in New York. In my opinion, I
believe this REZIDENTURA is composed of our GRU illegals. They
were brought in there after a STAZHIROVKA In a third country.
Judge for yourself and see if I am not right. For example, why
do you think SUDIN {is now being sent to Turkey as a counsellor?
He is being prepared to go now. We have not yet cracked the
Turkish nut. Our agent operations there were not effective.
He, specifically, is being sent there since he had always worked
on illegals operations. (Note: In fact he was a NAPRAVLENIYE
chief in the Illegais Directorate.) He is to create a
REZIDENTURA there composed of illegals from third countries. I
am positive of this. I know that those case officers who
followed me to Turkey were not able to accomplish anything.

1i2. G: How many illegal REZIDENTURAS did you say there
were in New York? S: I said only that there was one in New
York, that is, an illegal REZIDENTURA, and there is an additional
REZIDENTURA which is legal since the case officers therein use
the UN positions for cover. G: Do you know the GRU people who
are in the UN? S: I1 can find this out very easily, but I don't
know offhand.

ay G: Do you know a Dmitriy POLYAKOV? S: No, but 1
know enis POLYAKOV. He was in the USA twice and he has

taken over delegations, just like I am doing now, for the GNTK.
He was also the Interpreter, but in my case I was afraid that
they (the British) might not give me a visa, Ht: If we hadnit
known who he was, he might not have had a visa. S: I realize
that you-probably had something to do with this since you wanted
me to come. Our people at GRU were pleased because they assumed
that you did not suspect I was an intelligence officers Why did
you give SHAPOVALOV a visa when you know he is an intelligence
officer? H: That {$s a big question. S: I understand. ‘It is
none of my business to know. I don't even want to know. My

people at GRU thought that if SHAPOVALOV got through with a
visa, maybe I would also,

(a) S: Then I could fulfill GRU missions while heading
this @efegation. Therefore, I request you do all you can to
help me fulfill the missions which I explained to you. 1 will:
wrjte up an effective report. What I need from you ts help in
introducing an English acquaintance to the local case officer
here in London. All that has to be done js to maintain some con-
tact and possibly your man would pass some sort of material once
jn a while. The material can be worthless, and it would be good
if your man would accept money once !n a while. There is no
need for the man to accept recruitment. All he has to do Is to
string the case officer along until such time as 1 defect. This

#5 | ce ~3hh-

is how 1 visualize it. If necessary the man could be recruited,
but he has to work properly. Otherwise it would be traced back
te me as my man, and if they smelled provocation, they would

put me away so you would never see me again.

115. Gt Now, all of the problems you have raised in all
eperational plans are now being worked on and aS soon as we
return to London, we will accomplish everything. S: I under-
stand this perfectly. I realize that you have more experience
and scientific approaches and better heads than I have, even
though I have been In intelligence since 1953 except for a short
interlude thanks to being contaminated by RUBENKO. (Getting up
to leave) It would be well if you could get WYNNE In contact
with me for a couple of months. He doesn't need to be trained
or told anything. He can be unwitting, but of course he knows
who you are and that I am in contact with you. H: We will take
care of ali that. S: WYNNE may not be the sharpest man or the.
wealthiest, but he treats me very well and with respect and |
would say that he !s a good patriot and an honest man. G: Take
your key. St I wish I could have all of you in Moscow for a
month. G: JI will take you down out of the hotel and walk you
to the corner. (Subject left at 0020 hours on 25 April 1961.)
