Meeting no 1 LondonN) at Mount Royal HOTEL-20 April 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012392, dated 4 March 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012392).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MERTING #1 (LONDON), 20 APRIL 1961

1. The meeting wag held at the Mount Royal Hotel. Partieipents in the
meeting were: -
f ‘

"P77 Rerola Haglewood
J it Mishael Fairfiela
é : x Joseph Welk
. George MaAfam
2. By means of a prearranged meeting set up through Mr. Greville
WYNNE as organized by Mr. ~ (details of which are recorded elsewhere),

Subject was expected at any time convenient for him to take leave of his
companions under the pretext of turning in for the night. This was expected to
occur at eny time after 2100 hours. Bubject's instructions were to report to
Room 712 which was engeged by Mr. Hazlewood. Since Room 360 appeared to be far
superior as a meeting place because it was much larger, with adequate seating

. capacity and, more importent, it wes an intertor court thus avoiding street
nolees and in eddition since a clandestine recorder could be more conventently :
“concealed in this room, it was decided to use Room 361. Mr. HAZLEWOOD, here. \

after referred to as H. and Mr. ., hereefter referred to as J, waited for.
the errival of Subject in Room 712 for the purpose of escorting him to Roten 360
where the other two members of the perty waited. Subject arrived at Room ne -
at about 2140 hours and after being greeted by H. and J. was told thet a more
adequate meeting area wes met up in Room 360, to which room Bubject was con-
ducted. Subject arrived in Roon 360 at 2150 hours. Upon entering Subject was
introduced to G. and N. and all persons sat in a circle with a emall serving
tsble in the middle.

3- G: Would you prefer to speak Russien or English? S: [ would
much rather speak Russian because I can express myself much better in Russian.
G: Very well, then. 5: f greduated from the Military-Diplomatic Academy _
in 1953. In 1955 I went to Turkey. My working languege there wes English.

I had many difficulties there and during the pest four years T simply forgot
much of my Fnglish by disuse, Well, Gentlemen, let's get to work. We have a
great deal of important work to do. G: You have already introduced yourselves
upsteirs. §&: Yes. «a: Therefore you know now that you are in good hands.
8: Yes, end I hove thought about this for a long time and I have ettempted
to make this contact taking e very devious peth about which I feel I must
report to you in fl. a: You mst know thet we are in receipt of your
original letter. 9: You mesn the one I gave to the two teachers (the two
American touriets). If you knew how meny grey hairs I have eequired since
thet time; if you hed only marked the signel just so I would have known that
the message got into the proper hands. 1 worried so much about this. (‘to
reassure Subject J. pulled ovt the original copy of Subject's first letter -
referred to above including the photograph he enclosed of Colonel Charles
PEFKE, U.S. Military Attache, Ankara, et the time Subject served his tour
there.) 9: Yes, that in the photograph I sent end Colonel PREKE was the
Military Attache there. (¢: This wes shown you to reassure you ami in two
words I cen tell you why @ response was not mede to you immediately after

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

recsiving the letter. We deliberately delayed signalling you + a & Secure
manner for a receipt of the materials yo wented to pass could ‘devised.
This was done exclusively in consideration of your security. 6: Ani, between
frienis, admit that you did not trust me. That is the mst wpleaseant ani
painful to me. G: No, it is quite the opposite. ;

4, 5S: I was exposing myself constantly to considerable danger. I

was walking all around the American Embassy, but I will tell you all about
that in detail later; thoughts are just jumping into my mind. I had expected
to be met by an American representative - why do I say American? Because a
good frien’ of mine was the Military Attache in Turkey, Colonel Charles PEEXE,
ani I elso have many other American acquaintances emong whom were the Naval
end Air Attaches. On the British side I knew only the Brigafier who was the
Military Attache end his Assistant. Due to this friendship I wanted to ar-
range with Colonel PEEKE some sort of a future plan that I already had in my
mind but wfortunately just prior to my departure the mother of Colonel PREKE's
wife died and he andi his wife flew to Ameriew ‘for the funeral. Since he left

. I 414 not want to speak to any of the other attaches with whom I was not as
well acquainted -- for example the Air Attache had only recently arrived and.
I did not know him too well ~- ani in addition when I left Turkey I expected
to return. I thought I was going on leave but they held me up in Moscow and
aid not send me back. "They gecjeveime,"! .

6. 4 We know about this. Did you receive a telephone call (in
Moscow)? 6: Yea, I dtd, but this gave me absolutely nothing eat all; I dia
not unierstend anything. The only word I understood in the whole message was
the word "Merch", In a telephone conversation I do not unferstand English at
all. Therefore, I requested that when a telephone call was to be nede, that
it be made in Russien. In addition the call should be made from a public booth.
G: It was. &: The night before I was et a friend's house at a party ani the
following morning when the telephone rang I thought it was from him, My con-
trol time for the call was at 10.00 hours and the call came at 11.00 hours.
G: That is correct. 8: I understood nothing ani I couldn't ask questions
very well since my wife waswlking around. In addition, my mother ani daughter

* “also in the roa, Although they realive that I ean syesk Fnglish,
Ze in 8 serious-type conversation would raise the question aston
« G: Is your wife absolutely wwitting of your inten
tions? 8; Mo, She doem'’t know a thing. T will tell you exactly who knovs
anything about it later, (This is in reference to the mmerous contests mn.
Ject mate, of which we are evare),

7. (Sub mow begins hia biography.) 8: I wee born in 1919 in
the Caucasus. Oy Potion va pera (Ee Yi ge tggE Te bar ta 1009 tn

of the Crucasus, The town wes former y known as Viedikevkes, Tt isa
tri-lingwel eity; its Ossetien nem is Siniter ‘wi now it is called
Orizhontktdee | ston qenavneh agatn Ty STAY o pol DzhAvazikav

8. Well both my granifethers died; ny mother brought me up alone.
Jeriushed ten year clasoes ant tmedistely erolled te to oe toe Rae es

Stete 80 5 ,in one's official records in the Soviet Union. One

be Blocked for life from progressing in eny speciality, They would not
Bécept one In the ca ten, One would Jost be a common ly .. Therefore,
I Worked out a legend he hed been killed in 1919, we 414 find

9. I the Komscmols ant I considered myself a
young aen of our fighting for the iten of Lenin, My erbition then
was to Join the Party and in 1939 I ves cantidate Party mesber.

: a for
ghip. Algo in 1939 T eratuated from the Kiev Artillery Sehool, Dawitately
Uiretan suation T vas taken for w twenty-tay aarioment to tieerat ore ee

ul Om ection wes in the &frection Temopol ~ Lvov (ef thet Lis seen),

thine ‘s Cepoeen Novo si€irgic ro ae
Krasnoyarsk on River Ch

“~

wly ns

- Cols teute Cotancei
(Peli teas Com ns 660 t letters)

“At thet time the Yeshovahchila (popular expression for the extrem RXVD purges

in 1939) wes eeting in full force and there were many executions even of Army

various Army wits. I worked in that capacity for four years, My rank was
Sentor Politruk, There was little loss of life in thts cempaign in Poland.
This wes in Septenber end October 1939 ani we were engaged in liberating
Belorussia and the Western Ukraine. G: ‘This was Polish territory. 8: Yes
it was, but werwere liberating it, just as the Red Army liberated the Baltic
states. At that time I was on what was known as the First Western Front.

LO. G: Where did these troops come from? 8: Primerily from Kiev,
but also from other military districts. They were regular Soviet Army mits
which were engaged in occupation operations. Our Front ceeupied the territories
ineluding Lvov and then there was established a line of demareation (with
the Hitler occupation forces). I have been a cadre officer since 1939, upon
my graduation from the Kley Artillery School, end have served in the Arny
since 1937. After this operation i tre: -rred together with a mmber

of my fellow officer to Achinsk whic — . ' Jovosibirak, The 91st Rifle

Division was deployed there end I was trensferred to it. I was assigned the
duty of working as a political worker fn a battery. In December 1939, the

wer with the Finns began ani tn January 19/0, our Division wes sent into ace
tion on the Karelian Isthmus against the Finns, The Division was in reserve

to participate in the Peace Treaty -- our Division was thrown into action

end ocly 10% of the strength survived, All regimental commanders were killed
end I was fortimate to escape without a serateh, This was due to the fact
that I was an artilleryman and our positions are somewhat behind the front
line. Despite the hariships of weather and this conflict I was still Ail
of enthusiasm and, as this war ended, I was accepted into the Party in

March 1940. I em very gled that you have my original letter. My spirits
have been buoyed up considerably and I am no longer tired,

il. G: Let me ask this brief question. Please tell Us now how
mich time you have at your disposal? Cen you get into any trouble for being
awey? 8B: I have received a spectal Intelligence mission during this trip
now. I can leave at any tim to do my own work and I will tell you later
what my mission is, ‘The other members of the perty realize that Iemnot _
an engineer or a specialiat and that I em a member of this delegation because
I work in the foreign relations section of the Comittee (G.N.T.K.),. They
know that many Intelligence personnel work in this Committee andi in fact in
all ministries. All I need to say is thet I want to go off. G: We ask you
this out of consideration for your personal security, For exemple, if it is
alright for you to go for a walk tomorrow you camot again say, "I-went out

4

fellows ani went to sleep. That's all there is to it. G: At any rate you
must be on your guard constantly and it ie difficult for us to determine
what is dangerous for you and what ts not. 8: Yeas, I have asked you to pro-
tect me and I will also protect myself, G: Enough dangerous riake have been
teken by you already and by the graee of dod everything turned out alright,
Therefore, that is all the more reason for being extra earefl now. 8: Yes,
efter all the chances thexk God everything turned out alright and thank you for
your consideration,

12. 8: After I becam a Party menber and the war with Finlan!t vas
over, I was transferred to the Moscow Military district. My assignment there
was Deputy to the Chief of the Political Bection dealing with Komsomols in
the Artillery School iment Ssiuamors Later I will give you my complete auto-
biography in full chronological order as {t should be done, I worked there
until the beginning of World War IT, I received a smell room ani brought my
mother there. Previously my mother elso had a room in Orizhonikidve but we
hed to sell out there ani lost everything, When the wer began I was trana~
ferred to the Headquarters of the Moscow Military district. There I worked

( ae _ in Sverdlovsk as the Deputy Commander, He had sane previous diffieultiss «.
] 1 at
4Ne

ye 13. The member of the Milttery Couneil was GAPANOVICH, Dnitrt

Afanasyevich, a Lieutenant General whose daughter I married and to when I

em married today. He died in 1952. I have been mevried now for fifteen

years. G: What was exactly his position? 8: He wos a member of the Mili-
tary Council of the Moscow Military District. He was a prominent political
worker and at one time he wore three rhombs, He died as a Lieutenant General --
two stars. He is buried in Moscow in the German cemetry. He was a very fing
man} he helped me a great deal and he liked me. He saw that I wes very en-
thuslastic, which was quite true at that time, and I do not deny this to you.
I only make this remark now to explain why later I changed ell my views and
how I became more mature in my thinking.

| 14, I worked there until Novenber of 1943. At that time the re.
| capture of Kiev was being celebrated and I thought that the war would end
very soon. Here I was with no distinctions or decorations. I received no-
thing for the Finnish cempeign,only a commemetion and a cigarette case. There
were already a thousand Heroes of the Soviet Union so I submitted a request
for front line duty and was sent to the First Ukrainian Front. I wes assigned
to a subdivision of this huge headquarters by VARENTSOV, Sergei Sergeyevich, _
& General who is now a Marshal. Note hig neme3 I will tell you mich about hin
i
{
i

apa oink 3

. Oy. Cah pork

later. He was at that time e Cen, Polk. (Colonel-Ganeral) of Artillery and

wee the Chief of the Artillery of the First Ukrainian Front. He Liked me

sinee I was full of anthusiam anil ossigne’ we as the Commmiar of a treining
reeeption center for enti-tenk artillery regirents. At thet time we hed . ,
twenty-seven anti-tank artillery regiments in eotion on the Mrst Urreinten Tew =f
Front combetting German tanks. Therefore the Generel erve me this ansiqnment () 41.
enphesiszing how important it wes to heve ea eonstant flow of replacement units

to the front.

156; Later on when I'd like ta mention our mitnel future missions I
a | Will comm back to thie point. One of Hitler's createst mist=kes wes that the
« { @ighteen mobilisation and training centers in the USSR were never destroyed.
ee | These centers contimously fed millions of replacements to the front lines
 \ .: of the Soviet Aray. ‘These vere ell the modilfsation ani organtzational ¢iree-
J | tion untts and tt is the very ecul of the Army. They eantrol not only men-
a | power Bit also ell sorts of equippent aml mypiies. German bombing wns dis-
orgenired, end pointless small diverstoniat groupe could enstly heave destroyed
/ ‘these centers ami parelized the Soviet Army, but we'll eome beck to thet leter,
Primarily my work there wes to reorgnnize hervily depleted anti-tonk regiments.
In {ntensive combat the life of mich a regiment was often only one or tvo hours
since the Germans Lomched mony moss tark attacks. These depleted units vere
filled ont emt re-emriipped by an ebuatont ent ecnstant flow of tenks ant
from factories in the Urals which Hitler neglected to destroy ant whieh still
meintained moypply despite extensive food sbortegees on the pert of the factory
workers emi the popuintion. This wen » fumierental error oni I will disenss
this further when we consider whet mint be done in the frture.

Nv
i.

16. In my eeeigmeent I het toree treining write one each in Ker,
Belayn Teerkov aml Zhitemir. Regirents were re-equipped at theee points ani
returned te front line duty. I worked there for three months end wanted to
go on Line dusty an? miitted a remest. Iwas assigned as a deputy to ea
regimental ecsmenmier for personel metters. At thia point my ecrvice as ea
political worker ente? awl T wee ezain an line offfeer. I worked ty months
in this espreity unter my commer, c Rero of the Soviet Union noed TIKVICH.
He was a good fellew tit he wes a dmmkcri. Ye asseulted 2 vornn ani wes re.

moved, #o I beerme the Commomier of the 323ri Artillery /nti-Tenk Reginent

of the Eighth Artillery Anti-Tenk Bripete. The Brigele ecneteted of the 322d,

323r4, and 324th Regimentr. The Comenter of the Brigede wes CHELALAK, alao
a Hero cf the Soviet Union, who died reeently in Voronezh. Then I was wourled
prvi wos sert to Noscow in Doe 194h. I met mony friends there cmt at that time

H the Militery Coumetl of the Mosecw Military District included BORIA, PRONIN,
; 4 who was then 4emity of the Comeil of Workers of Hoseow, IRTEMIFY, ant ny _—
a}:)|Cofether-in-lew, GAPAHOVICH, as well an 91) the chiefe of the arms and mrvices.

ls This military district orgenization wee ot thet time the meet important one
| a beemise Lt also eontrolled the Headquarters for the defense of Mcetow. Thie _
va defenne included thirteen defensive rince extemied from the Kremlin to Horhatsk.

These were orgenized’d after the Germana were throwm back. These eireles vere
orgrniret into strong points eni leter When they were transformed into divisions
\ they were sent forwerd to the front lines.

17.s,I wes hospitalived for two months, released, and prepared to
return to the front. I was the youngest regimental camenider on the front
et that time. I then hed two decorations; now I have, altogether, flve orders
endl eight minis. G: What renk were you at thet time? 5: I was a Major at

thet time. dust es I was about to go to the front I beard thet General VARENTSOY, —

who was en route to visit Generel KONEV, wes injured in a tank accident ant was
flown to Moscow ani placed in m so-called Marshelsa' Hospital on the Sere
Pereulok. His hip was demaged and eas e reeult one foot was shorter than the
other. He was suspended by a pulley in a hospital for four months, Sinee he
was my commending officer I brought gifts to him. He ealreaty knew me well and
he assigned me to be his liaison officer from him to the front. He wanted me to
do this during his recuperation and said that then we would go beck to the front
together end he would give me back my old regiment. I told him that thet would
be fine and since the war would end soon ani the Germans would be crushed, I
would like to go to a Military Academy. He said he would arrange this. I

. went back ani forth to the front a mmber of times aml reported to hin.

18. B:At this time his wife, mother and hie two daughters were already
in Lvov. On Pushkin Street during the time the Marshel was hospitelized, they
hed a herd time getting fool and fuel. Therefore, I took care of the femily
since not only wns the Mershal a very nice person but I kmew that he would re-
werd me tenfold for anything I ata for hin. The Marshal hed been married once
before and from thet marriage he hed a daughter, Nina. She committed suicide
at the time the Marshal was hospitaltved because her husband, who happened to
be a Jew nemed LASHAK, ari with whom she was deeply in love, wes shot for parti-
cipating in a black market ring. I sol’ my last watch ant went down to Lvov
to bury the girl, purchasing a black tress ert her coffin. After I returned
to the front with the Marshal and he knew what I hed done, he said, "You are
like a son to m.”

19. 6: Up to this very time he supports me, and it is partially due
to him thet I am sitting with you now since as of yesterday he wns still heasitat-
ing to seni me here. Although I hed my vise from you on the Sth of April, they
were still umlecided in the Centrel Comittee yesterday as to whether I should
be sent or not. This in becnuse my fether was a White officer. On the other
hand I have had @ distinguished military record in three campaigns, have been
decorated and heve no black marks whetsoever on my Party records. If I were
not to be sent for the reason of my fether, I should be tsoleted anyway. In
fact, I once wes because I was slated to go to Initia es the Military Atteche
and was not permitted to go even though I was completely prepered to go. I
will tell you more ebout that leter. They did not let me go and transferred
me insteed to another section,nemely, this Committee. of course, the work is
slong the line of Intelligence, but of n more passive variety, namely, to work
with foreign delegations, the purpose being to obtain information -- possibly
to steel some documents of value, and, of course, the ever-present mission |
of recruiting someone in a foreign delegation. At any rate this latter mission
thus far has been unsuccessful as far as I em concerned.

20. G: For which organization do you execute this misston-the ROB?
5S: No, the GRU. I em an officer of Strategic Intelligence of the General
Steff. G: Fven up to now? 8: Yes. They had no cause to shoot me or to

arrest me. About a year ago I was ealled tp by the Chief of the Personnel
Directorate who questioned me about my fether. He said, "This 4s what you

have declered your background to be and this is whet we have found out about
your father. You said your father simply died." I replied, "I have never

seen my father and never received a piece of bread fran him.” The Generel
said, "But evidently you have concealed the fact.” To which I replied, "If

I hed something to conceal I had a tenfold opportunity to run off during the
war or on my assignment abroed in Turkey, end I aid not do this. I was even
in ell of the countries of the Peoples! Democracies." G: Who wos this Per- |
sonnel Chief? 81: The Chief of the Cadre Directorate is Gen. Leit SMOLIKOV |
and his Deputy is Gen. Mejor SHUMSKIY. The Chief of the GRU is General SEROV
who wes previously the Chief of the KGB. They asked me how long my length

of service was and I sald twenty-four years ani in 1962 I will complete my
twenty-five years of service. If I had already completed my 25 yeers they

-would have discharged me because for them I an politically umreliable. That

is whet I feel. Up to a certain degree they trust me, tut they watch me
clopely. I believe they actually trust me because about e:year and a hal?
ago before they unearthed anything sbout my father they sent me to higher
academic courses on mew technology. It 1s from there that I wrote up ell
this material on rockets. In my opinion, had they already known about my
father they would not have sent me there. However, they did not permit me
to go to India even though I had prepared myself completely and had studied
ell the required codes and ciphers since I wes to heve gone as the REZ IDENT.

21. 8: Well, anyway, when VARENTSOV returned to the front et the
request of KONEV I also went along and was given the comand of another regi-
ment, the 5let Artillery Anti-Tank Regiment, a 6.4.9. unit. This regiment

was independent and not part of the Brigade; 1t belénged to the First Ukrainten
Front. I comanded this regiment until the war ended. At the end of the war

I wanted to go to ean Academy but he asked me to work with him for a year with
the occupation troops. At that time the Hesdquarters was in Baden, Austria.

It was the Headquarters of the Centrnl Grom of Forces. I requested VARENTSOV
to relense me, seying that my bride, Vera, is in Moscow ant has just graduated
from the tenth class. At that time I had sub-let two rooms in Moscow which

I had then changed for ean apartment in which I heve been living for the past
fifteen years. G: Where is this apartment? 6: It is on the NABERE ZHNAYA
GORKOVA. It is about a two-mimute velk from the Headquarters of the Moscow

Military District, but I work at the Gensral Stef? on the Arbet. The General
seid "Go shead".

22. 8: I arrived two months after the courses begen, but I passed
the examination successfully ani was admitted. Since I had commanded a regi- _
ment, I hed no trouble passing a bettalion commender's examination. Bo I
entered and _in 1948, I graduated from the Frimze Acadeny, Imediately upon
graduation fron the Frunze Academy I was offered the opportunity of entering
the Military-Diplomatic Academy to study Strategic Intelligence. G1: How
long were you in Frunzve? S: It was a three-year course. I consulted my
father-in-law, General GAPANOVICH, who advised me to work for a year instead
of transferring from one classroom to another at once. So I worked for one
year in two places. My first assignment was as a senior officer in the

8

Mobilization and Organization Directorate of the Headquarters of the Moscow
Military District, where I head previously worked in a lower capacity. I
worked there for six months and then I was trensferred to the Headquerters

of the Ground Forces. I wes also there as a sentor officer and was pe tly
satisfied with the Job, since it paid 200 rubles a month more. But I did heve
in mind to enter the MDA in 1949 and fortunately we heave a regulation which
says thet the pry of an officer received just prior to entering the MDA is
reteined by that officer during the period that he is a student. Therefore
in 1949 I was aecepted at the MDA which is near the subway station BSOKOL.

G: Is it not 13 Peschermeya Street? 8: ‘That's exctly right and I need

not say any more about that.

23. §&: I stufted there for four years from 1949-1953,. It was then
e four-yeer course but now it has been reduced to a three-year courses, The
Chief of the BSehool is Gen. Leit KHLOPOV. He is a Gen. Leit. of Tank Forces
amd had previously been an Intelligence officer. I don't remember his name.
and patronymic at the moment. Prior to this assignment he had been the Chief
of the Information Directorate of the GRU. There are six directoretes in the
GRU, in addition to the Information Directorate, but we will come beck to that
later. The reason he wes given this appointment wes because two predecessors
die@ -- one wes Gen. SLAVIN, who was a Militery Attache to one of the Scanfinavian
countries, I believe Sweden, emi the other was Gen BRADYEt who returned from
Germany. He was at GRU at the time I graduated and wes the one who signed my
diplome.

- 2h. G: Wasn't KOCHETKOV there algo? 8: KOCHETKOV was the Deputy
Chief. He was also a Iieutenant General. He wee the chief instructor of

the Sclentific Research Department. ard I believe he was then a Gen. Mator.

At that time there were 98 students in the cless and now there are only sixty.
As I reported to you in the data I passed. I will tell you how I got this in-
formation. At that time I wes working there eas the chief of a clesa, but
they elso removed me from there when they assigned me to my present position.
I wes in charge of selecting students for the class as well as being chief of
the class. G: Isn't that a General's T/O slot? 6: Yes, it is, but here

I em already walking around eleven years ani a full Colonel. I attempted

to have WYNRE photograph all these documents, my various passes, my Party
cerd etc. since these had to be left behind, but he simply said he was afraid.

25. S: After gred{etion I was placed in the Fourth Directorate.
of the GRU. This Directorate is the Festern Directorate (Strategic Intelligence)..
There are other Directorates, for exemple the Anglo-American Directorate, the
Furopean Directorete and the First Directorate which is the Directorate for
Illegals under Vice-Admirel BFKRENEV, ebout whom you probebly know. We will
come to all these Directorates leter. Anywey I worked there for about e year
on the Egyptian desk. I became familiar with the agent nets there and remenber
something ebout it yet. At thet time the leeder of Egypt was NASSER'’s predecessor
_ who was Brigadier NAGUIB. Generel Motor KISLERKO, who was the Director in Chief,
called me in. KISLENKO had previously been in Japan. At thie time KISULENKO
is still living, but he had been discharged. G: Does the Fastern Directorate
include the Far East os well as the Neer Fast? S$: It includes everything -- at le
at thet time it did. I'll tell you what the new organization is later but at that
time it included the Near Fest, Middle Fast and Far East: His Deputy at that
time, whom I remember well, was Nikolay Mikhaylovich SOKOLOV who went under cover

ce]

somewhere to the Near East. (: Whet 4s KISLENKO's name and patronymic?
S: TI don't remember,

26. G: Can you list me ell of the other directorates of the GRU?
8: The former structure or the present structure? G: The present structure,
8: I will deseribe that all to you in detail later. Generel KISLERKO told
me that they wanted to send me to Pakistan ag the Senior Assistant to the.
REZIDENT. The Military Atteche, who was REZTIENT, was my instructor at MDA --
his neme slips my mind at the moment. I mist be getting tired. Anyway I
egreed to go,tut when all my documents were prepared the Pakistenl Goverment
refused to grant me a visa. Another Assistant, a Lieutenant Colonel ,8180
hed his visa refused. Oh yes, the Colonel's name was DUBROVIN. The reason
given for refusing the visas was that it was undesirable to expand the size
of the Military Attache’s office there. I will be remembering things from
time to time, please forgive me for not being eo alert since I herve been so
nervous. The visa was refused even though my appointment there was already
signed off by VASILYFVSKIY. Therefore, I could not go and neither could the
other assistant. DUBROVIN set there all by himself with just his code clerk,
Oma wired
27. 8: I contimed to work enother severel monthe on the Feyptian
desk and KISLENKO called me up again and sald, "We are thinking of sending
.you_ to Turkey". This was elreaty at the end of 1954. “Again T prepared my-
country, the armed forces etc.. At that time a Military Attache in Turkey
wes Colonel KONRASHEV. He is a little fellow who was an engineer, He is
now working eg an instructor in the MDA in the Area Studies Depertment. He
had been in Turkey ec long time - five years - but things were not going well
. for him. There were no RFZIDENTURAS there and even now there is insignificant
, activity there. It was difficult to reeruit Turks. Right now they bring
4 in people from a third country for contact with the REZIDENTURAS in Turkey.
i arrived in July of 1955 end became the REZIDENT.. My officiel position
\ Was acting Military Attache and I took over the whole agent operation net.
G: What rank did you hold - Lieutenant Colonel or Colonel? 8S: I was
already a Colonel - let me clarify this. At the end of the war just prior

to my entry to the Frunre Academy I wos promoted to Lieutenant Colonel and
T wae promoted to full Colonel in February 1950. Iwas already walking
about eleven years as es fill Colonel in February 2 ,tniiithey will never
meke me a General. ‘They have already seid so and they have asia I was un-
reliable. (Jokingly) Maybe I will become a General in another erny.

&

28. 8S: So I arrived in Turkey with my wife aml took over the
REZIDENTURA. During the course of one month KONDRASHEV turned over all
the responsibilities to me and I had for ny assistant CHICHERIN, the Neval ——
Attache, end at that time there was no Air Attache. There was an’ essistant,
| Ba, who was concerned with air matters although he was not the Air Attache.
SEvE th ative months later Gen, Mator SAVCHENKO arrived, but he arrived under the false
. name of RUBENKO. Many of our people use false nemes; for example, the Scien-

tific and Technteal Adviser to the Ambassador in Japan is « Colonel SERGEYEV

‘but that Is not his real name. I don't remenber his real neme now. G: Do
you remember Generel RUZANKOY? S: Yes, I know him. C: His real is

LO

ROSHCHIN. 8S: That's right.

29.8:This SAVCHENKO was previously Militery Attache in Afghanistan.
This old man arrived; he wae over sixty years of age. I turned over everything
to him and he became the REZIDENT end I became his assistant. I worked until
November 1956 end then we hed ea comprimise. This took place three months
after SAVCHENKO's arrival and it referred to Lieutenant Colonel Nikolay
IONCHENKO. He was simply approsching Turks in restaurants end offering them
money to work for him. 5; JIONCHENKO was attempting to purchase military
mammals from Turks in this erude mumer. Naturally the Turkish Counter-
intelligence was effictent and they noticed this. Now I will confess to
you the following: My relations with the General and with IONCHENKO were
extremely bady they were trying to undermine me along Party lines. Iwill — cq t
tell you the details of this later. (Note; ‘This is a most salient theme
in Subject's recent life ani hes contributed significantly to his decision
to approach the West. Specifically it involves his life-long legent thet 7?
his father had died of typmis in 1919. Actually his father was killed vhile °
fighting with the White Army against the Reds as a First Lieutenant in the
City of Rostov. The significance of the fact lies in a KGB accusation thet
Subject had deliberately concealed the true circumstances and this accusation
was a matter of record in his GRU file). I made an anonymous telephone call.
from a public booth to the Rurkish Counterintelligence informing them of
IONCHENKO's activities and specifying where hie agent contacts were made.
G: What was hie renk? S$: He was a Lieutenant Colonel; his first neme
is Nikolay.

300g

+ IONCHENKO was very bitter against me. Since he had QM CTUD/ED
the Turkish language at the Academy he wes indignant that I with the Fnglish
languege was sent out to be the sentor demrty to the REZIDENT instead of hin-
self. He was very friendly with the General and they had become good friends
in Moscow; both arrived in January 1956. They beth were dead set against me
and made my life so misernble that I wrote a letter to Headquarters requesting
a transfer - anywhere. They replied that I should wait. By nature I ema
vengeful person but et least on a basis of fairness. Even then when I saw
how unjustly I was being treated I had already decided to cane over to you.

I went to take onth ani to sign my willingness to serve you and spend the

rest of my days, whatever they may be, in a new life.

31. 8S: Three months later IONCHENKO was compromised and was de-
eclared Persona Non Grata and I accompanied him through Istanbul end he went
homevia Bulgerie. The General wrote a cable to Headquarters stating thet
the Turks and the Americans ran a provocation against IONCHENKO and while
he was purchesing fruit he was seized. Incidentally, et this time the Shah
and his wife were on an official visit and Turkish security and Counterintel-
ligence services were intensively alert in protecting the visitors. We even
had instructions from the GRU Chief, who was SHALIN at that time, not to run
any operations @uring thet time. However, the General permitted IONCHENKO
to go out for an agent meting since one was scheduled for the loth of May. —
I remember the date since it is my mother's birthday, The incident ectuelly
occurred at the time that a Turkish lieutenant was handing IONCHENKO ea mili-
tery mamal.

ill

32. 8: I wes sitting in his office when the Eebessy Duty Offieer
reported to the Genernl and said, "Corrrede Generel, yourassistant hes been
detained by the Nrrkish Comterintellicence che to his atterpt to obtain a
military marmnl from a Torkieh officer." The Sencrel was completely upset
emi told me to go to get him out. I seid, "Why dia you let him go to this
meeting?" The operntional finxis in Turkish lire were in my hends, mt the
Generel gave IOPCHENKO money out of his own pocket, Sone 200 lira to pay
the Turkish officer for the momunl vere given and this was done so thet I
would not know about it. This is a eonsidereble mm and it was not taken
from the operntional fixxl so that I wouldn't know. But since this compros se
occurred, the Generel mimitted {t to me. We had an argument. I told hin
that he head always secused me of being a bed operator, inexperienced, etc..
He was preparing a cable to Moscow ami If asked hin, ‘Are you a Comnmist7”
¥hen he enswere€ yes, I esked him why he had to lie. He asked mm to leave
the office, saying the affair vas nom of my business, and I said that 1
would report on the metter through another charmel.

33. S: Then I actually reported the incident through the Kop
channel, our neighbor's channel. It wan through YFRZIN who was then the
K53B REZ IDENT ebout whom I am reporting to you now as the reerutter et the
University of these negroes who are sent here from Afrier to study at Frieni-
ship University. They ere going to form powerful REZIDENTURAS. YFRZIN wes
then a colonel. How, I believe, be hes alrendy been promoted to General.
Re elso had been the KGB RPZINTHT in Intia evi his cover position wes thet
of counselor. My cable was received by SEROV, the seme SEROY who is now
chief of GRU. SEROV irmedintely reported this cable to KARUSIKTIEV since
BL) compromieces mist be reported to the Preeeidium, but SHALIN brought in
the cable from SAVCHFNKO-RUBENKO. ZIRIKOY wes then the Minister end the
codle went through the Chief of Steff, SOKCLOVSKIY. KERUSHCHEY yelled,
"Which fool ts the Mar? (Subject’s true name) or the General? Figwre this
out enl report.” I had told the truth and oll I eoulA be accused of is hay-
ing spoken coarsely to the Generel. Fart even then that was decenen be wes
always criticizing me wmjustly. I did not reeetye eny repriment, not even
along the Party line, but the General received a severe reprimeryl fron
7HUKOV, incompetence in duty. Shortly efter wy departure fron Turkey he

was removed ond recently he wes discherged. He is now working in the In-

stitute for frea Stuties as a department chief. G: At thet time SNALIN VL gnneete
wes the chief of GRU? 5: Yer, yes. SEROV only come in after SHIFMENKO, ~~

and SEROV wea then the chief of KNB but he hed se of then remenbered ny
neme becouse of the ecble. We call them neighbors ani they refer to us

as nesrast neighbors.

34. 81 Well then, gentlemen, up to Rovember I wes still working
there. I enlledt the Turkish CoutterinteLiigence anonymously once more ant
pt that time there wes e Turkish military exhibit. There was an assistant Vinane
case officer, you mny remember him, his name wos SAVIN, who together with ,
some Bulgerian agents etole a militery maminl.~ Tha officer I Spoke to on
the phone ead to_me in clear Fnglish thet I should drop In to speek with |
him, but I refused becuse at thet time I wos still umtecided. I wes not
sure to whom I should appear, tit of course if then they had made this of

_

accusation with mspect to my father orl hed expressed political distrust, y

—

Ly

Ce bit. taate. Vv
12 uv braced ts

I probebly vould never have gone beck to the USER even then. I called up
thie lest time: on the hth of November 1956. You em check this since ths
call mat have been offictally recoried.

35. 8: On the Gth I left Turkey by train toward the Fest enter-
ing the USSR vie Armenia. Upon arriving in Moscow both SHALIN aml KISLENRO
Jumped on me. Evidently thie SAVCHTHKO-RUBERKO is their elose friend. Te
hed gent then all kinds of gifts end they hel drumk vodka emi vine together.
They were indtgnant thet euch a tenot-nosed! young colonel could heve be-
haved thet way vith respect to a generel. They assumed thet I wented to
trip up the generel in order to be the military attache in Turkey. 1 tell
the truth, when I wes ecting military attache there wes more organiention
than under the general end I eould herve run the agent net effectively. But
I mmar to you that thet was not my motive even though I would have liked
to have been the milfitery attache. (Hotes Wine wes served and, incidentally,
@ very dry, mild liebfraunileh wee the only beverege consumed throughout
ell meetings. )

36. G: Could you help me fill out some names ont patronymies ani

' to review the orgeninntion of GRU? S: Yes, I'll be gle to. First of ell

; dt is called "The Secont Chief Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff".
The chief 18 SEROV. ‘The deputies ere now Gen. Leit. MANSURCY oni Gen. Lett.
ROCOY. G: Ia ROGOV the om who is the deputy for all aininiatretive metters? »
6; MANSUROV is the ona responsible for attinistrative matters, but ROGOY is
the one for operetional matters. All eables go to ROGOY.

37. Gt At ome time did you not have a staff for Strategic Intel-
ligence which was heeded by a vice-sdmtral, but later thia wes changed again’
S: Essentinily we heve stretegic intellipence, operational intelligence,
ani militery intelligence (VOYSKOVAYA). Many generals and edmtrals breve
left Strategie Intelligence ami heve joined Operctionel Intelligence.

38. 8S: The First Directornte -- thet is the directornte of EFKRERIV.
Re is a yice-efmirel. The Second Directorate ~ wrler a Lieutenenmt general -
is the one involved vith strategic intelligence on Europe. The chief is
Gen. Iett. KOROYALOY. ‘This includes Scondinevie. G: What ere their names
emi petronymics? 8: I never tried to remember them. We elvays addressed
them az ecomrnie-generel. But I will get them for you Inter. For a long
time the deprty to Gen. KONOVALCY wes Gen. Motor MELKISHEV, en eir force
officer. Put now - before - there wos Gen. KISLENKO -- E'11 tel you whet
hoppened about him later. Thet was still at the time that SiIFIMAIIKO was
chief er¥i SHALIN wae his deputy, emi Inter SHALIN become chief egeiny he
become very 112. SHALIN is still 1211, but is etill alive. KUDTSLERKO was
discharge.

33. St Bow, Gen. MULKISHEV becann the chief of the Fourth Diree-
tornte which ig the Fortern Directorete of Strategic Intellifence. Tr re-
placed Gen. Z0TOV. ZOTOV, Gen. Maior, had been a military attache in Italy
emi in France ant he will go as the military attache to Riungary on the 10th
of Mey. Our atretegic Intelligence Directorntes ore all on the fourth and .
fifth floors. How the Thin Directorate in the Directorete of den. Kelor
SOKOLOV. It is the Anglo-Americen Mrectorate. I em now wrier the 7/0 & E
of this Aireetorete becmime I em aftting in the CensAian Section of the

13

Committee and our OTURL consiwias of officers who are working under cover in
Moscow. We have a total of 58 officers incliiing myself. In all ministries
which heve any foreign reletions, there are strategic intelligence officers.
As members of theee ministries ani committees thereof they have eorteact with

end corntuct intelligence against visiting foreign delegetions, tourists,
lecturers, etec..

kO. 8: There is also a Fifth Direetorete. The chief of this dirse-
torete is the former chief of the MDA of whim you (G.) have reninied me - Gen.

leit. KOCHETXOV. This directorate is concerned with the placement of REZIDENTURAS
in all comutries including the countries of People'a Demceractes, anil the prepera-

tion of diversionists groups. This directorate studies all erlticel targets
such as bridges, tumels, etc. ani enslyves drop zones for lerge seele opera-

tions for General Steff use as well en emall group operations for behind-the-lines

sabotage groups. G: Are they now engaeed in sebotage activities? 8: Mo,
they ere not now engaged in sabotage activities, but they do have the persommel
trained ot pleced in erltical ereas where they will act when the order is
given. G: In all comtries, including the Democracies? 68:7 In all contries,
but in the Democrecies it is of a different nature, like stay-behind, because
we do not comtuct active intelligence agninst the Democracies. We have a
Directorate of the 2 General Staff which deals with all motters of a mili

Directorate controls the Gelivery” of all rocket t weapons, “ih the countries of.
People's Democracies.

41, 8: In this year all countries of People's Democracies must be

development of beses, storage eres, lemehing sites, ena the training of
eedres for the countries of People's Demoeracies. The rockets which we are

other countries of People's Democracies. (Note: Later Subject emphasized

that Albenia was the one exception, dve to the recent "revistonistic” atti-
tude of Gen, Enver HOXHA.)

kD, 8: In the DOR we now heve four brigades eri of theee two brigedes
alreniy ere equipped with etomic werhberds. They also have speeiel storage
facilities and the engineers of the Artillery festeny Deerzhinskogo mre work-
ing on this,/This Acateny is now in the hends of MOSKALFNKD, which oceurred
efter the accidental death of Mershe] NEDELIN due to a rocket disaster. That
was not an alreraft escident. The report was a big lie deliberately reported
to the world. But I will give you ell details of this separately. I wrote

a little about this but I mst add to it because it is imporsible to write
ell details.

43. Gs Let me fL11 out the GRU orgentzational chert. 8: I heve
given you five directorates, ei there is no Sixth Directorate so designated.
There is a sepercte Fighth OTDEL called the Coding Section end there ere Rear
Services units (SIXZHBY TYLA) which provide logietical mmport such as eloth-
ing and even dianonis end gold for agent operctions.

4

a a ne nt A

bh, Gs: What mmber does the Uperetionel Directorate have? 5:
Under SHALIN thet wes the Sixth Directorate, but now it is being changed.
However, it is unier SEROV emi may not be of quite the stature of an UPRAVLENIYA
now. They control all of the RP Foints in ell of the military districts and
with the Groups of Boviet Forces an! they have a duel subordinstion. They
report to the headquarters of the verious military districts an‘ olso to us
in headquarters. Ext, as I understand the structure now, it is not of the
peme stature as en UPRAVLFNIYA es it hed been before. Often Stretegie In-
telligence officers ore transferred to Operational Intelligence. I remember
thet MORGUNOV came to Turkey after I left and worked with this Gen. SAVCHENKO
for a while ond did something vrong with money and received a critician along
Perty lines ani wes tronsferred to en RP Point in Leniusken. G6: Tea the chief
still Gen. SHERSTNEV? 68: Yea, that in right, but it is no longer an UPRAVIENTYA.
I would call it e group (GRUPPA) of Operntional Intelligence. I recently heard,
however, that SHERSTNRV will not be there any longer. G: What is ROMANOVEKIY
doing now! Will he be the new chief: Who is the new intelligence chief in
Germany? S: I remember ROMANOVSKTY's name, but I don't know where he is, The
new chief in Germany is a lieutenant general. I will remember his name in the
course of converration. It escapes me right now. He did not ect along with
SHTEMENKO who sent him out.

4S. 8: Let m seo -- there ere a minber of other services, emi the
MD is also weler SEROV. How the course is only three yeers end the present
student complement fin the incoming class is sixty stutente. The graducting
class has ninety stiients andl the recom closs hes neventy to seventy-five
. students. This lest class is the one for which I selected the stiwients. When
I was at the Aceiery there were o hunired students, actually ninety-eight
since two were summperily dleniseed for political reasons. How the classes
exe smeller beceure there are a large munber of MDA greduates already who ere
members of Stretesic Intelligence. Mow our neighbors, the Ko, take almost
half of ow graduates, at eny rete, somewhere between 30 to 40%. The KGB
does not heave a formmnel atedemy of their ow for training their intelligence
officers, but they do have intelligence missions abroad, primarily elong
political intelligence and technical intelligence lines. They teke cadres
from our academy ani in one cass, I remember, they took up to 50% of the
grodustes. faite a mmber of those who gradunted with me were teken by
KGH. I mey be able to identify quite e mmber of them from photographs and
I know whet cover many of them operete worler.

46, 6: Well, having returned from Turkey, SHALIN end KISLENKO
jumped on me. They accused me of having generated 111 feelings with the
peneral which wee hermful for the GRU effort there and served no useful pur-
pose. Basically, they anid I wos right, but I wees not right to heve behaved
in a hoolignn mamer with him. They said further thot no grnerel in the GRU
wented to work with me because, "you ere a tattle tale (KAPALSHCHIK). Further-
more, you went out of chennels. Why did you report this to SEROV? You dis- |
graced us in the eyes of our neighbors." 50, since no ome wanted to work
with me, whet should I do? YT went to VARENTSOV. He told me to vait avhile —
until things blew over. I even went to sec SHPPMENKO severnl times. He
told me that he didn't know me and that I hed made such a mese with ny
associates thet he could do nothing for me. That wes logical since, after-

y STALIN wns hie deprty. He couldn't go against his deputy whan he de~
center ae upon for his operational experience. After all, SHTEMENKO had been
Chief of the Gamerel Steff emi previously hed been a military district

mK

~

L fn. 2-ds

Ahotee

\. ty : hao.

|

{

it

iM? £,2
ma
Cine i {

commenter, but his knowledge of intelligence matters was so-so. Tins
SUTEMENKO ami SHALIN rejected me ard KISLENKO wes preparing to retire.

7. 8: By the way, excuse me...I just remembered. After KISLENKO,
the Gen. Maior who took over the Fourth Directorate - I'll remember his name
in just a minute - he is now the deputy to KHLOPOV who is the Chief of the
MDA. He fe the deputy for scientific research there. Btill earlier, before
he turned over the Fourth Directorete of ZOTOY, be had been the chief of the
Military Diplomatic Bervice Faculty of the MDA.

48, 8: For a long time they kept me in the GRU reserves. They
geve me intermittent assignments anid then returned me to the reserves. This
contimied until the time KHRUSBCHEV removed SHTEMENKO. KARUSHCHEV vas afraid

of ZHUKOY em SETEMPNKO wes closely associated with ZHOKOV. And SHTEMENKO,

sioniste 2 hoal,. ZHUKOV knew ebout this. When ZHUKOV stated, "The exny
will follow me", KHRUSHCHEV took action and it wea discovered that SHTRMENKD
and ZAUKOV 7 had a large sabotage school in thetr hanés. It was located near

Tule. About two hundred specialists were being trained there and KHRUSHCHEV
thought that these could be let loose against him. Somehow this 41d not get
to KHRUSHCHEV since the Ministry allocated the fimdis and the information did
not go up to the Praesidium. SHTEMENKO was removed and sent as the deputy

commander of the military district with headquarters in Sverdlovsk.

49. 8: I just remembered who this Gen. Metor was I mentioned earlier
who hed taken over the Fourth Directorate. It wes Gen.Mafor LYAKHTEROV. 4G:
Previously he had been e sentor instructor at the MDA. 8: That's right ani
later he became a depertment head. You know these people very well. G: Dia
you ever hear of e Col. PAPPE who is an instructor there? 8S: Yes, he 1s an
instructor there, mrt he has recently been dismissed. By the wey, SHTEMENKO
who is now a General POLKOVNIK is the deputy commander of the Ural Military
District with headquarters at Sverdlovsk and previously he was the camanier

of the Voronezh Military District. Fowr military districts have since been
consolidated.

50. S: In September 1959 (et e later meeting Subject corrected
this to September 1958) I was sent to the courses at the Military Academy
iment Dzershtnskogo. Theee were celled the cowrses of the General Staff
‘for the study of new technology. Under NEDELIN the entire Academy Deerzhinskogo
on Selyanke “- you know where thet is. Previously this was purely an artillery
academy, but now 1t is en acedemy for rocket artillery and is under the control
of MOSKALENKO. He cone in after the denth of NEDELIN and had been the former
commanmier of the Moscow Military District. The Academy does not train any
officers in conventional rifled artillery at all. There were four faculties
at this Academy and now there ere five. There is a new faculty on electronics —
and radio technology. —

16

+

a ee rae A tte ee OO tN A Re wen atone ee

51. G: What is the forma) name of the Academy? 6: It is the
Military Artillery Engineering Acadeny iment Drerzhinskogo. There are

now 2,500 students there. Many caprble young officers of the air force _

and of the navy who hed some minimum technical ability were not demodilired
in the general reduction program but were gent to this Academy. The stutents
are trained eas spectaliste and engineers in the enployment of all types ef
rocket weapons. Specialists are perticularly trained to service the rockets
on their testing pads prior to launching. This treining is under the direc.
tion of very experienced engineers of whom there are not too many - about
thirty or forty. I graduated from these courses with distinction. The
courses are given anmelly end are given even today, but the contimous

duration of the annuel courses is ectually nine months.
32. 5: I graduated on 1 Mey 1960 (later corrected te 1959). In

mediately after greduntion, SEROV, who hed been informed of mY progress,
suggested that I go to Indie #ince Iniia is eonsidered to be our territory,

thet is, we might want to conduct operetions in that territory in the future.

‘Therefore, 1t would be desirable thet an officer with background {n rockets

should be sent there, since it is possible thet in the not distant future
rockets mey be given to India. I was almost completely processed to go.
PAVLOV hed been the militery attache there ~ he has since been removed -

and now there {s = Gen. Mator who is a troop commanier there, I wrote about
this new tendency of not having intelligence officers oeeupy the slot of
milttary attache -- . And since the ney military attaches do not need to
have eny intelligence background to Miflli their functions, they trek people
from troops -~- just ‘Junk! who have no language or area knowledge, just a
representative - a general to represent the Armed Forces of the Soviet Union.
fo a general wae sent there and his senior assiatent vas a Clasenate of mine.
['ll remember his neme in a mowent. Juet as I was all set to go I was called
out by Gen. Haior SIRMSKIY who is the deputy to Gen. leit. SHOLIKOY. The
latter was just promoted to Gen. Left. in 1950 and heeds the lerge Personnel
Directorate. He ig also the chief of the Personnel Section of Operational
Intelligence. Re has a whole breakdown there, They are really NAPRAVIENIYE.
The Personnel Directorate Le another directorate just like the ones we have
listed end is part of the GRU.

is only by chanes that one can fint ort vhet goes on in another department, Por
Cxomple, I canmot use my pase to enter the First Directorate of the General Start

about this ant wes very worried. To be grite honest with you, my disaffeetion
with the whole political system degen quite a long tine ago. I disagreed with
meny fncets of life there -- I will not bother you by listing entegories, but
the whole set-up war cone of Gemesogery, idle talk end deceit of the people.
The people were walting potiently for a lome time and now they exe tired of
vaiting ant they are restleas, Actually, KIRUSHCHEY to some decree has Cecreased
the KGB controls. Mnony persons have been rehabilitated or reeetyed samesties,
end now one cen say certain things, not everything of course, without being im
wrediately arrested as wes the cace in the past. Of course, if this is done to
excess & man can be ejected from the Party. He can be arrested ani, of course,
his working future would be Limited.

18

58, $1 There ig a difficult situstion in the country right now.
Everything {mn guboriinated to the armaments rece, end also a great deal of
money, billions, has been spent to sustain the eountries of Peoples’ Demo- |
erecies. China has been etven a great deal ent ov everything is direeted
to equipping cur forces with rockets. Everything fs going for rockets. In
this respect they have already ettoined a meeoure of success. Some rockete
\'| ere already proven and sone are not yet properly developed. The greatest |
wl | deftetency Is in the Self of electrontes. Cur main lmmnching test site Le
st Kapustin Yar ani the Dapact aren is in Renekheten. There were very many
cases where rockets had struck radirosis or e settlement because they had
devisted from their arsigned course.

i 59. St Rut a great effort tn now being mate; they hare mobilived
scientists, the most, cutstaniing ones. fone of them heve recetved four ée-
corstions es Herora of Soctalist Lebor, ami these never eppeer in newsprint,

_ photogrephieally or othormvive. They mey be acen only on cecasion at
- Congresses. They ecnatitute a mmll efrele ani ere given mo publicity. There
Dy are little settlements (GORODKI) sear Moscow and there is one GORODOK in which
Germen sclentiete live. These are the ones who were involved in the development
Of the Y-8.  Thene Germans are used to a greet extent am they are very well
subsidized vith the comforts of life ineluling eutombiles. ‘Their frrilies
are with them emi they have epectal schools for their children. Birtlerly all
other sclenticts ere kept isolated emi in secrecy.

a GO. 8: When this aceident befell REVELIN, they were testing a new
rocket. Tt was a two-stage rocket.RBy the wey, when the BPUTNIK was launched

ju, ‘hon of the fuel. The very firnt STUTTIX was leunched with the help of a
pow | cluster (PAXET) of rockets. ‘The rockets R-11 and R-2 vere joined together
fu | in « cluster. Later I will drev whet this eluster looked like. The overall

about this when I waa iying at
fuel components,/eyl this vas

launching puts, Pheae launching pols ore special ones, mot the type thet I

heve deseribed for the ordinary free rockets end guided missiles. This is the
field of emtsavor now.

61. 8S: Let m finish my thought new or I will be out of sequence.
I was thinkihg of beroring a soldier in a mew army, to adopt a new people,
to struggle for a new ideal, and in sow meteure, to avenge my frther antl
millions of ether people who have perished in a terrible wry - 8 well ae
for my close relntiver, ete.. I thought thet words sre, afternll, just words,
but I should bring seething tangible from the plece where I set. Y wes the

19

head of my class of elghty strtents.- Ry *hesa' YX ween that though there
was en neelened colonel who wes the retinal ehief, I seted es the meeter
sergeant of the clres. At eny rate I hnd a eertnin amount of authori ty.
My on studies were ortetemting: I had the opportunity of tckine booke
es well as eleealfled lectures from the special FOND (a elassified library).
By means of a pans, I hed the opportunity of working imiepentently. I had
a notebook ~- I even bloeked the door by pleeing a ehair uniler the kod --
aml I studied by myrelf. If anyone knneked I would alide everything into
my briefcene which was peeled, aut Y would simply say thet I wes stutying.
Gi Awl this is the mener in whteh you wrote up ell of your meterial?
8: YT eopted everything dowm wml, not heving any cavern, this writing
took a very long tim. oO: Ani whet tine periol did this eorer? 5; This
was dom: during wy courses. Fverything wes done conseeutively ant I 414
most of this writing in the evening. Ve were first taught free rockets,
then guided rocketn, end then all types of Immehing equipeent exvi tech-
Viesl eheeking at veriouw stags. Then we were given examinations. T
erefunted with distinction sil reeeiye4 p eertifiente which I now
home art whieh I ean show you, If you like,
— Et pas

£2. : Did you ever stwiy Els? 51 No, ve did not stuty
them. But I can tell you this. There ip nothing at all thet le wrusval
ebout them. All thege IChts end the rockets for immching hosans into
orbit ere constrneted fn exactly the erms wey op the others except thet
they sre ech Larger and have yery lerae fuel eapecity to aive n greeter

thrust. The working principles however ere ijentical. ‘Thus this lntest

AIUINIR wes Leunehed by s veeket of lovee sles, working om the sane prin.
ciples, It was also a tyo-stoge rocket, not a three-strge roeket.

63. Gr fw the aidener aystons Lor thoee large ICRM not yet
perfected 6: The electroniten develoumnt is far belind. Tey ere struggling
with this. The Porelen dalesntlons was cre bo ylalt you >“end now I must
sey that the frericen people ere doinz ¢& wry vire thing by evtting down on
the member of refenttifie exchange delegrtions pnd contacts. The British —
ere not yet acing thie. There are still s greet meber of deleretione folng
to Fnglemit ant a grect meer caning to us from Foslend, of course, I do
not know, nov is tt eny of my business to conjecture on whet benefit Brit-
ish Intelliownece dertres fron there visits, but I em show you the technterl
reports whteh I hove in my hems wt the Committers. For exmmple, thers are
twenty-two Ltens (RATSICMOLI-ATORORINST TREDLCLISNII) exclusively on synthe-
tice rubber Which f« of preet interect to ws now since we have hed trouble
in its proftuction. The Censdten firs, the POLYMER Corporetion, wis viaited
end many problems were elerified.

6h, fr Ve always prt tecinteal briefings for eomtucting tech

' nteel intelligences. hen mo selentiste emi technicions are sent,

don't tell them to mpy. They simply exy ‘to rtuty' the problen anit to

adopt eny wreful proesss into their om imhurtry. So they give them DOCKTY y

A free tiek*t, anf? sent them off te study processes which ean be wetilly |
installed in omr own Infustrier, 1 ecn gvdge only by the tverty-tvo reports
in my hans whrt piortaighteiness ent blindness thera in to permit eceess ;

20

of Soviet scientists to such ingortant oentera, especially when the eclentists
heave been specially trained in much matters.

x et pment ir
enue aia

oo :

65. 81 How they will permit our people to attend electronte éeron-
strations here in Faglend such as Pleesy, Ferrenti, ani another one - I believe
its nome le Leo Something. Two members of my delegation are very experienced

ay | men'in thie flel@. They will eertatnly plex wwe something of velue even though

Wy the firme will be eareful not to divulge their peorete. Howrver, since these
people of ours are experienced ant they will be shown varioun things, umioubt-
edly they will be able to fint somthing of yalun. Tt astounis me how freely
come of these things ere shown in certain free countries. It ie not for. me
to criticize, tart aince I now consider wyvelf a representative of the Free
¥orld also, I feel thet I heave the right to criticize as I wish.

S7. St Well then, further, IT will speek abort the Committee in
., Getell leter with reapect to ite structure. The Committee has now becuase: very
Gz lerge. Before, it wee the devernment Setentific-Technical Ccemlttee. Wow it

ayn in the deputy to KHRUSHCHEV, thet is, one of his deputies. Whet this mens
Vb ie 4 still greater effort is being mis to essign miesions with en
yo in edministretive lesdership in order to still further netivete setentifie
> intelligence through the overt Ingel sclentifie delegetions of specialists. |
Therefore {n the future if acecss in given to these people, I would consider

, reletions. However, there should be reny erens that are of m ecientifie

i dintereet or value. For exemple, Wiere do we permit foretan specialists to

| got We heve meny apen instelintiong vbere very Little, if exything, of velue

| would be discovered by mzking a vinht there. Therefore representetives of
cepitalist ecuntries are shown worthless instsllations. If requests are
mode to see sonething thrt is really of value, fll kinds of excuses mre given
such #8 a bridge is closed, or repairs are being made, or anything to serve .

) SS en excuse. The leper ts sometinen eo stupid thet yrw people are through

| it, but Just the seme they are not permitted! to see whet they wart, Even

; though your people my find sosething of Veluo, I em sure that it is not

a conparchle to that which our sclentiats piak up.

N 68. G1 Wend you know of the Loestion of ary piesiie beses which
os mey be plonned or unier-construction even though they are not yet in Une,
vv that is, benes which can theoretically be used as ICH mune sites
wu". | waether they are Milly equipped or not? S$: As ‘you must realize, such loce-_
ye j tions are kept in utaost secrecy. In our Directorate the only ones who would

21

know about these would be SEROV and the directorate chiefs. I doubt if any bic frente
subordinates would know it. However, our country is full of rumors. I have
heard, for exemple, that bases end troops, that is, rocket troops, for use

—~—

against Engiend are located north of L

. » SUTMAN
“north. ‘The exact coordinates of their location are known to a very small
group of people and the data liés in underground safes in the Arbat District.
There are many things which I must report to you, an even I may
repeat certain items from time to time, at least I will expand on thea. ‘The
General Staff of the Ministry of Defense is located in the Arbat area, that
is, in the blocks bounded by Frunze Btreet » Gogolervskiy Boulevard, and
Antipiyevskiy PEREULOK. (Note: See map of Moscow.) This. should all be
blown up with small, two kiloton tosbs.

69. G: Please trace for me your path when you go to the GRU froa
the Arbat subway. 8: First you pass through this little tumel. Then
there are three pass offices for various buildings. In the fret butiding
here sits Gen. Mayor SOMOLOV. He is the chief of the Foreign Relations

' Bection of the Ministry of Defense. He is an intelligence officer and

was formerly the chief of my class at the MDA.

TO. 8: By the way, the General Staff of the a rage ee aha is
comected to the Kremlin by means of a subway tunnel. You probably k that
there are two Arbat subway stations, the old one and the new one. The tunnel
leads from the new station to the Kremlin. The Minister of Defense and the

Chief of the General Staff have offices in the Kremlin adjacent to the govern-
ment offices and they use these whenever necessary. When they are not making

reports in the Kremlin their’ headquarters are in the Arbat aren. They go
back and forth either by ear or by subway in a special subway car. There are
underground safes here which can be opened only by registering. This matertal
da accessible only to special gemeral officers at the direction of the General
Staff. The normal operational charts by military districts are maintained by
operations officers in a separate area,

Ti. (Subject spotted on the Moscow map the headquarters of the PVO
of the Country which 1e under Marshal BIRYUZOV.) 8: The command points of
the PVO ara located in the basement of the Lomonosov University in the Lenin
Hilis, and another command point which ie really the Command Point of the
Moscow Defense Zone is on Kirov Street, next to the Kirov subway station.

72. 8: In the seme group of buildings with the PVO of the Comtry
is the headquarters of GAU, the chief of which is now Gen. Polk. ZHDANOY «
Formerly the chief? was Marshal YAXOVLEV whom STALIN removed because of
malfunctioning of anti-aircraft artillery caused by overheating. For about
three years after the end of the war there were no adequate anti-aircraft guns.
They had installed liners and had cooling systems, and in addition there vere
recoil springs which would constantly break. Due to these fatlures, regarding
which YAKOVLEV was accused of deceit, he was removed. If at that time boubing

attacks had been made, there would have been no adequate automatic anti-aircraft

artillery to defend Moscow. Mow they do bave automatie AAA. At one time
YAKOVLEV was the deputy to BIRYUZOV, but now he is being retired for reasons

of health.

22

#1

| Chief Directorate for Military Training. : Mrectorm!
| there. On Red Square opposite the krenlin in mo-called "Seon House”,
|, the Chtef Medical Directorate tm leeated, ea well ae the Fenr Services
aye | Directorate such as Automotive, Quartermaster - in short, the Foor Services.
ye] The reason why I mertion this to you now,
\. is that as a Strategic officer,
v7 | for sone tiie in the Ceneral

of theee eritionl tergets such
on Dzerzhinskiy Sqmre, the Centrel >

the RGD Neadquarters. The KOS Headquarters has seven vbarenents in vhich many
people hrve been executed. They also heve eight or nine floors above the

The 8: A small group of seboteurs equipped with such wenpons should

' plant thes: governed by a time mechanina in the locations from which all of
et | these hendquarters cante Geetroyed. Irrespective of what other attacks will
"| be rade et N-heur, these essential heacquarters must be destroyed by planted
ww | berbe. All military district headquertera must be destroyed. These heod-
ie quarters con be easily spotted in every mextor city. They are easy to find in
eo Leningrnd, Sverdlovsk, Voronezh, Novosibirsk - I Sive these es exerples. All
Lye one would nect would be one man to do this per military strict. This would

OKRUG sre destroyed, thig will reduc: the combat strength of the Soviet Aruy
to a very great degree. A mucher of months would be reqrire? to asreenble

' Jo. 8: Tt would be well to destroy also all of the VOYERKOMAIY of
the COLASTS. These are all easy to Locate, In these VOYISIKOMATY are aleo .

w’ | loeatet the recormis end personnel of the city, RAYON, enui even settlenent
‘ies jy | YOYEUOHATY. The latter are respournible for mobilising the yillege draftees.
ov | Of course it 1s difficult to destroy a headquarters dovm to that level, but to

Gestroy the hendquarters of the CRLAST sw, VOYEHKOMATY ~ of which there ere
eighteen or tyventy - and the prime hewviquerters Cbjectives is mmdatory. The

fi.

Germans did very Little damage. A few minor fires ani broken roofs ani glass,
but the staffs remnined in operation. This was due to inaccurate bombing. But
now possessing atomic wespons, emell size weapons of one or two kilotons as
required can destroy these vital targets eompletely. The exect timing for
thia destruction is up to the big people who have to make the decisions.

77. 6: But please give me your opinion of a Strategic Intelligence
j " officer, now your soldier, your worker ready to fulfill any miesions you mey
| ao Ee te eee thee eee future. All I ask is for you to protect my life
| ena I only heve three persons close to me, my wife, my mother, and my daughter.
I would de happy now to go to Fnglami or America myself, but I ennnot lesre
them behind. It would drive me insane in time thinking about this should I
: leave them behind. I have to prepare a besis for my future existence and I
believe that I can serve you most usefully in place for at least a yeer or
, two, perticularly if I were to work under a specific directive set by you
: to fulfill missions which would be vithin my erpabllity to rnecomplish. All
, 1 have seid above about destroying our headquarters 1a my opinion.

78. G: With respect to what you heve esked us, ve ere ecapletely
prepered to grant you your mintmm requests. Of this there is no question,
end it ia most gratifying to us to realize that you ean still contime to
work inside for a year or two. We cen give you {n hand whatever you need
and the balance we ean deposit for you in the bank. Not only will this be
en eccumulation of monthly payments, but efter you have joine’t us, we will
review your entire sgeope of activities. 6: Thet's right. Just ao I heve
a desis (nest-eze). I see in your faces official, responsible high stature

workers, my ¢oroedes, eni also being an intelligence officer I know how to
wet people (ZAKREPLYAT'). There is no need to keep things in the dark. No one
neeig thie. I wish that your governments, and I consider them both my govern-
ments, to trust me es their own soldier. It doesn't matter whether you con-
fer the title of colonel on me or not. I am etill full of energy, although
eas WYNSHE mey have reported to you I heve been nervous recently; and I have

this eye disturbence which I picked up in Turkey, although my vision is
perfect.

T3. St My request to you fa this -- set up for me a definite,
materiel basis. In generel, I em a men of ecere substance. I have been a
colonel now for eleven yesrs. Previously I received 5000 rubles per month;
now I receive 4,500 (old rubler). I hve en apartment with quite a few per-
sonel items, I heave been a regimental comantier, and I heve alszo been abroad.
Everything fs legenied normally for me to heve something. I married the daugh-
ter of a General Leitenent who had givén her a lot of money, and in generel
my stendard of living is good. But I would Like £0 live even better, ami to
provide luxuries for my femily. This ie all explained at howe easily
anyone who hes been abroad would normally acquire all sorts of things to
bring back. These things are eequired from one's own savings. As you well
knew, there are many things completely unevalleble in the USSR and others
that are extremely expensive.

&). I would like to receive a certein amount on ham, about whieh -
I would like to conmrlt with you. I was thinking of acquiring &_DACTA just
outside of Moscow. A modest DACHA is entirely normal for someone of my age

2h

A

fnd status. This would cost about 10,000 rubles fin new momy. After returning
from the Front, I had an Mercedes-Benz, tut efter riding around in it I sold it
since I couldn't get partes end I wea thinking about buying a VOLGA. ALL ny
comrades heave cerg. From my small sevings ani the money I have I veually spend
‘quite a bit on my femily and to go out to resteurents. I am not an ascetic:«.

81. S: Whet I would like to do is to swear en oath of allegtance
to you, to give you a signed statement ant to swear an oath in order to form-
elize our reletionship. Secondly, to work out a ecemmications system with
me without personal meetings -- providing me with dead drope where I ean pess
materiale, I would prefer not to meet with emyone. I did heve the desire
before of meeting with an American or a Britich representative end to ark then
to take me off somevhere overnight. Cut Counterintelligence te not operating
es intensively as it would seen. People are caught primarily beceure of erude
errors. How that we have met, thank God -- ari I have begun to believe in
God -- we can consult on all these. things together, end frankly I would like
to avoid personal meetings.

82. S: It would be well if I would remain with the Cometttee for
the time being. I heve planned a possible trip to Canade in about three months,
In addition, on the 2hth of May, MCCLELLAN fa erriving from Australia. TI also
fm assigned to thet country. In the Fall they want to send me to Australia.
Yesterday, however, they issued me a passport with great difficulty.
are undecided. Some believe in me and consider thet I heve been a reliable
Commniat sinee 19 , avian decorated in the wer, a regimental commander end
two higher educations. They even sent me to the rocket school. In addition
I heve a great member of friends ent many of them high-ranking both in the GRU
emi in the Artillery. We are such close friends, VARFNTSCV ani I, thet his
wife serves me soup before she rerver his. I already told you about this
matter with Wine. At ony rate, we ere close friends. VARENTSOY even spoke
favorably about me to SEROY, oe —

83. &: Incidentally, neithe- SFEROV ner VARENTSOY know anything
about my father or thet this archives wrterial has been unearthes, They do
not know why I wes held beck in Moseow, I seid simply thet the climate in
India is bed, pretending that I afan't went to go there myself, although I
hed already given ny consent to go. Others, however, wever and eonsider
that it ts not right thet a son of a White feny officer should have extensive
privileges. There is no such thing as the demoeracy they speak about. It
is ell a lie and e bluff, Thus far I can meintein myself beceuse they know
they cannot simply dimmisa me for then I would have every reeson to go over
to the other stde, They would heave to isolate me ant keep we under ronstent
mirvelllence. Right now my work is going well, I am recetving comentations
end even monetary rewards. I feel I mat develop my work in order to show
thet I have extensive seent contect enpebilitiers in the fteld of econonics
and selenee, as well es for the Gi, “oo oo _

ora a

N

me

2 cor pata ase
Where did-you find this

ie a fect, CHUKAYEL
this fsa“

people; generale would attend completion Courses there, There were extensive
residential leyouts there in the woods. One would go there by train from
the Belorusakiy Vokzal, The distance from Moseoy would be eomewhers from
hO-50 kilometers, I have deen there myself and that is where MOSKALPNKO

85. 8: Here 4 another interesting iten. On the seeont of
July 1950, a letter, of wm, Central Committee was tscued econeerning rais-
needed This letter contained a curious statenent and
I wrote Ita * scientist who come from the USA and who was visiting
the UBER, was called by the GRU and the Atomic Fnergy Commtssion prior to

there is someon working in your Atonte Energy Commission Or, excuse me,
in your GRU. hit how elre could this information heve gotten to the Central .

your selentiesta are being briefed for intelligence missions in the UssR,
G: But they allowed him to fepertt S: Yes. ¢; Whet was the neme of

your Central Coemntttee informant for the infornetion concerning Bipaiaieuss
S: This was told to me by CRURAYEV, vho ie = good friend of VARETeO xX
ey TN nate te. cee ce .

1

87. 8: Another fact stated in the letter ves that there was an
Foglish student in the Lentngredé University who received the rank of Capt.

the UBER. My thought immediately 19 where is the leek? Fither thege people i
are broken, or there is soo Working for us smong those who brief these

people. G: Were these ceses accusations or did the indtyiduals confess?
St He confessed, :

25 DS? fib > Chiat

wie

#1

~~ 88. §S: Let us go further. I meade a note bere on the RB-h7. This

‘wan brought down by rockets fired from a MIG-19. This MIG 1s equipped with
- four rockets, two upper rockets arid two lower rockets. The rockets have a
homing device; their range is between four ani flve kilometers. ‘The point
: Twish to meke is this. When the plane rises to an altitude of betveen 18

_ , to 20 kiloanters, it still hes the capability of firing an efditionel four

rac i\

: to five kilometers higher. Therefore when KAAUSHCREV seid that our planes

, een reech over 20 kilometers, even though we have no planes whieh can do

, this yet -- they are still experimenting -~ the striking eeLling is actually

' above 20 kilometers when one considers the ediftional four to five kilowrter

| Fange of the rocket. Anywny, the MId-19 fired a rocket at the RA-47, ani I

_ can say with full assurance since I have ehecked this vith many sources, that
the RB-47 414 not violate our borders although it wes elose. It wos eotually
over neutral weters. Our pilot had itehy trigger fingers ani fired the rocket

' Which knocked it down. The length of the rocket 4s three meters. Only the
two upper or the two lower rockets may be fired simultaneously; otherwise

_-the plane would breek up.

iv

ce

|

VW |
et uN

8. 5; There is e town called Klintsy., there atomie warhends.
; are assembled. 71 told you earlier that there are rocket bases north of
Leningrad directed againet England. There ie a city called Severoworsk.
A PVO regiment is stationed here. This regiment is equipped with ¥-75
rockets.

99. 8: When enke4 ebout Soviet intelligence officers, Subject
said, “If you wold only show mt e eet of photographs, we would do a let
of good work sines I enn identify a pretty large mmber, well over a nn-
dred." G: Are you personally sequrinted with eny illegals at alli 8: I
ean tell you about these who have returned from illegals’ work -- for ex-
waple, such an this men from the German aren (SICHERBAKOY) -- who are nen-
bers of the present Lneaning MMA elasa. I enn aleo tell you which of ny
clasemetes ere being trained ae iLlegnis. But vhether they were dispatched
out or not I do not loiev. The GRU hes meny covert installations much as
those used for training iliegnin. ALL of this is hantlea by the First Diree- —
torate. ,

91. Tr If you hove time 1t world be very helpful if you eould write
out the nemes, ranks, ezrl what you know briefly ebout other (RU officers,
perticularly your own classmates beesuse you probably remember them better
than others. 6: There were 968 graduetes in my class and I een probably
list e lerge mmber of these, Let me nem a pertioularly effective seni
dengerous intelligence officer. He wer previously in FEnglani in the APPARAT
of the Milftery Atteche ani he gredunted with re. His name is Col. FEDOROV.
He is an artillery engineer. Right now he is Military Attache somewhere in
the Seaniineyien area. He has many egents. I will name a lot of offieers
who heve extensive agent contacts. Then I em prepared to give you a list
of 15. agentr vhe nre presently icested in Ceylon, Pakisten, ont Intia.
Those in India ere presently on conservation. I herve all this material.

27

Orne ee OM ge eee

S00 ee eer

f

92. G: According to your time scheduleyou have about twenty mimrtes
deft. We can't cover everything in this session. 1 hope you don't mind if I
interrupt you from time to time and ask a question. 8: Not et all, That is
a very good idea because it helps me to remember. Please prepare a set of h
Photographs for me for identification. Now as to the tenth point I have on
my agenda which I have already mentioned, that is, about what should be des-

troyed. If necessary I will take the mission upon myself to blow up the General
Staff (jokingly) . ;

93. 8: Here is another new item. There is a new rocket. It is
called the RK-14. It isa long-range rocket, over 1,000 kilometers. I have
no data on it. (Subject repeats egein how easy it would be to blow up the

General Btaff.) This rocket is fired from Kapustin Yar, and the impact area

is Kazakhstan. ‘The impact Srea consists of high wooden tovers which are erected

in a triangulation pattern. Soldierg man these towers and there has not yet
been a case where a tower has been struck by & direct hit from a rocket. The
rockets fall at different points which are then re-sected with optical instru-

94. B: Let's see what else my notes have ... Re NEDELIN's death,
the second stage ignited prematurely. It broke through the lower stage and
an explosion resulted which killed a large number of scientists. These scfen-
tists were the ones who were engaged in developing &@ new type of fuel which
required a emall storage space and operated on the principle of atomie fission
in the rocket engine. This is what our scientists are working on now and they
have achieved a small degree of progress. Although nothing has been perfected
this is the basic iden on which they are working. The purpose is to eliminate
the large space required for the fuel tanks and oxidizer tanks by substituting
e® lighter and smaller fuel component and possibly effording a larger warhead
for conventional explosive as well as atomic types. KA MPawi rf

95.8:A very large rocket using atomie energy for motive power was
being tested when NEDELIN was killed. fe was in the shelter (KAMPONIK). I
don't remember its exact designation, but it is a deep reinforced concrete
structure where ople sit during test observation. After ten or fifteen min-
utes he (NEDELIN received a report that the rocket engine malfunctioned and
he came out. But at that time the fuel system of the second stage had already
ignited and an explosion occurred, killing a large mumber of service personnel
as well as scientists. Please keep in mind this is a two-stage rocket and
that basically all otir rockets are two-stage. When you report this to your
scientific experts, emphasize this 36 they won't heve to guess. Even vhen
NIXON was there a question was asked whether a solid or liquid fuel was used.
Only liquid fuel is used. Thus far no type of solid fuel has been developed

28

fi

which ern propel a lerge rocket et a great renge. A high-ealoried fel has
been develope’ using Boron as a component. However, I do not know what pro-
portion of Boron is used.

94. S: Another item I am reporting on is thot militery pensions are
being reduced still further. Kow full colonels will receive only 150 rubles
per month pension, ani generals up to 200 rubles (new rubles), The next item
I heve here is the electrie érili,

OT. Jt Before he goes on to that, sinee he has been spesking of

Boron maybe his memory is refreshed concerning whet he said about the first

: SPUTWIK. S: I will repeat it egatn. ‘The first SFUTMIK only was fired by
Spang -

‘were fuel ~ Liguid - anf the rest of the weight waa the bette shell ant all
| of the technical eqniment.

using a cluster of rockets. There were three rockets below and one ebore,
ell clustered together. The overall weight wes 100 tons. Of this, 65 tons

98. 5S: Now I wrote about the electric drill, ‘The renson I wrote
about this is becnuse some of your scitentists have been coming to the USSR
emi heve been wuirprise’ thet we heve alrendy developed electric drilling
techniques. Our ecientists here been keeping this seeret. The principle
is as follows even thouh I do not know the dimennionel detaile. There 4s
a pipe the diameter of which is 206 ~ 220 millimeters. An electrie motor

is mounted within the pipe. The motor in ferediately atjnacent to the drill

eee”

Cor

| is located in the DIM now. Its designation le exactly that - +

bit. Wires ere fed down to the motor amt the rotetion tekes Place down be-
low, not on the murfoee. That ie the principle, but whet ie the falluret
Recently Swedish technicians who are drill manufscturera from the eLl-knowm
firm of Stipko were there (in the USSR). ‘They heve both diemoni drills ent
hard steel drilin, thet is spectel steel frilis --~-.
D

99. St: Inetdentally, I heave as one Le ny missions here the sseien-
ment of obtaining e steel called Rimonte f - This is a heet resisting steel
waich 1s avoileble here in Englani. they have verioun Gesienation such as
Mimonie £159, 200, 240. They are ell in the eetalogue. They told m to get
ebout 100 grams of Nimonte steel £150. (Subject means £105. This ia later
clerifies.) 8: (Looking up his miszion nestenrent notes) Here it is -
Fimonie £105, exeuen me, net £159. The firm thet makes it is Henry Hiewin.

\ Later I will te11 you what my missions ere. Meybe you can help me fulfill

then,

100. S: Vell, comrades -- sines we ore auch in the Western sense --
theee Arili bits drill only acme two enti a helf meters. Then the teeth breek
emi they have to ba removed emi new bits put in. In other words it fe all
Jimk, even thotigh they drill as deep as three thourend meters en nore.

They give you the impraasion that ome drill fore through a Innvired arn! more
meters, aml that the drilling problen haa been solved by ne, but that fe not
true. There fe a whole pile cf broken bits for every effort.

1OL. 2 Hy next item -- the Sixth Brerkthrough Artillery Division

he Sth ADP
(ARTILUSRISKAYA DIVI-TYA PRORYVA). Remember thet in the Soviet Unton there

2

ae een,

fu

ere eleo artillery corps. This divieion hes four brigades. X do not know | sae
the composition of thase four brigeies. But in addition there are fou

other brigades which ere reeket ertillery briestes. Two of these are equipped
with ateni¢@ wariwel rockets. ‘The atone werhenda ere not asserblet on the
rockets but are wtored in opectal atante storage depots. I don't know where
thene depots are, but tt should be very simple For you to fint out.

102. G: To whom are thene trigeten subordinated, VARENTSOV? or
ere thay considera Gis units? 9: Ty are unler .HOSKALERKO beesuse these

rocket artillery of the ground forces which would include regimental, divi-
sionsl, and corps rocket artillery, Gt Fren though these brigates are
loeeted in the Di? 4; Yes, even though they are in Germany. 6: ‘This
would meen that they ere G9 yarlts. 8: Ho, tat you eee the Cenerel Starr
in B sense complemmnts the eteff of HOGKALERKO. The Minister of Defense
ent the Chie? of the General Steff control MOSKALENKO, but this unit is
not a pert of the military formations under VARTRTSOV. He is in charge

rockets ond gilded ntsatles of a short range « tacticnl - but strategte

SFUTNEKS, ant thin Stretegic Rocket Brigade.

103. 8: Then I gave you here » list of militery districts nil

” groups of forees. Firet thers is the Greap of Boviet Forces in Germany.

Then there is the Couthern Group of Forere emi the Rorthern Gra of Forces.

The following milttery Aintriets are eetive: Bw 7Zebeykal (Tronsbaykat) military
district (4.0.)3 the North Caucnatan Np, with Rostev-on-the-Don as headquarters}
the Belorvasian M.D. with headquarters in Mink; Sub-Carpathten M.D. with head.
quarters in Lrov; Ofenas HMD., Ros. Ofesse: Ktevy M.D., Hqs. Kiev; Leningrad
H.0., ys, Leninered) Transenucasien HD. Hqe. Thilisl - Boku {4s aleo in-

cluded heres the Pribeltiakly (Baltic) H.D., Roe. Riga. The Northern M.D.,

Where I mentioned these rocket bases extst which are positioned ageinst

104, $2 The Turkesten M.D., Hye. Alme-Atay the Volgn M.D.) Has.
Ruybyshey. You hetter add this, thet the Yolen M.D., just like the Voronezh

BERIYA, were mercbera of the Militery Counetl of the Mosecw Militery Metrtet. .
The Siberien HD. Agr. Novosibirsk; the Urnl M.p. . 7 €Lad not mention it here,
tut It very shortly vill de ineorpareted into the Siberien Milttary District —
Ags. Sverfloveks: The Four Fnatern Militery District, Bas. Kheberovekis and of

course, the MVC, Hin. Moscow, All of theee hesdquarters mint definitely be.

_ blown wp. Please destroy these slips ent notes of nine leter en you wish,

me)

\

105. 3: Flense sek him to elerify th: impression he recetved
eerlfer thet ho was the representative of YARFNTSCY and porssibly others
who were dissatisfied with the regimes. (4. repents question xe stated by
J.) St IT mentioned this before om wrote in ry letter thet Merahel KORSV
earl Marshal SCKOLCYSXIY ere absolutely heolthy people ent are VARCRESOY's
frients. They did not eeree with KAMUIErY ebout hie policy on reducing

Bese on

the size of the arny.
106. As your soldier I must report to you that the Soviet Union
is éefinitely not prepered at this tine for wer. ALL of this ezitation
for pence ani intimidation on the other hent, whieh mfortunntely many
Western leaders suecur to, provesnothing., Beek in 1956 when the Feyptien
affair wes going on the Soviet Union sheild heve been sherply ecexfronted,
rl even today this should be done. With Gobs for exemple, I simply ean't
umMlerstend why KHRUSRCHRY should not be sharply rebuked. I do not know
whet enewer Mtr. KINMOY will give him, but he certeinly should be secured
of arming Cube with Soviet tanks and- mms, right wxter the getes of Arerien.
Czechoslovakia aleo pent considernble quantitie Bof erms. KERNEDY mahonld be

_ firm. KARUSICHEV is mot poing to fire eny roekets. fe is not rerty for any.
wor. I respect ant Love the United Stntes ent I certeinly, in Keinery's

place, would be fire. duet aa wo helped the regime in Hungery meintein its
power enil everyone knew what ws vere fining, why showlda’t KENNEDY heve the
right to help the patrictie elements of Cuba, when you know whet erms heve
been ment te Cxbe from the USS? This is my opinion ani the opinion of

many of our officers.

AC]. S: I didn't finish ebout thee Marshole. When KARUSHCHRY
fourm out thet they id mt beek hin, he simply omlered them retired. Thay
ere iftving on a pension now, Just like ZURDY. TOMSHNKO wee aleo retired,
tat he hed atarted to drink heevily rometime emo. Meny officers are dis-
pleesed beesuse many healthy generale end officers are being retired and
beeruse of the reduetion in pay they heave no other means of errning a Live-
ihoot. Por exaepte, a reinetion from SOO rubles ineame to en income: of
2000 rubles per month ip very diffiewt when one has « forily.

108, Sr I would easy thet of the totnl Cormuniet Party atrencth of
7 to 8 million menbers, there ere no more then tw to tyo and e half million
of strong, fanatlesl Comantste, If e wer ever began today on the scale of
Hitler's wer, even with comrentionel ernment, courtless numbern of officers
end noldiers wuld simply desert to the other aide. This lex dbeemee all of
these ideels for which many of our fathers, brothers and relatives died here
turned out to be nothing tirt a bluff end a fdecelt. There is alwnys the pre-
mise thet things will b= better, but setually nothing is extting better ani
things are only petting worse. I[ sweeh to you thet only tn Momeow ent
‘Leningrad cen om even porehnoe footstuffs decently. In Voronezh ani Crel ~.
a friend of ulne recently came fram them cnimlé thet thiy are eeting horse
meat, nine rubles per pount by old priees. ven Smisages are mede of horee —
meat ant {t is difficult to act brect. Sines there are no roade, thin results

3

ral da
NG

xs

#1 — Clg te (~ i .

in unbelievable transportation delays end brerkdowns, an! grain 18 rotting since
it eennot be delivered. The country is large eri can profuse mich wheat, but
such a lerge perventage fa lost beceusm tmy cormmot meke equitable delivertes.
Mach cattle wos lost due to lnck of falter,

bones, axl they did not went the Englishmen to see this. They told the English-
imen that repeirs were going on. You can check whnt I sey with this delepetion.
| They 41d not see the plant. I could tell you much more, my friends, ani I's

| wure you know a grent deal more yourselves) :

110. Sr But I would like to emphasize one fact ant thet is thet

 KERUSHCREY has not renomeed wer ant is petiently mmiting the time when

he ean begin a wer. fie hos given himself the mlesion of being the instigator

bury ry imperielies". I en confident thet ry goverment-now the UA and Eng
lewi-with the other free countries of the world mich as Frence oni Yeet Ger
meny are sufficiently flexible to withstand the onslaught of Soviet rockets .

it seene to me that KORUSHCREY should not be permitted to {initiate the ver.
Today he will not becin » wer. He will rant emi rave end even send eens here
Pix there just as he Ald to Cuba endl ann, even serml mmall caliber rockets
there. In fect there wos tal tale with CASTRO end possibly a fev rockets
are alrondy there. : es 7

1M. S: In the User the youmr generetion ere disastiafied. Their
inecots ere emnll. ‘They herve few decent elethes envi when they see your tour-
ists and your visiting delegetions, md sce how well-drenped the foreloners
ere, thin hes on effeet on them. Our yerths heve no money end theft is common.

ALL Kinde of crimes for theft occur about vhtch nothing te written. After

eli, the press is entirely controlled. The peaple erent organtes. There

ig no opposition to the meim » SM vhen 4 empl. opposition does ertine such
os MOLOTOV, MALENKOV, ete., they ere limediately elimineted. The people are
efreiad to do anything because if they open their mouths thay will lose even
the little bit they heave. There te no morry in the bank; there is no pro-
perty, nothing from which to drew sustenmnes, There is interne! dissension
om Witler wes right whin in hte time he attemptet to heve minority eonflicts.
All of theses wesk moots mist be exploited before the external blow is dealt
during a wer. Fven the fovtet help to the countries of Peoples’ Democracies
may serve a good purpose in thet it is draining the nationel treasury.

\ 112. 8S: Valueble profnetion results fron our lebor even though the
/ inlividual worker gets only pemies., But ell Of these billions ere poing out of
| the country and it's becoming a serions drein. Relations are not alweys the

best with the Satelittes. Por example, with Chinn we ore heving divficulties

ied

- A -
#1 §.4 le ie cu

_—

Although we have given them foodstuffs and equipment, recently Mao Tse-Tung
chased out our specialists. He said thet his own specialists have now been
sufficiently treined. It can even happen that if

Satellites sore Of them like Poland and Yugoslavia will pe asking you for
aid. “Theré simply is no monolithic Warsaw Pact.

113. §: Now all of us are being squeezed more and more. Even of

my present 4,500, I pay 500 rubles incom tax. They took away allowances \_“..

for household help for high-ranking officers. They took away privileges

of those who are decorated vho in Stalin's time were declared exempt fron
income taxes. All of this is done because they need more and more funis to
build factories andi other equipment for the manufacture of rockets. _ The

cases of pilferag=, drunkenness, and innorality. All of these things I men-
tioned must be considered. By itself it may not be a decisive factor, but
it all adds to the general situation and can be exploited. Of course, I

| &m sorry for the people, but they have suffered go mich elready that if they

14. a: Therefore, you are not the representative of any group
of disaffected persons? 8: No, I em all alone. All I have is my mother,

training ere nt your disposal. I received a great deal of training earlier
from the Soviet Government. I am associated with no one whatsoever. I woulda
be afraid of this, and I do not wish it.

115. Ss Therefore, I repeat I would like to have agent commo with
you via a deed drop. Please give me a small Minox. I know it and I have
worked with it before. I will not develop the film even though I have my
Own apartment, so that my wife nor anyone else would not notice. so I
will deliver only umleveloped film to you and I will place it wherever you
tell me'to. I have many secret journals such es VOYENNAYA MYSL, mamals,

—~——~ | and classified lectures by prominent people. I have a chance to get these

items in my hands for possibly an hour, and I can photograph them. I woulé
not have time to write. I wrote up this rocket material because I knew it
wes important. I did it earefully because I knew you would check every word
and if it were perfect maybe I would get a decoretion. @G: That's fine.

116. G: Now the time is drawing close, let us plan for the future.
8: That's right. I will leave ina few minutes. G: Now what is your pro-
grem or your time schedule for tomorrow? §: (Looking at his schedule) Let
us begin working together tomorrow at 2115 hours. I have a little change
in my schedule. Tomorrow at 1700 hours our delegation schedule will be ;
completed and I have to run to the Fmbessy because I want to see if I can
extend the duration of this trip by five days. As it stands, we have come
here for ten days. We received money for ten days and our pessport notation
states that we have come for ten days. However, there will be an engineering
exhibition here in London up to the fourth of May and we have no delegation
planned to attend it. They wish to pass on the assignments for covering this

33

#1

to us. Tomorrow I must go to see SOLDATOV, the Ambassedor, and ask him to
send ae cable requesting that an extension of five days be given to myself
and my delegation. This will give me the opportunity of working a little
more with you, to get to know you better and to rest up a bit. I do not
know whether this will work out or not. In the meantime you must plan that
I would leave on the 30th because there is no permission to extend as yet.
G: When do you think you will know? That is, when will a eable reply
come in? 8: I will know about the decision on Monday.

117. 6B: In addition we want to gee what the firms Plessy and Leo
Computers can show us because they deal with electronics which is now a
first priority, and it would be an advantage to report even on some new screy.
Things are not sufficiently developed in electronics in the USSR. Some work
has been done and they have various integrators and computing machines, but

it 1s far from perfection. You have no idea of how many failures and unsuc-

cessful tests have been made. ‘The Americans are honest people. They write
about their test fatlures and admit when ® rocket falls into the sea im-
properly. We don't write anything about this but, believe me, we have more

failures than the Americans.

ee

118. 8: Well, this is about all I hed planned to tell you tonight.
Poasibly much of what I have said did not follow in proper sequence. How-
ever, I hope that next time we will eontime our talk with more concrete
details. What I would Like to do is to look over the materials I have gub-
mitted and explain whatever may not be clear and pinpoint details.

119. 81: Now with respect to the agent net -- in Ceylon there is
this diplomat who is working for the Soviets. His father ig a Kurd, which
fact he conceals. I have the names and addresses of all people. It is
hidden in a dead drop which I have at a DACHA. It is the DACHA of my uncle;
it is a little place. ‘This uncle is my mother's brother. In the dead drop
I have this list of agents, which includes the agents in India who are on
conservation. There are two brothers there. Formerly, they were very ac-
tive agents, but now they are on conservation because we are not conducting
intelligence operations ageinst Inila. This is because NEHRU is a fool and
says everything anyway. In fact, the entire government is that way. There
is a radio operator in this REZITENIURA which is on conservation, and in
addition to the two brothers there is a Major in the Army and other military
men.

120. 8: In Pakistan there are six agents, one of whom is a Turk,
and there are two agents in Ceylon. In Ceylon one of the agents is a
corporel who works in a headquarters. He obtaing all kinds of United States
military manuals. All this material I will pass to you. Don't forget to
prepare a set of photographs for me to identify. I will tell you whom I
know about, and who are dengerous intelligence officers who should be gotten
out of the country. Any means should be used to expel them, including provo-
cation, intensive surveillance, etc.. Let replacements come in because it

34

i.

tekes no considerable time for a man vho just arriver to do anything.

121. 8: Inefdertally, there wis ‘an importent moment I want to tell
you about. Yesterday when I wee leeving I sew MELIKH in the Jeneral Steff.
Why 414 you let him got This is sowething I do not understand. He is an
out-and-out intelligence officer who has even been an instructor in English.
I studied English unter him. Yesterisy I saw him just before flying here.

122. ©: Another important matter, ami please give this attention -
pleane contact oll people who have hed dealinge with me ari meke them
sign secrecy oaths to preserve my seeurity. Leet August I wos in Odessa
on leave with my wife ani daughter, On my wey beek through Moscow fron
Kiev I Toind myself in « ratlroed esr in which were American students and

_ instructors in the Ruesien lenguege, aleo Americans. I could not approech

them because I knew that there wna an Armenien with them who is s KOB in-
formont. For some time I stalked the American Fubessy like a wolf, locking
for @ reliable foreigner, a patriot. Across the atreet from the American
Fabassy there is a tunmel-like archway ani two benches. I eat there for a
long tine encking. There were two aflitionen welking around. One wes at
the corner. Dozens of cars vere coming owt of the Fnbassy. I even went to
the America Bourse. I saw then playing canis there and drinking whiskey,

ani there wna a militioaman at the entrance. I was weiting for some American
to come ort so I could contact him and say, "Mister, you ere a patriot.
Please deliver this letter to your Febessy. Byerything in it is gelf-explanatory."
I couldn't meet anyone. Ko one came out.

123. 8: These two instructora, one wns tall end one waa short.
G: They delivered everything properly and you ean see here your original
letter. 8: I hed noticed thes in the ratlroad car ami remembered their
appearance. I arrived in Moseow 6n the tenth of August ami on the twelfth
I spotted them as they were walking doyn to the river from Red Square. The
tell man hed an webrella since it wes reining. They were going to the bridge
end I appronched then. At first they were frightened, but I spoke to them
at length and told them what a coineidence it was to gee them ocrin. They
spoke Ruselen very well. I wes so interested in the conversation, that, as
an intelligence man, I mede an error. I didn't sey ferevell to then. I
head already given them the two envelopes, emi it wes high time te end the
conversation. A> we eapproeched a PERFUILOK, I saw two militiemen by accident.
One was telking to = women, and the other wee walking. I told the Americans
to go with me to sn entrance wey ao nt leart we could way faerevell andi I
could shake their hands, but they were frightened ani started to welk away.

1ph, &: So I didn't say farewell to them, but they kept the en-
Velopes ami on the 15th of August they departed from Moscow. My feeling
was misercble. I went to the dead drop; there wes nothing there. ‘There vas
also no signal on thetmoth. I heve a friend in Moscow vho is ean Armenian. .
I told him “Leva, cove with me to a hotel. I sm looking for another Armenien

35

p-

| (--
who was on a train. First I went to the Budepest and then to the Balchnk,
on the pretense that I was looking for the other Armenian. At the Budapest
Rotel we vere told that no Americans had been there, tit at the Balchuk,
agein using my Armenian as a cover, I found out that the americans left
Moscow on the 15th of August. After that I walked around for months and
there wes still nothing.

} 125. 8: FEerlier that Summer they hed assigned me to the commission
! for accepting students to the MMA. At first I was to be the chie? of the
' incoming tleas, but later wes told that this is not compatible with my back-
ground, that is, my father's having been a White Russian officer. ‘Then I
was trensferred to the Committee. But in the meantime I was writing wp all
the data on these stulents from their personnel files. ‘There were many who
\ came to Moscow from foreign assignments, and there was one illegal. I will
think of his name in ea mimite. G: He is SHCHERBAXOV. 8; That is emetly
I right. + -

126. 8: After this, in December, the WYNNE delegation came 3

Pai «They were elderly people. I decided to approach then.
I was determined to get all of this informetion as fast as I could to the An
erican and British governments. I was umlecided. You notice that at first
I wrote the letter when FISENHOWER was president. I didn't rewrite the letter
later and I added,you can see, the addressees, Her Majesty Elisabeth the
Second and MACMILLAN. I epproached them in their room at the Leningrad Hotel
ani appealed to them like to my fathers. I asked them to help me and simply
deliver this letter. If Col. PREKE had not departed fron Turkey I probably
would have established at least a contact to whom I could go when the time

came. eee vere frightened. They said that they would con-
sider it, but did nothing. They know ebout me.

127. §:.. In Jamary, the Canadian, Shivam, arrived. He is ac nted
with GRR the Second Counselor. I thought of SURGE since he aa a
diplomatic passport, wherees RQ hed eo civilian passport. T asked
to introduce me to WMGERAR since QAM, es 2 Comercial Counselor, hed
official dealings with our Committee regarding scientific-technical matters.
Therefore, I approached SQM end told him to please deliver my letter,
to be a patriot; thet to well me down the river wes in hig province to do,
but wheat would he get out of that? He took the letter, but two days later
when I met him again to give him the package with all this rocket material,
he returned my first letter. He politely, but firmly, told im to go. Im said
he was not concerned with such matters. A month end a helt ago he received a
new apartment in Moscow. I went to a reception with my wife anf took all my
material with me egain. I met Sp yEw ani thought maybe he hat thought the
matter over ani would accept the material. He greeted my wife and myself aryi
then stayed away from me during the entire time I feds there. I also request,
therefore, that you obtain a secrecy agreement from them and request that they

36

fl

forget all about me. Theee are the pathe nlong which I meandered like an
enimal in order to make this contact. Bow I thank you for this very much.
Don't forget the Minox ganera.

123. 8: I request that you evaluste my aubnitted material with
respect to its finanetel worth. I mm certainly not going to berrain about
it, ami I em a soldter, Whetever you determine I should get, I will eecept.

|
|

mimrte but during my etay, since I heve to buy quite e fev thinge, fone of

complete truet end know thet you wil) decide this Properly. Basically, those
are ell my reqests. 0G: I em sure everything will be arranged necortingly.

129. 8: Well, these are all ny requests emi please now consider
how to establish a system of dead drops. I think thet we can arrange all
this prior to the 30th of April and 1t seens thet there my not be any recson
maxing 1t necessary for me to mect with somone until five or six months efter
this. G: Are you planning to possibly return here agein in the Fall? 8;

they would see that I heve obtotoed something end brought it brok. Then there
is enother mission, that of turning over som of my Sequeinteanees to local eon-
tacta. I will tell you all about thet tomrroy. XI will esk youretyicr and
possibly your help in som of these metters. Then it all depenita on how all
this will be eeeepted et home. If they trust me, they may even send me vith

. ty wife and femily overseas. ‘This could be to the United Staten, to Inglamt,

, Or to Canada. By my experience ant meturity I em eligible, but it's a matter

of whether they trust mel _

she get to the IM: sos: Yes, it fs possible thet she could go there es a tourist.
G: In that enge {tt WLLL not be & difficult matter to get her out through Fest

| family to live in Riga or elgewhere in the Baltic States. Then I could get out
elther by mimerine or murfece craft. This my sount naive at this ‘point but
it in still ea possibility. dG: It would be much better if she could go es a
tourist to Fest Berlin end then simply eet to West Berlin. &: Anywey, think
ebout this. ‘The only other thing I want to mention ts thet you will be satinfled
with me. 6G: We are gure of this.

37
|

#1

131. G: How let us arrange about tomorrow. 8: TI believe that I ean
meet with you again tomorrow in the evening, late, between 2100 and 2200 honrs.
That would be the best time for me because the others will already be tirea
ami will be frlling asleep. G: Can there be any difficulty for you fron eny-~
one in your delegetion? 8S: No, nome at all. I am perfectly sure of this,
Tell me, what denger do you think there ean be? G: We don't know the exact
circumstances, but we are afraid that if a pattern of your disappearance ig

My room is locked. era is my key. If the phone rings there Will be no answer,
and I will simply sey that I was asl + G: Suppose they keep knocking loudly
on your door? 8: First of ell, there are double doors, ent secondly, why
should anyone knock on my door? I satd gocdnight to them quite properly, and
seid I would retire, I em positive none of them ere murveilling me. G: We

a
rs]
&
3
ct
g
a
B
8
Be
H
g
e
EB
3
ef
d

about 2200 hours. (: Yes, cone straight to this room. 6: This is about all
I hed in mind to tell you tonight.

tions, oaths, ete.. TI went to have a clear sou, that I am doing this irrevo- j
cebly for my whole life, These ere not impressions as the remit of one day. :
After all, I felt these urges fer back in the days when I was in Turkey. Maybe

the Turks even suspected, although I wae never identified to then by name. Now

thet I've waited patiently almost one year, God has granted our getting together,

G: That is why no further umnecessary chances should be taken from now on.

True, God has protected you so far, but there is a limit to taking chancer, _

B: Yes, God does not bless fools. G: No matter how much we want to meet with -:
you for long sessions and often, we mist be careful.

133. 8: I askea WYNNE when he was leaving on the Plene. I geve him my
letter and one document. If he had teken all of the material you would have
had a chence to examine it by now. It would have been important for you to
have studied this earller in order to have saved time, since there are
items there and no doubt many questions ebout them. After all, there are all
kinds of detaiis about the technical equipment, the organization, ete.. After

of speetal importance. [I put them into a briefcase which was carried in ant
out oF the building with a special PROPUSK,

134. 8: Well, then, let us Bey goodnight until tomorrow. ‘Tomorrow I \
will come as soon ap I can, but it may be as late ag 2200 hours. G: Come -

the elevator. (Subject wes given his key 7566, end G. escorted him to the a
stairway. Subject lert about 0103 hours, 21 April 1961.)
3

Addendum to Meeting Number L
eg Number 1

the short space interval of 3-4 mimiteg during which recording was not
possible. This situation was inevitable due to the fact that at the

short periods when the tape required changing. The following items follow

Paragraph 89, Page 27, consecutively and precede Paragraph 90, Therefore,

they will be numbered G9A, 93, ete..

89A. There are rocket lewmching sites established in the area north
of Leningrad toward Murmansk, Exact locations are unknown but these are ;

Ruscleay wv Cope hina

- 89C. At Glukhovo (from Moscow) in the direction of Konotop, there 3 fiijcerct
isa training center for officers of the Rocket Conmand.

CO. ap

—-

—

89D. At Kuzhenkovo and at Btaryye Toropy, there are training centers
for cadres to handle all types of warheads for rockets. ‘These are for en-
listed personnel rocket teans,

898. In general, all training with live rockets has resulted in

numerous casualties. ‘The most notable of which was the explosion in which
NEDELIN was killea.
