I,
A. Hemispheric “peace" conference Planned for Havana in May or June,
€ te Fre A )
1. Representatives of seven LA affiliates On vex? Peace
Council met in Havana last week to prepare for conference.

2. A visiting Soviet "jurist" and a French woman member of
= WPC also attended preparatory session.
Sr 3. Details of preparatory meeting reported immediately by New
aR China News Agency (Chinese Communist), which has branch
== offices in Havana,
a B. Conference would implement one of plans developed by representa-—
mera ~
C= ery PO .
aS, tives of LA Communist parties at clandestine sessions in Moscow
mm bal
ee at time of 21st CPSU Congress in early 1959,
a ss
S - 1. At Moscow meetings, Communists agreed to strengthen "peace"
ae PROPA EAN OA
= movenent, launch attacks on US missions and bases, and call
= a continental peace conference by mid-1960.


RR AS at A


Gentk tee as


CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW P
vse eniseive RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1997,


15 March 1960


Cuba becoming a center for Latin American Communist activities,


Peace conference could serve as vehicle to promote some of

objectives of a “people's congress," also planned in Moscow

in early 1959.

C. Popular Socialist party (Communist) of Cuba held plenary session
beginning 29 February, which other LA Communist leaders attended,


1. Scheduled 8th PSP congress for 14 July; last congress was


in 1952,


ord


D. PSP giving open support to “week of solidarity with the
struggles of the LA peoples," 20-27 March, called by
Communist-infiltrated Cuban Labor Confederation.

E. "Casa de las Americas" in Cuba, run by pro-Communist wife of
education minister, is promoting “friends of Cuba" societies
in most other LA countries,

1, Societies are, in effect, Communist fronts. Active in
propaganda, "cultural" affairs.
II. Sino-Soviet bloc continues active support for Castro,


A. Sino-Soviet propaganda repeating Castro's anti-US charges.


C. Representatives of Polish foreign trade organization reported


by US Embassy Warsaw to be departing soon for Cuba to discuss

supplying foundry and rolling mill installations and other

capital goods.

1. Polish press reports recent purchase of 50,000 tons Cuban
sugar and that Cuba wants Polish "investment goods" in


exchange,


; 4
2. East Germans and Czechs already active commercially in Cuba.


Te: BIS AR RAT
Sas RE ee ed


G. Cubans invited Soviet performers to "First International Ballet
Festival," 15-26 March,


ng, meals, $1000 exp


>: SY


Sou wol er oe es h mn Eve


y-inspir


A. Union of Guantanamo base workers issued statement 14 March
criticizing working conditions on base and alleged abuses of
US military personnel,
1. Volume of rumors of Cuban intention to provoke an incident
at base has markedly increased in last 10 days and may


presage formal demand for US evacuation.


B.


Civilian militia and “youth brigades" continue being


organized.


eM describing organization


of youth brigades, for 13-18 age group, says: "They will
be soldiers, with and without arms. They will learn
guerrilla warfare. They will assist the agrarian re-


form institute. They will learn farm work and other


activities."


report on "the obstacles placed by US diplomatic represen-


tative in the purchase of the arms loaded on the La Coubre."


dos


Cubans seeking "“proof'' of Castro's charges.


Castro is using Cuban diplomatic posts in many countries,


notably Bern, Lisbon and Latin American capitals, to dis-


tribute violently anti-US propaganda.


1.


Official HOLES to other diplomatic missions as well as
public handouts are issued.

In Guatemala, Cuban ambassador has started placing ads
in Guatemalan newspapers attacking Sec'y Herter and US


policy in Latin America.


\
\
