Prospects for Stability in the Dominican Republic
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011846, dated 4 March 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011846).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

(e-Siiiid |
NIE 86.2-66 ae

oh ty a tye

—

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE:
NUMBER 86,2-66

OQ:
pode xX ae
oe ad

' Hl
1 i 1
i
ho 0 tonsa anatiitisntineittnenmenueetertrnin ety imine we mH Fe Sw atde ile
H :

LBy LIBRARY
rs Mandatory Review |

OS cee Peek eae, Case # NL! ~84-922_ —
Document ? pes

ed

Prospects for Stability in the -
| Dominican Republic |

Submitted by

_ DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL. INTELLIGENCE : a Rag
Concurred in by the. * Fike 3 *
- UNITED STATES_INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf epee
28 April 1966

Authenticated:

: Ree pea: Pe ;

on Colonel, USAF
ACTING EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, usiB

28 8 Apel. 1966. A ata )

Few tower ©

a OME

awetee

wei itd dt

a

‘

a ate

tre

.

¢
?

TABLE OF CONTENTS .

Page
THE PROBLEM |. i: or Chee el ce ED ee eee eee eee 1
CONCEUSIONS 3 ee ish eae es 1
DISCUSSION BO US Baad bia MN oe alin, Babich oe Telek a Muda geht amaue tte sete 3
L BACKGROUND 0002 c ic nnn tenn een nnes 3
Il. THE ECONOMIC PREDICAMENT 7.000.000 oe. eee eee eee ee , ne
Ill. THLE POLITICAL ARENA 00 ails at aaasioian eM eed 8
IV, THE JUNE ELECTIONS ... 00006 - Depth Sp to Mico eeh Ketone eee oa
v. TIE ROLE OF THE MILITARY ............--..- 000 eee eee eee 10.0
Vi. POST ELECTION POLITICAL PROSPECTS .........+..-.50-+5++ il
Vil. POST ELECTION ECONOMIC PROSPECTS .:........-----20 0+ BB. .

g0seW
ap O1Dad

a.

OxGad {
InwS |

a

ap eueges -
| f eye x

FyRUES " zayoues.

ssayawoy OF OZ eissges
Saitw OP
peoy

DOONEY tere

yeqyides BIDUIAOIg @

{231d ed jeuOHNeN &.
Ase@punog} BtoulAdsg —-——
AJBPUNOG JBUOGRUIIU| eee ce

Orig nda NVOININOG

NORE

vA YNYWYS | - ot

enden \GuSnvse

‘yapuguseH

sedsed

bic?

ewig art
oveng |

-g

uguedny

vd

rg . = @ ow, ~ weg

‘| 99-7 SELES

BALEVAISOHANY ATIVVEER DIN LON
Bt NODILVANNEEUIBY ANWONNOD

JoNTyapv-sHed

PROSPECTS FOR STABILITY IN =

THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

THE PROBLEM

~ To estimate thins situation in the E Dominican n Republic and the pros-
; pects for stability during the next year or two.

CONCLUSIONS — cc lee NA

- A. - Prospects in the Dominican Republic are ie dlccoutaeine Long-
standing social; economic and political problems have been exacer-_
_. bated by the events of 1965, and no easy solutions or sure roads to
progress are in sight’

‘B. Even so, conditions have stabilized enough so that chances of
holding the scheduled elections on 1 June 1966 are good. If Bosch
and Balaguer remain in the race to the end, as now seems likely, the
voters will have a representative choice. The contest between the

cis aan nian aenbins Ditnteane Saaioa 22 5

i 1
cna tone ann, hts atemtmane abnsbaiaetnaae meneame dante smn amamcnmenannearinreniseeameeneitiest
1 i

i

two men appears close at present, and we cannot pieces the outcome ~V3{a(4)

with any confidence,

C. The winner will probably face major elements on the other side

who remain unreconciled to the outcome even if the eieAionis: ake telat ae ag aay

rela ively fair and free.— e. —

: believe the po-
litical nrospedte a are for further tension, instability and disorder...

D. The continued presence of the Inter-American Peace Force a

(IAPF) would serve to stabilize the situation; on the other hand it _ : = :

would tend to promote exaggerated nationalism and anti-US feeling,
and over time might become a factor for instability. After the elec-

~ tions and inauguration of the new president, we believe that pressures

for removal of the IAPF will increase on the part of elements within
the D.R., the Latin American governments whose troops are involved,
and public opinion in the hemisphere. --

ee ee a ee whatever gov-
ernment comes to power will be faced with social, political, and eco-

_nomic problems so intractable that any significant progress over the

next year or two will be extremely difficult—and without foreign aid,
impossible. Even with~continuing infusions of US aid and other
external credit assistance, the Dorninican economy in 1986 and 1967
is unlikely to do much more than regain pre-1965 levels The govern-
ment will almost certainly take some tentative steps toward agricultural
development, improved education, and more efficient operations in
the large state-owned sector of the economy; however, reform measures
of the type required for sustained economic growth can hardly be im-
plemented without a prolonged period of political stability.

DISCUSSION
1. BACKGROUND

race ee oe obs eel
2. Since the end of Spanish colonial rule in 1821, the Dominican people have
passed nearly a quarter of their history under occupations by foreign military
forces (Haitian, Spanish, US). When the country has been independent, it has
known oaly turmoil and civil war or. military. dictatorship. Repressive and

brutal rule have been the norm, and life has been held cheap. &

pee ee

3. The last dictatorial rule=the 30 years of Trujillo which ended only with
his assassination in 1961—left a particularly deep imprint. The Trujillo reign
not only prevented the development of political leaders and normal political life;
it bred fresh hatreds and held back progress in nearly every sphere, except the
economic, where there was modest growth. Much of the economic progress
was designed for show, however, or was for the benefit of the Trujillo family or
close asscciates, and did little to improve the welfare of the average Dominican.
Partly as a result of the Trujillo era, the political fabric is permeated with mutual
distrust, and there is a wide gulf between the small upper-class minority and
the great bulk of the population, which is ignorant and poverty-stricken. Dis-
satisfaction has increased as the Dominican peasants and workers have become
more aware of their underprivileged condition. -._____.

4, Some two-thirds of the people live in the countryside, most of them scraping
a mere subsistence from small plots of land. Less than half the Dominicans
are literate, only about 10 percent have managed to complete elementary school,
few have acquired any technical training, and there is a marked shortage of
skilled vw i-kmen. Moreover, there is an acute shortage of managerial and execu-
tive talent, Same meas ee ee ene

less a strong tendency for those of lighter skin to look down on the darker ones.
The poor of the city. streets are often called negritos, and political movements
seeking mass appeal sometimes. refer_to upper-class. political groups as “the
whites.”

5. The Dominicans have had one of the highest sustained rates of population
growth in the world.? ‘This, of course, greatly complicates any efforts to pro-

* Their reproductive rates have been close to the limits of human fertility. ‘The 1060 census
recorded a tutal population of 3,013,525, an increase of 42 percent over 1950. ‘The eurrent
population is estimated at 3.7 million. The growth rate is 3.5 percent a year; given some
improvement in present low standards of health and sanitation, this may go still higher.

138)

- mote economic or educational progress. It also ray have political effects,

especially over the longer term. More than half the population is now less than
18 years old; the young people, many of them not reconciled like their parents
to docile acceptance of minimal living standards, are likely to be a major force
for political change.

6. The Deminican military establishrnent, though it has recently been under-
going change, is still essentially a conservative force, which in the post-Trujillo
period has tended to align itself with elernents of the civilian elite* Under
Trujillo the armed forces had become a praetorian guard ensuring the dictator's
absolute control over almost every aspect of life. In return they received certain

" perquisites, including a share in Trujillo's institutionalized system of graft. Over

the past several years a number of the most reactionary and corrupt senior offi-

-. cers have been displaced, and some of the yo. >, US-trained officers seem to

be developirig a sense of professionalism and responsibility, Even so, the mili-
tary—or major groups within it-—will probably continue to vegard themselves
as the arbiters of Dominican politics and remain ready to intervene if they think
the occasion requires it.

I. THE ECONOMIC PREDICAMENT

7. The Dominican Republic is one of the poorest countries in Latin America, .

depending chiefly on agriculture, which accounts for 40 percent of GNP and
employs two-thirds of the labor force. Its asscts include some of the most
fertile land in the Caribbean, a climate suitable to the cultivation of a wide

rudimentary forms of technology throughout much of industry and most of agri-_.

culture, and by a general lack of technical and managerial skills.

8. Dominican foreign exchange earnings and gencral cconomic activity are
heavily dependent on agricultural exports, principally sugar. About two-thirds
of the sugar industry is government-owned. Production costs in these state-
owned sugar enterprises are so high that_exports would be prcfitable for them

_.only when world prices are extraordinarily high. Prices have been low since

the end of 1964 and seem likely to remain so. The country’s vulnerability to
fluctuations in export prices is increased by its heavy dependence on imports,

Personnel strength of the Dominican military is approximately as follows: army 11,600,

navy 3,750, air force 3,750. The national police have about 7,830 men. -

ae

~ ineluding many important staple foods such as rice and beans, and almost all

capital goods, fuels, industrial raw materials, and consumer durables.

9. In terms of standard of living, the Dominicans are better off than the
Haitians. With that exception they rank with the poorest among the inade-
quately fed, housed, doctored, and educated Latin American populations.‘
There has been a modest improvement in consumption standards over the past
several years, but the D.R. has been plagued by a iponsisteuty high level of un-
employment and underemployment.

10. The Dominican economy, which had shown generally rapid growth in the
period after World War Il, has done badly since 1958. . Initially, this was caused
by Trujillo’s use of an austerity program to gain foreign exchange to build up
the Trujillo family fortune outside the country. The policy actions of post-
Trujillo governments, which included governmental efforts to reduce unemploy-
ment by means of increased budgetary expenditures and hiring by state-owned
enterprises > and which permitted a rapid rise in real wages, generated demand
for goods far beyond the economy's capacity to produce or buy abroad. Political
instability caused private investors to be reluctant to increase capacity in response
to this demand. Morcover, the use of state enterprises as a “national patrimony”
to provide increased employment led to sharp reductions in public sector savings.

and investment. A sustained period of rapid price rises and increasingly severe > = > ~~

balance of payments difficulties ensued.

11. The rebellion in April 1965 made fhise Srblens more acute at the same
time that it lessened the ability of the government to deal with them._ The...
GNP dipped some 15 percent in 1965; the drop in pet capita GNP_was 18 per- ~
cent, though the decline in individual welfare was not that severe. .This_was__
partly because of the US emergency feeding program which for several months
reached 18 percent of the Dominicans. Even so, unemployment increased from
perhaps 20 percent of the labor force to about 30 percent. The deficit in the
government’s budget rose somewhat over its level in 1963 or 1964. ——-

12. A particular difficulty in 1965 which augurs ill for the future was a sharp.
decrease in earnings from Dominican exports—down $58 million from the $180
million total of 1964, About half the drop was caused by a decline in sugar _
production as a result both of the rebellion and of the low world market price. -—_-
Sugar output fell from 910,000 short tons of raw sugar in 1964 to only 620,000

*In 1964 per capita gross national product (GNP) in the Dominican Republic was some
$245 or about $100 below the average for Latin American coantries. While a considerable
number of Dominicans are well-off as compared with this jew: standard, there are no longer
many families who are very rich.

* State enterprises in the D.R.—most of them former holdings of the Trujillo family-—-
account for about half the country’s industrial capital and perhaps a fourth of the most
productive agricultural land. Cuba is the only country in the hemisphere which has a
higher concentration of means of production in the hands of the state. In the D.R. this

has meant that government policy. is the decisive factor in most economic matters and that’ >

politics and economics are more thoroughly intertwined than generally is the case.

er 5
or

SE

in 1965. However, the combination of US aid ® and a reduction in the level of
Dominican imports prevented further deterioration in the balance af payments.

lil, THE POLITICAL ARENA

13, The D.R. has had no experience in achieving political compromise through
representative institutions. Its political attitudes and organizations have not
progressed far; the parties are generally young and highly personalistic. A
large proportion of the people, especially of the rural peasantry, is not politically
conscious. In the D.R.’s first free elections in December 1962, Juan Bosch
polled some 58 percent of the vote; yet when the Dominican military leaders

ousted Bosch in_ September 8, there w were no significant public demonstrations
of : ve z= : Dae rele pes

14, The rebellion accelerated the process of political awakening in the D.R.
and widened the gulf between the various conservative groupings on the one
hand and the various parties of the left-on the other.-The senior military
leaders did not oppose the overthrow of the Reid Cabral government at the
outset of the revolt on 24-25 April. But when they realized that the coup was
leading toward a restoration of President Bosch and the constitution of 1963,

their reaction swiftly transformed the situation into a civil war, pitting the most
militant elements of the left and right against each other. There is no doubt

that the extreme leftists played a key role on the side of the “constitutionalists” . -

when the fighting was at its height and that subsequently they have engaged in
terrorist activities. Nor is there any doubt that elements of the extreme right
have conducted terrorist operations in recent months, which have been particu-
larly directed against members of Bosch’s Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD)
and against former “constitutionalist” military figures = =

15. Garcia Godoy, President of the Provisional Government which came_to

power in September. 1965, has given top priority to efforts to reconcile the
adversaries of the conflict. An experienced diplornat and a man of decent,

liberal instincts, though not particularly forceful, Garcia Godoy quickly came ---

under fire from political conservatives. and military chiefs for his responsiveness
to the demands of the “constitutionalists” and his appointment of a number of
men of various leftist hues to important government posts. Indeed the strong
support of OAS officials and of the Inter-American Peace Force? w- ~ required
to prevent a military coup against the provisional president within his arst two
months of office. The IAPF likewise played a key role in opening up the zone
of the city previously controlled by “constitutionalist” forces aud in supporting
other measures aimed at restoring order.

* About $96 million in US aid to the D.R. was disbursed in 1965, This was slightly more

~ than twice the level of 1964. Small amounts of assistance from other sources brought the
total for the D.R. in 1965 to $105 million.

.. "IAPF troop strength at its peak was about 23,000. It is now about 7,500 of whom

__ 5,750 are US personnel and most of the remainder Brazilian. The Force commander is

Brazilian General Alvaro Alves da Silva Braga. oe

AT mi 8

16. In a sense, the primary contribution of the provisional government has
been to provide a “cooling-off” period. That it could undertake few policy

initiatives and that it could not manage a complete restoration of civil order was

of less imrned.t2 importance than its ability simply to survive one crisis after
another. Even to send a number of “constitutionalist” military leaders and
some top-ranking officers of the regular military establishinent to assignments

outside the country involved a protracted struggle. Garcia Godoy was unable

to work this out according to his original plan. He did, however, succeed in
sencing abroad the key “constiiutionalist” officers and in making enough change
in the command of the regular military to nermit the installation of a new

- Minister of Defense, General Perez v Perez, in whom he has some confidence
> Py ? ?

and new chiefs of the army, the air force, and the police,

17. By no means all the improvement in the situation has been attributable to
the provisional government. Certain of the military have shown an increasingly
responsible attitude.” Both Balaguer and Bosch have on occasion provided
needed endorsement for Garcia Godoy or at least have refused to participate
in iresponsible or destructive acts of opposition, Perhaps as important as any-

thing else has been the breaking apart of the “unity of the left” which had been -

responsible for much of the strength of the “constitutionalists” in the wake of
the rebellion. Not only did the PRD and the parties of the extreme left pull
away from each other, but the latter resumed quarreling among themselves about
whether to use political tactics or terror and violence... The net effect of all these
things has been to permit restoration of a fragile equilibrium.

IV. THE JUNE ELECTIONS

18. The provisional government has made good progress in setting up the ~~

machinery for the 1 June elections, in which the voters are to choose a new
y erecuons, in W | Ene ve

four-year administration.5.. Specialists from the Organization of American States ~

have been serving as advisors to the Dominican Central Elections. Board since ~~

early January, and there are plans to bring in some additional OAS technicians .

and observers for election day. The electoral law specifies that except as
directed by the Elections Board the security forces will remain in their barracks.
Thus the framework-will be in place for relatively free and fair elections, if
the political climate docs not seriously worsen. — :

19. Such a change of climate could come about in any of a number of ways.
Because of the depth of political enimosities, small incidents involving the secu-
rity forces and students or workers could turn into major confroatations. The
return to the D.R. of such controversial. figures as Francisco Caamano or

* The president and vice presidential candidates of each paity run on the same ticket for a
four-year term. Election of the president, vice presideut and of senators is by simple plurality.

~: Twenty-seven senators and 74 members of the Chamber of Deputies are to be elected for

four-year terms; 77 mayors and 417 municipal councilien, for two-year terms. No member
of the provisional government can be a candidate for any of the elective offices. Members
of the armed forces and police are forbidden to vote; other citizens (Dominicans over 18
years old or of any age if they are or have been married) are required to vote and may be
fined if they do not. :

Wessin y Wessia could provoke new trouble. Assassination of one of the leading
political figures on either side is a continuing possibility|
GRIBEH There has, however, been a marked decrease in the number and serious-

__ness of violent incidents since early this year.

20, Elements of both extremes find the two major candidates, Joaquin Balaguer

and Juan Bosch, unacceptable alternatives. As elections approach, extremists

of the right or left may attempt to disrupt them by undertaking terrorist
acts or, in the case of the far left, trying to provoke incidents involving
the police, military or IAPF. In recent weeks the proCastro Mth of June
Revolutionary Movement (MR-1J4) and the orthodox Dominican Cormmunist
Party (PCD) have indicated that they accept elections as one possible solution

~to the present crisis, and they are likely to devote their energies to secking

support for Juan Bosch. However, the militant Dominican Popular Movement
(MPD) has expressed opposition to the elections. It may try to stir up trouble
in Santo Domingo, but its limited capacity for independent action will be
countered by improved police and military capabilities and the presence of the
IAPF, Although we anticipate some increase in trouble and violence, we
think the situation will probably remain orderly enough so that elections can
take place as scheduled.

undertaking a number of measures designed to appeal to the lower income
groups. Today he heads the large and personalistic Reformist Party (PR),

composed of moderates, conservatives, and some Trujibista elements. His pro- 0070

grain is populistic, reformist and designed to appeal to the peasantry and other
low income groups. Francisco Augusto Lora, the PR vice presidential nominee,
is a leading PR organization man but has little popular support.

92. Juan Bosch, who for years was a leader of the anti-Trujillo exiles, was
elected President in 1962 by an overwhelming majority, but he was then
running against a much weaker opponent than Balaguer. Barely seven months
after taking office, he was swept from power by a military coup. Bosch is the

undisputed leader of the well organizcd Dominican Revolutionary Party (PRD)

which is united behind his candidacy. He is clearly the candidate of the

1a)

“constitutionalists.” He is supported by the radical Revolutionary Social Chris-~

tians (PRSC), by the pro-Castro MR-1J4, and by the Moscow-oriented Com-
1unists (PCD). However, Bosch has sought to disassociate himself from the
Communist parties, and has publicly rejected the support of the MR-1J4. The
PRSC and the parties of the extreme left command few votes in comparison

with the PR and PRD but still might make up the margin of difference in a-—--~

close election. The PRD ticket has some added strength from the vice presi-
dential candidacy of Antonio Guzman, who for a time was considered as a
possibility for provisional president. Guzinan brings no large personal follow-
ing, but he will supply a certain aura of respectability.

93. A third presidential candidate, who appeals mainly to Dominican con-
servatives and rightists is Rafael Bonnclly, President of the Council of State

i
i

vss: an neti ontenemneapoerinincebosnesrnettsamansteniritn stomtenntaaecanhnatesieeieniteruarmn mene a hatte «mes iment maf

contest to the end.

that ruled the country in 1962, after Balaguer’s ouster. He is seeking to co-

“ordinate several right-of-center partics into a coalition called the National

Integration Movement (MIN). In a contest between Balaguer and Bosch,

_Bonnelly can be expected to pull votes away from Balaguer. If Bosch appears

to be in the lead, pressures will grow on the part of MIN and PR supporters
to unify against him. However, the ambitions of individuals in both groups,
as well. as the longstanding animosities between elements of the two parties
make such an alliance difficult. Some MIN sponsors probably hope to vse
the organization as a political front behind which the military could exercise
power in the event of a successful coup.

24. It is likely that

the candidates of the two major parties will stay in the

95. Bosch and Balaguer will be making their appeal to the same sector of
the populace—the urban and rural poor. Ruuning on reformist platforms, each
has his strong points. Balaguer is identified vith the peace and order of the
Trujillo period, at a time when many Domin .....s long for an end to upheaval
and anarchy. He is probably remembered favorably among the urban lower
classes for his largesse during 1961. Many Dominicans are anxious, above all,
to avoid a return to the violence and chaos of the 1965 rebellion; Balaguer appeals
to them with his pledges of conciliation and unity of action. His PR lieutenants
have done some organizational work, and he himself has made a series of trips
into the countryside to rally the voting groups likely to give hira greatest backing.
However the PR campaign so far has not matched the vigor of the campaign
of the PRD.

26. Bosch’s major advantage is his ability to appeal to the Dominican masses
in terms they find understandable and attractive. As a campaigner he has
unusual abilities. His general reputation for opposing the unpopular Dominican
military establishrnent will also attract voters. The PRD has a powerful voice
in the m:nistries and agencies of the Provisional Government and this influence
will probably give the party considerable leverage at the polls. Should the
impression that Bosch is going to win continue to grow, he would also profit
from a tendency to get on the bandwagon.

27. Both candidates have recognizable weaknesses. A Bonnelly candidacy

_will undoubtedly eat into Balaguer’s vote. On the other hand, if Balaguer

1.3(3)(5)

SP

and Bonnelly were able to come to some sort of agreement, Bosch would prob-
ably respond by trying to paint Balaguer as a candidate of the Dominican elite.
Bosch’s identification with the violence of the recent past, and his failure in 1963
to fulfill his campaign promises, have undoubtedly disillusioned some of his
potential supporters. MMi uses ae : pie

oe en gs oo Another major vulnerability
will probably be the susceptibility of the rural peasantry to charges that Bosch
is a Communist or Communist supporter. These charges will probably be a
major weapon of the Balaguer camp, and Bosch is clearly worried that they
will have an effect on the electorate, which though it understands little of com-

_ munism, is strongly opposed to it. ;

30. All things considered, we believe the election will be close. Balaguer
got off to an earlier start; Bosch now seems to be gaining momentum. We ] 3(2)(4)
= SE s

’ cannot predict the outcome with any confidence ff

V. THE ROLE OF THE MILITARY ==>

31. The new Minister of Defense Perez y Perez has stated that the Dominican
military establishment will abide by the election results, whatever they are.
‘This implies more of a change in military attitudes than we think has yet taken
place. If Bosch were elected, some key figures in the military would want
to prevent hira from taking or holding office. The continuing presence of the
IAPF would probably inhibit them from acting quickly; indeed their expectation
as to when the IAPF might withdraw would probably be a factor in determining
their timing. The dissatisfied military officers might also wish to delay action
for some time so as to take advantage of some specific action of the new govern-
ment which right render it unpopular or otherwise vulnerable.

"39 Tf on the other hand, Balaguer were elected, he would begin with the

acceptance of the military establishment. Moreover, he would probably manage

~to persuade leaders of the armed forces to go along with modest moves toward

social and economic refonn, even if these drew protests from rightist politicians.

. Initially, sharp opposition from the extreme left- would improve, rather than

detract from, his standing with the security forces, He might, however, lose
this rapport if he used the police and army less vigorously than they thought

_was required to put down leftist-instigated demonstrations and violence.

33. One of the most arduous tasks facing any new government is to continue
the gradual and delicate process of reshaping the military so that eventually it
will become the servant of the government. If the president moves clumsily in
this, he may provoke the very military intervention he is trying to rule out. If he
acts to reduce the strength of the armed forces rapidly, he may risk loss of
capability to cope with civil disorder, terrorism, or insurgency.

34. Whatever the nature of government action, there are likely to be growing
differences of attitude and political opinion within the military, and particularly
within the army. Increasing numbers of younger army officers, NCOs, and
enlisted men will probably become antagonistic toward the country's elite groups.
The PRD has been making efforts to build influence within the military; the
more extreme parties are likely to try too. Although this will tend to decrease
the danger of intervention by the military establishment as a whole, it will add
to the danger of a new split within the military and the aligument of military
units with opposing political factions.————-

VI, POST ELECTION POLITICAL PROSPECTS =

35. Given this uncertain allegiance of the Dominican military, the IAPF will -

coutinue, for a while at least, to_be_the primary stabilizing factor in the D.R.”

Its presence reduces the chances of a coup frony the right and of insurgency S28 =e See

from the left. Thus the chances of any Dominican government for survival will
be substantially greater as long as the JAPF stays on. Its continued presence

would, however, tend to promote exaggerated aationalism and anti-US feeling,

and over time might become a factor for instability. After the elections and
the inauguration of the president on 1 July pressures for removal of the Force
will probably increase, on the part of elements within the D.R., the Latin
American governments whose troops are involved, and public opinion in: the
hemisphere.

i

39. The revolution and its afterrnath have produced sharp new animosities,
difficult if not impossible to overcome. We think the broad tendency within
the D.R. will be toward continuing growth of the political left. How much of
this will benefit the parties of the extreme eft and how much the moderate
left will, of course, depend on the performance of the new government as well
as on the leadership and competitive skill of the parties involved.

40. All three parties of the extreme left—the militant MPD (pro-Peking), the
orthodox PCD (pro-Moscow), and the Mth of June Revolutionary Movement
(pro-Castro)—have gained some ground during the past year. Their members
have taken the leading role at the university, and obtained a number of positions
in the governrnent bureaucracy; they continue to have influcnce, although they
are by no means the strongest force, in the labor union movement. They have,
moreover, substantially increased their capability, in terms of weapons, training,
experience, and cadres, to carry out urban terrorism or guerrilla warfare in

parts of the countryside-—although in general the rural population remains
unsympathetic.

41, There is a danger that if the moderate left is politically frustrated, some
elements nay make common cause with the extreme left. In the event that
Bosch were elected and later displaced by the military, this combination on
the left would become almost a certainty. In combination, the various leftist
parties could bring heavy pressure on any government by means of political
strikes, student agitation, and general violence. This might in turn provoke

strongly repressive action by the military and finally lead to a new outbreak
of civil war, with possible divisions among the military,

42. In any case, the government which comes to power on 1 July will prob-
ably have nearly as much opposition as backing. It will be confronted with
socia!, economic and political problems so intractable that any significant

_range of $75 to $100 million. =
45. US program loans. and food: supplies, combined ‘with loans from-the ~.---> —-~ ~~

Inter-American Development Bank and other developmental credit assistance, ~

= accomplishinent over the next year or two will be extremely difficult. If it fails

to move forward at all in these fields, the support it begins with will shrink
away and its vulnerability will increase. Thus the outlook for political stability
is discouraging.

Vil. POST ELECTION ECONOMIC PROSPECTS

43. During the remainder of this year the Dominican economy will probably
continue to recover from the low point reached in 1965. This recovery is un-

~~ likely, however, to bring GNP back as far as the 1964 level. Spending for

consumption will almost certainly dominate, and no large-scale private invest-

~~ ment from either domestic or foreign sources is likely, pending a viable political
~~ golotion.

44. The new government's economic focus in 1966 and 1967 will be largely
limited to short-run measures to provide immediate benefits to the populace.

There will be strong pressure to cut down unemployment and central govern-__

meut spending can be expected to increase considerably. The budget deficit —--.—

in 1966 is likely to run about $50 million. Increased demand for goods

will probably lead to appreciable price rises. If for political reasons the governs => =~ -

ment should undertake greater expansionist spending policies, price increases

would be sharper and pressures on the country’s balance-of-payments stronger. ——"—

There probably will be significant deterioration in the Dominican balance of
payments position in-1966 and without improved production and prices for

sugar the outlook for 1967 rémaifis dim. A rise in imports and the_probable.

stagnation of exports could cause a 1966 deficit for ae and services in the --ss—-c0-2= _

can mect much of the expected shortfall in Dominican finances and materially

help with pressing supply problems.—‘The Dominican government may, never-
theless, have to give serious consideration to devaluation as a means of restoring ..
the balance in international payments. But unless this were done as a part
of a carefully worked out stabilization program, there is a good chance that a
round of price and wage increases would soon vitiate its benefits.

46. In short, Dominican economic policies in-1966 and 1967 will be almost
entirely aimed at achieving short-term and largely political results. The govern-

ment will almost certainly take some tentative steps toward agricultural develop-_

ment, improved education, and more eflicicnt operations of the large state-owned ~~~

sector of the economy. US and other lending agencies are already supporting
projects in these lines. Nevertheless, the cconomy will remain vulnerable to
export price fluctuations and it will face for a long time such problems as an

~~ inadequate marketing system, a shortage of capital, backward technology in
agriculture, a general lack of technical and managerial skills and a grave prob-

lem of government management and resource allocation. Reform measures of

x a
>< Seat Gane

the type required for sustained economic development will be extremely difficult
without a proloaged period of political stability. Political stability, in turn,
will be difficult to attain without a better military relationship to the government
and a determined effort by civilian leadership to undertake basic social and
“economic reform.

14

DISTRIBUTION:

White House
National Security Council
Department of State

Bo Department of Detanse
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
