Prospects for British Guiana
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119169, dated 2 February 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119169).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1
Bs

SNIE 87.2-61

Mandatory Revje
Case # NLJ q-3
Document # 2

SPECIAL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 87.2-61

PROSPECTS FOR BRITISH GUIANA

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 21 March 1961. Concurring were The Director of Intelli-

_ gence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant Chief
of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assist-
ant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), Department of
the Navy; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, the
Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff; the Assistant to the Sec-
retary of Defense, Special Operations; and the Director of the
National Security Agency. The Atomic Energy Commission
Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant Director, Fed-
eral Bureau of investigation, abstained, the subject being out-
side of their jurisdiction. :

APPROVED FOR RELEASE P won N? D
SEP 11 1997

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments.

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
c. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of
the Navy .
. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
_ Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for The Joint Staff
Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
_ Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
_ Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, for the Department
of Defense .
i. Director of NSA for the National Security Agency
j. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency .

2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable
security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrangement with
the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should
be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with LAC~D-69/2,
22 June 1953. ,

4. The title of this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified:
FOR ESOT “USE ONLY

prog f+ o> A,

This material con information affecting
ense of the United States
aning of the espionage laws,
, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
revelation of which in any manner

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Denartment of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

SE

ET

PROSPECTS FOR BRITISH GUIANA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the political situation and prospects in British Guiana, with
particular reference to the coming elections and Communist potential in the

colony.

THE ESTIMATE

1. British Guiana is a small outpost of em-
pire with a population of over half a million,
about half East Indian in origin and about a
third of African descent. The remainder of
the population includes small numbers of
British, Portuguese, native Indian, and Chi-
nese residents. Partially self-governing since
elections in 1957, the colony is scheduled to
assume increased responsibilities for its own
affairs following new elections on 21 August
1961 and, if all goes well, to gain full inde-
pendence two or three years thereafter.

2. The politics of British Guiana is domi-
nated by the Communist-led People’s Progres-
sive Party (PPP) of Cheddi Jagan. Jagan
is an East Indian, and his party draws its
support almost entirely from East Indians, in-
cluding not only poverty-stricken rural and
urban workers, but also a considerable num-
ber of small businessmen in Georgetown and
other centers. Jagan’s US-born wife, who ex-
ercises very strong influence over him, is an
acknowledged Communist. She shares with
Jagan control of the PPP, and is a govern-
ment minister. Several other PPP leaders are
believed to be Communists. Jagan himself is
not an acknowledged Communist, but his
statements and actions over the years bear
the marks of the indoctrination and advice

the Communists have given him. While there
is no Communist party per se in British
Guiana, a number of the leaders in the PPP
have been members of, or associated with,
Communist parties or their front groups in
the US and the UK.

3. Moreover, these individual leaders main-
tain sporadic courier and liaison contacts with
the British and US Communists and with
Communist Bloc missions in London. Both
Jagans have visited Cuba in the: past year
and have since chosen to identify the PPP
with Castro’s cause. However, neither the
Communist Bloc nor Castro has made any vig-
orous effort to exploit the British Guiana
situation.

4. The principal opposition to Jagan’s party
is the People’s National Congress (PNC), a
socialist party made up largely of city negroes.
It is under the ineffectual leadership of Forbes
Burnham, a negro and a doctrinaire social-
ist. Like most British Guiana politicians he
was at one time allied with Jagan, and indeed
was second to Jagan in leadership of the
PPP, The United Force (UF), a party made
up largely from businessmen of various ethnic
groups, was recently organized and has not
demonstrated any wide popular appeal.
Neither it nor the PNC is disposed to work

with the other to present Jagan with a united
opposition; previous efforts at coalition have
failed.

5. The elections scheduled for August 1961
will be one of the last steps preparatory to
independence, which the British have agreed
to grant approximately 18 months after The
West Indies achieves independence in 1962
or 1963. With the next elections not due for
another five years, the winning party in this
year’s contest will carry the government
through independence. During the transi-
tion period, the local British officials will re-
tain ultimate authority for external affairs
(including defense), but their present over-
all veto power will be narrowed to these mat-
ters. After the elections, the local govern-
ment will assume full control of the police.

6. The election seems likely to hinge mainly
on personalities and to be decided by voting
along ethnic lines—though racial antago-
nisms have not been deliberately stirred up.
Social and economic problems, though they
will certainly be issues in the election, have
not yet made as much popular impact in Brit-
ish Guiana as they have in most of the Latin
American area. The PPP has promised to put
through various schemes of economic develop-
ment, but has been ineffectual in fulfilling its
promises, partly through lack of technicians
and funds. It wants to get more money out
of the US-developed bauxite resources of the
country. The good rice crop of the past year
has made the economic situation seem im-
proved and for the time being has tended not
only to obscure PPP shortcomings, but even to
redound to the party’s credit. The PNC
stands for anticommunism and the desirabil-
ity of joining The West Indies (in contrast
to Jagan’s antifederation stance), but these
are not popular issues. The UF’s appeal
against communism and for a businessman’s
government is even less effective.

7. Of the 35 districts from which members of
the Legislative Council will be elected next
August, the PPP appears certain of victory in
13; the PNC, in 15 or 16. Thus, control of the
government will be determined by the elec-
toral outcome in a half dozen or so of the
35 districts. A PNC-UF coalition could take

enough of these to assure itself a majority in
the Legislative Council; but it is unlikely
that such a coalition will be formed. With-
out such cooperation between the opposition
parties, Jagan is almost certain to win in most
of the pivotal districts. Accordingly, we be-
lieve that Jagan’s PPP will probably succeed
in winning the right to form the next gov-
ernment.

8. From time to time Jagan has threatened
to boycott the elections, on the grounds that
a redrawing of the boundaries of electoral
districts, carried out by a British-appointed
commissioner, was adverse to PPP interests.
We think it highly unlikely that he will carry
out his threat; and certainly he will not do
so unless he believes his party is going to lose
the elections.

9. Jagan’s election as Chief Minister in the

preindependence phase would not be likely to
result in a dramatic and sudden shift to the
left, since he would probably seek to avoid
action which would discourage the granting
of independence by the British and recognizes
that he would lack sufficient support for a
revolutionary attempt to force the British
out. He is almost certainly mindful of the
effectiveness with which the British moved in
with force in 1953, when they feared he might
try to set up a Communist regime.

10. However, with a new electoral mandate,
Jagan will probably make a more determined
effort to improve economic conditions than
he has heretofore. This will entail pressure
on the UK-—and the US—for economic assist-
ance considerably above present levels. If he
feels that economic aid from the West is not
adequate to fulfill requirements for develop-
ment, he will go elsewhere being careful not
to provoke the British. He has already indi-
cated interest in an alleged Cuban offer of an
$8.5 million low-interest loan. At the same
time, he may threaten nationalization or con-
fiscation of foreign and local businesses to
extract additional revenues and benefits.

ll. How far a Jagan government might go
after eventual achievement of independence
is obscured by uncertainty about the nature
and extent of his actual commitment to Com-

suger

grees irrrrrmerermmanecrymewrreerrecererrwrsererernrerrermrnarortrenyrewan veeneee news ee ee ee eee

sughst

munist discipline and about the tactical aims
of the Bloc with respect to British Guiana.
We believe that British Guiana will obtain
membership in the UN upon independence,
and that it will align itself under Jagan with
Afro-Asian neutralism and anticolonialism.
At a minimum, we would expect his govern-
ment to be assertively nationalistic, sympa-
thetic to Cuba, and prepared to enter into eco-
nomic and diplomatic relations with the Bloc,
although such a government would probably
still be influenced by the desire to obtain eco-
nomic help from the UK and the US. A good
deal will depend on how far the spirit of so-
cial revolution has spread in nearby areas of
Latin America. We think it unlikely that
Jagan would give up his opposition to joining
the federation of The West Indies (TWI),
which would offer few economic rewards and
would subordinate his regime to outside and
predominantly conservative influences.

12. It is possible that Jagan, once he had a
free hand, would proceed forthwith with an
effort to establish an avowed Communist re-
gime. However, we believe that he would con-
sider this undesirable, even if he were fully
committed to eventual establishment of such
a state, in view of the lack of trained cadres

in British Guiana, the territory’s primitive
State of political and social development, and
the likelihood of adverse international reac-
tions. We consider it more likely that an
independent Jagan government would seek to
portray itself as an instrument of reformist
nationalism which would gradually move in
the direction of Castro’s Cuba. Such a re-
gime would almost certainly be strongly en-
couraged and supported by Castro and the
Bloc.

13. Before independence, the attitude and ac-
tions of the British will bear heavily on the
situation in British Guiana. Thus far the
British seem to have been motivated chiefly
by a desire to see British Guiana independent.
They have tried to get along with Jagan and
to overlook his Communist associations be-
cause he has seemed to them the only man
capable of running the country. Since their
intervention in 1953 to halt Jagan’s first bid
for power, they have refrained from actions
which would antagonize him; the Governor’s
veto power has never been used. Even though
they retain the capability for controlling
Jagan, we believe they will do little to inter-
fere with political developments in British
Guiana.
