The Fmln in Salvador: Insurgent Negotiations Strategy and Human Rights Abuses
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049246, dated 2 October 1988.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049246).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Contd laieflawnes Apricy

ua
Paahees ry,

Wihenin 10 ATS

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE

22 November 1988

The L ] Calvador:

Insurgent Negotiations Strategy and Human Rights Abuses

‘ Sunpary

Recent efforts by the Salvadoran insurgency to
bring international pressare on the Duarte
administration to reopen peace negotiations are part of

- an effort to appear moderate and accommodating while
portraying the government as inflexible. In our
judgment, however, the insurgents would not negotiate
in good faith, but would use talks instead to improve
their strategic position and undermine confidence in
the Duarte government. Meanwhile, we believe the
insurgency’s support among Salvadorans is waning in the
wake of increased guerrilla intimidation, terrorisn,
and often indiscrininate atta on civilians,
especially in the capital. aa

t t *

This typescript was prepared by ha cae eaaaee aa
Sues Office of African and Latin American Analysis. It

generally reflects the views of the Intelligence Community.

Approved tor Release

war--probably are involved. Increased political
tensions related to the scheduled presidential election
next year and the continuing insurgency will likely
result in a relatively high rate of political violence
in coming months. We believe the guerrillas, who are
frustrated by their dim prospects for a political or
military victory, probably will continue to account for
the majority of political killings.

Positive Trend Stalls

Political and suspicious killings of civilians in El
Salvador--which had been declining sharply until last year--have
increased slightly in the last 18 months.

S cicetieas fp aractiumeicetitet came eves 280
civilians died in 1987 in incidents of political violence, a
small increase over the previous year.! (See Fig. 1)
Nevertheless, the overall level of deaths remains far below that
of the early 1980s. Dwarfing the small increase in political
killings last year was a doubling of “suspicious” murders, in
which there are no clearly established political or criminal
motives. (See Fig. 2). In the first seven months of 1988, the
rate of killings with confirmed political motives was about the

same as last year, while the number of suspicious killings has
fluctuated wildly but generally remained higher than in 1987.

As during the early 1980s, the increase in civilian killings
has coincided with greater political and military activity by the
Marxist insurgents. The querrillas' political allies are
preparing to participate in the March 1989 presidential
elections, while rebel front groups continue trying to atage
violent anti-government demonstrations in the capital. At the
same time,. querrilla military actions--most notably economic
sabotage and terrorist attackasa--also have increased during the
past year (see Fig. 3). Many Salvadorans--civilian and
military--probably view these rebel activities as an attempt to
exploit the country's more open political environment while
simultaneously continuing the war.- Although government

T Statistical dat typescript waa obtained

are

e
reflect trends in political violence.

ues

operations since 1987 have disrupted some guerrilla activity,
they have failed to make deep, permanent reductions in the
insurgency. (S NF)

The Guerrillas’ Record

pe a car eet that the Marxist insurgents, no doubt
frustrated by their inability to make dramatic military gains or
attract significant popular aupport, are responsible for the
majority of confirmed political killings. Guerrillas have killed
Civilians for--among other reasons~--aiding the government,
registering to vote, having relatives in the armed forces, or
defying the rebels' frequent campaigns to blockade
transportation. The rebelsa' indiscriminate use of landmines--a
weapon adopted to compensate for tactical weakness--also has
contributed to increased civilian casualties. Finally, the
insurgents have kidnaped and murdered mayors, judges, local
officials, political candidates, and civilians suspected of being
government informers. For example, a guerrilla commander in
Usulutan Department recently killed two civilians suspected of
collaborating with the Army and put their bodies on display to
ee in the area to avoid involvement with the military.

A major element of the insurgents' overall atrategy is to
foment unrest and violence in the cities. This includes using
terrorist attacks to “bleed" government forces. Although we do
not believe the guerrillas are deliberately and indiscriminately
targeting civilians, their urban terrorist campaign has resulted
in some civilian casualties.

t- t

Circumstantial similarities to death squad murders committed
during the early 1980s suggest that right-wing extremists are

responsible Yor at least some of the recent suspicious killings,
although no one has claimed credit for them. oe ecstsceasr ee

bs rs arr some characteristica of death squad activity--the use of
orture,

execution-style murders, assassination by groups of
armed assailants, and bodies being dumped some distance from the
scene of the crime--increased last year. If rightists are indeed
involved, we believe they have been acting primarily out of
frustration with the slow rate of progress againat the insurgents
on the battlefield and out of fear “that the insurgents are
participating in the political process solely to expand their
urban support networks for terrorism and subversion.

Despite its past association with deathaquad activity, we
believe that the right-wing ARENA party currently does not
sanction human rights abuses. Such actions would wreck the
party's recent efforts to present a more moderate public image

Fe ee

and seriously jeopardize its prospects for winning the presidency
next March. Indeed, we believe that, for the time being at
least, even many ARENA extremists probably are cooperating with
party moderates in an effort to strengthen their position and
expand the party's popular appeal. Most ARENA leaders probably
also are unwilling to riak the reduction or curtailment of US
economic an litary assistance that might result from unchecked
violence. om

Nonetheless, some party hardliners may be involved in the
crimes, although we lack definitive proof.

Roberto D'Aubuisson, ARENA's founder
an onorary president, continues to maintain close ties with Dr.
Rector Antonio Regalado, the former chief of a notorious death
squad active in the early 1980s, though the two avoid appearing
together in public. ARENA's recent electoral triumph and
resulting control of the legislature may have inspired
lower-ranking party members or independent rightists to act

without - official knowledge or sanction of the party.
4

e ed Forces
4

I +: -.+- that the number of
politically-motivate ngs committed by Salvadoran soldiers

ia on the rise. The armed forces have committed 12 of the 106
confirmed political killings so far this year--or 11.3 percent--
compared to only about two percent in 1987. While we do not
believe the killings ara officially sanctioned, they may be the
result of concern within the military about increased political
activities by insurgent front groups. However, many of those
soldiers and policemen most provoked by leftist activity probably
are biding their time, calculating that an ARENA victory in the
March 1989 presidential election could result in_a sterner stance
against the guerrillas and their supporters. ee

Members of the Salvadoran armed forces, moreover, probably

have carried out at least a few of the suspicious killings.
believes that frustration over the end of "state of

exception” legislation in January 1987 has prompted some soldiers
to kill suspected leftiats. Without the special legislation--
which suspended some civil liberties for suspected querrillas--
the Constitution permits the authorities to detain suspected
guerrillas for only 72 hours before being turned over to the
civilian courts. Most Salvadoran officera believe 72 hours is
insufficient time to conduct a thorough intelligence
interrogation and they are frustrated by the-~eourts, which
jin” release suspected querrillas for lack of avidence.

“ona

Outlook

The Salvadoran government probably will respond to the
increase in political killings by quietly pressing the military
to be more vigilant in preventing and policing abuses. We expect
the publicity-conscious Armed Forces High Command, in particular,
will move to head off any sentiment or tendency among officers
and troops to deal with the left through illegal means. Despite
the frustrations arising from the many constitutional and
judicial restraints imposed on the armed forces--at a time when
they perceive the left as exploiting the hard-won democratic
reforms guaranteed by the very government they seek to subvert--
we believe most officers will want to avoid actions that would

as the populace or place vital foreign assistance at risk.

Similarly, politically astute moderates within ARENA
probably will exhort their axtremiat colleagues and
constituencies to avoid any actions that threaten the party's
political credibility and electoral prospects. Although the
Christian Democrats may attempt to use the death squad issue to
discredit ARENA during the montWs leading up to the March 1989
election, a similar effort by President Duarte prior to last
March's legislative elections failed to have much impact at the
polls. We believe a strategy of persuasion would be effective to
some degree in reducing political killings as the impending
— election invites greater international scrutiny.

Nonetheless, given El Salvador's long legacy of political
violence, extremist attitudes on the left and the right, and
frustrations on both sides over the slow rate of progress in the
war, we believe political killings will continue. Tensions
related to next year's presidential elections, particularly the
increasing boldness of the left, may provoke further violence, in
our view. The gquerrillas--whose prospects for political or
military victory are remote--prob 11 continue to commit
most of the political killings. eae

6

weno

Appendix: The Armed Forces and Human Rights

The Salvadoran armed forces--once responsible for the
greatest number of human rights abuses--have since the early
1980s significantly improved their conduct. US aid and influence
have facilitated the Professionalization of the Army, permitting
it to wage a "cleaner" war. Today, all members of the security
services receive human rights training from the International Red
Cross, the Catholic Church, and the government's human rights
commission. Soldiers and police who commit crimes are routinely
brought to trial before civilian courts,

Gi, and many have heen dismiased from =p service for
various offenses. In +i ¢ cr, TD
that concern about civilian casualties has driven the military to

adopt stricter rules of engagement. Rigorous restrictions have
been placed on the use of air and artillery support near
populated areas, and infantry seldom employ “reconnaissance by
fire"--firing blindly into an area to determine whether the enemy
is present. Moreover, despite the likelihood that most prisoners
will be released within 72 hours--under guidelines in effect

since January 1987--government troo ture more
guerrillas than they 111; aati a

The prospect of US military assistance being curtailed, fear
of negative publicity, and, in many cases, a growing realization
that expanding popular support is critical to their
counterinsurgency mission, have compelled officers to develop a
keener appreciation for human rights. Colonel Rene Emilio Ponce,
for example, an influential brigade commander who probably will
become the next Chief of Staff, is working in his sector to
promote greater public confidence in the Army, and he concedes

that human rights abuses by government troops contribute to pro-

querrilla sentiment, Sec crests oucreeeeerr cement quai
Ga that Colonel Mauricio Staben--often linked to

pas uses-~last year requested additional human rights lectures
for his troops and drafted a human rights manual. Gin

Despite the armed forces' improved performance and greater
awareness of the importance of human rights, abuses still occur
occasionally--albeit with far less frequency than during the
early 1980a--and institutional factors tend to impede corrective
action. Because the military has never created any formal
mechanism for investigating human wightes abuses, such probes are
conducted on a oc bas the results usually are kept
private, Civilian inatitutions
empowere Oo investigate the armed forcea--such as the Attorney
General or the US-funded Special Investigations Unit--often are
reluctant to pry too deeply into the "internal affairs" of the
military, El Salvador's most powerful and cohesive institution.
Others;-like the government's human rights commission, have no
legal authority. In addition, the Salvadoran court ayatem relies

Se

more on confessions or eyewitness testimony than forensic
evidence for convictions, and few witnesses are willing to

testify in a human rights case--particularly ong aimyolving a
military officer--out of fear of retribution. as,

The insular, highly cohesive nature of the Salvadoran
officer corps also hampers investigations of alleged abuses.
Officers generally tolerate misconduct--whether human rights
abuses, corruption, mora] turpitude, or incompetence on the
battlefield--on the part of their colleagues, and few have been
subjected to strict disciplinary action. The officer corps tends
to enact what CUMING chertcterizes as a "code of silence®
when one of thelr own is accused of wrongdoing. This collective

protectivenesa ia, we believe, fueled by a desire to spare the
military--and, by connection, themselves--any embarrassment.

Ne.

oe

ee ee

EL SALVADOR: HUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION

(FS Rg ee Pe ee ye nro
|

\

4

El Salvador: Confirmed Political Killings

1987-——280

Does net Include 36 eivilian deaths frem guerritia landmines.

JAN-JUL 1988-——106

Legend
‘ WB By Guerrillas
-27 Gl By Armed Forces
.3 8 By Right
¢ Wl By Unknown Assafila
SE Cvillans KA°

3+ 6%

Does not Inolude 57 etvilian deathe from guerrilla lendmines.

* Killed In combat by both sides.

Contents

Page

Key Judgmeats
Introduction
Civil-Military Relations Under Duarte.
Civilian Perceptions of Militsry —
Residual Military Unhappiness SS
Assessing Key issues “et eee
Military Funding
Human Righs
‘Economic Conditions end Public Disorder
Maneuvering for the Transition wana
Presidential Politics ;
Preserving Equities Within the Miliary £2

Outlook
Implications for the United States

OPO MO DR wR we ED —

oe

33%
<
eo

oo | | fo 4

é ten” Om
OL sMeiaae tant ng trees Fl

Co be Unerteg nee Sa va of7 ?

Cy Doenestans,
—- * te { ;
, Pez 5 1 naen 5 Soe {
( J
a, nes, - it tee
Y os
I oe
Bae .
Nicareg ‘%
af
Noah
. Pacity: Ocean
e 90 Reomeers
| nn ees Counsery sqammteves @
Qe coveusem; extherdenvs
al on peel
waa ‘ b
