Vietnam - Doc Mentions Drv-u.sS. Contacts, Air Strikes Against the Drv, Militar
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013301, dated 3 March 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013301).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ae _ Keon kgr-7-
LBJ LIBRARY :
Mandatory Review

93-44 CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS je vi Me

awn

Case # NLJ . 17 APRIL 1968
Document #__|___ -1l- —
] 2 .
VIETNAM a:

INTRODUCTION

Hanoi propaganda repeatedly claims that Washington is "creating dif
ties" in selecting a site for DRV-U.S. contacts and is thus delayin;
talks between the two sides. The statement by a DRV Foreign Minis
spokesman on 13 April defends the suggested sites of Phnom Penh antipr
Warsaw and says cryptically, without naming them, that "a number-4&
sites" suggested by the United States "are not convenient for the
DRV." The foreign ministry spokesman and other propagandists com
that the present U.S. attitude on the venue for contacts is not cc

readiness to-go anywhere, any time, to talk with the DRV.

The Liberation Radio, which had broadcast the 3 April DRV Governmen ee a
statement, has not acknowledged the exchanges between Hanoi and i
Washington regarding plans for contacts between the two sides.

Peking has still not mentioned the DRV Government statement or Hanoi's
initiative on contacts; however, a PEOPLE'S DAILY Commentator

article on the 15th cites President Johnson's rejection of Phnom

Penh as a site for "contacts between the two parties" as further
proof of U.S. hypocrisy regarding peace talks.

Moscow scores the United States for rejecting Phnom Penh and Warsaw
as sites for contacts with the DRV and accuses it of procrastination
on talks while continuing to bomb large portions.of the DRV. Unlike
Hanoi, Soviet media mention some other specific possible sites, but
do not acknowledge that the United States has proposed five different
venues.

Hanoi juxtaposes charges of U.S. procrastination on contacts with
complaints that the air strikes against the DRV from the 17th to the
20th parallel have been intensified and that air "intrusions" are
taking place throughout the country. But Hanoi stops short of
Suggesting that this would affect DRV "readiness" to establish con-
tacts with the United States. Alleged air-defense victories continue
to be reported routinely, and VNA on the 16th claims the downing of
a plane over Haiphong, which, it notes, is "far north of the 20th
parallel," The item puts the total of downed planes at 2,838, an
increase of nine in the past week.

Hanoi on 10 April announces the visit, from 4 to 10 April, of an

East German party-government delegation headed by SED Secretary and
Politburo member Kurt Hager. According to Hanoi, the delegation was
received by Le Duan and Truong Chinh, and it met with a DRV delegation

can ee

e.
+

CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
ae

which included Pham Van Dong, Nguyen Duy Trinh, Le Thanh Nghi, and
Xuan Thuy. ,

On the 16th, VNA announces that the National Assembly Standing Committee
has appointed Xuan Thuy as "minister of the DRV Government," and

Tran Quang Huy as chairman of the cultural and educational board of

the premier's office. Thuy, who was foreign minister from 1963 to 1965,
is a Party Central Committee member and head of the foreign relations
department of the CC. Huy is an alternate Party Central Committee
member and deputy chief of the CC's central department of propaganda
and training.

Hanoi reports on current military action in South Vietnam continue to

highlight engagements in Quang Tri and in the Third Corps. A 9 April
Liberation Radio commentary hailing the establishment of "revolutionary"
or "people's" administrations claims that the people's administration
will "rule over South Vietnam" and lead the resistance struggle to
victory.

Moscow continues to stress Soviet aid to Vietnam, and a 13 April PRAVDA
editorial praises the CPSU plenum's assertion of determination to
continue aid to Vietnam and the WFTU General Council's special Moscow
meeting on solidarity with Vietnam. Comment, including reports

of protest meetings and a statement by the Soviet maritime union,
continues to score the Chinese for obstructing Soviet aid by their
detention of a Soviet tanker carrying fuel to Vietnam,

DRV-U.S. ConTAcTs

HANOI Hanoi's first dicussion of the issue of a site for preliminary
DRV-U.S. contacts following its 8 April release of Foreign

Minister Trinh's interview with CBS! Collingwood comes in a 12 April

NHAN DAN commentary, summarized by VNA and broadcast by Hanoi radio

in the domestic service. NHAN DAN says that the United States is

finding "unjustified pretexts" for refusing to agree to Phnom Penh

as the site for the preliminary DRV-U.S. contacts. The commentary

recalls that in his interview Trinh had expressed readiness for

contact "in Phnom Penh or another place to be mutually agreed upon,"

but this reference to "mutual agreement" is not repeated in subsequent

propaganda. ; — ; ds 7 — ae

The first available reference in Hanoi propaganda to its alternate
suggestion of Warsaw as a site comes in a NHAN DAN Commentator
article carried by VNA early on the morning of the 13th. It says
that after refusing to meet in Phnom Penh, the United States has
rejected the idea of Warsaw and that on the llth Presidential Press
Secretary Christian said that the United States wanted contacts to
be made in a neutral country.

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
a,

Some eight hours after VNA's release of the NHAN DAN article, Hanoi
radio broadcast the DRV Foreign Ministry spokesman's statement which
gives Hanoi's version of the chronology of developments since the
DRV Government statement on the 3d. The spokesman says that following
the United States' 10 April rejection of Phnom Penh-~"on the pretext
that it had technical difficulties since it has no diplomatic
mission there"--Hanoi on 11 April suggested Warsaw. And he adds that
on the léth, U.S. authorities, without answering regarding Warsaw,
"demanded" that the site be in a neutral cowmtry where both sides
have diplomatic missions and adequate communications. The spokesman
acknowledges that on the 10th the United States had suggested other
venues but he does not name them: He says only that "they suggested
a number of sites that are not convenient for the DRV side."

The foreign ministry spokesman says that the U.S. rejection of Hanoi's
proposals for the site of the contacts runs counter to past statements
by the President and other U.S. officials expressing willingness to

go anywhere to talk. And surrounding propaganda seeks to document

this by citing specific remarks, including the President's statement

in his 31 March speech that the United States is ready to send its
representative to "any forum, at any time, to discuss the means of
bringing this war to an end." The President's 29 September 1967 speech
in San Antonio is cited frequently along with several other statements
by him and by Secretary Rusk.

In revealing that Hanoi on the 11th had suggested Warsaw as a site,

the foreign ministry spokesman avoids saying how or where this
"suggestion" was made and does not refer to any private communica-
tions. A NHAN DAN article on the 16th, summarized by VNA and broadcast
in Hanoi radio's domestic service, implies that private exchanges are
not going on. NHAN DAN says that while the United States rejects

the sites for contacts proposed by the DRV, "the spokesman for the

U.S. President claimed that contacts between the DRV and the United
States on the question of the site are continuing. This is yet

another trick of the United States to delay contacts and appease
public protest." DRV media in the past have displayed sensitivity

to reports on private communications with the United States and have on
occasion flatly denied such reports. But those denials were not

made against a background like the current one of a specific public
Hanoi initiative for preliminary contacts leading to possible formal
talks.

President Johnson's complaint, in his remarks upon arrival in Hawaii,
that the DRV had not responded to the U.S. suggestions of sites is
promptly labeled "a distortion of the truth." A Hanoi radio
comentary, broadcast in the domestic service on the 16th, couters
with the argument that the foreign ministry spokesman on the 13th

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
Spas

"officially rejected the sites suggested by the United States as not
convenient to the DRV side." But consistent with Hanoi's avoidance
of mentioning any venues other than Phnom Penh or Warsaw, the
commentary ignores the President's statement that he had proposed
Geneva, Rangoon, New Delhi, Vientiane, Djakarta, or "any other suitable
place." The broadcast interprets the President's statement that Hanoi
has not made "a serious reply" in the two weeks since the U.S.
limitation of air strikes against the North as a "demand for
reciprocity." It routinely says that the United States has no

right to demand reciprocity and repeats that what is needed is a
complete and unconditional cessation of "acts of war" against the

DRV and an end to the "aggression" against Vietnam.

A NHAN DAN commentary, reported by VNA on the 17th, rehashes other
comment in saying that U.S. delaying of preliminary contacts is at
variance with its professed willingness to go anywhere. In mention-
ing the President's trip to Honolulu, NHAN DAN quotes him as saying
that "the U.S. limited bombing has been in force for two weeks with-
out progress toward peace contacts." The paper says nothing about
his complaint over the absence of a Hanoi response; however, it quotes
State Department spokesman McCloskey as saying on the 15th that the
United States hopes for an official message of response from Hanoi on
other sites, and that it is trying to find a mutually acceptable site.

This latest NHAN DAN commentary echoes other propaganda in saying that
world public opinion is demanding that the United States quickly agree
to Warsaw. The commentary dismisses U.S. objections to Warsaw since

it is not a neutral country, but does not defend it as-a site. Other
comment, however, repeatedly notes the size of the U.S. diplomatic
mission there and says there would be no difficulty with communications.
On at least two occasions, Hanoi brings up the fact that the United
States has been using Warsaw as the site for contacts with the CPR.

VNA on the 14th in rounding up press opinion as published in NHAN DAN
quotes AFP to this effect. And the 16 April NHAN DAN commentary, as
broadcast in the domestic service, quotes the Japanese MAINICHI as
saying that it is difficult to understand why the United States refused
Warsaw, where it has held talks with the CPR for years.

MOSCOW Before DRV media had mentioned Warsaw as a site for contacts,
on 12 April a TASS dispatch from its Hanoi correspondents
said that "it is believed in Hanoi official circles" that Washington's
rejection of Warsaw as a site for preliminary contacts was unjustified |
for four reasons: The United States had expressed its willingness to
meet any place, at any time; it said it was willing to establish
contact with the DRV as soon as possible; Warsaw has a U.S. embassy,
a staff of correspondents and communications; and Warsaw has been the
site for over 10 years of Sino-U.S. contacts. Earlier, on the llth,

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
2 5.6

TASS' Hanoi correspondents had cited "reliable sources" as saying that
the DRV had suggested Warsaw as a site for contacts after the United
States rejected Phnom Penh.

Moscow commentators, like Hanoi, charge the United States with
procrastinating and trying to delay talks while continuing to bomb
southern portions of the DRV and preparing for further escalation

in the South. Yuriy Zhukov, in a PRAVDA article carried by the
domestic service on 15 April, says that U.S. propaganda depicted
President Johnson's 31 March announcement of a bombing limitation

and readiness to discuss ways of ending the war as a great concession.
And he adds that "many international observers" think that the United
States expected the DRV to ignore the announcement and that U.S.
"aggression" then could be intensified. Zhukov notes that while
Washington delays the solution of the question regarding the venue
for contacts it is intensifying its military operations in South
Vietnam. He says that the United States is hoping to secure through
force "an advantageous basis" for the solution of the Vietnam question,
and is testing whether it can "extract some kind of concession from
the Vietnamese."

Moscow on the llth, in a domestic service review of the weekly NEW
TIMES, notes that military writer Lt. Col. A. Leontyev recalls that
the Soviet.Government on 5 April officially endorsed the DRV's 3 April
statement, observing that it shows a practical way toward ending the
war. And Leontyev adds that "it is obvious that the time has come for
@ political settlement in Vietnam." (In discussing the war in the
South, Leontyev says the. allies’ casualties are growing. But at the
same time he says that "of course, in any war both sides suffer losses.
The South Vietnam liberation forces, which are fighting a cruel and
powerful enemy, suffer many losses." Such an acknowledgment is rare,
but not unprecedented in Soviet propaganda; Leontyev, for example,
broached the issue in commentaries last January and in November 1967)

TASS' 16 April report of the President's Honolulu trip cites him as
saying on arrival that the United States is ready to meet any
challenge in the field of battle, and interprets this as a U.S.
intention to continue escalation. Comment, including a widely
broadcast commentary by Shakov on the 16th, asserts that the Presi-
dent will discuss further escalation at Honolulu, and, as Shakhov
says, the meeting thus confirms the impression that "Washington
has never really wanted to negotiate on Vietnam."

Moscow's only available mention of the President's comments on Hanoi's
negative attitude regarding contacts comes in a brief broadcast to
the United Kingdom on the 17th which cites him as "alleging" that
"Hanoi was to blame for the delay in choosing the site for preliminary

CONFIDENTIAL

a ’ CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
ae eo

contacts." The broadcast accuses the State Department of making another
move to "torpedo" contacts, now adding the condition that the site must
allow for "participation in the talks of America's allies." The report
further says that after rejecting Phnom Penh and Warsaw as sites,
"Washington now intends to entrust a neutral partner with further
negotiations."

Some Moscow comment--including a Moscow radio broadcast in Mandarin
on 10 April and one in Rumanian on the l2th, as well as a Mandarin
broadcast over Radio Peace and Progress on the 10th-~attacks the
Chinese for ignoring the DRV's 3 April statement declaring readiness
for DRV-U.S. contacts. Referring to NCNA's 5 April commentary
deprecating the bombing limitation, Moscow asserts that by failing to
mention the DRV's statement the Mao clique shows that it is actually
"opposed to this important political proposal of the DRV Government."
The commentators also score NCNA for accusing the USSR of colluding
with the United States against Vietnam, and recall that the USSR
has given the Vietnamese "the largest share of aid." The commentators
recall that Peking had also opposed DRV Foreign Minister Trinh's
statement late last year on willingness to talk if the United States
unconditionally halted the bombing. Moscow has periodically charged
Peking with opposing talks and striving to "prolong" ‘the war.

EAST EUROPE On 12 April Warsaw's PAP releases an "authorized"
statement announcing the readiness of the Polish
Government to "create all necessary and appropriate conditions"
to facilitate a U.S.~DRV meeting in Warsaw. This is Warsaw's first
official comment on the developments of the past two weeks; it had
not officially endorsed the 3 April DRV Government statement although
East Berlin, Bucharest, Sofia, and Prague had done so. In later
routine comment Warsaw reports that the United States rejected
Warsaw as a site for contacts.

On 15 April East Berlin's ADN reports that Deputy Foreign Minister
Kiesewetter received the DRV acting charge d'affaires who handed

him the 13 April DRV Foreign Ministry spokesman's statement at
‘which time Kiesewetter condemned U.S. "delaying maneuvers." On the
same day Sofia's BTA releases a commentary by its editor scoring

the United States for rejecting Hanoi's suggested meeting places.
Other East European media denounce the U.S. moves in routine comment.

PEKING The CPR failure to acknowledge the 3 April DRV
Government statement appears the more blatant in
view of the 15 April PEOPLE'S DAILY Commentator article which dis-
cusses the issue of DRV-U.S. contacts. Commentator notes that the
President has "rejected" Phnom Penh as the site of contacts, without
indicating who proposed the site. He says that this incident alone

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
ae ae

is "enough to reveal that the 'peace talks! of the U.S. imperialist
chieftain are a big fraud." The article does not mention Warsaw,
although it appears four days after reports that Hanoi had Suggested
the Polish capital as an alternate site.

Criticism of the President's announcement of a limitation of the air
strikes against the DRV follows the line of the 5 April NCNA
commentary~-Peking's first and only other comment on the President's

31 March speech. Commentator says that in only two weeks the
President's "murderous intentions are revealed," and the article

cites the callup of reservists and the intensified bombing of the

DRV. The USSR is typically charged with colluding with the
imperialists and the article concludes with Peking's standard line that
the United States must be thoroughly defeated on the Vietnam battle-
field.

Arr Strikes AGAINST THE DRV

The DRV Foreign Ministry spokesman's statement on the 13th and other
propaganda on potential DRV-U.S. contacts complain of the intensity

of air strikes since the President's 31 March announcement of limitation
of the bombing. The spokesman says that aircraft and warships have
intensified their bombing and strafing of DRV territory between the

17th and 20th parallels and that Secretary of Defense Clifford "brazenly
declared that U.S. reconnaissance will continue north of the 20th
parallel." The 16 April NHAN DAN article on the venue for contacts

Says that attacks from Thanh Hoa to Vinh Linh have been stepped up.

And it claims that on the 13th and 1bth many reconnaissance missions
were flown near Hanoi. VNA reports of air activity list areas north

of the 2lst parallel where "air intrusions" allegedly have taken place,
but these items do not mention reconnaissance. And VNA in claiming

that a plane was downed over Haiphong on the 16th does’ not identify the

type.

A NHAN DAN editorial on the 17th hails the "brilliant" air-defense
victories on the 15th. It says that five planes were downed over Nghe
An, Quang Binh, and Ha Tinh provinces, making it one of the biggest
victories in a single day this year. The editorial Claims "massive

U.S. attacks from Thanh Hoa Province to the Vinh Linh area," but asserts
that all attacks have been foiled. It gives credit to the antiaircraft
forces, the missile force, the regional army, and. the militia force. .
Like other comment it links the alleged U.S. delaying tactics on
establishing contacts with the DRV with its intensification of air
strikes in the North and escalation in the South.

Propaganda generally does not claim that there have been air strikes
above the 20th parallel. But VNA on the 15th says that the People's

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL | FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
= 8.

Air Force "blasted down" one of the U.S. aircraft "raiding a populated
area 60 kilometers southwest of Ninh Binh Province capital between the

20th and 2lst parallel." Ignoring the Defense Department denial, the

13 April NHAN DAN Commentator article repeats the earlier charge that

on 4 April "U.S. aircraft attacked Lai Chau Province," and VNA inserts

“1 editor's note explaining that "this is nearly 500 kilometers west-north-
west of Hanoi.” (A 5 April DRV Foreign Ministry spokesman's statement
included Lai Chau in a list of alleged targets without saying anything
about its location. But a5 April NHAN DAN Commentator article noted

the target in Lai Chau Province "close to the Vietnam-China border.")

MILITARY DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SOUTH

Hanoi media still concentrate attention on battles connected with the

two major allied operations in the First and Third Corps: Operation
Pegasus around Khe Sanh, which ended on 15 April, and Operation

Complete Victory--which began on 8 April--and its predecessor Operation
Quyet Thang (determined to win). According to a VNA summary on the 15th,
a QUAN DOI NHAN DAN commentary that day claims that these operations were
launched to conceal allied defeats, give a pretense of initiative, and
cope with the insurgents' "mounting military and political offensive."
The commentary says that.the allies, having been pushed into the towns,
are now unable to defend them and are "trying to ease the pressure by
making desperate sorties into the countryside." ‘The commentary says that
the insurgents with various forms of attacks are "taking full advantage
of the propitious moment with the enemy at last trickling out from

their strongholds and dispersing in the field."

A 16 April QUAN DOI NHAN DAN commentary on General Abrams' appointment
as commander in Vietnam calls Abrams a last choice of the Administration
who can "only worsen the situation.” It says that the replacement

of Westmoreland by Abrams "marks the bankruptcy of the search-and-
destroy and pacification strategy" and, quoting REUTERS as Saying that
the United States was shifting to the clear—and-hold tactics advocated
by Abrams, it claims this is a "step back strategically speaking." The
article also disparages the policy of shifting more of the fighting

to the ARVN troops. Like earlier Hanoi radio comment on the 12th .

and Liberation Radio comment on the 13th, QUAN DOI NHAN DAN asserts
that Abrams will fail and it adds that he will be a scapegoat in the
"final stage" of the war.

KHE SANH The 15 April QUAN DOI NHAN DAN commentary claims that the ©
PLAF struck allied forces on highway 9, causing them to
"bog down" in their "attempt to lift the siege of Khe Sanh" and that
"staggering blows" have been dealt "both to those under siege and to
the reinforcements." It states that the latter "had five battalions
and eight companies completely wiped out or heavily decimated before

CONFIDENTIAL

an 7 * CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968

AO s

the linkup could be made." A commentary in the army paper on the follow-
ing day claims that, "far from relieving Khe Sanh," the air cavalry and
ARVN paratroopers in Operation Pegasus “have thrown this base into great~
er confusion and danger" and have "thus fallen into the PLAF siege."

It says that although the allies reached Khe Sanh, they "did not succeed
in rescuing it because they could not revive the exhausted and weakened
U.S. Marines there."

The PLAF command sent a congratulatory message to units on the Khe Sanh
front, broadcast by Liberation Radio on the 13th, which claims that

in the first three months of this year the insurgents in northern
Quang Tri killed, wounded, or captured nearly 15,000 allied troops,
mostly Americans, and downed or destroyed 250 planes.

VNA on the llth claims that,in the week ending 9 April, the PLAF in-
flicted 2,193 allied casualties, mostly GIs, shot down or damaged 19
planes, and seized a large quantity of military equipment. VNA on

the 14th claims that the PLAF on the 12th and 13th repeatedly "battered"
U.S. cavalry and South Vietnamese paratroopers respectively in Khe Sanh
and Lang Vei, causing many losses. NA on the 15th alleges that from 13
to 15 April the PLAF on the Khe Sanh front "kicked the enemy". out of
Lang Vei and continued besieging "Ta Con"-—-the Khe Sanh base~-"tighten-
ing their noose around this position and encircling and attacking the
enemy encampments in the Khe Sanh area." The item says that during

this period over 300 U.S. and ARVN troops were wiped out, two helicopters
destroyed, and many weapons seized, and claims that this brings the
total of allied troops killed or wounded in this area to more than

3,000 from 3 to 15 April.

On the 13th, according to this same VNA report, the PLAF shelled Ta Con,
the U.S. encampment at Lang Vei, and hills in the Khe Sanh-Lang Vei
area. An attack on Hill 656, five kilometers southeast of Lang Vei, is
alleged to have taken a toll of 70 U.S. air cavalrymen. Shellings on
the llth of Ta Con, Hills 571 and 845, and the eastern part of Pa Ka
allegedly caused over 90 casualties and caused the allies to pull out
of Lang Vei and many surrounding spots. NA on the 16th claims that a
14 April surprise attack by the PLAF on Hill 656 completely wiped out

a U.S. company of over 140 men.

The only action mentioned on the 15th is the shelling of the Ta Con
position. VNA on the 16th, reporting action taking place that day,
claims that PLAF gunners pounded a U.S. company which tried to push
toward Hill 622, wiping out 50 GIs, and that the PLAP intercepted the
rest of the U.S. force, causing 70 casualties, and attacked another
U.S. company aiming for the same hill, causing 40 casualties. At
Hill 519, northeast of Lang Vei, the VNA report claims that the PLAF
fired on two U.S. companies moving toward the hill and "knocked down"

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL BIS. TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968
=40 =

over 50 GIs. VNA says that on the 16th the PLAF inflicted a total of
-210 casualties on U.S. troops in the Khe Sanh area,

SAIGON AND QUAN DOI NHAN DAN in its 15 April commentary
THE THIRD CORPS characterizes the two operations around the Saigon
area, Operation Quyet Thang and its successor
Complete Victory, as "merely loose combinations or small, separate
police raids and a totaling of troops of. all kinds who happen to be
present in the theatre." It says that the allied forces are "operating
without definite direction of attack and practically without
coordination" and claims that the guerrillas frustrated Quyet Thang at
the outset and that Operation Complete Victory will be defeated more
ignominiously.

A Liberation Radio commentary on the 16th claims that in Operation
Quyet Thang about 4,000 troops, mostly Americans, were annihilated and
more than 200 tanks and armored cars and about 30 aircraft destroyed.
In disparaging Operation Complete Victory, the commentary claims that
the units taking part in the. operation are those that were "seriously
defeated" during the general offensive and in Quyet Thang. It asks
how the allies, who were unable to control the five provinces around
Saigon in Quyet Thang, can hope to drive the Viet Cong from the 11
provinces "as they have loudly boasted." The commentary concludes by
asserting that the armed forces and people are determined to turn
Complete Victory into "complete defeat."

Actions connected with these operations which have been: reported by
VNA are all located in Tay Ninh Province. NA on the 15th reports
that against Operation Complete Victory on 12 April, the PLAF mounted
a surprise attack on the encampment of a U.S. battalion 16 kilometers
north of Dau Tieng district town, wiping out over 400 GIs. The VNA _
item also reports a PLAF assault on a position of the U.S. 25th
Division 77 kilometers northwest of Saigon on the lth.

CRIMES NHAN DAN in a commentary on 17 April carried by VNA

that day lists several alleged "crimes" of the allies
and claims that "annihilation is the fate that awaits the killers." The
commentary asserts that these actions point to the fact that "the U.S.
aggressors have been driven to the wall" and they are "taking vengeance
on old people, women, and children." Saying that these acts "cannot
pass with impunity," the paper concludes by recalling attacks by the
PLAF on the allies in areas where the "crimes" reportedly occurred.
There are several VNA items describing specific "crimes" allegedly
committed by the allies, including one on the 16th which claims that
U.S. and Korean troops killed 1,235 people in four districts of Quang
Nam and Quang Ngai provinces since February.

CONFIDENTIAL

wt ” -

CONFIDENTIAL . FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968

ayy
” HMER The An Giang committee of the NFLSV issued a
NEW YEAR communique, summarized by VNA on 13 April, which

ordered the PLAF in the area to cease military
attacks during the Khmer new year, from 13 to 16 April. It says that
the Khmer ARVN troops and personnel of the Saigon government will be
allowed to return home provided they "do not go by groups and do not
carry weapons or means of espionage." PLAF troops are urged to help
the Khmers but also to heighten their vigilance and punish any allied
attempts to disturb the festival. On 23 March the western Nam Bo NFLSV
committee issued a communique allowing new year's visits by Khmer troops
and government personnel but did not order a cease fire. VNA publicized
this communique 27 March and Liberation Radio broadcast it on 10 April.

WESTERN, CENTRAL The third special commummigques of the PLAF commands
NAM BO COMMUNIQUES of western and central Nam Bo were broadcast by

Liberation Radio on 29 and 30 March but are only
now available. The communiques update the "victories" Since the
beginning of the Tet offensive on 31 January and cover the period up to
15 March; the second special communique from each of these areas was
broadcast on 7 March. (The third special communique of the southern
Trung Bo PLAF command, dated 20 March, was also broadcast by Liberation
Radio on 30 March, but poor reception precluded processing. The last
communique for southern Trung Bo was broadcast on 11 March. )

The western Nam Bo commmique--dated 20 March--claims the "annihilation
or capture" of more than 18,000 allied troops, including 2,440 Americans,
and the "disintegration" of more than 30,000 ARVN troops, policemen, and
GVN personnel. The communique says that 375 planes were destroyed, 27
military vehicles smashed, and 77 tankers and fuel transports sunk or
burned, The casualties, according to the commentary, put out of action
over 40 percent of the ARVN force in the area,

The central Nam Bo command communique, dated 15 March, claims that
insurgents killed, wounded, or captured more than 18,500 allied
troops, including 3,100 GIs. It says that 430 military vehicles

and 100 planes were destroyed and 60 Ships sunk. Like the western
Nam Bo communique, it claims the liberation of large areas. Hailing
attacks on communication lines, it asserts that insurgents destroyed
20 allied roads. ;

REVOLUTIONARY Expanded claims for the leadership role of the
ADMINISTRATIONS "revolutionary" or "people's" administration in

South Vietnam are made in a 9 April Liberation
Radio commentary. It asserts that the administration is being built
"into a strong and stable administration which will lead the general

CONFIDENTIAL

CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
17 APRIL 1968

= 49-0

offensive and uprising quickly to complete victory" and that "the
people's administration will become the single organization which will
rule over South Vietnam and will lead the anti-U.S. national salvation
resistance of the South Vietnamese people to final victory." At the
Same time, the commentary speaks of the NFLSV as being the leader of
the South Vietnamese people.

The commentary repeats the claim of the fourth PLAF special communique
last month that 1.6 million people in more than 600 villages and hamlets .
have been liberated and Says that "the people's administration has been
and is being established throughout the liberated areas, the rural

areas, in many towns and areas close to large cities, and in important
“reas along the strategic communicatibdns lines of the enemy." A

Liberation Radio broadcast in Mandarin on 12 April echoes the 9 April
commentary and further claims the establishment of "peasants' revolu-
tionary committees." It says "revolutionary political power" has been
set up "in many streets of Saigon, Hue, and many other provincial
cities,"

THUA THIEN-HUE On 16 April Liberation Radio broadcasts the third
COMMITTEE communiqué of the Thua Thien-Hue Revolutionary

1 April meeting, presided over by Le Van Hao, to review the situation

during the past month and to set forth a number of new tasks, a

(The second communique of the committee was broadcast by Liberation
Radio on 6 March.) ‘The communique claims that, due to the massive
allied troop buildup, the area holds an important position in the
southern battlefield, Routinely claiming success in the spring
offensive, the communique sets forth tasks for the people to take
advantage of the "favorable situation." Stating that the "revolu-

SECURITY Liberation Radio on 15 April broadcasts a commentary
on "vigilance" and the "safeguarding of secrets"
attributed to "Tan Cong"—a pseudonym which can be translated as
"attack." Tan Cong Says that since the spring offensive the allies
have tried to reestablish their control machinery in "recently
liberated" areas by using "remaining troops for relief operations"

CONFIDENTIAL

ee oe a a

a ne — ~ CONFIDENTIAL FBIS TRENDS
, eges : se : : es 17 APRIL 1968
as

: in an attempt to drive out the insurgent armed forces and by "every
cunning trick and every form of espionage to collect information for
their bombing and shelling and their rangers." He insists that allied
efforts have failed because of "our network to safeguard secrets and
guard against evil acts" throughout the liberated areas. The commentary
stresses the role of the people in security efforts and cites alleged
instances of the people's cooperation in discovering and capturing
allied "agents."

CONFIDENTIAL
