The Character of the Goulart Regime in Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013622, dated 3 January 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013622).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

me
. é fu

fe
a

CONTROJ¢ _
j
RARY SNIE 93-63
LBy LIS Review 27 February 1963

THE CHARACTER OF THE GOULART
REGIME IN BRAZIL

NOTE: This is the final version of the estimate and additional text
will not be circulated.

Approved for Release
Date TEEN

Central Intelligence Agency

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.

ae Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 27 February 1963. Concurring were the Director of
Intelligence and Research, Department of State; The Direc-
tor, Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief of Staff
for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant Chief
of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy;
the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF; the Director
for Intelligence, Joint Staff; and the Director of the National
Security Agency. The Atomic Energy Commission Repre-
sentative to the USIB and the Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside
of their jurisdiction.

CLASSIFICATION OF we @BPPCIAL USE ONLY |

This material contains information offectinggill™ pe Girona! Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage gimmie 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which ‘anner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

27 February 1963

SUBJECT: SNIE 93-63: THE CHARACTER OF THE GOULART REGIME IN BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the character of the Goulart regime and the courses of
action it is likely to take with respect to the financial problems con-

fronting Brazil.

NOTE

This summary estimate is based on extensive research done in prepara-
tion for a more elaborate national intelligence estimate on the situation
and prospects in Brazil. This summary treatment is presented now in view
of the impending visit of the Brazilian Minister of Finance. The more
extensive estimate will be produced later, when the results of his visit

can be taken into account.

_ Excluded tug

CE: ior
de a

THE ESTIMATES

1. President Goulart is essentially an opportunist. Although his
political career has been based primarily on association with organized
labor and radical nationalists, including associations with known and
suspected Communists, there is little reason to believe that he is dedicated
to a radical transformation of Brazilian society or to a radical reorienta-
tion of Brazil's independent foreign policy. He appears to be interested
in political power pointy for the personal prestige, popularity, and
prequisites to be gained thereby. If he believed it to be politically
feasible, he would probably seek to establish a more authoritarian govern-
ment along the lines of Vargas' Estado Novo (1937-1945) or the Peron

regime in Argentina.

2. The circumstances of his accession to the presidency of Brazil
have given Goulart a deep distrust of actual or potential opposition,
particularly in the military establishment. He has taken care to appoint
to high civil and military offices men on whose continuing personal sup-
port he has felt he could rely. A considerable number of them have been
notably pro-Communist or anti-US in attitude. Nevertheless, Goulart has
also among his advisers men of more moderate views. In domestic and
foreign policy he has shifted from moderate to radical attitudes and
back again according to his calculation of the political requirements

of the moment.

a, Be

3. Until recently Goulart has been preoccupied with his campaign
to recover full presidential powers, to the neglect of the problems
presented by Brazil's runaway inflation and by mounting budgetary and
foreign exchange deficits. Having recovered full powers, he is now
addressing himself to these problems. His principal advisers on these
matters are Celso Furtado,~ author of a three-year plan for economic

2/

development, and San Thiago Dantas,— the new minister of finance, whose

task it is to obtain urgently needed external financial support.

4, Since 1950 Brazil's expansionist ne policies have produced
a claimed growth in GNP averaging 6 percent per year, or nearly 3 percent
on a per capita basis. These policies have also led to large deficits in
the balance of payments and to domestic inflation, which in 1962 exceeded
50 percent per year. Inflation has in turn tended to aggravate the balance
of payments problem, partly by its adverse effects on the flow of private

capital; it has tended to stimulate remittances and to reduce new foreign

1/ Furtado is a reputable economist and planner, with an eclectic,
~ but predominantly statist attitude. He was formerly active in
the Commmist movement and still retains close associations

with radical leftist and nationalist elements.

2/ San Thiago Dantas is a political opportunist. Originally a
Brazilian fascist, he perceived the political potential of
Goulart's Labor Party and became one of its principal leaders.
Although best known for his opposition to the US at Punta del
Este, he is currently urging Goulart toward an accommodation
with the US in order to obtain US financial support.

investment. To some extent inflation has also discouraged exports, notably
of meat, and has encouraged large-scale smuggling to the detriment of gove
ernment tax and exchange income. At the present time Brazil has an external
debt totaling about 3 billion dollars. Payments of over 900 million are

due in 1963, of which an estimated 200-300 million dollars is owed to
private and official US creditors. Of the estimated 1963 balance of pay-
ments deficit of 825 million dollars about 500 million remains uncovered

by financing now in sight.

2+» As indicated in Furtado's three-year plan of economic development,
the government gives priority to maintaining rapid economic growth, but
also proposes a gradual attack on domestic inflation. According to the
plan, GNP is to grow at 7 percent per year, supported by annual foreign
loans and capital investment of 500 million dollars to maintain develop-
mental imports at the level of recent years. The rate of inflation is to
be reduced to 25 percent in 1963 and 15 percent in 1964 through various
measures of internal reform, including decreases in government expenditures
and increases in revenue, the reduction of subsidies, and the use of "non-
inflationary" means to finance government deficits. Steps have already
been taken to increase taxes on income and consumption and to remove

subsidies on imported wheat, newsprint, and petroleum.

6. The Furtado plan appears to have been designed with Goulart's

political needs very much in mind and in an effort to solve Brazil's

ace

SE

financial problems without austerity. It attempts the difficult feat of
reducing the rate of inflation and at the same time maintaining a high
rate of economic growth, and relies on extensive foreign assistance to
make these both possible. Although the plan calls for certain unilateral
Brazilian actions, it provides little evidence of any disposition to face
the hard realities of the Brazilian situation or to make decisions of a

politically difficult character.

7. Negotiations in recent months appear to have shaken the belief
of the Goulart regime that the US is so deeply committed that it must come
to an arrangement satisfactory to Brazil. The Brazilians now appear to
realize that the US will not meet all of Brazil's financial needs, and to
recognize that agreement with the US and the IMF is prerequisite to sate
isfactory arrangements with European and private creditors. Dantas has
said that the Brazilian government is willing to go beyond the stabiliza-
tion measures contained in the Furtado plan. However, Goulart is most
unlikely to make any concessions that he would consider prejudicial to
the maintenance of a high rate of economic growth in Brazil, a matter
of prime political concern, and this will seriously limit his ability to

attack effectively inflation and the balance of payments problem.

8. If the financial assistance which Dantas is able to obtain from
Western sources falls far short of that which Brazil now seeks, a sub-

stantial default on Brazil's external obligations would be inevitable and

severe economic disruption and hardship would ensue. In such circum-
stances, Goulart would probably adopt a radical leftist, ultranation-
alist policy line and intensify efforts to obtain aid from the Soviet
Bloc. While the Bloc could make considerable contributions to Brazilian
development over the longer term, it is unlikely that it could render
much effective aid on short notice. Goulart would seek to blame the
economic deterioration on US hard-heartedness, probably with considerable
success. He would seek to control the internal situation through the im-
position of authoritarian political and economic controls, and to disarm

any opposition by appeals to Brazilian patriotism.

9. If Dantas does obtain sufficient financial assistance to support
substantially the Furtado plan, Goulart may conclude that it would be to
his political advantage to pursue a moderate political course for the next
year or two. His constancy cannot be relied upon, however, His course
will be determined by the pressures exerted upon him from all sides as the
political situation develops. If it appeared to him that ‘he was losing
his basic support on the left without gaining any reliable compensatory
support at the center, he would be likely to revert toa leftist, ultra-

nationalist course.

10. Should Goulart embark on an extreme radical-authoritarian course,
he would risk provoking a military-conservative coup against him, a factor

which would be taken into account in his calculations. Such a coup's

a6 ia

chances of success would depend to a considerable degree on how the issue
was defined and the lines drawn, as well as on the timing. As time
passes, Goulart will have the opportunity to establish more of his per-
sonal supporters in key military positions, thus strengthening his con-
trol over the military establishment and reducing the likelihood of a

successful coup.

il. Under even the most favorable conditions, Brazil faces the pros-
pect of serious economic difficulties and recurrent political crises during

the next year or two.
