EstimatedD Pub Date) Annex B; Para-military; Parts Two & Four
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135836, dated 5 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135836).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

“ANNEX B

PARA-MILITARY
PART TWO by Assistant PM Officer, C J

Departure from LINCOLN was rade early in June with several purposes an
in mind to be accomplished upon arrivalf >) They were! H

a.  Brirg the shock troops to a state of preparedness which would
permit tie initiation of the campaign at an early date and at the
game timo would permit support of a premature uprising which might

be causei by any one of a nvaber of actions within the target country.

a
sy ‘Hever1ea
SVH INHHNDI0d SIH.

b. Orgenize five-man "Hornet" teams for the harassment of the £
enemy in localities far removed from the obvious area of activity.

c, Launch the remaining resident radio operators to their respec-
tive points, q
f

a. Move all shock troop ecuipment to selected staging areas near
the bordsr.

xa ‘CUEILINGS
CEAOUAY NATE

tb

ei Move by all possible methods, land, sea and air, arms to the
inner organizations,

fy Bring sabotage plans to the final stages Ready the sab leaders
for launching to their areas.

. Prevare c a) for

aunching to his targets:

h. Check the final military plans and modify them to suit the
latest analysis of the situation.

Upon arrival, and after meeting with{ an

ag well as with all the Leaders of the CASTILLO Arras org-nization, it wes
obvious that much of the above would be very difficult to accomplish in
the short tims which remained. It was apparent thct CASTILLO Armas had very
little knowle2ge of the numerical strength of his own organization. At
various times he claimed to have from 300 to 500 nerf -} It
wag on thé bovis of these figures that the decision to form the five-man
teams was ‘mada. During the attexzpts to form these groups CASTILLO Armas
made a number of excuses as to Wiy this coule not be done. It was finally
apparent that he undoubtedly did not have the men that he claimed to have
and a list of all mexnf Jwas demanded by name. He submitted

a list of men far below the number that we hed hoped was present. The list
contained 150 names. This not only did not permit the formation of the
five-man team3, but it also did not’ furnish the required numbers for the
shock troop opganization. This information came only a week before the
intended D-Day.

Upon the receipt of this information, m first inclination was to
relay the shocking facts to LINCOLN with an urgent plea to postpone the
initiation of the campaign. After mich careful consideration, however,
4t was my decision that due to the possibility of gathering considerable

& 10 .-
bs ee Oe era
2 eee

leg wees

MP SECRET

ypHSUTeESS

sympathizers along the way, we ccld launch the caxpaign <s planned. I felt
that any relaying of such informtion would five tho effect of detracting
from and dampening the enthusiasm of the CASTILLO Armas organization as

well as having the effect of possibly postponing a campaign which might bog
down hopelessly if not permitted to begin on schedule.

Mich of the preparation for the campaign was made very difficult by
the turn of evants within the target country. The crack-down after the
first leaflet drop made arms ingzs2ss almost ‘:apossible. Fost of our
methods broke down completely and we hed to raly on such rsthods asl 2
and his plane delivering arms te nis personal finca, We t2re 2dle to send
individuals across the line with arms in suitsases and bacs. It is not
known at this time how mich of that was effective. Me tried every method
imaginable anc we ara confident that soue of them worked. Even the launching
of the radio overators was extremely difficult and hazardous for them. We
are sure that a number of them were picked up and of these who did get to
their respective are2s, only a few came on thz air.

C Jhad done a fine job cf preparing the sabotage leaders and all
were eager to get in. and begin thair work, Tiere remained the problem of
getting the proper equipment in for them to work with. Scme was sent in
through © Dand some was taken in by hand. 7] While mentioning£ a
it might be added that he had done woncers in organizing CASTILLO Armas'
staff into the proper sections, All hands hei the utmost respect for

Cc -Jand his command presence 23 well as his language avalifications made
him invaluabic,

; — In looking over the final military plans, it struck re that the move-

7 mant-of ourt Jtrocps by way of Gualen woul’ not only give the eneny
adequate warning of the movement but the concentration of Communist per-
sonnel at Gualan would hinder our advance to such a degree that theL p|
enemy forces might stage a successful counter--attack, It appeared that a
pincers movermnt on € “would be more likely to succeed, A plan was

worked out to bring an additional force from Copan Ruinas dow through
Camotan and Jocotan for an attack upon Chiquimmla and ther-~> tof «2 The
mission of this force was 1) to aid in the canture of€ Jin the avent that
thal Jteam experienced difficulty, and 2) -*f Hell to us early, to
move rapidly through the Jelapa z>es to the capital. In the latter case,
thet Jforces would protect the rear of this column. CASTILLO Armas' staff
took to this plan with alacrity and it was decided that thr CP would be

with this grovo.

Much of ry time was taken up with interv’ews of perscnnel newly
arrived from Cuatema.a, both military and civ:.lian. Upon the arrival of

C yh and, following an intervie with him, I recommended
that he betplaced in command of tin Tfores, replacing
I felt that asf “‘Jhad been in commend of the gerrison off = =Jat one

time, along with his higher rank and greater =xperience, 1? should be com-
mander of this very important forze,

Another crrival was Colonelf 3 I was very much impressed
with his force and bearing and rcsommended hi: for some cc-umand, In this
case it was command of the force which was to cross from Nueva Ocotepeque.

In the absence of the five-man teams for harassment, it was decided
to utilise the talents of £ Jin this line. He had b2en most anxious
to do something other than delive> arms to his finca and claimed to be able
to perform borbing missions with his Cessna 1€0, I was frankly skeptical

Ragu f

bo. gre

\

IY SCR:

= ae on © Pita as
RYOTE Leese cs

at ste ist ya ts eos
(eed seeubade

about the accuracy of such bombing, but he convinced me that it was ‘feasible.

L Jeonstructed bombs of TNT blocks surrounding ccncussion grenades,
armed so that they would detonate upon imoact. © Qtook off or his
initial flight of this type, headed E *}. He had with him twe

men, for a3 a “pombardier," He flew in almost on the ground toward the

gasoline tanks at San Jose. As he approached the tanks, he pulled into a

semiestall and the bombardier threw the bomb. His first attenpt was a

direct hit and the tank burst into flame. He then flew to Retaluehue and

did the same thing to the SHELL and ESSO tanks there. He ran’ out of bombs

but "strafed" th Dtanks with a Madsen gun, successfully puncturing

them and then set them afire with grenades, C Jflew another of

these missions to € DHis audacity was illustrated by his calling the

field tower atl ;Jsaying that he was an air force plane wishing to land.

The towar gave him the proper instructions and he came in to his bombing :

mission on the TEXACO tank. He received mich AA fire as he tried to bomb “i

an ATS on the runway of the field, In eluding the fire he dived into a i
t group of trees and caught 2 branch of one of them in his control surfaces, :

He had to land at the first available field{ }io remove it,

cf Wao very anxious to perform very hazardous missions at all
time and was” invaluable to our efforts. .

Our safe house facilities inl Slinecluded a house where the
otaff of CASTILLO Armas could function as a unit. There we had maps,
tables, conference rooms and briefing rooms. £ Diand I mt there every

day early in the morning and worked there all day with the staff. C -)
worked in another safe house, too, which served as a storehouse for our
supplies. He worked with his sabotage leaders there. The latter house
was located high on the mountainside outside of the city. Upon the arrival
of the FCP radio personnel, we activated another safe house about halfway
betwee 2 This nouse was ideal for the

7 radio station as it was well into the suburbs and comings and goings were
not noticed. After this house was opened, we ment much of our time there.

Upon the arrival of £ J, the final touches were put
on the plans and very shortly after his arrival the campaign was initiated.
It should ba noted here that the entire organization of CASTILLO Armas
had completed confidence in £ Sand in his leadership. So far as I
could tell, none of his decisions were ever questionned and for that
matter, neither were any of mine, befre he came, CASTILLO Armas made the
same plea for strong air attacks tof }tnat he had made previously
to me, He was not given any assurance whatsoever that air support wuld be
forthcoming other than for air delivery of supplies, which we felt would
be a sure thing. All of the personnel who came out of the country to us

. Jwere of the firm opinion that, should powerful air blows be
delivered on the city in the early phases, the campaign would not be a long
one. The concensus of opinion was that if several bombs were dropped -
on the Guardia de Honor, on La Aurora Air Field, on the Base Militar and
possibiy one other one on a selactad tarecat. ~ the Government would fall
imeadiately. Colonel f > brother £ Vnsisted
that the Government almost fell with the first leaflet drop.

Just before the arrival off. Jourf Jorganizer returned £3
Cc He had been captured by several soldiers who recognized him
from a formsr association in the army. He was tortured but escaped to
return with valuable information, People were coming and going along the
border at this time without interference, particularly in thef Jand
{ Jareas.

; One of our big problems was the movement of men end supplics Cc _l
ia 3 We had cooperation. witht cdan representative

‘ara3 to the extent that he agreed to send a truckload of arms into
the country C D However, this did not work out, We

did send several loads of arms ian specially constructed private automobiles
with false compartments. We had no cooperation from the President there.

Movement of shock troops to the staging areas began in small numbers.
Receiving parties were sent ahead and when we received word that the areas
were ready, movement was initiated, Movement was very slow and in very
small numbers. Finally, when time became short and D-day-approached, more
speed was necessary and troops were moved in larger and less clandestine
groups. This movement caused a flood of newspanermen to descend £ po]
c J, miking operations all the more difficult. Final movement of
the shock troops brought the operation fully into the open as it becane
necessary to move the troops by commercial,chzrtored airplanes, This was
necessary in order to assemble the troops at the staging areas at the
proper time for the attack.

Difficulty was encountered in the plans for the seaborne operation
fort for which we had purchased a boat et La Ceiba on the north coast
of Honduras. The boat was loaded with equipment which was delivered to

La Ceiba through the moperstion of [ Jwho, incidentally,
was of tremendous help in many ways. © Dtransported equicment
int ‘Jplanes for us to many points end into fields which were

not well-suited to his planes. A group was dispetched to’ La Ceiba te man

the boat but discovered it to be missing. Presumably the boat had made _

# run to the tslands for cover purposes, Finally the team caught up with

the boat and boarded it for the operation. It is not entirely clear at

this date what developed from this operation. it is known that the beat
was picked up, but more than that is not known,

Communications were good with the exception that at night all con-
tact was lost betweenL SJand SHERWOOD, thereby causing a terrific
pile~up of messages in the morning and a conscquent bogging down of those
massages, There was considerable time lag betzcen the sending of r2ssages
from the field and their reception atc a¥or this reason, it was
decided to move the back tor a3 in order to give more
adequate service to the field. With respect to enswering some mossages
which came in from the field, it was frequentiy impossible to gain contact
with the field stations for some hours. More urgent messages would follow
and some of the original messages went unanswered.

With regard to security, it is obvious that many of the desirablo
security measures which would normally be eroicyed in @ truly clandestine
operation were disregarded in this instance. =n order to accomplish the
job, much of the clancestinity had to be abandoned. We had to mo-re
openly int , “ito and from sufe houses, thereby un-
doubtedly identifying ourselves with the organisation of CASTILLO Armas,
It ca be said, though, that this movement was kent to an absolute minimum
and that ome of it was absolutely necessary to accomplish the task. The
safe house where the FCP was located was by fer the best and kep the most
clandestine.

«After the movement i- £ J, the FCP functioned much more efficiently
‘and was able to offer the desired support to the field. The fact that the
c steff worked right with the Air Ops facilitated this support, in
addition to keeping everyone informed as the the field situation - which
situation had not existed prior ‘S° time.

~ 134.

fesse 7
Paste ee Ut kaes

atnseey

t Cre RE |
yt t pee
Re AL

COMMENTS

Other than the numerous small Jessons learned during the campaign,
there are, in my opinion, two main lessons to be learned from the overall
situation, First, at the very outset of the planning for an operation of
this type, a decision should be made as to the importance of. its success.
Upon reaching this decision, the amount of power to be utilized and the
method of employment of this power should-also be decided. This power
(and in this case it was air bombardment) should not be withheld. It should
be utilized at. the very beginning of the operation. It is my considered
opinion that if the air power which was used in the final phases of the
operation had been used on the first day in the same manner, the campaign
would not have lasted 48 hours. Undoubtedly, a few lives would have been
lost in the bombing, but many more lives could have been saved by shortening
the campaign. This opinion is based upon both the reports of persons who
came from Jjand my previous knowledge of the Latin people,

Secondly, I believe that thef Aprogram could have been better
coordinated with ther Tiprogram. By this I refer to the leaflet
drops. The reaction to these drops was terrific, The results, however,
were definitely detrimental to thef “effort, and the reaction of the
staff of CASTILLO Armas € .) was one of dejection. It was the
opinion of a11 of us, including C sdthat it would have been well if
the field had been consulted before the decision to make the drop had been
made, The leaflet drops caused a crackdown within Guatemala which would
have come eventually when the movement of our troops to the border was
noticed, but it came at a time when we were still able to make delivery of
arms, radio operators and sabotage personnel into the country, After the

' crackdown, it was virtually impossible to accomplish this. C a
pleaded with us to permit no more leaflet drops as every one reduced the
effectiveness of his air operations. The overall effect of such ,)

activity cannot be underestimated, but it is recommended that in the future
they be coordinated with thet activity so that they can be mtually
supporting. .

With regard to communications, as in operations in which I have been
involved in the military service, mech of the planning is based upon split
second contact between units and command by radio, I have never seen this
contact work out completely as planned, even with highly trained operators,
In thie case, with indigenous operators and difficult conditions, while
the resulte were amazing, they did not work out as planned. Only in the
final phases did the radio commo begin to work properly.

Finally, while an operation of this type is most difficult to keep
clandestine, it would have been mich more easily accomplished if the enemy
had not beeh fully alerted some weeks before D-day, Had not martial law
been proclaimed and the curfews, police patrols, etc., not been in effect,
our movement and sabotage plans would have been mach more likely to succeed,
It is not known at this time how mch of our sabotage was completed, but
so far not mich of it has been reported.

ANNEX B
PARA-HILTTARY

PART FOUR ~ by PM Operations Officer, L |

The following is a summary of the course of events from the
time C Jwas dispatched 1 jit January 1954, to the end
of activities against Guatemala,

The synopsis will attempt to shed light on all phases, that is:
Training, organization, security, operational matters and the effect
which the overall training had on the final phase and success of the
project, This report is divided into three phases: (1) From
c Tideparture to the White Paper; (2) Training period;

(3) Setting up of the para-military organization of CASTILLO Armas

Phases 2 and 3 are considered the most important
as far asl Jactivitiés are concerned. They deal mostly with
training and organizational setup,

PHASE I

Upont Jearrivail fl 3a semi-organization for para-
military activities had been set up. A total of fifteen men were on
hand as the advanced training element. The equipment had not arrived
and selection of the training site had not been settled.

Originally, training was to begin by 1 January but up te that
date no facilities had been made available.

After considerable negotiations witht 4 authorization was
given to commence movement of personnel and equipment to C

C

First difficulties encountered were movements of equipment and
personnel while taking into consideration the most strict security
measures, After an unsuccessful attermt to have C Z¥urnish a
boat for transfer and movement, negotiations with a private concern
were made to rent a suitable- launch, Cover story was that a crew
of engineers were to work on private experiments for[ . This
story was maintained throughout entire project,

*

On taking over£ Athe onty facilities nade available
were a barn and an inadequate water well, A complete training site
had to be constructec. ‘Two living quarters, mess hail, sanitary
units and showers were built along with development of suitable
areas for training activities. During this period evaluations,
observations. complete interviews and background studies were nade
of the trainees, Food and building materials were shipped on a
daily basis and continued until approximately 22 Jamary.

On or about 22 Janvary food shipments were discontinued,
{reasons unkmown tol ~Jat that time) -..though daily messages
were air dropped stating all was fine and that an attempt by
r Jwas being made to purchase a boat tc enable the
project to discontinue use of the rented launch. No attempts were

-19.

"a TT

j
‘
s

'e Tie Pal

made to pick up our distress messages telling that absolutely no
food was available and that serious conditions existed
although a pre-arranged method for pick-ups of messages had been
made. (A rig had been constructed solely for this purpose.)

During this critical period “|had one serious malaria
case, an appendicitis case, a hernia patient and two VD cases. wo
medical items had been included in the entire shipment of equipment.
Every effort was made to justify the conditions to the trainees.

It was certainly one of the darkest periods as far as the trainees
were concerned and it is mentioned here only pecause[,. :.. }was
never allowed to forget it by the trainees who had experienced it.
After a week of such conditions, a small boat arrived with small
quantities of foodstuffs and building materials. J.mediately

returned {, ‘Jto inquire about the disorganized logistics. —

On arrival at.c, all newspapers were carrying the accounts
that CHACO DELGADO had passed on to the Guatemalan goverment.

As{ -]was in the United States,£ immediately began
liaison with[ 3, requesting a new location. «Arrangements were
made and all equipment and personnel were evacuated thet sane night
without incident or problems.

Again, the new location was without adequate facilities and
work was begun immediately to construct suitable billets, training
sites, etc,

During the brief stay £ _j, some training hed begun,
primarily to develop a small cadre for future use as instructors.

A half-dey training and work schedule had to be implemented.
Labor units worked in the mornings and group instruction took place
during the afternoons, Individual instructions were held after
supper.

During this’early training period only one major problem was on
hand, It had been reported that the advance element would be
comprised of CASTILLO Armas! top leaders who were to be semi-trained
or experienced, and to hear in mind that they were to be the revolt's
organizers. This was truly an underestimate. In fact, of the first
twenty-seven trainees arriving atc only four had the possi-
bilities, or were considered capable, of becoming organizers or
leadgrse This later slowed down normal training operations because
separate groups had to be maintained.

Schedules were revised and instructions changed to meet the
requirements for the conditions originally set up. Three groups were
established which consisted of officers, sab trainees anc troops.
Three complete running schedules, independent of each other, were
drawn up. During the second phase of the training, sab trainees
and troops were made interchangeable.

COMMENTS :

1. Security prior to the "White Paper" had been extremely 1ax
on the part of the personnel working it A This was primarily
because no control was maintained over tne personnel, No serious
precautions or attempts at compartmentation had been undertaken.

8Go8

f

Compartmentation was unheard of among the principal factions and
contacts in most cases were made overtly. A cutout system was
never employed.
2. Wo adequate facilities were naintained for complete
security regarding incoming or outgoing correspondence, Safes
Were not made available and file folders were available for
. inspection by anyone. All personal folders were made inter-
changeable among the principalsh D DELGADO and a
-The "need~to-know" principle was never racticed. All conversations,
even those regarding the highest operational matters, were discussed
“openly" with absolutely no regard for security.

3. It is felt that because of the above lax security DELGADO
was able to secure and photograph a large mmber of documents.

PHASE IT

On receiving word to reactivate training atC

ali
2
efforts were then concentrated on the training prosram. 2

By the early part of March a total of 65 trainees were at
C |

The following schedule was adopted and carried out with full
, force:
ra

a. Classes for officers were held from 0700 to 1800
hours and from 1930 to 2230 hours,

bo. Classes for Sab personnel were identical,

c. Classes for the troops were the sane except for guard
and KP duties.

During the first three weeks, theory and blackboard problems
and instructions were in order. Classes organized for officers
concentrated primarily on the following courses:

a Troop leadershin.

b. Command and staff problems.

c. Hap reading and terrain evaluation,

d. Basic infantry tactics.

e. Deployment of troops in guerrilla warfare.

££, Guerrilla tactics.

€. Effective use of fire pover.

h. Supply problems and aerial resupply.

i. First aid.

jg. Attack on, and control of, cities,

~?1Ll«

aL

k, Security a
1. Nomenclature, care and cleaning of all weapons.
m, Tradecraft problems.

Subjects on which. stress was placed were: Deployment of troops,
effective use of fire power, aerial resupply, map reading, troop
leadership and guerrilla tactics, Security was stressed in trade-
craft instruction. Also included were lectures on cutout systems,
contacts, surveillance, CE, CI, etc. After the theory and black-
board instruction, live problems were conducted.

Officers were then assigned definite jobs and placed as group
leaders. A continusl rotation to various duties was mandatory for
each officer to familiarize him with other duties in addition to his
squad duties. Such duties as Sanitation, Hess, Adjutant, First Aid
(Medical Officer), Instructor, Liaison, Staff Control, etc., gave
each officer a wealth of experience.

During the same period Sab training was also conducted in full
force. Selected Sab trainees totaled approximately 30, with an
eventual prospect of using the best 20 for operations. The training
commenced with preliminary theory instruction. During the course
of training it was discovered that most of the trainees were limited
in mathematical calculations and a simplification method had to be
employed. Stress was on photograph targets, rather than mathematical
calculation. Included during this period were simulated charge
positions, actual handling of charges and detonators, electric wiring,
handling and demonstrations of electric and non-electric caps, time
calculations and improvised charges,

During the second week actual participation in sab problems was
conducted by the trainees, permitting the student to attain the
necessary confidence in handling explosives. .

The third week was a continual nightmare for the trainees,
Strict problems were conducted mostly at night. Stress was on
target approach and coordinated attacks. A model village was
erected in the midst of the jungle approximately six kilometers
fromn€ «} It consisted of several small houses, rail track
sections, small generators, automotive parts and gas and oil drums,
Approach to target was consistently changed with simulated action
being conducted while trainees were at work, Observers were always
on the ‘spot for checking of sab personnel or teams.

The third element, the foot soldiers, were instructed in care
and cleaning of weapons, firing techniques, patrol and recon pro-
cedures, methods to overcome terrain difficulties, security,
individual survival, first aid, map study, etc

By late March and early April the three groups were working
together in an effort to establish coordinated attacks. Constant
critiques were in order. For final exercises a three day CPX was
conducted. - :

On many occasions C F student tactical radio operators
were utilized in training, sab and field problems.

COMMENTS :

_ ie .During the entire Phase II period,£ Joore in mind the
necessity for developing "organizers't and in some respects viewed it
with skepticism for the following reasons:

a. The caliber of personnel sent to SARANAC was not
what it was expected to ba.

be Of the 99 trainees, only about ten were qualified
as organizers,

Ce Host of the men were of the "hood" type and could bs
only be utilized in regular troop units, guerrilla :.
or sab teams. ‘.

2. For the above reasons the term "instructors" was designated
to what was originally intended to be organizers, According to later
results the organizers had been selected and were either living
covertly or overtly in their designated targets,

3. Logistics: This was. above all, the biggest headache. It
took anywhere from one complete day to two days for the purchasing
of foods and materials to maintain the cam actively. Goods had to

‘Abe purchased ir ‘I Personnel had to be detached with a
considerable loss of valuable man-hours,

hk. Security: Overall excellent, Guards were yosted on a
regular tour of duty. During the period saveral stragglers were
made:.captive and turned over tol, -eJ On one occasion, two
"gun runners" were apprehended who later turned out to be principals
in the attempted assassination off «J It was also during this
phase thatt D requested the transfer of €
tol because of their lamess in Security.

5S. Idaison: Liaison was maintained WithL,
c Aon a very good relationship, discussing
periodically matters as directed by LINCOLN, procurement of
documentation, local authority support, etc, Relationship with
topg ‘Jofficials was on such a confidential basis that it
enabled fl ato obtain considerable first-hand, high-level infor-
mation with regard to internal and external government machinations,
This is evident from cable correspondence maintained during that

3

period,
“*
6, ‘Training: On completion of training » it was felt byf a)
that results obtained could be considered excellent for the following
reasons:

& Ideological motives were chiefly involved rather than
materialistic.

b. Trainees were extremely eager and willing to learn,
Their willingness to endure the hardship of training
and their constant cooperation made it extremely easy
to handle and instruct the men,

c. The majority had been at one time or another political
prisoners or tortured by the opposition,

~ 23-07

dc took advantage and exploited the "Sentimentalism,"
a Latin trait, at every opportunity.

e. Trainees were made to feel "highly superior" in relation
to the opposition troops by constantly indoctrinating
them in the fact that they would be better trained,
have superior weapons and fire power, anc were led by
highly efficient officers.

f, Morale during the period of training was always high.
Every effort to attain the best recreational facilities
was made, Disagreements among the men were referred to
r Sand were always settled by boxing matches.

ge. Thel slogan was "We were born to die for God and
Country." This was the premise by which the men and
officers lived and trained and which was kept uppermost
in their minds day and night.

PHASE 3

After closingl . returned to LINCOLN for reorientation,
instructions and further preparations before departing to rejoin the
CASTILLO Armas organization >

On May 6, 1954,C Jdeparted with instructions to act as the
c advisor and assist CASTILLO Armas in every possible way. The
first few days were spent in just making observations and assisting
wherever possible. Tof J amazement, no semi-military organ=
4zation had been established. A-request to correct this situation
was forwarded to CASTILLO Armas and he was asked to assigr: one of

his top military aides tof “Vin order to begin organizing and
building a staff. Colonelf ‘Jwas assigned and made Chief of
Staff atC Trequest. A definite military organization was

then established, with G-1, G-2, G-3 and G-L sections to insure
the preliminary working stage for staff study, assignments, etc.
Job assignments yere then given to all officers to insure that all
available resources were put to use in the best interest of the
movement, Up to this time no such organization had existed despite
repeated assurances by CASTILLO Armas.

Other sections organized were: A training center for the
instruction of new arrivals, security section, and CI and CE
working units.

“e

Shock troop units, as well as Sab and instructor assignments,

were organized.

Operations forwarded by LINCOLN were studied and necessary
changes made because of rapid and constant changes in the internal
situation in Guatemala.

Several separate operations were established which later had
a strong bearing on the success of the project. ’ These operations
were those at Copan Ruinas, Nueva Ocotepeque, Horales and “La Siesta."
For comments on results see Attachment 1.

It is extremely difficult to give a complete and full report
of the successes and defeats of all military operations as well

a ae

hoe

{
oe,
ee
we
re

as the Sab actions because of the lack of information and confir-
mations. All information on the successes and defeats mentioned

in the Attachments are as a result of debriefings with the exception
of “La Siesta" eperation. The latter information was received on
the monitored radio reports passed on by £ pa |

a
z
a
cos

.
2 Attachments
“<

~ 25 -

ATTACHMENT I

On June 16, 195L. all shock troops were in position. Those in-
cluded. other thang J £ Jandt were £ ac =. 7
CL )Jand the C 3) troops.

Each of the above operations will be dealt with separately in
an attempt to focus some light as to their successes or failures.

IC 3 SHOCK TROOPS.

The assignment of Shock troops was to strike on the
night of D-Day with the ultimate goal of completely sealing the exit
of government troops that might attempt to assist or to control the
rail line betweenf, ancl 2

As far as can be determined and in the debriefing of one member
of that force, theL IOtroops arrived at and did block the tunnel loca®
ted approximately six kilometers from€ Jand also set up a block at
Pierda Parada located on the Atlantic Highway on D + 1. From reports, *¢
several small guerrilla groups were sent to the outskirts oi€ for
harassment purposes. These positions were maintained for approximately
three days.

Information received from monitored calls confirmed that opposi-~
tion troops had been continuously flown from Guatemala City to
with the primary objective of re-establishing the connection between
t  2dforces with those off a

Approximately four days after D-Dav, a sizeable enemy force
counter-attacked and disorganized the€ | Ishock troops. The troops
dispersed and commenced retreating which eventually terminated at Los
Corrideros, Honduras.

II.f{_DoRoUP
This group consisted of approximately 30 organized men and
had the mission of taking and holdingt sDiocated between £ 1a
and a

fhe group was quite successful and on D-Day captured a
and Bananera, holding both for three days until the hreak-through of
the enemy forces fromt. 2 During this period the leader, had
organized and reinforced his group totalling approximately 120 men.

Failure to achieve further success, according to was
due to the lack of supplies. After a’delayed action the group gave way
and retreated, but not until they had caused considerable damage and
casualties to the enemy forces. retreated to his jumping off base,
Los Tarros, Honduras, with approximately 100 men,

His request for more supplies was granted and immediate steps
were taken to consolidate theL  xXshock troops with the £ agroup

with the primary object of retaking& which has an airfield, by 30
June, and commencing movement toward C with the objective of attacking

and capturing it.
&, 26 -

Ss

t

A
poets su,

an

g

ee azRTans
, ' oot aelaal f

"On the eve of 29 June this force was on the outskirts of
LC »dfully equipped, and ready to attack when word was sent of the
peace negotiations, and to remain in position until further notice.

mre £ )) croup

This group totaled 27 men “who sailed from £ at
to an area approximately above Santo Tomas which is located below and

Southwest of€ .J Their primary mission was to harass[ This

action was planned and coordinated so that they landed approximately :

Dei. $
According to monitored radio reports the group made a suc- ; &

cessful landing. The ship was discovered and captured on the day of Hi
landing, but minus its cargo and men. Reports further indicated that 5
this group was fighting a winning battle against the enemy forces be-
cause the enemy£ Commander, Colonel Bolanos, was consistently

requesting additional reinforcements from Guatemala City to cope with «
the small force. It was not until nine days later that it was reported .
that £ “Jeroup had finally been defeated and that nine members — ‘

had been captured. It was also reported that all were executed.

This group did not have a TRO, Several attempts were made
to localize this group from the monitored reports but every one failed.
It was therefore impossible to give them an aerial resupply or to aid
them with air support.

It is felt that this group was the most courageous and sus-
tained the enemy, limiting their objective in reestablishing the C 2
and& connections by continuously defeating and harassing the city oo,
and keeping those elements occupied during the other battle phases. RS

Tv.c€ 2) SHOCK TROOPS

The primary mission of this group was in accordance with
original plans. Only one change was made and that was to bypass Cualan
by detaching a small group and blocking the small element that ex-
isted in Gualan.

According to the debriefing of the TRO, this pian was in order
until a battle began between the enemy forces and the smali detachment.
The detachment requested aid from the shock troop leader who, with his

force, was on his way tol -) The troop leader temporarily changed his
plans aged returned to Gualan and captured same only after a fierce
battle.

On taking Gualan, the shock troop staff moved into the cuartel
to reorganize and build up their troops for continuation of their march

tot

During this period, it was presumed by the TRO, that request
for reinforcements had been dispatched tor 2 by the Gualan commander
prior to his defeat, because the following morning a sizeable force was
detected coming from the direction of £ SA batile commenced and
lasted for approximately 50 hours with the complete annihilation of
Castillo Armas' forces in Gualan. The only force not caught in this
Was +. s detachment which had been deployed south of Gualan near
Choyo,.

27 -

The TRO was asked if any blunders were committed that
might have resulted in the defeat, Subject stated that it was his
honest belief that if troops had had enough rest that circumstances
might have been different. He further stated that the trek across
the mountains and the continual push by the commander-to meet hig
dead-line resulted in only having fatigued troops, They vere com-
pletely exhausted, even before commencing the fight, and the fighting
continued for three straight days without them having the benefit of
rest or sleep. -

The later successes of can be attributed to the
tremendous losses sustained by the enemy due to both the battles of
Gualan and the last ditch stand of

V. COPAN RUINAS AND NUEVA OCOTEPEQUE

These two forces can be included in the same movement, al-
though their jumpoff points were distinctly apart. Both forces merged
at Quezaltepeque for the eventual attack of Chiquimula,

The success of Chiquimula can be attributed to many situa-
tions, with only a few mentioned here:

The successful aerial resupply of these forces, the fact that the Ad-
vanced CP was here and the majority of the high level staff were to-
gether, the successful aerial’ support and the checking of a possible
pincer movement by enemy forces coming from€ to Chiquimula and a
southern movement from Ipala. A force totalling 100 men were dispatched
to check this latter group with success on the part of Castillo Armes!
troops.q Ahad maintained constant enemy OB situations from mon-
itored radio reports and principally dispatched troops to this area to
avoid a rear attack of the Chiquimula forces.

The capturing of a considerable quantity of munitions, weapons including
8lmm mortars intact with large quantities of shells, war indeed evidence
that the majority of troops had been Gispatched from€ Jin an early

attempt to defeat troops there rather than at the strategicf£ a

The Ll -lmovement never developed because of the intervention byZ 3
c A These forcés were merged with the Nueva Scotepeque
troops.

= 28 «

CLE ERR

x
5

:
3
4
a

Ma
Parra

a

ee
ahs

ike ties

SC
hd

Cura
- 2
w 1

whet

. sof
eM tas

“ 7
ener’

ie ie a is wee’
ATTACHHENT IT

SAB ACTIVITY

During the action, Sab activity was in action at the following
points: .

ae Rail and commnications between Imtre Rios and Tenedores.

b. Rail and communications between Tenedores and Morales
and between La Libertad and Horales.

c. Rail and commnications NE of Gualan and HW of Gualan.

d. Rail and commnications FE of & Jand Ni of O a

e. The San Francisco Bridge, located below Tenedores.

The above sab activity was coordinated to assist all troops.

_ Other Sab operations were as follows:
ag of -JIt was reported that destruction of the oil storage .

tanks, which was to have been the signal to begin activities, did occur
on D-Day at approximately 2020 hours, just ten minutes before the exact
time of plans.

db. TGW. It was never reported whether an attempt or actual ac-
tivity occurred against TOW. Although the station continued to broad-
cast, it was reported thet TGR and other hookups had been grouped to
enable the continuation of broadcasts also utilizing the Quezaltenango
transmitters.

c. All possible telecommunications in or around the capital by
three separate teams’,

d. Rails and communications leading to El Salvador.

. The Sab activity successes have been the most difficult to deter-
mine. Whether attempts or actual action was accomplished on selected
targets is problematical because of the inaccurate reports, the tight
security maintained by the enemy forces during the stage, and because
of lack of information. ©
