National Intelligence Estimate Number 36.1-62-PROSPECTS for Nasser
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012088, dated 3 February 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012088).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Oe
3

OVED

as

5 a

ae
‘

tS

see gee |
(a(4)6)

va

Medes
Ag elo

SES

PROSPECTS FOR NASSER

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects for Nasser over the next year
or two.

CONCLUSIONS

1. We do not foresee any significant challenge to Nasser’s
control of Egypt during the period of this estimate. His
moves are often based on reactions rather than on advance
planning. Hence, the years immediately ahead are likely
to be uneasy ones, as he continues his vigorous ad hoc efforts
to remake Egypt’s social and political structure and to de-
velop broader support for his regime. (Paras. 15-16)

2. Nasser’s defeat in Syria has clearly cost him stature,
but he remains the most formidable single leader in the
Arab world. He will keep up propaganda and subversion
against the secessionist Syrian regime and against rival Arab
rulers elsewhere. He will remain strongly opposed to Arab
communism. He is unlikely to cooperate in efforts to reduce
tension with Israel. We do not believe, however, that he
feels any immediate compulsion for direct overt use of force
against either Israel or his Arab opponents. (Paras.
19-23, 29)

3. Nasser’s basic suspicions of France and the UK probably
will not change. . For the next few years at least he is likely
to be reasonably restrained in his dealings with both the
US and the USSR because of his heavy dependence on the
US for food and on the USSR for military and development
aid. The nature of his interests and his objectives makes
it likely that on many issues his views will be closer to those

—

. a
i
}
oe
rE
=
#
&
Pl
©
5
2

wy

2g gbe es

aii at ba feo te

AEA be agg ORE ete

2 hal atid hE ate ce cactonraens Wem: Hig he eee attnietiag AS gs

Sede BR, Sapte >

’
S
a

4;

$e.
£

i

of the Bloc than the West. However, he will be alert to
detect and will react vigorously against any attempt by either
to use aid as a lever to influence his basic international posi-
tion or his policies in Egypt and the Arab world. (Paras.
14, 28-31)

DISCUSSION

I. THE BACKGROUND

Basic Attitudes

4. Nasser believes deeply in the necessity of
major social, political, and economic change in
Egypt and the Arab world generally. He looks
upon “unity,” “dignity,” “socialism,” and “the
end of imperialism,” as interrelated aspects of
a revolutionary regeneration of Arab society.
He sees manifestations of the old order he is
trying to destroy both in certain classes and
practices in Egypt and in the “reactionary”
regimes in other Arab states.

5. In trying to implement his revolution, he
tends to respond to opportunities and obsta-
cles rather than to follow deliberate plans; he
does not concentrate at one time or another
on internal reform at the expense of regional
progress or vice versa. In the sensitive field
of relations with Israel, with “the imperial-
ists,” and with those whom he considers their
allies, his moves are often based on emotional
reactions rather than on advance planning.

'’ Ti general, however, his essentially pragmatic

approach brings him up short of catastrophe
and occasionally even overrides his ideological
preconceptions (e.g., his decision not to at-
tempt a recovery of Syria by force) .1

6. Nasser’s own assessment of the past 10
years must reflect a greater than ordinary
mixture of satisfaction and frustration. He
has wiped out the old order which flourished
under King Farouk. Determined efforts by

* Nasser himself recently told President Kennedy’s
Special Representative, Chester Bowles, that many
Middle Eastern developments are decided without
much strategic planning and represent a pragmatic
decision taken on the spur of the moment. He
added that in his opinion most estimates on the
Middle East, both by his own people and foreigners,
are overly sophisticated.

Britain and France to destroy him have come
to naught; indeed, their own influence in
Egypt has vanished totally. Nasser has mod-
ernized his armed forces and launched a major
program of economic development and has
obtained large-scale aid from both East and
West. His status as the most important
leader of the Arab world has been established.

7. However, his most conspicuous triumphs
were achieved some time ago; more recently,
there have been few notable successes and
many setbacks. Qasim’s Iraq remains beyond
his control. Syria has broken away from his
dominance. The arch-enemy Israel continues
to survive and flourish. Conservative regimes
and foreign influence remain in many parts
of the Arab world. Egypt itself has serious
economic troubles. Thus, while his revolution
has made much progress, some of the goals he
seeks must appear almost as distant now as
they were several years ago.

Recent Developments

8. With Syria’s secession from the United
Arab Republic (UAR) in September 1961, the
pretensions and inhibitions which had masked
intra-Arab rivalry in the past few years were
cast aside. Jordan and Saudi Arabia offered
support to the new regime in Damascus and
entered into virulent propaganda exchanges
with Nasser. Qasim also made overtures to-
ward Damascus and gloated over the blow to
Nasser’s aspirations for leadership of the Arab
unity movement. Nasser set out to under-
mine the Syrian regime by propaganda and
subversion, he dissolved the United Arab
States (UAS) with a blast at the Imam of
Yemen, and he renewed his calls for the over-
throw of King Hussein and King Saud.

9. Nasser’s defeat in Syria has clearly cost
him stature in the Arab world. His aura of

a :

invincibility is gone, the unhappiness of most

Syrians at the price they had to pay for unity

under Nasser is evident to all Arabs, and the

- inevitability of unity itself has been brought
into doubt. Nasser’s traditional enemies are
no longer as afraid of him as they were. The

‘regimes of Syria and Iraq are openly chal-
lenging his leadership of Arab unity and of
opposition to Israel. Some reformist elements
are probably now facing up to the likelihood
that the change they hope for will take longer
to accomplish and the possibility that it may
have to await other leaders.

10. Despite all this, Nasser remains the most
formidable single leader in the Arab world.
Even the conservative regimes cannot ignore
his role as the prime defender of the Arabs
against Israel, his status as an accepted inter-
national leader, and his ability to obtain aid
from both the USSR and the US. To non-
Communist revolutionaries and reformers in
all parts of the area there is still no alterna-
tive to him as an effective source of support
and inspiration.

11. Nasser’s own attitudes and intentions
toward the conservative Arab regimes have
probably not changed fundamentally. He
feels that until the governments which now

rule in Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Yemen, ~

Libya, and Kuwait are overthrown by elements
sympathetic to him, the cause of Arab unity
and socialist progress will be insecure. At the
same time, he is probably still convinced that
sooner or later the conservative regimes will
fall of their own weight. While he can be
expected to lend support to any indigenous
movement to hasten the end of these regimes,
he probably does not feel any compulsion for
immediate action to oust them.

12. Both before and after the break-up of
the UAR Nasser put into effect a number of
radical economic measures. Some of these
were probably inspired by the feeling that
many of the urban middle class elements to
which he had looked as the mainstay of his

revolution were themselves becoming cor-
rupted by money and foreign influences.
Others were probably intended principally as
a blow against the foreign communities and
against those remaining elements in Egypt
who were of the same class as the “reaction-
aries’ who had successfully defied Nasser’s
control in Syria.

13. The measures created confusion and un-
certainty in the Egyptian economy, already
affected by a dismal crop year. Most foreign
and many non-Moslem Egyptian business in-
terests were liquidated. Opportunities for the
acquisition of even moderate private wealth
were severely restricted. Three-quarters of
the corporate sector of the economy, on which
Egypt’s economic growth largely depends, was
brought under direct government control? It
remains to be seen whether or not these meas-
ures will seriously affect the moderate progress
which had been made in the past few years
in implementing development plans while
maintaining stable prices and providing for a
slight increase in the standard of living of the
masses.

14. Nasser’s increased dependence on for-
eign aid has been an equally important though
less dramatic development of the past year or
so. He has, of course, for some time relied’
primarily on the Bloc for large-scale economic
and technical assistance for the development
program and been almost completely depend-
ent on it for military aid. More recently, his
dwindling foreign exchange resources (which
have been falling at the rate of $50 million a
year for the past three years) have led him
into heavy dependence on US PL 480 ship-
ments ($93 million in FY 1961; an estimated

' *It should be noted that most of Egypt’s economic
activity has always lain outside the corporate sec-
tor and remains in private hands.

*As of the end of 1961, Nasser had received mili-
tary equipment valued at about $550 million and
commitments of $615 million in economie aid from
the Soviet Bloc.

4 =

$160 million in FY 1962) to feed his people and
to maintain internal economic stability. The
result has been to make him more cautious not
to offend the US or the USSR. He has not,
however, shown any sign of being willing to
modify his policies or attitudes within Egypt
or in the Arab world to suit the interests or
desires of any of the Great Powers.

ll. THE OUTLOOK
Within Egypt

15. We do not foresee any significant chal-
lenge to Nasser’s control of Egypt during the
period of this estimate. The relative impor-
tance of the various members of the small
group which has long participated in his rule
has shifted here and there, but none of them
is known to have either the desire or the ca-
pability to oppose him actively. Despite
an occasional outbreak of localized plotting
among the military, the large majority of
the officer corps appears loyal. The old
upper class, which has long hated Nasser,
has been reduced to the point where most of
its members are more concerned with get-
ting themselves and their assets out of the
country than with trying. to overthrow the
regime.
’ clearly lack the capability to oust him. A
challenge by Israel or any of the Great Powers,
unless pushed home decisively by force, would
merely rally his own people and many other
Arabs behind him.

16. Nevertheless, there are probably now
more disaffected individuals in Egypt than
has been the case for some time. Although
Nasser remains in close touch with events,
he has tended to become less accessible per-
sonally and less inclined to trust his associ-
ates. His revolution is 10 years old; it has
brought obvious benefits to the country but
it has also left promises unfulfilled; the pop-
ular fervor of its early days is running down.
While we do not believe Nasser is likely to
resort to a Draconian program to try to rush

His Arab enemies outside Egypt...

through completion of the revolution accord-
ing to any set timetable, he will continue vig-
orous ad hoc efforts to remake the social and
political structure and to develop broader
Support for his regime. In the circum-
stances, the years immediately ahead are
likely to be uneasy ones in Egypt.

17. The urban Moslem middle class, the
most politically conscious group in Egypt and
the one which has supported Nasser most’
Strongly in the past, still has a vested inter-
est in the regime. However, Nasser’s recent -
economic measures have almost certainly
alienated many of the upper level business
and professional members of this group, and,
if he presses too hard with his “leveling” pro-
gram, such discontent will spread. Should it
penetrate into the army, it could eventually
pose a serious threat to the regime. How-
ever, we believe there is little chance of such
a development at least during the period of
this estimate.

18. Nasser is still relatively young (44) and
vigorous. He will, of course, continue vul-
nerable to the possibility of assassination—
although in his case the degree of the threat
is less than that faced by most other Arab

. leaders: “He would most likely be succeeded

by a junta of his present: associates, relying
for support on the army. In such an event,
no great change of policy would be likely.
However, the loss of Nasser’s compelling per-
sonality and the probability of jealousy and

“bickering among his successors would prob-

ably render both the internal and external
policies of the regime less effective.

In the Arab World

19. Nasser will maintain a high degree of
activity and interest in the Arab world dur-
ing the period ahead. Above all, he will feel
compelled to respond vigorously to any move
which he considers provocative, whether
made by his opponents in the area, by the
West, or by the Communist Bloc. Should

SS 5

oe ane,

any of his enemies in the area demonstrate
weakness, or should he see an opportunity for
a spectacular personal triumph, he will be
quick to take advantage of it. We do not
believe, however, that he feels any compul-
sion for immediate action.

20. Nasser almost certainly has no imme-
diate expectations of bringing Syria back into
union with Egypt. However, he will be con-
cerned both with preventing an alliance be-
tween Damascus and Baghdad or Amman
and with promoting the replacement of the
present Damascus regime with one more cor-

_dially inclined and ideologically acceptable.

The instability inherent in the present
Syrian situation will provide him with ample
opportunities to serve both ends, and he is
virtually certain to keep up a fairly high level
of propaganda and subversive activity.

21. He will also continue his propaganda

Slugging matches with Jordan, Saudi Arabia,
and Yemen. If these regimes appear to be

sence of specific provocation, he is likely to
leave the conservative regime in Kuwait
pretty much alone. He has refrained from
openly attacking Libya on the grounds that,
while reactionary, the regime has not gloried
in the break-up of the UAR nor used it to
abuse him. Nevertheless, Libya, ruled by an
aged and ailing King, rich in oil, and geo-
graphically accessible, is a tempting target;
and should a favorable opportunity occur to
extend his influence into it, he probably
would not pass it up.

The Neighboring Areas

23. With the ending of his primary respon-
sibility for protecting Syrian territory against
Israel and the continuing gradual increase
in Egyptian military capabilities, Nasser’s

"sense of security in regard to Israel is prob-

holding their own, it is possible that eventu- .

ally he will again be willing to accept tem-
porary truces as he has in the past. How-
ever, should local opposition forces in the
conservative states reach a point where they
have a fair chance of a successful coup, Egyp-
tian support would probably be forthcoming.
For the time being at least, this is probably
true. even in regard to Jordan, despite the
increased risk of conflict with Israel inherent
in any upheaval there.

22. Nasser will remain deeply suspicious of
Qasim and eager to prevent any expansion of
the Iraqi leader’s influence. He will almost
certainly continue his propaganda attacks
and maintain contact with opposition forces
in Iraq. He will be active in trying to block
Qasim’s ambitions for control of Kuwait.
However, we do not believe he is likely in the
near future deliberately to initiate an all-
out campaign to bring Qasim down. He will
probably continue relatively content with the
Abbud government in the Sudan. In the ab-

ee

ably greater now than it has often been in
the past. Nevertheless, he will be obligated
both by his own ambitions and by Arab pres-
Sure to demonstrate his continued hostility
toward the Jewish state. In the circum-
stances, he is unlikely to cooperate in inter-
national efforts to settle the refugee problem
or to reduce tensions generally. We do not
believe, however, that he will deliberately pre-
cipitate any major military ¢lash with Israel
uring the period of this estimate.

24. Nasser will seek to maintain his con-
tacts and influence with the Algerian leaders,
but will probably wait to assess the implica-
tions of the settlement with France before de-

termining his future policy toward the North :
_African states.

~ However, with the emergence of an independ- '

ent Algeria and the rise of new leaders and
groupings of states in black Africa, the north-
ern, central, and western parts of the con-
tinent will offer a less promising sphere for
the extension of his influence. He will, of
course, continue to try to block the expansion

2 mz

1.3(a)(4)6).

ae

e (if

4.3(a)(4)(5)

. mnires,

of Israeli influence there and will remain sus-

picious of Bloc and Western activities in the
area.

25. Nasser will continue to give sporadic

support to revolutionaries against the estab-
lished, pro-Western order even in places where
his own direct interests are small.

He will also remain generally un-

friendly to Turkey. His relations with Greece

and Cyprus will continue to deteriorate due
to the impact of his expropriation measures
against the large and long-established Greek
community in Egypt.

The Nonaligned States

26. Nasser will continue to take advantage
of any opportunities to participate promi-
nently in the politics of the nonaligned states,
both to increase his prestige among the Arabs
and to sustain an image of himself as an im-
portant world leader. He will maintain con-
tact with Nehru, Sukarno, and other lumi-
naries of the neutralist camp, particularly
Tito whose brand of socialist progress he ad-

tiate any major programs or policies for the
nonaligned states. He will continue to place
considerable value on the UN as a useful
means for promoting his policies and for pro-
tecting the interests of the smaller powers.

Toward the Great Powers

27. We believe that Nasser will continue to
look upon his relationship to the Great Powers
in simple terms of self-interest. He probably
does not believe that he has any very impor-
tant common interests with any of them. In
any event, he will be much less concerned with
defining such interests or coping with ideologi-
cal issues than with what he thinks the vari-
ous large nations are likely to do for or to him.

_ However, he is unlikely to try-to ini- ”

28. It is unlikely that in the next few years
at least there will be any significant change
in his basic distrust of France and the UK.
Even with the Algerian settlement, he will
probably continue to regard France as an
enemy of the Arabs and an ally of Israel.
_Likewise, while remaining suspicious of the
UK and keeping up such pressure as he can
against it in the Middle East, he probably will
not see much to be gained either from all-out
hostility toward the British or from a major
effort to come to terms with them. He will .
continue to look’on West Germany as a useful
source of Western technical and financial as-
sistance. He will continue to suspect that
European economic integration will become a
vehicle for Western “neo-colonialism” at the
expense of his policy of encouraging non-
alignment, particularly among the new Afri-
can states. While taking advantage of any
opportunities which may occur with regard to
Communist China, e.g., for increased cotton
sales, he will not give very high priority to
relations with Peiping.

29. In some respects, his attitudes toward
the USSR and the US will be inflexible also.
He will remain distrustful of any sizable So-
viet. activity anywhere in the Arab world,
‘especially i in Iraq or Syria, and will continue to
combat Arab communism. He will oppose
anything which he considers an expansion of
US influence in the Middle East or US support
there for Israeli, French, or British objectives.
In general, he will not seek or accept any re-
lationship based on broad understanding and
trust with either the USSR or the US, nor will
he modify his policies and actions within
Egypt or in the Arab world to preserve or to
improve his relations with Moscow or Wash-
ington. Indeed, he will probably remain un-
able to pass up the opportunity to take an oc-

 casional jab at US policies even on such remote

issues as Panama or Taiwan.

30. At the same time, he is almost certainly
convinced that his security against Israel and
the success of his internal development pro-

; : és . : é . =

gram—both essential to any other revolu-
tionary advances—will depend on the continu-
ance of large-scale assistance from both the
USSR and the US. He is probably aware also
that, however much the mutual antagonism
of the USSR and the US and their broader
international commitments may inhibit their
actions, both Moscow, and to an even greater
extent Washington, still possess the power to
affect decisively events in the Middle East.

31. For the next few years at least, Nasser
will probably be reasonably restrained in his
dealings with both the USSR and the US. He
will be eager to reach agreement on a multi-
year PL 480 agreement, to encourage US eco-
nomic and technical aid for his development

program, and to pay an official visit to the
US. He may feel compelled to balance any
visit to Washington with one to Moscow; and
in view of the importance he attaches to main-
tenance of his supply of modern military
equipment from the USSR, he will be careful
to avoid publicizing any snags that develop
in implementation of his trade and aid agree-
ments with the Soviet Union. The nature of
his intentions and objectives makes it likely
that on many issues his views will be closer to
those of the Bloc than the West. - However, he
will be alert to detect and will react vigorously
against any attempt by the USSR or the US
to use aid as a lever to influence his basic inter-
national position or his basic policies in Egypt
and the Arab world.

ad_-by “the following volhicals
ty Goran ae Goes ke
‘of Inte ligence & a8 Re
Several CS SOMES Ss or “At he
Pefense Intelligence a

3S - fone year,
A eh ek CIEE Pe bh SC ST LS AR
.9f the forwarding gency: fe
