Chinese Communist Capabilities and Intentions with Respect to Taiwan Through 19
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010873, dated 2 March 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010873).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COPY 95.1

FOR THE PRESIDENT ~
gullieen OF THE UNITED STATES

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

CHINESE COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES,

AND INTENTIONS WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN |

THROUGH 1952

NIE-27/1
_ Published 1 April 1952

of ove
Soe

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

See LN OER Coe ERY TE Te

Ae oan da co ie ub alcatel tad cryin re art ogutasasntCe tle w epbresw Sonor dea

ERB acest canada Atte

Sicha yaaa AMBER tae Eno Road

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

CHINESE COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES

AND INTENTIONS WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN

THROUGH 1952

NIE-27/1

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticipated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the prep-
aration of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence

Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on 27 March
1952.

ee

gene

i :
ey S. TRUMAN LIBEL

4 «pavers OF HARRY S. 5
SOF vegeta 7's SECETT
x ee M

.

23

CHINESE COMMUNIST CAPABILITIES AND INTENTIONS
WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN THROUGH 1952

THE PROBLEM

To estimate Chinese Communist capabilities and intentions with respect to Tai-

wan through 1952.

ASSUMPTION

The USSR will continue to support Communist operations in the Far East but will

not intervene directly and overtly.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Except for a substantial increase in air
Capabilities, the over-all capabilities of
the Chinese Communists to launch either
a large-scale invasion or limited surprise
attacks against Taiwan remain substan-
tially unchanged since April 1951 when
NIE-27 was published. Chinese National-
ist capabilities to defend Taiwan have not
improved substantially since that date.

2. Provided that present US policy with
respect to Taiwan continues unchanged,
and provided that US naval and air forces
are available to defend Taiwan, Chinese
Communist operations against Taiwan
would almost certainly fail.

a. We do not believe that, under present
circumstances, the Communists could
achieve surprise in a large-scale attack. A
large-scale Communist invasion attempt
would almost certainly fail unless sur-
prise were achieved to assure a fait ac-
compli before US air and naval forces
could be brought to bear.

b. A Communist attack with a limited
number of their best troops probably
could achieve surprise, but the National-
ists alone could almost certainly contain
such an attack, unless the Communists
received timely large-scale reinforce-
ments. US naval and air forces could al-
most certainly prevent such reinforce-
ments.

3. If US policy with respect to Taiwan
should change and the US did not par-
ticipate in the defense of Taiwan, the
Chinese Nationalist forces could not suc-
cessfully defend Taiwan against a large-
scale Communist operation.

4. The Nationalist Government is rela-
tively stable and serious factional strife is
improbable so long as President Chiang
Kai-shek heads the government. In the
event of the overthrow or death of
Chiang, factional strife would be intensi-
fied and a period of instability would

ee ee aes

probably follow before another Nationzi-
ist leader could establish his authority.

5. The weight of military, propaganda,
and other indications suggests that the
Chinese Communists do not plan an early
attack against Taiwan.

6. Irrespective of developments in Korea,
we believe that the Chinese Communists
will not make either a limited surprise
attack or a large-scale attack against Tai-
wan during the period of this estimate
provided that present US policy with re-
spect to Taiwan continues.

7. During the period of this estimate, the
Communists will probably conduct recon-
naissance, nuisance, or destruction raids
(either by air or sea) against Nationalist-

as 2
a

BH 2

held offshore islands and may assault and _

capture some of these islands. However,
we do not believe such actions will neces-
sarily indicate an imminent invasion of
Taiwan.

8. Over the longer term, we believe that
the Chinese Communists will attempt to
secure control over Taiwan by diplomatic
means if possible; otherwise by military
action when a favorable opportunity pre-
sents itself. So long as the relative mili-
tary strength of the United States and
the Communists in the Far East remains
substantially unchanged, and so long as
US policy with respect to Taiwan remains
unchanged, we believe the Chinese.Com-
munists will not hazard a military attack
on Taiwan.

DISCUSSION

THE CHINESE COMMUNIST SITUATION

The Chinese Communist Army

9. Since April 1951, when NIE-27 was pub-
lished, there has been no significant change in
the estimated strength and effectiveness of
Chinese Communist troops in position for
an attack against Taiwan. Approximately
249,000 troops are estimated to be deployed
along the mainland east coast opposite Tai-
wan (Chekiang, Fukien, and Eastern Kwang-
tung Provinces). In addition, approximately
151,000 troops which are deployed in the Can-
ton and Shanghai areas could be utilized for
operations against Taiwan. (See Map.) This
total force of 400,000 includes an artillery
division and several thousand other special-
ized troops. Except for some inferiority in
weapons and equipment and in the scale of
supporting arms and services, its combat ef-
fectiveness is estimated to be approximately
equal to that of Chinese Communist troops in
Korea.

10. Reports of unknown reliability indicate
that at least 25,000 Chinese Communist troops
have received some airborne training in North

China and Manchuria. There have also been
reports that Chinese Communist troops have
been receiving amphibious training, but we do
not believe that this type of training has been
conducted on a large scale.

11. In the event of a resumption of full-scale
hostilities in Korea, the forces discussed above
would probably still be available for operations
against Taiwan.

12. In case of *1 armistice in Korea, up to
300,000 of the _. sops presently committed to
Korean operations could be redeployed to the
mainland invasion coast for operations
against Taiwan.

The Chinese Communist Air Force

13. The over-all capabilities of the Chinese
Communist Air Force for operations against
Taiwan have increased substantially since the
publication of NIE-27 and the CCAF is now a
formidable military force. The total aircraft
strength of the CCAF in operational units has
increased from 656 to 1,700 between April 1951
and February 1952. Jet fighter strength in-

air taeitsamioninenin sk Up lig a

ee So ee ey

creased from 400 to 900 during this period.
CCAF sortie capabilities have increased signif-
icantly. (See Annex A.)

14. The major part of the CCAF is based in
Manchuria and North China. There are, how-
ever, elements of the CCAF based south of the
Yangtze: an estimated 37 jet fighters at Can-
ton, 74 jet fighters at Hankow, 74 jet fighters
and 40 piston fighters at Shanghai, and 80
piston light bombers at Nanking. (See Map.)
Even in the case of these aircraft, redeploy-
ment would be necessary before the Commu-
nists could launch a large-scale air offensive
against Taiwan. Substantial logistic build-up
would precede or accompany such redeploy-
ment and would be difficult to conceal.

15. In addition to those aircraft already based
south of the Yangtze, the Communists could
without appreciable effect on their present
scale of air operations in Korea, make avail-
able for an attack on Taiwan 120 piston fight-
ers, 120 ground attack bombers, 160 light
bombers, and a substantial portion of the 150
available transports.

16. During the past several months the Com-
munists have continued their intensive air-
field construction and improvement program
along the mainland east coast. There are now
$2 first-class airfields within 500 nautical
miles of Taiwan. Six of these are within jet
fighter operational radius of Taiwan.

17. If fighting in Korea is expanded to include
UN air attacks against targets in China
proper and/or Manchuria, it is probable that
the Communist capability for air operations
against Taiwan would vary inversely with the
intensity and duration of the expanded UN
operations.

18. In the event of an armistice in Korea, a
substantial part of the aircraft available to
the Communists in China could be redeployed
to South China with little delay. However,
the supply and movement of fuel and other
essential requirements for full-scale opera-
tions would be difficult and would take time.

The Chinese Communist Navy

19. The capabilities of the Chinese Commu-
nist Navy to support amphibious operations

‘against Taiwan would be limited to the fol-
lowing:

@. Minelaying and limited minesweeping
operations in the waters concerned.

b, Reconnaissance, including the use of
small craft.

¢c. Amphibious operations against National-
ist-held islands off the China coast.

d. Surprise MTB attacks and possibly sui-
cide boat attacks on US or Nationalist naval
forces.

e. Limited anti-submarine escort for mer-
chan? shipping.

f. Patrol of Chinese coastal waters, employ-
ing both conventional naval! vessels and motor
junks converted to naval use.

9. Possible limited use of submarines.

20. Chinese Communist naval capabilities
would not be significantly affected by either
an armistice or by an intensification of hostil-
ities in Korea.

Chinese Communist Copobilities for
Large-Scale Attack on Taiwan

21. Limitations on Chinese Communist Capa-
bilities for Large-Scale Assault. The Chinese
Communists are pcorly prepared to cope with
the problems involved in a large-scale amphib-
ious operation. Their previous amphibious
experience has been limited to short over-
water hauls and coastal movements. The
Communists have few conventional landing
craft and consequently must employ a hetero-
geneous assortment of vessels including junks.
Loading and coordinating the movement of
this Meet would present formidable problems.
Air support for such an operation would be
hampered by the lack of Communist exper!-
ence in air-naval-amphibious operations. Fur-
thermore, disembarkation of troops and equip-
ment would have to be accomplished without
offshore naval support. Finally, the Commu-
nists wouid have to seize port facilities on Tai-
wan before a significant part of their heavy
equipment could be off-loaded.

22. Amphibious Lift. We estimate that the
Chinese Communists have the capability of

SARE eM AS UD AS CRATRRAIOE eh nse Nin trou

vad ado cAI heh pe

ny Ce ee
—en

Si a a

lifting simultaneously about seven armies,
(approximately 210,000 men). However, the
Chinese Communists have available amphibi-
ous craft and shipping of greater than 1,000
gross registered tons to lift only two armies, or
60,000 fully equipped men. The remainder
would have to be lifted in junks and other
small craft of under 1,000 GRT. Based on a
speed of advance of 4 to 5 knots, Chinese Com-
munist forces transported in junks from em-
barkation points in the Swatow-Amoy area
would require more than 24 hours to reach the
nearest landing beaches on the west coast of
Formosa. The Korean situation has no sig-
nificant effect on Chinese Communist water-

borne capabilities for operations against
Taiwan.

23. Airlift. Airfields on the mainland, within
transport range of Taiwan, are sufficient to
support large-scale airborne operations. How-
ever, Chinese Communist airlift capacity is
estimated to be sufficient to carry only ap-
proximately 2,700 troops a distance of 500
nautica) miles in a single operation.

24. Logistic Support. The Chinese Commu-
nists would face serious logistical difficulties
in supporting a large-scale assault against
Taiwan.

a. Although there are no rail lines serving
Fukien, eastern Kwangtung, or southeastern
Chekiang, the Peiping-Canton andthe
Kiangsi-Hunan Railroads are connected with
the Fukien-Kiangsi embarkation ports — Foo-
chow, Amoy, and Swatow — by a system of in-
ternal highways. Prior to undertaking a
large-scale invasion, the Communists would
have to stockpile materiel and concentrate
most of the required troops in the immediate
vicinity of the outloading ports.

b. Assuming stiff resistance on Taiwan, re-
inforcement and resupply of invasion forces
would require a substantial daily waterlift
and maintenance of air and sea supremacy in
the Taiwan Straits. The Chinese Communists
probably do not possess the air and raval ca-
pabilities to fulfill these requirements in the
face of US participation.

esa an
“

ATMO Sportstar USM

we 4

25. Neither an armistice in Korea nor re-
newed large-scale hostilities in Korea would
substantially change Chinese Communist ca-
pabilities in this regard.

28. Possibility of Surprise. Under present
conditions it would be virtually impossible for
the Chinese Communists to achieve Surprise
in a large-scale assault.

a. The only three ports from which sur-
Prise might be achieved would be Amoy, Foo-
chow, and Swatow, and transportation, stor-
age, and port facilities in these port areas are
inadequate for the staging of a large-scale in-
vasion. In any event, large concentrations of
tresps and materiel would be difficult to con-
cez! although there might be an appreciable
time lapse between the beginning of prepara-
tions for an invasion and the detection of
these preparations.

b. If the Communists staged a major por-
tion of the invasion force from more distant
ports such as Canton and Shanghai, the in-
creased distance involved would require major
elements to be at sea for 48 hours in advance
of the feet leaving from ports opposite Tai-
wan, thus reducing the chances of surprise.
(See Annex B.)

ec. Even if the Communists were to achieve
surprise and succeed in landing troops on Tai-
wan, US forces could be brought to bear be-
fore Communist offloading had been com-
pleted or beachheads firmly established.
Thus the Communists would face virtual iso-
lation of their landing force.

Chinese Communist Capabilities for
Limited Surprise Attack

27. A Communist assault in Taiwan could be
successful only if it could be completed before
substantial US forces could be brought to
bear. The Communists probably could
achieve surprise h an attack on Taiwan only
if they limited the invasion force to airborne
trcups end such other troops as could be car-
ried by conventional landing craft. In terms
of personnel this would amount to approxi-
mately 2,700 airborne troops and 25,000 sea-
borne troops.

SEE Re PTE eR ME ny ae eS en

atti ict < StS oh ROLE

Effect of Meteorological Factors on a
Large-Scale or Limited Assault on Taiwan

28. Considering the inherent difficulties of
any amphibious operations, the heterogene-
ous nature of the invasion fleet, and the neces-
sity for staging from a number of embarka-
tion points, we believe that the Chinese Com-
munists will consider favorable weather over
an extended period of time as essentia)] to
their operations. Unfavorable weather con-
ditions, in the form of strong northeasterly to
northerly winds which blow more than 70 per-
cent of the time, are experienced from October
through March. Asa result, heavy seas would
seriously hinder the movement and debarka-
tion of troops during this period. The Chi-
nese Communists would therefore probably
await the more favorable period from April
through September before conducting an as-
sault of either a large-scale or limited nature.
(See Annex C.)

THE CHINESE NATIONALIST SITUATION
The Chinese Nationalist Army

29. There has been no significant change in
the strength, disposition, and composition of
the Nationalist Ground Forces since the pub-
lication of NIE-27. The Chinese Nationalist
Army has a strength of 455,000 personnel, the
bulk of which is disposed on Taiwan. The
combat effectiveness of the Nationalist Army
as a whole remains low, although it may im-
prove somewhat over the next year as MAAG
efforts bear fruit. Materiel and training de-
ficiencies, absence of large unit and combined
training, and incompetent leadership on the
high levels continue to hamper the develop-
ment of the Nationalist Army. In addition,
the Generalissimo’s policy of divide and rule,
the promotion of officers based on personal
allegiance, and the system of political police
continue to affect the morale of the armed
forces adversely and to undermine the author-
ity of unit commanders.

The Chinese Nationalist Air Force
30. The strength and combat effectiveness of

the CNAF has remained at the low levels noted
in NIE-27. In relation to the CCAF, however,

the CNAF is in a much worse position than
it was at the time NIE-27 was written. The
principa) deficiencies of the CNAF are the ab-
sence of jet aircraft, lack of combat experience
and training, poor maintenance and shortage
of equipment, and spare parts. The CNAF
has 320 World War II-type aircraft in tactical
units, of which 118 are piston fighters and 36
light bombers. The CNAF is not capable of
providing an effective air defense for Taiwan.
(See Annex A for a comparison of CNAF and
CCAF sortie capabilities.)

The Chinese Nationalist Naval Forces

"$1. The capabilities of the Chinese National-

ist Navy have improved somewhat over the low
levels indicated in NIE-27, but the Nationalist
Navy is not an effective deterrent to a Com-
munist assault on Taiwan.

Stability of the Nationalist Regime

32. The Nationalist Government is relatively
stable and serious factional strife is improb-
able so long as President Chiang Kai-shek
heads the government. Chiang has had long
experience in maintaining authority in spite
of factional rivalries and much of his power
derives from the fact that al) factions ac-
knowledge him as the supreme arbiter in set-
tling factional disputes and rivalries. The
death of Chiang Kai-shek or his sudden re-
moval in the unlikely event of a coup would,
however, have serious consequences. In such
circumstances, factional strife would be inten-
Sified and a period of instability would prob-
ably follow before another Nationalist leader
could establish his authority. Because of the
intensely persona] nature of loyalty in the
armed forces, rivalry between military leaders
would considerably weaken morale, although
Nationalist military capabilities to defend Tai-
wan would be only slightly lessened unless
these rivalries developed into armed clashes
betweén rival elements.

PROSPECTS FOR SUCCESS OF A
CHINESE COMMUNIST ASSAULT

33. Unless given outside assistance, the Chi-
nese Nationalists are not capable of defending
Taiwan against a large-scale Communist in-
vasion attempt. Given timely and substantial

US naval, air, and logistic support, the Chi-
nese Nationalists would probably defeat Chi-
nese Communist invasion forces. As long as
US policy with respect to Taiwan is not chang-
ed, the conclusion of an armistice in Korea
would not significantly affect Chinese Com-
munist relative capabilities with respect to
Taiwan since the increase in Communist ca-
pabilities for operations in the Taiwan area
would be countered by the increase in US
capabilities for defending Taiwan.

34, We estimate that the Chinese Nationalists
without outside assistance and irrespective of
the course of events in Korea are capable of
containing and defeating & limited Chinese
Communist force engaged in & surprise attack
of the scale and nature described in para-
graph 19.

35. The Chinese Nationalists now have Com-
munist subversive activity on Taiwan wel}
under contro] and have the capability to
maintain such control under present circum-
stances. However, Nationalist security forces
continue to ferret out Communist agents, and
it is certain that an indeterminate number of
agents still remain under cover in Nationalist
establishments, possibly even in important of-
ficial positions. In the event of a large-scale
Communist invasion, these agents would be
likely to instigate sabotage and provoke defec-
tions, thus reducing the defensive capabilities
of the Nationalist forces.

INDICATIONS OF CHINESE
COMMUNIST INTENTIONS
WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN

Military Indications

36. Early Large-Scale Invasion. Available in-
telligence does not indicate that the Chinese
Communists are preparing for a large-scale
invasion of Taiwan within the next few
months.

a. There have been no indications of troop
or materiel build-ups in or near the outloading
ports.

b. There have been no indications that the
Communists are assembling or training the
waterlift for a large-scale amphibious opera-
tion. (In the spring of 1950 when an attack

6

on Taiwan appeared probable, intelligence, in-
cluding reconnaissance, reports revealed &
Communist waterlift build-up over & period of
months.)

37. Limited Surprise Attecks. Aithough lim-
ited a‘tacks against Taiwan could be launched
with ite warning, it is significant that nec-
essary preliminary actions have apparently
not been taken:

a. There is no evidence that Chinese Com-
munist paratroop units are adequately trained
to engage in coordinated air operations or are
deployed outside of Manchuria or North
China.

b. There have been no indications of a sig-
nificant deployment of Communist aircraft to
bring them within operational range of Tai-
wan.

38. Future Attacks on Taiwan. There are sev-
eral military developments that could indicate
longer range plans for a Communist attack on
Taiwan.

of preparation for &
‘We believe, however, that this deployment is
primarily for air defense.

b. Communist assaults already made
against small Nationalist-held islands can be
interpreted as preparations for an invasion
of Taiwan. (See Map.) Communist occupa-
tion of these islands increases their capability
for concentrating shipping, troops. and sup-

of a series of operations presently designed to
deprive the Nationalists of bases for intelli-
gence operations, guerrilla warfare, or for any
contemplated assault of the mainland.

c. The airfield at Swatow, which has not
been used for a long time, is now being re-
habilitated and"enlarged.

Propaganda Indications

39. Recent Chinese Communist propaganda
has not stressed the intention to “liberate”
Taiwan in the néar future. Whereas the 1950

ated

a ar

New Year's message of the Central Committee

Stated that part of the task for the coming —

year was to “liberate Taiwan, Hainan Island,
and Tibet,” the various messages in 1951 sub-
ordinated the question of Taiwan to the more
general struggle against American “imperia)-
ism,” and gave no indication of any specific
action against Taiwan during 1951. The 1952
eificial New Year’s editorial cited Taiwan
merely as a case of US aggression and made
no reference to the island's “liberation.”
Chairman Mao's New Year's message for 1952
made no mention of Taiwan.

40. Such statements as Chou En-lai's political
report of 23 October 1951 in which he de-
clared the “Chinese peoples are determined to
liberate Taiwan from the grip of the Ameri-
can aggressors and will never relax until they
have achieved that end” indicate that Peiping

has not abandoned the “liberation” of Taiwan.

as an ultimate objective. The “liberation of
Taiwan” has also been declared to be one of
the results to be achieved by Peiping’s pro-
gram of military modernization.

41. Although Chinese Communist propaganda
no longer includes the “liberation of Taiwan”
as an. early Communist objective, this omis-
sion by itself cannot be regarded as a signifi-
cant indication of intent.

Indications from Communist

Activities in the UN

42. Soviet and Satellite representatives in the
UN demonstrated considerably less interest in
Taiwan during 1951 than in 1950. Although
the USSR repeatedly charged the US with
Plotting aggression against Communist China
and Southeast Asia, including the transporta-
tion of KMT troops from Taiwan to Thailand
and Burma, these charges seemed to be a part
of the general Soviet propaganda offensive
against the US and not specifically designed
to lay the groundwork for a possible invasion
of Taiwan.

CHINESE COMMUNIST INTENTIONS

WITH RESPECT TO TAIWAN

43. So long as the US does not withdraw its
commitment to defend Taiwan, we believe
that the Chinese Communists will not attempt

q

large-scale or limited military assaults egainst
Taiwan, irrespective of the Korean situation.

a. The Communists almost certainty esti-
mate that an attack on Taiwan during 1952
would result in a Communist defeat by US
naval and air forces. The Communists prob-
ably estimate also that US counteraction
would include bombardment of ports of em-
barkation, and might include bombardment
of interior lines of communication, and air at-
tacks on major urban and industrial areas
throughout China.

b. As long as the Communists desire to con-
tinue negotiations with respect to Korea, it ts
unlikely that they will attack Taiwan.

c. If Korean negotiations should fail and
fighting were intensified in Korea and ex-
tended. to China, the threat of US ccunter-
measures would obviously no longer be a de-
terrent. However, we believe that under these
circumstances Chinese Communist military
capabilities for an attack on Taiwan would be
So reduced as to preclude the possibility of
such an attack.

44. Even in the event of intensified factional
strife among the Nationalists, we do not be-
lieve the Chinese Communists would attack
Taiwan unless the United States had with-
drawn its commitment to defend the island.

45. During the period of this estimate, the
Communists will probably conduct reconnais-
sance, nuisance, or destruction raids (either
by air or sea) against Nationalist-held offshore
islands and may assault and capture some of
these islands. However, we do not believe
such actions will necessarily indicate an im-
minent invasion of Taiwan.

46. Over the longer term, we believe that the
Chinese Communists will attempt to secure
control over Taiwan by diplomatic means if
possible; otherwise by military action when a
favorable opporfunity presents itself. So long
as the relative military strength of the United
States and the Communists in the Far East
remains substantially unchanged, and so long
as US policy with respect to Taiwan remains
unchanged, we believe the Chinese Commu-
nists will not hazard a military attack on
Taiwan.

ng AE EERO ENA a

sow wan Hath

ANNEX A
CNAF VS CCAF SORTIE CAPABILITIES

1. The CNAF, with its 118 piston fighters pres-
ently in tactical units, is estimated to be capa-
ble of mounting a maximum air defense ef-
fort of 310 sorties during an initial 24-hour
period of 59 sorties per day for a substained 30-
day operation. As opposed to this the CCAF,

TYPE No.
Jet Ftrs 185
Piston Ftrs 160
Ground Attack 120
Light Bombers 240
Transport 150
855

2. Sortie capabilities for both air forces are
based on an average of three missions during
the initial 24-hour period with maximum of
$0 percent serviceability (after preparatory
stand down) and attrition rates of 1.5 percent
for piston fighters, 1.8 percent for light bomb-
ers, 1.8 percent for attack aircraft, and 9 per-
cent for transport (assault). The maximum
sustained combat rate is estimated to be 15
sorties per month per plane for ali types in
both air forces listed above. No attrition rate
is applied for sustained operations since it {s
assumed that combat losses will be compen-
sated for by replacement aircraft. No combat

with the aircraft estimated to be available for
possible overations against Taiwan in 1952, is
estimated to be capable of mounting the fol-
lowing air effort from airfields in Futden
Province within operating radius of Taiwan:

SORTIES AVERAGE DAILY SORTIES
INITIAL FOR A SUSTAINED 30-
(24 HouRs) DAY OPERATION
500 90
425 80
315 80
630 120
370 35
2,240 425

attrition factor has been applied to decrease
estimated CCAF jet fighter sorties since they
will not be opposed by jet fighters in the
CNAF. The combat attrition of the CNAF pis-
ton fighters has been computed on the basis of
piston type opposition; it is believed that if
the CNAF piston fighters encounter CCAF
jets, the combat effectiveness of the former
would be reduced to an insignificant level
within a short period. In view of the forego-
ing, the CNAF isnot considered capable of
providing an effective air defense for Taiwan
against air attacks the CCAF could mount
from the China mainiand.

Moered ek awee

ROC CIT Sena

coy NPB ats.

ANNEX 8B

PORTS AND LANDING BEACHES

1. Ports of Embarkation. The following Chinese mainland ports are considered suitable for
staging an amphibious operation against Taiwan.

PORT

LAO YAO
TSINGTAO
FOOCHOW
SHANGHAI
AMOY
SWATOW
CANTON

TOTAL ESTIMATED
PORT CAPACITY

PORT CAPACITY (LT/20-HR. DAY)
3,450

91,650 LT/Day

Some 16 additional minor ports might also be utilized. Their average capacity is 300-400 LT/

20-hr. day.

2. Ports of Debarkation. The following ports on Taiwan could, if occupied by the Commu-
nists, be used to debark invasion troops and materiel.

PORT LOCATION PORT CAPACITY (LT/20-HR. DAY)
KAO HSIUNG SW coast 31,850
CHI LUNG N coast 24,100
AMPIN TAIWAN SW coast 5,850
TANSUI NW coast 1,500
NII TAKA W coast —
Total North and West Coasts ... 63,300
PORT LOCATION PORT CAPACITY (LT/20-HR. DAY)
HUA LIEN E coast 2,700
sUO NE coast 5,700
KAIKO E coast 150
SHINKO E coast 450
Total East Coast ... «.«.wsiwsasi(‘“aéts 9,000
TOTAL ESTIMATED PORT CAPACITY 72,300 Lt/pay

3. Amphibious Landing Beaches. There are
58 beaches on Taiwan considered suitable for
amphibious landings with conventional land-
ing craft and junks. The gradient of these
beaches ranges from moderate to flat. The
most favorable of these are located on the
west coast in the vicinity of KAO HSIUNG

(between TUNGKANG and TAINANO), on the
northwest coast between HSINCHU and TAN-
SUI and on the east coast in the vicinity of
SUO, HUALIENKANG and TAITUNG. How-
ever, beaches un the east coast lack adequate
exits to the heavily populated western section

bo
cs

Ee .

of Formosa, since the only trans-island roads
are found near the northern and southern
ends of the island. -

4. The six beaches between TUNGKANG and
TAINAN have an aggregate useable length of
approximately 25 miles. The seven beaches
between HSINCHU and TANSUI have a simi-
lar total length.

5. No specific data are available concerning
the Chinese Communist beach requirements

for discharging any given tonnage.® Chinese
Communist resupply requirements (food and
ammunition) are estimated to be 0.5 long tons
per man per month, or approximately 3,400
long tons per day for a 200,000 man force. In
terms of these requirements, no limitations
are imposed on the Chinese Communists inso-
far as the beaches themselves are concerned.

* UB World War II experience: 2,500 long tons per
mile of beach per day.

ANNEX C
WEATHER CONDITIONS IN THE TAIWAN STRAITS

FEASIBILITY OF LARGE-SCALE
PERIOD . GENERAL CONDITIONS 5cs coeuariina
October ‘Strong northeast monsoons, Weather unsuitable for
thru currents setting south- large-scale operations.
March westerly through the

Straits and reaching max-
imum drift of 60 to 65
miles per day in Dec. and

Jan.
April Transition period between April and May are best
thru northeast and southwest Tonths for large-scale sea
June monsoon; variable winds, operations; there is risk of
light and variable currents encountering typhoons in
setting generally north- June. :

east; high seas and swells
observed 6-10 percent of
time in April and May.
Typhoon may occur in

June.
July Southwest monsoon, average Average conditions better
thru velocities low and calms than in April and May, but
August frequent; sea and surf danger of typhoons makes
moderate. Typhoons this period less suitable.
move from Pacific due -
west across Taiwan into
China.
September Transitional period between Period from late September

southwest and northeast
monsoons; typhoons may
occur, winds are variable.

through early October aft-
er typhoon danger is over
and before strong north-
east monsoon begins may
not be too unfavorable for
sea operations.

* eur ia " see its a ae ET aS ase a as
eet Fe Syl an nr Aarus sre
sais a ich eaten aa in ea aaa andes a a a ee
a a a eh math :

i , ory S, TRU “AN LIPRaRY
: eee oF HARRY S. TRUM gs
TRESIDENT'S STOPETARY!

rT) te us
{Fer Une wah ME 271 { }

TAIWAN
AND

THE INVASION COAST OF CHINA

Concentration of Chinese Netonelist Troops.

ANNTEL

FAST CHYNA

NPA

SoUerH CHINA
