Memo from Richard Helms to Director, DIA Concerning Military Thought: 'the Theo
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012299, dated 1 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012299).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

#8 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
: WASHINGTON 28, D.C,
18 DEC 1961
| (0
| .
|
| ‘ fk
| ; MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency ;
SUBJECT +. MILITARY THOUGHT: "The Theory of Military
i Art Needs Review", by Colonel-General
AGastilovich = © ; ;
| | | |
| "+A, Bnelosed is a verbatim translation of an article which —

‘ appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
“ . . Journal "Military Thought" trie ennaya Mysl") published by the
Se nee NOUgHE ( Voyennaya
| Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of.
Army Commander, 2 we >, se i Af rs ; . i.
_ 2, In the interests of protecting our source,’ this material
‘should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
— Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of
"Ss . any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
"' . to the originating office... | Sn ta ee ais ‘ z

a: 2 Boat) eS Eye wt pet Capea oF 7 2 > Sin oe |
. ~ Se ca * .

= ee Guts t

Hi

i

t

3

|—-FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS?”

Enclosure,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE ® 0 Juv ni

Original: The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

ces Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

" Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff .

Ny

Headquarters, U. S&S. Air Force

~ «+ 14. . Assistant Chiet of Staff for ‘Intelligence
oe ‘Department, of the Army

1

|

!

i

|

| '.  . Assistant Chiet of staff, Intelligence.
| Director of Naval Intelligence

i _ Department of the Navy.
5 ae
H Director, National Security Agency

’ The Dir ctor of peeuteence and Research
Departm + of State

Division of Intelligence :
ergy Commission

wb wenn te ee : Pa

Chairman Guided Missiles and ABLLORB CIES:
. Intell ence roms Cte.

bee

beputy D one for Intelligence

Assistant Director. for National Eotinates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
“Assistant Director for Research and Reports
Assistant  Dixector for Sctentitic Intelligence

22 oo —eeteeeenene tememrntameet
oe ac eee

tet eee oe
‘ P

' SUBJECT * MILITARY THOUGHT: “The Theory of Military Art

. CONTENT . 3. Documentary

ae General A. Gastilovich.

version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Milita .
Thought). This journal ig published irregularly and is classified
_ TOP SECRET by the: Soviets. The First Issue of 1

., issue of this.special collection, and this article by Colonel- |
. Subsequent articles."

COUNTRY  : USSR

Needs Review? by Colonel-General A. Gastilovich
DATE OF INFO: Early 1960

SOURCE —§.: A reliable source (B).

. Following is a verbatin translation of an article titled -
"The Theory of Military Art Needs Review" written by Colonel. |

: This article appeared in the 1960 First Issue of a special

960 Was the initial. |:
General Gastilovich has been a subject of controversy in numerous |. /
A aa ea oe ae

4.3{ail4)

- The Theory of Military Art Needs Review

Colonel-General A. Gastilovich

We all admit that nuclear weapons and missiles change the conditions
of war, but having said "a", we are afraid to say "b". Dropping
curtsies in the direction of missiles Q@nd introducing some minor
corrections in the theary of military art, wa still hold in practice
to the old positions exfsting at the end of Wérld tar iH. Past og
experience, traditions, and habits, taught to us for. decades,
tenaciously hold us ‘back and prevent the same kind of revolution

sphere of arzanent.

_We strive unsuccessfully to squeeze missile /ouclear weapons into
the frarovork of the old habitual postulates of our military doctrines
only slightly "modernizing" the latter, and we forget that this doctrine
was founded on the basis of using weapons of military combat :
fundamentally different fron contemporary ones and not comparable
with then. :

Speaking of past world wars ire report to the Session of the
Euprecs Soviet in January 1950, N.S. Khrushehey noted that they
formerly began on the borders of the warring countries, where the _—-
trocps wore concentrated. ' Concerning contemporary conditions he said:

"howadays, if war, starts, military actions will
differently, since countries will have at their disposal the means .

ery
capital, every single large industrial or administrative center, every

single otrategic area » Will be subject to attack not Just during the
first cays, but during the first minutes of the war. In this mnner,

var will both begin differently, if it 1s begun, and dévelop differently."

‘ | : '

in another part of his report N.S, Khrushchey Said: | "I once

rere e=mhasize, that we already have go many nuclear weapons ~~ atomte |
and thermonuclear, and appropriate missiles for delivery of these ;

weapons to the territory of a possible ageressor, that if some madman :

i .
: : ‘ . j fe ,

: im |

Defining this thought concretely, Marshal of the Soviet Union

R. Ya Malinovskiy, in his: speech at the game Session, said: “About

: . > 3 7 aes “asteya)

—- 4,3(a)(4)

nen te ret enemeregriremey oe:

100 such nuclear charges, dotonated within a short period of tine on
an industrially developed country whose territory is approximtely

: 300-500 thousand square kiloxmoters, will be sufficient to convert

| all of its industrial areas and administrative-political centers

: _ into a heap of rubble, and the territory -- into a lifeless desert

| ; contaminated with deadly radioactive substances."

', It mst be sien to everyone that such statezents are not made nae
for the sake of rhetoric, but are fully substantiated from the stand- ha
point of the achievorert of military technology and of the “econente ©
capability of our country. - hoe

+

‘Under contemporary conditions, the formations of miesild troops;
of the VGX (Suprema \High Comind), with their unlimited range of | of:
action and colossal force of fire strike, have becors the. primary: . .
and decisive form of armed forces. They, rather than any other |
means of armed conflict "pave the way," if one may use the expresaion,
for all other forms armed forces, radically changing the | 7
. Strategic situation ds a whole and the Operational situation in the .

theaters of military operations. aoe .

Sr mere ee mee me tee 8 ee certs sees one

The efforts of all other forms of the armed forces, which are
" equipped with nuclear/missile weapons, must be directed toward
naxinum rapid and effective exploitation af the strikes of missile
formations of the VGK. In this connection, the basis for Planning
operations of each of the types of forces again becomes a question a
- Of the use of their ow nuclear/missile weapons, and not of the ars
number of divisions, vessels, aireraft, etc. oe oa

From these considerations it is already completely apparent
'. that a whole series of established views of our military doctrine
mist be seriously reexamined, beginning with questions of strategy
and operational art and ending with tactics and troop organization
. : Se: Ap. we t e »

missile strike of formt
. to exist in the first days of the war.

: first poworful enemy muclear strikes. As it appears to us, they

to review seriously certain tenets of our nilitary strategy con-

' . Ghormous moral shock to pooples, not to spcak of the huge mterial

VGX missile troops completely change the nature of operations of
Ground troops, the navy, and aviation.

It would be naive to think that the enemy will be incapable of
delivering similar powerful nuclear strikes against the territory of
countries of the Socialist Carp and first and foremost against the
territory of the Soviet Union. But such strikes will not be able to
knock these countries out of the war.

The superiority of the socialist structure with its econonte ees
potentialities and political unity of pooples.will enable countries - ,
of the Socialist Carp to withstand the first nuclear strikes of the

encay. This is further favored by the enorcous territory, the
‘inexhaustible huran resources yrand @ relatively great ‘dispersion of
industrial and administrative centers; The imperialist bloc does

not have euch possibilities. Yor this reason, in preparing the ps
country for the possible jaunching of war by aecresscrs, we mist first

of all utilize the advantages of cur scclalist system so as not to

give the encny the possibility of recovering after our retaliatory
nuclear strike. —

Of course we must take into account the consequences of the “i

will make themselves felt, first of all, by the fact that in the 4
first operation of the initial period of the war, @ substantial reine

force=cnt of troops in theaters of military operations cannot be —
expected by bringing up forces and equipment from the depth of the

Under these conditions, it appears. absolutely necessary to us

cerning the length of a contemporary war and the muber of armed
forces participating in it.

ee te ee ene eis pee n rere

The exarple of the capitalist countries annihilated in the
first days of the war will hardly evoke enthusiasm in the rexa
countries for its prolonsation. Wo must take into account the

losses and the humn victims. It is sufficient to compare figures
of human losses in previous wars with expected losses during the
course of the first days or even the first hours of a conterporary

‘war for the picture to become clear, :

The losses of 33 warring countries during the four years of
World War I totaled 10 million persons killed and 34 million persons ot

“te

4.3(a)(4)

rained, i.e., an average of 11 million persons per year. The losseg
of 72 warring countries during the six years of World War ID totaled

about 34 million persons kilicd and 28 million persons minsd, or

an average also of about 12 million persons per ycar. According to

the data of a special study by the Office of Civil Defense of the

USA conducted in 1955, the losses in the course of several hours .

from the first aerial attack carried out chiefly by atomic and thermo.

- nuclear weapons totaled 15 million persons dead and about 2h militon, os
Persons sick and wounded, altogether up to 40 million in the USA
alone. In addition, about 50 to 60 percent of the country's industry
was destroyed. . It is well to note. that in the above-mentioned study
only 53 cities were subjected to the pre-arranged attack and that .
thermonuclear bombs were droppéd on only il of these cities. ‘The
moral fatigue of peoples, which became evident tovard the end of
World Var I as well as of World War If, is well knom. It is easy

: to imagine how great this fatigue and depression will be after the
first nuclear strikes in a future war.

_It appears to us that after the first miclear/missile strikes, .
- the basis for all operations on a strategic scale must be a decisive |
. offensive against the as yet unrecovered enemy; the more quickly ae
and energetically that this is accomplished, the more probable that pa
the enemy will be unable to cope with the disruption brought about. -!
by the first attack, and to organize stubborn resistance, ene

Whoever withstands the first enexy attack mist conclude the var ee
. rapidly. oo ne! i oe

At present we already consider it possible for the tempo of
operations to be 100 km in a 2h-hr, period and the duration of a
frontal operation to be 10 to 12 2hehr, periods. If this is so,
for how many days are we preparing to wage war to achieve decisive
strategic results? —_— < 5 E :

At present there is already a deep-seated contradiction between me
de=ands to conduct operations on a large scale, at high tempos,
Without pauses, and the still extant and accepted position regarding
the duration of the initial period of the war, which mist continue. .
to the end of full mobilization of forces and the beginning of the
receipt of material resources and arms from mobilized industry.

This is hardly realistic and apparently one mist calculate on a
short initial period of the war, which will be the decisive period
of the entire war, .— a a .

There is no need to fear the term "blitzkrieg" Just because

. peoples will hardly be able to continue it in'a slow, drawn-out
' fashion, especially the peoples of capitalist countries, who have a -

' procises the manufacturers éf arn3 greater profits. ‘And in the rare

this concept was compromised by the experience of past world wars.
Under the conditions of nuclear war only "blitz" operations can
promise victory. If victory is not achieved in a short tine,. then

lower moral - political potential than countries of the Socialist
Camp. He who has withstood the first strikes Rust and can conclude
the war rapidly if he prepares his armed forces properly in peace-
time . :

Strategic art cannot be replaced by urgent demands on the moral
fiber of peoples, and neither can one plan strategy on the basis of
fear of calculated risk and the sacrifices connected with it.

- The enemies of blitzimieg habitually argue that our World War IF
losses of 1/3 of all military industry, half of the steel and coal
production, 40 percent of petroleun production and output of electric
pover, more than half of ail the rail lines and several tens of .
millions of the population in territory occupied by the eneny, not
counting combat losses, not only did not bring about cessation of
prolonged resistance but even permitted the crushing of the Germn
fascist blitzkrieg plan and subsequently the achievement of a
brilliant victory. 9

They forget the fact that the above-noted losses were spread out |
over & period of almost two years. They were inflicted only along
the line of the front and within its limits; in the zone of interior ae
they were almost non-existent, Buran losses at the front and in the. is
rear were not afforded the necessary medical and other aid available [- .
to millions of the wounded and sick of the local populace. ‘he
inhabitants situated behind the line of the front were physically i
alrost unaware of these Losses, since life in the rear continued to |
flow more or iess normally. The picture will be entirely different |
now. | a ; : ;

Under present conditions, the possibility of victory mist be
ascured by readiness » the capacity and capability of concluding the
war in the shortest possible time. The theory of @ prolonsed war
is more acceptable at present to the monopolistic, circles of the :
West, since-the preparation for such a war costs more and conscquently : .

1

}
i.
|
{

of profits they may not even consider the expediency of ‘the theory. -

The postulates of our military strategy concerning the size of.
the armed forces are also still based on the experience.of past: ;
world wars and arise from the necessity of conducting war with Ass,

. multi-million-man armies.

; Advocates of multi-million-man amies allude to the experience
' | Of all twentieth-century wars, which showed that the growth of the

_ destructive force of weapons in armed coxbat with an enemy of equal
strength never brought about a decrease in the armed forced
war, but rather caused their itnercase. They forget that this

experience is based on entirely different means of armed combat and

methods of its conduct. For this reason, analogies cannot be mde
in this mtter. :

Under current conditions can operations unfold in the old ranner?

Can they, having begun with a relatively small nurber of reguier e
combat-ready troops then continually broaden by dint of the arrival - :
of fully mobilized large units, ‘and finally change into engagements |
of nuzcrous fronts and of multi-million-nan armies? Under current a, “eel
conditions this is, firstly impossible, and secondly, unnecessary. |
It is impossible because nothing will arrive from the depth of the i
country in time, and possibly will never arrive. It is unnecessary =
because after the first nuclear strikes the remaining forces of the |

|

|

|

eneny in the border zones also cannot be numsrousz it is necessary.
to crush quickly the remains of these forces and to occupy the eneny
country and, for this, operations of a completely different nature

' will be required from those which we are now studying.

—o At the present time, of the 61 divisions within the composition
of the Allied ground troops of the European military blocs, there
are 5 American divisions, 4 British divisions, and 8 West German

divieions; the remaining divisions: 14 French, 10 Turkish divisions, --
and other comtries - 20 divisions. oo ae

« The y

taking of this strip will then becomes the primary mission of the a
advancing divisions of the first echelon; it must be accouplished cl

_ 8lso by their wide use of maiclear missiles of tactical and Operational ==

; After taking the border zone, ‘the mission confronting the troops
be chiefly the speedy taking over of zones of 8 greater ox:

strike of strategic missiles... : Under these conditions, the mbdili-
zational build-up of the enemy or the approach of his large

13(a(4)

operational, or even strategic, reserves can hardly be expected. It
is more likely that it will be necessary to overcome the resistance
of enemy troops retreating from the border zone.

To exploit the first powerful missile strike it will be
completely unnecessary to deploy a large number of divisions, as
was done in past wars. |

Taking over the| border zone and the zones of total destruction

and radiation will necegsitate special organization and preparation -F
of troops, but will not lat all, necessitate multi-million-mn armies.

The execution of this type of mission in the Eyropean theater of . a
military operations a front of 600-700 kn, for example, is
‘possible with 20-25 divisions, primarily tank, rushing ahead dlong ,
separate axes and in|separate heated battles, pounding the large La
units and units of the enemy which offer resistance in the above- |
mentioned zones. Of \course, a significant portion of these troops|

will suffer from en nuclear strikes; relatively frequent re-

placercnt of entire large units which have sustained heavy losses

will be necessary. For this reason there should be 10-15 more

reserve divisions behind them; in all 30-40 divisions, well equipped

with tactical nuclear |weapons, and which will mke up the first
operational echelon, w be required.

Organizationally, the strike of the first operational eoleteg
in a zone of 600-700 km my be represented by two fronts of 15-20
divisions each, plus a certain number of divisions of airborne
forces, (2 or 3 for a front). A front my consist of 2 or 3 armies
of 4 or 5 divisions, each acting in a zone of 100 to 200 kn, plus a
certain nunber of divisions of the front reserve. -_

Forces, mobilized in the interior ‘of the country, can arrive
gradually in the theater of military operations, probably after the
completion of the first operations at the front, and their principal
role will consist of occupation of captured territory.

If, after taking over the territory of a country subjected to
’ the first massive nuclear attack, the enemy docs not capitulate a
sinilar all-shattering strike may be repeated on the next countrys

¥rom the aforementioned, it does not follow of course, that
those divisions which will be in action in the first operational
echelon of ground troops will be sufficient for the war as a whole.
It is apparent that in accordance with the forward moveront a sicnifi-
cant number of bom cs which have beén fees for carrying cut

. =

4.3(ay(4}

' may be, as it appears to us, many times smiller than it was in

sr : of all arms of troops. To the same degree, with certain corrections .
_ for geographical conditions, it can also be applied in other theaters.

_ the aim of knocking entire countries out of the war.

4.3(ah(4)

occupational functions in the occupied territory will be required. .
A significant number of forces will also be needed in the zone of
interior chiefly for various formations euch as local antiaircraft
defense (!7V0). Therefore, for the conduct of the war a sufficiently
darge nurber of ground troops is needed, but their. over-a11 size,
dcsigration and ‘nature of use will of course be different than in
past wars.

The number of ground troops engaged directly in combat operations
previous wars.

We have outlined a concept for initial operations under
European Theater conditions which is convenient for the activities

In this concept, the principal leading role belongs to the operations
of the VGX missile formtions, but not with the aims which we now
have under general review. ‘This is not combat against enemy nuclear
weapons, not the weakening of his economic potential, not combat
against his reserves, etc., but the full annihilation of the eneny
with nuclear warheads of megaton yield over a vast territory with

Briefly, if there is a possibility for holding out, then there
is also @ possibility of victory in a short period of time. Moreover,
for direct combat operations at the front such numerous ground armed
forces ss in previous wars will be needed neither in the beginning -°
of the war nox during its course. i ;
= - i

"Certain Questions of Qperational Art |

_It is necessary to examine the current operations of ground ae
troops in close connection with the operations of VGK missile formations.
it appears to us that among the ranks of: the latter, in addition to ;
formtions carrying out the missions of knocking entire countries
out of the war, there mist be formtions designated for activities
in the interest of several fronts conducting operations on one stra~-
tegic axis. Such formations, reraining under the Jurisdiction and |

:
:

<
a ee pe wes Pen Sei ke %
nt eerste mar . teas ‘

. cOxmand of General Headquarters (Stavka), could establish favorable:

conditions for the development of ground troop operations. by means .
of annihilation of enemy nuclear weapons, his reserves, airfields, |
transportation centers, depots, and other installations located
beyond the range of action of front missile weapons; by their strikes
they could also reinforce the fire capability of the fronts in those

inotances when the latter, for one reason or another, found them-
selvcs without sufficient nuclear /utssile weapons. Strikes in the
interests of separate fronts could be carried out either on comand
of the Stavka (or the corzand of theater forces) or upon requests
of the fronts within tho range of prescribed limitations.

At the same time, this VGK missile formation can carry out
separave tasks assigned by the Stavka which are not directly connected
with the activities of the fronts.

In all instances the VGX operational missile formation must have
, at its disposal its owm longerange means of reconnaissance . (aviation,
' vadlotechnical, and others), in order to be able to respond rapidly rae
. to a change in the situation and to avoid milti-channel coordinationg = —
of reconnaissance tasks.

It appears exocdient to us to plan the VGX missile operations
as special operations for the destruction of eneny nuclear weapons,
for undermining his economte potential, for coxbat arainst supply,
etc. All this rust be a constituent part of two types of missile
opcrations: those operations carried out by the VGX missile troop |.
formations with the aim of complote annihilation of an encny country |
and knocking it out of the war, or operations in support of ground |
troops. lfissile operations of the first type usually must precede
opcrations of the second type and, subsequently, are also carried | |
out simultaneously. It is obvious that the nature of the targets
under attack will be different in each type of operation. =; -

It is absolutely unnecessary to deploy VGK missile formations,
in coordinated action with ground troops, directly in the theater of: .
nilitary activities or close to it. On the contrary, their placement
in the zone of interior is even preferable, since this rakes the
work .of eneny intelligence more difficult and negates the need to
form a separate antiaircraft defense of these formations; their PYO
can be cocbined with the antiaircraft defense of certain areas of
the country.

The execution of VGK missile operations, the possibility of
similar strikes by the enozy, the repletion of. ground troops with
their own organic nuclear/missile rcans, and the possibility of using
high-yield nuclear warheads, not only in the zone of interior, but.
in encsagements and even on the ‘field of battle, demnds thorough
review of certain postulates of our military doctrine in connection
with the operations of ground troops. a ;

4.3{a)(4)

4.3(ah(4)

Above all, iti

is time to repudiate the very concept and expression
“strike group" (u jrnaya Eruppirovka) as antiquated and harmful. Any
Grouping formed with the personnel and materiei of ground troops
threatens to bec & good target for an eneny nuclear strike and to
bear extra, unwarranted losses.

In place of the creation of “strike Groups” in all types of
operations, it 1s necessary to instill the concept of "concentration
of the efforts of nuclear/missile weapons". The activities; after
all, of ground troops both in-the offensive and in defense mist take
place over broad zones, Spproxirately the same for Jarge units in
offense as in defense. This, incidentally, was recently taken into ©
account by our probable enemtes, | é

The bases of contemporary operations are rapid maneuver and ~
swift attacks by small groupings (of division size), from different .
directions, not shoulder to shoulder, and miking use of their own
nuclear strikes. Even these litle groupings are dispersed after e
successful attack. A strike group in contemporary maning spells
. death, since it forms a compact and good target for « high-yield
'. Muclear weapon. ane a a

_ Contemporary offensive and defensive operations mist differ
from one another by the quantity of nuclear warbcads alloted to their
implementation and not by the number of divisions. Both in offensive
and defonsive ground troop operations the primary activities are -=- .
nuclear strikes, swift maneuver, and short assaults with tanks and ;
personnel. The difference rests in the fact that in offensive
operations there mist be a strong first echelon which permits ewift
: . destruction of the Opposing enemy; in a defensive operation it-ig —
' > expedient to have a weaker first echelon and to designate it for:
holding certain transportation centers, important areas or position - |
sectors behind large natural barriers, with the aim of slowing the
tempo of the eneny offensive; “defense as a whole should be based on
mincuver and strikes with forces located in the zone af interior,
* even with the loss of territory, in order to win tine and concen«
trate essential nuclear/missile weapons,

It appears ‘to us that under current conditions, it is un-
necessary to hava second echelons, in the previous meaning of this
term, either in defense or in offense. They were always thought
cof as a potential strike Group which could be brought into battle
in a new direction. At present it {8 much more expedient to
consider everything located behind the first echelon, which 1s en-
gaged in battle, as reserve, dispersed over the entire field of

Ba ren Meta inm ved. i=

4,.3(a)(

hostilities and designated as reinforcement for the first echelon
during an offensive, but on the defensive - for counterattacks and
counterstrikes. To overcome enemy opposition during an offensive, |
‘there should not be concentration of troops by bringing in the
second echelon, but concentration of nuclear weapons and their means
of dolivery (nositel). Only when there is an insufficient quantity

of these means can a strike be undertaken by several divisions, and

then not with a compact striking group, but rather from several |
directions. ;

The possibility of enemy use of high-yield nuclear ee in !
the field of hostilities obliges even those small groupings, of
division size as we mentioned, to operate at a distance of 20 to 4o
or more kiloxsters from each other or, as we frequently point out,
to operate in separate directions.

assistance to its neighbor, to wheel rapidly if necessary in a new

|
|
|
|
Moreover, the inclination of each advancing large unit to lend ae
[ .
i}

direction for a strike against the enemy rear is a binding principle
of coordinated action. .
Therefore, the conduct of offensive operations now requires a ue
significantly lesser operational density but a larger number ‘of tank
divisions in the first echelon. Divisions located in the zone of
interior and moving up -- are not the second echelon but rather,
reserves designated as replacements for decimated divisions of the
first echelon and for the circumvention of all types of obstacles.

It 48 necessary to reject decisively the inclination developed

. in previous wars toward encirclement of separate groupings and the

forration of rings around them. This tendency is very viable and
has remained with us as an inheritance from the period when there
wore no other methods for annihilation of the enemy Ieft in the rear
of advancing troops. Nowadays, the enemy left in the rear must be
destroyed either in meeting engagements by reserve large units and

ogo or if stationary, they mst de annihilated with nuclear strikes.

The Jatter, of course, is _ Preferable.

In the training of troops, At is ackenuey also to reject decisdive-
ly “thé cultivation of the principle of break through the enemy's
prepared defenses... It is possible, or course, in individual.
instances when the enemy defense cannot be bypassed or annibilated
_ by_miclear strike. In the main, however, under conditions not in= .
volving solid fronts or heated battles, the breakthrough of an enemy |
prepared defense has ceased to be the primry form of offensive

13ta

actions, but 1s ylelding to meeting engagements and envelopment,

The taking of radioactively contaminated zones created by the
enemy acquires great importance. It must be carried out by large
units, depending upon the tasks they are fulfilling, the meteorological
situation, and the degree of permissible dosage of radiation received
during the period of action, Depending upon these conditions, the
contaminated zones are taken either by @ rapid forward push or by
bypassing, or in the final analysis, the troops continue to carry
out their mission in the contaminated zone without regard to possible!
losses. All discussions regarding the creation of passages into !
contaminated zones, the surmounting of them in helicopters and others |
are utopian at the present time, : ge

In planning contemporary offensive operations on the scale of
a front and armies, it is impossible to proceed from an single "p* 3

(day). In terms of time, operations will flow in different directions,

at different tempos and it is more advisable to plan them by calendar
days (except, of course, the initial retaliatory missile strike), |
Moreover, ‘concrete army and large unit tasks can be established for
only 1-2 days and for a longer period it is sufficient to indicate

the general direction, the nature of the activities and final goal

of the operation. More detailed planning is highly problematical,
since sharp changes in the situation are unavoidable as a result of
enemy nuclear strikes, ss :

i

The tempos of contemporary operations may’ be planned, as already

mentioned, up to 80 to 100 and more kilometers during a 2hehr, period. .-

but it must be kept in mind that, as a result of enemy nuclear
strikes on our deep rear, the front will not be able to rely on

systematic delivery from the rear of the country. Everything which Poe

1s essential must already be stored in the theaters in peacetime and
such supplies as POL must, to a significant degree, be sought out
from war trophies in the course of the advance,

It is also essential to take into account the cumulative physical
tension on tank and truck drivers (it will be necessary to have two .
reliefs for interchange of crew members) and the large number of
vehicles which will go out of commission, , te

Vigorous maneuver and nuclear strikes must become the’ basis ‘of
contemporary defense. He who sits in place, even in prepared positions,
will be mocked out by nuclear weapons or bypassed, Only a relatively
small part of the forces can hold separate areas or positions with
the aim of slowing the tempo of the enemy advance along axes which

en

|
|

4.3(a}{4)

1.3(8

+
ra
é
t .

7 1.3{ayt

4st

are convenient for him and, consequently, cluster his battle array
and operational forration. In this connection an inportant role in
dcfense is played by broad utilization of obstacles and terrains
-prescnting natural obstructions for slowing the tempo of the eneny
advance. However, the fate of rodern dofense is decided in the final
analysis by the rineuvor of misotles, chiefly the shifting of thsir
trajectories, and the availability of nuclear warheads, in conjunctica|
with counterattacks and counterblows of the reserves.

i

~y.

|
'
|
|
|
| It appears to us that under conterporary conditions defense, in :
the past rcaning of this term, can take place only on a tactical scale.
| ; Aérry and front operational dofense, deliborately subordinated to the |
| ; interasts of offensive operations in other directions or dictated by |
x ‘a skarp change in the situation in the encny's favor, will, of course,:
also have its place. Eut it cust be based on the sare methods of
. operation as.in' offensive operations, 1.¢e., on heated meeting batten
and exncigexents. For this, the arny and front ray have a number of
larg? units and a scale of zoncs of action equal to those of an arny
and front carrying cut offensive operations. The difference will be |:
+ an the presence of @ sxaller quantity of nuclear warheads, which will |
| Hl necessitate loss of a part “ofthe forces and territory in order to ‘
| 1

oe es cape eeeener ane eee e

;
Lofensive operations of the front and arzy, ence from ~
offensive operations in aims of action and quantity of nuclear :
_. + Weapens, will resemble the latter in methods of large unit tactical a
'.f*.  . operations. = - ;

qn defensive operations, certain armies of the front eek certain
largo unite of armies, taking edvantage of a convenient local situation
8 waich bias arisen as a result of swift actions or nuclear strikes, will
; Sroaecatsy carry out an offensive with iimited goals. ;

. Tn a conterporary operational defense, the formation of defensive
a es zones 4s not advisable because they do not justify their desiccation.
; Any large unit dofending itself in place will be annihilated by —

iy nucicar strikes of the encay or sicply bypassed. On the operaticnal
scale, the term “stable dcfense" should be relegated to the archives
because under modern. conditions 4t can be neither solid nor stable.
Slowing the texpo of thé advancing enemy by mcans of deferse is based
on counterattacks and counterotriies carried out fram different
directions, on skilful and swift dicencagemonts from the onczy, and
on broad use of barricades and utilization of natural terrain cbstacles, |
i ' until the time a possibility presents itself to destroy the ensxy .
i with a nuclear strike.

(4)

ne cress mee ote > 2 ners ene monary remap

in connection with this it is necessary, evidently, to re-. :

exanine our views on the nature of soecalled counterpreparation

(kontrpodgotovka) in defense and on organization of counterstrikes.

In these questions we continue to proceed from the concept of the
nem solid and relatively stable front,

It appears to us that a limited quantity of nuclear weapons in

H the defense will not permit a breakup of the enemy offensive with
One or two massive nuclear strikes, especially since he will not

| form compact groupings for his offensive. Apparently, instead of

. counterpreparation, it will be necessary to restrict oneself to
daily and rapid annihilation of disclosed enemy means of nuclear
on attack and to individual (to the extent possible) nuclear strikes

at various times on the most dangerous of his tank divisions which
have broken through. If, however, the availability of nuclear
weapons permits the delivery of a massive strike capable of breaking

{

!

|

|

!

|

t

!

[

{

|

|

i

up the enemy offensive completely, then this is already not counters a

preparation but going over * the offensive.

x oe _ X& ia more expedient to carry out counterstrikes in operational
- . 1, “defense, by means of meeting ‘engagements, not with a compact grouping —
6epecially created for this purpose and deployed on a definite dine,
but with several divisions operating similtaneously, though from
different directions. es wy gt:

Anti-debarkation defense along the coast by ground troops can -
' also hava no defensive zones either on the coast or in the zone of

= Interior. In ports and in vulnerable janding sectors along the coast .

"+, there can be separate tank aubunits and unite designated basically -
we _ for combat against airboyne landings and for initial repulsion of
debarkations of the enemy in landing-debarkatitn craft.

maa The basis of anti-debartation defense must be the mancuvering

1; ° | |. activities of large units which move up from the interior of coastal

- _ Zones and, in meeting ‘engagements, pound the enemy utilizing nuclear —

". °°  Weaponse » se eg Ont Se ae be a ee e
'Of the now generally accepted means of antiedebarkation defense,

only the construction of obstacles, both in the water as well &s on

_ the land, can achieve mich significance. . ° — ;

“EBneny amphibious Janding operations, while enroute at sea, do
not merit expensive and cumbersome operations against them by the
navy and longange aviation. The basis of their annihilation can

“Nr

4.84)

1.3(@)( }

be missile strikes in exbarkation and debarkotion arcas; while enroute |
at sca, it ig aciin more expodiont to annihilate danding forces by
strikes with missiles having nuclesr charges of several mocatons,
After the discovery of the landing forces at wea, these attacks can
be calculated on the basis of their passage of a definite point (area),
H

Certain Questions of the Dovelop-ont_and Organization of the
Types of Arrd Forces _ oF

Tae changing of certain strategic and operational points of view
. is unavoidably bound up in the review of the prograns for development
and orcanization of the different types of armed forces. This
davelopxcnt rust, first of all, evolve only from the needs of the
+ Anitial pordod of the war, since @ long, drawn-out nuclear/nisaile
| struggle is impossible; secondly, it mist develop under the banner
of the indubitable priority of nuclear/missile troops. In this
respect it ig expedient to develop primarily missile troops of the
VGX, capable of using missiles of megaton yields.

'  Bigsiie troops of all types -» VGX, operational, and tactical <=
must develop in the directions of; ae ;

~ increasing their firing rate (skorostrelnost); in this respect
the introduction of solid missile fuels has decisive ‘Bignificance;
" missiles mist be per ge ready projectiles, fully assembled and
- requiring only the establishment of the flight program;

_* perfection and automtion of the process of tying in the launching
mounts (carriers) to the' terrain; -

- perfection of missile guidance systems, not subject to jamming;

"« perfection of missile carriers capable of changing the launch
arca quickly; in this. respect an important role must be played
principally by “air-surface" type missiles on seaplanes ( drosamolet),
missile-carrying submarines, and missile trains (poyezd) Ga .
strategic missiles); "

- perfection of the systen of centralized comand of launching
missiles fron widely separated corzand points. os

It must be acknowledged directly thit in their present state,
missiles of tactical and operational designation are still not suf-
Zictently suitable for the missions assigned to’ them because ‘of their —

| ‘ 7 ; : j

on a
es

low firing rate conditioned by corylex preparations for Jaunching,
for retargeting and for changing of firing positions.

The _pround troops as a whole must develop in a forn transportable
by air. Perfection and introduction of lighter type tanks (since any 7
armor ig penctrable) suitable for transport by air is essential. The |
great importance which is attached to the ability of ground troops

' to take ruined and contaminated zones and water barriers requires | r

' significant development of engineering troops; however |the most |

_ inportant mission of the engineering troops must not be fortification |

_ in the existing meaning of this term,i.e., not the construction of ;
positions and of anti-atomic shelters but the rapid preparation of .
missile Jaunch sites, establishment of obstacles, road construction,
and provisions for the surmounting of large water obstacles.

The air forces, it appears to us, have not yet lost their
significance to the degree that they should be ignored. Disctission
should concern only the change in their role in warfare and, subse-
quently, a change in their composition and organization. '

s Long-range aviation, armed with missiles of the “air-ship" class,
-is (in conjunction with submarines) a good means of combat with —
mobile carriers of nuclear weapons at sea and one that is difficult

to replace. In view of this, it is apparently advisable to include -
it in the composition of the navy. ‘

o Front air forces (VV8) are also needed, though of a type other-
‘than those now available. Certainly, front bomber aviation is .
. Geparting the scene, since its missions can, to a significant degree,
- be carried out by missiles. Nevertheless, on the field of modern
_ battle and engagements there will be many important small and mobile
targets whose annihilation by uissiles is still improbable. An air-
_ craft of the fighter-bomber type is needed which, on its own, could
find the target and annihilate 1t; such an aircraft must be capable
. Of great acceleration, permitting it to appear and depart rapidly
(this may be achieved with the aid of rocket boosters): at the
‘same time it must be capable of carrying out combat missions at
relatively low speeds as well. An aircraft flying at a Speed equal
to Mach 1-2 (M-2M), 1s poorly suited to seek out small and mobile
targets, even with the use of radar equipment. —

. ‘Fighter aviation within the composition of the WS of a front
is essential, as a more maneuverable component of the PVO, as long
ag aviation remains one of the principal carriers of nuclear weapons

for the enemy and as long as ground antiaircraft missile systems do
not possess a sufficient range of destruction.

In addition, the front needs a manifold troop (army) aviation
for observation and reconnaissance, including radiation, for liaison, .
ccccaind, and transport. Such aviation mist undoubtedly develop as.
non airfield~-based. It my consist of helicopters and other '
machines, for example the type well known in foreign literature woder a
-the term “flying saucers" (ground effect, machine-turbolet). ;

fhe VVS of the front mist have a mich greater number of
reconnaissance aircraft than they have at present.

Finally, greater-capacity“transport aviation is needed as a
resource of the Suprems High Command.

The VVS of the front (air army) is not desigmted under modern .
conditions for the execution of any independent air operations, and
is the means for directly coordinated action with combined-arns
arnoies. For this reason, their cocposition must include several
aircraft divisions of fighter-boubers because only the latter are
favorable for coubat against mobile carriers of nuclear weapons and -
the advancing reserves of the encmy. In this connection, however,
it is inadvisable to distribute the VVWS forces of the front for
support of dcfinite armies or divisions; it is better to utilize
them centrally, under the jurisdiction of the VVWS coémmunder. ;

tne Fivy» The future at sea belongs to submarines and to
missile~carrying seaplanes which are not bound to airfields and which
are capable of long-range operations. ‘These, it would appear, should
" now be developed. _ :

The basic mission of the fleet -- to annihilate carriers of
nuclear/nissile weapons at sea which as @ consequence of their
mobility, have greater survival chances. Such carriers will be
nissile-carrying aircraft and missile-carrying atomic submrines.
As a result of their high radar-irage contrast and, consequently,
their vulnerability aircraft carriers and other surface vessels
apparently will soon départ from the scene. .

Under contemporary conditions it is hardly poesible to imgine
jarge amphibious landing operations of an operational, and even less, - el

' Of strategic significance. A landing force is always, at sam stage ‘

of its activity, a compact group or it does not mke sense; but this

4.3184)

ARAN)

condition spells destruction for the landing force. The possibilities
are all in favor of its annihilation by nuclear/missile weapons while
4t is still at its bases or while it is at sea.

Eurface vessels of the fleet will not be able to play a signifi-
cant role in armed conflict. Their utility will probably be limited
to coastal areas under heavy PVO cover for execution of support
missions. As far as protection of ocean supply transport is concerned,
even now they are of little use for carrying out this mission.

Antinireraft defense of troops and the country, as it appears
to us, is on the correct course of development, chiefly of anti-
missile resources in the form of the creation of fully autamtic —
systems of antiaircraft missiles. ne

The age of tube antiaireratt artillery is irrevocably echoes
into the past and it is only in the antiaireraft defense of troops
. that srallecaliber tube antiaircraft artillery my still have some
* significance for the protection of smil subunits from low-flying
aircraft.

The poeeree antiaircraft defense of troops and the country

“":": gust be an automatic system of antiaircraft missile installations of
-. varLlous ranges which could cover, not installations, but separate

a large areas, and could resolve the task of protecting both tha
troops and the territorial installations of the country (in these
‘areas). Separate antiaircraft defense of troops, except for the

. self-defense of siz11 subunits mentioned above, appears to us to.

be an antiquated tradition. Fighter aircraft aviation within the .
system of antiaircraft defense will also become archaic in the near

Sas . future. It is needed only until antiaircraft missiles have achieved ©
oe the necessary technical perkectsods ,

A now type of forces. in addition to savise types of armed

= . forces the necessity has sprung up, in cour opinion, for the creation
‘, of a new type of force which is not designated.for direct conduct

' of combat operations, but which is extremely important, nonetheless,
under conditions of nuclear/missile war. We have in mind troops, |

- possibly called rescue-rehabilition, (spasatelno-vosstanovitelnyy),

which are designated for operations in the country’s interior, in -
(areas subjected to enemy nuclear attack. Their basis should consis
of medical’ serytce end. rehabilation aie and large units.

In. contrast to other ‘types of forces, these trope mst be

especially massive, organized according to territorial character=
istics and trained without being pulled out of production. We

have something similar now in the form of civilian formations of the
antiaircraft defense (PV0). But these formtions exist mostly

on paper, are not supported from a material-technical standpoint,
are scmlevoluntary organizations, and are not properly directed by
anyone. In addition, organs of the MPVO are concerned with a very
darge number of problems which, in essence, are the prerogatives of
governncntal authority, such as communications, supplying the popu-
dation with cone SYaCuatsOn, etc.

It appears “to us that such very important undertakings as medical
assistance to the suffering populace and rehabilitative work, 1.¢.,
meacures permitting the people.to withstand enemy nuclear attack,
must be implerented by special troops. Their cadres and necessary

aoe must be maintained in peacetime and they mist be assured

obiiizational buildup under the leadership of organs of military
control with the initiation of pense artiyities.

@uestions of Control. - Fron Che standpoint of the nature of
control of operations, the new forms of armed conflict do not
introduce any basic changes. As in the past there will be need for
intelligence and collation of its information, an appraisal of the

+ situation, a decision, and its transmittal to executors, supervision
- of execution, influence on the course of events by changing the

tasks of subordinates troops, ar through the influence of the senior
commnder's means exerted on the enemy, the infoming of the commnder

' and of adjacent units. Howaver, the methods of control and the means

‘by which they are TED Lemenbed SxesEsence significant changes.

. The method of direct personal contact in operations is of 1ittre
value today. It can lead only toa waste of the senior commander's
time and promote incorrect decisions based upon impressions of one
center of combat operations. ‘This method is admissible now only in -

_ combat on a subunit level, but not in operations.

The need to see the field of combat along the decisive diceetica

' @lso has little admissibility now. This need arose from crushing

the enemy with masses of troops which were in direct contact with. him.
This will not uaaay happen, noWe .

The most ‘important thing in control is quick reaction to a change
in the situation, a rapid tempo of control, and, consequently, the
well-known need for ‘ats mechAnienticn sutconticn, and reduction of

, Ry oh

|
gata) |

|
: | the number of its documents.
|

Even now wire telegraphy and telephone communications should be .
added to obsolescent means of control as they will not be able to
keep pace with the operating tempo of troops.

Apparently even such an attribute of control as the preparation
of large unit and army command posts with all types of shelters
(dugouts), by the forces and equipment of engineer troops, is r
becoming cbsolete. The rapid tempos of battles and operations require
highly mobile command points using available places of cover (cellars,
buildings, tunnels, quarries, etc.).

' The recording of meteorological conditions and their prediction,
become a very important factor in operational planning and in dally *
controle In this connection, the creation of special meteorological -  —~
units in all staffs from division to front is absolutely essential. ee

Until automatic systems permitting rapid and accurate determi- :
nation of coordinates for missile launchers are worked out, it is
essential to have in the staffs of armies and fronts a geparate
-topogeodetic service with subordinate special units to support missile
units and-large units. 8 .

eH

eH. ee ye in this article we have only touched upon some of the most ..
-| Rare: topical questions of military ert. In connection with the development
_. , nuclear/missile weapons, the total number of postulates in need
. Of review is undoubtedly much greater, Many of the questions touched
upon by us are set forth only by way of posing them and bringing then .
. to the attention of military-theoretical thought. Therefore, the
'-; Judgements of the author cannot lay claim to exhaustive completeness
om infallipility. ° - - Baste ot ly ame ets ae a
