Communist Insurgency in Thailand
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012498, dated 5 June 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012498).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Sema ae 1 years,
Te Tag PTs

wget

Kp aly nae 1,

ole

Approved Lor Release

pate 2 3DEG 1991

PRET SE
ae

a(a)(4)

4

ales
aes

eg eke
a fat.

fv

th

sere
.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
THE PROBLEM 4:24:04) case den verse an sareligu coh leila Wee eee te 1
CONCLUSIONS 73.25.3545 oc ts 14s as Se ae ee ee ea ee 1
DISCUSSION? wij congas, Sine te eaten nes y tn Gd cial Saher ee eee, S iit S ban 2
i BACKGROUND» 22.3 epi tun ct yetaeee hud eater ewarrenat 2
Tl. THE INSURGENCY. 2227s costiwdere tees Savkewern rap ee ne 5
HL -COUNTERINSURGENGY i424 Junin dgeada ghee w sate tide ed 7
DVRS PEC Seid seies sedi toa raeigtee cect aaa a a Rrache ta orto ci aticn eaten Bota cee 9
TABLES:
That. Military ¥Orees 038.) .4Gei longed ihe i cg hy ede. hte eee ede 12
Major Thai Police and Paramilitary Forces ....................--.---- 12
US Forces in Thailand .... 6.0... es i2
MAPS:
Thailand: Communist Activity and Major US Military Bases ..... Facing 1
Thailand: Major Ethnic Groups .............0 0.0 0c eee cece eee 4

———
: : Sanneudg * 3
—_ Yn fy Nam Dunn
fo} ? -
Chane ¢ OLuang Prapang
Ras mS” xoprn
‘ ( ° ra VIETNAM
: . ‘ Xieng Knouang
* TIN
‘ : *.
aort, © . L A oO Ss N., .
i x vin
ae 2: ri a . C
oe ey ; a ‘y id Se : .
nee Ful 7 VIENTIANE, \ \
ee ee ae Gian: P is Rome son .. Y
i vee ( +e ““Nong Khat AN
: a oLoei = ,udon Than- PD ans ssuciee
ae ar a Se ” Nakhi a sResne “
Phan .
Roger ie oe DEmarca”:
9, ‘ eH: PHAN. ae
Phitsanulok MT) «
Bat muxdahan de Savannaxnet
t SN “Phetchabun Khon?
°Mouimein ies “y _\ = i - Kaen Mana Sarakham ‘\
pe NH : 4
KHORAT *

x,
4 < nN
2 | Nokon Sawa
- :
4

:
i
a
t

MOA LAY

Th adarins seed

PLATEAU

R chathant®
- aichathant °
a ea Nakhon Ratchasima . > Pakse
Le : ee S :
Ne eye ES is re Sunn j
a oS Baran nd 2G
es XS Si Ayut: ra Cr” ON SO ae '
2K: aliaeatal “we
o. a anchanaburi = aaa |
‘avo Saag, : 7
‘ C. i *"Sisophon H
Cc ad ; a |
: — es = Sammut Prakan ‘
Cad 2 4s Son Snare | i
: a yar cm ; cAMBODIA |
# mS ‘ =. om: y o Kompong
£ 4 R ech ear ae “ Thom
S og i ayong -
Mergui bale ( |
ig: i a
Pd F i .
bal 6 Pracnuap ‘ f
e > 4 Khirt Khan By PHNOM PENH @ ed ae
L |
> wy ? SOUTH
a & Chumpnon Po aaa
o K peas
J pay Quoc VEEN AM
ye 7 srctnam:
“
~ i “
go od | :
surat 3
27 Thagt i
ee k Neale Nakhon S: Thammarat ,
BA assy aes THAILAND
sab | COMMUNIST ACTIVITY AND!
Q re | MAJOR U.S. MILITARY BASES |
Phuket 9 “—~. . |
arene : | ‘Jain areas ct ‘ :
| 7 CMMURIST activi ;
-. Pattant { U.S. neaaauarters t
adi i
Satun . : emmy .G2ISUCS GaSe
TSS: i
26 92G 4
& 4
AOS j
> cuitereorin i
PMATIR

rae 7

COMMUNIST INSURGENCY
IN THAILAND

THE PROBLEM
To assess the threat of Communist insurgency in Thailand over the
next year or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Comminist-supported insurgency in Thailand does not con-
stitute a present danger to the stability of the Thai government or a
near-term threat to its control over any large section of the country.
The guerrilla forces are small and their operations are generally con-
fined to remote and relatively sparsely-populated areas.

B. Nevertheless, the insurgency will probably expand further in
geographic scope and intensity over the next year or two. Its growth
will be due primarily to continuing direction, guidance, and support
by the Chinese Communists, and to the political and economic vul-
nerabilities which exist in certain parts of the country, especially the
Northeast.

C. In coping with insurgency the Thai government has the advan-
tage of a generally loyal and contented population. Dissidence is not
a serious problem in the most populous areas of the country. The
government now recognizes the growing dimensions of the threat in
the Northeast and the potential threat in the North and the Malay
South, and has undertaken major political, economic, and security
measures to deal with the situation.

D. Much remains to be done in terms of organization of security
forces and in the field of political action before government programs
become fully effective. However, barring a collapse of non-Commu-
nist forces in Laos and South Vietnam, we believe that the problem
will remain manageable and that over time the Thai government with
US assistance will be able to maintain reasonable levels of security in
the Northeast and other possible trouble spots. But a long and costly
effort will probably be necessary.

|

DISCUSSION

1. BACKGROUND

1. General. Compared to its neighbors in Southeast Asia, Thailand is a model
of stability and well-being. The military oligarchy, which has ruled with few
interruptions since 1932, has shown reasonable restraint and an increasing sen-
sitivity to public opinion. The large and relatively competent civil service pro-
vides jobs and status for graduates of the higher educational system; there is no
sizable, chronically unemployed and frustrated educated class. The rural popu-
lation—about 85 percent of Thailand’s 30 million inhabitants—is politically
passive, but there is a widespread sense of national unity stemming from
loyalty to the Crown, a common language and set of religious values, and a
centuries-old tradition of national independence. This heritage and peasant
conservatism greatly limit the appeal of alien and radical philosophies.

2. Rural life in most of Thailand is generally secure as well as stable. There
is abundant land and no serious land tenure problem. The typical farmer is a
small freeholder with enough to eat, a market for surpluses, and no overly
burdensome government interference. Peasant society is also free of oppressive
class barriers; there is generally free movement upward for those willing and
able to pursue a religious or secular education. Thai society in general is
characterized by freedom of expression and action for the individual. Social
responsibilities are carried lightly; the keynote is contentment and enjoyment.
Tolerance and placidity are other Thai characteristics that serve to reduce
tensions which might be exploited by disruptive political forces.

3. Although most Thai seem content with their existence, there are significant
vulnerabilities in the situation. Most important, the authoritarian political sys-
tem has not developed an effective means of sensing popular grievances. There
are no elected officials in the government above the level of village headmen, and
their main responsibility is to represent higher authority, not to transmit petitions
from below. Visits from national and provincial officials are relatively rare; and
the villagers are scarcely conscious of the government. As a result, their politi-
cal passivity is often closer to outright apathy. This indifference to the gov-
ernment is not a major problem in the rich alluvial lowlands of Central Thai-
land, the most populous part of the country. It becomes serious, however, in
the more remote and less favored regions—the Northeast, the North, and, to
a lesser extent, the Malay South.

4, It should be noted at the outset that the Communist movement as such
has had little appeal in Thailand. The indigenous Thai Communist Party, out-
lawed during most of its existence, probably has fewer than 500 members. Its
relatively unknown leaders are either in jail or live as exiles in Communist
China, North Vietnam, or Laos. Much of the failure of the party to attract

2 |

popular support is attributable to its essentially Chinese complexion. There are
an estimated 4,000,000 ethnic Chinese in the country, and although the vast
majority are well integrated into the society, the few among them who are
Communists have always dominated the Thai Communist Party. Moreover,
the Communist problem in Thailand has always been much less one of in-
digenous communism than of Communist movements of neighboring countries
operating in Thai border regions.

5. The Northeast. The chronically depressed Northeast, which comprises
about one-third of Thailand’s area and population, is the best target for Com-
munist subversion. It is largely cut off from Central Thailand by rough terrain
and poor communications, while movement from Laos across the Mekong border
is relatively easy. The Northeast is the poorest part of Thailand; its deficiencies
include infertile soils, inadequate water control, and a history of government
neglect. Vulnerabilities are intensified by ethnic and linguistic differences be-
tween the Central Thai and the Northeasterners; in these respects, the latter are
closer to the people in neighboring areas of Laos whose dialect and customs
they share! Im past years, the Pathet Lao has sought to exploit this rela-
tionship by sporsoring Laotian-based separatist movements which, however, had
no significant irmpact. The Northeast also has 30,000-35,000 Vietnamese refugees
from the 1946-1954 Indochina war, most of whom are oriented toward Hanoi
and under the close control of Communist cadres.

6. The North. Another area for possible Communist subversion is the moun-
tainous and heavily-forested North, which borders on Burma and northern Laos
and lies close to China. The inhabitants of the North include some 200,000
hill tribesmen who are by nature independent, nomadic, and have little loyalty
toward the certral government. Many of the hill tribes have been hostile to
the government over curbs on their opium growing and their slash-and-burn
agriculture. Chinese Communist agents have been attempting to exploit this
sentiment for years.

7. The Meo are the largest tribal group in the North. They number about
50,000 and most of them live near the Laotian border. The Meo of Thailand,
like those of Laos, have considerable paramilitary potential. In recent years,
the Thai goverrwment with US assistance has been carrying out civic action pro-
grams to gair their confidence. The approximately 15,000 Lahu comprise
another large group and dwell mainly near the Burmese border. The Lahu
are capable and experienced guerrillas, and are the most hostile to government
authority amoreg the northern peoples.

8. The security situation in the North is further complicated by the presence of
Shans and Karews who are in rebellion against the Government of Burma; many

*The present Tiai-Lao boundary was established in the late 19th century at which time
the French succesfully demanded that Thai sovereignty stop at the Mekong River. As a
result the Lao peraple of the Mekong watershed were split, the larger number remaining under

Bangkok’s adminienxation.
cay :

7

SUMATRA

Godonenia)

PENANG

98

53540 6-66

BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION if
MOT NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

a TR Butterworth ;
zs

MALA

ya, oe.

Sait Pa Sak

SIA

VIETNAMESE
Udon Thani

akhon” Khammouane Ney

anom

Khon Kaen K
to)

etchabun

DEMAR ATION
i LINE ~~ <7
4 Mukdahan,§ Savannakhet
9 “

ha Sarakham
NA :

cS

> Sunn”
>. CAMMODIAN
5. SAO

THAILAND
MAJOR
ETHNIC GROUPS

THAI

Centra! Thai, Thai Khorat,
Thai Lao, Thai Yuan, Shan

MON-KHMER

Cambodian, Kui

[=] vietnamese

TIBETO-BURMAN
Karen, Lahu

MEO-YAG

1co 150 Miles

150 Kilometers

*
.

ie Se

SOUTH
VIETNAM

of these move back and forth across the border. Some Shan dissidents and other
hill people have thrown in their lot with bands of Chinese Nationalist (KMT)
irregulars who live and trade in the Burma/Laos/Thailand trijunction area and
occasionally skirmish with the Burmese. The presence of these irregulars and
the fact that they occasionally cross into China could be used by Peking as a
pretext for involvement in northern Thailand. On the other hand, the presence
of anti-Communist Chinese in this remote and sparsely-populated area has some
favorable security aspects.

9. The South. In the four southernmost provinces of Thailand, an estimated
700,000 Malay-Muslims are the predominant population group. Their close
affinity to Malaya, reinforced by prolonged neglect by the Thai government,
has stimulated considerable separatist sentiment. Both the Thai and Malaysian
governments have tried to minimize frictions, but Communists and other ex-
tremists from Malaysia have capitalized on anti-Thai and pan-Malay sentiment
to increase their own followings in the area. For the most part, this effort has
been conducted by the Communist Party of Malaya (CPM), which is pre-
dominantly ethnic Chinese, and its Malay irredentist front, the National Party
of South Thailand. The paramilitary arm of the Communist effort is a 500-man
CPM force driven from Malaya in the late 1950s; it is tightly disciplined and well-
equipped, and finances itself by extorting funds from wealthy rubber estate
operators and Chinese merchants. It claims to be preparing only to return
to Malaya and has not initiated active insurgency against the Thai government.
Nor has it as yet had much success in recruiting large numbers of local Muslim
youth into its paramilitary formations.

10. In the Mid-South provinces adjacent to the Malay South, relatively well-
organized ethnic Thai Communists have been active in propaganda, recruitment,
and training, but have avoided terrorism. There is no substantial evidence of
contact between these Thai subversives and the Communist Chinese paramilitary
force in the Malay South.

ll. THE INSURGENCY

1l. The Communist subversive campaign in Thailand is a longstanding one
but first became significant in 1961 when Pathet Lao territorial gains in Laos
opened the way for the Communists to establish guerrilla bases in the Northeast.
Small Communist groups entered the country, concentrating on organizing party
cells and indoctrinating villagers. They played on local grievances, particularly
government neglect in the fields of health and education, and promised remedial
action. Thai youth were recruited, sent to Laos or Communist China for in-
docrination and paramilitary training, and returned to the Northeast. There
were also a few politically-motivated assassinations—one in 1962, four in 1963,
seven in 1964, and five in the first half of 1965. During this three or four year
period, however, there were no guerrilla raids and contact with Thai security
forces was avoided.

12. In late 1964 and early 1965, two organizations based in Peking were estab-
lished: the Thailand Independence Movement (TIM) and the Thailand Patriotic

a) 5

Front (TPF). In November 1965, the TIM announced its subordination to the
TPF, which Peking described as “the nucleus of the united front” against the
Thai government. The TPF is probably intended to be the political arm of the
insurgency, much as the National Liberation Front is for the Viet Cong; the
TIM may become the action arm. Both groups are led by relatively unkown
Thai political exiles in China.?

13. The shift in tactics to an active insurgency in Northeast Thailand in mid-
1965 probably reflects in part Peking’s response to Thailand’s growing involve-
ment in US military operations in Vietnam and Laos. The Chinese sought to
underline their threats with respect to the consequences of such involvement for
the Thai and to compel the US to divert military resources to the defense of
Thailand. At the same time, Chinese propaganda attempted to persuade the
Thai people that their government, acting as an American puppet, had un-
necessarily endangered their tranquility.

14. In the summer of 1965, the guerrillas began to meet government security
patrols with armed resistance. Later in the year, government patrols also un-
covered several guerrilla camps, and there were 13 clashes between Thai police
and small bands of insurgents. The number of terrorist attacks on government
officials, village leaders, and police informers also increased sharply; there were
95 in the last half of 1965. In late November, the Communists further intensified
the campaign, carrying out the first of several attacks on government personnel
and minor outposts. The pace was stepped up again during the first half of
1966 and Communist attacks included well-planned ambushes of regular army
personnel. Other regions of the country also reported some degree of insurgent
activity during this period, but about 90 percent of all types of incidents oc-
curred in the Northeast.

15. Peking’s role in Thailand is now almost certainly more important than
that of either North Vietnam or the Laotian Communists. The Chinese provide
a headquarters for the TPF and the TIM. They provide the principal propa-
ganda support for these organizations and arrange their appearances at inter-
national leftist conclaves. The provision of military equipment does not yet
appear to be a major element in Peking’s support, though large Chinese pur-
chases of Thai currency in Hong Kong in 1965 suggest the possibility of heavy
financial aid. There is evidence, however, that many insurgents have received
training and indoctrination, if not weapons, from the Chinese. North Vietnamese
and Pathet Lao roles in the insurgency are probably important mainly in terms
of providing paramilitary training and small arms.

16. Although acts of violence and terrorism are increasing sharply in the
Northeast, the guerrillas are still concerned to secure and develop their opera-
tional base and they continue to emphasize indoctrination, organization, recruit-

*Pridi Panomyong, a leading leftist politician who was Prime Minister of Thailand in
1946-1947, has lived as an exile in China for over a decade. However, his name has not
been linked with any of the Chinese-sponsored revolutionary organizations and there are
reports that he has rejected Communist efforts to use him in this connection.

6 az

ing, and training. Estimates of the size of the guerrilla force in the Northeast
range between a few hundred and a thousand, primarily Thai nationals; the
largest bands operate in the Phu Phan Mountain area northwest of Savannakhet.
There is no evidence that organized Pathet Lao, North Vietnamese, or Chinese
units have joined the guerrillas, though some foreign advisors are probably
present. Some guerrillas reportedly carry only homemade weapons, but most
appear to be supplied with light infantry weapons generally available in the area.

ill. COUNTERINSURGENCY

17. The Thai government has moved to reduce existing vulnerabilities, par-
ticularly in the Northeast. Greatest emphasis is on programs of short-term
impact designed to combine positive political, economic, and social improvements
with measures to protect the villagers against terrorism. At the same time,
the government continues to improve its security forces to cope with the budding
guerrilla warfare.

18. The political development aspect of Thai plans stresses government con-
tact with the people. Programs are underway to increase local participation
in government and make fundamental improvements in provincial and local
administration. Socio-economic programs focus on community development
projects in the fields of health and sanitation, education, and roadbuilding.
Longer range projects include many in these fields plus ambitious plans for the
development of local resources. However, it will be some time before most
of these programs have any appreciable impact on the populace.

19. Thai programs also aim at more effective police and intelligence opera-
tions, improved border surveillance, and the creation of special paramilitary
units and mobile strike forces. At present, primary responsibility for internal
security in Thailand lies with the National Police. As presently organized, how-
ever, the National Police cannot efficiently combat the growing subversive prob-
lem. Its main weaknesses are the generally low quality of its leadership and
personnel, its inadequate size, and the fact that the responsibilities of its several
components are poorly delineated, resulting in poor coordination and excessive
duplication.

20. Among the components of the National Police, those most directly con-
cerned with counterinsurgency are the Provincial Police, the Border Patrol Police,
and the Special Branch. The primary function of the 30,000-man Provincial
Police force is the maintenance of public order in rural areas, but it is badly
understaffed as well as inadequately trained and equipped for counterinsurgency
operations. Units at the village level are often too small and sparsely distributed
to be of any value against armed subversives. Perhaps its most serious disability
is its widespread and deserved reputation for high-handedness and corruption.

21. The 6,800-man Border Patrol Police force (BPP) is organized, trained,
and equipped as a paramilitary force. It is also experienced in civic action

programs, particularly in the North. The BPP is fragmented into small, widely-
dispersed platoons and thus is vulnerable to guerrilla attack. Subordinate to

oa 7

the BPP is the 500-man Police Aerial Reinforcement Unit, a highly-skilled air-
borne group designed as a quick-reaction strike force. Special Branch, thé
police intelligence arm, is the most competent and professional of all the com-
ponents of the National Police. Its Division VII, with about 200 men, is re-
sponsible for countersubversive intelligence operations in the border areas.

22, Thai Army involvement in countersubversive operations is not new, but
its role increased markedly in 1963 with the beginning of implementation of
regional security programs. Mobile Development Units (MDU) commanded
by army personnel were assigned to civic action projects. The Army's Special
Operations Centers began to provide regular patrols in sensitive border areas.
The military establishment also includes a local militia-type organization with
a current strength of about 9,000 men, the Volunteer Defense Corps (VDC),
which has a supporting role in counterinsurgency operations. Since late 1965,
when military help became essential to the police, the Army has become in-
creasingly important in anti-guerrilla operations, particularly those involving
attacks on insurgent base areas. Most Thai officers and non-coms involved in the
counterinsurgency program have received specialized training conducted in
Thailand by the US and, in general, the Army has performed creditably.

23. The sudden upsurge of an aggressive guerrilla movement in late 1965
led to other important changes in Thai counterinsurgency operations. To help
remedy the serious deficiencies in coordination between the many civil, police,
and military units working against the Communists, a Counter Subversion Opera-
tions Center (CSOC) was established in Bangkok in December. CSOC has
exceedingly broad powers and is designed to act as both intelligence and opera-
tions center of the countersubversion effort. It relies on information provided
by regional Joint Security Centers and the individual intelligence services.
Deputy Prime Minister Praphat, Thailand’s strong man, who is concurrently
Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Minister of Interior, commands the CSOC.
His deputies include top level leaders of the military and police establishments.

24. To carry out its responsibilities in the Northeast, the CSOC has established
a highly mobile field command, designated CPM-1 (Combined Police and
Military Force), at Mukdahan on the Mekong border opposite Savannakhet.
The total complement of CPM-1 is approximately 1,600 men including airborne,
special forces, and support elements; the commander may also draw upon
other military and police forces in the area. CPM-1 appears to have the prin-
cipal responsibility for finding and destroying the insurgents in the Phu Phan
Mountains and surrounding districts. Similar commands will probably be
established in the Northeast and elsewhere in the country. The CSOC appa-
ratus has improved coordination among the Thai security services.

25. Many other modifications of the existing Thai counterinsurgency structure
are underway. The BPP, for example, is to be augmented, in part by elite units
from other forces, and reorganized to permit the formation of Mobile Reserve
Platoons, small highly mobile strike forces. The Provincial Police force is also

8 ee

being restructured, but mainly to increase its traditional law enforcement capa-
bilities. There are also proposals for the establishment of locally-recruited police
forces at town and village levels. Census/Grievance Teams and Peoples Action

Teams, on the South Vietnamese pattern, are also being considered for the
Northeast.

26. In the Malay South too, Thai security forces are moving to check Com-
munist activities. For years, the Thai dragged their feet on Malaysian requests
for joint and sustained operations against the well-entrenched Communist
Chinese in the border provinces. The Thai were suspicious of Malay motives
and inclined to view the problem as primarily one for Kuala Lumpur so long
as the insurgents remained relatively passive. However, Indonesia’s previous
exploitation of pan-Malay sentiment in the region and the recent upsurge of
insurgency in the Northeast have changed the Thai attitude. In May 1966,
Thailand and Malaysia commenced combined operations against suspected
insurgent bases in the South. Results thus far have been meager, but operations
continue.

27. The many recent Thai moves to bolster their counterinsurgency potential
reflect deep and genuine concern over internal security problems on the part
of top government leaders. Nevertheless, Thai politics are such that competing
groups are not likely to be completely objective in evaluating each new element
in the counterinsurgency package. For example, the Army, which dominates
the government, is traditionally suspicious of any move that tends to strengthen
the relative power of the police. The frequently corrupt police bureaucracy
resents the close scrutiny of its financial operations which often accompanies
large-scale US assistance programs. Civilian ministries sometimes resist socio-
economic and political programs that threaten to diminish their particular spheres
of activity. Another problem is the understandable tendency of a military-
dominated regime faced with a security threat to focus on tasks of suppression
and to neglect positive efforts to gain popular support.

IV. PROSPECTS

28. Communist-supported insurgency in Thailand does not constitute a present
danger to the stability of the Thai government or a near-term threat to its control
over any large section of the country. The guerrilla forces are small and their
Operations are generally confined to remote and relatively sparsely-populated
areas. Moreover, the government is receiving counterinsurgency assistance
from the US and cooperation from experienced Malaysian forces in the South.

29. Nevertheless, the insurgency will probably expand further in geographic
scope and intensity over the next year or two. Its growth will be due primarily
to the continuing direction, guidance, and support of the Chinese Communists
who themselves have many assets in the struggle. In the North and Northeast,
China has relatively easy access—via Burma and Laos—to the scene of guerrilla
operations. In these regions, and in the Malay South as well, there are po-

om ?

litical and economic vulnerabilities susceptible to exploitation but not to quick
governmental] remedies. For several years, without major hindrance, Com-
munists from China, North Vietnam, and Laos have propagandized and re-
cruited in the Northeast; and there may be several hundred, a thousand, or more
dissidents currently being trained and equipped in Communist territory. The
Chinese may also seek to utilize some of the hundreds of thousands of ethnic
Thai, speaking various dialects, who live in southern China, and the 30,000-35,000
Vietnamese refugees in Northeast Thailand.

30. In the Malay South, it will be difficult completely to dislodge the ethnic
Chinese insurgents. In the North, the insurgency potential among the tribesmen
has scarcely been tapped. Another Communist advantage in the near-term
is that it will probably be some time before Thai security forces master the
techniques of counterinsurgency and civic action and remedy their existing
organizational weaknesses.

31. The presence of a large and growing US base structure in the Northeast
can also be exploited by the Communists to gain adherents. There are almost
25,000 US servicemen, primarily air force personnel, stationed in Thailand, most
of them in small towns of the Northeast. Several hundred are in Bangkok
daily on brief R and R visits from South Vietnam. While there has been a
remarkable absence of incidents between US troops and the Thai population,
some friction is probably inevitable. As the US military presence grows, so
will the possibilities for a potentially troublesome anti-foreign sentiment. The
Chinese Communists lay great stress on the theme that Thailand is “occupied”
by the US and its government a mere puppet. The villagers of the Northeast
will be less receptive to these charges than the educated and semi-educated youth
in Bangkok where nationalism has greater meaning.

32. Over the next year or two, we do not believe that the insurgents will be
able to threaten the tenure of the government in Bangkok or its hold on any
large and well-populated region of the country. Government counteraction,
coupled with the generally unfavorable attitude of the bulk of the Thai populace
toward anti-national movements and radical change, is likely to prevent it.
In the Northeast, expansion of the insurgency will be handicapped by the lack
of cover and concealment in the relatively flat and open terrain which charac-
terizes much of the region. The Southern insurgents are essentially a Chinese
movement in a Malay-Muslim setting and lack access to any Communist-con-
trolled territory. In the Mid-South, insurgency on any appreciable scale is not
likely to develop. In the North, the Communists are probably not yet prepared
for any large-scale insurgency.

33. Even so, the increase in insurgent activity that can be anticipated, par-
ticularly in the more rugged districts of the Northeast and the North, may
be costly to the government. Substantial resources will have to be allocated

to the security forces, and programs designed to ameliorate the grievances of
the people in the Northeast and elsewhere will be impeded. As the insurgents

r =

‘
gain in strength and experience, they are likely to attempt to harass and sabotage
Vietnam-connected military operations and this could force further allocations
of Thai resources to internal security programs.

34. Some Contingencies. This estimate could be significantly affected by
developments in Laos or Vietnam. If Thai and US combat forces became
involved in ground warfare in Laos, the Communists would have much to gain
from stepping up their terrorist and sabotage activities along Allied lines of
communications in the Northeast and from infiltrating larger forces.

35. Cessation of hostilities in Viemam on terms favorable to the US would
probably not lead to a slackening of Chinese efforts to foster the Thai
insurgency. But it would dishearten the insurgents, make local recruiting more
difficult, and encourage the Thai in their campaign of suppression. Though
a setback in Vietnam might cause the Chinese to expand their guerrilla activities
in Thailand in an effort to recoup some prestige, they would be more likely to
view the situation as requiring fundamental revisions in strategy and to tum
to.the-Jonger term task of building a more substantial revolutionary base in
Thailand.

36. If the Vietnam war were settled on terms favorable to the Communists,
the morale of the insurgents and the receptivity of the villagers to their organiza-
tional efforts would improve. The Thai leadership would undoubtedly recon-
sider .Thailand’s international stance. The politico-military elite would remain
opposed to Communist control over Thailand, whether imposed through in-
surgency or invasion. But whether Thai leaders would decide on even closer
ties with the US or on military dissociation and movement toward a more neutral
position would depend heavily on the circumstances surrounding the Communist
success and the nature and extent of the support the US was prepared to
undertake. "

37. The Longer Term. So long as a regime in China is committed to Mao’s
revolutionary strategy, the Chinese Communists are likely to persist in their
efforts to keep an insurgent movement alive and active in Thailand. From
Peking’s viewpoint, a Thai government which permits US military bases on its
soil is an intolerable neighbor and must ultimately be displaced. Peking also
sees Thailand as another point on its periphery where US power can be engaged
at small risk to China through the device of a “national liberation struggle.” It

guerrilla bands, and that terrorism and sabotage will become commonplace in
such areas. There is a good chance, however, that Thailand can confine the
active insurgents to such areas where they would not be a serious threat to
Thailand’s political integrity though they would, of course, constitute a costly
nuisance and an ever-present ally for any anti-regime or anti-US political

= n

a ny

A.

12

TABLES

THAI MILITARY FORCES (23 June 1966)

BPAY $6 cigar nae Sie ng a Re WES RR PEE Sey eae ers 85,000
NOVY. trict Gh osatinn os Gheaebaria ble aiela we Seek ie yy wees 15,600
Marines: 22560006 to fats Be tao l ied hielo eked ee 7,500
Air Force ..... bat tentet ie pats cln gutters ane yeep easel a tam he biel 19,600

127,700

MAJOR THAI POLICE AND PARAMILITARY FORCES (23 June 1966)

Provincial Police ........... 00 cece cee ene ee eee eee n en eeeee 30,000
Border Patrol Police ........... 22... cece e ee ence eben eeee 6,800
Volunteer Defense Corps .......... 20.2.0. 0. e cence eee eee eens 9,000

45,800

US FORCES IN THAILAND (23 June 1966)

AEMYy bites Pu aeledia ka tpeeuaene sete eae anas oe ean aa te 6,398
INBVY 2 cuc hanced eae cee Cee Gare arisbe tre cee eg es 230
Marines .is20oececa Sonos aig tie iuith arecnlessea horas trode 34 eatin be SG 53
IASY ONCE es itches awe Malek EMRE a Reds Fan NAie eeSEe gd nets 17,789

24,470

pe
Ups
Wee,

%
Sef,

¢:

“a

an

t sada
matic ts

'
'

pet
4

POR $e

aa

rg bin

Vain Sa?
Ftete ere a
et ieee

ry an
Poewees,
wad

oe We

oh

ha

+
aS Mae ef
