Operational: BlankK) & Operational Report: DeletedD) with 5 Attachments
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135816, dated 2 May 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135816).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a

grouping and other organizational work in connection with the underground teams

( )Within the limits of *need-to-know" we have indicated tol )
that PBSUCCESS state of readiness has not been seriously retarded by recent cou
promines and that they should be prepared te activate the underground teans at a
Roments notice, . ae

oe C )
Ee AtaAdn
Eas AY
Bg
| 3
mi 8 _
™ .
Be “THFOs Chief, WAD; ( )
As Spode Cee et Sh
2.0 . . .
aa JUN 151954
Ea
a “
bd 1. Enclosed ara five contact reports fron ( ) covering recent
8 meotings with ( )
W .
ey 2. The sudject matter of paragraph 4, enclosure 1, is also discussed in
4 y ° : J z a.
paragraph 16, enclosure 4, and it appears that the arrest of ¢ - ) ¥as not
as serious security-wise as we originally feared, . .
fos ; :
8 The bichlights of enclosure 2 ware cabled to LINCOLN, information DIR,
‘ The matter of ( paragraph 14, this enclosure, was previously reported with
j the request that appropriate security action be taken,
4. Enclosure Sisa detailed reply to ( Both € Jand ( )
i were convinced (vben the report was written) that a suspension of ( jactivities
| was essential in order to assure the existence of an effective underground organi-
- zation in the critical days preceeding D-Day, They have since concentrated on re-
i

5. The subject matter of paragraph 4, enclosure 4, was reported to LINCOLN,
{ }, and DIR (GUAT §21) and we are awaiting identifying data before atteapting to
establish contact with these elements that appear to have been cut off by the
} compromise, The identifier mentioned in paragraph 17, enclosure 4, is
retained in station files.

6, Paragraph 2, enclosure S, refers to tentative contact plans for picking up
the individual mentioned therein (not to be implemented until his bona fides are
confirmed hy ( ) Mach of the data in this end ebove enclosures (¢e. g., paragraphs
6, 7) cover matters outside station jurisdiction. We presune that these nf scell-
eneous comsents will have meaning to LINCOLE and( Jind that any action
will be handled by responsible personnel, Paragraphs 15-18 contain interesting PI
data reflecting reactions to current events and are submitted in compliance with

}

nak oe aes PA tA ne apieemetinens tare ememen f ne,

Attachnent: 5 reports . ( )
15 June 1954/( )
Distributions -
2-Line w/att v
2-Wasb w/ett; ( . ]
1-fSles w/ett

a ee ee Sinemet e

—_—— ,

10 Eune 1954

SUBJECT: Meeting Between ( ) and ( )

1.. A meeting occurred between t - )
and ( pon Wednesday night, 9 June,

2, Ya meeting with ( /, scheduled. for
Wednesday might, failed to mterialize. It is not )

-believed thatt Yhas. been arrested -and (

is attempting another meeting with( ) for tonight.

3, ¢. Jmet with several sefioras del mercado.
They are determined to carry on, and are full of courage,
( Preports that this group is perhaps the most
courageous wnd willing-to-fight group of any, These
sefioras are planning on sending out some deltgations to
the departments to tell-the people not to lose hope, etc,
( Jalso expects to utilize them as messengers to the
underground if this can be worked out in any way, They
are almost the only group left entire in € d's organi-
zation since the recent wave of arrests.

4.4

’ a aé .
. (2 Dt jnad had a meeting wi th her Tuesday
night, at which time she reported that apparently the .
police had taken the presmira off the CRUA headquarters,
eince the orejas were no longer evident in the vicinity.
Her arrest can pobsibly be due to information: extracted.
from other wrisoners + the lawyer retained by. the £.0 1.0.
reports that( is being sub=

dected to considerable torture at the hanis of the police,

p is probably true in the case of the other arrests —
also.

5. t )suggests that inasmuch as all packages
sent through the mail. are inspected at the post offloe,
and hence another method would have to be utilized dn

ss

on
. delive-*ng a package to such persons as
Coe, vitae ae ecacheee better to use some thine with a YHh
oe WO LHe Ke kre rae athpltvoteasg: ap.
| large: peat crste Un a ows hep a8; ie
than ‘ai “alarm clock oF- ae arm) fsa" f
Also, rather than to( Jand men ofthis.

ilk, who know they haven't anything to gain at the hands
of the opposition and ars confirmed goblernistag « .
[ Jand his fellows, who are fence-sitters, op omen
: and cowardly at heart, should be the reoipianta, of 8
"presenta", If we cannot obtain any grenade “Bheltees
Jhas a few (two or three) clips which he can ase cs
however, the grenade shells would be mich more effect! ve,

6, Goncerning the detaile of 0 ~ ) mestings «
before concluding one meeting, arrasgenonte, area made for
the next meeting - time, place, The meetings are hetd
at night, anl contacts established in the darker sections

Loo. of the city, Because of the present situation -¢ >)
i : in hiding, andi unable to come out during ‘the daytim,
‘ emergency or unscheduled meetings cannot be included - “

with any degree of certainty in these plans, .t ar
7, ‘Before her arrest C ») reported . to.
{ that the people arriving at the GRUA headquarters .

from the departments reported a great deal of discourage-
ment among the opposition, anithe belief that these
recent arrests ani government charges have meant the
destruction of the anti-Communist movement ~ at least

in so far as it means any effective movement to liberate
the country from its present rulera, .

( y,

wet ts 5 xan
.. ee ie. eh DLS
eS ee SS A a ete

om re _ ” . a7 2
‘DL Tune 1954
SUBJECT: Meeting Between( ) ana ( | )°
1, A meeting occurred between ( )

and ( Jon Thureday night, 10 June,

26 )"s house was entered and searched by ‘
the police yesterlay, jf nouse was also.

searched, as well as various other persons,  .

$.. The police released ( ). She reports .
that she offered no resistance to tneir questioning y: i
but answered "si" to everything, An attempt is being
made to obtain a more’ detailed account of her questions
and answers, a .

a & was arrested yestermay « possibly
as a result of the C » arrest, or of other.
arrests and confessions, C assisted in setting up
the und ergy ours! in Puerto barrios, Quezaltenango, and
Quiché,

4

5, Thel > (fm), believed connected
with some parv of the mvement, was arrested yesterday
also, « 7
6, Because of the( ) arrest, BLANCA is now
in semi-hidding,

7, BLANCA reports that many people are here in the
capital locking for ANABELA, They carry mésBageB, ani
not finding him do not know what to do - they search the
city for some one to déliver the messages to = the .
three groups of mssages.turned in this morning are -
samples of the t material these people are carryi nee
Also, a big demand seems to be for money from AN ABELA! 3
activites in the provinces to carry on the work they
have been assigned = otherwise it is in danger of lapsing,
The note concerning the arms shipment to Honiuras comes
from a Commnist on the ANABELA payroll «+ ani he is erying
for his money, We do kino not know how meh money is a
Involved in any of these cases, <

Tit ge

a ee ae tA DA at * Le . .
eh a A nee wm 8 Ft: et A Ne . oa sop ee ee . . ary ” aL + wee . .
MMT. D at fag oe. te: fe ee Re te ey tl : te oo ee Re VE Tae cote
PAS Nig Ee aires NSU B Not ep ethics AL WLS ee Ve Des yer Eten 2 cde et nn > SE a

4
aod

!

| a2

8. ) (of the ANABELA system pro”
sumably) has sent an urgent ery to the city that he.
is desperately in need of moneys”, Me a LS :

9. ( ) (fmm) anda peoretary izh-
anti-Communist Liliales in fiquisate have fled :to: the: .
capital (name of secretary tinknown) = they report” many -
arrests in Tiquisate area ant the people disheartengd,:
These two are being sought by the police and are now in
hidding here in the city. .

10, Reports indicate there was a tmatanza® in Amtit-
dn yesterday. The. gobernador, jefe de policfa; and the.
sub-jefe were reportedly Killed, as. well. as others unnamed,

Ji, Alfonso Bauer Pais” sterday stated that a .¢oup
by the military 4s expected this we ne ae

12, Current rumors, with considerable strength, in
the streets are that Hlfego YMonzén has fled Guatemala, .
presumably to HonluraBs +... 1. _ Mo

‘4

15, DelLeén (name ani rank unknown - but is on the
C —_ ) said that there is a great
states of “nervios y descontrol® in the arwy.: ;

come continued reports that Yarfa Cruz (widow of Oscar
Luna, and believed to be cook in Castillo Armas home in
Honduras) is a government spy. They report that there
peems to be little doubt about this, Her amante (names
unreported) is a menber of the. Policfa Juditlale Her

4p employed by a Sr. Serra oF Sierra (fm) who is report-
edly a relative of Arbensz. Again - 41% is considered extre=-
mely curious that Marfa Crus went to Honduras without
advising anyone and apparently on her own money = ani had
no trouble crossing the frontiex,.

re ee,

Le}
o

ce
ex
o

ie

+4

o
a

o
pte
d
@
ro
a
a
&
)
re
a
|
@
|
Ms
&
~*~
4
°
B
ty’
@
ve |
o

td
o
+
*
~
&
x

,
!

vK dd N
11 June 1954 7
SUBJECT; Review of ( ) umerground ‘situate oe

‘Referencess Dispatch, 24 May 195d, ani Memo S629." si

i.¢ lend { ), after discussion and review
of the whole general situation, believe that 4% is. deat
that po action be taken at the present time with regard...
to rererence matter, which may compromise our. onitions
or whieh will indicate to the government that the dbeck«.
bone of the opposition has not ‘been broken, -1b seen
pbest.to iet the government's enti~-*anti-Commmist®-~--
activities gradually lessen before we umiertake any more
propaganda activities from within the country, More
propaganda from within the country at this time wilt
only serve to betray to the government that there is
still a network or. partial network of the opposition
elements functioning, ani the government wi xedoublie —
its efforts at bresking this up, Toxrtures will be in- -
creased or renewed and many names will be given unier
these tortures that will only jJead to more arrests, more
disclosures, ani more arrests - which could have the
effect of breaking up whatever remains presently of the
organization,

2, Ahaiting of our propaganda activities now my ;
also serve to lessen or halt the tortures on the prisoners
already taken and now being taken by the government.

men, Was arrested yester-
day, and can disclose the umerground system in Quezale
tenango, Quiché, and Puerto Barrios.

3, Paragraph 3 of 24 May dispatch contains sentence
“strict compliance with this mule (the teams should engage
in no activities before word is given) is imperative to con-
serve our forces for the critical phase*®, If the undere
ground system is expected to play 4 part at a more eritical
phase of the operation, it 1s considered necessary that for
the present at least, no activities other than maintaining
lines of communication ami contact be undertaken,

4, At present there is no propaganda which we can put

out Which will counteract or soften the government's blows «
puch propeganda as “the government's actions have not

ga ce

~~

destroyed the opposition", etc., or “here lives a Commi-
nist", or the issuance at this time of the mimeograyphed
news sheet, give little encouragement to & people facing
arrest and torture, anéi who have been fed mich propaganda
through the years pee gegen 4{n the past fer months,
Their greatest fieh ‘only hope at present ‘is to see
some kind of armed action, They are afraid and want
nothing mre to do with propaganda = they want action,

or they will remier no more assistance until that time,

5, Another point to be considered in regard to the
undérgroum activities 4p that communications is a major
problem, Dispatch recommended that telegrams or phone
calis, in previously arranged open code messaged, be sent
to the obiefs of the umerground, It is necessary to-
remember that these people are not accustomed to receiving
telegrams, nor do they have phones, One telegram, when
most needed, is perhaps feasible, But more telegrams, at
{ndiscriminate times, will immediately call attertion to,
and under the present existing coniitions in Guatemala,
direct suspicions against, the recipients of said commni-g
cations. BNE She PE aes es ge Se

6, The alternative is to send messengers, This mst
be done by the lani routes in most cases, and in view of
the poor and indirect roads, necessitates time - time to
get there, and time to get an answer back, The air routes
are too carefully checked, ani the messengers available
cannot use these routes more than once or twice, if at all,

7, We feel thet too little advance notice was given
for the best organization of this underground stem, and
particularly is this true (although unavoidable in view
of ¢ é, ) cesultant enforced hidding.

We were given two weeks to set up this organization,

Before the two weeks were Up, the flap occurred, One part
of the directive stated that the persons chosen should not
be connected with any overt activities or should retire
from same « if mich directives had been given & month ago

or preferably even more (I understand the plan was in being
for some time before 4t was passed along to me and through
me to¢ ) such directives could have been carried out
more competently ar easily€ How, however, with |

and most of nis assistants either in hidding, arrest, or
exile, am arrests continuing in the capital and the depart-
ments daily, it is extremely difficult to get a true picture
of our set-up and what is available to us and what is now
compromised and dangerous, am to be able to judge how we

25c

can best proceed, We don't know who all have been com~
promised by C )papers, ani through the resultant
arrests, who else have been compromised by confession
extracted unier torture,

8, The foregoing is not {nutended to present a
pioture of hopelessness — but 4t 4s intended to explain
our picture ani our belief in non-activity for the present,
as we can only Judge from the meager information being
gotten to ¢ )from the departments, We believe that
all our present activities should be concerned with re-
trenching, establishing, or re-establishing and safe-
guarding -our commnication lines and our contacts, parti-
cularly in regard to the unierground,

not possible and feasible, thet the airplane make a

series of trips to the capital and other major centers,
aropping extremely forcibly written and presented volantes,
promising retribution without fail, to all those persons
having a hand in torturing any of the prisoners being
taken by the government? These tortures are being applied
to the prisoners and by no means gently, It might make
things somewhat easier for them, am also help us, because.
without torture, the prisoners are considerably less likely

to talk.

10, One great security hazard at present is that because
of the government news blackout, many people, including our
selves, do not know who has been arr :sted. Delegations
continuatly arrive in the capital, carrying messages, papers,
etce,, ~ looking fer ( Jetco, When they cannot
fimi the persons they usually contact, they begin to search
through the city for some one else to whom they can deliver
their messcsges. This is a hezard to all concerned, Perhaps
the clamiestine radio could make daily announcements of
those persons it knows have been arrested or are in exile,
This would serve as a warning to perscns 3Sooking for any
one so named on the programs.

11, ¢ ) both feel that military action
should not be delayed any longer than absolutely necessarye
The people are crying for a change and will support any
such movement. Propagama-wise, they are mentally prepared

~4-

for armed action (or at least they were, before the
arrests, and there is nothing to indicate they are any
less so now). All comments from the €: - ) group indicate
many are tired of propaganda and exposing themselves to
arrests, etce,g = they want action, They are no longer
willing to risk their seourity for what they regard as
useless ard non-resulting propaganda which geta them
nothing except the government's wrath and imprisonment,

12, Both ( ) feel that becmise we have
never been given even an approximate date for any military
action we have been handicapped in preparing propaganda
ox in giving advice on propaganda suggested. The propa-
ganda must be time so as not to get the people too aroused
until the propex moment, or should not ask the pan a for
too much risk and exposure unless the military is ready to
follow up, Also, knowing approximately when any military
action is going to occur to back up the propaganda, we are
enabled to know what propagania ypuld be most effective,
and when it should be used, We have engaged in certain:
propaganda work which, in view of the non-appearance of
military action, seems foolish ani ill-timed, am serving
only to bring down government repressive measures. It
seems tc ( }that the timing of the *52*
campaign was wrong, inasmuch as it occurred in April
(£5 April was the deadline given us - and with no follow
up until almost a month later ) and apparently no military
action of any kind was contemplated for anytime exreabouts,
The "32" campaign merely disclosed to the government that
a vast network of opposition existed throughout the country,
ard aroused the people (in confunction with other inflama-
tory propaganda including the clandestine radio, airplane,
etc,) - without ever arriving at the only logical olimax -—
military action, These propaganda campaigns should heve
been scheduled for very shortly before the outbreak of the
military campaign, The people's spirits would have been
at their highest point, and the government would still be
too bewildered by the barrage of different types of pro-
paganda and the vastness of the propaganda, to even begin to
effectively take steps to eounteract it,

12 Mane 1954

SUBJECT Meeting Between( Jand L )

1, A meeting occurred between ( J
ani( ~ Yon Friday night, 12 June,

eC ) and (fmjC ) of the
Municipalidad of Guatuuate City have been arrested,
Reportedly, some 60 more persons have also been arrested
along with these two,

3. { received a report that the entire -
municipal council of sither Juliapa, Zacapa, or Cuilapa
has also been arrested,

4, { } met with ( , Who has acted
as spokesman for the group of persons here in the
capital looking for ANABELA,( is from Zacapa, His
father, ( | >, also from the Zona Zacapa, is
presently a prisoner here in the capital,

5. C states that the group he represents in Zacapa
was given instructions by PANCHO (or in name of -RASCHO )
while( )was in Honduras, and ( )was told that ANABELA

here in Guatemala would provide them with all that they
neededs

a) a pick-up or Panel

b) three or four houses

oc) a place for the arnus

a) comida, etc., for the men
( )estimates that this would represent some $3,200.00 -
piek-up - $1,400.00; houses ~ $150.00 ~$200.00)
food, etc, for the men - $600.00.

e) guardians or watchmen for the houses sim and
the arms site - probably another $100 ,00

f) ( Jexpenses ~ $150.00

Other compromises mentioned by{ ), as spokesman for the
group

ma, AM
ies 7

Cn 4

am

~2e

@) ANABELA has been giving mney to the
families of some 8 or 10 of the men who
are in Honduras

h) ¢€ ) family - $125.00
_4y. C ‘Dor the zona
in the ( }, and who has a mumber of

people in his care =~ $500,00

§) Communist contact - his name is on the paper
turned in with reference to arms shipment to
Honduras, He states that in the upper part
of this paper is also the clave (key) to the
code used by the Communists for those parts -

$200,00
k) «a Guardia Judicial, apellido C )(fma),
who passes information to the group = $75.00.

6, The Commmnist of paragraph 5, Jj, states that the

- PGT sent to Honduras in the mentioned arms shipment, 32

ametralladoras ani a mumber of fusiles, .
7, Several lawyers have been arrested (names unknown).

8. C ) has been
arrested,

9, <A group of persons at the frontier (presumably the
Salvador-Guatemla frontier) asked( )to relay word to
Jin Salvador that "capas de hule” and “zapatos de
hule~ ve sent them because of the heavy rains,

10, ¢ .. )is revortingxy the following information,
he has no contact with the group now -( )talked with a
group of persons in Salvador on his way back to Guatemala
from Honduras, which persons are either now in the capital
or due to arrive very shortly, They stated they were to
make contact with "El Compadre" who was to instruct them
and to hide certain people here in the capital,

11, ( }s house was "cateada" (searched) by Villagran
(fru) and 10 other police, for 3 ani a half hours the other
day. They searched ever ing - book by book, and took
away 8 camras, projector, radio, typewriter, his
personal business accountings, photographs, They found
nothing compromising,

12. (

-

Jreports that no piiot has yi0ea with

‘any plane, #ach pilot has a “shadow" or spy, and everyone

{se carefully controlled,

oN

“om

13, The undergrouni chief and contact has been
arranged for Zacapa, ( Jdoes not have this namo as
yet, He will obtain it from 4

14, A group of locatarias left on a trip through the
departments to-try am calm am reasmire the people,

)

16. ( Yatates that the questions she was.
asked while in the hand of the police concerned only the
papers which the police had seized am her works

15. (

a) hed she seen ANABELA;
b) who gave her’ money for the office expenses
c) did she know where this money came from;

d) who gave her orders;
e) ( | )

£) did she have any knowledge of the papers
- geized in ANABELA's house;

g) how much was her salary}

h) what was the motive behind some telegrams sent
out to various persons in different Zonas and
signed by her};

4) was she aware of the persons who traveled to
the departments;

j) did she know the *apodos® of the persons who
frequented the officesy

k) did she know how they couminicated by code;
1) did she know the ( “nouse and address

m) did she know € ) and was he a
member of the Comté (she answered that some-
time ago he had been on the directive, but
that he had retired. Her acquaintanceship
with him was through sports and through
his sister);

44

n) did she imow ( address (she stated
that she believea ne lived ‘( ee oor ce
or butdidntt know the exact address) 5

o) they ‘had her identify signatures, letters
(letras), and types of machines, ~

p) what and to where did she semi to Honduras
and El Selvador by certified mil.

17, Contact with the locetarias (sefioras del mercado)
can be established throughs

( : ) _
C )

The half piece of newspaper photograph should be presented
to her to be matched up,

18, The following are workers (obreros) who can bs
used ap contacts with or through the locateriasi

C |

13 June 1954

SUBJECT: Meeting Between ( and rf

‘t. A meeting occurred between
and ( jon Saturday night, 12 June.

2. ¢ \ywe g given contact funsatiens the.

pass along to ( ). Further talka with ¢

)

5

have revealed » 5 leunderstanding concerning his udme «

: is not a as prevfously reported, but {

)

He ¢«( )ycearr nA. rrt hare in the

eapite ri is sea C

d.cus He can de contacted at this
place between 12:50 and 2:50 P.M, or at the tienda
"Lafco", which I umerstand is a radio servicio in front
of the Club Guatemala, which tienda is where he is pre-e

gently working,

3. ¢ | } has had two detailed conversations with

this man, ami says that he knows too many of the

right

people ani too many details for the mar -+ to be what

he claims to be, in all probability. C.. Dis

in

charge of the arrangements in the Zacapa zone and wishes
to return home as soon as possible in order not to call

attention by a too long absence,

4. & ) states that he had a countersign arranged
with ANABELA, consisting of one half of a 310 of snakes

playing card, This was arranged through | se

QD:

who had to leave Guatemalan as a result of the ANABELA
flap. ©.. )was to arrange the mtter of the pick-up,
maintenance of 500 men, radio technician and instructor,

houses,

6, CARTER arranged previously to our contast
instructions, a counteraign sonsisting of one half of a
50 centayo note (which has been already given to JORGE),
The note contains the numer DO 37402. This mimber is
on both halves, L.. ‘)has one half, andthe person

making the contact is to present the other half,

Cutis &

-2-

=

6, Mewbarn of the fanilies.
and eema A Ox: 8 other. famiifes age
Looking fox vrother. of: reg eer
has been in charge of Peet | money to these families,
This fs Q30,00 each tim to sach family,

at
)

8, ( }. coordinador and enganchador
for the Zona Los Piedros, La Palmilia, Ceculutan (7),
ete... left Guatemala City Saturday because of- necebshty.

( gave him some money. ( % J vas in Honluras
with PAICHO, ane
9. ( ) was asked by PASCHO to supply

some inf ormatzon on a gouple of railroad bridges, This
information is the following, ant should be ‘sent to
Honduras

Puente ferrocarril, milla 177.2 = barranco
profundo, cerro al otro lado. It could
be destroyed and its replacement or sub-
atitution would be very difficult,

Puente ferrocarril, milla 174.5 - same story.
These bridges are in the Zacapa area,

10. C ) rants to know about C ).
if he is in Honduras, ( )says it is many days since he
has heard from him, an chat( )is important betause
he controls a whole village in the area,

12, The chief of the wWerrround ereve in Zacapa

has been chosen. He is( )Cavrarently
related tac :

12. €

ee father is ( >s
mother ‘8( : ;
>
13, His assistant is vi. ( )» vatchelor,
34 years old, lives at the right hand side of the
His’ father is | es ye, : )

14,. Arrangements have been (or are.in process of
being finished) made witha group-of univéersitarios to
bring. out some ‘volantes among: the universitarios touching
on: the censorship, governmnt arrests, etess xx with the
aim of arousing the stuients and possibly provoking a
flare-up or strike, .One of the ditto machines from the
office will be used for this purpose, This group is
being rounded up through a professor of Derecho Irterna-
clonal at the university (I believe his name is C

‘Yorn fou) and’ is som relative - possibly brother -

to man where ( Jis presently hiding out).
- 3,0 )(goblernista) in a talk
with one of( | )s contacts, stated that he and others

would be willi te collaborate with the opposition if
they only kmew that there was something we organized,

16, C a licenciado and.a gobiernista,
says. thay ne and others like him in the government, feel
that it is a shame that because of a “grupo de intransi-
gencias® the aims of the October Revolution are going to
be lost, because it is “cosa sabida® that this govern-
ment is finished, and all because of the stubborness
of Acvbenz and his group and the comminist influence,

17, Paragraphs 15 and 16 are imications of how
many gobiernistas, now feeling that their side is doomed,
are making overtures to the opposition or at least letting
remarks drop where they can be over-heard, 80 they won't
lose out completely whemm a change COME Se

18, In the Quiché area, when the opposition airplane
passed over the military base, where a couple of machine
guns or anti-aircraft pieces were in position, the report
4s that the soldiers abanioned their arms am instead went
about chasing the propaganda that was dropped,
