Threat Assessment-el Salvador
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028489, dated 4 February 1979.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028489).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

o as Swe rrr . ie >
=,

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGEXCY
NATIONAL FOREIGN ASSESSMENT CENTER

1 March 1979 '

MEMORANDUM .
THREAT ASSESSMENT--EL SALVADOR ’
t

Leftist terrorism, which until now has been directed
ijainst businessmen and Salvadoran government personnel,
presently poses a growing threat to US offjcials and to the
foreign Ciplomatic itv in genera

Overview

The growth of the guerrilla groups--in numbers, techni-
eal ability, and sophistication--would in itself practically
justify such a conclusion. In addition, several other
trends have developed among the guerrilla groups that
significantly increase their threat. First has been a new
focus on the “imperialist” target, especially evident in the
propaganda and communiques of the largest guerrilia orgarn-
ization, the Popular Liberation Forces (FPL), and in the shift

nip menoranaum was prepared by ne
Cities of Regional and Politiea NOLMBLS, has

ant
becn ccerdinated with the Clandestine Serviec, Cif. It vase
requestad by the Deputy Ascistant Secretary of Siste for Inter-
teertcoan Affetre, Researea v2s_vom leted on 22 Feonugry 1873.

(Heme a See

RE ae tagg

So cree AANS eG Ses HE SE

oma ease

ra F ab 18 itigatn; Teta ee

Coclt ad ae Re Ue re ee -

to targeting for kidnapping of foreign rather than domestic
businessmes by the Armed Forces of National Resistance

(FARN). Secondly, the guerrilla groups are increasingly
inclined toward physical violence and outright murder. This |
trend is highlighted by the recent assassinations of locals °
and by the first-ever use in February of sophisticated
explosive @evices by the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP),
not for propaganda value or property damage, but to maim and
kill. These shifts, combined with the weapons and vehicles
known to be in terrorist hands--or which can be easily
acquired--make more credible the rccently reported intention
of the FPL to assassinate high-ranking US officials.

For more than a year, the FPL has been planning to
kidnap the US Ambassador, originally intending to hold him
hostage to secure the release of political prisoners. Those
plans have been thwarted by the Embassy's extensive security
precautions. In light of the FPL's apparently growing
preference for assassination rather than kidnapping, however,
together with its probable frustration after more than a
year of stymied plans, we would rate the threat_against the
ambassador's personal safety as substantial.

At the same time, it is more likely now that a less
risky effort will be made against a lower-ranking US civilian
or military official. The terrorists’ new emphasis on
foreign targets, for the most part, has been spectacularly
successful. While they have made no effort to date against

a diplomat, a strong ‘argument can be made that the changin ;
focus will center more on the official foreign connunity. iia

So far, in addition to propaganda value and monetary
gain for the guerrillas, the kidnappings of foreign business-
men have resulted in significant capital flight, the departure
' of many members of the business community, curtailment of
investment plans, and the embarrassment of the Romero govern-
ment. The terrorists have not succeeded, however, “in forcing
the President to admit that the government holds political
prisoners or to release them. Since the kidnapping of
foreian businessmen has not brought sufficient pressure to
bear on Romerc, it seems likely that the terrorists will
eventually up the ante. -

ee
aa! MR. tare
fgry ea

-~2-

Aside from strict security precautions, there are at
least two potential restraints on terrorist targeting of US
personnel. The local perception of US power in Central
America generally is larger than life, and the terrorists
might well fear US/CIA retaliation. Secondly, an analysis
of the domestic political scene might suggest to the terror-
ists that US human rights pressures on the government are
worth more than the possible gains from an action against a
US target. We van have little confidence, however, that
these considerations will be overridins.

We see no likelihood of the local security forces being
able to reverse their record of ineffectiveness against the
terrorists or to provide adequate security for US personnel

Terrorist Capabilities

The three principal guerrilla groups have grown substan-
tially in the past two to three years. A rough estimate
suggests their combined membership is in the neighborhood of
2,000 persons. The Farabundo Marti Popular Liberation
Forces (FPL) probably numbers around 800, the Armed Forces
of National Resistance (FARN) perhaps as many as 600, and
the third-ranking Feople's Revolutionary Army (ERP) may have’
several hundred adherents. Although these figures are not
firm, the growth trends are clear.

There are also two much larger front organizations--
composed of students, workers, and peasants--that support
the terrorists’ political objectives by staging demonstra-
tions and work stoppages end by disseminating propaganda.
The Popular Revolutionary Bloc (BPR), political affiliate of
the FPL, claims a membership in excess of 60,000; the United
Popular Action Front (FAPU), linked to the FARN, is estimated |
to have 8,000 to 15,000 members. In addition to, political
activities, these organizations provide a ready source of
recruits for the terrorist groups.

The guerrillas’ weapons, although primarily limited to
small arms and explosives, are more than sufficient to
support planned terrorist actions. Moreover, their arsenal

[
is being supplemented by light automatic weapons and grenades
stolen from government security forces. The FPL already
reportedly has 1,000 weapons on hand and intends to buy or
steal more. Demolition-type explosives are upparently in
plentiful supply. ‘the ERP especially has developed consider-
able expertise in the fabrication of explosives; for exhmpile,
the group recently used booby-trapped bombs to kill at least
20 persons--the majority security personnel. 650 far, the
terrorists have not acquired sophisticated or heavy weapons,
but they have had no difficulty stealing vehicles for their
operations. including armored cars and trucks belonging to .
wealthy Salvadorans. What the guerrillas cannot steal, they
can purchase, having collected an estimated £30 million or.
more in ransoms during the past two years.

Cooperation among the terrorist groups, although occa~
sionally hampered by ideological and personal rivalries, has
frequently been impressive, as in the case of coordinated
kidnapping efforts. Recently, the ERP has been supporting °
FARN operations, and the FPL may once again be willing to
coordinate its activities with both groups as it had in the
past. The almost unbroken successes enjoyed by the terror-
ists tend to breed further confidence and eseperation.

recently repoitedly sen en to Cuba for six months’
training--the first subs ial Cuban involvement in El Salvador
in recent years. Small numbers of Salvadoran guerrillas

have also slipped over: the border for training with Gvatemalan
groups. Together with other cadre now being trained in

El Salvador, the FPL reportedly plans to form an “army” of
2,000 guerrillas. If such a cohesive force is assembled, it
would raise leftist violence in El Salvador to a new order

of magnitude. Whether or not this is a realistic near-term
goal, it has little impact on the current assessment of the
threat to US personnel. At the very least, the-new Cuban
training program for cadres will enhance the guerrillas’
capabilities. Moreover, Havana will also use its influence,

as elsewhere in Central America, to encourage greater coordi-
nation and cnificetion. iy

Although foreign ~ oo has been minimal, the FPL

any i

ee an

Along with their growing military capability, the

- terrorists have shown a rising level of political sophis-

tication. The FPL, identifying itself as a Marxist-Leninist
organization, has announced its dedication to a struggle
against the bourgeoisie and "foreign capitalist imperialism.”
To spread the message, the politically oriented BPR:~whose
gradual takeover by the FPL was a significant measure of the
terrorists’ growing sophistication--is conducting indoctri-~
nation sessions throughout El] Salvador. It hopes to increase
its membership to 75,000 by the end of March--an objective
that seems within reach. The BPR has also gotten involved

‘dn several labor disputes, and last fall the FPL assassinited

two business managers allegedly responsible for union

Since November, the ERP and the FPL have seized radio
er television stations at least six times in order to transmit
taped audio or video propaganda. Last month, PAPU--the FARN
front group--temporarily occupied the offices of international
organizations and the Mexican Embassy in the capital, embar-
rassing President. Romero cn the eve of his trip to Mexico City. >

Prospects

As the terrorist groups have grown in strength and
sophistication, they have extended their operations to
include foreigners-.as well as Salvadorans. Since May 1978,
the FARN has claimed responsibility for kidnapping seven
businessmen, six of whom were foreigners: one of the foreign
victims was killed while in custody--apparently by accident;
two were released after the payment of large ransoms; and
three are still being held. The top command of the FPL
reportedly has annouaced its Intention of assassinating a
eS ee. US Embassy official. US military personne

pecificall mentioned as potent sey tar ets.

™

ash cis

Bodyguards and armored vehicles can no longer be con-
siderea full protection against assassination or kidnapping,
as the terrorists are well equipped with explosives as well
as smali arms, and their bravado is growing. An attack last
month on a high Salvadoran defense official who was riding
in an armored vehicle came close to success. This was but
the latest indication of the guerrillas' increased boldness,
commitment, and capability. Such dering daylight operations
make clear that local security forces have been reduced to
ineffectiveness and serve as littie or no deterrent.
