Prospects for Leftist Revolutionary Groups in South America -- Interagency Inte
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115456, dated 1 May 1986.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115456).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

; e.
; tnrector of (5.
~ Central QTY

- @ | tatctligence

. Prospects for Leftist
Revolutionary Groups
in South America

: Imteragcacy lnieiligeace Memorasdum

|
|

PROSPECTS FOR LEFTIST
REVOLUTIONARY GROUPS
IN SOUTH AMERICA

Informatrom available as of 22 Slay 19N6 was wed va the
preparation of thes Memorsadum, approved far pubhx stron
on 3 June 1966 ty the Acting Chuumasn of the Natal
Intethernce Counce

+o -0 dee, sath + Mettawa,

CONTENTS i

Puge i

SCOPE NOTE... 1 F

KEY JUDGMENTS | . | . 4
DISCUSSION ...... coe veveaaeee tes vevee cteee cs tevueuenerece ten 9
Current Levels of Leftist Revolutionary Violence oo... 9
Factors (ontributing to Leftist Revolutionary Violence... 00... 4A

Increased Political Latitude...

Serious Economic Disarray 000.000... cccccceccescscecseveveeevavertesees causa
Expanded External Support....0.0cccccecccceccceteeseectecees

The Soviet Role oo...
The Cuban Role... c.ciccccccccccccccccsesescscceseesnavevevsesarentevsessenacaesaresieees
The Libyan Role oo... ccccccccscnceessesececssestecseseneesneevaseneues
The Nicaraguan Role... cecceccccsensees cere sceuectessteretseuaecsaneaes

The Question of Regional Cooperation

ON ee Oe pr ne ee

SCOPE NOTE

This Memorandum surveys the nature, and seriousness of revolu-
tionary activity in 10 South American countries. Suriname, Guyana, and
French Guiana are not included, because they are usually considered by
the US Intelligence Community as part of the Caribbean region.

The survey is broken down as follows:

— Countries where revolutionary groups are currently active,
namely Chile, Peru, Coloinbia, and Ecuador, listed in order of
the seriousness of the problem.

— Countries where no revolutionary groups are now active but
where existing radical groups may have the potential to turn (or
return) to violence within the next few years, namely Argentina
and Uruguay. ,

— Countries where no insurgent groups are active ‘and existing
radica] groups appear unlikely to develop into true revolution-
ary organizations, namely Bolivia, Venezuela, Brazil, and
Paraguay.

In all, 21 extremist groups with revolutionary intentions are
described, ranging from the formidable, several-thousand-strong Sen-
dero Luminoso of Peru to the remnants of the BraziJian revolutionary
groups of the late 1960s. All are leftist groups) Nowhere in South
America are rightwing groups trying to seize power, although (as briefly
described in this Memorandum) in several countries rightwing extrem-
ists employ terrorist tactics for counterrevolutionary purposes.

In addition, this Memorandum:

— Addresses the effects of the political and economic environment
on prospects for these insurgent groups.

— Describes the nature and sources of external support upon
which many of these groups depend.

— Examines recent efforts to foster both nationa) and multination-
al cooperation among these groups.

— Estimates the impact on US interests of likely developments
among these groups during the next few years.

SEER EL yy eR a eT ee

' ’ ‘ .

‘ caeacas

A tsk ss
¢ _* . ve .
“Free, fn .° : ae Venezuela 2 Haines

; © Guyane « Cet ee
> rm Pd .
. 4 a oa ware :
Colombia V3 nw!

.

a
ton
Ecuedos “uwte , \ Lote ,
~ a, ee 7 .
f See . .
Coorvequd a” ‘ ~ ‘ :

%
“
Brazil .
ua’ :
‘ < = oun
~
South .
' Pacific ‘
: Ocean
* Peeve
“ow
. South
: Atlante
“2 ‘ Ocean

t
t

KEY JUDGMENTS

The Jevel of leftist-inspired politically motivated violent activity
varies enormously in South America, from Chile, where such activity is
endemic and incessant, to Paraguay, where there is virtually no leftist
political violence. In four countries, the extremist groups are strong,
active, and determined enough to be called revolutionary organiza-
tions—even among these countries, however, the violence varies consid-
erably -

A country not currently suffering from insurgency or harboring a
group likely to develop into a revolutionary organization is not neces-
sarily safe from rebellion. Bolivia falls into this category, for example,
yet history tells us not to expect much political stability there. Also,
Paraguay has been politically quiet for decades, but it has been the calm
of repression rather than contentment. Moreover, porous borders
between several South American countries enable insurgents and arms
to move freely across national boundaries and create the danger of a

spillover of revolutionary violence Fim

Nevertheless, recent and current trends in revolutionary activities
in the various South American countries appear to offer the best clues as
to their likely stability in the future, as well as to the prospects that US
interests in these countries may come under violent attack. Say

Status of Revolutionary Violence by Country

Leftist revolutionary groups are active in four of the 10 South
American countries:

— In Chile, the Communist Party and its affiliated terrorist group,
the Manuel Rodriguez Partiotic Front (FPMR), along with the
Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR), are taking advan-
tage of the increasing isolation of the internationally discredited
Pinochet regime and the continuing fragmentation of the
domestic opposition to raise the level of revolutionary violence.

— In Peru, the formidable Sendero Luminoso (SL) has expanded
its urban terrorist operations—including assassinations of securi-
ty force personnel—while continuing its insurgency in the rural
highlands. The much smaller Revolutionary Movement Tupac
Amaru (MRTA) continues its own urban terrorist operations,
often directed against foreign, especially US, targets.

—In Colombia, as anticipated, the 1984 truce between the
Betancur government and most of the leftist guerrillas has
gradually unraveled, with only the largest group, the Revolu-
tionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), continuing to
observe the cease-fire even noaiealy. ‘(Cne Cuban- and Libyan-
supported 19th of April Movement (M-19) and other, smaller
groups have renounced the cease-fire and resumed insurgent
activities—as we expect the FARC to do before another year
passes. At Havana's urging, cooperation among Colombian
insurgent groups has been growing. Revolutionaries from Ecua-
dor and possibly Peru have joined with elements of M-19 to
form the America Battalion, a small international guerrilla force
operating (without much success) in Colombia near the Ecua-
dorean border.

— In Ecuador, Alfaro Vive, Carajo! (AVC), which surfaced as an
urban extremist group, has—under the tutelage and with the
assistance of Colombia’s M-19—expanded its operations to rural
areas and undertaken operations of increasing intrepidity, com-
plexity, and violence. In recent months, though, after a umber
of severe operational setbacks, it has been rather quiet Sn

In Argentina and Uruguay, the remnants of former insurgent
groups such as the Montoneros and the Tupamaros have been taking ad-
vantage of the more tolerant atmosphere of civilian rule to rebuild and
reorganize, while their members debate whether to integrate into the
legal political process or to prepare to resume armed action in the
future. In the other four countries of South America—Brazil, Venezue-
la, Bolivia, and Paraguay—no revolutionary groups are active, and no
existing radical groups appear likely to evolve into significant revolu-
tionary threats during the next few years. On the other hand, some of
these countries are used by foreign revolutionary groups and their
supporters as safehavens, staging areas, conference sites, and smuggling
channels. Sites in Brazil, Argentina, and Bolivia, for example, have been
used by Chilean insurgents and their Cuban sponsors, sometimes in
collaboration with local radicals

Factors Contributing to Revolutionary Violence

The success of the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua heartened
and inspired would-be revolutionaries all around South America. In
addition to this demonstration effect, we see four other factors as
particularly aiding the spread of leftist revolutionary violence in South
America: oS

— Increasing political latitude.

— Growing economic disarray.

— Expanding support from external patrons.

— Improving cooperation among insurgent groups aor

In Peru and Ecuador, the increase in revolutionary violence has
coincided with the ostensibly counter va:iing current of democratization.
This demonstrates that, whi'e democracy may immunize a society
against revolution in the long run, in the short run a liberalized
atmosphere may make it easier for radical groups to organize, recruit,
propagandize, and raise funds

In most South American countries, adverse economic conditions
have led to declining living standards and government spending
cutbacks for both social and security programs. The pool of deprived
and disaffected citizens from which insurgents are recruited is being
enlarged, while the ability of the affected governments to cope with
extremism is being degraded ee

The Marxist-Leninist revolutionary leaders of the 1960s and 1970s
tended to guard their independence jealously. They rarely cooperated
with other leftist groups, and in many cases they rejected support from
Cuba and the Soviet Bloc rather than accept the strictures that came
with it. The leftist revolutionaries of today, however, tend to be linked
rather closely to the Soviets and their Cuban and Nicaraguan allies—or,
in some cases, with the Libyans—whose external training and material
support have become vital to their survival and growth.

Their patrons, however, are demanding in return not only that
these groups improve their effectiveness and make real progress, but
also that they cooperate with one another in working toward their
mutual goals. The America Battalion is one result. Apart from these
efforts to promote leftist solidarity, in Colombia some guerrillas (notably
from the FARC) have begun working with narcotics traffickers in order
to draw upon their financial resources and smuggling networks.

Sources of External Support

Foreign help of one sort or another has been received by revolu-
ticnaries in every South American country except Paraguay, where
there have not been any revolutionaries since Stroessner took power:

— Cuba has been the principal source of aid for South American
revolutionaries. Although Havana currently appears to be giving
more priority to the support of revolution in Central America,
in the past, Cuba is known to have backed revolutionary groups
and fostered wider cooperation among radical leftists in every
South American country save Paraguay and Peru. With the

exception of Chile and perhaps Colombia, however, Cuba
appears to be holding support for active insurgencies in abey-
ance while concentrating on political gains through diplomatic
and commercial initiatives.

— The Soviel Union has maintained a relatively low profile,
except in Chile, providing political and mora! backing but scant
material aid. We suspect, though, that the Soviets may channel
much of their aid through the Cubans. The Sovicts openly
advocate the overthrow of the Pinochet regime and make little
effort to hide their support of the leftist opposition in Chile.

— Nicaragua has provided training, safehaven, and political sup-
port to insurgents from Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and possibly
Peru. Sympathizers from most South American countries report-
edly have participated with the Sandinista forces fighting
against the Contras.

— Libya has supplied arms, training, and funds to Colombian,
Chilean, Ecuadorean, and possibly Peruvian revolutionary
groups. .

— Elements of the PLO provided training to personnel from

various South American insurgent groups before the Israeli
invasion of Lebanon drove the Palestinian forces from their

Outlook

Insurgents More Capable. Since the 1960s there have been
substantial changes in the nature of insurgent movements in South
America. The skill levels of leftist revolutionaries are often much higher
now, as a consequence of the training and guidance they have received.
The quality of their weapons and equipment has also improved, since in
many cases they are supplied by patrons and no longer need to be
scrounged or captured. Some of the leftist revolutionaries of today have
also begun using more lethal and less discriminatory weapons, such as
car bombs and rockets. All in all, they are more formidable adversaries
than their counterparts of 15 to 20 years ago

Security Forces Better, Too. At the same time, however, the
capabilities of the counterinsurgency forces in many South American
countries have also improved, in some cases even more than those of the
guerrillas. The counterinsurgency forces of today typically employ
sophisticated modern tools such as electronic surveillance equipment
and computer data bases and they are often equipped with advanced

an

weapons, transport, and communications equipment. In most countries
they have been more than a match for their domestic opponents§ ‘

Current trends point toward the following developments during
the next few years:

— Revolutionary violence will graduaily escalate in Chile while
continuing at a moderate level in Peru and Colombia and at a
lower level in Ecuador. Revolutionary violence may resume in
Argentina or Uruguay or even in other countries, such as
Bolivia, where political institutions are particularly weak.

— Soviet, Cuban, Nicaraguan, and Libyan support for South
American leftist revolutionaries is unlikely to diminish and may
grow in particular cases, if the insurgents appear to be making
progress. :

— While leadership rivalries and ideological disagreements will
continue to constrain in-country collaboration among revolu-
tionary groups, insurgent cooperation across state boundaries is
likely to grow somewhat along the lines established by Cotom-
bia’s M-19, Ecuador's AVC, and Peru’s MRTA.

— Collaboration between insurgent groups and narcotics traffick-
ing organizations is likely to increase in Colombia and possibly

Peru

Rightists Intimidated. Rightwing elements in countries beset or
threatened by leftist revolutionaries are likely to continue to respond
sporadically with terrorist attacks against identifiable leftist targets,
although such death squad activities will probably be more limited than
in the past. In general, rightwing government elements will be less likely
than in the past to respond to leftwing extremism by wholesale
abrogation of civil rights—a consequence of the development of
international human rights organizations skilled at exposing and publi-
cizing such repression

No Successful Reoolutions Likely. Despite the expected extent of
insurgent activity, no leftist revolutionary movement is likely to come to
power in South America during the next few years. Relative to the
regimes they are trying to supplant, currently active revolutionary
organizations are weak—and in some cases declining. The evolving
democratic political processes in most South American countries ‘will
continue to attract widespread public support, while insurgent groups
generally will not. In addition, many of the radical elements within the

Roman Catholic Church in South America are likely to abandon the
more extreme forms of liberation theology as civilian rule becomes
institutionalized. Finally. cooperation against leftist revolutionary vio-
lence has been improving among South American covernments. Thus it

will become increasingly difficuit [ur insurgents to prey upon one
country from sanctuaries in neighboring count

Implications for the United States. Increased activity on the part
of urban terrorist groups such as Peru's Tupac Amaru would result in
more frequent attacks against foreign, especially US targets, which tend
to be concentrated in urban areas. The attacks would probably consist
mainly ‘of bombings, armed attacks (shootings), and kidnapings for
ransom. Spectacular events of duration, such as the seizure of a
government or diplomatic installation and the taking of important
hostages, cannot be ruled out, since they generate more publicity than
any other type of terrorist act. Such operations appear less likely,
however, in the wake of the M-19 occupation of the Colombian Palace
of Justice, which ended in catastrophe for both sides .

Terrorist attacks directed specifically against US Government
officials have been rare in South America during the past few years.
Good security practices by US officials have undoubtedly played a part
in frustrating some would-be attackers, but we suspect the main reason
has been a lack of motivation—the extremists have been rebelling
against their own governments, not the US Government. It is likely,
moreover, that foreign patrons, such as Cuba and the USSR, have

counseled against attacking targets such as embassies and diplomats.

Nevertheless, US policies or actions that have helped to thwart the
aspirations of revolutionary groups, such as providing counterinsur-
gency (or counternarcotics) advice and assistance to a particular govern-
ment, have in the past elicited a terrorist response from the affected
groups or their sympathizers, and have set a pattern likely to be
replicated in the future. In other words, US efforts to limit or reduce
leftist revolutionary activities over the long run are likely to stimulate
anti-US terrorist attacks in the short run

Tie md Ne ee

_

DISCUSSION

1. Leftist revolutionary violence in South America
has increased significantly since 1979 when the Sandi-
nista victory in Nicaragua began to stimulate revolu-
tionaries elsewhere in Latin America and the Caribbe-
an. At that time, only Colombia and Venezuela were
experiencing active insurgencies—conficts in which
armed leftist opponents of the regime were regularly
engaging the security forces or attacking personnél or

property. The Venezuelan insurgency was on the.
verge of extinction, and the Colombian insurgency was

not particularly menacing. Since then, however, the
insurgency in Colombia has expanded considerably,
while new insurgent forces have emerged in Peru,

Chile, and Ecuador. Violence against foreign a

nel and property has increased dramatical]

2 Terrorist attacks against US targets in South
America have increased in frequency since 1979,
although they constitute only a small proportion of all
instances of revolutionary violence. There were 73
anti-US terrorist incidents in 1985 compared with only
18 incidents in 1980. Most of the anti-US terrorist
Incidents since 1980 occurred in Colombia, Chile, and
Peru, including all but five of those in 1985. Uruguay
and Paraguay are the only South American countries

a against US targets were recorded last
yea

Current Levels of Leftist Revolutionary Violence

3. In Chile, the Communist Party of Chile (PCCh)
and its affiliated terrorist group, the Manuel Rodri-
guez Patriotic Front (FPMR), along with the Revolu-
tlonary Movement of the Left (MIR), are exploiting
the polarized domestic atmosphere and using in-
creased foreign assistance to raise the level of revolu-
tionary violence. None of these groups, however,
currently appears capable of directly challenging the
much stronger security forces; thus they have general-
ly limited thelr armed attacks to bombing soft targets
such as electrical towers, railroad lines, and govern-
ment installations. The FPMR is, nevertheless, devel-
oping an effective terrorist capability in Chile. Ac-
cording to generally reliable sources, the FPMR is
receiving strong material and moral support from the
USSR and its allies. The level of this support is greater
than that received by leftist j
in South America ‘.

4. We see a rrowing threat to the US presence in
Chile. Terrorists attacked US-affiliated entities about

0 times it in 1984- 85. compared with only once in 1982.

reported last year that, as an
ibyan financial aid, 25 mem-
bers of the MIR entered Chile late in 1985 with plans
to attack the US Embassy or a US official. The group
reportedly abandoned the plan at year end because
leaders believed {t had been compromised. In the
future, though, the MIR might resume such plotting.
The MIR is currently in a rebuilding phase. If it

succeeds, we believe threat it presents will increase
significantly

5. In Peru, security forces are stretched thin as they
face two active revolutionary movements, Sendero
Luminoso (SL) with 4,000 to 5,000 members and the
Revolutionary Movement:-Tupac Amaru (MRT.4) with
an estimated 150 to 300 members. Beginning in 1983
the government declared states of emergency in sever-
al highland departments to facilitate counterinsurgent
operations against the SL. In 1984 the security forces
mounted an ambitious anti-SL campaign but failed to
destroy the SL's rural base or to prevent SL terrorist
attacks in urban areas—especially Lima. The security
situation has deteriorated since Garcia took office in
July 1985. Urban terrorist attacks intensified in early
1986. President Garcia declared a state of emergency
in the capitel in February, but to little avail. SL
assassinated several military officers, policemen, and
public officials, including a rural governor. At the
same time, SL appeared to be expanding Its rural
insurgency from Ayacucho into Puno as well

6. Long the region’s most insular group, SC has
finally established some foreign links, even though we
believe it still declines assistance from abroad in the
form of arms or training and does not collaborate in
any formal way with any other South American
insurgent organization. In March 1984 SL publicly
Joined a fledgling Maoist organization, the Revolution-
ary Internationalist Movement (RIM), whose current
mailing address is in London and includes groups from
Western Europe, the Near East and Asia, the Caribbe-
an, and the Unitéd States. We have no evidence that
either the RIM or any of its members receive support
from any foreign government—its propaganda’s stri-

a |
i
1

dent assaults on governments of virtually every politi-
cal stripe hardly invite such assistance. Neither of the
two other South American members of RIM, both
Colombian groups, seems to be involved in the Colom-

bian insurgency

7. We are nut optimistic that the Garcia govern-
ment will develop an effective and comprehensive
response to Peru's revolutionary violence. Neverthe-
less, we judge that neither SL nor the much smaller
MRTA has any prospects of taking power in the next
few years. The government would find it difficult to
cope with a more unified revolutionary challenge.
There is little evidence, however, that the two groups

coordinate their activities, although important anni-

versaries and events in Lima have often prompted
t nearly simultaneous terrorist actions

8. Both groups have attacked US targets. For the
most part, these attacks have involved bombs thrown
at US diplomatic, commercial, and cultural facilities in
Lima, including the US Embassy and Consulate. The
threat to the US presence in Peru has escalated since
the virulently anti-US MRTA lifted its five-month
moratorium on the use of terrorist tactics last Novem-
ber. Last December, for example, MRTA sprayed the
US Embassy with machinegun fire

9. In Colombia, truces reached in 1984 between the
Betancur government and most of the Colombian
guerrilla groups failed to prevent a deterioration in
the overall security situation. Insurgent groups are
divided over whether to continue to observe the cease-
fire with the government. The FARC favors maintain-
ing the truce, but most of the other, smaller groups
oppose it. What little remains of the peace process
may not last another year. M-19, the guerrilla group
Betancur had tried hardest to court, renounced the
truce in June 1985. Since then it has spearheaded the
formation of the National Guerrilla Coordinating
Board (CNG), a looce alliance of Colombian insurgents
opposed to the truce. The alliance’s international wing,
the America Battalion, with an estimated 250 guerril-
las including members of the Ecuadorean Alfaro Vive,
Carajol (AVC) and the Peruvian group Tupac Amaru,

The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombla (FARC}tied to
the orthodox Colombian Communist Party. the 19th of Apeil
Movement (M-19} the Quintin Lame Group, the National Libera-
tion Army (ELN} and the Popular Liberation Army (EPL) (s sr)

recently Jaunched an offensive against government
forces In southwest Colombia. While M-19 beasts of
“Binal victory” by 1987 can be discounted as the
bravado of an organization known for its dramatic
media announcements, the antitruce guerrillas are
clear!, determined to persist in their aggressive course.
Their determination has beeu demonstrated by M-19's
seizure of the Palace of Justice in Bogota in November
1985—the resulting shootout with Colombian security
forces left more than 100 dead. including 12 Supreme
Court Justices—as well as the America Battalion’s
rural operations. On the other hand, if M-19 continues
to sustain losses of leaders and combat personnel at the

rate evident during the past year, its days an
effective insurgent group are numbered a

10. The FARC is the only significant insurgent
group still formally committed to preserving the truce;
yet we believe it is also gaining at the government's
expense. Because the FARC is the largest insurgent
group in Colombia, it has the capability to intimidate
the government security forces and ta force the gov-
ernment to tolerate some of its activities in the
countryside. The FARC’s political front group, the
Patriotic Union, engages in legal political activity—the
group won minority representation in Congress last
March and presented a candidate for the presidency—
and carries out armed Intimidation and propaganda
efforts in rural areas

11. Including the FARC, the guerrilla groups op-
posing the government may be able to field as many as
7,500 armed combatants. With their present capabili-
ties and with the FARC barely observing the cease-
fire, the Colombian armed forces are strong enough to
maintain control over most of the country, although
they cannot prevent individual terrorist acts. If the
FARC were suddenly to return to open hostilities or to
join the other groups in the CNG, the government
would be hard pressed to provide urban security,
much less maintain control over rural areas. With the
victory of the establishment, Liberal Party candidate
In the presidential elections in May, the FARC may
decide to abandon the cease-fire, thereby finally shat-
tering President Betancur’s dream of pacifying Co-
lombie. We have seen reports that the FARC is
contemplating joining the other groups in a coalition of
guerrilla forces, but we do not find them convincing.
In the past, these ‘groups frequently clashed as they
vied for control of terfitory, and there fs no persuasive

evidence that they haye changed their basically com-
petitive sporoach

ee ere Sees

;
7
rf

ane nr
South American Revolutionary Groups

Countries and kleviogy Foreven Craelrs te Lypes of Comment
Tencipa! and Nuagaas Uontact Vinient

Revolutionary Numbers Activities

Groups : _ _

Primary Trouble Spets

Colombia ee.

Afbliated with pro-
Soviet Communisl

Revolutionary
Armed Furces of

Colombia Party: 2.500 to
(FARQ) 4.000 members.
19 Apeif Pro-Cube; 850 to
Movement 1,000 member.
(M-19)

Large rural

srongholds; focinally

“Kidnapings,
robberies, attacks

Cube, Nicaragus,
Libya: training.

USSR: political on military patra, participetes In peace
PIpport. occupation of tatks with government:
. small towns. some income from
drug industry.

Cuba, Libya: funds, Close links to Attacks 00 Debdilitating leadership

arms training. Ecuador's AVC: government sruegtes since 1983:

Nicaragua: arms, possible contacts bulldings, rebutiding from Palace

training. with Peru's MARTA, = kidnapings, of Justice incident;
Venezuela's GBR, robberies, probable contacts with
probable ties fo occupation of drug traffickers; seeks
Central American small towns. regional role.
guerrillas,

Sa

Peru

Sendero Lumincso —- Malt, Gercely
(SL) independent; 4,000
to 5,000 members.

Tupac Amaru Marxtst-Leninist;
Revolutiooary

Movement (MRTA)

150 to 300 members. material aid.

None Brutal attacks on Rural based;
peasants; . leadership reportedly
bombings of reocganizing.

powerlines, police
stations, military

and political
largels.
Cube: training and — Possible contacts Bombings of US Urbea based;
with Colombia's business offices, appeared 1984;
M-19. radio station specializes in targeting
takeovers. foreign Interests.

Chile

Communist Party Pro-Soviet

of Chile (PCCh) Communist party,
30,000 to 50,000
party members.

Manuel Rodriguez Marxist, pro-

Patriotic Front Soviet; 500 to 600
(FPMR) members.
Movement of Castroist, pro-
the Revolutionary Cube; 400 to 500
Left (MIR) enembers.

USSR, Bloc, funds, Bombings, Main advocate of
training, arms, protests, violence to overthrow
propaga oda. assassinations. government; building
Cube: arms. toward insurgency.
USSR. Cube: arms, — Contacts with Bombings of AStiated with
training, fonds, Argentine government Communist Party.
propeganda Communists, buildings, electric
Montoneros. powerlines, rail >
transportathon:
attacks on pollae.
Cube, Libya: Contacts with Bombings, Extensive foreign
supplies, arms, Argentine ERP, assassinations, contacts and political
training, funds Bolivian attacks on police. ties; recovery from
USSR: progaganda, = Communists. heavy losses in 1983.

Nicaragua: political
support and
training.

i]

i
¥
d
:
j

South American Revolutionary Croups (continued)

Court-l and Ideokony Forrivtc Crane Ta te Ts pes of
Principal act Suppl Contact Violent
Revolutionary Nuavbers Activities
Groups —.
Ecusdor
Alfaro Vive, Pro-Cuba; 390 to Cuba: training. Close links to Media office Urben based, fest
Carajo! (AVC) 500 activists. funds. Colombia's M-19. takeovers, trowing: beginning to
Nicaragua: arms, pemphlet bombs, press limited
funds, safeheven. bank robberies, tovernmend
arms raids, counterinsurgency
_ kidnapings. capabilities.

Other Countries
Argentina
Peronist Far Seftist, pro- Cube: some Probable None at present. Aims at inAltesting
Montonero Cuba; 300 to 500 training and contacts with political parties,
Movement members. funda Chile's MIR and trade unions, human
(Montoneros) FPMR. tights groups.
People's Marxist-Leninist; Cube: some Contacts with None at present Aims at infiltrating
Revolutionary 200 members. training and Chile's MIR and political parties,
Army (ERP) funds. FPMR, Uruguay's trade unions, human

Tupamaros. rights groups
Uruguay
National Far left, USSR and Cube: “Nooe at present. Rebuildlog domestic
Liberation nationalistic; 300 possible funds political
Movement members. organizations,
(Tupamaros)
Venezuela
Bandera Role Pro-Cuba; 25 to Cuba: possible Reportedly has Small terrortst Badly hurt by
{GBR) 30 members. funding. arranged arms actions in pest; security forces in

shipments with inactive at pest; little sign of

Colombia's M-19. present. activity.
New Revolutionary  Pro-Cube: 25 to Cuba: training Two M-19 None at present. Little known,
Coordinator 50 members. and funds. members
(NCR) reportedly in

groups's National

Directut acc.
—_—_-——— eee
eee

Bolivia

Communist Party Orthodox USSR: possible Supports Chilean None at present. Follows directions

of Bolivia Moscow -line funds, tretning. guerrillas with from Moscow

(PCB) Communist party; safehouses and closely. 3
800 to 1,000 arms shipments.

active members

12, Although not among the more spectacular oper-
ations in Cotombia, guerrilla actions against US targets
have been part of the increased leftist revolutionary
violence. In 1985 a number of US citizens, including
oi] and construction company officials and missionar-
ies, were kidnaped for ransom by various Colombian
revolutionary groups. M-19 and other groups also

placed bombs at the US Embassy, Ie -_"

centers, and US businesses in several cities

13. In Ecuador, the leftist revolutionary elements
do not appear to be as strong as those in Chile, Peru,
and Colombia, although the AVC developed consider-
able momentum against the undertrained security
forces in 1984-85. AVC operations progressed steadily
from a skillful publicity campaign through successful
arms raids and bank robberies, to kidnapings, direct
challenges to security forces, and initial operations in

hee an

wot
ow

rural areas AVC’s personnel have been trained, guid-
ed, and materially supported by the combat-experi-
enced M-19 of Colombia, given safe refuge in M-19-
controlled areas of Colombia, and acted with M-19
personnel in operations in Colombia and Ecuador.
There are alsu reports that at least 17 AVC guerrillas
received military and explusives taining in Libya.

14, The AYC has suffered some recent reverses,
however. The government has mounted a considerable
and, lately, successful counterinsurgency effort in
which several prominent AVC leaders have been
killed or captured. Moreover, unlike its counterparts In
Chile, the AVC does not appear to be gaining popular
support. President Febres-Cordero appears deter-
mined to achieve rapid improvements in the military's
counterinsurgency capabilities, although Jurisdictional
disputes between the police and the military could
continue to hinder counterinsurgency operations. The
AVC conducted minor bombing attacks against the US
Embassy in Quito in 1983 and 1984, but it has not
mounted a substantial campaign against US compa-
nies, facilities, or personnel in Ecuador

15. In Argentina and Uruguay, groups formerly
engaged in insurgencies until suppressed by military
governments are using the more tolerant atmosphere
of civilian rule as an opportunity to reform, recruit,
refinance, and debate whether to participate in the
political process or to prepare for future armed ac
tions. These groups include the Peronist Montoneros
and the People's Revolutionary Army (ERP) in Argen-
tina, as well as the Tupamaros (National Liberation
Movement) in Uruguay. Ata 1984 meeting in Havana,
the Montonero and ERP leaders reportedly agreed to
cooperate in infiltrating labor unions and political
parties In order to nudge these organizations leftward
About a year later, despite its Trotskyite origins, the
ERP agreed to join the pro-Soviet Argentine Commu-
nist Party in a “Forum for National Liberation” to
target propaganda against “imperialism” and multina-
tional companies. According to sources of varying
reliability, the Cubans have also been encouraging the
Tupamaros to pursue similar political strategies de-
signed to exploit the country’s economic woes. [he
Tupamaros have been calling on the Sanguinetti gov-
ernment to repudiate Uruguay's foreign debt (a favor-
ite Cuban ploy). In neither country, however, do these
groups seem anxious yet to take on the security forces.
In the case of the Montoneros, this reluctance has been
reinforced by the fact that the Argentinian Govern-
ment, having obtained the extradition of Montonero

founder Mario Firmenich from Bra
1985, intends to try him for terrorism

16. Elsewhere tn South America, we believe the
potential security problems lie not in the indigenous
radical groups—-which appear weak or, In Paraguay's
tare, poneristent—but In how these countries are
being used as slaging arcas by foreign revolutionary
groups:

— In Bolivta, there is no viable revolutionary move-
ment. In October 1985, however, the armed
forces reportedly turned up evidence thal over
the previous two years, apparently with the help
of local leftists, at least 10 clandestine arms

shipments had been made from a base in via

to leftist revolutionaries in Chile

— In Braztl, the military establishment closely mon-
itors the activities of the Revolutiuuary Move-
ment of 8 October (MR-8) and the Revolutionary
Communist Party of Brazil (PCBR). Even if the
two groups have decided to pool their meager
resources, as military leaders ?eportedly believe,
they do not pose much of a threat. A potentially
more serious problem is that Brazil] shares a
permeable border with four countries where
there are active or latent insurgencies. Reports
from various sources over the past two years
indicate that revolutionaries from Peru, Colom-
bia, and other countries have established safe-
havens in Brazil. In October 1984, representa-
tives from revolutionary groups in six South
American countries and from the Government of
Nicaragua reportedly met in Porto Alegre, Bra-
zil, to discuss establishment of a multinational
revolutionary “Coordinator” targeted against the
Pinochet regime. We have no information indi-
cating that this initiative advanced beyond that
stage; considering the lack of a common border
with Chile, it ts highly unlikely that Brazil would
be used as a of operations agains{ the
Pinochet regime

—In Veneszuela, two small clandestine subversive
organizations, Bandera Roja (Red Flag) and the
obscure New Revolutionary Coordinator (NCR),
receive some limited Cuban support and are of
concem to Venezuelan security officials. Al-
though Bandera Roja has disbanded its urban
unit and its raral unit has not been active, the
group has mot renounced armed struggle and

some members_se ly cooperate with Co-
fombia's M-19

Soe

Og, SOTO kee

— In Paraguay. leftist revolutionary groups have
had no success, and the Paraguayan Communist
Party (PCP) is in disarray

Factors Contributing to Revolutionary Violence

17 Much of the insurgency in South Auarica is
occurring in the tace of the presumab!y countervailing
current of democratization. Logic suggests that the
replacement of military dictatorships by popularly
elected governments, which—however flawed—pro-
vide more legitimate outlets for political grievances
than their predecessors, would undercut popular sup-
port for the insurgencies. Over time this conclusion
may prove correct, but ‘in the interim the elected
governments must cope with sagging economies that
compel them to adopt unpopular economic policies.
Moreover, the skill of leftist groups in exploiting an
open political climate, the demonstration effect of the
Sandinista revolution, and the beginnings of effective
collaboration among some of the groups are comglicat:
ing and threatening the democratization proc

Increased Political Latitude

18. Political liberalization has-given South Ameri-
can revolutionaries new opportunities to attract re-
cruits, raise funds, propagandize, and build front
groups. Throughout most of South America, it is no
longer inherently dangerous to belong to an orthodox,
pro-Soviet Communist party. From 1968-78 such par-
ties were legal only in Bolivia, Colombia, and Venezu-
ela; at present they are outlawed only in Chile and
Paraguay. Moreover, in addition to the universities
and labor unions that have often been vehicles for
leftist or revolutionary agitation, revolutionaries have

reached out to human rights organizations and other
middle-class —

19. Radical Christian activists, particularly Roman
Catholic adherents of liberation theology, are also
encouraging collaboration throughout Latin America
between Christians and Marxists. These activists, along
with numerous rational and international human
rights organizations created in the past decade, have
been prominent among public critics of the—admit-
ledly sometimes objectionable—behavior of security

a toward leftist activists and their sympathizers.

Serious Economic Disarray

20. In many South American countries, economic
conditions have deteriorated in recent years, contrib-

uting to a climate conducive lo insurgencies Popula-
tion pressures, high unemployment and underemploy-
ment rates, heavy external debt burdens, and other
economic problems have caused some governinents lo
cut funding for social programs and security forces
alike te wourtries where a lack of economic opportu-
nity has contributed to the crowth of the illicit
narcotics industry. such as Peru and Colombia. some

insurgents haye jyiged furces with trafhickers for mu-
tual bench

21. The standard of living In the region has actually
dropped since 1979. This has led some persons to
cooperate with insurgents out of sheer economic need.
For example, one Colombian group attracted recruits
by paying then monthly salaries one-third higher than

* the minimum wage. According to a captured member,

the AYC has promised half the proceeds from bank
robberies to those willing to join and participate in
such acts for the organization. Even members of the
security forces are not immune to such inducements.
The AVC has been able to recruit prison guards to
facilitate jailbreaks of captured members. M-19 has
bought the services of some retired Colombian officers
and enlisted men

Expanded External Support

22. The Soviets, Cubans, Libyans, or Nicaraguans
have contributed some form of aid to revolutionaries
in every South American country cxcept Paraguay.
The level of effort appears to be greatest in those
countries with active insurgencies, except for Peru,
and to be litde more than a token in nature in
countries. where insurgency is inactive. (see table).

The Soviet Role

23. A direct Soviet tie can be documented only in
Chile. The USSR hardly troubles to conceal its hostility
toward Pinochet in the apparent belief that it risks
incurring very little international] disapproval:

— Soviet-controlled propaganda broadcasts beamed
to South America by Chilean exiles openly call
for violence against the Pinochet regime.

— Moscow finances and provides guidance to the
PCCh, which closely follows the Soviet line.

— Luis Corvalan, head of the PCCh, lives in the
Soviet Union and is totally responsive to Soviet
direction. In 1980, probably at Moscow's Instruc-
tion, he announced resumption of the armed

struggle in Chile; he repeated this announcement
during his trip to Scandinavia in May 1985.

— The Soviets and their East European allies have
reportedly provided arms, training, and dnancial
support to the FPMR.

— According to a generally reliable source, 120
Chilean exiles recently completed urban warfare
training in Algeria, East Germany, Cuba, Nicara-
gua, and the Soviet Union and are being returned
to Chile. Some of them reported! hav partici-
pated in the recent violence Mii :

24. Elsewhere Soviet support is not well document-
ed. Beyond moral encouragement, there are some
scattered Indications of covert financial assistance to
certain groups. It seems likely that the Soviets channel
much of their aid through the Cubans, so as to conceal

thelr own role¥

The Cuban Role

25. For more than two decades, Cuba has been the
principal external source of support for South Ameri-
can leftist revolutionaries. In June 1983, Cuban, Vice
President Carlos Rafael Rodriguez publicly acknowl-
edged Havana's commitment when he stated that one
of his government’s basic aims 1s to foster socialist
revolution throughout Latin America. Moreover, in a
January 1984 interview with a US Congressman, Fidel
Castro emphasized that Cuba considers all of South
America part of the revolutionary process and predict-
ed specifically that Chile, Argentina, Peru, Colombia,
Venezuela, and Brazil would eventually all have revo-
lutio

26. Since the Sandinista revolution, however, we
believe Cuban support for South American revolution-
aries has been limited by two factors:

— The more immediate priority given by Havana
to Central America, except for Chile and possibly
Colombia.

— The perception in Havana and Moscow of oppor-
tunities to make political gains in South America
through diplomatic and commercial initiatives.

27. Chile is the one South American country where
Cuban policy now appears to focus on supporting the
armed overthrow of the government. Castro has stated
publicly and privately that he attaches special impor-

tance to undermining the Pinochet regime, both be
cause of its strident anti-Communism and because it
toppled the Cuban-bacled Allende government. In
addition, we believe Havana calculates that the regime
has become an international pariah—meaning the
Culms isk minimal political costs for promoting its
downfall. Castro judges thet domestic conditions ren-
der Chile ripe for revolution. In that context, Manuel
Pineiro, the head of the Cuban Comuinunist Party's
Americas Department, admitted to US officials in
February 1985 that Cuba was currently supporting
insurgents in Chile as well as in El Salvador and
Guatemala. Other sources of varying reliability indi-
cate that during the past year this support has included
infiltrating numerous Cuban-trained terrorists into the

_ country, prodding the MIR to resume armed action,

stepping up the shipment of arms and financial assis-
tance, facilitating the movement of Chilean revolu-
tionaries training outside the region, and providing
more frequent tactical guidance to several Chilean far
left groups

28. In Colombia, the Cubans have maintained long-
standing connections with both the National Libera-
tion Army (ELN) and M:19. Encouraged by the
Sandinista victory in 1979 and embittered by Colom-
bian competition that caused Havana to lose its bid for
a UN Security Council seat in 1880, Cuba provided
training, arms, advice, and safehaven to M-19 in the
early 1980s, according to reliable sources. In 1981,
however, a large M-19 force that had been trained and
organized in Cuba attempted to land on the Colombi-
an coast and was annihilated by Colombian armed
forces. The embarrassment led Castro to curtail arms
shipments, although he allowed other forms of aid to
M-J9 to continue—-even after M-19 agreed to a truce
with the government in 1984 In February 1985,
months before M-19 denounced tbe truce, Pineiro
admitted to US officials that M-19 personnel were still
returning to Colombia after training in Cuba. Pinetwro

claimed that this did not constitute a Cuban effort to
subvert the Colombian Government.

29. Elsewhere in South America, Havana has been
maintaining a more circumspect approach, in which
limited support for potential or actual opponents of

the rullng party is coupled with an outwardly cordial
effort to court the regime. For example:

—In Ecuador, accarding to a generally reliable
source, Cuba provided guerrilla training to a
small number of members of the radical Ecua-
dorean Soctalist Revolutionary Party in 1983 and

|

re,

' en ae eRe
nits, Sy ES

vb

est
wd

=
3
Be
A
%

1934 in the expectation, thus far unfulGiled, that
the party would initiate armed actions in late
1984. In addition, captured AVC documents
point lo Cuban commitments to provide training
additional to that furnished by M-I9 At the
sanie lise, Havuta has sought to preserve the
upgrading of diploinatic relations accomplished
under leftist President Hurtado in early 1984; the
US Embassy reports that on his visit to Havana in
April 1985 conservative President Febres-Cor-
dero was impressed with Castro's disclaimer of
involvement in Ecuador and his pledge that he
would counsel Ecuadorean leftists toward
moderation.

—In Peru, Cuba's flirtation with insurgency is
reflected in Castro’s January 1984 statement to a
US Congressman that Peru's “problems” could
be solved only “by revolutionary movements”
and in Radio Havana's encouragement to the
MRTA. Nonetheless, in December 1985 the Gar-
cia government agreed to upgrade diplomatic
relations to the ambassadorial level.

—In Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil, and Venezuela
the Cubans are encouraging radical leftists—
partly through financial backing—to rebuild
their strength, yet are also pursuing diplomatic
gains. To some degree they are counting on short
memories. Despite considerable past Cuban aid
for Brazilian revolutionary groups, for example,
the Brazilian Foreian Minister has expressed to
US officials his confidence that Castro would not
interfere in Brazilian affairs and thus recom-
mended that Brazil reestablish diplomatic
relations.

—=In Bolivia, under President Siles, the Cubans
established full diplomatic relations and gained
significant influence with some members of his
administration. Since President Paz Estenssoro
replaced Siles, bilateral relations have cooled,
and Cuban influence in the government has been
almost completcly erased Gia .

The Libyan Role

30. In 1979 the Soviets and Cubans reportedly
began pressing the Palestine Liberation Organization
(PLO) guerrilla groups to take a more active role in
Latin America. During the early 1980s Brazilians,
Bolivians, and Chileans were among South Americans
reliably reported to have been trained in PLO camps,
mainly in Lebanon. After the Israeli invasion of

Lebanon in 1982. the PLO largely lost its capability to
provide such training to nom Palestinians. Since then,
the Lib ans have in edect Glled the vacuam.

Ji She Libyan Government has been involved in a
wide-ranging program to tevin, arm, and fund subver-
sive and terrorist organizations throughout Latin
America. Qadhafi once said that he wanted to estab-
lish a beachhead for insurgency in Latin America. He
may have been deliberately trying to supplant Cuba as
the primary sponsor of Latin Ameri and Caribbean
revolutionary movemen

32. The Caribbean is clearly Libya's priority target,
bul well-documented activities are also under way in
Central and South America. Libyan support to Nicara-
gua, itself active in supporting rebel groups in other
countries, complements Tripoli’s broader efforts to
destabilize the region. Within South America, the
Libyans have promised and in some cases have sup-
plied financial aid and arms to groups In Chile,
Colombia, Ecuador, and possibly Pera. Colombian
insurgents, notably members of M-I9, have been
trained in Libya in military and terrorist tactics. At
least 17 members of Ecuador’s AVC guerrilla organi-
zation reportedly have received training in Libya in
the use of automatic weapons, explosives, and military
and terrorist tactics. Tripoli has provided training and
funding to the Chilean MIR to help upgrade its
terrorist capabilities. Libya has attempted to expand
its influence in Venezuela through its People’s Bureau
in Venezuela, but with little to effective
countermeasures by Caracas.

The Nicaraguan Role

33 The Nicaraguans have supplied training, and in
some cases arms and financial assistance, to the MIR in

Chile; M-19, FARC, apd ELN in Colombia; and AVC
in Ecuador :

34. The affinity between South American revolu-
tionaries and the Sandinistas has been expressed in a
number of ways. Since 1977, revolutionaries from
every South American country except Paraguay have
alded the Sandinistas politically or militarily. Leftwing
Insurgent groups have staged violent attacks In support
of the Sandinistas in several countries. In countries
without active insurgencies, such as Brazil and Vene-
zuela, pro-Sandinista elements have held demonstra-
tions. Some South American revolutionaries have dem-
onstrated their solidarity in person by participating

~ ~ forces fighting against the Contras.

ar ron

35. Asa direct result of increased external support.
some South American leftist revolutionary groups have
become more competent and capable. Training ac
quired in terrorist camps In Central America. the
Eastern Bloc. and the Middle Fast and combal experi-
ence gained since the Sandinista revolution in Nictra
gua have left insurgents more prepared to deal with
their countries’ military and security forces. In addi-
tion, revolutionary groups have acquired more lethal
weaponry and advanced communications equipment.
Unlike the 1960s and 1970s, when many revolutionary
leaders jealously guarded their independence and
chose not to be closely aligned with Moscow, Marxist
revolutionaries now tend to be linked to the Soviets or

their Cuban and Nicaraguan allies, training and
material support help sustain them .
The Question of Regional Cooperation

36. In no South American country is cooperation
among insurgent groups as close as it is now in El
Salvador or used to be in Nicaragua. So far, there is no
South American equivalent to the three Sandinista
“Tendencies” united in a single Directorate nor to the
Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front (FMLN)
that includes five Salvadoran guerrilla groups. The
nearest equivalent appears to be CNG, the coalition
antitruce insurgents in Colombia led by a

37. In Ecuador, other extreme leftist parties are
reliably reported to be resisting cooperation with the
AVC. The Maoist Sendero Luminoso in Peru has not
even publicly recognized the revolutionary credentials
of Tupac Amaru. Elsewhere in South America, small]
bands of revolutionaries proclaim their unceasing
struggle against “imperialism” and occasionally com-
mit terrorist acts In that cause, but because of personal
jealousies or the memories of old quarrels they do not
cooperate effectively with other revolutionaries in the
same country; each group marches and countermarch-
es to its own drums

38. The concept of a transnational “Bolivarian
army” has long been advocated by South American
guerrillas. According to various unconfirmed reports,
the multinational America Battalion that was formed
in Colombia under the leadership of M-19—number-
ing at least 250 armed personnel in March 1986—may
have included Ecuadoreans, Peruvians, Venezuelans,
Panamanians, and even North Americans. More reli-
able sources, however, can confirm participation only
by members of Ecuador's AVC and Peru's Tupac
Amaru, in addition to M-19. During the past several

Intefligence Gops on Sources of External Support

There are major unanswered questions about the

— The mechant.m by which the Soctet Unton pro-
tides support to leftist recoluttonary groups. Is
Soviet support direct but covert, or is il channeled
through other countries such as Cuba and
Nicaragua?

— The Sovtet-Cuban divtsion of labor. Do Havana
and Moscow agree on which South American
governments are most vulnerable to revolution?
Are Moscow and Havana less concerned with
unification of guerrilla groups in countries in
South America than in Central Americe? Are
there countries [n South America where the Sovi-
ets and Cubans are working at cross purposes? To
what extent sre Libyan and Nicaraguan aid pro-
grams coordinaled with either the Soviets or
Cubans? .

— Relationship of transnational collaboration to
external support. ls M-19 or Havana the ultimate
author of M-19's relationship with AVC? How do
Moscow or Havana fecilltate contacts between
South American insurgents and their counterparts
in Central America?

— The Peruolan exception. To what extent does the
Soviet arms supply relationship with Peru inhibit
Soviet and Cuban support for leftwing insurgents
in Peru? Are the Issues of accepting foreign
support and establishing regional ties subkects of
debate within Sendero Luminoso? Are there SL
factions that may break with the mainline organ-
zation and establish foreign Jinks? How does SL
participation in the Revolutionary Internationalist
Movement affect its activities in Peru?

P| ‘

months this small guerrilla force has clashed frequent-
ly with the Colombian Army in and around the city of
Calt in mountainous southwestern Colombia. The
guerrillas reportedly have well-organized columns
armed with assault rifles, rocket-propelled grenades,
mortars, and a few recoilless rifles. The Colombian
military, which tis determined to eradicate the Ameri-
ca Battalion, has reported inflicting heavy casualties
on elements of the battalion it has been able to draw
into combat but has not yet been able to dislodge the
main force of the guerrillas from their mountain

stronghold. Most of the Ecuadorean and Peruvian
guerrillas—a minority of the battalion-—-have report-
edly been killed oc captur

39. The America Battalion aside, the connections
wtablished by M-19 with the AVC apsear closer than
in any previous_¢c: of transnation: D
Latin America §

2 we He ; M-19 Icaders
have publicly claimed to have contacts with revolu-
tionaries In Peru arid, according to a source whose
reporting has sometimes been substantiated, privately
claimed similar contacts with the Chilean MIR. Else-
where in South America, revolutionary organizations
besed outside Chile occasionally are reported to be

providing support to either the FPMR or the MIR.

Outlook

40. Over the next few years, economic and political
conditions In South America appear to favor the
continuation of insurgencies in Chile, Peru, Colombia,
and Ecuador. There also is some chance of the revival
of at least a low level of armed revolutionary violence
in Argentina or Uruguay as well as in countries where

currently _t are no active insurgencies, such as
Bolivia

41. Throughout South America the combination of
government-imposed austerity and persistent inflation
is driving lower- and even middle-class families into
poverty, thereby contributing to the pool of potential
recruits for the violent left. Because of their economic
problems, some governments may be forced to cut
back military spending; consequently there may be
further reductions in the size, capabilities, and morale
of their for

42. Collaboration between South American insur-
gent groups and narcotics traffickers may spread. The
FARC and M-19, the two largest Colombian insurgent
groups have already been implicated with the drug
trafficking, and other South American groups may
succumb to the temptation. The Ecuadorean AVC, for
example, might come to emulate the drug trafficking
practices of M-19, its principal mentor. The reported
ad hoc arrangements between Sendero Luminoso and
drug traffickers in Peru could also assume a more
permanent form. Elsewhere in South America, a few
of the inactive insurgent groups—possibly in Venezue-

la and Brazil—may see narcotics money as the Gnan-
cial key to their revitalization. We believe that in-
creased cooperation between insurgents and drug traf-
Bickers wouk! considerably complicate the problenis
taccu bv the securily forces, which have had enough
troubse trying to cupe with the heretofore separate
challenges by the insurgents und the drug
trafficker

43. An additional area of concern is the possible
revitalization of rightwing terrorist organizations (see
inset) Typically, such groups are staffed by active or
retired security force personnel and sympathetic civil-
ians. Reportedly, rightwing terrorists are already at-
tacking perceived subversives in Chile, Peru, Colom-
bia, Ecuador, and Argentina. As in Central America,
rightwing violence will draw sharp criticism from
international human rights organizations and, In our

assist leftwing extremists in their recruiting.

Anti-US Terrorism

44. In recent years, South American insurgent ac-
tivities have become increasingly urbanized, a trend
we believe will continue, as leftist: revolutionaries
compete with one another and emulate their ideologi-
cal allies in Central America in trying to stage spectac-
ular incidents. This will lead to an intensification of
threats against nonindigenous targets, including US
interests, which tend to be concentrated in urban
areas. As in the past, US personnel and facilities are
likely to be frequent targets of radical leftists seeking
to strike at the United States, either for its own sake or

because to them jt symbolizes capitalism and “imperi-

45. The terrorism directed against US interests is
likely, in the main, to take the following forms:
bombings, kidnapings for ransom, assassination at-
tempts, and—more rarely—attempts to seize buildings
and take US hostages. Bombings—perhaps staged as
acts of solidarity with revolutionary groups in Central
America or elsewhere—will probably continue to con-
sist chiefly of low-risk attacks on US diplomatic and
commercial facilities or binational cultural centers,
which usually produce few casualties but attract the
desired media attention. Kidnapings for the purpose of
raising funds havacccurred most frequently in Colom-
bia, although not all of the kidnapers have had
political motives. A wide variety of both locals and
foreigners will continue to be victimized, probably
including US citizens, because US companies have

~<a *

Rightwing paramilitary forces have appeared fre-
quently in South and Central America am reaction to the
rise of perceived leftict Urceats Claiswdng to be deferd-
ers of the status qua, they have attearted Cousideraite
voluntary cooperation from the gemetal public and
varying degrees of support and pariiogation from the
security forces. Many people view them favorably as
the bearets of swift and vigorous punishment for agents
of disorder. Some governments, hasmpered by such
factors as cumbersome or corrupt judacial systems and
judging that they cannot curb subversion and armed
violence from the left using strictly legal measures, have
welcomed the advent of the anosymous rightwing
death squads, with the plausible denial they offer. The

rise of energetic human rights organizations concerned _

with Latin American affairs over the last decade,
however, has greatly ralsed the potesstial cost, in terms
of adverse publicity, for governments that sponsor or
permit such rightwing vigilantism Nevertheless, with
the recent expansion of leftist insangent activity in
several South American count new stirrings have
appeared on the extreme right

In Chile, members of the security forces have repeat-
edly been implicated in rightwing terrorism. In 1984
there were accusations from various quarters that the
National Information Center (CNT, which Is run by
military officers, murdered several leftist extremists
while they were trying to surrender or after they were
in custody. More explicitly, Chilean Anti-Communist
Action (AChA), which has been in existence since the
early 1970s and probably has links to Chilean security
services, publicly claimed to have killed one leftwing
extremist and has threatened several human right
activists with death if they do not cease their antigov-
ernment activities. In addition, according to sources of
varying reliability, active duty and retired carabineros
were responsible for the March 1985 lilling of three
Chilean Communist Party membe:

In Colombda, the vigilante group Death to Kidnapers

The Persistence of Rightwing Terrorism

announced its revival in Febrmar, 1985 and threatened
executiun of a Colombisa besincssinan, whom it a
cused of scendition with MEIS) Morcaver, the April
'*™> inucder of a campesino header, who belonged to a
Comuinunist party. apperss bo hkave been the work of a
rightwing dzath squad composed. at beast In part. of
policemen.

In Ecuador, various kind of evidence indicates that in
1985 the police force of Guayaquil may have set up a
death squad to deal summartly with both criminals and
insurgents. In March, six individuals accused of criminal
activities were found murdered. Also in March, wall
slogans challenging AVC (Alfaro Lives!) by implying the
existence of a mirror image organization (Alfaro Is
Dead!) were found In several parts of the city. The
methodical, unhurried way in which both activities
were carried out implied police connivance. In Septem-
ber 1985, two AVC members captured in Guayaquil
were by police while being transported between
jal

Io Peru, the Rondas Campesinos, tural civilian auxil-
laries that have been pressed into service to aid the
regular security forces, have sometimes shown Indls-
criminate brutality against imdividu uspected of
being SL members oc sympathize ~

In Argentina, we believe that a number of small-
scale bombings dnce April 1965 have been the work of
rightwing as well as leftwing forces. No rightwing group
has been identiBed, although the most likely candidate
would be whatever remalns of the Argentine Antl-
Communist AlHance (AAA) founded in 1973 by the
then Minister of Social Welfare, and composed of
retired military and pollce officers. Its activities during
the “dirty war” against subversion a rrently under
investigation by Argentine

In Uruguay, small groups of the far right are report-
edly monitoring the activities af the small groups of the

(MAS), formerly active between 1961 and late 1983,

established a pattern of paying ransom. Neither assas-
sination attempts nor the seizure of public buildings
with US hostages have not been commonplace in South
America during the past two years, although we
believe this has been pertly because of improved
official US security. We expect the threat of such
attacks against US officials to remain moderate:

— In Colombia, we cannot rule out the possibility of
another terrorist spectacle by M-19 to recoup lost
prestige. High-profile US persounel such as the
Ambassador or other senior officials are likely

far left, but so far there has been no
years from either end of the spectrum

targets in any future hostage-barricade action. To
preclude a government counterattack similar to
that staged at the Palace of Justice and create the
conditions for guerrilla success, M-19 has public-
ly announced plans to include important foreign-
ers in a future hostage-barricade situation.

— There is also a high risk of street assassinations in

Colombia, where narcotics traffickers as well as
guerrillas have threatened to assassinate US per-
sonnel. The apparent alliance between some
guerrilla groups and drug traffickers compounds

the danger to US Government personnel, espe-
cially when US antinarcotics or counterinsurgent
support to the Colombean Government raises the
US profile in Colombta

—In Peru, we capet a high level of MRTA
terrorism that will inockude attacks against US
targets. The SL will abo pose a continuing threat
to US interests, although it tends to focus its
efforts on the Peruvian Government.

Continued External Support

46. We see little likelihood over the next few years
that Cuban and Nicaraguan support for South Ameri-
can insurgents will diminish. Castro's hostility toward
Pinochet will not abate, nor will his determination to
further revolution In South America. In Colombia, and
to a lesser extent in Ecuador, Havana and Moscow
hope to reap gains from the ongoing insurgencies.
Elsewhere, we expect the Cubans to continue to try to
make diplomatic gains while quietly building up their
assets in leftist sectors. Libyan support Is likely to
continue or even Incr

47. Despite all these problems we see no South
American leftist revolutionary group taking power in
the next few years Certain developments are likely to

improve the ability of existing South American re
gimes to cope with the insurgent threat." Notably:

— Security forces around the continent are be-
coming more sophisticated and effective. ow-
wm iv tuaproved training, equipment, and

leadership.

~—~ As indications of external support of South Amer-
ican insurgencies aid regional tnsurgent collabo-
ration are recognized throughout the heml-
sphere, South American security forces will be
more likely to collaborate effectively with one
another and to accept help from the United
States, especially in the form of increased

training.

— We believe that the Roman Catholic Church in
South America, which has allowed some Church
sectors to collaborate with leftist revolutionaries
and to sympathize with charges of US complicity
with military regimes, will begin to distance itself
from liberation theology and Insurgent activities
as governments return to civilian rule, especially
if US policy works toward easing the Latin debt
burden.

— Most important, the democratic processes in most
countries enjoy widespread publ tt while
revolutionary alternatives do not

ANNEX

Revolutionary Movements: Country Profiles by Category

1. This annex divides the 19 countries of South
America into three categories according to the status of
insurgencies within their borders. We categorize
Chile, Peru, Colombia, and Ecuador as having active
insurgencies. We categorize Argentina and Uruguay
as countries where leftist revolutionary groups have
the potential to develop into active insurgencies. We

categorize Brazil, Venezuela, Paraguay, and Bolivia as -

countries where there are neither current Insurgencies
por any existing groups that might present an insur-
gem threat during the next few years It should be
noted, however, that the weakness of political institu-
thous in Bolivia, coupled with its economic problems,

make that country a place where revolutionary vio-
lence can flare up sudden} a
Countries With Active Revolutionary Movements

2 An active revolutionary movement is defined as
an armed opposition that regularly engages security
forces or attacks state property in such a manner as to
threaten the stability of a country’s government or

ecooomy. Groups at this level exist in Chile, Peru,
Colombia, and Ecuador

3 In Chile, revolutionary groups building up their
strength with significant foreign support continue to
call for armed opposition despite widespread popular
sentiment in favor of an accelerated transition to
civilian rule. During 1984, bombings Increased five
fold, and they continued at an even higher rate in
1985. Faced with a large security force under a
military dictatorship and constrained by an officially
declared state of emergency, the revolutionary groups
are forced to operate clandestinely, for the most part.
In 1983 the three largest groups publicly formed a
loose political alliance, the Democratic Popular Move-
ment (MPD), ostensibly to present peaceful, public
opposition to Pinochet. The following groups were
members of the MPD, which was outlawed by the
government in February 1985:

— The Communist Party of Chile (PCCh)
— The Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MTR)
—— The Chiles gcocialist Party/Almeyda Faction

4. In our view, the pro-Soviet PCCh (formed in
1922) dominates the MPD and poses the main revolu-
tionary threat to the regime. An advocate of armed
struggle since 1980, the party has 30,000 members plus
a 20,000-strong youth wing. POCh members organize
political oppositiun—such as strikes and national pro-
test days—through the MPD. By September 1965 the
PCCh Central Committee had reportedly moved to
improve the party's organizational capabilities and
éxert tighter control over those promoting armed
action by returning senior exiled leaders to Chile. In
April 1985, according to an often substantiated source,
the PCCh received a shipment of Soviet-made weap-
ons from Cuba for distribution to regional party units

nd to the Manue! Rodriguez Patriotic Front (FPMR).

‘.

5. The FPMR, which receives support from both
the USSR and Cube, was formed in late 1983, making
it the newest element of the developing revotutionary
movement. It often operates independently, but the
PCCh has reportedly attempted to assume control by
placing trusted members In FPMR leadership posi-
tions. The FPMR’s actions in 1985 caused at least three
blackouts in the capital and bombings in various cities
as well as disruption of rail transportation. After it
bombed government-owned buildings during the na-
tional protest day in March 1985, the FPMR was
publicly praised by Radio Havana for its “firm pur-
pose of fighting relentlessly.” In September 1965, the
Chiles: Communist daily published an FPMR mani-
{esto that advocated armed opposition to Pinochet and
expressed solidarity with the Governments of Cuba
and Nicaragua plus sup r the “Salvadoran peo-
ples and their s ‘

6. The Cuban-influenced MIR, although repeatedly
weakened by security force operations, remains pub-
Hely committed to overthrowing the Pinochet regime
by force. The MIR, which has a 20-year history of
subversive activities, conducted a terrorist campaign
from 1981 until late 1983, when security forces killed
several militants and leaders, demoralizing the move-

ment. By March of 1984, though, the group repartedly
had decided to return to violence as a result of Cuban
prodding. According to various reliable sources, the
MIB is training revolutionary cadre In Cuba, who are

sot
“4
#
2

Fede
we

‘aL,

Batata tds

mal

a aoe Eg

then to be infiltrated back into Chile to wage guerrilla terrorism in the capital, causing {requent power oul-
a ages. Maging attacks on military aed ruling party
7. During 1885 the MIR conducted several terrorist, ("Wels and—beginning in June 1985—detonating
actions in conhunction with the FPMR. beefed up its TUde car bombs, The SL's efforts to disrupt the
organizational structure. and began to develop an arms Inannural c-a. mes in late July, however, were
smuggling neiwork. ‘Lo support these eilorts, the MIR, brevenied by heavy security and arrests of key terror-
like the PCCh, has reportedly been bringing its exiles #3 At Grst, the rewl, elected Preddent Garcia
authorized continued milltary control ower emergency

home, according to a generally reliable source. In ; :
addition, ft hus launched a recruitment drive, seeking 203 in rural SL strongholds. but im December 1985

members from among the urban poor, students, and he ‘lifted the state of emergency im the northern
the unemployed. Currently, the MIR probably has highlands in all but four provinces. ba February 1986,
about 400 members In Chile. The group ix led by however, terrurist assassinations and bombings in Lima
Andres Pascal Allende (nephew of the late Salvador Caused the Carcia government to declare a stale of
Allende), who has lived in Cuba since the kate 1970s. emergency —

11. After emerging in Septernber 1984, the small

8. The PSCh/A—the best financed splinter group (several hundred members) but ambitious Tupec
of the Socialist Party originally formed in 193$-—-Jolns Amaru began using car bombs im Jure 1985, in
the PCOCh and MIR in their political front, the MPD. addition to taking over radio stations, interrupting TV
Named after Its principal leader, Clodomiro Almeyda, broadcasts, and employing Robin Hood tactics in
and numbering between 10,000 and 20,000 members, Lima's slums. The Peruvian press has quoted a Tupec
many still in exile, the PSCh/A formally advocates Amaru Central Committee document that defines the
armed struggle, but, according to an informazt, much group as a working-class, Marxist-Leninist, national
of the leadership tends to prefer political action while liberation organization based on revobutionary interna-
allowing elements within the party to collaborate in tionalism and inspired by the Cuban and Nicaraguan
PCCh-sponsored violence. Like the MIR and PCCh, it revolutions to join the “struggle for the construction of
is believed to receive support from both the Soviet world socialism.” The group has been publicly ap-
Union and om i plauded the Moscow-line Peruvian Communist

9. In Peru, security forces are stretched thin as they Part
now face two active revolutionary movements—the 12. In a clandestine press conference on 16 August
originally rural-based Sendero Luminoso (SL) and the 1985, Tupac Amaru announced a unilateral—and
newer, urban-based Revolutionary Movement Tupac —_conditional—suspension of armed actions against the
Amaru (MRTA). While the SL continues to pase the = new Garcia government. The revolutionary group
most serious threat to stability, the MRTA may pose a remained critical of the Garcia administration, how-
greater threat to US facilities and personnel two_ ever; in late October 1985, its clandestine magazine,
revolu ups operate independently Venceremos, published an editorial that charged that
we fey stional events often prompt the government engaged in “state terrorism and a
Lima by both groups, but no dirty war against the pecple.” In November 1985,
evidence of coordination between the SL and Tupac Tupac Amaru resumed its terrorist campaign in Lima,
Amaru has come to light _ and in early 1986, Tupac Amaru publicly announced
that it bad sent some guerrillas to join the M-19-led

10. Abimael Guzman began to organize the SL In
1963, drawing its membership mainly from Peru's America Battalion in southern Colombia. Tupac

Indian population. The rigidly Maolst group claims to | Amaru has demonstrated strong ideological affinity
be the only true Communist Party of Peru The SL, with M-19, but it seems unlikely that the two groups
now with an estimated 4,000 to 5,000 members, _ will expand their operational links—particularly since
maintains strong bases in remote highland areas and MARTA guerrillas tn the America Battalion reportedly
has become an urban terrorist threat as well. Led by suffered heavy casualties: Tupac Amaru presents a
the improved performance of the government's coun- potentially larger threat than suggested by its current
terinsurgency forces to change its tactics, In 1984 the — size and activities because it is well disciplined and
revolutionary group expanded from its highlands base — organized, appeals to students and urban unemployed,
in Ayacucho Department in 1984 and began diversify- se “th SL appears more open to foreign support.

war.

ing its operations. For one thing, it escalated its

13. In Colombta. there are four active insurgent
groups:

— The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
(FARC)

— The 1%h of Anril Mewement (MIT
_— The National Liberstiom Ariny (EL)
__ The Popular Liberation Army (EPL) Big

14. Among these four insurgent grovps, only the
FARC continues to adhere even nominally to the truce
signed with the government during the summer of
1984. Guerrilla violence has gradually Increased dur-

ing this truce, and new revolutionary groups continué .

to emerge. The peace accords broke down in June
1985 when M-19 unilaterally withdrew from the
cease-fire agreement, claiming government violations.
Smaller revolutionary groups followed suit, and M-19
has since spearheaded a boose alliance composed of
groups opposed to any dialogue with the government.
Some members of this alliance have carried out joint
guerrilla actions, and Coloenbian police intelligence
believes the alliance is plamning urban actions. Both
the FARC and 4-1 to have some contact with
drug traffickers 7

15. Formed in 1966, the FARC Is basically the
armed wing of the orthodox pro-Soviet Colombian
Communist Party. The organization is headed by
Pedro Antonio Marin, also known as Manuel Maru-
landa Velez, who currently advocates reintegration of
the group into Colombian society. Of the country's
major guerrilla groups, the FARC appears most corm-
mitted to the truce, but has taken advantage of the
cease-fire to strengthen {ts already formidable combat
force. The FARC has grown by at least one-third
during the past two years and by conservative estimate
now numbers 2,500 to 4,000 fighters; Colombian
military intelligence recently estimated its strength at
7,500 armed combatants. Since publicly announcing
its desire to participate in national politics, the FARC
has formed a legal political party, held peaceful rallies,
presented a candidate for the 1986 pational election,
and won minorjty representation in both houses of
Congress

16. Even under the truce, however, the FARC has
continued to arm and recruit guerrillas, and it has
employed armed propaganda to obtain support for it
political front, the Patriotic Union. Elements of the
FARC still carry out kidnapings, robberies, and extor-
tion, reportedly using a portion of the proceeds to
support the group's political activities. The FARC also

derives Income froa the drug industry. Ubrough culti-
vation of coca In its own Belds as well as by extorting
protection payments from trafickers. Recent report:
ing Indicates that some elements of FARC may also be
tnvelved te cL. eefinj trafficking. although

10 Getail, arr available

17. M-J9. fonned ta 1970 but inactive until 1979,
has suffered delilitating leadership struggles since
founder Jaime Bateman’s death In 1983. Its strength
has been estimated at up to 1,100, but this force has
probably heen reduced considerably as a comequence
of losses suffered in clashes with government forces.
Nevertheless, M-19 remains the country’s second-
largest and most active revolutionary group and the

one most influenced by Cubs. In June 1985, after

repeated clashes with security forces in several depart-
ments, M-19 publicty broke its truce with the govern-
ment. Although the group suffered casualties in subse-
quent actions, including the death of a top header, it
had significantly improved its combat capabilities by
late last summer. Since then, M-19 bas seesawed
between success and defeat, Initiating armed actions
but meeting strong resistance from the Colombian
security forces, who consider M-19 2 major threat to
internal security. Last November, for example, an
M-19 force occupied the Palace of Justice and took its
occupants hostage but lost 35 of its best fighters to the
government troops who stormed the buildi ;

18. M-19 survived this setback to form the National
Guerilla Coordinating Board (CNG), a coalition of
antitruce guerrillas The CNG’s primary combat
force-—a 250-man column known as the America
Battalion, which includes some guerrillas from the
Ecuadorean AVC, the Peruvian MRTA, and possibly
other non-Colombiam groups—recently launched an
offensive in southwestern Colombia, Including an at-
tack on the city of Cali The military responded in
strength, calligg in several brigades to dislodge the
gue

19. While the guerrillas have reportedly suffered
heavy losses in the recent fighting, the impect of these
losses on the CNG, as well as the rest of M-19, is not
yet clear. In spite of these setbacks, it Is apparent that
M-19 still represents a challenge to the government, at
least as a potential beader in future coordinated guer-
rilla actions. According to sources of varying reliablity,
M-19 now receives mopey and training from Libya,
arms from the AVC, and various sorts of support from
Cuba and Nicaragua. While it has reportedly experi-
enced internal dissent over the possibility of returning
to negotiations with the government, Carlos Pizarro

oe deck Ca A ae ae te

Leon-Gomez. its newty clected leader, is a hardline
ideologue who is likey to continue aggressive attacks,

The National Liberation Army (ELN), fumed
in 1963 by pro-Casiro extremists. has develeped strong
connections with lef Roman Cathalic Church acuiv-
ists. As with most cther Scuth American insurgent
groups, the ELN has shifted Its focus in recent years
from mainly rural to mainly urban areas. Estimates of
ELN's strength range from 300 to as many as 800.
Although two ELN froats have signed a truce with the
ents have reportedly joined

21. In September 1985, the small Maoist Popular
Liberation Army (EPL) folned the antitruce CNG
established by M-19. The EPL has profited from the
truce by filling its coffers with proceeds from robber-
ies and extortions and by conducting a recruitment
drive that, we beliewe, doubled its membership to
around 600. Although the group was pro-Chinese in
orientation when formed in 1967, it received arms
shipments from Nicaragua in 1985, giccording to an
often substantiated source & =

22. In Ecuador, Ube young, "middle-class, Cuban-
endorsed Alfaro Vive, Carajol (AVC), led by Fausto
Basantes Borja (Toenas”) until he was killed by
security forces in December 1985, has grown from a
mere handful when ® surfaced in September 1983 to
probably 300 to 500 activists and has developed a
semipublic, semiclandestine structure to further its
revolutionary aims. The AVC has moved from media
office takeovers, pamphlet “bombs,” and bank robber-
ies to arms ralds, the escape of four top leaders from
prison and, in August 1985, a kidnapine

23. The AVC already has achieved several of the
goals outlined in captured documents. Ecuadorean
Amny Intelligence believes its next objectives include
more kidnapings, garmering support from leftist politi-
cal groups, and increasing rural guerrilla activity. In
early May 1985, a midlevel AVC leader reportedly
told group members that the organization would soon
begin a new phase of terrorist violence, including the
assassination of a government official, coupled with an
aggressive public relations campaign to gain popular
support. The improving government security forces—
in consultation with their Peruvian and Colombian
counterparts—were able to counter this threat, how-
ever. In recent months, government forces have hurt
the AVC badly, killing or capturing AVC leaders,
raiding safehouses, and breaking up terrorist gather-
ings.

24 Some AVG members have served with M19
guerrillas in the America Battalion. Their apparent
objectives were to affirm a tactical alliance with M-19
and acquire combat expenence. Several have died.

“Ss in clashes with the Colombian militan.

Countries With Potential Insurgencies
25. We jadge that only two South American coun-

tries fall “ss category: Argentina and Uruguay.

26. In Argentina, seeking to exploit an atmosphere
of economic difficulty and the expanded freedom of
- action under a civilian regime, two former revolution-
ary movements—the Peronist Montoneros and the
People’s Revolutionary Army (ERP)}—are currently in
the midst of an internal debate over whether to
resume armed struggle or restrict themselves to partic
ipation in the legitimate political process. Those in-
clined toward pursuing armed struggle may be de-
terred by the President's determination to be tough on
terrorists and by a lack of public support for political
violence

27. Both groups are being supported by Cuba,
which has reportedly encouraged them to cooperate in
pursuing their goals through nonviolent means under
the country’s new government. After a meeting in
Havana in March 1984, the two groups agreed to
cooperate in infiltrating labor unions and _ political
parties to try to induce them to move leftward. About
a year later the ERP publicly joined the pro-Soviet
Communist Party in founding a “Forum for National
Liberation,” which almed at combating “imperialism
and its multinational companies.

28. Whether working individually of in tandem,
neither the ERP nor the Montoneros appears strong
enough to pose any current threat to the regime. The
ERP has perhaps 200 members. Its principal leader,
Enrique Gorriaran, is in exile in Nicaragua. The
Montoneros are believed to number 300 to 500. Mario
Firmenich, a primary leader and founder, was recent-

ly extradited from Brazil and is in p in Argentina
awaiting trial for — a

29. In Uruguay, the Tupamaros (formally, the Uru-
guayan National Liberation Movement) have taken
advantage of the installation of a civilian government
in March 1985 to begin rebuilding their domestic

organization. Under the new government's general
amnesty program, many Tupamaros were released

24

j
|
}
]
‘

™ ee,

from prison, while others were allowed to return from
exile wahout fear of prosecution. In addition. the
Tupemaros began recruiting new members and even
held a convention. Currently. the Tupamarns probably:
have about 300 members in Uruguay, with many
rthers dill in exile. The cneavenicnt reportedly is
divided over whether and when to ndturi tu violence,
although some Tupamaros who ceturned from evile
have been trying to reconstitute the group's clandes-
tine structure. Meanwhile, Raul Sendic, the top Tupa-
mar fader, has publicly called for repudiation of
Uruguay's foreign debt (probably at Cuban instigation)
and issaed an antipoverty plan in an effort to appeal to
the ecowomically disadvantag ~

Countries Without Active Revolutionary
Movements

30. The remaining countries of South America are
not troubled by insurgencies, although in all of them
but Paraguay there are smalli—fewer than 100 mem-
bers—radical groups or the remnants of such groups.
These countries are nevertheless important in the
context of South American revolutionary activity be-
cause—again, except for Paraguay—they are often
used as staging areas and safehavens by foreign revolu-
tionary groups from countries such as Chile, Colombia,
and Peru

31. In Boliota, leftist political parties—the National
Revolutionary Movement of the Left (MNRI), the
Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR), and the
Bolivian Communist Party (PCB}—all have connec-
tions with leftist groups, including insurgent groups, in
other South American countries. MNRI factions have
the most extensive connections. Elements of the
MNRIL, aided by some Argentine Montoneros, served
as conduits for Cuban ald to radical leftists In Chile.
The Cuban-influenced MIR traditionally has had close
tles to the Chilean MIR. A Cuben-influenced splinter
group of the PCB that advocates armed struggle as
part of the overall revolutionary process is seeking
international recognition from other Latin American
Commanist parti

82 The death of Che Guevara in 1967 led to a 15-
year lapse in Cuban Interest and activity in Bolivia. In
1982, bowever, Hernan Siles Zuazo of the MNRI was
elected President, reportedly with the help of funding
from Havana. Siles renewed diplomatic relations be-
tween Bolivia and Cuba, although ambassadors were
not exchanged. During the Siles administration, the
“palace group” of presidential advisers led by Felix
Rospigliosi, in conjunction with Interior Ministry offi-
cials who distrusted the military, were reliably report-

ed to be developing « core cadre trained in gucrrifle
warfare tactics in Cuba to protect the MNAI's interests
mm and out of office. Evidence fron a variety of
sources indicates that the palace group may have been
connected with the lneistics base discovered in Bolin ia
= O-totwe 6450 tron which Cuban-supplied arms had
been smugyed into Chile. Captured documents indi-
cate that at feast 10 arms shipments had been inade to
subversive groups during the preceding two years
Under current Presidemt Paz Estenssoro, Bolivia con-
tinucs to maintain diplomath tes to Havana, but
relations are much cooler

33. In Brazil, since the return to civilian male in
1985, there have been rumors that violent leftwing
groups will stage a resurgence. The security forces
squashed the revolutionaries of the 1960s, bat the
remnants of two groups, the Revolutionary Movement
of 8 October (MR-8) and the Revolutionary Cusummo-
nist Party (PCR), resurfaced in the early 1980s. Closely
monitored by the military, however, they appear to
pose an insignificant threat, even if they work tageth-
qr. N

34. The military tries to maintain security in the
interior, but we doubt it can fully control the country’s
hong and porous border. Brazil borders on two coun-
tries with active insurgencies (Colombia and Peru) and
another two with potential insurgencies (Argentina
and Uruguay) At least four foreign revolutionary
groups have utilized parts of Brazil's vast territory to
support subversive activities in other countries. Brazil
has been used as a safehaven by insurgents from Peru
and Colombla. Uruguayan subversives with ties to the
Tupamares reportedly operated an illegal arms anug-
gling network in Brazil In October 1984, representa-
tives of several Latin American groups and the Gov-
exnment of Nicaragua reportedly met in Porto Allegre
to establish a “revolutionary coordinator” for the
movement against Pinochet.

35. In Venezuela, revolutionary groups are tiny and
mactive, although some coordinate with and support
Colombian insurgent groups. The security forces are
effective, and there ts no popular support for insurgen-
cy. The two clandestine subversive groups that could
pose a security threat over the long term—Bandera
Roja (Red Flag) and the New Revolutionary Coordima-
tor (NCR)~are both small (perhaps 25 to 50 members
each) and poorly led although they appear to be
intensifying their organizational efforts. Bandera Rosa,
the more experienced of the two, Is struggling to
maintain its military ¢pparatus, having dismantled its
urban unit in May 1985. The group, which may
receive some Cuban funding, is beset by factionaiksn,

and many members remain in prison. We believe that
the Venezuelan security forces will be able to contain
any subversive threat from this quarter during the
next few years. °

26

36 Paraguay. Revolutionary movements have had
no real opportunity to develop under the well-
—_ dictatorship of Cen. Alfredo Stroessner.

y
