EstimatedD Pub Date) Supervisor's Guide to the Employee Assistance Program
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107985, dated 4 March 1993.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107985).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

AAAS

SANE

s
©
%

& y
ns

rom

zy
5 4
2\

\4
« fi

BY cee meet Crt re kL Se oe RU et eed Se ene ON ORE mE eens

Soe TOSCO dae seeds oe tes om ime ee Uo an ame te

BD ee ee

ore
7

RM Re ee ee ee me et re ee ee Re a ee ee

People are our most important asset.
The phrase has become a cliche, but only
because it’s truth ensures its frequent —
perhaps too frequent — repetition.
Managing people is often satisfying, but
rarely simple. Keeping your employees
informed, motivated, focused and product
is a constant challenge. In good
circumstances the challenge can be exciti
and exhilirating. In bad circumstances, it c
seem like an insurmountable task.

Few circumstances can be as difficult a
those created by a troubled employee.
When an employee’s personal problems
make it difficult for him or her to function
productively, the entire Office is affected
including his or her co-workers and the
unit’s mission. And you, charged with
keeping up morale and productivity while
managing wisely and well, bear a
disproportionate share of the load.

It’s a tough situation. That’s why the
Agency created an Employee Assistance
Program located in the Office of Medical
Services. The EAP provides professional
help to employees and to the supervisors
who refer them to EAP because of
performance problems. This guide tells y
what help is available, how and when to t
EAP, and what you can expect from it.
Identifying the problem and making the
decision to use an Agency resource is ut
you. Making the resource work well for y
and your employees is our concern.

Even the best employees occasionally
have problems or go through a slump wh
their work just isn’t up to its usual standa

If the situation persists, your responsibility as
a supervisor is ta call attention to it. Your
employee’s responsibility is to remedy it.
When the problems are minor, that’s usually
all that’s required to right the situation.

But there are a variety of serious personal
problems that make it difficult for a worried
and preoccupied employee to focus enough
to perform well. These problems include
family disruptions, emotional problems,
financial worries, and substance abuse.
Helping employees with those problems is
why EAP was created.

EAP’s staff of clinical social workers,
psychologists, substance abuse counselors,
and financial counselors provides professional
assistance to both supervisors and
employees. The EAP staff helps supervisors
by assessing whether the employee’s
performance deficiencies are rooted in
personal difficulties, and the staff helps
employees with those problems to deal with
them.

EAP services are available to employees
who often seif-refer to the program, to family
members, and to supervisors who refer
employees to EAP. Management referrals to
EAP by supervisors are based on problematic
performance which has been previously

‘identified to the employee but which has
remained unacceptable. There’s another way,
short of making a referral, that supervisors
can use EAP. By making your employees
aware of the program’s existence and
encouraging them to self-refer for personal,
job, and/or family problems, you may prevent
the development of a full-scale problem for
them...and for you.

The critical question in making a management
referral is when to do it. An EAP referral is not a
first step in dealing with performance problems.
It's only after the normal supervisory counseling
process hasn't worked that you should consider
a referral to EAP. When the performance issues
that you've discussed with the employee haven't

improved at ail, cr as is more often the case,
when the performance has improved for a shor:
time and then reverted back to an unacceptable
level, it’s time to refer. EAP was designed to
handle a very specific category of performance
problems: those that persist or recur
intermittently and which are not remedied by
normal supervisory counselling sessions.

When performance problems become the
rule rather than the exception, a referral to
EAP can provide the professional help you
need to make a critical distinction: either to
rule out personal problems as the explanatio
for performance difficulties, or to get a
troubled employee the help he or she needs.
The course of action outlined below should
help you reach that point. While this plan
works best in most cases, there will always b<
situations where the need for immediate help
makes preparation impossible. EAP is
available to help in any circumstance.

DOCUMENT

Keep a private record of the performance
problems, including dates, specifics of each
deficiency, and your directions to the employee
about needed improvement.

DISCUSS

Documented deficiencies must be discusse
with the employee. To emphasize the
seriousness of the issue as well as the planne
nature of the intervention and its followup,
make an appointment with the employee.
Rather than an impromptu discussion of
“impressions” or “feelings” that the éfriployee’s
work is somehow “slipping,” your planned
meeting should be a factual description of
specific performance issues based on the
documentation you have gathered. The
absence of specific and factual data is unfair t:
the employee and may be self-damaging.

¢
3
4
‘

PLAN

You must be as specific about the solution
as you are about the problem. What must the
employee do to bring his/her performance up
to an acceptable level and by when must
he/she have demonstrated the improvement?
Be prepared to discuss specifics of
performance and select a deadline for the
improvement to be apparent. Without
concrete standards and a timetable, the
employee is left without recourse. Conclude
your interview by setting an appointment for
the next discussion in which you'll assess
progress. The employee must know that just
as the initial discussion was a planned event,
so is the followup.

DECIDE

Before your scheduled follow-up, decide if
you’re satisfied with the improvement. If you
are, congratulations! If you’re not, this is the
time to consult with EAP. The contact should
take place prior to your next scheduled
appointment with the employee. You can
alert EAP that you'll be making a referral, and
provide some specifics of the case. It’s
important that EAP is aware of an impending
referral to ensure that the referring supervisor
gets the necessary feeback. The initial
conversation is also a good opportunity to get
some case-specific advice about making the
actual referral...which is the next step.

REFER

Your concern about the employee is based
on performance issues. it is in the best
interest of everyone concerned — the
employee, the Agency and yourself — that
you remain clear on your role in the process:
You’re a supervisor. Be one. Your
responsibility is not to diagnose the
employee’s problem or to solve it. Stay
focused on performance deficiencies both as
the cause for the EAP referral and as the
indicator you'll continue watching. Be clear
with the employee that the “problem” for
which he/she is being referred to EAP is
his/her performance. Let the employee know
that EAP is expecting him/her, and that
he/she will be asked to sign a consent form
that will allow the EAP counselor to provide
you with very general feedback about his/her
willingness to work with EAP. The single best
guideline to follow throughout the process is:

Be a good supervisor. Stay focused on your
professional responsibilities. EAP will focus
on its role.

EXPLAIN EMPLOYEE OPTIONS

Referrals to EAP are NOT adverse actions.
Employees should know that. They should
also understand that the decision to consult
with EAP is their’s and they may choose not
to do so. What if an employee says no? The
supervisor may decide to give the employee a
specific amount of time to reconsider the
referral, or may choose to initiate an adverse
action. The initial conversation with EAP may
have provided another alternative specific to
the case. Doing nothing is always an option,
but at this juncture it would signal your
approval of a continued performance level
that you've already labeled as unacceptable.

UNDERSTAND YOUR OPTIONS

Referring an employee to the EAP is NOT
your last decision about the employee. A
referral does not preclude your taking
alternative action later on, including initiating
an adverse action if the referral is not solving
your concerns about performance. While an
EAP referral doesn’t foreclose future action, it
does mean that you’re doing what you can to
help solve the problem and following a logical
course of administrative action by selecting
the least serious option first.

MONITOR

When you've kept your focus consistently
where it belongs — on the employee’s
performance — you'll be able to complete the
loop by continuing to monitor the
performance. Daily contact and observation
will help you to assess the employee’s
progress, and to provide relevant feedback to
the EAP counselor. If the performance
continues to improve with time, the process
has worked. If it doesn’t, you’ve dogs your
best to help, have used the right Agency
resources and are free to pursue other
actions.

it’s up to the employee to follow-up on your
referral to EAP. You should emphasize the
employee’s right to make that decision when
you first make the referral. The employee
should also understand that his/her refusal
means that you will pursue alternate
adminsistrative actions, including adverse
actions. If an employee refuses an EAP
referral and you are interested in alternative
actions, that is the right time to contact the
Office of Personnel’s

Personal information such as that regarding
marital or family issues, will not be discussed
with the supervisor without the employee's
written consent. However, if the employee
acts on the management referral, but refuses
to give the EAP counselor such written
consent, the EAP counselor will be able to
release work-related information (e.g.,
prognosis for performance improvement) to
the supervisor. Continued supervisory
involvement is encouraged. If the employee’s
performance improves rapidly, all is well. if it
takes longer — as it often does — the
supervisor’s involvement and cooperation is
necessary so that alternative actions can be
reviewed.

Supervisors have a number of concerns
about referring an employee to EAP.
Supervisors worry that an EAP referral implies
a negative judgment about an employee, even
though their judgment is about performance
and is required of them. They're often afraid
of hurting an employee, even though an EAP
referral may be the only chance an employee
has of getting the help they need. Supervisors
frequently feel that referring a problem means
they’re not doing their job, even though a big

part of their job is knowing Agency resources
and exercising good judgment about how and
when to use them.

Often, supervisors are concerned about
relinquishing control of a responsibility they
rightfully see as belonging to them. Referring
an employee to EAP does NOT end your
involvement with the case or your
responsibility as a supervisor. The ultimate
goal of an EAP referral is to correct
performance deficiencies. Your continuing
involvement is critical to monitor and evaluate
the employee’s performance.

Because supervisors are so concerned
about the harm an EAP referral may cause an
employee, they often overlook the harm that
not referring causes. |n trying to “protect”
employees, supervisors sometimes become
overly and inappropriately involved with an
employee's personal problems. When that
happens, no one benefits. EAP is staffed with
objective, trained professionals. When
supervisors try to become professional
counselors to their employees, they are
assuming a role they are not trained for and
depriving their employees of the professional
help they deserve. Meanwhile, supervisors
become diverted from their primary
responsibility.

The effectiveness of the EAP depends on
how much it is trusted by employees and
supervisors alike. Because the confidentiality
between the employee and counselor must be
maintained, you may never know the exact
nature of the underlying persona! problem(s)
and you won't be aware of specific details,
unless the employee chooses to let you know.
EAP records are confidential under the
provisions of the Privacy Act. They do not
become part of an employee's security or
personnel file.

is

What can you expect? If you've alerted the

EAP before referring an employee and the

referred employee signs a “Release of
Information” form, you'll receive a follow-up
call from EAP immediately after the first visit.
The EAP counselor will provide answers to
generic questions.

Did the employee keep the appointment(s)?
Will additional sessions be necessary?
Is the employee cooperating?

Will the employee be out of the office to
keep appointments, see an outside source
of help, or receive other helath services?

What are the prospects for improvement?

If the employee continues to see an EAP
counselor, you'll receive periodic reports. You
should also expect to be asked by the
counselor about the kind of
progress/improvement you observe in the
employee. Supervisors, by virtue of their daily
contact with employees, are in the best
position to evaluate the kind of slow and
Steady progress that are the hoped-for
outcome of any EAP referral. Remember that
the information exchange is a two-way street
with both counselor and supervisor working
together and sharing information to achieve
the same goal: improved performance.

Employees must be able to trust EAP to
keep their personal problems personal.
Supervisors must be able to trust EAP to
provide them with the information they need
to do their job.

Problems serious enough to affect
performance usually take some time to
develop. They generally can’t be solved
overnight.

Decide, after some consultation with the
EAP counselor, when you'll have a reliable

sense of how the case is going. Then give
yourself — and your employee — that much
time before considering alternative action.

The EAP has been a part of the Agency for
almost a decade. Thousands of people have
been helped and careers salvaged. But
outcomes aren’t always positive. If a referral
doesn’t result in improved performance after a
reasonable amount of time, you'll know two
things as you prepare to take other
administrative action: Organizationally, you
chose the least serious option first and you
may now proceed to the next level.
Personally, you tried to get someone
assistance in solving their personal and
performance problems.

More frequently, it does work out.
Supervisors who have been involved in
positive EAP interventions often consider that
experience among the most satisfying of their
careers, both personally and professionally.

We hope this guide proves useful. Call
EAP — sooner rather than later — to discuss
any case that may be causing you concern.
You needn't identify the employee — or even
yourself — until you’re certain about your
course of action. The EAP staff can help you
think about the case, consider your
alternatives and weigh the pros and cons of
each. A successful outcome is most likely
when the supervisor and counselor work
together toward a mutual goal: restoring a
good employee to full productivity. =

Call EAP on QP or, on a secure line,
