NIE-99: Estimate of the World Situation Through 1955
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000039792, dated 5 September 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000039792).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

2 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES = -- - ~
ae

' 16 October 1953

MEMORANDUM FOR THE INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEES
SUBJECT: NIE~993 33 of the World Situation through
19

1. On Ly October we circulated to you a text of NIE<99,
At the request of the JIG representative, the IAC representa-
tives were reconvened to reconsider certain parte of that
text, principally paragraph 18,

x
2. Attached is a revised text which incorporates the changes
agreed to on 16 October,

3. This text supersedes the Ui; October text and will be
considered by the IAC at 10:45, Tuesday, 20 October,

u. Because of the necessity for holding a clean-up session
on this estimate on 16 October, the Board has not completed.

ite discussion on the advisability of OTT, ae oe
see aces ee The Board recomenda- 1
tion will be sent to you on 19 October, for action on the

27th,

aut bh, Pork
PAUL A. BOREL
Deputy Assistant Director

Distribution * An

t Ku 0 Chores indicated ty eee Chany eee
Ponty d ( e 18) D Changin th magnitude

Ap
— tee (GE)

— 881091222

ye ype ne yn —
eee

—

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENcY

16 October 1953

SUBJECT: NIE-99: HE WORLD SWT TDR 1955
SCOPE

This estimate is concerned vith the majce international trends
which will effect the werd situation through 1955 ruther then with .
the specific events and conditions which will chiracterisze that
Situstion. The estimste must assume a continustion of present 86
Policies and thus cannot consider the effects vhich 8 change in
these pole ies would haves on the world situation. rel

there de-at"PEWSENE rern VITUS Por making such en ectimte,
I. THE OVERALL STICATION TROUGH 1955

4. Despite the change in regime in the USSR and the shifts
in Soviet foreign and domestic tactics, there has been no change
in the USSR's basic hostility to all non-Soriet pover. The USER

— 2

88109127

Will continue its cold war against the Free World, largely through
& vigorous political varfare campaign. While Enst-West pagotiations
4 like ot
are possible, there is little lihood ie Laas

2 1 . 2 * . ;
89 SE Tatar ‘
a 5 * ae ™ Ps, Un WH He oa

2. Ke we believe tint ae initiation
—— war b.
u.. WER yurvass more cautious policy, the ss of war by -
culeulation will also probably be less. Sovever, there vill be cen-
timing danger thet it my our from u series of actions and
countersctians initiated by either side, but act intended by either
side to have that result. Ip pertieular it might arise frou actions
dy one side that were regarded by the other as an immtneat threat to its
— lie dértes to

. — . 1
danger of Bast -Nost igs particularly in Indochina,
Korea, and Germany.

3. In the absence of such mew East-West clashes, and unless the
USSR ebenions its ostensibly concilistory tactics, the next two years
Will probably be @ period of reduced Free World apprehensions of general
ware So long as this period lasts it will present a nev challenge to
the Free World. While over the longer run the very diversity of the

381091

— —

Free World my lend it c flexibility ani potential fer grovth which
will constitute a source of strength, over the next two years this
diversity my prove A source of veakness. The totalitarian ture and
centralised controls of the Soviet Bloc might give it advantages in
this phase of the cold war, even though the totalitarian rigidities of
the Nee aysten might over the locger run impair its stability ant
een. Contimed stresses and strains within the Soviet Bloc are
likely, but the monolithic unity and forced cohesion of the Bloc vill
Probably be much less affected by a situstion of reduded apreehensions
than the more divided Free World. Moreover, the bulld-tp of Sloe

- strength vill almost certainly continue, even if at a soneviat reduced

a Fate, while the Free World my de incline to relax its guard. We
believe tint ine situmtion of Nause internstionsl apprebensions
Ani Rice emphasis on Giviaive tactics, thare is danger of « veskening
An the unity of the Free World.

(G1 4, The progress being de by the UESR in the develogment of
muclear wespons 18 also a factor of prime mtlitary ani paychologien!
importance in the vorld sitution. Ste- develovnent of muelesr
c Et treks-vhiet;“2f- WH vered

881091222

Fee rr
2 . . ia

4
target, vould festroy a lar 8 5 fal,

Z r cr_grester mgnt-
trates | As this Soviet cambility increases, Western superiority in

inereases its capabilities damyging attack
on the US, the US is losing genteel coc
West struggle. ‘The full et of this development is not yet clear,

“3 but even now ve perceive two new elements:
i: ‘ |
a. One is the danger that the UESR my use threats of atomic

bosburinent against certain Free World countries in an
‘attempt to force their ecmpliance vith its dans. There
is a chance tint some US allies, if they feared that the
threat of US retaliation would not deter Soviet action,
would be foreed by the prospect of atanic devastation to
adopt more neutral positions in a cold, er especially in

a hot, wr.

-

| 881091726

Serr 7 we a — — — „

b. In en ge vbere initial sir assault can be so destructive,
the US is losing, if it has not already lost, the fmsense
otratagie advantages of being able to conduct @ deliberate
and extensive post D-day mobilisation with relative freedon
from enemy attack.

5. Cohesion of the Bloc. Desrtte!the evidence of) ropuiar

disaffection within the Satellites and the possibility of a disruptive
strugzle for Per within the nev Kremlin leadership, we believe

the Bloc will preserve its cohesion through the period of this estimte,
ani that the Kremlin will contimue to play the dominant role in the
formation Of Bloc policies. We believe that cen wa teried-interests

881091227

6. Bloc Capebilities. The build-up of Bloc basic industry and
military capabilities vill continue even though incrwased attention
Will be devoted to the correction of certain economic deficiencies
in agriculture and consumer industries wich recently have been
specially emphasised. There are indications thet the Soviet authorities
intend to proceed along the lines 114 out in the announced plans
for these sectors of the ecorony. This would require en allocation f
greater resources to egricultural ani consumer goods production and,
at least for the short run, would lead to a reduction in the rate of
expansion of other sectors of the ee.

7. the most signiftoaht ue tn nes utiitary capabilities
“during the period of this est ra pom dp ent of tm
e e e. the mumber
of its Jet aircraft and its submarines. The Bloc by mid-1955 bave
available a sufficient number of heavy bosbers to increase greatly
its long-range air offensive cayebilities. The Bloc vill probably in- —
crease ite air defense capabilities, and my beve a limited aber of
Bll-veather jet interceptors in operational units. de do not believe
that marked changes in Bloc militery strength and capsbilities are likely
to our in other recyects; however, there vill be s general teprovenent
in training ani equiywent af Moe armed forces.

65

881091220

r weeny einai * ——— - - ————ů—— gr — 3 — — —
— . 2 tote oe nid
. . 5 — *

Dr ee 2 ane Hee Tt a eye .
% RL 7 7 * %

8. Bloc political warfare capebilities, through exploitation of
Western political dnt economic vulnerabilities, encouragement of anti-
Westernian and mationalise in underdeveloped countries, and utilisstion
of the world-wide network of Communist parties, will rein great.

9. Probable Bloc Policies. We believe that the Communist

rulers ruin profoundly convinced that permanent hostility exists.
between the Communist and the free verlis. Their basic objectives,
therefore, continue to be an expansion of their on sphere of pover
and the eventual domination of the non-Communist werld.

10. We delieve thst during the period of this estimate Rios
leaders vill try to av courses of action which in their juiguent
might involve substantial risk of general var. We also believe it
tmlikely that the Bloc will initiate new local aggressions with
identifiable Bloc. forces during the period of this estimte, since
the Communist leaders probebly estimte that virtually any new local
military aggression would now entail substantial risk of generel var
or political consequences adverse to Bloc interests.

11. It is always possible, of course, that the Kreslin vill dees
some act of locel armed aggression sufficiently advantageous to make

paragraphs 9 - 14 is teken from HI IIE- 933, “Probable
Soviet be den of Action ne MP5 28 September 1953.

—

is

881091727

ET — — — ee

——— —

A

the risk worth while. Moreover, despite its reluctance to run sub-
stantial risks of general var, the Kremlin might through Me-
calculation adept ss course of action involving such a rixk. We
e believe that the Kremlin would not be deterred by the risk of
general war from taking counteraction against 4 Western action vhich
r considered to present an nt threat to des security.

12. During the pertol of this estimte the Cominist Issans
Will confuct e vigorous political warfare cemaign to unieraine the
Western per position. At present the Kretlin seams to be trying
to give the impression that it has adopted a more consilistory policy
then thet folloved in Stalin's later years. The Kremlin may hope by
such ‘tactics to relax the vigilance of some Western states, to encourage
Gissensicn between the US ani its allies, and to delay the progress of
Western rearmuent, We cannot predict how long such comparatively
coneilistory tactics vill continue; we believe that harsh courses
Of ection similer to those pursued by the Kremlin in the pest will
reappear whenever the Kremlin deome them advantageous.

*

13. We believe that Moe leaders during the period of this esti-
mate will probably be nrepered to reach an accommodation on 808
minor quections, and may make Plausi{ble but unacceptable proposals on

881091

—— ——ꝛ —

2 —

major astters. Borer, they will almost certainly be unvilling to
settle any East-West differences at the cost of major concessions.
We believe, moreover, that the Bloc leaders will be extrensly
cautious in pursuing conciliatory tactics, and may revert fron tine
to time to demonstrations of toughness, especially vhen thay consider
that their vital interests are involved, or that their tactics are
being construed road as a sign of weakness. Offers to negotiate
may be ecccayanied by reminders thet the USSR now hes improved
capabilities in the nuclear weapons field, and as these cepabilities
further inerease, the Kremlin may become bolder in its dealings vi
the West. |

ls. There are recent inifcstions that the Moe intents to
re its trade with non-Comsunist states. The Bloc's volume of
trade with the Free World will probably increase somevbat during the
Period of this estimite, but this trade vill ocatime to be very
emeli in proportion to intra-Rloc trade. Mev trade agreements vill
Probably be intended not only to obtain desired imports but also to
weaken the econcaie ties of non-Ccammist stetes with the US, and te
make strategic trade controls a bone of contention between these states
and the U. While the Bloc will not be able to bring about a major
dart in present trade patterns, the Communists probably estiaate
that political dividends oan be earned from even sual) increases in
their current volumes of trade vith individuel non-Communist states.

-9 -

———— ͤ—u—.¾ e —— — —

TI. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE FREE WORLD

1S. During the next tuo years the Free World will have difficulty
in maintaining its strength in the face of Soviet divisive tactics
and probeble reduced apprehensions of East-West conflict. In contrast
to the Kremlin's ability to control or influence the close-knit
Soviet Bloc, the US, as leader of the ant{-Soviet powers, faces the
complex problems of dealing vith the loose anti-Soviet ccalition and
the agglomeration of other nations of varying neutral tendencies which
together make up the Free World. To many of this latter group,
particularly the Middle and Far Eastern countries, the East-West
struggle seems less important than the solution of their interm]
Problems and the assertion of their independence of the chief Vestern
Powers.

16. ‘Differing views also exist between the US and its allies
over the imminence of the Canminist threat. The very fact ar C mist
aggression in Korea increesed fears of general war and wes 4 prime
factor in stimulating Western rearmament. Now that many Free World
countries believe that the threat of var has been reduced by a Korean
armistice and by an ostensibly more conciliatory Soviet policy, the U
will bave greater difficulty holding together an anti-Soviet coalition
and in securing increased Free World armed strength. The levelling off
of the US's on rearmanent effort and the decline in many of its foreign

. aid programs also lessens the sense of urgency abroad.

e 88109122

Qꝛ— — — — — —— pea Se = aes iad e Soh
— — — — — —— — —än 2 —äͤ — ee

17. The apparent declins of Free World confidence in US leader
ship is another problem facing the US. Influential groups in miny
Free World countries, including several US allies, doubt the stability,
moderation, and maturity of US policy. On the one band, there is foar
the US will shift to a “go-it-alone" policy or even retreat to
isolationism, on the other thet the US will involve the Free World in
war. These doub!.s and fears offer a fertile field for Soviet
divisive tactics, and the new Soviet regime my be more successful
than Stalin in exploiting then.

18. Ina situation in which many Free World countries believe that
* the threat of var has been reduced, econoate yroblems will also assure
greater prominence and will test the strength and cohesion of the Free
World. This reduced spprebension will weaken what bas been a powerful
incentive to cooperation and sacrifice. Moreover, some readjustment

4

‘to @ reduced rate of reermament and declining US afd vill be necessary.
_s=“‘(‘asn ~~ +Mach will depend on US economic policies and the US economle sltuatlon ti —

Bot only would US economic setbacks bave a serious impect on the Free

World, but US trade policy will directly affect the economic health of

Free World countries, and US aid will remain in many cases an imports nt

element in their military build-up, economic stability and development,

and political orientation. The problem of East-West trade is also

likely to become more. troublesome.

-ji -

22

881091

— — — fee Fe ge en ee ee a ee ee ee eee —
nat as A cones aed 5 r Te er T 7 — 1

.
. *

19. Therefore, ve believe that in the absence of reneved Soviet
Provocation, there may develop further serious rifts betveen the
Free World nations which will weaken the Western position in the cold
wer. Such rifts my develop in any ease as a result of econanic
Gevelopments or local natione2ist pressures but reduced apreshensions
of war, combined vith skillful Soviet divisive efforts, would make

them even more serious. The at troublesome differences may arise
over policies to be pursusd in the Far East. Tt is possible, there-
fore, that the next few years might see an increasing isolation of the
US, not by its oun desire but beeause of increasing policy differences
detween it and other countries of the Free World.

20. Even assusing the comtipuation of the Soviet courses of
action projected in Fart II above, there remains @ serious denger
of nev or videning East-West clashes in such critical areas es
Indochina, Koree, and Gerzany, vhich vould again increase Free World
epprebenaions. Whether, f sh clashes took place, the Free World
would then rally to the support of the US ani of expanded rearmunent
Programs, as after the Korean aggression, vould probably depen at
least in part on the circusstences under which the clashes developed.

—

- 12 -

88109127

— A ————————r—— — — — a - TTT — 9 —— —k tens — ———ů—ñ —

—— — — — emer se ce cee eee 5 5 oe „ ee cee a
le 8 oh goa

Probable Developments within the NATO Coalition

21. Although we foresee no developments which vill undermine the
basic solidarity of the MATO alliance, ve believe that, in view of re-
duced Exropesn apprehensions of East-West conflict, rifts may develop
between the NATO partners, yarticularly between the Eurcpeen wATO
countries and the US. The USSR vill attempt to undermine popular
support fer the NATO alliance and for rearmauent, in particular the
program to rearm West Germany. ‘These efforts, together vith increased
Soviet nuclear capabilities, continued intrs-Roropean differences, and

Buropeen disagreements with the US over cold war policies, may lead to :

more nationalist and neutrelist attitudes in Western Burope.

—

22. So long as apprebensions remain reduced there also will almost
certainly be a further loss of momentim in the NATO build-up. The gen-
eral feeling that the immediate Soviet threat bas receded has already
led most NATO countries to reduce their military outlays. While a fur-
ther slow increase in NATO strength over the next too years is probable,
only in event of et aggressiveness will 4t be as repid as in
1950-1953. On the other han! this might allow many NATO countries to
concentrate on domestic needs and te devote more resources to meeting
their own social and economic problems. Such u trend might strengthen
countries such as the UK, which remain highly vulnerable to adverse
international 8898881 developments.

213

“SECRET

8810912

. —— —— —

a Ca
tag F. „ 1.
N

— 4

— i
„„ . „ „

„ Ate le 7.
e

8
— hee ts bb

1.

25

with the Western Powers and for initiating ite rearomment Jave inereased.

23. Significant increases in Biropean HATO military strength over
the coming period vill probably depend upon the extent to which Spain,
Yugoslavia, and above all West Germany can be directly or indirectly
Ssscciated with HATO. The Trieste issue vill ln en irritant in
Ttalo-Tugoslav relations vhich will render the essociation of Yugoslavia
With HATO difficult. Until a settlement of the Trieste issue is generally
sconvtat, th usefuloeen to HATO of the Oreck tenctah-Tegetar extant

2 4 8
e 7

Au. Dut above all, the proeyecte for groster European IANO strength
VVV 5

The ii say seek to avert or postpone those develovennts by wei 2
talk of German reunification, but 1¢ is unlikely to offer any terms wien
would jeopardise its control over East Germany. Aderauer's position 1
90 strong and German dieillusicament with Soviet unification offers 10
00 great that any Soviet offers not involving ebentooment of Soviet con:
trol over Best Germay would be unliieiy to bere mich set on Garman

reermaect 12 such, ‘Boweres, ‘that thay aight react $0 1c hy Saane

watch would entanee the risk of an Cute clash in this area. xe

likely pressure weint would be West Berlin,

— 26. Though many in France are avere of the need for strong govern-
ö ment, there is no evidence that this awareness vill lead to a stronger

French political systen.

_ 88109197

r

Probable Trends in the Far Rast

27. In the last two years the most active theater in the st -
nest struggle bas been {n the Far East. There th: Je stern Powers have
kept the Communists from overrunning South Korea 24 Indochina while
attespting to build Up anti-Communist strength througs CS suprort of
the non-Comminist countries in this area. We beltev: 1 ublikely that
the Communists will undertake new local aggression in the Fer Bact vith
identifiable Moe forces. The exphasis in C n,, Chine over the
next two years vill probably be on building up tarustrial and nilitary
strength. However, we believe that the Communists vould take counter- 5
action against Western actions vhich they felt presented an inainent

f threat to their security, even at the risk of Widening hostilities in
the Far East.

28. It will be difficult to increase the strength, ecobesion, end

_ anti-Communist orientation of the non-Camtet ctaces of the Par East.
The cessation of hostilities in Korea, together wit Coms:niet efforts
to promote rifts among the anti-Communist powers, will ad te this
aiffieulty. During the next two years there is urltkely to 3c any
significant improvement in the Hestern position in ths ores; moreovar,
there are possibilities of serious deterLoracion, parcicularly in Indo-
china, Indonesia, and Korea.

8810912

—— — 2 — —ů——!bd'
5 *

ee eee — ——— ——  teee Ste oes 88 os 7
N 7 79 . 1
* ry

—— — 2

nn

29. tom. A K Aan political conference, if it takes place ?
is unl Axel: to result in any agreement which would alter the status
quo, The cn ss ace unlikely to break the armistice by reneving
nostilitia:, bul. taey almost certainly will not agree to Korean re-
mf fest = o1 taras Mich vould er danger their control of North
Korea. Ca tin citer band, £2 President Rhee remmins convinced that
the US sould nefther prevent an ROK armed attack against the Communist
nor disassxints itself fron support c such action, once under -
taken, vd <lievm that he WELL at time seek to disrupt the arais-
tice by sur! ax attack, Ir hostiltities are renewed, the Communists
will proba>ly tee, at a minimum, the military measures they consider
necessary t¢ mmintain their position in Keres. Unless the ROK renevs
aostilfties, we believe that there will be 6 coutinued erwed truce in
this eres, vith beth the US and USSR engaged tn reconstruction and in
strengthen g thair respective Korean yartoers.

Ths Comrunists protably wild not attenpt invasion so long as the US
defemis Tuitna; ard unless the US decides to Support Chiang's forces
atrectiy bh: in tun will be unable to undertake more than minor herass-
ment cf th» atuland.

- 17.

3838109127

\ — ——— l2— — — —

31. Pehl We believe that there vill almost certainly be

important developments in the Indochina situation during the period

of this estimte. The steady deterioration of France's vill to en-

tinue the struggle has been at least temporarily checked by Tren

resumption of the initiative under the laniel-Ravarre plan. We do

not bel eve, hovever, that the French will achieve a complete afli-

tary victory. ‘the French objective 1s to reince the drain of the -

9 Indochina ver on France, ‘while maintaining position for France 4 .
the Far Rat. ‘The outcome. vill depend on whether, by a combination |
of military victories end political concessions, the French can strengthen
‘the Associated States to the point viere these states will be able |

Aq French support. | The French would hope in this way to create 1
@ situation ieh could serve as . basis . e
with the a The Taniel-Mavarre plan my be ‘the last Frensh |
-effort in Intochim’. Sould it fail to achieve its cbjéctives we
e unless the US groves willing to contribute forces, the
F)) Si the Ocmmtete te

‘the best possible terme.

. Likely to intervene with organized units, . ;
— —— — aE a

18

—— TOT — 8 ss

Western moves which in their opinion threatened the secis-ity of Com-
nist Chine. At the same time, the Communists vill prcbelly talk of
peace negotiations as part of their propagancs eagle era might reise
the Indochina issue in high level political conferemes. They ere un-
likely, hovever, to agree to any polities? ett lern which thay believe
would lessen their chances of eventually gaining corre of Inloshins.

Southeast Asian countries are those of sttaining political stability,
coping with local insurrections, and meeting their om acrious econonic
Problems. he outlook in the Philippines, ond Sx the abeanse of serious
Getericration in the Indochins situation, in Bursa, Thetland, and
Malaya, is for sco taprovenent in stadility, though theses countries
will dy no means resolve their cumerous internal probleas. In
Indonesia, however, the leftist character of the proses: governant
offers seas opportunities for Commurist peagtention.

*. Am- Accumiating economic difficulties cx! the reluctance
or inability of the Japanese Government to adopt enerpetic econcaie and
rearmament policies are prolonging Japansse Gepertance on the US and
delaying Japan‘s development as a counterveight to Cavumist poser in
the Far East. At the seme time there 18 growing 2rt..-Anorican

19

N

— 38100912

— — — — .. 5

D

sentiment in Japan. Unless Japan can find the necessary foreign
markets and take the necesasry internal economic measures, the
development of a sound defense structure as well as a sound econay
will be epiangered, the present dominance of the moderate conservatives
will be weakened, and the whole pattern of US-~Japanese cooperation ö
will be threatened. We foresse no baste ehange in Japan's pro-Western
orientation, but escnomie difficulties and growing mations Lisa vill
create incresced US-Japanese frictions and postpone the development

of a strong enti-Communist Japan.

35- In the underdeveloped areas of Asia and Africs the Western
position has deteriorated since World War IT. Loeal natiouslien hes
yroved a force against the West ani the deep-seated revolutionary
forces at vork in these areas have created politionl instability.
It 1. difficult to overcome the anti-Western sentiments of the newly
independent Asian and African countries and convince then that Comm-
nist policies threaten their intepentence. Except in Iran, hovever,
the internal Comrunist threat is 11 and is unlikely to grow greatly
in the next tus years.

80-3

88109172

—

* a.

36. The Middle East and North Africa. Conflicts between mative
nationalists and the colonial“ powers will continue, but ve believe
that in certain areas there are prospects for improvements the
West's position. The fall of Mossedegh in Tran has et least
temporarily increased the Opportunities for strengthening Iran's
internal stability and settling the Anglo-Iranian 011 dispute,
Chances fer settlonent of the Anglo-Eeyptian base controveray have
ieproved, amt if 0 settlouant is reached it will probably have a
favorubdle effect on both the stability of the Egyptian regime ani on
tha Western position throughout the Arub World. u the other hand,
an Anglo-Rgyptian settlement my set the yattern for siutler 3
from Ireq. The Areb-Israeli dispute vill 3 ea
of large-scale hostilities remins unlikely.” The more favorable
Folicy that the US has adopted toward the Arab States my contribute
to better relsticas With then. ever, there remain possibilities
of markedly edverse developments in this volatile area. Although
the deposition of the Sulten of Morocco has tenporarily bolstered
‘French control, t is likely to drive the nationalists to more
extreme positions since Prancse seems unlikely to implement very
far-reaching reforms.

37. South Asis. India and Pakistan vill probably in pre-
cocupied with their om serious cee and social problems; they

will also rin concerned vith their dispute over Kashair.
2
Ber
8810 91 PA

rr
* 8 . * 25
. 2

A

India is unlikely to sbanion its neutralist position in the cold
war, but Pakistan, motivated largely by its desire to improve its
position vis-a-vis Indis, will continue its efforts to secure some
pact with the Western Fowers, in return for extensive US afd.

Some further {sproverent in the relations of this ares vith the West
may cocur over the next tro yoars, but they will rin acutely
sensitive both to enti-colonial disputes in other ereas and to any
indications thit the West is pursuing aggressive cold var policies,
particularly . Communist China.

38. There will probably be a continued trend in latin America
toward extremly mationslistic regimes based on demgogic appeals to
sectors of new political importance -- organized laber, while-collar
workers, and the lower middle class. This trend vill be met evident

_ in counteies were rapid social ani @concmic change is taking place.
This change results from forced Industrialization et the expense of
egriculture, much is generally acccopanted by severe inflation. Right
or lef extreniem which poses potential threats to US security inter ests
will probably be strongest in Argentine, Bolivia, Chile, Guatemala,
and possibly Brasil. In these countries there vill contims to be
substantial Comsunist end demigogic mationalist influences, which
vill attenpt to channel the resentment of the dislocated groupe agsinst

*

- 2 .

881091 ,

the US. In Guatemala Communist influence over the govermmant,, already
strong, may increese. Comnmist penetration of British Guiens bas
poced a new problem in the Caribbean area.

39. Most latin American countries vill Probadly continue to
cooperuts with the U in the un on basic East-West Sesues, although
they will tend increasingly to pursue an independent course on issues
affecting underdeveloped countries. latin America will be increasingly
corcernéd about US trade and especially tariff Policies. Negardless
of the degree of latin American cooperation with the US, there will
Denen increasing tentency to eng comercial and r.
Giplomtice relations with the Soviet Bloc,

Oa

Be 3 — ——.— — — — ap nee
1 . .

—— — — — —
