Terrorism Review - Anti-us Terrorism in Latin America
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126949, dated 4 January 1991.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126949).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Directorate of
facelligence

Terrorism Review

21 February 199]

7 te

2 Fe ebruary

or 513

Terrorism Review P|

21 February 1991
ee A). <

Focus i

aa

Articles

Anti-US Terrorism ia Latia America 15

Attacks against US interests in Latin America hit a new high in
1990. Nearly a third of the protest attacks during the initial weeks
of Operation Desert Storm occurred there, most of them carried out
by indigenous groups with a record of hitting US targets. We expect
the threat to remain high, given the unsettled political, economic,
and social conditions in the region Siareea

Terrorism Diary for Apeil 23
Counterterrorist Center

Anti-US Terrorism
in Latin America

Terrorism has become an established political tool for
subversive organizations in Latin America and is
increasingly directed against US interests. Interna-
tional terrorist incidents in Latin America reached an
all-time high in 1990, and anti-US incidents rose
nearly 30 percent over 1989. Attacks against US
targets have been more violent since October—espe-
cially in Chile, Peru, and Bolivia. Among nearly all of
the leftist indigenous groups, the Gulf war has become
a rationale to attack US interests, probably in part to
exploit the current media focus on international ter-
rorism.

The Regional Terrorist Picture

Anti-US terrorist incidents increased substantially in
number and severity during 1990 in both Chile and
Peru and, since the beginning of the Gulf war, have
continued to mount. Colombia's anti-US attacks de-
ercased substantially in 1990, but this decline was
more than offset by attacks in Chile. Colombian
insurgents began a terrorist campaign early this year,
however, and many of the attacks have been directed
at the partially US-owned oil industry. Bolivia had
close to the same number of anti-US terrorist attacks
{fewer than 10) in 1990 as in 1989, but the most
recent—the attack on the US Marine guard residence
on 10 October—was : 's0 the most lethal, killing one
Bolivian guard and seriously injuring another.

The threat to US interests remains high in Central
America, especially from Honduras’s two small, well
equipped terrorist organizations. Some of the Canb-
bean nations, especially Haiti and the Dominican
Republic, also have weak terrorist organizations that
would probably attempt low-level attacks against US
interests if they could obtain the weapons and funds to
finance terrorist activities. Several small, previously
unknown lerrorist organizations began operations in
1990, attacking US interests six times last year. :

ret

Gulf-Related Terrorism in Latia America

More than 30 percent of the over 200 anticoalition ~
terrorist incidents that have occurred since the begin- {

ning of the Gulf war have occurred in Latin America. NN)
All of them appear to have been carried out by 2
indigenous groups, partly attempting to exploit the

current public attention on the Gulf crisis for their \

own agendas. Terrorism against US interests has \
climbed steadily since the beginning of the war, and 4
several of the incidents in Peru and Chile have been

serious, resulting in four deaths and numerous inju-

ries. No Americans have yet been killed, but the

threat to US citizens is growing, especially in Peru,

Chile, Bolivia, and Honduras. "°°"

Chile

Chile had the greatest number of terrorist attacks
against US targets in the world in 1990. Most of these
attacks were low-level bombings, probably meant
more to intimidate than to injure. In November,
however, the Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front/Dis-
sidents (FPMR/D) launched two attacks that demon-
strated more lethal anti-US terrorist tactics—a bomb
ala restaurant that injured cight people, three of
them US sailors, and a bomb concealed ia a softball
bat that killed one Canadian and injured two US
Embassy officials. On 16 February 1991, the same
group attacked a US Embassy Marine security guard
armored van with an antitank rocket and automatic
weapons fire, seriously injuring one Marine. In claim-
ing responsibility, the FPMR/D said it will continue
to target US and Chilean interests unul it “achieves
victory or dies.”

In all, US interests were attacked nearly 70 times in
Chile in 199G—up from 23 in 1989 and [7 in 1988.
Targets have included Mormon churches, US-<con-
nected banks and other US commercial interests,
binational centers, and official US Government inter-
ests. .

et

2! February 1991

Figure 1
International Terrorist Incidents In
eee ASS ;

Latin America, 1990

eer
aot aemmarty pater tates “

Sipe ree
North .
Atlantic

Ocean

South
Atlantic
Ocean

GRRE 20 end above
EGR 20 to 29
Ca] 10 to 19
(_] tess than 10
(_} None

7 Number of incidents

721377 (BOQTOR 2-04

16

Figure 2
International Incidents in Latin America, 1980-90

Number of Incidents

200

The government's effectiveness at combating future
terrorism—domestic or international—depends large-
ly on its ability to build up the counterterrorism
capabilities of the police force in the wake of the
incorporation of Chile’s central intelligence agency,
the National Information Center (CNI), into Army
Intelligence. Of the numerous security forces Presi-
dent Aylwin inherited from the Pinochet regime, the
former CNI had the most effective counterterrorism

, intelligence capability ~ .

“transition, Pinochet placed CNI personnel and re-
sources under Army auspices in order to enhance bis
control of internal security functions through bis
position as Army chief.

17

President Aylwin, since coming to office in March
1990, has reduced Army involvement in domestic
security, granting greater counterterrorism responsi-
bilities to the National Police Force (Carabineras de
Chile). Although the National Police bas an excellent
reputation as a traditional law enforcement entity, the
service will be uaable to provide meaningful intelli-
gence until it becomes more proficient at penetrating
terrorist cells and analyzing the intelligence it ac-
quires. The escape on 1 January 1989, before Ayl-
win's inauguration, of 40 convicted terrorists, some of
whom have claimed responsibility for the most spec-
tacular and violent terrorist attacks in recent Chilean
history, has further complicated the government's
ability to control terrorism.

ret

ITU
Figure 3

Latin American International Terrorism

1990 International Incidents
by Regioa

1990 Aau-US Attacks
by Regioa

Middle East 2

Africa 5
\
Latin America 36

Asia 19

Western Europe 17 Latin America 66

Asia 21
: Gulf-Related Lnterastioasl Terrorism
17 Janaasy-19 Febcwary 1991

Middle East 25

Chile: The Radical Left

Chile has four main leftist groups that engage in
terrorism as a part of their political strategy. All
have been known to target US interests.

Manuel Rodriguez Patriotic Front (F PMR)

« Founded in 1983 with Communist Party af Chile
support,

Classic Marxist-Leninist Communist revolutionary
organization; operates primarily in urban.
environment.

About 920 hardcore members in 1989; may have
declined in recent months,

* Received Cuban arms and training.

« Split in July 1987.

Maaael Rodriguez Patriotic Front Dissidents

(FPMR/D)

« Split from FPMR in 1987.

« Between 1,000 and !;500 hardcore members.

« Received extensive training and arms from Cuba.

« Responsible for most of the terrorist attacks during
the past few years.

Lautaro Youth Movement (MIL)

* Largely leftist but includes criminal elements; ad-
vocates overthrow af Chilean Government and is
violently anu-US.

« Became active in late 1980s.

« Probably very small—Jfewer than 100 hardcore
members.

© Finances activities through crime.

Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR)

* Founded In 1965 at the University af Concepcion.

* Estimated strength af more than 200.

© Hard-hitting government countermeasures in early
1980s and internal friction caused tt to become
‘relatively inactive in past few years. Nevertheless,
Chilean security forces consider it capable of ter-
rorist operations.

« Has received training and weapons from Cuba and
Libya.

19

oe

Peru

International terrorist incidents in Peru have in-
creased steadily over the past several years and are
likely to remain high during 1991. In 1990, Sendero
Luminoso and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
Movement (MRTA), the two primary Peruvian terror-
ist organizations, more than doubled the number of
anti-US attacks over 1989.

Middle East-related terrorist incidents have occurred
more frequently in Peru than elsewhere in Latin
America almost exclusively at the hands of MRTA,
which declared “war” on the United States in mid-
January because of its Gulf activities. Between 17
January and 19 February, coalition interests were
attacked 17 times. MRTA has probably been respon-
sible for 16 of those attacks.

For the most part, MRTA's carlier anti-US attacks
appeared designed to avoid casualties—carried out at
night or on the weekend, for example, or kept to a
very low level of violence. In recent months, however,
they have been conducted with the express intention
to kill or maim US aitizens and with little regard for
collateral casualties. On 7 November, MRTA explod-
ed a bomb close to the US Ambassador's house and
sprayed his home with automatic weapons fire, barely
missing a window of the dining room in which the
Ambassador was hosting a dinner party. Police de-
fused a second bomb at the same site. Since then,
MRTA has included the US Embassy, the US Am-
bassador’s home, Kentucky Fried Chicken restau-
rants, the Peruvian/US Binational Center, and the
Jorge Chavez International Airport in significant
attacks that have left at least four Peruvians dead and
many others injured call

The increased publicity MRTA actions have generat-

ed appears to be leading rival Sendero Luminoso
insurgents to seck equal notoriety. *

if

et

Peru: The Shining Path and Tupac Amaru (MRTA)

The Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) terrorist orga-
nization and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Move-
ment {MRTA} are both engaged in an armed struggle
that employs terrorism as a primary tool. Both have
been known to attack US citizens and facilities.

Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path)

Founded in the late 1960s by Abimael Guzman and
began operations in 1980. Believes in an unusual
mixture af Marxist-Leninist-Maoist-Guzman ide-
ology that is so extreme that it considers Soviets,
Red Chinese, and nearly all other Latin American
groups too far to the right.

Strength estimates range from 1,500 to 5,000 kard-
core members with numbers of part-time and co-
erced Supporters.

Supports itself by extortion fram companies, bank
robberies, and ties to the drug trade.

Probably receives no outside state support,
olthough there are a number of Sendero support
organizations in Europe, the United States, and
other parts of Latin America.

Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA)
Founded in 1982 and began operations two years
later; is a classic Marxist-Leninist group that idol-
izes Che Guevarra.

Chiefly an urban group.

About 1,000 combatants are members.

Supports itself with extortion, kidnapping, and
bank robberies.

Has received external support from Cuba, Libya,
and Nicaragua,

°

Sendero does not have the urban
capabilities that MRTA has, however, and has not
traditionally targeted US interests as extensively as

4

et

Bolivia: The CNPZ, the Zarate Willka

Armed Liberation Forces Zarate Willka

« Formed in 1987, probably at the University of San
Andres in La Paz.

Urban based.

Afore than half its attacks since it began operations
have been against US targets.

« Probably no more than 200 members.

e

The Nestor Paz Zamora Committee (CNPZ)

« First action in October 1990.

+ Espouses classic Marxist-Leninist revolutionary
philosophy.

« Associates itself with the defunct National Libera-
tion Army of Bolivia.

« Recent information indicates that CNPZ receives
aid from Tupac Amaru (MRTA) in Peru.

« Strongly anti-United States.

« Strength unknown.

Resource constraints, intelligence limitations, ram-

pant corruption, and interservice rivalry limit the
government's counterterrorism effectiveness. The gov-
ernment has yet to approve this year's defense budgct,

and a judicial reform proposal that President Fujimori
promised since his election-—-which could help stop the C
“revolving door” terrorists use to avoid long prison (b
stays—has yet to be implemented.

Bolivia

Anti-US terrorism in Bolivia is sporadic but hard
hitting and will probably increase over the neat few
years as factors such as continued economic stagna-
tion and the US-backed counternarcotics program
come into play. After a few low-level incidents during
the first part of 1990, the 10 October 1990 attack
against the US Marine residence and the John F.
Kennedy memorial in La Paz by the Nestor Paz
Zamora Commission—unknown until this attack—
underscored the continuing threat to US interests.

Colombian [nsurgent Groups

National Liberation Army (ELN)

« Began operations in 1963.

« Rural-based Marxist-Leninist guerrilla group.

° Extremely anti-US and opposed to foreign compa-
nies involved in resource development, especially
oil, .

« Anti-US attacks are mostly against oil facilities
and personnel,

* Has received arms and training from Cuba and

Nicaragua.

Estimated combat strength: 2,000.

Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colambia (FARC)

* Established in 1966 as the military wing of the
Colombian Cammunist Party.

* Ties to Cuba.

* Ties to drug traffickers.

* Has engaged in kidnapping of foreigners for ransom
and isolated bombings af US businesses.

« The largest guerrilla group in Colombia—estimat-
ed at 4,500 combatants.

et

Et Salvador

The Farabundo Marti National Liberation Fraat
(FMLN)
« Formed in 1980.
« Cuban backed with close ties to Nicaraguan Sandi-
alstas.
« An umbrella organization composed af five leftist
groups:
— Central American Workers’ Revolutionary Party
(PRTC).
— People's Revolutionary Army (ERP).
— Farabundo Marti Popular Liberation Forces
(FPL).
— Armed Forces of National Resistance (FARN).
— Communist Party of El Salvador’s Armed Forces
of Liberation {FAL}.
« Terrorist activities include bombings, assassina-
tions, economic sabotage, and arson.
« Estimated strength—6.000 to 7,000 combatants.

EN

Although La Paz has captured and killed\some Com-
mission leaders, the
group remains active.

wa

21

ye
