El Salvador: Managing the Military - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049376, dated 1 April 1988.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049376).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

EI Salvador:

Managing the Military ss)

Introduction

The Army's willingness to beck democratic institu-
tions has been vital to the stability of civilian govern-
ment in El Satvador since 1984. Most recenily,
impertia! military support for constitutional civilian
procedures was reemphasized during orderly legisls-
tive and municipal elections on 20 March 1988 that
resulted in the ruling party's surrendering its majority
control of the legislature for the first time in Salva-
doran history. Nevertheless, long-term Army backing
for an elected government is far from assured, partic-
ularly should key officers perceive dwindling US
military assistance as reflecting declining US interes:
in institutionalized civilian rule in E! Salvador and
slsewhers in the region

This paper examines the working relationship between
the military and elected officials in E! Salvador, their
attitudes toward each other, the key issues thas affect
the relationship, and pressures within the Political
parties and the armed forces that could derail what
has until now been a prescription for stability. Finally,
the paper amesses the Prospects for continued Army

backing of the civilian and the implica-
tions for US an

Civil-Milltary Relations Undes Dusrte

The key question President Jose Napoleon Dusrte
faced following his election in 1984 was the degree of
tolerance the military would have for civilian govera-
meat. Fifty years of repressive rule by the mijitary—
which exercised authority primarily to protect the
interests of the upper class—had exacerbated tensions
between the small, ménied elite and the large, disen-
franchised worker-peasant class, which profited little
from the economic boom of the 1960s and 19705. As
political polarization increased and became More vio-
lent, E} Salvador's military regimes resorted to politi-
cal killings and official intimidation—Duarte was
himself a victim of military torture and exile in the
early 1970s—to maintain control.

7

By 1960 the international legitimacy and domestic

Credibility of the political process in El Salvador were

seriously eroded, and the newly organized guerrilla

fronts were seen by many intellectuals and the work-

ing class as the only alternative to continued govern
ment repression. The installation.of an elected Con-
stituent Assembly in 1982 to replace a military-
installed junta marxed the beginning of the US-
furturel move toward democratic rule that
culminated in Duarte's election

- ten

Approved for Releasa
Nov 1993

4

«

among these officers aad might foment unrest within political bickering a the potitical parti
the military hat civil-military
ae instance, that s belong- f reac est ebb since Duarte's
t

guerrillas during Operation Mont-rrosa, which began In our judgment, four years of relatively consistent

in May 1987, Duarte signed the Ceniral American military backing in the face of repeated economic and

peace accord! indicates the Presi- political crises have reassured Duarte and his admin-

dent considers such initiatives less fisky when they istration that the Army High Command has little

follow military successes because the Officer corps is interest in undercutting the government. fa (act. the

buoyed—and distracted—by its accomplishments and High Command has oftea taken the side of the

less likely to focus on political a | Christian Democrats—ee believe more to ensure
stability than out of fondness for the ruling party—in

Military tolerance for civilian government has been policy confrontations with rightwing politicians and
encouraged by the recognition thet US military assis- the business Te
tances well as Duarte’s willingness to dedicate a = @@iByhis support has y engered Conservatives.

large portion of domestic spending to support militsry who feel their interests are no longer being protected
operations—has been the deciding factor in gaining by the officer corms Qi

the upper hand agziast the insurgency. Salvadoran

officers admit privat that periodic The military's willingness to back the democratic
temptations to intervene politically are tempered by process and remain largely aloof from politics has
the knowledge that such a move mos{ likely would reinforced positive attivedes among civilians toward

result in 6 cutoff of US military ald and training. the armed forces. Besides allowing the country’s first

Similarly, we believe senior officers tecognize that elected center-left civiliaa government to take power

public acceptance of decisions to devote a larger in 1984, the Army,

portion of the domestic budget—up to 25 percent strongly oppased eff e Tvative parties to

since 1984—+o security has been facilitated by the Characterize the 1985 legislative elections as fraudu-

fact that the decisions have come from an elected lent and blocked efforts to overturn the results. The

civilian government and not a military resine military's acceptance of the decisive conservative vic-
tory in the March 1988 legislative and municipal

Cirillan Perceptions of the Military slections, on the other hand, is ameliorating long-

Despite success in getting the Army to scqulesce to —_ standing rightwing suspicions that the High Com-

the authority of Duarte's sdministration; "mand has sided only with the ruling nny
indicates that the President

f
ruling Christian Democratic Party have periodi- Residual Military Ushagpiness
cally become suspicions that the armed forces harbor Despite the High Command's commitment to democ-
significant numbers of enticivilien hardliners. They racy. many within the armed forces continue to view
also have worried thet rightwing political parties and — civilian government as poorly sdministered, rife with
Conservative businessmen retained undue influeace corruption and incompetence, and plagued by petty

0 one of the rightwing opposition parties was election following » three-month boycott of the Legis-
lobbying among active-daty military officers fora lative Assembly by the conservative parties, s right-

coup. wing business strike, and Duarie’s unilateral decision
that another extreme right ag group had ra Nol to renew suspended staic-of-emergency legisla-
money to buy support among the military for ousting tion. Subsequent improvement in relations with the
Duarte. Nevertheless, the High Command publicly Christian Democra came
continued to deny aay involvement in botitics, andthe largely because most rs at no other
officer corps privately rejected these rightist attempts political party had the papular support or leadership
to draw the military into political intervention. to run the country more efficiently.

dom

The Monied Elite and the Military

fa our Judgmeni, ane af the mast noteworthy changes
in Salvadoran society over the last several years has
been the deterioration in the relationship between the
military and the country's mast affluent and conser-
vative families. Traditionally, the military ruled the
nation on behalf of the oligarchy. Monied families
aften provided financial support for cadets from
humble backgrounds, and as they rose through the
ranks, these officers were expected to serve their
Patrons’ interests.

The 1979 coup—which brought to power a group af
reform-minded officers who saw breaking the power
Of the oligarchy as necessary to prevent the couatry
from falling to the burgeoning guerrilla movemeni—
ilustrated that an important section af the military
no longer equated (1s interests with those af the upper
class. The new attliude was underscored in 1980
when the military initiated the first significant agrar-
san reforms by sending troops to remove wealthy
landowners forcibly from their plantations and to
seize their

The privileged class continues to suppurt the armed
Sorces as a barrier to Marxist insurgents coming to
power. Nonetheless: Ports that

many rich Salvadarans hold the nulitary in contempt
and argue that itis ane of the countey 's mast serious
Aroblems. The wealthy maintain—aften publicly —
thal the officer corps has no interest ina quick ead to
the war because that would result in. an end ta US
military aid. a reduction in the size of the Army, end
@ loss af officers’ perquisites and opportunities for
corruption. Further, although few rich apply, they
argue that the High Conunand eesjects officer cande-
dates from the upper class, fearing they will come to
dominate the institution. in our Judgment, these
attitudes are generally motivated by political frustre-
tion growing out of the belief that the military has
cast its lot with Christian Democratic reformists.

oe a — toward the meer mi
ually negative. Many officers consider the

upper class greedy and unpatriotic because of its tax
evasion and opposition to new tax measures intended
to fund the war. Many officers attribute the refusal of
wealthy Jamtlies to allow their children to join the
Army (o narrow, self-serving interests Qo

f

*

Many hardline officers believe that Duarte and the
Christian Democrats have used military SUPport os 6
political shield during confrontations with the right-

wing oppositian—making the militsry appear e tacit
ally of the ruling pany

for example, that, aa - atte vee é

unpopulsr economic reform package in 1986, Duarte
warned conservatives in a private meeting that the

military would not tolerate att to incite public
disturbances.
indicate that t t Duarte can

count on the Army to support him during political
crises.

a

‘

iam that hardline officers atso
A do nat sufficiently value the

opinions of the military on politics! matiers of nation-
al importance. Many officers view the Army's rela-
tionship to the administration as collegial rather thas
hierarchical and resent any effort by the civilians to
implement policy without prior consultation. Whea
Duarte has been sensitive to these concerns. friction
has besn minimized. In 1906 and 1987. for example,
the President enlisted military support before imple-
menting controversial economic austerity and tax
packages,

ce oa

od

PUEDEN VOTAR

Gensral Biendon (stending! and Presiden Duerty
Glenden: “This pear the soldiers can vets.”
please! Don’ ‘vate’ jer me.”
uses 6 play on words. fa spoken
‘5 Comment can olen be erpret.
of ts mean, “Don? throw ave out.

if
3

Assessing Key lesuce

Despite generally good working relations beiween the

ians and the military, several issues remain poten-
tially troublesome. The scheduling of a Presidential
election in 19§9 and a changed politica] climate since
the ruling perty lost control of the Legislative Assem-
bly in March 1988 may provoke changes in several
seasilive areas that could create fissures between tne
Duarte government and the officer corps,

Military Funding

Increasing political pressures fram the public for mare
Bovernment spending on social programs and rural
development projects are conflicting with the mili-
tary's requirement for continued funding to fight the
insurgency. We believe Duarte has so far been willing
to earmark a large portion of the budget to the
military—in hopes of buying military loyalty——ia the
belief that political costs were low because his party's
‘reditional worker-peasant constilwency had ao realis-
tic allernative to supporting the ruling Christian
Democrats. The slectoral success of the rightwing
political opposition in the March elections, however,
demonstrated thet Salvadoran voters are impatient
for improved living standards

Homan Rights

Duarte’s efforts to end human rights abuses are e
continuing irritant in civil-military relations. While
allowing the Army wide latitude on internal issues
and counterinsurgency operations, the administration
has insisted an the strict observation of the human
rights of prisoners and civilian RoRcomba tants.
Duarte also has blocked the Sppoiatment of officers
suspected of continuing human rights violat
positions of increased responsibility.
for inetance, that durit the

Moreover, the armed forces cuntiane to resist govern-
Ment attempts to investigate human rights abuses by
military indicates
the Army has sys prot Or covered up
for officers alleged to have participated in political
killings earlier in the decade. One gtoup of middle-
level officers—the powerful military academy class of
1966, known as the Sinfonica tanda—bas beer partic-
ularly active in opposing efforts to pursue investiga-
lions of officers’ abuses. When ane Sinfonica colonel
was arrested far involvement in a kidnaping-for-profit

ring in mid- 1986, the group successfully previc

The Siafonica Tanda—A Study i. Cohesion

The military academy class (anda) af 1966—nich-
named the Sinfonica (symphony) because of ty large
size in comparison with other classes af the lime—is
remarkable for (is cohesiveness, influence, and the
aumber af key Army commands it controls @yy

at the Sinfonica (3 exireme-
ly protec dts members and has clase tes 10
Minister af Defense Vides Casanova, a former in-
Structor at the academy. This group of colonels
controls four of six brigades, all eight military
detachments. and four af the six General Stag pasi-
tions.

in our judgment, the Sinfonica is potentially q major
abstacle to the consolidation af civilian authoriry;
paradoxically, it also has been a key ald in maintain-
lag the civilians in power. Many of its officers were
labeled extreme PAR rm > ry UO
early 1980s, and some are to have been
involved in rightwing death squad activity and coup
Plotting during that period. Critics of the Duarte
administration repeatedly have pointed to the failure
of the goverument to prosecute these officers a3

evidence af continuing military links to the death
squads In addition. Gee *:
indicated that Sinfonica members are more inclined
to political involvement and more critical of civilian

rule than their ‘per\ors aa

We believe, however, that the Sinfonica has at the
same time been instrumental in maintaining military

support far the Duarte Canin
Sa co: General Vides Casanova us
s clase

3 fo the colonels of the Sinfonica to
explain civilian policy decisions, lobby for their sup-
port, and pressure Sinfonica members to calm poten-
dally dissident afficers. In addition, the 1966 tanda
has 80 far been willing to act as an intermediary
between the civilian administration and High Com-
mand on the one hand, and junior end middle-level

fficers on the othe Sa indicates
this group of colonels—alihough often cynical about

democracy—seems content. Jor the present, with ci-
wlian, government

7

4

it mecessary to Sisfonica efforts to
bring the security services—which have become in-
cteasingly moderate and are generally more reapon-
sive to civilian efforts to investigate human hts
cases—under more direct Army —
Ecoacmic Conditions and Public Diserder .
Declining ecanomic cond {fions, in particular ia urban
areas, have given rise to political pressures from both
the right and left that periodically spark concern
within the armed forces. Early last year, for example,
officers were critical of Duarte’s inability to end ¢
rightwing legislative boyoott provoked by s proposed
economic and tax reform package. Leftist demonstra-
tions and urban violence have caused friction between
a civilian government concerned about its interngtion-
al image and determined to prevent police overregc-
tion and a military establishment intent on preventing

gverrilla urban activities

for his et recone
rts repeatedly eae ia thet

actance of the police to use force to prevent
street violence by Communist front groups caused
significant discontent among hardline officers. This
SSR 51: such police inaction also
ca many voiers to turn ageinst the ruling party
dering the March elections QS

Maacuvering for the Transition

la our judgment, the defeat suffered by the ruting
Christisa Democrats in the March 1988 elections will
engender significant anxiety within (he armed forces.
Before the election, most observers believed Duarte's
party was the one most likely to win the 1989

‘
coe

OF

Figure 2

Extent of Sinfonica Influence Withia Armed Forces Chain of Command

aa Commanded by a Sinfunwu Vande ocmbr

{a
228 Pe
Wes ey
Ny BR aE Ab
pee 4, eran
ie ce er nde Mags ry
*
DM Meduery Dra tenens
< Theewe av thee wetnindinate csmensnds. test Por heheng te the Seatemea Tomaba.
* Then Army commander st. the Amy © eommambed by the art of the Ciena Shalt
. er
Ga! _e

a

mr

See

many of whom have returned from self-exile to live
openly in the capital—have refused to sever thelr
longstanding ties to the
indicated increasing d

“a pare over the ohegiens of the left wo
participate democratic process while supporting
armed groups trying w seize power through force.
Further, some officers may fear that, Wf the legislature
performs as poorly ander the right as under the
Christisn Democrats, a disenchanted public may turn
to the left. Army aazistles are tempered somewhat
because the lefi—which chose not to run in the March
1988 elections—faces significant funding problems,
remains disorganized, and sesms unlikely 10 make 8

credible electoral showiag in the near "7 é

Preserving Equities Wlihla te Military

We believe the High Command recognizes the need to
begin to replace key afficers-—some of whom have
heid their jobs since before Duarte's election and are
anxious to retire—before the 1989 elections. Their
efforts have been stalled, however, because Duarte
has insisted, that top
leaders such a a Blan-
don remain in their pasitions until the end of his term.
The President apparently believes no other officers
command equal respect and authority, and he is
probably concerned that establishing a close working
relationship with their replacements during his re-
maining year in office would be difcul

Nevertheless, pressures to retire senior officers contia-
we to mount. The limited opportunities for promotion
10 general officer has caused some impatience among
some senior held-grade officers whose carcers are

blocked by lack of movement of generals eligible for
ee
. the years Vides fepeatedly

interceded with officers during various crises between
the civilians and the Army—tost much of their origi-
nal credibility among the officer corps, which has
come to view them as spokesmen for the civilian
administration. Finally, ia the midst of these monat-
ing pressures Duarte probably recognizes that, if key
personnel changes are made well before the election,
he can play an influential role. He will want the High
Command to choose moderate officers who support
civilian rule rather than hardliners who might attempt
to play a mors assertive role in government policy-
making.

Ovtlook

In our judgment, the officer corps is likely to provide
becking for a civilien government at least through the
end of Duarte's final year in office. The evidence
provided by the first four years of civilien rule
indicate that the armed forces have established a firm
working relationship with the civilians that is suffi-
ciently fleaible during periods of political instability

a

iin

and crisis. We believe Duarte, viewing his relations
with senior officers as 8 top priority, will continue to
employ the techniques ke has used to placate the
military over the past four years. Thus, he is likely to
remain generally aloof (rom internal military affairs,
avoid policies that could be Perceived as threatening
to the integrity of the officer corps, and allow the
military a relatively free hand in its conduct of the
war

We believe Civil-military relations will continue to be
tested in the period leading up to the presidentia|
election. A contentious relationship between the con-
servative-dominated legislature and the eXecutive—
and the administrative inertis and increased politica!
bickering that result—will reinforce doubts in the
military about the ability of the civilians to govern.
Although Duarte may allempt some bureaucratic
housecleaning and administrative reform to improve
his party's image before the presidential election,
general preoccupation with preparations for the cam-
peign will be « significant distraction from the busi-
ness of governing, and military sympathy for civilisa
Tule is not likely to be eahenced over the next year.
Should the officer corps perveive the ruling party ls
headed for another electoral loas, senlor and middle-
level officers may become less inclined to bend to
civilian executive suthority as the Army positions
itself politically for Conservative win next year.

fa our judgment, political wacertalatios will spur
efforts by the Army to make key and long-expected
reassignments among the High Command. By making
such changes well before the 1989

officers can ensure Continuity within the Generg!
Staff during the presideatial transition, as well as
preserve the Principle of military preeminence in
internal personne! matters. Finally, « timely shuffle of
the General Staff would avoid leaving the new presi-
deat to face wholesale and potentis contentious aad
destabilizing personnel changes.

civil-military relations will
come following the 1989 election. While the military
probebly will accept any candidate who wins in 9 fres
election, the new presideat will need quickly to estab-
lish good relations with key senior officers and reas-
sure the military that he intends to continue Duarte's

Another critical test for

Coup Factors

in our Judgment, a military coup, while always
toniy civilian

Passible. (s not a
* suggested ¢
poiltical interferdhce directly threatening the integrity

oO the military institution, or inept policymaking that
undermined the constitution, would Produce a coup.
So far, the Duarte administration has kept well
within safe bounds on these two issues. Indeed, the
only serious coup rumors have cone about not asa
result of unhappiness over allegations of corruption
or lack af mavement on serious economic reform, but
when the Duarte administration attempted to influ-
ence military promotions or attempted negotiations
with the guerrillas that the military perceived might
lead to powershari

We believe the military is further constrained from
launching @ coup by the realization that it Probably
would cause a US aid cut’, as well as Seriously
distrage-military resources from the war.
for tastance, that the police—st

6 y active police cfficers— are loyal to
Duarte end would be likely to resist @ coup allempt.
in addition, the strategic First Brigade, located in the
caplial, has traditionally been headed by politically
aruiral or pro-Duarte commanders who would more
Ukely follow the lead of the General Steff than —
dissident officers atiempting @ coup.

few officers would

id result in military or police casual-
tes, or that would divide or weaken the milltary
dastitutt

policy of periodic consultation. In addition, the new
President will have to improve on Dusrte’s weak
administrative performance and make some effort to
demonstrate serious intent to correct burcaucratic
lassitude, incompetence, and corruption. We believe
the military would accept a rightwing victory, despite
fears of - political restructuring of the officer corps

through wholesale reassignments and forced resigna-
on

tf

As in the past, antipathy for embban cule is mast likely economy. and continued civilian ineputude, a cansen-

(0 come from field-grade officers and their subordi- sus could well build within the middle and upper
nates. The degree to which uNnbeppiness at the middle classes as well as officer carps to blame Washington.
level can be controlled will depead largely on the arguing that US policies no longer serve the national
ability and willingness of senior officers—many of interest. Some might point to Guatemala asancxam-

whom may be telatively new to their jobs—to inter- ple of a Central American country that defeated an
cede on behalf of the civilians. By almost all accounts, insurgency—albeit under an extremely repressive mil-
field- grade officers—in particular the class of 1966-— — itsry government and at an enormous human cost —
have enough cohesiveness to aca ia unison should they with no significant US assistance

perceive a civilian threat to internal military eutono-

my or determine that policies of the new president A coup, even if disguised by the retention of a civilian
were seriously undermining potitical stability. Given figurehead as chief of state, would be widely per-
these conditions, we believe that many junior officers ceived as a defeat for US policy in the region. [n our

would look to the Sinfonica to take the lead in judgment, the nascent Central American democracies
confronting the Genera! Staff wah demands for would view such a development as « failure of US
changes in civilian policy or in lauaching a a resolve and policy, and the militaries
rere feel less constrained to lau
j similar coups reflecting their frustrations in dealing
Implications for the United State, _ with civilian institutions.

We believe that perceptions of a deciining US com-
mitment to foster civilian goverament in the region
Wuuld prompt the officer to become mors:
iavolved in politi i-
cates that reduced US Tu iceraguan
insurgents and for El Salvador hes caused the Setva-
doren military to question US retnive in Centra!
America. If public frustrations M@cuat over deciining
US assistance, the pace of the Wat, stagnating

ne
