Memo from Richard Helms to the Director of Central Intelligence Concerni Ng Mil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012321, dated 1 January 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012321).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
| 3 WASHINGTON 25, D.C,

4.3(a)(4) |

29 JAN 1962

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "The Role of Aviation in

Military Operations at Sea", by Rear-Admiral
V. Bogolepov

le Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which

appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought" (oyennaya Mysl") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander.

‘2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handied on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of
any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office.

RICHARD HELMS
Euclpsure

1.3(a){4)

zz: - _— ~

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 0 JUN 1992

1.3{a)(4)

Original:

ccs

‘Atomic Energy Commission

* 43lay(4)

The Director of Central Intelligence

Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff ,

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence

National Indications Gentes
Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National eseiuates
Aesitetant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

a

4,3(a}{4)

COUNTRY : USSR

SUBJECT ITARY THOUGHT: “The Role of Aviation in Military

~eew Operations at Sea", by Rear-Admiral V. Bogolepov
DATE OF INFO : October 1960

APPRAISAL OF
CORTENT 3 Documentary
SOURCE : A reliable source (B). e

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled "The
Role of Aviation in Military Operations at Sea", written by Rear-
Admiral V. Bogolepov. :

' This article appeared in the 1960 Third Issue of a special
version of Vdyenna sl (Military Thought) which is classified
TOP SECRET by ‘the Soviets and is issued irregularly. It is
distributed within the Ministry of Defense down to the level of Army
Commander. The 1960 Third Issue was sent for typesetting on
17 October 1960.

a
cua *”

~j]-

4,3(a){4)

Tae Role of Aviation in Military Operations at Sea
S oe

Rear-Admiral V. Bogolepov

The gigantic development of missile weapons compels one to ask
the question; Will the missile in its triumphal advance diminish the
role which manned aircraft have played up to now in military operations
at sea? One must answer quite categorically: Not only will it not
diminish, but rather, on the contrary, giving aviation more perfected
weapons will even increase this role in the foreseeable conditions ‘
of warfare. To demonstrate this is the aim of this article.1l

Two dual, basic strategic missions have always stood and still
stand before the navy: operations on sea (ocean) commnication lines,
and operations in connection with the coast; in each case combat is
conducted against enemy objectives and for protection of one's own
installations.

Previously, which is very important, to these basic strategic
missions was added, so to speak, an operational mission - the battle
for supremacy at sea, which facilitated the accomplishment of both
primary missions. As a practical matter, it also developed into a
strategic, and in many cases, even into the foremost of strategic
missions, inasmuch as its more or less successful execution (by
destroying or blockading the enemy's fleet) automatically led to
a suitable athe io a mplishment of the ess missions.

tye! ore

AG the oresent: ‘ie: this battle for rene at gea a has
changed its meaning and character to a significant extent. First,
under conditions of the diversity and the dispersion of naval power
(including here, above all, aviation), it is almost impossible to
neutralize or blockade the forces of the enemy so as to completely
curb his activity; submarines and aircraft, especially pilotiess,
have broken "the law of numbers", so that within known limits they
can operate even where the enemy has superiority of forces. Second,
for the accomplishment of some missions, such preliminary neutralizing
or blockading of the enemy's forces is not required. Third, modern
combat against the main forces of the enemy - aircraft carriers or

T White the present article deals with the question in an operational-
strategic context and perspective, in the Collection of Articles
(Sbornik statey) No. & of the "Raval Collection" (Morskoy Sbornik)
ohecteal for 1960,in the article of P.P. Nevzorov,the same question is

xamined from operational-tactical positions.
om

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

missile submarines ~ has as its goal, primarily, not indirect, but panes
direct and immediate protection of one's own installations from their
influence, and not only the naval but » primarily, land installations.

Undoubtedly, operations against enemy sea (ocean) communication
lines and against shore installations in a number of cases already
can be executed not only by naval and air forces » but also by land-
based (nazemoye) missiles. To be precise, sea (ocean) communication
lines of themselves also include, along with those at sea » shore
installations such as ports, hydrotechnical facilities, etc. But
while earlier, because of the limited capabilities of naval weapons,.
the basic objectives on sea (ocean) communication lines were vessels
at sea, now such basic objectives are frequently becoming those on
shore.

Therefore, the question is what is more "profitable": to
destroy all these objectives with land-based missiles or those from
"intervening" (pranezhtochnyy) missile carriers - submarine, surface,
or air? Even elementary calculations show that a uniform solution
to this question in 211 cases is impossible: Under varied conditions
it is advantageous to use varied forces and weapons.

If one has in mind the probable enemy's stationa ound : a
installations which are separated from us by water and whose precise
locations we know, it would seem in all cases more advantageous to
destroy them with land-based missiles, for this saves us not only
from losses of missile carriers, but also from the necessity for
creating these carriers. ;

_ However, in a number of cases, depending on the distances > on
the nature of the antiaircraft and antimissile defense of the eneny,
and on other elements of the situation, the use of "intervening"
carriers may be fully warranted, partly because of the feasibility :
of simplifying construction and decreasing the size, weight, and Ba
hence, the cost of the missiles, partly because of their great
accuracy of hit at lesser distances from the target, partly because
rm ' mobile “intexvening" carriers are less vulnerable to the enemy's
e missiles than fixed land-based launching installations » partly
because these carriers may be needed anyway for performing other
missions, and finally, as a result of the necessity for the enemy
to expend weapons in these cases to combat the missiles and their
carriers.

If one takes as a unit the military-economic cost of destroying
in the initial period of a war not less than 15 to 20 percent of an

1.3(a){4)

4,3{a\(4)

~ $.8(a)(4)

enemy industrial area measuring 60 by 20 kilometers by intercontinental
ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads, then with regard to all the
conditions enumerated, as well as the probable losses » the cost of
.accomplishing this mission by atomic submarines will be approximately
the same, by diesel submarines-twice as mich, by cruise missiles from
land bases ~ three times as much, and by aircraft - several times

more expensive. The expenditures of the enemy to counteract these
strikes will be: for operations against missiles - 6 or 7 corresponding
units a ea aircraft - about 15, and against submarines ~ 20 to 30
units.

Undoubtedly, these calculations, in view of their extraordinary
importance, mist be verified repeatedly and be defined more precisely
for the most diverse conditions, for, depending on the situation, it
will be advantageous to use one or another method of delivering missiles
to the target. 7

If one speaks of “intervening" carriers, then it is very clear
that it will be more expedient to use aircraft in case of relative
weakness of the antiaircraft defense (PVO),and to use submarines in
case of relative weakness of the enemy's antisubmarine defense (PLO).

Thus, one my conclude that in Operations against enemy shore Meu,

installations the role of aviation under modern conditions is rather
modest, although in same cases it is not ruled out. It is more
advantageous to use land-based and submarine missiles against such
installations.

'___Let us proceed to an examination of methods of operation against —
‘mobile sea (ocean) objectives: the transportation means of the eneny,
as well as his combat large units (soyedineniye) and vessels. ‘The
picture here is drastically changed. ONE

The level of development of missile technology theoretically even
now permits the destruction of any objective in any area of the world
ocean by land-based cruise missiles, and in certain cases even by me
ballistic missiles. And, if one speaks of offshore (pribrezhnaya
vodnaya ) zones saturated with technical shore surveillance means » then
such a solution to the problem,: at least in relation to surface objectives,
as_a practical mtter, is not only feasible, but in many cases even
more advantageous.

1 An exposition of the methodology of these calculations requires
a separate place.

1.3(a)(4)

4,344)

1.8(6)(4}

-In which cases? In those where the extent of the development
of a theater facilitates the creation of the necessary system of
missile launchers and shore installations in general. If this does
not exist, then it is evident that it is simpler to utilize, for these
targets, mobile forces and weapons, primrily aircraft. This question
must also be solved on the basis of military~economic calculations
based on initial operational-tactical requirements.

The width of the coastal zone now consists of several hundred
kilometers and, in accordance with the development of technology, is
growing continually. Extensive investigation must define precisely ‘
the order of this growth in the near future, but in any case one mst
consider that in some offshore naval theaters land-based missiles ad
already are becoming the backbone of naval forces.

Meee oe

It may be asked: Why are land-based missiles regarded as a naval
force, even if only provisionally? For the same reasons that “one
gun on shore is worth ten guns on a vessel", as has been correctly
assumed up to now, considering that one of the basic elements of naval
forces is the so-called shore defense, including,above all, artillery.
A_naval direction is not necessarily connected only with vessels; it
is connected with those forces and weapons by means of which it is
more advantageous to accomplish the existing missions.

Concerning combat with submarines, in this zone the solution
to the question depends on the method selected by us for detecting
them. If this mission is assigned to fixed means (which at present Se
can work only on the basis ‘of hydroacoustics ) having good communteations
with the shore, then detected submarines could be destroyed ‘from: ‘the’ |
shore under conditions in which this will not disrupt the ‘syaten of °
detection. But if the search and location of submrines is done by
mobile forces, then these, naturally, will have the mission of
destruction. As is known, the leading place among these forces
belongs to aircraft, including hestcopvers ie

Thus, the nature and degree of ortance of one or another -
mission of aircraft in our offshore zone depends on the situation. ba
But if the basic weapon against enemy surface forces in some cases :
is land-based missiles, then in combat against his submarines a .
prominent place, along with smli vess@1s, as before, belongs to
aircraft, in particular helicopters.

It must be added that if the operational range of shore missile

| 4.3(a){4)

4.3(2)(4)

weapons is superior to the range of shore technical means of surveillance
and target designation, then in this "external" part of the offshore
zone the significance of aviation will grow still more as a result

of the assignment to it of the mission of surveillance (recconaiseance),
target designation, and, when needed, guidance.

We shall turn to an appraisal of possible methods of operations
against mobile enemy objectives located outside the offshore zone
just examined. If one speaks of enemy submarines, then, naturally, -
detection and destruction of them outside the offshore zone by some
type of fixed or shore means is impracticable, and may be accomplished
only by surface and air forces. If one speaks of surface ocean
objectives, then elementary calculations show that the destruction
of them from the land, although possible, demands such cumbersome
missiles and such a complicated system of target designation and
guidance that in an overwhelming mJjority of cases it is mich more
profitable to destroy them with missiles from mobile, specifically
“intervening”, carriers. Which carriers in this realm are most
advantageous ~ submarine, surface, or air?

As is know, we have set aside surface ocean forces as a result
of a number of considerations. Therefore, the discussion may proceed
solely with submarine or air forces.

Unfortunately, the requisite comprehensive examination of this a
question does not yet exist. Preliminary calculations permit one to —

assert that the most advantageous carrier of weapons a sea is indeed
ye UL Cey tte F :

“The peer once. be £ etary confirms “this Soreect: Thus, while —
in the First World War, aviation, especially at sea, only spread its
wings, in the Second World War, its share was already from one-third
to one-half of the destroyed and damaged combat vessels and ships
of all combatant nations. As long as manned aviation is compared here,
not with missiles (for it itself uses missiles), but with the other
"intervening" carriers - surface and submarine, then there is no doubt
that this process of the increasing role of aviation in operatiors
in open sea (ocean) theaters will continue. In addition, without the
assistance of aviation, the operations of submarines, imi
diesel, are made mc more difficult.

- Concerning iereuiipease: as is known, even with the comparatively
favorable ratio of the rates of speed of German submarines on the
surface and merchant ships in the First and Second World Wars (respectively

4.3(a){4)

4.3(a}(4)

" 4.3(a)(d)

10 to 15 knots for the submarines and 6 to 10 knots for the transports),
the effectiveness of the submarines’! combat operations depended to
an extraordinary degree on their receipt of timely and precise data
on the movement of convoys and ships. Now the ratio of these speeds
is becoming all the more unfavorable for diesel submarines (15 to 18
knots for them and 10 to 16 knots for the transports). But in
addition, while submarines traveled on the surface.” in the past war,
especially at night, comparatively without hindrance, and were able
to overtake and repeatedly attack convoys, now, with the widespread
participation of aviation in antisubmarine defense, this is almost
ruled out. The underwater speed of diesel submrines with regular -
use of the RDP (submerged diesel operation-rabota dizelya pod vodoy)
apparatus does not exceed an average of 4 or.5 knots.

-

As a result, when the enemy has at his disposition routes in
an ocean zone with a width of 500 to 600 miles, then for dependable
assurance of only a single attack of a convoy by a_grou of submarines,
it is necessary to deploy ahead of this group two reconnaissance
screens of 15 to 20 submrines each. With a coefficient of operational \,
utilizationl of diesel submrines of not more than 0.1 to 0.15 for y
such uninterrupted reconnaissance (and only for reconnaiasance), it
would be necessary to have for only one ocean direction, not considering
possible losses, 200 to 400, or as an average, about 300 submarines,
at a total cost of 12 to 15 billion rubles. Meanwhile, for the
accomplishment of the same reconnaissance mission by aviation, with
two or three flights daily by paired flights of aircraft and with an
intensity of 6 to 8 flights per month for one aircraft, 16 to 30 are
needed, or an average of 20 to 25 aircraft with a total cost of 1 to
1.5 billion rubles. Figures are eloquent, and with regard to possible .
losses, such a comparison will be still more to the disadvantage of —
diesel submarines.

Of course, the mission of reconnaissance now can also be eae
accomplished by pilotless means. If one bears in mind the long-term :
possibilities in this connection of artificial earth satellites. eae
(I8Zz) , which could systemtically give a complete picture of oe
movement on the oceans, then the conclusion followg that the speedy
realization of that prospect should be worked at persistently. But
if the discussion concerns the so-called reconnaissance missiles,
then they, especially from submarines, my be launched only far

1 By coefficient of operational utilization is understood the

relation of the time of the submarine's stay in the area of combat
operations (te, without taking into accougt the time/reminder of

footnote miss .
yd

ay 8"

4.3(aN4)

 4.3(y(4)

tactical elaboration of an already known operationa Raa tatial: and
to effect reconnaissance of the latter is actually much simpler and
more convenient with the aid of manned aircraft.

Perhaps these calculations and conclusions will appear to someone
to be exaggerated. But, it is enough to analyze the experience of
the Second World War, in particular the extraordinary decrease in the
effectiveness of the operations of German submarines because of their
poor aerial reconnaissance support, in order to arrive at the same
conclusions. And since at present the min bulk of submarines still
have diesel-electric engines, the question of supporting submarines.
with aerial reconnaissance is pace enone ey. important.

Of course, nuclear subrarines present another perspective.
Considerably surpassing in their submerged speed the average speed
of convoys, they can combine reconnaissance with attacks, even
repeated attacks. Calculations still show that aerial reconnaissance
can also substantially increase their effectiveness.

"The close combat assistance of aviation is no less important
for diesel submarines. Being obliged regularly to proceed under
RDP from one fourth to one third of the time, for recharging their
batteries, even though not rising to the surface, diesel submrines
all the same are comparatively easy to detect by the radiotechnical
means of the enemy's aviation. Hence, for a more or less reliable
guarantee of their security, regular combat against enemy aviation
is necessary - a mission which, on the ocean again, can be accomplished
only by a sufficiently sn ala (avtonomnaya ) and poweraut. coniba t
aviation. as

There is ne doubt that operational and combat beeeairec ian with
aviation is also advantageous for nuclear submarines. Thus, the role
of aviation in conbat against mobile objectives of the enemy on the
ocean, i.e. inst his combat forces, primarily aircraft carriers

and against his convoys and transports, bas even increased; moreover,
not only directly in relation to combat, but also in the realm of
supporting operations of submarines, especially diesel submrines.

It my be asserted that now a greater role in operations at sea in
general belongs to aviation.

Up to this point the discussion has concerned itself with the

possible participation of aviation in the fulfilment of the first,
“offensive", half of both basic missions of naval forces - operations

ay 1.3(a}(4)

4.3(ay{4)

4.3(ah(4}

against the shore and against ocean objectives of the enemy. At the
same time, a second, ‘defensive’, half of the first mission has appeared
for examination, i.e., the defense of one's own shore installations,
since operations against enemy aircraft carriers and submarines are
really the execution of this mission.

What is the possible role of aviation in fulfilling the second
half of the second mission, i.e., in the defense of one's own communication
lines? If one speaks of the very real, for us, securing of them in
the immediate offshore zone (with a depth in modern conditions, as
has already been noted, of several hundred kilometers), then depending
on the situation, land-based missiles and aviation must serve as the
basic means of defense of communication lines from surface forces of
the enemy. ;
Our small vessels of the patrol boat (storozhevoy kater) class
("subchasers" - okhotnik), together with aviation can fully protect .
shore commmnication lines from the submarines and air forces (VVS)
of the enemy. It should be noted that in spite of some views the
possibilities for aerial combat will in no way be curtailed. The
history of the development of weapons irrefutably proves that when
the conduct of combat by conventional means between any types of newly
appearing major elements of armed forces (weapons carriers ) becomes
impossible, then human ingenuity finds a way out of the situation
by creating new combat means. Thus it is here. While the tremendous
speeds and great turning radii of modern airplanes prevent visual
observation of the enemy and the utilization of cannon-machine gun
armament against him, technical means of surveillance are arriving» 22
to assist the eye, missiles are appearing in ‘place of machine guns * - neki
and cannons, and the work of the brain is mde easier ‘by electronic 7

computers.

Of course PVO vessels carrying a number of antiaircraft missiles,
as well as helicopter vessels of the PLO, could also be useful for
these purposes. However, the role of the PVO vessels will be too | ner
passive: owing to the short range of operation of their weapons,
they cannot combat the enemy's aviation itself, but only the missiles
launched by it. Concerning helicopter vessels, for each specific
direction, one mist consider whether it is not more advantageous
to have landing areas for the helicopters on shore in place of the
helicopter vessels.

There is no doubt, finally, that the transports themselves can
. be equipped with antiaircraft missile launchers and that they also

emul on

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

can carry helicopters.

Thus, for the defense of close communication lines, share-based
aviation, including helicopters, have, as before, vital importance.
What is its possible role in securing distant ocean communication ©
lines? It mst be said directly, that with its present range, aviation
is not in a position to defend ocean communication lines, and that
the defense of them now is feasible only for aircraft carrier aviation.
This is precisely why the USA continues to build aircraft carriers -
vessels which in their time were actually born from the insufficient
range of aviation: our enemy cannot manage without ocean commumicatiions,
and without aircraft carriers these communications are*indefensible.

Of course, aircraft with a long flight range could, being based
on the shore or near the shore, cover ocean convoys or large units ss
of surface vessels "in watches" ("povakhtenno"), taking off fromthe . “
shore and returning there. But the cost of such coverage will turn
out to be Less than the cost of aircraft carrier support only when
the shore-based aircraft gain not less than several days' range.

This is why, while continuing in the meantime to construct
aircraft carriers, the Americans at the same time*have been working
strenuously in recent years on the creation of a nuclear power plant
for aiteraft. There is no ‘doubt that we have every possibility of
outdistancing the USA in this connection.

But if sufficiently long-range (avtonomnyy) and cargo-carrying
aircraft are created, then perhaps with their assistance ,trageccsanic vies
transport can be realized, ‘at_ apy. "rate, military. ~~ OMe Oma cce * Ye

To this, one my answer that cargo merchant marine transport
will be retained in the foreseeable future oving to its great economy
in comparison with air transport, and on the strength of the fact that
along with regularly scheduled, | there will always be irreguiar transport. .
(seasonal, etc). In connection with passengers, the situation is
different; even now, more and more people prefer air travel to travel
by sea. In wartime the situation changes still more. During the
Korean War, 1950~1953, the Americans transported by air about 5 million
persons (true, in the same time, about 80 million persons: by sea)
and about 0.08 percent of all cargo.. But the application of nuclear
power to aviation will undoubtedly u,sn here completely new perspectives
in the area of the freight-carrying capacity of individual aircraft
and in relation to the overall freight-carrying capacity of aviation.

4,9(a}{4)

) 12(ays}

Will the cumbersome shipment of troops by sea transport still
remain? It is doubtful. But the role of aviation in military
operations at sea will become even more important.

We shall summrize our arguments by means of a simll table.

The Role of Shore-Based Aviation in Milita Operations at Sea

Missions of Naval Forces The Role of Aviation in Modern Conditions
and in the Future

fr.

Against
installations
of the eneny

Manned aviation yields its role to
pilotless aviation, but in some cases
may be utilized,
Operations in
relation to shore
installations

In combat against combat firvés“ tr” the-~:
enemy-mainly against aircraft carriers,
missile carriers, and to a certain
extent also submarines-the first place
belongs to manned aviation. —

Protection
of one's own
installations

Against

vommunication
dines of the
eneny

Against shore installations of com-_
munication lines (see above); in opdyations
against sea (ocean) objectives of com-
punication lines, manned aviation plays
a direct and essential role, andalso

At the present time it cannot protect
distant commmication lines. In the
future it will protect sea transpdrt
and will also carry it out directly.

4 Baya)

4,3t0N4)

4.38(a)(4}

Thus, at sea the relative weight o° shore-based aviation not
only remains high (with the assimilation of missile weapons by aviation),

but in the future it wlll increase still more.

What kinds of aircraft are needed for operations in sea (ocean)
theaters?

First and foremost, if this is not prevented by other circumstances,
seaplanes, in particular, flying boats {lodka), are most advantageous,
not only with regard to their ease of basing (both on a strip of water
near the shore and deep inside the country), but also because, ina *
number of cases, by landing on water in the course of accomplishing aan
their mission they my increase their range. It is really unnecessary ©
to speak in this regard about aircraft specially designated for
coordinated operation with submarines, for conveying supplies to then,
or, on the other hand, for receiving supplies, in particular, fuel,
from submarines.

Other demands on naval aviation mst be outlined mainly depending
on the planned area of its operations. In regard to aviation for
coastal waters, it can manage without special range, although for some
classes of aircraft, for example, reconnsissance aircraft, antisubmarine,
and PYVO aircraft guarding convoys, greater range would be useful.

To the extent that this is “our zone" and we mst always have air
superiority here, especially high speed for these aircraft is not
required, the min need is for excellent means of surveillance
(including detection of submarines) and weapons.

On the other hand, especially great range and mximum speed (now
not less than 1800 to 2000 kilometers per hour) in order to have the
capability of evading an air enemy with superior forces are required eg
for ocean-going aircraft. It should not be said that the best way .
to fulfil both demands will be secured by a transfer to nuclear power,
the introduction of which to aviation, however, should be given most
serious attention. -

In the first volume of the secret military-historical essay
The Navy of the Soviet Union in the Great Fatherland Wer 1941-1945,
it is justly said that the min striking force of the Navy in World:
War II was aviation. Despite the systemtic utilization of naval
aviation for operations on ground axes, owing to the situation which

arose, it still occupied the first place in inflicting losses on the
enemy at sea. At the same time, it is noted in this work that by

|
Waa 4.3(a)(4)

-]2-

4 alayi4)

1.3(a\(4}

the beginning of the war “qualitatively, our aviationy,sin the navy
was significantly inferior to the aviation of the enemy..." (page 76).
Only 12.5 percent of the aircraft were new types; the remaining types
were obsolete. "The lag of aircraft in a technical sense, principally
in speed, and also their numerical deficiency in each of the operating
fleets 2, created significantly difficulties in the initial period of
the war" (page 62). Everyone knows what urgent and most energetic
measures were required in order to correct this situation. And even
long before the war, a basis already existed for considering that
aviation in the near future would occupy the place of the basic
striking force in combat operations at sea and, in addition, in the
Basic Considerations in the Development of the Na VMS) of the .
Workers’ and Peasants* Red Army (RKKA) during the Second Five-Year
Plan it was indicated that "The most important and decisive role mst
belong to submarines and heavy aircraft" (page 46).

ue
c

Such are some conclusions, not so much from a theoretical, as
from a practical, underestimation by us of the significance of aviation
in operations at sea before the last war. There is no doubt whatever
that on the basis of attentive study of the experience of the last

war, exhaustive analysis of the new requirements of the situation,

the powerful development of Soviet science and technology, and, finally,
the gigantic potential of our industry, we shall not repeat the old
mistake...

Of course, ina journal article one my take up the question being
examined only 1 a very general plane. But its importance urgently

demands the most attentive and detailed examination of both the
question as a whole, and of all its individual facets.

ae 41.34)

4,9(2)(4)
