Prospects in South Vietnam
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000026784, dated 1 October 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000026784).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL XNTELLIGENCE AGENCY
OFFICE OF RATIONAL ESTIMATES

19 Noventer 1962

~ gupyEct: NIE 53-62: PROSPECTS IN SOUTH VIETNAM (Draft for
Board/Panel Consideration)

THE PROBLEM
Mo assess the eituation and prospects in South Vietnan, with

: special emphasis upon the military and political factors moat

oo. [ikely to affect the counterinsurgency effort.

CONCLUSIONS

(To follow)

~

DISCUSSION

Introduction

4. The present conflict in South Vietnam is s complex amalgam
of a purely Vietnamese civil war with dynastic overtones, a test-
case competition of antithetical ideologies, and sn active the.ter
of operations in the global struggle between the Free World and the
Commmisat Bloc. The conflict is many-faceted. In it, military
operations have played and will continue to play an important role;
but in essence it is a political struggle in which military activity
is but one technique ewployed. For either side, military success

vill be a necessary but not a sufficient condition of victory.

2. This conflict involves five principal protagonists -- the
Communist "Democratic Republic of Vietnam" (DRY), the USSR, Coumu-
nist China (the CPR), the Government of Vietnam (GVN), and the
United States <= each of whom has a considerable strategic and poll-
tical stake in its outcane, each of whoa is using the conflict to
demonstrate the viebility or “correctness” of certain political
programs, and no two of whom have identical intereate or cbjectives

in South Vietnas.

3. Om the Cooramist side, the primary concern of the regime
which now rules North Vietnam (the DRV) is to secure political
control over all of Vietnam, along with de facto suzerainty over

at least those portions of Laos contiguous with Vietnam's bordera

and, eventually, a sphere of influence in Canbodia as well <= Li@oy
-to reap what it probably considers the still ungarnered fruita of
Ste 1954 victory over the French. In pursuit of this objective,
the DEV will expect and welcome assistance from other menbers of
the Bloc, principally the USSR and CPR. ‘The DRV would not be
unduly preturbed about taking militant action which might engender
erlsea eleexiere in the world, but seems well aware of North Viet
nem’s own vulnerebllity, particularly to air strikes, even
eonventional oneg. Consequently, the DRV is prevably anxious to

, avoid an escalation of the war in South Vietnam which would bring
4% into a direct confrontation with US forces and entail the risk
of North Vietnam's receiving blows similar to those suffered by
Worth Korea during the Korean conflict. Furthermore, we doubt if
the IRV would wish to purchase victory at the price of becoming
an outright vaseal of the CFR or, indeed, if it would wish to see
ites territory traversed by Chinese troops easter to invite in than

to invite out.

h. The CPR is in sympathy with the DRV's enbitions, but
would like to see them realized under Chinese tutelage and direc-
tion, in part to enhance the CPR's prestige aad in part because
one of the CPR's own long-term objectives is to establish an
effectively controlled satellite on China's southera maritime
border, The CPR is unquestionably enxious to eliminate the US
presence in South Vietnam; though it 1s probably not displeased
at the present extent of US involvexent in the Vietnamese conflict,
since a IRV victory would now be a serious political defeat for
the United States. The Indochinese peninsula is an area of vital
strategic concern to the CPR and one in which it can easily dis-
play a militancy pointedly contrasting with Soviet caution. We
believe that the CPR, though not anxfous for totel war, would
probebly teke a more sanguine view of the risks of escalation
which militancy in South Vietnam might entail than the USSR or,

in fact, the IRV.

§. The USSR is certainly sympathetic to the TRV's ambitions,

and would welcome the strategic and political reverse which achieve-

ment of the DRV's goals would inflict on the United States. To
the USSR, however, South Vietnam is but one front, albeit en

importarit one, in the global Commmnist struggle againat the

nn,

capitalist world end, in perticuler, egainst the United Stetes as
the leader thereof. Furthermore, from a strategic end territorial
point of view, no vital interests of the USSR itself are directly
at stake tm Southeast Aste. The USSR would have little reason

to be diseatigfied with the present extent of US entanglement in

. South Vietnam, with the drain on US morale and resources & pro-
tracted struggle there would produce, or with the continual
irritants such a struggle would occseloa between the US and its
princtpal Free World elifies. So long as the DRV suffere no major
reverses in SVN «= perhaps even so long 48 the territorial integ-
rity of North Vietnam itself fa not threatened <- the USSR would
probably not wish to countenance any DRY moves which would entail
the risk of escalating the level of the conflict in Vietnam or of
_ & direct military confrontation between itself and the United
‘States. The renge of policy alternatives open to the USSR, howe
ever, is narrowed by the fect that it cannot riek seeming appreciably
lees zealous than the Chinese in advancing the Communist cause.
Furthermore, for a variety of reasons, most of Hanoi's key figures
(including Ho Chi Minh and Gen. Vo Nguyen Giap) seem to be more
pro-Soviet than pro-Chinese. To keep things this way, the USSR

must provide the DRV with a measure of encouragement and support

yhich could entai}, running risks of US reaction the USSR might

otherwise prefexy not to incur,

6. The three Cammmist protagonists seem to be presently
agreed on pursuing the struggle for Communist control over South
Vietnam as a “wer of national liberation" directed by the DRV

“with USSR and CPR advice and support. Barring a radical change

in the local or international situation, it appears that the DRV
intends to rely on subversion, guerilla warfare and united-front
tactics, using as its principal instmments an insurgent force

in South Vietnam know as the Viet Cong (VC) and an ostensibly
indigenous "National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnam”
(NFLSV), 4n whose cause VC forces now usually claim to be fight~
ing. Both the WC and the NFLSV are controlled creations of Hanoi.

“There is no indication that the DRV is now contemplating a xerean=
type invasion across the 17th parallel with ite regular troops (the
PAVN). Instead, present evidence suggests that it intends to wage
the military aspects of its campaign entirely with forces inside
South Vietnam Be d.e., the VC or VC-dominated "National Liberation
Aruy" -- using the PAVN only as a latent threat against which the
GVN must constantly deploy same of its own forces. However, the

DRV wlll continue to inflitrate PAVN personnel into South Vietnam

-6-

to serve as cadre and leaders of the VC. It also may begin (and
way have already begun) to infiltrate individual PAVN units into

SVN to fight as VC troops.

T- The DRV appears prepared to underteke whatever degree of
subvereive activity in South Vietnam it finds necessary to attain
‘ite objectives, subject to the Limitations imposed, on the one
hand by US/GVN inte atanicee and, on the other, by the level of
Bloc aid made availeble te Hanol, by the North Vietnamese econany,
and by the need to minimize the rleks of eevalation (a need cun-
cerning which the three Communist protagonists are probably in
general accord, though they probably differ over what minimal
risks of escalation are acceptable). The increase of US presence
in South Vietnam and recent rents in Laos have probably influenced
“the DaV's tactical planing and {ts flexible tinetable, but ve
doubt if they have materially affected overall Communist strategy
or objectives in South Vietnan.

8 On the anti-Commmist side, the extent of US involvement
in South Vietnam and the level of US aid to the GVN have reached
the point where the struggle against the Viet Cong in South Vietnam
has become « Joint US/GVN effort. ‘The US and the GVN, however,

60 not have identical interests or objectives,

9. The principal objective of the US effort in South Vietnan
is to prevent the Cormunists from acquiring control over its people
and territory. For the foreseeable future, the present GVN is
the instrument with which and through which the US will have to
work. US interests, however, require only that there be a free,
nonComunist end effective government in South Vietnan. ‘The US

has no vested stake in the political fortunes of the Ngo family.

10. ‘The present GVN is, in a sense, but en extension of
the personality of its President, Ngo Dinh Diew. Diem is 4 deai-
cated anti-Cocmunist patriot. He is also the proud descendent of
a family long prominent in Annamite court circles. He is also 4
person steeped in and molded by the traditions and concepts of
the classical Vietnamese nandarinate. Though his government bears
, the outward form of 3 modern parliamentary State, its functional
orgenization bears strong resemblances to the Annarite Court end,
in particular, the siicimeoreaat Office of the Presidency is almost
exactly patterned along the lines of the old Inperial House-
hold. In effect, if not in name, when Dien deposed Bao Dal as
Chief of State in 1955, the last Vietnamese ruler of the House
of Nguyen was :eplaced by the first of the House of Ngo Dinh.

Though Diem has unreservedly dedicated bimself to and identified

-8=

himself with the cause of Vietnamese independence, available evi-=
dence suggests that he has also identified the cause of Vietnamese
independence with the political fortunes of himself and his family.
The Viet Cong constitute by far the gravest inmediate threat to
the Iiem regime. This is not the only, but is by no means the
least, of the reasons why the GVN is now waging an unrelenting war
against the VC. However, the present GVN would probably regard
as Phyrric a victory over the VW achieved through policles or
tactice which permitted the rise of serious non-Communist een
dera for political primacy in South Vietnam. In that sense, for
the present GVYN the objective of defeating the Communists is
ancillary to its primary objective of preserving and extending

the control of the House of Ngo Dinh within Vietnam.

dW. The prospect of a North Vietnamese invasion across the
Afth parallel has menaced the Republic of Wetnam aince ite incep-
tion in 19543 but the immediate Communist threat to South Vietnam
derives fron an insurgency campaign of subversion and armed in-
surrection being waged by the Hanol-directed Viet Cong within

South Vietnam itself.

12. After the 1954 Geneva Conference which marked the end of
its successful ineurrection agalust the French, the Hanoi regine
ostensibly withdrew all of ite military forces from South Vietnam;
but left behind certain selected cadre, weapons stocks, and a
mucleic organizational apparatus which became the Viet Cong. In
eddition, the DRV carefully developed a pool of PAVN officer and
enliated personnel with Southern origins to be infiltrated as

needed back into South Vietnam for service with the Vict Cong.

13. The Geneva Atcords stipulated that Vietnam was to be
peacefully rewiified by natiouwide elections to be held in Jime
1955. In the immediate post-Geneva perlod, Hanol seems to have
acted on the belief (for which there was ample apparent evidence)
that vithout further effort om ite part the nascent Republic of
Viet -Nam would collapse and the IRV would secure internationally
sanctioned control of South Vietnam at the forthcoming secticae’
Coservers in Hanoi, aa elsexhere, underestimated Ngo Dinh Diem's
toughness, skill, and capacity for political survival. When Dien
weathered the sect crisis in the Spring of 1955, deposed Bao Dal
as Chief of State and succesafully ignored the election deadline;
it became obvious that although the Republic of Vietnan was beset
with meserous internal problems, they elone wold not cecasion its

oe

collapse. To check GVN progress and exacerbate its internal diffi~
culties, Hanoi activated the Viet Cong epparatus and used it to
launch a systematic, though, limited, campaign of terroriem,baress~
ment and subversion. By 1959, the Viet Cong constituted a relatively
emall but nonetheless effective nilitary-political force spotted
throughout South Vietnam but confining the bulk of its operations
to the Mekong Delta provinces. In about mid-1959, the DRV seems
to have decided to step up the pace of its activities in South
Vietnam and embark on an all-out “war of national Liberation” -- a
strategy endorsed by the Third National Congress of the Lao Dong
party conference held in Moscow soon thereafter. The size of VC
forces together with the scale, intensity, and extent of their
activities began to increase appreciably during the letter part of
1959 and began taking quantum jumps in the epring of 1960. (Des
pite an apparently increasing casualty rate, available evidence
4ndicates that the size of VC “hard core" forces in South Vietnam

more than quintupled between the spring of 1960 and the fall of 1962.)

14. On-the-ground direction of the VC insurgency campaign in
South Vietnam sceme to be vested in two bodies <= the Naxbo Regional

Coumittee and the Interzone (often called Intersector)V Regional

=» jl =

Comittee” «= each apparently independent, equal in status, and

responsible directly to Eanoi. ‘The Nezbo Regional Committee

appears to be responsible for all VC operations in the southern

provinces (or, roughly, the former Cochinchina area), while the

Interzone V Committee apparently directs sll operations in the

-central and northern provinces of South Vietnan. (See Map No. 1)*

Fach regional committee bas several staffs responsible for milt~

tary and political activities; and the organization of the two

regional committees appears to be duplicated among intermediate

and lower level committees responsible for operations at the

"snter-ppovineiel,” provincial, district, and villege levele,

Information on the political component of the VC apparatus is

esi

a

ini = ray a pn em,

“ranbo" and ‘Snterzone V" are terminological legacies fram the

- days when the Viet Minh divided all of Vietnam into three

regional commands ("bo"), viz. the Horthern Region ("Bac Bo"),
Central Region ("trung Bo") and Southern Region ("em Bo").
Fach region, in turn, was subdivided into mmbered "zones" and
"“tnterzones.”

Recent reports euggest that Hanoi may te subdividing Interzone ¥
into two separate regional commands, but this is not yet esteb-
lished. It aleo appears that VC intelligence gathering and
paramilitary operations conducted just south of the 17th parallel
dexarcation Line may be directed by PAVN 4th Region Headquarters
in Dong Hot (NvN) rather than the Interzone V Committee.

sketchy; but 4¢ ecors evident that the etructure provides for
tight, centralized control of nilitary, paramilitary, intellie
gence gathering, propaganda and subversive activities sufficient |
to insure that each complements the other and all are integrated

into « well-coordinated insurgency campaign.

15. In the initial post-Ceneva years, the DRV’s podlic
policy position was that the National Assembly in Hanoi constituted
the sole rightful government for the whole of Vietnam. The mid
or late+1959 decision to etep up the pace of insurgency in South
Vietnam and abift to a “war of national liberation” strategy,
however, dictated a change in political tactics. Consequently,
in Jamury 1961, Banol news media announced that a “National Front
for the Liberation of South Vietnam" (NFLSY) had been formed in
South Vietnam. Ostensibly an indigenous, "ati party” group of
patriots banded together to fight for Vietnamese independence
against “Anerican-Diemdet (My-Diem) oppression and tyranny," the
BFLSY, with help from Hanoi and other members of the Blec, imedi~
ately launched on 4 still-continuing round of diplomatic activity
intended to give the Front ean prestige and standing particularly
in neutralist or *nonealtgned” cireles. (letters of congratulation

were eent from the Front to nevly-independent African nations,

e113 «

Front representatives began turning up at Camnmist sponsored
international gatherings such as the Helsinki Youth Festival

end, in its most notable coup to date, a Front delegation to
Djakarta was officially received by the Government of Indonesia.)
In January 1962, a year after the "foundation" of the NFALSV,

Fanol news media announced thd the “South Vietnamese Peoples
Revolutionary Party" had recently been formed, an "indigenous"
Marxist-Leninist party vhich had associated itself with the NFLSV
and, in fact, placed itself "in the vanguard” (1.e., assumed con-
trol of) the Front's activities. Since the founding of the NFLSV,
Hanoi has teken the public line that although it synpathizes

with the Front's "just" cause, the conflict in SVN is a purely
internal affair in which the DRV plays no role whatsoever. Hanoi's
apparent object in creating the NFLSV (an obvious reincarnation of
‘the old "Lien ¥ies" front adapted to contemporary circumstances)
has been to develop a political cut-out mechansim through which

it can wage war in South Vietnam without openly implicating the
DRV itself in aggressive activity or violation of the Geneva Accords.
Though VC forces now generally claim to be Nghting in the name

of the NFLSV, in point of fact Front activities in any given area
of South Vietnam are almost certainly controlled by the VC adminis«

trative unit responsible for that area, and not vice-versa.

oh «

16. It is believed that within South Vietnam there are now
between 22,000 and 2,000 regular (e.g., full-time) Vict Cong
military personnel now organized into identifiable ites”

These accepted unite (25 battalions, 125 separate companies, and
111 separate platoons) are classified in three categories: inter-
* provincial, provincial, and district (the classification being
based on the zone of operation of each unit and the level of the
covmand vhich controls it). These forces are vell-trained, well-
disciplined, well-led, and, generally, well-armed with avtematic
weapons, light-machine guns, bagookas, and 57mm recoilless rifles.©
Both officer and enlisted cadre of VC regular units are frequently
experienced PAVN personnel of South Vietnamese origin infiltrated
from North Vietnam. Generally speaking, interprovincial level
furces are the most effective; since they constitute the elite
troops who receive the best available equipment, food and training.

This estimated figure is based upon the most recent available
MACV studies (October 1962) and stands in significant contrest
to the 1,000 Viet Cong regular force figure of Apri]. 1960, This
estimate may well be conservative; for MACV'’s figures are based
on rigid criteria of positive identification and independent
verification,

To date, VC forces are not known to have artillery or specifie
cally anti-aircraft weapons; though in recent weeks, VC forces

= 15 =

have become markedly more adept in using smell arms and

light automatic weapons against both fixed wing and, cepeci«
ally, rotary GVN or US aircraft. As yet, Cammmmist aircraft
have not been used in support of VC military operations in
South Vietnam. The DRV does not itself have either fighters
or bombers; though this is probably due less to the fact

that the Ceneva Accords prohibit the acquisition of such alr-
craft than to a Bloe judgment that the course of the conflict
in South Vietnam does not, at this jimcture, require the intro-
duction of these aircraft types into the DRV inventory. The
TRV does have 21 primary trainers (belonging to the Arco Sports
Club at Haiphong Cat Bi airfield) which could be utilized for
reconnaisasnee or spotting; but there is no indication that
they have yet been so used. Though the DRV has no military
air transport as such, ite civil air fleet could be used in
support of YC operations. If so used, the present DRV civil
fleet would have a total Lift capacity of about 40 tons. In
sustained operations approximately 15 tons of cargo could

be airdropped daily or 20 tons sirlended. Troop lift capa-
city would be about 450 men. DAV personnel have had consider-
able experience (and success) in supporting the Pathet Lao

in Iaos and hence would not find it difficult to fly similar
missions in support of the Viet Cong. As SVN tactical air
comes to play an increasingly significant role in interdicting
VC activity, the Conmmists may find irresistible the tenp-
tation to inject some of their own air resources into the
conflict.

All VC regular units, however, are capable of giving a good
account of themselves in combat; though provincial and district
level forces often lack heavy weapons and must sometimes adjust
their tactics accordingly.

1]. The regular or "Main Force" Vict Cong units are supported
by an additional 100,000 odd lightly armed, semi-trained local
guerillas and self-defense forces. The former normally operate
wnder district committees but are often wed on operations with
regular units as the first, or shocs, wave of an attack. If the

successful, Main Force troops follow on to finish the job. If the locals are
locals are/repelled, Main Force units are not committed. Their
integrity, morale, and reputation are thus preserved and serious
losses of valuable equipment or trained personnel are avoided.

The self-defense forces are charged with protecting Viet Cong

areas when other units are absent. Self-defense wits constitute

a training and replacement pool for the local guerilla forces

which, in turn, perform the same function for the regular forces.
Virtually all VC regulars, therefore, are battle-experienced and

battle-proven.

18, The strength and composition of VC tactical wits varies
widely from area to area depending on the local manpower situation,

extent of governmental control or nature of govermment forces

= 16 «

temporarily in the region, the availability of weapons and

cadre personnel, and local operating conditions. However, through-
out South Vietnam, VC forces have proved themselves adept masters
of the classic guerilla tactics of eurprise, constant movement,
concentration for attack, and dispercal wpon withdrawal. Though

- they rely primarily on small-unit actions » the VC have also

shown themself able to carry out company-size attacks against

army and security wits and the capability to strike simultan-
eously in battalion force against several widely dispersed targets.
(To date, there is no hard evidence that the YC have formed or
used units of larger than battalion size.) Their tactical intelli-
gence seems excel)ent and their apparent foreknowledge of major
QVR military force movements or operations is often employed to
devastating advantage. Jn spite cf severe and apparently mounting
losses, the VC continue to show an unabated regenerative capa-
bility and continue to strike effectively in all parta of the

country.

19. VC military activity -- from solitary ambush to quasi-
conventional operation == plays an important but carefully con-
trolled role in what is essentially a campaign of political
subversion, Extensive use is made of complimentary techniques

ae ae

such as propaganda, psychological warfare » and intelligence
collection. Whether the target under -itack be an isolated out~
post of the GVN itself, the VC make every effort to veaken the
eneny's will, penetrate his ranke » and bore from within before

attacking from vithout.

20. At the present time, the VC are concentrating their
efforts on acquiring control of the South Vietnamese countryside,
apparently following Mao's theory that once an insurgent force
acquires control of the countryside, the cities will fall of
themselves. The YO have not neglected urban area; but available
evidence suggests that their main present interesta lie outside
the cities. In the country, the VC are primarily concerned vith
obtaining the obedience, support and, where Possible, the active
loyalty of the rural population rather than with seizing or attempt~
ing to hold specifie plots of territory. Even in their War Zones
and Hase Areas the VC seldom attempt to defend the ground itself
against the entry of overwhelmingly superior GYN forces. Instead,
they withdraw and disperse; only to reassemble and resume activity
vhen the superior Government forces have departed.

“1. In their political action campaign among the Vietnamese
Peasantry, the VC are seeking willing supporters more than cowed

subjects. Needed supplies, for example, are seized if necessary;
but where possible they are boveht at fair prices. Terror and
coercion are extensively employed but selectively used to pro-
mote the idea that the VC forces are the protectors end avengers
ef the poor peasantry as well es the idea that swift retribution
awaits all who betray or fall to cooperate with the VC cause.

The VC take full advantage of the fact that the average Vietnamese
peasant'a horizons are bounded by his village, his neighbors, his
relatives and his ancestors. YC forces and personnel up to dis-
trict level generally operate in their native areas. Even cadre
{infiltrated from North Vietnam are usually of South Vietnamese
origin and, where possible, are aseigned to at least their native

provinces. As a matter of policy, single personne] are encouraged

to marry local girls; for wder rural] Vietnamese mores, 510 ties

or obligations are 20 strong as those imposed by family kinship.
(Even if the husband himself ie evbsequently transferred else-
vhere, "friends" asking in his name have a claim on the services
or support of his wife's relatives.) In short, VC forces make
every effort to identify themselves with the rural populstion,

and vice versa.

#2. The VC insurgency campaign is virtually self-sustaining.

For weapons, ermunition, end releted. military eupplées, YC forces

«19

nore OM

ie yd

rely primarily on atocks captured fron GVN forces, suppleaented
by the improvised output of clandestine “ractories” in VC base
areas. For food, shelter, concealment, tactical intelligence,
and replacements, ¥C forces rely on the rural population of South
Vietnam. Senior leaders, cadre and various kinds of technicians
are infiltrated from North Vietnan and such persomiel do not

come south empty-handed. ‘To date, however, the DRV's logistical
support of the VC effort has been minimal and cosfined largely to
heavier ordnance items, commmications equipment, snd other
materiel not readily available by capture from small GYN units.
Probably for cover reasens, most of the Limited amount of equip-
ment provided by the DRV has been of a type that could have been
obtained in South Vietnam, although GVN forces have captured some

WC ordnance adapted to use Bloc ammunition and, recently, have

captured mortar eshelle vith fuses of poseible Soviet origin.

This basically autochthonous character of the ¥C insurgent force
is ite greatest present strength and greatest potential weaknese.
In Mao's metaphor, without their hospiteble peasant ses, the
insurgent fish could not survive. If the GVYN were ever sble to
rupture the present reciprocal identification between the Viet
Cong and the bulk of South Vietnam's peasant population, the YC
insurgency campaign would soon collapse.

« 20 «

23. The Role of Laos and Cambodia. There is considerable
evidence that senior officers, cadre and technicians are being
infiltrated into Scuth Vietnam fran North Vietnam on a fairly
reguler basis via established routes traveraing Lace and, to a
lesser extent, Canbodia. There is some evidence that areas in
Cambodia nvar the South Vietnamese border have been used by the
YC as eafe havens or training areas; and there are grounds for
suspecting that the Nambo Regional Committee may at one time have
been physically located in Cambodia. The present importance to
the VC of Cambodia and the so-called "Inotian Corridor,” however,
fe easily exeggerated. The total number of cadre and other
personnel infiltrated overland to date has been relatively mzall,
and though some recent groups of inflitrators may have totaled

as many as 200-400 people, the infiltrators themselves have
generally been sent South as Sndividuals rather then menbers of
organized unite moving in a body- Consequently, of the VC
personnel in South Vietnam today who came by the overland route,
there are very few who could not have been sent South by sea. To

this extent, the fact that those portions of Southern Laos here

* See Map Number 2.

involved pow happen to be under the effective control of Communist
forces ia a convenience for the DRV, but little more. Even if
they were under control of neutralist or FAR forces or, for that
matter, even if they were open to such inspection as the ICC is.
ever likely to exercise, the DRV would have Little difficulty ia
continuing to use the Corridor to the extnet that it is presently
doing so and the VC would not necessarily be seriously hurt if

DRV use of the Corridor were curtailed. However, should the Vo
step up the scale of its military activity to the point where it
48 regularly sttacking in regimental or Larger formations, with a
concanitant need for additional supplies and, especially, heavy
weapons support, or should the war in South Vietnam reach the
point where the IRV considers it desirable to infiltrate organized
unite into South Vietnam, then the Corridor could become extremely
Amportant and control of it would probably te considered essential
by the DRV. Commmist forces, therefore, would probably react
strongly to any attempt to diminish their present control cver
the Corridor erea, but more because of its possible future utility

than its present importance to the VC campaign.

oh, The intensive VC drive to acquire control of the South

Vietnamese countryside has had @ considerable measure of success.

a 22 «

os

Recent MACY statistics indicate that (as of 1 October 1962) only
about half of South Vietnam's rural population lives in what may
be aaid to be GVN-controlled villages. Most of these villages
are located in the environs of major tows, provincial capitals,
and ih the more heavily populated aress along main Lines of can-
munication. Though controlled by the GVN they are not likely to
be lacking in VC sympathizers. The YC themselves control about
20 percent of South Vietnam's 2,500-0dd villages. These villages
eontain only about nine percent of the rurel population, but in
aggregate areas they cover 4 significant portion of the country-
aide.” The remaining 47 percent of South Vietnam's villages,
containing about Wi percent of the rural population, are not
effectively controlled by either the (UN or the VC. Some signi«
 ¢ieent proportion of thelr inhabitants must be sympathetic to
_the Viet Cong. There are signs that recent GVN counterinsurgency
efforta have reduced the rate at which the VC were acquiring con-
trol over additional elements of the rural population, but there
ie no evidence that the GVW has yet succeeded $n eradicating YC

control from areas in which it hae once become established.

- 23 =

25. The pace of VC progress in the strictly military ephere
aleo seems to have slowed. There is evidence to wuggest that the
VC, following Giap's doctrine, had hoped by now to be able to
move from guerrilla warfare to mobile warfare invoiving the wie
of large, quasi-conventional forces. This has not occurred. In
fact, between mid-July end mid-October 1962 there were no VC
battalion-size attacks in South Vietnam <= though two such attacks
did occur vithin ten days of each other in late October bese
early November. Claimed VC losses in military operations have
been severe and, apparently, increasing. VC casualty estimates,
however, are largely based on GVN intelligence reports which must
be treated with extreme caution in light of the proclivity of
GYN wit commanders for inflating VC loss figures and, especially,

for counting every dead, non-uniformed Vietnamese in a battle

.area as a KIA Viet Cong. Recent information suggests that in

some areas the VC may be suffering shortages of medicine, food
and, possibly, ammmition. However, there has been no significant
ineresce in VC desertion or defection figures, which remain
negligible, no hard evidence of lessening morale, and no evidence
of any diminished ability on the part of the VC to strike sevects
ively throughout South Vietnam at times and places of their ow
choosing.

@ 2) o

26. Probable Viet Cong Intentiona, We belicve tuet over the
next few months the Viet Cong will continue to maintsin constant
harassing pressure on GYN forces occasionally utilizing company
or batallion-size formations, especially against targets of oppor-

tunity, but relying primarily on widespread esmall-unit actions

“against targets selected fcr maximum political and psychological

effect.A major aim of this VC activity will be to demonstrate to
the Vietnamese people (particularly those in rural areas), the
GVN security forces, the world at large ~~ and, indeed, to their
own troops = that VC forces have not been seriously hurt by the
recent upsurge of GVN military segressivencss or the new techni«-
ques now being employed by the GYN security forces in conjunction
with US advice and assistance. On the political aide, primary

VC attention will be devoted to increasing their political hold
Gver the rural population. Special emphasis will be devoted to
countering the effects of GVN military sweeps through VC dominated
areas by publicly reasserting YC control as soon as superior GVN
forces have depated, as, indeed, the VC bave just done in the
southernmost portion of the Camau peninsula. The ¥C will probably
try to improve their wiban apparatus and may attempt to step up
the scale of terrorist activity in the major population centers,

particularly Seigon/Cholon. In short, though there may be

heiphtened activity in sone localized areas, the overall VC effort
in the near-term future will probably ancunt to the continued
waging of a deliberately dull end wesring war of constant attrition
designed to demoralize the South Vietnamese public and the GVN's
security forces, to weaken GVN authority in the countryside with
the intent of supplanting it wherever possible, and to discredit
the effectiveness of the Diem regime. The VC will, of course,
stand poleed to capitalize on any unforeseen opportunity such as

a non-Commnist coup attempt's precipitating 6 temporary Diatue

of authority which the VC could turn to their advantage.

27. Though we believe the VC are probably not comtemplating
eny major military moves in the near-term future, certain indie
cations tend to suggest a contrary thesis. There is scce evidence
that in the highland area of Central Vietnam, the VC are developing
‘a command and support structure, with commensurate communications
facilities, capable of directing coordinated activity by unite of
at least regimental size. If this 4e true, the VC may be con-
templating # major move in the highlands. The most likely such
pove would be an effort to extend the range of VC control in the
Do Xa area (the northernmost of the VC War ones)’ possibly by

aR ae hE EEE AE OLIN LA EAE ETI AE

Gee Map Number 2.

+

ériving toward the Laotian border in an attempt to establish a
belt of VC authority terminating in a controlled tone contiguous
to the frontier through which organized units and heavy equipment
could be funnelled into South Vietnam and by which the landvard
flank of South Vietnam's northern border would be turned and South
Vietnem itself virtually cut in two. If the VC were to {initiate
guch en operation, it would probably be leonched vith a series

of sharp company or battalion-size attacks in the delte area
designed to draw enongh of the GVN security forces dow toward the
southemsvemps 80 that the VC's real trap could be sprung in the
northern mountains. This would, in effect, *2 the came strategy
es that employed by the Viet Minh to win their daeaoateet the
French: a war in which the bulk of the fighting was éone in the

delta, but the crucial, decisive battles -- Cao Bang, Lang Son

and, especially, Dien bien Phu << were won 4n the mountains.

29. Over the next fev months, Hanoi and other merbers of
the Rloe will doubtless continue their diplomatic propaganda
support of the National Front for the Liberation of South Vietnan.
The NFLSV, in turn, will probably issue manifestos, send more
delegations to neutralist capitals, and engage jn what activity
it can to build its intespational image. However, we doubt it

the WC itself plans to make aay near-term use of the NFLSY,

- 27

though VC forces will probably continue to claim to be fighting
on the Front's behalf. Hanoi will probably give continued, but
low-key, play to the propaganda theme of the desirability of a
“neutral” South Vietnam and may send up a few trial balloons to
test prevailing sentiments concerning an international conference
to settle the "South Vietnamese problem." However, though there
may be some difference of opinion eeteeh the TRV and the CPR
on this point, we doubt if the Commnist Party leadership in
Hanoi -- or their senior subordinates actually directing the VC
insurgency effort on the ground -= really want a conference on
Vietnam at the present time. The Laotian parallel here can be
dangerously misleading; for in Coomnist (or, at least, DRV)
eyes, the situation in Vietnam would not now be “ripe” as was

the situation in Lacs in the summer of 1962. We doubdt in fact

* 4f Hanoi will of its own volition seriously press for an inter-

national conference on, or neutralist solution in, South Vietnam
until such time as the NFLSV has some reasonably secure real J
estate over which its fleg can safely fly. This condition, in
turn, will not be met until the VC forces in South Vietnam are

| able to provide thenecessary territory by scoring some significant
military success along the lines outlined above.

(text to be continued)

F :
\ s

To be attached to the
19 Novenber dreft. .

te 53-62
~ Koyerer 1962

III. THE GVYN RESPONSE
A. Background

30. In significant measure, the present gravity of the
Commmist threat to South Vietnam is attributable to past GVN
. errors, not all of which have yet been rectified. Since ite
inception, the GVN has been understandably fearful of a North
Vietnamese invasion. To meet this implicit external threat, it
initially adopted a defense posture ill-suiter to cope with
anternal ineurrection. The GYN leadership persisted in regarding
the threat developing within South Vietnam as a& menace jargely
created and supported by external forces with little appeal among
the South Vietnamese population. It ademantly viewed the growing
. problem as an escentially military one whose solution required
" paramount emphasis on purely military measures. Eves in the
strictly military sphere, the effectivenees of the GVN's response
to this threat was diminished by ite leadership's reluctance to
sbandon static defense concepts and permit more offensive actions,
for which it had ample forces, and, especially, by ite ecehaiive
exployment of various policies end control devices designed to
protect the interests ef the Kgo Dinh fanily, % goal which tock

evident precedence over that of defeating the Commnists. Ta

eotrast to the rapid acceleration of the Communi st insurgent and
subversive effort, the GVN’s response was gradual, relatively
uncoordinated and, wnitil this year, reflected Little sense of
urgency. Not until early 1961 was & comprehensive counterinsurgency
plan drawn up, with the help of US officials, and several more
months elapsed before puch implementing action was taken. Not
until early 1962 did the GVN begin to act 68 if ite top leadership
had acknowledged that the crisis situation in South Vietnam was
primarily an $nternal and political problem which could not be
solved unless military action were coordinated with political
measures capable of eliminating Communist appeal, support and con~
trol among the peasants. Though senior GVN officials, including,
Ngo dinh Nhu, heave begim paying lip service to the thesia that &

government must serve as well as be served, the GYN seems loathe

_to face the smplications of the fact that popular support is not

aomething that can be expected or demanded as a matter of divine
right but, gnstead, is something that must be actively sought

and earned.

B. Military

ZL. Recent gonthe have witnessed a marked tnerease in the

size of GYN military forces and considerable inprovenent in their

--

a

effectiveness; both attributable, in large measure, to various
forms of vs assistance = The tide of VC victories which mounted
steadily during 1960 end 1961 seems to have been checked. GYN
forces are undertaking an ever-increasing number of offensive

any
operations, They are capable of entering/area of South Vietnam

* and clearing it, at least temporarily, of VC forces; though not

capable of keeping many sreas free of VC comination. The latter,

however, ig a political more than 4 purely military task.

32. US materiel support, coupled with the training programa
and tactical advice provided by US military personnel in South
Vietnam (who now number almost 11,000) have considerably enhanced
the counter-guerrilla capability of GVN military and security
forces. Axmed with weapons and equipment suited to counterinsur~

- gency missions, these forces are now anbushing and patrolling more

The CVN military establishment consists of three separate but
related organizations: (1) the regular forces (RVNAF) with a
present strength of 207,033 including the Army 189,544), Ravy
(5,876) and Air Force (6,464) (2) the Civil Guard (0G) vith

@ strength of 75,815; and (3) the Self Defense Corps (spc)
with a strength of 95,399. ‘The CG are internal security troops
organized on a provincial basis. The SDC constitute a militia
or "home guard" responsible for local security in the villages,
henlets snd rurel areas.

a,

than ever before, are engaging the VC increasingly in emall-vnit
actions, and are following through their attacks in order to keep
the VC from disengaging. The improved tactical mobility made
possible by an increasing utilization of air power, principally
US helicopter support, le being used to advantage; as, indeed,

are all forms of afr support.

32. Although their counter-guerrilla tactics have improved,

GVN military forces continue to rely more on large operations or
clearing sweeps than on small-unit actions, make excessive vse of
CG and SIC units in independent offensive missions, and, during
large operations, deploy combat wits, particularly artillery and
air, according to conventional tactical methods as if the eneny
conatituted a conventional military force. As a result, OGG and
spe wnites are incurring disproportionately heavy casualties.
Furthermore, YC forces generally have advance knowledge of major
GVN operations, particularly onee preceded by artillery or air
bombardment, and are frequently able to disperse in time to

avold an unvonted engagerent with superior forces. Though GVN
eweepe are sometimes quite successful in capturing VC stores or
shredding VC regular units, the results of many such operations
are marginal when compared with the GVN effort expended. Porther-

more, there is little evidence that even successful sweeps have

- %-

any appreciable effect on VC domination of the areas traversed

by GVN forces.

34. The political effectiveness of GVN military operations
is often diminished by poor relationships between the GVN end
the local peasantry. Efforte to convince GVN leaders of this
have gone unheeded for years, though some individual commanders
recognize the problem and are trying to correct it. By deliberate
policy, GYN troops are usually not native to their areas of operae
tion; VC forces, also by design, generally are. Consequently,
even when there is no question of outright brutality or punitive
action against persons unjustly considered collaborators, the
ordinary peasant is going to lock upon GVN troops as outsiders
speaking in alien accents, whereas the local VC forces usually
speek his dialect and frequently include his relatives or

neighdors.

35. A major weakness in the GVN military effort, one parti-
ally responsible for ineffective sweeps or politically counter-
productive punishment of innocent persons, is the lack of
reliable, timely intelligence on the VC. Better communications,

particularly the installation of radios in most villages, have

2 33 «6

o~

improved matters somewhat and facilitated quick response to
sighted VC concentrations or actual attacks; tyt.GVN military
Planning at all levels continues to be hampered by inadequate
intelligence support. A shortage of trained personne] is parti~
elly responsible for this problem, as is the lack of orderly
“collection, evaluation, and dissemination techniques. Its
principal causes, however, lie in the overlapping responsibilities
and jurladictional rivalries of the GVN's multifarious intelli-
gence agencies, coupled with Uiwfact that each of these agencies
devotes considerable effort, not to the VC, but to squelching
non-Communist opponents of the Diem regime and protecting various
leaders from their bureaucratic rivals. In response to US pressure, the G
Gvi/has created a Centrel Intelligence Organization (CIO) to
improved some of the defects in its anti-VC intelligence effort.
Recent evidence suggests, however, that the CIO has been quietly
‘chante ted and is wlikely to become anything but a facade kept

up to please the Americans.

36. In political tems, the GYN's most Smportant military
task io that of providing constant and adequate protection from
VC incursions at the village and hamlet level. The provieion
of such security, together vith statis defense of transportation

routes and civil installations, is the primary responsibility of

= 3h oe

the CG and SDC; but in the past these organizations have been
unable to discharge these functions with any measure of success.
To rectify this situation, virtually all CG units have now been
retrained and provided with modern arms and equipment under an
intensive, US-aided program begun in January 1961. A similar
program for the SDC is also well under way. In addition, the
GVN, again with US assistance, has sponsored or aided a hetero=
geneous variety of paramilitary organizations referred to collec-
tively as Citizens Ixreguler Defense Groups (CIDG), sbout 22,000
of whom have now been trained and armed. ‘The CIDG progrem ie

an important development since it provides a vehicle whereby

at least some Vietnamese private citizens can identify themselves
directly with the GVN counterineurgency effort and take a hand in
their ow defense. Yn spite of the encouraging success of these
‘various programs, however, large numbers of RVNAF personnel
remain tied to local security and static defense missions. The
GVN will not have achieved a really significant improvement

in ite military position vis-aevis the VC util the OG and SDC,
supplemented by armed private citizens, can maintain local security

with only modes and occasional assistance from the regular troops.

- 35 -

37. The effectiveness of all categories of GYN counter-
insurgency forces, as well as their relative degree of susceptibility
to VC subversion or psychological warfare blandishments, is and
will continue to be significantly influenced by these forces’ morals
end general attitude toward the struggle in which they are engaged.
There are indications that the heightened level of US presence
and support, the scmewhat greater role now being played by GVN ~
military professionale in formulating and directing military
operations, and the record of recent successes against the ¥C
have improved morale among menbers of the middle and wuuper
echelone of the GVN military establishment. Other reports suggest,
however, that a number of entices , at all levels, are discouraged
by the overall progress of the war and have little faith in the
Diem regime's ability to lead the country to victory. Morale of
’ the lower ranks is more difficult to determine; the desertion
rate of GVN forces is extremely high and not decreasing -- though
4t is highest among recruits, recalled reservists, and SDC unite,
which do the least glamorous fighting and suffer the heaviest
casualties. During the first seven months of 1962, 17,827 com-
bat personnel were reported dropped from GVN military force
rosters as deserters or uwnreturned AWOLS. (VC desertions during

this same period totalled 701.)
=e 36 7

38. There is conaiderable evidence that both Diem and his
brother Kgo Dinh Nou have little feith in the professional coupet-
ence of the sanior membere of the GVN military establishment and,
for understandable reasons, entertain grave doubts esbout the loyalty
of the officer corps. As a resuit, they try to maintain a detailed
control of GVN military activity which frequently exceeds their
administrative ability, to the detriment of GVN military operations.
Also, the numerous devices employed to monitor the political loyalty
of the military forces and eliminate any political risk to the
regime posed by possible dissidents therein do little to enhance
the effectiveness of the GVN military esteblishment as an instrue

pent for fighting the VC.
B. Political

39. Background. For several crucial years, the GVN's poli-
tical response to the growing Communist threat was ineffective and
uncoordinated, largely as a result of the GVN's reluctance to
acknowledge that the threat was basically pelitical and had to be
met by political action in which military operations played a vital
but essentially subordinate role. However, in response to persis-
tent US pressure, the GVN finally devised a basic strategic plan

which takes cognizance of the political nature of the struggle

and provides a framework for the coordinated implementation of

the GYN'e various counterinsurgency programs, The two key ele«
ments of this plan are the strategic hamlet program and the concept
of a large-scale but vell-integratea military/political operation
designed to isolate the VC and regain control of the countryside

oo a systematic, area-by-area basis.

ko. ‘The Strategic Hamlet Program has become the major vehicle

of the GVN counterinsurgency effort. In essence » it involves
regrouping the rural population into fortified and defendeble
settlements and within these settlements initiating political,
social and econamic programs designed to weed out YC sympathizers
or agents, provide effective local government » improve the general
popular image of the GVN and increase the peasantry's identifica.
tion with the GVN's fight against the VC. As of mid-October 1962,
according to GVN figures, more than 3,000 strategic hamlets had
been carpleted and another 2,000 pluse were under construction.”

The program has many meritorious features and there is considerable

wa ies

See Map Munber 2.

evidence that both the VC and Hanoi view these hamlets as potential
threate of considerable magnitude. The hamlets constructed to date,
however, vary widely in the effectiveness of their external forti-
fications and the zeal with which enlightened political action
programs are being pursued within their confines. Excessive fin-
ancial levies on their inhabitants or use of forced lebor in their
construction may have made sone harilets politically counter=
productive. Though the program appears to have becn fairly succes3~-
ful in some areas, it is still £60 early for an overall evaluation.
Some of its sound features, however, are being negated in an
attempt to implement it too rapidly. Certain GVN leaders, includ-
ing President Diem and Ngo Dinh Nhu, tend to place an exaggerated
Smportance on the program, viewing it as a quick panacea to the
Communist insurgency problem rather than one more measure for
cutting off the VC from the peasantry. As @ result, the strategic
hamlet program has not been effectively integrated with the basic
military-political effort to eliminate VC control gradually but

systematically.

hi. Major Pacification Operations. To date, the GVN has
initiated four integrated pacification operations of the type

provided for in its overall strategic plen and has made preparations

ix

to launch a fifth in the near re The resvlte of thia opere-
tional approach are encouraging but ite limited application to
relatively few provinces has not yet appreciably altered the
balance between the government and the VC in the countryside.
Moreover, there are signe that the GVN is having second thoughts
,ebout the feasibility of such operations as a major element of its
counterinsurgency effort and is contemplating putting renewed
reliance on more strictly military operations. We believe that
such a shift in program, if adopted, would prove disasterous for

the GVN.

h2, The success of some specific counterinsurgency projects
has done little to improve the GYN's provincial administration,
which remains a basic political weakness and prime cause of the
.rural population's lack of identification with the GVN cause. With
‘aus notable exceptions, the calibre of provincial officials is
yoor, premotion end preferment is based on loyalty to the regime
rather than efficiency or demonstrated competence in promoting

the welfare of those over whon guthority is exercised. Various

See Map Number 2,

forms of minor corruption are rife and seldoa disciplined by

higher goverumental echelons. The actual inplementation of GYR

programs {ntended to improve the lot of the poorer peasantry is

often inept or politically counter-productive. The land reform

program, announced as completed, bas in fact been quietly scuttled.
Significant Gtxdrartionof VC political. appeal in rural areas is

| unlikely to occur until GVN provincial admipiatretion ie drasti-

cally reformed and the calibre of indivicual adrinistrators markedly

improved.

43. In pursuing ite various counterinsurgency programs, the
GVN has paid relatively Little atteution to urban areas. It has
made no concessioas at all to the aspirations or pensibilities
of those non-Commist Vietnamese with Vestern-oriented educations
who chafe at its limitations of free expression and curtail inent
- of eivil Liberties. In consequence, the CYN continues to deny
4teelf the services of many whose administrative or technicel

qualifications 4t urgently needs.

bk. On balance, the GVN's political response to the VC
threat bas been much Less effective than its military response.
Certain programs have had encoureging resulte and there are sone

indications that support for Dien and bis government in the

-\l-

eT a

countryside may be growing, particularly in areas where security
has Jmproved and the government's military power is increasing.
However, eocial and economic advances are not keeping pace vith
military successes and positive identification of the peasantry

with the government is still a long way off. Though aware of its

. need to improve its political standing among its own people, the GYN

seems loathe to change any of the political modus operandi respon~
sible for ite unflattering image and lack of political support.

IV. ECONOMIC FACTORS

45. Though the YC insurgency campaign and the insecurity
4t generates have disrupted many aspects of SVN's economic activ-
ity, there are as yet no signs of serious inflationary pressures.
Prices have been relatively stable and the money supply nearly
constant for over a year. Adequate supplies of foodstuffs are
kept circulating to urban areas; exports of rubber continue to
constitute the GVN's chief source of foreign exchange. Since late
1959, the GVN has concentrated on preserving the status quo and
done little to stimulate economic devalopment; but the recent -
enactment of its Second Five-Year Plan may presage a renewed
attempt at edonomie growth. ‘This surface econanic ealm, however,

» h2 «

has ite illusory espects; for the VC have dieruptive capabilities
they have never used. Rubber continues to be produced in export~
able quantities partly because the taxation of plantations provide
the WC with a lucrative source of revere. Commercial road and
water transport continues to function relatively unmolested for

* enalogous reasons. Were the VC to exercise their strangulation
potential in conjunction with an all-out offensive, economic
conditions in SVN would be markedly altered, at least temporarily,

in very short order.

VY. PROSPECTS

LG. In the near-term future, the Communists will probebly
continue to conduct the insurgency campaign in SVN as an ostens-
ibly internal “war of national liberation.” Though VC forces
may mount an offensive or step Up the pace of their operations,
it is unlikely that the Communists will alter the character of
the struggle in a manner that would entail the risk of a direct
controntation between US and Bloc military forces, {neluding DRV

forces acknowledged as such.

h7. If the US presence and assistance programs sre maintained
at present levels, GVN military forees will be able to contain the

- 43 -

VC military threat and may be able to mount offensives which will

reduce its immediate gravity.

48, If it adheres to ite present strategic counterinsurgency
plan and continues to implement certain promising programs, the
GVN may be able to prevent the VC from increasing their present
‘level of domination over South Vietnan's rural poprlation and

establish firmer GYN control over presently contested rural areas.

49O, The present GVN ie not likely to take the political
steps necessary to reduce the VC threat to a point where the
US could significantly diminish its present involvement in the
South Vietnamese struggle.

v4 wilt 1994

Me. Janice k. Hanover

U.S. Hews & World Report

2300 HW Street, Nie

Washington, DE 20027 a

Dear Tia, Hanover:

Shis in our final response to your 30 Octoner 1961 Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) reyuast for Geclassification and release
of NIK 53-63 dated 17 April 1963 and its first draft dated
13 iovember 1962.

Vs)

after a thorougn search of our records, we were able to
lecatea both documents. We have oarefully reviewec the GocuHEnts,
both of which nave been declassified ard may be ‘-g@leased to you
in segregavle form, Deletions nave heen made pursuant to FOTIA
exemptions (b)(3). The denying official is Hr. Louis J. Dube,
tnferpetien Review Officer for tne Directorate of Operations.
Copies af the documents together with an explanation of the
exemption are enclosed.

tl am informing you of your right to appeal the above
decisions oy agdressing your appea) to tne CIA Information Review
comnaittee, in my eare. Should you decice to do this, piease
explain the basis of yout appeal.

Te reference to your J Decenter 1961 Jetter wherein you
wished "to make my request more specific by asking for the
Development File on tne 1962/1963 ‘Prospects in South Vietnam,
which was issued as RID 53-63," it is my understanding that in an
attempt to clarify the tern "Neveloprent File," 8 wember of ny
ataff called you or 15 December 1481, During that teleprone
conversation, you reconfirmed your Gesire for copies of only the
two Gccuments reterced to in paragrapy twa above, If my
understanding is incorrect, please let me know,

fhe comts incurred in the processing of your request amounted
to $20.10, consisting of one hour of professionel search time at
$3.50 per quarter hour, totaling $44, and 10 cents @ page for 61
pages of releases material, totaling $6.10, Please send your
check of money order to me in the amount of $20,10 made payable
to the Treasurer of the United States, You should refer to our
punber FRl-1019 to ensure proper credit to your account.

t. oe eG 7 eer ee Sn a an A : %
We Wiss io Spulogime for the darett of time 1t

z awe eoares
; a V4aS Leren ws
to comeletr Ese PEOCeSs Its OT

YOUF Peguest, ne have been

uAdateu, MOWEVELD, DY 3 Marge nugrer Of requests. OVer the past-
Several years, Cacer trie Civeunstenees, We Cen ont- ge our beat
tO apportion ou: taki Bad atforte ina ane ys calculated to

SAatiafy | if oe "RUGS CGE oars eP Ot j i
Setisty sli ol our PequUesters, P24, KO Have: SlOeeea tie police,

ye PS Paced E a fe Sie ty ae ¢

Sie es mts QUans Soa for 2UUS patienrice

ann CUneiageraktior While we were COBPlLetias trg POC me Laer gy CEE
A aA ™ a — : sag Mes PS *

T@cuest.

ere tece Pepe,

7s} Larry R. Strawderman

Tam ge oe Vy ead ad = -
PPP Re bree OL

ritegtepeng - - a : Bp ae ys Deyry etd 4, -
AAO EEG toa anc. Piya aU} OOP GTS toys

IPD/FO/mse(11 hovenmber 1983)
Distcrihution:
Oridg = Adse ;
1 ~ Chrono
“I-="TPD Subj P81-1619 grp (BIL) (alta) pene ex’ DDO, LJIDUBE
Fee “$2./0
lo = Dbo Coordinator

aol Y pecar
“Tl - FO
