Soviet and Chinese Communist Strategy and Tactics in North Africa, the Middle E
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014188, dated 4 June 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014188).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SEP St thee Ea

bes SRE. : SNIE 10-2-65 f

CONTROLLED DISSEM 15 July 1965 ,
: I

“LBY LIBRARY ae

Mandatory Review

Case # NLJ 22-4)

Document #13

SPECIAL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 10-2-65

Soviet al Chinese Communist Strategy —
and Tactics in North Africa, the
Middle East, and South Asia

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
‘As indicated overleaf

15 JULY 1965

APPROVED FOR RELEASE —

AUGUST 1994

0
CONTROLLED DISSEM N? 1

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and NSA.

Concurring:
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Director of the National Security Agency

Abstaining:
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the Assistant to the
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
jurisdiction.

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic
downgrading and
declassification

oS

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 10-2-65

Soviet and Chinese Communist Strategy
and Tactics in North Africa, the
Middle East, and South Asia

=

THE PROBLEM

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CONCLUSIONS .... wu eee ee eee

TISCUSSION. srdentitac Senses nett. oe an oar pp ceca ecpteg emia Ss ts aly MA bs as

J. THE SETTING ...... She ane, Nene tina nae gtd sey Atced cao ona ieee ate tA: oe,
Il. COMMUNIST OBJECTIVES ............----4--- +++ Aer ee ee 6
Ill. MEANS AND METHODS ..0.. 0). ce ec ees ioe

Military Assistance ...... nfl stat a Be Baaih kare sae errr Pensa dalesuel. eh —68
Economic Aid ............ Sd es eat La Ot ae Rope hs Ss a ty ited elect, street, 2)
Paley «cious otto eet ORM ceili Gl a athe antennae aia arene Ah
Cultural Relations 0... 000. cece ce ee eter eee 13
Communist Movements ........0....0 02 eee ee eee eee te ee eee 13
The Covert Mechanism ..........-.- 0. cee cee ee ee ne eens 19 |
IV. COMMUNIST PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS ..............---..-5: 21°
South Asia ............. ee Coa och btext ade Snes See a Perrier: 21
The Arab World ............- wae bali A onctth Bete eniuat pashacett hy iene Lenctnst tte wet ib ss 24
Iran, Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus ........-.. old Ave Rete een SSO 28
VAISUMMING:! URS 23.335 208 badils wld pe Bode Sede ew tees a Ra ed 29°
ANNEX: THE RUSSIAN INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (RIS) ........... 33

geet

SOVIET AND CHINESE COMMUNIST STRAT-
EGY AND TACTICS IN NORTH AFRICA, THE
MIDDLE EAST, AND SOUTH ASIA

THE PROBLEM

To assess the nature, extent, and present effectiveness of Soviet and
Chinese Communist overt and covert efforts in North Africa, the
Middle East, and South Asia, and to estimate the outlook for such
efforts over the next several years.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Most of the countries in this area have been opened up to
Soviet and other Communist penetration by the liquidation of Euro-
pean colonial empires and by the widespread emergence of movements
of protest against the concentration of political and economic power
in the hands of a small ruling class. Over the past decade or so, the
USSR has injected itself dynamically into the whole area. ‘China plays
a significant role mainly in South Asia. With the exception of Yugo-
slavia, whose progress while maintaining a balance between the USSR
and the West has greatly impressed certain leaders in the area, the
East European countries have ridden into the area on Soviet coat-
tails. (Paras. 1-4)

B. Soviet influence in the area has been achieved principally
through the customary instruments of contemporary statecraft. With
a considerable degree of success, Moscow has exploited nationalist
and anti-colonial resentments, encouraged neutralist sentiment, and
taken sides in local disputes. The USSR, and to a lesser extent China,
have mounted cultural and student exchange programs and expanded
their trade relationships. The Soviets have extended economic aid
to 16 of the 23 countries in the area, and six of them have armies that
are largely equipped with Soviet arms and trained in Soviet methods.

* The following countries are included in this estimate: all the Arab states {including those
in northern Africa, ie, UAR, Libya, Sudan, Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco), Israel, Greece,
Turkey, Cyprus, Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Nepal, and Ceylon.

The economic and military aid programs have not only contributed
to the Soviet image in the area, but also provide Moscow with some
potential for leverage by slowing down projects, failing to deliver
spares, and the like, though this leverage could not be exerted without
some political cost. (Paras. 9-20, 33)

C. The overt Soviet presence—for example, diplomatic, trade, mili-
tary missions—provides cover for an extensive clandestine apparatus.
The Committee for State Security (KGB) and the Chief Intelligence
Directorate (GRU) play a wide role in carrying out foreign policy.
Aside from the classic intelligence collection functions, these services
conduct operations to denigrate the US and other Western powers, to
capture and exploit press and other propaganda outlets, and to place
individuals in positions in local governments, political parties, etc.,
where they can influence policy in Moscow’s favor. The Soviets have
recruited local officials at various levels, including some holding senior
government positions. In general, the Soviet covert operations have
been fairly successful. (Paras. 26-32)

D. The Communist nations also strive to develop and use local
Communist movements and international front organizations. The
former include a few sizable legal or quasi-legal organizations, as in
India, Greece, and Cyprus, and a dozen or so small, mostly illegal, but
fairly well organized parties. Their organizational strength has en-
abled them to survive repression and, on occasion, to make significant
but temporary gains in the wake of political upheaval. On the whole,
the Communist parties have made little progress as mass movements;
they have done best in attracting discontented intellectuals, while
making little headway among the peasants who comprise the bulk of
the population, and only somewhat more among workers. This has
led the Soviets, in some countries at least, to slacken their efforts to
develop a mass organization and turn instead to a tactic of infiltrating
ongoing nationalist or revolutionary movements. (Paras. 21-25)

E. In both overt and covert operations, the Soviets probably con-
sider that they have met with a fair degree of success in establishing
their presence and influence in the area. They have, broadly speak-
ing, been most successful in the Arab world and least successful where
fear of Slavic domination remains strong—in Greece, Turkey, and
Iran. They will probably continue their efforts to establish an identity
of feeling and interest with the modernizing forces in the “Third
World,” though tailoring their approach for individual countries.

Some of the countries we are dealing with have adequately functioning
political systems, sufficiently coherent societies, or strong enough
leadership to be relatively impervious to Communist efforts to make
them into Marxist socialist societies, barring a major upheaval. A
number of others lack most or all of these. qualities, and upsets in their
fragile political situations could present Communists with good op-
portunities to gain a position of power. (Paras. 33, 34, 64-66)

F. The prospects for the Communist powers in the Middle East,
North Africa, and South Asia over the next several years might best be
characterized as “more of the same.” The generally low state of the
local Communist parties is likely to persist, although the presence and
influence of the Communist countries will expand. The influence of
Marxism is likely to increase, particularly in those states following a
socialist path. The Chinese will also be more active, although much —
of their effort will be directed against the Soviets, thus inhibiting
Communist progress. We recognize that in some places situations
could develop so as to provide promising opportunities for the Com-
munists to come to power; nevertheless, we cannot specifically identify
any such situation and—all things considered—doubt that any country
of the area will come under Communist control. We believe that the
forces of nationalism in the area will remain strong, and that nationalist
leaders will continue, by and large successfully, to, play off East against
West. (Paras. 56, 57, 67, 69)

G. Two sorts of development could give the Communists a con-
siderable victory. The first, essentially unpredictable, is the emerg-
ence of a leader who decided to take his country into the Communist
world, either rapidly like Castro, or by stages. Another would arise
from a successful Soviet or Chinese effort to achieve a complete and
continuing identity of interests with the nationalist forces of the “Third
World.” As long as this identity remains negative, devoted to elimi-
nating special Western positions and the like, it will be troublesome,
sometimes serious, but not fatal. But if these nationalist forces came
to believe that the Western powers, and especially the US, were
fundamentally opposed to their desire for national independence and
domestic progress, the opportunities for the Communist powers to
achieve a fundamental gain in the “Third World” would go up sharply.
Countries which felt they had no other way to turn would be under
very strong pressures to enter upon still closer collaboration with the
Communist world. (Paras. 67-68) :

DISCUSSION

I. THE SETTING

1. In the vears since the end of World War II, the USSR has turned outward
from its concentration on building “socialism in one country.” It has emerged
as a powerful industrialized nation and has come to play an international role-
consonant with its military and economic power. It has reasserted historic
Russian interests which had not been pressed in any such fashion since before -
the Revolution of 1917. Moscow has expanded its diplomatic and commercial
relations the world over, and has entered into a competition with the US and
the West for position and influence. In the Middle East, North Africa, and
South Asia, this Soviet drive has coincided with a resurgence of nationalism and
an area-wide drive for independence from European colonial rule and special
influence. The Soviet Union and many of the emerging nations have found a
conemicne of interest in reducing and eliminating special Western positions.

2. In consequence; the USSR has made great progress in projecting its influence
in the area; nationalist forces, provided for the first time with an alternative to
traditional Western suppliers and markets, have thus had greater freedom of
maneuver, and the Soviets have been able to exploit local situations to their
advantage. Soviet and—within the limits posed by their far smaller capa-
bilities—Chinese Communist penetration has been assisted also by another
aspect of nationalism—the widespread emergence of movements protesting the
concentration of political and economic | power in the hands of a small ruling
class.

3. Until 1954, however, Communist activity in the area under discussion was
limited, as it was in most of the world outside of Europe and the Far East.
The Soviets (and some other Bloc countries) maintained diplomatic relations
wherever possible. In 1955, the USSR had official missions in only 12 of the
countries we are dealing with in this estimate. The Soviets were making some ~
efforts to promote local Communist parties, were founding front organizations,
and were conducting propaganda efforts. In most cases, the Communist parties
were too small and too poorly organized to achieve much by themselves, and
Soviet policy opposed “national front” techniques. In the instances where Mos-
cow supported local Communist efforts to seize power by violence, e.g., India
and Greece, the efforts failed, and the failure eye the standing and pros-
pects of the local parties.

4, Following the death of Stalin, the Soviet ides eee to look on the newly
independent countries not as hostile bourgeois states but as potentially useful
instruments or allies in the Soviet conflict with the West. Every sovereign state
but one (Saudi Arabia) has established diplomatic relations with Moscow, and
more than half recognize Communist China. (See map, page 5.) East Euro-
pean countries have ridden into the area on Soviet coattails, although Yugo-

Dipiomatic Representation

CEYLON
ax*

51524 5-65

News Representatives

|
| GREECE
a
TUNISIA
ax

ALGERIA
Ak

UNITED

ARAB
récdaue SAUD

> CEYLON
51525, 5-65 Pan GN are ne,

slavia has achieved wide acceptance on its own. Soviet cultural, commercial,
and propaganda activities have followed in the wake of diplomatic relations.
Economic and military assistance to countries in this area accounts for about
65 percent of the total Soviet foreign aid effort.

Il. COMMUNIST OBJECTIVES

5. Looking at the area after the death of Stalin, the Soviets believed that anti-
colonial animosities, certain local disputes, and desires for economic advance
were such that Soviet aid and political support could accelerate developments in
favor of both Soviet interests and those of local Communists. At the same time,
the Soviet leaders probably saw an opportunity to check US progress in estab-
lishing military facilities and treaty relationships. As one country after another
accepted Soviet aid and adopted neutralist and even pro-Soviet postures in inter-

-national matters, Soviet confidence in the success of these tactics grew. Begin-

ning about 1959, however, Moscow undertook a critical reappraisal. Soviet
actions were neither winning countries quickly to alignment with the Bloc, nor
were they advancing the interests of domestic Communist movements. The
need for reappraisal was sharpened by anti-Communist moves in several Arab
states and by the emerging Sino-Soviet dispute.

6. Soviet policy in recent years has reflected a recognition that the struggle in
this area will be a long one and that the widely differing types of regime and
society require a variety of approaches. This has been reflected in the develop-
ment of new and interrelated concepts—first “n national democracy” and then
“revolutionary democracy’—which defined the “progressive” political role of
radical leaders and provided the Soviets with an ideological rationalization for
dealing with them. The former was intended as a device by which Communists
could gradually move into government roles and, ultimately, assume control.
“Revolutionary democracy” went one step further: it has allowed such leaders as
Nasser and Ben Bella to associate themselves with the Communist world with-
out adopting Communist patterns of government or even necessarily accepting
any important degree of influence by domestic Communists. In several Arab
countries, this approach has involved playing down the Communist movement
and encouraging local Communists to join and work within the ruling single
party. In effect, Moscow accepted the view that if effective revolutionary move-
ments developed outside of Communist party control, they deserve support and
encouragement—even at the expense of local Communists’ interests.

7. The long-term goal of the Soviets is to supplant Western with Communist
influence, leading in time to a Moscow-oriented Communist political, economic,
and social system. Over the period of this estimate, their goals are more limited.
The Soviets are trying to erode Western positions, to make their own ideas and
techniques accepted in the area. They are, of course, interested in disrupting
Greece’s and Turkey’s relations with NATO and eliminating Western bases and
facilities in the area. They seek to establish ever closer ties with key countries—
Algeria, the UAR, India. They have little hope that local Communists will
come to power soon, either through development of a mass movement or through

Beet

coup d'etat, and they might find an avowedly Communist regime to be a tactical
encumbrance. Rather they are working to bring nationalist regimes progres-
sively into such close association with Moscow that a reversal of the trend be-
comes virtually impossible. The Soviets do not appear to be seeking military
bases, but they certainly recognize that the denial of a given area to Western
forces works to their own military advantage. Moreover, the establishment of
airlines and other communication facilities helps the Soviets give support to
revolutionary groups, as it has already in Africa.

8. Aside from their contest with India for advantage along the Himalayan
mountain spine, the Chinese were hardly active in the area until a few years
ago when the Sino-Soviet split became acute. They did back the Algerian rebels
against France with arms and diplomatic support. Since Chou En-lai’s tri
through the Middle East and Africa in 1983, Peiping has worked hard to gain
wider acceptance and influence. The Chinese do not accept the possibility of
peaceful transition to socialism as the Soviets do, and tend as a result to look for
radical movements and truly revolutionary situations to exploit. Where such
developments are unlikely, they are willing to use conventional aid and diplo-
matic instruments to further Chinese interests. Although the Chinese and the
Soviets are both pursuing the short-range goal of expelling Western interests
and presence, their methods differ and their respective interests are coming into
increasing conflict. This competition interferes with their efforts to guide the
Afro-Asians toward communism and limits to some extent the effectiveness of
their policies against Western interests.

lil. MEANS AND METHODS

9. Exploitation of anti-colonial resentments is a major feature of the Com-
munist world’s approach to the area. These sentiments generally lie close to
the surface; the populations of most of these countries are inclined to blame
their history of subjection to Western powers for much that is wrong with
their own society. It is remarkably easy for the various. Communist powers
to take advantage of this by associating themselves, through their propaganda and
their positions in the UN, with the deeply felt antipathy to colonialism, Western
bases, and other special interests. The Communists have also made use of
a variety of Afro-Asian and similar international organizations, many of which
they control or greatly influence.2 Both the Soviets and the Chinese have
worked to get these institutions to take an extreme anti-Western line, though
in recent years Sino-Soviet hostility has antagonized some members and reduced
Communist effectiveness.

10. The Communist countries generally see their cause advanced not only
by the reduction of colonialist influence but also by the decline or fall of in-
digenous conservative regimes, monarchical or otherwise. The current label

*Some of the more important are the World Peace Council, the International Union of
Students, the Afro-Asian Peoples’ Solidarity Organization, and the World Federation of
Democratic Youth. ;

aGECRET 7
Oe

for both anti-colonial and anti-conservative activities is “National Liberation
Movement.” Under this designation, Moscow has given direct support to
republican Yemen and has permitted the UAR and Iraq to pass on Soviet
weapons to terrorists in Aden and rebels in Oman.

ll. The Soviets have also shown themselves willing to take sides in local
quarrels, especially those between “progressive” and “reactionary” (i.e., Western-
oriented) states. Moscow has often decided that more is to be gained by
supporting one contestant than by trying to remain on good terms with two.
In South Asia, the USSR has consistently supported India and Afghanistan

_ against Pakistan in the disputes regarding Kashmir and Pushtunistan. The

Soviets have backed the Arabs against the Israelis, though not to the point of
being willing to actively support an all-out effort to “liberate Palestine.”

12. Their ability to take sides is becoming increasingly limited, however, as
their range of interests in the area widens, and particularly as they see oppor-
tunities to court such nations as Turkey and Pakistan, which seek to broaden
their international ties. In nearly four years of intermittent and often bloody
struggle with Baghdad, the Kurdish cause has received steady support on the
“clandestine” radios broadcasting from Eastern Europe, but precious little
else. Except for the first months of Baathist rule, Moscow has felt its interests
were served by maintaining good relations with the Iraqi Government—and
supplying the weapons and ammunition used to combat the Kurds. The Soviets
have seen little benefit for themselves in the Arab unity movement; Moscow’s
relations with Nasser have been complicated by its support of Iraq under Qasim
and of Syria after the breakaway from the UAR. Moscow, despite Pakistan's
unhappiness at US military assistance for India, cannot offer arms to Pakistan
without undercutting its position in New Delhi.

Military Assistance

13. A primary feature of the Communist drive has been the sale of military
equipment on favorable terms to countries which have asked for it, a process
begun with the sale of arms to Egypt in 1955. The Soviets are relatively un-
concerned with area stability and feel little responsibility for keeping the peace»
between antagonists. Hence, they have been forthcoming as to the types and
quantities of equipment they are willing to supply, have responded fairly quickly
to requests for help, and have imposed no formal restrictions on use of arms.
The Soviets perceive in military aid certain particular advantages which economic .
assistance does not provide. At modest cost, Moscow can serve as sole supplier
to an underdeveloped country which has been unable to procure elsewhere the
type or quantity of arms it desires. Even more than economic aid, arms assist-
ance offers an opportunity to establish a continuing dependence on the Bloc
because of the recipients’ need for training, spare parts, and technical support.
Moreover, arms programs enable the Communist countries to establish a relation-
ship with an elite which is likely to have an important part in the future politics
of the recipient country.

8 sagt

MAJOR ITEMS OF SOVIET MILITARY EQUIPMENT oe:
(Figures refer to deliveries made from 1955 through June 1965, not to current holdings.)

Afghan- . = ALo-
istan Algeria Cyprus India Iraq rocco —s Syria UAR Yemen
Land Armaments
JS 3 heavy tanks.........-2..0..0 0002 2: oats BO ce tig St ehh. bow cere oh agen ee  BU:
JT-34 medium tank.........00.. } 499 101 32 i SO Pe 250 B16} uy
T-54 medium tank............. (ee 154 <i. .. 300 2 ©6150 300 fF
SU-100, self-propelled assault ae
GUN Pe cae nah dudee 18... 25 ee 52 120 a 90 200 65
PT-76 amphibious light tank...... ae os eo ge , “OE z 2 20
Personnel carriers armored and. wae
amphibious...........0-545 weseen, 62 _ 100 30 oe 500 pe 450. 770 155
Artillery Pieees-ficld, anti-tank, iv -
anti-aircraft. ...........0. pee ls 600 500 120 ae S00 . 90 650 1,300 160
Naval Vessels 2. ohey
Destroyers... 6.6.20 eer ee ee ee ec SE et sa a Giga g Sal
Submarines.................002 2% ee Be GREK ce yt Meaty wes wetter |. aettes 10. :
Minesweepers..... eee ee eee . » 6
Subchasers.. 0.2... - eee eee tee te oe “3 3 ne 6.
Motor Torpedo Boats........ ss eee 6. [eee ae 12 15 25.
‘Komar’ Class Guided Missile
BOBS! acct as tk as ee =e 7 4 38
Other, Including Auxiliary and
Landing craft.......6.0...65 Be. Heath 2 ie ce 7 fs 8 5 3
Aircraft Me
TU-16 Medium jet bomber...... oe aed 8 a Hs 10 os phe ot. eee ROE -
’ I-28 light jet bomber. ....... 30-40. 12 ae a 15 24 7 50
MIG-21 fighter................ ey 9 ae 12 16 ae 30... . 102.
MIG-19 fighter.......... 0.4.24. b beer ts Bes © teen oe 16 ihe 2 eh 83...
MIG—-18/17 fighter............. 125 34 oh i Ad i2 46 145
AN-12 heavy transport......... -—.. 5-8 eke ul 32 3 a ce 2 20»
Other: helicopters, trainers, non-
jet combat, ctc...... Ae Wed & 92 . 32 ee _76 T+ 5 59 254 | _ 55
Surface-to-air Missile (SA-2) sites ¢. some a obs some 11 a ae on 23,
missiles equip- ,

ment

eee race a Nc en th ee
a We have evidence for delivery of 20 TU-16s, but 25 different aircraft numbers have been sighted in the UAR.

b Five of these are Sovict aircraft on loan to the UAR.

¢ Bach firing site includes 6 launchers, with + missiles per launcher.

4 Iraq purchased some SA-2s in 1961, but they were subsequently returned to Soviet custody, and shipped to the UAR.

14. The USSR and its European associates have provided military aid to nine
countries in the area.2 Most of it has been supplied at discounts of a third to
a half of established list prices, and payments have usually been spread out
over several years. Of the total $2.5 billion worth of arms that the Bloc has
supplied to countries in the area, over $1 billion have gone to the UAR, and
for this, the UAR has had to pay only about $500 million. Other major re-
cipients have been Syria, Iraq, India, Yemen, Algeria, and Afghanistan. In
all these cases—except India—Soviet military equipment has become the stand-
ard for the armed forces involved. While the bulk of it has gone to countries
with foreign policies or political institutions having some degree of harmony
with Moscow’s, the USSR has also been willing to sell military hardware to

Cyprus and to such regimes as that of the late Imam of Yemen and of King
Hasan in Morocco. ~

VALUE OF COMMUNIST MILITARY ASSISTANCE
1955—June 1965

(Dollar values are derived from list prices specified in agreements where
these are known, or by analogy with these prices in other cases.)

Million US $_

Eastern Communist

Total USSR Europe China
Afghanistan............... 215 . 22. 202 13
AISCPIO cs oe ead tea eoecganed 123 110 1 12
Cyprus...... 42 aseneben aun tte gies : 14. - : 14
India..... 20.0... preside rates --293 293
TAG) ss is ce ete eae okeiok 378 378
Moroceo...........20. ae - il SAL
OYTO og estates each el aerate en _ 387 302 35 aa
United Arab Republic... ... 1,100 885 215
VOMON cies oii ees cared aa 88 60 28

2,559 2,255 292 12

« The UAR concluded a new arms agreement with the USSR in late 1964. We
believe it to be large but we have no information as yet to indicate its value.

Economic Aid

15. Since 1954, Moscow and its European associates have extended nearly
$5 billion in economic credits and grants to countries in the area, of which about
$1.8 billion has been utilized to date. India and the VAR together have goiten
almost 60 percent of total extensions in the area. Other principal beneficiaries
are Afghanistan, Iraq, Syria, and Algeria. The Soviets have gone in for a wide
variety of aid projects—railroads, ports, roads, schools, and industrial installa-
tions ranging from steel mills to factories for light bulbs. Soviet aid is directed

* Chinese military aid has been limited fo about $12 million worth of arms supplied to

Algeria during the struggle for independence. China may also have agreed to furnish arms
to the Palestine Liberation Organization.

10 secrete

ates

to public sector enterprises which, Moscow believes, further the development of
socialism in the recipient country. An important part of the Soviet and East
European economic aid program is the provision of technical assistance. In
the past 10 years, an estimated 45,000 economic technicians have been employed
in the area, of whom about 10,000 were present during the last half of 1964.
During the same period, some 7,000 trainees went to the USSR and East
European countries for various types of technical training.

16. Communist China has provided aid on a far smaller scale. Its extensions
to eight countries have amounted to $357 million, of which less than $50 million
has been utilized, almost entirely in Yemen, Ceylon, and Nepal. Peiping’s share
of economic technicians and trainees has been correspondingly small.

COMMUNIST ECONOMIC AID
January 1954-June 1965

Million US §
eee Million US'S
EXTENDED DRAWN
Commu- Commu-
Eastern nist Eastern nist
Total USSR Europe China Total USSR Europe China
Middle East.............- 2,228 1,452 633. 143 647 492 133 22
Cyprus. ...-... 2... - ob 0 1 0 1 0 1 0
TPB sra tenth aches Bates 70 39 31 0 8 : 2 6 0
TPH Setdsateor aee Seca 218 184 34 0 102 We. <0 0
Syrian Arab Republic.... — 2167 150. 50 16 63 40 23 0
TUPKOY tah ee 16 8 8 0 16 8 8 1)
United Arab Republic... 1,560 1,011 464 85 A315 316 94 5
VeMCNs sci bach eae Se 2. 2 Ld47 60 45 42 42 24 1 17
South Asia......-.. Busta abet 2,295 ~ 1,759 364 172 1,091 957 109 25
Afghanistan............ : 646 611 7 28 365 358 7 0
Ceylon............2000. 124 31 52 41 26 10 2 i4
DNC oe ces nk Ge decade Go 1,299 1,022 277 0) 648 548 100 0
Nepal wcchii aun ceca dies 64. 21 0 43 21 10 ) ll
Pakistan. ...........0.. 162 74 28 60 31 31 0 O-
North Africa... ....,..... 402 281 69 52 38 21 15 2
Algeria..... 2... eee 304 230 22 52 13 7 4 2
Morocco. ... 2 eee eee 17 0 17 0 5 0 5 0
Sudan... ....-.. cece ee 33 _ 23 10 0 11 11 0 0
"PUMA ied ke wes ‘ 48 28 : 20 0 9 3 6 0
POM Mien eases ehe _ £,925 3,478 1,066 367 1,776 1,470 257 49
Trade
17. The Communist countries have established commercial relations with
nearly all countries of the Middle East and South Asia. While total trade turn-
over has tripled since 1955 and reached almost $2 billion in 1964, it is heavily
concentrated on a few countries and a few commodities. Much of this can
be accounted for by a vigorous trade offensive, but a substantial amount results
from Soviet willingness to take surplus commodities and to provide goods on
long-term credits. Trade and credits are already an important feature of Com-
munist expansion and are likely to become more so. Of the area’s trade with
exe 11

Communist countries, 45 percent is with East Europe, 40 percent with the USSR,
and the remainder with China. India and the UAR account for almost half
this trade; other principal participants are Greece, Iran, Syria, and Afghanistan.
The share of the total trade of these countries conducted with the Communist
nations ranges from 45 percent for Afghanistan and 30 percent for the UAR,
down through 15-20 percent for Syria and the Sudan, and 10 percent for India;
the involvement of the others falls below this and in many instances is trifling.

18. Since 1960, the USSR and Czechoslovakia have acquired extensive civil
air routes in North Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia. (See map, pages ~
16-17.) They are continuing to develop a substantial international air service
network to countries in the area, and through them to sub-Saharan Africa and
to Southeast Asia. Though other Communist countries have established some
air routes, their development has been limited by insufficient modern aircraft
and low traffic potential. Local countries are generally willing to grant routes
and landing rights. Soviet shipping is increasing and carries a large proportion
of the bilateral trade referred to above. Soviet port improvement and fishery
projects in Yemen, Sudan, and the UAR have given Moscow the potential to
acquire special facilities for its own trawlers, both legitimate fishing vessels and
those used for intelligence collection.

TRADE WITH COMMUNIST COUNTRIES ~
Million US $

; USSR EASTERN EUROPE COMMUNIST CHINA

Country 1935 1964 1955 1964 1955 1964
TOTAL..... Pe detius nat ima lata ates 130.6 ~ 793.1 340.9 918.3 147.8 232.3
Afghanistan................. 24.5 72.0 1.0 12.0 0 Nua.
AIQOLIAs ores bac ee ode See Sule 2.4 5.84 4.3 NLA, 0 NLA.
Ceylon..........00....000005 0.1 35.3 1.8— 30.4 _ 42.3 72.2
CYPIUS 64 b4n lect bods oa waves 0 1.8 2.1 6.1 0 N.A,
GrOGCC ifs nF '55 kW sles -d.1 43.2 17.4 80.3 0.1 b
PRA es ees ated Shoe 3 Aaa 11.2 301.8 12.5 _ 226.0 27.0 0.1
TPAD tinctiaiadin sth antes ee a tades 37.4 53.3 9.1 40.3 0 0
PRA Geen atels ela a bob ndeat cata b 39.3 / 552 22.1 0.1 19.3
Tsrael. cassis 4 tats aeadtore. 6.5 0.6 Tot 32.2 b b
POVOAD si oie t ae eede ko bake _b 2.1 2.3 11.8 b 2.0
WMuwaiticc4 kere esd N.A. b N.A, 2.04 N.A. 3.04
Lebanon... .. ee eee eee eee L.8 - 5.88 6.2 15.04 0.2 NvA
Libya... eee eee 0 5.1 0.3 7.6 0 1.7
Morocco... 2... cece eee ee 1.8 17.7 IL.t 4122: _ 19.0 _.29.8
Nepalisct sginanig se eewees wad 0 lla NLA NLA, NLA N.A
Pakistan. ............200006 0. 12.5 8.2 10.3 32.1 21.1
Saudi Arabia... 22... .....20, 0 NLA 0 NLA 0 NLA,
SYL1A shone base oh t Salve latin Sees 0.2 18.8 6.6 43.7 O.4 28.2
SUA Gs. eon tie de Mane aids O.1 11.4 7.1 32.1 0.9 10.5
PUUMUSIA toh ctetieed be Bae ee 0.1 3.9 2.0 19.6 0 0.5
FPUP RC Ys &. catec welsh eed te od 13.5 17.4 146.4 59.8 0 0 :
United Arab Republic. ....... 26.8 139.3 89.6 225.8 25.4 43.9
MiGMOtie sen es donee en ca? 0 4.94 NLA N.A. NA NLA

® 1963; latest figures available.
b Less than $50,000.

Cultural Relations

19, The Soviet Union devotes considerable effort to educational, cultural,
and propaganda activities. China is also increasing its activity in these fields
and has equalled or surpassed the Soviets in a few places—notably Pakistan
and Ceylon—where it had special access or interest. More than half the
countries in the area have concluded cultural agreements with one or more
Communist countries. These may provide for any or all of the following—ex-
change of delegations, performers, exhibits, and teachers, import of books at
very low prices, and arrangements for scholarship study in the Communist world.
The Soviet news agency, TASS, has offices in virtually every country in the area,
while the New China News Agency has offices in about half the countries.
(See map, page 5.) Radio broadcasting by the Communist countries, in local
or commonly used languages, has trebled since 1955 to nearly 700 hours a week.

20. Communist propaganda, coming from countries with no history of colonial
domination in the area, emphasizes interests. and attitudes which are at least
superficially congruent. Consequently, in most countries relatively few impedi-
ments are placed in the way of cultural and information activities, and themes
of anti-imperialism and Communist progress go over fairly well. The Com-
munist countries have cultural centers in more than two-thirds of the countries
of the area, ranging in number from 17 in India to one in Pakistan, in the UAR,
and in Iran. Some 8,000 students from the area have taken academic training
in Communist countries. While some return disaffected with their experiences,
and while the total number is small in comparison with the tens of thousands
educated in the West, such education serves to spread Communist political and
economic ideas in the area. The number of students entering Bloc universities
has declined sharply from a peak of several thousand in 1961 and 1962. Students
are generally selected through the mechanism of cultural agreements, but many,
especially those from countries hostile to the Bloc, are picked up semi-clan-
destinely when they run out of funds in Western Europe or through the inter-
national youth and student front mechanisms.

Communist Movements

21. Domestic Communist movements run the gamut from legal parties of some
size—as in India, Cyprus, and Israel—to small numbers of Communists, insuffi-
cient to form a party—as in Saudi Arabia and Afghanistan. In much of the
area, Communist parties are repressed and kept off balance by government
harassment. In only a few countries—India, Cyprus, and Greece—do the do-
mestic Communist movements rank as important nationwide political forces.
Elsewhere, their power derives from the fact that they are better organized
than most competing movements. This has enabled the Communists to survive
repression and, on occasion, to seize opportunities presented by political up-
heaval. Such was the case in 1959 under Qasim in Iraq and in the Sudan

in late 1964.
sete? 13

“quoul 04

UWMOUY SISMNUNUOD TBA yy-UOU OUOg
AOA yHoqord quiy

Youu ory -qUoUIRTPInd Jo SOqUTOPT G

*pUNOLA Op VUOs: ‘protge

oumos {rel ul SdopeRvp ouloy = “[TRsN{]
Hzdiory ur daysiopwary — pesPuy yy.

“(QUO quesRog)
VYGUY UBSTT BIPU-[TY
“SSOLTUOD
UdlU() OpelL BIPUp-[TY “6 quoUTelIeY [RUOIBN UL SsyBos 7%
I

“PIOUIVIPR, [PUOITEN,

UL syees PT Tel ur saapeoy dog Ausypy

“qUOUT
-JAOWT FSI[TVITIpUsG 7
orewowog, = *(¥ CLS) .
‘qJorT oesooocy popu, 6
(NOCD)
uolyezIUesIQ yyNoZ
d4BIIOWOCE poylug

“(OWd) worete
“po toqey wendsourg

cress TINO UL SepBory — ‘TBRYTT]
“NOCAL UF o8sye
Od OOOTE ME “000% SFU NOAH
“SO
“WOW TADSTV 000° pue 000'LE S84 Od

“quoUulBILIed Jo SuacHUDyAy QO]

“‘quoulelpied Jo s1oqMayy, +
"NL Oy. opur poydod
~9B Ud DABY SMOqtOUl WO g vulos
pues ‘ngdO 0% sdiysuonvpr Aq1ed

POYSTIqByso SVE NTA !296L UL pouueg.
“AqATqOR ‘Aue J OTTT

 S}ted Aq poppoayues SUOIUUIOD

SUOTTBZIUBSIO LYIO

7“ MODSO LAT
SQUALOY
osu o-ord
qguq = fALoasO Ay

-pe
Sey
Ferree ee OO8O AL
cs "surdig
emo e ewe ek . * MODSOJAT
“UOry

-a"y asouTyy)-o1d
B YQIA yng ‘Mooso yy

* MODSO JAI
OPVAYSIOLL
sete ene “OUAYSIONL

suidng
Ferre esos MoaSO RAT

voUBIZd.[TV

a rk cre Sian |) ° |

Bese seven St ee Roe ee
sopLxo

Ub podpumy [Blo

-AOS ‘UBIT UL + OOS

g00'GS

Bree eee ne QQ0'0L
“YISSN, oy pur odor
“NGL WIO|SUST UE OpXo
Ul SyvoIry Zuowy
SESTAIZOT COOOL
-o00'2 suid gootre

be

“> (G95 E JO'SB) OOG6'SI
;

ee VT

are eae tema 11016 0

ec aog

SSPE TEE ALET

RE acre

« Ciysuaq uo]

ViRIV HAUL NI SiLuvd LSINDWWOO

Stree etn te eee tena eee re nese e secre fap pozea1o ON

nrrseresss(qowasy JO dO) VIRAL

sre Derp jo Aqaegy ysruniuui9y

“Uva
jo Aye (8jdoog) ywpny

sees (qgorq) BIpUy JO dD (2)

se (usin) wipul Jo dd (1)

ttetes es (GreTyp) 000019 JO dO

(TEV) doo
SuLpIOM OYy Jo AqVT WOR; YY

(Areuornyoanyy)
Aqaug vleurey wurug wyusy (F)
Aqieg vleurey vuryg vyuey (¢)
tresseseesssHoTfay jo go (Z)
a sorts -uropfag JO FO (1)

(WOd)

Aqivg ysrunwuog uesLwosTy

(S)otule Ny

Tr aT BALES

srs pL RIST

ct bea

Sees cupay

vee eeeeppuy

"hrs togp0dr)

vee egnadsig

tee *uopsag

see ‘Blas Ty

“UBISIUBY SY

AUN)

st
—

“ORY URYD LoyJO SUOIUZIUREIO JUUgIOdUITT oto ASIP OA, Odo ‘SurqolDOs
dryspuolyp ‘sduodd suoui0 A pur Quopnggy ‘yqnO A ‘oave JO SUUSIZAUY-—SJUOL] ASHMMUWOD JO vBUTA Tens a14y AosuOds 09 4dtio74T JO AosuOdS SoIQINd YSOTAT 4

DOA) PUB ‘FORIST

‘wipuy ‘snadAp a0y sounBy ano Ul vduepyuos vow YeILMoUIOS VARY OM “UOIQRULIOJUL AreyUOWBly AOA UO posed Uaqjo ‘soywuTgso YSNor ole soanBy osorpy, v

f TC Ae

“UOITY] FSITWIVOY

L ‘opXe UP dirysiopewary peBopp tr oasopg ch Om

AUAIOV oGRLOSIp OFT POROTTP tr agg
‘adoangy .
Wdoysusg UP offXe UL ysepyeg pIyEqy
lopBey FsyUNTUWOD oulTg-Buoery peRoyp ot Moo py 900 -0005T

*saTqoey [eorqtfod .t0A0
OT YOS puw parvy OFUL poplaAtp Ayeg ;
“UOIUL) SIOYIO AL ABATIVY "FOG L dquwaony oowis Aqipeso] oyonf aq «7+

* M0080 J] Bae Pee SAE? ate

“BIPUT UL StopROTE [RBaYP Tt ANooso py) |

SUOTPEZINERLO IOTIO

(panuiqued) VAUV WILL NI SUILUVd LSINOWWOO

Totnes ares eecs seers sss + Ka red poZies1o ON Tees UO

UOTYBALOGE | [BUORN OJ
MWUHAOPL o1gemoucy (Zz) '
({RrY JO LOAVS UY “GOG] UT poapossyp YOR, “°° MOOSOWp Th  QQOTT-O0R cooeestadédsy Jodo () ava

crete Koy JO dQ ooo tt Aoyang,
TRISTE JO TO oot RIstuNy,

totes se mTag Jo dO nn Tes)
heres ssa ugpng cots uspng

‘

Aqred poztueZio oN * + viIqery Ipneg
“UBISHITCY IBY JO ID (0 UBySHyeg

c8ituOIqNO, ,-[BdON TD (@)

Tedop-isengy a ** ODKO TA f ead Ciel ee any... *_ oyampour,,-jedan dO () ccc pedan
“UO polLiea st APTATY ne” ane EG
-Ov quopnys pur yok poqruniy {esol ey set ROARS Re hana st “y00'F-000‘T Ce “do uB900L0}] seen ee “099010 J]
Apred pozireBao on, ot  BAQIT
‘duidiug ‘cccc ccc cumouyuyy *Aqieg Areuornpoaoyy 4siperoog
svouopuad
~OpUT d410UL JUBAL ;
Uopoyao puoaos
‘wn oul]
UOLpofo UL ayediaiaud pur JIAOY 04 oxOPD
‘qoour ‘ysiqnd 09 peao[p[e ‘Pesop-iseng avy swoproy doy pw coco Sy a eR a sores uouRgorE JO gO coo uouRgory
*pBolge atuoes href ul SIVPBI] AUBIY i “004'T-00% ey “Usps0¢ jo dO ee ee eee “aBpa0r
q 4qaed Ay payo.uo0a SPUOULUOD VIUBIBO[TV w Ciys1oquisa yy (s)ouuN | AIQUNOD

15

aa a Soviet and Chicom Economic and Military Assist

Moscov
\ Wis

t
% 5 a“ if. !
re ee / i
: Po
Frankfurt \_ ; |
cy

i
Bucharest
ay N\
cer Marseille \! sofia x F
fo LS :
va - ™ J Istanbul \
\ Tuzlax % \
fa ae | glass factory Ww Ankara\
uae - a TURKEY
Algiers a Tunis A Al Qam
* ———— 2 : a |
_ oil tanker A echnical Nigogia |" Rag l iboag
a institute . ®
bat ° CYPRUS
: eS TUNISIA day Ak
-MOROCCO a Tripoli ffeil
a = e ® Tel Aviv- gre
; Benghazi _ : ; Yafo : ;
| | A eS
fh _ ALGERIA <a JORDAN
7 a LIBYA ‘ee
t steel plant iS
expansion
UNITED ARAB
REPUBLIC
= 2
Aswan
dam
Port Sud .
‘ort Sudan
SUDAN grain silo K
A
Khartoum i
® : ALK
a ‘
Al Qadarif
grgin silo

Conakry &, a)
ees :
Accra
y ®
: £7 ya

51523 5-65 ee:

ince xk *

a A
Aras River
shit dam

IRAQ
‘ae

Slane e2ehdad

pared | “Dawid
aes

"ad ee R
KUWAIT Y

Riyadh

SAUDI
ARABIA

ee
t 2 airfield
idoydah an

port ee

Kuwait

devlopment
program

Karachi

BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION [S
NOT NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

road | Salang-Pass~

tunnel

Economic and Military Assistance

wm Soviet military assistance

A Soviet economic assistance

3% Chicom economic assistance

4... Selected Soviet project

Selected Chicom project

Soviet and East European Air Routes

aes Soviet
Czech
Other East European

——-— Other East European
(proposed)

7

a

hu

BHUTAN
INDIA PAKISTAN
ae
.
7 Ranchi hi
Q 7 eavy machine
* Koyali ‘2 building plant
oil refinery Bhilai
teel pl Ss
shite steel plant Soest :

2 Neyveli
power plant

»
*

@. CEYLON

Colombo AS -

~~ To p;.
~~ Ya,
= hart

~

22. The Communist parties employ a wide variety of tactics, including the
infiltration of local organizations and institutions—governments, political parties,
student groups, ethnic and religious bodies, labor unions, and security forces.
They control important trade unions in India, Sudan, Greece, and Cyprus.
Communists have also infiltrated and influenced the National Awami Party in
Pakistan. In Greece, the United Democratic Left (EDA), though a legal party
which polled 11 percent of the vote in the national elections of 1964, is in fact
a front of the outlawed Greek Communist Party (KKE). In the Sudan, the
Communist party collaborates with parties and organizations of professional
people, youth, and students to oppose the traditional parties. In Algeria and
the UAR, the official Communist parties have been dissolved in favor of support
of the single socialist party established in each of those countries.

23. The Communist parties in most of the area have been unable to capitalize
substantially on the widespread poverty and limited social mobility characteristic
of these traditional societies. Hardly anywhere in the area has a modern
political party been successful in reaching the peasantry, and this is true also
in the case of much of the urban population, which is still strongly tradition-
bound. Nevertheless, it is within the urban framework that such parties, in-
cluding the Communist, seek their principal support. The expansion of edu-
cation and the growth of industry are gradually eroding traditional attitudes
and bringing awareness that change is both possible and desirable. Thus, both
the working classes in the towns and the growing educated elements are po-
tential recruiting grounds for modernizing parties. Almost without exception,
however, the Communists’ have emerged a poor second to nationalist, reformist
movements in winning support and establishing themselves as the principal
modernizing force in developing societies. For the most part, Communist parties
have attracted discontented intellectuals and only moderate numbers of workers,
often from minority groups.

24. Other factors have also served to limit the usefulness of Communist move-
ments to the Soviet Union. Policy direction from abroad often hurts the local
Communist party’s image and sometimes creates suspicions of Soviet motives
among local leaders. Communist hostility toward religion is a detriment where
religious beliefs are still strong. Factionalism has been a prominent feature
of Communist parties in the area for several decades; it has increased as the
Sino-Soviet split has deepened and as the Chinese have begun to work actively
within the parties. In a number of parties, some factions have adopted the
Chinese line, at least in part as a tactic to work against long established Com-
munist leaders. In India and Ceylon, the local parties have split into two
organizations. In Algeria, Cyprus, and India, the local parties stood apart from
independence struggles and thereby damaged their standing with the nationalist
forces. Narrow personal involvement of some leaders, e.g., Khalid Bakdash,
has hurt Arab communism.

18

el

25. While these problems and errors have by no means eliminated the value
of the local movements to Moscow, they have limited their usefulness and
progress, especially when they have revealed basic conflicts between the aims
of communism and local nationalism. Indeed, the low estate of the Communist
movements and parties throughout much of the area has been a major factor
in the realignment of Soviet tactical objectives; the shift from attempts to gain
power “from below” by developing a mass organization, in favor of attempts
to infiltrate ongoing revolutionary movements “from above” by the tactics of
“national democracy” and “revolutionary democracy.”

The Covert Mechanism

26. For the formulation and execution of policy, the Soviets and the Chinese
each have a highly integrated party and governmental apparatus. Moreover,
the conspiratorial background and nature of Communist organization tend to
make clandestine activity fit well into their overseas activities. The Soviet
intelligence services, the Committee for State Security (KGB) and the Chief
Intelligence Directorate (GRU), play a wide role in carrying out foreign policy.
The KGB does a substantial amount of work in reporting and in influencing
local officialdom. The KGB also plays an important role in the effort to gain
influence and control over the persons and groups who dominate local
political life.

27. Our information on the numbers and activities of the services in the area
is necessarily incomplete. Of the 1,917 Soviet officials known to be in the area
at the beginning of 1965—exclusive of military and economic technicians—we
can positively identify 211 as intelligence personnel. On the basis of established
criteria, a further 235 are suspected of being intelligence personnel. The actual
number is probably considerably larger; we know from KGB and GRU defectors
and from analysis of Soviet installations in areas where more evidence is available
that more than half of Soviet official personnel abroad—exclusive of military
and economic technicians—are intelligence officers.

28. Soviet intelligence officers are heavily concentrated in diplomatic missions.
In those countries of the area where our coverage of Soviet embassies is most
extensive, the known and suspect intelligence officers often occupy over two-
thirds of the diplomatic positions. Such ratios obtain in Soviet diplomatic in-
stallations the world over. Moreover, Soviet intelligence officers fill most of
the principal positions in such embassies, sometimes including that of ambassador
and almost always those of the chiefs of the political, economic, and other
sections. The services also use other Soviet government organs—TASS, Aeroflot,
military missions, etc.,—as cover for clandestine operations. Economic aid
missions provide some cover for clandestine activities, though the specialized
work done and the isolated lives of most technicians argue against extensive use
of them for such purposes.

*In Communist usage, “intelligence” implies, to a far greater degree than in Western
parlance or practice, clandestine or subversive activity. The Soviet Intelligence Services
are described in more detail in the Annex.

sEDRgr 19

29. Analysis of Soviet covert operations in the area, based on evidence which
ranges from extensive and intensive surveillance of a Soviet embassy in an Arab
country, through fairly good observation in several other countries, down to
minimal coverage of the remainder, brings out discernible patterns of activity
and of principal targets at which the Soviet intelligence services work. We
know from defectors that the Soviets place considerable stress on the recruit-
ment of assets able to influence or control the policies of local governments,
political parties, and the like. The Soviets put great effort into influencing,
buying, and subverting the press. They naturally do more where the press
is relatively free of government control, as in Lebanon or India, but are very
active even in countries where it is not. The Soviets work consistently to pene-
trate US installations, both diplomatic and military, and to discredit US policies,
often by planting false intelligence and circulating forgeries purporting to be
‘US Government documents. They mount operations aimed at developing
sources of intelligence within the government and security services of the host
countries. Finally, they attempt to monitor, support, and control local Com-
munist leadership. ; -

30. The Eastern European countries also undertake clandestine operations
in this area. Their services are small by comparison with those of the Soviets,
seem to be fairly limited in their activity, and very often work quite closely
with the Russians. The little evidence at our disposal indicates that they work
against emigre groups of their own nationality and in some cases collect in-
formation on local governments. We have no evidence indicating efforts of
Eastern European countries to acquire controlled press assets.

31. In various areas of the world, Communist China conducts a pattern of
clandestine activities, including covert intelligence collection, political subver-
sion, and the promotion of pro-Peiping Communist parties or factions. Covert
intelligence collection is handled basically by two intelligence services: the
Intelligence Department of the armed forces and the Investigation Department
of the Communist Party. The other clandestine activities are conducted by
other components of the Communist Party. In the area covered by this estimate,
our knowledge of specific Chinese Communist clandestine activity is sparse but
the general pattern would seem to be the same. There is no evidence of co-
operation between the Soviets and the Chinese in clandestine matters.

32. It is impossible to make a very thorough assessment of Soviet intelligence
successes and failures. We do, however, have evidence that Soviet efforts in
respect of the press have had a good deal of success. Controlled press assets
or overtly Communist papers are fairly numerous in certain countries, particu-
larly India, Greece, Cyprus, Israel, Lebanon, Algeria, and Ceylon. Assets of
both types include the well-edited Indian weekly, Link, the Lebanese newspapers
Al-Akhbar and Al-Nida, and the Cypriot Haravghi. We have good evidence of
Soviet recruitment of several people who have occupied senior government posi-
tions while working for the Soviets. They include a former foreign minister of

20 Bag?

Ee,

one state, a former ambassador of another, and a sensitively placed military
officer of a third. The Soviets—or their East European allies—have had several
successful recruitments in Israel, including an agent who held Ben Gurion’s con-
fidence for five years. There have also been a number of successful Soviet
recruitments of lower level assets in a variety of countries. We must assume
that the Soviets have other successful operations of which we do not know.
All things considered, we believe that the Soviets have been fairly successful
in mounting covert operations.

IV. COMMUNIST PROGRESS AND PROSPECTS

33. In particular countries, the Communist powers have gained entree, influ- _
ence, and leverage by military and economic aid and by support on issues of
great importance to that country. The tactics of promoting nonalignment, en-
couraging nationalist feeling, and moving to aid revolutionary regimes with
arms and economic aid, have given the Soviets a sizable measure of prestige
and influence in a number of countries. Six armies in the area are largely or
totally equipped with Soviet arms and trained in Soviet methods. By such
moves as denying military spares, the USSR has some potential to exert leverage
on those countries which look to it for aid. The expanded Soviet presence has
given the Soviets good opportunities to acquire clandestine assets.

34. We believe, however, that the vast majority of actions and decisions by
area governments which in one way or another favor Communist aims are the
result of deeply held beliefs in nonalignment as a valid national policy, of anti-
Western prejudices stemming from the era of colonial rule, of predilections for
an authoritarian socialist system, and of admiration for the rapid economic ad-
vance of the Communist countries. On occasion, clandestine Soviet assets have
apparently been able to influence their governments’ policies in ways favorable
to the Soviets. There are other prominent figures—Khalid Muhvi-al-Din in
Cairo, Dr. Lyssarides in Nicosia, for example—who habitually advocate policies
congenial to the USSR. However, in no case is there evidence to suggest that
either Moscow or Peiping can get a specific decision of major importance made
on command. Nevertheless, the Soviets through their overall activities are able
to exercise a degree of influence on a number of area governments.

South Asia

35. In India, both the Soviet Union and China enjoyed an upsurge of popu-
larity in the middle 1950s, when Khrushchev and Chou En-lai proclaimed their
interest in coexistence, mounted major political and propaganda programs, and,
in the Soviet case, extended large amounts of economic aid. The Chinese gains
were lost as the border conflict developed between 1959 and 1962, and Chinese
influence now is confined to a part of the Left Communist Party of India. The
Soviets, on the other hand, have used a growing and well publicized aid pro-
gram plus support for India on international issues—most prominently Kash-

seoeey 21

RRO

mir—to gain substantial good will within India. Their open break with the
Chinese has further contributed to this good will and permitted them greater
latitude in courting India.

36. India will remain among the more moderate members of the Afro-Asian

world. The influence of any foreign country will be limited by India’s deter-.

mination to pursue its national interests as it sees them. India will continue to
recognize its heavy dependence on the West. Nevertheless, New Delhi will
place high value on Soviet military and economic aid and on Soviet support in
its difficulties with China and Pakistan. Thus, India will take care to avoid
antagonizing the USSR, and its public postures on international issues will often
coincide with those of the Soviets.

37. The Soviets have not been able to translate the good will they have won
into any substantial influence on the domestic politics of India. Soviet indus-
trial assistance has been of great assistance to India in carrying out its plans for
expanding the public sector. The Communist movement, although it has gotten
as much as 10 percent of the vote in past elections, and maintains substantial
influence in the trade union movement, has been weakened by the split into
two parties. Indian Communists, particularly those on the left, appear to be
moving toward a stronger anti-government line, but they cannot carry such ac-
tions very far lest the security forces crack down on them still further. There is
little prospect of either Indian Communist party achieving any major national
gains in the next several years.

38. The situation of the two Communist powers with regard to Pakistan is al-
most the reverse. The Soviet Union has made very little progress since it has
-chosen to identify itself with Pakistan’s rivals, Afghanistan and India, in the
disputes over Pushtunistan and Kashmir. China has capitalized skillfully on
Pakistan’s reaction to the US military aid program for India and has been willing
to give at least the appearance of support to Pakistani security interests, In
retu, Pakistan has supported a number of Chinese positions in the Afro-Asian
context, and the two countries have concluded a border agreement (in the
Pakistan-occupied part of Kashmir) as well as a civil air agreement, and have
begun to establish economic and cultural ties, though these are so far minimal.
Ayub has generally kept Pakistan’s relations with China carefully bounded, and
we think he will continue to make this effort. However, there is a danger that
Pakistan will miscalculate US tolerance and carry its relationship with Peiping
so far as to precipitate a major crisis in US-Pakistani relations. Tn such a situa-
tion, opportunities for the Communist countries to increase their influence in
Pakistan could be greatly enhanced.

39. The domestic Communist Party in West Pakistan is insignificant. In East
Pakistan, the small, illegal Communist Party works chiefly by exploiting Bengali
suspicions of Rawalpindi. A fair number of Communists and sympathizers have
joined and exercise influence in the National Awami Party. They trade on the
massive poverty, student discontent, and general political negativism charac-
teristic of Bengali political life. However, Ayub is firmly in control of Pakistan,

22

Se

‘ENE enamel. aa

Pe ait

and his domestic policies are designed to minimize the weaknesses out of which
a Communist threat could grow. We see no significant Communist threat devel-_
oping at least for some years to come. : :

40. Though Ceylon is now ruled by a pro-Western government, there is con-
siderable potential for Communist advance, despite the splits within the Marxist
movement. The government lacks a firm parliamentary majority, and the op-
position—led by the former Prime Minister, Madame Bandaranaike—seems to
be increasing its radical and leftist orientation. Indeed, during its last six
months in office, the Bandaranaike government included representatives of the
Trotskyite party in prominent roles. The present anti-Communist government
is faced with economic problems—inflation, depleted exchange reserves, unem-
ployment—which will plague Ceylon for a long time to come. There is a fair
chance that the Bandaranaike government (or one like it) will be returned to
power during the next few years. In such an event, Ceylon would almost cer-
tainly move toward closer ties with the USSR and with China. Moreover, the
influence of the Marxist parties would increase, and they would probably be
able to influence the government toward a sweeping program of socialization.

41. Penned into the mountain barrier between China and India, Nepal has
little choice but to play one side against the other. It has pursued this tactic
rather successfully, getting aid from both, and at the same time putting out lines
to the US, USSR, Pakistan, and any other country likely to be of help in bal-
ancing off its neighbors. The local Communist Party is split, and Chinese efforts
have won Peiping some sympathizers in the Nepalese Government. We think
the King will retain control of the country during the next few years and will
continue to play off China and India. However, Nepal is vulnerable to Chinese
pressure, the more so because such power as ‘is exercised is concentrated in the
King’s hands. Moreover, Nepalese suspicions of India might hamper efforts by
New Delhi to counter Chinese moves.

42. In Afghanistan, the large Soviet military and economic aid effort has
helped to open up and change a remote nation in a very short time. The
Afghan armed forces are almost entirely Soviet-equipped, and nearly half of the
country’s foreign trade is with the USSR. Moreover, Afghanistan, while inde-
pendent and proclaiming a neutral foreign policy, in practice sides with the
Soviets on many international issues. Significantly, however, the political lib-
eralization measures of the past two years have been in the direction of Western
patterns, rather than of a one-party socialist ideology, though political power in
Afghanistan still remains largely in the hands of the King.

43, The massive Soviet aid program, plus the increasing trade ties, will prob-
ably continue to keep the relationship between Kabul and Moscow close. ~In
the immediate future, the Soviets probably will have little incentive to risk dis-
ruption of this favorable situation by overplaying their hand. However, Afghan-
istan’s efforts at modernization, particularly in the political field, will almost
certainly lead to serious strains in the society. Such circumstances could present
opportunities for the USSR to use its presence and influence to shape the course
of events. Chinese influence has been and is likely to remain minimal.

ake 23

=

The Arab World

44. Arab resentments over European dominance and at Western support for
Israel have presented the Communist countries with opportunities. Nationalist
feeling is widespread and is directed at eliminating the vestiges of Western
special interests—e.g., military bases, British dominance in portions of the
Arabian Peninsula, and Western contro! of the oil industry. The UK-French-
Israeli attack on Suez in 1956 is still fresh in the minds of the Arabs, and even
moderate elements suspect the West of meddling in area politics. In most
Arab countries, the political leadership devolves on one man, and those who
have emerged as the new leaders have been disposed to try to play the Soviet
Union off against the West. F inally, the Arab states are experiencing consider-
able difficulty in evolving political and economic systems which combine mod-
ernization with their own cultural traditions. Some of the modernizing elements
in the area have come to regard Yugoslavia as a state which is making sub-
stantial progress in development through authoritarian and socialist means
and at the same time maintaining its independence from Soviet domination.

45. Soviet influence is strongest in the UAR. It has been built on Soviet
willingness to provide substantial and continuing supplies of arms and large-
scale assistance in economic development, and on shared interests in promoting
revolutionary governments and cutting down Western influence in the Middle
East and Africa. The Soviets are the source of almost all the UAR’s armaments
and so have the capability, should they choose to exercise it, of hampering
Nasser militarily by withholding spares and ammunition—albeit at considerable
political cost. In terms of state-to-state relationships and international affairs,
Soviet prestige is high in Cairo.

46. Cairo is host to the secretariat of the Afro-Asian People’s Solidarity Or-
ganization (AAPSO), which is heavily supported by Communist countries, and
to a number of other radical organizations. Moreover, Cairo has ambitions to
play a leading role in African affairs. The USSR’s military aid has enabled the
UAR to intervene in such places as Yemen and the Congo much more effectively
than it could otherwise have done. The Soviets have not only encouraged
Nasser to transfer Soviet arms previously delivered to him, but they have on
occasion used the UAR as a conduit and transshipment point for their own’
supply to third parties. At other times, they have supplied arms directly to
other countries in the area.

47, Nevertheless, Cairo is jealous of its own independence; while it some-
times responds to Soviet pressures, we believe it is determined to resist any
significant efforts to undermine its freedom of action. The Chinese have a
large official and quasi-official establishment in Cairo, but appear not to have
much influence. UAR and Soviet foreign policies are congruent over a wide
range of affairs and there is a good deal of willing collaboration, but we have
no evidence that any Communist state has the ability to exercise decisive influ-
ence on the basic thrust of UAR foreign policy.

24

48. For a long time Nasser suppressed the Egyptian Communists, and Moscow
put up with this. Nearly all of them were released in 1964. Recently, in line
with Moscow’s policy of treating certain “socialist” parties as fraternal parties,
the Communist Party of Egypt and a second Communist group—both small
in size and heavily penetrated by Egyptian security forces—dissolved themselves
and ordered their members to seek membership in Nasser’s Arab Socialist Union
(ASU). Several Communists and Marxists already occupy responsible positions
in the ASU and in the government-controlled press. Nasser apparently has
little fear that the Communists will take over the ASU and thinks that their
organizing ability can contribute to making it more effective. This development
clearly offers opportunities for expanded influence on the part of the Commu-
nists over the longer term. However, the ASU must overcome many difficult
obstacles before it can become an effective political instrument.

49, The emergence of an independent Algeria after a bloody war against the
French presented attractive opportunities to che Soviets and the Chinese. Under
Ben Bella, Algeria showed a willingness to align itself with the Communists
on sensitive world issues. Algeria also claimed to be following “scientific so-
cialism,” and the CPSU treated the FLN as a fraternal party. Ben Bella’s ouster
by army chief Boumedienne has been a setback for the Soviets. Boumedienne
has declared that his regime will turn its attention to internal affairs, and this
is likely to involve a more genuinely nonaligned foreign policy. Among for-
eign influences, the French will remain the most important, thanks to linguistic
and economic ties as well as substantial financial assistance. Nonetheless,
Algiers will want to continue to receive Soviet military and economic aid, and
it will endeavor to keep good relations with Moscow.

50. The Communist record in the remainder of the Arab world is uneven.
The Soviets provide virtually all the military supplies for Syria and Iraq, and
considerable economic aid as well. As a result, they have correct state-to-state
relations and a firm presence. Both Syria and Iraq are suspicious of Moscow’s
close relationship with Nasser, and this tends to limit Soviet influence. The
fortunes of the local Communist parties have fluctuated greatly. In Syria before
the 1958 union with Egypt, and in Iraq under Qasim, local Communists made
spectacular gains. However, these advances were wiped out in subsequent
political upheavals, from which the local Communists have not yet recovered.
Evidence is appearing that both the Syrian and Iraqi Communist movements
are having internal difficulty, due to the efforts of the Chinese to capture or
influence them and to internal opposition to Moscow’s policy of support for such
one-party systems as Nasser’s and Ben Bella’s.

51. In the Sudan, the small and well-organized Communist Party took advan-
tage of the confusion attendant on the collapse of the Abboud regime in October
1964 to get four posts in the first civilian cabinet. However, this thrust alarmed .
the conservatives; the Communists were forced out and failed to win any seats
in the regular parliamentary elections. They are still influential in the labor
movement and in the professional organizations; they have won 11 of the 15

BS a

oe

parliamentary seats allotted to secondary school and university graduates.
Sudanese relations with Communist countries are limited to moderate amounts
of trade and aid, and Soviet influence is small.

52. In most of the rest of the Arab world—Af orocco, Tunisia, Libya, Jordan,
and Kuwait—the Communist countries have been able to do little more than
establish a diplomatic presence over the past decade. They are unrepresented
in Saudi Arabia, as well as in Aden and other British protected states in the
Arabian peninsula. Local Communist parties, where they exist, are small and
repressed, and the several rulers are hostile to communism, although Tunisia
and Morocco have taken modest amounts of Soviet aid. On the other hand,
Soviet and Chinese presence in Yemen overshadows that of the West, though
so far without noticeable impact on the politically important elements, most of
whose energy is spent on working with or against the UAR. Lebanon is a center
for area-wide Soviet clandestine activity. However, although the local party
has scored occasional minor successes, Communist influence’on Lebanese govern-
ment policy is small. A separate, pro-Chinese party has been formed by a small
group of Lebanese Communist Party dissidents. Israel, a country with a West-
ern political system, tolerates a small, anti-Zionist, legal Communist Party, which
has little political or subversive potential.

53. We believe that the Soviets regard their efforts to extend their presence
and influence in the Arab world over the past 10 years as having been fairly
successful. Their initial hopes of establishing a dominant influence among the
nationalists have not been fulfilled and they have on occasion been discomfited
by the sudden occurrence of anti-Communist measures. The ouster of Commu-
nist-leaning governments in Iraq in 1963 and in Algeria in 1965 have demon-
strated to Moscow that local political instability does not always work to their
advantage and that they must expect periodic setbacks. Nonetheless, the
Soviets have helped the erosion of Western positions and they see in the de-
velopment and spread of socialist ideologies some potential for manipulating
developments in their favor over the long term. Thus we believe that Soviet
policy will continue to follow the same lines as in the past several years, stressing
military and economic aid, improved relationships, and the acceptability of
certain forms of socialism. - Moscow will seek where possible to expand influence
and leverage, as it recognizes that direct pressure as a way to gain its ends
is often self-defeating. a =

54, Throughout the area, the Communist presence will almost certainly con-
tinue to expand, though with limits on the amount of influence that can be
exercised, and though developments transcending the area—such as policy
changes in Moscow—could affect the trend. We think that Soviet economic and
military aid will continue to flow to the countries where they are already estab-
lished, that the trade of these states with the Communist countries will rise, and
that cultural relations and the like will increase. The Soviets are also likely
to extend economic aid to. conservative regimes such as Jordan. Moreover,

26

there is a significant chance that in one or another of the Arab countries where
Soviet presence is now limited or even nonexistent, the replacement of a con-
servative regime by a radical one would result in a rapid growth in Communist
influence. Conversely, it is possible that a regime in which the Soviets have
invested heavily may be replaced by one less tractable. All things considered,
we do not anticipate any decline in the overall Soviet presence, which has
become an established element in the affairs of the region.

55. We must assume that Soviet efforts to penetrate and control the military
services of the countries for which Moscow is the major arms supplier will con-
tinue, but we cannot assess with any confidence the probable degree of success.
We assume that Soviets and Chinese will strive, at times successfully, to create
assets in government ministries, political parties, and other centers of influence.
We think that the Soviets will strive for influence rather than outright control
of governments, at least for the next several years. But efforts to cope with,
influence, and try to control the growth of types of socialism being developed
in such countries as Egypt, Algeria, and Syria will be a continuing and difficult
task for the Communist powers. ;

56. We think that socialism in the Arab world will continue to have char-
acteristics distinct from classic communism—limited right of private property
and support for religion, for example. However, the international movement
itself is growing steadily less dogmatic on such points. The forms of socialism
practiced in the UAR and Ba’thist Syria (and at least until recently in Algeria)
have been becoming less parochially Arab; this trend will be augmented as
relationships are developed between local socialist movements and the CPSU
and other Communist parties. At the same time, ideological bonds within the
Communist world continue to loosen, as former satellites emphasize nationalism
and increased private initiative while the. older parties not in power explore
compromises suitable to their political circumstances. :

57. In time, these processes may converge. As the Arabs draw eclectically
from communism as well as other philosophies and methods, their own versions
of socialism are likely to end up a hybrid (which may or may not call itself
“Communist”). The appeal of such a local ideology, in which communism has
been acclimatized and reconciled with nationalism, could be great (although
still greatly influenced by the leader or leaders who sponsor it). Substantial
increases in membership and influence might ensue. But, although the USSR
would greet such developments as major victories, it is far from certain that
parties of this character would align their policies with the Soviet Union or
China—more, that is, than the normal convergence of interests already described.
The net effect of this development would be a nationalism somewhat more
noisily anti-Western than before, a tendency to experiment with forms of social
and political organization based on Communist-world models, and regimes
slightly more vulnerable to bona fide Communist penetration because the dis-
tinction between Communists and nationalists would have been lost.

27

BE
Iran, Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus

58. All these countries except Cyprus have been the object of Russian or
Slavic expansionism and, hence, in some measure are conditioned to look on the
USSR as a national enemy. This attitude is strongest in Turkey, and only some-
what less so in Greece; it is also deeply embedded in the attitudes of Iran’s
rulers. However, the deeply discontented in those countries are less affected
by such feelings. Rather, they are concerned primarily with altering the eco-
nomic, social, and political fabric of their own homelands.

59. In response to hostile Soviet policies in the postwar period, Greece, Turkey,
and Iran entered into defensive arrangements with the West, but during the past
two or three years the Soviet approach to this area has changed considerably
and Moscow now seeks to gain acceptance as a “good neighbor.” The Soviets
have renounced border territorial claims against Iran and Turkey and have
accepted partial responsibility for the deterioration of relations that occurred
in the postwar period. Thus, US-sponsored regional defensive alliances in the
area are now confronted not by the cohesive effect of Soviet hostility and
threatened aggression, but by the erosive effect of Soviet “friendship” capitalizing
on the emergence of neutralist sentiments and local discontent.

60. The USSR has succeeded in normalizing and improving its relations with
Tran in recent years. A modest Soviet economic assistance program has begun,
and cultural exchanges have increased. However, Iran’s foreign policy and its
voting record in the UN have generally been responsive to US initiatives. The
sizable American presence in Iran, the Western orientation of the regime, and
the present arrangements between the US and Iran have made it difficult for
the Soviets to acquire significant leverage in the country. But the Iranian
system is fragile, and the country’s stability rests to a high degree on the Shah.
Some Communist activity persists, but the Tudeh Party is effectively suppressed.
More importantly, there is considerable discontent among politically conscious
elements who feel themselves denied participation in the system. Should the
Shah be removed from the scene, Iran would probably become extremely
unstable, a situation which the Soviets might have considerable success in
exploiting.

61. Neither the USSR nor the local Communists have acquired any significant
influence during the past decade in Greece or Turkey, both of which have
valued their NATO membership. In the past year or so, the Soviets have sought
to exploit the frustration that all the parties to the Cyprus dispute felt towards
the Western powers. They have provided arms to Archbishop Makarios, and
have lent qualified support to Ankara’s position regarding the Turkish community
on Cyprus. This multiple approach has had some success, and has placed strains
on NATO ties in the Eastern Mediterranean. There has been a notable increase
during the past year of official contacts between Turkey and the USSR, including
visits of a type that have not occurred since the 1930s. At the same time, a
general relaxation of tensions on the international scene has made rigid align-
ment with NATO appear less imperative to Athens and Ankara. Accordingly,

28

we think Moscow will continue its present approach. Both Greece and Turkey
will come to look for expanded economic relations with the Communist coun-
tries. The former, in particular, will probably find the USSR and Eastern Europe
willing to buy crops that cannot be sold in the West. Both may be expected on
occasion to take foreign policy stands which parallel Soviet ones, but no basic
shift in their foreign policies is likely.

62. Both Greece and Turkey are stable societies, have well-developed politi-
cal systems, and an advanced degree of social cohesion, factors which severely
limit opportunity for the Soviets or the local Communists to make substantial
advances. The Communist front EDA vote in Greece has declined from a high
of 25 percent in 1958 to 11 percent in 1964, Communist voting strength will
persist in Greece, but is unlikely to grow significantly save possibly in the event
of severe economic difficulties or an extreme and bitter fragmentation of the
Center Union. In Turkey, the Communist Party is suppressed and insignificant.
Since the 1960 revolution socialism has become more respectable, and this de-
velopment, combined with pressures for social and economic changes, has led
the country a few steps toward the left. Some further moves in this direction
are likely, but Turkey almost certainly will not change enough to provide promis-
ing opportunities for the USSR or local Communists.

63. Cyprus is a rather different matter. The Communist Party of some 13,000
is the largest, in relation to total population, in the area. It is also the only
organized political party. The Communists also control a large and effective
labor organization as well as an active youth group, and Makarios has accepted
Communist political support. The Archbishop is, however, determined that
he will be the political power in Cyprus and has contained Communist power
when it suited his interests. The presence of some 10,000 mainland Greek
troops is a further inhibition upon Communist progress. A settlement of the
Cyprus dispute involving union with Greece would leave strong Communist
influence in Cyprus itself, but would add relatively little to overall Greek Com-
munist power. If the island remains independent, the local Communists might
increase their strength and influence to the point where they could make a
serious bid for control when Makarios leaves the scene. The USSR is interested
in preventing enosis, in supporting the local Cypriot Communists, and in bring-
ing pressure to bear against Western bases and facilities on the island. To this
end it has provided substantial military aid, by way of Egypt; the island has
also developed economic ties with Communist countries,

V. SUMMING UP

64. We believe that the Communist presence will continue to expand over
the next several years, both in numbers of personnel and in activities. The
replacement of any conservative, Western-oriented regime by a radical nationalist
one would open the way for a program of Soviet military and economic aid.
Similarly, a majority vote in the UN for the admission of Peiping or a rise in
general sentiment in Peiping’s favor among the Afro-Asian group could result
in establishment of Chinese embassies in several more countries. There is also

seer 29

likely to be an increase in the acceptability of Communist political and economic
ideas, and in the use of Marxist terminology; however, the conflict between
Marxism and local cultures will continue to inhibit Communist progress. In
a few countries, residual European influence is not large and could perhaps
be outweighed by that flowing in from the East. However, we think it unlikely
that, even in these countries, Western influence would be wholly eliminated.
The benefits of maintaining some sort of balance between East and West are
certain to continue to appeal strongly to area leaders, who will aim to avoid
domination by either party.

65. Differences in tactics between Peiping and Moscow are likely to increase
in the area over the next few years, reducing the effectiveness of the two coun-
tries’ programs and inhibiting the development of local Communist apparatuses.
Further splits within local parties are probable as Peiping offers an alternative
pole of attraction for radicals and other malcontents. Chinese attempts to prod
local groups into aggressive postures and support for such entities as the Palestine
Liberation Organization will probably bear some fruit, but in general the area
does not lend itself to the more extreme courses that Peiping is likely to advocate.
Russian and Chinese national interests are likely to be most in conflict in South
Asia, where Soviet military and economic support for India will continue to
build up that country’s capabilities to oppose the Chinese.

66. Some of the countries we are dealing with e.g., India, Turkey, and
Israel—have adequate functioning political systems, sufficiently coherent so-
cieties, or strong enough leadership to be relatively impervious to Communist
efforts to make them into. Marxist socialist societies. They would by no means
be invulnerable in the event of a major upheaval, e.g., prolonged depression
or a major war. However, they have elements of strength which enable them
to tolerate domestic Communist activity or to carry out relations with Moscow
without succumbing to Communist blandishments or intrigues. Others lack
most or all of these factors of strength, for example, Iran, Jordan, Saudi Arabia,
and Libya. Though all these regimes have shown a considerable degree of
durability and are making significant economic progress, all are made vulnerable
by a concentration of power at the top. In each, the sudden demise of one
man would probably result in a scramble for political power by a variety of
competing forces. Such a tumultous situation would give opportunities for
radical elements—including Communists—to seize control of political move-
ments contesting for supremacy.

67. The generally low state of the Communist parties and movements in
the area is likely to persist through the period of this estimate. While it is
not possible to identify a Communist movement which appears likely to become
a national threat in any of the countries of the area, we must note that oppor-
tunities for domestic Communists to advance could arise. A related danger lies
in the possibility that local political leaders may associate themselves with Com-
munist aims and tactics as a means of achieving personal power or fortune.
Individual leaders might even decide to take their countries into the Com-
munist world; either rapidly, like Castro, or by stages. A critical situation of

30 Baer

4g

.

me

this type could arise almost without warning. At this time, however, we can
identify no state where it appears likely to happen.

68. A more serious danger lies in the Soviet and Chinese attempt to develop
a deep and continuing identity of interests with the nationalist and modernizing
forces of the “Third World,” both as a means of strengthening their own posi-
tion and undermining that of the West. As long as this identity of interests
remains negative, devoted to eliminating special Western positions and the like,
it will be troublesome, occasionally serious, but not fatal. But if these nationalist
forces came to believe that the Western powers, and especially the US, were
inevitably opposed to their desire for national independence and domestic
progress, the opportunities for the Communist powers to achieve a fundamental
gain in the “Third World” would go up sharply.. Countries which felt they
had no other way to turn would be under very strong pressures to enter upon
still closer collaboration with the Communist world.

69. The picture we have. sketched for the successes and failures of the Com-
munist powers in the Middle East, North Africa, and South Asia over the next
several years might be called “more of the same.” On balance we do not believe
that the Communists will take over or come to control indirectly any of the
countries of the area, but there are some places where situations could develop
in such fashion as to provide opportunities for the Communists. We think that
the forces of nationalism in the area are strong, and that the political leaders
who derive their strength from nationalism will continue, by and large success-
fully, to play off East against West.

veh

Be

ANNEX

THE RUSSIAN INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (RIS)

1. The Soviet intelligence services—KGB and GRU—are technically subor-
dinate to the Council of Ministers of the USSR. More important, however, is
the relation of the services to the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU),
members of whose Central Committee have always taken a close interest in
RIS activities. The current CPSU secretary for police and security affairs is
a former chairman of the KGB. The intelligence services, in particular the
KGB, play a very prominent role in the Soviet system of government and have
provided a ladder: for many of their members to high level positions in the
Soviet hierarchy, including membership in the CPSU Central Committee.

2. The KGB. The First Chief Directorate of this organization is devoted
exclusively to clandestine operations abroad; it has eight geographic depart-
ments covering the world, except for Eastern Europe, and nine functional com-
ponents. The geographic departments maintain operational stations (legal
residencies) abroad; the Sixth is responsible for Africa and the Seventh for
the Near East. Functional components perform such specialties as scientific
and technical information, counter-intelligence, liaison with East European
services, and work against emigres. Two functional components have no coun-
terpart in Western intelligence practice. One (the “Disinformation” Depart-
ment) initiates and coordinates operations specifically designed to influence the
policies of other governments and to reduce the effectiveness of inimical per-
sons, organizations, or governments. The other employs assassination, kidnap-
ping, sabotage, and certain other activities, such as inciting riots or demon-
strations. The Second Chief Directorate operates against diplomats, students,
tourists, and other visitors to the USSR. As the general rule it turns over to
the First Chief Directorate for continued handling abroad those agents re-
cruited inside the Soviet Union who are returning to their own countries.

3. The GRU. Soviet military intelligence is also organized along geographic
and functional lines. While its primary mission abroad is the collection of
military and related information, the GRU concerns itself with all activities
of the armed services in the host country. If local military forces have a po-
tential for political influence—for instance, by participation in coups or revolu-
tions—the GRU is permitted, and has been observed, to engage in operations
designed to establish control over politically influential elements of the armed
forces. The military intelligence service has the responsibility for strategic
sabotage and other paramilitary activities. GRU residencies are run by the

33

ook

5?

geographic components and, under a directive of 1961, are headed by a GRU
officer under non-military cover and not by the military attache.

4. The Soviet intelligence services are organizations whose professionalism
has been developed over a long period. Their ability to recruit, control, and
keep agents productive over extended periods of time is attested by such well-
known cases as those of the Englishmen Blake and Philby, the Swede Wenner-
strom, and the Frenchman Pacques. Within the Soviet Union, the KGB works
methodically against targets assessed as potentially useful—particularly against
students and diplomats from Western and underdeveloped countries. Testimony
from defectors indicates that the Soviet services have considerable success
against the Moscow diplomatic installations of these countries, and in recent years
have recruited agents from the diplomatic staff of almost all of them. Two
particularly successful techniques are straight-forward monetary inducements
and blackmail, the latter often based on provocation or fabricated circumstances.
Sexual entrapment operations are common; in four recent cases, recruitment
approaches have been made to citizens of Middle Eastern countries on the
basis of paternity charges arising from sexual indiscretions arranged by the KGB.
Homosexual entrapment appears to be used less frequently against Easterners
than against Westerners. In heterosexual entrapment, KGB blackmail threats
seem more often based on possible legal consequences than upon threats of
public disclosure. a P<

5. In areas contiguous to the USSR, ethnic, religious, and linguistic similarities
have given the Soviets some advantage over the West. In a number of countries,
the Soviets are able to establish effective operations quickly, more quickly than
in the sub-Saharan countries where they experience difficulties similar to our own.

6. The overt Soviet presence—diplomatic, trade, information, and the like—
provides cover for an extensive clandestine apparatus. The KGB, with the GRU
playing a lesser role, acts as the clandestine executive arm of the Soviet party
and government in promoting Soviet long-range political goals in underde-
veloped countries. Aside from the classic intelligence collection functions, the
services conduct operations to denigrate the US and other Western powers, to
capture and exploit press and other propaganda outlets, and to place individuals
in positions in local governments, political parties, and organizations where they
can influence policy in Moscow’s favor.

7. The KGB and GRU residencies in countries of the area are the dominant
factor in the official installations. The KGB has the responsibility for main-
taining security over other Soviet nationals, and officers from both services have
considerably more personal freedom than other Soviet officials abroad. In the
area under discussion, observations of Soviet operational activity indicate that
Soviet intelligence officers respond in a highly professional manner to the en-
vironment in which they operate. In Turkey, for example, the effectiveness of
the local service makes necessary a high standard of tradecraft on the part of
the Soviets. In India, on the other hand, the Soviets can operate with relatively

“few precautions. While Soviet professional standards are generally high, we

have observed the Soviets in Libya using routine patterns of meeting and on
occasion making recruitment pitches without sufficient assessment of the target’s

34 oer

susceptibility. In their operations abroad, the Soviet services have the authority
to “co-opt” employees of other Soviet government agencies to assist in clandestine
activities. Soviet employees routinely inform the local residency of potential
recruits; they may also help develop such potential sources. There are numerous
cases on record of the involvement of co-opted agents up to the point of the
recruitment attempt.”

8. Identification of RIS Officers. Soviet intelligence officers whom we cate-
gorize as “known” have been identified beyond reasonable doubt, either through
identification by defectors from the KGB or GRU or through observation of
their agent-handling of other clandestine activities. Defector sources, as well
as our own experience, indicate that a “known” intelligence officer seldom
abandons his profession to become, for example, exclusively a diplomat, although
there are exceptions to this; some Soviet ambassadors with backgrounds in
intelligence have become Foreign Ministry officers. The criteria for labeling a
Soviet as “suspect” are based on fairly detailed knowledge of the KGB and
GRU: their work methods, cover, patterns of assignment, and fields of interest.
No single criterion is sufficient to place a Soviet in the “suspect” category, but
several taken together will. When we have been able to test our estimates by
the testimony of later defectors or other sources, the degree of confirmation has
been very high, and there are always several more errors of omission than of
misplaced suspicion. Therefore, Soviet officials not identified as “RIS” cannot
automatically be assumed to have no intelligence affiliation.

9. Among the criteria used to place a Soviet in the “suspect” category are:

a. inconsistency and lack of continuity in assignment of cover positions;
-e.g., a Soviet employed by the Military Attache’s office.at one post may appear
as a trade official at another, or a Soviet may arrive at a post as a clerk and
become second secretary a few months later, or be two or three grades lower
in rank in succeeding posts;

b. repeated divergence of an officer from normal patterns of office hours;

c. frequent association with known RIS officers—almost always KGB with
KGB and GRU with GRU. Private parties celebrating the anniversary of
the founding of Soviet State Security on 20 December each year offer an
opportunity to identify KGB celebrants;

d. possession of or driving an automobile (in these areas); and failure to
use diplomatic license plates if entitled to them;

e. extensive association with foreigners;

f. contacts with Communist party, Communist front, and emigre organ-
izations; a ; .

g. actions suggestive of intelligence methods of work, such as counter-
surveillance measures and unusual or frequent travel to locations of intelli-
gence interest.

*The dominance of the intelligence services is attested to in many installations where 75%
or more of Soviet officials on the diplomatic list are known or suspect intelligence officers.
Intelligence officers participate directly in, or are in a position to exploit, all facets of Soviet
activity abroad which bring Soviets into contact with foreigners.

sping? 35

2A ne me ee Pu

ee et a eae Re cera

partn Re'

(he an ETT AY
— ee

Hy

THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Ceniral Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force

£. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

_ Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

_ Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

i. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

aa

9. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain if in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

A. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-
sified: FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

CONTROLLED DISSEM

oe
CONTROLLED” DISSEM
