The Situation in Uruguay
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013616, dated 4 May 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013616).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SNIE 98-65
17 June 1965

le

oe as "SPECIAL : a Document #
poe, a NATIONAL _ INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

& “NUMBER 98. 65

The Situation in Uruguay

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

. Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf
17 JUNE 1965

Approv:
Date

EC N
CONTR DISSEM ,

ay

GROUP 1
Exduded fron ae:

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 98-65

The Situation in Uruguay

THE SITUATION
IN URUGUAY

THE PROBLEM

To assess the economic and political situation in Uruguay, the
potentialities for extremist subversion, and the involvement of Brazil
and Argentina, over the next year or so.

CONCLUSIONS

A. There is growing dissatisfaction with Uruguay's present gov-
ernmental system, particularly with its nine-man executive, the Na-
tional Council of Government (NCG). This device, designed to
prevent one-man or one-party rule, has also prevented effective gov-
ernmental action to halt a steady economic deterioration marked by
growing budgetary deficits, an accelerating inflation, a decline in real
wages, and a banking crisis. (Paras. 3-9)

B. Within the period of this estimate, the NCG may be reformed
by constitutional amendment, or there may be a credible prospect
of the adoption of such an amendment in the general election to be
held in November 1966. However, the political and legal obstacles
to such a reform are great. Moreover, reform of the NCG would
not, in itself, end the factionalism which characterizes Uruguayan
politics or ensure effective action to cope with the economic situation.
(Paras. 17-18)

C. In Uruguay there is already some apprehension of a military
coup to alter the political system. We consider it almost certain
that no such move is now imminent. If, however, the situation con-
tinues to deteriorate without effective remedial action by the NCG
or a credible prospect of constitutional amendment, the odds in favor
of a coup attempt will mount. If there should be a coup, it would
almost certainly be initiated by non-Communists. If initiated by a

President who had full military support, the actual takeover would
almost certainly be quick and effective. Any other coup attempt
would almost certainly encounter both military and popular resistance
and might result in prolonged and widespread violence and disorder.
(Paras. 19-21)

D. The Communists have no illusion that they could seize power
in Uruguay in present circumstances. They are apprehensive of a
rightist coup, however, and are preparing to stimulate popular re-
sistance to one. In a confused and disorderly situation, their labor
leadership and paramilitary capabilities could be an important factor.
It is unlikely that they could gain a dominant influence, but, if they
were to make a substantial contribution to the defeat of a coup attempt
or to a democratic counter-coup, they would gain respectability and
further political opportunities. (Paras. 10-14, 22)

E. Brazil is seriously concerned about the subversive threat which
would result if Communists or extreme leftists were to gain power
or important influence in Montevideo. Brazil would be reluctant to
intervene militarily in Uruguay without US and Argentine concurrence
and OAS approval, but would almost certainly do so if convinced that
the situation there required it. (Paras, 22-25)

F. If Brazil were to intervene in Uruguay, the Argentine military
would wish to intervene also. An incidental consequence might be
the overthrow of the constitutional government in Argentina, if it did
not sanction Argentine military intervention. If Argentina did inter-
vene, it would almost certainly be in collaboration (rather than con-
flict) with Brazil. (Paras. 26-28) ,

DISCUSSION

Il. THE INTERNAL SITUATION

A. Political and Economic Problems

1. During this century Uruguay has becn outstanding in Latin America for
its political stability. General economic well-being, a high literacy rate, respect
for civil liberties, a two-party system, and an advanced social welfare program
have facilitated the maintenance of representative government and democratic
institutions. The population of nearly three million is almost wholly of South
European derivation; there is no problem of religious or racial strife. As a
result of free education through the university level and the absence of rigid
class barriers, Uruguay’s middle class is large by Latin American standards.
Over the years, moreover, the Uruguayans have acquired a certain pride in
their country’s civilized approach to political matters and have developed a
tendency to abhor violence.

2. Since independence two parties, the Blancos and the Colorados, have domi-
nated Uruguayan politics. The Colorados were the dominant party for nearly
a century, until the election of 1958, when the Blancos took the lead. In modern
times the Blancos have generally represented upper class and agricultural in-
terests, the Colorados urban middle class and labor interests. There are few
sharp ideological differences between these parties, both of which spread across
most of the political spectrum, but, there are sharp factional cleavages within
each. Only the adoption of a unique political device has kept the widely
divergent factions within their respective parties and maintained the facade of
a two-party system.! This device, however, has institutionalized the factional
cleavages within each party. The passage of important legislation almost
always requires extensive political log-rolling; in practice it has been extremely
difficult to secure passage of any measure that runs counter to the specific in-
terests of one of the principal political factions. (See Figure 1—Composition
of the Uruguayan Congress—for the representation of the present parties and
principal factions in Congress.)

3. A constitutional amendment in 1952 established a nine-man National
Council of Government (NCG) to exercise the executive power in lieu of a
single president.” This device, intended to prevent arbitrary one-man or one-
party rule, has also prevented decisive executive action. Its built-in tendency
to prolong discussion and to compromise important decisions has been particu-

*The Uruguayan electoral law provides not only for the proportional representation of
political parties, but also for proportional representation of the factions within each party
on the basis of their shares of the party vote.

* Six of the nine members are from the leading party, three from the second ranking party.
The major factions of those parties are proportionally represented. The presidency of the
Council rotates annually among members representing the majority party.

URUGUAY

«
0%

Artigasa”

oo ee

between Argentiog
and Utuguay in thel

} Fra .
tho eng Mercedes

q

2 \ hee :
1A NO “Trinidad

\. SU OLOANEA

“sc
Ss Garcia ~~
ee by Argenuam Ow 2

and Uruguoy)
“Sionia

oO

‘\puenos
IRES

51630 6-65

Paso fe

los Tatos
GRO a, eS
Qe

7

De
we Durazno
“Sp os
\
f FLORES

BRAZIL

2K ivramento
see?

te

1.

Tasgavarb6 » see.
oe ee:

L°A R G om \giaguarao
Rio Branco’
mo, aa :

d Santa Clara
pened TRLE
a

ot

A ZNO

Treinta y Tres r
Sarandi -

al Vig.”

ee

ae !

LAGOG
SHRIM.

-- Rosario j San José

ry :
Minas  —

Canelones|

“eC SNELONESN *

ae

“hes,

ba aoe Se

MONTEN i a ee sO

MONTEVIDEO

f
Pixie. ase
ear k oan
-—,_@Maldonado
Jae
- Punta del Este

10 20 40 Miles

01020 40 Kilometers

ait
a ce Paloma

Boundaries ore not necessarily those
recognized by the US. Government.

FIGURE 1. COMPOSITION OF THE URUGUAYAN CONGRESS

SENATE MEMBERS
National Party (Blancos)

Unién Blanca Democrdtica (UBD) .........----++-- ose De be? 7
Blanco Axis (Herreristas and Ruralistas) ..........-0. 000025 eee 6
Orthodox Herreristas ©... 00000 cee ce eee een eens 2
Sub: Totals gant oekd eats he tein See sie ie Se eee aed 15

Colorado Party (Colorados)
Colorado: Gist 15. 25. eave ecg oe eee Saeee Bee es salante ats bie 8
Unién Colorada y Baitllista ........ sieht eens Miele A Mot'y o8 o he, 2 een and 4
Colorado “List 99° 2 36 ccc ee dese cen ees eae dee Stee e ee 2
Sub ‘Total’ 2.2 ccadeesnestde Pet hod Dobe den pekeeaaees 14
Christian Civic Movement (MCC) ............- isthe. E aac cache Seoinad:
Communisis (FIDEL)* .........0 cece cee eee enters 1
Totals cde hes eae ted ears ae Salah asta sate se dete 31

CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES
National Party (Blancos)

Unidn Blanca Democrdtica (UBD) .........-..+0025205+ Elcaasd 22
Blanco Axis (Herreristas and Ruralistas) ............2 00 0+eeee++ BL
Orthodox Herreristas ..........-.---- Sous Pica lise ia teusneceoe Siete meek 5
Sub: Vota isi eeeree ede dodaci aah abe ee 1 48

Colorado Party
Colorado List 15 ......... td, ote SEE h see a dig i leter dle he bs BTS A 28
Unién Colorada y Batllista .. 00.1... cece eee tenes 9
Colorado List 99 0.0.00... cae eee ee eee ree eee meee eee ee ne 7
Sub: Totalos wwtik tea etais bat nied Seek tiene Pesos 44
Christian Democrats (PDC) .......-22 0 eee eee eee ee eee . 3
Communists (FIDEL)* ...0......--...---- Sl fai ace tte ts Get erate. x a8 3
Popular Union Party (PUP) .......0- 00 - cece ne cere eet tenes 1
Total ......... eed gel Pe alee cS ol te Nine yteace anit Renee 99

*Leftist Liberation Front (Frente Izquierda de Liberacién), an electoral front
formed and dominated by the Communist Party, but including as well various
small leftist splinter groups.

larly apparent in the difficult economic and political conditions of recent months.
(A similar council, established in 1919, was abolished by a presidential coup
in 1933.)

4, During the past decade there has been a steady decline in the Uruguayan
economy. Indeed, the government’s inability to take needed action has been
a contributing factor to Uruguay’s economic deterioration. Although popula-
tion increase has been moderate (less than two percent), per capita gross domes-
tic product (GDP)* has declined steadily at an average rate of almost one per-

2CDP is used here, instead of the more familiar GNP, because in Uruguay, as in most
Latin American countries, national accounts are almost always in terms of GDP. GDP differs
from GNP in that GDP measures the value of all production within the country before net
payments abroad to owners of factors of production are deducted. In the case of Uruguay
this difference appears to be unimportant.

a Fae

cent annually since 1957. Agriculture, on which Uruguay depends for its
foreign exchange earnings, suffers from low productivity and discouraging gov-
ernment tax and exchange policies. Both crop and pastoral production have
tended toward stagnation since 1958. Moreover, during the last five years the
output of manufacturing industry, the largest single economic sector, has been
declining, in real terms. The economy is now unable to provide the goods and
services necessary to implement its advanced system of social welfare legisla-
tion. In fact, that system has become short of liquid funds and actuarially
unsound, but the government has taken no effective remedial action.

5. Unemployment has now risen to about 12 percent of the labor force and
is largely concentrated in the Montevideo metropolitan area, which includes
about half the population of the country. Over the last 18 months real wages
have decreased about 15 percent and organized labor is pressing for wage
increases. However, wage increases for employees of the inefficiently operated
public enterprises would further increase the growing budget deficits of those
enterprises, over which the NCG has only limited control.

6. The annual rate of inflation has been increasing since 1962, with consumers’
prices rising 21 percent in 1963 and 43 percent in 1964, This rate, which may
reach 50-60 percent in 1965, derives in large part from unrestricted private credit
expansion, as well as from the monetization of the government’s growing budg-
etary deficits and the deficits of state-owned enterprises.

7. Uruguay is confronted by an external payments crisis and some debt service
payments are in arrears. The Uruguayan peso, in its official exchange rate,
has been devalued twice in less than a year (November 1964 and March 1965).
During the last six months the value of the peso on the free market has declined
from 25 to 50 pesos per US dollar.

8. Uruguay’s fiscal problems are now further compounded by a banking crisis
in which the management of over-extended private banks has been assumed
by the Bank of the Republic. Recent disclosures indicating corruption involving
political figures of both major parties have led the government to assume direct
control of the Bank of the Republic itself. The upshot has been loss of con-
fidence in the country’s banking system and serious impairment of investor con-
fidence in Uruguay's economic prospects.

9. This pattern of economic deterioration has intensified dissatisfaction among
almost all strata of the population. The accelerating inflation and the banking
crisis have alarmed businessmen; the level of wages and the growth of un-
employment have antagonized labor; the continued rise in the cost of living has
upset the consumer. The fragmentation of the political parties and the inability
of the politically mixed NCG to provide decisive leadership has prevented re-
medial action by the government. Consequently the considerable and growing
dissatisfaction in the country is directed increasingly against the governmental
system itself—and particularly against the cumbersome plural executive and
its tendency to reinforce factionalism and indecisiveness. A number of civilian

as 5

and military leaders have become convinced that effective administration can
only come through change in the plural executive system.

B. The Extreme Left

10. The Communist Party of Uruguay (PCU) is a well-established legal
political party with about 15,000 members, some 2,000 of whom are actively
and regularly involved in party affairs. Communist support is concentrated
in the metropolitan area, but the party is increasing its propaganda and re-
cruiting activities in the countryside. It has organized an electoral front
(FIDEL)* which includes several small pro-Castro groups. Under the system
of proportional representation, FIDEL’s 40,000 votes in the 1962 elections (3.5
percent of the total) enabled it to elect one senator and three deputies. There
are also small pro-Chinese and Trotskyite splinter groups; these have no repre-
sentation in the Congress and not much potential for attracting votes.

11. The PCU derives most of its support from organized labor and student
groups. It dominates the leadership of the principal labor confederation
(CTU), which represents about one-third of organized labor. The Commu-
nists have used the CTU to exploit legitimate labor grievances and to call
major strikes. Recently, however, public awareness of their use of the CTU
has led them to use another labor front (CNT) for this purpose. Through
the CNT they were able, in early April, to secure broad support from non-
Communist unions for a 24-hour strike, their most effective strike effort so far.
The PCU’s small youth organization exerts a considerable influence among
politically active university students (about 15 percent of the total number
of students), but it is by no means as influential as are its counterparts in such
other Latin American cities as Caracas and Lima.

12, Under the Uruguayan political and legal systems, the PCU and other
extremist groups have considerable freedom of action. Meetings of Commu-
nist international fronts are frequently held in Montevideo.* Traditionally a
refuge for foreign political exiles, Uruguay has long been a convenient base for
Communist Bloc and extreme leftist operations in other Latin American coun-
tries. This situation tends to exacerbate Uruguay’s relations with the other
countries. Brazil is presently the outstanding case in point: the Uruguayan
Government has only reluctantly imposed limitations on the range of movement
of Leonel Brizola, the exiled Brazilian leader of the extreme left, and has not
prevented him from keeping conspiratorial contacts with followers from across
the Brazilian border.

‘This acronym, derived from Fronte Izquierda de Liberacton, is manifestly intended to
appeal to the non-Communist admirers of Fidel Castro.

® The NCG, however, recently prohibited the holding in Montevideo of such a meeting
called to promote “continental solidarity” on behalf of Cuba and the Dominican Republic.

*'The USSR, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Rumania, Yugoslavia, Hungary, and Bulgaria all have
diplomatic missions there. In addition, there are trade missions from East Germany and
North Korea.

6 —

om

13. The PCU has followed the Soviet Union’s lead in urging Communist unity
and solidarity. While it seeks to attract the support of Castroites through such
devices as FIDEL, the PCU has continued to stress legitimate political activities
aimed at exploiting generai discontent with the existing economic and political
situation. The PCU hopes to attract disillusioned supporters of the traditional
parties and new voters to FIDEL and thus to increase sharply its legal political
influence. At the same time, the PCU has taken initial steps to improve its
capability to foment violence. It is prepared to organize strikes and street
demonsirations and has trained some 50-60 activists to incite rioting.

14. The Communists have no illusions that they could overthrow the gov-
ernment. In the present circumstances in Uruguay their strategy is essentially
defensive. They are concerned lest a rightist-military coup bring drastic cur-
tailment of their present freedom of action and have organized a paramilitary
unit of 300-400 men specifically to take part in opposing such a coup.

C. Security Forces

15. The Uruguayan security forces number some 29,000 men: Army, 10,000;
Navy, 1,800; Air Force, 1,400; National Police 15,000; Maritime Police, 500.
They are generally reliable and efficient, but are handicapped by shortages of
modern equipment, especially communications equipment. For this reason they
would have difficulty controlling widespread disorders. Almost certainly, how-
ever, they could prevent the overthrow of the government—unless, of course,
a major portion of the security forces themselves were engaged in the attempt.

16. The security forces have usually kept aloof from interference in the
political life of the country. There is, however, considerable dissatisfaction
among military and police officers regarding the ineffectuality of the existing
system of government, and particularly regarding their relatively low pay and
declining economic status. A few of them are probably disposed to support
a move to establish a more effective system by coup, if need be. ‘They would
be united in opposing any revolutionary attempt by extreme leftists.

Il. THE PROSPECTS FOR A CHANGE IN THE POLITICAL SYSTEM

17. The growing dissatisfaction with the present political system, particularly
with the NCG, may bring about its alteration by means of a duly adopted con-
stitutional amendment. Influential leaders of both major parties are already
seriously concerned about the deteriorating economic situation, the difficulty
of getting remedial action through the NCG, and the danger of an eventual
military coup or Brazilian military intervention, and have publicly advocated
an amendment to reform the NCG. We must emphasize, however, that as
yet there is no consensus on how the NCG should be reformed. President
Washington Beltran, with support from some leaders in both major parties,
has advocated the substitution of a single executive. The idea of a smaller
NCG drawn exclusively from the principal faction of the leading party has

niall

also been suggested. For the present, the Herreristas are generally opposed
to any change.’ Even if the terms of a constitutional amendment were to be
agreed upon, it would still be almost impossible to obtain its early adoption.
The quickest method would be the enactment of a “constitutional law,” which
would require the affirmative votes of two-thirds of the members in each house
of Congress and a popular majority in a special referendum. It is highly un-
likely that the required two-thirds vote could be obtained except under the
most compelling circumstances. Alternative methods would be by a petition
signed either by 10 percent of the registered voters or else by 40 percent of the
members of Congress, subject to popular acceptance at the next general elec-
tion—but the next general election will not be held until November 1966.
Meanwhile, Beltran is due to turn over the presidency to Alberto Heber, an
Herrerista, in March 1966.

18. We must emphasize, further, that a reform of the NCG would not, of
itself, end factionalism in Uruguayan politics or ensure effective action to cope
with the economic situation.

19. In Uruguay there is already some apprehension of a military coup to alter
the political system. We consider it almost certain that no such move is now
imminent. If, however, the situation continues to deteriorate without either
effective remedial action on the part of the NCG or a credible prospect of a
constitutional amendment, the odds in favor of a coup attempt will mount.

20. In such circumstances, the coup initiative might come from the top, as
it did in 1933—that is, from a frustrated president. If the move had the support
of the military and the police, as would be likely in such a case, the actual take-
over would be quick and effective. The coup group would almost certainly
promise an early return to constitutional normality, subject to such reform of
the executive as would enable it to deal effectively with basic national problems.
There would be some adverse popular reaction and perhaps some disorder,
but the security forces would almost certainly be able to control the situation.

21. Alternatively, a coup might be attempted by some impatient military
leaders, with some political support from Herreristas who would be more in-
terested in seizing power than in constitutional reform. Such a move would
almost certainly encounter both military and popular resistance. It might be
quickly smashed, or it might precipitate prolonged and widespread violence
and disorder. Even if the coup succeeded initially, the resulting situation would
be highly unstable, with an early counter-coup likely.

22. The Communists would attempt to lead popular resistance to any coup.
In the case of a coup from the top (Para. 20), they would not have much oppor-
tunity to do so. In the case of a coup which precipitated prolonged and wide-
spread violence and disorder (Para. 21), their labor leadership and paramilitary

*The Herreristas are the followers of the late Luis Alberto de Herrera, the outstanding
Blanco leader during the period 1925-1962. Herrera was an admirer of the fascistic regimes
of Mussolini, Vargas, and Peron. The Herreristas are generally ultranationalistic and au-
thoritarian, but are also highly opportunistic.

3 sill

capabilities could become an important factor. It is highly unlikely that they
could gain a dominant influence, but, if they were to make a substantial con-
tribution to the defeat of a coup attempt or to a democratic counter-coup, they
would gain respectability and further political opportunities.

il. THE INVOLVEMENT OF BRAZIL AND ARGENTINA

23. Since the April 1964 revolution in Brazil, the Brazilian Government has
been sensitive regarding the failure of the Uruguayan Government to control
effectively the activities of Goulart and Brizola in Uruguay and apprehensive
of the increased subversive threat to Brazil which would result if extreme leftists
were to gain power or important influence in Montevideo. In this connection,
Brazil has sought to bring pressure to bear on Uruguay by open discussion of
the possible contingency of a preventive Brazilian military intervention in
Uruguay. The precedent of the US military intervention in the Dominican
Republic and Brazil’s prompt support thereof have redoubled the effect of
this psychological campaign and have occasioned considerable apprehension in
Uruguay.

24, Leading Brazilian officials undoubtedly think that Uruguay would be far
better off with a regime more like their own. Brazil’s experience under Goulart
may lead them to overestimate the actual danger of a Communist takeover in
Uruguay. They have good reason to fear subversion in Rio Grande do Sul.
the Brazilian state adjacent to Uruguay, which is the home ground of Goulart
and Brizola. The Brazilian commander on the Uruguayan frontier and the
Brazilian ambassador in Montevideo are particularly nervous in these respects.
They have almost certainly sought to alarm the Brazilian Government regarding
the trend in Uruguay. They have probably also conveyed their views to their
Uruguayan military contacts. There is no evidence, however, that they have
more directly sought to foment a military coup in Uruguay.

25. Undoubtedly Brazil has a contingency plan for military intervention in
Uruguay to forestall a Communist or extreme leftist takeover there. Brazil
would be reluctant to put such a plan into execution without US and Argentine
concurrence and OAS approval, but, bearing in mind the Dominican precedent,
would almost certainly act unilaterally if convinced that the occasion required it.

26, Uruguay came into existence as a buffer state between Brazil and Argen-
tina which neither would allow the other to dominate. The Argentine military
leaders are as concerned as the Brazilian to prevent a Communist takeover anv-
where in Latin America. There have probably been discussions between them
regarding the potentialities for such a development in Uruguay. If Brazil
should decide to intervene militarily in Uruguay, the Argentine military would
wish to intervene also, not only to combat communism on the borders of Argen-
tina, but also in order to prevent Brazil from gaining a dominant position in
Uruguay.

27. A Brazilian intervention in Uruguay would probably provoke a strong
anti-interventionist political reaction in Argentina. The Illia administration’s

ee 9

relations with the Argentine military are already strained by its failure to secure
for Argentina a leading role in the Inter-American Force in the Dominican Re-
public. Ilia would be caught between this political reaction and the desire
of the Argentine military to participate. Thus an incidental consequence of
a Brazilian military intervention in Uruguay would probably be a political crisis
in Argentina and the possible overthrow of the constitutional government by
the Argentine military.

28. If both Brazil and Argentina were to intervene in Uruguay, they would
almost certainly do so in collaboration. There would be almost no chance of
an armed conflict between the two intervening forces. The intervention would
be an affront to Uruguayan nationalism. Nevertheless, the intervening forces
would be unlikely to encounter serious opposition outside of the Montevideo
metropolitan area. There the Communists and ultra-nationalists might be able
to organize a die-hard resistance. Even if the intervention were accomplished
without too much trouble, the subsequent political settlement and disengage-
ment would be likely to present great difficulties, compounded by the mutual
distrust and antagonisms of all the parties involved, Argentine, Brazilian, and
Uruguayan.

10 aes

Sere

"DISSEMINATION NOTICE -

1. This ascaruend was eidiecbicted by the Central ‘Intelligence ean. This copy”
is for the information and use of the rediplent a “and c of. f persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional’ “essential dissemination’ macy be “authorized by the |

- following afficials Ewen their —— are

e "Department of § State

VIS RE.

or the. oe “of the’ boaeaie of

bas

e Assistant. Chief of Naval Space Maweek
the Navy ee Ee eS

. Force. :
Pa Director of Intelligence, ’ “AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau ‘of | I estigation ss
h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency Be ie 2S
i. Assistant Director for ‘Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or -

Agency *-.- he eae

2. This document may ‘be retained, or destroyed | y. burning in accordance with

applicable security regulations, or “returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by Pa

arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

nate
ol TARE

3. When this aecument is disseminated overseas, the oroneas: recipients may _
retain it for a period not in excess ‘of one year. “At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to. retain it in accordance with
IAC-D~69/2, 22 June 1953.50 0s

4. The title of this document when eed sarcily “rom “the text should be clas-
sified: POR=Onnaile PTT :

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
