Memo from Richard Helms to Director DIA Concerning Military Thought: 'the Deplo
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012305, dated 5 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012305).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

&S

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 1.3(a)(4)
WASHINGTON 23, D.c.

29 DEC 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Director, Defeise Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "The Deployment and Forward
Movement of a Combined-Arms Army of'-a Border *
Military District in the Initial Period of a
War", by Lieutenant-General S. Andryushchenko

al

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which

appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought" Crvcpannaya Mysl") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander.

2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of :
any part of this document in any other form should be addressed a
to the originating office.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

RICHARD HELMS ~

Enclosure |

~ 1.3(a)(4) -

= #;}
mm”

"APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 0 JUN 1992

‘ ‘

" 4,3(a)(4)

Original:

ces

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the’ Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence
Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence

Assistant Director for Research and Reports

‘Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

1.3(a)(4)

" t.3{a}{4)
ane

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

COUNTRY r USSR

SUBJECT Bi ureany THOUGHT: "The Deployment and Forward
‘Movement of a Combined-Arms Army of a Border
Military District in the Initial Period of a
War", by Lieutenant-General S. Andryushchenko

DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary
SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled
"The Deployment and Forward Movement of a Combined-Arms
of a Border Military District in the Initial Period of a War",
written by Lieutenant-General 8. Andryushchenko.

This article appeared in the 1961 Second Issue of a special
version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Military
Thought). This journal is published irregularly and is
classified TOP SECRET by the Soviets. It is distributed only
within the Ministry of Defense down to the level of Army
Commander.

aay 1.324).

1.3(a}(4)

e af mt and Forward Movement of a Combined-Arms of a Border

Military District in the Initial Period of a War
Iieutenant-General S. Andryushchenko

In the event of the sudden unleashing of a war by the aggressive
imperialistic states, and the absence of a threat period, (ugrozhayemyy
period) the combined-azms armies of border military districts my
find themselves in a difficult situation. The territory on which the
troops of an army are dispersed may be subject to enexy nuclear/ y
missile strikes of various yields, to chemical/missile strikes, and
also to the use of bacteriological agents.

We have set the goal of studying theoretically insofar as possible,
all aspects of the conditions of deployment and forward movement of
a coxbined-arms army in the area of combat operations, and to check |
out some of the problems in practical troop and commnd-staff exercises.
In addition, we studied the combined-arms army made up of four or five
divisions (two or three of them up to strength and the rest in cadre —
form, or at reduced strength) with a minimum amount of frontal means
of reinforcement. The composition of the enemy was taken to correspond
with his actual formtion, and the probable methods of conducting
combat operations in concrete operational directions were taken into
consideration.

In the conditions resulting from a sudden attack by the eneny,
the nature and scope of the work of field control of an army and of
commanding officers and staffs of large units (units) will seen
unique. ‘The basic measures of the commander and the staff of an
arny in this period should be as follows:

at

- to evaluate thoroughly and in the quickest possible time the
apparently sexious and complex radiation, chemical, .and pactertologicnl:
situation evolving in the entire area of army deployment; determine
the degree of disruption of control and communications, the condition
of the troops, their combat effectiveness, security, and losses, the
condition of materiel reserves, and communications routes 3

- to clarify, without delay, the decision which was made earlier to
move the troops forward from their permanent disposition points into
areas of concentration, taking into consideration the possibility
that these areas are contaminated; to determine, in compliance with
the operational assignment of the army, tentatively, the problems of

FS 4.3(2)(4)

_ 4,8(a)(4)

constant combat readiness in future operations of large units and
units, to utilize all means and methods for the most expeditious
method of notifying the troops of the decision;

- to restore the disrupted control of and communications with the
large units, units, and senior commander (nachalni¥

- to reestablish disrupted control and communications with the
Jarge units, units, and the senior commander;

~ to take measures to eliminate the results of an attack by is
weapons of mass destruction;

- to organize evacuation, dispersal, and replenishment of mteriel
supplies;

~ to determine the order of entrance on duty and processing of

thése reservists, draftees, and technicians arriving to join large
units in cadre form or-at decreased strength, taking into consideration
the fact that the terrain in the conscription areas and the routes

of movement may be strongly contaminated by radicactive or potsonous
chemical substances and by bacteriological agents;

- upon receiving the operational directives from the district
headquarters, to clarify and execute the plan worked out previously
to commit the army troops in the area of combat operations, or, in &
the case of an abrupt change of circumstances, to work out a plan

for regrouping the troops in a new direction; take measures to
conclude quickly the preparation of large units and units fora.
prolonged march, the reconnoitering of the routes of forward movement >
reconstruct sections of roads and road structures that were destroyed,
organize the commandant's service, combat security, and material-
technical support; order full mobilization of the large units and
units designated for the formtion of secondary echelons in a limited
amount of time, or alter the mobilization plans; mke a decision
regarding the subsequent forward movement of the mobilized large units
and units directly behind the troops of the first echelon;

- maintain constant control of the troops.
All. the above-listed measures mist be carried out similtaneously,

within a short period of time, measured in hours, and even in minutes,
apparently under circumstances during which considerable losses my

have taken place in command complements.
ee 1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

e+

Upon completion of the first of the indicated measures -
evaluation of the radioactive, chemical, and pagteriological situation -
we immediately come up against a series of difficulties; it is
impossible to overcome these difficulties with the forces and equipment
at the disposal of the army, and even of the front. In case the
opponent uses weapons of mass destruction first, it is of primary
importance to evaluate the situation not only in the areas subjected
to the strikes, but to foresee with sufficient clarity the possible
contamination of the entire disposition area of.the army troops, due
to the spread of radioactive and poisonous substances in the direction
of the wind. In order to arrive at a practical decision regarding
the regrouping and subsequent troop operations, the army commander
must quickly receive precise data regarding the number of eneny
nuclear strikes, the coordinates of their centers (ground zero), th
type and yield of the explosion, and ‘the ‘direction and vélocity of
the wind at various altitudes in the area of army troop disposition,
and in the adjacent areas. Without this data it is impossible to
evaluate the radiation situation, even by the analytical-computer :
method (raschetno-analiticheskiy metod). The instruments for detection
of radiation and chemical contamination which are available to the
troops are not capable of forecasting radioactive fallout by tracking
‘the various radioactive clouds, and do not permit the determination
of a drop in the level of radiation in the contaminated areas. This
is a very important problem, as well as one that is very difficult
to solve under present conditions.

As we see it, its solution must be realized on a nation-wide
soale if we consider that the above-mentioned data will be essential
not only for the ground troops, and the armed forces as a whole,
but also for enterprises of the national econony and the civilian
population. :

Apparently it is necessary to.set up automatic intersection \
points (avtomsticheskiye punkty gasechki) for locating nuclear bursts,
capable of determining the parameter of the burst, and determine all,
or most of the above-mentioned data. These points should be united
by analytical-computer centers, where the incoming data are ‘processed,
collated, and relayed to the analytical-computer groups of formations,
large units, and the command points of PVO of the Country and of
‘elvil defense. — ;

In our opinion it is necessary to create analytical-computer
groups in the army and in the military district in peacetine, primarily
to process and transmit to the troops the data coming in from the

ee 1.3(a)(4)

whe

4.3(a)(4) .

1.3(8)(4)

analytical-computer .centers, and also to determine drops in the
levels of radiation after certain periods of time, and transmitting
them to the troops. In addition, during forward movement and front
and army troop operations in enemy territory, they will naturally
need their own organic analytical-computer groups, capable of quick
and accurate forecasting, and determination of, the radiation situation,
at least within the boundaries of the offensive zone of the front and
the army, and the nearest adjacent territory. These very groups, in
the event that they are relieved, or leave the specific area, have

to transmit in written form (dokumentalno) the latest data about all
sectors contaminated by radicactivity to the other large units (units),
in the same way as all informtion on mine-fields was transmitted on

a form (formulyar) during the last war. The mke-up and equipment

of the analytical-computer groups still require some thought. However,
it is already quite clear that they mst have the most modern detection
instruments (pribory razvedki) and special machines for reproducing |
radiation situation mps for the troops. In our opinion, these groups,
which consist of operations :officers (ofitser operator), chemists, —
intelligence officers (razvedchik),and topographers, should be headed
by the chief of the chemical troops of the front and the army.

t

The creation of autamtic intersection points for locating
nuclear bursts and the analytic-computer centers will apparently \
fall, of necessity, to the system of PYO of the Country, inasmich as
it embraces the entire territory of the country, and the additional
introduction of the indicated points and centers will require only
a partial improvement on its part. Corresponding anslytic-computer
groups should be formed under the operational formtions. We are
convinced that carelessness in the setting of these posta ané centers
can lead to excessive humin losses.

In addition to evaluating the situation in terms of radiation
and chemical contamination, it is also necessary to evaluate the
pacterlological aspect. The army bas no such capability. It is
known that almost all bacterial agents have an incubation period
from a few hours to tens of days. In this light the great danger
that the troops will be subjected to becomes quite evident if the
contaminated areas are not identified inmediately and excluded from
occupation by large units and units. This problem, in our opinion,
should also be resolved on a nation wide scale, by creating special
antiepidemic detachments under hospitals, clinics, and medical
establishments, by bringing in civilian medical cadres and the .
local population. The personnel mst (4 or 5 words missing}training,
and the detachments should be supplied with instruments, equipment,

-5=

4.3{a)(4)

4.3(ay(4}

and transportation.

It is equally important to secure from destruction, primrily
by radiation and poisonous substances, the personnel and equipment
which is being mobilized and is arriving from the national econany,
especially from industrial centers which have been subjected to
strikes. It would seem that the ideal situation would be one where
the personnel and equipment are directed to the reception centers
of the fully mobilizing large units and units along routes which
were ascertained by prior reconnaissance to be uncontaminated. r
However, the terrain will often be so contaminated that it will be
difficult to establish such routes. In these circumstances the
personnel and equipment will have to proceed, without the means of
radiation reconnaissance and antichemical protection,from areas with
very high levels of radiation (concentration of. poisonous substances -
OV) or cress these sectors en route. Naturally the personnel will
join the units unfit for combat; or will have received large doses
of radiation (contamination). In addition, the lack’of recording
devices might result in the inability to determine ‘the degree of bi
radiation received. i

The way out of such a situation, as we see it, is that a
certain part of the antichemical protection equipment should not
remin in the warehouses of the large units and units, but should
pe handed over to institutions, enterprises, and kolkhozes, so that
the latter could then issue the equipment to the reservists subject
to call at the time of a threat situation or in case of necéssity.
The reasoning behind the advance transfer of these means is also
justified by the principle of deconcentration of materiel supplies. »

From our point of view it is necessary to deconcentrate not
only the antichemical protection resources and part of the radiation
and chemical detection equipment, but also clothing, by having the |
institutions, enterprises, and kolkhozes issue the latter directly
to those subject to military call-up, with the stipulation that
the uniforms be kept in special bags at the piace of residence.

There need be no apprehension regarding loss or premture use
of part of the clothing. Experience shows that storing such supplies
in warehouses (bases), which in turn require the maintenance of a
large staff and expenditures for upkeep of the building, costs the
government sizeable amounts, even if we rule out the possibility of
spoilage. Issuing this equipment to persons subject to call-up, and
holding them responsible for it, will cost a great deal less. The
management personnel of the enterprises (institutions) and the military

+ 4.3(0y(4)

1.3(2)(4)

1.3{8)(4}

commissariats will periodically check the issued equipment.

The system of hospitalizing irradiated military personnel also
warrants attention. It is known that the army does not have adequate
hospital facilities for accepting and taking care of irradiated ~
personnel, as will be required for elimination of the consequences
of a sudden enemy attack. Apparently it will be necessary to send
the casualties to civilian medical establishments. However, the
mss of the civilian population that received combined dnjurias: ...
will also be going there, and there might not be any vacancies. F
This question must be carefully thought out by specialiots » and the’
necessary decision should be mde.

In our opinion, it is essential to examine such mtters as the

maintenance, even in peacetime, of fully staffed chemical protection

ub-units in large units of reduced strength.” As its known, @iring .
full mobilization.a division mst set up six or seven reception
centers for personnel and, equipment, and in each one of these, posts
for medical and special treatment. Besides, the division, as it

is presently staffed, does not have at its disposal the appropriate
sub-units, nor are there any under the subordination of the arny
commander. Practically speaking, a division is not capable of

' conducting radiation, chemical, and bacteriological reconnaissance

of its own concentration area, and the army commander cannot carry
out these measures in the interests of the field command, army units,
and in the interests of the army as a whole. There are no means for
setting up dosimetric examination of the arriving personnel and
equipment that was mobilized from the national economy. We consider
it expedient to propose the following:

- besides’s chemical protection company, the divisions at constant
readiness should have a special treatment company that would be
equipped with all the necessary miteriel and equipment as one of
the motorized rifle companies; the combat readiness of the division
will not be decreased by this.and thus, even in peacetime, the
cadres will be ready that will subsequently be the backbone in the
formation of special antichemical protection sub-units; ;

- in divisions of decrenued strength a chemical protection company
should be mintained, composed of a platoon of radiation and chemical
reconiaiissance and two special treatment platoons, each of the latter
setting up a special treatment post; regiments should mintain
radiation and chemical reconnaissance platoons comparable in composition

to similar platoons in regiments at full strength;

4.3{a}(4)

~ in peacetime the army should have a full-strength separate radi-
ation and chemical reconnaissance company and an army chemical-
protection battalion, composed of three special treatment companies.

*« e& &

The combined-arms army of a border military district, deployed
at a distance of 900-1000 lan from the probable area of military
operations during the initial period of war, can make up the second
echelon of the front, since the min blow of the enemy ground forces
will be absorbed by the troops located in the zone near the front.
Consequently the army will receive simultaneously the tasks of
fully mobilizing the large units at decreased strength, and at the
‘game time, have the Jarge units at constant readiness execute a
forced march to the area of combat operations, with subsequent
immediate engagement from the move (from the march).

Because of the possibility that large railroad centers my be
put out of commission, and also because of the difficulty in effecting
transport, caused by the difference in the gauge of Soviet and West
European railroads, it is impossible to depend on railroads alone for
the transport of the troops at constant readiness. The execution of
a combined march can be accomplished only under more favorable ,
conditions. There is also a possibility of shifting separate large
units, especially from the second echelon, after they are brought -
to full strength, by air, using military air transport. It is most .
probable that, as a rule, the army will have to carry out a mrch
of 1000 km on its own.

In our opinion, it would be expedient to assign to the army a
zone no less than 100-150 km wide for executing the march. In such
a zone it would be possible to use up to six to eight routes (two
for each division) for trdop movement, and two routes for -the field
command of the army and large units and units, and also to carry
out a maneuver during an abrupt change in the direction of movement
or in case of destruction of communications bridges and roads.

The march formation of the first echelon of the army may vary
according to the number of divisions and routes in the zone of
movement. In the beginning of the mrch (during the first march
periods) it is expedient to have columns mde up of similar vehicles.
Tanks and artillery drawn by tracked vehicles must travel by inde-
pendent routes. At the end of the march, possibly during the last
day's march, depending upon circumstances, the march colums should
be formed in such a way that the troops would be ready for instant
deployment and commitment to battle. In our opinion, e nissile

4.3(a}(4)

4.3(8}(4)

units should follow the forward regiments; they should be moved to
the front during the last day's march with suitable protection, and
should then follow the advance guard of the forward regiments.

As a result of experience gained from training, we have con-
cluded that a series of prescribed norms is subject to review
appropriate to the demands of the initial phase of the war. Thus,
a@ march of 900-1000 kn, using our existing vehicles » equipped with
additional fuel capacity, can be executed in four march periods;
the first of 300-350 km, the second: of 200-250 km, the third up to
250 km, the fourth up to 150 km. It would be expedient to execute
the last wmrch period at night.

*
é

In the situation under review, we feel that it would be expedient
to call halts as follows: short (up to one hour long) - after every
4 to 5 hours of movement, long (not over 3 hours long) ~ after 8 to
10 hours of movement. During the last march period (at night) there
should be a short halt only - of 1 to 2 hours’ duration. Personnel
should have a rest period after each march period of 8 to 10 hours.

. In order to mintain minimum vulnerability to destruction by

nuclear weapons, to insure mximim speed of movement and execution

of maneuvers when bypassing contaminated sectors and various obstacles,

it is expedient to mintain a distance of 50 m. between vehicles ’

3 to 4 km. between battalions, and 5 to 7 km between regiments.

Distances between companies (batteries) should be the same as between zs
vehicles, because the prescribed distance. of 100 m.-only increases

the total depth of the column, and as a rule is not maintained in

actual troop movements.

Traffic control lines should be set up after 4 to 5 hours of
movement, i.¢., to have no more than two in each day's march. Setting
up & greater number of control lines is not advantageous, because
this limits, up to a point, the initiative of the commanders of large ©
units and-units, and eliminates the possibility of moving the colum
at increased rates of speed in sectors where the roads are of better
quality, even if the routes of mrch are mde available to the arny
for definite periods of time...

The commandant's service has the leading role in ensuring
organized and timely transfer of troops. Careful study shows that
during long marches the organization of the commandant's service
presents certain difficulties, and the recommendationg contained in
the Manual of Commndant's Service, published back in 1953, does not

completely fulfil modern requirements. ‘The situation ie m se |
a, 1.3(a)(4)

~-9-

1.3(a){4)

1.3{a}(4}

by the fact that the army actually has no personnel or equipment in
the table of organization for setting up a commandant's service, and
the district commandant's service will not be deployed yet by the
peginning of a march. In our opinion the tasks that the commandant's
service is responsible for during a march by the troops in the
initial stages of war, far exceed those in the above-mentioned Manual.

We fully share the viewpoint of Marshal of the Soviet Union
M.S. Zakharov, expressed by him in the article "The Traffic Control
Support of Modern Operations'! (0 dorozhnom obespechenii sovremennykh
operatsiy) for the organization of traffic control areas, their é
problems, and the forces and equipment that can be brought in.

However, we consider that it is possible to examine this mtter
in greater detail, under conditions of the execution of-a long march
by the army immediately after a sudden attack by the enemy. In our >
opinion, the commandant's service is confronted by the following
problems in these circumstances; to mintain the established order
during the movement of troops, to protect them from eneny air attack,
to prepare bypasses and alternate routes for carrying out the maneuver,
to assist in the elimination of the effects of an enemy nuclear or
chemical attack (evacuation and deactivation of equipment and weapons;
special treatment of personnel; repair damaged sections of roads and

road structures) and to ensure troop control.

The composition of the army commandant's areag and the division =
commandant sectors should include motorized-rifle units and sub-units,
antiaircraft defense, engineering, chemical, communications, special
treatment and medical sub-units, and-means for evacuating equipment.

The establishing of army commndant's areas and sectors eliminates
the dispersal of forces and equipment along the entire route, and
permits their concentration in sectors of special importance, depending
on the presence of natural barriers. It would be expedient to set
up individual, radio-equipped commndant's posts along the remining
sectors of the routes.

It is best to set up army commandant's areas in the more
dangerous and difficult sections of the routes, where natural barri-

ers block the entire forward movement zone of the army. The area
commandant must be given a wide range of authority. All the commnders, >

1. Collection of Articles of the Journal "Military Thought".../reminder
of footnote missi - Headquarters fomment: This journal is not identi-

cal with the Special Collection of Articles of the Journal "Military

Thought".
ma“

4.3(a)(4)

~10-

i

4.3(a}(4)

staffs, and troops passing through the commndant's area mist execute
the commandant's orders implicitly, and he, in turn, has full responsi-
bility for the successful passage of the troops through a given sector
of the route. In connection with this, one of the army deputy commanders
should be appointed commandant of the army area, and the commandant

of the division sectors should be one of the deputy division ccmmanders.

The organization of a service in a commandant's sector of a
division requires varying amounts of forces and equipment in each
case. Generally speaking, for the movement route of a division, a |
total of up to three motorized-rifle battalions can be activated;  ‘
these will be reinforced by the necessary engineering, chemical, and
other sub-units, which are relieved of commandant's service duties
when the division approaches the area of combat operations, or when
they are replaced by forces-and equipment of the front.

Briefly, on the organization of control and commnications
during the march. In our opinion, in order to ensure troop control
during a combat alert, it is necessary to set up, in the army, a
forward command post (PKP), a command post (KP), and a reserve command —
post (ZKP) - the second echelon of the field command. It is not
advisable to set up a rear area control point (TPU) before the field ~~
command and communications units are set up according to the wartime
t/o. The officers of the rear services are located at the command
post and the reserve commnd post. In the divisions at constant readi-
ness, forward command posts, command posts, and rear area control points
are set up; only ccmmand posts and rear area control points are set
up in divisions that need further modilization.

ue

The forward commnd post, with the chief of the operations
department in charge, must begin an immediate forward movement to the
army departure line (into the area where the division at constant
readiness is deployed),where he will control troop commitment. The
command post and the reserve: commnd post remain in the concentration
areas where they were at the time of the alert. During the period |
when the forward command post moves. forward, communications with tie
troops and the district staff are carried on from the command post.
The army commander, with a group of generals and officers from the
forward command post staff (four or five persons), remins at the
command post in order to make decisions and assign tasks to the troops,
but by the time that the troops of the first echelon begin to mrch
he must be at the forward command post. The command post begins the
forward movement from the concentration area during an alert only after
the troops have been assigned their tasks. The reserve command pos
supervises mobilization and formation of new units from its vo

le says

4.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4}

concentration area at the alert.

En route the forward command post moves along with the min forces
of the division, deploys and sets up communications with the troops,
the commnd post, and the headquarters of the front during halts and
in rest areas. The command post of the army moves by bounds and de-
ploys in spots that ensure the use of permanent lines of communications
with the headquarters of the front, the forward command post, and-
the troops. The duration of the halts will be determined in each
case by the time necessary to receive a situation report from the ;
troops, transmitting orders to the latter, and reporting to the higher
headquarters. Shifting the command post of the army in this manner
may result in its lagging as much as 100 km. behind the troops and
the forward command post. In order to avoid this during a march meade
in separate sectors, the command past and the forward command post
must be on the move simultaneously, but for periods not to exceed a
2 hours, due to the necessity of maintaining constant communications
with the higher headquarters and the troops. After each march period
the control points are placed in the area of disposition of the troops.

It is also expedient to have a forward command post and a
command post within divisions on the march. They mst move along
separate routes and at a distance which ensures stable communications
with each other.

Certain difficulties are encountered in ensuring communications
during long marches. In order to conceal the troop movements, the ~
radio nets of the marching troops cannot be used, and the permanent
comminications lines, even those on the territory of the Socialist
Camp countries, my not be entirely familiar to the cammmication
units of the army. These circumstances compel the use of commandant's
_ service radiocommmications and mobile means, above all, helicopters.”:

Radio stations of the conmandant's service network are set up along
specific lines. These stations operate by means of rebroadcast or
relay of radio signals. As each unit passes a line, a pre-arranged
signal is transmitted over the radio, which is duplicated by all the
other stations and is received simultaneously by the control points
of the division and army. The signals must be of a one-way. type,
without call letters or coded service phrases. During the first
2h-hour march, radio communications of the commandant's service are
organized using shortwave stations, during the second and third,
ultra-short wave is used, and for the last day's march, commmications
are carried on with the assistance of radio-relay stations.

PS 4.3(a)(4)

~ 4,3{a)(4)

—=s
In carrying out a long march it must also be taken into consider~

ation that the troops may suffer losses from the enemy weapons of -

mass destruction, and in some cases entire sub-units and even units

may be put out of action. This is particularly pertinent in cases

when the personnel receive large doses of radiation. In these con- ;

ditions a new problem arises - replacement of personnel losses right :

during the march. The equipment not affected by the shockwave-which 4

belongs-to the radiation-contaminated sub-units and units, can be

used after decontamination. It would seem that in peacetime plans,

provisions should be made to provide for the formation of sub-units

and units (of the march company and battalion type). at the district

level that could be shifted by air to the formtions carrying out

the march, and which could be used later as replacements for losses

sustained during combat conditions.

—_ *x% *

The conditions under which-a-combtnett~dime- army ofa border military
district that is moving forward from the depth is committed to combat,
will always be determined by the nature of the combat operations
carried out by the first-echelon troops of the front during the first
days of the war, and it is rather difficult to predetermine them in
advance. It is most probable that the arny will be committed to ae
combat directly from the.march, and this is always attended by great |
difficulties and a series of peculiarities which require detailed
atudy. a

First of all, about the work of commanders and staffs in these
conditions. It is apparent that the commander and the staff of the
army will get the order from the front to commit the army to combat
while moving (marching) at a distance of 250 km, or more, from the
front line. Therefore the clarification of the mission, evaluation
of the situation, mking of the decision, planning, and informing
the large units of the tasks will all be done ina very. limited
period of time, en route, without halting. Otherwise the commanders
and the staffs my straggle behind the troops and lose control.

The situation is aggravated by the fact that at the present
time the staff field equipment does not ensure cperation onthe. march.
Even the T/O of the commander of an army does not have an equipped
mobile control point capable of ensuring operation and control of
troops in a movement over a long distance. The creation from the
forces and equipment of the troops of improvised mobile command posts,
and the equipping of buses and GAZ-69 vehicles for operating in field
conditions has indeed helped consfderably in cutting down the amount

| an 1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

- 4.3(ay(4)

of cumbersome equipment at the control points, and has mde them .more
mobile, but it involves great expenditures, and does not basically
solve the problem. The means of radio commmication remain the same,
and the cross-country ability of the automobile chassis does not
conform to modern requirements.

While planning the commitment of the army to combat, and the
carrying out of offensive operations in the entire depth, commnders
and staffs must simultaneously define in detail the remining segment
of the march, taking into consideration the commitment of large units
into combat and the conduct by them of an offensive, to inform the
troops of the change in the plan of march, to control the troops
continuously, to organize and maintain constantly coordination with
the large units operating ahead, ensure replenishment of materiel
supplies and fuel expended in the march, and to carry out reconnais-
sance. of the eneny. » . ‘

According to experience gained from the war games carried out :
in our army, it would be expedient to organize the work cf the
. commanders and staffs in similar situations in the following manner:

Beforehand, when the army commander receives the district
operational directive to march, he sends out an operational group
to one of the headquarters operating ahead of the troops in the
direction that the army is moving forward; their mission is to
constantly provide information about the situation in the area of
combat operations. The group should consist of five or six persons
(officer-operator, intelligence officer, artilleryman, communications
officer, chemical officer) and also a squad of radiation and chemical
reconnaissance. It follows /one line missing/ of operations and
methods of transmitting informtion must be planned beforehand, in
peacetime. Can

‘Inasmuch as the sey does ace cave an air transport capability
for distances of 900-1000 km, the operational group must move in
motor vehicles, and thé latter mst move at a speed of up to 60 km
per hour. Moving twice as fast'as the army troops, the operational
group will transmit the first informtion about the situation from
the area of combat operations, at the time when the troops moving
forward will be halfway to the concentration area, or the line of |
deployment. Moving along one of the basic routes, ‘the operational
group will be able to determine the condition of the route, and
after arriving at the destination - can fully reconnoiter the area
of command post disposition, and determine the presence of radto-
active and poisonous substances and bacteriological agents.” The

i, 3(a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

4.3{a}(4)

organization of communications with the operational group mist be
thought out in detail, utilizing intermediate radio stations,
comminications of the front, of the conmandant's service, and, with
the approach of the troops, mobile equipment.

When he receives directives, to commit the army to combat, the
army commander will mke his decision by consulting the mp. The
army command post, headed by the chief of staff, must transmit the
missions to the large units and control the forward movement of the
troops, and with the forward command post the commander and the >
coumanders of the large units move forward to the line of commitment
to battle, in order to clarify the situation, organize coordination
with the troops operating ahead, resolve the questions of support of
commitment to battle, and possibly to change the original decision.
.The forward command post of the army mst plan the operation quickly,
resolve the questions of coordination and supply, and together with a
the forward commnd posts of the large units, assume control of the
arriving troops. In connection with this, the forward comand post
must be very efficient, small in number, highly mobile, and must
have adequate numbers of means of communications with the troops,
the headquarters of the front, and of adjacent units.

The scope of work of the commanders and staffs under similar
conditions requires detailed study, and a unified method of
supervision and control mst be worked out. Many are of the opinion =
that all these problemtical questions should be formalized by the
General Staff in official instructions or in a manual. We are of a ,
different opinion. It is impossible to foresee all cases and possible
variants under which the army may be committed to combat from the |
second echelon of a front, and to incorporate operating procedures \
in one official manual. It would be more beneficial to study similar
problems constantly, check them out as much as possible during
training exercises, and publish them as discussions. This method
develops’ deep thinking and.increases the general military outlook
of the commanders and staffs. aS

It is another mtter to resolve in a centralized mnner questions
regarding establishing a mteriel base for command, . communications,
and technical support of commnders, staffs, and troops, with modern
means of control. For instance, the critical need arises for the
commanders of armies and large units to have mobile.control points
equipped with the newest,’ small, long-range radio stations, ensuring
secure conversations without resorting to numerous conversation and
signal codes. In the operations department of the army there should
be a computer capable of quickly producing the data needed for the

Ma 3

: 1.3(a)(4)

- £.3faha)

evaluation of the situation (above all the radiation situation) and
arrive at a decision. A squadron of helicopters should be made a
part of the army field commnd 1/0, to implement troop control, for
conducting radiation, chemical, and engineer reconnaissance, and for
fulfiling other important tasks.

Another problem which needs to be solved is the method of
recording the degree of radioactive contamination of the personnel,
The commanding officer of a sub-unit cannot keep a written record :
for each soldier, especially during the frequent transfer of ‘
personnel from one sub-unit to another, and especially after hospital-
ization. It is apparently necessary to issue to personnel, individual,
‘ miniaturized devices of the "pencil" type, with coded indicators;
this will exclude the possibility of independent reading of the
radiation dosage received hy the personnel themselves » but will permit
the commanding officers to determine the true meaning of these doses - |
with the aid of a corresponding decoding device (one to a company ).

It is known that modern conditions for conducting a battle and
an operation demind exceptional speed and maneuverability by commanders
and staffs. Therefore it is necessary, even now, to change radically
their style of work. Up to this time the staffs are producing many
combat documents. Even though in the past few years they have eliminated
somé of the written documents, these sane documents are now being
worked out on maps, and often duplicate each other; this takes even cae
more of the staff officers' time than before. Frequently the work

is taken from the troops for work in the staff. As yet the troops

do not have staff field service instructions which fulfil modern

requirements. This also appears to be one of the reasons for a series

of shortcomings in staff work. oo: _
The questions that we ‘have raised call for thorough study during

cCommand-staff exercises, war games, and, during the buildup of large

units to wartime strength.

Sliea * 1.3(a)(4)

~16=

1.3(a)(4)
