Tape no 4 - Friday Afternoon - 9 November 1962
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012425, dated 5 October 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012425).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

mae, i a _ Ao 8 : EZ

CATR,
su AS +EIV
TAPE NO. 4, Friday afternoon, 9 November 1962 1:35 p.m. i fv pee :
8: As I say I believe that silver hair, D, went out and brought in the
4 goons. ‘The men were ushered in, they were brought to a point on the
left hand wall about five feet from the (large???) desk. They stood’
with their hands at their sides, rather relaxed position of atention
and introduced themselves once again by their last names with the portz
prefix Grazhdanin to it. A, the English speaking Russian, had informed
them that the AKT had been drawn up and that -- asking them if they
were prepared to sign it. They assented and A then began to read the
AKT. He read it very quickly and read it to them not to me. The main
elements of the AKT were the following: that I had been apprehended on
2 Nov by citizens such and such at the address, giving the Otcomm?
number - the entrance - entryway mumber at such and such a time and

LNoF oO
had been caught with materials of a I think they called it razvepypvateR-

nakaweberya?? Kui teA ETE CH
N: Which means?
S: Of an intelligence nature on my person. To the best st ofuy knowledge

t said on my person, although they had been found on the

that these materials, materials which I had removed XMX fram behind

i

the radiator in this country.

N: Now on this are you MNMMHEXE absolutely sure 5, from behind the radiator?
8: Because I was waiting for this since I had heard radiator mentioned
previously by A as he was drawing up the AKT. And I was listening for
this to see if they were going to specify a fact which they could not
possibly have known. In other words, this was the point I wanted to get.
It seemed to me that this was the key to the whole thing. Would they

inthis AKT
include a fact/imekais which they could not have known unless it had
been (discovered?). It was in there. They then eaut on to specify

"Ghat Whee four citizens bed talon be nto custody ant brought me to ught me $0

he militia! where I had been questioned. It was not a long document
since it had been handwzitten, the 2} pages apparently, had been written
very closely and ittock nim about a mimite and a half to read it off.

I do not recall anything elese in it that wes ..

Nz Do you recall the precise time, ZHMXaaX that they said you were
epprehended?

8: Let me see. No I don't. It was about 3:15

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 3 20ar 1092

wae a el ca

-2-
NH: By your reckoning?
8: Yes-No I guess it was about 3:17 but © can't xeumke remember exactly
what they specified. Having concluded, B in Russian, B the Ukrainian (in Russian)
said to A, the English speaking Rusbian who was standing up as he read
this AKT to the Russian goons, translate this into Englié or =~ let
me’ see now -- he may have said don't you think you ought to translate this
into English. A, Sbebieve, said that will be unnecessary. He understands
perfectly xiuckx well. And then, I think, he looked at me and he said
Oh no. Now he either looked at me and said either Idon't think an}
English translation Witt Pe necessary or he asked me do ot eee an
English translation. I can't recall exactly the way he put, But at
any rate, I said to him I have no intention of Signing this AKT whether
you translate it into English tum or not. And then I said, I also wish
to say at this time that I have never in my life seen the materials thet
you_have there on the desk, I thought that just for the books I shoulda
say this. He just shrugged his shoulders and motioned to the four
citizens without further word about asking them if they had any corrections
or additions to make. The four citizens signed the AKT. He thep, I believe,
he sat down with the AKT and wrote out several lines. I believe these were
probably notations to the effect that I had refused to sign. Because
then the four citizens then came up and signed below this. He then left
the AKT on the table » the four citizens left, and F the editor also left
without having said a word, without having signed, the AKT, just nothing.
He left and I never saw him again. gostthen/ sat down. I think by this
time it wax must have been almost five o'clock and E, the individual
I believe is identifiable with the fifth goon, the man with the glasses.
It occurred to me for the first time I think just about at this point,
: without his glasses
that this man bore a very distinct resemblance/to the fifth goon/who mR
had been wearing glasses and appeared to direct ny apprehension. Just
at this point it jut hit me. I hadn't even been thinking about this
or even, or even for some veason, tried to identity any of these men
in room with the fifth man. In fact I had almost forgotten about him.
. It was just at this point that it hit me all of a sudden that this man -
his face clicked and then I thought elmost as suddenly he looks just
like the man even tho Pe wearing glasses who appeared to be directing it.
This man hadn't sata anything up to this point. Just after the goons
left tho he was standing slightly mx to my left about 3 or h feet in
front of me. He Just stood there, staring at me, For the first

{. | -3-—

time TI decided to meet one of their stares. So I just looked up at him
without smiling or anykickax emotion on my face and just xtc stared him
down. Iguess it must have lasted about two minutes and I just decided _

that if he wanted to look at me, I was going to look at him and I was going
to make him lower his eyes first and he did after about two minutes I guess.
NH: YOu are a pretty good starer.

S: TI just did. I don't know how I did it because I felt like laughing,

I just decided at this point that /any way which I could do it without
talking that I would try to take a little bit of initiative. Then, he

looked at me and said, well, you dirty career is finished. I think he
Pel
said vas yakonchna. Then D, who was sitting in the same

seat and the same sofa to the lef’ of the small table and B who had also
teken a seat on the right hand side of the table proceeded to say,

yep, career is finished, his dirty work is finished. A little laughter
ensued and’ they ua one of them, I forget which one it was said something

to the effect that I could now take up a clean profession. chestiye
a ELE_professigniva, As I say, this dialogue ensued which lasted about

@ minute or a minute and a half. This was the essential substance |
of it, that my dirty career was finished and that I could now take uk
up a clean profestion, that I just had no future. Then, they resumed |
this carnival about my name again. Yes. Then B, got up from his chair |

and once again said now why won't you tell us our name. WHY We need j
we need it |

this, we want to put it in the AKT and/in order to get in contact with the
KE

Embassy. Meanwhile, EK, the goon had taken G, the Ukrainian's seat « |
interruption. As I said B, the Ukrainian had gotten up fram the easy |
chair to the right of the teble and came’ over towards me, I believe, with
my diplomatic card in his hand, but maybe not and E, th goon: haa taken |
his seat and he came up to me and asked me what is your name. I think \
he said something like woes cemiye. I said y-pounemayetya anid
I repeated again I want only to speak only with the American Enbassy \
and then he said whet are you doing(?) and why are you afraid to give

us your name. At this litile cue, E, the goon who was sitting in the ;
mxts chair started mumbling  prunicprastpeuct coward coward coward. |
He dust repeated the word coward nothing else, in a very low but
audible voice about 4 or 5 times. I just looked up at B, the Ukrainian

shrugged my shoulders,
and still with a meczx puzzled expression on my face/ and looked over

at A. A looked at me and he said give us your first name. Then he

got up Prom - Ao Protea W025 . a . .
IRTP CE te there tener rane ra eH kee ee . ten ene command anennlampetereeens i cnemen as bees we a are a - Weseee ©

. of _— he

and came around and stood in front of me about ~ oh no, I guess he didn't
get up from behind his desk. Just sat back there - no maybd he dia.

I can't remeber exactly. I know before this other thing I was thinking
of took place he mumx (stood???) in front of me, about 5 feet away and

asked me why I hated the Soviet Union. He used the word hate. Hated
ere .
the Soviet Union and the Russian people, that they couldn't have possibly

oe

elven me any cause for such behavior and that you Americans are suppose

to stand for peace and liberty and freedom, yet you behave in such a

manner and you engage in such dirty activities. I think at this point
DEYATELN OST . ;

he used gryaznoye dyetemest?7? ‘The substance of it was: 1. that fc

why G14 I hate the Russian - I think he used Soviet Goverment and

Z am not sure whether he used the term Soviet or Russian people. 2.

That I mst hate them to engage in such dirty activities. I repeatea

again that I wanted to speak to the American Eubessy. They then

launched into another diatribe about the fact that I sounded like an

xftumx avtomat and that I should cooperate with them to this extent to

give them my name. They then mk asked me again - he then produced

~ A the English speaking Russian then again produced my card and

agein asked me if the date at the bottom of this card corresponded

to mféy entry into the Soviet Union or whether this was simply the

second card I had been issued. Was this date - the date given on ny

card later than the actual time of my arrival in the Soviet Union. Zz

simply repeated again that I wanted to speak with the American Embassy.

D, the silvery-heired man, and F, the - which * one is the goon E or F,

Ns: £E

S: The goon had put very few questions to me and said very little throughout

this period. I think, if anything, F was actually more - observing more

than D. I think he really, of everyone who took pert in the interrogation

seemed to be the’ sharpest, although this is e subjective impression,

because certainly the questions he put to me were very few and I can't

really say that he dummmextks demonstrated any more technique or persistence

than any of the others. If anything less Rext persistence and so few

questions that I couldn't really analyze his technique. I do recall

that, I think, that they did put a few questions to me but they were

essentially para phrases of those questions which B, the Ukrainian

had put to me and that A, the English speaking one had put to me in

English. By this time I , of course, feeling pretty confident, because
not only had I not given them anything whatsosesever so far, but also I

“3
their questions had not gotten on to what I consider to be the only important
things-that I could divulge; namely, either any operational information
about the specific operation which was the most important; and second
of all, any information as to the organization which I represented. My
past intelligence activities there in Moscow and previously; and three,
they had asked me no questions about the Embassy. For instance, personal
date about People I worked with, who dia x work with, who were my coworkers,
who was my chief in the Enbassy, I mean my K State Department Chief. Who
else is engaged in this sort of activity inside the Embassy. Hone of
these questions had been asked. It seemed to me at this point, unless -
they were intending to make 2h-hour afffair of this, which I knew they
couldn't, that these questions were not going to be asked. It also seemed
to mex me, since tir their own attitude toward me hadn't changed in the
Past 2 hours, in other words they hadn't gotten more hostile, they hadn't

& gotten more forceful, They didn't even seem to be more persistent,
that I had, I thought, passed the ckisis. I was just at this point concentrating
on trying to repeat what had becane a boring Phrase to me and certainly
to them, I want to speak with the American Embassy. Place me in contact
with the American Enbassy. Just to try to keep in that channel and not
get out of it. ‘This was about 5 o'clock, The Foreign Ministry
xEyOEKE representative didn't cone in until about 5:15 and I can't
vemember what laguunt happened in the next 15 mimrtes. I know that essentially
it did not depart fron the previous questions which I have already told
you about. They were still asking me if I was married . I think once,
had any children, what my first name was --
8S: Yes at one point the A, the English-speaking Russian, after he had
asked me this question said, what is it Robert? This was the - what
he asked me. He seid, What is your name, Robert? TI didn't answer.
Oh yes yes yes. This was very impottant too. Then, they said ~ he asked
me how I had gotten there to Pushkin Street. B, the Ukrainian, asked
me, How did you get to Pushkin Street? I looked at him with & puzzled
expression, shrugged my shoulders, and then he went through this toe,
| ALD SH,

you know, with hands imitating a walk. A walk or with a car - -Smecking ,
I refused to answer and then E, the goon, said to me that my friends

were cruising around the block in the Embassy car and he geve me a
license mumber,

ates te tees te eente dl:

it

abs
S: Mo, no. He @ edited. That is all. That ae E.. I can identify
oe
this for you in my report. (8 identified E as KANKKAX. cane kov shu

N: How about this one?

5S; JXOOUSK MIME XX I'm glad you came up with one so soon. I don't think so,
WJ: The same one. HEX That is why I had them together. Even in color.

8; Yeu see the thing is with this smile $2) and slightly SOKROKIEROIX slaeuiem: EX
is hard because when he was in there, in my report I mention the diagram

of this room and also the diagram of the relative positions that these

men had in the room et any given time during the interrogetion, they all

pretty much had their own stations. This man sitting next to the desk,

I couldn't really get a side view of him at all. MWe certainly wasn't
emiling during this thing. ‘That is him.

H: Mo question.

S: In fact N, it looks like the same tie.

BH: Let me catch his name for the benefit of the tape, Vledimir M.

Gribanev 7
KOMAROVer’ Mr. E. osoreine to your best recollections. (qnmnDcogannaack

looking through peek I hope these are numbered; good; Samiz.-
[Qo ee ough theas eet Ld ama if f there is any positive or probable

apell.out the mmber on the. beck. ‘could you turn then face down they
may be in order of some sorgt.

S: You may think I am going through these fast, but I have these faces
in my mind so..

Nz; That is all right. Are there any that you think that you might like

$e look at again. You might just throw them aside. (This is group 1

that 8 is going through.)

S: Here is KOMAROV again. I am pretty sure that this mmber 167 Sey

is not the man but he looks like D when he was about 25 or 30 years old.

This is ene general facial structure of D. That was the man with the

silverl Similar, but as I say different enoughk that I am pretty sure rN

that isn't the man. ee 7 q ) a
ee ZIUiehev . (' |,

NM: ‘That is U 132 whose name is Ivan ILICHEV. (Please note there are two {5 : poke

.
mumbers on photos 167 ani 132.) We are curious about Mr. A. Aren't

we.
Y by dw
8: That guy spoke English well enough that I am pretty sure that he bas He ov
Cine Ree ee ee ee ae
been outside. If that guy isn't in any of these I'll look through avery ey

photo we have.

H: This is group 2 (v's) that you are going to look through now.

~7-
5: This man V-106 you have the number here ag 255.‘ This man, his picture
will give you a faint idea of his facial structure (A's) and his head
shape. However, this man here has a fairly prognathous Jaw which A aid
not have. However, this is not a bad resemblance -- giventhe fact that
it is now 5 or 6 years. His hair would be about the same shade too.

HN: He was never referred to by name? ey hd
: S: Mone of these men were. | gi ens pat
. ‘MN: This guy's name is Andrey GRAUR. “we ew”
8: Well, I don't want to take any chances. Y-121. He may be, hightly
unlikely but may be identifiable with B. he interrogator who spoke
Russien with a slight Ukrainian accent. Highly unlikely. If it is,
he is at least 10-15 years younger in that picture. :
N: 121 is SMIRNOV, Andrey 8, Op/teCY Lew? Himes
5: This fellow also V-124. This fellow even more likely is identifiable
with B, altho nee Seen with the reservation that the picture is at least
10 or 15 pete fae : is now.
N: His name, GUSEV, Andrey A.
S: Wo more of Group 2.
N: Wow group 3. (Y's)
8: his man here possibly Y-2, possibly identifiable with B, the man
with the Ukrainian G. His head is just little bit too square and his
features not quite sharp enough. I don't think he 1s, but just possibly. 5 te :
N: I've got mmber, his name Boris Bikolayevich BABICHENKO. J xeeme /¢*?
8: Y-3, his face is very similar to A. His hair, A is balding on the side
and in hich ta ies aire Sid bak hae groomed, combed very closely to
scalp/ but with a few years difference and a little bit of Wild Root, just
possibly. The face is very very close. :
H: I wish they, would date these pictures so we would nov.
S; It would be a big help
N: hey may have the info. Y-3 is Ivan A. BALASHOV.

ener ERE tren,

S: Oh boy. This looks like B right here. It is not a complete mx picture

fy

of him. Y-ll. This looks like him. That is as close as I would hope

to get to him. The pkenk picture isn't quite a good enough quality that

I couldm definitely say, but I would say that is 90%. What is his name?
N; Y-11 is Dnitriy Mikhaylovich KONYAKHIN.

5: The nose, the jaw, the hair (the high cheek bone -- 22772?) very very

close. 904.

-8
é But
5: Y-19. Bears a strong resemblance to A. /I don't think so.
N: K.I. PARKAYEY. Astana to mat.
PORN AEIP OD ph ich set ee
N: That was group 3. This is group 4.
5S: V 69 Some slight resemblance to A.

5
N; . Nikolay Mikhaylovich BELOUSOV.
een

S: V 77, Facially may perhaps bear some resemblance to D, but once

egain with the qualification that this picture looks about 15 years
younger. I don't think it is the same person.

N: Vladimir Andreyevich IVASHKIN.

N: Trg the second half of same series of group 4.

8: Well I think we already have B in this other picture, but this man
also bears a resemblance - is that V-7 (not mae

HN: V-7, now what did you say about V-77

S: He bears a resemblance to B the Ukrainian, but I think the other
picture is .. better ... this one only 60%.

N: Aleksey N. CHIZHOV. ._. .

N: We have one more batch to go thru. The last group was taken at
the Powers trial. I don't think those group photos help any because
I am not sure we know who they are.

8: Wo, but at least if we had the face,

5S: This fellow here, number 20, without glasses, he bears some resemblance
to D, the man with the silvery hair, without glasses.

N: Wo. 20 the man in the middle wearing glasses.

S: Facial structure, size of head?, hair very very similar, except that
thet man locks a bit clder (one in picture). He looks older than appeardd
to me. His hair doesn't appear to be as well iia si or as silver. D.
resamblance very great.

N; That's dD. :

S: These people on these pictures really do look like the types.

Once again this fellow here, altho it is not a very good picture bears
some resemblance to B, the Ukrainian.

N: To B. The one seated

S: Exactly. Below the man .... inaudible.

N: No. 13 man seated on left bears resemblance to B.

S: right.

S: No one here. I would like to look at all of these again. I would
Like to go thru all the photos in SR/6/Bio. I know their faces well

enough ....

I EI DEEZ EE Ee

: d
been there for 23 hours my impressions are still clear and fresh/ For long time,

See him staring at me there et the other end of the dexkx desk. It were
Just as if he were back here. That one of B, even tho a bad photo. It

8: And the only reason that I don't say 100% on him ig because the photo
is kmitex bad. ie it weren't for that I would Bay 1004, but there is not
much doubt in my mind. Even ir he isn't you have a clus there,

N: You didn't have any problems with reporters?

in Paris. They just reverseg the numbers, They didn't know which flight
I was coming in on. I messed them Up, altho not intentionally, by taking
an earlier flight out of Paris.
N: Isn't that earlier flight a Presidential flight?

8: They didn't Bay. :

N: Well, was it first class all the way?

8: No. Tourist. There were very few beople in first class, but tourist

LRAXEX YW OCF BOC S 26eCCT;

<I dia, “Me an looked 1 wp and sold ve have a flight leaving at One
ny?)

determined that this wasn't my right passport mmber, They thought
something was MELME wrong with my passport.
N: You certainly didn't travel under alias any place along the route?

8: No.

cabled the wrong info to Parts, Let me put it this way, if it wasn't
the wrong info, the code clerk at either end of the line made a mistake,
Instead of 358 they put 853. transposed the mmbers. I just very naturally

some Finnish mewspapermen ang they took some pictures Of me getting ore
the plane and also of me On the landing strip, They asked me if I had
any statement to make. I said no. I ak had no Comment to make + and
