Meeting no 12, London, England, 1 May 1961REGARDING Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012400, dated 1 April 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012400).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

@

mee es 7
a ' P : . .

1 TS. SEE Se emanate
ee ae recat cement ettns atte etna ene RS A OTPrNERS He Ate a

(Subject arrived at 2112 hours, on 1 May 1961, at Room
360, NWount Royal Hotel, London.) 8: Good evening! G: First
of all take down @M@Mge address. S: And his telephone
number? 4H: ae The telephone number is
Vee “S: lo understand. (Copies) Well, shall we
work some more to celebrate the Ist of May? (All laugh). In
the Kremlin, on 1 May, they invite the cream of the crop. The
game ones are invited all the time, the Ministers and wives,
the Party, the Marshals, one or two workers from the plants
(laughs).

@.) G: You have not determined when your meeting with the
RESIDENT will take place tomorrow? 8: Noa, it is the day after
tomorrow, on the 3rd. Tomorrow (at the Soviet Embassy 2 May day
celebration) I will attend the movie. There will be a few drinks.
It will end at 2200-2300 hours.

8S: I saw WYNNE, after talking with you. He invited me
to a ghtclub tomorrow evening -~- with your permission. (Al1
laugh). He said, "Very expensive", but that is okay. G: That
is necessary. S: A big nightclub! One should go once. G: Of
course. J: And you are not going to take us with you?! (All laugh)
8S: If you like,

G: Do you think you can come over tomorrow during the
day?\—S: Yes, of course, but I do not know exactly when. G:!

Rhat is your program? §&: Tomorrow we visit FERRANTI and another
place. WYNNE told me. This is very interesting. That takes
piace in the morning at 1000 hours. He will come at 0915 hours.
We will have had breakfast by that time. I think we will return
circr 1700 hours. G: Well, since you have to go shortly to the
Embassy, maybe you can come earlier. Only, 4 hour;, if you can.
S: And maybe we can do everything even at 1600 hours. We will
try. Wait for me after 1600. hours, at 1630, 1645 kours. G: Of
course. Don't worry if you are 4} hour late; that is okay. 8:
Okay, after 1600 hours. G!: That is Tuesday from 1600 hours, and
for j hour or an hour, because he must go. He needs to wash,
shave, etc. in order to go there properly. 8: I can't go dirty.
G: Okay, no longer. So 4 to a maximum of one hour. 38: That

is the 2nd. G: Okay. Then the 3rd, Wednesday? 8: The 3rd.

On the 3rd and 4th, my people will be at the exhibit. The exhibit
closes on the 4th. I won't hang around there; I have nothing

to do there. I will take them to breakfast and to the exhibit.
Then, I will direct them what to do. Later, after the exhibit,
they will go to the Embassy, where they will work -- write, con-
solidate all the cataloging. So on the 3rd we work "seriously" -—-

Ra

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
i

ee ——"—"—~ eee

#12

according to time. G: Yes. 8S: The 4th!

5. Gt Wait! Can you come over on the 3rd in the evening
at about 2100 hours? 3S: Of course, definitely. G: Let me
write it down —-- 2100 hours, There will be a surprise for you,
the Big Man. 93: On Wednesday? G! Wednesday. We need a de-
finite answer regarding this because it would be awkward, to be
honest... 3! Of course, it can't be otherwise. G: That is
why X wanted to clear it up. 3: This is all most important
for me. G: If it is inconvenient for you, or you are not sure -~
it ig better to do it right. It will be very awkward otherwise.
8: There is no question about it. There is nothing to talk about.
I will be here. G: Exactly.

6. G! On Thursday, can we also pian to work? S!: Thuredsay
also. Gt Fine. On Thursday, from the organizational standpoint,
we want to make a final check of all commo arrangements, find any
unfinished things that might show up in the conversation. We
want to review everything carefully, and have you take all the
things that we are giving you -- the little transistor, the little
camera, the film, etc. S$: Papers. G: ,Yeg, operational papers.
S$: Give me lotsa of film. G: Yes, you will get 4t. You will
seal them up Thursday evening in your (evom), #0 as to eliminate
the risk that something might happen on Friday. $0 that you have
4t. On Friday, we will meet anyway. 5: We will meet daily, but

ie set the next time every day. Is that what we decided? Gt
es.

G: On Fridsy, we will have a friendly relaxed meeting

with Pew drinks, We will talk over all the details and will
clenr up anything that might arise. We will review with emphasis
on what are to us the main things of interest. It is not manda~-
tory that everything be fulfilled, but if the opportunity ariser.,.
S: Thia will definitely be done. I'm a little inventor, I will
invent! (laughs). Then I will send it to you. G! You will do
everything you can, but within the Limits of your opportunity.
3: Okay. I will have personal letters to pase to you, shout
information, military matters, political matters, personal matters,
advice, etc., and you will let me know orally, or in writing -~
typed on a Russian typewriter. Please have it in Russian so I

: don't have to burden myself with translations and to avoid meanings —
being confused. G: That is clear. 8S: In the form of directional-
instructions. G! Of course, that is clear.

$: On the 5th, we hug and say goodbye. G: Exactly.’
G: Feé bad it is so! (ALL laugh). G: Fine, this is settled.
8: 1 wish I could come to this side sooner. Maybe the trip to

Pa an

Ak aaa
t fo” Lp Y

child? H: Yes, we will prepare all thie. G: Okay. Instructions

#12

Canada will work out. It would be very good, in about thive
months. HH: In three months? 3: I think ao, maybe 2, 24, 3.

I asked you once when I should plan to have my vacation. I will
wee how it can be worked out with my trip to Canada. If Canada
works out then I will postpone it until late Fall. I will go to
the South, where it will still be warm. Well, in general, I will
keep you informed about everything in writing.

6.) G: Regarding the vacation, our advice is not too impor
tant. our opportunities should determine this. 3: I'm tying this
up with the arrival of WYNNE. G: We don’t have any definite (dates)
when you should take your vacation. You should rest. It would

be good for you. 5S: Now, let's aay something happens to WYNNE.

He becomes ill; he is hit by a car. Please think out by the Sth,
who will contact me then; where we should meet, the two recognition
words. What are the arrangements regarding this girl with the

will be sent to you through the dead drop? G: Of course. 3:
The dead drop works well? G: Yes, fine.

10. 8: Now to check the sites, The signal site will remain
the seme? G: Yes. S: PBon't let 1t bother the person if the
telephone is not in the booth, on the board. The board is nailed
there. G: And they are converting the machines/telephones to
the new coins. 38: Correct, and then the hooligans cut them (the
telephones) off. G! Clarify this. What do the hooligans do? 5S:
When the hooligan cuts it off, he takes off the (telephone), The
apparatus (telephone) is there, but not the receiver. Despite the
fact that the receiver cord is covered with a metal sheath, it is
cut anyway -- hooliganism! G: But later it is fitted with another?
8: Yes, later, but the board (SHCHIT) remains there, despite the
fact that the (telephone) is ripped off. The person should mark
the line with a thin red pencil. In two minutes I will be at the
dead drop! (laughs).

: (a) G: Okay, fine. How let's start from this. We have a
few tions. The list is getting shorter and shorter. The first

question is about atomics, The question: Do you know what auth-

ority -- through which degartments -- actually has control over "5
the locations where the stockpiles are? Who is in charge? I'm

not asking where they are located, but who is in charge of this?

3: The finished atomic weapons ~- warheads? QG: Yes. 8: Fis-
sionable atomic material, that i168 not in warheads, is’ under the

control of the Main Atomic Commission, just like yours. They

control all fissionallé materials, and raw materials. The; s#it-

vation with raw material is bad. It is not accidental that slich

Oy tener — -
oe oe a on es soe snd MS tt ened

~3-

#12

da, Ni
rt interest was shown in the Congo. Almost all the high grade ores
| from Czechoslovakia have been removed. There were hopes that

settled with China now. Monazite sands had been found in China.
fey The Czechoslovakia supplies were meager. The basic supplier has
been Czechoslavakia, and also our own. There are Monazite sands

ties within the territory of Ruesia, with a varying percentage of

die
content, also other radioactive substances.
9) G: Where did you hear that the situation was bad? 8:
: You the source? G! How well do you know this? 8: I heard
this from several places. First of all, when I attended the courses,
| We asked the instructors questions; we were told about the strategic
| | Yaw material but we were not told exactly how much is produced ~~
because it is none of our business. But from the standpoint of
what we have and what the People's Democracies have, Czechoslovakia is
in ae in firet place for production of Monazites. China has Monazites
loge and we have Monazites as well as other fissionable materials. “The
| 4 Congo has a lot. KHRUSHCHEV's feelers were sent there at once in
order to get everything eee sets You know, an awful lot was thrown
into the Congo. When KASAVUBU was «till not in power and Patrice
LUMUMBA had a very shaky Oittsn, LUMUMBA gave his consent and
28 planes with generals, officers and arns were sent via Egypt and
| Sudan to Congolese territory. A small airport in the Sudan, next
to the Congolese boundary, was mentioned as the refueling station
i for our planes. It was impozsible to fly by any other route becsuse
| no one would permit us -- grant permigsion to land or refuel our,
planes. Twenty-eight planes -- IL-14's and several IL-18's, no
others, no fighters, heavy planes, etc., mostly IL-14's...
|
|
|

snget 13. 9: Major Aleksey GUR'YEV, who was my interpreter in
Turkey, flew there with this group. I showed him to you here
(his picture) —-- his wife and children, Kolya and Zhenya. GUR'YEV
is working in the Information Directorate now. He Knows Turkish
7,  VWery well, and French quite well, When the Minister of Defense
wiv, yeceives the Turkish Military Attache or soneone similar In Moscow,
he is invited. The Minister and the Chief of the General Staff
invite him, a major -- despite the fact that there was a big scandal
' with bis wife. For things of this type, we kick people out of
Intelligence. They try to get rid of the person as they conmider
' that the family is not stable, That meang he has no prospecte.

But because he is clever and knows languages he is kept on...and
this is what he does. He flew down to the Congo and he told me

Cre everythi about the Congo. He Héard what attenpts were made by
the soviet bdo Ne and further what the orders were «-- to es-

a om

a,

Gia aT i!

bef |
i

° 7A
AL,
~GMSpen
ee
hs
A -botd
ta

_ have to produce so many (war) heads for certain rockets. I told you

#12

.

because the fissionable materials there are of a very high Uran~
jum content. Theré is no shortage of raw materials for the -
duction of atomic energy in the Us sionable pure elexents.

But they are looking ahead and know thet the reserves are not too.
large, That is the general situation as T have heard. Where did
f hear this? From GUR'YEV and the scadeny the instructors told me.
I believe I spoke to Andrey Tomanovich PA OLOV (Phonetic) about
thia; he also added something about this. I did not spenk to
Sergey SRERGEYEVICH about the raw materials; there was no need. I

did not use my initiative to discuss this. ‘,

(ia) G: And who controls the finished preducts? §: All the
elenenta tion is controlled by the given comission. If
already explained this. G: That ie clear. 8: Now they say we
about the Kiloton -- and equivalents of TNT. These begin with S
kiloton, and higher.

1 repeat, the whole soul of the technical aspect, the
atockpiling of finished products for seosrate components, is what
I have in mind. Empty warheads, and the contents that are to be
put into the warhead, all that is for the Army and for strategic
purposes also. Because ZHDANOV worke for MOSKALENILO, as he worked
for the late NEDELIN, he has all this. All the bases are centralized
and the security is centralized. ZHDANOV is proved with security.
battalions by our Army men, plus OMSDON Divisions (DIVIZII O80B0G')
NAZHACHENIYA). In addition, there are KGB units. It is considered
thet all sites of national importance are always guarded, not by
refular troops (RYADOVOY SLUZABY) -- we have such guard battalions,
guard companies, guard platoons, depending on the size of the site.
They must be guarded by the KGB. They are attached to us.

232 Bt This matter then goes to the GAU, to ZHDANOV. G: The
GAU!

16, 38: I don’t know if you happened to get the film of when
the Soviet tested their first atomic bomb. They made a film. It
showed how they wheeled? the armed atomic homb. On the sides, there
were two officers here and two officers here, with pistols. Soldiers _
are there also, drawing the cart; a Willys-type vehicle towed it. .
We mentioned it someplace, a light vehicle copied from your Willys,
a light GAZ-63. It has a wider axle than the Willys. G: Of the
jeep type? 8: Exactly -~- of the jeep type, and sometimes they put
on a truck body for carrying light loads. Such a vehicle tows a
low cart with 4 dual rubber wheels. It tows it slowly to the
airplane, This Z2ilm was Secret, of course, and was not shown to
everyone. This was the very first, when the atomic bomb was in its

wa Bove

#12

{> first stages. They showed the woods and birds; they showed a
huge cross that was laid out (on the ground), a circle and a cross
in the circle, to mark its bomb target. Tho error was insignifi-

—y-"cant. The guidance was dual. The pilot pressed the lever to
drop (the bomb) and a radio signal was given from the ground —~
the corrections. The pressing of the lever by t ot was
not BII. The bomb did-not fall.

vee

Ses
Vee

built in the genuine manner. They studied the degree of destruc-
tion. Everything was studied scientifically in all respects ygine
all possible methods and equipment. This was done for the wheje
area up to the points where only radiation was present. In other
words, the parameters of damage created by the explosion were
studied, the atomic action, and the power of deatruction, G! Whe
told you this? 8: I saw the film with my own eyes. Yictor spoke
and explained everything. Everything was shown. There [was no music
or sound, They showed everything. 2 Vy Sretotens [pat

, i7. G: Was this at Frunze? 8: No, at the General Staff. I
was still working at the General Staff, when they dropped the first
atomic bomb. That was before I left for Turkey, G: That is clear.
5: There was this film. AIXI the other atomic tests were filmed also.

Ro tuts, X think I saw two more films. I think a total of three films were
( made, Then everything was explained to me. Here there is death;
fu. | here 1f humans are well protected they can survive. There are three
_ " gategories of radiation illness. At this distance, if you are poorly
protected, you will have radiation illness of the Ist eategory -—~
there, it will be the 2nd category. It is even. possible at this
distance. If one goes further underground and makes reinforced
concrete fortifications for the full profile, the radiation will be
insignificant. They showed nll the devices and indicators that
are used. I saw this training film,

A dianol 1 G: But who controls, not the equipment, but the actual
veee| atomit“weapon? 8: ZHDANOV gets everything. It is ZADANOY's res—
Yat hs ponsibility to conceal everything according to strategic directiona.

se I know definitely. VARENTSOV personally confirmed this. i will
ae swear to this. - ? .

Va 8: There are two separate underground g tonto stockpiles
will | "

=
=
2
“Ne
—

, on_Gbr'territory, I know this "exactly", like 2x7 4 ~~ two stock~
ee piles, two locations. But I don't know how many warheads there
Gs

ae Cw 6—

#12

are in each but, of course, it's not one or two. They are held
in reserve. The command will be given from the Presidium, from
the Commander in Chief. There is a curly-headed Commander-in-
Chief, without a single hair on his head, or anything in his head.
(laughs). From him to GDR and that's it, Similar stockpiling»
exists on Soviet territory. =.

: G: Who is in charge of thie stockpiling? 8: I'm tell-
ing yaw ~~ ZHDANOV. G: The materials and the bombs? St No, |
he is in charge of the warheads and the bombg. But they are not a
armed. Gt So he controls the bombe also! 3: Of course. That
ig part of the equipménat. G°°" What exactly does he control? 3:
Ke controls the safekeeping, the technical supervision, the main-
tenance, the technical-ongineering control. How is stockpiling
conducted? Is there any radiation? Is there deterioration of

naw

independently. VARENTSOV can’t demand to get one bomb for use

in maneuvers. No, it hag to originate in the Central Committee.
G: What do these letters mean? Why is it OMSDON? 8: This is
_DIVIZIYA OSOBOGO NAZNACHENIYA. OMS is just added by them, I
never asked. I will find out about ¢ghese three letters. [It is
not read DON-OMS, but OMBDON. I will give you the exact full
nane; I never paid any attention or I forgot it. They guard the
Kremlin, Lenin's Mausoleum. G: Yes, yes. 8! There was a mil-
itary school in the Kremlin, in the name of KALININ, It has been
removed -~ an infantry school, There are no schools in the
Kremlin now, <A Honor Guard Regiment of Artillery .(SALYUTNIY POLK)
was stationed there. It was removed. During the war, it was there.
Your obedient soldier was slmost appointed Commander of the reg~'
iment, upon graduation from the FRUNZE Academy. It was stationed
in the Kremlin, I was in the Artillery and a former regimental
commander, and was a good student at the FRUNZE Academy. Then

they began to cut things down and I was assigned to the Ground
4forces. ~ : ;

~7~

ee an RS PC cS LS ee

7

#12

(33) G: To what extent does the responsibility of MUSEKALENKO
and VARENTSOV go into the rocket program? For example, you said
that development and all scientific research groupe are coordinat~
ed at GAU, 8S: The AIis? G: Yes, the Nifs. Does the respon-
#ibility of MOSKALENKO and VARENTSOV. reach the plants? 8: Yes,
it reaches to this extent -- the Director of the Plant is respon-
sible to MOSKALENKO, if he produces rockets for him, to account
Yor the fulfillment of the plan. But neither HOSKALENKO, VARENT~
SOV, nor the Minister, can order the Director of the Plant te do
anything without first contacting the civilian authority in the
Central Comaittee that is concerned with this. Their job is to

take delivery; the plant is the supplier. That is, to fulfill

functional responsibilities. He doesn't have the right to come

to the plant and say, "This is a mess here; the men are not working." |

Or, “You are not fulfilling the plan.” You have to report to the

Minister, and the Minister will report to KHARUSHCHEV or his Deputy,

whoever oversees this plant. This is the way nembers of the
Presidium are placed in controlling positions. When BERIA was
alive, he was in charge of all the rubber industry, in addition
to his KGB functions. He was also in charge of all plants that
produced tanks, rubber and explosives. Gther members were in
charge of other heavy industry plants. The Minister and everyone
was subordinate to him. While the Supreme Soviet of Hinisters
met, these members of the Presidium, this head, was the highest
Politburo, Now the Politburo does not exist as such, but the
system ia the same, They (Presidium members) all have 4-5
Ministfies in their hands. They can make the Ministers stand
on the carpet, remove them, sit them down, kill them, do any-
thing they want. The member is responsible to the Presidium for

his 5-6 MinistHies; that is the functional breakdown. G: That
is clear,

&.) 8: BREZHNEV does even more now. He is responsible
for many of the defense enterprises. In this way, any big ques~
tion is first referred to BREZHNEV, not to KBRUSHCHEY, BREZHNEV
reports on this to KARUSHCREY. That is the way the “headsa" work.
The "heads" are constantly in conference discussing some cable
from the agenta. They decide where and how. They are constantly
in conference and by telepkone they give orders through their
assistants. Sometimes the Minister sits there for days on end;
he has his own office. G: I understand.

8! | I renomber this case. J was invited to the Kremlin
to theParty Meeting (AKTIV) when ZHUKOV was relieved.

ing (AKTIV) when OV was re At the
Party Meeting in the Bol'shey Georgiyevskiy Hail of the Kremlin,
they got 2,000 military persons together. It im necessary to

o>.

—
~~

ARUIN,

ye

#12

come to an understanding with us so that we would applaud (applauds).
"It is right that ZHUKOV was rel4eved!" It has to be supported
so that it can be used in the newspapers and speeches later. At
the entrance to the central hall, in the corridor of the Bol'shoy
Palace, they exhibited the large painting of ZHUKOV on horgeback.
You probably heard of this. G: On a white horse! 98: He is
sitting on‘'a white horse in full uniform, and under the hooves

of the horse are the fallen Fascist colors with the Swastixas.

It is very well done, When the war was over, © ZHUKOV had actual-
ly done a lot to defeat Fascist Germany; he did an awful lot.

The artist was inspired by thin. Paintings of SUVOROV and KUTUZOV
were displayed -- why not one of a 20th century notable by GRABAR’
and snother artist! A very beautiful canvas, higher than this
ceiling, a beautiful frame, everything. When they painted the
picture, it was said that it was fitting and that ZHUKOV deserved
it. He got his fourth Hero's Star. He was given everything.

-ffhy did KHRUSHCHEV pick on him? If you remember STALIN relieved

paste dae ener A ee ne Si Lane
et ene mee ete mamma

ZHUKOVY because he feared an army uprising -- not the whole arny,
but let's say 80% ~~ 75% for sure, well 80%. Some said 90% would
have followed ZHUKOV, I will tell you now how this tock place.

_Aiheard VARENTSOV say this and I also heard it at the Party meetings.

He (KHRUSHCHEY) said, “By the painting, you will see what a
personality cult he has. <A shame!" Before this he said it was
right that the painting was made, and the painting was hung in

the Central Building 6f the Soviet Army. Everything was as though
it was proper to have a painting, in color -- a national hero!

And then the personality cult was brought up. If he was a modest
person, he wouldn't allow the painting to be done. He said, “The
painting cost about 20,000 (rubles).” So what? They could have
written ballads, poems, plays about ZHUKOV just as well. This was
all a put-up job reshuffled for this meeting ~~ first, to relieve
the man and put him to shame, and to undermine his authority.

So, the Minister, all the Heads of the Directorates, Chiefs, of
Staffs, were at this meeting (ARTIV). The Minister gave his report.
He just started to report, when someone came and whispered in his
ear. He left and was away for an hour. Then he returned and sat
for a while. There was a buffet -~ mineral waters, fruit, every-
thing! Then the top man -- the brain -~ arrived, and the whole
matter was discussed and the sccugation mad --He said, “Please
excuse me, comrades, that I did not work with you all the tine.

I was called ‘into the government’ (V¥ PRAVITEL'STYO)." The
government, however, was right there,in the Kremlin, next door

to where they confer.

an) on

(PAU
Re.

teres eee

Ned

b fears

—

x
A

:
(g55 pon ~ ped

us" ik,

#12

7. So that is their functional breakdown. There is no

one person who can gdanction the use of atomic energy, the movement

from a atockpile to somewhere, Bverything is centralized, The

bases are acattered all over the country and the GDR and there are
prepared warheads, This has to be investigated, I think that in
Germany it can be done easily. Maybe I'm a fool, but I think that

purpose, G: I understand, That is the way you explained 1€ to
mo.

(26) G: Everything is coordinated by the Committee which sits
ina U. Who is in charge of it? &: The Chief of the GAU is
automatically the head. G!: So it ig_under ZHDANOV? 8: Under
ZHDANOV! G: That's clear. That's fine if it's ZHDANOV. 8:
But, when necessary, VARENTSOVY gets mixed up in it. G: Yes,
That's clear. 8: He could say, "You were given a certain matter
to work out and you are dragging it out,” or, on paper, "You
worked it out well but in practice it doesn't work, or it works
wut with mistakes." You see, they all participate in all these
discussions, conferences, meetings when necessary. But to start
off, it's the scientists, These Germans that are in the suburbs

_@f Moscow. They work also; they are invited; they are consulted,

developed, Maybe they do more and just finish up there, because
they developed the V~2 rocket which ts the prototype of all the
rocketa,

(27) G: Now, going beyond the scientific people -~ who builds
not only the launching pads but the foundations, ete.?7 8: I
understand -- thé Chief of the Main Engineering Directorate. G!
Only he? S: He has the Ruibyshev Acadomy, which prepares eng-
ineering cadres and fortification epecialists, who are subordinate

~190~

*) oth
[ows
ie

ee

#12

to and available to construct everything needed for the rocket

command, G: That's clear. 8: They also prepare fortification

specialists for other underground defense sites and also engine er-

4nge% cadres for mining, mine clearing, for making passages (roads),

etc. All types of engineers needed in combat. All cadres are

prepared there. The biggest department there is thia one (for

xocret base construction) ~~ the one with all the new requirenents.
3 orrect. '

Gs) @: So the Chief of the Main Engineering Directorate

ig Colonei General of the Engineering Troops VOROV'YEY -- 2’don*t
remember the initials. Underhie control he has the Academy, a Nit,
his own ranges (POLIGONY) outside Moscow. Like the Chief of the
Chemical Directorate, he has his own ranges ./’1 will tell you where
the chemical one is; I was there twice. There they put 2 rabbit
and other animals in a metal box for tests. G: In Moscow? 8:
Outside Moscow, very close, G: This will be VIEH? 8&8: Xo.

G: ...the All Union Institute of Experimental Medicine? 8: Ho,
this Experimental Medicine is under Colonel General GRIZHOY. 1f

am taiking about atraight chemistry -- pure bacteriology and pure
chemistry. I was at thie range twice. it is about 30 km outside |
Moscow. There is a small populated area in the woods. When you
drive up, it stinks of IPRIT gas. There are yellow spots on the
grass. There is barbed wire along the road, guards, patrols ~~
even cattle cannot enter. They put a rabbit in a glass tox and
give it one dose {of gas). The rabbit shudders and dies. They
give another type; the rabbit shudders and then dies. We were
shown nll these gases.

: Do you know what gases they are? 8: No, G: Nerve
gasex 8: We have all this, But the evaluation of gases that you

asked about...the best American gas, which is ordorless and color-
less, is very highly regarded as a tactical gas. G! You sre’

G: It is highly thought of? 8: It is highly regarded but we don't
know the secret of (this gas), but we know its tactical properties.
Maybe not all, but some of them. They say that the Americans have
a tremendous gas ~~ colorless and odorless, excellent for tactical
use. That is the evaluation they give it. G! Yes, 8! There is

‘one gas -- I won't answer now as I have some materials about this.

By the way, they are not secret. I will tell you what gases thoy
are. ili

0.) G: Is there an intention to use gases in case of war?
8: The 7th Directorate of the General Staff, the Main Chenical
Directorate, has the Academy of Chemical Protection in the name

~L1ju

#12

of VOROSAILOY, Military-Chemical schools, Scientific Research
Institutes. They prepare cadres, both chemical and bateriolo-
,gical. G: They are joined together? 8S: Yes, one command and
one management. The cadres are also one. The Institutes are
geparate. G: De you know #nere the Center is? 8: All the
Centers are in Moscow, but the experimental Centers are... One

is on a small island in a swampy area of the Volga, beyond Kalinin.
G: You don't know the name? S! They aaid there is a small
island... G!: Oh, yes. When you were at Kalinin, do you remember
seeing the huge stocks of chemicdis. They were there during

World War II, Are they still there? 8: When I was in Kalinins,'
when the Academy of Rear Services was there... G: Across the
Yolga from the Academy.

a1.) Here is what I will tell you. There are Centers in
generar, all around Moscow, in Kalinin and especially Kaluga. G:
Kaluga, yes. 83: There is a big base there and the brother of
Sergey Sergeyevich VARENTSOV is the Chief of the Base in Kaluga
Colonel Nikolay Sergeyevich VARENTSOV. Two brothers. Sergey
Bergeyevich lives in Deitrov, and their old mother lives there,
60 km from Moscow. I go there often with him. G: Where is
this? 8S: Dmitrov. He is from Daitrov, His mother lives there
in a house, 60 km from Moscow. It is in the direction of our
atomic center where they take scientists openly, where the first
atomic atation (ATOMNIY BLOX) was created at Dubny. Dubny is
beyond Duitrov. I was at Dubny once. On Sundays, I often drive
out to (Dmitrov) with VARENTSOV to see his mother; he gives her
500 rubles every month. We take produce out to her. There is

a nice garden there. We get a good meal, tomatoes, etc. There
is a museum there,

32. 8: His brother is a colonel like me, but a colonel in
the engineers. He fought on the First Ukrainian Front with me
all the time. G: What base is he Chief of now? 8: Chief of
the Kaluzhskaya Base, subordinate to ZHDANOY, a huge base.

33. 8: But now to finish what I started -- beyond Kalinin,
there is a swampy area. G: Yes, yes. 8: I was told this by my
jate father-in-law, GAPANOVICH. G: That is considered to be the

- _ Toatew water atorage area? S: The water storage area is in the

direction of Dmitrov. JT am telling you about Kalinin, about the
chemistry. You are correct, the water storage area is huge. There
are all kinds of water overflows, sluices. A canal passes through
there. New to finigh, there is 2 small island (OSTROVOK). The
Volga flows around it. It is like my living on an island in the
Moscow River; there it is the Volga river. The (island) is covered

~12-

hae dlingh ls.

ribeye ;

ian

NN ttn a eet et

enteteee

#12

with woods and there is a barbed wire fence. All the little
houses, offices, and all the containers with the beeilli, and

the various inducers of plague (CHUMA), ete... G! That is

-Clear,

8: I want to finish about the brother, Colonel Nikolay
Sergeyevich VARENTSOY, so that you will know everything. He is
a nice, modest fellow. He is older than 1 am, about four years.
He im about 46 years old. He married the mistress of VARENTSOY .
VARENTSOY had a mistress at the front and one day, when he was
sleeping with her, his wife arrived early in the morning and
found them in each others’ arms, It almost ended in a divorce,
VARENTSOV's brother liked the girl and married her. She was
pregnant at the time. She gave birth to a girl, who is actually
the daughter of Sergey Sergeyevich, (laughs). 8! He had two
more. So there are three children now. G: It's a family affair!
(laugh). 5: In generazl, he is very nice, I was at his DACHA, the
last one. He wrote me a few things. I even have a photo, which
he signed. He likes me very much, G: But you don't need to send
the photo! S: will send it to you. (laughs). It won't take
& lot of room in our mail. (laughs). I will ask you to study it
well, make an enlargement ard a portrait, (laughe}..

c

50 modest Nikolay arrives, He says he had an accident, .
a.soltter got tangled up in mines and a high tengion mine fell
down and killed him. As x consequence, there was unpleasantness,
ZAHDANOV came down and chewed him out. ZHDAKOV dees not like
VARENTSOV and VARENTSOV does not like him. When ZHDANOV had the
heart trouble VARENTSOV said, "The least he could do is retire", .
I knew ZHDAXOV personally. I mat with him like I am with you now.
I will be bossing everyone sround on September 2nd at VARENTSOYV 's
birthday party. What I need is a microphone so that I can hear
everything. A very miserable looking little colonel came down
with ZHDANOV; you keoow the expression POMESHCHAL KA REM (to report

on him), Well, he did not take anything down. Nikolay Sergeyevich
had a gmali fire, just recently.

: (a6, 8: By the way, I have another good source. An _Mozhaysk,
we he uge artillery base. There is a Captain Yevgeniy

fa hu
Mikhaylovich SKLYAROV who works there. You need the name and

patronymic? G! Yes, please. (laugh). §! His wife, Valya, works
in the Main Military Publdshing House. In Turkey I had a steno—
grapher-typiat, PRONINA, from the embassy who helped me. The
wife of GUR'YEV was the stenographer-typist, but when she was sick
sometimes and also when she went to USSR, Tanya PRONINA helped.

2195

#12

She was an M,I.D. worker.
Pe
al got! (37) S$: There was a Shura ANDRIANOVA there who ig working
c.4° (° for PODBEROY now. She is his mistress. Whenever PODSEROY flies
pt... s@meplace, to you especially, ANDRIANOVA always goes 4150 and sits
wo" there for 2-3 months. But this is Tanya PRONINA, also an H.I.D.
oe stenographer-typist, who helped us. When I returned from Turkey
on 25 January it was the namesday of Tatyana and she invited me
ie) my wife. She lives close to Pushkinskaya Ploshchad.—
384

There I met the SKEYAROVs, husband and wife. SKLYAROV

vw
As
at

en

is sau n fool. We-participated in the Hungarian affair and

) | yveeelved the Order of the Red Combat Banner (ORDIN KRASNOGO ZNAMYA
BOKVOGO). He was a tank crew member, but from the engineering end,
in the armored forces, Before this, before Hungary, he was
stationed in the city of Vozh. Vozh is in the Turkestan military
district, on the border of Afghanistan. When the war, the eveats,
ended in Hungary he was recalled. They drowned everything in
bleed and then removed the tanks. He waetsent to Yozrh again.’

| He is such a nice modest fellow. Re said he was stationed there

i before, but he went to Vozh anyway. This one (Tanya PRONINA)

} started pestering me ~~ "Please help my girl friend and the girl

| friend is not bad." I'm also sorry for him so I help. Good
women should be helped! (laughs). 8: I said a couple of words
and he was transferred from Vozh toe Mozhaysk.

(35) 8: There were no yncancies in Moscow; it is hard to
4 find ‘ob in Moscow. But I have so many friends and I have
connections with VARENTSOV and cthers who work there. Often
people ask me; I have had many requests from friends because we
have a simple relationship. I help them but demand the same
attention for myself, If someone is not nice to me, then I can
tear his head off. There are my morals and my personality. I
am respected, I am known for this, and people are very afraid of
me.., They respect me.

Hi I said two words to the personnel man and. he -was.out of
Vozh and in the place where he is now. He is bored with being
there, He has been working there mpre than two years. He wants

to be transferred to Moscow, hi# mother died and left a large room
on Armyanskiy Pereulak which he wants to get from his stepfather .--
his father is not alive —- who wants to grab it and get married.
But he is registered (PROPISAN) in Mozhaysk and Valya is registered
in Moscow. Valya, his wife, is the daughter of a retired artillery

~14—

f
ia

—

|

#12

colonel who worked in the Artillery Academy and lost his job
recently. He has a sual] apartment on Gorkiy Street opposite
‘the telegraph office. This is an interesting thing —- why am,
I mentioning this? Thim captain tells me everything.

4.) 8: When I was getting ready to go to England I met

him. said, "(Subject'’s true name) will you transfer me eome-~

pince?" I said, "There is nothing in Moscow now, my dear fellow.

Sit and wait, there is nothing.” It is not easy to get him into

the Academy. I offered him the slot of chauffeur in Turkey as ”

driver in Istanbul -~ as head driver and instructor. The perszon~

nel people upheld me. He passed the Central Gonmmittee and KGB

(security) checks. He recéived a perfect score (5). Everything

was okay regarding the relatives and all that. Then they looked

and could not send him abroad. He does not have a mother or

father and eight years ago, in 1953, there was a case of drunkeness.

They are keeping him in mind but are holding up his processing for

an (exit) visa to go to Istanbul as a chauffeur for our Strategic

REZIDENTURA, I tell him, "You are a fool! You see I do everything

for you, but am I responsible that you don't have a mother or

father? So sit and wait. If I have an opportunity, I will transfer

you.” °

© 42, 8: (Note? Subject is quoting SKLYAROV) "(Subject's first

name and patronymic)! I recently had an unpleasantness." "What?"
“There was a fire." "Why?" "A shell exploded." It killed two
civilians, They were cleaning with brushes and it created a spark.
Apparently they were steel brushes -- a regular shell, not an .
_atomic one. Two were killed and four wounded, A smali fire occurred.
The system in as follows: The cells (rooms) where work is done

with ammunition) are isolated from each other by thick walls, so.

-—- that a fire or shock will not spread, This occured in Nozhaysk

<—

ta a“

where our Captain SXLYAROV works. G: This iavery interesting a
source, 58: Yes, I can describe many more. I will write them |
up for you later. I can simply ask how is everything? What is
new? They know that I know more about work than they. They feel
very lucky if they can tell me something also, and then. they. trust
me ~- without a doubt. Captain SKLYAROV, a nice fellow,

: Does the General Headquarters Reserve (REZERY GLAVNOGO
.KOMANDOV NIYA) still exist? #8: The RGKs are unite that are
created“in wartime. But now they have the following subordination.
They are centrally oor a ea Everything that we consider to be
centrally subordinate is in the hands of the Minister and Chief

of the General Staff. This is actually the basis of RGK. But they
are not called RGK now..

wIf«

which will be used to strengthen one or another strategic area,
@ front or army. So there are installations and units that have
special unite (SPETS CHASIT) within their organization. This
exists and is in the hands of the General Command, but they are
not listed as such. It is not said that you are serving in RGK.
You serve in the Army but your assignment is such in case of
battle readiness.

4 G: Yes, who are they subordinate to now? 8S! They are
subord te to,..G: To the OKRUGs? 8: No, by territories.
That ig a very good question, What is located in the territories ,
of the OKRUG, from a garrison standpoint, is subordinate to the
Commander of the OKRUG. He is responsible for the supply of food,
uniforms, fuel, etc. to the garrison, But directives regarding
battle training, the closing down or reduction in size of the unites,
came from the General Staff in Moscow. (The Commander of the
Military District (OKRUG)) is responsible for discipline, parades,
etc., and the garrison commander has to obey his orders.

46 8: But the commander (of the Military District) can't
order « battalion transferred or relieved, nor can he criticize
or supervise training. He does not have the right. He is (in
charge of) general administrative supervision, and concretely it
is the General Staff. These units exist all over the Soviet Union,
they exist in all Military Districts but they are not Military
District (units). They are centrally (subordinate). Military
District commanders are given several brigades for their division.
They have to train them and be responsible for everything. The
commander is regponsible for order in the RGK units but cannot
command them. G: That's clear. Fine.

-) G: When did you first hear that_all satellites would

be given rockets? When was the decision made and by Whom? 8:
4 . E heard this tei times, ‘The decision was made “by the Praesidiun
feitde | of the Central Committee of the KP§S together with the palitical
Le leaders, who often come secretly without anything appearing in
ie the press ~~ SHIVKOV, KADOR or MADOH. They fly in, are met and

seen off, and there is nothing In the preasa, When necessary they
a announce it - "The peade-loving Warsaw Pact met!"

Lori vas Dy Page dade. |
‘ ge ~16-

KA DA Q

ko
Cw fil
hay

lux Bia

\
{
!
H

|
|
|

F12

3: They, first of 211, have telephone conmunications
and KHRUSHCHEY can talk to them ten times a day. Representatives
sit in the General StafZ% for coordination. If there is the slight-

est change in the situation, the agent net reports political
(information), American or English treop movements, etc. All this
is reported at once. It is plotted on maps, and changes are made.
Intelligence information is fully coordinated. Intelligence
operations are not run against these countries but they teach
them how to run operations against the opposition. There are
constant political consultations, eta. There was a meeting and

.it was decided to give rocket weapons, So it is this way, If . ne

there are rockets, then there are bases where any kind of warhead
can be a It can't be separated; it was decided this way.

3: I heard this about ten times. G!: At the courser?
8: > Today it is two years since I ampleted the course. I
maintain contact with the courses, I maintain a friendship with
FILIPOVICH, he lives in the same house as Valya. He is the chief

“of a Course. Ne is in charge of a VAK which is subordinate to

the general staff. The subordination exists because he receives
orders to train 50 General Staff officers. He accepts them, But
all this is coordinated through VARERTSOV ~~ HEDELIN formerly ~~
now MOSKALENKO, ” ,

~ S$ VARENTSOV tells me this: ("Subject's first name) !
I am overworked." “What's the matter7" "New matters!" Really,
all the time, he spends 2-3 days in Moscow and then leaves by air |
in either one direction or the other. He draga BUZINOY with hin.--
“BUZINOV, where are you going?" "There! Sergey Sergeyevich is
taking me_to Poland -~- new matters. We have to help our brothers
who can do us dirt +~ to teach them and give them some things.
It is an order from our government!" Se, a few fragments from
VARENTSOV, and thie one tells me in detail: "(Subject's first
name), I am leaving for Hungary for two weeks", Why? A new
something or other. G! so in othe#® words he was there already?
3°: Yes. Thie year.

» %S! And they forecast that by the end of 1961.i.Sorry,
I heard this in 1961, in 1961 in the beginning .---The preparation
of course, began in 1960 but not for all countries, I have this{
in my report someplace in 1960. Germany ~~ the GDR got them first —
in 1960. In 1961 -~ by the end of 1961 — following Germany's
example, set them up in all the other Peoples' Democracies. G!
That's clear. $8: We are giving rockets to Ching aiso, but they

ere making their own now, according to our specifications,

~17~

and send it to you, as proof. VARENTSOV was in China several times.

: 4./ 3: My daughter stays with them all the time, oi fher at
the PAC in Babushkino or at their separate apartment nex to the
t

#12

82, 8: Personnel are being trained all the time. There had
been a faculty for foreign students at the Dzerzhinskiy Academ .
How it hag been removed because there are many secret things, and
there have been cases of arrests of the officer students in USSR.
I know some Germans were arrested, some Hungarians, and I know
one Pole was arrested. The faculty was moved to the Higher Voron-.
ezh School at Voronezh, This is in connection with artillery. The
Combined Arms part at Frunze Acadeny has remained there. Officers
from all types of units comé (here), chemical, engineering, artillery,
ete, ~~ all, G! Of course, a school for all branches of the . :
military. 8: Yes, they arrive and have better conditions that
our officers. The government gives them an allowance, and here in
the Soviet Union they get a subsidy. They live it up. They go
to restaurants; they have girls and have money left over. This is
just information, This is a very important matter, what elwe did
I want to tell you? Everyone is promised (rockets) .

53, 8! VWARENTSOY visited all the Peoples’ Dewonracies in-
cluding Keres, He showed me photographs. There is one of him in
field uniform, walking along fortifications in Korea. He has these

photographs; I saw them. I can steal one photograph from the album

Whenever Chinese come here they immediately give him two or three
big boxes of tea. He loves tea! He brews fresh ten every tine
he drinks it and uses 50 grams of tea each tine. He drinks only...’
real tea. Gt Where did you put him up at home? 8! He invieed “Or
me when he worked in Thilisi and Lvov. He slept with me. I had

nan wonderful double bed. My wife, mother and daughter slept in the
other room. You know, I have 45 sq. meters of area. That's
enough for me under the present circumstances. He ate at my house,
and KARIAFILI visited me at my home when he was there. Now when

x want? celebrate some occasion I invite hin with his wife and
ehil n. :

PvO he country, -- the one we will blow up. G: (laughs). 8!
Because hia youngest daughter, Natasha, is the same-age-as Galys.

: Yes. 8: I bought a blouse for Natasha today. When he comes
from Cvechealavakin or someplace he brings something for Galys,
shoes or something. G: That ia the way it should be. 8: That
ig what our relations are like.

8% Now to finish this, I may be repeating myself but
X wi foufiom it. It won't do any harm. This is a firm order

that the rockets be operational b y the end of this year, 1961,

~18-

nen

fo @ fetta

“sad smaller. The free rockets will definitely by given, In

Ee
#12

in all countries. This does not mean that there will be large
numbers, that's my feeling, and I can't say how many. I think‘
that, of course, they won't be given everything. To start off
they will definitely be given the R-11 definitely because we have
very large numbers of them and it is proven. When one knows the
R-11 rocket then it is easy to go over tothe others, both larger
general I want to correct myself.

The free rockets will be given
first, then the guided ones.

(%,) 8: Personnel is being trained well and very intensively
in t ountries of the Peoples’ Democracies. In other words, ‘the
officers whom we trained will teach there with the help of our

instructors and teachers who go there for 2 -~ 3 years as consultants.
This is being done very quickly.

57 §: There is a question that I asked and never got a reply
to, —VARENTSOV did not go to Albania, and I have not hear that any
of his artillery officers went to Albania. Because Enver HOXHA
turned away from us in the presence of KHRUSHCHEV, when the whole
clique met, they said that after TITO the next traitor, an opportun-
ist and (aubject can't remember word) -- one who -- Lenin's...

Oh God, what's the matter! G: You mean: independent conmunism?

8: Well one who preaches Lenin's doctrine in his own way -~- Marxism,
Leninism. Not a reformist, no. G: One who splits away? S: No,
we are all around it but there is a word for it. G: A revisionist,
no? S: No. Dolores IBARRURI said that he is the second declared
right4st scoundrel in this respect, a deviationist (revisionist),
after TITO, And he, HOH, behaved very independently there and he
departed first. He left his first deputy... a short name, four
letters... G: Why did he stay? 5: Because Enver wanted to

leave, KHRUSHCHEV made the following decision so as not to wreck
relations with Enver completely, because this would do harm. GQ?

Of coursas.
(ss) 8: He was told everything they wanted to tell him. Enver
turn t down and departed. They kept quiet, because the others
support, and are in the Soviet Bloc. But Albania is only hanging

by a hair, Itwants to proceed independently. Also..it does. not

want to joint our bloc nor does it want to be dictated to by the
Soviet Union. That's how Enver wants to break away. Despite the
fact that Enver is on bad terms with TITO, he has bad personal
relations; he has taken his own path. We Marxists, like KHRUSHCHEV
think that persona who take their own paths are revisionists and

are playing into the hand of the Capitalist Bloc.

~19—

#12 I

t tay

cae “
area G: Now I have several questions about the V-75, Can
x ,  they-be used on ships? 5S: I have not heard. Why do you have
‘Sip | dt used there? G: I don't know. Is it possible? 3: Why? We
= have coastal armament and we have coast defense troops as part
ste of the navy. They have them. G: Of course, that's a different
matter. 8: We don't have large units that have to be protected,

(60) G: The headquarters’ will have or already have them to

a i | ace n extent? §S! For what? G: Where there aré large con-

{ centrations, etc. 8: The V-75? G: Yes. 8: The V-75s are in
the hands of the commander of the PVO of the country and commanders

of the rear areas. In case of war it is different; There are

separate PVO units that have these rockets; they are separate

units, They can be assigned -to the Military District where there

is no PVO zone and a PYO zone will not be created. The military

zone needs anti-aircraft protection. It will be given,.for example,

- a regiment, a division or two regiments. G!: I understand.

at oo j
pushy ( a1) G: How about in Germany ~- do they have them to protect
‘ae thet cops? 8: Germany was the first country to get rockets.

CI «Gt For their own use? §! For their own use, for the Germans...
at G: So they have them. §: <£ don't know, can’t Be that. Tf have e
a | heard that the Germans of the GDR are anti-Soviet and cannot be
e ' @asily penetrated. Is it really that hard to find out things? I
" / thought that you knew about the rockets through Germany a long time
; ago, through your agent net. G: To some degree only.

GSfR 4 2./ 8! You should pose this question -- there are four
~~" + rocket brigades, two stockpiles (of nuclear warheads). Two of *)
the rocket brigades are to receive atomic warheads when necessary 7):
They are trained for this. G: I understand. 38! That's exact «anys
Ke 2 _... The 6th ADD Brigade is there under Colonel FEDOROV} “G: Are they (Fanci
‘ i Found around Moscow?‘ Bi They are deployed there,”yes. Mcscow eae:
ty15(*'| 4s very well protected. It's the Moscow zone. Gi Have they eee
Ye sf Standard artillery and rockets all tied in with Lighter intercepter
_ | aircraft? 8: Yes, they are all tied in together,

G: Now this is interesting. When VARENTSOV: said: that
a shortage of electronic equipment... 8: And that the
electronic equipment is bad. He said so directly. G: Did he
ar ever complain that there is a lack of accurate geodétic maps?
Heino | This is from the standpoint that extremely accurate maps are

rt necessary. S: We mentioned this. He never said that there are
Gy } HO maps. There are maps ~~ at any scale. The geodetic tie-in
Yotetn at separate installations (UZLAKH) is not done on maps but on a

| given plane table (DANNOM PLANSHETE), There are special geodetic
“ f € 7 a . Se ae . ee

“

-~20-

". a : ‘ 7 : ; |

#12
Geeelitic,
ae A units (CHASTI) which make ready the goedetic preparations in
an three days for R-2 rockets. G!: Yes, : For R-11 it also said

hig

how long it takes ~- about the same. This is considered to be
extremely bad! ° ~ OS

8: But the matter is not in the maps, the matter is
is in the branching out of the triangulation net. Triangulation
has to be tighter, more points that have been caiculated down to
the last second by X and Y should be created. This triangulation!

oe | in AC raining of the cadres who could do it fast, and the matter

_——

Where there are triangulation

points, and in others there are none.
plane table (PLANSHET) and the

points it is very easy to tie up the

—_—_——.

i . G5 Yes. 8! In some directions there are many triangulation -
-

{| docation of the rocket, to aim it at the target. Here where there

| ds no triangulation we don't have any order and they check, and

i recheck, (CHEKUYUTSYA). They establish an agreed upon triangulation
,!, met, check it and recheck (CHEKUYUTSYA) for days, day and night
without sleeping. G: I understand.

S: There was such a case, Listen to this, almost un-
knows concerning this. Last year, in 1960, there were big

maneuvers in the Transcaveasian Military District, next to the

Turkish border, The training was under the supervision of the
Minister (of Defense). KHRUSHCHEVY came there (to observe). In

a a

: Kapustin Yar, CHUIKOV, who was appointed already, was in charge

vy | connection with the visit they had training. They fired rockets
wr

to _the Turkestan impact area (PRIENNAYA) like they fire from
4

nog) of everything and had to report te the Minister when everything
~ was ready. The Minister was to report to the Commander~in-Chief,

Marshal KHRUSHCHEY (laughs). MALINOVSKIY says, "Comrades, marshals,
generals, and officers! I present to you the Commander-in-Chief
\j, Of the Armed Forces of the USSR, Comrade KHRUSHCHEY." Cs applies
{ all laugh). 8: He (KHRUSBCHEV) nods his head and steps forward.
FE és.) {It is awful, all the Russian people @uffer from this.
i When Ook at this I say they are lied to, suppressed; they have
| not seen anything good and deo not see anything. They wait all
i. the time. That's the Waiting Doctrine that has been developed now.
| It's great! Wait! (Laugh) Die and others will wait. Well -~
VARENTSOV told me this in detail. Please remember this; it is a
very characteristic moment. YVARENTSOV became very miffed at CHUIKOY.
iene called him an impolite scoundrel who used abusive language,
i ’

the § OCK

f 8: So the Minister and KARUSHCHEV are about to arrive.
| Everything is ready; the troops are deployed. Everything is ready
.| except these points (triangulation) don’t exist. It can't be said

os

#12

that everything is ready to fire at any time. There is an inspection
comission to check this. It is not the object just to fire. The
object is to train the troops. They said to him, "Are you going

to imprese?* CHUIKOV is nervous. As long as they are auch monkeys,

‘they can't manage to do it. Why drag it out for so long?’ They

tie it in too long and when they (team of Ground Force Artillery)
report the coordinates, CHUIKOV checks them through his people.
Are they accurate? Who will take the responsibility Yor inaccurate
coordinates? The same thing will happen in wartime? They would

be court martialed and dismissed from the Party. (G laughs).

68, /S: Everyone is sitting and waiting. The Generals ~~ they
wait and demand. CHUIKOV calls KARIAFILI, VARENTSOY's Chief of
Staff. "Well, Colonel general! Are the coordinates computed for

firing, cir “No, Comrade Marshal. Thia and that is still to —

be done. # I were in your position, I would have provided every-
thing." VARENTSOY then entered. "But miybe you, Marshal, can

tell us if the coordinates are ready or not?" VARENTSOV said,

"You know, Marshal of the Soviet Union, coordinates are not pro-
duced (as fast) as you make pancakes!” (211 laugh). 8:A 1 saw ch -
that he was nervous, I put something on the table, turned around
and left without requesting permission to leave. One is a marshal
of the USSR, the other «4 marshal of a branch of the armed forces.
CRUIKOVY in the important person, KHRUSHCHEV might call him his
right-hand man. CHUIKOV is the closer to KARUSHCHEY, can approach _
him easier, and circulates closer to him than VARERTSOV who is
called up only when he is needed. And VARENTSOV said, “I replied
to him! Comrade Marshal of the Soviet Union! Coordinates are not
produced as fast as you make pancakes". He fixed him with this

, and left. (#11 laugh)

(69. ) 8: A lot of effort is going into this now. What is the
trouble? A bear and rabbit can be taught to play on a drum and
strike matches, but that ien't the matter. The fact is that the.
matter with triangulation ia bad, and therefore they must spend a
lot of time. Sc, as far as i understand it, an adopted triangula-
tion net is formed. It is accurate, but requires more time for
complete readiness and complete calculations. More than one point
has to be tied in. Many launching platforms have to be tied in.
This the whole trouble. :
\ 70, J8:. Let me again repeat my analysis of rockets ~- free —
rockets. /There are large lateral deviations at long ranges, They
still can't reduce this to a minimum, In wartime they want to
compensate for this throggh the use of atomic warheads, since a
greater destructive ares; will result due to a more extensive

mB

Ct Q
Tet

Z
~ AN

hele A.

#12

detonation, Geodetic preparation for these rockets is still the
obstacle, They are preparing cadres, improving aiming devices
that I gave you, calimators, various compasses (BUSSOLY) etc.
They are trying to perfect this geodetic work. This historic
event did take place -~- "One does not do this like you make
pancakes" and he left.

oan lL; 8: A He ig a very spiteful person, He probably will not
be 2 fed (the .Order of Lenin. He wants to get it very badly,

not ‘because he has 5 others already. He also has the Hero of the
Soviet Union; he has many orders. But (He wants it for) the pres-
tige. When I was at KARIAFILI's GO0th birthday celebration ~~ a top
artillery man but he hag poor relations with everyone, Everyone
criticizes him; they did not give him an Order. Instead he was pre-
sented with a watch engraved with his name, but this in not the sane.
What doea he need the watch for? He has ten already. But to get

an Order ~~ that is what would have been significant.

G: Now tell me how are the rockets transported? Is air

t used or is it all over roads? 8! It i8 a8 follows. I
told you how many axles per rocket load. That's worked out using
these trailors (TELEZHKI), also the number of rockets per railroad
car. Railroad loading hes been worked out. There ate separate sub-
nasemblies in crates which come to the assembly center. Then they
are mounted. They have transported free rockets by air during train-
ing -- I know this ~- révkets’ like the KORSHUN, 4n unassembled forn,
There is no established system (by air transport), but I de not think
this is a problem. If necessary they can be transported by air. If
it is possible to transport tanks by air it should be possible to

transport rockets. Light tanks are transported easily.

Gt You know this place, Mytishchi? Is the Central Artillery
Dest 4reau located there?: 8: No, I definitely know where the
Central Artiliery Design (RASCHETA) is located because I had arranged
for a person to be employed there. It was in the hand of VARENTSOV;
now it is in the hands of Moskalenko. It is on Khoroshovskoye |
Shoase opposite the Aganderzhevskogo Cemetery. I placed the son of
your friend BERDENNIKOV, whe was wy directidn chief (NACHALNIK NAP-
RAVLENIYA) there. I arranged things for so many people. Maybe

that is why I am still in the position I am, It helps; everyone

. puts fi supporting brick, This BERDENNIKOV came to me...

74. |G: Is VORONOV in charge of this? 8S! What VORONOV? G:

: Chief Marghal VOROROV; he ia a consultant to the Minister.

You
|. Gi Coféerning thie? St No, a general consultant. “Chief Marshal

-23-

#12

, Of Artillery VORONOV, But VORONOV was not made the commander of

; the strategic or ground rocket troops. He is a consultant to

| the Minister. G: VORONOVY. 8: VYORONOV, Chief Marshal of Artillery.
| He was commander of artillery at Stalingrad. G: so he is con-

' sultant to... 8: «--~-To MALINOVSKIY and/the Consultative Group,

i Your friend SHALIN is in this group also, All important retired

, Generals are in the Consultative Group. But SHALIN is aging now.

_“ He is 111, but he is a member of the group. ma

: 75. G! . Was there a General FEDENKO in GRU? 8S: Of coursé,
a general lieutenant. G: Ie he still there? $8:  FEDENKO is an
Old intelligence man. He was one of the chiefs of Strategic In-
telligence. He was deputy chief of the Directorate but he was
never the chief. He was in Germany for a while. G: Is he in
Moscow now? 8! FEDENKO is in Moscow but not in our Directorate
(Strategic). G: It's strange that he is not in yourg. S! He
is somewhere -~ concerned with scientific matters. I will find

out for you. He is not on the higher staff of the GRU.

pe. I 76, %St There are two deputies, MANSUROV and ROGOY. G: Of
cde .- course. Is there a General FEDOROV there? S: Yes, he works for
L.- ..\ ug, Major General FEDOROV. G: With whom is he connected? In
) ‘which directorate? §! I think he is doing something in the 10th
| Directorate. G: You mean the Directorate of countries of Peoples’

_ Democracies? 8: Yer.

e. 77. %$S: General of the Army TULENEV is alive, the former

\.*  ; Commander of the Military District of Moscow. He is also connected
“a,j With the 10th Directorate. G: He is not in retirement yet? 8:
io > No, He atill works. I see him at the barber shop which serves
rere = us. He does not have to wait in line as we de.
augh :

78. will send you the new organization of the Comnittee,

a the teleptiones, and I will send you a list of the General Staff.

Une Ther the names are lasted alphabetically with two telephone

a numbers. There are two switchboards ~~ the three digit one (TROY~

CHATKA) and the four digit one. I will give you thin list; it is

printed. The ranks and positions are not included. Example: Re-~
ed bea room of MALINOVSKIY, KONEV, etc. It is very easy to get

- this.

a 7 G: Do the troops have means by which they will be able
1 aed a to da

ge tefmine when they are attacked by chemical, bacteriological...
yal means? St: That is a good question. Here is the answer. All

yo

oF . : of ss

#12

/
I
}
“] | -¢roopa have anyone attached to them for this purpose? 8: The
troops have cadres that are trained. I repeat -~ at the scadenies,
F=y%= and military schools they have the task of teaching the

duct chenical inteliigence. G: Yes, that is clear, 8! Thea* is

part of the Chemical Corps? 8: Yes, exactiy.

a (B.) G: What are these secret military addresses? Example!
(a! Lentngrs@-300. Moscow-400., etc, What do they mean? 8B: This
=e number is not assigned to any one unit. It is a map ttery RAYOR,
edo The address will first read 'MNescow-300" and then there is a postal

_. | VAYA POCHTA). Field Unit Namber is a wartime term; now it is called
Kev | pestal box number or Military Unit number (V.Ch, — VOYSKOVAYA CHAST').
ope ; So the 300-400 is the RAYON, in which some six units may be included.
rf > ' phey know that it should be sent to this sector, to a garrison. it

whe is a very general, or prearranged mimerical indicator. There they

| institute, a civilian aviation plant, ete. FP. Ya.’ V.Ch. is a
| “military unit. POLEVAYA POCHTA was a term used on the front dur-
| ing the war. It fa no longer used.

Cyt tf gee Q: Do you know what the exact numbers are which are
ee ass to apecific defonse installations? 8: To electronics,
saadaiags | optics, physics, etc? G: Exactly. 8: Thave, available to me,
On |{ very many post boxes. Specialists from secret enterprises come

i || to as at the GNTK, and when we vwrite up their personnel files we
‘\; |) write post box so_and go. We don't write the name of the enterprise.
cl {| Gt In the Committee? 8: In the Committee. I Will give it to

=". |\\ you. Gt We will thank you for that. 5! These specialists who
orice come to you, the TV and film specialists... There are many secret
oa enterprises connected with electonics, exact mechanical things. 1

, have the name from post box so and #o, address so and so. I will
| gend you some with names and addresses -~ of the ones coming to
_ you.

a) G: Are the Field Post Numbers in especial blocks of
numbe Are they all five digit numbers with '25' being a certain

~25—<

iw

Bie '4
whafe 4 a

1,

‘1

—_—

ee eee ct een ret

bec

> mumberg.

.
#12

thing, etc.? 8S: All military unit numbers are five digit. They
are not in blocks. For example, the Military Diplomatic Academy
is #75033. That's the way they write it -~ V.Ch. 75033. Every~
thing goes to your relative, Mr. Georgiy, to KHLOPOV. They are
not grouped in any way. Military units are grouped in a garrison

| and every unit has its block. 8: For example, if the rocket

troops' military unit 1s '38' and 75033 is KHLOPOV's. G: int-

4

eresting!

p33 ) 8: KHLOPOV -~ if we take him as an example -- is within
the city limits, but on the outskirts. There are not other «.
battalions or divisions nearby that would be under KHLOPOV's command.
They are all subordinate to the commandant. of Moscow, who just

got promoted to a lieutenant general -~ a big, tall fool with a

large forehead. He was a'division commander at Rostov-on-the-Don,
His first deputy is VERESHCHENKO who was the deputy chief of my
course (class) at the Military Diplomatic Academy. General KHLEBOV
was the Chief of the course. Colonel VERESHCHENKO was the deputy
and had me running around for four years. Later something happened,
He was kicked out of Strategic Intelligence completely and he was
able to get the position of Deputy Commandant of the city of Moscow.
He still has this position. I see him often. His wife died from

' cancer recently. He has two children.

To
-84,/ G: Are there numbers like, let's say, 25000 to mean
artillery, 17000 will be the engineers, etc? S! Yes. G! What

is the relationship? Ss: If don't know. These group numbers are
always given in this way. The numbers mean something. That's the
way it was developed. Here is what I can do. I will take several
units of the artillery -- the (VOYENNAYA CHAST) the field post number
and we can find the key. There is always a key in the number. Here
please -~- in intelligence we always have a zero 75033, 22504. There:
is an institute (FILI) of your friend, VARTANYAN. There are many }

I don't remember. The zero indicates that it is an institution be-
longing to the Second Chief Directorate, GRU. @! Ah ~~ so there is
a specific system. 8: Government cars always have a zero in their
number, A zero in a four-digit number is always a government car.
There are not too many government cars. They are changing to

Chaika cars now, All KGB, Ministers, various chiefs -- their cars
all have a zero. SEROV has a two zeros! But they are four-digit

G? Have you ever seen or heard radio sets named BERYUZA

or KA ? Do you know anything about. them? 8! No, There is a

‘ KREMNYY, but I have not heard about the first one you mentioned.

-26~

~

#12

G: The firet one is BERYUZA. 8S: I have not heard, It is
BERYUZA -— a stone, KREMNIY is a type of quartz. G: So
both are etones, How about R-4017 Do you know about it? It
is also a set of some kind, 8: I have not heard. Ia it used

in avyhation? G: It is used in general for radio transmission.
8: <I have not heard.

#12

G: In generol, vhot sets axe unset for coded messaose or as radio

equipoert? Are there any special noma whieh are weed ns cover noms? If
om wanted to trenmit romething asl rather than use a certain muber, use
a nome ike "on the stringfon the LUNA"... 8: You see these prearranged
iniiestors are always weed, Wot there ia no system for their use. They are
always use 25 cover names -- HARS, LUBA, KORGHUN, etc. exe always weed.
Ci Nothing can be called by ite reel meme. Where there is an “O", 1% means
af rockets. A brush for the rocket will have en "6" if it is s ecperate piece.
ie ol | (Leughs) S: ‘the air heeter, whieh ia ao metal box with a centrifuge, on electric
eh a ventilator -- the suber starts with an "8". = nemed meny of the mmbers
ane | starting with en "8". You can’t soy Launching platform! You een't sey the»

: -° «iy warmer for the rocket. ‘They will take your Party eaml at ones. (8 laugha.}

aa (Gil G: Reweber, when we spoke about the atomic weapons you mentioned
thet are BOYEVYYE RADIOARTIVAYYE VESHCHESTVA (combat radioactive _

| emibstences). Axe they ueed in sells or in were other missile? Are such
Actus | missiles operetionnl? St Ve &4d not go inte thie because we were not tenght —

\ thie. However, they exist for use in battle. They are protuets of the
decomposition of etomle substeners. Gt Yes, oxactly. 9: It is the effeet after
the explosion of e beck, This is al] eonsidered. Ve consider that the
dertruction ef an nteomte bord constets of heet waves, shock waves, flash waves,
 wedietion, ext then ell the redintion by-preivets -~ redionetive dust that is
, esrried 25-50 kx depeniing on the vind. If it le gerrie’ in the direction
, of our treapa, they wil. be given the comment to put on the protective clothing,
: @te, O: Sheet fen't the question. That ts normal.

Ay bn toe i

Cor Are there substenees of this type that are deltvered in a
warheedd t They extet! Gs Then they set te contaminate a whole eres. Te it
considered to be ep separate method? GS: Yes. It le taken into consideration --
Wet eteated aml plumed. It i# not considered to be very effective, but it is a
Leeds supplemental. method to polaon an aren, water, ete. O: Is it considered to be
.  . Yery inportert? §: 1 dtd not mention thie in my notes tut I knew about it.
_ This is put isto apecial warheadz -- I mentioned two types of werhends _yestarday
; { but...formet one. There” gtockplies of misatles (shell or other) filled with
 ) ‘| the mibstenee.” It can also be spreed from a speoial apparatus carried by planes,
e a4 not only by warhesds fired from the gros to conteminate an even.
ots | @efinitely there are BRV's. (Short brenk while tapes ere changed.)

7 (2) Gt Regending the signal by phone, do this on Moniny rather then
furviay \_8: Vhere will I go on Sunieyt Oh! So that's what you heve in minds
I thought you were doing this in general. @: Mo, 16 is better = day later.

a

28

#12

&: Mo, no! I will arrive 4n Moseow on Saturday at 1905 hours. I will spend
30-40 mdimrtes for formalities, penaport, snying farewell to the delegation,
ete. tf heve sm document there s#teting that f em a member of the delegation.

G: Wouldn't it be better 4f you dia it after you visited your office anit made
mire thet everything wae in order? 69: No, I will go hore. Then, an hour
leter, I will leave and will call. G: If this is convenient for you. 3: This
4s convenient forme, tut I don't want to go against your decisions. G: But
wouldn't it be better if you spent a couple of deys in Moscow, went to the
office end determinad that all wis in omer? 8: fo that is the wayyou want
4¢! G1 What do you think? You know, from the official stentpoint, it is
also more rensmiring to know thet all fe well. 9: Maybe I showld sell
Howley. 6: Thet'’s whet I thought. 81 Saburdey end Mowlay ~-- aren't you
interested to know that I arrived home on Seturdey art that many things heave
heen proyerly comeealed? (Laughs) G: Of course. But remember that we also
‘want to know bow everything is at -your offfee ani that no one there haseny
suspicions. 8: Chay. Let me eal) on Moniey after work. G: That is not necessary
becuse 1f the signal ia recetved on Monday thet all is well it is cleer that
evarything was in order on Seturday. 5: So I will not say enything on the
phone. Iwill just ring. O: Tviee. Two gsevtes. 8: Yes, two series. That's

on explanation. 6: dust so we don't have a mix-up. If everything in okey

on Monteay, it mens thet everything wos olay on Paburdey. 8: Yes, that's

right. G: This way you will. have the opportunity to risit the office. 6: Whet

date is tits? Saturday ts the Gth, #o it will be the Sth. 4G: So on the 8th.
B: Okay. @: At whet time will it be convenient? In the evening? 6: To call?

G: At 2000-2100 howe? S: I ean call et any time. G: Bub you have to leave
home.

(“s0.) S: Yes, I ean stay Late et work. Coming (home) from work, to the
right trom the office, is a church where I go to pray. Opposite the church

is = public beth (BANYA) where I stop to drink beer. G: In the public bath?

S: In the public bath. ‘There is a counter there. The public bath is opposite
the eburch, and there ie # public phow right next to the entrance. Further to
the right is the kiosk with beer sixl therm ere the Hens't avi Yowen's rooms.
(All leugh) &: Yo the right i# a decd-end street (JUPIK). ‘There te never
anyone there. There I have a apot from which T can check surveillance
(XONTROL'NAYA 'OCHKA). I like this street thet Jeeta from the public bath

evi church. It ie bertter to orient oraself from the church. U2. Stankeviche
leoda Qireetly to the Choikevakiy Monument, the conservatory on UL. Gertaagn.
There are some very tice houses there -~ mosieiens/artiate Lived there ent
have since been buried. There are plaques on these buildings, about four

of them. ‘There is a garden (POLUSADNIX) in front ani the entrance is very dark.

#i2

it is very exay to go that wey, stop in the entrance, kies this girl, and

give her the mxterial, (ALL lawh) 8: Maybe she won't be shle to recognize me in
the ork, (Alllaugh) §: I would do this so she yeuld not worry. (ALL Leush)

G: So she would mot eel for help!

8: Ve should think this other thing: over. It was a very good
iter (the material) over the fence into the American House grounis.
O: That is, et a speetfic time. 6: Definitely. ‘There fa a pool, a germien.
The dog can be taieen out for walks there. It is esny. I once had the ides
of Jwming over the fence. 6: Tt is high. 6: It's high, but it's possible .to
elimb over. OG: About four metere. 8: There is one plese where it cen be
elinhbed. Thera 1s a little house theres one cen get on it ant jrey over.

Gt Why clink there? f: It is territory where diplomatic inmmity ean be
ecloimed. OG: That is a dengerous iden. Why? &: I wanted to. I aweer I wanted
to climb there with wy materiel. I hed the material in my peeket. 6: Yes.

8: KARUSHCHEY was eoing to the UN. Be should have been exposed arvi the rocket
information that wos needed should not here been delayed in lying around for
Ho long. Some sections of the material sre two years old, from the beginning
of the course. Thin was not written In one sae but during the whole course.

We'll heve to study hard. It's May lst today. (ALL lengh) 8: We need vodke.
To the fame of Russia!

Vkg Ot Whet do you know shout the latest tanks? Yor example, is there
-—— | Orne ‘Trew ofter ae the hesvy tank? 5: ae good thet you asioed this

manbere.

i out. And this whole ainda of tanks can become serap. He is very unhappy
" that KHRUSHCEEY and the doverment sdminiatretors have been convinced by the
Minister, the Comanter of the Armored Zroope eni the Highest Military Soviet --
not the Selentifte one but the Militery canpored of «ll the cenmmenters of the
| various types of troops. Tanks are bullt in lerge mobera; some tanks act as
corriers of lounehing platforms. 9: Timt is clear. 98; Mo. Not only the
Athen Lemeching pletforns I mentioned, but free rockets aa well. A lot of KATYUSHA

yoekets ere mounted on tanks. Dee caus ecauecm un anee ea

ee “¥ informetion on the strength ¢ of new steels, ata.

bok

!
|
H

Cyt: a :

if train

mf

he: Wye.

weernen Perens metrenenne ot

Ne

_ stendpoint of fLrepower ani movement 76 the striking forces.

#12

($3 ) as The main deficlency of Soviet tanks is considered to be the
exces ‘weight of the armor. The mumruverability emi apeed could be
improved. by’, just reducing the weight. A lot of money is wpent for tenxs.
There aye no absolutely redical new tanks. There ta a constant improvement of
the Ja ani tenks mentioned from the stantpoint of reducing the wight of the
armor and incressing the strength. Also improving the engine and fuel quality.
Formerly heavy fuels were used -~ heavy, wmrefined. New I hear they are
developing new fuels. They ere working on this but I em't give you enyieteils.
G: So there is nothing new? S§: There is nothing new; we studied then.

G: So the lest one is the 54. 9: Ani also the Js are also being improved.-.

G: And the floating ome, the 761 &: Yes. Yeu know that they showed en
amphibious tank in the perete today. O: There was? A 761 8: Yeo, on
emphibious on. They were shown in the last parede also. I was et the Fnbassy
tedey. OG: Yes, and thet is all there iat 8: There are no ebcolute sew light,
meiwa, or heavy tenks. There ore no new models or new types of construction.
They are improving the existing ones and produce large quembities of them. So
ee They form a bie atventeme from the

G: Ave there lores treeked vebicles for personnel, for = -
eronst , ote.? 8: Tory have everything. I will tell you. a: Hirve you
heard of the geLf.provelled unit, the 98-717 X-41 is the normal, mall one.

8: Maybe. I fen*t°*know this mmbers 1t does nob mean anything to we. Self-
propelled untta using the tenk chassis exist. There are speeial cemmasl tenks,
mobile bservation pointe. They heve Light protective weapons, short range
weapons for close range combet, ne eanmon or anything. It ia equipped as om

Observation Point: 15 has many aighte (Spiscoper), Lots of equipment, and is
usesble in all directions, 360°.

65.) G: Do they heave TV ne wellt 8: Infra-red techniques are widely
ramendl fhe Ot Se ey cen ert Se 6: They ean wee at right.
GQ: Do they heave e equipment like a newel ship? 8: I witerstend.
Fox the stebilizetion of the armusent in ~*~ mobile situation. It exists!

G: This exists. 3: Teerrhinskiy Aentemy hed. a very lerge fnenlty working on
this matter. The position of the gun is stebiliced, no matter whet position
the tank ie in. This is very well developed. The problem hee been solved.
G: Is it in ell the tenke? 8: The infrared eqnipment? 6: Infre-red. 8S: No.
It is special, empectally in these tons, the ecamend points. These tanks
are used ag ncoute. At night, they oro sent fer out ant use the infra-red rays.
a: And oll the tenks heve (t7 6: Thees tenkea thet are to be need aq econ
points, apeciel tenks. 9: A-a-a-h! 8: Bet they don't have much fire power.

fiz

‘In return, they sv covered by the fire power of the other tenks. The
Toe | commanders ait in these tanks. G: Do the combat tanks haw: infra-red thet
ip ' would ennble then to operate at night also? 8: You see the Infre-red equipment
'S + 1 portable. If it ia needed, it will be instelled in a tenk. eb these
mpecial tenks nlrenty hove 6. 4: Rut in general they don't heave it, You
answered that clearly. &: I think they don't have it ami there is no reason

to heave it.
ee (38: ) ot tioe yo heeed eagthing about the mew sobile tnateltetton
AWG 1p2 (oI Ss Yes. There's a new ons, tut I em not familiny with the member 122,

ire 1 (Gs This ie & gun. 8: A sunt I thought 122 was a reber of 8 ecaponent. ere
is @ 122 mms 1t exists, G: A new one? Sr One twenty-two em with

rifling. G: Yes, a new improved type. 9: { will tel: you whet is improved, I
know beoeuse I vimlted thet tenk perk (TANONROM). It is outetde Noscoy at

cl Kubinks. I'm trying to remember where , shemieal thing ie amt I can't
“Yow weronber. O: What direction? 8: FE Te 70 km ewsy. G1 CoulA it be neor
ae Folneshuogerek? 8: No. I know Soluechwogorsk. G: Could it be Seneshno?
2 eae S: There is «a Loke Senesh. G: Yes, thet's right. Theres is an inlaw thers
fav oleo. 8: Yea, there is an inlaw there. 8: ‘The former range (POLYGON) is

there and the highert combined arms Gourmes are given there. : Exactly,
eonbined exna with tenks, ertillery, ete. 8: They have everything. 6G: I
don't know your tenkodrom locetion. You tell mes I don't know any other places.
rs , 9 I een't remonter the chemical center. I wit) find ont. X will rember.
A? Or Do you wen the mept It will help. 9: Heve is Kubinkn. Ast we questions
while I look. Mow obout the terks, new ones -- and the gun.

. BAGHRYA)
rates | C ret design. he Gabe Hie eres en ste a
the barrel comen out... ft ie good I rementbered. The recoil
: mechanian hae been

' berlow, They were able to reduee the length of the recoil mechentom beomen of
' this. The weed) is now teken up ty the double mechontion. nte of
ge St ee ie (Ponwe ~ 8 locking ot mrp.

S: The Militery-Chenies! Aerdemy ia on Yiitas Refie, Dos 10, This

is the Toate of VORCSHILOV in Moscow; it remains as it was. Tbh is very lerge and

AreS 4 46 hee o ist of equipment. They heve tanks there with fleme throvers. I sew
then in operntion there. G: Who is in charge of flane throwers, the engineers?

wcepiane |

{ he treeced ¢

&: Mo. The heed of the chemical | is in charge. ‘The engineers, of course,

j provide the equipment; there ere ape plente for this. wy work together
very clorely. Fagineere sre from Kuybyshev Aendemy in Moscow. It {0 located

|
|

(ice

i avy “{

|
|
:
|
Ndet,
|
|
|
|
:
|
:
\

#12

close to the Deerzhinskty Aerteny., TI will. yemnber this; I heave this written
down. I have all this information on our equipment. Of course there are
new Geert ones there. It is in wy workbook, where I have military notes

' written down.

99.) Gd: Where ie your workbook? In 6907 &: In my desk. 6G: They vere
in : No. This ts my workbook on military matters, strategic directions,

* ete, There ame mony Secret things there For me. If it should be found 1

would be bal for mm. G: Of Gmirae. 8: It is in my desk. It is locked ent
I herve the key here with me, in Lonion. 6: Don't lees it. 8: dust one key.
I didn't even lecve it ab how. 6: You would heve to breek open your desk.
By The lock te o epectal one thet I hed installed like the ones used in 2

plone. I tock the other one cut. The ory is heres I can show it.

100, 8 (Looking at the mp): You know it fs somekere to the northeast,
30 kn, but here details are not shown. G: Not Pushkino? 8: Bo. G1 It is
to the northeast el#o. &: No. Correct, here ta Pushkingo. It is e short word.
Cne ean go there like thie ... 4: Ry electric train? §: You can go by electric
train, but {¢ does wt go thet fer. I went there by car. We brve the Main
Veterinary tatitute, ant there they heave a Militery-Veterinery Femilty, even
now though we hartly heve eny horees left in the army. They only use them for
transport in internel TRON. If you go past this Veterinary Institcte,
to the left, is the Strategie Intelligense Institute verre your Arrenten friend
VARTANYAN was the ohter (FILT). Ami this reed goes etraigixt past & large
menaion, end then gore into the woota; the range begins there. I will write
thte up. Let's not weete time. I een't remember now.

1OL. G: What schools or _seademies heave been closed these pest two
years? 8: First, the Rear Services Acadeny wes closed at its bese in Kalinin.
G: Bo it won trensferred? &: No. The feulbies were seattered. One faculty
wan given to the Leningrad Acetemy, others fo the Frunuce Acatemy. A new
neateny was created (FVO in Kalinin) eat has been in operation for two years and
4a begineing to produce endxes. To start off, higher acedemle courses for the
FVO were esteblished. ‘Two elesees greftunted from the higher eaenfemie cowrses.
How the PYO Acedemy is subordinate to BIRYULOV. ‘The General Steff Acatomy
in the neme of VOROSEILOY wes closed. They organised 2 famiity ani placed it
in the Fron Academy. They consider that xt combined arms center, the Fre
Academy, TE La possthie to tench an even higher level -- Generels ent Division
Commusiara. Thin formerly woe done at the VOROSHILOV Aendeny. This VOROSHILOY
Aeatemy dees not exist any more. a

<

33

Ve Rid

habe? stip

thee 4.

Gh) 3: In those bulldings your friend YYRZIN site nov anil this is the
institute of Feople's Friemtship. (Langhs) Thet'n what they erensed! a Yes,
St It should be emoned eo that pernons would not be sent there for otuty,
pm the Ingtitute would elose, It's not em Institutes it's « Vatversity.

If you deelde to play it up well, refer te the following fact. When I was

in Ofmaea, before I met the Amerd con interpreters, I heard with my own enrs
over the radio, in early Aucunt 1960, "Now we will heve » word from Prorectors ~~
YERZIN and somone elne!’ f0 in Odesse, I heerd YERZIN'« voler in my hotel
reom in the evening, Te weld we heve snenpted so many stufents of all] ‘
nationalities, es well an Soviet yarthe; we plon to recept so many wore, This
War in 1960, when the University wes beginning to Dimetion. This does not coe
from me an the rouree, The whole world heart YERZIN shout (you con any),

"He knew who Covoede YERZIN dat Comrade EV, how are we to unilerstand
thist Why ere you cheating these negroes whee yOU are sipporting, ete., when
you are treiming then ox your spies there!” Tite can be Played up very nicely;
this should be used to erntherrass him. ‘These negroes ae] thendelres without
any hesitation. :

193. S: fo YERADN apeke over the radio. He has the eam cover story an I;
he is maly deche ‘ At one time he did serve (in the army), before he
always imed to be en MID worker. His {13% hee on entry that he served in the
army. He never gerved in the Anay} he served in the Kom ent he de in the Kon

now! Before he wos appointed Proreeter, awit ufter hin renova) from Turkey.

S: ff left. on 5 Nowwiber, fm k November, I enlled the Turks. Please
chook - Do. they have a reeord of this or mt? If not, they are fools.
(Leughs) t ox sure they heve it. Such things axe not minnedy I called dtreetly
to the First Direeterate. 4: Ye rent be too noay in this remperty the Darks
don't know wher you. a: tet mayhe comhow mofficielly. o: But why drew

; their attention to thie? 1 You are right there, rt maybe in some way, maybe
| by ehomee. G: Lf by chenos then. 1 I mede 45 euch calle over the telephone,
TER@IN left in a year. Be hol inplessintimss with SENOV despite the feet
that he personally meruited a Seanfinevion @iplossat awl peve hin 5,000 tri gh

Lire oll mt ones, They took money from me, from the operetions) find. Leter
they reimburemt it.

¢ TE i ea cn Ne a ry

ya

Io said, “Please sian the receipt”. TF plnead Lt inte oo folios ome seetion
is with the codes aml the other is the operational portfolio. It in redled
anil with n ninper on three sides. 1 lent them the money. So they didn't
take sny money from the Fnibassy} they tock the money from me. ‘the agent
wes someones from Seulineyin, ne nee or anything. When YeR2IN retired, he
had trnhles with SENOyY, I met YERZIN. He wae alwys very nice to me.

mS Hie gave me all his keys end his cosminteations chemmel, when
I " © OFROV about the deestt of the General amd all the Gewerelts

affairs, I wos right in doing thie: it releed my etabure a lot. T acted
from the strmipotirs of the RPerty, end honesty. Tt wes ebsolutely right ent ;
proper, even though I entered into a emfliet with the Cancral, When I spoke
to him he said, "Cet owt of here you bebe in sms”. He often ext in my oftics
on the firet floor with me and drank Yodke,

St YERLIN had troubles vith StROV beeause of fellures in Turkey,
ert HERO vas making trouble for him, He bought a car in Ayrin end exvhenged

the new foreion eer im Otesea for a Volga. ‘thie ven done go es mot to attrect
ton much attention by heaving a foreign ear, Forelmn ant American cars attract
2 whole erowl (in (05%). the MiLitts ehese the people eway cleiming that
they bow down to Vertern ecoomli sheente, (Leughe) Whenewer there is ao car
at the Metropale (Hotel), Tntewrlst, or om Anbesneor, wte., there in always
® Srowl, This is deride the point. I met iim (YERZIN) ant he offered to
give ma ride tn the new car ont oid, "I'm in a bed mood. How are your
effeirat” I said rine were mot good efthor, He geld, "IX heve thie jerk
(StROV to dent with), he docs nob went to listen. You mske a report to him
nwt be is probably thinking shout KEMCEMAEY's daughter”. fe (ZRRov) ts
morried to a relative, nob a daghher, wre a niece or something. In any case,
SEROV In related’ to KIRUSRCHITY in none wey, the seme an the Ohler Faitor of
IZVESTIYA, ATERUBIY. G: Thet's clesr.

A: ARMORY vielted you emi he ine complete fool, The world
or Jj ata hates him beemise he compiled end edited a book of all of
KESUGHCESY'a mpeechen in the Us. aperches thet were written by the Central,
Committee. For this he recelyed the LYIiy prise evi medel., ft in enlled a

|. RUD (work). (tengh) Ae soon ea KHWSHCREY 49 eritietzed then the book enn

be throw: out. (Alllewsh) Bf: Th wen printed in Large members. It-is-eo thie!
Tt contetnel all hie epeeches at bemguete, ete., thet he reed from notes,

ALL this ADAMINITY eremtled. You sen, It pores to he « relative, I weld
ifke to be = reletive : .

#12
109. 8: Whet wes 1 talking shout? Gr About the old awl new ecetent oy,
S: Yer. So YERZIN seid be wee fiewting with senoy, He seid when you report

Intelligence mm why was not rent ont anyplace beenuse of drurkeunesn? 8: Ne.
This is « cleen MID type. 80 suddenly he wos ¢Levyeted to the position of
Proveetor. ‘Tin is « high (postition). He Lives on Fomeenskeya Nab, not

Tox from VAREIESCY, ebort three houses beyond Stroitel mayan UL. Tf was at

his hom, on the Sth floor. Be has ty row, fe te mrrted ext hen tye
rons, So le wus elevnted to this high position es Prorector,

LLO.S: YR TH hes an operation etery these, Among them ie a Colenel
of the Armoret ork Fortes, who wag Chief Awsistert in Afghanistan twice. Be

Wes kiekedt out fran the Atraterte InteLligene orgentertion. Mark his photograph,
He fe now « civilinn mployes of the Inebitute with YERZ.IR, Wt he hes active
teeks. Other ROM personnel were obteined by YERADN and now serve as inetructers;
sont were ccopted, srl ome are also in tha ciuinistention of the university.

So our Colonel got « position there. 1 asked sbout YERZIN ent the Colenel weld,
"He thinks highly ef you. Be remembers "(Subject 's tray name) is n good
operational worker: he has high principles”. TERVA is his nme, rite éown
Colomel of the Aronred Fortes, Leonid. He was in Afshenteten teles nnd after

hit last seotommont, from whieh he retrrned in 1960, he wes @lecherged, Before
thet, he was tit Agwtetart in Maxkey. He wea obroad 3 times. I hewe +

not eeen his photo yot. YFRAIN ds wetng him elas.

AL. 82 Where they om teaght MARXISM LEMOIT Se, They are prepared

They
oxi dastroymt. It’s shed! Tt $6 fniee nll eroumd! Did you write thie dow?7
YERAIN wos tn Berkey ont tyiee in Atmheristen, Be wee discivoed becauve of
ees he A214 nes work well in the orgenizution. He worked for TSAREV) he was
his aseletrosth.

. AWB. Be Yertte -. TAAREY, Militery Atteohe in Afghenisten, repleeed now
by Hero of the Soviet Union, Colom] Yertlty PORTcHt. Ae gredueted from the
Aesdemy together with me. T probably heve nemed all 98 persons by new.

Don't forget thet t'n the 90th! YT hove nome Of slrewty, Ie there a photo?
Please pick owt a goot one, (% showed Subjest his ow pleture taken on a
Polerotd.) &: do you hey PORTORKE? Gt Yea. St We finished with me in 1953.
Re 1a a Hero of the Ceviet Usion, Combined Armed Yoreas, THAREY, wher he
repleced -- you see we heve a whole chrin —» is ter the hend of the course in
the Htlitery Olplomrctie Academy, Ti in working there alrendy. We te Head of
the 2nd Course,

#12

G: Do you see military maps? &: Yes. I heve ther: in my poreseston
aml Ios for then, I enter the eltuation or they give me aitustion reps that
are all printel shoving the Front militery operations. We enter our own
notes. O: Can you get one of thenet 5: I enn only hit. Every sheet
is necemmted for. We hve goed reales: 1/200,000, 17100,000. @1  1,/100,000
would be enpreinily ries £f you enald photograph one. S: 1/200,000 and
1/100,000 ere very good. ‘They show Moseov aml everything. G: Avt all the
regions of Tiageow tht are needed.  f: The mapa are new amt all thet. 0: We
are interested in thes not because they ere mope of the Soviet Union, ‘turk
brenuse of necormey .. the scale ond portleulsrly new mextietie caleuletions,

St They lurve very strict eesourting oF all sheets. They exe counted 10 tims,
when they exe igened emi returned. A person lost a sheet ones. It wea really
not loeb buh destroyed, Like the notebook I teld yuu sbout ~~ the one that

vas dentroyed by en internel eneny. Tuave wee a Srthumnl; there war mn order
from the Aray. It le very diffieult with these maps. How bout photographing
with the Mine WLLL it com ont welt G: Bo, thet won't do too well beeause
there mre senles there en€ ... Sr Co Lt has to be on the 15) % 2) ems. O1 You
can't help thet brenvess the Hinox has = very gma freme after ell; it hes to
be enlarge4.

Ls, S: Now, Twent to ask you this. It ts very importent. 1 have
15 agents. /the detelis are all written in lenghant. The peper ia rolled up
Like = tube. (ALL Loughing) &: When TL retoom, I will type it up in deteil.
T heve % lot of ivformstion shout them in my heed. Gs Cf covroy. 6: Then
shoulda To aeive thia peper an it fs or should I photegreph it with the Minox?
Sheila f fold it wp like thie? 1 think it's not meceenery to photograph Ls.
Yes? Gt If you con give it to wrttm.. 8: Tt WILL be in WHwe's peekage with
BLL the domrents. There will be a meperete paclenge with Top Seeret documenta,
ont the other wlth retisriale thet ere for Beemt Use Only. ff: Be will gm
direetly to the Tribaeay. 5: Ttert will be fine. So L won't photograph it.
G: Ho, dem't. Hr It comes to the seme thing. He ahowld only nse the eemers.
when he can't weite. od: The Rinox showld only be vaed when you enn't write,

f: Yes, Tones. th For anything eles, longhenl or typed ~. watehever ie easier -- —
in Pine.

Br Okay. Now, this teek thet Chere to finteh worries me ant intereste
me S information in in the field of things thet I em supposed ‘ko lnow about.
How, when I give el] this data to yo, t+ will be ao easy thet you can find
then tomorrow. You von't touch them? d: Mo, we won't touch then. Absolutely!

8: How ehout tht one in Ceylon? Gi We will weit until you ere in complete
safety omt you tell us te ett. 8: Tf anything happens Lt will irmedietely be

fle

reported . fe is in divect contact with CRECHRO. You mow Colonel GREHKO!
G3 Yas. Lat's put Lt thie wey - we won't do anything without your egreement.
S: Bot my aormement te to moke Ain useless. thet is ny det. 01 Yes,

of ecurse. S: But 15 wlll be seportet ~ DOP SICHET ent Tor PRIGHITY «-

ent a comninsion will be erented to Invertionte vho hed secese ta the agent.
My signature ts there, every place! 6: Ve won't do anything wrrtil you tell
wa. 8: If you een do it in seme wy to meutralire hing be baa 3 children.
Gt Wo, we will watt. It doem's pay. Let him eteay. 8: Barb he provides
special informetion. dG: So let birt. You are veluehle also. Why stenld we
ervierger your Life. If: Theat ie not neweesory. fr And how about killing bing
rma him over with a eer? Gr He cen overdo tt with this mother. Woy kill hin?
Si Why net! Foo the coure! 6: There ere temertterian conelderntions.

thia into conslderntion. oO: Of course not, Tne, St (Lenghe) So my
request ie thet if ym: do it, then ao {t fn such a monrer thet it s

to be on aectdeant. Oo: We won't do anything. He won't do anything Like thet
beenue if in dangermnia. 81 Anyway, keep thte in mini.

S: Xo mwt ALEKSANTROY reeently, who returned fron Ceylon. This
Rowetine® thet I axntered. yeeteriay for kidvey stones ~~. ALEKSANORMOV saked
me to met it for PLAKNIN. PLAKHE stuiiled with me; he fintehed the Aendeny
with me and wee the Militery Attach: in Syria. Bow, he io Heed of 2 Direction
in the Sth Directorste. T guve the ordew for the bottle of Rovatintx thraugh
ASPRSARDROY. To agked hin, "Well, how is everything’: Me enid, “Finn, this
om (Ceylon ogent) ia giving ve feforretion all the tine emt it 1a being
evataated very highly". @: het him ste there.

LLT. OG: When your attaches go shrond, who tenehee them the new things
( (trateered’t) thet they heve te knew for work? Por axeule, « peeve is sbrond
) for tve years - who keepe him tafcered on the new Gevelogments sbout whieh be
needs to Iom? 6: Bhrowh Letters of Destruction (OTRECPIVEYY® PIo‘HA)s they
pa oe instructions. The Letters of Destruction are weitten on separete
with diverttions thet after rewling, the Letter should be destroyed end
| ene hin tesiostin) reported by a dcement. This is dons. Tt is sent on

umtevelognl Lim. G: Yeo. -
Gb) o Tear abeark bho yx of muslene weepormy? The
pce | (Soviets)-tee shouting thet = suspesion hea been in effet Hoverber
What do they wert, 2 periment suapension, or ere they acting with decettt

1958.

(ott | Sy Of cores they ove meting to deceive, in omter to gain tine, ao thet you
we WELL mh erry on experiments ant dewelep new, more atvencel, techrienl] theortes
emt check thom ows. Et's to their eadteentnam. tts alt desett. Of emrene?

ry) enki wat
a

:

die

They cover wp with chretegia rockets, smirks. (1: fo they themeslved set
but went to shop others. 8: Yes, ent in thi way slow down the development
of others - your personnel, experizeents, contusions, sol developuets of
these weapons. (Pause) 8: Yor sore rence, I wes of this. You
WLLL pet scm reperte ebout his (KIRIN) decett. Cheek then. You
will believe what T reported. In the meemphile, he shouts, dxintkes rast mikes
a lot of notes. If yom enild ony, "Bow ebout thin YeRetin Who is yee
Who is this? snl this one? Hew did you Afweherge this onal Bow eve yent
eutting dow the oxmmts of funis fer tis, thie ent this?” You lmnow .
everything! His month will drop open! axe do the furvis go for the beby
mirseries? If you gave ell thie fo te ahiltren, they would be covered with
pola!" : : %

(5. You know how these tillers mee eollected? The Arey is trope
and they I

Tat allowances of the eadres ome-hel? and more. Formerly
reeetved 300 rubles for Gteuretionss all Colonels revetved this. They don't
pay for langueges now. Regerfing the Secreey allowanes ~ now they don't
bey a cent for Beerevy, even 4f yom work with eofes. Before pmntons were
namelly 90% (of sslery), sad in som esses LO, for special gerrices centered,
Now the cellimg is 2000 for a GulomlLend 2000 for a General «~ 800-300 mew

rubles. They anve a lot of mmey. A perso who had a very dirty role in this,

om is heted by the militery, ia FURTSRVA. the is the one who proposed this
and ZVENEV supgertet her in this. Then CVEny beams etek ant he wee ousted,
He (ZVERGY) wos the Minister of Fimener, The offlesen were ready to kill ZYPRRY
amd FURTSEVA ox Sewemle them on « ptales.

L20,/ ft Tava you hesrd of any new thoughts regawiing new oteete or
rocket tneties? Vor exemple, tm there a mew deetrine? 8: Yeetically, the
conventionel reckete art for stesior! caleulations. In wetng xtonle ones,
the effect of the explosion Le eongrated “ith respeet to the densities
(FLOTHOSTPY) of attack, the parnmetern of the combat area, the withtreml
of friewlly troops, the protection of equipement, neutralfentton of en aren.
These are el) eoxthet conelderntions. d: Yes. 5: This ie elk in the

remidetiong, We wlll photemreph it now. Filty frees on a file. Thet's
om! Ther will ‘be 50 pages.

I2L./ 2 fre there any special new develogemts regerding techies?
8: Yes;-there exe. O; There ore,nleo. Bris is very importent -— if you con
fiml it ~~ the new battle teerties, the changers due to employment of atonie
Weepona. St Lf will gah alt thie fer you. In four days we will pert. I om
only telling you that you will be getting all these idean, theirs developeenta
and comlusions, photographed on flim. Ti’s impousible tn ‘ery other for.

‘3

via
Hifi: Of ecuren, wo understand. : I promise thet this will be one of the
first tacks. Tite te readily available to we. ALL T heave te do is ao ing
take 163 photograph It; return it, saying, “Sherk you. I hed te look mt a
covple of pages there.” LT cm spent o helf-hour on thie ond in a half-hour,
I can photerraph the whole bork. The flim won't be developed. 6G: Fine.

G: You mentioned this before -- whet were the main points in the
Geert le from toe Central. Coranittee eoneerning reletions with Chinat
A: The onxin polnts -~ 7 mein points of conflicting views with thethinens, of
& general, theorettcel nature. Seven seporete pointe. ‘The letter wes this

big evi thick. “The First wea dtengreement comerning the possiblity of '

co-existence. The Chiness, of courses, mivenend this tden ent these 7 pointe
ere intereconmeted dinlectically. They are not separate; yes ean't sexy thet
ome point enn bo changed but mot another. If they would opermte as they wished
mx vould nob comect their stant to theother questions they wuld be aleply
enestiow. Al the Chinese ere clearly not fools! But this wey the Chinese
aleo have fone very soul tdeas, Like TTT, who las his cum mood ideas.
Concerning the question of peeceful. go-axlshenes, the Chinese eleim thet it is
temporary. Peaeetul eo-existenes can't Lact long. Regarding thia, they aey
thet KHSUSHCIEV and the Centeel Comittee of the ce/ussn are not interpreting
the mxtter of yer. Ou Conmmistlenderbip eleina thet wer is not inevitable.
The Chinese eny that this doss not mobilise the working messes, the Conmmnt ste
ext peoples, mrt only in our ecuntrtes Inet allen in the eoutries that ere to
Join us some dny. On the eoutrary, thie leevres them aold. het is the hadle
ides. IL you went Tenn get tis letter, in the form of photocraghs. Maybe

not the whols EnDHE, But séparnte points, heemue 16 1a very long. It was

Feed Mebont 2 Weird, Tere ere so my theories there -- 1,000 people vere

*

(es, Rt I do nob think he should spowl smeh time on thet. oO: I think
this is dated alreedy. It is mich more toportest to get the militery mtertals,
the manuals, lectures, ete. 5: Alright, you give ee the priorities. You
cen't grey everything with one honit. ¢: Cf course mk. fr So the Chinese
sald that when KERISHCISY wants to prov: thet wer can be completely erotded, he
ig completely wrong. Thhe enmot be Aone beemumn the Copitelies mprtem esctets
with {ta own Lnteretta, powerfil eomy, meens of attack, ete. Therefore, whet
RARUGECIRVY anys he does not belies Nimeel?. If this would only beer on the
interests of KERUSHUREY andi hin amell ero, 1b would be one thing. Bt such
® theoreties! ctetenent with e founlebion only cools the mesees ant the peoples
who whould be inthuensed oppositely. Trey should be mobilized for a wer with
Cepitelinn. Thet fa the polith thet thay mate, As you wee, thede Liens cover
some of the seven extegorics woes they are seperated, but they ere all
presente! temrther. Thies is in general terme. I een photagraph them: separeste

ho

file

pointay they ave printed in lerge type. d+ Or you ean write, eepy then.
S: Tt will teke too long to write. %: Ba, just the main themes. 8: I can
teke the letter from the Farty Committers (paRmiopp, eien for f{&.. G: But
don't give too such debedl on this. He mpoke for hors there. There fs a
greet mans (of mebertel). It's a whole volun. S: It's « whole volume,

oh. 8: Mert the Chinese apche up aceiuea £ the eomlertnation of the
persomility evlt of SUALIN. ‘thin ls in the letter. Firet, they discussed it
in genernl terms, eat then im detedi. They sald tlt when epcekking about
Aremaced persons you should sey oied things or keep quiet. That's the Chinese
gttitute. The Chingesr efit thet STALIN hed faults, but they mey thet every
polities, lester hae thea ani despite oll of his feulte STALIN wes working
townrd victory in the emi. Be mobilige’ the mensesy he pot thea unfler bis
command threvgh the use of fore, throw the £08, with « plece of tread,
through fect. Te wag a tyrant. MMUSETENY orftieized (STALIN) for hte use

of a glove to point our direetions. te head a huge globe in bis offiee in the

Kremlin. He syn it axcomel ost pebeted oxt dirertions te hia eoneniers.

He poderbed ont directions but STALIN also worked with mops thet were prepared
fox him by the lst operstionnl Dircetorate of the Cenevs]. Steff. KESUSHCREY
broveht thie up. KERUSITERV sotd, “fe more operabions on 2 globe.” You
know, this wae jumb childish! G: Of course.

( 15 - 8; The Chinese Liebened ml sivtied all thie, then they qreecrt-*
th RRO. Listen, HAO TS TUNG has not sent toe the Soviet
Velon for ceverel. years new. KHNUSHCEEY went (40 Chins) only omer. ‘The
Chinese sewt to the WOR were all «bt the Level of Ort or 34 revicing sen in
the Government even though HHRUSHOIEY le constidere] to be the let man, not
only in the USSR ttt else the other People's Demeeresies. He ie considered to
be the top man, the Comenier-in-Chief. Tw GRECHEOD hes been appoluted,

but still Os ie witer KERUSHOREV's sombrol..

S: Row about the persimitty alt end the hereful effects which
they sath equated to the Lien that the rene and Mle Comemists, who *
are not deeply imfoctrinated with the (Communist) theory, lott their frith
in the Coemamist Party vhen they homed this matter ebout STALIN, Another
persen who en think thia out deeply and enn peperate one lten fros another
without mixing them up will renin os Meratab, a Party manber in hia views.
Wt the revk-eni-flie ~. for exerple a segre who exrried a photogreph of PLALIN
as & tynbol(of Coremmien) -- when they fmol cat about this, they tore
everything wo and be in this woy destroyed thetic fotth fn the Covmunist Party.
This is the Chinnse analysis. It le sl) enid very correctly from a Perty ;
viewpoint. Ideten, at one time KAUCETIFY waked to take the enelket (OMALIN's)

ht

! #2

and bury it in or next to the Kremlin Wall. He was talked out of it. I told
you this before, that when the Chinese spoke at the lest session (KHRUSECEKY)
: #eld, "Take him (STALIN), together with the box". These are historicnl --

historical in quotes -~ worls. Sergey Sergeyerich told me this -- KERUSECHEV
said, “Take him, tomether with the box."

$: Further, the Chinese are very eggressive in their polictes
: cones this matter of a future war. In other words, thelr whole political
jw =“ theory boils down to the fact thet masses have to be mobilised. atred of the
enemy should be developed to prepere them for wer. KHRUSHCHEY's peace-loving
policy, in quites, Le caleulated to clowl over the minds of the peoples of
America, Englenwt and other countries. Of courte, the governments don't believe
KHRUSHCHEV ami he knows thie. ‘This ie the battle forthe World. ‘he Chincée
ate two sides to thie. One side ie good, to win time to bulld up arms. But
the other side {fs thet the peoples are cooling off ani the revolutionary type of
hatred ani spirit dees not exist towardes the Capitalistie countries.

this very deeply for themeélves. KHRUSHCHEV ant the Central Committee
answer in the Intter.

jen My 28. 8: Tile is whet we are taught ent what we ave told. That et the

\ » it's not necesaary to onalyze so deeply. In other words,

_~ RERUSHCHEY is exposing the fact thet he fa fighting for peaee now in order to
win time eo ag te lull Cepitalien, lite governments and peoples to sleep through
oll methods ent then dictate his own terms. Here it is in very general terns.
There are a lot of interesting conclusions made there, a lot of. interesting
ides, There ere 7 seperste questions - directions -- and they are «ll tied

_ together ond support one enother. 6: That's clear.

wh Lies Cs.) 8: That's the mibetonee of the letter. There is aleo a let of
water ¢ > bit these perte that cover these 7 points of the present
interpretation, war anf the eveluetion of war, ere important. The Chinese gay
A there has to be a wer. KNRUSHCHEV anys there might not be a wer, or there
\\ | might be a wor at nome distant future tine. ‘They (Chinese) eny war can start
‘| et any moment but 1f KARUSHCHRY admits this, whet will happen to his Fesee-Loving
\] Polfey. It will go xight unter the cat's tall! (8M: Yeo. 81 That's why
he (KANUSHCHEY) 1s breking out. fe says, ee I am
forging up the brains and you are beginning to remove 16". ‘That's the way it
la. This is the erux of the matter.

we

2 Gi Have you seen any inetenees where goof intelligence neterial

—") was ob from radio intercepts or deciphering of coled mesenges? 8: Yes,
uf have seen “tt, There are such enses. : Yes. 68: We do not possess your
wv | codes. We don't know ell the keys but there are departments Like LEREDEV's

See ere ne ee ee eeneneenanerenent emanann meamemamet ee

#12

at Tankovoy Proesa fh, which is SEROV's (GRU). G: Yes. 6: He is the one
who tries to decipher everything. There are mathematicians sitting there and
whenever a group, « mmber, repastea itself then they atart numbing for the
key. I think they sometimes find the key. Yes, of course, they do. We
don't get anything that is complete or thorough or exact through agents, but
radio intereepts give 1 lot. G: Frou whieh countries do you fini it easiest
to get this informationt What results do they have? 8: Radic intercepts are
made ‘in all countries -- in Englent, Turkey, America, etc. -~ wherever there
ere radio messages to intercept. You cen'’t gontrol it in any way because

# special radio recording station ts loeated in each Rebassy. (: Of eourse
not. 8: The chennels are monitored. Teetical meterial is intercepted, that is
deta that is tranenitted for official use. This tactical material often is
concealed by use of code words, ete. It's very easy to decipher this.

Es. When ciphers were broken, whieh countries were they fron? Do
you BH: Those Intelligence Pointe loceted in CKRUGS which are adjacent
to other countries constantly intercept messages. They have mpeciel stations,
mechines, speetal radio gear. It ie enlled the OSMAT syetem. (Subject
means OSNAZ - OfOBOGO NAZNACHENTYA. Commert; There ere two such Regiments in
the DOR under the oSfo.) @: What does 1t meant 6: This is a special unit --
listening equipment, intercept equipment, by radio. They also tap wire
conmunteations whenever possible. This is all the OSMAT (CENAZ) system. Arel
cipher/eote clerks that return from a tour ebroad go to work for OSNAT
(OSNAZ). ‘There they don't lose their quelifiestion or specialty en when
necessary they can be sent abroad agein. G: Bo you know if the Turkish code
wes broken? Which ones were brekent 9: The only teetical material we had ebout
Turkey cast: through interception of channels of eoemunication. Ye eetually
knew all the divisions ant shipment of mpplies to specific places. We knov
everythings mubers are repented. thia is a frightful thing, This is the first
accurate tactienl scurea which Le reliable ant these reports go o11. the way
up to the government. G: That's eleear.

S: I every country, in every HEZIDENTURA, there is a representative
Atenl Intelligence. If the equipment goes out or order then uniter |
aioe of a courier, a technician will be dispatched from Moscow at once.
fe will arrive, bringing porte. He will repair and turn up everything. They
are Colonels, Comnmicetions engineers, ani they really know their business.
Dmayine thie! This is a frightful thing! But whet can be done? Jemsing
possibly, or more c ’ et communications security measures -~
# directive to this effect unter penalty of a trial. Bring up this matter!
Rliminate this souree for the Soviet Technieal Intelligence service! They get
ae lot of tactical materiel without agents. Don't give them anything. You

3

* es

#12

should esteblish the following Giseipline. Regarding conversations, use codes,
speelol trenesiosion means emi above oll when it is not necersery, maintain

comm silence. fSewl written reports instead. This 1s a frightful thi ng!
' It should be weekend,

{

|

|

|

|

| CG: What ls the Central Bureau of Political Informetion?

| 8: The rel thowen of Politier) Information exiete but it's 2 Directorate,

not o Bureeu -- Directorate of Politienl Information. It is miberdinete to...
G: The KGB? 8S: Bo. ALL these Directorates thet have their own representatives
abroad are aubordinete to the Central Comeitter of the Party. They collect
information, em then publish a special bulletin. Some talietins have a red
classification inticators some are bleck. The red indientor is Top fecret...

AlL information on you from intercepts, informntion obtained about your

| policies eluniestinely, are all under red initeators. Of Special Importance!

“~Blaeck indiestora also cover Seeret metters but of lesser importance. They

| publish this wulletin of their own. ‘The politicians study tt ~- the ideas,
the views, ete. This le the center where all political events ere evaluated,

| Not economies, only political. Military matters are seperate. G: I unierstant.

!

{

|

|

|

| (a8) fr: Yho ia in charge of the Comittee dealing with (persons)
going ol? Ine it KOB or the Central Comittee? &: XOR. G: Not the

Central Committest S: One moment, in the Central Comittee there ia Commission
for Departures. ‘The Corminsion for Departures 1s attached to the Central
Committee, bit Lt is staffed by the KB. ‘They heave the positions of instructors,
and the instructors are members of the ORKOM of the Party. Colonels ent Generale
ait there. The exemrtion of orfers from this Comission for Departures falls
on the Administrative Department ant from the Administrative to the Military

1\ Department. Did you know that the Adninistrative Department ia the Hilitery |

i] Department? @: Yeu, yee. : They ore ashewed to eay that there in a Militery

| Department in the Central. Coumittee so it fe called the Administretive

Department os though they were busy with paper, pens and ink -~ sdministratively ~~
but it ia setually military.

(135) 8: XRULOV ie in charge of the Department; MIRONCY was there before
him. Now-he ie Deputy Chief of theAendemy,. Nikolay Mikhaylorich Mironov wes
formerly the Chief of the Directorete of the Moscow Military District. 1

worked for him es senior instructor. Row he te Deputy Chief of the Acedeny,

He lives clowe to me. He is aleo a good soures. IT ehristened hin ron. 6)

G: Bo you soldered the KGB to the Central Gomilttee of the cp/useR! “f1 My God!

It's kept seeret thet there is a Commlesion for Departures. I had to go

before I could leeve for Turkey snd I wes called there when I wos to leave for
Pekintan, when they were checking om me. I was ready to go to Pakistan, I told you.

fie

DUBROVIN got the visn. DUBROVIN was lnter dlechsram’. He wer the Tend
Instructor of the Department of Military Diplematie Service at the HDA. Hew
it hes been incorporated into the Deportnent of Special Training (SPER
PODGOTOVKA). ‘Tha head was General LISITSIN, You know him, Gr Yes. 8: He
woe diachorand, .

136. ) 8: So this Commission exists. You are ealled before it and '!
niven to $111 owt. The forms have the classification Top Seeret when
Filled in. The first page reads: "Ie eitizen of the Soviet Unton.... that. ;
I won't betray my trust, ete., ate.," (ALL leugh) 8: ‘The second one (for)
is for information. You te them and they ere taken to the Instructor.

person feel he ie in the hichest orgen of the Central Committee, An ordinary
person briefs you. Of course, net VOROSHELOV? (ALL leugh.) 8: Everyone is

thie from the (R.R.) conductor. Ueter no elreunstences should one travel in a
e with both wees. It contimes this way: Don't drink toe minh;
don't telk too mich. Reperb any ease of provocation to the Anbarnedor,
Commsellor or VORS representetive, depending on vho is avaliable. pon't take
any Secret materials with you! (All lewgh) 8: Don't meke any notes, Tf notes
ere mode, then carry them with you all the times don't leave them any place.

|
138.8: Here is 2 good cane, Tt con be written up in the press, 1
give you ny permission. Let then think how you got it. Tyo months ego we
sent o CNIM Delegetion to the German Federal Remblie. An engineer from
Leningrad wae gent alone. Ha was aligntly sick mentally. me wade notes in
an agent notebook like mine. He wer not on Intelligence moms he was en engineer.
Possibly he wae comptedy I never foul ows. We afd not eoopt him, possibly the
ROS aid. He mitt the notebook in tie pooket of his overceat and forgot it in
the cor when he got out. fe got thr overecet back tut the notebook -
waa minwing., He beceme: so woret thet when Ain comrades wert shopping he henged
himeelf?. He vaed the cord of en electrie iron whteh he atteehed to the electric
fixture hook on the ceiling, They hed teken 2 porteble trea to #are money crt
preseing. He used the cord from thts fron. The body was flown to Leningrad.
i
t

hg

#12

G: He beeeme gsenred? &: Yeas. He henged himeelf. He hag «a good wife ant

two children. Tivwy said thet he vee mentally unbelenceds he took {t too
hard. He was « fool, of emuse. But he di4 heng himself. whe others retumed
andi found him deed. It was tye months ago. We were all called together;

it was a big affetr.

139. G1 They dldnot want to let DOMMUR eome with me. Be is a Letyien
fron Riga. This 4s the 2ni time he hes cone here, He is not merriedy that's

before, they aid let him go. I did net wart any changes in the delegntion.

It eould ehenge my whole life. IT anid thet he hed 9 mother ant thet © would
take prrgone), resporsiié lity. He wae in Enclent before ant {4 not defert,
Why were they efretd this time? Beenum a Letyion defected seme place
recently. 8: Do you know thet « Latvien defeated? GO: I dtin't know. 6: Well
cheek! A Latvien defected recently! He was with a delegation end did not
retiren,. se

WAO. 6: Is there a comitttes or person whe is hanfling our defectors
MARTIN and METCHEILY Are you fesflier with thist B: Of eourse, I'm fomti{ar.
They ere heniled by the KOR. They ere under their control, their protection,
awl they provide for them. But I personally feel that they vent to retwen
very much. (Laughs) G: Did you see anything ~~. theiy questioning, ete? B: Ko.
G: How did they art there? Whet wes the travel route? St They vere tatted
(RAZRAROTANHY) beforshand. ‘Thst's whet T heard, 6: You meen here in the
USA? 8: Yes. 4: Then they were efven the mity amd... 8: They were
giver the oppartimity, but they were wetted le Sevelaped definitely,

G: By who Do you know? 8: I don't know. Mot ours. Not the Strategte
intelligences, The neighbors (Kma),of courre. 5: Yes. Definitely, I know
we had nothing to do with this. YASORTN tola me, "(Subject's tre neme),
we have nothing te do with tht ¢ nettier, wrifortunately. It would heve been
a big plus.” ‘The neighbors (X08) errand 46.

fi) G; Whatorgentzation tabes all RB en your (art) reports ant
eollatew—tie for finnl use by KERUSECHNY or scmeone oles? 8: The systen
is simple ont eleer, very easily defined. All important telegrans go i
“vin the top", {.0., KARUSHCARV, and then the Nirtlater reads them, ALL \
felegrens from the KGB and from our Chief Intelligence Direetorete, ete ean go :
“vin the top", ‘The Monde of the Dirvetorntes sian off tf they go to tha top
or if they showld be held et seme level to the worked on for incorporation inte
urther reports, Some may merely go to the Information Directorate, They
route then, The slaning off for us ie dene by SEROY on the important ones,

g12

they then go to the Minister. It may happen that the REZIDEWT, the MGB or
our (SPU men) will write: To Comreda STALIM, to Comrade KURUSHCERY,

Comrade MALINCVERIY, Comrade SOXOLCVEXTY, the Chief of the General Steff,

He writes to the top, going over the heel ef hia supervinor. Ye write
averything to SEROY, but we can afidress it directly to MALINCVEKIY. In that
cane, Lt will definitely go te SERCY first.

~_t: Vho prepares everything 20 fhet i+ will be cleer to the ministert
9: The “orem is reed in its originel forms, also the staneture -- (aay from
me). There were much telegrams; my telegrams were read, ete. -- such as
information (telegrane). The original ia rend. Then all the mxterfal is .,
pulled together in the Central Committee ~~ Let's ary regerting Anglo-Sovies
relations, for example. Then it ia given to the MID. If there ore meny
questions or # note, a amountement ia prepored. In other worta, everything
is pulled togrther at the too, in the Central Comittee. The Certral Comittee
gives it to the MCD or to some other Minietry, depenting on the type of
information, There are some teleeranst thet never go to the top. They art
stopped at SBROY's office or at the fesks of the Heslds of Directorates. They
give them te the action party. 6G: You mean adsinistrative telegrems or thore
which ere cent if there ave new summaries, or additionel deta, which fe to be
edllated inte a new report? &: I wvterstan’d. The Hilitery Atteche prepares

® yearly report on tive combet readiness of, Let's say, the Baglish army.

Yhot vew units exist, denlcyment, new technological developments, training if
we sew it or if our neltvhbors (KGB) geve ue this type of materiel, All these
reports, summaries, sre collated emi giver to the Minieter in the form of a
report. The Itformmation Directorate preparer this. G1 Ami the Rost 8: Thet's
for the Minieter of Defense. The KoB does the seme thingthere. The KB

aleo hes en Inforsmbion (Directorate). They aleo receive information ani

heave to think Lt out ani dectde where Lt hae to be sent. : That's clear.

&: What haa to be incorporsted into the peneral information? I repeat, the
information cones im ag enables aml then os reports.

U3. A: Mow that the questions are finished, let us show him sone
photos. : You anewersd very well. You anmewred an awful Lot. I congratulate
you! Beceuse the quentiona were not simple. It wes 41ffiewlt to answer then.
8: I em not prepared of emuree. If I had prepared myself I might heave teen
able to give more theoretien] informetion. (1 What we are interested in finding
out is whet your reread knowledge covers. One con't know everything that is
haypening in life. 6: 16 in the duty of on offfeer of the Gaiberal Staff to
know a lot. (ALL lewsh) Maybe eco erswers wore net exact. O: Bub you 414

RT

eh a a re te
a

|
|
|
|
|
|
|

very well. You seid when you did not know something. This ia metrreal. You're
not an oneyclopedia. S: I will tell you this, If I only knew the ARBAT or
the Coumitties, 1f I only vielted the ARBAT or the Comnitter, I world

probebly know only ebout Strategic Intelligence. This is my fields IT ws
teupht thie. O: Thet's clear. 5: Bub I heve a wide civele of frientis. If f
went to fini out something about a given field I alweye cet -- either in general
or in Qeted1. 6: Thet's why wr ace trying to fin out yow flelds of
krowledgesbhility,

1hh. (the pecketes of photon were now prepered for Subject to itentity.)
He QUS5. S: I do on officer of the Strategie Intelligence. He vorked in the
Information Directorate. ‘That's all, You didn't bring PAYLOV's photo?
G: He is not in this oot.

1h5. Ge This one is Strotegie Intelligenme. Ht QlLGO. fr fe in a
Low-renking one, © radio operator (RAYS?) or something. He hes hopes for
something higher.

16. 8: thle one te the sem .. ORY. A high-ranking one. Hr QL65.
Ss What's hie nomet To kmov him. He in stocky. Isew him momiing moun.
Ye is operational, not on Informntion Direetorate officer. Write Ent
Directorate, that's under KOROVALCY,

hy]. S: No friends, maybe I will Sint someone. I heave not seen ZOTOV
yet. ZOTOV Is nok here, OG: It's pousible thet he is not there. Tf thought
that he would be there, tub if you did mee see it. i: What series is thie?
RY J: Italy. o: Herve ht ia. We met him, He 4s en officer of the Strategie
Intelligence. Hr W-97. f1 A young ome. Br entered the Acateny whlle T was
there: T don't rember the year.

48. Hr RSG. S: A radio operntor - code clerk (RADIST-SHUFROVAL'SHIK),.
Te might be under enver of courier-guerd. Wa sever abate in the passport that
& person is o cote clerks we sey ecurter, gunrd, aininistrebtive worker, ete,
H
149. 8: Tate one te o neighboring worker (kom). Ks RG.
150. 8 Thie one is one of oar Strategle Intelligence officers. Ht R42.
251. &: This te one of cura, o nevel one. I know him. Hr R-4O.

1592. WW: RL. 8: A eheuffenr of the Strategie Intelligemme. He wes at
the school/bene undergoing training.

#12

153. 8: Works for Colonel AVHAMENKO, his wrker, an officer. W: RL6.
G: Of the sexe type as the other? 9: Mo. He i4 a case officer, an operational
worker

*

154. Si Nave you noted what I told you -- that Lt. Col. FEDOROY should
be removed. The Hilitery Attache in Ire showld tbe rewred and his i
frightening apeietent NIKOLSXIY, a very good natured fellow, a mnjor. Be is
unter cover -- a Swi oecretery, I think. I don't remember. ,

155. GO: Reve you heard of BUCHICHEV? A colemel? No, I don't 7
 yomenber. VAVILOV shomld be removed from Ictenbul. He has many comections
there. Len'ka da a nice fellow. He should Be removed. VAVILCY, 2 neighbor
(x03) should be removed because he operates well in Ietarnbel., He hes lots
of commctions, mony frienis, en operations]. worker, case officer. Check on
thin yourself. Bon's forget te establish direet survellience.

155. 8: Offteer of Strategie Intelligence, H: WO. S: FT? this ta
Sweden, there hae to be a Colonel here -- the one vho gave me the exenminabion
after the lst course. He ie working with the 6O gbufenta now, He wes 8
Military Attache. Hi In Svedent 9: In Sweden. : Maybe you will find hin,
St He exemined me.. He ie in comm of the 60 students now. They were
very sorry when I left. Hy typist told mo. She xatd, "They liked you so
such”, I mate them use their brains well, yet I wos ineven.

157. 8: I forgot to mention ebout apmrteents. I wrangled 30 epartaents
for the students froa SWLCPOY. His wits died when I was gredunted. He ig Red
like e wemover. (ALR leugh) Ot Ibm 2tke a semtover. 8: Mo, I'm not talking
ehout you. You are just « benlthy person. You have lota of blood -- like
bronze. (ALL langh)S: He is driven in a cer, 5 ZIM. Be is very stoekys you
are better lecking! (¢ lenghs) §: But tt is not worthwhile teking «
photograph for # portrait,

G36.) s: I vue serons the street from the meta gxte of the Amertean
Exbassy. in a house which ls a clothing store end heberdeshery. I
bought a lot of soep ani underwear there. 1 would look out the window (at
U.S. Exbemry) to see ££ the policemm seluted. When he anluted, XY knew tt wae
a Siplonst. I knew, alsost from the manent Z sev bin. Then T would walk
perallel to hin end think to myzelf ~~ when he gets into the car I think I
will get in alno. Then I wold tell myself, "Ko. Don't be a fool, ie night
eall a policemen.” (AL leugh) §: At one time, I follow: a poor girl -- yellow
seeks amt s yellow hat. (ALL laugh) If you would cl#er this up, I would he
very happy. (ALL lengh) she hed to report thie, that there wes surveillance
on her. She was a good-looking Aweritomn girl, tall, good-locking!

4g

7.

159, Hr: HIG, Sr 100 pervert guarentee ~ ours (oR). You ena, he
mish hove en Inbelligence comection, ters IF don't know him by sight. of
course, it's the Military Attoche's offices (VOENNIY APPARAT) so he is an
officer. I don't remenber whet he looke like.

160. &: I heve another goottrient, YAICHEND. He went to Africa.
A Colonel. Ie hes always worked es & reporter, but he is a Strategte
Intelligence officer. A senior offleerthe seme as I om. We worked at the
Aeniony when T waa in ecemend of a course. He is a nice, goot-netrred fellow.
We wes very nies to me. Ve drenk eri went to porties together sereral tines.
He wes celled out urgently, ani he went out oe a TASS correspondent. TASS”
ie used ae a cover, Everyone hes cover. They planes either KOR, or our
officers, in the slots. We heve people uvier eover of Torgpredstro, 0.7.8.
(Civil Airlines), TAGS, ete. YANCHEMKO's wife came hore for an operation:
She called my wife aml aeid, “We got 2 bed port. There is nothing to eet.
It's frightening”. Be ie with Sekmore Toure. Hr That's thiinen.

161. G2 De you rememberthe meme KOTSUBAT oS: Of eowrse. KOT-GU-B.
Os He cums fron Cermenyy he wns in Intelligence. 6: I remember. 9: He was
with you, then be left and was Deputy Covmeniler of ths elty of Berlin, unter
the Conmenitantes’ offien. 8: He ie e gemeine officer of the Strategte
Intelligence. I think he newer Lef'¢ emf 4s stil) working for us. I stersetber
the veme and hie fece nlightly. (: He was finty he Liked to heve 2 drink,
8S: That's him -- AOP-SU-BA. Gs Fomeshy.

162, f: this one is a code clerk or m redio operator. a: Fg.
S: Probably net a node clerk, bat a radio operstor. This one has somthing
to do with OSMAZ. He in at the Center stutying rediico teshniques.

153. Gt Yo am net ddentifying meny people today. Nowhere heve I seen
on old Intelligence offleer.

15%. 8: T know BOCHMARFY. @: Do ytrr know him? d: Be stutied with
me at the emirse, in tha Pall of 1993. Sow he io working for RRC VALCY.
His goes to Germany, checks derd drops, eta. fe helps establish dead drops,
carries money, ete. Write this -- BOCHKAREY. He Lo the o7th (of oject's
MDA elace of 1953). He wears glastrs.

165. S: Chant: ebowb Colonel PARKHOHEMKO, He is com kint of relative of
YERLINA's stepixther, The ome who defected In Cermmy, or the one vho was
cepturml before he fled, SALIMANOY. The one who merried the daughter of a Generel.
G: I did not heer of this. 8: SALIMANOV, they say, wes caught before he eculd
defech nmi they shot him, A frierl of SERCY. ‘The relatives don't know thaneelver
what happened.

30

Yada . " ) |

166.A:Y recognises a lok of HDD workers. I @4an't potnt them out

to you. If knew many from MID. What's the mettery FEDOROY io not here ant this

ROCHKAREV.. 0: BOCHKAREY tn Vietoy Viktorovich, fen't her 8: How fo you lenny?

I can’t belteve 1¢ but that ts emotly ‘

Ho listen -- when ata you lesye Moscow? (411 Laugh.) $1: When you cone over,

Come amt see me, (ALL Leh.) s: te att with you. We will renlly secompliah
ator .

with you letter. 8) Be stwiied with maz he fintshea in 1953; he ts very nice
to me. He sew me before LTileft. He ian Lt. Colonel. 6: He was in Auntrint
Re trevele? §: fe aafa he wos in Germeuy several tines. Mm gald he went
are Platt re om checked 9 dend drop in the ruins, in Germeny, You

LET. Ay Do you know KALOPOY? ay I even know his nome aml patronymic,
(All leugh.) §: Poor KELOPOT! Te he only knew how many times we have the
of him, et this high level of ours, (ALL. Lewsh.) Bs Fapecinily atnee he”
is the gem hetebt as you. His face is very sintler, When he works he wears
Rleaten; otherwins, he doesn't war fflaveer, G1 You ase it's the seme, with~
cut plasees., 8; By the woy, I wart to confesa nev, Vien you were Mret betes.
ins end talking to me, I thought thet you wore KILOPOY in Alemmie

168, a: De you know 2VEREY by any shenes? 8: Write this down. fe
graduated from the A + Gs Be gratusted from the Acedeny. He is e big
Fellow with n red feee, as Yeas, yes. 8: He hed some kind ef. trouble st
Work. G: ff in Vietor also St Yew, Viet, Correet, He gredurted in
1953. At present he is working at the Center, They went to train hin for
duty some pleee ebrona, He works in KOWWALOD's 2nd Directorate, He stwited
with me. ,

199, G: DO you know thie big fellow, MAD? As te a huge teLiew.
St f don't renember,

170. Wobe this one. fe ts a Strategic Intellinenes officer. #4; J-87.
5S: T don't knew whet hig job is there, He might be stable boyy XZ don't know,

Tl. Gs Bo you know the ome with « Georgten neme? EHARLAMPIDI? $1
No. Is thet hts correct nme or a nickname? ¢; Zt don't know.

172. @: There wes & YELSUROV. 8: Ho, You can write this écwm.
Another person who wtutiod and erotunted fron the Academy with me wes Frenocoy,
ie wes Qnd Seeretary in to) Aviv, Teron]. An svister. At present, be worke
in the lst Direetorste of the General, Starr,

173. &: Write dom a fey more of my clasmeates, Troy gredveted
from the Aesfemy with me in 1953. te i 0 Colonel nov, He works in the
lst Direetornte, me refused to eo to Ttely wiler cover, fe asia he warrkerd
to be went ae an Army Attache, a rend. warrtor, Gt The Ist Directorete of
‘the Cenerrl Stare; 5; Yea, the Cperntions Directorate, 1 vemenhered ttn,
I have to reesll all my 99 classmaten,

51

LB. 8: The one ta in the hth Directorate of the Strategie In-
telligenee. HH; J~-39.

Directorate, MYARKESHEV, yest J: Yea. MYARESEY 6 3-39, &: IT know
him. I say"helio"to him, ete. He is in the hen Directorate now, this
MYAKESHEYV. He eratuated from the Academy Inter then I did,

176. a: fe you know o BELyAyry; He was supposed to have stuiled

with you. Ss: Mo, Tere was no BFLYAYEV fn my clash. He mipht heve been
£n another elas.

8: Mow write this. tf Just remembered; this one tn very in-
teresting SALCHATIN, Fedor Prferovieh., fe weg in Amarion, A neighbor (1073) ?
he graduated from the Fromze Academy with me end entered the Military Diplometic
Aendemy 1m 2950, 1 entered in 1949, ont he ewtered in a ® year Inter. He
studied in the nome elass with TORIENED, a neighbor (Kom). fe wes in Amerten.
He worked poorly. Be worked in the Consular ' :

ARBAT often owl met him, He tn being transferred tron the meighbors (xm)
to our orgentention, Even thia eonbinstion ie pesseble. 1 444 not heve 9
chance to find out where he was going. He wee in Americas sbout 2-23, years.
Be is of fee grevtunting elaes an Sergey Sereeyerich,

81 Show me photographs of the ones who were {nm Amoriesn before,
I will show you whieh ome in nov the Couuwselior in Delhi, Indians he 19 operat~
ing with afriewlty there. fe ip the ome who told me that there are tw
REY

have been with me. In Ini. A Lt. Col. who graduated from the Academy with
me, fs in a big good-looking fellow —. Sergey Sergeyevich ~~ and has a
beertiful_wite,

unter cover or are in an overt offfeini! (APPARAT) offies of the Military

Attache, They herve egeutes ant persons whee + ere developing. They
meet with them and gtve them money, ve oe

ce

180, 8) ‘wre are also {Liegel RAZIORWTORAR, thet our Leal
eppars # mot content. Thay only provide redic eqrri pment
tapping-intercent equipment -~ all that ie needed ~= through dead drops.
logel networke” Riid Retwork w also tltege! an dace ere gee oe
legal network, Fada em cemeatiions ehemel to Moree or
@n OSA’ station, using the radio given to hin. For exemple , Wew York

phe REZIDENDS might not know each obtee” G1 I wvterstam. S: the agente
deep corer Sgents EA SO OMY apy thenesiines ben ty wet ye SSN

deep cover agents, They only heye comuntioations with Moscow, Thet's the
kind of REZIDRNTURA it ia. ZI wrote the ¢ 3 2% meens the one
which is eut-ore, Gt That's clear, Thert ie just one OY more? fy
Jttiet one,

G: There ie no such REZ TORNTURA in Weshington? 61 thems
it relington., There ie a very week agent network tn Yeshington,

them ont wlll see then, rere ore no mestings, no Vonteel en ety,
Phone calls, or anything, ee en rent Over and put in a deol Arey. In
yuk £

other. They heve means of Yealo comment entt on ie MORN
Work -- aml they wort, One may be a barber; another
‘may be m Welter; the ord in military services, GC: That's elear,

Gs Do you know what the 8 has there? 8: You see the mms
also hey Lege) RE TORPTURA®. T dom't kosow whet they have in America,
Thay aloo have {1lagn) RESIDENTURAs that ere in contact with them ant fulftt1

- 53

exis aie a oe

theiy reanivemente. They also here these eonmpiretorial (sover) RF IDeRTURAS, |
but they are dirceted by MOB (netghbor) ao. ricers who are in Veshington -- sgain, |
the Covneellor, the lat Seeretery, some Toragpredityo employee, ete.. Like

MELIKA. Wheat wos MELIKH’s title: Feployee of the United Nations! G: That's

clear.

Gas ‘Mow the probles thet bothers me, ani all of us. The
REY, TEE NTURA direct radio comuntestions with Moscow. They here a powerful
station, a special frequency, a trananlesion tine-teadle. To intercept the broad-
cest, determim the location, esteh, end shoot then... There ie such a REZIDENTURA.
I think 1% is composed of non-Aspricens. This L4 my opinion. I een give my
opinions I mut give it. The reasoning is beenves analogously there is nothing
in Turkey. Plense listen to this sgein, carefully. SUDIN Le going there. Tl-
legal agents will be sent in. They wlll be brought together into an orgentzation.
A REZTORMT will be appointed. He will be finence’ and he will work. They will
eet up the Llleagel REZIDSPURA in this wy. ‘There ere no vyalueble sgente who ’
sre Turkish, ete.. Why is SUDIN goingthere? Beceuse the exphesia ia on Legale.
In pleeen where it is hem to reerult egenta, they will sent in sqente and will

| opernte using the iliegsal means to carry on their Intelligence work. 4: ‘Thatte
cleaner. 8: Let SUDIN wo there. You night umcover something. Me 4a going to
Turkey e4 @ Courisellory a slot was obtatwed frem MTD (Pause.)

185.) 8: Xt tee frightful thing, the flexibility of the Intelligence
orgenization this end mike your own conelusions. This affair vith
FOWERS happened on the lst of Mey. On the Sth of May, there was an ortier to
stop all. Intelligenme activity. Money thet wea already in deed drops was not
plexed upy The hell with tt! -- If we lose all of the agents; 2f they got mid
up or stray awey trem ws; or LY they are withent money or feel ebandoned. ft
wea suggested thet we contact the ones thet were nested, but nof This wae for
prestige. This wea eo great lors for our Intelligence, but the hell with it! .
It benefited hervise.

(186% 8: Phen a new ordex wos given, Again they shorted reorgentsing
end carrying on Intelligence. Now the enphesis is for tllegel Intelligences
ell efforts sre expenint to this emi, Any amount of money for training, pene-
tration, ete...third, for radio intelligeme. They are preparing special radio
monitoring persomel. In other words, there in en emphasis on exything thet
aives evidence of auceess, ant muccers ia nehieved. Rrop by drop At, of course,
gives s lot of information. You know this yourmelyes. It is a weapon thet they
heve developed snl one whieh we should evt down, We can loezlize ext et down
to almost zero the mmber of radto-cemunications channels. I's sure that this
cen be done with certain techniques, disciplines, ate.. We ean cehieve on goal.
Tf you don't believe that we get a lot fron thie source, how. enn I prove it to
you? Tllegais! Please «. I can give you a lecture. I nemed persommel, SUDIN;
whet extete in Vashingten end Rew York.

- i me
fe en re
a en et

5);

_ : : aa d : : = 7 ‘ rg
srs 8: Thin Sergey Sergeyerich haa oe confused. Where te his
phetet HH: will find tim. 8: He in Counsellor in Nelhi wow. How mony
Counsellors can there be ~. two, three? Give me the neme and I will reeognise
it. It is @ good Russian nem.

Qa at A tell Colonel. H: J-26. Sr: An experienced Cece
Officer, he graiueted from the Acateny before me. He ie a clean ORU man, not
Kos. He is atther on Artillery or Teak offieer, not Inferntry.

(cm S: I don't eee many from Pekisten. I know #11 the Case
Offieers in-Pektietan; I have not found « single em of then. I ean give you
thatr alieses end preudes, emt you don't give their photos to me. Either you
don't want to knew or yen loww already -- good! (ALL lewgsh.) 8: Officer
of the Strategle Intaliigenes, HM: J-14.

105) §: Tere be ie! BH: 3-12. S: Bore is Colonel FEOORCY. te ”
gredunted with m: from the Acsdeamy fn 1953. His wife divorced her firet Inus-
bewl; he ie her saeonl hasband. She hed cancer in her left, breast amt it was

removed; she weer ¢ "falmie”. They have two ehiléren. He worked in GAU for
Mershel YAKOVLEV. In 19h9, be come tous st the Aertemy from GAY. He wan in
| Rnglend. Te waa mot too sucerssfidl here (in Englewi). He did not reemit
/ timyors when he hel operetional requiresents. Now he is Military Attache in --
what country fa thet? HW: Hollen. 8: In Bollami -~ Milttary Attache. Be
ia not the RSZINUNT there; he is oa eonsultan’. Write this. He le 2 candidate
for Teehnteal Selencesy he gob it at GAY. He ia a foul, erefty fellow. He
ves neety toverds his comrefes. Re is not the REAIDENTs by lew, be ie definitely
not the RIZIDENT. No matter whet. If he te Military (Attache), he is not the
REZTOENT. He ie conmmiltant toe the REAIEEMT beemuee he de amerter then the ote ra.
Remove him from there.

,291.) 8S: Wha Deprhy Aesictent. Hr 3-11, 8: You see how they ore
together.

& WH: Indie! 8: Good, By She way, the Military REZ TpenTura

in Ywita following task. I wlll cive yet the egentsy there in a REZIDERTURA.
The agent net ia on conservation. There fe a radio operator with everything ceched.
There are two brothers in the agent nevtwork. Wheat eombact do they have with the
Cese Officers? They cet monrys we feed art mepport them we cheek their hexlth
etc. so thet they ore always evatleble te put the redic in operation. Hr. RRA
showld be told thie. All is held in reserve. Everything ie cached in zine boxes
| thet area soldered and ere air tight.
i

| 193. S: ‘This ie a low-renting worker, Hr P-83. 9: ‘Technical,
i aku. Are the Intest ones here elect Sergey went with then tn shout Septenber.
Bs Sergey Sergeyevich who was in my eleas. I eve not found him yrs.

| 19h, 8: Chmvfferr, A: P-3s. 8: This ta my code clerk. fe was
| in Parkey with me. Wt: P-'9. 5: NEYZOROV, he une in forkeey with me ar a code
clerk until the heginning of 1956. He woe formerly in OSNAZ. Ve heve a big

| O5RAZ in Chita, o Img center in Chita, Batkal. At the emnter, while

I won saying goodbye ani asking ZASORIN whet I should bring kim, 2

i cable arrived in whieh MMVZONOV eskedt thet he be trensferred fram Initia,
His older gon hes to attend school, ar he doen not like it there, I
know him ent hie wife, He ina gowd, very enim fellow, who does hip
work well. Gr What is his renk? &: Ceptain. He wos Sentor Lt.,

Will be replaced. NEVZOROV, code elerk, experienced, an old heat.

| 193. 8: Senter Assistant of the Military Attache. Hf: P-25,

Si He graduated from tive Aenemy with me. Lt. Col. in the Teolmtent

| | Troage. He wes abroad before, Me to a Senter Aseietent to the General.

He went to Inile, efren fepterber. What is the fires letter of hie nee?

| J: Alexnawiy. 8: No. ‘The Jest nome, Te ia my collesme «. the first ..
letter! ¢: FE. 8: ‘thw second? I don't remenber, J: K-O-R 6: NBORYARDV!
| Fo, ne, Js KORYARDVSKIY, I think. $: XORYAKOVSKIY! ‘Thet’a right; he

| greduated with me in 1953. He was abrond before. This is kis seennt tour
abrond. He was se Senter Acstatent to the Mijitery Atteeh. Se worked -
in the Informrtion Dircetorste before hin departure, Re is a clean
| officer of the Streteste Drtelligenes. RORYAROVEC

|

|

com in now. By the way, SEROV suffered a lot when he wee appeinted to
a ponttion with « lower reo. M wos «¢ Minister of SER ent now he is
Chisf in the Gemernl Steff, He imm't even the Chief; he fa Chlef of In
tel Ligaenee, ,

198. 8: Mere te Sergey! Th 414 not comm out well, HH: P-183.
GS: Whet is the firwt Letter in his maset I want to recall tt nygels,
Tt La very bad photography, I weengiised him by hie good-looking wife
next to him. He was in Amerion for s long time, about 3) yeers, Whet's
the first letter? 31 V-P-8h...8: VESHONUNOV. J: That's right. 8: Hold
it here. She fs a pood-lecking women. He fa her Ont inwhersls shes divorced
the let one, I will find the one whan he replaced now; he is working with
me in my OTT.

195. 5: A worker of the Strategie Intelligewwe, i: P-LUh,
19T. 8: Eb would be mice tf General of thy Army, SEROY, would

199. GO: ‘TSAREV? St Wo. TAAREY was the Militexy Atteshe in Afahanteten...

200, 8: I don't see Petr GANICHRY Here, who is the fenter officer
in the hth Direetorete remiing Indie, He repleced me. It is n poor pitote-
ereph. He wae in Amerion 3h yorrs as lst Seoretery,

56

.
ne nl ep tt

vn tle ©

202. 8: Atretegie Intelligence. A Mujor. HH: P1457.

203. 8; Where ds OANICHEV, the one who repleced me ee Senior
Offleer? Ye wee Sentor Asaietant to PAVIOV, the Military Attache. Do |
you heave any more photographs from Infiteat J: We. 8: Yeen't fint .
the Counsellor who he replaced. This one wee a First Seeretery nt
he wes given the Counsellor's position. He was algo a Colonel. S$: this
in the Majer General, the newly sepdred Militery Attechs. MORYAXDVEEIY
is hie Chief Assistent, 6: Ton't he an Inbellfeened offleer? d: He's
“from the troops". Beta an much on Intelligence officer an a dog's Sth
leg. (leughs) It's incomplete. Fetr GANICHEV, who waa PAVLOV's Aseistent,
is missing. PAVLOV in not here, the Hilitery Atteche who was replaced vy.
the Generel. You ese how ineomplete. it is. ‘Three Strategie Iytelligence
Officers ave missing. H: We do not have every enrd. 8: Pleane write

20h. 8: Then the Snot one minging, Denia POLYARDV. fe is the
one whose wife lived with the Commercial Counsellors he greduated fran
the Acedeny with me.

- 205. 8: Tie Colonel, who wae Comeellor, is mineing. I don't

remember hin nome. Be was replaced by VESRCRUNCY. YFSHORINCY in nissing,

Four are miosing. Vrlte it down, breswme when I ema not bere you will eeny

(Bubject's True Hume) does not remember, If you. wish, I will look through

1% again. Four Straterte Officers are miseing from thin gap. I heve

@ good memory end I imow them all well, Colonel Petr GANIONRY is slso

missing. He wes tromsferred beemuwe he hod 9, mralienerh tune. yes wes

opereted on ami now he in feeling better. Be in worting an genfor officer

of the hth Direeternte in charge of the Dilia eren. He repleced me. Another

one is mlesing -- Aneistont Militery-Air Atteche of PAVLON, the one who

was in nh ear acetdent ontetde of Delhi. He beoke his spine ern ribe ani

wee taken to Hoseow by nix. Y don't remecber his name, tut I remenber

whet he looks Like. Pivt officers missing. De you recognize this one

who wea in Veshington? J: Yes. : That's not bad.
1
|

205. 8: The Militery-leval. Attache hed one of these eemeras.

You say thie errera ts expensivel 4: Yes, it is. 8: I was told thet
Lt is quite expensive.

e

Whet shall we ao? G: Go to bed. thoorrow we will meet
Lheire oa agreml, It will be « short meting to eleer ug everything,
Please don't forget to call RRM in the morning. 8: I will cell him
esd wlll gt vinit hin, maybetomorrow. G: Yeu. You have to set thig.

: > = % ~ ; ; f STs ara 2 Se na oa

px2

\ BS: Tomorrow I will. eo to tht Roboeayy then I will go te the nightelub.

The dey after tomorrow, I meet the RIZIMENT offfeielly. I will gtve

him the mtertols shout thernonte ant eleetrontes. G1: At vheb tine?
Ss: Iwill be told temrrow. ff: Ceny. 6: Tomorrow I might be eble
to fini out from SHAPOVALOY shout the agent's mensage. OG: When do you expact to
cnl) Wg 8: The dey after tomorrow, I will settle everything conerning

when I meet with the REZIONWT. ‘ill Qe, if he eriis. I wil

eell hin myself tomorroy. AH: Be mist ring wp tomorrow! G: Yen. te will
Go'thet. Have you set up a tentative tine when you will meet him? $1 the
Comsellor (HZZINENT) will tell me whom he plane to eppoim es tle contact
for Wimaem@lir I will report everything to him. I will show him the meter
dels you heve given to me. 6: Bet when you telk to QQ over the |
telephone, won't you arrengs for a meeting? 8: Ho. Tomorrov, when IT talk
to SEMEN over the telephone, I wert to moet MEE end then arrange: it |
personally. Wi He mist ring up to errongs: this, O: Yes, I know. Bi: . a
Cthervine, you seo, RMB osy not be ewvaileble. fe ean't keep the cheap
here you see, 8: Iwill esll. @: He will do it. FH: Whet time tomorrow?
G: 1600 hours, A very short one, Jurt before he goes beck to the Robassy.
H: 1600 hours. G: You anid ab 1600 hows, yes? a: At 1600 hours,
Gt Chey. We won't keep you long begevee yo have to wesh end eet rendy
to go wlth them. 8: Yen. Tomorrow I will. dance. 6: We can't keep him
too long. Me hea to mat kis group.

(26) 8: New, IT will spel Mr. Herelda's mol. I wes told thet {+
cost te go to we nightelyub. Io was told it eomte BLO to donee with
the girls, ent thet the tables cost e lot. Ne (WYNER) watd £50, so thet
I would pay for him elec. I sew hie more « pdle of send from the etrwet
Arte hie yard. Me pela BO. Me is building » house. dG: Yes. of:
prepented the suit te hie wife tofisy swt ee deneed with joy, just Iie

eB goxt. (AL) lengh.) 6: I wae very gid thet she wes pleased. She is
a very pleasent vorens she ie nice to me. She venlly helpet me. ves I
right in dning thist Yes, Iwas! o: Yes, of courses. §: I'm a kind
person. HH: We ore not eritieising thie. G: Bub it le o feet. OG: But
you are teking gifts, ete.. That's eleo importent. Rr Of course. Every-
thing is in orfer with this. 4: I wee only thinking whet your supervisors
will any mbennt the £50 thet I spent in the nightelub. 6: Ho, no? a
You gave ee £250. IT will sit for arether five mimites. Now will I ery
goxibye to sll of you on Fridey. It will be hert and only the feet thet
we WiLL be working together WiLL help me morally. 0: We will meet agein
goo. =: Well, I thirk it's time to co mow. (Farewells are seid. Sub-
Jeet left m& 0030 heoure on 2 Mey 1901.)

8
