A Red Sea Security System: Political, Military, and Economic Issues
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098721, dated 2 November 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098721).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4

ary _
oe ye :

- A Red Sea Security System:
Political, Military,
and Economic Issues

An Intelligence Assessment —

Information available as of 8 December 1981
has been used in the preparation af this report.

RHPA Re NFER SG TIRE FONE CHER Het C6 eas RSIS HV ck

Sret

December 1981 |

rs re
fen e TTEA He

ov

te
?

yet

HRS THEN LE RPC AR Me!

fer
tay

a
=
3

AP

rere S ope dee iY

sabe tins

wets

ate

"+ Key Judgments

|
|

Py ge BA te SE el ot

ts

TM ae Pe ar ADR PRT ARUN SRN VAAN TEA PLLA PARE CEFR A SS Gay hel deen pan

SO ee Eh easiadeniacll

Pa RR a «PANT

ae ae ee cee a

‘A Red Sea Security ‘System:
Political, Military,
- and Economic Issue

o
“se,

fe PME ee oe oC : Net BAD Bea cea OE ae Ra tee!
The strategic importance of the Red Sea is likely to gruw substantially over

the next few years as a result of recent military and economic |

develupments: ; i ' Le, wa

vote

+ ab

e US Rapid Deployment Forces rely on military facilities in the region to -
help counter Soviet expansionism. age . :

¢ Saudi Arabia has just completed an oil pipeline to the Red.Sea that will
enable it to export a substantial share of its crude without going through
the vulnerable Strait of Hormuz. — é ae: :
e Riyadh has agreed to finance a pipeline to the Red Sea from Iraqi oil-
‘fields. - :

e At the same time the Libyan-Ethiopian-South Yemeni pact as well as
the Soviet presence in South Yemen and Ethiopia threaten the stability
of the southern Red Sea basin) — :

These developments give Arab countries from Egypt through Saudi Arabia
to Iraq a stake in Red Sea security. At present, security cooperation among
these and other Arab countries faces major obstacles, including longstand-
ing political and ideological rivalries and disagreement over the role of US
military power in the Middle East. If the Soviet and radical! threats became
more menacing, however, neutral and pro-Western countries might make
common cause. In the absence of Arab cooperation, Israel probably will
cite the growing importance of the Red Sea shipping lanes to the West to

strengthen its argument for broader US-Israeli strategic cooperation in the
region aa . ;

it , et.

December 1981”

x
os
aS:
a

A
ai

t
y

ot
7

en

4

+

"

ae,

7

(y

MES ba AANA AAI ESTEE, Fate ge US Pint

4

x
= te

Siety * -

7). “A Red Sea Security System:
22 - Political, Military,

ae ‘

Military Factors =

- The Red Sea is critical to Western efforts to stop

: a e eae ib ign .* Sg i

“i+, 7 and Economic Issues ie

rr eS Cr oR Lt 7R

ae wee

[ co

‘ j agreed with Iraq to finance construction of a pipeline ~ oe

+ + | Soviet expansionism in southwest Asia and te guard with a capacity of from 1.6 to 1.9 million barrels per i

a” , | the oil supply routes from the Persian Gulf. The US _ day to carry crude oil from Iraq's southern oilfields to E
a : i Navy prefers the Suez Canal to the longer and costlier a terminal near Yanbu. This pipeline could be in ‘ th
2 ‘1 poute around the Cape of Good Hope when sending operation by 1986. If the second Saudi line and the : Sy
: ° .+ _ Ships between the North Atlantic-Mediterranean and Iraqi line are completed, Red Sea terminals could &
x the Indian Ocean—Persian Gulf. These transits— furnish close to 5.5 million barrels per day of oil by =
iq i which have included conventionally powered aircraft the mid-1980s; at present about 12 million barrels per Be
§ |. carriers—will increase in number as the United day move through the Persian Gulf and the Strait of €
be) j States develops facilities in Kenya, Somalia, Oman, | Hormuz. Riyadh plans a 1.5-billion-barrel oil storage ae
5 '’ and Diego Garcia. The United States and Egypt plan facility on the Red Sea near Yanbu, although costs S.
5 | a massive improvement in Ras Banas, a small airstrip and technical considerations will delay completion &
£ and harbor area on Egypt's southern Red Sea coast,  uatil about 1990. Saudi Arabia is also building a pi
‘4 to make it suitable for use as a staging arez. for US petrochemical complex at Yanbu, which will make PN

; 4 forces moving into the Persian Gulf.' The oollapse of — that port a major procuct export center ia | BE
ee US influence in Ethiopia has dramatically increased : : =
the importance of Sudan and Somalia as bases for The Red Sea basin also furnishes oil of its own. Bx

9

AEF,
=

projecting Western power into the southern Red ‘Sea Egypt's most important oilfields are near the upper
ad northwest Indian Ocean. The United States plans’ Red Sea in the Gulf of Suez, and oil expluration is
to use air and naval facilities at Berbera, Somalia, to under way along the Red Sea coast of Egypt and

monitor the sea lanes along the southern coast of the Sudan jg

Arabian peninsula and the east coast of Africa

France stations about 4,000 troops and air units at
Djibouti at the southern end of the Red Sea on the
Strait of Bab-el-Mandel. Djibouti serves as the home
port for the French Indian Ocean fleet of 14 warships,
the second largest Western naval force in the Indian
Occan iat

|
Economic Factors
The Red Sea is becoming an increasingly important
transit route for oil. Both Saudi Arabia and Iraq look
to the Red Sea to provide a sccure alternative route
for oil exports from the Persian Gulf. The new Trans-
Peninsula Saudi pipeline terminating at the port of
Yanbu supplies 1.1 million barrels per day, and this
will soon increase to the pipeline’s capacity of 1.85 —
million barrels per day. Riyadh plans to double the
capacity by the mid-1980s. Moreover, the Saudis have

' See foldout map at end of report ag

Asa result, the Guif of Suez and the Suez Canal are
regaining the strategic importance they held before
the closing of the Canal in 1967 and the near-
simultaneous appearance of supertankers which made
economical the shipment of Persian Gulf oil around
the Cape of Good Hope. Present oil shipments
through the Canal are about 700,000 barrels per day.

‘Shipments through the Suez-Mediterranean (Sumed)
pipeline—which crosses Egypt from the Gulf of Suez
to the Mediterranean coast near Alexandria and is
jointly owned by Egypt and several major oil-produc-
ing countries—are at the pipcline's capacity of 1.6
million barrels per day. Egypt has enlarged the Canal
to permit transit by larger oil tankers, and there is
discussion of further expanding the Canal as well as
increasing the capacity of the Sumed pipeline. Cairo's
revenues from the Canal—an estimated $1 billion this
year, about one-tenth of foreign earnings—will gruw
steadily; Sumed pipeli:-e earnings—an estimated $75
million this year—can also be expected to rise as more
oil is moved through the Red Sc

al

‘

CPS ANI RYT

f

Sih

ct

are

4

me

OTe

PSS

Fs

area Cae UO VCORE DEBRA CAT CORT OSI RTO STO Te nae sel ohhh Leake Scand:

| nea ee araes: ER TES EE EE La Ste RS TAS ie aS

Soviet and Radical Threats Me :
The signing of the Libyan—Ethiopian-South Yemeni
Pact in August has intensifisd the radical, Sovict-
backed threat to pro-Western countries in the south-
ern Red Sea area. The Tripartite Pact caps Soviet
efforts since 1977 to bring about closer ties between
South Ye:nen and Ethiopia and, more recently, Ethio-
pia and Libya. The Pact prob bt, will tie Ethiopia
more closely to the radical community and increase
Ethiopian-backed military and terrorist activity by
the Somali Salvation Front against the government cf
Somali President Sud iy

South Yerwna continues to support insurgents against
the North Yetneni Government of President Salih.
Libya mounts subversive activities against President
Nimeiri of Sudan, and Ethiopia may be considering
support to Sudanese dissidents. External pressures
may heighten political tensions within Djibouti (yy

The radical states act in the shadow ef an impressive
Soviet military presence. The USSR has furnished
substantial military aid and training to South Yemen
-since the early 1970s and to Ethiopia since 1977 (the
Ogaden war), at present, there are approximately
1,000 Soviet military advisers in each country. Soviet

oe ye

MGs Ay tee

Pe Ae bd 60 ae

~ airfields, for example, could provide air defense and wi

ground support capabilities to a range of about 800
kilometers. A much more sustained buildup would be

’ necessary for Soviet forces to match the kind of forces

the United States and its allies can bring into the
region” ee .

A Red Sea Strategic Consensus? .
These threats give several Arab countries a stake in
Red Sea security. Egypt, Sudan, and Saudi Arabia
explicitly recognize the strategic importance of the
region. All three countries see Soviet activities in the
Middle East as designed to weaken pro-Western
governments and gain control of the strategic sea
lanes and Persian Gulf oilfields. Cairo, Khartoum,
and Riyadh alsa believe that the Tripartite Alliance of
South Yemen, Ethiopia, and Libya was probably
instigated by the Soviet Union and pursues similar
objectives to the USSR

Jordan's traditional distrust of Soviet goals has been

“strengthened by Moscow's strong support for Syria.

Despite its recent purchase of arms from the USSR,
Amman has worked to limit Soviet influence in the

Persian Gulf and the Yemens and is sensitive to any
threat to its trade route through the Gulf of Aqaba.

military aircraft regularly use Aden airport to patrol I

the Indian Ocean, and Soviet warships from the
Indian Ocean Squadron make regular use of Aden
port and of the anchorage at South Yemen's Socotra
island. In Ethiopia, Soviet aircraft use Asmara for
reconnaissance flights, and the Soviet Navy regularly
visits Dahlak island in the southern Red Sea. Soviet
warships transit the Suez Canal en route between the
Mediterranean and the Indian Ocean. This continu-
ous land, air, and naval presence stands in contrast to
the Soviet failure to develup a comparable presence in
or around the entrance to the Persian Gum!

The Soviets could substantially improve their overall
military posture in this region by introducing relative-
ly small numbers of men in selected types of military
units. The deployment of two or three Soviet squad-
rons of combat aircraft to Ethiopian or South Yemeni

? For regional reactions to the Tripartite Pact. see SNIE 34/76.1-81
—a-November 1981, The Libyan-Ethiopian-South
ement Pact: Short-Term Prospects

of

Most dramatic, Iraq has been forced to recognize
common security interests with its traditional rivals,
the moderate Arab countries. Even though .‘raq does
not border on the Red Sea, its war with Iran has made
the Red Sea an important alternative route for ex-
ports and imports. Baghdad has received large quanti-
ties of civilian and military supplies from Jordanian
and Saudi Red Sea ports and is pursuing several road
and rail projects—as well as the oil pipeline—across
Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Syria. No matter how the
war ends, !raq will still have to contend with its
longstanding strategic problem—lIran's ability to cut
Iraq's trade lifeline through the Persian Gulf and
Strait of Hormuz. These military and economic incen-
tives for rapprochement with the moderate Arabs
coincide with an estrangement from the USSR—
prompted by the Soviet cutoff of supplies to Iraq
during the war as well as Iraqi worry over Soviet
expansionism in the region—and from the radical
Arab states—which refused to support Iraq, a fellow
Arab country, against Inn

2

LRSM CAEN CAR EEE NET

\,
fe

aa Sa

EMAAR RTF

rf
)

OER

Me whe

ay

nih

a
(2

"Soviet Tactical Air Coverage Wag tits onget
‘From Selected Airflelds in Ethiopia and South Yemen

ne 4? -
AIA Nh alten reat
rhe Lethe

f ")
7

age ty
*)

B Pin

ee

JINOTAN - OCEAN ra

te
od

es

i
4

NAH

Cs
620706 12-4t

SAM

si

BPE eae ew eS
Tete Sree See ea

 Mititary ‘Adeadtages of Rezional Caeaaiioa oe
*. Regional cooperation would offer important military —

_ Israeli attack across the Sinai and a potential Libyan Obstacles to Regional Arab Cooperation .
. thrust from the west, Egypt has little available to Two maior political obstacles would make it diffi cult”

‘Saudi Arabia could also strengthen air defense of the

~Iraq—as well as on discussions with the United
benefits to cach country, particularly Egypt and ~ . States, whose personne! mal remain on the AWACS,
Saudi Arabia. All of the Arab countries involved wish
to limit Soviet and radical activity. At the same time, : .
separate military problems make the Red Sea only a - . The military and fi cadictal strains of the war with Iran |
secondary consideration for each of them aaa |.» mean that for the foreseeable future Iraq is unlikely to.

boo “2 'rs contribute perport for Red Sea security
With its major forces deployed to ae a pocential be :

guard Red Sea routes. Cairo has no plans fora strong to translate common security concerns into effective
naval presence in the Red Sea. Morcover, it lacks the regiona! cooperation untess Soviet and radical activity
capability to project or resupply forces over long appeared more sneeslenine than at present a
distances. Egypt would respond to Libyan adventur- :

ism abroad—such as an invasion of Sudan—mainly
by threatening a direct attack across the Egyptian-
Likyan border rather than by confronting piel ina
thitg country.|

Saudi Arabia and Iraq are
traditional rivals for influence in the northern Persian
Gulf. Riyadh took advantage of the Iran-Iraq war to -
Mea to rae Saudi Arsbia has concentrated on establish the Gulf Cooperation Council, which ex-
guarding its eastern borders;—through measures such cludes both Iran and Iraq. While the Saudis welcome
as formation of the Gulf Ccoperation Council and {raq’s increased economic ties with Riyadh and other
purchase of the US AWACS—it has indicated a moderate states, they are still uncertain about their
concern about its western seacoast by beginning con- long-term relations with Baghdad
struction of naval stations and ship repair facilities at
Jiddah on the Red Sea as well as at Jubayl on the
Gulf. Saudi oil revenues could help Egypt develop
sufficient forces to protect the Red Sea. The Saudis
presumably se the potentia: military advantages in
cooperating with Egypt in naval training and patrol-
ling, with Egypt concentrating on the northern half of
the Red Sea and Saudi Arabia—from its base at
Jiddah—concentrating on the southern half -

~
ys s

TRCN

ania

Py

southern Red Sea by shifting AWACS coverage from
the northeast approaches to the country to the south-
west approaches. Such a redeployment would be
supported by Oman, which nas long argued that
Soviet-backed South Yemen is the most serious threat
to the security of the Arabian peninsula. Any such
shift would depend on the course of the Iran-Iraq war Security cooperation could also be undercut by differ-

ences over the proper US military role in the region

: aera hoe pica gar part aaie a for Cairo and the related issue of the Arab-Israeli conflict.
to respond to a Libyan attack on sudan sending to artoum
two brigades of commandos and a squadron of MIG fighters Egypt—backed by Sudan—supports a US-sponsored

strategic consensus to limit Soviet influence. Both
countries favor a high level of US military aid and

HTS

We HRC RT A

EMM ALER BT

ot ot
Ke

bes

boop

_. , Participate in joint military exercises with th
4 States such as Bright Star 82. Cairo allows the United
"© States to preposition equipment in Egypt and has

t+

pushed for substantial US assistance in developing a
large military and communications facility at the Red
Sea port of Ras Banas, In effect, Egypt and Sudan |
argue that pro-Western countries need 3 US military

Ethiopia. Moreover, Cairo and Khartoum defend the
Camp David Accords, which help both ccuntries
cement their relationship with the United States and

which guarantee the return of the Sinai to Egypt yy

Jordan fears an attack from what it considers an
ir.creasingly aggressive Israel as much as it fears a

southern Red Sea basin. Amman's recent purchase of
air defense equipment from the USSR was designed
to introduce some balance into its arms supply rela-
tionship with the United States—both to avoid ori:
cism from radical Arab states and to avoid the
restrictions that the United States has placed on
deployment of weapons sold to Jordan gs

Iraq opposes a Western military presence in the
region because it aims at a leadership role in the Gulf,
the Arab world, and the Nonaligned Movement.
Riyadh, Amman, and Baghdad all charge that the
Camp David Accords cannot produce a comprehen-
sive Arab-Israeli peace settlement; all three countries
criticize Egypt for not Pushing Israel hard enough on
West Bank and Gaza autonomy

Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and even Iraq might cooperate |

with Egypt and Sudan if Soviet and radical activities
threatened their national interests directly. Such ac-
tions might include a major buildup of Soviet military
forces to crush a rebellion in South Yemen or Ethio-
pia or to threaten or Coerce states close to South

ie United Yenien or Ethiopi

a; & seizure of power by pro-Soviet
groups in Djibouti or North Yemen that threatened
radical control of the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb and
perhaps of the southern Red Sea; or an ouster of
Nimeiri and a turn to the left in Sudan py

Vit

Such developments could drive home to Riyadh,
‘Amman, and Baghdad their increasing stake in Red
Sea security and overshadow—at least for a time—
longstanding Arab rivalries. A dramatic change in the
Present regional balance of forces could lead Egypt
and Saudi Arabia to recall that they overcame earlier
antagonisms during the period between the war with

_ Israel in 1973 and the Camp David Accords in 1978.

Iraq has moved far cnough from its dogmatically

’ radical stance of the 1960s and early 1970s that

cooperation with Saudi Arabia and even with Egypt
against a common military threat seems plausible.
Baghdad has displayed its pragmatism by refraining
trom criticizing growing Omani Military ties with the
United States because Oman has Supported Iraq on
Several issues during the Iran-Iraq war

A small-scale regional precedent for Cooperation
among political rivals is the Gulf Cooperation Coun-
cil. In that case, the threat of the Iran-Iraq war and a
Series of Soviet advances in the region brought togeth-
er countries that differed as widely on foreign policy
as Oman and Kuwait and lessened—even if it did not
remove—the concern of the smaller Gulf countries
about potential Saudi dominance —

ftp ce

Ue hpi

‘

BY Aas

tI
x

“Ags,

Ye

Se Soy
Raaeeit

SAR SEF Be

n
:

ann:

RESP EAR TEI SF sas of

SON P EY UAE ARNG,

4
a

TREN RR MOAT TE ARERR NET A,

te att, tle

2.

rae

Du

+ awe cies ta
aera

‘a

PE Ate te
w *

om,

ae Saudi Arabia

@. Soviet port facility
Ax Soviet sicfistd

a Soviet anchorage facility es aN ae
(2) usv/French port facility : a aDablek is.
_ Aarnare ¢ ee

AN US/Franch airtield an
<} Indigenous naval base : [- :

: i =e = : t
As Indigenous airfield a inex EAR A oe Socote Is_,.
A Selected oil refinery a \* Babel Manded (S. Yemen}

tm Selected tanker terminal

om Selected oilfield

r=) Treaty of Friendship and
Cooperation with USSR

poe Somalia =

63078? 12-8)

:

{

say

A

rye

eres Bey
is Spee lee
’ : P%22

ri

=
