The Situation and Short Term Outlook in Laos
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028780, dated 2 November 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028780).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SNIE 68-60
6 December 1960

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 68-60

hthisthssnnbdnintasldamshan, ¢ anamindnbidiabardther ene Te

THE SITUATION AND SHORT-TERM
_ OUTLOOK IN LAOS

Ses Submitted by the”

© DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

ee The jzNowing “intelligence organizations: part:cipated in the

27, Preparation of th:s estimate: The Central Intel:oence Agency
oS and the. inteliicence - organizatic-s of the Departments of
= | : State: the Army: the Navy, the Aur Force, The Joint Stag, NSA,

a
#
Paes
acemanens

Uo ane the: Department of Defense: . .

;  Concurredin by the
UMITED STATES INTELLIGENCE. BOARD.
on € December 3929. Concurring were the Director of Intelli-
gence ond Research, Department of State; the Assistant chies
uf Stes jor Patetigence. Department of the Arriy; the Assist.
unt Chie, of Naral Operations tinte-agence+, Department of
the Navy: the Assistant Chicf of Sta%. ditelzigence, USAF;
the Director for Intcligence. Juint Steff: the Asstitant to
ay : the Secretary of Detense, Special Operations: end the Director
=, Of tre. National Security Agency. The Atomic Eneroy Corns
mrssion Representanre to the USIB. and the Assistant Di-
RPPROVED FoR RELEASE 7 rector. Federal Bureau ct Ini estgation, costamed, the subjsect
c 2 6 JUN 1985 = being ouiside of their jurisdiction
: DATE = -nennnnnnmnn nn

melease

ane

Approyes. %

Date

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was dicsrminarcd by the Contral Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the imturmation and use ot the recipient and of. persone under his jurisdiction en
@ med to know basis. Additional essential di. s2:mination my be aut: orzed by the
following O.4clals Within thar respective departcnis.

. Director of Intelligence and Researel., for the Depaitment of State

. assistant Chict o1 Stet icr dk: uelligence, Department of the Army

- Assistant Chief of Naval Operations: AIMICESOnEC) for the Department of
the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Dey artment of the Air Force

- Diicctor for Intelligence, Joirt Sta‘t, for ‘rhe Joint Staff

. Director cf Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g- Assistant Director, FEI, for the Fececral Bureau of. Investigation
é “ent to the Secretary of. Defense, Special Operations, for the Department
Ol ..-.2ense
Dire OF of NSA for the National Security Agency
Assistant Director. for ‘Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. . This = copy may be retained d. oF destroyed. the bitaing | in accordance with applicable:

al Intelligence Agency by arrangemciit with,

satitenena tenn baton ek te oy

c Grerseas recipients may rere ain

22 June 1933. es ee :
4. The title of this Slee rhen used separately from the text, should be class,ticd:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY... ee eee

ARNING

au ontains information affectins

mal Deferse cof the United Stites

Of the és spuonace laws,

; 93nd G54. the. trans-~
mission: or reve! tation of, Whsch in any monner
to an: urs uthor.ced. person ': prohibited by law.

ts

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

ssationsi Besun co Ceouney
Department cf te
Department cf Se
Operaticas Cocre: nating Boarc”
Aconvic Eneres Cemmission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

THE SITUATION AND SHORT-TERM OUTLOOK IN LAOS

THE ESTIMATE

!. THE SITUATION

1. Laos has never ocen a national entity gov-
erned by sure and united authority. Its
people lack a sense of national lovalty and
identity and they continue to be divided by
traditional ethnic, regional. and family an-
tagonisms. A guli has alwa\s existed be-
tween the central government in Vientiane
and the people in the countryside, and those
who have governed Laos have never _estab-
lished effective uuthority: or. won the respect
of all of the various peoples who make up
the Laotian nation. The! So

munist left. As a result. no strong. effective
nor-Communist leadership: has emerged since
Laos achieved independence. These funda:
mental weaknesses in tne pelitical and social
fabric of Laos have been brought again to the
surface and accentuated since Kong Le seized
control of Vientiane in ‘early. August. In-
deed. developments since the coup were made
possible. almost inevituble. by the incol:crent
nature of the country: its leaders. and «its
people. “his chaos has “been ‘compounded
by contradictory and inconsistent’ Western
counse' and by the wide attraction of neu-
trahsm. however vaguely understood. among
many Laotians.

2. The principal political elements in Laos.
aside from the Communist-dominated Pathct
Lao—the Souvanna Phouma government in
Vientiane. the Revolutionary’ Committee set
up by Phcumi and Boun Oum at: Savanna-
khet, and King Savang atthe roval cay ital of
Luang Prabane— have been unwilling to work
together.

on-Communist po-; -
litical factions have never achieved: unity or

cohesion and have tended to view one-another:
with as much suspicion as they do the Com:

Alone none of them has the {fol-'

lowing, the natioral status. and the military
strength lo contain the Pathet. Lao. The
Lactian Army. spread thin in small atten iso-
lated units. has been uncertain in its joyal-
ties. A majority of the commanders Jean to
Phormi and the Revolutionary Committee
athough some still support Souvanna’s pov-
ernment. Others seek to maintain a neutral
position in the strugcle among the non-Com-
munist factions. Few of them, however, ap-
pear willing to fight one another. Some com-
manders are anti-Pathet Lao and ready to do
battle with that enemy.

3. Under cover of the <onfusion, and. taking
advantage of both the stalemate among the

-non-Commmunist elements and the desire. “if

Souvanna and Kong Le for a negotiated end
to ‘the ‘civil conflict. the Pathet Lao have
steadily improved their political and malitary
positions. Thus. Kone Le's act of mutiny
set'in-m ‘ion.a-chain of events in Laos whicn
could lead to the country's departure from its
western orientation and its entry into the
Communist orbit.

4. Kong Le’s mutiny and its aftermath have
also had decp repercussions in Southcast Asia,
particularly in Thaijand and South Viernam
Thailand's Prime Minister, Sarit. is con-
vinced that cithtr a Communist takeover or
the estabushment of a neutralist, coalition
Bovernment in Laos would seriously threaten
Thai security. Either development, he feels,
would dancerously expose his co antry to Com-
munist infiltration. subversion, and attack,
and would generaic strong pressures inside
Thailand for a more neutralist policy, More-
over. he believes it would unccurmine his own
personal position. He almost certainly views
US policy in the Leotian crisis as providing a

Gena 2

demonstration of whut support he could ex-
pect from the US if a Communist coup
against his government were to occur. Thus
far, be has been most Jisiliusioned by US pol. cy
in the Laotian crisis, feeling it to be inde-
Cisive and umbiguous.

5. As a result of the cevelopments .in Laos
and the 1] November coup attempt in Saigon,
Pre-ident Diem of South Vietnam probably has
lost some of his confidence an US will sness
to support fuiiy his anti-Communist pusition.
He may believe that. the Saigon coup effort
Was at lust partly stimulated by Kong Le’:
coup and the ‘ailure of the US -to extend
General Pou: | full and immediate support.
Moreover, these events, coming on the heels
of US efforts to convince him to hold less
lightly the reigns of power in his own gov-
ernment. have prcvably further underminca
his vonfidence in US judgment... From Diem’‘s
POINt Of view, an anti-Con.:nunist: Laos pro-
vides sume shield against a North Vietnamese
attack. and southern Laos::atleast.- must <be

cally exposing his own borders ‘to
and attack. See Ga ae

the Pathet Lao.

7. Souranna. Compared with other Laotian

politicians. Souvanna -has:-considerable per-
sonal prestige and appeal among the. peoples
of Laos. He is stili Prime Minister, but tc
controls no organized ‘political apparatus, he
Jacks administrative contro of the country-
side and command ef the Laotian military,
and he is not trusted by the King. A quorum
of the National Assembiy. chosen. in highly
corrupt elections in May. iof 1960. remains in
Vientiane. but almost certainly a number
of its members, if {ree of duress. would Oppose
Souvanna cr defect te the Phoumi froup.

8. Souvanna is neutralist and leftist. but we
do not believe that he is a Communist. Sou-
vanua’s leadership qualities are weakened by
his impulsiveress, willful disregard of un-

pleasant facts, and over-weaning = self-confi-
dence. particularly with regard to his ability
to deal with and control the Pathet Lav. He
believes most of the Pathct Lav to ve patrivts
who. once reintegrated into Lavtian pohtival
and social iife. would lose their Communis!
coluration. Those few hardcore types who
would remain Cor.munists, he states. could
be kept in check. Accordingly, the only fea-
Sible solution for Laos. im Souvanna’‘s mint
is a negotiated settlement with the Pathet
Lao along the lines of the 1957 agreement,
and. a neutra! foreign policy. Souvanna is
moving Laos in the drection that he has
mairtaimed for several years it should move.
Howrver, we believe that it is moving at 2
faster pace than Souvanna would cou.rte-
nance if he were master of his government
and free from the pressures Kong Le and the
Patnet Lao exert on fim in Vientiane.

9. Early in the ersis, Souvanna apparently

had hcped to stren2then his negouatiny pusi-
; tion vis-a-vis the Pathet Lao. He was unable
Ker in anti-Communist hands to/aveid enti:
nfiitration.--

lo use Kong Leto this end because Kong Lr

" tended’'to: be. more-amenab'e to the Pathet
-Lto than to Souvanna: Atone time Souvanna

probably believed that a combination of Kong

“Le and: Pathet Lao military pressure on the
*-one-haad-and US political pressure on Phoumi

on ‘the other, would force the latter to capitu-
late, thus resturing ~ his government's au-
thority over the troops and areas controtied by
the Revolutionary: Committee. Although he
has attempted to open negotiations with the
Boun Oum-Phoumi Group, his conditions have
been unattractive to Phoumi. and, at times,
seemed: to be -calculated insults. Recently
Souvanns -has attempled to strengthen his
Position by recruiting several new battalions
of troops in Vientiane. However, these units
are probably infiltrated by the Pathet Lao.

10. Suuvanna also hoped to win over the
troups in the Luang Prabang area which had
attempted to maintain a neutral position.
However, this hope was dashed by the pro-
Savannakhet coup of 10 November and the
Subseque:.t defection of Generat Ouan to Sa-
vannarnet. This was a serious biow to Sou-
Vanna. and he attempted to compensate for
it by drawing closcr to the Communists: in

A siehaabihegis near meena ee ee

both the domestic and international spheres

On 17 November, his government anc thy
Communist Neo Lao Hak Xat announced an
agreement to establish a) national coalition
sovernment including representatives of the
LHX. The agreement. also provided that
the government would: soon aceept aid trom
Co:mnmiut ist China and’ North Vietuam and

would send a delegation to thuse countries.

to negotiate for exchange of economic and
eultural relations. for the re-establishme mtoo.
telecomr-nnications with North: Vietuam, and
for the immediate opening of. the Laos-Chins
border, On 29 November. ‘Souvranna’s cavinet
named a 10-man fnendship: mission. herded
by the Prime Minister.-for a. visit to Poiping
and Hanoi beginning 10 December. Leliverics
of Sovict food and POL to Vientiane have be-
fun and uw 3-man. Sov ist: Enmibassy stat has
taken up residence in Vientiane.

1. Thus, Souvanna now relies Very heavily
Hpen the support of pro-Communist and Kong

Le clements. Ht apptals: that this. will-con-)
linuc, and ihat as oppesit on: toc hira mounts. “bel
he will keep on secking broader: and more eG

specific support fr ont
Souvanna probably st

measures 16 protect }

closer to ihe Communists-are: irrexe ble. and os

most, if not al. of them’ h:

Savoraule to fiure Cummunist. domination of

the Vientiane Government.
12. Phoumi. The position ‘of Phoumi,. ana

of the Revolutionary Committee He-has. ‘set:
up with Boun Oum, has’a Number Of serious:
weaknes:es In southern | ‘Laos. ‘there. -are’

about 7.500 combat troops, most of whom are
under commanders »robably loval ta Phoumi.
Most of ‘these troops are. scattered widely
through the area. and: have their hands. full
attempting to cope with Jocal Pathet Lao
activitics. In the Thakhet-Savannakhet are,
Piioumi h.s about 1.500. troops: He is in
the process of reerunting and organizing an
additional battanon. (It is unliz ely. that
Phoumi‘s troops without continued US assist-
ance could or would offer very strong or effec:
live resistance to a determined attack on their
positions by Vientiane and Pathet ‘Lae forces.

3

i3. Phoumi's military capabilities have mark-
taly increased since he received addstional
US aid and moral support. Moreover, the pro-
Savannakhet coup of 10 November in Tuang
Prabang greatly improved Phoumi'’s nuhtary
and political positions. Nearly all the com-
manders in the Luang Prabang region have
pledged their support to him. Several small
units operating. against the Pathet Lao in
Sam Neus are being supplied by Phoumy and
are probably responsive to his Huidance.
Phoumi is nandicapped. however, by poor
communications with these units, In Xiong
Khouans, the mihtant. Meo tribesmen are
be.ag supplied with arms by Phoumi and are
curiently conducting effective anti-Pathet Lao
operations.

1. The Revclutionary” Committee probably
has. some political appeal im southern Laos.
Boun Oum is a.member of the Royal Family
of Champassak. which ruled southern Laos

- Until Laos was united by the French fotlow-
ing the Second World: War. However. we

Ahat _Boun Oum: and Phoumi: Jack
‘appeal outside othe south.
fp c. tige amony both political

“and: military, leaders:in Lacs as a result.of the
Kong Le- coup has becn ‘only. partially made
cup: by: the Luang. Prabang coup and General
Ouzn's uefection. Moreover, Phoumi has in
the past proved to be an undependable and.
at. times. careless mili! ary leader, highly am-
ditious: ‘and opinionated.

15. Proumi's motivations: in the present. sit-
uation are: probably i. combinatien of per-
sonal pridé“and anti-Communist convictions.
He is frustrated ‘y what he ‘believes ta be
inadcquate US. support and oan ambiguous
US policy. Hewever. he probably has never
intended to come fo terms with Souranna
and -probably ‘has felt that the US would,
in the final analysis, support him. He would
like to retake Vientiane by force and almost
cerainiy has plans. for such an operation,

16. King Sarang. The King appears io have
no personai courage. He has been extreme Ww
earciul to stay within constitutional limits
and he has never asserted. openly and clearly,
his potential authonty and influence. Al-
though it is quite clear that he distr: -ts

Souvanna an-t desires Souvanna‘s resignation,
thus far he has been unwilling to take any
Overt steps to this end. Thke Revolutionary
Committce at Savannakhet received the
King’s private approval. and the 10 November
conp in Luang Prabang probably had his
blessing. al:nough thus far he has been care-
ful to avoid associuting himself with either.
It is possible what the King has played a sig-
nificant: behind-the-scenes role in the anti-
Souvauna plotting. and maneuvering. It is
unlikely, however. that he will openly take
@ strong personal stand. or one which he
believes would endanger the position of ihe
monarchy.

17. Kong Le. There is Some. circumstantial
evidence that Kong Le may have. piotted hts
coup with Souvanna. . However: Kong Le's
August revolt apparently was conceived anc,
executed on very shert. notice, and: it may
have been a decision made: primarily by Kong
Le himself.
largely by pe sonal grievances: rising from
the way in which his 2nd. Paratro
jon—the best combat

armed forces—had be

the revolt has assume.

“ propertic>> NG

opencd up ramifications w ich Kons <3 cae
ich hee an

ably did not anticipate-an ch
yond his ability to cope with: He has now

becoine so implicated with Souvanna and ‘he

Pathet Lao that he probably cannot turn back.
Although there have been some. indications
that his control over his troops has been weak-

ened. Kong Le is still an-important element |

in th> situation and could still raliy a consid-
erable nu.iber of troops to his personal com-
mand.

18. The role of Korg Le with respect to the
activitic> of the Souvarna government is not
clear. Until recently, it appcared that ue ex-
ercised a veto power over those political and
military decisions of the Souvanna govern.
ment which he considered. important to him.
Now, however, it appears that his direct intlu-
ence on the government is being usurped by
the Pathet Lao. Although Kong Le has lim-
ited Souvanna's {recdom of action, it is also
clear that Souvanna has used ‘Kony Le.

He probably was motivated:

12. Shortly after the coup, Kong Le eritacally
comproraised his position with respect to the
Pathe? Lao wher he distributed the arms
Stored in Vientiane to villagers, including
many Pathet Lao, in the surrounding area.
Although he probably did this to buiid
Strength — .ainst a possible attack from Luang
Prabant .nd Savannakhet. once the arms
were distributed his favorable balance of mili-
tary power in the Vientiane area vis-a-vis the
Pathet Lao was Jost. Whatever his own wishics
may have been. Kong Le has become inervas-
ingly a capt.ve of the Pathct Lao. If Suu-
Vanna were to lose out and an anti-Pathet
Lao government take over, Kong Le would
probably join the Pathet Lao.

20. The Pathet Luo. The hand of the Pathet

Lao has been strengthened: greatly by events
since the Keng Le coup. Any figures cone-rn-
ing the strength of their armed gucrriflas are
highly sy-eculative. It 1s almost certain that

“their number as: higher. tran at any tame in

the past. We estimate ihcir present strength

woto.- bec between. 4.000. and 8.000.. They have
obtained considerable. arms. and ammunition
from Korg Le‘and as a resuit cf captarimy
~ equipment during the rout of Phoutui's forces

at Paksane. and ‘their defeat and disarming
of the Sx: Neua garrison. They" probably

have been reinforced by — cadres recentiv

trained. in. North Vietnam,.and they probably
have concentrated increasing nisnbers of
troops in the areas around Vientiane. Thakhet-
Savannakhet. Phong Saly, and Luang Pra-

bang. The Pathet ao and Vientiane forces
‘in the Vientiane areca are deployed cin such

a manner as to either desend or attack the
city. and the forces facing Phoumi alone the
Nam Ca Dinh line are of ‘both Pathet Lav
and Vientiane units. At present. anti-Pathei
Lao operations are going on only in Phong
Saly and Xieng Khouang. :

2i. The Pathet Lao. probably view the devel-
oping situation as a goiden opportunity cither
to force acceptance of their participation in
the sovernment and their forcign policy de-
mands, or to seize control of Laos by armed
acticn if they conclude that they can do so
quickly and without risking outside mterven-
tion. We do not belicve that the Pathet Lac—

ov Peiping and Hanoi—are likely to Jet this
opportunity pass The longer the present cri-
sis continues. the beiter the Pathet Lao will
be ab‘e to consolidate their political and mili-
tary positions. a

22. They would prefer to Bain their objectives
through negotiations and politicai action te-
cae this would reduce ‘the chances of out-
Side intervention. Events since the Kong Le
coup have moved along lines favorable t« such
tactics They have profited greatly irom dis-
unity among the nen-Communist political and
mililary leaders. Moreover, they hold Vien-

tiane virtually a hostage and have bccn able

to exert considerable leverage on Souvani.a
and Kong Le, and Quinim, the reost influen-
tia] member of the government. after Sou-
vanna himself, has apparentiy become tcir
tool.

23. ANhongh Pathet Las-tactics have empta-
sized negotiations. psychological. pressures,
and political action, they have maintained a
fairly high level of military pressure on- the

Laolian armed forces and havé built up their.
areas. This puts |
"Was the‘legal head-of the gL

“the-other hand, Souvanria were forced out by

@uerrilla strength in key. ai
ihem in a favorable position: to.
large parts of the country:

points as Lvang Prabang. Savannaki.et. the.

Phong Saiy. If tne Pathet Lao were to cxeri
their full guerrilla warfare capabilities: the
Laotian armed forces, in their-present disor-
Banized condition, probably could nc. revent
the loss of large parts of the country. “°° and
a number of key towns:

It. POSSIBLE FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

24. If present trends continue. the situation
in Laos will remain one ‘or confusion, driit.

and disintegration. Ulimately this wuuld
probably result in the fragmentation of the
country, with the Communists. supported by
the Bloc, assuniing control over most of the
north and the Revolutionary Committee at-
tempting to set up a separate: state in the
south. Witrout large amounts of outside as-
Sistance. a separate southern. Laos probably
would not survive for long.

25. We believe it more likely. however. that
the pace of events will quicken over the next

5

few weeks ar’t. barring a quick victory by the
Paoumi ferees, that the situation either wil
move to: ard some form of political settlement
or will acyenerate into widespread civil war.
Although a puiitical settlement based on a
compromise agreement betwee the Vientiane
and Savannakhiet groups may still b> pessible,
we belive that odds are against it. Souvanta
and Phoumi are not hkely to find mutually
acceptable terms for cooperation at this late
point in tacir conflict. Any negotiations held
between them are not likely to te con-
cucted in pood faith. Althougii it is con-
ceivable that the King might be induced to
exert more influence than he has in the past,
we do not believe he can be induced to take
personal charge of the situation. Morcover,
wt do not believe that Souvanna is like: y to
resign voluntarily. If an effort is made to
upset his government by calling a special
mecting of the National As.cmbly in Luang
Prabang to pass a 10-confidence motion, Sou-
vanna could maintain that the dcputies and
the King. as. prisoners of rebel furces, were

acting under duress. He could declare their
~actiilegal atu i: valid. and maintain that he

enki on

political pressures, the Pathet-Lao would prob-
aly step up sharply ‘their mihtary activity.

- Consequently. it is. probable that any politi-

cal ‘measures to oust Souvanna will be inef-
fectual unless enforced by military means.

26. Thus. we believe that Laos is heading to-
ward civil war. with supporters of the Sou-
vanna government—primarily the Pathet Lac
and the followers of Kong Le—on one side
and anti-Pathet Lao elements and supporters
of the Savannakhct group on the cther. The
conflict could b2 triggered by a Phoumi at-
tack on Vi-ntiane or by a Souvanna or a
Kong Le-Puthet Lao att:.ck on Luang Prabang.
Both sides have major problems of loxistics,
com...unications, and transport. The strug-
gle would probably be one of widely-scattercd.,
small-unit operations in which the Staving
power. the iraining. and the relatively shorter
Supplv lines from North Vietnam would give
the Pathet Lao guerrillas an advantage.
Withou’. extensive ovtside assistance, the
Phoumi forces would probably soon collapse.

‘eaving Che country open to carly domination
by the Communists.

27. If no political settlement is reached be-
tween Phourii and Scurvanna, the US may
seen be faced wiih the: following. situations:
(a) A Scuvanna solution, which would gravely
risk ultimate Communist’ supremacy. This
Would iovalve serious adverse conscquences
for the US position in Southeast. Asia, and
ose: the longer run. would greatly facilitate
Com™unist subversion. infiltration. and ex.
pansion in Southeast Asia.

strengthen the SEATO
Communist aggression:

cal and social probams of Laos will remain
and, as a result of recent events, will prob-
ably br more acute than before Pathet Luo
srmed strength will be greater and more
Communist footholds established in villages
throughout the country. Solutions to the
fundamental problems. if indeed there are
solutions. can be worked out only over a
long period of time. Meanwhile, the urgent
ibreats of the Pathct Lao on one hand and
the centrifuga! force of non-Communist dis-
Unity on the other. will operate against the
solution of long-term problems.

29. Consequently, we believe that any non-
Communist government assumung “ower in
the wake of the present crisis would. in time,
face very heavy pressure to move toward a
Neutralist position and Pathet Lay integra-
tion into the p- cal life of the country, or
face the likelihow of the situation gravitating
again toward civ.l war. 1U will be extremely

_diMcult: for the nen-Communist leaders. of
~ Laos to resist this pressure ana- to- contain

crisis: by--a-*°

Political settlement. the fundamental politi-

the Pathet: Lao unless: they develop.a much
greater degree of unity. determination, and

ationalism than they have in the past, take
€fiective measures: to! wii the loyaity or tne
“peoptes of Laos, aid receive extensive outside
assistance to this.end.

ieorerT™

ears

~
:

tava. \ 4 jos ta b.
pale eee Rete: Be we ne
TE re ye Og rows
