Prospects for Indonesia and Malaysia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012243, dated 4 June 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012243).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

| ON bt tet
' ( 4
hy ak ig ioluagat | | july 1964

Joate oo { ae eo oy | Z
nae i Wage
M,

Ade +

HOE bere y : Sind

_ : ; : . ; ‘ {. tne 4 hry ; ' } it) ,

= ‘ ey os - : a : Poni tie pd 2 >

eer NATIONAL, INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE, :

eR Aa 65.

ee re 1 : as

: tye '

‘ FIA ae

J Shes

G eh
; Ve
f

RA nag |
pit

4 ob is tl
yt “y i ‘ ri 4
aly yy tui Poy
tae ys * q A, ¢
4 veh Aa My My ft ’ {7 \
a v tM

s nf ie f
4 f : |

ee i i in r
oe oe gi
an ni ' yet baie ne ¢t
Ar AN Ach

Mei | j
a SAG =I,
Lesh deal Udit
se ear i

i y
oe STATES!

v aan ‘:

aM itil

sey we ce

ie u

Realy

a bk sth
a *

ak
i He N

nae oe

oe sae

1A ape,
eect ¥

ay hit
Ue a

‘ aRNTRG
Non enss

hah

te ra pe
way fatal 7
za Ait a
ce oie

Pha I nA mine 14

“hay ten oe hfs

aaa

ab eee ae bl adden ated

ve me é eo

oe : :
; %. " . 7 . .
oe ae Ihe following titelhqence organizations patti rpated: ut Ihe preperation of
he phe this estimate:
{ar Aprhp a in Pye , ; .
a vhs wee bee Ihe Canotral ditelpence Agen y Gat the uitebbepenn a Gagan ccd len vA the Degocut
a iy | - ’ oe '
i oe nents of Slate, Pafemse, and HLA

ne Concurring:

\ Dieeetor of batelliqenca ciel Rescareh, Deporment of Stile

"Director, Vatense tntellygenca Aqene y to ;
oe yea ol the National Sen uyly Agymuncy bog ea ; : poet Me ae ini
ae ey wha ¥ : ‘ ; a Sh A Oa! es : : fins bt :
: oe oe ' + : ey bs t B : a 7 + I me ‘
‘ eed toe a! : ‘ a ‘ase Sah gota o
“the Neue {nevay ( iin@iaaienn Representative Wo, ihe USIB ancl the Asousteni lo here oc. ,

Director, badaral Burecu ol lnivestnyetion, the slip! Fem oupida af than”

j
o qurisdictron.

: 1
a : sell : a ee — ei oe cog toed a t i
BAD eae dah ed PE ae gan A eee a Fe Ste EP es .
‘ : . ees fe ie
: : ‘ ‘ , : ut. ’ ye ae
elie eee i Pai, ag eo
ype hy poate, Agee ee
,

pe 3 tatoaint Ca
ras es i Yee bh tea
o ey ao Pera

Pe Det

“an J oe agate Be f

: PRK Kt nC

ae ee aa thas! sobs Vitae oa
Cane ya in is "i i An his he a ' Ng pyet i‘
MH, Bact ‘ ‘ on ee ae at ore ,

ee re ann es ) 4h visite hy’ ie mM WN i eet Chee ,

aed rw Saas yale

eyes (i! 5 j

4
nes

ue ee :

Atse
ir we

Eph
hoy we i he

eu he “
seed .
o ,

i
tin aan 4

rae

Riv iN ie ny

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 54/55-65

Prospects for Indonesia and Malaysia

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Puge
THE PROBLEM ............ dtd Diciticdetre tel  ahareats® ae ol
CONCLUSIONS ..... . a ee ee ree |
DISCUSSION we ne 3
I] INDONESIA .......... Sieh hee Sy ee ee 3
A. Introduction —... fie . 3
B. Domestic Trends and Prospects. oa. ae . 3
C. Foreign Policy Trends and Prospects ids chess - an)
I]. MALAYSIA |... Lief othe RG omtey al
A. Introduction ...... =... SO a bi |
B. Domestic Trends and Prospects hic Be Ge = . dl

C. Foreign Policy Trends and Prospects : 13

.

PROSPECTS FOR INDONESIA
AND MALAYSIA

THE PROBLEM

To examine the domestic political situation and foreign policy
trends in Indonesia and Malaysia, and to estimate the prospects of
both countries and the probable course of their conflict with one
another over the next vear or so.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The principal development in Indonesia over the past year has
been the sharply accelerated growth of the Communist Party (PKI)
role in government. This trend is likely to continue as long as Sukarno
is in contral. Opponents of this trend are discouraged and intimi-
dated; even the military has all but lost the will to resist. The longer
Sukarno lives, the better will be the PKI chances of maintaining or
improving its position following his death. (Paras. 2-11)

B. Sukarno’s campaign to destroy Malaysia, now in its third year,
will almost certainly continue at varying levels of intensity. There
is little prospect of an Indonesian military victory and Sukarno knows
it. This realization has led him to denounce and harass the entire
Western presence in Southeast Asia, and indeed in the Afro-Asian
world. (Paras. 14-16, 21)

C. We look for a continuation of Indonesia's hostile attitude toward
the US, though chances are less than even that Sukarno will go so tar
as to break diplomatic relations. Ties with Communist China are
likely to become closer, since Sukarno sees no immediate Chinese
threat to Indonesian ambitions. The desire of the Indonesian military
to continue receiving Soviet arms aid will probably induce Sukarno
to maintain relatively friendly relations with the USSR. (Paras. 17-23)

LCL )

——

D. If Sukarno dies or becomes incapacitated in the next year or
so, the immediate successor government would probably be an osten-
sibly non-Communist coalition. The military would almost certainly
exercise greater authority than at present. but would be unlikely to
risk civil war to initiate a roll back of the Communists. Indeed. the
Communists are already so entrenched that they could probably not
he denied an important share in any successor government. ( Paras.

12-13)

E. In Malaysia, existing political and racial frictions will intensify,
but even if no settlement is achieved, we do not believe that this will
lead to a breakup of the federation during the period of this estimate.
The subversive threat to Malavsia is unlikely to bring down the present
regime unless it is significantly weakened hy Indonesian actions on a
scale which we consider improbable. (Paras. 24-33)

F. Malaysia is totally dependent on British military support and
its foreign policy is closely allied to that of the UK and its Common-
wealth partners.

: rt will probably prove‘adequate to cope with likely
Indonesian actioas and to deter Sukarno from substantially bolder
aguression.

| ( Paras, 34-36)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

DISCUSSION

I. INDONESIA

A. Intreduction

1. The principal development in Indonesia over the past vear, overshadowing
the effort to “crush” Malaysia. has heen the sharply accelerated growth of the
Communist role in government under the sponsorship of President Sukarno, — This
trend has taken on even greater significance because of Sukarno’s declining health.
Meanwhile. “Confrontation,” though it continues to dominate Indonesian foreign
policy, has become only one aspect of a broadened Indonesian campaign to
remove Western influence fram Southeast Asia, Pursuit of this objective has
drawn Indonesia into informal alliance with Communist China.

-1 Sukarno has alsa

chosen to withdraw from the UN and to plan for the esta lishment of a com- 1.3(a)(4)(5)
peting “Conference of the New Emerging Forces" —CONEFO—to rally Com-

mumist or any other sympathetic nations and groups ina crusade against Western

influence throughout the Afro-Asian world.

B. Domestic Trends and Prospects

2. Trends. Sukarno has heen Indonesia's leader for 20 vears, and for several
vears his rule has been virtually unchallenged. Nevertheless, until about a year
ago, Sukarni——despite a growing predilection for Communist terminology and
for extreme leftist patterns of government activity—-moved very slowly in’ ex-
panding the role of the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) in his administration.
He was restrained by the Indonesian military leadership and. to a lesser extent.
ae requirements of public opinion, particularly among conservative Muslims.

—

3, Acceleration of the pace of Communist gains over the past vear is attribut- 4.3(2)(4)(5)
able primarily to the erasion of the military's will to resist Sukarno’s e croachmentg,
It is also related to Sukarno’s abandonment of earlier hapes fort
assistance in the dispute with Malaysia. Sukarno’s declining health may have
made him feel a need for haste in pressing taward that “transition to the socialist
stage” which he desires for Indonesia, The health problem has also intensified
political infighting in which the PKI has succeeded in improving its position.

4. Only a vear or so ago. the major political function of the PKI appeared
to be to provide agitprop support for Sukarno's varied domestic and foreign
campaigns. Today. crypta-Cammunists or pra-Communists hold several im-
portant ministries: the provincial governorships af Greater Djakarta. North
Sumatra. and Bali: and several important municipal posts. notably the mayor-
alties of Medan and Surahaja. PRE representation on local governing bodies

r

LL

throughout Indonesia has also increased aver the past vear. The quasi-olficial.
all-embracing National Front is now almost completely dominated by the PRI.

3 The Communists, with Sukarnos encouragement, have ulso demonstrated
power and audacity

The Communist program of “unilateral” land reform (ie. seizure
of land by the peasants) has become more blatant and widespread, despite
opposition by local Mustim and nationalist groups and the police.

6, Meanwhile, the political fortunes of anti-PKI elements have deteriorated.
Two of Indonesia's most prominent non-Communist politicians. Adam Malik
and Deputy Prime Minister Saleh, have had their once substantial administrative
responsibilities severely curtailed. Saleh’s primary political base. the once
powerful “Generation of “45,” has heen taken away from him; and Malik’s in-
fuential leftist (but anti-PKT) Murba Party has heen outlawed. Factionalism
in the large Nationalist Party is at its peak, and the party's left wing has become
little more than an echo of the PKI. Perhaps most important, Sukarno has
made anti-communism virtually a crime in Indonesia: the non-Communist press
is almost completely silenced or intimidated, and teachers and public officials
are compelled ta pay at least lip service to the tenets of Marxism-Leninism as
expounded hy Sukarno.

7. The military leadership continues to hold considerable political power
throughout Indonesia, but gver the past several years has retreated from the
strong anti-PKI position it once held. [t has given in to Sukarno on several
important issues. For example. the Army has begun arming and training limited
numbers of “peoples’ militia.” a program it has lang resisted; and Indonesian
military strategy is now based an the assumption that the Western “imperialists.”
rather than the Communist Chinese, ure the likely enemy. The military schools
have also revised their general curricula, by injecting Communist doctrine into
many subjects. Thus far, the military leadership has responded equivocally
to proposals by the PKI and Sukarno to give the Communists a policy-making
function in the defense establishment, a move which would quickly vitinte the
military's anti-PKI potential.

8. The military leadership is constrained to follow Sukarno because of its
heavy dependence on his personal favor for privileged and often profitable
positions, and because it views Sukarno as essential to national unity. The
leadership is also weakened hy divisions within its own ranks. The Navy has
experienced a series of major mutinies of vounger officers against their Chief
of Staff, which hus severely shaken his authority. The Air Force Chief of Stall.
= is now taking Sukarna’s strong pro-Communist line.

Stain Army regional commanders are alsa known to he friendly to the PRI
and might not support Army action against it. PKI influence among the lower
ranking officers cannot be estimated. but it is probable that at Jeast several
hundred are under Communist influence. Communist influence among nen-coms
is probably more widespread.

1,3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

——

9. Prospects. ‘The trend toward increased Communist power tinder Sukarno’s
sponsorship is likely to cantinue.  Sukarne probably plans fo grant additional
Cabinet and sub-Cabinet posts to Communists and their sympathizers and to
enlarge the PK role in’ provincial and local administrations. We will almost
certainly move to eliminate remaining pockets of avert opposition to such moves
among non-Commiunist politicians and te restrain. or break up the most out-
spoken conservative Muslim groups.

Ecanomic planning and practice
will continne to stress grandiose projects” but there is little prospect that
measures adequate to improve economic conditions will he adopted. Sukarno’s
policies are likely to accclerate the deterioration of the Indonesian economy and
contribute to increased distress of the urban population, We do not helieve.
however. that Sukarna is likely ta he threatened hy repercussions from the
worsening economic situation; his powers af persuasion and the coercive powers
of the palice and the Army could: probably bring any series af civil disorders
under control quickly.

1

10, In pressing his pro-Communist campaign. Sukarno probably does not in-
tend that the PKL shall come to dominate Indonesia in his lifetime and threaten
him with the possible loss af his unique position. Rather. we believe that he
secks to evolve a “national-front” government comprising all radical and na-
tionalistic elements oval to him and his. policies. He probably views the PRI
as hest qualified hy size, organization, experience, and ideology to play the
leading. but not dominating, role ip such a gavernment. Tn his view, strong
Communist eparticipation would also insure sustained and effective pursuit of
his campaign to oust the West from Southeast: .\sia.

11. Conceivably the PKI could become powerful enongh to threaten Sukarno’s
own dominance, but so Jong as the Indonesian military remains basically hostile
to the PKI. Sukarno would be in no danger in this respect. For its part. the
PKI would almost certainly not challenge his position hy diverging from. its
present cooperative and profitable course. PKI leaders probably believe that
continuing party gains will eventually permit them fo assume the leading gov-
ernmental role under only generalized supervision by Sukarna. Thev probably
hope that the party will became so entrenched under his protection that. when
he leaves the scene, the military will have neither the will nor the ability to
oppose its predaminance in the government. The longer Sukamo_ lives. the
hetter will he PKI chances of maintaining its position following his death.

12. The Succession. Sukarno is 64 and in poor health. His doctors believe
that he can survive his serious kidney ailment only another vear or twa without
major surgery, and perhaps no more than five years in any case, In the event
of Sukarno’s death or incapacity in the next year or so. the immediate successor
government would probably he ostensihly non-Communist and headed by a
coalition of familiar non-Communist military and civilian names. The PRI has
only limited potential for armed insurgency and would almost. certainly not
wish to provake the military into open apposition. Hence we believe that the
PRI would be unlikely to attempt a seizure af fill power hy force. The military
would. for a time. almast certainly exercise greater authority: than at present

5

1.3(a)(4)(5)

fon
* (Aeren arian Aer star’ jetum sot

See ge “eng Koeah A
oN +. eet = Te ee ee BUN
ke pany Ny i

Webel
iat, NAtUNS .
Tae ad /
- fae i \
a oe a oe 29 dun eee /: waTUNA : ris
wut +e apa ™ see bis = / (ELANDS oe fAnawan
* Vis eAteuperaper,| | “ . , “*
-—— Siboiga, a ‘ \ : ; Mie, ~ Rlav (. nee eae eS
rye MATERg , pinged _ an MINQAPOAE gs "3%, gh!
mika UTaRA, e ae , ne ait mat Pamanguat, \ ina lea el
—_

~ cropper
Dp. BARAT Asie ;
ies CUMATE® ; ? ~ mil Tolukmetoneg siege” aK - 3 . oth -, SaaLixpanan

he * BARAT ‘gm bya aah Fen ‘ gn ‘ ad

Pytay ”. 7 At. BIAMAT bok : a i ae Fonungregor
oh N - a «Panghaipnang Surarag,”” { 7 1, if
1) , < endewengane " KALIMANT As
/ ay. Te su > tMnugppenten ~ a sy
= iti bi : Denscngs 2Meneeve oS : SELATAN
¥ Parebumuth, He MA UM ate ied hd ad vf ¢ AAUDJEAMARLY
fen ‘8 he ee.
mhutue V0 Ela = AY

{—————_ Me Sats ae ae T Bue SUNDA 1 1 Stae

Same ee oe

Kreee’

“tha i
andng DIAKARTA 7
eer ,

fe

MIAWA TIMUR
PULAU Kanetan

He. “
<i st A wat a

ey jae pe

: eae i on
mee ¥ Ow, wee, 3 te: eee =

CHAATIAE thane
{Ameerotiat

PHILIPPENES

Neue s}
Pa iter
phaeie oe z hoes tee verlag Oy eel indd Shee ee Sst
Se. “l- ai Vowaty beanate of the hubinrenes Say,
“F ES waeanana a is
1 Be Ae .
wahan Be Aa ak Eos a? weeusauan / oescomme inieriahenal Raundary @ Nationa caise
: ; ——"—— Pravinee haungary Lely Prevince capital
: "SULAWESI Sore! ee ell
UCTARA Raruhe, jalute Miles
oGatele
7 ‘iid ; S dameters
% Kemeungparu, - . . oe
=e. ee areas aren 1 “AMManenn j
: — = = Galea fe eM mee mere nme = - era
———— 014 ST ee ee caer ee ON
nda ¥ . G. fa ee : Cree - vir
- jo a a a aprynauan cn ww oti oKiemene - AN i , ‘ wii
, 1g Ie i in) PubeW Hal
as Fei fae a,t ee cea Moe ‘ . : r en A ol , am maa
i 5 Kt Po ee Pulau hu ve So
= \ i / stousauan eva be Beant Vg Pe ae myo # pire ant
= | (ey: : an) ,
ll al > Piha ne Want, NX eg ms \ ren ea > ‘ Fane
‘aPalepo. a amie V@ Loy, mua® ‘ Pres ; AT
aes ls CN et OR tA SAREE UU Hi
ret ik ae ERAS go agg
1! oT wens " Make oats aay :
NDS : dWatempene  (STRROGARS ~ ae } “let
D 1B" Nim E .  § la A —7 TT WER
~"Yatasale ee rns MALUKL 1 E
". 5 Baubau® ' q
Teinen ea - suri \ \
Ay Pe r
e ae weer 3 _ ASpULANAN :
Eadapd UNDA IS G AN oO SN er rus an ree :
SC ee San Tag |
Ss Bars Jatunermeat gw tiedhnere oe f Cc Ay we eh
; / NUSH TENGGARA Ayitrdene,
bo es TIMUR yur “rouge
enengaiaku®—. 2 : vengens Pe: a is ;
wg lg ene ot mere sees zener in
nanan Kang “sums /

oe

INDONESIA AND MALAYSIA

A UST,R ATL LA

EF

because its support would he essential ta the maintenance of public order. but
it would be unlikely to risk civil war to initiate a roll back of the Communists.
For its part. the new leadership. anxious to avoid PKI ugitation in the country:
side, would probably not initiate a purge ef Communists in national or local
administrations, A period of political ferment would inevitably follow.
Although the outcome cannot be estimated. Communist strengths and capa-
bilities are already such that the Communists could: probably nat be denied
an important share in any successor government.

13, Indonesian domestic policies would probably not change significantly in
the first months following Sukarno’s departure. mainly hecause of general un-
willingness to rock the political boat. The current firtation with Communist
China might cool, and there would probably he a growth of cardiality toward
the USSR, if only at the insistence of the military who rely on continued Soviet
arms shipments, For want of a prominent spokesman, Indonesia, would prob-
ably become generally less boisterous on the Afro-Asian scene.

— |The new leaders would prabably not cease to agitate
the anti-Malaysia issue, but continue the campaign in a lower key, The ag-
gressively nationalist dactrines of the Sukarno era and the broad commitment
to regional hegemony will almost certainly persist.

C. Foreign Policy Trends and Prospects

14. Confrontation. . The two-vear-ald campuign to “crush” Malaysia continues,
though there is little prospect of an Indonesian military victorv in the near
future and Sukarno knows it. He persists in this course for several reasons:
he is committed to it in the eves af his people and the rest of the world; it
strengthens national unity and helps to justify the siege mentality that diverts
attention from economic problems at home; it bolsters his reputation as a militant
lender in the worldwide struggle against “neocolonialism;” and, finally, he’ is
probably convinced that it contributes to the weakening and ultimate destruction
of the Malavsian state.

15. Confrontation reached a peak of intensity during August and September
1964, when groups of up to 100 uniformed Indonesians were landed by sea
and parachuted into southernmost Malaya to commit sabotage, to recruit and
train insurgents, to establish guerrilla redoubts, and generally to harass local
security forces and demoralize the population. The effort failed. though it
did succeed in tying up large numbers of British and Malaysian troops and
in impressing Kuala Lumpur with Indonesian audacity. The episode was fol-
lowed by British threaty of retaliation and the adoption of a more aggressive
policy by Commonwealth forces in northern Borneo, These and other events
have apparently convinced Sukarno—at least for the present—of the perils of
proceeding beyond minor infiltrations of Malava and Singapore and small-unit
military action in northern Borneo. both coupled with a variety of subversive
activities.

; Lo

4.3(a)(4)(6)

Ld

16. Other Foreign Relations, Growing frustration with the failure of Con-
frontation to date
hns Jed Sukarno to broaden
his campaign. He now attacks the entire Western presence in Southeast Asia,
indeed. in the Afro-Asian world in general. and refers to this effort as “the
struggle of the New Emerging Forces (NEFO) against the Old Established
Forces (OLDEFO..” This shite in emphasis has helped to disguise the failure
to destroy Malaysia and offered a personally satisfying psychological substitute.
It has also permitted him to move toward closer ties with Communist China,
overriding deep-seated antipathies in Indonesia. particularly among the military.
It has not. however. helped to reinforce Sukarno’s position as the self-proclaimed
spokesman of the Afro-Asian states. mast of whose leaders are offended by his
overbearing and contemptuous attitude toward them and disturbed by his
closeness to the Chinese Communists.

17. Indonesia's growing cordiality toward Peiping is based on a near identity
of short-term interests in Southeast Asia; hoth seek the elimination of the US
presence. A contributing element is Sukarno’s personal admiration for Mao
and his organizational achisvements. Their informal alliance has been nourished
hy the distinctly pro-Chinese posture of the PKI in the Sino-Soviet dispute.
Sukarno also views Chinese support of “national liberation” movements as an
endorsement of his own NEFO-OLDEFO doctrine.

18. Indonesin has derived relatively little material gain from its close relation-
ship with Peiping. A few Chinese‘advisers and technicians are now in Indo-
nesia, Chiga has shipped small quéntities of rice, textiles, and other consumer
goods to Indonesia and has provided same small arms as well. Perhaps more
important to Sukarno. the Chinese have heen lavish in their praise for his foreign
policy initiatives, particularly his withdrawal from the UN. For its part, Indo-
nesia has shown a readiness to front for and support the Chinese line at a
variety of Afro-Asian conferences,

19. The growing congruence of Indonesian and Chinese Communist objectives,
statements, and actions has cooled Djakarta’s relations with Moscow. The
USSR has failed to receive significant Indonesian support for its participation
in Afro-Asian conferences. Instead, it has seen Sukarno tolerate vehement PKI
attacks on the whole gamut of Soviet domestic and foreign policy. The only
major Soviet asset in the effort to maintain some influence with Sukarno is its
vast military assistance program, particularly Indonesia's need ta service and
replenish with spare parts the equipment already acquired,

20.

1,9(a)(4)(6)

, $B(a)(4)16)

on

ae

e af

=

aay ay
91. Prospects. Despite its averall lack of success to date, we believe that 4.atel ve)
Sukarno intends to continue the military campaign to weaken and dismember

Malaysia. As before, he will probably press forward at varying degrees of

intensity, seeking to avoid an open war but accasionally testing British resolution

with some famboyant military operation. There is some danger that in carrying

out his campaign he mav miscalculate the British response.

In adhering to his Confrontation_tactics. Sukarno
will occasionally move the dispute to the conference table,
nic ve would he un-
likely to terminate the campaign unless an agreement were reached which
opened the way for the achievement of his objectives—the withdrawal of Com- 1.9(a)(4)(6)
monwealth forces and the dismemberment of Malavsia. [_
, ;
22, Indonesian cordiality toward Communist China is likely to continue.
Sukarno and most of his top leaders are aware of the long-term dangers of
growing Chinese strength in Southeast Asia, hut they see the Chinese threat
as a distant one, to be considered when more immediate obstacles to Indonesian
ambitions have been overcome. As for the USSR, the Indonesian military
will probably urge Sukarno to repair relations with Moscow so that Soviet
military aid will continue and expand. Chances are at least even that Sukarno
will heed this advice, partly in response ta the renewed Soviet interest in South-
east Asian affairs and in the “anticolonial” struggle generally. He might grant
the USSR such tangible concessions us satellite tracking stations and the limited
use of Indonesian air and naval facilities.

aL

1.240 y8)

Lo)

2

i

Il. MALAYSIA 1,3(8)(4)(6)

A. Introduction

24. Malaysia's internal problems are political and racial, Racial antagonism
is net now Vigarous among the masses of the people, and the important political
parties are still not exclusively racial in character, Yet suspicions among the
various cthnie groups in Malaya, Singapore, Sarawak, and Sabah have not
heen overcome, and almost every issue hat now arises in the new federation
takey on communal overtones. These latent antagonisms could readily be
. aroused by extremist or reckless political leaders, Occasionally there are acts
of violence, and there are reasons to believe that a period of incrensed racial
tension may be approaching,

25. Confrontation remains Malaysia's greatest external threat, At the same
time, Indonesian hostility provides an issue which strengthens a feeling of
mutual interdependence among the various areas and races. The morale of the
population has also heen boasted by the forthright manner in which the UK
has come to Malavsin's defense. In the foreign relations arena, Indonesian
actions have drawn sympathy and,support for Malaysia from some Afro-Asian
quarters once unfriendly to its conservative pro-Western regime.

26, Nevertheless, Confrontation has exposed the fragility of the Malavsian
state. Its armed forces are not adecuate to contain such limited military activi-
tes as the Indonesians have carried out. much lesa to face an all-out attack.
Djakarta is attempting, though so far without much success, to exploit the
ethnic and political cleavages that existed at Malaysia's birth in September 1063.

B. Domestic Trends and Prospects

27. Trends. Though the problems of communalism, communism, and regional-
ism which plagued Malaysia at its inception have in some instances worsened
i over the past two vears, the government of Malaysia is reasonably stable. The
federal political apparatus is dominated hy Prime Minister Tunku Abdul
Rahman's Alliance. a conservative coalition of Malay, Chinese. and Indian par-
tles which has governed in Kuala Lumpur for almost a decade.

28, Behind Alliance rule is a tacit agreement between Malay-Muslim leaders
and the Chinese business community of the Malaysian mainland, whereby the
former are allowed to wield the preponderant political power in return for
implicit guarantees to the latter of personal and economic well-being. This
concept is intended to serve as a device to help the relatively backward Malays
to catch up—in education. business. and government-—to the more energetic
and advanced Chinese who might otherwise quickly dominate Malaysia.

CF

Though not wholly satisfactory to the Chinese and other races. since it leaves
political power largely in Malay hands. this formula had heen widely accepted
up to new on the mainland as the hest available. Rahman and other Malay
lenders expected to extend it to all of Malaysia, ie. hy bringing into the

ruling Alliance the moderate and conservative communal parties of Singapore.
Sarawak. and Sabah. This effort has heen largely unsuccessful.

20.

1.3(a)(4)(5)

a

30, The political difficulties among Malaysia's non-Communist parties have
tended to obscure the continuing subversive threats to its existence. On the
Thai-Malaya border, several hundred hard-corp Malaya Communist Party guer-
rillas are the object af considerable concern in Kuala Lumpur. A small num-
ber of Communists elsewhere in Malaya and in Singapore have assisted Indo-
nesian infiltrators. The once powerful pro-Communist Barisan Sosialis ‘Party
of Singapore has turned to peaceful tactics, but certain factions are now pressing
for a renewal of strikes, demonstrations. and mass violence agninst the gov-
ernment. The most dangerous Communist group at this time is the Clandestine
Communist Organization (CCO) in Sarawak, The CCO is composed almost
entirely of ethnic Chinese; it has 1,400-1,600 hard-core members, partially armed
and trained by the Indonesians, and 20,000-30,000 sympathizers. The CCO
| 1.8(a)(4)(5)
wold sustain a paramilitary effort of serious dimensions.
The subversive situation in Sabah is less serious, though some 30,000-40,000
Indonesian plantation laborers remain a source of concern,

31, A far less serious threat is posed hy pan-Mulav sentiment, which looks
to the ultimate goal of a state embracing all Malay-Muslim peoples of Southeast
Asia, Some pan-Malay extremists within Malaya have covertly aided the Indo-
nesian campaign to subvert the Kuala Lumpur government. Abont 100 are
under arrest or have fled the country. For the time heing, however, pan-
Malay sentiment (which ix primarily anti-Chinese) has been set back by
Sukarno’s Confrontation palicy and by his cooperation with the Chinese Com-
munists.

; a

32, Prospects. Over the nest vear or so, existing political and racial frictions
in Malaysia will probably increase in intensity. The principal cause of domestic
tensions will be the rivalry hetween Kuala Lumpur and Singapore, which may
take on increasingly racial overtones. The chances are about even that, in order
to reduce pressures, the leaders of the two sides will reach some sort of uccom-
modation, althongh same sudden act hy cither side which would invite racial
violence cannot he precluded, While Singapore unquestionahly wants more
autonomy than it now has, particularly with respect to police powers, its con-
tinued interest in the economic henefts of federatign should inhibit actions
which might threaten dissolution of the federation. aa

Hence, we do not believe that the struggle hetween Kuala Lumpur
and Singapore will lead to the breakup of Malaysia during the period of this
estimate.

33. Internal threats to Malaysia will remain potentially serious, but unlikely
to bring down the present regime unless it is significantly weakened by Indo-
nesian actions on a scale which we consider improbable, One of the great
strengths of Malaysia is its relatively prosperous economy. Prospects for con-
tinuation of this favorable situation are good, despite some lingering effects
in Singapore from Indonesia's economic boycott. The principal economic hurdle
will be the necessity for increased military budgets which will tend to restrict
much-needed domestic develapmental plans, particularly in Borneo.

C. Foreign Policy Trends and Prospects

34. In the face of Indonesian hostility, Malavsia is utterly dependent on British
military support,

It
will probably prove adequate to cope with likely Indonesian actions and ont
Sukarno from substantially bolder aggression. In consequence, Malaysian for-
eign policy is closely allied to that of its Commonwealth partners. Malaysia
will benefit in international conclaves from the frm support of most Afro-Asian
members of the Commonwealth, particularly India and Nigeria. In the broader
Afro-Asian sphere, Malaysia's dependence on the military support of whito
Commonwealth nations will tend to conflict with its strong desire to be recog-
nized as a bona fide member of the Afro-Asian community.

35. Malaysians probably now believe that Commonwealth forces are sufficient
to contain Sukarno aver the next few years, but they are less confident over the
longer term and concerned too over the potential threat from Communist China.

|

cq +

4.3(0)(4)(5)

4,3(0)(4)(6)

4.3(a)(4)(6)

_ £4
Al 1.3(a)(4)(6)

36. Thailand remains Malaysia's closest Asian friend. The Thais. who tried
for many months to mediate the Confrontation dispute. have hecame disgusted
with Indonesian tactics and new express outright sympathy for Malaysia.
Malaysia and the Philippines now have consular relations, but efforts. to re-
establish diplomatic relations are stalemated pending o resolution of Manila’s
claim to parts of Sabah. The issue is quiescent and unlikely to be revived

. until after the Philippine elections in the fall of 1065. Malaysia and the Re-
public of China have moved closer in the past year and this trend is likely
to continue, although domestic considerations will probably prevent Malaysia
from agreeing to the establishment af full diplomatic relations.

CENTERAL INGE EIIGEINGE AC APUG Y
HOSE MINATION WHOTICH

vy the Contd bate iqemea Agency This copy

Loodhis document wos dbseninated: |
undes lire josey lon ona

is for dhe tiformation: cab ase af the recipi and ab persons

Adibhonel essential Gesciusticaiien may br authored by the

treedl de kinaw beisi
following clhicials wathae these pep hive cli pron tenets
hy fer the: Depeatineat ad Shiba

a Director of dntedliqgenee aud Roseare
Ollie of the Secrotary of

bb. Director, Defense latethyeiuce Agency, boo Whe

bo Dofanse ane the organization of the dort Cols ob Stoll -
' co. Assistant Claot at Stadb tos ntalligenes, Departine mal ol tha Avy, for “ihe ag
a "2  Paparinent af the Auny- , .
7 cl. “Assistant Chie! ob Flava Ope wcions (elles far the Depertmoat of thea a 7 _
. May 7 ne re
© Assistant, Chiut ot Stall, Intallyyen SAL! los thea Dopactment of the Air wee, oa
, Force , me . me mo ° '
as cL Davactoy af Intolligence, ALG, bor ho: Aten Lacey (ommeasion ‘ 4 _
we ~. Assistant Diector, PEL for the Jaoral ‘urea al Fraverstiggeationty 1” re ‘

he Directoy ol NDA, jon the Hanon Secu Aqui ; ‘ . _ .
y Agency

As IA, ben ny vilvor, Deparment 9 one ae

7

“y
© [hiel docs, ney bis rolainad,: OW.
; ; rilyi, pagulations, a} “daviiad Io
hs Officn ‘al Cantal: tvs iy CIN 7

arr

aie t nay
vont dag a “Pe

age ~

‘ ee ne ay Poa Ton SPTt aed ve ” aa
“ Wha: i ft tor wet miei ‘from:
Nad Ne AYE A

ror :

oe a) ity r nist
tea oo oe
: ys phe

‘isininuneyre
While ;Houses iy ha
7 National pau ‘Counciby
Department’ of* State!
‘ Dopartment ‘of: Defame:
Atomic. Energy: Conmission—°
“. Federal Bureau of Investigation my

dad Wee toll
