The Situation in Hungary InformationN As of 0200 Est)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119745, dated 3 September 1956.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119745).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Pee See | v4

2. THE SITUATION IN HUNGARY (information as of 0200 EST)

Comment on:

Reports from reliable eyewitnesses in
Budapest indicate that as of 1400 (Budapest
time) on 30 October Soviet forces were
withdrawing from the city, but apparently
only to the outskirts. At noon Soviet tanks
withdrew from the Kilian barracks, which
were still occupied by armed nationalist
insurgents. Later in the day, at 1820 hours,
the Hungarian defense minister announced
that agreement had been reached with the command of the Soviet
forces in Budapest that all Soviet troops in the city would com-
plete their withdrawal by dawn of 31 October. The job of main-
taining order, according to the announcement, would be taken
over simultaneously by certain units of the Hungarian army,

the police, and the national guard.

On the other hand, the American army at-
taché in Budapest, referring to Shepilov's statement of 29
October that ''no Soviet units have arrived in Hungary in the .
last 24 hours, in fact last 64 hours," observed that a Soviet
column was seen arriving in Budapest at 1100 hours on 30 Oc-
tober, with obvious signs of a longtrip. Numerous reports
of reinforcements by large Soviet forces over the Czech-
Hungarian border are not borne out

Coincidental with these developments came
the announcement of the formation of the Revolutionary Military
Council of the Hungarian Army. This council stated it approved
all the demands that had been made on the government by the
workers’ councils, that it had decided to disarm immediately
those secret police formations which still remained armed, and
that it had dismissed a number of high officers including General
Toth, armed forces chief of staff, and Generals Hazai, Hidvegi

31 Oct 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 6

baa
re Rgeces,

pooroved 1 4
‘ . &

“ aes
so ae ee
Yat Kr
ee

a

and Szabo. Later announcements indicated that the council
would be responsible for maintaining order in Budapest and
throughout the country.

The announcement that the Soviet troops
would be withdrawn from Budapest contrasts with the earlier
Soviet statement that the insurgents in the city must lay down
their arms prior to any Soviet evacuation of the city. Although
Premier Nagy's attitude has been vacillating in regard to this
question, he clearly implied on 30 October that the insurgent
forces in control of the provinces should retain their arms.

He added that he expected these forces to become part of the
regime's newly organized national guard.

There are still no clear indications from
any source whether and how soon Soviet troops may be with-
drawn from Hungary. In a speech the afternoon of 30 October,
however, Nagy repeated an earlier statement that he was nego-
tiating this question with the USSR. Moscow's announcement
on 30 October that it is ''ready to enter into relevant negotia-
tions. . . on the question of Soviet troops in Hungary" sug-
gests that agreement may be reached soon concerning this
matter.

The announcement by Nagy last night that
"the Revolutionary Military Council shall operate until the new
government to be formed through general and setret elections
takes office'' meets the other major demand of the insurgents.
Along with the announcements concerning the withdrawal of
Soviet troops from Budapest, it suggests that the Nagy regime
is moving toward complete capitulation to the rebels.

Earlier in the day Nagy revealed that the
one-party system in Hungary had been abolished and that a
coalition government consisting of representatives from the
Communist Party and from the other parties existing in 1945
(presumably the Smallholders, National Peasant, Citizens'
Democratie, Radical and Social Democratic) would be formed.

31 Oct 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 7

An appeal was issued simultaneously for the reorganization
of these parties.

Later Budapest announcements stated that
the Social Democratic, National Peasant, and Smallholders
parties had re-formed in Budapest. If the Social Democrats
should join the government it would be a clear indication that
the Nagy regime has given in completely to rebel demands.

So far, Nagy has been unable to gain Social Democratic partici-
pation in his government because of unwillingness to satisfy
their demands.

Unity of purpose among the rebel forces--
who have no central authority and who remain only in tenuous
contact with one another--appears to be confined largely to
the question of Hungarian independence and the need for an
immediate Soviet troop withdrawal from the entire country.
Since actual fighting in the countryside apparently has ceased,
and since the present moves of the Nagy regime may have
caused some confusion among the rebel groups, political
maneuvering is probably already under way between various
insurgent factions, particularly between Communist and non-
Communist elements. The Communist insurgents apparently
retain their confidence in Nagy--insisting, however, that he

-must implement his promises before they will actively support

him--, but non-Communist rebels robably remain suspicious
of both Nagy and his intentions. a

31 Oct 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin

a

5. SOVIET DECLARATION ON RELATIONS WITH
THE SATELLITES

Comment on:

The Soviet government's declaration of

30 October on relations with the Satellites
is an attempt to regain a position from
which the USSR can begin to exert control
over the too-rapid development of Satellite
independence without compromising its self-initiated "liberal-
ization" program. The declaration attempts to cancel out the
serious loss of prestige and leadership which the USSR has
suffered, both within and outside the bloc, because of events
in Hungary and Poland.

\

In a key paragraph, the declaration em-
phasizes that Soviet units are stationed in Hungary and Rumania
under the authority of the Warsaw pact, and carefully establishes
that Soviet troops in Poland are there on the basis of the Pots-
dam four-power agreement as well. East Germany and the
Soviet forces there are pointedly omitted from the statement,

a tacit reaffirmation of the Soviet position that withdrawal of
any of these troops is dependent on withdrawal of Western
forces from Germany, US . forces. from:-Europe, and a change
in the orientation of West Germany.

While the declaration holds out the promise
to the Satellites of greater internal independence in economic
affairs and withdrawal of Soviet advisers, it also places great
emphasis on the Warsaw pact as a unifying system necessary
to protect and maintain Communist control. In stating that it
"is ready to examine with other socialist countries" the sta-
tioning of Soviet troops on their territory, the declaration as-
serts that this should take place only with the agreement of the
state concerned as well as agreement between participants in
the pact. In its specific references to the Hungarian situation,
the statement also implies that withdrawal of Soviet troops is
subject to negotiations with "other participants of the Warsaw
treaty" as well as the local government.

31 Oct 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 12

6. TITO URGES HUNGARIANS TO SUPPORT NAGY

Tito, in a letter of 29 October addressed
to the Hungarian Communist Party, calls
for the Hungarians to stop further blood-
Shed. He says that the recent measures
taken by the Hungarian leadership show
that the policy of the Hungarian party and government and
the ''genuine socialist aspirations of the Hungarian working
people have been merged into one’'

Tito regrets the "wrong and harmful policy"
pursued by the past Hungarian regime which produced the
present crisis, but calls on the Hungarian workers to avoid

‘ "undermining the faith of workingmen in socialism and the
essential development of socialist aemocracy’'

The letter says the Yugoslav leadership
does not wish to interfere in the internal affairs of Hungary,
but out of a feeling of solidarity with the "progressive social-
ist aspirations" of the Hungarian people, appeals to the people
to make every effort to end the struggle, "which could have
unforeseeable consequences not only for Hungary but for the
international labor movement:”

Comment Tito's remarks closely parallel the line
now being pushed by the Nagy regime it-
self as well as a Polish statement to the Hungarians sent by
Gomulka and Cyrankiewicz,.

The Yugoslavs are apparently worried lest
a continuation of the present Hungarian rebellion lead to either

a non-Communist government in Hungary or to Soviet imposi-
tion of a Stalinist-type regime.

31 Oct 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 13

1, WESTERN EUROPEAN COMMUNIST REACTION TO
HUNGARIAN REVOLT

Comment on:

Communist reaction in major Western
European countries to the Hungarian
revolt ranges from rigid support of
Moscow by the French to an increas-
ingly anti-Soviet position in Italy.

The American embassy in Paris reports
that on 29 October the French Commu-
nist press surpassed itself in defending
the Soviet Union and gloating over the
"defeat" of the insurgents.

The London Daily Worker, on the other
hand, has walked a tight rope in both ab-

horring the necessity" for the intervention of Soviet troops
against the counterrevolutionaries and in speaking of the
Hungarian workers' "just demands."

The official Italian Communist Party paper
Unita has abandoned its earlier support of the Soviet line blam-
ing counterrevolutionaries for the violence. On 29 October
party leader Togliatti criticized Hungary for its failure to de-
velop its Communism on an adequate national base and to make
reforms quickly enough. The leadership of the Communist-
dominated labor organization and the fellow-traveling Il Paese
have condemned Soviet intervention in Hungary.

31 Oct 56 Current Intelligence Bulletin Page 14

a
