Nie-the Outlook for the Union of South Africa(fyi NIE Number Is Unknown)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000036489, dated 2 June 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000036489).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE OUTLOOK FOR THE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

THE PROBLEM

To re-examine the outlook for South Africa in the light of present racial tension.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The recent wave of racial disturbances
in the Union of South Africa has rein-
forced our view that in that country the
years ahead will be characterized by in-
creasing tension, culminating eventu-
ally—probably after considerable blood-
shed—in the end of white domination.
Nevertheless, we continue to believe that
the white minority, with all the powers
of a modern state at its disposal, and with
a firm determination to use them, will
be able to maintain its dominance for the
next few years. (Para. 22)

2. Despite their number, the Africans are
presently too weak and disorganized to
mount a braad and sustained campaign of
resistance in the face of the means of coer-
cion available to the white community.
Nevertheless, localized strikes, boycotts,
and other manifestations, touched off by
some specific grievances or incidents,
will probably flare up more frequently
over the next few years. The more ac-
tivist non-white elements are likely to
turn to terrorism. Africans outside the
Union will probably find means of fur-
nishing at least small amounts of arms

and other material support to the Afri-
cans within the Union. (Paras. 11-15,
23)

3. Continuation of internal strife in
this manner will further increase racial
tensions in the community and magnify
the difficulties of maintaining white
dominance. It may provoke a number
of Asian-African states—and perhaps
others—to adopt economic sanctions
against South Africa. It will lead to
some focal economic dislocations within
the country, and will further reduce
South Africa’s ability to attract the in-
vestment capital, both foreign and do-
mestic, which is needed for the country’s
continued prosperity. (Paras. 24-25)

4. At present the rather substantial struc-
ture of influence which the Communists
had established within the leadership of
the older non-white political movements
in South Africa appears to have been hard
hit by recent events. Since the develop-
ment of a new apparatus will probably
have to be started at the local level, it can-
not be accomplished rapidly. The Com-
munists will be hampered by the absence
of reliable and numerous African cadres.

|

Over the longer run, however, with their
conspiratorial) skills and their ability to
get material support from the Bloc, Com-
munists may come to exercise important
influence within the protest movement in
the Union. (Para. 16)

5. Although the white community gen-
erally supports the government's efforts
to stamp out African dissidence, recent
events have aroused increased misgivings,
even within the dominant Nat.-.:alist
Party, as to the moral, economic, and in-
ternational implications of the govern-
ment’s apartheid policy. Within another
year or two, the growth of this feeling
will probably begin to force some easing
of the government’s more onerous racial
restrictions, but no comprehensive ac-
commodaticn to non-white aspirations is
likely. Probable government concessions

are likely to have no more than a tem-
porary calming effect, and probably will
only stimulate pressure for further

(Paras. 17-21)

6. Growing world disapproval of its racial
policies will probably push South Africa
into an increasingly isolated and contro-
versial position in international affairs.
There is at least an even chance that it
will be forced out of the Commonwealth
if it carries out its plans to become a re-
public, South Africa will almost cer-
tainly be a target in the UN for the grow-
ing number of Afro-Asian members, but
it is unlikely to withdraw unless sanctions
are voted against it. Given the vehe-
mence of both Afro-Asian and South
African feeling, the Western powers will
find it increasingly difficult to avoid
offending one side or the other. (Paras.
26-27)

change.

DISCUSSION

1. INTRODUCTION

7 The recent wave of racial disturbances in
South Africa has dramatically Wlustrated the
growing bitterness of the conflict between the
determination of the Union’s substantial white
minority to maintain its traditional domi-
nance and the growing restiveness and as-
sertiveness of the African? and other non-
white elemer-ts of the population.

8. As a naticn based on the concept of white
supremacy—with some three million whites
ruling over a total population of about 15
million—South Africa has long had the seeds
of racial discord within it, This has been
especially so since its development into a
modern industrial state in which Africans and

‘The term used here to identify the black South
Africans o2 Bantu ethnic origin. Afrikaner iy
the term applied to the white Afrikaans-speak-
ing descendants of Dutch (Boer) settlers.

other non-whites represent an essential por-
tion of the urban labor force.? These inherent
strains have been intensified since 1948 by
the Nationalist policy of apartheid, under
which a single-minded and determined effort
has been made to tighten up and systematize
the loose body of customs and regulations
through which racial segregation and the
white moncpoly of political and economic
power had previously been maintained.

9. The Sha-peville riot of March 1960, in
which 67 A‘ricans were kJled, was a direct
consequence of a civil disobedience campaign,
and aimed primarily at the highly unpopular
pass system on which control over the urban.
Africans is largely based, It was followed by
an effective stay-at-home strike in the Cape

*See Annex A for summary of essential back~
ground data.

Town area. Inthe 10 months prior to Sharpe-
ville eight other outbursts of violence had
taken place. Although all were more or less
spontaneous flareups touched off by some loca!
incident or gr:evance-—e.g., police liquor raids,
the forced removal of Africans from their
homes, the banning of a popular leader—-they
gave addit.oral evidence of how close the
tempers of many urban Africans were to the
boiling point,

10. These disturbances not only reflected
underlying conflicts but themselves contrib-
uted materially to an increase of tension.
For the whites they have aroused as never
before the spectre of anarchy and destruction.
Among the Africans and other non-whites, the
harshness displayed by the government in
suppressing any manifestations ot protest has
almost certainly provoked -resentment and
even desperation. Meanwhile, South African
race relations has becomes even more a cause
célébre in the eyes of the world.

I. NON-WHITE PRESSURES FOR CHANGE

11. Despite the relatively large numbers in-
volved in the disturbances of recent months,
South Africa is still far from the point of a
mass uprising by the 12 million non-whites
who make up 80 percent of its population.
Active discontent exists primarily among the
three million or so urban Africans, whe in-
clude the best ¢ducated and most politically
conscious of the Africans in the Union and
are the most heavily burdened by the gov-
ernment’s racial restrictions and by economic
hardships. There is little indication of un-
rest among the approximately three million
Africans working on white farms. However,
there have been occasional disorders in the
native reserves, where another three million
Africans live under the sometimes tenuous
authority of government-approved tribal
chiefs and one cannot assume that rural Afri-
cans will remain quiescent. The Indian and
Colored (i.e., mixed biood) minorities, although
their social and economic status has dimin-
ished under epartheid, still remain more privi-
leged than the Africans and generally are
more passive.

12. Even amcng the urban Africans there is
little likelihood that a broadly based, closely
integrated, and sustained campaign of re-
sistance can soon be developed in the face of

police countermeasures. The pre-Sharpeville
African political protest organizations which
had never really succeeded in developing a
broad, organized following, have now been dis-
rupted by the police crackdown, leaving the
urban Africans for the moment leaderless and
cowed. Over and above the problem of re-
creating leadership and organization, these
Africans lack the weapons to stand up against
the police. In addition, the fact that most of
them live on a hand-to-mouth basis severely
limits their ability to sustain strikes and boy-
cotts for any extended period.

13. Nevertheless, sporadic manifestations of
African unrest will increase in frequency as
time goes on. During the nezt year or two
these will probably continue to take the form
of more or less spontaneous local flareups, in
most cases resulting from specific economic or
social grievances rather than frorm any politi-
cal motivation. As some semblance of Afri-
can leadership re-emerges, discontent is in-
creasingly likely to involve strikes, boycotts,
and demonstrations designed to bring pressure
on the white community, with the object ini-
tially that of forcing removal of onercus racial
curbs but with an underlying demand for
poltica] and civil rights eventually becoming
more prominent. Many such strikes and boy-
cotts will lead to at least temporary lavoffs
among African workers in other areas and
industries and will accordingiy tend to in-
crease the economic strains contributing to
tension and unrest within the African labor
force at large.

14. Given the temper of the urban African
masses and the determination of the govern-
ment to crush all opposition, violence will
probably figure prominently in rnost mani-
festations of African unrest. The jailing of
the older and more moderate leaders and the
need to operate illegally will probably bring
forward 8 more radical and activist leadership
element, operating to a large degree under-
ground. The Africans will probably recognize
that they would have little hope of develop-

ee

ing an effective armed resistance movement
against the government's overwhelming
strength even if they were abie to smuggle in
arms. However, the activists among them
will probably be increasingly tempted to turn
to the deliberate use of terrorism, regarding
it as the only effective means, other than
economic pressure, of reinforcing their de-
mands.

15, The growth of a spirit of resistance among
South Africa’s urban Africans—which in time
will probably spread to the reserves-—will be
stimulated not only by the accumulation of
local grievances but by the example and en-
couragement of the emerging states of biack
Africa. In addition to their efforts to bring
international pressure against South Africa,
the new African states will almost certainly
broaden their efforts to provide direct en-
couragement and support to the Africans of
the Union. South Arrica has thus far been
fairly effectively sealed off from the Test of
the continent by the white-controlled terri-
tories of Angola, Southern Rhodesia, and
Mozambique, and the delivery of large-scale
assistance, wkether by sea or by land, is un-
likely in view of the great distance and se-
curity barriers involved. However, Africans
outside the Union will probably find means
of furnishing at least small amounts of arms
and other material support to the Africans
within the Union.

16. For the present, the rather substantial
structure of influence which the Communists
had established within the leadership of the
older non-white political movements in South
Africa appears to have been hard hit by the
post-Sharpeville police crackdown. Since the
development of a new apparatus will probably
have to be started at the local level, it can-
not be accomplished rapidly. The Commu-
nists will be hampered by the absence of reli-
able and numerous African cadres. Although
the new Afrizan leadership likely to spring
up within the Union will be anxious to get
help from almost any source, it will probably
prefer to get it from other African nationalists.
Nevertheless, the Communist Bloc will seek
to exploit non-white unrest within South
Africa and sooner or later is likely to find

means of re-establishing contact with dissi-
dentelements. Over the longer run, the Com-
munists, with their conspiratorial skills and
their ability to get support from the Bloc,
may come to exercise important influence
within the protest movement in the Union.

Il, REACTIONS IN THE WHITE COMMUNITY

17. Following the Sharpeville incident, the
government moved swiftly to crush any Te-
sistance to its authority. It mobilized the
civilian reserves to supplement the military
and the police in maintaining order. It for-
bade all public gatherings. It declared a
state of emerg>ncy giving tne government vast
powers ubhampered by the usual legal re-
straints. It arrested virtually all known non-
white political leaders and their leading waite
supporters. It banned the principal non-
white politica. organizations and tneir pubii-
cations, Althougn the pass system was briefly
suspended for tactical reasons, it was soon
reimposed, and thousands of pass delinquents
have been rounded up in urban areas, either
to be sent to jail or banished to the reserves.

18. The government's prompt reaction has
been supported by a large majority in the
white community, which for the most part
was badly shaken by the eruption of African
emotionalism and violence. Such feelings
have been particularly strong among rural
Afrikaners from whom the Nationalist gov-
ernment and its epartheid policy have ob-
tained their principal support, Even those
whites who felt tnat apartheid was being
pushed too rigorously accepted a need for
stern measures to enlorce order. Following
Sharpeville, available stocks of firearms in tne
cities were quickly bought up by apprehensive
whites. Altnougn the attempted assassina-
tion of Prime Minister Verwoerd on 9 April
was the act of a demented white man, it has
at least temporarily reinforced this tendency
to close ranks behind the government, Like-
wise the excesses of the present disorders in
the Congo are likely to harden attitudes
toward non-whites. With Verwoerd now well
on the road to recovery, the government will
remain dominated by a vigorous and doc-
trinaire proponent of apartheid, Verwoerd

ees ee

will almost certainly continue to insist on
strict enforcement of racial curbs and will
probably seek to speed up programs designed
to isolate the African labor force as much as
possible from white communities.

19. Nevertheless, the recent wave of disturb-
ances has increased misgivings about the
moral and practical validity of apartheid as
presently apphed. Even within ruling Afri-
kaner Nationalist circles, the small number
of intellectuals and cnurchmen who had pre-
viously questioned the direction of South
African racial policy has been joined by most
of the important business and financial leaders
and by the principal Nationalist newspaper of
Cape Province. indeed, one member oi the
cabimet, Miniscer of Lands Sauer, has publicly
called for a new look at tne situation.

20. Such reservations will “almost certainly
become more widespread aS the adverse im-
pact of continued racial tension on South
Africa’s economy, international standing, and
way of life becomes more obvious. Tnere is
at least an even chance that within the next
year or two effective pressure for an easing
of the more onerous racial restrictions will
emerge. Since the Nationalists control 101
out of 160 seats in the lower house of parlia-
ment, the development of any effective pres-
sure for change will require a breakdown of
the strong discipline waich Verwoerd has thus
far been able to maintain by virtue of his
driving and cominant personality, his firm
control over most of tne party machinery,
and the widespread rank-and-file support for
his policies. Any significant mouification
of racial polizy would probably necessitate
dropping Verwoerd. It might even involve a
coalidion betwzen the more moderate wing of
the Nationalist Party and the opposition
United Party, which has long sought such a
coalition as providing its only hope of sharing
power.

21, Except for a small minority, the white
population will probably be willing to offer
no more than Limited concessions to non-waite
aspirations. While the Afrikaner-backed Na-
tionalist Party, and the opposition United
Party, which derives its principal support
from the English-speaking populace, represent

widely differing political, moral, and religious
concepts, they are in agreement on the need
to maintain white dominance. The opposi-
tion of the United Party to epartheid has been
cast in terms of constitutional, moral, and eco-
nomic requirements, rather than of opposition
to the concent of white supremacy. Such
modifications of racial policy as are likely to
be adopted—« g., the relaxation of liquor con-
trols, the easing of the pass regulations, the
raising of minimum wages—would remove
some sources of friction and thus contribute
to a temporary easing of tension. Although
such changes would probably be welcomed by
most urban Africans, these and possibly later
educational and perhaps even political con-
cessions would probably fall well short of
African aspirations and expectations at the
time. Over the long run, such limited con-
cessions will probably serve orly to heighten
non-white aspirations and demands.

IV, THE INTERNAL OUTLOOK

22. Thus the outlook is for increasing tension
and strife. We continue to believe that the
white minority, with all the powers of a
modern state at its disposal, and with a firm
determination to use them, will be able to
maintain its dominance for the next few
years. Indeed, the preponderance of military
and economiz power on the white side,*
together with limited concessions, may result
in fairly lengthy periods of uneasy quiet.
However, the basic struggle will continue, re-
sulting eventually—probably after consider-
able bloodshed—in the end of white domina-
tion.

23. Even though we believe that the whites
will maintain their dominance over the next
few years, the costs of doing so will increase.
Particularly L’ terrorism emerges as a major
instrumentality of non-white protest, the
white population wiil be forced tu live under
greater strain than heretofore and probabiy
to endure continued restriction of white as
well as non-white civil Liberties. South
Africa's international stature will decline.

*See Annex B for detalls regurding South African
military and security forces.

ae

eer eel

2 ona ETT TN PET ET

24. Finally, the continuation of internal strife
is virtually certain to have adverse effects on
the South African economy. The cumulative
impact of strikes, boycotts and disturbances
of public order within the country may be
appreciable, even though each separate oc-
currence is short-lived. More serious eco-
nomic consequences, however, are likely to
flow trom actions taken outside the country.
There has already been much discussion, espe-
cially among Afro-Asian nations, of an inter-
national consumer boycott of South African
goods; Malaya has adopted such a boycott
as public policy. The Conference of Inde-
pendent African States, meeting in Addis
Ababa in June 1960, called upon its members
to adopt an extensive program of economic
sanctions against South Africa. The effect
of such sanctions would proBably not be great
in the strict economic sense, for the propor-
tion of South African national product in-
volved would be very small. On individual
producers, hcwever, the impact would be sub-
stantial, and the psychological effect on the
South African business community would
probably be marked.

25. By far the most important economic con-
sequence of unrest in South Africa is the un-
easiness which it causes among domestic and
foreign investors. During most of the period
since World War Il, South Africa has enjoyed
high prosper:ty with a steady inflow of foreign
investment. The recent crisis Jed to a sharp
drop in the price of South African securities
and a serious decline in gold and foreign ex-
change reserves, indicating some flignt of
capital. Future disturbances will further re-
duce South Africa's ability to attract the in-
vestment capital, both foreign and domestic,
which is needed for the country’s continued
prosperity.

V. EXTERNAL REPERCUSSIONS

26. Growing world disapproval of South
Africa’s racial policies will push it into an
increasingly isolated and controversial posi-
tion in international affairs. The new Afro-
Asian nations, whose growing numbers give

them an increasingly important voice not only
in the UN but in the Commonwealth, will
almost certainly make intensive efforts to
rally world pressure against South Africa to
force a modification of its racial policies. The
May 1960 meeting of Commonwealth Prime
Ministers refused to give advance approval of
South Africa’s continued membership if it
becomes a republic, and there appears to be
little likelihood that it could obtain the neces-
sary unanimous consent to stay within the
Commonwealth.s Indeed, the problem which
South Africa presents to the Commonwealth
may prove to be one of the most difficult in
the latter's history. Although South Africa
faces no danger of being ejected from the UN,
it is bitter and cynical about that organization
and, if the UN should actually vote sanctions
against it, would probably withdraw.

27. International controversy over South
Africa's racial policies will pose increasing
difficulties fcr the West. The US will be faced
by a dilemma. If it cultivates good relations
with the South African Government, and espe-
cially if it gives that government material
support or allows it to purchase arms, it will
incur the vigorous aispleasure of many
peoples and governments, particularly the new
African nations. It is possible, for example,
that the UN votes of the whole group of Afri-
can states on a wide variety of issues may be
affected. On the other hand, if the US
strongly condemns the South African Gov-
ernment, it will deeply offend a staunch anti-
Communist friend, and perhaps lose the use of
South African territory for space tracking sta-
tions, or find difficulties put in the way of
using South African ports and airfields. An
especially serious problem might be posed if
extended racial clashes should occur in South
Africa, with heavy loss of life among non-
whites as well as whites.

ee
*Afrikaner Nationalists have long been uncom-
* gortable about South Africa’s allegiance to the
British Crown, and legislation was recently
adopted authorizing a referendum, limited to
white voters, on Its transformation into a re-
public. This proposal, which will probably be
put to the vote this fall, will probably be adopted.

mee ee

Sep ee ee a ERE SEES He: PER SE

ANNEX A

THE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

General

1. The Union of South Africa, which was con-
stituted as a single self-governing territory in
1910 and granved dominion status in the
Commonwealth in 1931, is an outgrowth of
successive Dutch settlements dating back
to the 17th century and of later British coloni-
gation, The tctal population of some 15
million includes some 10 million black Afri-
cans (officially “Bantus”), about 1.4 million
Coloreds (ie., persons of mixed blood), and
close to half a million Indians. However,
political, economic and social power remains
concentrated in the hands of the country’s
three million whites. The concepts of white
supremacy and racial segregation are deeply
imbedded in the life of the country.

2. In its half century of existence, South
Africa has developed into a prosperous modern
state with a national income of well over $5
billion a year. Although more than half the
population is still engaged in agriculture, with
wool and fruits constituting major export cash
crops, the country’s growth has depended
mainly on exploitation of its mineral resources,
notably gold, diamonds, and uranium. Par-
ticularly since World War H, the industrial
sector has also greatly expanded, to the point
where it now contributes over a quarter of
the national income, South Africa is now
self-sufficient im many manufactured items
and has developed an important market for
those products in neighboring African areas.

3. Although impetus and direction have come
almost entirely from the whites, the growth
of the South African economy has depended
heavily on the availability of a plentiful supply
of cheap non-white labor. Some three million

Africans derive a livelihood from employment
on white farms. Another three million are
in the urban areas, some working on a con-

tract basis but many of them more or less
permanently employed.© The Colored and
Indian elements, concentrated in the urban
centers of Cape Province and Natal, play a
major role as agricultural, unskilled and semi-
skilled laborers, with the Indians also im-
portant as merchants. For the most part the
non-whites occupy the lower paid unskilled
jobs, with the better posts reserved for whites
(or in a few cases Coloreds}). However, the
growth of the economy has made these prac-
tices increasingly burdensome, and a continu-
ation of substantial economic growth will
almost certainly require a liberalization of
labor practices. Even where enough white
labor is availakte, it is sometimes inferior to
non-white labor, which is far better educated
and productive thar. native work forces in
other ports of Africa.

4. Direct foreign investment has also con-
tinued to play an important role in the econ-
omy, despite a steady growth of domestic
capital resources which has been marked by
an increasing participation of Afrikaners——
traditionally a farming people—in industrial
enterprise. Total foreign investment Is of the
order of $4 bilzion, including a US stake of
over a half a billion dollars. Thus the $1.5
billion fall in South African security prices
in the three months ending in March was a
serious shock to the South African money
market and suzgests that sufficient external
investment to sustain the recent pace of eco-
nomic growth will be lacking. The rush by
foreign investors to sell South African se-

‘The remaining third of the African population
in the native reserves practices subsistence agri-
culture along traditional lines and makes no
direct contribution to the economy as a whole,
put the reserves themselves have become in-
creasingly dependent on remittances by urban
workers,

een a as] eel ail

a
'

curities and repatriate the proceeds helped
produce a $96 million fall in gold and foreign
exchange reserves in the three months follow-
ing the Sharpeville incident.

Social and Political Patterns
In the White Community

5. The more than half a century which has
passed since the Boer War has not eradicated
the mutual suspicions and differences in out-
look between the Afrikaans-speaking descend-
ants of Dutch settlers, who comprise 60 per-
cent of the white population, and the English-
speaking inhabitants of British stock. Under
the influence of the Dutch Reformed Church
and other organizations, most Afrikaners re-
tain the intense sense of mission inherited
from their Calvinist forbearers. There has de-
veloped among them a fiery nationalism
which regards their success in carving out
a nation on the African continent and the
principle of white supremacy on which it has
been based as divinely ordained. In contrast,
most of the English-speaking element are
descendants of those lured to South Africa
by the prospect of economic opportunity.
Although they share a common loyalty to
South Africa as their homeland, their patri-
otism lacks the intensely exclusive quality
found among the Afrikaners and is tempered
not only by their background of British moral
and political concepts but by a greater sense
ol iaentification with the Commonwealth and
the UK.

6. The political party structure of the Union
reflects tnis ethnic division. The dominant
Nationalist Party, which with the aid of con-
siderable gerrymandering holds 102 of the 160
seats in the lower house of the Federal Parlia-
ment and controls all provincial assemblies
except in Natal, is the chief organ of Afrikaner
nationalism, and has worked closely with the
Dutch Reformed Church, the Broederband
secret society, and other organizations to mold
the Afrikaners into a tightly knit group. The
opposition United Party is essentially the
party of the English-speaking minority.
Although it commands more voting strength
than its 53 parliamentary seats would indi-
cate, it has lacked vigor and has developed

no clearly defir.ed alternative to the rigorous
racial policies advanced by the Nationalist.
While critical of the lengths to which the
Nationalists have gone in enforcing white
supremacy, the United Party and the vast
majority of the English-speaking population
also consider it essential that white domina-
tion be continued. The only voices favoring
any radical concessions to non-white aspira-
tions are those of a small body of intellectuals,
exemplified by Alan Paton and his tiny Liberal
Party and the somewhat larger but still rela-
tively insignificant Progressive Party.

The Policy of Apartheid

7, The principle of Raasskap or white suprem-
acy was initially manifested in a collection of
customs supplemented by a patchwork of law.
Although the skatus of Coloreds and Indians
was clearly inferior to that of the whites, cus-
toms, law and their greater adaptability to the
modern social and economic order provided
them greater opportunity for advancement
than Africans. The Africans enjoyed nominal
parliamentary representation and the Coloreds
voted on the same roll as the whites.

8. Since 1948, when the Nationalist Party
came to power, the government's racial
policies have hardened. As articulated in
Afrikaner Nationalist dogma, the concept of
apartheid, on which these policies have been
based, is an expression, not of racia] animosity,
but of a profound conviction that the non-
white races are “different” in their aptitudes
and qualities and their place in the divine
scheme of things—that it is in their interest,
as well as that of the whites, that their status
and contacts with the white community
be carefully circumscribed. Nationalist-led
parliaments have appropciated sizable sums
for primary and secondary non-white educa-
tion; as of 1958 over half of the African chil-
dren of school ege were enrolled. In the last
ten years the state has also provided new and
vastly improved housing for half a million
urban Africans. However, the proponents of
apartheid insist that improvements in the
status of the non-whites take place within
their own communities and that they be sepa-

eee

1 Eee ee

erage

SPT OE * Techie anesihinieeeeran “ceoeineeim amen aon dl A a ES TEI Ty a en a “eerie we

rated as much as possible from the white com-
munity, Their avowed aim is the ultimate
resettlement of the bulk of the urban Africans
on the native reserves, with factories and other
sources of employment nearby, where they
can live under their own leaders according to
their own cu3toms.®

9, In practice, however, the net effect of gov-
ernment policy has been to tighten the con-
straints placed on non-whites by custom and
by their inferior economic status. The prin-
cipal burden falls on the urban African, al-
most the whole of whose life is now governed
by inflexible regulations and administrative
decisions largely administered by local officials
and the police, Taxation has been increased,
while repressntation in parliament (three

"seats out of 163) has been eliminated. Both

men and women are now subject to “pass
laws” which seriously restrict freedom of
movement and often separate famiHes; their
education is circumscribed; they may no
longer enter “white” universities; their place
of resitence is prescribed by law, and they may
purchase land only in specified townships in
the native reserves. Africans may not belong
to registered trade unions, are largely pre-
vented from entering the skilled trades, and
are forbidden to engage in strikes. With few
exceptions, they may not legally purchase or
consume liquor, nor, in urban areas, may they
brew the traditional “kaffir beer,”

10, Members of the two other non-white

groups are subjected to lesser but still onerous
restrictions. While the Indians are not sub-
ject to the pass laws, they are forbidden to
cross provincial boundaries without a special
permit and are subject to important restric-

*Little has been done towatd implementing this
plan, which -s highly impractical as demonstrated
by the findings of the government's Tomlinson
Commission in 1956, The native reserves, consti-
tuting only I} percent of the country’s area, are
too small and poor in resources to sustain the
bulk of the Africans. From the viewpoint of the
nation as a whole, as well as that of the Africans,
the scheme wou'd not be economically viable
without a massive relocation of industry and
communications at immense cost. Indeed the
physical resettlement of the bulk of the three
million urban Africans In the reserves would
Itself be a staggering task.

tions on land purchases, and face, in many
cases, eventual displacement from residential
and business properties. Since they are still
regarded as an unassimilable elemant, they
have no vote. The far larger group of
Coloreds, who were formerly treated as an ap-
pendage of the white race, have progressively
Jost in status and freedom. In 1956 the
Coloreds were denied their long-established
right to participate in ordinary elections and
were placed on a separate elzctoral register
to elect four white representatives to parlia-
ment. Other legislation forbids intermarriage
between Coloreds and whites, provides sepa-
rate Colored schools, forbids Coloreds from
entering “white” universities, denies them
membership in “white” trade unions, and gen-
erally forces them to use separate social
amenities and transportation facilities and to
live in segregated areas.

Non-White Political AAovements

1t. Non-white political activity has centered
among the urban Africans. Organizations
representing Colored and Indian interests
were participants in the Congress of the
People Mevement, @ Communist-dominated
united front promoting non-white interests.
However, most of the Coloreds have tended to
identify themselves with the whites rather
than with Africans—their social and economic
inferiors—and have been relatively inactive in
the political arena. Occupying a precarious
position as a relatively smail, unassimilated
minority, the Indians have been generally
passive and the chief significance of the Com-
munist-led South African Indian Congress
(SAIC) has stemmed from its ability to pro-
vide advice and (through donations extracted
from rich Indian merchants) financial support
to the African politica] movements.

12. Until it was banned early in April 1950,
the African National Congress (ANC) was the
most important non-white political organi-
gation. Founded in 1912, the ANC had be-
come increasingly active since World War I.
It had a large but undisciplined body of follow-
ers, particularly among urban Africans, and as
an instrumer.t of political power was unwieldy
and difficult to direct, Nevertheless, under

the leadership cf ex-Chief Albert Luthuli, it
had great prest-:ge as the symbol of African
aspirations anc constituted the principal
school for the political education of the African
population.

13. In April 1959 there emerged a hew and
more militant Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC),
headed by Robert M. Sobukwe, a young lec-
turer in Bantu languages at the University of
the Witwatersrand, It was formed by a group
of ANC dissidents who espoused a “Black Na-
tionalist” policy. The new organization was
strongly anti-Communist in approach and
looked for insp.ration to African nationalist
Jeaders north of the Union. It rejected the
gradualism and nonviolence preached by the
ANC and its Indian and white advisers and
urged instead direct and immediate action by
Africans to enforce their demands.

14. The PAC was responsible for the anti-pass
campaign of March 1960, calling upon its
followers to: (a) turn in their passes to police
stations as an indication of refusal to obey the
pass laws any longer, (b) willingly accept ar-
rest as a consequence; (Cc) offer no legal de-
fense for their actions and refuse to pay any
fines; and (d) “fill South Africa's jails." This
strategy was ezleulated not only to eliminate
the keystone of the government's racial pol-
icies; it was also designed to remove thousands
of African workers from the labor force and
thereby threaven South Africa's economy.
The PAC leaders clearly indicated that their
ultimate purpose was to bring about an
African government in South Africa, setting
1983 as a target date. This campaign led di-
rectly to the Snarpeville inc:dent of 21 March
and to the banning of the PAC shortly there-
after.

Communist Influence

15, Although banned in 1950, the Communist
Party of South Africa continues to operate
underground, Its hard-core membership is
composed principally of whites but includes a
few Indians and uther non-whites. The pre-
dominantly white South African Congress of
Democrats (SACOD), formed in 1953, provides
the organizational framework for overt Com-

10

munist activities and has on occasion pub-
lished a journa! entitled Fighting Talk.

16. Communists in South Africa direct the
bulk of their propaganda toward non-whites
and their principal organizational efforts
toward penetrating and controlling the non-
white political movements. This they have
succeeded in doing in the case of the principal
Indian organization, SAIC, while the South
African Colorec People’s Congress, the South
African Congress of Trade Unions, and
the Federation of South African Women are
essentially Communist fronts. But the Afri-
cans, as by far the largest racial group and po-
tentially the principal locus of political power
in South Africa, have constituted the prime
Communist target, with the African National
Congress (ANC) the most attractive organiza-
tional prize. Since about 1952 Communists
dominated the ANC’s formal organizational
structure and policy directives at the national
level, although they had little ideological sup-
port, among the rank-and-file and several
local ANC committees and individual leaders
steadily resisted the Communist-controlled
national leadership.

17. Communist influence within the ANC was
exercised in a mumber of ways: through a few
convinced adherents in the ranks of the top
leadership; through money provided to the
impoverished organization for operating ex-
penses and salaries of the few full-time offi-
cials; and through the weekly propaganda
organ, New Age, which had extensive African
readership and which furnished a handy club
to batter opposition elements within the ANC.
The disinclination of many respectable and
moderate Afrizans to become involved in ANC
politics further assisted Communist efforts to
determine its policies.

18. In order to win new adherents to their
various front organizations, which they in-
duced the ANC to support, the Communists
mounted an all-out propaganda campaign
against the government's racial policies.
However, the Communists carefully eschewed
calls for immediate action, instead stressing
the need for discipline and for building slowly
for the future. They extolled passive resist-

ance, a philosophy which exercises a strong
influence on South Africa's Indian community
(of which Mahatmi Gandhi was a member
from 1893 to 1914) and on many of the
elder African ieaders (e.g., Luthuli). The
Communists’ tactical restraint apparently

stemmed from a well-founded fear that any
head-on clash with the government would re-
sult in the destruction of the organizational
apparatus built up at such great pains over
many years. This fear appears to have been
borne out in large measure since Sharpeville.

ANNEX B

MILITARY AND SECURITY FORCES

1. Although all of South Africa’s armed forces
have a primary mission of assisting in main-
tenance of internal security, the South African
Police Force has the chief responsibility in this
field. A force of 22,000, it is a generally ef-
cient, well-armed and highly mobile agency.
Equipment includes armored cars, machine

, and individual automatic weapons.
Slightly under half of the police are non-whites
who are normally unarmed while on duty.
These non-whites are carefully selected and
would probably remain loyal to the govern-
ment, except in the case of a full-scale national
non-white uprising. As presently constituted
the police force is capable of suppressing dis-
turbances and generally preserving order.
Organized resistance over widespread areas
would tax its capabilities, however, and again
require the mobilization of army Teserves.
The police are strongly disliked by the bulk of
the African populace because of their harsh
tactics in crusaing political protest demonstra-
tions. Moreover, the police force has been
charged with the enforcement of the pass laws
and other urpopular racial legislation over
the years, resulting in the arrest of about one-
tenth of the total population yearly.

2. The South African Army relies heavily on
reserves to carry out its mission of supporting
the police in maintaining internal security.
The professional force on active duty consists
of only 3,200 men, who are concerned mainly
with training the Citizen Force and the Com-
mandos. The immediate source of army fight-
ing strength is rather the Citizen Force of
14,500, Composed of part-time yolunteer offi-

cers and NCO’s and enlisted conscripts, it is
maintained in an early-ready condition, with
personne] assigned to units near their place
of residence. In addition, there is a Com-
mando organization of 65,000 men organized
into 178 smal] units. The Commandos are a
wholly volunteer body especially trained in
marksmanship and infantry tactics. Army
mobilization requirements have been estab-
lished to supply 30,000 troops within 30 days,
and full mobilization can place 70,000 men in
the field in 99 days. Personnel] in all three
bodies are drawn from the white population
alone.

3. South Africa’s Air Force has 486 aircraft of
which 121 are assigned to tactical units. The
force is capable of rapid expansion, drawing
on civil aviation for equipment and pilots.
Personnel strength is about 3,000 whites, of
whom 200 are pilots. A reserve force of 4,000
crew members and 5,600 support personnel
could be mobilized rapidly. Tactical strength
consists of five squadrons, including two jet
interceptor units; no bomber-type aircraft are
available. Close cooperation with the army
is stressed in training exercises, and the air
force is proficient in ground support tactics.
In addition to its primary responsibility of
supporting ground forces in maintaining in-
ternal security, the air force shares with the
navy (and the British Navy} responsibility
for protection of the sea routes around the
southern tip of Africa. However, its capability
in this field is limited to a single maritime
reconnaissance squadron equipped with ASW
aircraft. South Africa’s skilled airmen have
excellent fighting qualities.

ee RS meen nike sme conn ae mal pn Aw

4. The active list of the South African Navy
how numbers only six combat vessels (DDE
and smalleri, two auxiliaries and six service
craft. Three DDE’s are under construction in
the UK. Prasent manpower is approximately
1,800 backed by a small active reserve of 500;
aliare whites. The navy lacks any significant
offensive power, but has some ASW and mine-
sweeping capabilities in home waters. It is
currently committed primarily to an internal
security role, and during the recent emergency
sailors assisted the police in guard duties

"5. Communist penetration in both military
and police fcrces is believed to be nonexistent.

Ome_ aOlEE

eounay unos 1

ty aaa,
ifdav HINO

his
GR oor oor a
Bpdisagins
oon oaP aon o

Crete oat rf
: = oF UG See? Patt Spyajiie
Oe a ad fete G03 “8 he) WGI ud ays au Se -uMOYS ase
‘eqs Pur ied pallales

VORUV HLNOs
dO
NOINA FHL

“s, wXUFQ0
er on ee ne ova
H#LUGN

ne
(Powistoay,

heweang ‘naar (ETERS
yam ae on ee rene

; “ASVOVIVN ” 5

i pees hieg, a ee rm et oo = : H -

x = M :
A Aiea Sat oe r : 5 r i =
f Leal naaere Fr 2 5 G if
ovat ’ : amos ‘ 4 so :
Cee curr Pe Asnge og

. e, 7 - ‘.

y : 2

ion Oe 4] erar 7y

en

a7"aO } NOY Mads

eda

'
.

.

Crab > Nee eg

Saneist =

Oe Gad
waa ™ ma “

a aS ra
Kasce

Ce, ae

re) ce oO Srianaae
weulenwr or Le
she de ithe
