Information Obtained from BlankK) at Interviews at the American Embassy London,
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012422, dated 2 February 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012422).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

e: 7: —

1, The following information was obtained from
at interviews at the American Embassy, London, on
March 9, and at home in Woking on March 10, 1962.

2. In his capacity as Russian expert and i rpreter,

has spent a great

‘deal o me trave ng in the soviet Union and the Satellite
countries during the past few years. He reckons he has spent
a total of one year in the USSR alone. The Soviets have made
it plain to MMM from the first that they consider him to

be a suspicious character, and they have told that
they would much prefer to deal with a non-Russian-speaking

representative. Nevertheless, aside from one or two attempts ©

to tempt him with an attractive woman they have not bothered
him, and MMMM had felt that the Soviets were more or less

reconciled to his frequent appearances in the USSR on behalf
of

3. As we already knew, MEM was with the
delegation the entire time, and was the GKKNR official in

charge of the group. Most of the other Committee officials
with whom they had dealings were technical specialists in the
pulp and paper field. MMMM was very clearly in charge,
and all the other Soviets deferred to him on all subjects
except technical ones. would drop out of the con-
versation whenever it took a technical turn.

l.. On the train from Moscow to Leningrad, et ee
asked MMM if a reception would be given by the British
Embassy for the delegation,. to which the Soviet officiais
involved would be invited. replied that no such
reception was planned. | said that it would be a
good idea to arrange one, and that Mr. Hilla y KING and his
assistant, ee should be invited. raised the
issue again in Leningrad, and once again on the train going
back to Moscow. Worn down by persistence, upon
returning to Moscow egy OO to ask him what
he thought of the idea. said that he was willing to
arrange such a reception, but that because of the short
notice he thought it should be quite informal and that it
would be simpler to leave the British out of it, particularly
since Hillary KING was out of town. “In any case, all the
delegation members were AMERICANS. MM and BM wrote
out a short guest list consisting of the delegation, the
appropriate GKKNR officials and 2a few membersC/ASR_the Americas

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

9 War B22

: Pea a  ghre Mmm *0K8
pyr oe

.
64 r Aa ;
Broly popret ter ee

1.3(a)(4)

1.3{a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

et on-only dt

& O°
Sate pe
Aor pet,

1.3(a)(4)

=Da
Embassy, and it was agreed that would relay the Soviet 1.3(a)(4)
invitations verbally to
on Friday, January 26,
e subject of the reception
again, arranged for that evening
and asked nvitations to the Soviet 1.3(a}(4)

officials concerned. asked if Mr. KING and

were coming and seemed quite unhappy when he learned that they
were not, explanations as to why they had decided to
make ita strictly Soviet-American affair did not appear to
satisfy him. repeated that at least (whom
he described as having a beard). should be invited.

6.° The reception took
very well. According to
very pleased except
after all the
first place.

place that evening and went off

all the Soviet guests seemed
which was a little strange
pressure he had applied to arrange it in the 1.3{a)(4)’

did not notice anything else about

behavior at the reception f this point was touched
tly/. An interesting point
LOPATENKO beforé ot even |
was clearly the ranking Soviet official
in his fifties, speaks English fairly we
personality. The Soviets came and left
LOPATENKO who gave the Signal for depart
lasted about: 14 hours, :

7. On the evening of January 27, MMMM learned that
their scheduled flight for Warsaw the following day had been  1.9{a)(4)
moved up from noon to early morning. Since they did not tnow
if Was aware of this fo tried to reach him at
home. No one knew home address or
ber, and it proved impossible to obtain them; does not
know whether this was because | ds not listed in the
directory or because he doesn't have a telephone at home.

was finally able to get in touch with VASENKO, one of the

GRKKNR paper specialists, who allegedly went to PM home
with the message. ,

telephone num-

8. At 6:15 the following morning (Sunda » January 28),
was packing in his hotel room when knocked M4 3(a)(4)

the door and came in alone. ME sec into the
bathroom ina mysterious manner and proceeded to turn on all

the taps. He then said, "You must do Something for me as a
friend." He asked upon return to London, to send a
telegram to a certain cable address with the following message:

Ste ON - /signed Andy."
explained that must provide the time, date and

-=

1.3{a)(4)

‘teenies

; Bees Sse 4.344)

place to suit himself, and that a man (undescribed) would meet
him there at the appointed time. was then to give the
man the following message from "Budte ostorozhny,
potomu chto mashyna _.. /three letters/ sleduyet za vami

i oni smotryat na vas vse vremya seychas." /Be carefu]
because car is following you and they are watching you

é
; had just 1-3fay
Started to voice his objections when the porter came for the
: On the way
‘good

9. At the airport, while they were going through Passport’
control and customs, noticed a man in Civilian clothes
and a green hat, obviously a Security type, who was Standing

ye | me has never

departures from the Soviet Union. When the processing was
Completed, MMMM had to exchange money to pay for excess 1,3(a)(4)
baggage. To do So, he. had to go to the bank which is located '
accompanied him. On the
that he-could not

he was a businessman and did
omething that was a Clear viola-
was sturineds; when
uld definitely not fulfill

rn the paper on which he
had written down the message, — tore the paper several
times and handed the pieces to
Cmameg ty upset. He asked to be sure to

to retu

10.) It was still quite dark when this scene took place
and MJ is quite Sure that mo one could have Observed or
Overheard them, ho tonger: remembers the telegraphic 1.3fa)(4)
address except that it was a standard commercial one-word
contraction ( gave "AMFITREX" as an example), followed
by "London." He has forgotton the Plate number of ¢

1l. Peco ese Slept in the same compartment with
on the train from Leningrad to Moscow. While the two of them 1.3{a)(4)

a gen 1.3¢a(4)

| ey ay ee 4 1-3(a){4)
-)-

were sitting alone in the c
transistor radio (he told
the volume up high and told
being here -- you know too much,
searching your bags."

12. For a Soviet official, MENMMNNM talked a good deal
about himself. MMMM was able to recall that aay is a 1.3(a)(4)
retired Army colonel, that he was at one time the assistant

ompartment are pulled out a

it was Japanese), turned 1.3(a)(4)
"They don't like your
"and, "be careful, they are

‘military attache to Turkey, that he is married, has a sixteen

year old daughter, and that his wife is six months pregnant,
that he has been to England and France with delegations.
also mentioned that he worked with an electronics

| delegation several weeks before (WBBM does not know the

eet

nationality of this delegation), and that he was planning to
take a group to Switzerland for the auto show in the latter
part of March; MMMM added, however, that the Swiss trip
might not come off because "the Swiss are very difficult
about visas."

13. MEM mentioned several times that he was
planning to lead a group to the United States and that he has
already applied for his visa. BEM recalled that
already had the itinerary for this trip: they are to arrive 1.3(aj(4)
in New York on May 9 or 10 and will proceed to Seattle to ;
spend about three weeks at the World Fair. They will also
visit Washington and perhaps San Francisco, was not
sure about the exact sequence of cities and did not Know what
character the group would haves; he did have the impression
that the entire trip would last four to five weeks. This
American trip was common talk among the other GKKNR members.
SHVARTS said that he was looking forward to it as he had never
been in the U.S. The trip was also mentioned by a girl
interpreter who was filling in for § TS one afternoon: she
said that she was dying to go to the U.S., but that
would never take her, he would take SHVARTS.

1). MMMM was intrigued by MME apparent duality.
In the presence of other Soviets he was the typical officious ©
party-liner: at a banquet in Leningrad he got up and 1.3(a)(4)
delivered a militant speech about peace and friendship that C
could well serve as a model of its type. On the other hand,
when ME was alone with SE or with the.other delega-

» tion members = would make very candid and unusual remarks.

He told Mc N that MOLOTOV was very ill and that there was
no chance whatsoever that he would ever return to Vienna. ‘He
also told them that "We are giving the Chinese so much aid
that we are beginning to wonder if they won't bleed us to

death. Our relations with them are asi pe WE said
1.3(a)(4)

we

1.3(a)(4)
see

that_up to the scene at the airport just before departure 1.3(a)(4)
appeared to be in good Spirits throughout, and in
full command of the situation. ; ”

15. MBM describegd SHVARTS as being one of the
official GKKNR interpreters, His English is quite good. 1.3(a)(4)
Although assigned to the MMMM delegation as interpreter,
SHVARTS did not actually spend much time with them because

when. was busy at TEKHMASHINIMPORT or elsewhere,
SHVARTS is about 33 years old, is aggressive, intelligent; .and
quick. His relations with appeared to be good, and

he acted towards MMM swith the respect due a considerably
more senior official,

16. The MMMM delegation was originally billed as a
lecture tour. However, from the very beginning of their visit
to the USSR the Soviets Said that they wanted it to be the .
basis for an exchange delegation to the U.S. on a somewhat
different basis -- that of visiting mills. Therefore, the  1.3(a)(4)
Soviets proposed to enlarge the delegation!s itinerary
to include visits to Some paper milis. In practice, this
boiléd down to a visit to one mill, a condensor paper mil1
near Leningrad. The Soviets then tried to blow this up ds
grounds for a return visit by a Soviet delegation to ten of
the latest swifite mills in the U.S. The lead in this was
taken by ORL » the newly-appointed chairman of the Committee
for Pulp & Paper, Woodworking, & Forestry, and was faithfully
followed by all the GRKNR officials, including

has urged not to agree to such a visit,

particularly since the U.S. mills involved represent the

tour like the Moone. reported the details of this
aspect of the trip to. feels that it is
likely that some sort of an exchange visit by a Soviet paper
delegation Will take place, but that it will take months to
agree on its nature and on the timing and itinerary.

17. MBM did not ring up MMM when he was in
Moscow at the end of February and he has no intention of doing
So in the future as he thinks the chances are 100 to 1 that
was trying a provocation of some sort, MM has 4.3(a)(4)
not discussed the incident with anyone, and will not do so.

He is sgheduled to go back to Moscow around the middle of May
i; this will be a short two- or three-day trip to

s = | 1.3(aK4)

a CO ltztan

-6-

discuss penalties on a contract and will not involve any con-

tact with GKKNR officials. However, has requested 4.3(a)(4)
guidance on how he should act if should turn up to

pester him again. We have promised to give him some advice on
this score when we have had a chance to analyse his informa-
tion and to compare it with other recent Soviet overtures to
and provocations of American businessmen. RSs promised to
get in touch with BM before going to the USSR if an
unexpected trip should come up before May. EE most
urgently requested that the information he provided on

be used in such a way that it could not reveal him
as the source. He also requested that the fact that he

reported to us at all be kept in strictest confidence, even
within our organization.

say

plea oe yo:
