El Salvador Performance on Certification Issues(truth Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000027407, dated 5 January 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000027407).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

OP, Director of aSoeretaie—

= oe f %, Central mE aba 5
a 5 3 Incelligence
j
g
:

a

Wea

-_

oo to Paes

SATE 83.3-83 oe
44 Jonuary 1983

on329

Approved for Relsaae
Date

“= Warning Notice *

“Sensitive Inteligence Sources ond Methods Involved

as NATIONAL SECURMY 1 INFORMATION -

es

" -Anowthorized ‘Disclosure ‘Subject 9 40 Criminal Sonctions

| ADISSEMINATION SONTROL ABEREVIATIONS

SOFORNE

: PROPIN—

aN AIBONLY=
DROON-

RELL

Ge

sorranged through uy

; _- Not Releasable to Foreign Nationo’s *
% HOCONTRATH .

thot Releasable to Lontroctorsor -“
Comrector/Gonsyttonts ;
Lovtion~—Propretory information anvolwed
NEB Deportments Only
Dissemination ond Extraction of informetion
| Leontroilied by Driginator
This informotion Has Geen Authorized tor
‘Release 40...
Toreign Government information -

Teena <i 27S | “

laiviEW De GuDE

ee

ONIE 83.1-83

EL SALVADOR: PERFORMANCE
ON CERTIFICATION ISSUES

Information available as of 15 January 1985 was
used in the preparation of this Estimate.

ed

.

THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL

INTELLIGENCE, |
THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONGURS.

The following intelligence organizations participated in the greporotion of the
Estimate:

‘The Centro! Intelligence Agency, the Defense intelligence Apency, the Flationol Security
Agency, ond the intelligence organization of the Department of State.

Also Participeting:

The Assistont Chief of Stoff for Intelligence, Department of the Army

The Director of Novel intelligence, Department of the Navy id
The Assistont Chief of Staff, Intetligence, Department of the Air Force

The Director of Intelligence, Headquorters, Morine Corps

‘KEY JUDGMENTS

During the past six aponths ave have seen signs of modest_progress- -
insome areas, and nosigns of backsliding on the part of the government.
or the military in their commitment to improve the human rights
situation and reinforce Cemocratic institutions in El Salvador. Neverthe-
less, positive efforts by the government in al] areas continue to be

_.... hindered by deep-seated problems, and overall we conclude that Liere .
>=. fave deen few dramatic changes since July. We expect progress do © -
‘ semain slow.and ardvous.421r 7” heer a os

° "The government has-made limited progress on duman tights issues
inthe past-sia months, although in at Jeast one zrea—the zate-of civilian .
deaths—the improvement ‘has been substantial. Other positive trends,

such aszood treatment of political-prisoners, remain overshadowedsbya .

virtuslly nonfunctional criminal justice system that has proved amable
to indictama prosecute the.accused. ea} OS

Although some progress hhas been made in curbing abuses dy the
a armed forces, =) Salvador continues to -have serious problems in this
respect. Major problem areas semain the Jack of fire -control in
poptlated combat 2onesand arbiuary violence commi tted by amsuper-
ae viseé security forces. Nevertheless, the military has increased efforts to
aoe educate and discipline subordinate officer. anc’ troops, anc-§ a
=: Pa ln advitian, replace (WG.

wmnem of 2 dew commanoers pas peen ioliowed by 2 subsequent

improvement in the human sights records of their units. Moreover,

- before launching operations some field commanders reportedly have
fae received specific instructions to respect the sights of the Jocal civilian
Saban He _ we population and to take guerrilla prisonezs. Thex increasingly -have

adhered tothese orders in operations of the past six ‘mor ths. 4eae)

“The government hes demonstrated advances in political and
economic programs, particularly in Phase I of the agrarian sefonns,
and the parties have shown a sillingness 10 cooperate on Jaajor issues. A
anity pact signed by the maior parties has Jed to establishment of
political and human aights commissions and 2 new (Centra) Elections
Council. A new constitution is scheduled to be completed this spring,
and presidential elections 2te scheduled for March J964. -toqepte

| The government continues its interparty discussions on teconcilia-
tion. On the issue of negotiations. the positions of all government and

military elements have coalesced against guerrilla terms for dialogue,
but they will discuss a role for the guerrillas in the ongoing political
process. San Salvador has renewed offers to the left to compete in
elections and is drafting an amnesty law to help convince leftists to-end
the fighting. The government le. ves the door open for possible
informal talks to that end. en} a

The killers of the US churchwomen have been identified, indicted,
and have been remanded for trial in civilian crimina} courts. There is no
evidence of higher level complicity in these murders. Two members of
the National Guard have confessed to killing two US representatives
from the American Institute for Free Labo: Development (AIFLD) and
the president of the Salvadoran land reform institute. They have been
ordered ‘to stand ‘trial. However, the three accused authors of these
crimes—two military officers and a businessman—remain free. {ear

Oe

Sone mm

Exnbassy in San Saivador continues to provide our
rimary base of information on the fundamental issues
eae in certification; the data provided appear

objective and accurateard reflect the judgmentofal _

selements of the mission.<frarrje oe

Humon Rights

US Congress criterion for “spdging Salvadoran
Covernment's performance: Making 2 concerted -
and significant effort to comply «vith internation-
2liy recognized human tights” ~-

2. Overall, the Salvadoran Goveroment has «made
Jenited progress on human sights issues in the past six
snonths relative 10 the period covered in the Jest
seport, although in al Jeast one ares—-the aate of

civilian death:—the improvement ‘has been substan
tial. Given the virtualiy nonfunctional erimina) fustice -
system in E] Salvador, the standard Jur measuring

progress in this yegard is elusive. According to the LS

Embassy, only 300 criminals had been sprovessed
through civilian courts oui of 2 pationa) prisoner
population of 4.000 «ca

S. Tne government's record on treatment of prison
ers, however, is good. “These abuser that de occur,
according te the US Embeacty, usually happen suring
the process of 2rresi.and not during detention. For”
example.-the- government claims to have ander detex- ~
tion approximately $00 politica) prisoners. We Jnuw
that some 700 are housed .at ‘the relatively modern

Reporting fron: the US :

number of detainees. The establishment of an amnesty
comthission also is being considered to oversee the
Droader issue -of ascmilating guerrilla defectors inte
the political and economic mainstream as one phase of
a democratic solution to the insurgent war. A seven-
amember human rights commission was appointed ia
early December, charged with formulating an “insti-

tutional mechanism that will promote and protect
human zights "fep=

3S. The ansurgent var has intensified ace qulys and -

the rate-of combat deaths on -both sides has increased. -_
The sate of civilian political deaths, however, has
continued to decline-rnarkedly.’ The monthly averages
eof-political deaths in 196] was about 510,-but for 1982 -

dt dropped to 2}7—a dectease of S7 percent. Since : -

Julythe death rate bes dropped mmoze than-40 percent - i.

drom thatec! the fests anonths of 1982. ee,

Control xt athe genes Forces

~Isachieving subs‘antia) contro! over. a elements -
sof dts -own aimed Jarces”™”

=. For example, the genera! staff rernains dargely ©

Marions Prison outside the capital. These prisoners _ ineffective in promoting ‘fire contro} among corbat

ange in status from -captured guerrillas to Jeftist — inits although some improvement: shove deen made

jnteliectuals suspected of subversion. According to LS
Eanbassy officers who have visited the prisoners, they
are well Jed ane zeceive excellent treatment, including -
accest 10 schooling. use :o! -an industrial shop, and
richits to conjugal visits in private dormitories. +or

4. "The government is atlempting to expedite Tria}

eating for political prisoners and is drafting 2
new amnesty Jaw that wil) further help in reducing the

O71 Ube ari Oi Some Salvadoran scommmander: during *

over the dus! six smonths.

| Political deaths wre those that take plow: wunide 2 zone ol
conde! and which cearh sugees + politica) tpotive: Jor example.
cavitians murdered because of suspected complicity «ith the insur:
pen. Civihan: ilied asa resull of being caught ina crosfire a
othe: miltary-relaved activities are chassifred as combat deaths ase

”

1644,
(6) (3;

0)

Iv

“snilitary personne] dargelyreflects the excesses of these

abyi ERE jue
OER TE?

bombardments and large-scale sweeps against guerrilla
strongholds sometimes result in civilian Joss of life and
destructicn of property. In some instances, moreover,
the distinction between combatant and noncombatant

Lee : teeter guerrilla’. casualiies
ien anclude unarmed ansurgent support personnel,
_carmop Jollowers, and inoocent civilians trapped in the

- & The tenuous and often wonexistept contro) of

senior officers over elements ofthe paramilitarysecuri- __

ty forces and civilian sirregulars isa wontinaing wause .
dor concen. Reporting on Auman rights violations dy ;
smal niral based constabulary'Forces In dsolated areas
sespecially,avbere pwlesspess aca way of Jife semiliter-
ate personne] Jed dy corpora).or a sergeant 2) too
often assume the soles of prosecutor,judge,-<and ex€C0-
‘tione.-o-em) ee .

S. Senior smilitar: Jeader:, dhov ever.care continuing
then efforts 10 overcome druman zights abuses. ‘Over
the Jas! six smenth:, members of the thigh rommandg
Aave stepped up visits 20 sposts in the interior, emphs-
Sizing to subordinate officers the necessity of disciplin-
ing troops guilty of abuses. The high command appears”
increasingly concerned that combat officers sets good
example for their troops. The replacement of a few

. cormmanders has beet followed by z subsequent im-

provement: in the human rights record of their Units. 4gn—

10. Defense Minister Garciz continue: to the «
jeading zole ir: curbing military abuses. In October
2952 he orderecz conierence in San Salvador of early
306 Joca] commancer:;—essential]y.aJ] enlisted -person-
siel—and reaffirmed the hich command's commitmeni
to human rights and the -penelties for committing

‘eGncatt the rnilitary “have shown some positive val |
though undramatic, sesults. Before launching an oper:
a2tion, some field commander -repornedly have te
ceived specific instructions to sespect the rights of the -
Jocz} civilien population and to take guerrille prison-
ers. They increasingly have adhered to these orders in
operations of the past six months. They continue to
take prisoners 2nd inlerrogate them in 2 more profes
siona) mannes.4e=~

' Internationa] Devdlapment provide the bulk of our

raission. Jt reportedly-will be formed by February, dut

Progress on Reform -

“Is making continued Progress in implementing
essential economic and political reforms, includ-
_ ing land reform.” see

‘U2 “The State Department .and the Agency for

information on the." «nm pincess. AE: available infor-
mation indicates tha. cne~overnment has made prog-
Tess in some areas of political and economic reform,
but has accomplished little in others_fe-wep

JS. ‘The function of government remains hampered’ 7

dy continuing tensions between sthe -najor sparties ~ 305-

: i Thus, despite (2:
spenodic flareups«thin-aod2mong the diverse politi ==. |,
cal groupings, moderates sand thardliners have been

~able to tend «off crises sthrough «compromise. For
example, in September the three major parties agreed -
to clivide the 26) mayoraltiessevenly, thosavoidinga
Bovermment cvisis dea ;

4. The ability of the partie go cooperate on some
key issues was underscored dy the signing in Augusi-of
the “Pact of Apanecd”—z amity document in which
the major pasties zledged 40 cooperate on political,
social and economic sefomms. As stipulated by the
agreement, human tights and political commissions.
since have been forméd and are functioning. vith the
dJatter setting = sorm2) timetable for drafting and
ratifying » new constitution by-early 1983 and sched-
uling presidential elections jor March 1984 The for-
mation of 2 peace commission, however, remains
mised in partisen controversy-over its compasitionand -

~ fem

_ We believe. therefore, that achile the coalision govern .

ment temnains vulnerable 10 partisan in-lighting the
overall trend points to increasing progress in policy -
formulation end implementation. twee

16. The military remains the key 1 stabilin in San
Sa)vador and continues tc seppert the Mapanz e¢min-

we te ae t

we believe the armed forces will remain
ahe priroary Torce for moderation. Shoulda change in
the Defense Ministry take place <in the next few
mmonths—as mow -2ppears sprobable—-swe believe the
officer corps will again select a pragmatist 40 assume
the porifolio.4e

Jc. While escalating arsentousas have pul new
strains on the economy, they diave not deterred the

armed forces from keeping thegrarian seform proce -.

“ness on track «On dalance, the selationship between the
peasant oranizations-and the amilitary chas improved,
and theland teform process insrecentsmonths has mot
sme! exith sthe skinds .of -sethacks and conboversy “that
-spccurred Jollowing the March-election, eben fonmer
landowners illegally eviciec several thousand -peasant
beneficiaries te--

QS. Progress in Phase II] Mand tothe tiller) has been
particularly apnatemt since an Army colone) was
=ppvinted 1o head its administration and.a top peasant
Jeader was named 10 the presidentia) committee wver-
seeing legislative action on jand velonm. For instance,
wccording to information provided by AID in 3]
Salvador, 1.366 applications for Jand tides were sub-
aitied in August and September, more than tnree
ames the figure G4 itor the previous two months 4e—

JS. Such increases also are attributable to-2 povern-
ment publicity campaign tc inform eligibie recipients
of benefits.anc procedures. At of J October, applice-
tions for new titles since the beginning of the reform
progrzm totaled 36.615. according to ATD. Since Octo
der, the government seporiediy chasse! the goa] of an
additional 22.000 new applications. by the end of
March 1985. According to AID,-more than 11.006 new
applications had been zeceived by vear's-end, indicat-
ing that government efiorts.are on-track. Meanwhile,
at of 2 October, 32,959 provisional titles had een
distributed. The zovernment hopes to increase this
digure dy an additional 14.000 by athe -end of March
1985; -bist by years-end the sota} had increased-by only
17720 suggesting that the government is well behind in
teaching tha! goa! ln addition, 357 permanent Jand
titles were granted under Phase Ll) during the pas six
months. bringing the tota] number of pcrmanent titles

granied to more than 400. 46a

Despite the recent dispute within —

Elections and Negotiations

“Is commited to holding free elections at an

early date and, to that end, has demonstrated...

good-faith efforts to begin discussions with all

tnajor political factions in FE] Salvador.”

20. The government and military appear commit-
ted to holding presidential elections on schedule by
March 1984. During « special plenary’ session in
November, the constituent assembly appointed a new
Central Elections Council to oversee the electoral
process. The five -political parties represented in the
assembly seach shave one anember zand sone walternate
serving on the ‘Council. “The president of that body—

elected zby chis colleagues—zepresents -the -moderate

Democratic Action party, which -curreatly holds no
“posts in the provisional government fep— -

21. The Council is charged primarily with:
—"Drfting a new electoral bw. *

—— Preparing 2 new voter zegistry.

— asthodsivg political party activities

— Promoting the election process.

— Regulating its own internal functions. ¢e>

22. The Council faces some fundamental -hurdies,
however, including its temporary status and the poss-
bility that it coule be* restructured before the 1984
election. Ji also currendy lacks financial ané material
resources. such 25 new compuiers to assure prompt and
accurate voter talhes. Ju predecessor's attempts to
Gesigns new voter registration system proved organi-

aationaliy infeasible during the last election and prob-

ably.alse will be bevond seach Jor 1964. ee>

23. National interest in the 1984 election, mean
avhile, aseteat evident in the atiempts of new partie
4o organize #
conservative splinter party has emerged with consider-
able private funding -and ches successfully zegistered
with well over the required 3.000 signatures. Two
Fledgling -center-tight croup: and one deftof-center

is

“party also plan 10 participate in 1964. den

34. We believe the government and the military are
willing 1¢ make some ahempt: at seconciliation with
the left before the presidential election. The Mapanz
administration tepeatedly has sated its policy of
allowing jettis! parties to register. campaign. 2nd field

a oe

candidates for office. Nevertheless, government and

Tailitary leaders of all stripes resect any proposals {or

negotiations aimed at achieving a power-sharing ar-

rangement outside the ongving political process. Ac

cording to the US Embassy, the five parties in the
-asserpbly have debated the issue and-appear 4o agree
" on three major points: — Ta

=“Dislogveandyér wéegoustons-at the initiative of *
the Jeftare unacceptable

— The left must compete for power in democzatic
-elections

— Any talks promoted dy the overnment should -
have.as their only objective the participation of

The det aeels wo secain dot

Support-—domestically and internationdlly—by por.
traying iselfac-the more Jezitimate governing alter -
native to the zivil-military power structure in San
Salvador. The Marxist-Leninist smajority of the insur-
gent alliance views negotiations 25.2 mean: of undes-
mining the amity of the governmentane the military,
while also buying time for ahe ueszilias to strength-
en their politica) and military -organizations.-Fven
the concept of power sharing—totally amaceeptable *
to guerrill chardliners—ic perceived by the Jes
doctrinaireas a temporary -phase defore fina) victory.

7. We view asnegligib.e the prospect: for negou-
ating # comprehensive 2nd binding solutian over the
next six months. The fundamental -goale of the
government ang the Marxist-Leninist insurgent Jead-
exsnip eppear ineconcilabe. I! elections take place,
therefore, they are likely 10 be held once again in an
atmosphere of violence. w-=eme

MOOR

Murders of US Citizens

“Good-faith efforts to investigate murders of six
TUS citizens] and bring to justice those responsible
for those murders.”

28. Our discussion of this issue is based almost
rentizely on US Embassy reporting 4¢}u0

29. “The five National Guard members accused in -
the slayings of four US churchwomen ‘have yel to go t0
trial. Court-appointed defense attorneys routinely
have appealed the presiding judge's order to begin
trial proceedings on the basis of the available evidence.
Tbe appeal process is likely to be completed by ihe
send of January and will determine whether the tia}
degins promptly or mast.be postponed pending fisther -
anvestigation. “There ds no additional seporting to sug. -""* ee

sgest how the appe'late court awill nule.dej= (630), (6)

dhas dmplied that toe junior sergeant accused of plan-
cing -and lirecting the dillings «might thave only ssug-
gesied they were under higher orders,” -presumabhy
to-elicit the cooperation of his peernaicls ;

wry

incident yedlects the Jang -of <arbitary -abuses by
element: -of the security forces that we Ddelieve stil!
take place. albeit with Jess freg DENCY ahh

Be. Iwo members of the Mational Guard have
confessee to killing two US representatives from the
American Institute Jor Free Labor Development
(ATFLD} and the president of the Salvadoran lang

teform institute. They have been ordered ‘to stand
trial. The three accused authors of the crime—militery z
officers Lt. Lopez Sibrian and Captain Avila and

businessman Hans Christ—remain freee

33. ‘The shereatoot: of Captain Avile and Ban:
Chris are unknown. Christ fled in 298) to Mizmi,
where be -~wa: Setained by VS authorites pending
extradition to Ei Salvador on crimina) charges.”
Charges were dropped by the Saivadoran Government
for lack of eviden with them the
extradition. re tS ees oe

we

country, and the government has appealed the release
by Jower court judges and expects a decision soon.

34. [The case ol Lt. ‘Lopez"Sibrian, Pe i ey +
on active duty, das underscored the cootinuing weak- *
esses of the judicial process. He avas twice ordered
seleased from anilitary detention” by two civilian

35. Jo bread terms, the Lopez Sibrian ease conti ..-
nes to-point up the endemic weakneses.and vulnere- -
Dilities of the entire ec situation

te
