Iran
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028290, dated 5 January 1969.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028290).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

10 Jesvery 1969

£

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 34-67

(Supersedes NIE 34-46) o

Svbmitted by

dade ta Ab rd tA

CIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTCLUSENCE
Concvrrad in by the

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE 20RD :
As indicoted orarieal
10 Jonvery 1967

~

Authenticated: ee Approved for Release
| : Date —--2 Of isie

4

PXECUTIVE SECRETARY, Asi
ws ene

a No 420

CONTENTS

CONCLUSIONS .
DISCUSSION
1. THE DOMESTIC POLITICAL SITUATION 02... eee eee 1k ceielte
Ik THE IRANIAN ECONOMY
Hi FOREIGN AFFAIRS

A. The Persian Culf

B. Other Regional Relations
© Relations with the US
D. Relations with the USSR

is ee mm gem mrp ree ty tS toe cm ewe eau pre came peat

iy, :

eee TOL Sat Ee att Saas

Sa aeialahall ee Er Te Se ET neree ea emetnenne poe parm ns sam om

NOTE

Over the past several years, Iran's hostility end suspicion towards
the USSR has declined. Iran has purchased some mililary equipment
from Moscow, and economic relations between the twe countries con-
tinue to expand. In addition, with the impending British withdrawal
from the Persian Gulf, Iran is viguroutly asserting its own claim te
a Icading position there, thus nianing afoul of the aspirations of Saudi
Arabia. In this estimate, we euur ae the implications of these and re-
lated develupments for US interests in the area.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The initial suctesses of the Shah's program of ascial reform
hite-Revalution”—and Iran's notable progress in eco-
nomic development have given the Shah considerably greater con6-
dence that he is master in his own huuse and coasiderably greater as-
surance in secking for fran the pusition in regional affairs that he deems
to be rightfully his. At the same time, he has come to see a lessening
in both the threat uf direct Soviet aggression and the likelihood of
US support in case of threats to fran from other sources.

B. In consequence, the Shah now feels that Tran can and should
be less dependent on the US than in the past, though he will ecntinue
as the ultimate guarantor of Iran's security and his
preferred source of arms. His Hlesire for a position of primacy in the
Persian Gulf will involve recurrent frictions with Saudi Arabia, a state
of affairs that will pose prublems for the US and provide the USSR
wit. opportunities for some expansion of its influence in Teheran.

C. “The USSR has es
mic develope.

the so-called “W

to regard the US

econo

ae

IRAN

=~

tablished itself as an important factor in trans

emery ae prone renee

ieee ee

amgmemctsteiaraP apcsareme disp mvs trimmnaisadtenaracratiion ia aralh wi 4 i

erent oe eh a

re ee

ese ype

ae reine emerald crear

ema
emcees Ng Oe ae gh A SS Rm rm BEI NT el

B catenin nacrtat nain ene RR OE

~~. In the domestic field, the Shalvs refurm program pow s¢emns
to be entering on a period of cunsvlidation likely to last for some
time. Demands for greater political participation by educated group:
are likely to grow. Hf such participation is nut permitted and if Iran's
economic progress should falter, this could pose serious problems for
his still narrowly-based vegume, particularly if dissent were & find sup-
port within the heretofore Joya! military. .

E. Iran's remarkable economic progress has been underwritten
largely by sharply rising oil revenues. We believe that differences be-
tween Western companies and the Shah over production levels will
be cumpused and that cuntinuing high levels of oil receipts will enable
Iran's ewunomic growth to cuntnue at a rapid rate and prregress to be
made on the many intractable problems that hamper modernization

of Lran's economy.

DISCUSSION eo

1. THE DOMESTIC POLITICAL STIUATION

i. The past Bve years have been matic by political stability and rapid eco
nomic growth under the leadership of an incre ssingly sell-assured Shab. During
this period he has shaken of his previous insecurity ard hevitance, emerging as
a contdent aud parpateful leader, His wvecesses in disc om Sting his poltical
cuemies and in cutting down possibie challengers have left lum unrivuled at the
center of power. These achievements, often scored in disregard of the advice of
his long-term foreign allies, have reinforced his conviction that She gounor’s
welfare and progress depend on his continuing mule, The elaborate coronation
ceremonies staged in October 1967 symbolized his determinaled & assert his
and Fran's prerogatives against all comers.

@ The Shah has ambitious plans for his country. He sees rapid ecanomic devel--
opment as kway fo acquire the power and prestige he wants for his country
internationally. For this he recognizes that some social change and. the spread
of education are qwential. His program of economit and social change, expressed
in the po-caled "ite Revoluton.”* has propelled some of Iran's semifeudal

——— #
t The “While Revoludon” ia tbe same shen in 1962 to the Shah's siz-potet profes a
Lard v-form, probit sharing for workers, eradication of itliteracy, eles tord reform, rations: an ticm

the Hualth Corps, the Development Corps, the village court notem tion of rater
rewoarces, derelopment, and a progaua @ increase adounstratieg efficieacy 4

’

Re SR ee ee ee er
; Poe aes uy ere rer Se oe

eee oe Basar |

ate alee
ahve

a

one ee rman me geese tens renee

ers sree EE AE Ee eye Eo et Negba tes seme, ©

i nee here EE TE pa ey ernie URN ome BES
Salat Ae sea

sandow ners inte the muadcm world, und has undermined du power and inSuence
af the more reactionary. While there reforms succesfully stole the thunder of
che radical opposition, they have greatly increased the role of the government
cn franian life. It fay become responsiole for such endeavors at providing the
pun credit and apistance formerly supplied by the landlords

4. The structure of icrmal chunges embodied in the reform program has now
bern cretted: the far more dibeult task of carrying out the new governmental
Functions efectively is not bring pumucd with the earlier vigor. Nor das the
huh appear to have any dramatic new programs if mind, Ta short, the White
Ttevolutiun now seems to be entering on 3 period of consolidation Likely to Lust

Horse time. The effort to spread education through the literacy corps uf teachert

assigned to village schools has onjoyed considerable success, though mere lite acy
ata hure functional level wems unlikely of itself te produce far-reaching charge.
Locally cleuted courts hive worked well Land nform bas transformed patter.t
af pecsunt ownership. But the overall povitivn of the peasant ip the csuntrynidle
hay not pet change very much, and efforts to alter altitudes. to raive living
standards, and fo increase production peesent a cvntinuibg challenge that seems
distined to slnorb the government's energies and aticntioe for many years to come.

4. The Shah has sticweded in presenting himself asa nationalist refonaer,
bat he fas comertrated all political power in his own harelg and the regime
remains narrowly Buoed, ff the List analesis it depends on the amy and security
forces, which ax far a we can tell are faithful to the Shah. His eTorts to eniist
the support of well-educated technocrats in important posts in government have
home fruit and many members of the once politically restive middle class have
had their attention diverfed to .noneymaking. They were attracied by the scope
for actiun they have been a'lowed in the economic Bek. Yet their support is
not bused on any widespread devotion to tran’s politigal system; Bn economic
recession could quickly reduce ‘heir sense of commitment te the regime. This
gould alse take place if the Shah's sense of infallibilry should lead him to restrict
further their participation in. the Geciionmaking process, Over the long tern,
sconamie development probsbly will not provide a atisfactory sulstitute f:2
greater political participation Hence, in 3 few yeart exes may egain begia to
reach significant h-veis among politically aware element In time this could pose
stious problems for the regime, particularly if dissen’ were to Gnd support within
the militaty. ;

& The Shuih has attempted to institutionalize the regine © y providing a mecha.
nism for sucevssion. Despite traditional Iranian opposiica to women in political
life, he has ranght to build up the stature of the Queen, who has been designated
as regent for their seven-year old son if the Shah should dis.ppear [rom the
scene forany trax n. Although the Shah has made me progress in breaking
loon these projudiees, ruch a succession arrangement would be basically un-

wate, Initially at feast both the civilian political structere and che military would .

yrotubly support the monarchy, since both of there groups are essentislty inter-
eted in political stability. However, the former deriws its power from its rup-
pect by the Shah; after hia departure the military weutd egert proportionately

’ ct 2

a a pee . ee oe oe

swtermagee et

OT Y= 9 EY tS SP on aamaneladtiienetar edd aye rete gerne pene grees 854-2 mmr Loe TT TE ee tae
ore i i 7 rae z ar 5 4 “ : ‘

epee
’

pene tdlacten. The military would ginal certainty be rrore alert te any possrble
Ghainutivn of heise daterces and, sites they appear ta be mere gowervative haa
the Shaty enght find it mure daevit io accept the primacy of the Queen as
Regiot, But at Jeast in the begins a regime whith #5 duminatets by these
vibevts would probubly continus to fullaw much Ure present youre,

i. THE tRANIAN ECONOMY

6. During the put nic growth has been proceding at an
annual rate of over TOR i urring inkution, without 6 maior
increase in debt, a i : pasmunts problems. This re-
markahly performance has bern pinsibte becaua papidly increasing oi]
reveusk permitted greatly eepanded public developant espenJitures meal im-
ports, with only minus pirain on Iran's foreign exchange positon. The growies
oil income coupiod sith tileral credit policies has ratored business coabdenoe,
chwourating a rpid rie in private sector imiotenent as weil Pet capita Income
has ren te a point where frag is in the iniddde range of less developed countries

’
i
L
‘
i
1
i
4
‘

4. Develop mat activity in iron started in earnest with the reuapton of off
revenuct in IOS. Since den the i ent has been atlermpting ¢
diseet the expansion of the economy through a series of development plans. These

lans at first concentrated On developing & communiatiuns octwork, tben
after 1962 save greater emphasis to investment in industry and agriculture.
The Think Plas (1962-1965) surpasied its tergel of tix percent merge aunual
growth largcly lecouse private sector investment recowsted from tbe doidn: os
of the carly 1960's and was 78 percent higher than forecast. Bet throughout,
the meimtay of the develogment program has been the rapidly rising oi! reve
hues, sent of which have been pledged to public sector investment? Especially
in the eatly years of the Plan period considerable private investment ent into
housing. domestic inveslors have only reventy tring much money fate
manulacturing and agriculture. Despite UU mccest, manly id
tractable problems reams that will hamper atlempts bo expand and modernize
the Iranian econoury.

& Agricultwe, which is gill the most important source of ecome in Iran,
has i:gged behind other sectors. While the sweeping land reform progtem did
pot bring aout the devteased productivity that normally follows such disrup
tions, agis-ultural production recently has increased at a rate pot far above that
of populition growth. This modest rise has been attributable more up favorable
weather conditions than to imp is in techniques. Even with the coar
pletion of the dutribution phate © the average Lranian
peasant remains a subsistence farmer, i eniti
at low yields. Many of the farming units
to make mechanized cultivation economic. The bureaucracy.
manzower and mort accustomed to ignore than ‘6 encourage
adapting only slowly to its role in stimulating development In sew

—
Ta crew Fourth Pan eas far OO percent af ad vrvesar w be Geom te OW PENS

‘

Kita a ee ise 4 eee eee ee Pe

wae

enor. ty of the proLicm, it will be some ume before the government is able
to fl! the needs of the new aystem, particularly requiremeots for credit asd
poarketing facilities as well as ibose of water, fertlins, and mids

@. The industrial sector bas fared considersbly better. Industry, including
manufacturing and minirg, hat growo rapidly and now slmost etjuale petroleum
in importance as a contribuler to gross national product (CONF). Althougs
most manufacturing enterprises thus far have been io the textile or other
coosumzroriented Belds, the government is undertaking Lo establish heavy
industry. A steel mill is under construction and the development of peuacherical
and aluminium industries has begun. This activity iw laying the base for con-
tinuing industrial growth Yet it is already beginning to tax Lran’s lunited re.
sowrees in managerial talent and shilled jabor, which form tbe principal .on
straint te the expaosion of industry.

10. Ol has been the bey to the yuecess of the Lrapiaa eoomorpy, and the Shah
is determined to increase his tevenues from th's source as much as he can. He
has presied the Consortium of Wettun oi} companies ® very hard for a commit-
stent lo guarantee fran total payments of 35.9 biilog over the wext five year
a sum which would mean an e-erage anoual increase is ol revenue of about
16 percent The companies would prefer to expand production of cheaper oil.
in otber Middle Eastern countries, bence they have resisted his demands. Cur-
tently the Consortium cecms prepared to make total payments 0: ebout 856
billion over the five-year period, an wmount which wous—under Ue current
tar and royalty structue—require @ veuly 8 percent eamzal increase in oi!
peeduction After @ hard bargaining session in the epring of 1968, the Shab
Revepted a compromise propotal by the companies wheieby oJ mvenues te-
sruing to the Iranian Government during 1968/1969 wentd meet plan goals
($665 million}, but Ggures for next year's vftake have not wet been agreed. ile
has since shifted his ground somewhat and is now pressing for rapid expansion
of facilities cecessary to permit sharp sanual increases later ta the current
Sveyear period.

LI. Both the Shah and the companies find oil productce ia fran profitable
and neither wishes to precipitate a break in this nituation, the two sides will no
doubt explore numerous allemativer in involved negotialrons throughout "he
course of the next Give years. The Shah appears to be counting on the domestically
gened National franian Oil Company to expand its markets, primarily in Eastera
Europe, sulfciently to be able to dispose of the additional of] pecessary to roret
tran’s targeted oil income. This will pe # dBcult task, particularly if the Suez
Canal remains closed. though more rapid progress will probably by recorded
alter a lrge israeli pipeline is completed in 1939. The Shab also hopes for some
improvement io the probe split on th: operation of the Abadan refinery. No
such arrangements are Likcly to meet frao’s decnands ia Bl, baa we believe that
in the end the Shab will accept « compromise for the Sveyear poriod

T Pay percent of the Consrtse shares wt held by US compact $0 perceat by Brith
Petroleum, 14 peroent by Roy Detch/Soell, and & percent by a Ferach fro

5

ee ee a ee

co ee ea eee aS ep ee oe EIU Ce a REE mee femora oo ONE

Fe ON eg ee ney a a ri EL eo NES ee ER TRON A

reach Uvs conclusion because +t Deliese that Iran will net
he able to sper] money at quite the rate set ie the Fuunh Development Phin
C1GS- 1074). This Plan, whih calls for invescarent of Ht hillion from the gov-
ernment and $4.4 billion from the private tector, env istget annyal economic
| growth of 9d percent Aleady, however, ome .ajet projects castied ever From
the Third Plan are running behind schedule. Adminiswrative and constructot
delavs redecting unforeseen technical problems probably will hamper invest:
ment somewhat in the future as well. Nonethele-s, hese shortfalls in meetog
Pin targets are tikely to be modest, and fran probally will be able to pustain
an averoge ancual increase 1 CNP of about cight percent ever the remainder
of the Plan period. 2
13. Presently projected increases Io military expenditwes probably will pot
materially slow Iran's eoonoinic development. The Shab plans 0 inca ease defensz
outlays at we annual rate of nearly L2 percent; as ip the past this target mor
significantly usderstate actual expenses Iran hus already obtained from the 5
arrangeraents for credit qaics of @ substantal quastity of gnilitary equipment.
. Repayment will not begin until the goods are delivered aod will stretch out

“over a muober of years, however, thus mitigat.g the immediate economic

impact uf tbeve purchases. Moreover, oaly about 10 percent of Iran's foreign
foreign ecunomic snd mibltary

exchange carting: are currently commited to
debt repayrveat. ifence, although Iranian free foreign gachange reserers baxe
recently declind somewhat, the equotry can afford tu borrow fra shroad.
Indeed, we believe thet for some years io come f-an can continue without #g-

niGvant sain to Snaoce both ity. miliary and economic programs wt curendy

plunned levels.

12 In pan we

fit, FOREN ATFAIRS

14 The Skah’: preseot foreign policy bar three major clements. One is Sis
fongstanding reliance 09 the US as the ultimate sipport lor Lrea’s security: The
yecond, more recently developed, is his beef that fran can and should seek the
advantages of good relations with the USSR and that the political and econociic
bonefis thereof outweigh the rists to Tran Third is an active concen for ane

ing tran's inBuence lp ibe region, both to enhance access 10 ail resources and

to block the expansion of revolulionury Arab nationalism Sinee the Ui's ane

councement 2 ils inteation to withdraw itt forces
puticulas atlention 06 the Persian Calf.

A. The Perdan Gyil

15. The Shah is determined to discourage any outside power {roo playing
an infuential
Yemen and the resounding Egyptian defeat is
to some extent eased the Shah's feart

the Culf. Nonetheless,

ra am

role ia the Cull after the British leave, VAR withdrawal Fom
the sia-day war with Imac! have
of Nasser's ability to foment trouble: in
be gull regards radical Arab nationaliae as & threat to

~~

§

his position and an espe ial danger to his province af Khudtan, shere the
main tranian ei! Gclds arz located apd which has a large And population. He
therefore fevis impelled ty expand his inBucoce, particularly over the weak feudal
states on the Gulf. an aspiration encouraged by hit conbdence that ro country
in the region can match Lran’s power,

16, Lrao’s tentitorial claims in the Gulf are a major initaot ip iu relations

with the Arab states of the area. The Shah Gnds it hard to abandon recently

revived pretensions to Bahrein, though thew undoubtedly rum cov.ter (0 the
detree of the overwheiming majority of it pogulation, While be evijenily has
no intention of atserting these clams by force—aod indeed wort) perhaps be
willing to drop them if & face-saving arrangement could be worked out—he
oppoits the nascent Federation of Aral Amirates (FAA). This aenugus venture
at combining the seven trucial sheikhdoms with Bahrein and Qatar seems ua-
likely to achieve any significant unity; it may even fall of its owm weight before
the British depart. Despite the Shah's efforts to woo the sheikhs andiv dually, his
continuing opposition to the inchuioo of Zalvein in thi grouping may further
encormge the [ederation’s tendescy 10 fook 16 Saudi Arabia as bts main source
of support. ff the FAA should collapse, the Shab probably bopes to lablba
close ties with some of the sheichdoms-a relationship that (hey might wel.ome

‘a3 an alternative to the protpect of domination by Saudi Arabae

17. Iran siso has claims to islands is the lower Culf. The Shab Tear the pos
sibility thar hostile forves might gain contol of the Sait of Hommur and clove
aevess to the Persian Gulf. However remote Uhis contingency marr he, it noncthe-
tess reinforces bis desire to control Abu Muss. and the Tunb ishhnds which we
held by two of the saall Gulf sheikhdoms. In conversations with the Brilisd the
Shah has asserted Ain ight ty jurisdiction oer these islands, but he may be willing
to settle for arrangements which would allow him to use them [or defense

P te

"Ff ie pee

~

. Gonship with the LS as the comentone of his policy and

B. Orher Regional Relotions

19. Iran views its othet regional conserns 34 less immediate. The Shab is nol
as afraid of Lraq as in Genes past. Yet he would be retuctaot t¢ abandon his
intragoes with ihe Kurds in nomthern Iraq whore disidense he seed as insur
ance in Ue event a more dangerous and purposeful regime should come te
power in Baghdad. fran’s interest in CENTO hus declined considerably in
recent yeas, though the Shah has no cesize to see it disappear entiscly. Lras
never set mech store by the Regional Cooperation for Development arrange
ment, © its preepeets have tecn further dimmed by coouness 10 tran's relations
with Pakistan la response to Pakistani support for Nasser, the Shah is eucouraging
mere intimate ties with India which he visited early in 1969.

C. Relotions with the US
20, Ass sige of his increased indupendence the Shah ia recent }ea79 has sought

publicly to appear Jess aligned with the West Nonctheless, he considers a rela-
he looks to the U5

acipal source of the wev ons which be feels be needs. He believes that
he must have the capability not mtely to deiend Persian shores end auspace.
but te kop open the Surat oi Hormuz and perhaps to intervene Ow the Arab
Littora) as well Those desires bave led hitn to seek F-d Phantom Sizbter-bombers,
pato! craft, C-100 air transports, Sheridae tanks. and other equipmet from the
US. While be i basically content with the May 1963 military gedit sales pro-
gran that could provide up to 260 million in such equipment ovet @ Bu-year
period, he will continue to presy for accelerated Sélivery of the major items.
If significant revolutionary activity were to erupt ia the Cull, we would expect
the Shah to sequent major additions! arms fron the US; if he coud pvt get
pome satisfaction from these efforts, he would almost certainly scek mapons from
other Westcra sources and from the Soviet Union. At the sz-ne tie, be may
calculate that if be were to pursue 0 overly aggrssive policy > the Cull,
American artos might be denied hin
M1, Bevond the cive god take of these arms negotiations, Us-Ireniag relations
are likely to be subjected to relatively Ltde surain for the next lew yearn. Some
longstanding sritants~duch a: Hilgation by a former Iranian national atacng
the ass’s of the Shah's brother and sister=-have disappeared in recent yean
Despite the mounting nationalist fervor that animates the Shah's sctous, he con
tinues to value his essocistion with the US. Hence dhe Shah has accepted with
equanimity the end of the AID program ip 1967: he is gre
rapidly rising oil income as pryepiable pbstitute. Ite als
American investment ip Tran a eee

pared te view his ©

encour Bes orate

fe

fe

O. Relations with the USSR

23. The Shab is interested in forlcring Motcow's “guod neighbor” policy. It
olfcrs him useful economic celauouships, in the Gi ids both af trade and ef de-cl-
upment ff provides ab additional source of military equip rent, Jt has atlracive
pwiitics aspects as well, thy Shah may cuculate that a more cordial) reluionship
betwen Teleran and Moscow will serve (9 temper the ambivous of Moscow's
Arab chents~ those sadical states which ibe Shah sees as the most immediste
threat tp his own uspiravens in the Gulf. At Ure same time the Shah unde btediy
fivds it useful within Iran. Lt serves 10 upcertul the crititisms of the let, while
the econumic deals can be held up as hard bargeins much beloved hy Dranians
af any class. Cor dderations such as these probably wederlay the raion decis.-a
to purchuse awn S110 tnillion af arms-—pot includirg advanced weaponty—
fro:n the USS, dough the immecia'e occasion was thy withholding of U5 credits.
At the same time, the Shah revoguizes Uiat to procwe surfacttosarface missiles
and other advanced weapon systems trem the Secict ane would call inte

uesban coatinuaton of military deliveries from the US. Hence, we believe that
the Sliah «Ul net turn to the Sovies for map items af sophisticated equipment
as lung as he ix reasonably satisbed by We-tera supply.

24. In the economic field, fraa continues to expand its peuwtions with the Soviet
Union. The principal deal thus fer involves 25 exchange of natural gas for a
steel mill and other items. While Iran will ‘ave to make pubrtaotel investment
of its awn in connection ‘with there projects, the Shah is particululy peated by
this arrangement, which brings him 3 substantial reture for gas that had pre-
siouly becu flared in che process of oil production. The pebiree sssentia) for
delivery of this gas is somewhat behind schedule, bowewr7, maint because

of construction delays, occasioning some Inction between the fwo Parlen

45, in June }768 the USSR extended a credit uf about $20) milion Tor devel
opment projee's under the Fourth Plan wise to be repaid by ssturd gas deliverics,
Prevent ecunomic deals wilf use about £34$ million of tran’s expected SW)
taillion in Soviet barter crediy for the period 1¥70-15S3 The wacommiltad
ceedit balance could rise further if the gas pipeline capacity should be enlarged,

Pe 9

x

z

a1,

a

ee
dae
eee
eo.
am
—
{*

ere

oo ee
: s ic :
a a ; Z pines

“I isp

t,

aa

Ae

Fe tats Reet
ee oe

+

‘

el

Say mreennes sa 8 cee emer eee Tre oe

nn anemia ee a aiid Aantal

2 propect pore

iniatly undet 0 though dearled by com-

varicon with the acter ol the we ; USSR nas established
itsclf as a major factor is Iranian eponinle development.

euntact with Tranien uvilitary pero’ ‘Only a few have beew sent to the Soviet

tuion for specinlized t

raining —atgy fies for short periods. Som: Soviet tich-

nicgisns were permitted to soconniy a rulitary equipment sera from the USSR,
but they remained ooly @ few S there do act appear to he any Soviet

military advisers in Tran et sont
Devan am! the Pension Gulf may,
tions, Although the Shab felt og BF
wesn ts to the Ponwa Culf port of :

wer, the USSR's interest in the Indian
to mew strains in Sniet-lromian reta-
to permit a visit by shree Soviet navai
dar Abbas in June, be clearly dacs not

~

a
=

avant to ser the Soviets become rate active in thie arru—# pomibilily that «ill
become inore dnerediate whes acai tbe Suez Canal is coemed Indeed, there

ate linits beyond which the Shah wersd Whely to go in deempvaxsizing his tes {9
ghe Wet und i improving peiatinzcedth the Communist’ counmcs. At bottom,

the Shah renuiins wary
potential of ius Atal client.

te
oe et

“aioa and suspicious of the revolutonsty

ne rr ir i CL Ad aed er ne

woo

5
F
{
k
+
re
i
i |
rf
j
t
‘
t
i

aap EY ES TE

en rE ae 8 Em EF Ee FT

ves prey MUR
r eS #

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was diseminored by tha Central Intelligence Agency. Thy topy
av for the infermolen and use of the recipent and af person: ender bin jyrnd.chos of @
need-lo-anaw bavk Adu.tignel evential diseminaten may be avthor'zed by the
Igllzeeng ofcale within thes tipective deporkmenti:

a. Decor af liieligraca and Research, for the Department of Sate
& Diecier, Delenw intelligence Agency. jor the Giice of tha Secretory al
Dulemie and the ogonmzoton of the Jot Chiels af Sto
cg. Aswolont Chief of Sto for inreiligence, Department of the Army, for ihe
Dupartmcat af tha Army j
do Anivant Chixt of Novel Opealost {Intelligence}, fae the De portment of the
Nary
@. Avvilont Chiet af $10, lntelligance, USAR, far the Deperment of the Air
. Ferce
| Dicectar af Intetl’gence, AEC, for the Aromec tnargy Commisian
| Auvatuat Drector, FB for tha Fedcro! betoy af laweiigation
. Director 9F NS&, for the Holaeol $acuy Aguacy
 Owrector of Central Selerence Service, Cla, lor any other Oepariment
Agency

as Fe

2. thir document mrp be ectained, of devicoyed by burning in wceprdonce with
oppleuble security tenvlatast, oF tewined to the Central irreltigence Agency by
arrange menl with tha Cenval Refereace Service, TA

5. When this document it disemincted qeencas, the aetness recipests mex
relain # for @ period nat in escent ef ena yoor. Al the wend af this period, the
dfocument should euher be destroyed, cetwened te the forearding agency, oF per:
maven thevid be teqvescd of the lerwardag agency He relom it in ectordance with
IAC-0 67.2, 22 Jung 193).

4. The tute of this dotwment when wied separately fom kee Hat should he clas-
ated: FOR OFNGIAL WSE ONLY

7 -

DISTRIBUTION,

White Movw

Notianal Security Cowncit
Department of Stata
Deporiment of Oclenee

Atome Energr Commition
federal Bvreov ef Investigation

ee ee eee i eae ST tae ge ear oe

er ee

LIED DISSEM

net wk vanadate ccm: math a eh lee se ont erent anhntes a aerasictenananbimaes 4 weitammasird weenie te teiaemnineratamnanees ote bat

pp ne Pee re a pe em ne ut

I Ta oe at ae Be

Ray

Sees a
