Observations Concerning Palestine and the Arab Countries
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107452, dated 2 February 1949.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107452).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BL THIS OOCU RENT. CORTAING 1Uro é boley re3) =

m or JHE MAITEPSTATES ‘wit nar: MEANS! "oni THe: 15 fiOMAg SE. TAS USO BO

Fog. s. Cl-31 AND IZ 24 be CMQEO SN ATg TRARSMISSION OM TAR ALY ULATION

Ey OF 315 pourexts 4 fauv MAM ERLTOIAREUN AUTHORIZE 0 “PERSO NR 2 EO”
REPRODUCTION OF. oan 3 PROMI

et = gee.

Jeunes 7 Sree ee SSR

ae Sa LATS

oats Rips ee Bae SES ah as Ne: SBR. a 2 shag CE ee Coes
‘he Ag YASt Ate: Zorel gras, REE SLP sissies astee finances, ‘and: porale, .
nd Se & 2 eee noize. phe: ‘enainder™ of. *
eS LU. dj B an: , Of ‘YEypt north of
fhe pextandittary.”
bc corratta rer

rey ixe aT Re 1 acs ee “assured: >
eg oni pue ee DL. Fenrir i¢ion’: 3Ww678;,00' the
ay vodat, aa a railes eet co bed, ‘eut'.to’ the
pees saeeleg See
a epeovureds ‘from: many, pour cen --
“pouredsint: ee trae] s* -
ue

OSES RSH LRP vend st0 a to
a arses afore, Dank r Soe
rasving ‘diply Oe detects
tary, ‘program, *cand'iby.: the-battle .
noire, pepteuee Oy: ‘Israsl*
rads x et. wto-pgsitior

tm the te reba ds

swith: ‘datinidation- of ¢ drab
\.goveranents } by. the: USiand the: SDSSE,. with. the.cutting off of British arms and
anmunitdon: (the. Araba! onl yvsource . of. supply); Ath ample™ sources for Israel
yobs muni Sd ond end: creer earned peter eT is. igompi ete tat o has

Wiens: r ‘ Mae
oa The’ -estad \ishmen’ : “of: “the. ‘State: ‘of -Israe “by force.

are “Muslin World: ss. a “ ee
rece ino, eS: to Adve:

aS ald 23:

epere
Zt ioe eee ‘at.

ee ee ale eee ‘driven pe “the: Arabs: from their
a ee HIsraelilacks ‘cheap.labor,sand-without ery, ‘large: per: ‘capita subsidy
Fe tees Se consny forthe, patate-would jscon: gollapse woh a ‘the Israeli: Government |

Tom Jiostete Rect other « a

_fatondsst ot Cpreventy pyigontinding $0! an Beece
: Sage b larg ee tenne. as
B DS. ‘Jand er 8P2

hee Ae ae ‘the: ee ac

ve 6r r of

TES ee

per NT

wees eerment dienes B! Tat seatinnen Tpapanse ss eee Pyorkebie’ aes ‘bas ‘been. proposed for

Siete TiPepgu Lome s, Agiae ee Adveltycod cE tsza0l: §noers at: the UN order :to

; rhave: ‘already: taken ‘place: Antiqome - “ofthe
emesis penny Fafigen lander a havaaadéronsed. thetF, folloverg: An: ‘yituperative.
neo cden) per perros teese Reisen Ziogloysicand Arab Loacue ‘failures,-of

Sovaloitney ere, “the fholpless3 Fai Perea There reine oes eielectaals ee oe
ethan” pe -for sfor Ory £9 eucil. Lay Ps 5 ropagande
See 2s Zi wre : ee x? aie e :
q aed SES ee SEE ar ee

Ist Shas oii teats ae ees
eee a RAISED at

a

SENS Arad: cae ean ues
seeptehe: ei Unite: ta teaadaiaa
ee jolatteals

ates

FRNA Rees

AEC Breese
ean a RAYS; E908, chance ; “succeed:
ovingtthe:s ewe {platdoalepoltey- aie

detels eae ISIeHA EY Hedin: $0 comnit ..

AR PAB ORR: pete Pica tencewead danecure.

ee ananny _ BAY, sLiopheaval end the
zp

jPvotentially w Wealthy in: naturel: Tesources, vould be the first to fall into
E onmial et ‘control,’ Althoug -intalligent: leaders ‘have. managed to hold Syria
. “Yogather;; 44, 4s believed by acme! foreign. diplomats and many drab leaders that
“SM syria, 2 asa ‘natdonyy will. break wD ‘in “two. or’ three years, with autonomous
“ghadkhdons in. Lleppos. Homs“and\Hana,’ a: ‘Kurdish puppet province in the Jezireh,
“and iwith the. Jebel Draze. delivering. Danascus to. Abdéulle of -Traas—Jordan unless
$ho3 sdezeelis get. Danagous first Sega . .

~

oo

: v8 ax. Ses ‘

eared

(Gee wee from reaching, Tarael.

: as aged,’ “tom “exchse, Which they: seine ~the:sane UN ‘partition ‘proposal ; Q
2o-(Fhe Arad: iarsas: occupied: An defiance. ‘of the UH;. include Yestern
Galiles,: Jaffa, Nazareth,. pad qlleges over the Ledanoa’: frontier. )

- rete nee eae af! : : . , ae, _
“Althoughsbuaeia™ hat “of figialiys sided, with’ Tazeol a phe Me actually: “ga, the. ‘side of
disorderiand_ hunger. Russia pad) herisatellites| ‘arned Israel to an extent few
-pecpleiin “the. ‘United. States. paderstaad?’ “but” Communists are: also. active anong.
+the Arags.i: They: may. vapset’ the: Iraq‘ Governnent ‘at any time; they have succeeded
in vestadl{shing contact, with the ‘President, of Syria to whom overtures have ..
been made} they have ‘captured. the ‘leadership. of Arabs in Nazareth, Jaffa, and
cre, Mio. are despairing: of: any. effectivehelp fron Arad. countries and are .
‘turning. to. Communism. it ‘(In Nazareth,’ ‘for: ‘example, -no.one can hold. or get.a jod
without. “the permission | ‘of the: Commatst ‘boss: ) ¥.The USSR will help Israel exm.-,.
-pand’ unfil: ‘the: Arab: Goyeraxent si Bs Wwelltas® ‘British: ‘and ‘American*poligies are -.
Se eet Tha. Buss dans: will: ‘then: decide whether. to make a puppet
on OF Whe. Arabs:n= zee ythe:. situatton: in: the Fear. ot continues
Y -fhe Prine

SUMFARY OF COMMENTS BY CERTAIN PERSONALITIES MADE IN PRIVATE
: INTERVIEWS — December 17, 1948 to Jannary 19,1949,

Key Designation

Bs “Propaganda has failed; the UN has failed; the Arabs are divided. What
is the use of empty threats by Farouk, Ibn Sand, etc., when there is notning

they can deliver?

tabdulla at least has a program. Wo one else is acting effectively. Ee
is the lesser of evils, although he is not reliable himself. Sut he might

atop the Jews.

"Syria suffers from no program. There is profound discontent, a demand
for a real economic program. Otherwise the country will be bankrupt and in

chaos.

"Only a Greater Syria will provide the economic means to enable the
northern Arad countries to avoid revolution and escape Communist domination.
This Greater Syria, however, should not be under the crown of Abdulla of Trans-
jordan, but under the crown of the King of Iraq, with viceroys representing
hin in Syria, Transjordan, and Palestine.

"The northern countries cannot hope for support from Egypt or Saudi Arabia
from which they are Separated physically by Israel and by the unreliable
British puppet, King Abdulla. In spite of the 4nfiltration of Iraq by
Comminist propaganda, I feel sure that Iraq is more secure than Egypt, where
the Maslim Brotherhood will continue its assassinations, and where King Farouk
keeps a plane fueled up for a quick departure to his happy hunting grounds in
Rhodesia.” ‘|

have no confidence in the new Syrian Government QR Eee eae eee

~k a : ey Sym Syria cannot be saved by a re shuffling of the sane
faces in th if -~- most of whom are content to hold office and draw
salary. Syria cannot be lifted from its demoralized condition after the
Palestine defeats, or preserved from the threat of bankruptcy and of civil str:
unless there is a profound reform and a constructive economic progran reaching
and benefitting the common people.’ So far as Aleppo is concerned, we hare

no reason to believe that the new Syrian Government will te sny better tran
its predecessors."

C. "The last chance for a peaceful end reasonable solution of the Moor Fower:
was the Bernadotte Proposal for the frontiers between Israel and Ara> Palestir:
At that time I still believed that there was a chance for UN officials and the
general American public to consider limiting Israel to reasonable frontiers
which would leave in Arab hands the principal centers of Arab vopulation. Un-
fortunately no Major Power supported the Bernadotte Plan. After Bernadotte's
assassination, I spoke with the two top men responsible about the solution I
have described, and both said, 'Yes, that is a very sensible plan and @ very
fair solution if it could be arranged.' But nothing ever happened about it.

It was like a subject of tha weather — which Mark Twain said everybody tes

about but no one does anything ahout."

D. “Strange as it may seem to you, I now favor the partition of Palestina.
Convinced as I am that the Zionists will continue their aggressive policy of
expansion in the effort to exploit the Arab World, I think’we Arabs are much
better off to have Israel behind definite frontiers resulting from partition
than to have to include the Zionists in a single State of Palestine and have
them, with their propaganda and endless financial resources, gradually work
from within Arab Councils and the Arab League to undermine Arab interests. I
believe it if better to have your enemy in a neighboring lot with a fence
between, behind which he 1s suvposed to stay, than it is +o have him as a part
owner ¢’ your own farm with fr3edom to roam all over your own house and
propert7." - : aa

Key Designation

BE. "I am concerned about nepotism in the Saudi Arab Government, especially
with regard to the Royal Family and the Minister of Finance. Other advisors

of the King seem to rise or fall in accordance with their personal services,

but the Minister of Finance is entrenching members of his family in positions

of Government responsibility without regard to their competence. His nephew,
who is practically an idiot, is getting too much control of finances. Although
the King makes good use of a few of his older sons, some of the others are
intriguing and running up debts in a way that does not promise well for their
conduct if the King should die, and they should de free to suit themselves. In
my opinion, Saudi Arabia is. entirely too mach hound to the Royal Family and to
the family of the Minister of Finance, without any opportunity for others to
reach positions of responsibility."

F. "I myself and a number of my family have lost all faith in the program
‘of the Mufti and in any of the Arad leaders: proposing plans for Palestine.
Together with three of my cousins, Z/we are in
close touch with the Communist agents with whom we mee As a good
Muslim, I do not believe in the Communist doctrine, but I also do not velieve
that Russia is helping the Jews because she cares about them. Opposed as we

‘are by American sympathy for Israel, and abandoned as we are dy the British

who used to supply us with arms, we shall look for help wherever we think we

may find it; and I believe that we say find help in Russia, to whom your

country also turned when you were paras for survival in the recent war."

G. ‘WWe still feel the ‘way we did ehouy Palestine, but the Arab program for

Palestine has been defeated for the time being; in fact, there was never really
any agreement on an Arab Plan for Palestine. King Abdulla would sell his
fellow Arabs into slavery or permit them to perish if he could increase his
own power. You may be sure that Saudi Arabia will follow a realistic course
in its own national interest and will not be diverted by any sentimental or
fanatical considerations, nor by any foreign interference. Insofar as we can
do so without the loss of independence we shall cooperate fully with Americens
and British in economic matters and in the technical developments needed in
Arabia, but in politics we shall be very careful before Gesid ine what other
countries or governments will be our friends.* ;

A

‘qi. "I believe that popular enthusiasm for Israel has passed its peak with

the successful establishment of that State. I understand that some of the
principal Jewish supporters are already cutting down their contributions,

and it may be that financial resources will steadily dry up. If this is
understood and believed ty Israeli leaders, they may be willing to comp: omise
their ambitions and settle down in a limited state such as the territory they
now occupy. If, on the other hand, they are confident of cominuing resources,
the extremists may win out, and they may continue to seize additional
territory. This continues to de the chief threat to peace. The United
Nations has not deen able to agree on definite borders for the Israeli State

‘which already administers territory it was never contemplated she should have;

and without agreement among the powers to establish the frontiers, the hope

‘for peace depends upon the reasonatleness of both Jews ana Arabs in accepting
‘boundaries that constitute a compromise, and then remaining within those

poundaries.*®

I. "The leaders and the people of Israel, as I have seen then in Haifa,
Tel Aviv and elsewhere during the past eight months, are exultant and confident
as a xosvliMot their victories, and of their recognition by the world powers.
They “{nclude many mer with brains and ability, and eney have gash oes pious:
for their State.

"In spite of what Some: Israeli leaders have Aatned. the Israelis drove
the Arabs from their homes and never invited them to remala peacefully ine
Israel until after they had left and their property had been confiscated. The

-hones have been and are being rapidly filled with Jewish immigrants. This is

true of the cities and tovus; as for vhe small villages and farns, “the present
procedure is to obliterats and plow up the Arab hanlet or farm and boild.a
Jewish settlement with a new nae, wiping out all trace or record of their
previous drab Jocation ani property. The purpose in all of this 1s fresly ad-
mitted — that the Israelis wany to make impossible the compensation of Arabs
driven ous even though such compensation should ve forced upon them in penet ons

9111067

Key Designation

‘by some world authority. How can one estimate the value of a home and
property which has beer obliterated, and of which no record remaias? There is
no question about it in my mind: Arabs will not be permitted retura to
Israel and compensation will not.be made to them. On the other hand, there

is @ desperate effort being made to invite back certain Arabs with Communist
‘leanings who may be used for propaganda purposes against their fellow Arabs.

A few hundred such Arabs have returned upon the invitation of Israsli authorit:

"The Israeli military leaders have told me that if the first truce had
not come when it did they would have lost the war. During the thres months
following the first trace, the airplanes-with-mechanics which arrived fron
Czechoslovakia and the arms and explosives purchased in many places, coupled wi
the complete embargo om arms to the Arabs and political dissension anong the
‘Arabs gave the Israelis a striking force which was decisive..

“Tgrael still faces a sajor problem even if she does mucceed ix controlling
her: extremists and expansionists. This is the problem of maintaining: the
standard of living which she has thusfar enjoyed by virtue of a very high
subsidy from abroad. The cost of living in Haifa and Tol Aviv is 500% of the
average cost of the period 1933 to 1939. There is xno cheap labor; wages and

rents are exorbitant. —

‘the petals cannot possibly live oft the land and sell their produce to compete
with’ the drabs in neighboring countries, who are raising the sane fruits and
vegetables at less cost. The danger in this situation 1s that Israel will

not accept a lower standard of living nor reduce her population to the number -
which the land would aupport. She expects to maintain the prosperity of the
country either (1) by continued financial support from the Jews of the world
“and their sympathizers, or (2) by exploitation of the neighboring Arab countrie
‘where she expects +o find the cheap lator and the raw materials."

J. “Ihave seen Bunchsand General Riley several times. Both vere hopeful
of a Palestine settlement, if Zionists could de restrained..

“British General | Cie. commanding Sues Canal Zone, and U.S. ddniral
Sherman, are ready to act 10° ne their nationale, or evacuate them fron
the area.

Minbassador Griffis acted on the Bernadotte Plan, sought to seoure Arad
agreement to it, only to be slapped down by Yashingtoa. One day Griffis told
me he had received the same day four telegrams from Washiagtonz all mutually
contradictory... Wealthy Jewish friends of Griffis ia the U. S.4.,.when he
tried to seoure their support for the Bernadotte Plan, slapped him down and .
aetatbs to back him as they promised to do... Griffis hoped to get Egypt in lin

to have Ezypt withdraw from the drab group and align itaelf with the West,
leaving Syria and Lebanon in the lurch... Griffis never permitted any telegran
or despatoh from the Zmbassy to oarry any anti-Jewish news, 2or any anti-drabd
news. Ireland is more free to. report the truth of Israeli violations, etc.,
ainoe Griffia has left... Jaraeli reoruits iu the last six months have deen
40% from behind the Iron Curtain."

‘Britain ie backing Abdulla of Transjordan, with the purposs of Balkanising
the other drab oountries and making them come crawling to Sritaia for protectic
and eeparate treaties. It is alla matter of arms, planes, military transport,
and Briteis will deal it cut to her. ta alone.®

“go>

De ‘Syria will go to pieoss: tines There is no powerful friend, too many
centrifugal forces pulling it apart. Abdull# Tr'nothing in hinsel?, bale
Fesourced,. daputal “or“fitacctayy He mst therefore be a puppet and cannot
ao8 independently. “He is a safe investment until the British drop hin,
i a “Ade-hard Arabs mush saintain morale and never compromise, I was
against war dut having embarked, the drabs must keep 1% up, cold and hot,
until victory, no matter how many years. Morale mist de sustained. Dunkirk,
Stalingrad, prove one can survive ‘emporary battle defeats, provided the
_will-to-viotory remains. Abddulle will be throwa out of drab League, and the
‘fight will go on. The Teraclia are NOT inyinoible. How oan three-fourths
of one million Jews overcome er five alllioa Arava in the aaa runt!

- | | 911106-

dae Din.

glready a, +001: of- Pussia. sThe:, ‘Arabs can never cooperate with Russia ‘bat they

¥, FLebanda a Rost stable aad” Foldable. reny country. Tapline would ve
decisive: in-its sconomy, and snecessful. Griffis 4a wrong in urging Egypt
as 3 better route. Egypt's fature will be decided by other factors. (You
cannot, sarry Egypt to reform her -- she is too far gon.) Egypt is less
secure as a ‘pipeline route than’ Lebanon..

\ \Syrians are convinced of. Tapline's values. ‘When a government is formed
7 at-will ratify early. To be surs, Syria is precarious, aad in a couple of
veers it may be broken up by the. Greater Syria plots of Abdulla, but whoaver
‘owns and governs eee Taplins | aren: will probably. be sensible ences to protect
“ae eas
_ | fWhen T “got an 5 alecphedeiois & roe Abdulla, ens King are it 15
red ink, !the color of the aoe but fe think Britain would not Bt toe Abdulla
to, attack Saudi Arabia..: ee
ST tine, Abdulla.will ‘probably Gare eeeBitns Jebel Druze and Danascass
He-will not “touch Lebanon which;:he said, !is lize a beehive, very active and
“full‘of honey, bus better not ‘stdck your. finger in! At the sane ‘time, the
‘ Communists. may take over northern Syria, the Jerzirah, Aleppo, etc. The Sovie
“Minister, to. Syria and Lebanon,> eSeported +0 be on adel tutte leave or transfer.

ee as eee — . :
‘On +t our opinion, “go Syrian®, Goveranent formed. Row li be stable.
discontent is too profound. if
:*Woell- kmown Communist sympathizers ‘anong the ‘Le refugees ore been.
invited. Sack ‘to their hones byiIsract, ‘rand hare gone back. REussia is arming
Israel and prepariag some day to" take over the interual government. The
Israclis have been successful . dp winging the favor of pueert ere ee javish

-hospitality, eeree cheapagess tnt Jewish oneas

The

aot ee Lf

ot

+ oth: “Terasl. aad. the reren “Garastt is.

eons. v. S.. Goveraneat ban Tos

have. lost all* faith dn the:U. S52: Their’ only hope. is to. refuse to agree_to any
“rape of: itheir: lande! Levithe Jows seize what they can, they will over-extend
, themselves, and fail dn che “ends &: The Arabs will not ‘and, cannot sabgit. 7

S . : oo ae

N
