The Cuban Pot Boils Over
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132628, dated 5 June 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132628).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE iN FULL £997 18 Judy 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR
SUBJECT: The Cuban Pot Boils Over

le US application of economic sanctions against the Castro
regime and Khrushchev!s blunt warnings against US intervention in
Cuba have plunged US~Cuban relations into their mest critical phase
to date. Fortified by promises of Soviet support, Cuba has openly
charged the US with interference in its internal affairs before the
UN Security Council. This rapidly deteriorating situation raises
fundamental questions as to how far Castro is likely to go in exe
ploiting his conflicts with the US and what effects the Cuban, US,
and Soviet actions are likely to have not only within Cuba, but

elsewhere in Latin America.

SECRET

26 Consequences Within Cuba. We believe that events of

the past few weeks -- touched off by the refusal of US ofl
coupanies to refine Soviet petroleun and Castro's subsequent
seizure of the US refineries in Cuba -- have strengthened Castro's
hard in Cuba over the short tern. Previously he had been ex-
periencing a slow but steady deterioration in political stature.
While the US econonte sanction probably heartened hard core
nocerate opposition to the revolutionary governnent and cenon-
strated the consequences of Castro's ways, it has also given new

life to Castro's strident anti-US canpaign.

3. Moreover, Khrushchev's pledge of support for the Cuban
reginve has given new iupulse to the revolutionary leadership. It
has caused new alarn ahorg noderate and conservative Cubans, but
neither it nor the US econonic sanctions is likely to provoke the
strong opposition necessary to threaten Castro in the next few
nonths. While opposition to Castro continues to grow and broaden
and defections by noderate officials are on the rise, Castro's
popularity is still widespread and we see little likelihood of
the energence in the near future of an opposition Castro Ainnot
control. A rallying point for opposition to Castro exists abroad
in the forn of the Denocratic Revolutionary Front (Frente Revolu-

cionario Denocratico - FRD).

2.

lo The cutback in asswed, preferentially priced sugar
sales to the US is a blow to Cubats sagging economy and fiscal
situation and has greatly increased Cuba's economic dependence
on the Bloce While the Soviet commitment to absorb the sugar
refused by the US this year will take much of the sting out of
the US move, because the USSR will either buy at about world
price or make barter arrangements, Cuba will probably suffer a
substantial foreign exchange losse On the other hand, with con-
timued Communist Bloc help, Cuba can take care of its petroleum
needs after a period of initial short supplys At the same time,
Castro will be able to equate his domestic economic problems
specifically with the US sugar sanction and in this way justify

any austerity measures which he may feel necessary.

5e Castro and the US. Backed firmly by the Communist Bloc ;
surrounded by pro-Communist advisers and faced with US reprisals,
the erratic Castro almost certainly is more inclined to destroy
remaining ties with the US than he is to back dam in his conflict
with the US. Given the increasingly stormy course of US-Cuban
relations, we believe that harassment of the Guantanamo naval base

wild increase and that there is a good chance of Cubats demanding

US withdrawal from the base ~~ President Dorticos has already
said that Cuba was returning this yearts rent. There is also
a good chance of dangsr to American lives and a Cuban-initiated
rupture in diplomatic relationso The likelihood of these oc-
currences would obviously increase if the US were to break all
economic ties with Cuba or to undertake additional economic
sanctions such as eliminating the sugar quota entirely, or the
premivm price paid for Cuban sugar, or blocking Cuba's doliar

accounts in the US.

62 The Reaction Elsewhere in Latin America. US restraint
in dealing with Castro in the first 18 months of his tenure was
well regarded in other countries of Latin America, even though
relations with Cuba hit rock bottom. Latin Americans generally
approved of Washington's adherence to the concept of non-
intervention and insistence on legal forms. Moreover, US be-
havior regarding Cuba was in accord with the slowly evolving
changes in Latin American attitudes toward the Cuban dictator

and his performancee

7o Initiaily Fidel Castro captured the sympathy and
fervent support of most Latin Americans as the Cuban liberator
and reformer, Today popular sympathy for Castro’s reform pro-
gram is still sufficientiy widespread in other covntries of
Latin America to cause many governments to act cautiousiy in
dealing with Castro for fear of arousing domestic oppositiono
Castrots most vocal adherents have narrowed to a trouble-making
minority composed of Communists, other extremists, and student

and labor groups.

8. Nearly every government has felt the bad effects of
Castxots subversive actions and interference and resent his
rebel government for this. Covernment officials, conservatives,
moderates, and important segments of the Latin American press
have been worried by Castro!s excesses and his dictatorial
methods, his offensive remarks about respected area leaders, and
his ever closer ties with the Communist Bloc. At least two
Presidents -- Betancourt of Venezuela and Lleras Camargo of
Colombia -- are convinced that inter-American action must be
taken eventually to neutralize Castro and to prevent the spread
of his revolutions However, untdl the Soviet waming against

US intervention and Cubats charges in the UN, Betancourt and

~Sin

Lleras Carargo tnsisted that Trujillo be dealt with first. In
Central Averica, where Cuba's intervention in local affaire has
been nost obvious, Guatemala has broken relations, Nicaragua has
suspended then, and other governnents are probably considering
diplomatic breaks. In short Castro's star has been falling in

the Greae

9e On the other hand, Latin Avericans -- particularly
lower incone groups a still feel ioportant bonds of syupathy
for Castro and Cuba in their present circunstance, and these
sentivents have worked to divide Opinion on what to do about
Castro, Despite apprehensions about certain aspects of the
Castro regine, Latin Americans Generally share Castro's de«
sire to achieve rapid social and econocic developrent, to re-
duce econonie dependence on the US, and to better their posi~
tion in their relationship with the US. It is doubtful ir pany
Latin Anericans regard the confiscation of Anerican ofl refiner-
ies in Cuba as an outrage; Mexico in particular reverbers its
' own difficulties with the US over the expropriation of oil
properties. Furthernore, the proopt US retalfation of

cutting the sugar quota will seen to cany Latin

Americans a dangerous precedente There is also a tendency to

see the Cuba developments primarily as a problem for the US
rather than for the inter-American community.e Moreover, Latin
Americans make a distinction between the Trujillo dictatorship -=
with which the US has had good reiations in the past -= and that
of Castrog the latter is regarded as a reformer who has gone
wrong, but one who, like probabiy no other Latin American leader,
has introduced rapid, sweeping socio-economic change and stood

up to the US»,

10e Latin American opinion on the Cuba problem has probably
sobered with recent events. Heretofore Latin Americans had gen~=
erally criticized the US for overdoing the Commmist threat in
Cuba and elsewhere in their areag ‘The intrusion of Khrushchey
into the Cuba situation probably has also gone a long way to
water down Latin American concern over the harsh US sanctions
against Cuba. Khrushchev's threat to retaliate if the US inter-
vened in Cuba probably did not impress most government leaders in
the area who probably did not expect the US to intervene in je
first place. At the same time, in placing Cuba under the protective
wing of the USSR, Khrushchev almost certainly clarified in the
minds of many politically articulate Latins Cubats growing ine

volvement with international Communism.

my

CECRET~

BECRET

ll. In these circumstances, we believe that a majority
of Latin American governments is likely to support the US against
the Cuban charge in the UN and to support the Peruvian initiative
for a consideration of the Cuban problem by the CAS. Much will
depend, however, on whether or not the US wholeheartedly supports
a strong Venezuelan move now pending in the QAS against the
Trujillo dictatorship, with which almost half of the Latin American
naticns have no relations. If the US does this and if the Cuban
case against the US is throm into the OAS, we believe that the
US can count on the measure of support necessary to counter the
Cuban charges. However, most Latin American governments would
consider that there could be no mceral basis for a condemnation
of Castro without a prior condemnation of Trujillo and effective
action against his regime. Even 3f a condemnation of Castro in
general terms could be obtained, we believe that the US would have
difficulty in securing enough votes in the QAS to cause nulti-
lateral sanctions against Castro,
FOR THE DOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES:

A> Sn Me?

SHERMAN KENT
Chairman

=Geo
