Penkovskiy Operation, Parts 3 and 4 - TAPED22 October 1966
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012428, dated 6 September 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012428).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

2

„ pERKOVSK TY OPERATION, PARTS 3 and 4 ‘Taped 22 ‘October 1966.

Now, the first few days were a furor, not qnly in finding
out what made him tick; what he wanted us to do for hin; what
he was willing to do for us; but to analyze in the greatest of
detail from his own notes, what all the little abbreviations,
hieroglyphics and everything were, on sone one hundred fifty
pages, some typed, some written, of misselery. The people who
understand this subject from a scientific viewpoint completely,

they would of course, analyze everything that they needed to
know themselves, but we could at least contribute this one .
effort of expounding and extrapolating every abbreviation that
wasn't clear, but which he, having inserted, knew about as to
what he meant when he put it in. This was a monumental job.

I don't remember seeing à tree between London and Leeds, because
in a jiggling car, as I was yapping from Russian as to what

this particular R-7 missile would or wouldn't do, and Bulik was
writing with the others, which was in English, we never had a
chance to lift our heads. = ;

We barged into the hotel, had a meeting set ‘up there, met
him, went on to Birmingham. In Birmingham we had a technical
flap with the British, but we managed to luck out. We took
along two large suitcases, hand bags I should eey, much larger
than this, with Mohawk, battery operated recorders, just in case

we would need then. Unfortunately, they are albatrosses,

because we had no place to leave then, except the U. 8. Embassy.
Therefore, in the hotel room, someone had to be with those damn
pieces of equipment. On travelling, ve took thes along. Well,
when we hit Birmingham on a Sunday night, the Seotanen came in
with sone very incongrous expressions which sounded like "whir
oh whir, we are in trouble," ~ we had hit the tail end of the
world in England. This part of the town, the center part, is
still on direct current. I have no place to get a converter at
midnight on Sunday and the tape recorder can't work.

So, ws said, “however, for three thousand miles we have
carried those damned instruments of ours on battery. Let's see

if they can pick up the slack." So we ran eight ‘reels, and they

REPROVED FOR RELEASE

9 14 1992

— 2 =

*

211 came out. One from one machine, one from the other,
alternating to cover our four hour meeting. 80, even then,

it was worthwhile taking them along on the trip, they appeared
superfluous at the time, we were glad when we realized we could
tape this, not only overtly, but with superb electrically
operated equipment. That's just a side light, and having
analyzed everything he had in his notes we had one of our top
men, a very heavily and well decorated one, even 8 he is

a reports officer. I would love to mention his name because he
is one of the most distinguished reports officers I know of,
his name is Len McCoy. He had spent time at Cape Kennedy,
Thule, „ Churchill, all the air force bases, he is
quite an adept and knowledgeable person in anything relating to
misselery. He came out to give us all the yomusresents and
processed the material as fast as he could. The: British were
so impressed by him that they permitted him to handle all the
British requirements. They threw up their hands; he was so
much head and shoulders above them that they accepted anything
that he would. Of course we would need hin, not; at the meeting
with PENKOVSKIY but after the meetings. We tried to transcribe
the tapes, but it was totally impossible. When you have a
meeting of four hours, onee a day, it would take six months to
finish all the tapes after we brought them home, because they
were just catching up ahead of us all the time. :

Well, amongst other things that he told us about, all of
the associations we reviewed carefully with Marshall VARENTSOV.
We began:to tabulate his unbelievable accessability to highly
classified documents. First, he had a complete entree to the

fund of GRU, which is the classified library section
of their intelligence organ. He could read anything on missilery
in the headquarters of Marshall VARENTGOV. „ whe was | ——
there as his adjutant, about to become a general, would just
unlock the room and say "PENKOVSKIY, I know you are writing a
book in Russian from the English on missilery, that's why you
have all these research privileges. Please be my guest. Don't

take them out, but read anything here." So we were getting a

- « 3 = * e.

pretty good idea of what their ICBM's could do, where they were,
„about the Cuba situation and what their missilery there could

do, almost straight from the horses mouth. In fact, there was

a publication (I will make a more complete reference to it

later) called the Strategic Missile Bulletin, on ICBM's from
MOSKALENKO's shop. MOSKALENKO at that tine had two hats. One

ö he was on the General Staff of the Ministry of Defense. Renenber,
they have only one ministry, the Army, Navy, Air force are all
under it. The first hat was, he was the first deputy to the
minister for all new technical developments and means of mass
destruction and so forth. The second hat was at the gane time

lie was the Commander in Chief of all Strategic Missile Forces.
That is, all the manpower and officers and 80 on, who are

| scattered at the various ICBM sites. You know already what

" VARENTSOV's position was, but they are closely related. In

fact, outside of the tremendously complicated geometric and
geophysical machinery and computations for guidance systens,

the ICBM Russian style is an expanded, enlarged practical nissile,
and probably is in all countries. We didn't get yet into space
technology thank God, because that would have been oun too much

ae
"aye mbt .

to swallow.
Anyway, next we had brought over with courier service

suitcases full of photographs. As I remember we had covered

something like 7,000'available photographs frou aii the assorted

files of CIA, MI5 and MI6. These were all categorized by

countries, when last seen and ne? identified maybe 57 to 10 per

cent of these people. The total nunber of GRU officers in

detail, depicted, described, identified fron photographs, etc.,

vas somewhere over one thousand. The KGB numbers ‘were less,

some two or three hundred. of course, the rosters of everyone

who was ever in Turkey before him, during his ting, and currently

was like knowing his five fingers; not to mention : ‘everyone on

the India, Pakistan, Ceylon, also Iranian and Reyptian desks, es

and the field stations; as well as everyone in London, and later

as you will see, everyone in Paris. That was very, very

significant. This is of course from a CY viewpoint, but his

are

greatest contribution, as it became more and more’ developed

came strictly in the PI field.
Alright. During this «| we have consolidated all

possible ways of recontacting him. We knew he was going to
come back here. He had a scheduled return, knew there would
be a very short interval. We knew he was coming back per
schedule to London without a delegation, alone, for the purpose i
of establishing a program for a later delegation. This gave "=
him even more latitude and freedom of action, and “this time he
| came very heavily reinforced with influence from back home.
ke was called in by Arny General SEROY, the Chief of GRU, and, |
as I mentioned before, the former Chief of KGB, and told
“PENKOVSKIY, my wife and daughter are taking a trip to England. i
I know you will be there at the same tine. Please keep a |
weather eye open for them and make sure there is no difficulty."
"Yes sir, be glad to do it." Naturally, the Soviet Enbassy
gummed up even having a car waiting for them when ‘they arrived,
but PENKOVSKIY did not. He took them to the hotel, he wined |
‘them and dined then. He did everything, except he over did it. |
He began to play "footsie" with Svetiana, and I begged him on
my: knees almost, “This ig not the girl tor you. Let us not |
complicate life." "But she likes it." "Look, PENKOVSKIY - :
Pozhaluista - there are others: Not this one." Anyway, I'm
not going to get into that phase of life. He is very human, !
very normal, he likes to flirt a bit. Anyway, he: ade a terrific _
hit with Mrs. and Miss SEROV and loaned them money. because they
ran out. He made sure they ran out. So they ‘shipped all kinds
of stuff home, heavy freight, by boat that was parked sonewhere
in the Thames River, such as a swinging artisticusort of affair
for the garden. I remember personally purchasing > beautiful
Vecut sweater for the General for the General to play tennis 1
with on the courts at his dacha and then we went into a shopping
list which was out or this world. He said "I need help. This
is operational." But the list, the list was not a piece of
paper. It was a book. A book. And neatly depicted pakkeßy were
page were items for who for what. In the middle of it

Poy id
8. 7

; ~ 5 « =

outlines of a foot, his wifes foot, his daughter's foot, his
mother’s foot. Who knows these English sizes... The foot. 80
we had to get shoes, sandals and 80 on in all sizes and descrip-
tion to match that. He needed a suit so we measured Mike Stokes
who looks Something like him, back to back, a little shorter and
he went to Oxford Street and got a suit for PENKOVSKIY. But the
list, finally, I'm not going to describe the details. They are
too unbelievable, but there were about 4 suitcases of about 70

' kilo, 70! That means. well, how is he going to take it home?

A cinch - no problem, Well, here is how he did it, WYNNE took
them in on his official trip, between meetings. He met WYNNE

at the airport. He had every pass in the book and when the
custom officials were there, he said “Don't stand there like
apes. This 18 a guest of the Soviet Union, Help him carry
then." They were all Carrying them into his car. 80 as he

| delivered WYNNE to hig hotel, passing messages frou us and
giving him cachets in the car, he drives off with the rest of
the baggage, to his home, for further distribution there.

WYNNE would immediately proceed to the British Eubassy, without
even washing his face and hands, and his own personal little
baggage there they could search to the hearts content, he would
deliver everything, he would be clean, and on the return trip
the messages would come back in reverse. 80 that was ideal,
That is how he got them in. No problem. :

Well, what did we get. we got, for about 28 pounds, a
rocket, a beautiful rocket, tor the birthday which was actually
on the 16th of September, although the birthday ‘vas on the 3rd.
You see, you had a calendar switch about 13 days. VARENTSov
was about to get an Order of Lenin, already he did have the title
of Chief Marshall, on his 60th bigthday, which is very customary
for high-ranking people in Russia; as I read to you from this
order which happened to PENKOVSKIY's great uncle, For this day
and occasion PENKOVSKIY was nominated to be the major domo, He
got the singers, he got the dancers, he got the wholé list of
guests and naturally he had to present his own gifts too, He
got a gold watch and he immediately wanted it engraved "To dear
Sergey Sergeyevich from the Penkovakiy'g", I said we could not

— 6

eee this in London. We have no cleared engraver. We could
“do that in Moscow. He argued “What kind of an intelligence
service, you can't even put this on?" "No!" That he had to
take back himself. The big rocket was a silver thing -

beautiful = you press buttons here cigarettes come out — cigars
come out and light. It's one of those sort of things. It was
very appropriate for VARENTSOV, but the piece de. resistance was
something else and this gave us 2 TSS problem. He waanted a
bottle of the rarest Napoleon-type brandy cognac, exactly brewed
60 years ago on the date of his birth. Oh with 50 years we could
40, but 60 that was a little more difficult. However, with 4 case
officers, which it took, outside of us for support, to buy all
these things every day; they were coming hone with buckets of
assorted material; with the help of TSS on the label we got a

60 year old bottle. This bottle paid for itself many, many times
over, during that cele ra@ion for his 60th birthday. One of the
first guests to enter was Rodion MALINOVSKIY , Minister of Defense.
No one was there with less than two stars. One poor little

was there with two stars, who has Yong’ since retired

for all times sake, KARIOFILLI with three, Chief’ of Staff of the
Rockets, this,that, Marshalls. From the Central: Committee side
CHURAYEV, the poor peoples representative at the Central

| Coumittee level, who has a dacha with 20,000 roses the poor
communist society be even bragged about it at the party and
got drunk. e made a bee-1ine for this cognac, "This
is better than our vodka," and he was slopping up our cognac
like mad. At the same time he was predicting, depicting every
thing he was going to do with the Berlin Wall; how he was going
to do it and how the Americans would swallow that pill, and he
was prepared to make us swallow a second pill 17 KHRUSHCHEV
wanted to press a different button; namely the second pill would
have been to sign a seperate peace treaty with Fast Germany, by
prolonging the maneuvers or the Warsaw Pact nations by three more
weeks, 250,000 men strong. However, KHRUSHCHEV himself, passed
that one up. The first one, when it was reported, we told them
exactly how he was going to do this, how we could stop it like a
clock, probably for the cost of $200 worth of gas, but it took

r dd ee ns ꝛ

Washington three nonths of deliberation before ve could give

any sort of definitive answer for what to do in Berlin. 411
kinds of speculation about future nuclear wars wie discussed

at this meeting. They felt completely free, oiled with our
cognac didn't harm a thing, fortunately, so we had a complete
report on this. This high level access, other than the tre-
nendous nt of documentary material was what: was really
helping us out all the time and he was delivering them to us

in cachets. 5

. Now, at this second go-round of moet ings * had to re-

tool the whole operation in terms of secure future contacts,

and the receipt of this invaluable material that was now in

huge volume. First of all, we had a Minnox camera especially
prepared. A gentleman in the Ninth Bridge, an excellent techni-
cian, British more or less froze the "I" stop at 8, you could
click off of it; more or less froze on the (21ftieth "pD") speed,
we had a template in centimeters 21 K 173 where the brown fringe
of the eye piece would adjust you are in focus. It
takes practice but you are on focus, you can throw away the

chain, which is a security risk if you are going to clandestinely
carry the Minnox, the more chains you have the more complications
you have, so you eliminate three variables. 411 the training
then took place on the steadiness of hand and tina fon of light.
As a result, the man produced something like 5, 000 perfect franes.
One fram had two bottom lines cut off. It became so hairy with
this accuracy, we wondered “could it be possible the KGB is

doing this." 80 at one of the meetings, after.we got the cachets,
Ln London, we threw him one jut like that "Catch" - "Take
picture." "Where" That wall, that map, this map, this magazine."
We were brewing tea now. Every four o ‘clock - tea. We are in ö
Britain you know. We are taking tine out for tea, and you have
this done. In about 15 minutes with the steadiest of hand, "I'm
done. He even squeezed out 55 frames from a 50 frame roll in

a Minnox. You can do this, but you have to have an awful lot of

practice. He threw it back to us. Tomorrow we will see. The

next day in gloss prints this big the Ninth Bridge brought them

* 2
— 2
*

developed. Out of this world. out of this world, like a
photographers masterpiece. Well, obviously he dan photograph.
Whatever he . he learned well. I do not. nean he can

run 15 kinds of photographic apparatus, but the’ ‘one he knows,

he knows. The same thing with the Russian version of the one
time pad. We practiced with them. This is 411 done by us.

We had all the commo support in the world. A member in

Frankfurt gave us test messages. He would finally break it out.
Naturally, he had the "yo yo 51" with the Russian coding-decoding
system, one time pad, and with it in this interval he came back
with a little typewritten message. In it he had, gummed up one
word, one word =~ one letter. Begginning - he said "nosh" instead
of "nach" which means nothing really, beginning or our number
one. I said "Becareful with our 32 instead of 38 on yo yo."
"Yes, I'll not do it again." The rest was perfect. ZI thought
"Well, gosh darnit, who is breaking this code." Again, it took
me three hours to make two different type messages, old book,

new book. It is the difference of one group. Again, we are
brewing tea. I said “Here is a test pad. Break these messages.
In 15 minutes he had 1 messages done. Perfect. The man is

a technician, So in one phase of commo, in one phase of photo-
graphy the man was absolutely superb: I've never seen one like
it and never expect to again in my life. But, with his photo-
graphic capability (and he is a three Minnox man - he would |
send one in for repairs on occasion to us via channels night
as well be hung for one as well as three and why change cachets
in the middle of an important operation) when he ould go into
the GRU room, ask for quiet, don't disturb me", he looked tor
certain things of interest. Aa, a bibliography. : I wonder what 4
kind." Looks it over. In about two or three frames he had a |
bibliography of every document stolen frou the United States, xen |
and the Correct title, right down the line. Military manuels,

211 other kind of documents that had 3 eitel "value. The

hall with the documents. They are ours anyway, but now we know
what's been stolen from us. The same from the French, The British,

the Italians - the bibliography. How many frames does it take to

~ 9 =

take a bibliography. Peanuts! He got us all the Classified
directories of the Kremlin; what you call here the gray line,
the red line; complete, who's on it, what number, how they cross
connected. Well, it took us four frames for the whole thing.
Directories - that's big those directories. 80 he got us nine
assorted classified telephone directories. A complete volume
on everybody as to his background, history, Acadeny of Science
of the USSR, and its' filiale in Siberia, and eight other
directories; Ministry of N Government of the USSR; KGB;

| GRU; Internal » those are the internal

dialing systems of three and four numbers. It vas really

fantastic. Well, now our idea is "How shall we keep this thing
going?" "What channel?" At this point of history, the wife

of an MI6 officer Ann, was brought into the act. „She was stationed
in Moscow. Ann came and was introduced to PENKOVSKIY in London.
Now here is the gimmick. He had gone to a scientific gathering.
There was an officer by the name of Mr. PSENIOR?, ‘actual nane,
British, and he was ordered to go there and report and he net

Ann. He vent to the UK Embassy and again said "How: do you do“

to Ann. Therefore, she was, her last name was CHISOLM, on their

interest list, They had a dossier on her. He had an official

‘reason to meet with such people because he vas sen there. We

didn't like it in terms of frequency of meetings, outside of
official functions. He said "Well look, if I meet her on the

street, tip my hat and say 7 ‘ talk to.
1711 make a report on it. Of course I say hello.to someone I

know officially. This will e me a chance to pass something,"
“All right, you can do this once or twice, but beyond that you
are gambling." The British say “And what do you have American,
besides a big mouth?' They just about were as nasty as that.
Wedidn’t have very much going at the moment, but on: the road ve
had plenty in what we call the pipeline. our object was to get
an appropriate nan, in the Embassy under the appropriate cover,
which was a big keadache; to whom PENKOVSKIY could be officially .
sent by his people for official business. Then, we have no

clandestine, risky meetings outside. It's a beautify) thing,

210

escort that you canfit schedule it always and n that ou
can't predict the frequency of the meetings. That was our
concept and we held out for it as long as we could and we
also injected into the plan to have such person er persons
available. In the neant ine, Ann was briefed that “when the
tine comes, you will do this.” Okay. We didn't need her

| when WYNNE was going back and forth because that; was completely

blessed by the GRU and the KGB for that matter, as official.
Fine. : 5

So, tine goes by and we get a mossage through WYNNE that
pretty soon he is going to the French Exhibition: in Paris and
he is loaded with cachets, other than what WYNNE ‘has already
picked up. We are getting all these things all the time and we
are drooling. Fine, but this was an awful beating because
although it says the 20th Septenber it was the 1éth October
for the twelve meetings. We were before 1 September. We
didn't know when the French would give him his visa. We could
not hurry them up or show any interest and the French were
playing fancy reciprocation. You make us wait three weeks, we
make you wait three weeks. So he is furious. What are they,
Allies or not? I mean, after he told us "Why the hell you keep
me bouncing in place in Moscow for three weeks?". Well, we were
bouncing in place in Paris for the same tine, letting things
develop normally. In the meantime, we had cased more safehouses
and more meeting sites and everything else that we needed in
Paris than you can imagine. There, unfortunately, the British
have assets far and away above anything we could dream of in
the way of gafchouses, support assets and everything you want:
in Paris. After all they are close to the continent themselves,
they have been there for many, many years and they know how to
operate. 80, (garbled) the British safehouse, the British
vehicle, a lot of them hired, a lot of then right hand drive,
Everyday I went from Orly to Le Bourget and back; a beautiful
distance of about 40 or 50 miles through French traffic; we had

a special driver Roger King, who drove (garbled) ¢ he was a race

track driver; when necessary he would go 60-70 miles a hour

—
— 32 -

respect for you in his mind, All right that 18 fine for a
fellow who might want to work with you or defect. There are
the in-betweeners for whom the timing is off, the concept is
ripe, but the timing is off. Family situations, obligations
which may change. He might say like PENKOVSKIY said "If you
gee Colonel Peak, give him my greetings." Maybe/did a great
deal without even knowing it himself, of putting some seeds of

ss _ Shought to cooperate with us in PENKOVSKIY 's mind. Someone

„e may get the credit in the future for the contact, but
_ there is where the seed cones in. fe. don't pass up the 5
: _ (garbled) at ‘phe guy doesn't want to play ball because he ents
“at this time. Xgarbled portion) but he can't telegraph to you
mow or to anybody else his views. Of course, in the case of
the fellow who never would, you still have an asset to generate
by creating respect for you. At the very outside he who hates
the United States might at least tell another Soviet "You know,
all Americans aren't sons of bitches. I met one who wasn't,"
and even this is a plus by having this or desire to the Soviet.
How do you do this? No two people are alike amongst us and
no two Soviets are alike, but as an objective, how to impress
favorably the Soviet, try to generate a concept. I just quote
his own words “....«..respect, he was dignified, he could keep
a confidence, and I could trust hin. So, I think as a
piece, as we teach down south, to quote someone like this is
far more meaningful than to generate concepts of how to get
along with a Soviet from every other possible self-generated |
psychological Anglo-saxon background thinking. It is not quite
the sane thing.
