Memo from Richard Helms to Director, DIA Concerning Establishment of the Top Se
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012294, dated 3 October 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012294).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4.3(a)4)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY = -
: WASHINGTON 23, D.C.

para

BNCV iyol

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : Establishment of the TOP SECRET Special
Collection of Articles of the Journal

Military Thought z

by the Ministry of Defense, USSR

Enclosed is a verbatim translation of the editors’ .preface
to the initial issue of the above publication, released in early
1960. The Tables of Contents of the first five issues of this
Special Collection are also included.

This material was acquired by'a Soviet official who has
provided reliable information in the past. We request that it
be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office. Ar-
rangements for utilizing any part of this document in any
other form must be cleared with the originating office.

>

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

fe
1.3(a)(4)
—

* 4.3fay(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 2 0 uy t9%

ccs

1.aay(4)

Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

‘ Assistant to the Secretary of Defense

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State .

National Indications Center

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

| 4.3(a)(4)

£.3(a)(4)

COUNTRY : USSR

SUBJECT ; Establishment of the TOP SECRET Special Collection
of Articles of the Journal "Milit Thought
("Voyennaya Mysi") by the Ministry of Defense,
USSR

DATE OF INFO: 1960-1961

APPRAISAL OF ac
CONTENT : Documentary
SOURCE : A reliable Soviet source (B)

The following is a verbatim translation of remarks by the
Voyennaya, Mysl editors which appeared in the initial issue of the
Special Collection of this publication, released in early 1960.
Also included are verbatim translations of an editorial note
which appears at the beginning of each issue (see page 6) and
the Tables of Contents of the first five issues of this Special
Collection.

4.3{a)(4)

5

4.3(a)(4)

rom the Editor

With a view to activating theoretical discussions of the most
important and pressing problems of Soviet military science, and above
all of military art, according to the decision of the Minister of
Defense of the USSR, Marshal of the Soviet Union R. Ya. Malinovskiy,
in addition to the Secret Collection of the Journal “Military Thought"
which is being published at present, a Special Collection stamped
"Top Secret" is being initiated. :

The leading personnel of our Armed Forces, from the troops, =;
military academies, the chief and central directorates, and the
General Staff, are invited to write articles for this Collection.
Obviously the leading personnel of the Soviet Army and Navy, who
have the best theoretical preparation, the greatest practical experience,
and the widest horizons,” can contribute “mdst tothe development of
Soviet military theory in the light of the requirements of modern
warfare.
This Collection will be sent to a limited circle of officials,
from army commander upward according to a special list.

The creation of a new Collection was dictated by the desire to
ensure responsible authors of an opportunity to express their ideas,
proposals, and critical remarks on all immediate problems of military
theory in a more restricted circle, which would be difficult to do
in other printed organs.

The Collection should be regarded as a continuing forum for
articles, in its way, a military-theoretical conference by correspondence.

The fundamental methodology of articles on the pages of the
Collection shtild be sharp, controversial, and forcefully argued
Yormilation of the most vital theoretical problems and a creative
discussion of them. Depending on the elaboration and clarity. of the
various matters discussed, there will be published conclusive articles
which we propose to invite the most competent individuals, collectives
of creative authors, and, when necessary, official organs, to write.

The most urgent task of our military-theoretical thought is to
overcome certain antiquated views, and to scrutinize boldly, on the
basis of a feeling for new developments, the changes taking place in
military affairs. Such an approach will assure the clear understanding
of realistic courses of the further development of Soviet military 4.3(a)(4)
Sr seems mcs ee eee OE

Pra

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a}(4)

science, and vigorous, creative elaboration of pressing, new problems
of military art as regards strategy, operational art, and tactics, as
well as problems regarding the structure and organization of the Armed
Forces and of the development of military equipment.

Military-theoretical thought should look ahead boldly, vigorously
pave the way to the new and progressive, refute decisively preconceived
points of view, and evaluate critically the experience of the past.

As N. S. Khrushchev emphasized, "Under modern conditions, wars
will not be waged as before and they will hardly be comparable to *
former wars." These new aspects of modern warfare, and their dis-
similarity to previous wars, indicate with conclusive force the
necessity which has arisen of examining from all aspects the qualitative
changes which have occurred in military affairs. It is necessary to
define the trends of their further development, to subject to a serious
and decisive review the established theoretical viewpoints regarding -
questions of the conduct of war and military operations of all scales,
of training, organization, equipping of the Armed Forces, and the.
gamut of other similar questions, the understanding of which has been
predicated up to now to a significant degree on the experience of the
dast war.

It is envisaged that the theme of the Collection will be to exanine
problems relative to the nature of modern warfare, methods and forms
of conducting armed combat, the use in it of all modern scientific -
technical potentialities and means, of the types of Armed Forces
individually and in coordination, = the employment of various means
of mass destruction.

Particular attention should be paid to the examination of the
nature, preparation, and conduct of operations of all types, particularly
missile, under the various conditions of the probable theaters of war
(TVD), and the strategic, operational, and combat employment of missile
large units and units. It is necessary to elaborate on offensive and
defensive operations of formations of the ground forces, air forces,
the navy, troops of the PYO, and airborne troops, with exposition of
those features and peculiarities which the use of the means of mss
destruction and the conduct of missile operations inject into modera
armed combat.

It is necessary to have an over-all analysis of the problem of
modern combat with due regard to that particular influence which will

be exerted on it by modern means of combat which will be employed by
the higher command in the interest of conducting operations and the

war as a whole.. 4.3(2)(4)

1.5{a}(4)

‘Particularly worthy of serious study and detailed elaboration are
the problems of operational and combat support, among others, intelligence,
protection of troops from the means of mass destruction, and radio
countermeasures. ;

A large part of the pages of the Collection should be taken up by
questions regarding the control of troops throughout all elements and
echelons. Problems related to these questions are particularly important
because the greater independence of action of strategic groupings in
the TVD, operational formations, and tactical Jarge units and units,
complicates to a great degree, and gives ‘special features to, the
control of troops. Also entering into the framework of these questions
is elaboration on the best forms of organizing the organs of control
in all areas, the methods of their work, equipping and outfitting,
using various means of automation, and problems of planning military
operations. oo

It is very important to analyze as carefully as possible, and to
elaborate, problems relative to the organization of the modern Armed
Forces rear, of the field army and operational and tactical groupings
of troops, from the point of view of mintaining uninterrupted supply
to the troops of all necessary support for combat and life under
conditions of continuous and powerful action against the rear by the
combat means of the enemy; and the related problems of defense and
protection of the rear and the coordination of operations in this area
between the Armed Forces and civilian organizations. Also belonging
to this group of questions is the problem of the preparation of the
theaters of war and material reserves of all types and designations.

It is necessary, on the basis of profound analysis of the methods
and forms of modern military warfare, to study and develop proposals
for the future make-up of the Armed Forces and their organizational
structure at all levels, and questions of the organization and
methodology of training troops and command cadres.

Great importance may be attributed to proposals for further
development of military technology, weapons systems, correlation of
various types of weapons, vehicles, and mechanisms, and recommendations
for further improvement of the old, and designs of new, models, based
on the trends of development of technology.

The editors turn to the readers of the Collection, who should

actually be its authors, with the request to participate widely and

actively in the work of this publication and to submit articles ‘which

pose important problems. and which propose realistic solutions. : 4 3(a)(4)

~ 4.3(a)(4)

he

Taking into account the limited size of the Collection, the editors
request the authors t make the articles as short as possible, to avoid
redundancies and the commonplace, and at the same time, to argue .
convincingly their stated positions. ;

The Collection, with a volume of 8 to 10 quires, will be issued
periodically. In the current year, it is proposed to publish 4-5 issues.
In this first issue of the Collection are included articles which are
most suited to the goals of this publication , chosen from articles
received previously by the editors.

i.
,.

_.

~ 4.3(a)(4)

-4.3(2)(4)

From the Editor

Articles of the Special Collection of the Journal "Military Thought”
(Voyennaya Mysl) are published as a discussion and express only the
opinion of the authors on the subjects which are broached.

All articles for the Collection, as well as inquiries regarding
its publication, comments on published materials, and remarks regarding
them, should be sent to the chief editor of the journal "Military
Thought; following the rules for transmittal of Secret materials. ~

The present issue of the Special Collection of Articles of the -

Journal "Military Thought" is being distributed to army commanders and rn
higher, according to a special list.

vow

Chief Editor General~Leytenant Radetskiy, N.A.

This Collection contains pages

_ . i,

4.3(a)(4) | .

~ 4,3(a)(4)

Ministry of Defense of The Union of SSR's

Special Collection

of Articles of the Journal

 MELTTARY THOUGHT —

First Issue 1960
Contents
| Page
From the Editor 3
A, GASTILOVICH - The Theory of Military Art Needs Review 6
I. TOLKONYUK ‘: Some Problems of Modern Operations , Pa |

V. BASKAKOV - New Developments in Operational Art and Tactics 39

I. ZAVYALOV ~ The Suitability of Modern Means and Methods of
Conducting Operations he

V. CHUYKOV ~- Intelligence at the Level of Modern Missions 56

S.- KUZNETSOV » A. TIKHOMIROV - Questions of the Control of Missile
'- Units in an Offensive Operation Sh

Military Publishing House
of the Ministry of Defense of the Union of SSR's
Moscow - 1960

1.3(a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

2nd Isaue Wee kd 1960
Contents
: ; Page
N. KUROCHKIN - The Nature of Modern Armed Combat, and the Role

and Place in It of the Various Branches of the
Armed Forces 3

. IVANOV - Certain Factors Influencing the Planning of a Modern

Offensive Operation ; 14.

fe

. KHETAGUROV - A Front Offensive Operation Conducted Under the

Conditions of the Initial Period of a Nuclear-

Missile War 27
IVANOV - Some Conclusions on Exercise "Si destep" of the NATO |
Armed Forces Ty
KASATONOV - The Use of Naval Forces in Closed Sea Theaters in 4.32)
the Initial Period of a War 56 .
MALYKHIN - Some Problems in the Preparation of the Rear for =
the Support of the Armed Forces in the Initial Period
of a War 71

GORYAINOV - Nuclear-Missile Armament and Some Principles of
: Military Doctrine » 89

KOCHETKOV - Elimination of the Lag in Operational and
Tactical Intelligence 105

IVANOV, ~ The Improvement of the ‘eitcacion of poe
CHIRKOV Training of Generals, Senior Officers, and Staffs 12

; Military Publishing House
of the Ministry of Defense of the Union of SSR's
Moscow 1960

4.3(a)(4)

-4.3(a)(4)

_ 4.3(a}(4)

“Third Issue

Contents
Page
V A» GORBATOV - Characteristics of Modern Armed Combat 3
I. GUSAKOVSKIY - Some Questions Regarding the Theory of
Military Art ; 10
V. TRIBUTS - To Develop the Theory of Soviet Military Art 17
o V. KURASOV ~- The Influence of Nuclear Weapons on the |
Principles of Offensive Operations of a Front 25
y A. SHEVCHENKO - The Strike Groupings of a Front
, & SINYAKOV, - The Air Forces in the New Stage of Soviet . 4.8(a)(4)
. M. KOZHEVNIKOV Armed Forces Development “7
_ V. BOGOLEPOV - The Role of Aviation in Military Operations
at Sea te 58
vy M. NOVIKOV - Rear Area Support of Missile Troops During
Front Offensive Operations 67
I. KOVALEV, - The Problem of Transportation in Modern Warfare {7
P,. BAKAREV, *
K. PAVLOVICH
»  P, DANKEVICH - Intelligence at the Level of Modern Missions 89 .

Military Publishing House
Ministry of Defense of the Union of SSR's
Moscow < 1

This book contains 92 pages.
EDITORIAL OFFICE ADDRESS

Moskva, V-160, wl. Kropotkina, 19. Telephone K-0-13-00, Ext. 53-66

Technical editor: Volkov, V. Ye. Proofreader: Pavlov, N.P.

Given for type-setting 17/10/60 Released for printing 10/11/60
Paper format 70 x 108 7/16 - 5 3/4 quires = 7.87 conditional quires

Pub. No. 2/8162ss ats Reg. No. 00220

1.3(a)(4)

First Issue

N.

Contents

PAVLOVSKIY - The Initial Period of a Future War and

Pecultarities of the Conduct of Military
Operations During ‘his Period

ROTMISTROV ~ The Paths of Further Development of Tank
Troops of the Soviet Army

BABADZHANYAN - The Question of the Nature of Modern Warfare

SEMENOV - The Paths of Further Improvement of Combat
Readiness of the Troops

IGOLKIN, S. BURYAK - Some Questions of the Organization of
Modern Operational Defense

IVANOV ~- Improvement of Stability of Troop Control of a
. Front (Army)

LISYUTIN -~ The Use of Naval Forces in a Missile-Nuclear War
MALAKHOV - Intelligence at the Level of Modern Requirements

ey = The Most Urgent Problems of Training of Senior

Personnel and Increasing the Combat Readiness of

Border Military District Staffs

Military Publishing House
of the Ministry of Defense of the Union cf SSR's
Moscow - 1961

72 —-1.8(a}(4)
90

-

32
Oe

. 4.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

1.3(a}(4}

Second Issue - "1962
Contents | Page
y A. ZHADOV - Trends in the Development of Tank Troops of the
Soviet Army 3

S. VARENTSOV - Prospects for the Development of Missile
Weapons of the Ground Forces 12

I. IVANOV - Turning Point in the Development. of Soviet Military
- Art el

7 $8, ANDRYUSHENKO - The Depdoyment..and Movement of a Combined-Army
of a Border Military District in the Initial

Period of a War 3h
“ -V. MIKHAYLOV - Anti-Missile Defense of Troops of a Front . 4S
“P-~--—_  K, PASHUK - The Organizational Structure of Field Command of a
5 Front 56
* A. MOROZOV, ~ Some Questions of aii Control in Modern
. N. LYASHCHENKO, Operations 65
 V. ARKHIPOV

v V. PLATONOV - The Missions of the Navy and Methods of Carrying
Them Out -

1.3(a)(4)
/ WN. 2VYAGIN - The Use of Surface Vessels in Modern Mliitary ase,
‘ Combat at Sea 91

G. ODINTSOV - Rear Area Support of Missile Troops fn Front
Offensive Operations 3.03

Military Publishing House
of the seat ey of Defense of the Union of SSR's
Moscow - 1961

7.3(a)(4)

1.3(a){4)
