The Soviet Earth Satellites, 1957
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124334, dated 19 June 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124334).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

als | SCE ROTIOM OF PAGI FOR SPicI

; J 4
ae INFORMATION REPORT

PREPARED AND DISSEMINATED BY
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

COvmray

PLACE Am OSTE ACQUIRED (DP command

WO ihe ae F Perea wer Pe wert

1937
THts tS UNEVALUATED INFORMATION
- os

{oa fle in CIA Library is on Uhelessified soviet poblioation in Nogiieh,
Soviet Perth Satellites, 1957". It wns sent to « UB Technical
Goutety ty Vieiiair GC. Dwienteff 3x4 Secretary of the Soviet Bubecay,
Centring ten, DC. in eee a oe eee emarer the
yubliontion eevers the fulloving

1, Mleteric Evert in the Ristery of Mackint

Tl. The Spvtntks
fhe Problew of Launching Thea. Rockets. The Take-eff, Design

TI. the @pctnike’ Orbits
Syutnfk-1. How te Fini the Orbit. The Brolution of @putatk-l'¢ Crttt.
Why Mast the Rocket ani Sputnik Burn up!.

Ave Shere Inperstseible Orbits for Satellites? yp. SEES
Sputnik-2's es 7
« Uhet Fakes Satellites Kove?
¥. The Reelad peel. Altitale ant @peel. Observations of the fpuintke'
vr. Pa WG ka at weet ; a

The Vpper Atmosphere. Cosmic Rays. ‘The Becrets of the Ionosphere,
The Barth's Mametic Field. Weather Forecasting.

fe LAN ae Ri th a a ll nn A NE Ratt

rr. |

YW. Rare See ees eee
Prokina Doveived in the Stuy of Animals Trevelling 12 Oxter Spawe,
Biological Phenomena in Commic Flights.

VIII. Utena Seteriite ,/

: ¢
Witheut Atussyhere./ The Sun is not all Life. Wheat 1s Welchrtlecsnesst

mK. fin in Outer pees.
Fi

uacussTroD]
Ae for Release

Date__| {seP_ 105  -

—— a

nave Sn CoE yc i nt Be

5 ree
aa...
cep cemanin wed gher schival =1h thet? temediate seppertiag etetts. Bot tbe diommingued  sonruheam comes
ene

ws chert Geren wetre duty foreomiog lattetdwels whe ore sareeaiy
+ etme af ee ttn attire bene ent need nny Ra Tentateee Merwgtye Int Core! Padermene,

eel et TI Rg TT RT TE

oa e

*
ew as ane gee ae ene eta ee lee cen cee e emars cmae me emp my me te emma eg Fame ty

Contents:

: are
Publishers' Note
I, Historio ivent in the Fistory of Mankind 1
II. The Sputniks ” 6

The Problem of Launehing Them (6). Rockets (7).
e The Take-off (12). Design (14).

III. The Sputniks' Orbits 17

Sputnik-1 (19), How to Find tha orbit (20),
The Evolution of Sputnik-l's Orbit (23).

why Must tre Rocket and Sputnik Zurn up? (24).
Are Theres Impermissible Orbits for Satellites?
(25). Sputnik-2's Orbit (26).

Iv. “hat Makes Sat2llites Yove? 29

The Navded Spead (30), Altitude and Speed (31).
Vv. Observations of the Sputniks' Motion 34

VI, Reseerch With ths Ald of the Sputniks 40

The Upper Atmosphere (40). cosmic Rays (48),
The Secrets of ths Ionosphere (56). Tha
Earth's Magnetic Field (59), Westher Fors-
casting (62).

VII, Towards the Conquest of Outer Space 66
Froblems Involved in the Stucy of Animals
Travelling in Cuter Spaca (66). Biological
Phenomena in Cosmic Flights (68).

VIII. Life on a Satellite 71
" “~Hthout Atmosphere (71), The Sun is Not All
Life (73). ‘that Is “sightlisssness? (75). ‘
“hare Ars the Blolovioal Limits? (79).

Man in Outer Space

Epigraph

\

>». “The steel birds find the air increasingly crowded,
and this has be€ome possible in our country only at this tine
when our whole industrious nation, every working man and wt
man in our Soviet land have all together set out to make
real mankind's dream of conquering the heights beyond the
clouds...

“Today I am very certain that ny other dream, namely,
interplanetary travel, whieh I substantiated theoretically,
will also eome true.

"Por forty years I worked on jet-propelled engines and
thought that a pleasure trip to Mars would begin only after
several centurfes. But tines are changing. I believe that
many of’ you will witaees the first flight beyond the at-
‘MOSPhOreeess”

(Fron a speech dy K.E.- Taiolkoveky
recorded in 1933)

Lads &

«l=

On Fly 1, 1957 began the International Geophysical
Year. Joining their efforts, scientists of 64 countries
are engaged in extensive invest igat ions of the continents

and islands, seas and oceans, the depths of the sea and tae

=

atmosphere. _
To be studied are the aurora polaris and glow of the
air, the cosmic rays, terrestrial magnetism, the earth's
gravitation, and solar radiation; also the ice situation,
the physics of the ionosphere and a number of problens of
meteorology, oceanography, seismology, and so On.
Occupying a special place in the researth is the study

of cosnie space, one of the - fascinating tasks of modern

seience. It ia of tremendous interest for physics, astrophy- ~
gies, astronomy, meteorology, aviation, chenistry, biology
and many other“spheres of science.

An important place in the IGY progranme has been assigned

to this explometi¢n which is being conducted with the aid

of rockets and artificial satellites of the Barth.

The Soviet Union plans to launch 125 rockets, to rise
from different points in the USSR approxiaately along the
sane meridian, beginning with Franz Josef Land beyond the
Arctic Cirele, and from starting grounds in the middle la-
titudes belt. Roekets are also to be launched from the area
of Mirny settlement in the Antarctic. The Soviet rockets
will take up containers with instruments for different
kinds of observations 100-200 kilometres high. The United

States plans to send up 35 rockets, and Britain, France and

i tei

eran

-2-
Japan, alsao intend to launch rockets for research purposes.

The IGY's most important problem is the launching of
artificial satellites of the Earth. The very exdlen of the
IGY 16 a pleture of our planet ringed by an ordit of a
moving artificial earth satellite. Only two countries @-
the Soviet Union and the United Btates -- have decided to
undertake to oarry out this task, one of the grandest man
has ever set biaself.

On Octoder 4, 1957 a truly history-making event took
place -- the Soviet Union successfully launched Sputnik-l,
the first artifieial oarth satellite. And defore another
full aonth had passed it was followed by Sputnik.2., its
younger but much bigger brother, which took up to the
fringo of outer space the dog “Laika”, the Earth's first
messenger.

The launching of Sputnikel was a great triumph of
man over nature. Man had surmounted “the physical harriers”
‘which have kept hin out of cosmic space; he had overcome —
the force of gravity and the resistance of the atmosphere.
Eowever, there still remained the biological barrier, a8
yet unexplored. Could a living organisn endure the con-
ditions of space beyond the Earth's atmosphere? “Laika's"
_heartbeats heard by the world's radio statiors furnished the
acewer to this question. This is the first step toward
man's travel in cosmic space.

In this booklet we offer for your attention material
published in the Soviet press in connection with the launch-
ings of the satullites, amons thea articles and other pub-
lications by the following autchors?

ai
By
oa
Ed
i

Peal A ait yg Meee
: Pe tS ea

-3-

Academician Y. Anbartsunyan, President of the Acadeny
of Sciences of the Arsenian SSR; Academician A. Blagonravov,
Academician =- oeeretary of the Technical Sciences Section
of the USSR academy of Setences; E. Blinov, Corresponding=-
Mender of the UooR Acadeny of Sciences; S. Vernor, Corres=
ponding-Member of the acadeny; K. Gilzin, Candidate of
Technical Seienees; Prof. ¥. Dobronravov, Doctor of Physical -
and Mathematical Sciences; S. Dolginov, Candidate of Physical ;
and Mathematical Sciences; P. Isakov, Ugndidate of Biological
Seiences; A. Karpenko, learned Secretary of the Rational
Counission for Interplanetary Conmunication of the USSR Ada deny
of neiences; V- Krasovsky, Doctor of Physical and Mathematical
Sctences; Y. Krylov, Candidate of Technical *ciences; Prot. ae
¥. Soaadin, Doetor of technical °cilences; Vv. Parin, Member of
the Academy of Medical Sciences of the USSR; J. Pushkov, Can=-
didate of Physical and Mathematical Sciences; Prof. A. Predvo-
ditelev, Corresponding Member of the UsoR Academy of Sciences;

Prof. Y. Poredonostsev, Doctor of Technical Sciences; Prof.
G. Pokrovsky, Doctor of Technical Dciencess Academician

A. Topehiev, Chief Learned Secretary of the Presidium of the
USSR Acadeny of Sciences; A. Shternfeld, Winner of the ;

International Prize for the Promotion of Astronautics, and

others.

I. HISTORIC EVENT IN THE DESTINY OF MANKIND

Our epoch is rich in great diseoveries in the fields
of setence and technology, and soxe of thea are so great
that it is souctizes hard for us to assess then proper$y
at once. Space flights and an artificial Zarth satellite
have been discussed in detail in the scientific literature
of different countries for a long time, aud one would think
that the importance of this question had long been realised. |
However, now tnat the Soviet artificial satellites have bead.
successfully launched and are whirling over various countries
the history of the question should be re-examined once nore
and the success achieved assessed in a new way.

Many uchieverents of seience and technology can Le
evaluated more cerrectly and objectively by first ascertain
ing to what exteat they have given aan greater power over the
forces of nature.

If we approach the event of the -successful launching
of the Soviet artificial Barth satellites fron this viespoint,
we may say the following:

Most biologists today are inclined to the wiew that
organic life, the highest manifestation of which is zan, had
for sore than 1,000 million years after ezerging 09 Earth
een bound to Kotker Earth, her hydrosphere and atmosphere.
And now we are witnessing the fact that sachinery developed by
man has left ‘the Earth and its atmosphere and is strikixcg
root in cosmic space, where nothing energizg om the Earth

had ever deen before.

-2-
Obviously it will not be many yeare before flights to the
Moon and other planets will be made not only Dy automatic
space ships without crews but also by vessels carrying people
on board.

In other words, we are now standing on the DSorder line
of two great epochs, The epech in whieh the life of man wae
eonfined to the Earth is coning to a close, and the ep0ch
of man's striking root in cosmic space is beginning. Froma
terrestrial being man is becoming a coszic being.

There can be no doubt that this transformation will
have little effvet oa the course of man's normal life on Earth
in the next few years or even vecades. However, there can ,
de no doubt either that prospects are opening up for future
centuries and millennia which we cannot begin to assess
siaply because there is no appropriate yardsticz.

We may say that there are in seience and engineering
"tactical" and "strategical" echievenents. “Tactical” achie-
venents rapidly becoae part and parcel of life, bringing us
much that is useful but not changing tke nature of man's
social existence. "“Strategic™ achievecents do not affect
the life of individuals directly. Their pructival effect
manifests itself slowly, but then they radically change all
relations of husan society and its environment.

We can assune that achievenents such as the subju-
gation of fire, the making of metals, and so on, were
“strategical™ achievements of technology in hoary antiquity,
But presumably all these hunan accomplishments are a trifle
conpared with the conquest of cosmic space. Only the dis-

covery of nuclear energy =~ an achievenent of our days --

can in any way be conpared with cosmic flights.

The beginning of space flights opened to mankind the
prospects of conquering endlesa space. Nuclear energy and
cosmic flights sogether open up to humanity boundless vistas
for further development.

To master nuclear energy and cosmic flights fully,
seience, engineering and the economy have to be planned and
managed in the interests of husan society as a whole, and
tt ig therefore far from accidental that it was precisely .
the Soviet Union which has found an excellent and reliable
solution of the probles of building and launching artifle
elal Earth satellites. :

Russian science has splendid traditions in the dsuild-
ing of rockets. Advanced selentista and inventors have
occupisd thenoselves with probleas of rockets and jet propul-
sion since way back. Many valuable works on powder rockets”
were put out by. K.N. Konstantinov, an eminent artillery
engineer, who aoekea in the first half anl she middle of
the 19th century. In 1881 the famed Russian revolutionary -
N.I. Kibalchich suggested the idea of vertical flight by
using a jut engine to overconethe force of gravity, and
towards the end of the 19th century Professor HAV. Meshehersky
of Petersburg Polytechnical institute developed the theory
? sf bodies of variable amass, which is sian today the -
basis for all calculations in the sphere of rocket engineer=

ing. However, the most recarkable occurrence in Russias

science in this direction is the works of K.E. Tsiolkovaky,

works which received universal acclaim for brilliance. in

their purposefuliness, concreteness and classic sizplicity,

—Ya
Taiolkovsaky was the filgst in the history of science to
work out the principleg uncerlying the theory of jet
propuleion and the genqral theory of space flights as
early as 1903, and a aqncrete scheme of multi-stage cosnie
\

rockets in 1929.

Towards-the end of [the twenties groups of enginvcrs
worced on a number of iqoncrete problems in the physics and .

technology of jet propdlsion. Tsiolkovsky was tirelessly

i =
carrying his research jn the dynaaics of rockets which he
: :

had begun at the begid ing of the century, and by that

tine he had cone to the eonclusion that a one-piece rocket
powered by cheaical fudl would not be able to attain cosmic
speed (8~11 kilometres ja second), and in his search for

the solution to the prqblem of attaining greater speed

he conceived the idea dé multi-stage rockets, an idea
which proved 50 fruits 1.

Research in jet propulsion was placed in the category
of research of sac State inportance - far back as.
early five-year plans, land this sade it possible carly
in the thirties, long before similar work way begun in
other countries, to con uct stand tests of jet engines
in the UooR, and in 1933 to launch a rocket designed and
built by engineer u.x.| bichonrevov for neteorological od—
servations. .

After the war Soviet} scientists began to design long-
range guided roccets. |

In 1947 regular infest of the upper layers of

n with the aid of instruzents lifted

the atmosphere were de

+ meg eme ee

ee as

-5-

dn rockets, and study was begun of the processes taking

_ Place beyond the atmosphere. It was discovered that the

Sun radiates X-rays, data was obtained on the chenical

~
eonposition of the atmosphere over 100 kilonetres high,

a study was made of the concentration of free charges in

the itonosphere, which plays a very iaportant part in

shortewave radio comcunication, observations were conducted

of the condition of a living organisn in the state of

weightlessness, which occure during the free flight ofa

rocket, and a nymber of other valuable investigations have

been carried ovt which have widened the horizons of scien-

tific knowledge and have paved the way for man's flight in-

space.
The artificial satellites were lauceched in the USSR

under the IGY programme.
Artificial satellites are of importance purely for
The programme of scientific neasure-

scientific reseerch.
ments on the artificial Earth satellites is very broad,

enconpassing rany divisions of physics of the upper atmos-

phere and study of outer space near the Earth.

These probleas include: a study of tne state of the
f its ;

donospher3 and its chezical structure; measurement oO

pressure snd density; a-gnetic measurements; study of the

nature of the Sun's corpuscular radiation, of the prinary

composition and ch3snges in comsic Trays, of the ultra-violet |

and X-ray regions of the Sun's spectrun, the electrostatic

fields of the upper atmosphere and microparticles, aad,

lastly, a whole series of investigations into the vital

-6

activity of the living organisa in cosmic flight. |

To obtain all essential scientific data from the
flight of the sasellites their sevicent has to be syste=
matically oveerved by means of astronomical (optical)
inetruments, radio ang radar aids.

Ovservitions of satellites cin Oe conducted by scient-
{sts in all countries, snd this vill serve as a basis for
the growth and enrichnent of all of world science. The
Soviet sputaoiks therefore not only symbolize achtevenents
of the Soviet Union but also the friendship and co~opera=
tion of all peoples with the ain of giving man greater
power over the forces of nature for the benefit of all
mankind.

= II. THE SPUT

The Problen of Leynching Then
_ The difficulty of launching an Earth satellite is due
first to the fact that it has to be inparted colossal speed:
to indicate what these difficulties are it is enough to
gention one figure: a rocket (single-stage) capable of
attaLning the go-called primary cosmic speed (roughly eight
Kilometres a secoad), at wrich it will become an artificial
satellite of the Sarth, has to take along 150 to 200 tines

ag much fuel by weight as weigh its body, {instruments and

_gource of power required for the functioning of the inmtru-

ments. So far we have suceeeded in building rockets in
which the weight of the fuel is 75-60 per cent of the total
weight, in otner words, only four times as auch as the

weight of the rocket itself.

-7-

But even 50, even under these conditions, prisary cose

nic speed can be attained by applying Taiolkovsky's idea
ofa nulti-stage rocket, made up of two or three ronketa,
with their engines working in turn> When the fuel of the
first (rear)_rocket has been used up this stage falle away
and the second 3tarts working. And when the second has
used up its fuel it falls away and the third will take

the artificial satellite to its orbit.

It took many years of nard work by large teans of
engincers and scientists to put into flesh Taiolkovsky's
daring ideas. The greatest difficulties wer: encountered
in working out the carrier rocket which wus to place the
Satellite in its ordit. The rocket had to be light and
durable and it had to have powerful yet very light jet
engines wiieh could operate under the difficult tnornal
conditions acd would ensure a propelling force of hundreds
of tons for a sufficiently long period. Needed too was an
exceedingly precise and reliable systen of control over
the rocket's flight. And, finally, compact and light power
sources hid to be desigu2d for radio transnitters, and
automatie and renote-coatrolled equipment which could de
‘relied upon to function for a consideradle time under oon-—

ditions of interplanetary flight.

ROCKETS
Present-day extra longerange rockets designed to fly
at sub-cosoic speeds high above the Earth's surface, are
set going by liquid-fueled jet engines. In the main

part of such an engine == the conbustion chanbor —-

-8-

special fuel is burced continuously and the gases produced
are ejected, developing the force of recoil, or that is
called the engine's thrust. Since a rocket over zost of
its path has to fly in extremely rarefied layers of the
atmosphere, where the amount of oxygen required for the
burning of any sudstance is negligible, the oxygen has to
be carried on the rocket along with the fuel.

In order that the rocket earrying the artificial satel-
lite say attain the required speed, the engine has to dee
volop a gtvat propulsion force. The rocket should weigh
as little as possible. Several ergines have to be installed
du such rockets, for to attain a propelling force of even
several score tons froa one engine is a problem which has
not yet been solved. ,

Even on the best prvsent-day rockets the structure weighs
avout 20 per cent of the combined weight of the rocket,
and fuel. That is why the first thing that has to be
done is to manage to attain the speed of cosnic flight
with less fuel. :

K. Tsiolkovsky showed that te accooplish this it will
be necessary as far as possible to increase the speed at
which the gases produced by the combustion of the fuel flow
out of the engine, and then each kilogran of fuel will
produce a wore powerful “recoil,” and then less fuel will
be required to obtain the needed propulsion force for
acceleration.

How is that to be done?

The answer to this question has long ago been furnished

areal mara

-3-
oy tnernodynamics and heat engineering: what should be

dons is to take the most calorific fuel and burn it in

the combustion cnanber under high pressure.

Ia an engine working efficiently on such fuel, pressures
of 50 atmospheres or core should be developed at a tenpee.
rature of sone 3,000°, Although such an engine functions
very briefly (a few cinutes), no uwaterial available to
engiaeering could stacd the strain of work under these
conditions. And such a problem has never cone up before,
as tue nost powerful taercal engines of other types developed
only between 100th and 1,000th part of the power developed .
by liquid-fueled jet engines.

To build a reliably working engine it is necessary
first to solve the problen of cooling and of making its
walls strong enough. And that is not 80 sinple. However, —
even with good cooling it is very difficult to obtain a
wall temperature of less than 500-800°, Whien seans that
the saterial of which the chamber is nade has to be excep~
tionally heat-proof. The provlen of cooling 18 a basic
one but rot the only one. :

To make sure that the engine works reliably highly com-.
plex calculations have to be made of the processes taking
place in it. We have to know what laws opefate in the .
mixing and burning of the fuel, how to ensure that it is
unifornly fed to the engine, how to produce safely the
initial ignition of the fuel and, finally, what loads the
engine parts are sudjected to while it is in operation,

Special attention has to be given to ensure uniforn

-10-

feeding and combustion of the fuel, as otherwise strong
vibrations will aevelop, leading to the destruction of
the engine and the rocket. This problem is ao less
difficult than tne problem of cooling.

Solution of all these probleas would be impossible
without the jaint effort of scientists working in the
field of gas dynanics, the theory of combuation, hydraulics
and the theory of control. Only by starting out froa the
accomplishments ia these spheres of science have Soviet .

‘engineers been able to design a powerful and reliably
working engine for the carrier rocket.

Without the work done in ballistics, aerodynanics, gas
dysasics and the theory of strength it would have bcen
dapossible to build the carrier rocxet.

To ensure that tne satellite gets exactly to the orbit,
the whole path of the rocket nad to be calculated in ad-
vance. Experts in ballistics and aerodynaaics, especially
the latter, had to labour much. The physical structure vf
the upper atmosphere differs sharply fron the regular
atmosphere: because of the considerable rarefaction the
gas molecules travel at trenerdous speed. At an altitude
of 300 kilometres the rocket traveling at a speed of seven
kiloasetres a second comes up against oa pressure of five
nilligraas per square centiaetre and as they bombard the
flyicg body the molecules impart their exergy to it.

To mace sure that the rocket or satellite do not burn
during the launching or flight highly complex computations

had to be made to determine the force of resistance of

Ee eagle a Boh

«lie

the surrounding aediun.

It te necessary to have an efficient and exact systea

of autoaatic control to look after the fuel feeding aod

the flight characteristics, to detach the ysad-up mages

of the rockets, and to keep the rocket in the set trajec-

The following figures give an idea of what ia
when it

tory.
denanded of the control systen of a rocket!

reaches its top speed of 28,000 kilometres an hour (whieh

4s 20 times as auch as the velocity of sound), an error

ad in the speed or 0.5° in the direc-
ove fatal for the satellite.

‘of L0~20 cetres a secon
tion of the rocket 's motion can pr
A rocket is nade up of tens of tnousands of parts, euch

perforaing a certain task. And if any of thes should not

work perfectly the rocket oay not fly and aay not carry

out the prograage set for it.
Extrene care in aaking and asseabling it was ueccesary

to ensure success.

In the few seconds tnat it taxes the rocket to rise a
ooustrous power is devavoped.a8 the fuel burns, reaching ~
several million kw. The colossal speed of the outflow of
gases fron the engine, which 1s several tines faster
than the speed of a bullet, the tremendous tenperatures

require special fuels and special constructions ta nake it
possible to use such fuels. ;

It is not without interest to note that the energy of
tue useful nass of Sputnik-2, its kinetic force at a speed
of 8,000 netres a second is equal to tne energy ofa

goods train weighing 320,000 tons traveling at a speed

~l2=
: ¢
of 36 xilonetres an hour. No such train could travel
on railway tracks, for it would have to be made up of
thousands of waggons, oaking the train several score

kilometres long.
\
Of course, it is inpossible to attain a speed of some

8,000 metres a-second on land. Such speed is possible

only in outer space where there 18 no resistance “at all."
The construction of the rocket for launching the first
artificial Earth satellites in the history of mankind
shows that Soviet science has reached a high degree of
‘developaent in every sphere and is capable of solving the
nost complex overall problens.
The Take-off
How is au artificial satellite of the Earth launched?
It is done by teans of a sulti-stage ballistic rocket, and
the flight of such a rocket can be pictured as follows.

+o. Towering over concrete grounds is the launching

outfit, and through the open-work structure of stcel trusscus

can be seen the streazlised rocxet set up vertically.
Immediately before the launching the steel framework of

the outfit is taken away on a special track, the rocket

standing by itself for a few ninutes before the take-off

as though taking seave of the zarth.
Tne people leave the take-off grounds, taking sholter

vehiud thick reinforced-concrete walls. The launching is

made autocatically, the instruments installed in the
vocket receiveing the order from the comannd poiat by

radio.

-13-

A thunderlike roar deafens tne people, even though
they ar in the shelter, and a dazzling torchlike flame
bursts fron the rocket nozzle, scorching the concrete.
The rocket quivers as though hesitating for an instant
and tnen siowly rising fron the ground mounts faster and
faster towards the sky. It take off vertically to an alti-
tude of about two xkilonetres, then, guided by a progranmned .
control device, it begins to slope in a vertical plane.
The first-stage rocket engine stops a sinute or two after
the start; by that tine the rocket had attained a speed
of sonething like 7,000-7,500 kilosetres an hour and
reached an angle of about as? to the Earth's surface.
After the first stage has fallen away the secoud-stage
engine starts, bringing up the speed to 18,000-20,000
kilonetres an hour. Fron then on the rocket travels by
inertia ‘e¢raecing in space a gigantic ellipse designed
so that ite suanit touches the set orbit, hundreds of
kilometres igh and so that the path is parallel to the
Earth's surface. By that time the rocket was nore than.
1,000 kilometres away fron where it started. .

Then comes the decisive moment. The rocket is at
the set altitude but the speed is aot enough to nake it
a satellite. If the rocket does not get a further .
inpetus, in a second it will start falling back on its
eourse to the Earth, along the second half of the ellipse.

ae But this will not happen, for the last-stage engine be-
| a gins to work. Another effort and the rocket picks up the
don : needed circular speed of something like 8,000 mq treo :

-14-

a‘socead, And then the rocket's engines grow silent for-

ever. A satellite has been DOT. eee

Design
Sputnik 2 is spherical in shape. It is 58 centinetres
in diameter aad weighs 67.6 kilogrannes. Its hernetically
sealed wody is made of aluoiniua alloys ard its surface
ig polished and specially treated. All its apparatus
and power sources are locatud inside the body. Before
being launched it was filled with a gaseous nitrogen.

On the outside surface 20rials were put up} four rods
2.4 to 2.9 actres long. While the sputaik was taken out
to ita ordit. the aerials were folded back to the body of
the rocket, and after the two stages had fallen away
the aerials turned on their hinges, assuming the position.
shown on the photo. ;

While aoving in its orbit the satellite is subjected
fron tine to tine to sharply changing heat influences —~
heating by the Sun's rays while on the lit side of the
Earth and cooling when flying in the Zarth's shadow, the
influence of the atnosphere’s heat and 30 on. Basides,

a certain amount of heat is generated wheao the cpparatus
on the satellite is working. As far 48 heat is concerned
the satellite is an independent heavenly body, exchang-

jag radiant heat with the surrounding space. To ensure

for a considerable period the normal teuperature needed
for the functioning of apparatus on the satellite is
therefore a fundaaentally new and rather difficult problen,

arene sere ameter eet

5 Siento to

-15-

She needed temperature on the Sputnik-I was ensured by
incorporating in its surface the proper ratio of ebsorption
to the Sun's radiation and by regulating the heat resist=
anee between the envelope and the equipaent through the
forced circulation of the nitrogen $n the satellite.

Two radio-transmitters were installed in the satellite
constantly emitting signald frequencies of 20,005 and
40,002 megacycles (15 and 7.5 metre wave-lengths respecte
ively).

Sputnike2, unlike Sputnik-1, is the last stage of
thé rocket on which all of the scientific and’ measuring
dustrunents are installed. This arrangement nas satertlale-
ly simplified the problem of determining the satellite's
coordinates with the aid of optical instruments; our ex-
perierce with Sputnik-1 showed that observations of the
carrier rocket were simpler than of the satellite it--
self. The earrier roeket was brighter than the Sputnik-1l.
Sy several stellar nagnitudes. The conbined weight of
the apparatus, of the animal taken up and source of
electricity on Soutnik-2 anounted to 508 kilogramnes and
300 grammes.

Installed on a special frame in the forward part of
the last stage of the rocket are an instrunent for neasur-
ing solar radiations in the ultra-violet and X-ray regions
of the spectrun, a spherical container with the radio ~
transmitters and other apparatus, and the nernetically-
sealed chamber in which the dog was kept. The instruments
for studying the cosuic rays were mounted outside the dody

of the rocket. A special cone protects the instruments in

~16-
the frase and containers froa aeroaynauic and therial
influences during the rocket's flight in the cense layers
of the atuosphere. After the last-staze rocket had been
taken out to the orbit the cune was dise -rded.

The radio transuitters and their sources of electrle
city, the syste of heat regulatiun Bad the sensitive
eleents registering the changes in the teaperature and
other para.etres were put up in the spherical container
whieh reserables Sputnik 1 in dgsign.

The Bignals frou the transaitter on 20,005 :ega~
eyeles (15 netre wave-length) sounced like telestraphic
clicks. They lasted on the average about 0.3 seconds,
just as did the pauses between the-, changing within
eertain liuits when there were chanes in the parazeters
dn -the spherical container (teuperature and pressure).

The transaitter on 40,002 cesacycles (7.5 xsetre waver
length) eontinuously gave out signals. These frequencies
peruitted the inavestications of the propagation of radio
waves couing fro: the satellite and teasurexent of the
paraneters of its orbit, and audibility of the signals
wags ensured regardless of the state of the ionosphere.

It should be nentioned that because of their rela-
tively large weisht it was found possible to set up
powerful radio. transaitters on both sputniks. This
and the selection of the wavelength have ensured setting
Signals: fron the sputniks over great distances, enabling a
areat nany radio anateurs in all parts of the world to

cooperate in the observations. The latter's observations

pe we eee

-17-

proved thet signala fron the sputniks ¢eculd be relicbly ,
seaantvae Panetaagy anateur receiving sots ct ranges of
several thousend kiloastres, and in so..0 ¢1ses 10,000,
12,000 anc 15,000 kilonetres. \ .

The dog was put in a heractically s-eled chanber
and to provide the conditions needed fer the eniaal's
nomial existence during tho -obesrvetions a supply of
food was placed in the chanber and an aisw-conditioning
plant, consisting of a regonerating outfit and a syste2r of
n0at control installed. Also installed were instrunuents
to register the dog's pulse, respiration and blood
pressure, apparatus to take clectrocardio.roas, and sen-
sitive elencnts to noesure teaperature and pressure in
the chanber.

The aniinlts chanber, like the sonerical containcr,
‘is uade of alusiniua alloys; the surface is polished and
specially treated so cs to incorporate in it the neccessary:
absorption to solar radiation ratio. The heat regulation
systen installed in the container and chauber cbintesnod
‘the teaperature within the fixed linits, seading the heat
towards the cavelope through forced circulation of the
£98.

Installed in tho last-stage rockct besides the

apperatus uenticned were a radiotelenctric outfit, an

{nstrudeat for ucasuring the teaperaturc and an cloctric
P

powor source to provide power for the scicntific and

neasuring apparatus, The tenperature on tae outside sur-

face of tha aninal's chanber and inside wes Deasured

by necaons of special tenperature gaugos. Teaneraturc

gaujes were elso dustelled on individual isstruncats and

saa Te Serene it ory —_ - a parca aes abide . y ee . as .
= . F Bn tee oo ig im tee Sy ee Se a gine teat es aut, 4 we, Shar aa AEE age ere LSe ee Pee ae
J : SS Peds Sree Si cia Yee Boe Fy) 5. tea)

pes,

=18=.

structural clonente, The radiotelemotric apparatus site
sured transmission to the Barth, of the roadings of all
noasuring instrunents on the sputnik. I¢ oa tined to
transait the roadings at recular interv. 1s.

The progranne of investigations conacoted with the

acasuroncnta.on Sputnik 2 was calculated to work for sovon

days after which the radio transnittcrs and tho radiotclonstr..

apparatus on doard ccasad functioning, Purther obsorva=
tions of the uovenent of Sputnik 2 for studying the charactor=
istics of the uppor atnosphero and predicting tho oputnik's
Sovencnt are being carriod on by optical dastruncnte and
radar, ,
TIJ. THE SPUTNIKS' ORBITS

jiissiles have beon shot over a lon; Cisvancos bee
fore, but no natter how fast they travolod thoy olucys
renained within the confinus of our Planot. Now that the
sputoiks have bccn Given a spood rouvyhly 10 tines a6 great.
as tho initial speed of sholls leavin; lonz-=renge guns,
their flischt distance inercasod by loap al.sost to infinity:
qan-nade structures bogan to revolve around our plonet just
lito celestial bodies, and if thers Vere 29 resistance,
which though it docs not anount to nuch ia tho rarified
air is nevertheless appreciable their nove.:ent tould naver
top.

Tho artificial satellitcs do not IVa Vestvard, a8
do all heevenly bodies, Oosorvers, depcesdinz on where they
are, see ‘then flying northeastward or southvestvard, and

obsorvers near tho 65th paralloi in the nexthern or southern

ees tee

‘ ~19-
heaisphere see then on rare occasions flying in an eastera
direction. It nay seen therefore that the curve along which
the eputniks nove is very intricate. They nove in orbits that
are ellipsus, in first approxination, with one of the foot
lying in the Earth's centre. \

Sputnik }

7 Since the Barth rotates on its axis, the sputnik should
appear over a different area, at each succeeding turn, shifting
approxiuately 24° in longitude each tine. Actually, the longitus
dinal shift will be a little greater (roughly a quarter deg-
ree ¢feater each revolution). As a result of the notion of
the Earth relative to the orbit plane each succeeding turn
will pass approxiuately 1,500 kn. west of the preceding one
at Moscow's latitude, while at the equator the shift is
roughly 2,500 kilonetres.

The plane of the sputnik's orbit is inclined at an
angle of 65° to he plane of the Earth's equator, as a result
of waich the sputnik's path crosses the land areas lying
approxiuately between the Arctic and Antarctic Circles.
Because of the zarth's rotation about its axis the angle of

slope of the path to the equator differs frou the angle of

slope of the plane of the orbit. On entering the northern

- heuisphere the path crosses the equator at an angle of
971.5 decrees in a northeasterly direction.

Then the path gradually turns more and Lore to the east

and touching the parallel neeting 65° NL. it deviates to
the south, crossing the equator at an angle of 59° to the

southeast. In the southern henisphere the path touches tne

: paraliei neeting 65° S.L., after which it is deflected to
the north and again enters the northern hecisphere. (See
picture).

, Owing to the large angle of slope to the plane of the
Earth's equator the sputnik flies ove> aluost all continents
and expanses ofwater, except some snall regions beyond the
Aretic and Antaretic Circles, This has opened up considere
able possibilities for solving various scientific problens.
It can be stated that launching the sputnik on thi- orbit
is a nore difficult task than launching it on an orbit near
to the plane of the equator. If launched along the © equator
the speed of the Earth's rotation about its axis could be ; :
utilised to a larger extent to accelerate the speed of the _

rocket.

How to Find the Orbit

Soutnik lade approxiuately 15 revolutions around the
zarth in 24 hours in the foitial stage of flight.

Readers can easily see what areas the sputnik will fly
over and when by doing the following,

Put a ring around a globe at an angle of 65° to the
equator and fasten it to the leg of the globe. At a cer-
tain socent, let us say, when Sputnik flies over Moscow
turn the globe so that Mcscow eones in the plane of the ring.
which represents the orbit of the sputnik. Now by sicple

calculation you ean figure out where the 6putnik is at any
particular tine. For instance, let us locate Sputnik after
|

i

it has passed over Moscow, In one ninute Sputnik flies

over 360° divided by 96.2 (the period of its revolution a

~21-

, arouad: the Earth in the «iven tine; we @rbitrarily took the

initial period) /3. 7% degrees and in 12 cinutes, roughly 45°,
Mark the ring accordingly. During the sane ting the Earth
has turned around its axis three degrees to the east, and
the mark on the ring will show the spot sought.

Ia the parid way we can solve the problen in reverse,
nanely: the tize when Sputnik Passes over a particular localte
ty. We can also figure out whether Sputnik will fly over a
particular territory at all.

If we sake with the help of this devige the consecutive
projections of Sputnik on the Globe along its orbit we shall
find that the l6éth turn of such projection coincides alnost
exactly with the first, the 17th with the Second, and s0
on.

Ve nay say that Sputnik 1 appears at regular intervals
(with slight variations), since every 24 hours it appears
Over approxirately the saue area Over which it had already
flown, :

Using our device (the ring and globe) we can easily
understand a nunber of other featurcs of the uoveuent of the
artificial satellite,

It nay be thus: an observer notes, for instance, that
Sputnik travels in a southeasterly direction. Then sone
tire later it again appears over the sane area but this tine
flying northeast, Does thig sean that Sputnik ts flying in
a different direction? Of course, not. Sputnik keeps re-
volving all the tine in & so-called straight direction, and
the apparent change in direction of ite uoveuent is due to

~22=
--_ the fact that in the interval between two regular obser- » Th 85
vations the observation spot on the Earth's eurface has Jt
nade along with our planet half a revolution (or one and a
half, two and a hulf revolutions, and so on) about its:

axis. \
aN

is Sputnik uakes a conplete revolution the observation . .
point on the Earth's surface shifts, as a result of the
: Earth's daily motion, 1,130 to 2,670 kilonctres, depending
- on whether the observation point is on the 65th parallel
or on the equator. However, if Sputnik were up at an al-
3. titude of even 200 kilouetres the diaueter of the area ;
fron which it could be seen would be core than 3,000 kilo- ,
netres. This ceans that approxinately an hour and a half
after the artificial satellite passes over the given local-
, ity 1t would again cone into the field of vision of the pare
ticular observer. But that does not sean that it really

would be noticed, for this would require special conditions, ..- 2" 7F

Baas

ia nanely, that ‘our "little star" should be flooded with sun-

shine, and the surfece of the Earth where the observations.

are conducted ghould be dark, Twilight is therefore the best

tine for observations. .

Fron what has been said beforg,it is clear that the ar-

7 tificial satellite will never rise in the east or set in the |.

q west as we are accustoned to see the Sun do. Why is that so?
Theoretically it is possible to launch a satellite to revolve

go to speak in the general streau of heavenly bodies.Practicil-

as it is on its axis the Earth can help in the launching of

an artificial satellite if the latter is launched in the sane
direction,or hinder ixparting to it the nesded speed if it

is launched in the opposite direction. (Theo Earth, as we know,
: noves fron west.to east).

{ ly however,this 18 not done for the following reasons.Rotating
‘

. o

-~ 236

However, to turn to aocount the speed of the LCarth's
rotation 4s not aivays expediont. In faot if tho
satellite is lounohed in tha dixeotion of the carth's
motion 4t will fly only over a belt confined on the
north and south dy the pavyallel of ‘the starting point
relative to either sphere. For Sputnik-1 9 compromise
decision was adopted under which the Earth's daily
rotation is utilised to an insignifioant degree. This
is apparently because of the tasks connectod with
the Internaticnal Geophysioal Year, namely, that

Sputnik should fly over as much terrestricl space 48

possible.

In our aise sees uePora/<agunek that re moved
elong its orbit ata uniform specd. However, cven whore
there is no -air resistance this movenent would be
possible only if the orbit were a perfect circle with”
its centre coinciding with the Darth's contre. Actually, 3
however, Sputnik describes an ellipse, and for this ,
recson, when it passes through its perigeo (the point
on the orbit nearest to the farth's centre) its speed
4s appreciably creater than when it passes through its
apogee (the point on the orbit farthest from the Sarth's
centre). As to the ellipse along which Sputnik moves.
4t moy be pointed out that it is very slightly flattened:
tho difference in length between its major and minor
axes is less than o quarter of one per cent. As con de
seen, this 1s prootically ao sirele, but the centre of
this "eirole” 18 0 little off from the Earth's oontre.

. 24 -

The period it takes Sputnik to circle the carth
cradually changes because of the braking force it
enoounters, ond as the orbit contracts the period too
will grow shorter. The rapidity with which the period
changes will serve to show how fast tho shape of the
orbit shines Since on great heights where Sputnik
moves the donsity of the atmosphere is very small tho
evolution of the orbit will at first be very slow.

The heizht of the apogee’ will decline faster than that
of the perigee and the orbit vill more and moro cnobonis
mate & cirele, and when Sputnik enters the denser layors
of the atmosphere the braking force will bo quite
substantial. Sputnik will then grow ourning hot and
burn up like meteors from interplanctary space vhen

thoy center the Earth's atmosphere.

Other oonditions being equal, the greater tho mass ‘
of 6 satellite tho longer at will survivo, since the
croatey the mass the less speed it will lose on crossing .
throuch upper layers of the atmosphere. ;

Why Lust the Rocket and Sputnile Burn up?

After the take-off the rocket used for launching
a satcllite vises straisht up, which encbles it to cross -
the Lowor and donse layers of the atmosphere the shortest
way. The rocket's speed rises graduclly. Passing throush
the dense layers of the air there is not enough time fo»
it to become greatly ovorheated; it will therefore not burn
and manage to get out to a greater altitude where the oir

is vory much raroficd.

ay Ee!
Ry

“e

Bee rere $e

-25-—

On returning to Earth the movement of the satellite
and carrier rocket will present a different picture,
Gradually descending the rocket and satellite will enter
the dense layers of the atmosphere at a tremendous speed
and at 4 relatively small angle to the horizon. Moving
towards the Barth in a spiral they will have to travel
longer in these layers, and as the friction of the air
will be very great both bodies will rapidly grow very hot
and “burn up.“

Apparently the carrier rocket will burn up first as
it will land in the lower strata of the atmosphere some~

what earlier.

Abe There Inpermissible Orbits for Satellites?

First of all, the orbit of a satellite nust absolutely.
lie in one of tne planes passing through the centre of the
Earth. A satellite can de designed to revolve in the plane
of any meridian or in tne plane of the equator, but its
orbit will never stay in the plane of a pavallel. A
satellite launched on such an orbit will certainly shift
to the plane of the equator or fall back on Earth.

A satellite's path has to lie at a great height, beyond
the dense atuosphere, otherwise the resitance of the air
will act as & brake and the circular flight will turn into 7
a spiral, ending in the satellite falling to earth. Yor-
tunately, it is not necessary to lift it too high. In the
neighbourhood of 200 kilometres above the Zarth the resist—
ance of the air is virtually impalpable.

In selecting orbits for future satellites specific features

ce eg ge tees

i
H

peter:

Ag She

~26-

of some of them must be taken into account. For iastance,
a characteristic feature of an orbit at an altitude of
557 kilometres is that the satellite's period of re-
volution along it will equal exactly\an hour and a half,
and it is therefore sometimes called an "hoursand-half"
orbit. Traveling in it the satellite will circle the
Earth 18 times in 24 hours. Moving in a "two-hour" orbdit,
which lies at an altitude of 1,669 kilometres, it will
circle 12 times. Obviously there is also a "24-hour"
orbit, for which the period of revolution will be exactly
24 hours. This orbit should be at an altitude of appro-
ximately 36.000 kilometres. Especially interesting is a
24-hour orbit in the plane of the equator. Indeed, in
such a case the satellite, which actually travels at
breakneck speed, will hover motionless over ‘sone point

of the equator as though on top of ah invisible tower
tens of thousands of kilometres high. There are also a

nunber of other no less interesting orbits.

Sputnik-2's Orbit

Sputnik-2 was taken out to its orbit by means of a
sectional rocket. “hile being taken out to the orbit the
rocket rose to an altitude of several hundred kilocetres
above the Earth's surface and on reaching the end of take-
out sector the last stage moved parallel to the Earth's
surface at a speed of more than 8,000 hevres a second,
becoming an Earth satellite. By the tice it reached the
orbit the fuel in the rocket's tanke had been used up

and the engine stopped. Thereafter Sputnik moved by kinetic

“29

energy gained by the rooket while it was sped up into

the oroit.
The speed imparted to the rocket's last stage was higuer

than the speed needed for Bputaik's movenent in the circular

NX
orbit at a constant altitude at which it entered its orbit.

Sputnik does ndt therefore move in a circular orbit but in

an elliptical, its farthest point from the Earth being

roughly 1,700 kilometres, or almost double the highest al-

titude attained in launching Sputnik-1. Since the seni-

majer esis of Sputnik-2's orbit is larger than that of

Sputnik-1, the period of its rotation around the Earth also

proved greater, initially amounting to 103.7 minutes.

Owing to the greater period of rotation Sputnik-2 makes

some 14 complete turos around the Earth in 24 hours, while

Sputnikel in the initial period made about 15 turns.

Because of the Earth's rotation the shift of Sputnik-2-- -.

with each successive turn is 1.15 tines greater relative to a

Sputnik-1, and the distance on the Earth's surface between —

the paths of two nearest turns has grown to the sane

extent.

The resistance of the Earth's atcosphere acts as a brake

on Sputnik, its orbit changing its size and shape. Owing

to the fact that at great heights the atmosphere is very

thin the braking force acting on Sputnik does not anount

to much. At the point of apogee the Sputnik moves at such

a great height that it is in outer space beyond the Earth's

atmosphere, which according to theoretical calculations

axtends to an cltitude in the neighbourhood of 1,000

kilonetresa above the Barth's surface.

-20- Sal

The braking force operating against a4 satellite de=-
pends not only on the density of the atmosphere but also
on the shape of the satellite and on the ratio of its ; ;
wight to cross-section area: The greater this ratio the
snaller the loss in speeds ‘

Two satellites taken out to the same orbit but mov-
ing against different braking forces will after a certain
period move along different orbits, since their orbits
will vary with time at a different rate. And while the
orbits are contracting it is mainly by decrease of. the
apogee height.

Sputnik-l and ite carrier rocket at first moved ; ; oS
approximately in the same orbit and their periods of
revolution differed slightly, being about 96.2 minutes
for either: Later, owing to the fact that Sputnik-l exper-

denoed less resistance than the carrier rocxet their orbits

began to differ materially..

fhe braking force operating against doth the carrier
rocket and the Sputnik has changed in time a5 a result of =
the change in the orbit's parameters. As the orbit lowered
the braking force increased progressively. Thia/distinctly .
confiraed dy the findings of the observations.

How long a satellite will survive depends on the brak=

pet

ing force of the atmosphere. Ooviously the greater perigd :
of revolution and the less braking force the longer it will
survive. Estimates based on data obtained from the obser-

vatione of Sputnik-1 and the carrier rocket suggest that

px enbhonhiah soneimecsnnesthdag tik exke recmentnecer oi fhe

OIE oh TKK AEGIS SUX TAXTRERKEMAEELIIZX Sputnik-1,
January 1958.

will move in orbit apparently until tkexxrtorex

The carrier rocket will not last as long, and it can ve

expected to burn up before Sputaik. The greater period

of revolution of Sputnik-2 and the enalien braking force

it experiences warrant the statement that Sputnik-2 will

move in orbit appreciably longer than Sputnik-1.

When the trajectory measurements have been worked

up it will be possible to establish fully the whole process

of evolution of the parameters of satellites' orbite and

to obtain important atepnation on the distribution of thu

density of the upper atmosphere. Later on it will be
possible realsbly to predict how long artificial Earth

satellitea will survive.

TV: WHAT MAKES SATELAITES MOVE? Bo, Jee

Modern celestial mechanica is based'on the law of - .
gravitation. The artificial satellites move around the
Earth like heavenly bodies. The movement of the little
"soon" ig subject to the same laws of celestial mechanics’
as that of the real Moon around the Earth or the movement
of the Earth and other planets of the solar system around
the Sun.

Satellites move around the Earth at great speed. If
there had been no terrestrial attraction the satellites
would be moving in a vacuum uniformly and in a straight
line, and would disappear in outer space. The Earth's
attraction distorts their path, making them circle the Earth

and move around the Earth along its surface.

--
7 The force of attraction acting on the satellites is
cf a definite magnitude, and that is shy they can make
their circular mowement around the Earth only at a certain
and quite definite speed. =
gne_ Beeded Ssved
The approxicate walue of this so-calicd circular speed
. can be determized on the basis of the following reasoning.
In order that a satellite moving around the Earth should
continue at constant altitude it cust every instant gt a
far away from the Earth as it gets nearer to it ia its
continuous dropping. In the first second a body faliing
freely to the Earth loses approxinately 5 setrces of altitude.
Odviously in this second the satellite has to get away
frox the Earth the sane five metres so that there is no
change in the altitude at which it is moving. This macs
it possible to build a right-angle triangle and making use
of tae Pythagorean theoreh; to figure out the speed we want.:
For a gatellite tioving not very far away from the Earth’s
surface the speed i& equal to foughly eight kilometres a
second. :
The question may aris: why the speed is the same for 2

bodies of any weight when the force of attraction acting
on a heavier body is greater. At first sight it would

seem that such a dody should move around the Earth ina
circular orbit at greater speed decsuse of the action of
ferce of attraction. However, if we bear in mind that
i it is harder to deflect a heavier tody from movement in
q a straight line, and exactly as as many times more as it

weighs more, it will become clear that the speed of a

a Ra aa We oe

-31-

F sateliite's movement should not depend on itsweight. The

speed of mouvement of Sputnikel in its orbit therefore will
be approxiaately the same also for other and heavier satel-
lites. \

It should be mentioned that to launch heavier satel-
lites it is eceasaay to hurdle a nunber of other obstacles.

That is why their launching will be 4 now and important

stage in the development of science and engineering.

Altitude and Speed
The required speed of a satellite changus with alti-

tude. The force of the Earth's attraction diminishes as is
the distance from the Earth increases, and therefore ina
higher orbit a satellite must move at a lowsr speed. For
satellitos moving in different orbits lying about 1,000
kilometres aboye the Earth's surface the difference in the
speed of motion is comparatively small. However, for

satellites moving at considerably greater distances from

!

the Earth the speed appaare to be substantially less. _
For instance, the Moon, which is also a satellite of the ;
Earth and is approximately 380,000 kilometres distant from
it, moves around the Earth at a velocity of about one

* Kilometre a second, that is, a speed roughly one-eighth
that of a satellite flying close to the Earth. Bearing

in mind that the Moon's path around the Earth is much

longer than the path of an artificial satellite per revo-
lution, it will become clear why the Hoon revolves around
the Earth not in an eighth of the time the Sputnik does

but much more slowly.

~32-

In order to launch an artificial Earth satellite it
has to be lifted to a great height and accelerated to the
speed required for its movement in the orbit at that height.

No energy is expended as the satellite moves in its
orbit. The satellite has no ide tis; moving solely at the
expense of the speed imparted to it by the carrier rocket.

Because ina Hiehex circular orbit the satellite
moves at lower speed, it follows that when the satellite
is taken out to such an orbit it has to be accelerated
to a lower speed. This however does not mean that it ia
easier to launch a satellite on a higher circular orbit
than on a lower one. The thing is that in launching a
Satellite the difficulties in lifting it to great alti-
tudes are very great and the higher the altitude the
Greater the difficulties, . aon e .
We pointed out before that at every height the move= ~~
nent of a sutellite in a circular orbit has to “proceed fee
at a definite speed. If the speed ia less than the one ae
tequired, the Earth's attraction will defluct it more easi- .
ly from a straight line; the path will be distorted in the
direction of the Earth and the satellite will begin to
drop. If the speed is only slightly less than required,
the drop will be relatively small, and the satellite,
after drawing closer to the Earth and gaining a certain
speed thereby, will be able once again to rise to the
earlier height, repeating the Grop and rise periodically
on each revolution.

If the difference in the speed of novement fron the

-33-
circular i6 somewhat greater, the drop may prove precipit-
ate. The satellite will eater the dense layers of the
atmosphere, and after losing its energy as a result of
friction in the air it will not be able to climb again,
and dropping lower and lower will grow terrifically not and-
burn up in the atmosphere. :

If the speed of the satellite at the point at which
it enters the orbit is considerably greater than the circul-
ar specd required for its motion ino the circular orbit at
a constant height it will be harder for the force of aviay -
to deflect its course closer to the Earth's surface and the
sotellite will then be able to rise to a very great height,
much higher than to which it was originally lifted by the
rocxet. Should the speed reach something lixe 11.2 kilo-
metres a second or more the satellite will disaprear in
interplanetary space.

Thus, in order that the satellite may move in an
orbit at the predetermined altitude its speed has to de.
quite definite. It is impossible to design another sa-
tellite to move in the same orbit at a different speed.

A speed of eight kilometres a second is called pri-
mary cosmic speed. It is the speed a satellite must
attain to move in an orbit close to the Earth. A speed
of 11.2 kilometres a second is called secondary cosmic
Spred, and an interprlanetary vessel launched near the
Earth must have it to overcome the Earth's attraction and

to begin to move in interplanetary space as a new planet

of the solar system. Speeds between the primary and secondary

-34-

cosmic speeds will maxe it possible to launch a satellite

coving ina elliptical orbits whose perigee will be near the
Earth and apogee C

will be the more extende

onsiderably distact from it. The orbits
d aod farther away frou the Earth

\ :
the greater is the {nitial speed imparted to the satellite

by the carric® rocket.

If a satellite's orbit can be oade
altitudes in the neighbourhood of 1,000 xilometrcs
the satellite will move

.*

to pass at all

points at
or more above the Earth's surface,

: so
virtually in a vacuum and continue/for ar indefinitely

long time. With present progress in the duilding of rockets

4t is quite realistic to spesk of launching a satellite to

survive scores of hundreds of years, and such a satellite

will be practically a perpetual satellite of the Earth.
OBSERVASIOTS OF TSB SPUTNIK'S soTiONn

A very important eleceat of the r-search conductc

rvation and record=.

d

With the aid of satellites is tre obse

ing of their potion, treatzent of the records aod forecast

of their further motion on this basis.
During the first period of the sputniks’ motion

tne scientific stations conducted observations with the

aid of radar and radio direction finders and by means

of optical instrurents and photographing their motion.

Since the radio transcitters have stopped working the
observations have been conducted mainly by the latter two
nethods.

All data obtained by the stations and the observations

of amateurs are collected and anal_.sed and elyctronic

How

conaputing aachines are used to work vp the data.

see epee ee

-35-

valuable will de the geophysical observations by the
setentists will depend on how correct and presise are

the data obtained in observing the Sputniks as they nove

{n their path. For exanuple, to deternine the Earth's exact
shape for edad purposes the orbit of the satellites’
notion has to be determined accurately within a few seconds
in the are and a few milliseconds in tine.

Many of the ground stations neasuring the position
of the Sputnik in its path transit the results of their
observations to a central station, where the orbit is de-
termined, and the nore observations are cade the more
accurate will be the deteraination of the orbit. Radio
anateurs have been very helpful in tre collection of radio
observations; in particular, thousands of Soviet radio
anateurs Lave conducted observations of tne sputniks using
ordinary radio 4{nstrusents as well as radio receivers de-
signed specially for the purpose. Diagrams of the receivers
and of the direction finders with which they are equipped |
were published in "Radio", a Soviet popular-sciance magazine
in the field of radio engineering, long before Sputnik-1
was launched.

Used too for observing the Sputnik are ground radar
stations, which irradiate the Sputnik and receive signals
reflected from it, the same as radar stations designed to
detect planes in the air at high altitudes, or which make
it possible to receive signals reflected from the Moon.
However, 43 the Sputniks and their reflecting area are
relatively call, these special stations must have a very

large pulse radiation capacity.

setpes yMedaben, te TS me ee RG ML) Coe gma Mga ee eS GER TAR
ene. wegen OED ST AI ea OR SE Fe -

+e

fT act See

-3F-

Optical observation of the Sputniks is possible
nornings and evenings on cloudless days, when the Earth's
surface where tse observer works froz is all in darkness
and the sputnik, very high up, is lit by the Sun.

Since the transuitters on tre epuraiks have ceased
working, optical observations have been widely used.
Besides, optical observations in conjunction with radio
nethods have made it possible the setter to ascertain the
actual path of the Sputniks, and to mare geographicul
calculations such nore exact.

Wide-angle optical instruments are best for these
orservations. Put the satellites can be seen also through
an ordinary binocular or a wide-angie prism spyglass.

It should be zentioned that observations of the
Sputaixs with the aid of astroronical instruments present
4 certain difficulty; they are not sinilar to observations
of regular heavenly bodies, as the Sputniks move very —
fast across the sxy, at an average speed of approximately
cne degree per second. 7

To nake sure that the observations art reliable,
each optical station has one or two sets of optical
instruncats placed as a barrier on the seridien and along

the vertical circie perpendicular to the apparent orbit
the nethod enployed

of the Sputnik. In addition,/in searching for the Sputnik .

ts baned on the so-called “local-tine rule". This method
turns to account the fact that the Sputaik's orbit is not
tnvolved in the rotation of the Barth, and the Sputnik

itself passes through a given latitude in local sidereal

FERNY

deo Malena eSaP IO YE

£
=
=

-37~-
time, which changes slowly as tne orbit revolves in ab-
solute space around the Earth's axis, owing to the di-
vergence of tne gravitational field fron central. There-
fore, with respect to a given station the satellite will
in the course of its motion pass suceeadtvely through the
points in the celestial sphere which tay be called
waiting points. If the axis of tne optical instrument is
regulated 50 as to be directed to the waiting point next
in order in the celestial sphere as figured out in ad-
vanee, then sooner or later the satellite will inevitably
be detected, and when detected the time of its passage
should be noted with the aid of a chronometer or by
radio time signals. In this way the accuracy in deternin-
ing the time the satellite passes through their range
of vision will not be above a second. Among other things,

the Soviet amateur astronomers at 66 optical observation .

- stations and all observatories have at their disposal rany

special improved wide-angle optical instruments. The
observation stations also bave sets of equiprent naking
it possible to fix the Sputniks in the celestial sphere
as accurately as within one degree in position, and

one second in tine.

Optical observations of tne satellite and following
it up will be more precise and thorough if the optical
instruments are fitted out with special photographic and
photoelectric apparatus registering the position of the
satellite and the azimuth and quadrant angle of the in-
strument's optical axis. The purpose of the optical follow-

up is to obtain a relatively exact position of the

-38-

- satellite in the eelestial sphere (during twilight hours)«
All along the time of each recorded position of the satel-
lite in the orbit should be determined’ precisely.

The satellite can be folloved up by instruments

with a focal distance of 0.6 - 1.0 netres. In such an in-
strument, ad the satellite passes through its range of
vision, the rate of movement of its isage is 1-2 eénti=:
metres a second. A particularly icportant part will be
played by the optical observations of the satellites at gE
the last monent of the final st:ge of their passage, a :
when they make the last spiral movements before entering

the atnosphere's denser strata and when they begin to

burn up.
Etotey acon thamouneuisaiiel-» wb rt se Kot E3
or eS Cr pace.
eee ee -
Ure rn eT ESS Tpun wwe wa we bp eeeRs t 7 “o seS
EPO net = SE ae aerrods .

v

Along with visual observations, photographic observa-
tions of the carrie> rocket and Sputnik-2 are conducted.
The photographs taxen by observatories in the Soviet
Union and other countries have made it possible to define
the orbits of the Sputniks and of the carrier rocket with
considerably higher precision. ‘

In using the special cameras for photographing
satellites highly sensitive plates are required. ~ The
shutters should pernit very swall exposures and the lens

aie should have an aperture ratio of 1 and the sight at least

-39-

30 degrees. Exact pictures of the position of the Bputniks
in the orbit will make it possible to determine their geo-
detic position ia space in eeiseren to the Earth's centre
with an error of about 10-15 metres. “hen we have a num
ber of these positions for 10 to 15 regions of the Earth's
surface it will be possible to determine the Earth's figure
more accurately than has been done up to now. As a result
we shall be able to refine the continental geodetical
systen. These observatiors will also enable scientists
to understand better the distribution of sasses in the
interior of the Earth.

In fact the Sputniks move in the gravitational ficld
of the Earth ard this field in turn is determined by the

-distributiom of the masses in the Earth's interior and ip
“its erat, Studying the sovenent of the Sputniks weean

highly refine our knowledge of the gravitational field

of the Earth and therehy arrive -at interesting conclusions
on the Earth's structure. True, revolving around the .
Earth is also the real Koon, but a study of its notion
gives us information only about those parts of the terrest—
rial gravitational field which are relatively far from the
Earth, as the distance fron the rarth to the Moon is sone
380,000 kilonetres. Of course at such a distance the terrest- -
rial gravitational field depends ouch less on the distribu-
tion of the masses in the interior of the Earth. The study
of the Moon's motion can therefore furnish only very meager

information on this question. Artificial satellites, how-

ever, launchyd sometning lixe 1,000 kiaioactres adove the

See aad

Barth's surface, offer many more opportunities in this
respect.

Thus, not to sention the telenetric ceasurenents
of different quantities in following the artifidal Earth

\

satellites in their orbit, simple observations with the aid
of radar, optical instruments and photography will furnish
scientists abundant geophisical data widening and refining

our xnowledge of our planet.

VI. RESSANCE i178 THs AID OF THE SPUTNIKS

The Upper Atcosphere
In studying the heavenly bodies around us and the

outer space in which the Earth noves, scientists have en-
countered considerable difficulties due to the fact that
the observatories and sotentific stations are situated
at the botton of the air ocean surrounding the Earth,
hundreds of kilonetres deep. “This ocean is the Earth's —
atmosphere, which lets through to us only sone narrow re-
gions of the apectrun of electronagnetic oscillations
enitted by the dun, stars and other Roavenly bodics. .
Setentists have therefore always dreancd of extra-ataos—
pheric observatories, as are artificial satellites, which
open up new possibilities for carrying out all kinds of
scientific experinents that earlier seemed unrealisable.
What is meant by the upper atnosphere today is the
region above 30 or 40 kiloxetres high. It is of great
practical interest, as it is the nedium through whieh
artificial satellites will travel and the routes of future —
interplanetary ships will pass. Besides, the upper

i ga a LAist wet TT Bee

-4l-

atmosphere is the sedium in which radio waves are propagat—
ed. The strata and regions with high ionisation forming
in it reflect or scatter the waves, thereby creating the
cs ‘N

requisite conditiocs for their propagation over great dist-
ances. At the™saze tine, under certain conditions, the
upper atmosphere sonetizes becomes a uediur in which radio-
waves are absorbed.

The processes going on in the upper region of the
atmosphere are characterised by a great cany features
which are not usually intrinsic in its lower parts. Among
then are the features related to the continuous chenical
conversions of the ataosphere's molecules and atons and
their Lonisation whien occurs when they are irradiated
by the penetrating ultraeviolet, X-ray and corpuscular
emivsion of the Gun (corpuscular radiations of the Sun are
the fast-noving elexentary particles: electrons, protons,

“neutrons, alpha-particles, etc.). Besides, in the higher

parts of the upper atzosphere the change of its relative
atonic composition beconces significant. Here the lighter
solecules and atons ‘seodominate owing to the force of
gravity. The circulation of the ionized atmosphere, which
is an electrical conductor, in the Earth's constant magnet-
4c field is accompanied by the generation of electric |

currents which cause different kinds of variation in this

_ field.

Valuable infornation on the circulation of tne upper

atnosphere has been obtained by the observation of the drift

of meteoric trails by means of optical instrunenots and radian

~42-

aod the observation of the tides in the atmosphere caused

by the mun and Moon. We know of tae high and low tides of
the seas, yet these phenomena have been observed to be

much more intensive in the upper atmosphere. From the obser-

vations approximate characteristics of the upper atmosphere |

have been derived; the temperature in the upper part was
estinated to be several thousand degrees and the density
ahout 1,000 million molecules and atoms per cubic centi-
metre (at an altitude, of some 300 kilometres). It should
be nentioned tnat the air density at the farth's surface
is more than 10,000 million times as much.

It bad been believed that in the upper atmosphere
there were three or four distinct ifonised strata. How-
ever, the infornation gained about the penetrating ultre-
violet and X-ray radiation of the Sun which is absorbed
by atmosphere and does not reach the Earth's surface, was
until recently rather hypothetical. The dynamics of the | fog wo
upper acmosphere related to the photo-chemical changes and
jonisation remained unclear. Too little is known also about
corpuscular emission,which causes auroral displays and anecialous
dunisation.Without exact knowledge of tnese disturbing factors
it is difficult to build up a general theory of the dynamics
of the processes going on in the upper atmosphere.

Of late there has been considerable development of the
study of emissions, that is, certain forms of radiations
of the upper atmosphere. Many valuable data have been
obtained in this way. For instance, by using spectroscopes
4t has been estamlished that the Earth's atmosphere RBout
100 kilometres above the surface is colder over the equator

and warmer over the polar regions. That is a very :

ree

~43—

important factor for the origination of circulation. The
higher teaperaturo in the polar regions leads to a highly
original structure of the highest regions of the atmosphere,
called the oxosphere. as is known the tonised particlos
in highly rarefied medium can nove ouly along magnetic
lines of force, and therefore projections of ionisod
particles or oolumns are formed over heated arcas and thoy
are souetines discovered in the twilight hours when the
exosphere is 11%. These are the so-called high radiant
structures of polat auroras. Interesting infornation about
ionisation was obtained by investigations of the auroras
by means of radar.

Betsors greatly influence the properties of the upper
ataosphere. Their falls lead to the fornaation of readily
jonisable aitrogen oxides and shock sound waves, which cause
variations in the density of the rediun. This phenonenon —
occurs in the upper atzuosphere also thon sub-audio waves :
produced by winds and the disturbances of the ocean sure=
faca and 80 on, penetrate up there fron the atnospheric
strata near the Earth. Thus, to employ a figurative
expression, the outer part of the atmosphere suggests
sonuewhat the agitated foaning water surface during a
storn.

In recent years new and important results have been
obtained through the use of rockets in investigations of
tne upper atmosphere. A lower density and lower tecperatures
have been found above 150-200 kilonetres. Exceptionally
valuable rusults have been obtained in determining ioni=

sation; it was found thet there ia a gradual ard encoth

Sha

rise in tonisation with a large nuuber of very snallow peaku,
whieh it ie diffieult to identify with the sharply defined
sicple strats assumed earlier. Then, the real Lonosphere
proved to be lower tasn had been belivved, and the penet~
rating ultra-violet and Xeradiation of the Sun has been
measured directly.

The measuring of absorptions of the penetrating solar
radiations has made it possible to bring out the fact of
the lower density of the upper atmosphere. However, a
material shortcoming cof rocket investigations was the
short time they lasted.

Artificial satellites can ensure long and conti-
nuous observations over different localities of the globe,
and therein lies tneir chief advantage. Most important is
the observation of the penetrating ultraviolet, X-ray and

corpuscular emission of the Sun.

On Sputnik-2 instruments for investigating tre Sun's

radiation were installed. Three special photoelectronic
cultipliers set up at an angle of 120 degrees to wach
other serve as the radiation receivers. Euch auitiplier
4s successively covered with several filters nade of
thin-metal and organic plates and avee of special optical
uaterlals, which make it possible to separate different
ranges in the X-ray region of the solar sp.ctrun and the
hydrogen line in the far ultraviolet region. The vlestric
signals produced by the photonultipliur trained on the Sun
were magnified by radio circuits and transnitted to the

Earth by telexttric systen.

Qwing to the fact that the Sputnik has continuously

changed ita orientation in relation to the Sun and part

of the time was in the sector of its orbit 1it up by the
Spa, to economise on power the electric circuit wae ;
switehed in7only when the Sun landed in tne range of one
of the three light receivers, It was switched in with the
aid of photo resistors lit by the Sun sipultaneously with
the nultiplicrs and the system of autoratic control.

Parallel] with the observations of solar radiation
fron tho Sputaik, observations of the Sun are also con-
ducted by the whole network of the ‘solar service" .

_ ground stations under the IGY progranaze. By comparison .
of all the observations it will be possible to arrive at ,
the preliminary deductioss on what connection there is
between the Sun's ultraviolet and X-rudiations and the
processes going on in the chronosphere and the Sun's
corona and the state of the Earth's ionosphere; these data
will serve a8 a basis for the regular observations &o
follow.

Outer space is full of cosaic dust, the nature and
characteristics of which it has heretofore not been
possible to study directly. Science had only conjectures
on its origin and characteristics, With the artificial
satellite serving a8 a laboratory it will be possible to
begin direct study of this problem too. What makes it
“important is the presuzption that cosmic dust is the

material out of which planets are forued.

-htGo

Since Newton's ways scientists all over the world
have beea ponvering vver the ghyaical nature of terrestriul
_ravitatiun anu vf tue furce vf intereaction detween a=
terial bodies in general. But it was ynly Linstein's

theory of relativity which slishtly lifte. the weil fron

the uystery of these phenouend and hence attracting the

attention of the vast .ajority of scientists throughout the
world.

S50 convincing is Zinsteta's conception that tocay
it is tue only rational theory explainin; cany cosuic phe-
nocena. However, in sone respects it has to be refined
and checked by experinents. Artificial Earth satellites
launched to cove in hich altituijes can help to check experinen-

.

tally sone vf the theses of this theory, ona of

the fyncarental theories of nosern science. :

It is known that the Ketagallazy possesses a cefainite ‘
jucinosity and its value should be &n aereerent with the
jeneral tneory of relativity. It is difficult to neasure the
luoinosity of the Metayallaxy fron the Earth's surface be-"
cause of the nisht-sky air-clow, but with the aid of an
artificial satellite it will be easier to solve this problen.
when we have beasured the luninosity of the Metagallaxy we
shall solve an iuportant cosoic probleu and verify certain
theses of the general theory of relativity.

Finally, in astronomical observations by telescope
from the Earth's surface nagnification of 300 tines ia
ordinarily the Jinit because of interference caused by tiny

air strea.s in the atmosphere (twinklin, of stars,

wreaking up and dlurring of the images of the heavenly do-
dies in the telescopes, eLgeh. On the other hand beyond

the atmosphere magnification as high as 10,000 tines is

possible so that objects 12 metres in‘diameter will be.

seen on the Moon from a satellite , and on Mars areas

measuring approximately 1.5 kilowetres in diameter will

be observerle.
Of considerable interest is the study of electric

fields at great heights (in the nelgspourhood of 1,000
kilometres) and solution of the problem whether the Earth

‘and ite atmosphere constitute a charged or a neutral system,

Along with indirect studies of the Lonosphere, by observ- '

ing tne passage of radio waves, the programme of investiga-

tions on sutellites envisagea direct messurenents of ionic

concentration at different altitudes, and later the chemical

rad

composition of the ionosphere by mass spectrometry. If the : at

present ideas that there are no negative lons at great alti-

tudes are correct, these experiments will furnish coaplete

{oformation on the composition of the ionosphere.

Of great interest for seience is the atudy of the

radiation arising from the disturbance of the atmosphere by.

a body moving at cosmic speed. This radiation will become

especially {nteresting when the satellite will be sonewbat |

slowed down by the breaking force and will wet into the

lower strata, behaving like an enormous artificial meteor

which excites and ionises the molecules and atous of the .

surrounding medium. It will be particularly valuable if all

shese observations are concucted simultaneously with those

whB-

from the Barth's surface as provided for under the current
IGY programme.

It goes without saying that a complete solution of

equipped vith various equipment of high degree of perfection.

the problems enumerated ahove will require sany satellites -—

Aad the data thus obtained will of course give birth to a

great many new problens.

ee ae

Cosmic aay 5

Cosmic rays come to us from outer space. These
radiations are a stream of nuclei of the atoms of different
elements travelling at velocities very close to the velocity
of light. They are the heralds of the gigantic processes
as a result of which ths nuclei of atoms of elenents are
accelerated to very great energies. The cosmic rays produced
in this way offer the possidility of studying the cosmos at
great distances from the Earth and even from the solar systum. .
In most cases the energy of the particles of cosmic ; =
radiation amounta to thousands of millions dad igen tens of ;
thousands of millions of electron-volts. Some of the
particles, however, attain an energy millions of times grvater.
Up to now particles have been found with an energy of as much
as a billion billion electron-volts. This high energy of
cosmic ray particles rakes it possible for physicists to use
then effectively to "bombard" atomic nuclei, and to study -
the laws operating only at the extremely high energy of the
colliding particles. The study of cosmic rays, especially
with the aid of instruments mounted on a satellite, will

make it possigle considerably to simplify some of the studise

which whea conducted on the ground require highly powerful
accelerators such as 4 ¢yelotron or proton synchrotron.
Wo might meation incidentally that the world's biggest proton
synchrotron, made in tne Soviet Union, can accelerate to
an energy of “a mere" 10,000 million elactron-volts.

Not many particles of cosmic radiation reach the
Earth. On the average a square centimetre receives one
particle a second. Despite the great energy of the indivi-~
dual particles the total energy of cosmic radiation is there-
fore small, being equal approximately to that brought to us

vy the light from the stars.

That ta a trifle compared with the energy entering

the Earth from the Sun. However, far away from the Sun
the cosmic rays play no small part in the general energy

balance, P

The question naturally arises how cosmic rays come
_into being? “There can be no doubt that as a rule they start

out far from the Barth and even from the solar systen.
Sonetimes, though extremely rarely, the oun itself is the -
source of cosmic rays, and in such cases explosive processes
have been observed on the Sun.

Cosmic rays produced on the Sun consist of particles
possessing little energy, which shows that the scale of
phenomena taking place on the Sun is very small compared
to that which cause the formation of cosmic rays.

¥here then in the Universe do these gigantic proccsses
occur? To answer thie question it is first necessary to

study the composition of primary cosmic radiation. When

~W-

colliding with the nuclei of the atmosphere's atone the
particles of cosmic radiation igpart a portion of their
energy, sCmetimes a very considerable portion: to secondary
Tadiations, and owing to the high eperey of the particles
of cosmic rays a good many genetations of secondary’ particles
appear. For this reason, what we are studyiayg on the
farth's surface and in the stratosphere too ig aut the primary
Tadiution which cans from cosmic space but in the main its
numerous offspring.

In order to study primary cosmic rays selentific
apparatus has to be lifted beyond the Farth's atuoepheres

Until now we could lift instruments to considerable
“heights by means of sounaing balloons, stratostate or
roccets, but in the first two dases prinary radiation is
masked Ly a secondary, while in the case of rockets the

time of measurement is limited to a few minutes.

Artificial Barth satellites make it possible to study

fully the composition of prinary cosmic radiation. We shall

very likely succeed in finding new components of cosnic

radiation which will reveal Gany of the universe's suerete.
Physicists have long tried to establish the arse of

cosmic rays, to find out how ouch time has passed since

the particlus of cosmic radiation have obtained their great:

energy and besan their wanderings through the universe,

Tois question, however difficult it seens to be, can

nevertheless be answered if we turn to account the fact that

the longer cosmic rays travel in the universe the more

tines they collide with the atoms of So¢erstellar apace.

a,
-51~
of
In such collisions the atomic nuclei/heavier elements ia
cosmic rays will break up and out of their fragments nuclet
of lighter elements will be formed. 19

In cosmic rays we find nuclei of the atoms of different
elencnts. Thé more nuclei of the atoms of a particular
element there are in the cosmos the core of them will
become accelerated and gain high energy. Exporiments have
shown that the conposition of cosmic rays corresponas, in
the maih, to the distribution of the different elezents
in the universe. Though there is very little of sone
elements in the cosmos, lithium, beryllium and boron, for
instunce, yet the nuclei of these elements are often produced
when heavier nuclei decay.

Consequently if such nuclei are found in the com-
position of primary cosmic rays it will mean that cosmic fy ett A ha
radiation travels a long time in the universe. - . ce

To find the nuclei of atoms of different eleneats in
the composition of cosmic rays is.a very difficult prodlen.

It may be successfully solved by using special
)

counters, which register the Vavilov-Cherenkov radiation.

*) The "Vavilov-“herenkov effect" (named for the Soviet

scientists who discovered it) is that charged particles fly
through matter at a velocity greater than the velocity of
light, producing an original lightwave similar to the sound-
wave produced by a plane flying at supersonic speed.

-52-

The greater the specifie gravity of the element the nore
intense the radiation of the atomic nucleug paselng through
the counter. As shown by experiments carried on by the
Soviet scientists L.V. Kurnosova, L.Ao hazorenov and

M.I. Fradkin, this is a good way to analyse prinary cosmic
radiation and especially to try to find out if it hoe the
quclei of lithium, beryllium and boron. In tho same way

the nuclet of the atoms of many other elements, particularly
heavy elements, can de searched for in cosmic rays. The
large opportunities offered by the satellites will permit
undertaking new attempts to find among primary radiation
electrons, and photons, the tiniest material particles of'
light, If these new components were found even in very amol2l
quantities our knowledge of the origin of cosmic rays

would be considerably advanced.

This will be evident, indeed, if we recall that
there are magnetic fields in outer space. While passing
through the Earth's magnetic field the cosmic-ray particlos
are greatly deflected in the field; and as a result the

primary particles of cosmic radiation, possessing as they do ..n.

an electrical charge, follow a considerably distorted path.
Observing these particles on the Earth we cannot tell where
they came into being since the original direction of their
motion was completely lost owing to the deflection in the
magnetic fields.

Photons, on the contrary, move practically ia “,
straight line. If, therefore, we succeed in finding then
they will batter than any other radiation indicate to us

-53-

where in cosmic space are to be found the sources of cosmio

rays.

Thus, study of the composition of primary radiation

will make it possible to Giscover a nunber of phenoneno

occurring in cosmic space and to shed ‘light on the origin

of cosmic rays,.and in particular to check some consequences

of the hypothesis put forward by the Soviet scientist

V.L. Ginsturg to the effect that cosmic rays are formed on

gupemovae outbursts.
With the aid of artificial Earth satellites long obser=

vations of primary cosmic radiation can de conducted affordis:.

the possibility of discovering even relatively little variatiuns

dn the itatensity of the different components of this radiation.

In every particular case it is very interesting to

find out the nature of those particles of cosmic radiation,

which have changed in muaueRe: | The use of satellites will

nake this possible.

Among other things, ‘the number. of prinary particles

can be registered to this end aad eimiltoneously the tonisa- 7

tion cxused by them. In this way it will be possible to

ate the variations in the intensity of the main componcnu~

separ

of cosmic rays consisting of the nuclei of the atoms of

hydrogen, namely, protons, from the changes in the number

of nuclei of the heavier elenents. “Instruments on the Earth's

surface cannot effect this separation, but satellites offer

an altogether new approach to analysing the processes going

on with cosmic rays.
The number of primary particles can be meusured

54=

with the aid of a counter eof charged particles. As has
been shown by experiments conducted in the USSR (oy N.L.

Grigorov, Y.I. Logachev, A.M, Coarakhchyan and A.E. Chudakov),.

it ig now possibdle to design an instrument which will use
electricity viery economically.

Considerable difficulty is presented in measuring
fonisation produged by cosmic radiation beyond vhe atmoe-
phere. However, the measurement can be managed by enploy=
ing a method developed by Chudakov, as follows: owing
to the ionisation, the instrument travelling outside tho
atmosphere accumulates an electric charge, and when the
charge 4g removed an impulse energes which is radioed to
the Earth, and the ionisation produced by the cosnic rays
can be judged from the value of the impulse.

Tre orbits of the Sputniks girdle almost the entire
globe, and this makes it possible to study the dependence
of the intensity of cosmic radiation on latitude and ee

tude. This dependence ig due ae the deflection of the =
prinary cosmic rays in the Barth’ 8 magnetic field. By aus.
sing the Earth as a huge meaguring instrument the composi~
tion of cosmic radiation can be analysed, and the distri-
bution of the radiation over the globe maxes it possible

to investigate our planet's magnetic field.

Instruments for studying cosnic rays were installed
on Sputnik-2.

The particles making up cosmic radiation were regis~
tered on the Sputaik with the aid of charged-particles
counters. when an electrically charged particle passed

—

-55-

through the counter & spark was produced which supplied

an impulse to the radto eireudt incorporating seni-con-

ductor triodes, the purpose of watch is to add up a numbur ,

en Tae Sy
.

of cosmic-ray partieles and signal when a certain number
has deen counted, After transmitting the signals that. —
the particulary number of particles had been added up .
registration of cosni¢-rag particles began again and when an :
equal number of particles had Yeon counted another signal
followed. Dividing the registered number of particles by
the time in which they were dounted we get the number of
particles passing the counter per second, or, in other
words the intensity of cosmic rays-

The preliminary analysis of the data on the cosmic
rays transmitted fron the Sputaik has shown that the tastrie “

ments function nornally- it has been definitely shown _

ITT! 07 SEER TST a EES

that the number of particles of cosmic radiation depends

on the geomagnetic latitude, and the analysis of. the
many measurements of the energy spectrum of the prisary
cosmic particles makes it possible to study the variation
of the spectrum with tine and compare it with the processes ©
going on during that time in the space around it.

There can de no doubt that in time the instruments
set upon the Eputniks will provide the possibility for a
continuous observation of the primary cosmic radiation.

In this way cosmic rays will decome a powerful

means of etudying tac Universe.

-S6-
The Secrets of the ionosphere

The characteristics of the atmosphere at altitudes
above 200-250 kilometres have deen little investizated,
Espectally interesting is the study of the fine structurc
of the ionosphere, that is, the part of ‘the atnosphere
woich contains a vast ounber of electrically char ed
particles ~- eleotrons and tons. Beience today nossescos
few cata on the circular electrical currents in the iono~
sphere and other related vhenorena, as until now the prin-
cipal inforuation on the fonosphere has been obtained by
studyin, tue ratas of the radiowkves sent fron the Earth anu
reflected fron the ionised strata. Moreover, @his cethoc
nakes it possible to set an idea of the ionosphere only up
to the level of caxinua ionisation (F2 layer), that is, up
i to a heisht of roughly 250-300 kilometres. This is because

the Lonosphere reflects or lets throuh radio signals, se-

+ ehee ntti sce neem ot

pending on the ‘frequency used fn: transnitting | then

tae - oe ee

tustance, greater density of ionisation is required ‘to reflect
siynals sent on high frequency waves.

The sreatest frequency at which radio waves are
reflected fron a given layer of the tonosphere when they

fall vertically on it is called critical frequency,

> The greatest critical frequency is observed in the F2
layer. Uadio waves of a greater frequency than the critical
freyuency of the P2 layer pass through the inonosphere and
do not return to the Barth. Thus,-in order to study the

higher layers of the ionosphere it is necessary to have
Tadio-wave sources placed considerably hizher than the 72

pn

-57-
layer, and it is such sources that the Sputnik carries. . ; :
However, radio waves fron the Sputnik fallin, on the
. tonosphere from the outer side and not fros the side of

the Earth cun also be reflected and not -et to the Earth.
To avoid this, the S,utoik's radic transnitters had higher
frequencies than the eritical frequency ‘Of the F2 layer,

a with a ranje of 10-15 uegacycles, dependin.; on the season
of the year, -

Radio Waves Enitted fron the Sputniks Made it possible
to_ Get Signals fror. an Area jn the Ionosphere in which
nadio waves Travelling from the Earth Cannot Penetrate

Radio observations were conducted froa points in

ee we ee ee

different seo jraphical latitudes and longitudes dy radio

dircetion-finder stations, r.dio clubs and thousands of .
radio anateurs.

Of very pest icportance are the neasurenents of the
field intensity of radio signals received fron the Sputnik. — 4

The zeasurenents were ade by Spee rauoue automatic ‘record= See

teat: ~

ing as well as by separate neasutenents at certain fixed -
instants, and so nuch caterial has been obtained that at
this tine only a prelininary analysis has been coupleted.
The results of receiving the radio signals fron the .

Sputniks and seasurenent of their levels have shown that
the signals transuitted on a iS-netre wave-length rose very
high up, far exceeding the direct vision range.

of special interest is the fact that while noving in 2
the elliptical orbit the Sputniks occupy a varying position

in relation to the main naxinun of electronic concentration

in the terrestrial atmosphere. while in the Southern
Hecisphere the Sputnik travels above the ionosphere layer

in the Northern Henisphere at certain momenta it is above thu
peak ionisation of that stratua, at other nouents uncer it,
and at still others, near the peak. Those conditions sake for
a great many ways” of propagation of short waves over reat
cistances. One of these ways is the reflection fron -e
Earth's surface of the radio waves which have * cone
fron above through the whole sass of the fonosphere,

followed by a sinsle reflection of it from the Lonosphere

in the regions where the eritiecal frequencies are suffi-
ciently high. In other cases the radio waves fallin, on the
fonosphere fron above at a certain angle are considerably
refracted by it and as a result penetrate into a region

lyins beyond geonetrical direct visibility.

Tae position of the Sputnik near the area of oaxinun..

ionisation of the atmosphere creates especially favourable

conaitions for the propagation of radio waves by neans of

jonospheric radio-wave guides. In sone cases, as the obser- .

vations have shown, radio waves cane to the receiving
point not the shortest way but rather travelled about

the globe over the lon.er are of the great circle. In sone
cases the phenomenon of round-the-globe echo of the radio
signals has been observed.

There can be no doubt that the final analysis of the
great amount of naterial obtained through the radio observa-
tions of the Sputniks will provide very valuable information
on the specific features of ionisation of the upper layers of

59-
the donosphere and the absorption and propagation of radio=
waves in thes. ;
The Earth's Magnetic Field

There ig a natural nagnetie field around the Earth.
Ite properties, for instance, its directional effect on
the magnetic needle, have long been utilised in practice,
though the nature of the field and its origin still renain
obscure. The Earth's cagnetic field affects the notion of,
charged partieles coning frou the Sun to the Earth through
outer space, particles formed in the upper layers of the
atmosphere when the latter are ionised by the Sun's ultra-
violet rays; This is the explanation for the geonagnetic
effects such as the latitude distribution of the intensity
of cosaic rays and the frequeney of auroral displays, the
polarisation of tne radio waves reflected fron the dono=
sphere and many other things. = = oos :

ane Woolies ees

Until recently the Earth's magnetic field "wes deasur

either on the Xarth's surface or close to it (from serophjses))

it was only lately that several measurenents were taken fron”
rockets at altitudes exceeding a 100 kilometres. The
nathezatical analysis of the xeasurenents made on the ground
bas led to a number of isteresting deductions. It turned out
that the field observed near the Earth's surface should de
regarded as consisting of two parts: one due to sources
tn the interior of tne carth, and the other to sources
cutaide the Earth.

Although the share of the outer sources is very small
‘one to three per cent), its valwlying close to the limits -

ee eee ee ae errs

mop.

:
+

of the error iavolved in the cathematical analysis, there 4s | a
no. doubt that it exists in reality. The existence of an
external field ig confirmed by the rapid chanses takin.; :
place in the Earth's nagnetic field, thanges that are
known as diursal sagnetic variations, magnetic disturbances - |
and cagnetic storms. These changes are closely related to

many phenomena occurring outside the Earth's surface, such

+ mete.
5)

as polar activity, the state of the ionosphere, auroral displays
and cosaic rays. ;

& mathenatical analysis of the chanses shows that
their sources lie outside the Earth's surface. Unfortunately,
the analysis of the data obtained from ground observations
will neither indicate the exact spot where the field's sources

are to be found nor define their nature. Other data have

to be found foe this  PUTPOSE : od otaes --f

= ariations,. “hagnetie

and the ats related to" them have led scientista to: Pees me: .
assuny that an external nagnetic field nay be produced by - BOS
systeos of electrical currents outside the Earth's surface.
The most likely place where guch currents night originate is
the upper conductive layers of the Earth's atmosphere,
namely, the ionosphere. .

It is also suggested that there may be currents
beyond the ionosphere too. They may possibly be due to
charged particles and corpuscles, ejected by the Sun and
captured by the Earth's magnetic Yield and revolving around
the Farth in the plane of its magnetic equator several tens - ?
of thousands of Kilometres away from the Earth. These

ees

extra-ionospherie currents increase when during magnetic

storms the Earth finds itself in the nidst of intensive

“at auch time their magnetic field shifts the zones of

f

|

{

b

|
corpuseular streams ejected from the Sun's active regions, | s

i

auroral displays closer to the equator aod reduces the

intensity of coanic rays.

The presence of sources of a magnetic field in the

{onosphero ia confirmed today by direct magnetic measurecents

conducted from rockets. ~

Considerable attention is given in the International

Geophysical Year to studying the varying external magnetic —

field and its relation to solar and other geophysical phenonena,

Tre changes in the magnetic field will be registered continuously

at a great many stations. It is also planned to measure

the magnetic field fron satellites and rockets, Magnetic

measurenents on satellites nake it ‘possible to survey the

ee eed

magnetic field ‘2 ‘ound the Earth. at ereat. altitudes. Their *.

Big neeen

purpose is to check the existence “of extra-ionoepheric

currents, to find out the system of ionospheric currents

and learn more about the main part of the fild, i.e, the ‘part:

due to the Earth!s interior sources, By means of satellite ;

measurements it can be checked whether the streams of the

Sun's particles are neutral or consist of electrically-

ACE. particles of either sign.

Date. on the field portion created by exterral sources

can be obtained by comparing the measured valuvs of the

* field with the theoretical caleulationa based on the
icatdapeten that the pteid' is produced only by sources in

~62-

the interior of the Earth. Knowing the field produced by
the external sources at high altitudes it will be possible
to appraise better the part it plays in particular geomagnetie
affects. It ia not impossible that ian some causes it plays
a considerable part. In particular, the recently revealed
differenee in the position of the Earth's geomagnetic equator
us found from the data obtained by magnetic measurements on
land and by measurements of the intensity of cosmic rays,
may possibly be caused by the action of the field's external
gcurceg on the charged particles of cosmic rays.

Observing that the intensity of the large magnetic
anomalies decreases with altitude we shall be able to
judge whether the sources of these anomalies lie Abate the |
Earth's surface or far out in space.

a Weather Forecasting ees

It is close to 75 years since the first attempt was
made to carry out geophysical investigations sinultaneously ,
ona worldwide scale. That was the first international

polar year, Ite task was to etudy the influence of the

Aretic on the weather, and to investigate the Aurora Borealis

and the Earth's magnetic field. The second attempt was made

50 years later, in 1932-1933, when the second. international

polar year was organised. The object of that attenpt was

to study the ionosphere and its effect on the propagation

of radio waves, and to conduct meteorological observations

by an extended network of stations. . % 43
The mateorological maps compiled following the observa~

tiong of the second international polar year (for the Earth's,

nee . /£

Northern Hemisphere) setved scientists as a dasia for 4
‘ developing a thermo~hydrodynemic method of long-range weather i
forecasting, and to verify whether the experimental hydro= |
dynamic longerange forecasts were justified.

The next-Lnternational meteorological observations were |
planned for 19862-1983, but the rapid rate of development of
scfienca and technology in the middle of the 20th century adda
it necessary to change the schedule and fix the IGY for

1957-58.
Participating in the IGY are 64 countries, with the

USoR taking an important part in carrying out its programe.
soue 300 meteorological ground stations and some 100 aero-
logical stations were set up on Soviet territory. The be
work done unver the IGY progranse will be extrunely important Ss
wick is tae.

for netaorology, sepectally for Beathes r forecast,

Re

principal problem in this sciences: - st
results of observations by a wide network of ‘netecrological a
stations will be received from both henispheres of the Karths ee

Thig will be the first time that aeteorological condd=
tions in the Antarctic and equatorial regions will-be widely.
analysed, an analysis that meteorologists are so badly in need
of. Vast material will be collected for neteorology, during
the year, and by using electronic fast computing machines the
material will be analysed in brief tine. The calculations,
which formerly would have taken scores of years, can now be ..' iy
done in a few hours. , .

The automatic meteorological stations set up on the . ie

Sputaiks operating beyond the Barth's atmosphere will lead

vi

hie

to fundamental changes in the theory and practice of
weather forecasting. Many meteorological phenomena
hidden froa observers of HZarth will Recome obvious wheo
observed fron the Sputnik. Today meteorologiste are forced
o ecolluet most of their data from an extremely linited 7°
nunber of ground observations. However, making use of
a satellite it will be possivle, for instance, to photograph
at once all clouds over the Farth's surface at least sevcral
tines in 24 hours, It will also be possible to obtain
data on ice conditions and information on other factors
{nfluencin; the weather all over the world.
Many problems of meteorology are already in the process
of solution as a result of the observations of the first
two satellites; for instance the distribution of the density
of the air,in the upper. layers _ of the ie HR OREO TE along. _-
longitude ‘and. latitude, ete. In ‘future ‘catellites: will ~
help to solve a vast number of wetéorotogical questions. —

The successful launching of the Sputniks has afforded -

the possibility for the first tine in the annals of meteoro-

logy to conduct extended observation of the Earth's atmos-
phere "fron above."

By equipping the bputniks with apecial sensitive photc-
cells, scientists will set a picture of the distribution
of clouds over extensive regions of the Barth's surface and
eiuultanvously pst a picture of the distribution of the
gigantic planetary and atmospheric waves (more than
1,000 kilometres long), which play a part in shaping the

weather over large distances} acientists will be able to

watch jet currents, that is, a pronounced belt winding
among the cycloas and anti-cyclons which dlock it, like a
river winding between islands, and many other things.

In short, the Sputnixs will furnish ‘a picture of the

distribution of the air currents, a picture of total air

circulation over wide expanses.

It hag been proved that for short-range forecusts
(24 to 48 Rey carers Pere of decepeciogigal
-elemants for a relatively snall area, surrounding the
particular region for whieh the forecast ia made, However,
as the tiné for which the forecast is made grows longer —_
the territory to be elucidated by the initial data ia-
creases sharply. In the case of long-range forecasts
for some point in the Northern hemisphere the initial
data have, to cover the entire Northern Hemisphere apa.

mininua. : eu
a dense network of stations to take observations and
couplete information from the stations are essential for
making more accurate forecasts. “there are still however,
large areas on the Earth's surface in which there are ou.
stations or none at all. Thus, while on the Atlantic
Ccean daily observations are conducted on a few stationary
vessels belonging to the neteorological and aerological .
service, practically no obeservations are conducted on
the Pacific Ocean. Here observatiors from the Sputniks will
beader da@ispensable service, “hey will oover vist arccs
ineluding the oceans, on which no regular observations of

’

the state of the atmosphere have been conducted.

VII. TMWARDS THE ‘QUEST OF OUTER 5P.

Prodlena Involved in Study of Animals Travelling in Outez :
Space

Soviet seientists began the conquest of apace by imple-
menting a broad programme of medical and biological iaveati=- F
gations of animels on their flights in rockets to 100-200 if
kilometres above the Earth's surface.

From the biological standpoint a flight in the upper

layers of the Earth's atnosphere has nuch in common with a

ee ee eee

flight in outer space. A living organism in that case
too, will be affected by a shole series of factors not = 1
found in the usual environment, such as the effect of

cosmic radiation, the long gravity-free dynamic state and,

under certain conditions, the virtual absence of atmospheric ihe

pressure aud molecular oxygen.

Some of. these factors can be produced artificially

LET SAM A

and studied ia. ‘laboratories, and others during brief: ‘flights:
in rockets. A good many papers deal with the study of a: a
gases eSeeta- bn the organism. Airflight medicine today : =
has enough experimental and theoretical data which reveal

more than merely the physiological effects of the influence .

| of this kind of factors. At its disposal are preventive
:3: I ; aud protective measures to safeguard the living organisa}
a \ these are hermetically-sealed chambers, space suits and 580
oe on.
fg The effects of waightleasness, of priuary cosmic radiation,
corpuscular and ultra-violet radiation of the Sun have as ;

yet practically not been studied from the nedico-biological

angie, Their dDlological effects and perhaps also other
factors we still know inadequately cana be found out only
hy long flights in the upper layers of the atmosphere.

To conduct, such investigations, considerable difficultics

7 \
as regards design and method have tobe overcome. All appara-

tus in auch cases sust operate independuntly over a long
period, ensure autocatic recording of the needed data and

be highly resistant to the action of overstrainvibrations

and variations in pressure and temperature. At the same

vime the apparatus has to de compact, weigh little and consume
litcle electricity.

No less are the difficulties arising in providing con- |
ditions to onable animals to survive io the flight. for
{nstance, the efficient systems of air regeneration used
ordinarily are unsuitable for the hermetically-sealed chambers

because of taste bulk and ls Benen’:

Odviously the ventilation systen nad to ee ‘forced feed
system since the gravity-free state precludes the air ex-
change usual for conditions on Earth. Becaus’ of this, the
heat exchange in the chamber and protection of the animal
from the considerable variations in tha temperature have
to be specially designed:

A special systen had to be worked out to provide the
animal with water or liquid food, as in conditions of weight-
lessness liquids in a free state can possidly disperse
throughout the chamber.

It was necessary to work out a whole system of rather

-68-

complex automatic equipment to.ensure that the conditions

raquired to keep the animal alive are maintained. Scicntife.

de instruments are used which are designed to investigate

a number of pete ea eer. peers ete he anical and
hygienic conditions in the chembe?#s For this purpose pare~
ticular physical values are-converted into electrical,

then they are coded into different «inds of radio inpulees,
which are transmitted dy radio and automatically recorded on
Barth with the aid of special recording devices.

Even this by far incomplete enumeration of the prob-
lems is enough to give an idea of the variety and comple-
xity of the tasks due to the specific conditions of the
experiment.

Observations of the animal's behaviour on Sputnik~-2
made it possible to find out the effect on the organian of

factors which-could not be studied ia laboratory: scomahet ons:

Bees AS ge ees eas

or in high flights on seroplaness ~~

Biological Phenomena in Cogmic Flights

For the purpose of studying a number of medico-bdiolo-
gical questions a special hermetically-sealed chamber was
fixed up on Sputnik-2 in which the animal (a dog called
Laika) was placed, also instruments to study the physio-
logical functions of the animal, equipment for regonerat-
ing the air, for feeding the animal and removing the
producta of its phystolugical activity. In designing
the equipmenc account was taken of the need of the utmost
econony in the size and weight of the instruments and of

minimum consumption of electricity by then,

Hegre

6} af
Functiouing for some considerable time, tne apparatus ‘
easured with the ald of radio telemetric system the re=-
gistration of the animal's pulse and respiration, ite
arterial dlood pressure, the jslectrical potentials of the
heart, the temperature and air pressure in the chamber, «nd

_

Bo On. - :

It is perf.ctly natural that the first “passenger” on
the Sputnik was a warm-blooded aninal -- a dog ~- the nornal
phyelology of which had been thoroughly studied. It may be
that to clear up special questions it will be necessary to
use anthropoid apes, rodents, mollusks and insects. Inscete
will afford opportunities for genetic studies.

Laika, the passenger on Sputnik-2, was a small dog
weighing approximately five xilogrammes. Unfortunately
its genealogy is not known. It wae a chlegmatic aninal;
while living in the vivarium it never quarrelled with its
four-footed neighbours, The information obtained from the. -. ae
“Sputnik shows that during the space flight too it didnot ©
lose its calm disposition.

Before sending it on the Sputnik, Laika underwent
preliminary training. It was gradually accustomed to long
stays in a small hermetically-sealed room wearing a special oY
outfit, and to the gauges attached to different parts of its
body for registering the physiological functions, and so on.
The animal was also trained to stand the effect of over atveins,
and in the laboratory it was determined how far it was
proof against the effect of vibration and certain other
factors. Following iong trainiue the animal calmly endured

severas weeks in the nermatically-sealed cnaamoer, which waae

-70-
it pessible to conduct the needed scientific investigations,

The study of the biological phenomena of a living
organism travelling in outer space became possible as a
result of extensive preliminary investigations on animals
in short flights in rockets to altitudes of 100 to 20C.
kilometres, investigations conducted in the USSR over ea
number of years,

“This is the story of one of the flights.

.o. Five minutes before suprise a cigar-shaped silver
grey rocket was zooming up to the stratosphere. In the
forvard part was fixed up a non-hermeticaily sealed
compartment in which catapulting trolleys had been placed.
aAttaobed to the trolleys were special outfits ~- oxyger
supply instruments, containing 900 litres of oxygen, &
parachuting system and apparatus for recording the physical
functions in-flight gee

tae catapulting trolley weighed 70 kilogramnes, and =

the parachuting system ensured a vertical landing speed of -

about six metrea a second. The rocket quickly reached a_
height of 110 kilumetres, at which the head part fell away
fron the body and began its free fall. At an altitude of
80-90 kilometres the first trolley was catapulted at 4
speed of ‘some 700 metres a second; three seconds latex, the
parachute system began to work and the animal éropped down
to Earth from a height of 75-85 kilometres, the descent
taking an hour.

In the last five years Soviet scientists carried out

many similar rocket flights for the purpose of studying

aon
ee ee

Ain eee

ob |

ait

-71- :

the high layers of the atmosphere and their effect oa .
living organians.

Unlike earlier investigations, the flight of an
animal on the Sputnik makes it possible to study the effect
of zero gravity over a long pertod. Before this the in-
fluence of weightlessness could be studied only on an aero@
plane for a few seconds at a time, and during the vertical
launching of a rocket for a few minutes. On the Sputnik,
however, it was possible to study the eninal's organien
in gravity-free state for several days. é ae

The experimental data obtained in the nedico-biologic-
al investigations are now being studied thoroughly end in
detail, It may be said already now that the animal atood well
the long action of the accelerations as the Sputnik was . &
taken to its orbit and the gravity-free state which followed ai
for several days. The data show that throughout the o_experi= is ues :

er e

nent the aninal's etate was satisfactory.

Viir. ON A SATELLIT

without Atmosphere ee
Animals and human beings can travel in outer space .
oaly in hernetically-sealed chambers, where the air comyo-

sition and pressure are close to those prevailing on Earth.

In order that the organism could breathe the space ship must

have a supply of oxygen, and most expedient is liquid

. eeemerapeer sa

oxygen. One litre of liquid oxygen yields 6CO litres of
hie oxygen gas as it evaporates. However, the required amount i

'
'

of oxygen dissolves in the blood only at a certain barometric

-72=
pressure; if there is ‘not enough daronetric preasure, even
if the organisa breathes pure oxyger it will not get all it
needs. .

If the Sarometric pressure drops (in outer apace there
is practically none) the gases dissolved in the blood pasa
out. This orings arout grave consequences, and sometimes
a completa disturbance of the vital activity ef the organisn
ie the result.

Ligquidst boiling temperature depends on the surrounding
pressure. The lower the pressure the lower the temperature
zt which a Liguid tegins to yoil. At a pressure of 47 mm,
of mercury (which corresponds to 19 kn. above sea level)
the liquid begins to doil when its temperature

reaches 37°C.

varely
This is the blood temperature of a human
weing, and the ‘boiling’ of the Blood would inevitably
vring serious consequences,

_ Haan could such Atsordere erine? Mey could occur sf
something unforeseen: happered to the hermetically-sealed
chanter. If a meteorite traveling at a terrific speed . .
collided with the space ship and pierced the chamtar and
the astronaut was not wearing protective clothing he would
faint in 15 to 30 seconds. For this reason, besides
hermetically sealing @he shamber, space or special high
altitude suits are provided. In the space suites the re~
quired barozetric pressure is maintained and in the special
aititude suits the pressure is produced by * ten-
sionarg the fabric of the suit which. tightly fite

the human body. Both hermetically-sealed chambers and

-73~
space or altitude suits are used.

Flights of animals ia satellites will make it possible
to check up how reliable are the hermetically-sealed chiuabdorgs
and the space and altitude suits cn to work out waye to
enable the organisms to take food and water under thuse
conditions, and to solve a nunbder of other questions,

An important requisite for the ncrmal life of living
beings ia the adequate temperature of the surrounding mediun.
Tne first experiment of laucching @ satellite with a dog on .
board has shown that Soviet scientists have correctly solved
the problem of producing the required temperature inside. the
satellite; the animal behaved calmly in flight and its

general state was satisfactory.

e ot A Life
It is oxtrenely inportant to study with the aid (of.
satellites ‘the. effect of the. “different kinds ‘of solar and.

cosmic radiation on living organisns. The intensity of
the ultra-violet radiation in the upper atmosphere and
beyond is 80 great that it is fatal for the Living celie.
However, protection against the action of the Sun's ultra-
violet rays is no difficult problem, since most materials,
including ordinary gless, do not let Shrough this a:
of the sclar spectrum.

Solar radiation also contains the so-called X-rays.

While at first their influence on the organism is quite -un-

noticeable, in may later lead to very unpleasant consequences,

Therefore an effective protection against X-rays must be

secured, —

+
a gaceates Shen
?
An

wt pee mee meee ne

~The

Cosmic ray6, oF cosmic particles, a8 they should be
culled more properly mayde even more dangerous. Possessing
enormous kinetic energy these particles, on encountering
molecules of other substances, cause their dialategration
into ions. Melecules become Lonised*also when cosmic
particles penetrate into the tissue of tae organism} that
leads to the destruction of the cells, to unhealthy symp-
toms lixe those caused by gamma radiation, which occurs in
nuclear reactions.

The question naturally arises: how can the organism
be protected against cosmic particles? While there are no
finished plans on this score as yet, published data
indicate that this protection is faced with considerable
difficulties, and the launching of satellites carrying
animals will make it possible to obtain highly important
information OR this question.

gputnik-2_ is equipped with measuring instruments -
for studying all "radiant" effects of outer ‘spacet the ™
Sun's short-wave ultraviolet and X-ray radiation, and coamis
rays. : ;

A few words should be said atout the aanger from
meteorites.

It has been established that more than 6,000 million
meteorites enter the planet's atmosphere every 2& hours,
their total mass being approximately one ton. Possessing
an immense speed of movement -- 30 to 50 kilumetres or
mere a second -- they becone hot from friction in the air

and Suro away in tne upper strata of the atmosphere}

-75-
we gee them as "falling stars." Meteorites do not, 48 4
rule, penetrate below 70-100 kilometres. However, the
nigher a satellite moves the more likely it is to geet a
neteorite. It is 4mportant to establish how much this
possibility depends on the height of the orbit, the tine
of the year, and-so 00.
The very first weeks of the Bputniks' flight have.
shown that the Sputnike have mot been hit by a8 netevrite
of destructive force. It may well be that the chance of
colliding with meteoric particles will urn out to be so

greater than the chance of an automobile accident.

What_Is Weightlessuess?

: To have a satellite get out to its orbit a speed of
sone 6,000 metres a second has to Le imparted to 4t,; and
this involves a considerable acceleration over a long

period. The eifect of acceleration depends on its magni-.

~ Caria AS

tude, period of action, the rate of Tereace: and “the “dires- =
tion of the motion in which the force producing the aeewles
ration acts on the body of the human peing or animal.

The effect of the accelerations, or overstresses, 28
they are also called, on the organisa of animals and humau
beings has Leen studied quite intensely in recent years,
since modern high epeed planes are subject to considera>le
accelerations over long periods. ;

If the acceleration acts upward from a person's feet to
his head it will cause 4 redistribution of the whole nasa
of the blood, and there will We more Viood than usual in

tne sowsr past of the body and unt enough in the upper.

et Soe Me

poseapmecn BARISTA %

a eee figs
pte OS eg

-76- :

a

If the acceleration is strong enough the blood circulation
in the brain may be less than the regular, and this will
lead to a disturbance in the functions of the central ner-

vous system, including the loss of conscivusneas,.

If the acceleration does not act on a person along

his body but perpendicularly it can be withstood much

easier. The special suits also help $6 protect from over-

strains, as they envelop the differght parts of the body
tightly, not letting the blood accumulate in them. These :

questions too will be checked in the experiments witu
animals. Lé :
zy ¢ ae
A few words on the speed of movement the organism

can.stand, Uniform speed does not affect the organisa,

Ne certainly are not troubled in the least by the Earth's

rotation on ite axis, Neither are we disturved Ly the 7 og

’
Earth's notion. prommegae § Suny. at a velocity, of more than sl
100,000 kn. an hour: i fWe may state definitely. ot at ‘the | ae ee
However, vy

human organism can “pately stand any uniform speed,
at a certain speed of movement there comes a point when
man's sense organs cannot supply the brain with exhaustive ’ |

4nformation because the information is transient and in~ Le
|

complete, Space flights will therefore be controlled

eLiefly from’ ‘Vand stations by means of electronic computing
Astronauts in space

Soeding ri

: machines with a stored programme,
. * flights will be released from having to control their
- g flight thenselves, which is literally beyond mants capacity. |
ee: Let ua now pass on to the question of weightlessness, a

. eo

which travelers in space are bound to come up against.

=/7> -_
The effect of weightlessness has been studied in recont
years on both animals and human veings. True, the observas

tions were of effects lasting but several scores of secunda.

Undoubtedly the effects of being a considerable tine ina
XN a

ravity-free state will be quite different. That is just
what satellites tarrying animals should establish. Dogs
clad in special space suits on their brief flights in
rockets also experienced a state of wightlessness. Automate
ie 4nstrumente recorded the animals' respiration, measured
the blood pressure and pulse, and an automatic motion-
picture camera took photographs. No material changes ia
‘respiration or heart activity were found. However, sucd |
experiments were iimited as to time. .
Interesting results have been obtained in studying
the effect of zero gravity on human beings. Weightless=
ness occurred th a speciapNy programmed flight by sero-
plane and i Goneioiek for 30 to 45 seconds. of ‘the ab.
persons who took pay ‘in those flights eight said that
they had felt well! The scientist who conducted the study
and who tock part in the flight stated that the zero—
gravity state was ‘the best form of relaxation for a human
being. Five of the fliers, however, experienced illusory
sensations auzing t the gravity~free state: they had the
feeling that oe were iu a state of free falling or that
they were flying “upside down." Anc one showed symptoms
of health disturbance very much like the sick feeling one
gets during air sickness. , ,
It has been estallished that after repeatedly exper=
feneing weightlessness in flight the human organism adjusts

tsalf to it, and a person who has experienced it several

times retains a sufficiently good orientation in space and
4s capable of saking precise coordinated novements.

The dog's flight on the Sputnik, re which the gravity-
free state continued for a considerable tine, makes it
possible to study the effect of prolonged weightlessness *
on the organisa and to solve the problem to what oxtent
centrifugal forces should ve created on a satellite to
take the place of gravity.

There can be no doubt that weightlessness also affects
the organism's functions of breathing, blood circulation,
body. temperature, and so on. Odservations have showu -
that weightlessness causes some drop in blood pressure:

Under the action of accelerations there is increased
gas exslange in ‘the organisa, . and the consunption . of oxyge
and evevement of earbonic uci ees rises sdverertoia ©
During the gravity-free prate a drop in the gas exchange
nay le expected, at least. ‘after the organism had become
adjusted to this state. These facts are important for
casguring a supply of oxygen for the animals and for deter-
mining the capacity of,the air-conditioning apparatus.

Another inportaft reason wuy satellites should be
lauuched with animals on boari is the saving of crews of
future space ships. It may happen that unforeseen circum
stances will forcey. ilots to avandon the cosmic vessel, and
provision should 3 made to save the people in suc cases.
Naturally, such experiments should first be conducted with .
animals. Besides, for scientific purposes it would also

>be highly desirable to save the animals after the satellite

has completed its movement in the orbit. 7 5

od

ae

Where Are the Biological Limits?

The height of the orbit ahove the Earth is important

A me me me ee nee ne

for flights of satellites; the greater the altitude the : :

longer will the satellite survive. But what about satellites :

carrying animals? Is there any reason to limit the distance H

of its orrit from the Earth? There appears to be no

difference, for animals have the same chance for survival

at any of the heights to which a satellite can be launched, i

The thing is that already at very low heights our ' . wf

atmosphere begins to lose rapidly its proporties which are 2

essential for a living organism.

At eight — .or nine kilonetres above sea level oes

effect of insufficient rarometric _ pressure ‘is! elt

een rie

at 19,200 metres, where total Larometric pressure equals

47 mm, of mercury, measures have to ve taken to protect

i
the organism against the liquids Vegianing to boil. ae ras
At 36 to 37 kilometres up lies the Loundary where

heavy particles of cosmic radiation are absorbed; avove

that level in the, atmosphere one must be protected against =

cosaic particles. Arove 42-43 kilometres segins the re-

en which as regards the ultraviolet part of the solar

spectrum is equivalens to interplanetary space.

Meteorites generally burn away at an altitude of

cv-ut 100 kilometres,
At 122 kilometres above the Earth's surface and

-80-
higher sound cannot propagate in the atmvephere. At that
altitude the distances between the air's molecules are
approximately equal to the Tengthe of sound waves apprehend-
ed by the human ear. Above this limit Bhs free path of the
air'ts moleoules is longer. *

Approximately at these heights the intensity of
cosmic particles begins to {nerease sharply.

However, the region in which a satellite can survive

for a long time ie considerably higher than these outeide

limits.

TX. Man in Outer Space
Today we may already say that in a very few years

satellites will be built to revolve around the Earth at a
distance of several thousand kilometres fron the Farth's

surface and whey. will be equipped with apparatus for .

every kind of. ~ecientific neasuyencnt. One of the’ “next ae

steps should be ‘the developaedt of a roekee capable oo
vreaking away from the sphere of the Earth's attraction,
get close to the Moon and fly around it. Such a rocket
would give us abundant information on the nature of the
Moon's surface and on the structure of the Moon's hemi-
sphere which we never 5€@-

We can say that a flight to the Moon is a matter of
the not distant future. The carrier rocket of the world's
first artificial Earth satellite imparted to it an orbital
speed of some eight Kilometres a second, and the second

satellite was imparted an equal speed. And to send up 4.

-8l-

gpacea ship to the Moon it will need 4 speed of only three

yeilometres more, or slightly mora than 11 kilometres a
gsoond. In the latter case the space ship will travel ia

a drawn out ellipse, and entering the sphere of the

NYoon's attraction will after a few evolutions land on the
latter's surfaces

The whole trip will ¢ake ao more than five days and a
minimum of fuel will be consumed. A route has veen figured
out to make the flight in less time. If the space ship
will fly faster than 11 kilometres a second it will te
atle to reach the Moon in 24 hours. Suck projects too have
been worked out Ly Soviet scientists.

Soviets selentists are also working on projects for
flights to Mars. One of the projects envisages the assembly.
of 10 space ships each weighing 1,700 tons on flying
stations. From their circular orbit around the Earth
they will get out Via the transitory orbit to an ellipse
and will move towards Mars in the aphere of the Sun's
attraction without using fuel. The trip to Mars will take
256 cays. For the return flight the travelers will have
to wait on Mars or its artificial sateilite until tne
position of Mars and the Earth in relation to each other
4s again such as will favour the start of the return flight.
This waiting period will equal 440 terrestrial days. The
rhols: trip will thee take 952 days, or nearly three
years. Scientists beiieve that such fli,hts will be made
towards the end of the present century. There are also
projects under which a path has deen figured out fora

flight to Mara in —- less times

~82-

At first, space ships will make their flights without
people on board. The development of present-day automation
and electronic computing machines provides a theoretical
basis to build equipment which besides taking measurements
will be able gid without humdn TAREE O REL OE tye esa out
exactly which measurements should be taken and hog “they _
should be arranged in view of the findings of the earlier
measurements. The radio makes it possible cous eae

: \ :
4n short time to transmit to the Earth the resulta obtained

dn the vast number of observations and measurements, Theo~
retically it 1s possible also to transmit pictures visible
from the ship. .

It will thus de possible to outain enougu so a
data without sending people out into outer space.

oa
¥ e ¢ s

Pes a

4a

oF .
Considerable sechnical difficulties are still to de
overcome before ya be able to fly in outer space. ~

However, the prog ess made and the continued hard work by
“4 f

scientists give us grounds to believe that before very long

man’s flight in outer space will become a fact.

x
ay

po isis esp aie
te
aa, We Saale oS ea Uy Vere peered :

oe ee

pyre

enacts ee + aren aes ee ge
a
I
