Router with Attached Memo Titled DeletedED) Calibaris Briefing Notes" with Atta
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135881, dated 2 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135881).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ma a,

2 FNAS
oe Ve _ + ‘THIB: HAS BEEN APPROVED
FOR + AS SANITIZED, BY
4 ft OW eg yusy 96
Ss YBAT ‘
ROUTING

FORM Indicate title of person to take action and that of the “s
; originator. Place comments thereunder by mrmbered para-
Doc. Now: . graphs. Initial in center of page and draw a line across

= Cabbage the page and forward... Zach recipient is to repeat above
vate: procedure until action completed and ready fer filing.

s on - This coversheet. must be retained with enclosure. _

TO

C|

a+

je

SEBRET

3 February 1954

SUBJECT : ) . ~{pacremas Briefing Notes

1. Attached are sterile notes from which) \intends to work
in the coming meeting with CALIGARIS, Deviation to fit the situation
will undoubtedly change the complex of control points, however these
notes will be adhered to insomuch as possible.

‘ ‘ .

v2 «

fey |

3 February 1954

_ SUBJECT: ‘Briefing Notes

1. Former planning of Indigenous Commander will be utilized as
fully_as possible, the basis of which being to rearrange the plan to
comply with unconventional warfare standards.

2. The major consideration in all alterations in the Indigenous
Commander's plans will be to avoid a prolonged Siege situation and to
avoid placing many assets at the disposal of the tricks of the opposition.
To accomplish this we mst realize that all key points of resistance
should come under our control immediately at H hour. The conditions
under our control should be accomplished at each key poiht of resistance
by one of or a combination of the following methods:

a. First Method: Seizure by outside force with mission of
support being performed by an inner organization, organized by the
Indigenous Commander's personnel from his personnel plus defections
obtained through Psychological Warfare persuasion.

b. Second Method: Seizure by an inner organization such as
above without the aid of outside forces.

c. Third Method: An inner organization as above to the point
of capabilities of control and nullifying the positive action of
any areas of resistance until success at other key areas is obtained
and consolidated to the point of capability of supporting outside
force on arrival to prevent a siege situation. .
e: Arm unt personnel form Prrorit target for detectior,
ad. Fourth Method: Blocking strong resis ce points from the
entire action by organizing strategic surrounding areas for their
retarding and harassmert, and blocking by specially placed Sab teams,

3. Unless the positive assurance of control of Guatemala City by
one of the above first three methods is obtained, no overt move will be
made, It is considered there are nine points of resistance at this time:

a. Guatemala City: garrison, communications, and air facilities

b. Puerto Barrios: garrison, commnications, air facilities,
and port facilities

¢c. Jutiapa: garrison, commnications, and air facilities

d. Zacapa: garrison, communications, and air facilities

e. Mazatenamgo: garrison, communications, and air facilities

£. Quezaltenango: garrison, comminications, and air facilities

g- Quiche: garrison, communications, and air facilities

h. Coban: garrison, communications, and air facilities

i. San Jose: garrison, port facilities, and commnications.’

; 4. It is contemplated that during this first discussion certain
portiens of the Indigenous Commander's prior estimates of the situation
and contemplated needs will arise. The theme to be used on each

. anticipated subject is to be as follows:

ms a. A feeling by the Indigenous Commander that on the capture
of certain of small outlying garrisons, Guatemala City and other
strong points can be expected to capitulate: Recent disclosures
have proved that may approach in efficiency those
The Key positio” os andards met in other Communist countries. We know that several
SOATEM ALA CTY of the enemy are Soviet trained. Soviet traihed active opposition
COR eS LO THE Iz gathers its knowledge thoraughly and employs it at the opportume
Leo GRAPHICAL time only. We mst design our mode of attack and preparation for
LocAnon, Toposkaps.qche attack so that a limited bit of knowledge obtained by the
oosrhow, Superior active opposition cannot be built into possession of the full
‘STATE of Reaovess, Getails, We are attempting to aid in these standards by utilizing
_. ORGAN IZATIOT F compartmentation within the new target organization between the ,
2 TRANG, AD wsrabe target organization and the surrounding partisan forces,
“= NumeERICAL STR pegetween the Guat complex and the outside shock troops and specialists,
FORCES ao yey cence? and between shock troops and speeialists for each target and troops
ra yor COATRIW and specialists for another target, The entry of shock troops and
of whice we Comnr’ Specialists will be designed as nearly as possible to an infiltration
Consider @a 2veRT type entry rather than thet of regular forces placed along commnica-—
Moveat sae oresention routes. Techniques of partisan warfare will be applied to the
Indigenous Commander's prior planning and preparations in the best
manner to support more conventional military tactics. This technique
of combining two types of tactics has proven itself in military
history by reducing the number of personnel necessary, lessening
hog-tying logistical problems, and utilizing strike mobility,
surprise, and tactics making the opposition fight on your terms,
at your time and place for which you are better equipped, trained,
and mentally adapted to. By the same token infiltration entry by
small, light-—traveling units avoiding possible military traps by
the opposition will negate the enemy's utilization of material
they possess concerning us, the extent of which is unknown to us.
£

t
u

\
at
ay

« Ihe genous inguire as to what possible
reason could be behind the thought of a military campaign not
employing combat aircreft: The utility of bombing and strafing
tactics to neutralize any strong point is being shied away from
even as a psychological factor by the Group in view of the fact

that the very concept of our mvement, that of release of persons
from oppression, and ali of our actions mst allow this discontented
element to participate in the overthrow of oppression or at least
aid by sympathy or nonintervention. Our tactics should veer away
from terrorism of this faction and veer towards inviting their
participation. NOTk: Writer will employ non-rigidity in the above
in the presentation to allow for the following deviation:

lee

~~ gfHET ~ :

(1) It is admitted that there is a psychological vaiue
to the appearance of aircraft. If strafing and bombing air-
craft are made available by outside support Ale Lee bebe
to the Group ,that they can be utilized if the Indigenous Com-
mander's assurances of complete control of that support will
be maintainable by Group and Indigenous Commander during
operation to the point of not allowing one round to be fired
or one bomb to be dropped unless prior Group—Indigenous
Commander concurrance is pre-determined, Writer will call
upon disastrous personal experiences to point out possible
hazards of group air support even when air-ground liaison
teams and air force have been strenously trained and when
operating under best conditions /2}Writer will point out
Group's yet—unfirm initial planning on preparations for
reserve support under Plan Able or emergency support under
Plan Baker and Plan Charlie by Group air facilities.

5. Communications: Indigenous Commander may query the Gropp's
former claim to communications efficiency. The writer's position here
will be that of pointing out difficulties experienced in utilization
of varied radio trained tactal situations even of the comparitively
small enormity if encountered in inter-company raider situations
encountered in semi-conventional tactics. The proven reliability of
the technical equipment being proposed and the security efficiency

that can be maintained should aid in setting the basis of communications
plan.

6. logistical Support: The Indigenous ‘Commander will query methods
of getting material in the hands of tecipients. Here the writer wiil
outline basic conceptg of the logistical support plan as prepared in the
rough from which each) was composed. Without going into the exact
method of getting matérial 6 the staging site and without being dogmatic
on the Choggi system as being the only method, Flame throwers will be
disspelled by pointing out lack of portability, wrong psychological effect,
and availability. German bazookas will be mentioned as being sought.
Special equipment such as silenced rifles, survival kits, Napalm, shaped
charges, and canned grenades will be played up.

7. The entire basis of the writer's approach to this conferance
will be the realization that the Group must follow, both from their
groups and our groups standpoint and that side from the known opposition
tactics and precautionary measures, that we are coming up against and
are faced with the third factor of opposition's trained Communist Tacticians
in the field of security, stay behind, subversion, and intrigue which would
make our employment of straight military tactics, alone, an issue of doubt.
All of us involved mst over plan and over prepare and be prepared to
"drive the tack with a sledge hammer" in the event the sledge hammer turns
out to be a railroad spike,

«

: SebRET

8 In the event accord or mutual compromise is apparant at this
point the Indigenous Commander will be queried in order to initiate the

formation of such organizations we should start preparing specifications
on the following:

a, The name and biographical data on the person or persons ~
the Indigenous Commander considers to be the key man or men to be
nucleus of the organization within the garison. We should consider
a strong executive officer (probably to be chosen by the’ key man
himself if the Indigenous Commander considers feasible). We should
choose personalities for Partisan Leaders around which organizations
of the surrounding areas can be built. We should determine the
personalities most suited for residence radio operators for each
specific target. We should choose personalities for leaders of
sabotage teams and move them the latter part of March to the staging
area which has been selected for the particular area of interest
so that graduates of the present training program can be assigned
to instruct them. We shoufd pin down the air fields near by.tke
Staging areas to which material can be sent to the staging area.

The Indigenous Commander should ascertain at this time his ability
to operate secure landing at these airfields from the head of the
countries concerned, Similar to the arrangements for the last
Similar flight made by the Group. The Indigenous Commander should
inform the Group soonest on obtaining the answer to this query if
such answer is not available at this conference,

9. The Indigenous Commander will be acquainted with at this point,
if deemed feasible by writer, the proposed methods of initiating these
first steps and at this time can comment on feasibility at specific
instances. Contact of the selected key personality in each area of
resistance by one of the graduates of present training, which contact
to be instructional in nature, the secu ity of which contact we will
guarantee by the techniques of clandestine trade, which contact will
be limited to one man in whom the Indigenous Commander has confidence.
The reasoning here to be stressed is that the building of the new
organization should be comparitively cautions to prevent tne recent
disclosures to the enemy from contaminating the new organization,

This key figure will be instructed to work even within his garrison by

using one strong assistant to provide the implimentation of his organizing

efforts thereby preventing exposure of himself through too much activity.
e key figure will be instructed to organize within the garrison one

man to form the necessary organization to negate air facilities (i.e.

prevent opposition aircraft from entering the action); one man to form

the necessary organization responsible for cutting communications; one

man responsible for instructing and organizing special mission details

(assassination, destruction or seizure of materials and stock piles,

physical submission of garrison troops, etc.); one man as a courier

cutout with liaison with incoming resident radio operators: one man

for possible courier contact (emergency with Indigenous Commander).

In addition, personalities chosen to head area organizations in the

- surrounding area will be contacted by graduate trainees for instructional

purposes to acquaint the area raiders with harassment and retardation

tactics and organizational style. ile

—?

- ACTS §

wel:

‘het

DG
a Pe

{

4
ou

fry '

we

ET

10. Discussion on reason for compartmentalization of staging
training sites and specific locations wili be handled,

li. Once Indigenous Commander's assigumemt February is .determined,
he will be asked to present financial estimate for discussion,

312, It is the purpose of this conference to reach an understanding
with the Indigenous Commander and find personnel and geographical
requirements which will initiate a positive forward move in the military
field during his forthcoming trip to his home area.
