Nothing But the Facts on Ufos or Which Novosti Writer Do You Read? WitT H 2 Ar
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000015452, dated 2 March 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000015452).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Cae, a ee soe te Se Ae er ee a ten

Nothing Bit the Facts on UFOs

’
4
4
+
‘
H
Hl
i]
!
e
pn ee eee meres Antes

2
™ s
or
Which Novosti Writer Do You Read? :

*, o

-

Ll. Whether you believe in unidentified flying objects (UFOs) or not,
Novosti (APN -- the Soviet “unofficial” news agency) agrees with you. We
are forwarding attached reproductions of two articles which argue both
sides of the issue: Caer ee ee trae .

>
a. “Unidentified Flying Objects" by Felix Zigel, Doctor of
St Science (Technology), Assistant Professor,-Moscow Aviation Institute,

appearing in the February 1968-issue-of Soviet-Life: (counterpart to
USIA’s America) for which APN supplies all materials; and

>. "'Flying Saucers'? They're a Myth!" by Villen Lyustiberg,
APN Seience Coumentator, which originally eaeee ea the 16 February
1968 issue of Moskovsky Korisomolets,- end which APN-released in
English translation on 12 March 1068. :

The first article takes UFOs quite seriously; the second laughs them off
and even clains the U.S. publicizes them to divert people from its failures:: = 7 :-
and ageressions.

¥
4
|
\
|
|
|
!

> 2. It is not surprising that™ two- writers take ,opposing views on so
controversial a ie patie or that. one adds a Gollop of propaganda. It is
surprising to find any disagreement on any: subject_in Soviet media, :
especially in materials made availeble by the came agency _ to approximately
the same readership. The irony is obvious. Pee

ae TR LAN Arpt
: ; lave en heise
~ . ee tN AF a ae

Which Novosti Writer Bo You Read? :

”

L. Whether you believe in unidentified flying objects (UFOs) or now,
Novosti (APN -- the Soviet “unofficial” news agency) agrees with you. We
are forwarding attached reproductions of two articles which argue both
sides of the issue: . . : ;

+
a. “Unidentified Flying Objects" by Felix Zigel, Doctor of
- Science (Technology), Assistant Professor, Moscow Aviation Institute,

appearing ion the February 1968 issue of Soviet Life (counterpart to
USTIA’s America) for which APN supplies all materials; and

vo. "“'Flying Saucers'? They're a Myth!" by Villen Lyustiberg, i
APN Science Commentator, which originally appeared in the 16 February
1968 issue of Moskovsky Komsomolets, and which AFN released in ~
English translatzion on 12 March 1968.

The first article takes UFOs quite seriously; the second laughs them off
and even claims the U.S. publicizes them to divert people from its failures ~ BE
and ageressions.

»-

“7 2. It is not surprising that.two- writers teke .opposing views on so
controversial ea subject, or that one adds a dollop of propaganda. It is
surprising to find any disagreement on-any- subject in Soviet media,
especially in materials made available by the came merecy to approximate ly ae >

_the Same rea dership. The _irony is _ovvious.— 7 a ee i co 7

fn ae enema at

areas TR TAR arpeea,
: : idiocy yi haiede

. EArt AE mites Bet fGirsve

; | - ei i

ih 6 a ois

Wah ener ten nek

Shanta

Y .
= a u =
a se
4
3 Attachments
2 unclassified articles (para 1) ~
te So etich ae ga
2
ay e
. 2
ew Sale EERE SET ear

ee :
Tuesday, March 12. i-

"PLYING SAUCERS"? THEY'RE A MYTH.

Villen Lyustiverg; ARN Science Commantator

In the last 20 years pubdlicatio
of literature on "unidentified flying
objects” has advanced to one of the
first places in the world. ,This prot~
lem is dealt with by mumerous associa-
tions and clubvs.

Are these "flying saucers” just
= imagination or reality?. Thousands of
recorded statements by ¢ye-witnesses ——
seem to show that "there must be some-
thing in it". But let us try to Look
all these materials from a different
stand. So, as the convinced supporter
of the “saucer” theory say almost ever
time, you can draw your. own conclusion
while we give you. .

fo

“Pacts- Only"——

Kenneth Arnold, an American pilotj-is-the="godfather" of flying saucers. It.
he who noticed in 1947 nine shining discs flying in fornation at the speed of. about
3,000 km an hour.

The next encounter with saucers had a tragic outcome. In January 1948, an
immense flying saucer appeared over the Nox US Air Base, Pursuing it Captain
Thomes Manthell perished. The last thing he reported from an altitude of 9,000
metres was that he saw an object and was going to approach it.

This story found extensive response. Many considered it to be a stern warnig;
of unknown envoys from other planets to leave them alone. There was a great deal
of a talk about the mysterious death of the pilot. It-was received as undoubted
proof of the existence of mighty forces still unknown to us.

But the results of a thorough investigation by US authorities received much
publicity. The mysterious Neaucer™ proved to be nothing but a thin-walled
ie balloon made by US Navel Forces under the secret "Skyhawk Operation" pro

Such balloons could rise to an altitude of 30,000 metres. Meanwhile, Thomas
Manthell pursuing it, forgot that he had no oxygen apparatus on poard his craft.

We know of stories about encounters and even hand-to-hand fights with pilots
of craft landing from other planets. They were shot at, but without success.

A saucer out down a tree oa tne Amazon River shore and disappears? in *he
turbid stream. It was never recovered. Another saucer glided over the earth Like

an injured tird and | rost Crashed before the eyes of witnesses. But "heving spit
out” several pieces of metal, it levelled out its course and flew off, Delivered
to the police, the metal proved to be ordinary tin,

An abandoned Silvery dise was found in the deep roek-coal seams in Norwegian
coal mines on Spitzbergen. It wes pierced and marked by wicrometeor impacts and
bore all traces of having performed a leag space voyage. It was sent for analysis
to the Pentagon era disappeared there,

Nothing but a saucer put out of commission a high-voltage power transmission
line in 1965 and thus Plunged several large American cities into darkness for six
hours.

But the most thrilling masterpiece of this sort was probably the "Interview w:
& Man from Venus" published at the close of 1967 by the West German Stera magazine,
This materialized dlue-eved "superman", a version of Nietzsche's "blond beast",
proved to be @ secret service agent of the Pentagon. _He was 190-cm-tellj-spoke~
excellent English (it was English indeed!) ana could breathe freely in our atmos-

phere without any aevices. His modest fibre suitcase Conteined an unusual silvery

Suit, flexible like silk-and-so hard that a diamond drill broke off it.

The man from Venus said that he-cold-walk-freely_in such a suit over the sur-
face of the hottest Stars, ignoring all powerful gravitational fields.

Maybe these "facts" will do?
How Can They Be Studied? :

It is easier to ask this question, than to answer it. Yhese flying saucers -.
they are like Our Lady: they appear to those who believe in them. And they per. - ve
Sistently fail to shoy themselves to air. observation posts, neteorologists ands
astronomers, i.e, precisely to those who can give us accurate information and trust. _

worthy descriptions of a flying object.

Experinents that do not repeat themselves, or the chance appearance of «4
phenomenon always either handicap the possibility of investigation considerably or
exclude it altogether,

Nowhere in the world is there EVEN ONE trustworthy stereoscopic photograph
making it possible to trace from two points simultaneously the outlines of e solid
lying object Clearly. All photographs that exist have been made with single-lons
cameras and always leave a margin for doubt.

A series of such photographs amazingly resenoles a Straw hat with a black silk
ibboa, thrown inte the air. Others undoubtedly prove to be internegatives obtained
iron two combinea Slides, for instance, that of a landscape and that of a strangely
designed crart draw On white paper. Modern photographing techniques allow photo-
Braphs to be produced which no expert will ever prove to be counterfeit, They are

al. But they do not show strangers from Space; they show quite ordinary earthly
ects unexpectedly foreshortened += pots, pans, plastic toys, and the like.

Are there Photographs which evoke no doubts whatsoever? Yes, there are, They
always show shining objects of a circular or Oval shape with vague outlines. Most

en

likely these photographs show ball lightning. Incidentally, the nature of the lat
has not been fully elucidated yet either, due to the vagueness of the place and ti
of its formation. However, no one ever thougnt of ascribing a cosinie origin to it

Even with a superficial analysis, mysterious flares on clouds proved to be
reflections of slectria welding, warning lights of airplanes in the area of airpor
or distant summer lightning. And the Novenber 1967 “saucer" over Sofia proved to?
a high-altitude NATO reconnaissance balloon. ‘

Among the most serious works devoted to an investigation of the problen, there
are two which ought to be mentioned. One of them igs the book "Flying Saucers" by
Donald Menzel who explains almost all cases of their appearance by disturbances in
the Farth's or Sun's atmosphere. Our. planet_travels—in-the upper layers of the Sur
atmosphere where clots of high-temperature plasna are moving freely.

The other is a book by Frank Edwards, It is @ collection of statements, notes
and records of eye-witness testimony classified into several sections, True, Fdwar
often qualifies his source as a witness who did not wish to have nis name mentionea
but who may be fully trusted, or that the trustworthiness of the Witness is con-
firmed by numerous of his countrymen, but he cannot mentica his name so far for a
number of reasons. That's not very convincing, is it? ~--

For Whom Is_It Not a Myth?

They are those for whom science is a business.—Taking advantage of the lively
interest of people for everything that_is strange and unusual, numerous lecturers
in the West appear before audiences with reports atid stories, invite eye-witnesses——-—_--
to such Lectures, and demonstrate photographs and slides. Most of these lecturers -
are nothing but ordinary quacks. True, there aré people who are Sincerely convince:

in the truth of what they are talking about. They strive to draw the interest of 8d

the puodlic to certain phenomena but, we are sorry to say, there is more harm than
use in that.

The Americans Lesly and Adamski are the most outright frauds among them.
Vsing their "good frieidly relations" with Strangers from other plenets, the enter-
prising businessmen "visited" Mars, the Moon and Venus, learned from our cosmic
neighbvours to treat by Simple and accessible methods such diseases as cancer,
glaucoma, hypertension and others which afflict the human race. Their lectures,
motion-pictures, books and medical practice have brought then many hundred thousand
Goliars out of the pockets of trusting listeners and patierts already,

We may trace a clearly defined regularity in the appearance of large numbers’
of flying saucers. And, strange as it might seem, this regularity is closely
connected with earthly events. :

«

The first "cycle" of four years began in 1947. The number of saucers always
grows sharply on the eve of presidential elections in the USA. This is difficult
to explain. Maybe people on other Planets lay bets as to who will win in the next
eiections -- the republicans or the democrats. Perhaps, these saucers appear in
order to divert the voters! thoughts from the again non-fulfilled presidentia)
programme and promises to make tha oommtyy “sveet" and "prospering ' society.

There is another cycle. True, it is net determined by time. Saucers flooded
the earth's atmosphere in 1951, in the months when the American troops were waging
& ruthless, annihilating war against the Korean People's Denocratic Republic,

— ‘3 Sorinttcet Gir ease eke ais 7 < ii .

The next invasion of saucers was in
South Vietnam were quickly replaced by ha ;
latest arms and intending to rout the Nationzi-Liberation Front within two weeks
and when the President of the United States of America, without declaring war and
in violation the constitution of his own country, gave the order that the peaceful
population of North Vietnam be subjected to brutal bombings.

*
.
"
”
2a cums trntht temp RCRA et ett tone o

In short, when newspaper circulation drops, when readers get tired of economic:
and politics and when they are to be diverted fron "irrelevant" questions, the
Western businesscen resort to three reliable, “always fresh" sensations: Flying
Saucers, the Sea Serpent (sometimes it is substitued by the Loch Ness Lake monster).
and the Snow Man.

It is much ricer to read about nysterious eraft—from Venus than-to think of the->-
future, of the wegze freeze, of. growing prices or-unemployment. Statesmen in-imperie ;
ist countries resort to this “information” quite deliberately. For them the flying
saucers ere not 4 myth, but-a well-camouflaged means for misinforming the people.

And nothing but that.

_ (Moskovsky Komsomolets, February 16. In fw

THE END '

Firet the facter several striking and
relishie UFO observations: and then,

conclualora,
Firs. Account

ioe PLACE of olvematian is Narakh-
efan. the foul camp of o geophasical ev
pedition feum a Leningrad research institute.
The nearest populated lerality, Koktal is tt
niles awar, The time af observation te August
16, 1908, about DE PLM. focal tise.

*  Aecarding to Mocs nf Geology ond
Minerologs Nikolai chevanov, the cap
Thief. a atrange, tunvinaue beds suddenly ap-
‘peared mver the mountains on the eastern
vtlope oof the valley. Towae mosirg from
enarth te ssuth, and ite visihle diameter was
‘ane aud a half times longer then the Moon's.

+
t

A few seronde Later the body dicsppeared
behind a mountain top. reappeared and

headed southeast. keeping constant sperd and

height sfeve the Farih. The tivaterjous ob.
vjevt wae Teneshaped and bright, the edges

-apmewhat Jess luminous

theing

:eentcr,

JINUIDIEIN '

fe -

[i Pr F
4 J] iad

: oa |

‘
On Augost 2, 1967, at 210 PML Maseaw
line, while crossing the Norwegian Sra in a

_ westerly direction, Tzhersk sailors: witnessed
| this usual phenomenan, said the radio.

ae
i
?
i

grants 4
“There were three of ue in the cabia—

' Captain Markoy, - Senior Engineer branoy

and mmverlf, Sssovew ne" ron duty. ree

A A Y
ported a strange phenomen. 407 the ky. We
ran to the bridge and saw a ephere-tike

whitish spot moving southward.

“A few minutes later a bright: spot flared
up high in the sky, For a couple of seconds
it ruched headlong from weet fo ext at an
angle of 45 degrees to the Earth, getting much

; Suse : mil ; a ‘ .
larger, Suddenly it came to tap and with balsersations have beea documented in the

a play of bright rainbow colors tvellow pre-
sheninating® began threning off sparke and
became raveloped ina white shroud.

ee

“Onee again the sphecedike white nebula -

ry
ta biG
; y U it. | a
FEBRUARY 1968
By Felix Zigel
Oactoe of Sclance tTachnslogy) 7
Assletaont Professsr,
Mostaw Aviation taititvte .

topeva in halla minute. \ bright star of the
i Ret magnitude was moving at a corelant dis.
Stanre abead of the crescent.

(As it moved anay from thé obeervere, the
ereacent dwindled. turned inte a sinall die -

and then indanth disappesrad. is

The nivsterious abject was seen by 10 of
“the ststinn’s wientific workers. Tt was alo
obverted in Kictovadsk. According to Sa.
gapoy, the crescent: wae 12 miles

and it waa ce Tese than 500 feet arrose,
Optical Hlusion?

GAR,

Let us stop hese and draw some conclusiane.

Fien if alt the DFO evidence amoynted to
* oe taore than these four acceunts, it ise clear

'
b that the evideurs eviste, The fart of the matter,
pi. henever, that many Uhoveands ef anh

'
Spot 2a wears They come from dozens of

Senunteiee gad Virtually overr eerace of our

planet. ineloding the Sectic_and Antarctic,
The UFO phenomenon ie ton widespread and

began moving south.-The procedure wat Pee pepulaely accepted to be diumived tightly, -

than the |

i The body described an are in the shy and |
-3— Jn white miss onl. with ite white tail, began

tilisanpeared behind the mountains, leaving pe
i Ware. :

+ The untdentifed Mving object HUFOu was
abeersed ba eight scientific workers, mene
bere of the peophasiral etpeition,

Secaml Account

On July 26. 1965, Latvian astremeanes
Robert Vitelniek. Van Meldrrie and Kemer.

ally Vitelniek were studying nectilueent —

rhanle at an nbservation tation at Ogra.
WOR PM they neticet an unustall
bright star neving dowh ina weareh dite:
tion, Lacked at Uicouph binoculars with «
mogriGcation of eight diameters, the “etar™
tecohed iteel( inte a small, far pack. The
Irlessnpe thea disclosed the felloning i
credible picture.

To the heart of a leoeshaped diac, which
the asteoneniere ectimated te he haut 13
fret necoces, woe eleach evident a ahickened
yor, a seall ophere. Around the disc, at
distance of Deo dismrters. were Viren apheres
gesembling the one in the center, The «pheres
slewhy eetated arcu the dies as the entire
evatepr deninicbes in size, graduate leaving
the Eaeth
spheres began tw move asay frm the disc,
as if teceding in diflezent: ditectinnea, The

epheee in the renter glen deft ite place and
| en | eee Fee | ee; oe

sere U5 te 24 minutes hater the

prated four thaes, On the filth and Laat tine

the spot's behavior changed. It slopped mide

H
war, turned over and assumed the shape af an,

ope with the thicker end up. Then a powerful —:

white jet squirted from the Inver end. after
which the ‘egg’ grew pale. became enveloped

“ta heal southward.” =
AM this arange celedial activity was visible
for an hour and thea vanished inte thin ain,

Fourth Acrount

Not wae but several reports came from
J asteonomers-at the Mountaia Astenphasical
Sutien. USSR Avadean of Sciences, 12 miles

from Kislovadeh, Gauresus,

In July 2967 he tation ree cived letters
fram local newspaper. reporiing the fight af
aclrange tedlich cre-ceat acto the sky af
9:20 PM, en Jabs 17,

Un the very cack morning of July 18, 1967,
adconomer Hod. Patter, wha wae obeerving
the Moon at the Mountain Station. noticed a

_ strange begmation against-acelear stares shy
at 2S AML Mbwcon Une, A ahite cloud
eppeated in the northeast at an elevation of -
about 20 degrees, He diameize wae Deice ae
fong ae that of the Moon bot ite nove was
several Hines bees bright

The cloud itecll had a dense milks -white
color. with 9 cocred nurleus clearly divcera-
ible near ite nocthem end, The cloud ex
panded and grew pater, A few minutes Iver
the white riond diqpersed completely. but
the eeddish nucleus remained, Toward dave
Break at het ite nuthines and then MNeappeared.
Photographs shoning tte changes were tokeo.

AG SY BAM ea Naga RL 960) at the

il A growing number af eerious scientiste are
pot satisfied with explanations characterizing
Tale sightings as visual aberrations, It gare
: aithout saving that the phenanienon attracts,
aad sill unfortunatets continue ta, all sarte
«of poblicitvserkers, Bur we do net top using
ninnes because there are counterfeiters, The
tack of scienee is, preciely, the obligation to
distinguish beteen the falee cand: the true.
Thue if eciener conddere Mving caucess a
t hallucination. it tilt must explain the cause
i of this glohal parchie iilness, That may well
+ be ae difeult to establish as the irur nature”
_ of UFOs,

The wellknown American atrophssiciat

a
H
3
t
'

Damald Meazel cave that sing saucer are
optical phenomena in the Eacih’s atomaphers,
> Hevause of Peofecsoe Menuel’s erieatifie pres.
, Hpe the etplanatinn te penecalls accepted, Hor
it does not hold water. As coon as we ga oon
+ from thie generalization fo concrete inter

prelations af ronerete obeerations, it be-

cones eviderl thar UFOe will net reduce
* Weneehee te optical phrnamena of the imi.
. tage, rainbaw ne hala type. Tey the Menzel

explanation on the four accounts we cited

earlier, Nothing intelligible will-enierge, What

we wen to he dealing with here be a hind of
malin all unesplored,

The appearance of UFOs is abot alwase
areompanind bv a Riminescence af alr and
the formation of an atunepberie plasma, This
jact is tbe hacia for the “plasma” hy peateeds
of UFOs as accumulations of atnveepheric
plaava of the hall Hgttniog type. Hor this ev.
planation does not hold up cither. Mall Hght.
ning is alware a thunderstarin product, and

Firet the factor eeveral eirtking and
relishie UFO) aheervatinna; am them

conelishona.

Fhest Account

TRSHE PLACE of observation in Kazakh.
stan. the fieut canyp of o zrophysical ec
pedition {ran a Leningrad teeearch institute,
The nearest populated Jerality, Roktal is 1
tiles away. The time of oheereation is August
16, 1060, about PE PM. loral Ger,

; Aceording to M
Minerulogs Nikolai
‘chief, a airange, fuminnus body suddenly ap-
“peaced mer the mountahie on the eastern
valope of the valley. Tt wae mosing from
enatth te south, ait ite visihle diameter was

ose oof Geologs and
thevanoyv, the cain

‘ane aud a half times longer then the Meon’s.
'

A few sevonde fater the body disappeared
‘fehind oa mountain lop. reappeared and
headed eautheact. keeping constant sperd and
height above the Forth. The mysterious ob.
jot was leneshaped and bright. the edges

theing somentat leas luminous than the |

:tenice,

i The body described an ore in the chy and |
tdicanpeared behind the mountains, Jeaving no:
’

i trace,

, The unilentificd Qing object 1UFO) was
observed bv eight scientifir workers, mein.
bere of the peophveiral expeitition.

Seennl Aceaunt

Moa July 26. 1965. Latvian astrenemes-
Rotert: Vitelaick, Yon Melderia and Rener-
abla Vitdlniek were studying
tloade ata oobsenation dation at Ogra,
Aro BAL

bright star ovning sloch ina westerh direv-

thes noticed ain sacusnalfy

Gon, Locked at theough Minorulars with
magnification of eight diameters, The “star”
traded iterlf inte o amall flat eperk. The
tele npe then dWstdoeed the following in.
agedible pic fare,

To the heart of a beaeshapel ise, which
the rdoomemers etimated te be shout 125
feet arenes, woe clearly evident a thickened

pant, a canal ophere. Around the die, at a 2

distance of two disoieters, were Miser spheres
toormbling the one in the center, The spheres
steak cetated around the die as the entire
svatent diminiched in cize, pradually leaving
the Facth Some U3 te 20 aninutes ater the
spheres hegen te mene away feng the disc,
ae if cecediog in different: dirertioas,
tieved away, Finally at tO PAL all three
shining emershd green bodies were aa far

away thot the astronemere lot eight ef them. —-
This steange picture was observed in the

nerthwcdern pan ef the do at aboot
degeree shove the horjion, The attroncnetrs
estimatal that the enigmatic abjects were
akeut (2) miles above phe Parth.

Third Account

N long tadingram atrived at the athce of
the magazine Smeaa, for which U hak weittes
aa article on UFOs. fe wae sent he Fiest Mate
Baaharhin on behalf ef the eres of the Sevciet
ship dsheark,

needle ent

Oo Avge 2. 1967 at Veto PM. Mosca.
tine, while crossing the Norwegian Sra in a
westerly direction, dshersh sailors witreued

“this unueuel phenomenon, said the radio.
+ gram: ;
i “Thete were three of us in the eubin
Captain Markov. Senior Engineer Wanov
and mvcell, Svan, n>

a Foon dat. re
ported a strange phenomen. 3 on the sky. We
ran to the bridge and saw a sptiere-tike

* whitish spot moving southward.

- “A few intnutes tater a bright spot Mared

‘up high in the sky. For a couple of seconds

Gt rushed beadbing from west to east at an

» angle of B53 degrers to the Earth, getting rch |

“Aarper. Sudilents it came to a stop and with

a play of bright caintew colors tyellow pre:

‘ haninating! began throwing off sparke and
lecame enveloped in a white shroud. |

“Once again the spheredike white nebula -

began maving south. The procedure was ret
peated four times, On the Ath and tat time -
the apot’s behavior changed, Ut stopped mid: |

may. turned over and seumed the shape ofan,

‘egg with the thicker end up. Then 6 pawerlul
white jet squirted from the lower end. after

which the ‘egg’ prem palechecanie enveloped

fy white nist ost. with ite white tail, began
“Qo head svuthw ard.”

All this atrangs coleatial activity wae siail
for an hour and then vanished inte thin air.

Fourth Account ~~ > 7

Natoone bat ceveral reports came fram
astronomers-at the Meuntain Adeophscical
Station. USSR Aeadeany of Sciences, 12 miles

feom Kislovadck, Cauracus.
fn July LOGE the station ree chved letters
from local aew spapers reporting the fight of
a strange reddish creceat ocrove the ehs at
9:20 P Moon July 72
Un the vers cach ninening of Jub_1B. 1962

a

Nes
F

‘first magnitude wae rieving st a canctant Wa.
‘tance ahead of the crescent.

§ As it waned anay from the obcervers. the
creemnt dwindled. tured inte a anall die
and then instantly disappeared,

The mistrrious nbject was seen by 10 of
the station's eientifie workers, Ho was also
ofeived in Kidevodsk, According to Sa-
12 miles

and it was ce dese than 500 feet across,

Optical Hiwian?

r

ganov, the cresent wae away,

t

Let us slop here and dram some conclusions.

Frew if all the UFO, evidence amopnted to
na nose than theee fue acconnte, it os clear

that the evidence exiqe, The Cart of the matics,
ie, however, that pany theuands ef euch
ubserations have been documented in the
pa 20 veare, Thes cone frou deans of
countries and virtually everx corner of our
planet. including the Arctic sal Antarctic,
The UFO phenemenon is tin widcepread and
pepulerly arcepterd to be dismieed fagith,.

i. A grouing number af eerious sclentiste are
Y pot caticfied with explinationa characterizing
toghe sightings as visual aberrationan. Tt: gure

and sill unfortunately continue te, all ecote
of publivity-seckers. But we do net dap using
moner- because there are counterfeiters, The
tack of scleace is. precisrls. the obligation to
distinguish berveea the fale and the true.
Thus, if scienre considers Mving saucers a
hal urination. iti must etplain the eau
Piaf thie plobat pach: idee That may well
Phe ss diffiral to establich as the irue nature’

ce em in Ree

| of LO,

The wellknown American astrophysicier
* Pons Menzel ave Ghat flying ssacere ore
- onptical phenonvas in the Escih’s atinephere,
Because af Profesor Meazel's srisatifie pres

; Uge the explanation ie prarrall accepted, Von

Pit dues not hahl water, We soon as we ga on

astrsnamer HE Potter, who wae oheerving
the Maas at the Msuntain Station. noticed a
Maange formation against a elvan stare: sky
at 2:30 AM. Mewown tine, A white cloud
appeated in the northeast at an elevation of
shout 20. degrees, Ite diasuriers wae wire ae
tong ex thateof the Moon bot ite nove was
several tines less bright, y ;

ifrow whis generalination to concrete inter.
prelations af concrete observations, it be.
enivee evident thar UFOe will
“heneelyee te optical phenomena of the mi-
tage. teintaw or hala pe, Tre the Menzel
e\plnation on ibe four arcounte we. cited -
earlier, Nothing intelligible will emerge, What
we seein to be dealing with here fe a kind of

net reduce

The
ephete in the center aba left ite place and —-—

The clo Well hale dense miliy-white

color. with a cos-red nucleus clearly discern.
thle near ite. noahern. end, The_cloud_ ete
pandel and gies paler. A few minutes Inter,

the white Tinnd “diqaersed camipletely.- but ~~

the reddish rusteas regained, Toward das.

Photngraphe shoning its changes were ken,

Ar Soke PAL ca Vugad i. 2067) at the
same—Mountain Sation adranemee Naatoli
Saraner aleesved an unfamiliar fing objert.
ft was shaped Hike an ammetzical crescent.
with ite remes cide luraed in the direction of
ite momvementoNarrens faintly luminous ribs
bone receabling the eandensation trail of a
jv plone fothowed tehind the harne of the
trewent, [te diameter wae Tanthirds that of
the Veen. and it wae net ae bright, Wo vas
selluw with a radbhch tinge.

ccaccompanicd by a Rintinescence of ait and

“vealits eolt unesplorad
The sppeacance of UFOs is ahnost alwave

the fornatinn of an ataisepherie plaama, This
jact is the deasie for the “plasina” hy petheab
wf UFO. as serunulations of ateoepherie

Lreat it fost ite wutlings and then ilisappeared,—_Plastoa of the ball Lightning type, [ut this ex.

planation dors not hobl up either, Hall light.
ning iv alwave a thunderstorm product. and
the appearance of ERO. hae na relation to
weather, Mall fighting diameters av a pule
run four ta fie tiehes, ne Jargers the disap
Mere of Suing dive are tene and even hun
diets of finwe Dat size, The lehasinr of
{ TOs. their shapes and other pleciral prop
erties ate quite differeot frou what we hee
of tall lightning. ‘ .
“ Saucers anil Walle
Ta Rnd a clus te the nature of [Pt he, we

The objet wus fiving herisentalh jn_the mus} stu all the reports on Uheee cunpriing

northern part of the sky, from weet to eat,
al about D3 degrees above the hozisea. Wore
teed the didamee liom Ursa Major ta Gis

andl tammy mind. reat objste Only a eien
Ue analvsis will gevcal the truth. What i.
however, clear elreads ie that LEQ) phenom

without sasing that the pheanmienon altracta—— —-

enen con be abjectively analverd and classi.
fel, The UFO clacsifiration adepaed ba fee.
rigs bnerstipatere te alse canfirnied ta Sinia
olergers,

ft. das. uben Karth or
planes, CPOs appear ne bright livre with @
wnetallie Hinge, Neditant Profeaor Viuachedas
Jolt observed ooh a Shing exures be PGT,
alene Hobigose, front a TE-DOD aireraft mink.
ing 2 hetukel ght The huge Hestgha metal
dia did unitee the liners beth, made a turn
gel ad eon distance tusk @ coure paralicl
wlth the aiscentt. \ bulging rare pecembling
aeshin enuldl be sera ins the heart of the dis.

asdecers od foo

lier Gsing ahogeide the plane for several
operatuls, Ho onenved abripais aint Wisapprared.

A similar abject wae obeerved by peodetic
astronamer Leudnsla Teekhanavich In the
summer af 1963 nrar Solhumi. Ceucasus.
The UFO made g anift maneuver aver the aca,
then headed for the moauntainy. The setran-
emer wae, hawetee, able ta eve thal the cen-
tral protruding part of the die had holes
which seemed ta be Bit frou the inside.

UFO movements ore peculiar, Sametime
ther hover nver the earth for tens af minutes,
la Aight thes can develop incredible sperds
and acrvferations.

Ap: on the evening ef June 1, 19,
en the eutkite of Baliga a team nf peo
phreiide Prone the baditate of OM and Gat

badustes. Vedpagial. ta Tn VooG. Keefe. :

ndiest acreblich objet nraving across the
shy. Uwae chaped Tike a wall dive, —_—

Sunkledh the bey began te fall enifth
gdong ao heliral trajetors. ie pedlich color
cohanging te bright whitebhie, Then there was
a owt af flare. aot instead of the frends 5
“frightblue mount oud appeared. Th quirkls
spread ent and sortied away,

Depemting un the ciewing angle. fring
discs fork tattenal ee cigarshaped ar epheri-
ral, In same cere a TRO appears as
crescent, taraing inte a div before your
mea

The belief that UFOS ate real is also bearce
wat ba the fact that ther enigmatic aby is
ate net only vieihie te thr naked coe, bot
Wave dicinrt imoges on plotearaphic ploie
and are rennet by each impartial “wit-
neers” as radar screens.

Nin Farce Majer Moitubo. cate night mis
een aleve the Odecsa Region an April 4
10h, watienst on the srera CC his plaoe’s
telar astrnge object abi was alsa apotted
be greunthaeed cade onite, Within 1 min.
ayes fhe oljedt dhrpped feany AP te BY miles,
in the weve quarter of an hour te 13 oles,
and in the nest Tt aaites to UL miles, The
£80 enaine! uni beonfiel.

Maneiser and Pureult
Vie aclklnenn Soviet pilot chief navigator

af Soviet polar aviation Vatentia Mbarates.”

deutihes one ef his en nuntere with Aying
eHincas

cla 1 engaged in ateategic we teenth
naissance ina VCD plane in the area of Cope
feaep Geewilsndt, we deppad deen rem
the aleuds be aie erather aad avkleahy nem
thd aw unknown fies coll aeaing on eur
pereik garaltet tor come cater, by Pedal ven
www hy the a hage prob ecdart |

as th ur sha, We spotted nes aerials, super

Jolow ire. winge op poheles on That elise,
Nie did we cee an ovhaned paces or condenses.
fies teal, Fy flew at what ceenied be ve an
tripree i fo ape” -

i No Peejudires

-* Patil escenth na wientific tudy af UFOs

has fern male in the Soviet Union. Mere
shan that, the prevalling and. tn my opinion,

‘qitaken View was thar UFOO ate ceinmen ~

optical phoneineas in the Barth's praephere.
There was ne eallection of LEO af erations,

and the peneral iupression wae that fixing —

eawere are Lontasie, The sitnatim now is
changitg.

fa 10
USS8 Aeadeins af Sciences is acheduled to
bring yt oa beech tiled Populated Outer
Space, aliind by Veademician Derie Renstan:
linn. View President of the USSR Nada
af Sileites, The distingoi-hed Soviet and
Cacigo comtributars imftudes Acadeiniians

Vietor Ambarteumsan, Alexander Oparin, .

Vevander Dnshevetky. Andrei Kolinngorov:
Cartespe nding Meniher:

“en of Scenes Vasili Kuprevich, Mevaniier -

‘ 4
the Naula Pulidiing Hane ef the —-

‘af the USS Arad. the pad te devades, Thies is nat

Vedogdin, Yord SPilevshas and eminent fore.

“vign swientiste Melvin Calvin. Wiltiom Pick-
MUS AL

‘ering Prank Solisburs Norman

Pirie, Bernard Lovell eGreat Meitsine. Hane:
* Frewlenthal tNetherlands+, Giuseppe Piccardi -

sTialy) and many others,

The anthebige will have a apectal aration |

salvated te the t fo press th ceoteibu.

‘tiens from Amerinan acientiste Joseph Hneh. *

James VMieDonalh Jack Vatlo. and Frank
Salidvurs, articles by Soviet writere and PEO

sdeetvathate mide in the Soviet Unians*

Soviet observation. of UFOs Tike those F.

sited carher, were sed taken froin a sysiematic
wQbection of information of thie kinds the
erie aponbineine fesponaes fa mr arlicle in

Saiena, This facts orrant. the éanclusien that

there have been mans andes LEO cheers ations
in the ESSER We have alirads telkewted sone -
of anil

dhoretie weltcbe umented — reports

cerautits,

spature PLEO. G0 tenes ef bailar pheno.

tea. Judging bs other suiprices. noture fas
seene dn etore for us bete feo, and we anid be
teady fer perhaps a radial Teeacreouent of
values.”

The ha path sis thar UFO. eriginate in
ther worlds, that they are Asing eral frem
plunets ether than Earth, merrite the mint
ser bare eX eiiirial hives,

OLecrvations show Har UbOhs behave “sen.
SIA Inv grenp fetination flight they mrain-
Lain a patiern, Thee are intest eficn epratrdl
Vines airfields atemiv stations and ether ver

i
!
t
H
|
{
‘
t
'
i

Lnew enginerting in-tolltene- On eacesintet-
Ying aircraft. tties always maneuver sa as to
axed direct contact, Vo censiderabe Bar ef
Whose seeminighs intelligent ations gives the
bapressben What POs are bivestipating, per-
haps eusn goennsitering.

- Cured emurph, the number of CFO ots

servations inermases as Mare apgrnacbes the

Farth, f. shat pure eaimblene?
Seow people think that UFOW have ay
- peared in the Earth's atienphere enty during

The UNO) phenomencn has Leen obeennd
thought the histery of mankind. There are
speitierval aod ancient reporis steikingh eles}.
“Yar te ours, -

Anong (he earlicn UFO reportg ae an ei.
‘ample, may be the welldecimental chen a-
ethene of a “Usrge cower” be UD and a

+ Mp essbon of Ee tehe” in POPE These geperts

OL a anal invetigation,

te Vag 1967 a epansoring proup of tien. —.

Nias, the military. writers and public heures:

fuet Ie Comm an unnfliciat body whee purpose —

a woul be te conduct a preliminan ~rn-
he invatigation of UFOS Thase pres ine
calidad Paofaace Peincich Eudwip: Doctors -
ed Nedenee Niketad Zico and for Be-torhes-
Lala chief navigater of Saviet polar aviation +

varea, Leni Reine, Georgi Uper ant Georpi-
SYrvaflia: teier Hera of the Soviet Union -
‘ Crigert Sinko, Master af Nience Cenpineet.
Wess Hegre. ef the Soviet Unien dorent
VeRatcring Ryaleva and Natalia Kites.
i The erganization, set uy Oebsber VG, is
~ eal the PEO Setien of the AP pion Coe |
peqguths Committee, with headquarters at
“the Central Hewe nf Viatien and Ceenin-
 pautire is Meeeon se Vir Fone Majer General
Peedi Stevan nas elated chains al
the ser Gen,
There uf ne whet are parti ipating in Wie
new ard ewiting undertiling have as ain-

jee es ee

The awet remakaile CED phencinenon i»
the farses "Tunpicks neteetite.” In eceent
apace Soniet aclentiate have established that
he Tunge-ke evptosinn had vers paraineter
efan air nuclear Maat. The USSR deademy
+ af Sciences Keporte Vitume TL Now dD and
4 3 U0Gee have studies be Alevei Zoku ta
{ perte that the Tungeks beady could meat De a
ticteurile an a comet,
2 bw the summer of 100 the Joint Institute
: ef Nuckar Reearch at Dubna puldi-hal a
- study ba Viadisuir Mekhaba, abe romeludes
that the Tungu-ky Blas belt ennsiterabte re
sidual radinactivity, Finally. ae revently as
14. after analvaing the aun total of elueria
Ltions on the Tunguehs fads ‘s flight. this
: writer showal that before the Mast the Tun
ppehy bad deeriled in the almoyphere
i hreniendogs ate of alewt 373 utiles in event
} Fin azimutht, that is. carcial out a maneuvers,
to All these new results warrant the concladion -

Valentine Ukkurates: Generals Prrfish Stel © Gat the Tungucky beady sceme te have Leen

an_artifirial Maing craft fre pome other
planet.
Shoubt thie be finally confirineat ba inves
“tigations nes in progress, the alpnific aoe af
the Tungasks disaster would be inestimable,
But phis. invideatalls, will pes new: prole -

Joins, TE we are indeed being slulied In

“erestures Prom other plaots. what fe “their
perpen? Wha are thes so stufiemiy avnid-
jog anv dire Ceontat? Ts thei enseialility
the paul efiae Niel a ine nl devdopeurnt
that thes starts ns from that “height” just gs
we bok spn and stinks ante® O37 fe there sd) =

othe pos hilin: ef connnen vrlevstanding sim

Lithens progeaie of work abroad, The bretsiep wer are ean in the caine Univerer and obey

ah ote toeem af rebate

Ue eome Lane ed fature?

the ease. _

Afier Ching sbsngside the plane Jor several
eperaufe, Ht netvcd abruptly acd disappeared,

A similar abject was oleerved by prodetic
astronomer Leudsila Terkhsausich In the
eurmmer af 1965 near’ Sukhumt. Ceueares,
The URO made 9 enilr maneuver ae the sca,
then headed (ar the moanatains. The asteon-
ener was, however, ably te eve that the cen-
tial protruding part af the dix had holes
which sensed to be Ht Leen the inside.

UFO asnvements ore peculiar. Sometimes
ther hover over the earth for tens ef minutes.
ta fight thes ean develop inceedible speed»
and acerictations.

Ye AS cat the evening of June 95, Va,
nn the eotkirte of Fulidta sg teanr nf gene

plisiciste fron the factions of OOD and Cae

wheter, Velgepads bed ta VG, Riata.
diced aoreblish objet moving across the
sha. Howae chap ike a emall dive.

Sublads the boils began to fall awifils
‘gling os helical trajeeters, ile rehdich esdor
thauging ta bright white-lMue, Then there wae
post af fare. ond instead of the beady 6
“fight-bdse round cloud appeared. TW opaiclls
spread ent and wrlted owas,

Depewting on the viewing angle. fing
dies Jock fattened oe cigarshaped or spheri-
ral, Tn seme caves a EEO appears as a
sreeetit, Uurning inte a disc before sent
eves,

The belief dat UFOs are real je ako borne
wor be the fact that ther enigmatic olsjats
ate ned only stelle to tee naked eve. haut
Ieave dlistinet images on photepraphie plein
ant ar revnted ba cach inganial “eit
neers as talar screens,

Ur Farce Major Roidibon. sat a night mie
sien aleae the Qdeaca Pegine on April 4.

10th, niatierd on the scroru Cf hie plane's -

radar a strange object shih was ales epotted
Ie prounthased radar unite, Within 13 min
pire the objet diapped frany VP to Hi miles,
in the weal quarter ef sx heur te PS miles
aad in the neve Ut ininutes to TF tiilee, The
CEO remained unidbentificl

Moanraver and Porelt

The wrth lion a Sovtet pilot chiel navigator ~~~
of Soviet yedar aviation Valentin Abarat”

alewribes one of hie ene vunters with fying
oliecet

“En Pte engaped in ateategic ier pero
nsjeame ina TCLS plane in the ara of Cae
fear rernlauds, ne dipped denn trem
the ebiteds de faire wrattet and stwblents pee
Oat ag anknown Aviog arf meving on eur
peebib parallel to eur conte. ft beded very
woul Hhe a dorge gearkerbaed bone with
wate. paloting edgea VW Girt we tonght it
was an Vetican aierafl ef an niknewn de.
pr wel ince we lid net wand be entsainie:
it we went inte the eheud. agsin. Ufier we had
flown Bee Kt roinutes teeard Mean Defined, the
ahead cevee ented abruptts. it skared alewd
andien car porbih ee can eee acsin that
came unkuewn craft, Malling ny eur unin ta
sew Watebee quarters, we changed cus erupt
sheapthy aad began the appre bh eeaene at
inkeming ear baer at Viwkerma of the
sre see BES When we charged ant enure, the
etiam Ging muchtne Bethe ed calt and
weed porstkt al out ayer

~Vhier Pte Plesinutes of hip htihe alosan
seal charph sleeend He tre, qed ahead
ef ws pred quae aah bh watl be bic anc sanl

“ein af Sciences Vadli Kuprevich, Abrvander |

changing. ’ -

Ya 1968 the Nauka Publidring Howe of the
USSE Asada af Selenees be hedubed to
bring cut bee titled Populated Outer
Space, olited bv Ve alemictan Perje Kanstan-
finay, Vier Peesideat of the USSR Acadenn
fo Suenos. The distinguished Soviet and
feacign centeibutora imlude: Aeademivians

Vietos  Anabarteyeian. Alexander Oparin. 2

Vesander bushenetha. Andeet Kolinegoray:
Corsespe nding Members of the USER Acad-

Vedlipdin, Posid SiMlavekes and eminent for-
‘viga scientists Mehin Calvin, Willison Pick-

‘ering.
Pirie, Bernard Lovell ¢Great Britaint, Mane -
Freudenthal tNetherlonds), Giuseppe Piceardi -

Frank Salisbury 1US.A0. Norman

Stalve and mans others.

The anthelogs will have a special eectien |

edented te the (FO) prebtesn, with cootribu.

cllwlal Prfescr Urinrich Ludwig: Deetors

of Seaee Nidal Zdrav and Por Be-turhes~
Late: biel navigotalel Sevier polar aviation +
Valentine Whurater: Generale Perfiri Stub:

> Zrvathing twice Were of the Soviet Union -

 pautice in Masea, Vir Fore Major General

Potire Stelvarey owas elated chaienun of

liens from Vere an erientioe Joseph Uvnek. ”

James Ve Donald Jick Valles. and) Frank
Nalichura. articles fy Soviet writers ant LEO

ncaa mate in the Suviet Union. >

Soniet nfeersations ef UFOs, Ske those Pp.

vital eartieg. were not taken from a susiematir
edia tien of dnformoation ef thie kind: thes

Bete Apsaitaneius Pepunars fo my article in

Smeng, This lat wartaint. the eonefusda that :

there have been mam noce LEO obsers ations

io the ESSE. We have already cafierted some -
thease - of wellubaumented reports and

me eerutit~.

Yn May 1065 a sponsoring proup of sci
lite, the militars, writers and public figures:
tnet tea form an unoflirial body whine purpee
it weuhl be te conduct a prelininary scien
Vite invatigaliog ef UPORD Vhase pre-cnt ine

see oe

nt ret

yaa; Leonid Meine, Geargi Uger and Geotci

Origedt Sivbuas Mader of Nene tenginect-
fnges Hereee- af the Soviet Uninn dhvent

The ntgenizatian, sV ap) Qetober VT. is
- allel the UFO Sa tien of the MEV anion Ga.”

te mouths _Comuitice aith headquarters al

ing aineealy, thes always manecuser so as tn
axehd direet contact, \icenshlersble fia ef
thee sermingh jutellipent: actions gives the
hupresivn Unat CEOs ace investigating. pot:

haps evra recenneitering. .

Curkah enough. the nunher af UFO ol.
wcuvations imeaeaece ga Mare apptee bee the
Earth, t that pure esiuritenr?

Some pergie think that UFO. have ap

peared in the Hart's atuwephere enty during

the pat twa devades, Thisda nat the ease.
The UFO) phenomenon has bern observed
Hhroupheant the history of mackind, There are

medieval and ancient seperis strikingh eiel

lar ta eure. .
Among the earties CBO report. as an en.

‘ample, mas be the wellabavmental obs.
ofteme of a “large sawee” ty EQ and oe
. Spradon of botides” in VTA These report
1 atl) am att inv etigation, j

The nant resarlalde EEO phesemencn te ——-—_-—

the fanenas “Tungucks peecteerite.” In revent

spate Sait wientite have estalticbel thay

the Tunzusks evplaien had every parameter

_vfian aie nn Vear Maat. The PXSR Aeademy~
of Sciences Keports Vebsnwe 172 Now band

3. VaOTe have stuties be Alevct Abas te.

pte that the Tungale beady couhd ef bee

liclecrile ar a permed.
In the summer of PGT the Joint Institute

: of Nockag Reranch at Duley poldished
atudy by Viadinir Mekbaba, whe concludes

that the Tungu-Av- Baad belt eonsiferahte re

sidual radioactivity. Final. ae recently as

UHH, afies anaivaing the sunt total of olsen a ,

tions on the Tongoshi beds’s: flight this”

ariter showed that before the Mat the Tun-
1

wp pus fends described in the atmasphere a

vin arimuth?, that bs. carrinl ect a maneuver,
oo AY these new resulte warrant the contlgsion

that the Tungushs beds seems fo have been,

an artificial Maing eealt fren pome cther

plana,
Shault this be finally confirinet In inves.

7 tigations naw in proptess the signifi anee of
he Bungwebks dieacter would be toestinatbe,

ul this, ineientally, will pase new prob

_Fems. Uf we are inteed Ieing ehtieds fy

ereatares from ollier planets. what be their

the Cateal Hewe of Uiatien and Conia

the section, Boe a F
These of ae whet are pantie ipating tn this

pew aml) eviting undeitabing have an ain

Dithen. program ef werk alead The hers”

will Ge tee erpanioe the collation of mloble
infer natien on CRO, That will be dhne at
the euteeg by the ecicting essen ef ate
pombal neteorelogical and peophy sie al els

mervatories, satelite and apas eroeheg tering
stathens and the eae installstion: af chitian

airpetts and the fede artrcrebog al wsibe.
AW these eapanisathons ean ale CFO ob
eavathas sith equipment nas availble,

Tn the elesipn stage ate cpetial dev es foe
pletguaphing LEDS sod reveding Uhe eadis-
tee and magnet di-turhanre whrh ths
wu be gegen le fa.

Cyests fron Onher Warkle?

We reannded cbeenostions sill wave te

thal Bypether. Thee hy prahewee ehauld

ahd. in en opine. atiemyt ts evplala the —-

purpose? Wa ate thes at sluficgele ayaid.
jog any irs tenntat? Pe theig anweiabitits

; the tuk rf en Nigh anna Gevelopaurnl

that thes eto me from that Theighn™ port po
we hak upon and dads ante? Oe is these etd}

> othe proibilits ef cannmen werletotanding slime

wevare bea in the caine Univer and oles.
the same Lane of nature?
Yes, there will be rians quectinns, Lat a’)

“are dn Whe dictant future, Oar etady af EOS

nas fad te quite different cone fasinne and
present maotind sith quite diflerent prede
bears.

The feqettont thing now ie Par us te din
card ana preenerived neti alent PPOs |
ae) te sapanize naa ghdal ocale a calm,
senition- fier amd arity wieatific stety of
this strange gorenmncren, The sebjped- and
aime af the investigation are se serious that

Hey fectily any oflerte, fe poe witheuut saving
that international eneyerpten b vital

& tremendous are of aleut 3T3 utiles ie entent -_-.
