Conditions and Trends in the Middle East Affecting US Security
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119704, dated 4 January 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119704).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COPY NO. cb
FOR THE CHIEF,
ACQUISITION & DISTRIBUTION DIVISION
DEPT.OF STATE

Pema pegs

NATIONAL. INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

CONDITIONS AND TRENDS IN THE
MIDDLE EAST AFFECTING US SECURITY

Published 15 January 1953

The following member organizations of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intelli-
gence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.

All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
concurred in this estimate on 8 January 1953.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

Approvet
“97

»

- ~

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipips
ated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the regipient’s ,
require the information for the performance of their official gu
jon elsewhere in the department to other offices which-fequire the in-
formation for the :
a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intélligence, for the Depart-
ment of State ;

b

c —

d. Director of Intelligence, USA, forthe Department of the Air Force

e. Deputy Director for InteHigence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

f. Director of Intelligefice, AEC, for the Atomic nergy Commission

g Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau f Investigation -

h cron any other De-

. Assistant to fke

_ AssistaptDirector for Collection and Dissemination,
arifient or Agency . ‘

riiis copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accord with

appljedble security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
pafigement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

WARNING
Sis material contains information affe
the Nattonal_ Defense of Up

the :
within the me&ning_of the~éspionage laws,

Title 18, USC, ¢ and 794, the trans-
mission elation of which It esg manner
‘unauthorized person is prohibited by tex

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State

Department of Defense

National Security Resources Board
Mutual Security Agency
Psychological Strategy Board
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

1. In addition to its objective of contrib-
uting to stability in the Middle East, the
West has a specific and basic concern
with the extensive oil resources and stra-
tegic location of the area. Denial of
these assets to the West would constitute
a serious setback to it in the struggle
with the Soviet Bloc, even if the area did
not come directly under Communist
control. ;

2. Patterns of authority are being under-
mined by rising discontent among nearly
all social groups. This discontent is
finding expression in growing demands
for elimination of foreign influence and
for internal social, economic, and politi-
cal reforms.

3. Attainment of stability is obstructed
by the ineffectiveness of Middle Eastern
governmental and political institutions,

*This estimate deals with Iran, Iraq, Syria, Leba-

non, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Egypt, and
the principalities of the Arabian peninsula.
Conditions in Turkey and Israel, and their rela-
tions with the West and the Soviet Bloc, differ
in so many respects from those in the rest of
the Middle East that they will be treated only
insofar as they affect developments in the rest
of the area.

CONDITIONS AND TRENDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST?
AFFECTING US SECURITY

SECRET

THE PROBLEM

To identify the major forces and trends in the area, to assess their origin, rela-
tive strength, and probable development, and to estimate their effect on the West-
ern and Soviet positions in the area, in the absence of general war.

CONCLUSIONS

by inadequate development of economic
resources, by Arab-Israeli hostility, and
by inter-Arab rivalries.

4. The USSR will continue to encourage
disorder and anti-Westernism and to ex-
ploit the substantial opportunities for
creating friction among states of the
area, between them and the West, and
among the Western Powers. Soviet
rulers may estimate that the area can be
effectively denied to the West without
being brought under direct Communist
control and without forcing the USSR
prematurely to accept full responsibility
for supporting Communist regimes in the
area.

5. Local Communist parties, except pos-
sibly in Iran, are not likely to develop
the strength to seize and maintain con-
trol of Middle Eastern governments dur-
ing the next few years. However, Com-
munist influence will probably grow, the
principal danger being that without
formally assuming control Communists
will exercise an increasing influence on
non-Communist governments.

Ie

—826R57—

6. However, except for Iran, Middle
Eastern states do not feel immediately
threatened by the USSR and they fear
that acceptance of Western support
would lead to Western domination. In
particular, the acceptance of US influ-
ence is seriously hampered by the Arab
conviction that the US is responsible for
maintaining the state of Israel, and by
US association with the former colonial
powers — the UK and France.

7. Although we do not believe that a
breakdown of authority is imminent, ex-
cept possibly in Iran, the over-all situa-

tion with respect to stability is deteri-
orating.

8. In the foregoing circumstances, gov-
ernments will probably rely increasingly
on their armed forces to retain power.
Although such authoritarian regimes
offer hope of arresting the drift toward
disorder, they will be beset by many in-
ternal problems. They will also have to
find a solution to the problem of estab-
lishing relations with the Western Pow-
ers which will be acceptable to nation-
alist aspirations at home, but which will
permit them to obtain Western military
and economic aid and advice.

DISCUSSION

Introduction

9. In addition to its objective of contributing
to stability in the Middle East, the West has
a specific and basic concern with the exten-
sive oil resources and strategic location of the
area. Denial of these assets to the West
would constitute a serious setback to it in
the struggle with the Soviet Bloc, even if
the area did not come directly under Com-
munist control.

10. The Middle Eastern states do not have
the strength to stand alone in the modern
world or the capacity to cope with their own
internal problems. In past years, the pres-
ence of British and French power in the area
contributed to stability, even though it also
provided a focal point for nationalist opposi-
tion. Ineffective governments and inade-
quately developed resources still make out-
side support. essential to Middle Eastern
stability. Yet these states, jealous of their
independence, fear that acceptance of West-
ern support would lead to Western domina-
tion. The question, therefore, is whether a
new relationship can be established between
the Middle Eastern states and the West which
will on the one hand mollify Middle East
suspicions of the West, and on the other

BEORH-

permit such Western advice and support as
will enable Middle Eastern states to maintain
internal conditions generally favorable to
themselves as well as to Western interests.

Basic Forces

11. Patterns of authority are being under-
mined throughout the Middle East by rising
discontent among nearly all social groups.
The traditional ruling classes — landlords,
tribal leaders, and wealthy merchants —
while struggling to maintain their privileged
positions, have shown little ability or disposi-
tion to solve growing social and economic
problems. There has been a rapid growth of
educated and semi-educated elements in the
cities — students, government workers, pro-
fessional classes, junior army officers, small
businessmen — whose aspirations for im-
proved economic and social status are frus-
trated. These elements are being aroused by
agitators offering varied and often conflicting
programs—religious fundamentalists preach-
ing a return to true Islamic practice; secular
reformers advocating such programs as land
reform, the elimination of corruption, and
the extension of democratic government; pro-
ponents of authoritarian rwe along fascist
lines; and finally, the Communists. Urban

DAL

——F--- REE 8

industrial workers are not yet numerous or
well-organized, and the large peasant class
is in general still politically passive. Both
groups, however, are becoming more respon-
sive to political agitation.

12. Each country is at a different stage of
social change and political development. In
Saudi Arabia and Yemen, where no political
parties exist, the tribal monarchies are in
firm control. In Jordan, political activity
outside the court and tribal leadership is
just beginning to take form, and is being
fomented by educated elements from West
Jordan. The old guard is still in control in
Iraq, but the advocates of change are growing
in strength. Although secular reformers are
in control in Egypt and Syria, attainment of
social and political stability is by no means
assured. In Iran, the National Front’s in-
sistence upon pursuing an anti-British policy,
regardless of the effect on the nation’s econ-
omy, may lead to further political and eco-
monic disintegration from which only the
Communists could profit.

13. Throughout the area, many proponents
of change have a similar negative and emo-
tional attitude. There is a general disposi-
tion to eliminate the powers that be, with
little regard or thought for what comes after.
The two basic forces that motivate the pro—
ponents of change are:

a. A desire to eliminate foreign influence.
The Middle Eastern governments and people
are basically suspicious of Western motives
and tend to become increasingly nationalist
and neutralist.

b. A growing demand for internal social,
economic, and political reforms. Few of
these reforms, however, have been cast as
positive programs.

Obstacles to Stability

14. Attainment of stability is being blocked
by a number of problems not capable of easy
or quick solution. They include ineffective-
ness of the instruments of government, seri-
ous economic problems, and rivalries among
the states of the area.

SEonRE

15. Existing political institutions and govern-
mental machinery are inadequate in the pres-
ent situation. Many legal and political forms
have been copied from the West, but have not
been adapted to Middle Eastern needs. In
addition, there is a shortage of trained per-
sonnel, and a tradition of responsibility and
integrity in government is lacking.‘ Govern-
ments are further handicapped by the facts
that the formerly dominant class is inflexible
and resistant to change and that the propo-
nents of change frequently offer programs
incapable of rapid or practical implementa-
tion. Any government efforts to execute re-
form programs encounter strong resistance
from special interests.

16. Growing pressure for economic improve-
ment adds to the problems facing Middle
Eastern governments. Except for oil, the
area has few economic resources. Egypt, Jor-
don, and Lebanon are overpopulated in rela-
tion to arable land and known resources. Al-
though Syria, Iraq, and Iran have much land
which could be brought under cultivation,
development of this potential would require
many years and large-scale investments. Gov-
ernment efforts to develop the resources of the
area are handicapped by inefficient economic
procedures, untrained personnel, and resist-
ance to new methods.

17. Israel and the related Arab refugee prob-
lem constitute a major obstacle to stability
in the Middle East. Arab hostility toward
the new state and fear of Israeli intentions
have aggravated the difficulties of the Arab
states in tackling pressing internal problems,
have burdened them with high military budg-
ets, and have prevented the development of
an expanded area economy. Although Syria
has broken the solid Arab front against re-
settlement of Arab refugees (totalling 800,-
000) by signing an agreement with the UN
for resettlement in Syria of 80,000 refugees,
final solution of this problem is a long way
off. No progress has been made toward
solving other Arab-Israeli difficulties. The
Arab states fear an Israeli attempt to con-
quer additional territory under the pressure
of overpopulation and lack of economic re-
sources, particularly water. - Conversely, Is-

- 227

rael fears that a growth of Arab strength will
lead to a war of revenge.

18. The stability of the area is also weakened
by rivalries among the Arab states. The Arab
states have a common cultural and religious
heritage which some religious and political
leaders have hoped to make the basis for area
cooperation and unity. The psychological
and political significance of this common
heritage has been overshadowed in the recent
past by petty dynastic quarrels, narrow na-
tionalistic politics, religious differences, and
differences of economic interest. These have
made disunity a characteristic of the Middle
East and have interfered with efforts to solve
common problems. Effective leadership for
the area as a whole has not been forthcoming.
Egypt, which is regarded as the state most
likely to provide such leadership, dominates
the Arab League, but has had little success
in achieving positive united action. Attempts
by Turkey, Pakistan, and others to promote
unity in the area have evoked little response.

Obstacles to US Influence
in the Middle East

19. US association with Israel is a continuing
irritant in US-Arab relations and the major
obstacle to the acceptance of US influence in
the Middle East. The Arab world is united in
its belief that the US is primarily responsible
for the establishment of Israel, which it in-
terprets as an act of ruthless anti-Arab im-
perialism. Moreover, many Arabs believe that
US partiality in the Arab-Israeli dispute is
further demonstrated by US failure to press
more vigorously for enforcement of UN de-
cisions on Arab refugees, on delimitation of
the borders of Israel, and on the internation-
alization of Jerusalem. The US faces the
dilemma that Israel cannot survive without
foreign aid and that US aid to Israel deepens
Arab resentment against the US.

20. US alliance with the UK and France, the
most important former colonial powers in the
area, also arouses Arab distrust. Demands
in French North Africa for greater independ-
ence are strongly supported in the Middle
East. Most Middle Eastern countries will al-

most certainly remain determined to weaken
if not abolish British influence and special
privilege. On. the other hand, the UK, for
reasons of prestige as well as of economic and
military security, feels that it cannot afford
to relinquish its still substantial military and
economic positions. US efforts to bring the
two parties together run the risk of (a) en-
couraging each side to be less inclined toward
compromise in the hope of eventual US back-
ing; and (b) evoking charges of favoritism
from both sides. Finally, a too rapid abandon-
ment of British positions would leave a mili-
tary vacuum which the US would have diffi-
culty in filling, and which would accentuate
insecurity and create further opportunities
for Soviet or local Communist exploitation.

21. The US is also handicapped by the fact
that the Arabs do not feel immediately threat-
ened by the Soviet Union or recognize an
immediate personal stake in the East-West
struggle. They are far more apprehensive
of Israeli aggression, and they suspect that
Western interest in the area’s defense is mere-
ly a camouflage for strengthening Western
influence at the expense of their independ-
ence,

Soviet Capabilities and Intentions
in the Middle East

22, The USSR has so far carried on relatively
small-scale overt political activity in the Mid-
dle East. Soviet rulers probably estimate
that Western influence is declining, that eco-
nomic and political deterioration will con-
tinue, and that the general situation will
become steadily more favorable to the expan-
sion of Communist influence. Soviet rulers
may conclude that the area can be effectively
denied to the West without being brought un-
der direct Communist control and without
forcing the USSR prematurely to accept full
responsibility for supporting Communist
regimes in the area. The USSR will con-
tinue to encourage extremism of many kinds,
particularly anti-Western and nationalistic,
and to utilize opportunities to embarrass the
relations of the Western Powers with each
other and with the states of the area. Con-
ditions in the Middle East, particularly the

—S oR EE = OX

Arab-Israeli dispute, offer the USSR many
opportunities for increasing these activities
and for winning Arab good will.

23. Although the Moscow-directed Commu-
nist Parties are small and illegal and are
not now, except in Iran, a major political
factor in the Middle East, Communism con-
tributes to and profits from umrest in the
area. The Communist program holds out a
ready solution attractive to dissatisfied
groups, particularly the educated class. The
Communists can exploit the widespread hos-
tility against the Western Powers and the
ruling classes without too openly revealing
Soviet imperialist motives and goals. Com-
munist agitation among workers and peasants
is increasing, and Communist influence is
likely to grow as these groups become more
insistent upon improving their lot. The
principal dangers posed by the Communists
are: (a) that they will infiltrate government
and military services to the point of seriously
interfering with the exercise of authority; (b)
that progress toward reform and economic
improvement will be so slow that radical
groups will become discouraged and turn to
Communism; and (c) that non-Communist
groups, particularly the nationalist and re-
formist elements, will become divided, Com-
munist-infiltrated, or willing to cooperate
with the Communists, to such an extent that
small, disciplined Communist parties can ex-
ercise a decisive influence on governments of
the area even without formally assuming
control.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS

Political Developments

in the Arab States

24, We do not believe that a breakdown of
authority in the Arab states is an immediate
danger. Their security forces, if given effec-
tive leadership, are capable of maintaining
internal control. None of the Communist
parties is likely during the next few years
to develop the strength to take over the gov-
ernments by peaceful means or by force.
Nevertheless, the over-all situation with re-
spect to stability is currently deteriorating.

—5-F-CREDH

25. In this situation, governments will prob-
ably rely increasingly on their armed forces
to retain power. Military reformist regimes
are already in power in Egypt and Syria, and
further regimes of this type may emerge.
Although such authoritarian regimes offer
hope of arresting the drift toward disorder,
they will be handicapped by their lack of
experience in dealing with economic and so-
cial problems; by the difficulties of imple-
menting reforms which produce quick and
tangible benefits for the people; and by op-
position from vested interests, extreme na-
tionalists, Communists, and possibly religious
fundamentalists. If they are to succeed, such
regimes will have to provide the people with
some prospect of participation. They will
also have to find a solution to the problem
of establishing relations with the Western
Powers which will be acceptable to nation-
alist aspirations at home, but which will per-
mit them to obtain Western military and
economic aid and advice.

Political Developments in Iran’

26. Iran presents a more pressing problem
than that existing in the other states of the
area, owing in part to the proximity of the
Soviet Union and the strength of the Tudeh
Party, and in part to the more immediate
danger of social, political, and fiscal break-
down. The longer present trends in Iran
continue unchecked, the more difficult it will
become to prevent a breakdown of govern-
ment authority which would open the way
for at least a gradual assumption of control
by Tudeh. Although such a breakdown ap-
pears unlikely during 1953, the Iranian sit-
uation contains so many elements of insta-
bility that it might occur at any time. The
loss of Iran to Communism would be a blow
to US and Western prestige and would in-
crease the vulnerability of the remainder of
the Middle East and of the Indian subcon-
tinent.

*See NIE-75/1, “Probable Developments in Iran
through 1953,” published 9 January 1953.

“DAI

Economic Developments

27. The Middle East’s basic economic difficul-
ties are not likely to be resolved in the fore-
seeable future. It is improbable that local
action can correct the low and, in some
places, declining standard of living, techno-
logical backwardness, and foreign trade prob-
lems. Middle Eastern foreign trade, except
possibly that of Iran, will probably continue
to be principally with the Western nations.
The most important foreseeable economic de-
velopments will relate to oil and to foreign
aid programs.

28. Anti-Westernism and nationalism are
growing threats to Western oil interests in
the Middle East. However, the Arab states
are unlikely to attempt to nationalize their
oil industries unless they become convinced
that Iran is profiting more as a result of oil
nationalization than they are under existing
contracts. Saudi Arabia and the small
Arabian principalities are generally aware of
their inability to produce and market oil with-
out the assistance of major Western oil com-
panies. Nevertheless, the states of the area,
particularly Iraq, may be expected to exert
greater pressure for an increased share of the
oil revenues, for a reduction in the privileged
position of the Western oil companies, and
for greater local participation in their man-
agement. Refusal of the Western oil com-
panies to make some adjustments to these
pressures would increase Arab hostility toward
the West and might eventually lead to fur-
ther nationalization of Middle Eastern oil
resources.

29. Oil revenues are an important source of
revenue for government operations and poten-
tially a source of capital for economic develop-
ment in the Middle East. The oil companies
provide important technical and educational
services. Although fear of losing oil revenues
acts as a deterrent to the adoption of extreme
anti-Western policies, such rational self-
interest cannot be counted upon in the
present emotional political climate in the
Middle East.

30. As pressures increase for economic and
social reform, the governments will be under

“Sr e-RE-T 6

increasing compulsion to turn to the West
for assistance. The granting of such assist-
ance may influence the evolution of the area
and offer Middle Easterners hope of a solu-
tion to their social and economic problems.
Nevertheless, there are formidable obstacles
to a successful aid program in the Middle
East. Western supervision of such aid will
be handicapped by the sensitivity of the gov-
ernments of the area to any signs of Western
interference in local affairs. Demands for aid
will probably be large and for projects which
the nations of the area are not ready to use
effectively; US refusal to meet these demands
will create disappointment which may in-
crease anti-US sentiment.

Military Developments

31. Middle East armed forces are incapable,
individually or collectively, of effectively re-
sisting attack by a major power. The availa-
bility and usefulness of manpower for mili-
tary and military support purposes is limited
by prevailing inefficient agricultural tech-
niques, physical disabilities, a high rate of
illiteracy, and lack of technical and mechan-
ical training. None of the states of the Mid-
die East has the resources or industrial base
to support modern armed forces, and nearly
all countries are already allocating dispro-
portionately large shares of their resources
for military purposes.

32. Accordingly, defense of the Middle East
against Soviet Bloc aggression will ultimately
depend on employment of Western armed
forces. At.present, local forces are not even
capable of manning and maintaining ade-
quate bases for quick and effective use by
Western forces in the event of war. Efforts
to strengthen Middle Eastern defenses against
aggression are confronted by obstacles al-
ready noted. The Middle Eastern states, ex-
cept Iran, do not feel immediately threatened
by the USSR. They are apprehensive of a
renewal of Western domination. Hence,
there is a growing demand in most of the
area for elimination of existing Western bases
and removal even of existing Western mili-

tary forces.

SECRE-D~ ; 230

—8-1-O-R— 7

33. On the other hand, the emergence of
regimes relying largely on the support of
local armed forces will stimulate demands for
Western assistance in the training and
equipping of those forces. But here again,
this opportunity for Western influence is lim-
ited by the deep Arab-Israeli antagonism.
Any aid given to one side will arouse resent-
ment in the other.

34. It is possible that the desire for military
assistance will be strong enough to induce
the Arab states to join with the Western
Powers in a regional defense organization,
particularly if Egypt should take the lead.
The success of such an organization would de-
pend largely upon the extent to which the
states of the Middle East could be convinced
that they were participating as equals with
the Western Powers. Even so, it is unlikely

that participation in such an organization
would quickly lead the Arab states to agree
to the stationing of more Western troops in
the area or to the allocation of their own
forces to a command organization. However,
such an organization would provide a mech-
anism for coordinating Western military aid
and advice to the Middle East states and for
carrying out some preliminary defense plan-
ning. It might also have some beneficial
political and psychological effect and would
give the West an opportunity to reduce Mid-
dle East suspicions of Western “imperialist”
designs. Such an organization is not likely
to develop sufficient military strength in the
Middle East during the next few years to cause
the USSR to consider itself seriously threat-
ened. Soviet rulers, however, would be par-
ticularly sensitive to any Western military
moves in Iran.

23)
