Soviet Dependence on Space Systems
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107391, dated 5 October 1975.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107391).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SOVIET DEPENDENCE ON SPACE SYSTEMS

CONTENTS

I. INTRODUCTION 200 8 eee.

A. Overview of Soviet Space Systems ..... be ee ee
B. Concepts of Dependence and Degradation .......

Il. SOVIET SPACE SYSTEMS—DEPENDENCE AND DEGRADATION

A. Weapons—Satcllite Interceptoss ww

B. Intelligence .....00........000.0..... 02... Doe eee
Photographic Reconnaissance ............ ......
Electronic Reconnaissance... ............. boca eee
Radar Ocean Reconnaissance ........ ...........
Surveillance by High-Altitude Satellites ..........
Photographic-Geophysical Satellites .... ........

Dependence and Degradation.........

G. Calibration und Checkout. iss ws
H. Other New Missions and Uses ....................

ERBR!

. ;
A. AWAPENEN 0 nent 25
B. Capabilities ..................... ne 28
Existing Features 20 0 0 eee .. |
Potential Featuses 0.00000 oo ee ce nee ....
Deterrence 0 cece eee e eee ee . 98
C. Outlook 0 cece ee beeen cence ee 28
IV. PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET INTERFERENCE WITH US SPACE
SYSTEMS . Le ebb e eee bee beeen eee 98
w Retrospect 20... eee es 28
B. The Present Situation and Prospects fr the Near Tem a ..% |
Crisis or Conflict ... ... Cee beeen cee beens . ¥
©. Long-Term Prospects bk eee beet eee 30 J
TABLES
Page
1, Estimated Sovict Dependence/ Degradation: Space Systems for Intelli-
gence and Military Support... ...... 3
2. Levels of Dependence and Degradation . i 7
3. Current Soviet Space Systems and Their Associated Military. or © Intelli- -
gence Tasks 6.06. . @9
4. Estimated Soviet Dependence/Degradation: Orbital Interceptor
Satellites 000 cence te eee e eee . &g
5. Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Intelligence Collection
Systems 0 eect et ee 15

6. Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Communications Satellites . 9

7. Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Naval Support Satcllites
(For Navigation) 0.0.0.0. 2 0.06. cece cee eee tee eee

. 2
8 Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Meteorological Satellites 22
9. Assessed Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Geodetic Satellites . pA}

10, Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: ( Calibration and Checkout
Satellites ...... 0.0.0.0... ey

SOVIET DEPENDENCE ON SPACE SYSTEMS'

SUMMARY

This memorandum examines the missions of the most important So-
viet space systems. It identifies the tasks those missions support,
assesses the USSR’s dependence on those systems, and assesses the deg-
radation of Soviet capabilities if the systean were not available. Also
examined are the Soviets’ defense of their space systems and the pros-
pects for their interfering with those of the US.

The USSR’s space effort is directed toward three broad applications:
those having scientific and national prestige value, those relating to
economic activity, and thase supporting military and intelligence op-
erations, The latter comprise the great bulk of the effort and this memo-
randum assesses the degree of Soviet dependence on them.

Three out of four Soviet satellites in the past several years have
been associated with military and intelligence activities. They per-
form a variety of missions in the areas of inteiligence collection, com-
munications relay, navigation, weather, geodesy, and radar calibra-
tion. In addition, the Soviets have developed a satellite interceptor

ETE

that can be placed ia orbit. We have identified one or more military
or intelligence tasks to which these space systems contribute. These
tasks in tum support the operaticns of military forces either directly
or through the national-level decisionmeking apparatus.

Dependenca and Degradation

Soviet dependence on these satellites is assessed in terms of the
availability of non-space substitutes for the missions thev perform or
the support they provide. Insofar as a space system is the only mean:
of performing a particular mission or providing support, Soviet de-
pendence is judged to be correspondingly high.

Also assessed is degradation, i.e., the reduction in capability to
perform specific tasks that the Soviets would suffer if these space sys-
teins were rendered unavailable. Dependence differs trom degrada-
tion because there are sutellites for which the Soviets have no substi-
tute, yet we believe their absence would have little impact on Soviet
capabilities to perform the particular task.?

Judgr ents about dependence and degradation are provided for the
present and for the pericd ten years hence, and are applied to three
situations: peacetime, crisis, and conflict. Three levels of dependence—
i.e, high, moderate, and low—and three levels of degradation—
severe, moderate, and slight—are used. They are summarized in Table
1. It shows that at present the Soviets are highly dependent on three
of their space systems: those that perform orbital intercept, photo-
graphic reconnaissar-ce, and radar calibration missions. The table de-
picts estimated increases over the next ten years in Soviet dependency
on space systems for electronic reconnaissance, radar ocean recon-
naissance, and the detection of missile launches.

Increased dependence on future versions of Soviet electronic and
radar ocean reconnaissance systems stems from what are likely ta be
improved technical characteristics fur target discriminaticn and faster
response time. The high-altitude system for detecting missile launches,
which we project, will represent a new capability that will extend re-
liable warning of missile attack by some ten minutes. By 1985, im-
provements in communications satellites and an expected substantial
increase in the number of thes. militrry users will jead to increased
dependence on them despite the continued expansion of alternate
means of communications. High accuracy and faster response times are

71t should be noted that the tasks to which the satellites contribute are not necessarily of

the same importance or value in a given situation, It is beyond the scope of this memorandum
to assign relative values to the missions of reconnaissance versus communication versus naviga-

tion, ete.
tof

"Ong | mor]
rong ys
NbN | ao]

epesopo py /Q3i Hy

vb

P7OLPpO HE /Ve9pO}K
w815/m07

ocoaag q31H
a7OLapo py

[3 L-oesapoyy
| eros2po pe

MqBiF-M1es :posy

t- :

o7es2p0 F /ovesapoyy,

949029-210495.0
IW H-owsepopy

£961

aye. Eo OD:

M5 [mor]
bugs AB
Weng ao]
9sD49p0 py
AUP -oesaposy

nong/aoy
whyg/moy
—*
sre2p0 py
IVA -ovapoyy
a7DL2po Jayarapoyy

15115 -270.42po py
[morn uaposy

beabeawrere bail |

lcuenenieetiesmeenener

QL3t

noddng Aww pus sauaS a quy 205 seu: -

HOS; a7
wens 'qhy
161g; m0'7]

NOS mo7

7M 42po JY IWOpO TY
Te |

aamarg YB]

a7es2po jy
MMB -s1es9po4y

2}042po yr
MATE-a esopagy

aang Usity

24249G-9)049p0 jy
MBH-are2apoyy

ry81g 1 mor7
Ons qa]
Da EL |

181g} moy

Ways mo7y
NWENS) ao]
|
aD sapo fy -1y8
[aVesapoyy- ory
+ PDs2po fy aywsapoyy

Ma pos, 240028 YPyy

549095 4th

“peuonwsado 394 you warrtyy

‘VON APRITop szuepuadop ‘499-20 WY) UT paquanold aae CORA De i

Ba |
wong qi
Wong /awrapo yy

wong]

MO sep0 WY 2819p 94K

neng/acy

osseag qin
whng/moy

bos 7 fy ‘ar wsspoyy

sede Yh tall ||

wong) acy

rySuginoy “(waskg pusuwe-y aN12I4g) jno_oagsy
MONS TAB “GPE Way) Gopesquey
rong ineopoye BEE SOE Bre GSE ty eg Ee ays aah es *aapoan

Nong jao7y corer sssescecesss ss + se ploqosoaayy

ONS Moy

~ hejay Sao} ¥anEMO-)
eine Ui: “papekqdoag-s1yduso 044

GONDaI9q Youney] apenryy — sayy
AIFS apr y-qMy Aq aauszposing

Ld eh |
oe |
wig jac]

rybny
“PIDLSpO py /oresapopy

"7" ** -@oUBRE]WOUOSa1! B8IDC) JEpTY
“2OURREEUUOSIY sUOIa0;-q

Osresg /q8y34 HUeHRIUU SAY sYdEsHOIOY A
: > BONIIIPOD Joa aIqay0]

nyOng jmory “To's sgoydassaquy arypprieg

oupja00

E 3tquy

3 aaudg :.uo1npnsbag /aaapuadag jajaog payranysg

characteristics of improved navigation and meteorological satellites
that wili lead to increased dependence in conflict should alternate
sources of this support be denied.

In terms of degradation, the table snows that the impact would be
severe if the capabilities of two of the Soviet space systems were not
now available, i.e., those for satellite interception and photographic
reconnaissance. The assessment for the satellite interceptor is based
on the lack of non-nuclear alternatives for performing its mission. The
assessed level of degradation the Soviets we-ild sufier through the loss

of their photograyhic reconnaissance systems stems from the diverse
tasks they support.

By 1985 the degradation which would occur if the Soviets lost
their photographic reconnai:sance systems would be even greater
than today due to expected improvements in the capability and flex-
ibility of those systems. In connection with the loss of the satellite in-
terceptor, the possibility that the Soviets might use ground-based lasers
to attack satellites is the basis for lowering our judgment to moderate-
to-severe levc's of degradation. The loss of the projected high-altitude
satellites for detecting missile launches would severely degrade Soviet
capabilities to react to warning of missile attack, despite the exist-nce
of their long-range radar systems. New reconnaissance, communica-
tions, and navigation systems with more rapid response time will sup-
port military tasks in crisis or conflict; loss of these prospective new
battle-management capabilities is reected in the increased degrada-
tion levels shown in the table. Although there is no alternative for cali-
brating ABM radars without satellites, the effect of the loss of these
satellites on effectiveness of ABM systems is judged to be slight.

System Defenses

The USSR almost certainly understands the requirements and tech-
niques for the defense of its space systems. Soviet interest in defending
its space systems sterus from the Soviet perception of US antisatellite
research and develcnment and the development of the USSR’s own
satellite interceptor. “he satellites already have at least some inherent
protective capability by virtue of their technical design features, such
as bulky and thick-skinned construction, and maneuverability. The
use of multiple spacecraft and a capability to launch backup satellites
rapidly affords other means of coping with the loss of a satellite.

The Soviets aso may ‘udge that their satellite interceptor
provides a measure of deterrent protection. For existing, or follow-on,
space systems the Soviets could add various types of defensive meas-
ures at any time, but we do not know if they are doing so now or
will do so in the future.

Noninterference Prospects

The USSR has participated in de facto, mutuai noninterference with
all space systems for years. The Soviets gradually muted their position
that space reconnaissance was contrary to international law as their
own capability expanded, as detente progressed, and especially after
the signing in 1972 of the strategic arms limitations agreements. The
Soviets probably do not regard US non-recopnaissance, military s:p-
port satellites as “national technical means” of verification protected
by the provisions of these agreements. They have long reserved the
option to interfere with direct broadcast satellites, and while they have
toned down their subsequent discussions on this issue since 1972, their
position apparently has not changed significantly.

Short of preparation for a conflict involving the use of Soviet and
US forces or what they believed to be US action against their own
satellites, we believe it highly unlikely that the Soviets would inter-
fere with any US military or intelligence-related satellites in the fore-
seeable future. We believe that the degree of Soviet dependence on
space systems we have fuzecast for the next ten years is not by itself
high enough to deter the Soviets from interferiny with US satellites
in the face of other compelling reasons to do so. A Seviet decision to
interfere would depend on a host of other factors, notably on Soviet
estimates of the overall political costs, of how much and for what
purpose the US relied on its own satellites, and of the US ability and
will to respond.

Increased Soviet dependence on space systems, however, probably
will increase Soviet incentives not to interfere with US satellites and
to enter into explicit non-interference agreements. Nevertheless, we
think it unlikely that the Soviet leadership would find acceptable an
agreement covering all space systems. In particular, we doubt that the
Soviets would agree not to interfere with direct broadcast satellites.

DISCUSSION

I, INTRODUCTION

A. Overview of Soviet Space Systems

1. Since its inception, the USSR's space program
has grown to encompass the use of satellite systems?
for a broad range of military and nonmilitary
applications upon which the Soviets have become
increasingly dependent. Its r:ogram can be broken
down into three groups of activities: that which
provides scientific information and creates national
prestige, that used for direct economic benefit, and
that which supports military or intelligence opera-
tions.‘ This memorandum focuses on Soviet depend-
ence on space systems that support military or
intelligence activities,

2. The bulk of the USSR's efforts in space—
based on the number of satellites and variety of
uses-—-is in support of military or intelligence opera-
tions. Three out of every four Soviet spacecraft
launched in the past four years or so have provided
direct or indirect support for such operations. The
Soviets regularly devote a significant part of their

space effort to collecting intelligence with photo-
graphic and electronic satellites

3 nother area im-
portant to the Soviets is space’ communications syt-
tems for the command and control of military
and intelligence operations. Additional space efforts
in support of military or intelligence activities in-
clude: the use of satellites for positioning and com-
municating with naval forces, meteorological satel-
lites for collection of weather data for operations
worldwide, geodetic satellites for the contribution
they make in improving the accuracy ef ballistic
missiles, and satellites for exercise and calibration
of ABM radars. And the Soviets also have an Opera-
tional orbital interceptor, although it has not been
flown since late 1971.

3. The number of Soviet military and intelligence
related space launches per year grew rapidly in the
1960s, then leveled off in the 1970s. We expect
that the present level of launch activity will remain
approximately s'. Sle for the next year or so. The
number of launches may then decline as the Soviets
come to rely upon satellites capable of more time
in orbit, of performing multiple missions, and of
more efficient or direct recovery of data they
collect.

4. In most cases, a specific space system per-
forms one mission of significance that supports a

veriety of specific uses or tasks. For example, a
photographie reconnaissance system that collects
high-resolution imagery aids in the verification of
agreements on strategic weapons, as well as in
analysis of foreign weapon systems.

B. Concepts of Dependence and Degradation

5. To assess the Soviets’ “dependence” on their
military or intelligence Space systems, we con-
sidered the availability of substitutes for the func
tions they perform or the support they provide.
We also assessed the “degradation"—that is, the
reduction in capability to perform specific tasks
if the various space systenis were not available.
This study does not address such other important
aspects as satellite repiacement costs or the re-
sources necessary to replace a space system's
capability.

6. We have established three levels of depend.
ence—high, moderate, and low—and three apprexi-
mately corresponding levels of degradation—severe,
moderate, and slight (see Table 2). Insofar as a
space system is the only means of performing a
particular mission or providing support, for ex-
ample, Soviet dependence is judged to be high.
There is not, however, a one-to-one correlation
between the assessed levels of dependence and
degradation. There ace space systems for which
the Soviets have no substitute, yet the absence of
the space systems wouid create little impact on
Soviet military or intelligence capabilities. (For
example, see the discussion of radar calibration
satellites on page 23.)

7. This memorandum does not address specific
scenarios in which various space systems are, or

would be, employed. Instead, we define three gen-
eral situations as follows:

Peucetime—Sovict military forces at a normal

alert status and no crisis or conflict exists for the
USSR.

Crisis—A period of tension in which Sovict
military forces are in an increased state of readi-
ness, such as in the 1973 Middle East war. (Use
of the orbital satellite interceptor, by definition,
would create a crisis situation and might lead to
conflict. )

Conflict—Non-nuclear or nuclear warfare in-
volving major Soviet military forces.

In a given situation, the tasks to which the space
systems contribute are not necessarily of the same
importance or value. It is beyond the scope of the
study to assign relative values to reconnaissance
versus Communications versus navigation, and so
on.

8. The evaluation of dependence and degradation
depends to a great extent on our understanding
of the role and effectivencss of non-space substi-
tutes. In some cases, there is more than one type
of substitute, since a single space system may con-
tribute to several military or intelligence activities
or tasks. Generally, the substitute would be ground-
hased—for cxample, high frequency communica-
tions links are a substitute for communication satel-
lites, But the substitute for a Sovict space system
could also be a non-Soviet space system—such as
US navigation and geodetic spacecraft.

9. Our understanding of Sovict capabilities te
provide substitutes for current Space systems, and
hence our judgments about dependence and degra-
dation, are made with fair confidence overall. Our

Teble 2

Dependence
High.. 02... No practical or satisfactory :ubstitute.
Moderate Srbocitutes are available, but they are
not as eonvenient or do not perform
the mission as well.
Low........ . Substitutes are available, and they are

at least practical or adequate.

Degradation
Serere........ No meaningful capability remaining.
Moderate... ... A capability remains. but it is sub
stantially reduced.
Slight. ....... A capability remains, and it is casen-

tially untouched.

bi wag

confide=.cx is greatest in the judgments conceming
those Soviet soace systems in which the dependence
is high and/or the degradation is severe. For ex-
ample, we are certain that the Soviets are highly
dependent on satellite systems for pho’ographie
reconnaissance of areas denied to Soviet personnel
or aircraft overflights. We ave less certain about
our evaluation of those space systems hat per-
form tasks for which the Soviets have a broad
range of substitutes, such as for their communica-
tions satellites.

10. Moreover, our assessments apply to an as-
sumed situation in which Soviet space systems, as
‘well as the alternate ways of perforraing the tasks,
remain intact and operating in a mnanner most
reasonable for the situations of peacetime, crisis, or
conflict. We have assessed each type of space
system independent of the other ones.

Il. For 1985, our confidence ‘n our judgments is
lower than for today. Our assessments are based on
the expected technical characteristics of Soviet
space systems, as well as on our estimates of likely
Soviet policy about the uses of space systems.
Cbviously, both of these factors are’ subject to
change during the next ten years.

Il. SOVIET SPACE SYSTEMS—DEPENDENCE

AND DEGRADATION

12. Our discussion of Soviet space systems is
organized according to functional categories: weap-
ons, intelligence cullection, communications, naval
support ‘for navigation), meteorological, seodetic,
and calibration. Within each category, the discus-
sion of each space system covers its function and
uses, Soviet dependence on the system, and tne
degradation in Soviet military capabilities which
would result from its loss (see Table 3 for the
uses or tasks supported by Soviet satellite systems ).

A. Weapons—Soteilite Interceptors

13. In the late 1960s ard early 1970s, the USSR
developed and tested an antisatellite (ASAT) sys-
tem employing an orbital interceptor which destroys
satellites with a non-nuclear kill mechanism. Seven

ently achieved a full operational capability at Ty-
uratam after the last test in Decem).er 1971

The system has demonstrated the capability to
intercept targets at altitudes up to 550 nm when
launched by the SL-11 booster—the booster that
uses the SS-9 ICBM as the first two stages, With
this booster we believe the system is capable of
intercepts at up to 2,500 nm altitude.

14. The Soviets have also demonstrated a ca-
pability to perform some of the orbital operations
required to intercept a satellite in geostationary
orbit. We therefore believe the Soviets could com-
bine the orbital interceptor of their present ASAT
system with the large booster (used to launch
Soviet geostationary satellites) and thus attack geo-
stationary spacecraft. They have not ow Jucted any
tests of such a combination, and we therefore Jo
not believe the Soviets now have an operational
capability for this purpose.

15. The Soviets may believe the’: orbital inter-
ceptor serves a deterrent role vis-a-vis the US.
It therefore will serve essentially two purposes—
deterrence in additicn to its actual intercept/at-
tack role. Nevertheless, we judge the USSR's de
pendence on its orbital interceptor to be low in
peacetime (see Table 4) since a number of other
factors contribute to deterring the ™S from inter-
fering with Soviet space systems. The associated
degradation is slight. In crisis or conflict, the Soviets
have no other way to fully replace the interceptor’s
capability; therefore the dependence is judged to
be high. As a potential alteraative to the orbital
interceptor, Soviet antiballistie missiles armed with
nuclear warheads could be used to attack satellites
up to about 500 nm. Depending_on their character-
istics, however, both US and Soviet satellites would
be vulnerable to the effects of a nuclear explosion
in space—even at very long renycs. In due course,
the Soviets may be able to disable most low-altitude
satellites with the large, probable laser system
at Sary Shagan.* Thus, uy 1985 the USSR’s overall

‘ea

NO ue

Table 3

Current Soviet Space Systems and their Associated Military or
Intelligence Tasks

Sat. Ilite Syatems

Known, Presumed, or Potential Military
or Intelligence Tasks

:
£
—]
=
=
>
2
g
é
4
a
had
>
be
3
Ra

Altitude Satellites
Photographic-
AH Communications

Geophysical
Naval Support

(navigation)

e
<
i
e
Z
g
=

Satellite
Reconnaissance
Elvetranie
Reconnaissance

Perform orbital intercept of satellites... .... :
Verify portions of agrecments on atmrteyie

CC ea ee dete
Estaolish or verify locatious of forces under

truce conditions...... Seieca ages CREA
Determine atatun of warning indicators. ....
Position radars for electronic order of battle...
Establish effects of ‘iostilities... Vabnoes Ss bee

forces, especially strategic............ otis
Assist In detailed technical intelligence
analysis... eee ee,
Perform mapping and kcophysical studies...
Locate surface ships... 0.2...
Warn of ballistic missile launches...

leadership........ 00000000... Opie ese
Commend and control militar; or intelligence
fore. eee cece cece ee Staaye ‘
Positior. military forees.................. Fi
Collection of weather aformation......... ‘
Improve sceuracy in the delivery of selected
WOR PONG eos bie rete CPR e ES “keane ‘
Improve accuracy of ABM Intereeptore...,
Checkout s satellite command system...

Table 4
Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Orbital Interceptor Satellites
Peacetime Crisis Confllet
VETS wee oeedin i celdce Low/Slight High/Serere High/ Severe
MOBS oi eke tains Low/Slight Moderate- Hiv h/ Moderate. Moderate-Migh: Moderates
Severe Severe

dependence on orbital interceptor satellites and the
degradation in capabilities resulting from its loss
would likely be reduced somewhat.

B. Intelligence

17. The USSR has been involved longer with
space systems to collect intelligence data than
with any other type having military importance.
Photographic reconnaissance satellites were first
launched in 1962. Dedicated satellites for elec-
tronic reconnaissance appeared in 1967, Also in
1967 the first flight tests occurred in a satellite
program that by 1972 had evolved into a radar
Ocean reconnaissance system. In 1972 the Sovicts
began flight tests of a satellite that may ‘ead to
some type of surveillance from high-altitude orbits.
And in 1974 the Soviets began flight tests of two
types of reconnaissance satellites to acquire in-
telligence data more rapidly.

Photographie Reconnaissance

18, Photographic reconnaissance is the single
most active Soviet space activity in terms of number
of launches. Annually there are about 30 of these
satellites launched, and each has a normal lifetime
of 12 to 13 days. Such frequent launches provide
some flexibility because the satellites can be placed
in orbits suited for specific targets. These satellites
operate in the perigee range of 90-110 nm. Cne of
these spacecraft is almost always in orbit and in
many instances two or three satellites are in orbit
at the same time.

19. The Soviets have two operational photo-
graphic reconnaissance systerns.

is type of satcllite is used in
“search” missions to look for targets and also to
obtain coverage of Jarge areas for mapping. The
second type carries a high-resolution camera sys-

21, The photographic reconnaissance systems : are
used to cover targets important for Soviet military
planning and to monitor develenments in crisis

situations. |

22. The Soviets used their space station, Salyut
3, to test the feasibility of—-and gain experience
in using—manned satellites for intelligence collec
tion. The space station had an encrypted voice
link for the cosmonauts, a data capsule that was
subsequently deorbited, ard sensors that apparently
can monitor 1U8M launches. Moreover, the Soviets
deployed at Tyuratam the most elaborate set of res-
olution targets ever seen in the USSR, probably
for testing sensors on Salyut 3. We suspect that
Salyut 3 has used high- and low-resolution sensors
in the visual and near-infrared spectral bands,

23. In late 1974 the Soviets also tested the first
of a new type of unmanned satellite from which
capsules, or “buckets,” were deorbited periodically
in the course of the mission, apparently for the

having application to future reconnaissance systems.

recovery of imagery. Only two launches of the new
satellite have occurred so far, although earlier some
of their operational satellites also may have de
orbited such buckets for testing purposes. The first
of these new satellites had a number of the char-
acteristics of Soviet photographic reconnaissance
spacecraft, particularly the orbital parameters, the
command link, and the recovery of the main part
of the satellite after a 12-day mission. During the
lifetime of the first satellite a bucket appears to
have been deorbited inta the USSR on one or pos-
sibly two occasions. If the Soviets introduce this
bucket recovery technique operationally, it will
allow them additional flexibility. They could, for
example, recover some satellite imagery without
having to end the spacecraft's mission. In addition,
the Soviets might not have to launch as many
spacecraft to achieve a flow of data comparable to
that obtained by current systems.

24. We expect evolutionary improvements in So-
viet photogruphic reconnaissance systems including
changes to their present high-resolution system
which will permit operation in lower orbits with
more precise attitrde control. We believe their
objectives for this system will be to achieve resolu-
tion of about one to two feet and to obtain better
coverage and response by recovering imagery in
buckets. They probably will also improve the recon-
naissance sensors on Salyut-class spacecraft. We do
not believe, however, that the Soviets -will develop
a visible-frequency, near-real-time system with mod-
erate-to-high resolution before the early to mid-
1980s because of limitations in sensor technology,
data handling, and imag- display.

25. Lacking such a near-real-time imagery sys-
tem, the Soviets might choose to develop a limited
optical reconnaissance system in which imagery
data are stored on board the spacecraft and trans-
mitted to the ground periodically when the satellite
is over the USSR. Retrieval of some imagery data
would be much more rapid than with the present
technique of recovering the entire spacecraft or by
recovering several buckets from a single satellite.
However, the number of frames of data which could
be taken between each retrieval would probahly be
limited because of restrictions in data storage in
the spacecraft and in the time available for trans-
mission of data io ground statiens.

Electronic Reconnaissance

26. The Soviets have electronic intelligence
(ELINT) systems on three types of operational
spacecraft to collect information on the location
and characteristics of land- and ship-based radars.
Because of the major differences between these
systems, we refer to each as a “generation.”

Bean

27. The Soviet first-generation ELINT system is
a simple one that collects rudimentary data from
emitters. These emitters have included US space
surveillance radars and shipborne surveillance
radars. We suspect the system can detect other
emitters as well. In an uncluttered radar environ-
ment, data from one satellite pass can be used to
derive the position of rotating emitters with known
characteristics,

29. A second-generation ELINT system, first
launched in 1967, is a nonrevoverable satellite
designed specifically for electronic reconnaissance.
Same 25 of these spacecraft have been launched,
and the Soviets maintain an active network of four
to six of them simultaneously.

al The Soviets appear to use this system to de-
tect and ajproximate movements of foreign ships,
in particular US aireraft carriers in transit. An
estimate of a ship’s movements can be made after
many satellite passes have occurred and the ELINT
data has been analyzed. By providing the approi-
mate location of ships, this satellite system provides
some support to Soviet ocean surveillance capa-
bilities. There is evidence that hip position data
from these satellites is correlated with data from
other more conventional ocean reconnaissance
sources.

32. Beginning in late 1970, the Soviets launched
an advanced ELINT system—a non-recoverable
satellite designed specifically for electronic recon-
naissance. Eight of these third-generation satellites
have been orbited, and the Soviets recently estab-
lished a network of three active spacecraft

34. The third-generation satellites are used for
electronic order-of-battle recounaissance and, in
selected cases, to augment the second-generation
satellites’ collection against surface ships.

35. In late 1974, the Soviets launched the first
satellite in what we suspect is a development pro.
gram of a new electronic reconnaissance satellite.
Only two launches have occurred so far. The first
satellite was placed into an orbit about 240 nm
high, and had a mission duration of about six weeks.

: The ELINT measure-
appear to be similar ta those of the second-
and third-generation systems

expect that positional data wo included in
the information provided to weapon platforms
through the satellites’ data transmission system.

38. Soviet ELINT satellites appear to be used
primarily for operational support rather than tech-
nical analysis. & : Pe .

to provide

operational support for military forces.

37. The Soviets will likely use their second- and
third-generation ELINT satellites for several more
years. They may make additional improvements
in them, such as expanded frequency coverage to
include emitters not within the frequency band
of current satellites. They may also add capability
to measure radar parameters for “fingerprinting”
sufficient to allow the Soviets to differentiate one
radar from another in the same class.

Radar Ocean Reconnaissance

38. A flight test program for a Soviet radar ocean
reconnaissance satellite was under way in 1967.
The objective appears to have been the develop-
ment of a spaceborne, active radar system for de-
tection of large surface ships. Fourteen launches
have occurred in this program and the last seven,
beginning in late 1972, have carried the radar
sensor. These satellites use an orbit about 140 nm
high and observe a narrow area of the ocean,
about 250 nm wide. The satellite can detect med-
ium-sized and some small ships—such as cruisers
and destroyers—u.der favorable sea conditions,
and probably can detect large ships—such as air-
craft carriers—even under adverse sca conditions.

39. In mid-1974, the Sovicts launched two radar
ocean reconnaissance satellites into coplanar orbits,
indicating one possible pattern for operational de-
ployment. With two satellites in that orbital ar-
rangement, portions of the ocean at middle latitudes
can be covered daily, and overlapping coverage
can be obtained several times a day at high lati-
tudes. Such a deployment does not provide enough
coverage by itself for monitoring worldwide ship
deployment. It does offer, however, a limited capa-
bility to determine some ship locations and to cor-
relate such data with that obtained by othcr means
of intelligence collection.

esa the Soviet Navy would have
the primary operational interest in data collected

by the satellite system. The satellites are used to
collect data over parts of the ocean where the
Navy is operating, in what appcar to be efforts
coordinated with the Navy.

41. In addition to providing data to Moscow,
the radar satellites transmit locations of surface
ships directly to naval units, and perhaps to air
units. The Navy, and even Long Range Aviation,
would be interested in receiving such data tu sup-
port other reconnaissance missions and the target-
ing of antiship weapons, such as the SS-N-3 or the
SS-NX-12. We doubt, however, that the Soviets
would commit antiship weapons solely on the basis
of data from their radar ocean reconnaissance satel-
lites, since the data are not adequate for target
identification. Data from a radar satellite pre-
sumably would be collated with other ipfoonenon
for targeting antiship weapons.

42 We expect the Soviets will develop an im-
proved radar ocean reconnaissance satellite some-
time within the next five years. The improve-
ments more than likely will include the radar.
We also might see a more extensive network of the
current type of satellites, especially if ther low-alti-
tude lifetime can be extended significantly beyond
the 70 days seen so far. The Sovicts place great
emphasis on the US naval threat, particularly the
carrier task forces, and attach considerable import-
ance to detecting, tracking, and targeting such
forces. A more capable radar satellite would contrib-
ute significantly to this objective. Development of
an improved system oppears to be possible with cur-
rent Soviet technology in space and radar systems,
and cuuld be accomplished by the late 1970s.

Surveillance by High-Altitude Satellites

43. Of the several types of satellites which the
Soviets have in high-altitude orbits, most are used
for communications relay.

have a space system to detect missile launches op-
erational today, but we expect such a system to be
in use in 1985. The flight test program for such a
system appears to be under way now.

44. In late 1972 the Soviets began flight testing
satellites that eventually may lead to a h'gh-altitude

strategic surveillance system. The first four satel-
lites were launched in highly elliptical orbits that
reach an altitude of 20,000 nm over the middle
latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere. The latest
one is in a geostationary orbit drifting westward
towards Africa. f BavhA,

po y é mis-

sions of these satellites, the more likely possibilities
are the detection of missile launches and nuclear
detonations and/or meteorological and atmospheric
research.

45. The Soviets are capable of developing and
deploying a spaceborne early warning system, con-
sisting of several satellites in high-altitude orbits
to provide nearly complete coverage of US ICBM
launch areas. We think the Soviets have sufficient
interest in such a space system, and we know they
have experimented with appropriate equipment. In
addition to possible testing of launch detection
sensors on high-altitude satellites, we believe the
Soviets have tested such sensors on board their
manned Salyut spacecraft. By 1985 the Soviets are
likely to deve‘op a missile-launch early waming
satellite, using infrared sensors for detection durirg
the boost phase.

46. To provide worldwide, real-time data essen-
tial to a comprehensive early warning system, the
Soviets would require some type of data relay
capability. This most likely would be achieved
through an additional ground station in the Soviet
Far East, although a satellite-tu-satellite relay capa-
bility is conceivable. The Soviets might choose to
depioy an early warning satellite system to cover
those close-in SLBM launch areas near Europe as
an initial step before they have the data relay
system. In any case, a spaceborne early warning
system would provide as much as 15 minutes more
warming than Soviet carly warming radars. A space-
borne early warning system would provide only
about five minutes more warning than an over-
the-horizon detection system, ay

Photographic-Geophysical Satellites

47. A series of satellites launched during the
past three years apparently collects basic mapping
and geophysical data having military/intelligence
value. The satellites operate in orbits about 120 nm
high and carry a low-resolution camera that pro-
vides extensive coverage of land areas and polar
ice fields. age

@ In addition, these satellites carry beacons
or Doppler tracking that may be monitored at
many overt and covert Soviet satcllite tracking
stations around the world. Tracking from an ex.
tensive network of stations permits accurate detcr-
mination of the satellite's orbital characteristics,
which in turn allows coordinate positioning on the
imagery for compiling charts.

Dependence and Degradation

48. It is, of course, recognized that intelligence
information, for whatever purposes and for what.
ever uses, is collected by a variety of Soviet re-
sources. In addition to space reconnaissance sys-
tems, support for basic intelligence activities is
provided by public information, human sources,
and non-satellite SIGINT of several types, as well
as air and naval reconnaissance. In most cases,
non-space resources provide more voluminous
amounts uf data. And sometimes non-space col-
lected data have a greater impact or are more
timely—especially for intermediate and low-level
commands. We are confident, however, that the
Soviets use satellites for intelligence collection be-
cause they are a Soviet-controlled, independent,
and reliable way of corroborating information
gained from other sources. Moreover, by their
nature, space systems are capable of providing
intelligence collection on a global basis, particularly
against remote or denied targets. Of equal impor-

tance, such satellites can help verify that certain
unreported cvents have not in fact occurred.

49. In general, the tasks performed with data
from Soviet intelligence collection satellites change
with the escalation from peacetime to crisis, as well
as with a transition from crisis to conflict. The
emphasis on the tasks changes too. In peacetime,
for example, Soviet photographic reconnaissance
satellites collect data that assist in the detailed
analysis of foreign weapons systems. In crisis or in
conflict, such a task is of lesser importance. Simi-
larlv, Soviet electronic reconnaissance satellites col-
lect data from the radars of US surface ships. In
periods of crisis for the Soviets, or when their
interest in US ships is raised, the Soviets increase
and concentrate their ELINT satellite collection
and they retrieve the data more frequently—for
example, twice a day instead of once.

50. Just as the Soviets change the use of these
space systems, they also change their use of other
sources of data. The Soviets’ SIGINT collection,
their air and naval reconnaissance, and their human
reporting are all upgraded during crisis or conflict
periods. This occurs because of the need for more
specific information more quickly. The upgrading
also occurs to make these non-space sources more
effective, since the targets being collected against
will undertake steps to deny (or at least control the
amount of) data available to the Soviets.

51. Considering all of these factors—the diverse
space systems, the variety of tasks they support,
the alternative sources and the changes in data
needs and uses which occur under different condi-
tions—we judge that the USSR’s dependence on
these spacecraft ranges from low to high (see
Table 5). Highest dependence is on photographic
reconnaissance systems during peacetiine.

32. In a peacetime environment, Soviet space
collection systems primarily support the activities
of basic intelligence and warning and the verifica-
tion process for international agreements, As an
example, support for verifying the compliance of
the US and other nations with international agree-
ments—-such as for strategic arms limitation, mutual

force reductions, and nuclear nonproliferation—

also is provided by open source material, human
reporting, SIGINT, and (in some limited circum-
stances) air reconnaissance. Satellite photographic
reconraissance of US ICEM and ABM facilitics,
however, undoubtedly is the only continuously re-
liable method of data collection available to the
Soviets to verify the 1972 Strategic Arms Limita-
tions Agreements. Althougl the Soviets would re-
tain some capability to detect violations of inter-
national agreements without space reconnaissance
systems, the USSR probably is more reliant on these
systems for this function than for any other.

Table §

Peacetime

Photographie Reconnaissance... .. 1975

1985s High Servers
Electronic Reconnaissance....... 1975
Radar Oceas Meconnnissance.... 1975  Low/Slight

1985 Low/ Slight

Surveillance by High-Altitude 1975 oad
Satellites— Missile Launch De- 1985 High/Serere
tection.

PhotographieGeophysical....... 1978 Low/Slight

1985 Low/ Slight

Moderate/ Moderate-Stight
1985 Moderate/ Moderate

Estimated Soviet Dependence / Degradation: Intelligence Collection Systems

Crisia Conflict

High/Severe- Moderate

Moderate-Low/ M oderaie-
Slight
Moderates Mf oderate
Moderate/ Af oderate
Moderate-High/Afoderate
Modcrate-High/ Moderate

High/Severe

Moderate/ Moderate

Moderate High/ Moderate

Low-Moderate/Slight-
Moderate

Moderate-High/ Afodcerate Modcrate-High/ Moderate

—_¢ —_
High/Severe High/Serere
Low Slight LowiSlight .
Low Slight Low Slight

co

53. In a crisis or conflict environment, space re-
- connaissance systems primarily support threat anal-
oo ysis—identifying and locating enemy forces and
oo assessing their readiness, Photographie reconnais-
sance satellites become somewhat less important
for this activity than they were for verifying inter-
national agreements. In contrast, although the So-
viets upgrade their other sources of data, depend-
ence on their electronic and radar reconnaissance
spacecraft rises because the alternate collection
methods are expected ‘o be less effective. Delays of
one to five days in receiving photographic data
reduce the effectiveness of this support today—a
limitation that could be especially significant during
a conflict. In contrast, delays in receiving ELINT
Cata can be only a few hours, and data from radar
ocean reconnaissance satellites can be transmitted
to users in real time.

54. Between now and 1985 we expect that the
improvements in existing intelligence collection sys-
tems will result in greater dependence. These im-
provements are likely to embody brvader area cov-
erage, more frequent coverage of any given area,
more precise data, and faster recovery of the in-
formation. In addition, because non-space alterna-
tives are likely to be less able than now to match
the performance of improved space systems, the
Soviets are more likely to view data from intelli-
gence collection satellites—as well as the uses of
such data—as essential.

55. We judge that the USSR would experience
degradation in capabilities today ranging from
slight to severe if intelligence collection spacecraft
were not available. Degradation would be sharpest
for the photographic reconnaissance systems. In
1985, we expect that the degradation the Soviets
would experience would be greater than for today
for all of these systems except for that of the pho-
3 tographic-geophysical satellites.

C. Communications Relay Systems

56. During the past Sve years the Soviets have
= greatly expanded their use of satellite systems to
- relay communications. Not only are new systems
emerging for this purpose, but the older ones are
being used in new ways s ee
Pees teem techniques are now used by Soviet

satellites. The real-time satellites are publicly an-
nounced as relay systems and given names in the
Molniya series. Three types (Molniya 1, Molniya 2,
and the new Molniya 3) are in high-altitude, 12-
hour orbits, and a fourth type (Molniya 1-S) is in
a gecstationary orbit. zeae

B Each of these types of satellites is
ow,

Molniye 1

57. Molniya Is are the oldest of the real-time
relay satellites, first launched in early 1985. Mol-
niya | satellites use a high-altitude orbit, and the
spacecraft is visible to the USSR for nearly ten
hours at a stretch. Molniya Js have become a major
national communications relay system Each Mol-
niya I has a limited relay capability—tor example,
a two-way carrier capable of 60 telephone channels,
or a single television channel. This limited capacity
requires the USSR to have a large number of active
satellites. At present there are at least eight avail-
able for use.

58. Molniya 1 satellites are used extensively for
several types of high-level military support.

ough we do not know the of information
sent in these communications, we presume the in-
formation includes a two-way flow of operational
end administrative data.

Molniya 2

63. The Soviets began to launch satellites in the
Molniya 2 series in late 1971. Molniya 2 represents
a potential tenfold increase in relay capacity over
Molniya 1, but so far has shown only about twice
the capacity. These sateilites use orbits identical
to Molniya Is. Typically, only four Molniya 2s
appear to be active. The Soviets are continuing to
launch both Molniya Is and 2s, suggesting that
both will be in us: for several more years,

64. In the last three years the Soviets have shifted
the bulk of their communications for non-military /
intelligence purposes to Molniya 2 spacecraft. The
data routinely relayed now on Molniya 2s are tele
vision and 60-channel, common-carrier communica-
tions. Use of these satellites extends into the Inter-
sputnik system (the Soviet-sponsored counterpart
to Intelsat), with operational ground stations in
Cuba, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Mongolia.

Molniya 3

85. In late 1974, the Soviets launched the first of a
new type of Molniya satellite—Molniya 3. Only one
other has been launched so far. These satellites
use an orbit similar to the other two types of Mol-
niya. Although we are not yet sure, they appear
to have double the relay capacity of the Molniya 2.
We have net seen Molniya s space -raft used opera-
tionally, although the Soviets indicated they will
be used for the US-Soviet Hotline.

Molniya 1-§

66. There are also two spacecraft in the Soviet
geostationary communications satellite program,
both launched in 1974. The first was an eng‘neer-
ing test of the booster and satellite propulsion units.
The second satellite, named Molniya 1-S, was posi-
toned over the Indian Ocean. It uses relay equip-
ment similar to that of Molniya 1 payloads, and
has been used for what probably are a limited
series of military-relate? communications experi-

Future Developments

67. Between row and 1985 we expect that the
Soviets will introduce follow-on, real-time com-
munications satellites with improved capabilities.
These improvements will include technology ad-
vances, such as « larger communications capacity
and more powerful relay signals. This should make
use of these systems more convenient and, in the
military arena, more available to lower echelons
than is the case today. These new users may em-
ploy small, fairly mobile equipment. We are
likely to see the Soviets install equipment for the
use of communications satellites into a varicty
of mobile weapons systems—such as surface ships
end aircraft. Moreover, by the early 1980s we
expect that geostationary relay satellites will be
phased into operation and will carry the bulk of
military communications to ground stations in the
more remote areas of the USSR.

68. We expect operational use by 1985 of a com-
munications relay spacecraft that can support the
relay of data from Soviet intelligence collections
systems, either through satellite-to-satellite relay
or through an intermediate ground station. We
think the Soviets would derive considerable bene-
fit from a satellite svstem that conducts satellite.
to-satellite data relay. This could allow the Soviets
to relay data from reconnaissance, early waming,
or ocean surveillance satellites to the USSR or to
military forces outside the Soviet Union in real
time.

viets might be able to introduce and -tart testing
such a spacecraft in the late 197Gs. or early 1980s.

69. The key element in our assessment of So-
viet dependence on communicatious satellites is the
growth in users. Uses of Molniya suteliites for
military/intelligence purposes are expected to en-
large partly with the introduction of many more
terminals at lower echelons of command. Also, be-
tween now and 1985 we project the availability of
a multi-user Molniya which will permit direct, two-
way traffic with mobile users

70. As a result, by 1985 the USSR will be using
communications relay satellites much more widely
than today, for both military/intelligence and civil-
ian purposes. This will especially be the case in the
Central Asian, Siberian, and Far Eastern areas of
the USSR and for communications with naval units
at sea.

71. We judge the USSR’s dependence on all of
the Molniya spacecraft today to be low during
peacetime, crises, or conflicts (see Table 6). The
functions and uses of these satellites—to provide
reliable, re'atively high-capacity mea ~ of commu-
nications to the Soviet government and military
commands—also are performed extensively (but
by no means coinpletely duplicated) by individual

aris
of communications relay probably cnuld fulfill basic
Soviet military/intelligence requirements in peace-
time, crises, or conflicts. The Soviets apparently
have adequate redundant means of communications
so that the loss of any one, while causing consider-
able initial confusion and delay, would not seriously
damage their capability to conduct essential affairs
of state or to prepare for and conduct military
orerations,

Table 6

Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Communications Satellites

Molniya........... 1975  Low/Stight Low/Slight Low: Slight

1985 Moderate/ Moderate Moderate/Moederate Moderate! Moderate

ow Sig

72. By 1985 the expected satellite developments
and growth in usage wil! lead to increased Jepend-
ence of military users on space communications.
This will be the case especially if automated data
support systems for command and coutrol——which
require considerable channel capacity—are put into
use as we anticipate. At the same time, hevever,
the Soviets now have a policy to maintain key
military communications redundantly so that criti-
cal command and control nets can be reconstituted
in case any one means were lost. The Soviets will
probably be unable, however, to maintain redun-
dant ground-based systems with capabilities equal
to future satellite systems. Therefore, we expect
their dependence on Molniya communications sys-
tems will increase to a moderate level.

73, We judge that the USSR would suffer only
slight degradation in military capabilities today if
the Molniya spacecraft were not available. In 1985,
we expect that degradation in their capabilities
from loss of Molniya communications will rise to
a moderate level.

To

Peacetime Crisis Confliet

1985 Low/Slight Moderate; Moderate  \foderate/ Moderate

these spacecraft active in separate orbital networks
about 550 nm high. After a long development and
testing phase, the serics of first-gencration satellites
became available for use in the carly 1970s. The
Soviets generally keep a network of three of these
satellites active at one time. Second-generation sat-
ellites were first launched in late 1974. Four have
been orbited so far, All are active at present, and
to be undergoing test and c-aluation.

ie

‘o beecons for

he

Poe

Naval Support Satellites (Navigation)

A Soviet satellite program to provide naviga-
‘tional support to naval entities has been active
since late 1967.7 There now are two generations of

87. The naval support satellites almost certainly
were intended to provide navigational support for
a variety of users. Soviet ships known to be using

these satellites for navigational support include
missile range instrumentation ships, oceanographic
research ships (including some conducting tests of
sensors for antisubmarine warfare), and the diesel-
powered, Z-IV-class submarines used in scientific
expeditions. A D-class Soviet ballistic missile sub-
marine used one, perhaps two, of the first-generation
al support during the 1975

missile units, geodetic survey teams, and iono-
spheric propagation research groups.

88. By 1985 the USSR probably will have intro-
duced follow-on satellites intended to include an
extremely accurate navigation capability to support
follow-on or new strategic offensive weapons, such
as replacements projected for the SS-N-6 and the
SS-N-8. Moreover, if the Soviets try to develop an
air-launched ballistic missile or a strategic cruise
missile, they would probably require a precision
navigation satellite which might be able to update
the missile’s guidance system during flight.

89, We judge the USSR’s current dependence
on these spacecraft for navigational support to be
low, except in conflict situations (see Table 7).
Dependence in conflict is judged to be moderate.
In 1985, we expect this dependence to remain basic-
ally unchanged, except that in a conflict situation
Soviet dependence on much-improveu naval sup-
port satellites will become high and the associated
degradation will be modcrate-to-severe.

90. Short of conflict, the navigation support func-
ticn of these spacecraft more than likely can be
replaced today, even for ballistic missile sub-
marines. Other means which the Soviets use for
this purpose are celestial navigation (weather ond
atmospheric conditions permitting), bottom con-
tour navigation, and probably the US navigation
satellites and the US LORAN radio nav‘gation
beacons. In conflict, these substitutes will not per-
form the navigation support role as well as the
naval support satellites. They are not as convenient,
and in some cases arc not as reliable or secure.

E. Meteorological

91. The Soviets orbited their ‘irst “Meteor”
weather satellites in 1969 after several years of
testing. The satellites still have certain’ limitations:
for collecting weather data, including a relatively.
low orbit (now at about 500 nm), an optical system
with a relatively narrow ficld of view, and a limited
picture storage and transmission capability. This
has required multiple satellites to provide timely
global coverage. The Soviets kecp about eight
weather-collection spacecraft active in orbit simul-
tancously. Each has an instrument package con-
sisting of several radiometers that yicld data on the
heat balance of the earth, and tclevision and infra-
red scanners that provide cloud cover information
on the earth’s daylight and dark portions. In 1971,
the Soviets modified their meteorological satellites
ty permit real-t.me transmission of imagery.

92. In addition to normal weather forecasting,
the Soviets also could use the data from these
satellites to:

— improve weather data transmitted to ships
and other out-of-area stations;

Table 7

Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation: Naval Support Satellites

Peacetime

Low/Slight Low/ Slight
LowiSlight Low/Slight

Crisis Conflict

Moderate/Shght-Muderate
High! Moderate-Serere

—— optimize the targeting of photographic recon-
naissance satellites;

— provide post-strike verification of nuclear
weapon d.tonations;

— monitor ice packs and floes.

If this capability were linked to ground and satel-
lite communication networks, the Soviets could
also provide irtormation in near realtime to So-
viet military units and ships on a global basis.

93. Soviet officials have described a future three-
tier meteorological satellite program. The three
tiers apparently are to consist of a low-alritude
manned space station, a medium-altitude savellite
(similar to the current Meteor satellite), and a
system of geostationary satellites. We believe the
Soviets are proceeding with this program, and
they could have it in use by the late 1970s.* The
low- and medium-altitude satellites could have im-
proved sensors. 6

94. Recently the Soviets launched the first of a
new family of weather satellites named Meteor 2.
We know little about this satellite at present, but
expect that it is an improvement over the earlier
Meteor spacecraft, and that it will be part of the
three-tier systun.

95. We juige the USSR’s dependence cn these
spacecraft today to be low except in conflict situa-
tions, wher. the dependence is assessed to be
moderate-to-nigh (see Table 8). We expect this
dependence to remain basically unchanged. Meteor-
ological spacecraft can provide the Soviets data on
weather conditions around the world, particularly
on cloud cover. Ignorance of such conditions could
adversely affect the Soviets’ air and sza operations,
as weil as use of their own photographic recon-

8 A Soviet high-altitude satellite program, discussed above
on page 13, may be related to this effort.

TABLE 8

Estimated Soviet Dependence/Degrs-iation:
Meteorological Satellites
Peacetime Crisis Conflict
_ Low/Slight Low/Slight Moderate-High/
Mocerate
High/Moderate

_, Low/Slight Low/Slight

naissauce sateliites. Additional data on weather
over Soviet territory and peripheral areas are pro-
vided by ground sensors, balloons, and aerial recon-
naissance. Moreover, during peacetime, wor'dwide
weather data are exchanged by the developed coun-
tries. Compared to Soviet-acquired data, though,
this information generally has reduced usefulness
for open ocean and underdeveloped areas, and is
not always timely. More importantly, during con-
flict, when the exchange of weather data pre
sumably would be interrupted, the Soviets woul
be much more dependent on their own meteor-
ological satellites for weather data over hostile
territory and open ocean areas.

96. We judge that the USSR would suffer only
slight degradation today if these spacecraft were
not available. In conflict situations, the degradation
rises to moderate. We expect the degradation to
remain basically unchanged for the foresecable
future.

F. Geodetic

97. Sines: about 1963, the Soviets have been
gathering a limited amount of geodc'c data, using
mensuration techniques on imagery from their
photographic reconnaissance satellites. This effort
has been worldwide, but the emphasis has been
on collecting data over the US. The Sovicts have
also gathered geodesy-related data through the
optical tract:ing of Soviet aid non-Soviet satel-
lites—in part, under international cooperative pro-
grams.

98. In 1968. the Soviets began launching geodetic
satellites to improve their overall effort in gcodesy
and gravimetry. These spacecraft have many char-
acteristics similar to the naval support satellites,
but now are in orbits about 750 nm high. These
orbits allow extensive tracking from the Northern
Hemisphere, where Soviet ICBM launch sites and
nearly all ICBM targets are located. ‘I ne orbits also
provide several opportunities each day for ob--
servations to be made on the same revolution frora
both the USSR and North America.

99. Soviet geodetic spazecraft have flashing lights
that permit the Soviets to take measurements under
controlled situations and without relying on solar
illumination. Light-pulse sessions and Doppler

oA,

beacon transmissions are programed to occur over
selected areas around the world where the Soviets
have established optical tracking stations. These
optical tracking sites are lovated within the Soviet
Union, at overt Soviet stations in Antarctica, at
overt stations located in a few countries around
the world, covertly in official installations in many
countries, and perhaps on certain Soviet ships.
Light-pu’se sessions have been correlated with ap-
proximately 30 of some 40 known or suspected
optical tracking sites.

100. Geodetic satellites probably are intended
to provide improved worldwide geodetic informa-
tion and to improve gravimetric and geodetic
models of the earth. The most significant applica-
tion of these data is to increase the accuracy of
strategic ballistic missiles. Bae Aue Da

101. We judge the USSR’s overall dependence
on these spacecraft today to be moderate in peace-
time and low in crises and conflicts (see Table 9).
By J985 this dependence probably will not change.
Geodetic satellites are used to refine knowledge
about the earth's shape and field of gravity. These
data allow the establishment of an accurate geodetic
grid of the earth’s surface, and thercby reduce
crrors in delivery of some weapons. There is no
other way to perform these tasks to the necessary
degrces of accuracy. This is a long-range, research-
oriented effort which has some key military appli-
cations, such as for missile targeting, but is not
al ays time-sensitive. The support provided by
ge detic satellites is cumulative and much of the
required data collection and analysis almost cer-
tainly has already been accomplished. Little prac-
tical support of this type could be provided by
non-space systems, but practically any near-earth
spacecraft—Soviet or US—could be tracked to
provide some of this support.

TABLE 9
Assessed Soviet Dependence/Degradation:
Geodetic Satellites
Pes-~etime Crisis Conflict

1975 .... Moderate/Slight Low/Slight Low/Slight
1985 .... Moderate/Slight Low/Slight Low/Slight

102. We judge that the USSR would suffer only
slight desrudation if these spacccraft were not
available. The impact of the satellites’ absence, al-
though very small at the beginning. would grow
slowly. We believe that between now and 1985,
as the Soviets push for improved accuracies cf their
strategic ballistic missiles, the overail impact of
the unavailability of these satellites could rise.

G. Calibration and Checkout

103. The Soviets orbit two types of satellites to
calibrate and exercise ABM radar systems, Bega

ese space: use orbits that range in
from about 200 to about 1,100 nm. One type of radar
calibration satellite has been used since the mid-
1960s. A new, more versatile type of satellite, first.
launched in mid-1974, also is used for radar calibra-
tion. ao
The Suviets keep

about five of these F satellites active in orbit.

104. The calibration spacecratt pluy an important
role for the ABM rystems by allowing determina-
tion, and thus removal, of tracking errors. Bes

tion to calibration, the Soviets probably use the
satcllites in their radar-related operations to ac-
quire and track real objects which simulate portions
of SLBM or ICBM trajectories.

106. We judge the USSR to be highly dependent
on the radar calibration spacecraft (see Table 10).
There is no adequate substitute for this spacecraft.
This level of dependence for the calibration satel- -
lites will still exist in 1985, or as long as the Moscow

Table 10

Estimated Soviet Dependence/ Degradation:

Calibratio Satellites
Peacetime Crisis Conflict
Calibration
1978........ High/ Slight High/Siight High/Slight

High/ Stight Highi Sight

ABM system exists or the R&D ABM work at Sary
Shagan continues.

107. We judge that the USSR would suffer only
slight degradation if these spacecraft were not
available. Although there is no alternative for cali-
brating Soviet ABM radars without these satellites,
we believe that the loss of these satellites would
have only a slight effect. The overall effectiveness
of the Moscow ABM system would deteriorate
slightly. But we doubt that the reduction woud
be so significant as to preclude use of the Moscow
ABM system. This leads us to the assessment that
the loss of these satellites would cause only slight
degradation to their capabilities. We expect that
degradation in 1985 would also be slight.

H. Other New Missions and Uses

109. Between now and 1985 we expect the So-
viets to introduce advazced versions of many, and

perhaps most, of the types of satellites they now
operate. The Soviets will likely consider certain
new types of satellites to provid: additional sup-
port to their military and intelligence capabilities,
such as a high-altitude spacecraft to collect com-
munications intelligence (COMINT).

110. The Soviets could be investigating the use
of space-based weapons using lasers. The conceiv-
able uses of such weapons include satellite nega-
tion, destruction of high-altitude bombers or com-
mand posts, or ballistic missile defense. The Soviets
could develop a space-based, laser antisatellite
system by the mid-1980s. The other conceivable
uses of space-based laser weapons would present
extremely difficult technical problems. We consider
it very unlikely that the Soviets could solve those
problems and develop a usable satellite by 1985.

113. Other space systems Soviets may be
researching to support military and intelligence op-
erations include those for:

— detection and tracking of submarines; and

—detection and tracking of large aircraft, such
as bombers and airborne command posts.

We consider it highly unlikely that, by 1985, the
Soviets will have space systems in being to per-
form these functions because of the extreme tech-
nical difficulties involved.

}
t
}.
i

eine noe

Se enee= >

Ill, SOVIET SPACE SYSTEM DEFENSES

A, Awareness

116. The USSR almost certainly is aware of all
the more fundamental ways to provide 2 defense
for, or protect, its space systems. And we suspect

that the USSR’s interest in defending its own space
systems, as well as in the research to be able
to do so, has stemmed at least in part from Soviet
perception of US autisatellite research and devel-
opment activities.

117. The Sovicts have indicated their aware-
ness of some of the older US development pro-
grams for an antisatellite capabili
EM The Soviets probably are aware that
does not presently have a dedicated, operational
satellite intercept system. They may believe or be
concerned, however, that the US will have a dedi-
cated capability to interfere with Soviet space sys-
tems in the next five to ten years. They may credit
the Spartan ABM missiles at Grand Forks, North
Dakota, with a potential capability to intercept
some Soviet satellites now. Thus, the Soviets al-
most certainly have had sufficieut stimulus to sup- -
port research into the entire spectrum of defensive
techniques for satellites.

118. The Soviets already have done research into
some of these techniques

clear indicator cf Soviet interest in antisatellite
countermeasures is an unclassified 1971 publication
which discusses sophisticated concepts for anti-
satellite systems. The report includes postulated
future US orbital intercept systems for the des-.
truction of satellites, as well as their neutralization
(through optical blinding, jamming of up-and-down
links, ete.). This publication also discusses explicitly
the now-defunct US 505, 437 and 922 direct-ascent
antisatellite programs.'® Also mentioned are the
countermeasures avilable to a target to prevent
acquisition, such as man uvering, deployment of
decoys, and interference with a radar sensor through
clectronic countermeasures. It can be inferred from
the discussion of various postulate:! attacks by US
satellites on Soviet spacecraft that detailed thought

has been given to a variety of defensive counter-
measures for satellites coming under attack.

119. The Soviets must also have investigated the
vulnerabilities of spacecraft during the development
and testing of their own orbital satellite interceptor.
This research «:ndoubtedly made the Soviets aware
of the ways that such \Inerabilities can be re-

B. Capabilities

120. Despite the foregoing, we are not aware
that the USSR has had, or now has, any on-going
programs specifically intended to provide defenses
for its spacecraft. Over the last ten years, however,
we have seen the Soviets introducs < number of
spacecraft having characteristics tha. provide at
least some inherent protection. But we do not know
whether they have any significant overall capability
to defend their satellites beyord their inherent
designs. Moreover, we are not able to define the
specific situations against which the Soviets antici-
pate the need to use, or rely upon, any defensive
or protective capabilities their space systems might
actually possess.

Existing Features

Sigal These features are either inherent
in the technical design of the spacecraft or were
deliberately incorporated, although it is not clear
that the purpose was proteciion. These features are
presented below in what we assess to be their
degree of protection for the Soviets.

— Secuty of command, telemetry or mission
data links, which is achieved either by the
encryption of the command link to the satel-
lite, the telemetry, or mission data links from
it, or the use of zround stations so located
as to make the exploitation of such deta dif-
ficult. Such steps reduce or deny access to
the satellite’s housekeeping data, which con-
tain the status of subsystems, such as attitude
control and propulsion. Encryption of com-
mand links prevents electronic “capture” of

-— Bulky and thick-skinned construction provid

the satellite, as well as “spoofing,” ie., giving
it false command

ing protection for the satellite against radia-
tion and debris of a nuclear detonation, the
pellets of a non-nuclear warhead, or laser
radiation. The USSR has a different approach
to space systems design from that of the US.
For various technological reasons, the Soviet
Union has produced bulky, thick-skinned
spacecraft which are relatively unsophisti-

cated. They are sealed and pressurized with
a controlled internal environment. In contrast,
the US generally develops thin-skinned, rela-
tively sophisticated, and vacuum-certified
spacecraft. Although it may be inadvertent,
Soviet design preferences result in a degree
of protection that the US systems do not have,
particularly against thermal and laser radia-
tion, and electromagnetic pulse. Most Soviet
photographic reconnaissance satellites are also
thermally and mechanically “hardened” for
reentry. This technical design feature more
than likely provides these satellites with a
further degree of protection.

— Maneuverability is the capability to change

the orbit of the satellite by the use of a propul-
sion subsystem. This capability can be used to
make corrections for whe drag effects of the
atmosphere, to remove the satellite from orbit,
or to evade an interceptor. Changing a satel-
lite’s orbit makes tracking of the spacecraft
more difficult, which in turn makes it more
difficult to predict where the satellite will
be and thus to intercept it. Maneuvers are
not likely to be effective against elec:ronic
interfererce. A number of types of Soviet
spacecraft with military or intelligence sig-
nificance hive a maneuvering capability.

We believe

neuvering capability in order tn perform their
missions better, and not for defensive purposes
as such.

— Multiple satellites, providing a capability for
having a large number of satellites either in
orbit, or on the ground available for launch.
In terms of redundancy and sheer numbers,
some types of Soviet satellite systems have
this measure of indirect defense. This is par-
ticularly true of communications relay and
photographie reconnaissance systems. For a
variety of technical and geographic reasons,
the USSR keeps about 40 communications
satellites active in orbit, including nearly 15

e

keeping older spacecraft in a dormant con-
dition—in effect, maintaining silent spares.
Moreover, the USSR uses about 30 photo-
graphic reconnaissance satellites each year.
There is one such spacecraft in orbit nearly
all of the time, and there regularly are short
periods of one or two days when two or three
satellites are in orbit at once. The USSR has
demonstrated several times its capability to
launch a series of photographic reconnaissance
satellites, have them cover selected areas, and
recover the data so as to maintain a flow of
intelligence data. As a consequence, were a
single Soviet photographic reconnaissance sat-
ellite to become unavailable, the impact almost
surely would be slight. As a consequence, even -
though we earlier demonstrated that the USSR »
now has varying degrees of dependence on a
number of military or intelligence space sys-
tems, the unavailability of an’ one satellite
almost surely would be irconsequential.

Potential Features

122 In addition to the foregoing inherent fea-
tures, the Soviets could build into their space
systems the following defensive capabilities, pre-
sented in what we judge to be the decreasing order
of difficulty for the Soviets: ry

— Counterattack capalvility, i.e. providing the
satellite with a self-defense capability to dam-
age or destroy an interceptor, such as through
the employment of an on-board laser.

— Electronic countermeasures which provide a
capability to interfere with any radar tracking
of the satellite, either by an interceptor or as
part of a ground-based system.

— The use of chaff which provides the satellite
with the capability to create discrete “puffs,”
or what amount to multiple false targets.

— Providing the satellite with the capability to

deploy decoys that simulate its radar and/or
optical characteristics.

— Modifications in radar signature by changing
the radar cross-section of the satellite to dis-
guise its size and shape, or to make the
satellite easier to decoy through the employ-
ment of inflatable protrusions and radar ab-
sorbent material.

— Providing the satellite with electronic protec-
tion against electronic interference, such as
through the use of anti-jamming features.

Deterrence

123. We de not know to what extent the Soviets
rely upon deterrence as a defense for their own
satellites. Deterrence, i.e., the threat of retaliation,
depends, in part, on the existence of their non-
nuclear capability to attack satellites in orbit or to
attack the ground-based systems that support facil-
ities, such as control sites or communications links.
The Soviets know that the US is aware of Soviet
capabilities to intercept satellites, and they prob-
ably are confident that the US does not presently
have an operational satellite interceptor. Thus, the
USSR might conclude that its orbital interceptor
does, in fact, presently serve as a deterrent.

124. In any case, the USSR has two operational
weapons systems!! capable of intercepting and
destroying satellites:

— The orbital satellite interceptor known to be
capable of non-nuclear attack against satel-
lites in orbits of up to 550 nm altitude, and
probably up to 2,500 nm altitude. ( Both situa-
Hons include the current booster. With a large
booster the interceptor could be used to attack
geostationary satellites.)

— The Galosh missiles in the Moscow ABM sys-
tem. These are capable of nuclear intercepts
at altitudes up to about 500 nm.

The two systems provide the USSR with an ability
to respond, almost immediately in some cases, to
any US interference with Soviet space systems.

Although these capabilities may not have been
intended to perform a deterrent role, they, in
effect, do so by requiring a would be attacker
of Soviet space systems to seriously consider them
in its calculations.

125. The USSR may have plans—and concciv-
ably may have a capability—to interfere with US
space systems by focusing on the ground-based
elements which are located outside the US. Such
interference could be directed at command and
control sites or communications links, and might
take the form of direct attack, sabotage, attacks
by local populations, or political pressure on the
host government to reduce or close the sites. If
the Soviets had any such capability, they would
be likely to try to exploit it when necessary. And,
thus, any such interference capability could have
a deterrent effect once the US became aware of it.

C. Outlook

126. We do not know what paths the USSR will
follow in providing dedicated defenses for its own
satellites or, in fact. if the Sovicts will do anything
more than they have done so far. We know that they
are aware of US interest in the subject, and un-
doubtedly they will continue to follow US devel-
opments. The Soviets can expand the use of exist-
ing, inkerent protective featurcs, or introduce some
of the additional ways of defending satellites if they
want to. We believe that the Soviets would almost
certainly do so if they saw the US embark on the
development and deployment of a satellite intercept
capability.

IV. PROSPECTS FOR SOVIET INTERFERENCE
WITH US SPACE SYSTEMS

A. Retrospect

127. Soviet attitudes about the uses of space end
space reconnaissance systems have undergone some
changes during the last 15 years. Initially, the USSR
maintained that reconnaissance from space was
merely another form of espionage and, as such, was

~ iNegal. By about 1964, however, when the Sovicts

had achieved a significant satellite reconnaissance
capability of their own, their attitude began to
change. For example, during the negotiations which
led to the 1967 treaty governing the peaceful uses

of outer space,'? the Soviets avoided raising satellite
reconnaissance as an issue. This was the first con-
crete sign that they had come to accept space-based
reconnaissance as an important and necessary na-
tional function. It is now enshrined in acceptance
by the Soviets of “national technical means” of veri-
fication—which includes space-based reconnais-
sance systems. These means are a fundamental ele-
ment of the ABM Treaty '* and the Interin: Agree-
ment on Offensive Missiles, and will be included
in any subsequent strategic arms limitations (SAL)
accords. The Sovicts probably do not regard US
non-reconnaissance, military support satellites as
“national technical means” of verification protected
by the provisions of these agreements.

128. The Soviets have expressed concern pul-
licly about direct-brondcast satellites, particularly
those that the US might use. Although the USSR
has the capability to build such satellites of its own
(it indicated recently its intent to establish a similar
dumestic system—the Stationar-T), we think it
realized long ago that it is quite vulnerable to the
internal political impact of these satellites. These
spacecraft can transmit television or radio programs
directly to listeners without routing through a
ground station. The Soviets have focused on the
potential of these satellites to relay what thev call
“offensive or illegal” information to listeners inside
the USSR. The USSR has stated before the UN
that it reserves the right to take action against
such satellites. While it has toned down subsequent
statements of this issue siice 1972, the USSR’s posi-
tion has not changed significantly.

B. The Present Situation and Prospects for the
Near Term

129. Present Soviet attitudes toward noninterfer-
ence with US space systems resuit from an an.algam
of political and other factors. In addition to the

12 The 1967 treaty governs the “peaceful” activities of
nations in the exploration and use of outer space, including
the moon and other celestial bodies. It does not address
explicity the ssue of noninterference with space systems.

13 Paragraphs 1 and 2, Article XII of the APM Treaty,
provide that: “Each Party undertakes not to interfere with
the national technical means of verification of the other
Party operating in accordance with .. . a manner consistent
with generally recognized principles of international law.”

overall dependence of the Soviets on space sys-
tems, they inciude detente and the US-Soviet politi-
cal and military relationship, the related mattcr
of obligations under the SAL agreements, the essen-
tially unprotected nature of Soviet space systems,
the Sovict assessment of the level of US dependence
on its space systems, and Soviets’ view of the US
ability and will to respond to any interference on
their part. Each of the factors is dynamic and would
acquire different significance over time. The net
effect to date of all of them, however, is de facto,
and mutual, noninterference.

130. The most important political factor at pres-
ent is the impact that interference would have
on Soviet-US detente. The Soviets probably reckon
that detente would not survive an atiack on a US
spacecraft, and it might not even survive US detec-
tion of sporadic, covert electronic or laser inter-.
ference with its space systems. Moreover, the USSR
undoubtedly recognizes that physical interference’
with US intelligence collection satellites would be
inconsistent with its obligations under the SAL
agreements. It probably understands that any di-
rect attempt to prevent the US from using its ; pace
systems to gather intelligence on Sovict strategic
programs would constitute so serious a violation of
these agreements that it could only be justified
by an effort to disrupt the established US-Soviet
political and military relationship. The USSR prob-
ably realizes that such action would be so inter-
preted by the US.

131. Perhaps the most important of the other
factors is the USSR's overall dependence on space
systems in general, and space reconnaissance sys-
tems in particular. As shown earlier in this paper,
the USSR is deeply committed to the use of space
systems, particularly for intelligence collection. This
commitment, illustrated by the number of launches
annually, grew to about its current level in the
mid- to late 1960s, and has been rising more slowly
in the 1970s. Given their dependence on these
systems now and what will be greater dependence
on these and other systems in the future, the Soviets
will be reluctant to undertake any actions that could
jeopardize them.

132. The generally unprotected nature of the
USSR's own space systems is a factor that probably

also weighs against Soviet interference. Moscow
surely takes into account the possibility of a severe
US reaction to a Soviet attack on US space systems,
or to some lesser form of Soviet interference. The
Soviets presumably would expect the US response
to include something other than a physical attack
on Soviet satellites, however, since they know the
US does not now have a specific and dedicated
capability for this purpose.

133. Another factor is the Soviet assessment of
the level of US dependence on its space systems.
The Soviets undoubtedly pevceive that the US relies
upon its space systems extensively for a varicty
of military and intelligence tasks. And the Soviets
may be aware that substitutes for space systems
do not exist in some cases.

134. Despite these considerations, we believe
there is still some smal] chance that the USSR
might engage in activity that could cppear to the
US as interference. It is conceivable that a Soviet
laser tracking device while tracking a Soviet space-
craft might shine inadvertently on a US satellite.
Moreover, if the Soviets were to test a ground-
based imaging radar against satellites, including
US vehicles, the energy from such a system might
affect US spacecraft and appear to be interference.

135, We cannot entirely exclude the very small
chance that for all space systems-—even those pro-
tected by formal agreements—the Soviets would
conduct activities that are truly acts of interference.
Such activities undoubtedly would be conducted in
great secrecy. We are not certain we always would
recognize such acts if they were done on a very
limited basis, but we believe we would recognize
such acts if they numbered more than a few.

Crisis or Conflict

136. The USSR’s position in a crisis or conflict
will be influenced by some of the same factors that
are relevant in peacetime. Their net effect probably
would be that the Soviets would refrain from
interfering with US space systems until such time
as the USSR perceived its vital interests to be at
stake. Specifically, US space systems likely would
remain immune to Soviet interference until such
time as the Soviets believed that their military
actions would be compromised by US space recon-

naissance systems, or the Soviet military position
was judged to be undercut by US satellites directly
supporting US weapon systems. Below this thresh-
old, US military or intelligence satellites almost
certainly would be safe until the Soviets believed
the US had taken prior action against Soviet space
systems.

137. There is a small possibility that the Soviets
might use interference with a US or NATO space
system in a crisis situation as a test of US resolve.
As such, it could be a positive, though not decisive,
step in the escalation toward conflict with the US.
If the Soviets took such a step, they might do so
first on a satellite not owned by the US. The po-
tential danger for the Soviets is that the US might
not recognize the interference immediately and,
thus, US inaction might unintentionally mislead
them.

C. Long-Term Prospects

138. The prospects for standoff throngh 1985—
whether in peacetime, crisis, or conflict—take into
account the same set of factors. Among them, So-
viet dependence on space systems is sure to change
significantly. As discussed in Section II, it will
grow during this period. The impact of this growth,
assuming no significant change in peacetime ox
the other factors, probably will be to make the
Soviets even more reluctant to undert.ke actions
that could put their own space systems at risk.
Moreover, this growth will increase Soviet desire
to ensure the unimpeded use of space, particularly
for military and intelligence activities. However, we
believe that the degree of Soviet dependence on
space systems we have fcrecast for the next ten
years is not by itself high enough to deter them
from interfering with US satellites in the face of
other compelling reason to do so.

139. The other factors that could lead us to

reconsider these judgments include:

— a Soviet perception of a widening gap between
what the US and the USSR gain from space
systen.3;

— a Soviet perception of development of a US
space system that provided support in a way
which, in a crisis or conflict situation, would
be extremely disadvantageous to the Soviets;

~~ a Soviet belief that the US was unwilling, or
totally unable, to interfere effectively with
Soviet space systems;

~~ Soviet acquisition of additional, and more
effective capabilities to interfere with US
space systems;

—the introduction by the Soviets of means of
countering US interference, such as anti-jam
features and wider-scale encryption; and

——a Soviet unwillingness to discuss an agreement
prohibiting interference.

140. While the growing Soviet dependence on
space is a factor that contributes to de facto non-
interference, it also might contribute to a Sovict
interest in a noninterference agreement. It may
have played this role alreadv, since the USSR is
at least somewhat interested in the general topic
of noninterference with space systems. At Geneva
in May 1974, Yuri Kolosov of the Soviet Ministry
of Foreign Affairs delivered a speech to the UN’s
Outerspace Committee suggesting that the cum-
mittee might wish to examine noninterference with

141. The USSR might view negotiations toward
some sort of agreement on noninterference as a
useful means of buttressing detente. While any
such agreement would have to be acceptable to
the Soviets on its own merits, we would expect
them to portray the possibility of a noninterference
agreement, publicly and privately, as a reinforce-
ment of detente, even if that were to be, in fact,
much less important than the technical considera-
tions and benefits.

142. We conclude that the prospects seem favor-
able that the USSR would be willing to participate
in negotiations toward a formal noninterfcrence

agreeent, including some and perhaps nearly all
space systems. (Given the Sovicts’ position on direct
broadcast satellites, if they could not achieve an
agreement limiting the use of such spacecraft,
through the UN for example, it is very unlikely
that they would want these satellites included in
a noninterference agreement.) The rationale for
Sovict participation could include the technical
information they might gain during such negotia-
tions, although they would have to expect to pro-
vide at Icast some information on thcir own systems.
The existence of the Soviet orbital interceptor could
have an effect on the USSR’s attitude toward a
noninterference agreement. The interceptor could
stimulate the Soviets to seck an agrecent that might
prevent the US from developing or deploying a
similar system.

143. If the US commits itself to develop or deploy
its own satellite intercept system, Soviet interest
in the subject of noninterfcerenee—such es a formal
agreement—might ;ise sigificantly. A maior Soviet
objective would be shutting off the US effort, cither
by direct prohibition or by undercutting the US
rationale for its system.

144, We suspect that any neyotiations toward
such an agreement would last several years and
would be techrically, if not politically, difficult.
The following specific features of any potential
agreement probably would be among those the
Sovicts would find mest appealing:

—— positive protection of key Soviet systems;

—barring US development or deployment . f
anti-satellite systems;

——a focus on subsets of space systems;
— limited duration; and
— bilateral.
