Meeting no 13, LondonN) 3 May 1961REGARDING Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012401, dated 3 April 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012401).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Meeting #13 (London May 1961

(Subject arrived at 1310 hours on 3 May 1961 at Room. 360 in the
Mount Royal Hotel in London.)

G) S: (Looking at the various items of medicine -btained
for h¥fm) I*11 not put anything in the suftcase now. You have a
lot of work ahead of you Mr. Harold. 1 Just had a talk with the
REZIDENT. At 4:30 J left the girl. God knows how I was able to
a accomplish everything. I saw the REZIDENT; I had a talk with
SHAPOVALOV: I had decided everything; I had clarified everything.
‘Hr That {s fine. S: But there !s so much work to do. G: How
: much time do you have at your disposal? S: Wetll work for an
k hour and a half or two hours. JI sent the delegation to the
ow Exhibit. They will be working there and a ainenal {s with them. 1
coe arranged this to come here.

5c) Sa A oe ;
2. I has spent the whole night on my feet. But then how
the n nee had been spent! I was at a most luxuricus cabaret.
Could you extend my leave for about ten more days? (Laughter) 1
was at her place two hours. I left WYNNE there. There was WYNNE's
friend, Norman -- a nice chap. He takes trips to Canada -- a very
good friend of WYNNE's. He knows me as a Soviet representat! ve and
that fs all. First we went to one club, then to the caharet. The
show started at one ofclock 'n the merning, very nice, Class'cal,
the music ‘n TurkSsh style, as if to crder.

"yoreeem ames ete

en] G) St They picked up a 23-year old girl for me at the club
~~ argGod girl. She has a pretty name -- - Meh.- Her telephone
number ‘s . Now, everybody knew t. (Laughter)

‘ 1 spent two hours with her. I had to get some sleep. At eight
fi: c'clock I had my breakfast already. G: Were you at her place?
ee ---5e Yes, J] was at her home. She has 4 separate apartment. tee
thing was modest, but good. She was a nice girl, somewhat -
experienced, but that was okay. She Is twenty-three years old. Hs:
Once more, SiR? St (all laugh) « G: Did
she charge you much? S$: WYNNE said 15 pounds, 1 paid her threugh
WYNNE. 1 do nct think he would overcharge me and pay her ten
founds. She was told that I was Alex from Belcrade, Yugoslavia
(lauchter). We had a table there, everything was fine, WYNNE said
that she wanted 15 pounds. 1 gave the money to him. He yave ‘t to
her and asked her nct to .esee She didn't ask me for a penny more.
I spent two hours w'th her. It was getting Light.

Se ee ere

=: YT was up at seven, ate at e' ght and at nine we went to
assy. We rece‘ved our money. Then to the RE*‘IDENT's rece; -
tron. IJ s;oke elone with him for 30 minutes. I had a talk with

3 1MAR 1992

«APPROVED FOR RELEASE

SHAPOVALOV. 1 told the REZIDENT all about my trip. 1 showed him

my daily itinerary; I showed what you had given me (f.e., the
brochures). He had everything packaged up, called the code clerk

“in my presence and sent It out. See what ‘t means not to have /
shown me all photographs!

G) S: Today 1 met @ very fearful HGB man, VORONIN, Yevgen'y..
He h been here two years already. There was no photograph and,

if I had not met him today, you would not have known anything.

1'11 report on VORONIN separately, allright, in order.

) G: One more question -- could there be any consequencet
pecause of the girl? S$: I do not think so. It ‘s true that:

gave me a preservative, but I .sccsee G: This is important.
$3 Of course ‘t Is. 1 considered !t. 1 came home and washed and
everything. She was clean. I think she takes Care of herself. .
WYKNE guaranteed her “but at the same time, he gave me & box ( laugh-
ter). No, no. Everything !s okay. I exclude this. 1 have Little
experience -- ] am responsible. G: There is a proverb, if one is
unlucky see. 5S: One could get it from oriets own sister. @G:
That's 't. You know the proverb. &%: I do not think so, but if
anything «ser... to get cured, there is nothing to fesr, but I do
not think 80.

(2) St £0, the REZIDENT saw me right awey In the MOrn' NG,
belows7in the basement {n reom number 8. The bookkee) ers are next
door. This room is adjacent to the REFERENTURA. The main entrance
to the REFERENTURA Is to the right of the entrance, to the basement.
This 's all in house #13. 1 tcld him about the trip and showed h'm
your material. Right then he called a code clerk. He brought an
envelope and was told to put the material ‘n the envelope and to
address {it to Colonel ROGOV, V. M. from Colonel (Subject's surname
and ‘nitieals). That will go cut with the next mail on 13 May. G:
Alaa were the ‘nitials. St V. M. Well, I reported everything to
Me

G: What 's the name of the REZIDENT? Ss: He did not tell
me and I did not ask anyone. The photograph which I picked out was
he -~ 1'11 risk my neck on that. But no one told me h's name, not
even he. 1 asked him whether there would be a package or a letter,
1 would be bringing back. He said perhaps there would be a letter
for VORGNIN, the Chief of the NAPRAVELNIYE. | 1 could send that home.
Why should I ask him his name directly? I know that SHAPCVALOV
talks about everything. I did not ask him any questions and yet
SHAPOVALOV told me the character stics -f those w'th whom he works.
In day you will know woth whom SHAPOVALOV Is working. G: That's
good.

26

“

Gs: Look up the name of the person fn the picture. The
same‘one ~- he ‘s the REZIDENT. I've reported to him in detall
about @aMMMOM, the plan of working with amg. Ops officer
GENERALOV will be assigned to MgQgRiiem, tomorrow or after tomorrow.
I'll know about that at five o'clock tonight. They are bringing
GENERALOV to the embassy at five c'clock for me. 1 am te give
GENERALOV all the data on cS and to arrange the meeting for
him to meet SRN. +

St I want you to tel] SeQRmRQN about my flan

0 - Speer
head iweited me to visit him, but why drink whiskey? If I had the

time J weuld visit him with pleasure. I'11 telephone
after my talk with GENERALOV. 1°11 ask Q0QQ9NBBBto come to the
‘lobby of this hotel. We'll meet here. I'11 call GENERALOV and
arrange that -~ we'll be drink!ng coffee. I'l] tell him that

will be here and that he ‘zs rot ‘n his own town.
GANA wil come up to us and I will Introduce them.

(x7 S: Migambiae should be told that 1 shall not come and
viel m. 1 should not do this. MGM had asked me to see him,
in general, to tell him everything. That J cannot do now. You told
him everything and now 1 can't spare two hours. I'll telephone
WH tonorrow. Maybe seme could make $!t tomorrow when
GENERALOV would be here to see me jn my hotel room. Luter, we would
come down to the lobby or the bar and @@RMNBMR would show up at that
time. I'll tell him the time und ask him to bring a few things, cne
er two items, and to say to me that he will mati me the cther items
cn cement and steel that I requested. I'll say to him, "Mr.

why do that? Here Is my friend from the ONTK In the
embassy. Hand it to h-m. Then 1 shall ‘ntroduce them and the deal
will have been sade, That !s the plan. Gs: Fine.

12. /s: Warn GMMR notite call anyone himself -- never,

net GENERALOV, until their relations develop further, The

REZIDENT would invite him through GENEAALOV -- there will be an:
official Invitation -- Let him go. 1 told them about @aNgRMM. that
he was an esteemed person -- he is educated, cultured, loyal to us.
He had visited the Soviet Union two times. I said that we could not
recruit him, and there -s no need to do that -- . He Is already 69
years old, but we could get ‘nformation from him. As the REZIDENT

had said, he would expect to get general information from him and 30,

on. So, should not be active: he sheuld not show any
sae ga Y ask you to report my request. They themselves w 11
come to

S: When they approach MMMM with certain requests It
up to & to figure -ut what te y've them. He should
conduct himself plainly but firmly because he could be esked many

ohne

#13

cuestions. He could reply that despite his experience he does not
knew, but he could reply to some quest‘ ons by eo that he wae
sure he was right. You understand. Later their relations would
develop stepeby-step. What dec'sion they would come to, you would
tell him about that yourselves. You'll direct him. I request that
hie brief him, 1 cannot do ft, 1 do not understand him well. @: |
Okay. .

St So, GENERALOV should be wafting for me at five o'elock
in the-€mbassy. I1'11 take a taxi to the embassy, quickly arrange
everything, and return to the hotel so we can meet again. Gs Okay.

3) S: Another thing. SHAPOVALOV had asked me to his office
when I-Saw him today. 1 asked him wheat 1 should say for h'm at the
Center. He asked me to request the Center to permit him tc operate
more actively. As it is, he can work with the Indians (Hindus)
cnly. I had supposed that he was working with the Indians. He
knows the Language br'lliantly. I said he knows only two words ‘n
Enolish and even that in the nominative case only.

St_ An Indian correspondent had given him some data.
There_afe several Indian correspondents here; there are many Indians
here. You solve that yourself. Set up surveillance and find out

who, and what has to be done. The Indian is paid by them; he is
their agent. The Indian passed on the Information on that day when
SHAPOVALOV was the duty officer. The !nformation was of a
polltical-military nature, about some treop movements, about some

new American bases hére, and about deliverses of new arms to a
England. He told me !n general terms. 1 did not display any inter-

' eat.

“

iH S: J sald that I could send a telegram to the Center, but
he saic“to tell them cnly {f the REZIDENT said to dc so. If the
RETIDENT does not tell:me, J am mot to say anything because they.
would chop off his head for tell'ng me wbout ‘t. Lo, those tele-
grams, and what J am telling you in general terms -..e. He is right,
the REZIDENT did not say a word, not a word. That means 1711 not
say anything. I asked SHAFOVALOV to tell me ebout the telegram so
that 1 could remind them -- the general contents of the telegram,

no detalls. Well then, the Indian -----. He knows the Indian
language very well; he had been {n Ind’a and knows the language well.

18. S: So, how, 't ts simple to find this Indian, and some
thought should be given ts what to do neyvt. You'll expose the
Indian and SHAPOVALOV could say that some frformation had leaked to
(Subjectts surname), that is what I am afraid of. Gz: Don't werry, ©
we won't touch h'm. St The Ind an !s « correspondent, a very
Informed person, a paid person, He did not tell me that. I do not

|
{
|
|
d | Lot | ~h-

ca ee fo ot

_I have been eupposing, 1 am clever sometimes, sometimes, rarely

‘Ambassador about the contents right away. Therefore ‘t must have

acquaintance ~~ that he be used for getting !nformation from him

know whether he had picked him here or had contact with him in
India. The fact ‘s that he {fs his (SHAPOVALOV'S) source, Just as

but right. So, I told him, he does not know English, or he would
be given a written report. If it were given in English he cculd
not transiate from English to Russian immediately. But he told the

been In Indian,

19. S: The next matter {s most Interesting too, G: Wait,
and your material, the brochures, were they sent by the REZIDENT?
St Yes, the REZIDENT In my presence, called the code clerk of his
REZIDENTURA, who brought an envelope. It was placed in the ”
envelope and will leave on the'13th of May. The code clerk took !t
with him. There they collect diplomatic mafl. I do not have the
material -- ] made the selection. He looked at electronics. There
was a brochure on Nemonics. ‘There was the one 1 picked up yesterday
from Ferranti and the one you gave me on canning. Wow, this is all
on SHAPOVALOV.

20. G: How about MERRIMAN? W111 be a plus for yu If the
REZIDENT transmits his report? $1: Of course! When I return I'll
write such a report! (Laughter). What do I need that for? G:
Will the RECIDENT send one to his people? St: I had reported to
the REZIDENT and he had made a note about MERRIMAN that (Subject's
surname) and GENERALOV would meet you to discuss this matter, to
arrange with SHAPOVALOV, -- SHAPOVALOV tntroduces me to everybedy.
When could it be. done? i.said that I..would bring him at: five.
o'clock in an automobile; he had en operation.

(21.) St At five o'clock I'll have ea talk. That will be
writ down and e telegram will be sent to Moscow. Then an cpera-~
tional report !s compiled .... saying that (Subject's surname) ‘had
suggested that an acquaintance of his whom he had met twice, once
in the USSR and once here ~- plus detailed deta about the ;

unwittingly. In my report I shall state I had suggested him to the
REZIDENT and he wes transferred to case officer GENERALOV. And 1
receive a small “plus” (laughter). Thet {s the way ‘t looks. This
will all be in line with my program, my assignment. (Laughter).

Ss: Are my eyes red? G: They’are beginning to be. 4%:
But I not want to sleep. To continue ..... The REZIDENT chetted
with me for thirty minutes and told me the following things. He
said it was d'fficult to werk. When I asked him why, he said that
recently an Englishman had offered some mater‘allof a military
nature and had asked for 2,000 founds. He had te have ft urgently
for a hcuse, his personal needs. The REZIDENT said that he had

==

"#13

asked the Center. The Center replied as usual that ‘t was tco
much and wanted to know whether the material could be obtained for
study, but who would be fool enough to surrender the material? Up
to now he seid he had had no reply, and the person did not give
him the material, This is 2 fact. An Englishmen with military
Po Information wanted 2,000 pounds.

23. St The REZIDENT i2 taking his vacation in June. Prior
to his leave he will travel sround the country. 1 asked him about
that yesterday and he confirmed ‘t. He told me himself that he was
waiting for his replacement on scientific and technical matters,
the Colonel whose photograph you have not shown me, PAVLOV. Had
you shown me all photographs 1 would have found the one zbout whom
1 shall talk now. :

2h. St This Is the content of the conversat'on. He is
pleased w' th everything -- is pleased with the Delegation -- that
there were ne incidents. I told him that toasts were drunk (seated)
for KHRUSHCHEV and (standing) for the Queen (laughs). So he is
pleased, and thanked me for everything. 1 thanked him. I nave
known him by face for a long time.

$: In my presence he told the code clerk to prepare a

a te ‘am that Colonel (subject's surneme ) would leave by a’rplane
on the 6th. He asked me whether I had been civen 8 pseudonym prior
’ to my leaving. 1 told him that J had an cld one but there wasn't.

any need for it when I travelled here. So he told the code clerk tc
use my true name. The code clerk took my hesitates) -- your --

1 materfal (laughs) and left. He seid that he would write a letter, he
ttl could find me through SHAPOVALOV and asked me what my plans were.

ie told him there was an exhibit and then preparations. He said that
everything was okay. SHAPOVALCV had reserved the tickets for the
6th cf May.

cs Now, I left the REZIDENT and went for the celegation
toh yee number 16, G: What time was this? S; J was:-with the |
: REZIDENT ~~ at 9:05 we were at the Embassy, all five of us. I

placed everybcdy !n house #18 where PAVLOV sits, end where the

i sctentific greup is. SHAPOVALOV met me immediately. SHAPCVALOV and :
; 1 had a chat. I told y:u about it. He went to the REZIDENT about
| (Subject's surname), and was told that he would tee me immediately.
| Not more than 30 minutes with the REZIDENT. He asked SHAFCVALOV tc
leave. We had a conversat’on Just by ourselves. There was only the
code clerk he left later too.

| ; | -6-

a
»
a
fl
|
i

Ltaetes . ' Re . - a
“ape . i hh . - :
ein “ ‘ = i ‘ bat ‘
* ? % 7 ba . . , .
‘ 7

#13

G) St He started to tell me how difficult ‘t was to work;

_ PAVLOV has been away for 81x months; GENERALOV has this --

_ SHAPOVALOV does not know the language. He repeated the same thing
again, but in brief. He said he wanted to rest and would send his
wife earlier, -- that Is, his wife would leave before him. We said
cur goodbyes. ,

St The bookkeeper came In as ] was lesving. The bcok-
keeping section !s right there, in house #13. He said that he would
pay each delegate separately. I said that that would be fine. One
delegate Is paid from one account, another from another account.
Thera is such a confusion that the dev!l himself would bresk his
head. So I left for house #18 and brought the delegates to the
bookkeeper. The bookkeeper calculated everything and gave us the
money. The delegates and 1] were wolking, same side of the street
then to the right, to the Exhibit. As I] was leaving house #13, the
delegates, abcut three of them, were behind me.

Be) I saw Zhenya VORONIN pressing the button to the

REZ1I A. 1 gave hima sign. He understood and we didn't greet
each other, He and I had i'ved ‘n the same house. VORONIN lived

In house #36. His father {s @ General Major VORONIN, a political
worker. He is now retired; he is not working. They lived near the
MVO headquarters ‘'n the howse of a friend. The mother had died.

The father remarr‘ed and gave to him (Zhenya VORONIN) ard his family
a room tn my heuse, on the seventh floor. His wife, who is here

meal now and whom ] also met, badly wanted me to pet her =® Llittie.

i
|
i
|
|
i

30. S: He wears glasses, He Js near-sighted and wears thick

| lenses. He has a bad case of DIATRIYA, external sivns. He Is of

| medjum he!fght and on the sk: nny side -~ not exactly thin, solid but
iu not fat. He wears glasses. VORONIN has been here for two years
already, KGB. He had graduated from the Diplomatic Academy In 195).
His basic language was Yugcslavian. He was preparing to go-to .
Yugeslavia but f-r some reason did not go to Yugoslavia. English
was his secondary lancuage; it has been activated and he has been fn
England for two yeurs now. Immediately after graduating from the
Academy he Jo!ned the KGB. He is an act‘ve worker, !mpudent, doring.
He should be watched very closely, more £0 because you have picked
up may KGB men.

see ee

Gi) St This (s what else the REZIDENT told me. That ycu had
some Rtnd of a lawsu't here and some one had received a 25-year
sentence for illegal contact, for passing material, for spying. I
co not know when that happened, recently «cr a yeexr ago. He suid
that In general jit is difficult ts work with the English. Thr
Saler‘es are high, the life ‘s good. When an Englishman fs <«ffered

-7T- hen 3

<
‘
teygathsee

a a |

100 pounds he says that his jan‘tor gets that much but, when !t
comes to 2,000 pounds -- what that one has asked, why this is what
happened. They 52Ys "ret's have the material and ‘f it is worth
2,000 we'll pa it." He said that 'n general the English sre
frightened. Their standard of living {is high and they are
frightened. Why should they take risks for 100 cr 260 pounds, to
put their heads under the ax, to be imprisoned? If one wants to
take a risk then do it for large sums of money and our government
does not pay large sums. They must produce rockets! You know,
they want to grab two places with one hand. You know the
expression; it is tndecent. (Laughter).

S: He complained that they give too Little money. That
is the—general situation, I] know ‘¢ exactly. If one asks fora"
large, sum they do not ask to cut It in nalf, they sey cne tenth,
cne-twentieth could be aid. They have & tight fist on their money
wo very Interesting, there, in America, there was 8 decision by
the Central Committee to pay $50,000 to ball out MELIKH. It was
KHRUSHCHEV's decision and jt was upheld by the government. There,
this Is only a detall, during the conversaticn he mentioned that
someone got 25 years. He did not disclose to me who {it was. i am
Listening and gsking questions with my eyes only. Why should I
display any interest? ;

ct He talked with me for 30 minutes and he had revealed
to me ters about which the REZIDENT fe not supposed to’talk even
if J am a worker of the GRU. Gt Yes, cf course. 3: He complained.

“And what wasithe total sum of our conversation? He wants me tc

speak favorably nm his behalf at the Center. This is.a poor guy.

One of his men ‘s away, another cne 1s tll, and another cone doesn't
know the language. Another one ‘gs a fool, that one says he i: 4
Military Attache and cannot be active. He knows thet I have contacts,
that 1 am an old member ef the group, thet 1 would repeat everything.
Of course I am net g-ing to say anything; there ‘s nething ta talk
about. These were the contents of my talks with the REZIDENT. and _
SHAPOVALOV and the deduction which 1 made about acquaintances cf
SHAPOVALOV. One of them ‘s military, or a civilian who is working

at the Ministry, who had asked for 2,000 peunds for military infor-

mation. Whe, of course wecces 1 would get inte that safe with
pleasure -- and would give 50 years -eecre

S: So J] am passing by, and VORONIN is pressing the burger.

1 ha 't f(nished with VORONIN yet. we acted as Sf we did net know

each other. The delegates and 1 walked 200 meters and met h's wife
who was pushing a carriage in which was her twe-year-cld daughter.
1 told her eos. we use the familiar form of "thou". We used tc
kiss; 1 could de anything I wanted. she did rot appeal to me; §

-8-

told her that !n Moscow. There, J] cowld never have run into her,
but in London I did (laughs). We stopped and 1 introduced all the
members of the delegation. Then ] asked them to waft for me,
squeezad her shoulder a little and asked her hew she felt. The
Little girl was staring at me. She told me that I had grcwn older,
1 told her that she had changed also. Later they traded the room
they had [n house #36, my house, with her relatives. Her father
hed died recently, In Moscow. She said that she was planning to fly
and have sent go on leave In the fall. He Is HOB, he must be
watched.

#13

35. &2 You elready had picked cut and exposed (RASKOLOLI) --
thet is very good. He Is very act: ve and undoubtedly has contects
here, 1 am sure of that. He has one man for sure and one or two
act! ve acquaintances. So I can say his abilities and charecteris-
tics are such that he {s nét the kind of man who would be sitting
and not doing anything. He wears glasses, shorter then I sm.
VORONIN ~~ how did we miss his photo and PAVLOV's too? So, at five
otelock, 1 am repeating once more, I'll go to get acquainted w' th
GENERALOV, officially, and brief him about MERRIMAN. Tonight I*22
inform you-when GENERALOV will come to-see me,

cab ceording to plan. Laughter). Everything !s,‘done accord-
“Ing't> plan. I would say that you are helping. The girl'is playful
~- Interesting. She knows Fnglish only. She was bern in London, 1
‘would ask her how to say things in English and she would say how do
you say {t in Yugoslav, and I would say in broken Russian and she
would repeat (laughs). Okay, that {s all. Do we have s right for
a minute of rest? :

ao. St Everything Is going according to plan. I visited the

Gn.) Sy I have a vvestion. Now suppose someone contacts me?
What 1 he call me? What would be my name? W!ill be call me
Alex, Paul, Peter, Joseph?’ G: First cf all he will say, “How de
you do? Greetings from Colonel PEEKE Str (interrupts) - Well, how
wit] he talk tec me? We address each other. I would like to have
you eo this some thought. G: If you meet people off‘clally ..2.
Se interrupts) They'1) know me officially as Mr. (Subject's sur-
name). G: We have agreed, he w ll be off'c'al and you will be

off'c'al.

+ St Another ,uestion. I'11 have reports, and I] may feel
that could write with the afd of carben paper, tc conceal some
important nf-rmation. I'11 send yc:u a sheet cf clean paper. How
will ycu know that there ® cn S/W message there? 1 should make

9

ly
vate

meee cccemiace mee emes ene enh EOL S eres ws
‘

-gl2

some mark. Otherwise you could think that it {s a wrapper and
throw ‘t away. But I'11 have information there. Here, there Js
the usual, standard paper, I'll make « report cut with the ald of
carbon paper. How should J mark ‘t so that you would develop ‘t?
G: All papers would be checked. St Maybe I should make some kind
cf a mark?) Gt,... something not normal. H: We'll both know.

39. Sr But why should you check clean wrappers when there {s
nothing there, and there will not be. I shall not carry it. But
there will be a sheet, folded thus. There will be material..os.

G: If you had some material and among !t there would be a blank
sheet of paper then !t would be clear that there ‘s somethingron {t.
S: Well, the sheet will be folded ‘nto four parts. Gr: Fine. &:
Like this ese then develop it. G: That's good, but don't place
any marks, if there !s a small line ft may draw suspicion. Ss:

yes, correct. But J] had to ask. wi

ho.) £3 Now, something has happened te my radio all of a
sudd Well, they have trans!stors and you are giving me the
batteries? If the betteries go down I can throw them away, but if
something else breaks? G3: ‘You can get ‘t fixed there. It Is 4
normal radio. S$: Now, if something happens to this (the Minox),
should I send it to you for repairs? Hr (in English) The camera?
We shall send him the second one by WYNNE. G: You'll get & spare
cumere via WYNNE.

CHE Now, another thing. I -heve another request, such
items B camera, your Instructions, do not give !t to WYNNE. Gt
Under ne circumstances. 8: Send them by diplomatic pouch. As
soon a8 WYNNE arrives he'll get them. At the same time, I have
made « note of this. Perhaps it would be worthwh: le; please think
this over, that is, to send these things here, my suitcase, by

‘diplomatic pouch. When WYNNE comes he will bring {t to his hotel.

Would that be okay -- the suitcase? G: That :s net that s'mple.

S: Is the freight expens've? H: (in English) It is not the
cuestion «f the price. You see, the plan he (Subject) put cut the
cther day: was much better. See, what I don't want to do ‘s to have
WYNNE voing into the embassy, bringing a dirty grey suitcase.
Taking It {nto the place, it can be noticed. Carry a small package.
like « briefcase, That 's a different problem. As # businessman
he can carry !t, walk around the street. Carrying @ dirty grey
suitcase out of the embassy {s net normal. G: (translates above

into Russian.)

42. S: No. The cars drive Inside beyond the gate. The
militiaman remains cutside. He has no right te go In there because
"t fs inviolable terr‘tory. G: But the dr ver Is KGB? &: Whose?

-10-

|| 7 > : rs Ey rs r

v3 | =

G: The chauffeur? S: No. Now our middleman, an Englishman, has
-recefved those things. He knows they are for me, cr for WYNNE. He
comes to the Embassy; the car drives up to the embassy entrance and
WYNNE brings the suftcase to the hotel. This !s a variant. .G:

(In English) He 1s talking about an official car. The embassy cer
‘brings the sultcase to WYNNE's hotel. S: Okay, let's not do it.

H: (In English) lt Is not normal, you see. G: It {is not normal.
(Note: Several people talk at once. It was agreed that the material
would be delivered to Subject in person.) ©: Just in case, we must
bear in mind, that things cculd be sent to me by mail.

(BD S: I have a Soviet telephone, ‘t ‘s Soviet and bad but

tha of no consequence. It works well. We have many Yugoslav,
Ceech and German telephones. These are not poss!ble to buy since
they are ordered by our ministries. My point !s this -- It is very
simple to take cur phone out and make # microphone in our telephones.
All my telephone conversations can be heard without Lifting the
receiver. J have a request, not now, but later. Send me a new tele-
phone through WYNNE or other channels, preferably German or Czech.

G: Could you buy one yourself? S$: I cannot. G: You could install
{t? S: Of course. Then they could not tap the line end use the
telephone as“a microphone, Secondly, the workers come, I had the
telephone a long time. They were near the telephone during my
absence. I exclude completely that something has been connected, but
for safety 1 want te connect a new one, throw the old cne away, and
say I bought it.

~/S: They are Sold, but {t 's very difficult to-get one,
very\difficult. As a rule they are distributed. This ‘s my recuest
-- teléphone apparatus. I do not want an English cne -- German. Gr
WI1l 1t work? Ss. Yes. Many houses have white telephones, black,
small portable ones. Everything js the same. G: How about the
magnetic parts? And one could dial? £: Yes. The numbers are the
same, the Latin letters are painted over with cur own letters. For
some reason J] want to replace my telephone. Gs Have you had any
suspicfons? ££: No. I could say I bought it from a friend, from a
telephone man. Think sbout that. JI have a separate apartment. who
would see it? It came from Ceecheslavakia; It [!s d’fficult to get
them. We w'll have conversations, but the dev'l knows, you under-  <
stand, maybe ...se.-. G: Yes, Yes. S: I know, we were-taught how
to adjyat and make a microphone out cf our telephones.

\
| St The next very important matter. -- I want ysu to y’ ve
it soa thought. As scon as another (Soviet) agent, spy is caught,

_ analyze all spies whe were caught curing the past year, two, three
| ~~ Soviets in all countries. Using them as reasons, send a note.

-1l-
!

|

i}

it

Qe

03

. = ii bs i * .
| - . : i,

1 am leading up to the proposal that personnel of Soviet embassies,
trade delegations, and Consulates should be cut. You will chase
out many active cperational Intelligence officers and will create
confusion between the services fighting for slots. This would
disorganize them for approximately six months, eight, a year, until
they sent in new ones. Believe me, I have « good idea. G: Fine.
S: In this respect we will weaken them somewhat. I am not saying
that we will eliminate completely, but we'll hinder them very much.
This {s all accord'ng to my List .... Gr Fine.

S: And we should catch encther one, and then. analyze,
there\were so many, who did what, that th’s situation cannot be
tolerated, the blown-up apparatus leads tec Increased spy activities
in a country by Soviet organizations, accredited, abncrmally blown-
up. It seems to me somehow that we must analyze all this. It seems
to me that there are more Soviets than Englishmen and Americans in
foreign lands. 1 looked at the Soviets here ~~ tuch a great colony
~- a whole Sataiffon:. Decrease them, all categories, because spies
are Installed everywhere beginning with attache, Ist, 2nd secretaries
and counsellors. Decrease them all! It seems to me that ‘f-you did
have to decrease your apparatus in Moscow we still could do business
with the exfeting apparatus; But to deactivate the Soviet organs In
England, in Amerfea -- this !s a very Important question. It can be-
played up from the political point of view. Tell them you have too
many -~ make It less. We should give this deep theughts It Is an
jmportant problem.

G: Now 1 have several questions which we can finish now
because the rest we will leave for tonight. We have much to do. We
had prepared everything so that it is sll systematic. S: I want to

add one thing about WYNNE. 1 want you to tell WYNNE that when he

goes to Moscow he should not expect free food, free automobile, free
hotel reom from either the Government cr the Committee In which

(Sub ject's surname) works. He will not be given @ free room on the
Exhibit grounds. This {s not England. Just because he wined and
dined and drove them {na car here thus saving them money fer their
personal expenses, tell him not to demand the same from Ysubject's
surname). He has been telling me from time to time that he hoped
that I would arrange everything for him there, There w'1l not be
anything. No one will sign the order to issue funds for WYNNE. For
that reason WYNNE shculd be taken care beyond that which the firms
give him tn terms of minimum allowance. Let him go alone, w thout
his wife although I am not ashamed before him.. I cannet do anything
for him. I am not permitted to do this at my personal expense. Tell
him notite be angry with me. Whatever I] can do for him I'l] do. H:

Allright, we will do this.

re

xy
eS Serene

48.) G: Prior to our last review of the signal plan, here is

#13

ast fication of the time schedule. There would be only cone

transmission per month sent repeatedly every Saturday and Sunday at
200 hours. Sz This ts wise. I agree. Let me review what I will
take with me -- the !nstructions, the signal plan, film, and this --
the camera, The transistor is in the suitcase. It'll put the medi-
cine and catalogues on top of !t. G1: The S/W -- there !s noth'ng
on it now. S: This will be here; it will be under my feet. G:

Now all this -- three sizes -~ do them by tomorrow morning. 51 Yes.
Row these one-time pads would be in my pocket. That ‘5 clear.

G&S St Now about this notebook where USA Is written, the’
blac ver, perhaps I shall net take the cover, I*li join the four
sheets of carbon paper l'ke this and the rest will be clean paper.
I'2l. not take the cover. Gz: Okey. Ss: It is too large, and then

there is "Made ‘n USA". If it were a beautiful cover that would be

another matter,: but it {8s cf the common type. It is good for
camouflage. L'11 camcuflage the carbons with someth!ng else. G:

‘Maybe we can get a British cover. H: Yes, we can. S$: And I'l]

transfer the carbon Into It.

50.) S: Wow, let us think, gentlemen -- WYNNE could not come
for some’ unforeseen reason; someone gave me the s!gnal; J go to the
dead drop. We ulready worked that out. G: Yes, and inétructions
for you would be there. 3S: Yes there would be questions and
instructions. It does not matter. Then I'11 be making a contact
with that girl and the beby carriage. G: All instructions will be
there. S: Now 1 have a rajuest, There were suggest'ons; we had
talked much. Very many matters were decided. All your other advice
write down for me. I'll read everything, and burn it well. G: We
propose do do all that tomcrrow.

G:. Wetll review photography, we'll look at the ciphers,
I'11] Bhow you -- S: You gave me a cipher for 70 greups. After I
decode !t, how do I reply? Perhaps something would be urgent -- te
whom do 1 reply? Gt There will be instructions on that. <5: Do

- you have the telephone number for me? Gr You'll have it temorrow.

All cperational matters will be taken care of tomorrow and will be
prepared clearly and s'mply. Already you know. when to listen to the
radio, you have a choice as to what day. - on

52. S: I want to teli yeu something. SHAPCVALOV had recuested
me to see General LYAKHTERCV. He Is the deputy ~f£ yrur relative
HHLOPCV. He was formerly the Chief of the Fourth Directorate.
SHAPOVALOV had compiled a dictionary cn the Hind! language and
turned It !n to the Foreign Language Department of the Military Di,-
lomatic Academy sc that they would edt ‘t and have ft published. I

Ot Ne ote a

am teliing youth's so that you would know how well he knows Hind!.
He has comp'led a dictionary. He has business net with one agent
se probably more, but he has one for sure who can be easily
caught. |

#13

G: There ure several ,juestions left. We cannot cover all
_ofF t @ but we still have a half hour left. We'll do as much as we
con. There are rumors that you have duplicate head.uarters for the

Party and for the Government in the event of war. ey are organized.
These head..uarters are hidden somewhere In the Urals of Sone ete
else. Have you heard about them? 5: Wheat kinds cf headjuarters,

military? Gr The ‘nd which are needed te operate, such as Party

head: ,uarters,-aréa headuarters -- in case of war. S: Those are

emergency headiuarters. All reserve sites for military purposes,

.ggnistries, etc., all government functions, have been set up. All
this has been worked out. Where” eae

G: The military, too, since this !s easy to displace. 3S:

Yes. ere fs a huge, Command Post. They are {n the subway fn
. Moscow, somewhere Setween the Kremli: and the General Headquarters,
deep below.~ There is an electric (train) that goes there. That
exists. G: Are there any in the Urals area? 5S: Yes there are.
Operational groups fly there from every ministry. Everything is In
the rocks, underground. G:. You do not know exactly, byt in the
Urals area? St In the center of the Urals somewhere. There are
shelters there. os a

S: By the way, I think I mentioned that !n the Urals there
are ation hangers, underground factories. There are very many
underground structures, but it {s very, very expensive. I've been
told that this takes up so much money that there are no roads.

There is not enough money for the roads, but for elwilian and mili-
tary defense constructions there is plenty cf money. Gs Probably
th!s duplication also exists in military districts, PVO, etc.? “S$?

Yes, absolutely. The commander of the district takes care of that.

He Ns# an engineer directorate with eng’ neer brigades to do this.
This is the problem for!commander of the district according te the

mobilization plan. Only military, not civilian.
\ a G: In the event of an unexpected war, how much reserve

suppites do the land treeps have? what is the supply level? S:. I
Know that exactly -- 30 days. G: In place? 3: In place. But,
take a reg’ment -- !t would not all be fn the reg'ment's hands. It
would be in rear supply points. The units have a five‘day supply

carried cn hand, also canned fceds, hard tack, ete. G: That would |

aie

- commander has a. 30 day supply. If he does not rece've anything, he

_prepared ljsts of what-personnel will go to what units, where

. immediate instruct‘ons prior to recefving Instructions from higher

be for the theater of operations? Ss: Yes. In general, the

#13

will be eble to feed large units. He has flour, grits, concentrates
and canned goods .escos Gs Who is responsible for this supply, say
for a Group of Forces? S$: That Is done b ORGMOB. That ‘s tha

soul of the army. G: Why do you say thet? “St The ORGMCB, the
Organization-Mobilization, abbreviated to ORGMOB. It can be 8 direc~-
torate.

G6) * Now, in general, you have just brought up & cuestion, a
stra one. It {8 an important problem. We had talked about it..
The CBLASTs! VOYENKOMAT must be spotted and destroyed. They ane
vitale G: This brings up the ,uest!on of what exactly is the :
mobilization plan. Who dec'des where recruits should go? $: Begin-
ning with the Organization and Mobi lization Directorate of the
General Staff and running through all the military districts and
through the OBLASTS, city and RAYON as well as village ccunciis where
they have military conscription registration desks, the latter is the
cell of the system. Down to and including the offices of the RAYON
there are sealed envelopes. These are to be opened !n the event cf
war by each RAYON VOYENKOMAT. The contents have been prepared by the
General Staff. The instructions state exactly according to what plan
what should be done. This plan has been completely worked out in
time, phase, feri!ods, such as H-hour, H plus one, etc. This plan has

vehicles, eyuipment and even horses will be assigned. The local com-
mander at this peint merely opens the envelope and follows the

command. Even {f a coded cable did not arrive from the OBLAST or
military distr'ct headvuarters yet, until receipt of such, the local
Commander knows exactly what to do. This includes dispos:tdons of
personnel, supplies, equipment, etc. He would know what to do for
the first three days. Supplemental Instructions covering the period
up to D plus 90 w'll follow later. aa a

“Gt Is the VOCYENNY BILET st‘il used as ‘n the past?) ¢:
Yes, have one and 1 will send you a photocopy. «f mine. G: Does
it also include the. pink mobilization {nsert? S: Yes, ‘t does, but
it ts given enly to lower ranking personnel, ron-coms and officers

through the rank cf captain. Majors and abcve no longer have this

insert. They yvave me a VOYENNY BILET as a le.end that I hed been
demobilized. You will see a copy of this -- In fact, 1 will devote
an entire film tc my documerts., You w'll see my Party BILET, my
UDOSTOVERENIYE LICHNOSTI and all my varfous passes to different
organizat‘ons, my VOYENNY BILET and my c'v lfan passport. This
passport which Js yiven te all off'cers who work In ‘ntelligence end

afr

hee se
GEt HS

—_"

Resins

and receive civilian passports !s called an operational passport.
Pay clipse attention to the numerical designation on this passport.

-Jwill underscore it for-you. If a militiaman checks my passport
and notices these numbers, he will pass me by, realizing that this
is an operational passpert and thet I heave not been demobilized or
anything of that sort. Otherw' se, except for the code number, !t
looks Like any civilian passport.

“3

~& G} What Kind of alerts do you have? For example, there
are training alerts and then there are other cetegories. S: There

is the air alert which exists:as in the past, 3 chemical warfare
alert, and there is @ combat alert for troops to assemble troops.
This is e general alert. For example, at the academy there were
eee leak assembly points for-each cof the five departments and for
the instrection personnel. ODINTSOV would always call one of these
every two months as a practice alert. A general alert may be
followed by a chem'cal alert, The general alert ia the basic one.
Then they eriticize deficienc’es In the speed of assembly. :

| (eo) S$: In the General Staff we also ‘have @ system of

: OPOVESHOMANIYE which means mo should notify whom in case of an
palert. This ds the key to insuring the desired sesembly in case of
lan alert. In garrison positions alerts Cin be éasily signalled by
sound devices, but where people Live in civilian quarters a personal
contact method by phone and even. in person must. ‘be _estab}ished.

(Each officer must always have a small suitcase with minimum articles
for personal use prepared for lmmed‘ate piekup. Other academies may

have only one slert in’ three wonths.” That is done.gither on the
individual direction of the chief cr by an cverall garrison commander.

61) G: To what extent ‘5 combat ready equ:pment brought cut?

S$: Vehicles and artillery are brought out including ammunition, etc.
One cannot teil whether or not consequent action w “take. place: after
the alert is sounded. G: Is there any practice alert which takes |
place In a skeletonized form w' thout esaipment, etc? S: Yes, but ft
{s atill a general alert with specific Instructions added to it,
namely to assemble without this and that equipment or arms. So it fs
simply a general alert with qualifications, But there ‘8 no such

cateuory as practice alert.
2) Gt What type of annual maneuvers and troop deployments
take ce? St: Twill send you the manuais Covered ‘n this and you
can see all the deta'’ls for yourself. G:. How about the army
reserves? De you net have large numbers of beth enlisted and -ffiecr
reserves? St There are extensive reserves and they continue te
train them by meant of agsembifes. G: How often de they have te go?
S$: That depends on whet thelr VUS (VCYENNC-UCHEBNAYA SPETSIALNGST')
(MOS) js. If they are technictans, they are celled cut every year.

~l6-

So oar @ Ht og .
. ae r
,

But if he fs a veterinary, and we have few horses now, he may be
called cnce in three or five years. Now that technical eculpment
plays such ea great role and technical units-are extensive, engineers
and technicians are called up to be trained itn new Ne

There are ten-day training perfods, one-month and three-month train-
ing per sees Ik all depends on what the training program has been
se or. !

‘#13

complete decalt.” Under this pretext they are discharging physically
unfit, old people, and politicelly unreliable persons. And the rest
they don't touch. He has made many skeletonized units out of divi-
sions and regiments, Sut 412 key personnel, the un!t des! gnation,
rema i st the same. In case of emergency, in three days the unit

‘heED the OBLAST VOYENHOMATY would. be destroyed, there would pe. omplete _

panic in case of war, They don't even have real safés where the!r

papers ere kept, but:streng boxes which would easily be destroyed In
a good fire. If the contents were destroyed, even though reservists
would know where to report In'tially, they would not know what to do

from there on since all detalls are ‘neluded in the mob! ligation plan.

- Cs) Gi What would you say that the strength of. the Soviet: Army
sn

HHRUSHCHEV mentioned that there are epproximetely three
million six hundred thousand. 5: We estimate it to be abort five

million. Gs: Is this from rumor -or from statistical deta? $: After

thousand, This 1 know exactly. G: Hew about the breakdown by air
forces, naval forces, etc? S: This fs known tc the Minister of

=17=

. aa | | .

4 Staff and the chief cf the Mobilisational and Organizational Direc-

#15

¥

-torate. If you ask SEROV, he wouldn't know. However, he would

knowymore about it than Ido.
| 66/ Gs Do you have any idea of the budgetary allocation given
Budet 1 to (Ge yr 4 eS Teel :
Gn thtions. First of all they consider, of course, the officers! pay.
we have now. There they would compute for foreign duty what the
monthly equivalent pay weald have te be In foreign currency. I
received 2,000 I!ra per menth or 24,060 per year, Then all other
intelligence personnel were computed similarly. Our cperational .
funds were always inza rotating fund -- 15,000 lira. This was used
for agent support. G: Suppose you had a rather expensive operation?
me | $3. For this, if 4 debe ada funds would be sent (rom Moscow. Monies
ae ‘|. -aré transferred through the embassy and theifinancecofficer knows .
7 for whom the allocations are, Agent support funds, cperational .
4 travel, and even operational entertef{nment, are all operational funds.
; « MWehicle repair, havsing, ete., are adminiatrativerfunds. 1 cantt
give you a GRY total, although I could: break down what Individual
incomes are, .

a te

. (8T) @: How about the total military bud,et? How is that
brokén—down? S: That ts deliberately never brekensdoun, KHRUSHCHEV __
may announce that there are one hundre on rubles for military
‘) purposes, but ne breskdewn Is given. This is always a reduced figure

- because there are other funds from which payments Are made to fac- _
tories which produce more material. You should ‘siways askime that the
capeounced a Titery. budget {s actually two to twosand a half more times

than what’ Ts publiély annéuncea.

2 G: What does {[t mean for example when he atated that
30,000-Tubles would be allocated for the development of the ICBM? 5:
1 am_not familiar with that figure:and have nct seen ‘t weed -
officially, Possibly KHRUSHCHEV said something out cf turn once,
but I am positive thatithe amount! allocated fer recket development

igs much creater. Even VARENTSOV who Is supposed tc get a tertan”
enount from the budget fs always attempting to get supplementary
unds from covert sources since he needs more money, He once told me
this. He had been responsible fcr a cons iderable juantity of. cone
ventional artillery which did not have proper protect ‘ve shelter and

he was authorized to order large quantities of Canvas covers, However
in a year or twe these covers rotted. ‘Se he dlscardet these at a loss
of several million rubles and spent twice as much tc construct |
permanent steel and concrete shelters. Despite the ultimate saving
ever canvas as well as the preservation of ordnance, he was critis-

cized for this big expenditure.

~1b~

bat ») Gt Do you have eny Idea of what It costs to fully equip

a 5 pattelion? §: J have no !dea but 1 do know that 8 MIG-15
‘ cos actly 500,000 rubles (in old money) because I was ordered
VIS to destroy one in Turkey and I had to sign papers. Of course the

oe M1G-17 and MIG-19 ere far more expensive. Just keep in mind that

MiG for very overt things such as Individual pay, cost ef running

oa ‘7 | academies and othar military installations that ‘$8 where the mill-

(ices | tary budget can be seen, but neither VAR nor GAU pay for the
‘is | production of cannons and rockets. That is all’done by secret alio-

zi | cations to facturies whith are all part of the GOSPLAN.

‘ 4 (16) G: Let me see what other guestions we have here. You
ment! d VCh before and said you would get us a directory. 5: I

Pe will give you a list of all the military units that J run across.

4 ee I already gave you the academy and I will_give you the one «t
“il Fen). eapestin Yar es well as others. Ge I mean the VCh of the telephone
1 ky

et

ment and for cther official purposes. Everycne in the General Staff —

does not have a VCh. G: Can it not be tntercepted? St 1 believe
it ts difficult to intercept end ‘t fs a Line which is connected —
_ Whol) with all OKRUGS and even with the countries of Peoples! Democracies.

tysten. Si That [8 classified telephone line used by_the_goverh- a

ee tee ete eee

There [Ss an-internal Kremlin l{ne called the KREMLEVKA through which
we can be switehed through a switchboard, but this can be Inter-
-~eepted. The General Staff hae ‘ts own circult and to get the city
line you first diel TEt, On Incoming calls to us we cap also be
reached by those whe know the edd't oneal letters tc add such K-2 or

Kel. The VCh is basfeally e four number system but coes from switch-

BS ate es aes to awitchbeard betweenttewns and it is considered.to: be secure
: . oO USEC :
: ¢
: CEA «) @: Here {8 an economic juestion. Does the comm ttee
ce # j call he Council of Economic Mutual Assistance have a relationship
1 lrofad/ to the Warsew Pact? S: Course it does, It controls and coord!«
nates cverything. The Warsaw Pact is concerned with armaments,
aed ewuipment, training, and military ald. G: Do ycu know who is fn
“se charge af t ia committee? §S: All this yoes through the Foreign Sec-
Isle t'on of the Central Committee which has to do with the countries of ©
fora ~ Peoples! Democracies. If {t's a military matter then [t wenld ge
fart threugh the Tenth Directorate cf the Ministry of Defense. The Chief

of Staff has a deputy who is concerfied only with”these metters. G:
Who fis the commander <-f the Tenth Directorate? &:-. He fs a general
of the army end s former commander «f the Transceaucasian Military

cistrict.

2) Gt Welre werrfed ebiut your time new and we cen leave
these her things until tenight when we meet egain. Thr prominent
persen whe will meet you tonight wlll come here. He will come efter

~19-

ras)

we have met and he will visit you for half an hour or 30, S: 1]
will be back here et 2100 hours then. Then I will meet the man,

and when shall I see the yneen ( joxingly)? If i were tn the USA, -

I wontd ask to meet HE . Jt The sueen happens to he in Italy
; at the moment. St I mow. I'm Joking.

H: Ask him if he will have time to take 8 few practice

ore this evening. St Yes, 1 can do this, just for prac-

' ; Load {t yourself to show! that you know how and take !t
with you. H: Then we can develop ‘t tomorrow and show him the
results temcrrow evening. S: Now with respect to ae, you
will tell him what I need. G: Yes, 1 have already trantlated the

a4 (tems Inte English and have !t typed. You keep this list since It is.
ae our control List which was given to you by the HGS man in his own

a | - hed. Se Thank-you. 1 will take this. J will leave all other
materials except the camera. “I will geé WYNNE right away, then rest
a little and ge to the Consulate at 1700 hours. 1 will return here
at 2100 hours. 1 may be five or ten minutes late, but no more. G:
Pick up your money; you may take {t with you. Wetll see you later.
St Thank yar. (Subject departed at ihe hours on 3 May 1961.)

2+

ves ast tes
sbedse et
