Memo from Richard Helms to Director Central Intelligence Concerning
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012364, dated 2 July 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012364).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

: = — Cf P2)
: | 1.3(a}{4).

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D. C.

IRONBARK 1

}.>
\

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT (‘TOP SECRET): "Several

Questions on Evaluating the Effectiveness
of the Basic Means of Antiair Defense of

a Front, and Its Organizational Structure",
by Colonel-General of Aviation S. Mironov

cy

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which
appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought” “omen Mysl") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander.

2. For convenience of reference by USIB agencies, the
codeword IRONBARK has been assigned to this series of TOP SECRET
CSDB reports containing documentary Soviet material. The word
TRONBARK is classified ‘CONFIDENTIAL and is to be used only among
persons authorized to read and handle this material.

3. In the interests of protecting our gource, IRONBARK
material should be handled on a need~to-know basis within your
office. Requests for extra copies of this’ report or for utili-
zation of any part of this document in any other form should be

‘addressed to the originating office.

ry
Richard Helms
- Deputy Director (Plans)

Enclosure

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 9 JUN 1992

9 3(a)(4)

ccs

1.3(a

a Director of Central Intelligence
Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

The Director of Intelligence and Research,
Department of State

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

The Director for Intelligence,
The Joint Staff

The Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence,
Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

The Assistant Chief of Staff, quer teencs
U. S. Air Force

The Director, National Security Agency

Director, Division of Intelligence
: Atomic Energy Commission

National Indications Center

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

The Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Deputy Director: for Research

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates

Neo tetent Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports
Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

Director, National Photographic Interpretation Center

"12304

1.3(a)i4)

IRONBARK}
WE 304

COUNTRY > USSR

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT (TOP SECRET): "Several
Questions on Evaluating the Effectiveness
of the Basic Means of Antiair Defense of
a Front, and Its Organizational Structure",
by Colonel-General of Aviation S. Mironov

DATE OF INFO: December 1961

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENTS : Documentary

SOURCE >: A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article
entitled "Several Questions on Evaluating the Effectiveness
of the Basic Means of Antiair Defense of a Front, and Its
Organizational Structure", by Colonel-General of Aviation
S. Mironov.

This article appeared in the 1962 First Issue of a
special version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya
Mysl (Military Thought). This journal is published
irregularly and is classified TOP SECRET by the Soviets.
The 1962 First Issue went to press on 29 December 1961.

pee ageer ere Comment: Military Thought is published by

nistry oF Defense in three versions, classified
RESTRICTED, SECRET, and TOP SECRET. The RESTRICTED version
‘has been issued monthly since 1937, while the other two
versions are issued irregularly. The TOP SECRET version
was initiated in early 1960. By the end of 1961, 61
issues of the SECRET version had been published, 6 of them
during 1961,

1.3(a){a)

es 3
Gaal 1.3(a)4)

Several Questions on Evaluating the Effectiveness:

of the Basic Means of Antiair Defense of a Front,

and Its Organizational Structure
by

Colonel-General of Aviation S. Mironov

The thinking abroad is that aviation will continue to
be the basic means of delivering nuclear warheads for a
long time to come, since the overwhelming majority of targets
‘in the theaters of military operations are small in size
, and highly mobile, and the combat operations of both sides
extremely mobile. The enemy's arsenal of means of attack in-
Cludes flying apparatuses which represent air attack wea-
pons with high combat capabilities. And, in our view, these
characteristics should determine the nature of the require-
ears on the system of weapons of the PVO troops of ground
roops.

As is known, among the basic tasks carried out by front
PVO troops are: reconnaissance and destruction in the air of
enemy means of air attack; neutralization of his ground and
aerial radiotechnical means of control and guidance; destruc-
tion of airbornetroops while in flight to the landing area,
and at the landing area; and warning the front troops and
the PYO of the Country about an enemy air raid.

“To carry out these tasks, the front PVO has at its. diz-
posal radiotechnical troops, antiaircraft. artillery, antiaim
oraft missiles, and fighter aviation.

It is conpletely obvious that any system of troop for- .
mation, including that of the front PVO troops, will attain
the highest combat and operational effectiveness if the role
and place of all basic combat means in the system are correctly
defined. —

1.3(a)(4)

TE a 3
a
+3(a4).

Therefore, it would be advisable to examine in detail
the role and place of the basic combat means within the PVO
system of a front, especially since the press has carried
articles in which authors have presented contradictory views,
sometimes highly praising one type of weapon while undeservedly
depreciating the value of another. For example, in a number
of published articles, authors proclaim the decisive role of
antiaircraft guided missiles in destroying an air eneny,
while clearly underestimating fighter aviation, which, even at
the present time, in our opinion, represents one of the
primary means of PVO, especially the antiair defense of
troops.

It must be noted that in most cases such statements are
made by authors without adequate grounds or concrete analysis
of the combat capabilities of all PVO means.

It seems to us that it is fundamentally wrong to single
out only one of the combat means in deciding on a system of
weapons for the antiair defense of troops. Because any
weapon, even the most sophisticated one, always has its weak
points which the enemy can exploit to facilitate his own
task of overcoming PVO.

Experience of armed combat very strikingly demonstrates
the necessity of a harmonious combination of all means of
combat, since in this way the most effective use is made of
the strong points, and the weak points are compensated for,
in each of these means, thus causing them to complement each
other.

In this connection, we shall examine the basic tactical-
technical characteristics and the combat and operational cap-
abilities of the principal PVO means of a front and try to
establish their true significance on the basis of specific
calculations and on the experience gained from exercises.

In view of the fact that antiaircraft tube artillery now
carries out only a limited number of tasks, namely, directly
covering objectives from strikes by low-flying, low-speed

1.3{a)(4)

23

1.3(a)(4).

ee
[IRONBARK
—

aircraft and helicopters and also combating airborne landings,
we shall dwell on the analysis of combat capabilities of
antiaircraft guided missiles and fighter aviation.

Antiaircraft guided missiles (ZUR) are a very effective
means of antiair defense. Their probability of destruction
of single targets represents an average of 0.80 to 0.85.
They are less affected by meteorological conditions than
other types of weapons of the PVO troops.

At the same time however, antiaircraft missile conm-
plexes possess a number of negative characteristics which
reduce their combat and operational capabilities. The first
of these is the low maneuverability of antiaircraft guided
missile units. Thus, in a situation in which the ground
troops are advancing at a rate of 80 to 100 km per 24-hour day,
the full complement of guided missile units can participate
in covering the troops only.when the latter are in the initial
position or when they are delayed by the enemy at some intex
mediate line; and only an insignificant part of the guided
missile forces can provide cover in the course of a swift
maneuver of troops.

Also contributing to the above situation is the great
amount of time required to bring the antiaircraft guided.
missile complexes into combat and march readiness, For —
example, it requires 3 to 5 hours to bring a missile complex
to combat readiness and 3 hours to dismantle it. Because of
the great weight of missile equipment (up to 11 to 14 tons),
its extreme sensitivity to road-surface irregularities, its
limited capabilities of climbing and descending steep grades
and managing sharp curves (the turning radius of a prime mover
with a launching mount is not less than 10 meters), the speed
at which a mount can be moved at night is only 10 km per hour.

Thus, in view of the high rate of advance of ground troops
and the missile complex's limited effective casualty radius
(35 to 50 km), the forward elements of troops will advance
beyond the ZUR zone of cover every 5 to 6 hours unless the
latter can effect a timely advance to new positions. In view

<r ea

~4-

3(a)(4)

IRONBARK

P . a
of the above-mentioned shortcomings, it is inadvisable to 1 3ayi4)
make frequent shifts in the disposition of antiaircraft
missile complexes over short distances. While they are
deploying to a new position, the ground troops will have
advanced an average of 15 to 20 km, i.e., they again will
have moved beyond the protective zone of a given missile
complex.

Even under the most favorable of circumstances, in
which the missile complex is relocated only once every twenty-
four hours, up to 19 hours will be required to dismantle, move
and set it up. Thus, even under the most favorable conditions
the maximum amount of time left for the combat employment of the
complex in a 24 hour period is 5 hours. Even with a slower rate
of advance by the ground troops, there will be virtually no in-
crease in the time available for the combat employment of
missile complexes because.of the aforementioned reasons. Con-
sequently, the existing antiaircraft missile complexes
essentially are means of protection of stationary objectives;

“while in operations of fronts they apparently will be used

only for the protection of troops in important operational
positions, and, most effectively, during lulls in operations.

Antiaircraft missile complexes installed on chassis of
assault guns will possess higher maneuver capabilities. How-
ever, even this will not ensure a rapid concentration of
missile troops in a required area during the course of an
operation.

The second important shortcoming of missile complexes
which sharply reduces the combat and operational capabilities
of antiaircraft missile regiments is the exceedingly great
amount of effort spent in the preliminary preparation and
checkout of missiles. The productivity of a technical
battalion under field conditions is extremely low. Even with
well-trained personnel working under favorable conditions,

a technical battalion can prepare, with only a checkout of

zag

Be

Ms —-43(aN4)

as

the complex, a maximum of 20 to 22 missiles in a 24-hour
period; while a checkout of missile-borne instruments in
their complete program (using two lines) can be done on 10
missiles in a 24-hour period. In view of the fact that a
technical battalion is not provided with a reserve supply of
missiles, it will be compelled to carry out a full program
checkout of missiles received from front and army bases.

Thus, an antiaircraft missile regiment will be able to destroy
only 5 targets from among the enemy means of air attack in a
24-hour period (on the basis of two missiles for one target),
and this under the most favorable conditions and without taking
enemy opposition into account.

IRONBARK

Another shortcoming of antiaircraft missile complexes
that should be mentioned is the fact that they can destroy
‘only those targets flying above 3000 meters. Thus, a situation
may develop in which antiaircraft missile complexes will be -
unable to destroy a large part of the air targets flying at
low altitudes. It should also be borne in mind that, because
of the characteristics of the methods of detecting low-flying
targets, the complexes designated for destroying them have an
extremely limited range of fire, and a large number of com-
plexes will be needed to provide adequate protection for front
troops. ;

The combat capabilities of antiaircraft missiles are also
reduced because of the lengthy preparation for launching from
readiness No. 2. Experience proves that to bring a complex
from this condition of readiness to readiness for fire takes
8 minutes if the diesel generators are running or if some
other power supply is being used.and up to 13 minutes if the
diesel generators are turned on when ths command is given to
prepare the complex for firing. It is evident that the amount
of warmup time (passivnoye vremya) is quite great, and in order
to have the time to launch a missile at a target flying at a
speed of 420 m. per second, it has to be detected at the dis—
tance of 245 and 370 km respectively. For example, to destroy
a B-47, which has the lowest speed of this class of aircraft,
it is necessary to detect it at a distance of 130 and 200 km

mmm 1884

-6-

1.3(a)(4)

4.3{a){4)

| ee 1.3(a)(4)

respectively. But since the search and target acquisition
Yadar set, P-12M, detects a medium bomber flying at 20,000
monly at a distance of 240 km and a fighter at 180 km, there
is not enough time, as a rule, to prepare the missile com-
plex for firing from the moment the target is detected. Thus,
the present antiaircraft missiles complex, whem in readiness
No. 2, does not ensure the destruction of the most probable
indicated targets; azd when in readiness No. 1, it ensures
the destruction of targets flying at speeds up to 1500 km
per hour, and has a limited capability against those flying
at speeds up to 2000 km per hour. Furthermore, a complex
can remain in a condition of readiness for launching only 25
minutes, and at least 20 minutes are required to get the com-
plex ready for amother launching.

The short range of fire of antiaircraft missile com-
plexes and the exceptionally high speeds of modern aircraft
sharply limit the possibility of timely missile launchings.
Thus, a target flying at the speed of 420 meters per second
(1500 km per hour) is in the zone of destruction of an anti-
aircraft missile complex for 67 seconds, and a target flying
at the speed of 560 meters per second (2000 km per hour) for
only 50 seconds.

A number of the design characteristics of an antiaircraft
missile complex limit its capabilities of reliably destroying
any type of target. In particular, the destruction of.a |
maneuvering target is possible when its angle of approach
up to the moment of impact with the missile does not exceed
55 degrees. For the same reasons there are also prohibited
areas at an azimuth of 40 degrees and an elevation of 45
degrees. The presence of a single guidance channel (tselevoy
kanal) in an antiaircraft missile battalion ensures simul-
taneous fire against only one target.

Unquestionably, antiaircraft guided missiles represent a
new, effective, and very promising type of weapon. There is
no doubt that the continucus process of development and per-
fection will see an improvement in their tactical and technical .
characteristics and an imcrease in their combat capabilities.
The antiaircraft guided missiles and controlling radar stations
mounted on assault gun chassis, which are now being issued,

a 1.3(2)(4)

1.3(a)(4

—Eeanan npr

IRONBARK

1.S{a}{4)

ae 1.3(a)(4)

have better maneuverability characteristics than the pre-
vious ones, while the <reation of missiles with engines

that operate on solid *tuel will skarply increage their combat
readiness. However, because of «2 whole series of specific
characteristics of antiaircraft missiles, which exist in
future systems as weil, it is our view that we should not
expect in the future to be able to concentrate, within short
periods of time, their main effort in a required area in the
course of an offensive operation amd, especially, while an

air raid by enemy aircraft and cruise missiles is under way.
This is also determined by the short range of fire of missiles,
by the comparatively weak protection against jamming, and by
large limitations of 4 design nature in isunmching the missiles.

In view of ali the abovvememtionsd, we are not inclined
toward considering antiaircraft guided missile complexes as
the principal and decisive force in a system of antiair
defense of troops of a front.

We shall examine the tactical—technical characteristics
and the tactical and operational capabilities of fighter
aviation.

Modern fighter aircraft armed with missiles of the
"air-to-air" type also possess a high probability of target
destruction (0.8 to 0.9) and can destroy one aircraft or
one cruise missile of any type in one attack. Thus, the
modern fighter in essence has become a highly maneuverable,
flying ZUR launching mecunt, while retaining its most valuable
and most important quality - the high probability of target
Gee teuecsons

High maneuverability of fighter aviation constitutes its
most important quality, which is meeded especially in antiair
defense, when the initiative in regard to the type of action
and time and direction of the strike always belong to the
attacker. It is perfectly obvious that only fighter aviation
can be concentrated and employed in mass in the course of an
air enemy attack that has already begun amd at the exact
place and time of the greatest danger and threat to the troops

iy oF] 13

(a)(4)

Ge ee
ws

and to the most important objectives of the front. With

its long range of fire and by using a wide maneuver, fighter
aviation is capable of providing the mecessary correlation
of forces in a required arsa to repulse successfully an
enemy attack in any .ssctor of a front and On the flanks of
cooperating fronts. Ensurance of moving from one airfield
to another (aerodromnyy manevr) by aviation along the line
of the front does not present any particular difficulties.
On the other hand, ensurance of such moves by aviation while
following advancing troops at the present high rates of ad-
vance presents, just as in moves of antiaircraft missile
troops, definite complexitiss and difficulties. For example,
the volume of excavation necessary in the construction of

a field fighter base om terrain of average ruggedness is up
to 10,000 m One engineor-airfield battalion can prepare
such a field in 24 to 48 hours. As is known, the volume of
excavation work necessary in the first stage of preparing

an antiaircraft missile regiment's siting area is 8230 m

and can be carried out in 24 to 48 hours by the forces and .
means assigned for the work. Thus, the time necessary to
prepare field fighter bases and ZUR siting areas is about
the same. However, the time necesgary to move them to new
positions is different, just as the respective ranges of these
PVO means differ. Morsover, the solution of the problem of
vertical takeoff and landing will give fighter aviation a
new quality - operating without airfields, which will
immeasurably increase their combat and operational capabilities.

Fighter aircraft is the omly means of antiair defense
combining within itself the qualities of defense and attack.
They can not only repel raids already under way, but can also
disrupt them by combined bombing-strafing attacks against
airfields and against launch sites for missiles and cruise
missiles and by the destruction of enemy aircraft during take-~
off and while assuming flight formation.

Fighter avintion is capable of destroying the eneny's
radiotechnical means. Two fighters can completely put out of
action a guidance radar station of any class or designation.
Because of their great range of fire, fighters can destroy

aaa 1.3(a)(4)

~9-

1.3(a)(4)

ely :.;

IRONBARK

CE + 3x3

"air-to-surface" missile-carrying aircraft which launch

their rockets beyond the effective range of the front's

ZUR, as well as, nuclear-weapon-—carrying aircraft at dis-

tant approaches. Modern methods of aerial, radiotechnical

and other types of reconnaissance permit the timely dis-
closure of the enemy's preparations for take-off or of aircraft
already underway and the immediate dispatch of fighters to
destroy them.

Until recently, the accuracy in directing fighters and
intercepting air targets was not high emough, mainly because
of the known physical limitations of combat crew personnel
at command posts. With the issue of mobile, automated
systems of control, which are now being mastered successfully
in units and large units of fighter aviation of air armies,
‘the accuracy of guiding and intercepting air targets is rising
sharply, and the combat and operational capabilities of
fighter aircraft as a whole are increasing.

Because of automation in the processes of collection,
processing and transmittal of data, the warmup time is being
sharply curtailed, the lines of interception are being moved
toward the enemy, the capabilities for intercepting low-flying
targets are increasing, the time necessary for the guidance
process is being cut, and the capabilities of simultaneous
guidance are being enlarged, as a result of which a
fighter division consisting of three regiments with four
command posts, using the communication channel for guidance,
can simultaneously direct 21 to 25 fighters (groups) against
21 to 25 targets (groups c* targets). The arming of fighters
with "air-to-air" missiles “hich permits an air target to be
attacked from any directio. will greatly increase the
capabilities of aviation tc destroy the enemy at great dis-
tances from the front line. This is particularly important
for carrying out intercepts at low altitudes, which at the pre-
sent time are accomplished behind the front line over one's own
territory, because of the limited range at which radar can de-
tect low-flying aircraft and the necessity to direct the
fighter against the target aircraft's rear (rear hemisphere-
zadnyaya polysfera).

am 1304

~10-

1.3{a}(4)

IRONBARK

1.3te)(a).

a...

_It. should be noted that fighter aircraft operations
are dependent upon meteorological conditions to a greater
extent than are antiaircraft missile troops. Under normal
meteorological conditions, as well as below or behind clouds,
and depending on the level of training, the full complement
of fighters can participate in repelling enemy aircraft and
cruise missiles; while in the clouds at night, only a part
of the forces, in planes with radar and infra-red instru-
ments,can participate. Thus, the combat capabilities of
fighters to intercept enemy aircraft in the clouds are
significantly lessened. In this connection, a continuous
process is taking place in the armed forces of equipping
air armies with all-weather fighters. In addition, it is
necessary to bear in mind the limited capabilities of a
probable enemy to deliver strikes from the clouds and at
night, since his basic delivery vehicle of nuclear weapons,
as has been previously noted, is piloted aircraft.

From the point of view of economics it would be interest-
ing to compare the cost characteristics in the construction of
each type of weapon in use.

It is known that the overall material expenditures in
creating a combat-ready fighter regiment are significantly
higher than for an antiaircraft missile regiment, However,
after aviation and antiaircraft missiles have been used
three times in combat to achieve a similar combat effect, the
economic indices are in favor of aviation equipment. With
further frequency of use, this difference becomes even more
perceptible.

The experience from World War II, calculations of combat
effectiveness and losses of aviation cquipment, and taking
into account the modern means of counteracting aircraft, show
that the average number of missions per plane is between 30
and 50, These data permit aircraft combat means to be classi-
fied among the most’ advantageous from the economic standpoint.

A brief analysis of the tactical-technical characteristics
and the combat and operational capabilities of antiaircraft

wm (14

1.3(a)(4)

oe
2

guided missiles and fighter aviation indicates that both

these means have a number of positive and negative sides.
Neither antiaircraft guided missiles nor fighter aviation

is a universal weapon, guaranteeing the independent

achievement of all goals and the solution to all problems

of antiair defense of a front. In our view, both of these means
should be combined in the front PVO system, complementing each
other and reciprocally compensating each cther's negative
qualities and raising the effectiveness of each. However, the
principal role should belong to fighters.

IRONBARK

Let us briefly examine several questions relating to
the organizational structure of a front's antiair defense.

As is known, control of the antiair defense of 2 front
is the responsibility of the PYO chief of the front ground
troops. At the same time, radiotechnical troops and the
basic PVO means (that is, antiaircraft guided missiles and
fighter aviation) are in the S/O & E of the combined-arms
armies, air armies and the front itself. Such a distribution
of PVO forces and means between the types of armed forces
and arms of troops significantly reduces the effectiveness
of their utilization as a whole, since the organization of
coordination is encumbered, the necessary efficiency of control
is not assured, and serious obstacles are placed in the way
of concentrating forces and means and utilizing them expediently.
Moreover, the front PVO chief does not have the necessary
forces and means to organize and carry out the control of
antiair defense,

Control over the basic PVO means is organized in a
rudimentary manner and carried out from various command posts:
fighter aviation is controlled from the command post of the air
army; antiaircraft missile troops are nominally controlled
from the command post of the front PVO chief, but actually are
controlled from the command posts of the combined-arms armies.

Experience from exercises in groups of forces and in
military districts during 1960-1961 completely confirms the

Se

~123-—

1.3(a4)

 1.3(a)(4)

HRONBARK]
EE 23

indicated shortcomings in the organizational structure of
front PVO troops.

It is perfectly apparent that such organizational
dispersion and lack of a clear system of centralized control
contradict the basic principle of the necessity for mass
utilization of PVO forces and means, hinders the development
of a clear organizational structure of PVYO troops in peace-
time, and can lead to grave consequences in time of war.

In our opinion, it is advisable to centralize control
over radiotechnical troops, ZUR units, and fighter aviation
at the front level. This proposition is in keeping with
the general principles for the utilization of combat means
and will scarcely cause any doubt.

Naturally, the question arises as to how to organize
most advantageously the direction and control over the PVO
forces and means of a front. It seems to us that direction
and the entire weight of responsibility for antiair defense
of a front should be placed om the commander of the air army,
according him the appropriate rights (without changing in
this connection the direction of PVO in armies and large units).
Such a proposal is based on the following reasons.

In the first place, one of the basic PVO means, fighter
aviation, is under the direct subordination of the air army
commander and, being a versatile weapon, it can be used for
a large number of other tasks along with PVO tasks. At the
same time, fighter aircraft can most effectively carry out
their assigned tasks only when under centralized control and in
mass utilization. Therefore, the solution, in which direction
of the front antiair defense is carried out by someone else,
for example, the front PVO chief, will naturally lead to the
splitting up of fighter aviation forces, to decentralization
of its control, and, consequently, to a sharp decrease in its
combat and operational capabilities. Besides this, the means
available in the air army for aerial and long-range radio-
technical reconnaissance can assure a high degree of efficiency
in the control over all PVO means and completely satisfy the
needs of antiaircraft missile troops (ZRY) for long-range radio-

technical reconnaissance data.
Ce )

~ 4.3tayta).

-1.3(a)(4)

In the second place, a modern air army is mainly com-
posed of fighters and fighter-bombers, which combine the
qualities of the means for defense and attack and can, in
the course of an operation, and depending on the ground and
air situation, switch a significant part of its forces or its
entire complement over to carrying out the task of antiair
defense of a front or to the support of combat operations of
ground. troops, or, what will most frequently be encountered
in practice, to carrying out both tasks simultaneously.

IRONBARK

Along with this, as a result of the dynamism of a
sharply and quickly changing ground and air situation in
modern operations, it frequently becomes necessary to switch
considerable air army forces which are already carrying out
PYO tasks over to the support of combat operations of ground
. troops in exceedingly brief periods of time, even to the point
of redirecting aircraft already aloft. Such a situation re-
quires exceptionally efficient control, organization, and
maintenance of coordination, which is possible only under strict
centralization of control in the hands of the aviation chief
alone, who is carrying out tasks of antiair defense of troops
and support of combat operations of the front in an operation
of all the forces of the air army.

In the third place, the commander of an air army has
available to him a control apparatus in the form of a staff
which has highly qualified specialists with considerable ex-
perience in directing aircraft in carrying out their diver-
sified tasks, including PVO tasks. An air army staff and its
command post are equipped with the necessary technical means
and have specialized combat teams. Moreover, from the time
they were created in the armed forces (1942), air army staffs
have been carrying out PVO tasks at the front level, as a con-
sequence of which the transfer of the direction over all FVO
of front ground troops to the commander of an air army and his
staff would be the logical continuation of a further improvement
in the PVO system of a front, assuring the continuity of com-
bat experience and tradition on a modern basis. Thus, the
already available control apparatus in an air army, with the
necessary T/O & E (command posts) and trained personnel, could

oS] 4.3104)

ma

1.3{a)(4)

 4.3(ay4)

IRONBARK Wii 1.3(a(4)

direct the entire antiair defense of a front with insignificant
reinforcements of appropriate specialists. There is no similarly
prepared apparatus in a front at the present time. Therefore,

if it is decided to be done differently, it will be necessary

to create a new, special control organ, which will entail the
expenditure of large means and will significantly increase the
T/O & E,. And, what is most important, such a control organ

will not be able to direct effectively the use of one of the
basic PVO means -- aviation. ;

In the fourth place, as air armies are equipped with
automated systems of control of fighter planes, the capability
of intercepting the air enemy will be significantly increased,
the time required for the collection and processing of
intelligence information on air targets will be sharply re-
duced, and, with the further improvement of these systems, the
automated control of the basic PVO means from command posts
of the air army commander will become possible. Naturally,
the utilization of an automated system of control also pre-
supposes the unification of all front radiotechnical troops
for centralized resolution of the tasks of detecting the
air enemy. and a sharp reduction in the time necessary for the °
processing and transmittal of the necessary information to
command posts of PVO means, as well as the time required to
alert the troops,

In the fifth place, great flexibility and uninterrupted
control, with an extensive use of diversified and complex —
technical means, and the availability of a highly qualified
control apparatus familiar with the specific characteristics
and features of aviation, are necessary for more complete
realization of high maneuverability of front aviation under
a sharply and rapidly changing situation.

‘Thus, the problems of direction and organization of
antiair defense of a front can, in our opinion, be successfully
solved only if the front has, under the jurisdiction of, for
example, the deputy front commander for aviation and PYO, a
responsible person who has fighter aviation and radiotechnical
means subordinate to him and antiaircraft missile units under his
operational subordination. In this case, the most effective and

324)

1.3(a)(4)

-15-

a
Ww 4.3(a\4)

mass use of each of the combat means, the efficient and precise
control over them, and the uninterrupted coordination of all
forces in a sharply and quickly changing operational situation
will be assured, in accordance with the front troop commander's
concept of the operation and his official decisions.

4.3(ay\4
