Memo from Richard Helms to Assistant to the Secretary of Defense SpecialL Opera
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012285, dated 5 July 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012285).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4 _ CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY GG ' 4.3(a)(4)
_ WASHINGTON 25, D. ¢. ae ee S

25 ALS 1951

MEMORANDUM FOR: Assistant to the Secretary of Defense
(Special Operations)

SUBJECT : "Rear Area Support of Missile Troops in Front
Offensive Operations", by Col. Gen. of
Artillery G. F. Odintsov

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
"Rear Area Support of Missile Troops in Front Offensive Operations"
by Col. Gen. of Artillery G. F. Odintsov which appeared in a special
TOP SECRET issue of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl

(Military Thought).

2. This article was acquired by a Soviet official who has
provided reliable information in the past.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

RICHARD HELMS

Enclosure

1.3(a)(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 6 JUN 1992

ec:

Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence
Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

Assistant Director for Research and Reports

1.3fa)(4)

1,3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

COUNTRY : ,USSR

SUBJECT ear Area Support of Missile Troops in Front
Offensive Operations", by Col. Gen. of
Artillery G. F. Odintsov

DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE: Reliable Soviet source (B) who has access to this
type of document. .

Following is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
"Rear Area Support of Missile Troops in Front Offensive Operations",

written by Col. Gen. of Artillery Georgiy F. Odintsov, Chief of

the Military Engineering-Artillery Academy i/n Dzerzhinskly.

The article appeared in the 1961 Second Edition of a special
version of Voyennaya Mysl (Military Thought ) which is classified
TOP SECRET and is issued irregularly. According to the preface,
this edition contains articles never before published and some
speeches which have been delivered prior to being published in
this form. It is distributed only within the Ministry of Defense
down to the level of Army Commander.

nee 4,3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4

1.3(a}(4)

CHE =.

REAR AREA SUPPORT OF MISSILE TROOPS

IN FRONT OFFENSIVE OPERATIONS

by Colonel General of Artillery

G. Odintsov

As is known, timely end thorough rear area supply of missile
troops is the most important condition for achieving success in an
operation. But the recently adopted system for supplying missiles
and missile fuel to troops does not yet completely fit the nature
of modern operations. It requires further improvement. From this
point of view the article py Lieutenant General M. Novikov is of
great and practical interest, and the questions upon which it
touched required the most serious attention.

It is difficult, however, to agree with the author's assertion
that under present-day conditions the principal organizer of the
supply of troops with missiles and eeceee

[one-half page missing/

The experience of having service of artillery armament sub-
ordinate to the deputy commander of ~troops ~ for the rear area
did not prove itself during World War II when the conditions and
volume of rear area work were considerably simpler. And it is
doubtful that such subordination will be acceptable under present-
day conditions. The resubordination (perepodchineniye) of the

*service of missile and artillery armament not only increases the
volume of work of the rear area chief, but also requires the rear
area staff to spend considerable time coordinating both the very
important and the routine problems with the directorate or de-
partment of missile and artillery armament, the HQ of missile
troops and artillery, and also with the departments of the PVO
troops of the front (army). It is difficult at this time to state
whether it is expedient to have the service of missile and artillery

* gluzhba raketnogo i artilleriyskogo vooruzhentya

4.3(a)(4

4.3(a)(4)

armament subordinate to the chief of missile troops and artillery, *
even though such subordination was completely justified in the
years of World War II. At that time all of the field and anti-
aircraft artillery was under the commander of artillery. He
organized the combat activity of all artillery, and only he was
able to direct the work of the service of artillery armament.

At the present time only units (chast) and large units ~
(soyedineniye) of tactical and operational-tactical missiles, as
well as units and large units of field artillery, are subordinate -
to the chief of missile troops and artillery. Antiaircraft weapons «
(antiaircraft artillery, troop and army missiles of the class ~
"surface-air") have gone over to the control of the chief of PVO ~
troops of the front (army). The dual control of the combat
activity of missile troops and artillery leaves its mark on the
conditions of work of the service of missile and artillery arma- «
ment. It is compelled to execute the instructions and requirements
of two chiefs: the chief of missile troops and artillery and the
chief of PVO troops. Besides this, the further equipping of com-.
bined arms large units and operational groupings (obedineniye) +
with tanks increased significantly the need for tank ammunition,
the expenditure of which is planned and determined to some extent
by the staff of the front (army). Consequently, the service of ~
missile armament also has to coordinate its activities with the
staff of the front (army). In essence, therefore, three senior
officers have an influence on the work of the service of missile
and artillery armament in the resolution of basic problems. This
ig obviously an abnormal situation. In order to eliminate it, it
is advisable to transfer the subordination of the service of ¢
missile and artillery armament directly to the commander of troops uo
of a front (army). —

To some extent this proposal evolves from the real inter-
relationship of the chief of service with the staff and the
commander of troops of a front, since he very frequently is the
chief advisor to the command on questions of supplying troops
with nuclear weapons and missiles of all types. Also, this
proposed resubordination of service. brings it nearer to those
elements of control where the basic questions of the combat
employment of missile troops and other arms of service are
decided.

Let us examine some of the author's personal proposals.

The complex utilization of rail, road, and air transport in
the operational rear area undoubtedly is necessary, but the
possibilities of using them for missile troops are extremely
limited. As can be seen in Diagram.1, missiles, component parts,
(komplektuyushcheye imushchestvo) and nose sections (golovnaya
chast) are delivered from the zone of interior (tyl strany) to the
rear area missile bases of the front principally by rail and air.
The principal organizer of the loading and dispatch of this freight
is the Chief Artillery Directorate and the 12th Chief Directorate |
of the Ministry of Defense. The responsibilities of the front rear
area are limited to dispatching these transports, upon arrival, to
the various front rear area missile bases or their sections
{(otdeleniye). It is unlikely that missiles will be transported
within the front area by rail under the existing system of supply
because of the extremely limited number of rear area missile
installations (uchrezhdeniye) capable of handling missile components
and because of the comparatively slow pace of reconstruction of
rail lines behind the advancing troops. Besides this, transportation
within the front area is also limited, to a certain extent, by the
lack of an adequate number of temperature-controlled (izotermicheskiy)
railroad cars, specially equipped railroad cars, and gondola cars
(poluvagon) at the front.

In the operational rear area the basic method of supplying
troops most of the missiles which have undergone preliminary —
technical preparation is by special cross-country carriers s~
(gruntovaya telezhka) and not just automotive transport. It is
practically impossible to use them for other purposes, just as it
is not possible in practice to use truck motor pools for transporting ‘
missiles. That is why the author's proposal of giving the chief
of the rear area the responsibility of transporting missiles to the
troops by complex utilization of the transport in the front rear
area is impractical; for it does not reflect true capabilities and
is not supported from the materiel viewpoint. The only other means
that the chief of the rear area will be able to use for transporting _
missiles is helicopters. But up to the present time they are still ~
considered as resources of the commander of troops of a front and

of an army.
fF 1.3fa)(A)

1.3(a)(4)

oe

e

We come to the same conclusions when we analyze the conditions
for transporting special fuel and for fueling missiles. It is
known that the fueling of missiles is carried out in preliminary
preparation areas by forces of the front rear area missile bases.
At these preliminary preparation areas the fueling facilities are
used both for the transporting of missile fuel and for the fueling
of missiles. These same fueling facilities are incorporated in the‘
plan of service of missile and artillery armament for transporting
missile fuel elements from the depots of the front. Therefore the
principal of function of the service of supply of fuel must be the
/one word missing/ development of depots and «+..

_. (One-half page missing. ./

soos armament, and no other should be responsible for the organi-
zation of the delivery of missiles.

The correct deployment.and timely movement of rear area missile .
units of the front and army depend not only on the prepared network 1
d? railroad lines and military roads, but also on the groupings of
missile troops and on their combat operations. The timely movement
of troops is determined by the front troop commander with the active
participation of the chief of missile troops and artillery, as well
as by the chief of PVO troops. It is evident that these chiefs will
not be inactive regarding the deployment and movement of the missile —
bases of the front rear ares. “Fheir thoughts on this subject will

_bé more sound than the proposals of the chief of the rear area.
We do not deny the need for a close working relationship among all
the above-mentioned senior officers, but we do not see the need
to levy this responsibility on the chief of the rear area. The
last word concerning this matter will obviously belong to the
commander of. the troops of a front (army). There is even less need
to include the rear area apparatus in the planning of supplying the
troops with missiles, when the matters being decided relate not
only to the work of rear area missile installations but also to the
feasibility of using the transport equipment of units for delivery of
missiles. The latter depends, basically, on the missions of the
missile units. In other words, the feasibility of using troop ,.
transport for delivery of missiles depends on the times of their
launching. it appears to us that it is in the interests of this

matter to have constant contact between the chief of the rear.area
¥

1.3fa)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

and the chief of missile and artillery armament. Regarding coordi-
nation, the directorate of missile and artillery armament is required -
to coordinate with the rear area staff and with the fuel supply
service: the areas where front rear area missile bases and missile
fuel depots are to be set up; the distribution of the missile fuel
received to its destinations; and, the time required to establish

*OSG depots and the road network at the front. Under the circum-
stances the chief of the rear area, although not responsible for
supplying the troops with missiles, must give all possible assistance
to the service of missile and artillery armament.

—_——

We fully share Lt. Gen. M. Novikov's opinion that the new system .
of supplying troops with missiles has a number of serious short-
comings. In our opinion, to these shortcomings should be added:
the narrow specialization of the rear area missile bases of the —
front and their Inadequate ability to withstand enemy. action; the
dirrisilty in organizing nos section crewa_Cotdeleniye); the com ~
paratively great. distances over which ready | gotovaya) missiles
have tobe transported; and-the difficulty of relocating bases.

According to the data from the troop exercise "Don" the new ~
system provides that each front have one front technical missile
base and one front technical ZUR base (Diagram 1). The front technical
missile base, which is intended for the preparation of tactical and
operational-tactical missiles, 4ncludes one i transport: battalion _
(parkovyy divizion), one technical, and several mobile technical .
repair bases. The front technical ZUR base is intended for the
preparation of antiaircraft missiles and may be composed of one or
two wtrahsport: battalions and three or four technical battalions.
From the front missile bases it is possible to detach two_nose _
section crews comprising a very small personnel force (from the
FRIB-Cc one tiobile technical repair base and a ‘transport-and _
technical battery; from the FTB ZUR -- a technical battalion and
several itransport.. batteries (batareya).) Because of this, even
during a period of preparation for an operation, all missile.
troops operating in a zone of 150-200 km are obliged to depend on
Gach tose section crew of the rear area base: during the

operation all mfssilétroops of a front must depend on each nose
section crew of the rear area base. The distances that ready
missiles must be transported during different periods of an

* osG '- asibly otdeleniye spetsialnogo goryuchego - 8 cial
Poel gevtion— eae = B i

4.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

%

Lala (4)

CE

operation may be 150-200 km, or more. The transporting of r ;
missiles over such great distances adversely affects their relia-
bility. While-retaining the concept of centralized preparation

of missiles, it is more advantageous to have two bases with a

broad profile but capable of iS a a eer | (see
Diagram 2), instead of two specialized bases. In this way the
distances of transport are reduced -by. two. times and the stability

of work at the bases is increased. By organizing the rear area
missile bases in this menner, if one directorate of the base is

put out of commission it will not affect the work of all sections.
In order to reduce the distances that ready missiles are transported
and in order to increase the maneuverability of the bases, it is
advisable that each base, instead of having specialized sub-units
(podrazdeleniye), have small complex rear area installations designed
to receive, to relocate, to carry out the preliminary preparation

of missiles, and to bring the nose section components (golovnaya
chast) to the final stage 6f readiness. We propose that each rear
area missile base have at least two installations for the prepa-
ration of operational-tactical missiles and the nose sections of
tactical missiles, and also two or three installations for the

\. preparation of army antiaircraft missiles. In our opinion, the

\proposed organizational structure of the rear area missile bases
removes, to a certain extent, the shortcomings of existing bases
and insures a wide dispersal of missile resources at all levels of
supply. Besides this, it sharply reduces transportation distances,
inereases maneuverability, simplifies the organization of
redeployment, and also increases the stability of the entire
system of supplying troops with missiles.

In our opinion, an offensive. operation can be started when the
missile. resources of the front reach 70 - 80 percent of its
requirements. The remaining missiles can be on their way to the
rear area of the front. Also, it is definitely more advantageous
that the troops have in their possession 4& considerable portion
of the missile resources. However, Lt.. Gen. M. Novikov's pro-
posal that at least 50 percent of the missiles required for an
operation be delivered to the troops before initiating an operation
is apparently not altogether correcte This proposal is applicable
to a certain extent for tactical and operational-tactical missiles,
when the transport capabilities of troop units are fully commen-
surate with the existing rates of expenditure. Antiaircraft missiles,

a

1.3(a)(4)

-T-

1.3(a\(4)

RE

especially those of the army, are expended in much larger quantities
than missiles of the surface-to-surface class. Therefore it is
doubtful that it will be possible to supply the antiaircraft missile
units with 50 percent of the missiles required for the operation in
advance of the operation, because the transport facilities of the
units are not calculated to handle so great a volume of freight. .

We think that it would be best to create supplies in the units
adequate for two days' needs. Such supplies will become the norms
for the mobile reserves of the missile units. The amount ‘,
calculated for one launching installation (puskovaya ustanovka) \
may be:

-- Tactical and opérational-tactical -- three missiles; ‘

-- Troop antiaircraft (voyskovaya zenitnaya) -- six missiles; .

?

-- Troop army (voyskovaya armeyskaya) -- eight missiles.

Lt. Gen. M. Novikov proposes that small mobile sub-units for
storing and transporting missiles be added to the rear of motorized
rifle and tank divisions. But wy burden the rear of a division if
the division will get not more than four to six tactical missiles
for the entire operation. The rate of use will be somewhat higher
in an antiaircraft missile battalion, but ‘through the joint efforts
of the missile and arny mtrahsport: battalions if will be possible
to supplement the supply successfully. The addition of _a small—--
missile delivery: and storage sub-unit to the division rear at once
necessitates the addition of at least one lifting crane for trans-
loading missiles, and teams to make adjustments (reglamentnaya rabota)
on the mfsstle and nuclear nose section. It is clear that this will
not increase the maneuverability-of the division rear. ‘

Having stated our proposals, we would like to note that the
questions mentioned in the article by Lt. Gen. M. Novikov need
further serious study, consideration, and testing in troop field
exercises.

1,3(a}(4)

1.3la)(4)

1.3la)(4)

4.3fa){A)

1.3(a)(4)

Diagram 1*
Support of Troops of a Front with Missiles According to Data of  -

Exercise "Don"

1. Iz tyla strany -- From the zone of interior
2. Parkovyy divizion -- Transport battalion

3. FRTITB -- Frontovaya raketnaya tekhnicheskaya baza -- Front
missile technical base

4, ekhnicheskiy divizion iz  PRTB*¥ -- Technical battalion of
4 mobile repair -- technical batteries (podvizhnaya
remontnaya tekhnicheskaya batareya)

5. FSRT* -- Frontovoy sklad raketnogo topliva -- Front storage
area for missile fuel

6. Tekhnicheskiye diviziony -- Technical battalions
7. FYB ZUR -- Frontovaya tekhnicheskaya baza Zenitnykh
upravlyayemykh raket -- Front technical base for
surface-to-air missiles
8. Puskovyye diviziony -- Launching battalions
9. Otdeleniye FRTB -- Section of the FRIB
10. Otdeleniye FSRT - Section of the FSRT
ll. Otdeleniye FTB ZUR -- Section of the FIB ZUR
12. frbr* -- frontovaya brigada -- Front brigade
13. Armeyskiy parkovyy divizion -- Army transport battalion

14. fzenrap* -- frontovoy zenitnyy raketnyy { artilleriyskiy polk --
Front antiaircraft missile and artillery regiment

15. arbr* -- armeyskaya brigada -- Army brigade

tate

16. msd -- motostrelkovaya diviziya -- Motorized rifle division
17. td -- tankovaya diviziya -- Tank division

18. Armiya -- arny

* Abbreviations which are marked above with an asterisk were
not expanded in the text of the article.

=
oe.
os
oe)
~~

~-l2=-

Central

Front

i0 YN

ef begga

Diagram oe

s

uggested Variation for Deployment and Movement of Rear Area

Missile Units of a Front and Army in an Offensive Operation

Conventional Signs

1.
2.
3.
4,

5.

6.

12.

13.

FSR -- Frontovoy sklad raket -- Front missile warehouse
APD -- Armeyskiy parkovyy divizion -- Army transport battalion
Golovnoye otdeleniye APD -- Nose cone section of the APD

NR -- Sborochn. tsentr nazemnykh raket -- Assembly center for
surface-to-surface missiles

ZR -- Sborochn. tsentr zenitnykh raket -- Assembly center for
surface-to-air missiles

lst FIRB -- Frontovaya tylovaya raketnaya baza -- Front rear
area missile base

end FIRB

PBF* -- Peremeshchennaya baza fronta | , -- Transloading base
of the front

$/S* -- Stantsiya snabzheniya -- Raijhead
AK* -- Armeyskiy korpus -- Army corps
AK rezerv -- AK reserve

pd (rez.)* -- pekhotnaya diviziya (rezerv) -- Infantry division,
reserve

brtd* -- bronetankovaya diviziya -- Armored division

14, Blizhayshaya zadacha -- Immediate mission wet as s

15. Dalneyshaye zadacha -- Followup mission

* Abbreviations which are followed by an asterisk were not
expanded in the text of the article.

1.3(a)(4)

~Lh.

1.3(a)(4)
