The Situation and Prospects in Cuba (NIE-85-2-62)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028764, dated 3 July 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028764).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SECRET NIE 85--2-62
1 August 1962

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 85-2-62
_* m{Supplements NIE 85-62)

The Situation and Prospects in Cuba

ne en a at ce nee whup YD oS

Submitted by the
RECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concerred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

T AUGUST 1962

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
: 1966

SECRET NY 422

‘
re ee

é ba ' i
CERO EE GY let ree err Ee ea Peers

ce ale A ln a Oe

*
Mie
use he

ae okie ee

meddle

WARNING

@ Nationol Def
10, USC, Secs. 793 ond?
unevthorized perzon is

ane of the United States
94, the trans-

contains information offecting th
prohibited.

the espionoge tows, Title
t which in any MOANT fo oh

This material
within the meaning of
mission oF aevetation ©

erour i
Eechded From wtomotic

do wngroad: 9 and
selasifcotion

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 85-2-62 .

The Situation and Prospects in Cuba

eA Me ye mms TnL Tee INS A TTT ae eer RRIF e) PRT SAR rap ETE IEG I 5 TTS I re SA Ee (eee ee eee erat
‘ E : : :

' 7 q =

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE SITUATION AND
PROSPECTS IN CUBA’

+ THE PROBLEM o
To analyze the situation in Cuba and io estimate the pros-
ts over the next year or 50

CONCLUSIONS

A. Fidel Castro has asserted his primacy in Cuban commu-
nism; the “old” Communists have had to eccommodate them-

selves to this fact, as has the USSR.

B. By force of circumstances, the USSR is becoming ever
more deeply commitied to preserve and strengthen the Castro

_regime.

C. The Cuban armed forces are loyal to the personal lead-
ership of the Castro brothers. Their capabilities have been
. and are being greatly enhanced by the Soviet Bloc’s provi
5 sion of military equipment and instruction 5

D. The Cuban armed forces are well able to intimidate
the general population and to suppress any popular insur-
rection likely to develop in present circumstances. They are ;
pable of containing and controlling any threat

h feat cee 2

in part because of agricultural and indus-
trial mismanagement, Despite remedia) measures, it is un-
. likely that agricultural and industrial production can be sig-

a gear ana he, andl aA a ohn ah abl ata a) adhd min od me a

“ .
i H. The Castro regime atill seeks to lead the “inevitable”
F revolution throughout Latin America, but its preoccupation i,
with domestic problems tends to limit its activity in this
i 2 : EGRET
- :
(a i af ee : Pina a = Aus a” .
ate ete { .2%7 :

SEGRE

respect. In Latin America there is widespread disillusion-
ment regarding the Cuban revolution. Nevertheless, mili-
tant pro-Castro groups exist in several countries, and Cuban
subversive activity could prove effective in certain unstable

situations:

DISCUSSION

1. Developments in 1962 have tended to
define more clearly the relationships between
Castro end Lhe leaders of the prerevolutionary
Cuban Communist Partly (PSP) and between
Castro and the USSR. For the time being, at
least, Castro has established his primacy in
Cuban communism, and the PSP and USSR
have been constrained to accommodate them-
selves to that situation.

2. Differences between Castro and the “old”
Communists of the PSP devcloped in 1961 and
seached @ climax in carly 1962. Castro had
accepted “old” Communists in every branch
of his government and had relied heavily on
them for their expertise, However, he was
anxious to preserve his own authority as
leader of the Cuban revolution and wanted
the “new" Communists—his followers of the
26th of July Movcment—-19 play a role at Jeast
equal to that of the veteran PSP members.
Castro was also anxious to have Cuba ac-
cepted as a member of the “Socialist camp"
and resented the appellation of “national
democracy” (as opposed to “socialist democ-

racy") which was invented for Cuba In 1960

et a world congress of Communist Party
Jeaxders li Moscow. The Soviets were rejuc-
tant tu make these concessions to a regime
that they did not consider to be Communist
and that was not urder their arm control.

3. Castro kept up the pressure for full rec-
ognition, procialming Cuba a socialist state
and himself a Macxist-Leninist. Meantime
elements of the PSP pushed ahead as rapidly
as possible to estabtish “oud” Communist con-
trol of Cuba through the machinery of the In-
tegrated Revolutionary Organizations (ORI),
an interim party set up t bring together che
various political forces behind the regime and

create a single dominant political party. Vet-
eran Communist Anibcl Escalante, the organ-
lzing secretary of ORI, was the key figure in
this effort.

4. The result was a head-on clash between
the “old" Communists and Castro, who real-
ized that they were threatening his position
and that of his loyal followers of the 26th of
July Movement. After careful maneuversng a
new National Directorate for the ORI was
agreed upon, in which power was shifted from
“old" to “new” Communists. Then on 26
March Castro denounced Anibal Escalante
and by implication ell “old" Communists for
seeking to dominate the Cuban revolution.

§. Further reorganization of the OR! and
of other elements of the regime's political ma-
chinery followed, with the general effect of

-strengthening the position of the “new” Com:

munists. These changes, however, can by no
means be described as a wholtsale purge of
the veleran Communists. Many, including
Bles Roca, the PSP chairman, have remained
in Lmportant positions and Castro has made
it clear that the differences between “old” and
“new Communists are not over the goal of
¢communizing Cuba. The overall effe-t of the
“Pscalante affair,” and of the changes in the
regime which followed, was tne assertion of
Castro’s personal Jeadership of Cuban ¢om-
munis.

@. Nelther the PSP nor the Soviets proved
willing to contest the issue with Castro. Both
moved quickly to acknowledge his authority
and to reaf_irm their close ties with him.
Bias Roca gave his approval to Castro’s move
agalnst Escalante. &

’ SCERE4

Moscow then proceeded to ele
vate Cuba in the "socialist" hierarchy by plac-
ing it next afier the Bloc states and ahead of
Yugostavia on the list of May Day grectings
and by such minor but significant moves as
referring to the Cuban premier as "Comrade
Fidei.”

7. In ylelding to Castro’s desire to have
Cuba brought into a closer relationship with
the Bloc, the Soviet leaders have made a sig-
nificant concession. That they should have
done so, fully aware of Castro's undisciplined

— -—~pature, Is a measure not only of the impor-—

___ tance they attach to Cuba, but also of the
narrow field of choice open to them.

8. The Soviet Union has also made a con-
sideralle concession in its agreement to sup
ply a@ line of credit for the purchase of con-
sumer goods. It has, in effect, reaffirmed its
willingness to pay the increasing costs of keep
ing Cuda afloat, despite the Cubans’ failures
in the field of_economie reorganization and
develop.nent.

whole, an asset for sore tinie to come.

they recognize that he will remain, on the

tion now than appeared likely a few months
ago. He has asserted his leadership and it
has been accepted by the USSR and by the
“old Communists In Cuba. He has deroon-
strated remarkable political skills and an abil-
ity to engage in cerefully calculated maneu-
vers Which had been obscured by his generally
erratic and bombastic behavior. He seems
to be well in control of the apparatus of gov-
emment and security. His attack on Esca-
lante and the efforts of the “old" Communists
and the reshuffling of the top leadership of
the ORI and the armed forces have appar-
ently satisfied the majority of the “new” Com-
munists, who were becoming restive, At the
same time he has retained the cooperation of
the “old” Communists and the USSR. He
probably believes that be can handle them
and that both the “vid" Cuban Communists
and Moscow must continue to accept him
as the Indispensable men in Cuba.

41. The USSR is becoming more deepiy

10. On balance, Castro Is in a stronger posi-

= 1
ate oe
peeve hall SSS, 3
te ae 2 SP a ;
weed Tt . ‘
ais iS :
en ee re ned cs

' wins tye s < We aed Bees SP gi wee me Ne ws rriek ata
+ i on sae fee 3 ; sage ge eS EM it . 4 o
my ‘ De Nice. ie Ss noe, ee on
: : : 2 a '
rae: ’ ‘ 1 me fy ‘y
aa en eee rene aay Oy ae aN ee ae Sree Le ee er ere ee peiesbidbals dele sche emintase’ Bis

committed to the preservation and advance-

}2. The capabilities of the Cuban armed
rees to suppress insurrection OF repel in-
sion have been greatly enhanced by the
oc’s provision of military equipmenS@land
struction and by a thoroughgoing reorgani-
tion Initiated in the fall of 1950. This re-
ganization and concomitant training pro-
ams ore now welj advanced, although not
- mpleted.

13. Up tog
structors are
loc advisers are probably assigned to the
‘incipal staffs throughout the military estab-
shment. Most of the instrucvors are sta-
sned at established military schools and
. aining areas. In addition, several hundred
wban military personnel have received or are

i Bloc military advisers and

celving military Instruction in Bloc coun-

des.

14. Almost certainly the present military
ttablishment as a whole ts politically rell-
gle. Successive defections and purges have
iminated the serlously disaffected elements.
he principal commanders have been selectod
w thelr personal loyalty to the Castro
rothers. Great attention has been paid to
ae political indoctrination of the troops.
forale probably has been acverzely affected,
: some Instances, particularly among reserve
omponents, by the discontent of the general
opulation. However, the milllary eslabiich-
yent 83 a whole wil! almost certainty support
nd defend the Castro regime, uniess Its over-
hrow seems imminent.

believed to be now in Cuta.

15, The Cuban ground forces are beli
to consist of a standing army of about i
men and a ready reserve of about
Some cf the standing army perso
as full-time cadres in ready reserve units. In
addition, there are homeguard kype militia
units numbering about f AACN.

16, The standing army has received inlen-
give training in the use of Bloc-supplied arms
and equipment and tactical training through
the battalion combat team level. it has ac-
quired capabilities for the combat employment
of armor and artillery (including antiajrcraft
and antitank weapons) hitherto unknown in
any Caribbean country. °

17. The ready reserve battalions ure less
heavily armed and Jess thoroughly trained
Each has a@ full-time cadre varying from
2men. The remaining personnel are
available for only one or two drills a week and
a month of active duty treining each year.
The arms are kept in the custody of the ful-
time cadre. These battalions are based on
places of employment and are gencrally capa-
bie of rapid mobilization.

18. The homeguard militia units have no
gignificant combat capability. Thelr function
is fo augment the police as necessary to con-
scol the populaticn.

19

” ms ry hi oA 4
’ ‘ . 2 7 of : 1 "
areamciimedlN tarantino cnnbatiates am eae) susie -

“ botae a is gee ae aye oy bos
‘ 4 Nae : ‘ : 4
Men ek. At 0 anteater Vane snmneiins aden!taincads Crna

. 7 . dive *s 6 ; aca fe ps 3 ie 3 on
iF ln OA ic lll I ac BP ig a —— ae re + oe gy are a . S ee
tata yeh SE aie ica ce Dal we pit an lL th hhh lin

92, The Cuban ground forces are well able
to intimidate tre general population and to
suppress any popelar Insurrection likely to
develop In present clrcumstances. They have
not been able to eliminate the low level of
sporadic guerrilla activity which now exists
in Cuba, but they are probably capable of con-
teining and controlling any threat to the re-
gime through guerrilla action.

26. The capabilities of the Cuban armed
forces will continue to Lmprove through fur-
ther training and experience. The Blo¢ wil
almost certainly continue to support this de-
velopment through the provision of equip-
ment, instruction, and advice.

0. Mid-year 1962 finds the Cuban economy
fecpening trouble. A highly vaunted eco-
ale plan and the record budget officially
scunced for 1962 have by now, for all prac-
UY purposes, been “handoned. The perva-
: disruption which was evident in industry
i transportation fast year manifested itsel!
s year in the agricultural ceclor as well,
st conspicuously in she sugar industry, the

heart of the economy and the principe!
ner of foreign exchange.

H

a crolonged drought, growing epathy and
wive resistance among the cane-<cutlers,
a bad managerial judgmens—such as the
sisions to reduce the rate of replanting d
vert eane land to other crops. J ;

Industry with Bloe equipment

The 3062 sugar crop was hard Wit

32. With respect to other agricultural prod-
ucts Cuba has clearly not achieved the much
necded expansion calicd for under the re-
gime’s plans. Cuba's own prodiction of food
has remained insufficient to suppert the popu-
lation, and food rationing has become neces-
sary. Meanwhile, in the nidustrial sector the
deterioration of plants, cquipment shortages,
poor quality of raw materials, and gross mis-
management continue. - Because of the US
embargo and the shortege of foreign ex-
change, tue Cubans have not been able to find
adequate sources fur the machinery and parts
formerly imported from the US and other
Western countries. Only the first beginnings
have been made in the reconstruction of Cuban

Nismanazement of plants by unqualified
gonnel, c{ten selected for thelr political reli-
ability, continues to be the rue.

43. The regime has responded to the apri-
cultural crisis with aseries cf chan es in police
and organization. § a

oe ce eee New regulations have
been announced casing governmental controls
over private farmers and lightening controls
over the collectivized sectc¢ of agriculture

cee Nat at il a

Watttidaete hd

1
aes

- ext 18 months

$5. Cuban economle prospects for the re-
mainde: of 1962 and for 1963 ore bleak. Cuba
will not be able to bulld up significantly its
dangerous!y low holdings of convertible for-
elga exchange. The expected increase in
capital imports trom the Bloc is unlikely to
bring about net groyth of Cuba's economy in

meee “The effect of the mew egricul-
tural poucy remains uncertain, in any case
te could not result in # significant increase
in production within the next year or 60.
Supply and management problems will con-
tinue to plague industry, fransportation dif-
Aculties wilt probably get worse. No sub
stantial overall Loprovement in the Cuban
economy is likely to occur for several ycare.

36. Active
has declined

he hard core of chis support consists of

who have a rested interest in the revolution,
especially the new managerial clase and the
Communists Others support the revolution

support for the Castro regime

because they hare been influenced by indoc-
trinaton and riicination in the mass oF-
anizations &

37. Diofcclion ts increasing primarily be-
tause of the growing inability of the regune
to provide the goods and services to which
mest of the Cutan prople have becn acee™
tomed. The ahorteges of food. ordinary
heusehola items, mesicines, public transpos-
tation, ele., have underscored. in terms under-
glandable t Lhe individual Cuban, the re
gime’s failure lo live up to its enginal prom-
ise. Others have become bored with years
of repetitious propaganda. One factor Which
js Likely to have an uncreasingly adverse eficct
on public attitudes us the deterioration of pub-
Lic Health conditions and services.

38. The majority of the Cuban population
: Serent toward the

$0. In the past four months Fidel Castro
and other regime spokesmen hare themselves
acknosledged two enuses of popular discon-
tent and have begun corrective measures.
One of these Is the diss2tisfection and Inse-
curity afoured by the increasingly obrious
“old" Communust tabeover which Unreatened
to destroy the loyalty of a large segment of the
“new class” until Castro took action in March.
The other is the fear of collectivization on the
part of ferivers. which the regime has also
taken steps to alisy. Pubic hostility to Com-
munbst regimentation ts likely to continue to
be a factor in the ability of the regime to con-
trol the population, but It is the eflect of such
regimentation on them personally, rather
than communism iterif, that seems to arouse

SEGRE 9

SARL PAA FER BEAN PER

-~

Secrer
tne Cubans Ir.creasing communization $s 43, This widespread security effort by the
inety to continue 10 provoke discontent! Castro government does effectively limit and

harass the active opponents of the regime
Jevertheless, there are at least six nationwide
resistance groups in CubMBwith a ciaimed
membership ranging from a few hundred to
a few thousand, only & smal] part of whom
are active at any one time.

v.

42. There has been some increase in active
resistance to the Castro regime despite its
massive and expanding gecurity apparatus
and its constant efforts to intimidate, harass,
and immobilize those who take action against
the government. The armed forces are
extensively to guard against sabotage, to con-
trol public demonstrations against the fre-
gime, and to sweep arcas of rebel activity.
The Ministry of interlor, mun by & loyal Castro -
follower, exercises checks and controls over

apparatus, Its nctwork of informants in the
Committces of Defense, and the antisebotage
People's Defenst organization. Between 400
and 500 thousand Cubans—one in every 14—-
are involved in this elaborate gecurity m4a-

ehinery.

10

ea

abi Ptr tes Mee

cr ey vale

enue Bat att

CEERET

47. At present the primary effect of resist-
ance operations is psychological: they are an
embarrassment to the regime and force it to
commit large resources 10 meet security Fe-

quireinents.

45.“There is some coordination of the activ-
fties of the national organizations and there
have been reports of & recent agreement
among them for unified action. In practice,
however, activities tend to be planned, di-
rected, and carried out on & focal level. f

_by changin

Vi.

§2. Castro seems to have no doubts about
the desirability of facing the rest of the world
as a member of the “Socialist camp.” He will
continue to associate Cuba with the Bloc and
to seck to make the most of Soviet commit-
ments. For their part, the Soviets must re-
gard the situation in Cuba as a net gain for
their invemnational position, despite the mis-
givings they must feel about the Latin Ameri-
can reaction to the proclamation of
avowedly Communist regime In :

53. Castro's vitriolic antl-US position con-
tinues unchanged. Antl-Americanism

deeply Ingrained in the regime and in much
of the Cuban populace. The authority of the
regime depends in significant part on Its so-far
successful defiance of the US, and the regime
is unlikely to see any advantage to be gained
g its attitude toward the US. Gam

§4. The regime continues to try to
appeal to the Afro-Asian neutralist bloc, even

while proclaiming its adherence to Marxism- ¢

Leninism. It seeks to play a role at such neu-
tralist-sponsored conferences as the “World
without the Bomb” meeting in Ghana and the
underdeveloped nations economic conference

in Cairo. However, the conduct of the Cuban
emissaries at these meetings has generally
been such as to antagonize the Afro-Asian
neutrals.

55. The appeal of Caslroism has dimmed
considerably in other Latin American states
as a consequence of the Cuban jeader’s avowal
of Marxism-Leninism, his obvious toadying to
the Bloc, and the self-acknowledged failings of
the regime. After a period in which Castro
and Cuba were the focus of attention through
the area, Latin Americans have turned back
{o their own problems. However, there are
militant pro-Castro minorities In several Latin
American states and many neutralists and
protagonists of reform who fogk with favor on

56, Mexico, Brazil, Chile, Bolivia, and Uru-
guay are now the only Latin American coun-
tries maintaining diplomatic relations with
Cuba. Relations between Cuba and Uruguay
have been strained on account of the nearly

es In the Uruguayan Em y in

57. Cuban leaders, although preoccupied
with domestic problems, still seek to assert
Cuban leadership of the “inevitable” revolu-
tion in Latin America. They have been very
active in attempts to organize a new and os-
tensibly neutral Latin American labor organi-
gation. Cuba operates schools for inauctri-
nating and training in guerrilla warfare Latin
American students who eventually return
home to what they have learned.

12 . SOORET

and _im perialists.

Steret

58. Communist partics in other Latin
American states have been disturbed by
events in Cuba, and particularly by the So-
viet Union's acceptance of Castro as a Com-
munist, because they feel that the role and
the prerogatives of veteran Communists have
been cast in doubt. Uruguayan Communists
were disturbed by statements made by Blas
Roca at a Communist Party meeting in Mon-
tevideo to the effect that it had been demon-
strated that a non-Communist could Jead a
successful revolution against the capitalists

59. The present image of the Castro revive
in Latin America is that of a client of the Bloc
and a failure in the conduct of ts own af-
fairs, particularly in the important area of
economic development. §

Da ncnhaan Sod ete itv) none ater aa ame others tmelere Mand) mei bach lasts arms Ty a

clue ef al nae atlanta be Pad ten went hein at tabi that 9B" Wheat te

sosoite mae aah

ANNEX

INVENTORES OF THE CUBAN ARMS AND EQUIPMENT

TABLE 1: GROUND FORCES
TABLE 2: AIR FORCE (CRAAF)
TABLE 3; NAVY

x

fe alta farce 1p toe.

me ae ate : . 4 ’ :
7 Oe sed ps ’ . . . i
at sv cheeses ecm tae sama imeem nh, i ne aoa es vind cattadabe 21!

~ '
Lane, Lge oa teed oe | ae a vem

es ects poe en Ni TA tS auesicd
. :

lt ted ncaa alls ns th nara ct
Lo

‘

.

penn, So ee ane ee

f
b

7 : Le Py fy nt 4
mate em ! 4, .
i urn om, ‘yee’ oN
Sona rn =
uk SUR NS : o :
zi a aed . coon -
tem E el te : + Teak
fins 2 cE
oat
a
: ede :

RR E AN S fA

BD Cortes,
toe

Sy seca 4 shen et eee Tne tee nner Le one ig ace
ie SAS A my Sven mec prem LT CO Ae Pore cprepramapen ere mmemetieie eagnconee TEC nO IO SI, il teas re ; :

Fe Ae ei regen pate ea,
i oe A Fi F

+ fad
An
te

te

tuk
wre
~

pl:
<i
oF

FOrUrt

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
: DISSEMINATION NOTICE
