Soviet Rockets and Earth Satellites
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124294, dated 7 November 1957.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124294).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SST PAR

7.

& <7 5a OF = acess Soa ob
SEZ BOTTOM OF PAGETOR BPECIAL CONTROLS, IFA

ee ee RUS pa ieee
. Rod or herwren whieh, ereete or nemtrcame Gomerthed ts a

The Conference ca Rockrts and Satellites, beld in Weshington, D. C., fre

30 Bep to ’ Oct 57, waa attenied by Boviet eclentista, A. A. Blagwirevcy,

3. M. Foloskov, and A. M. Kasattin. vas chief of the Soviet
delegation. ts the course of this conference, the Soviet delegation revesled
considerable inforextion on their rocket end satellite program emi oa a few
other aspects of their participation in the International Geophysical Year.
This report covrera odsarrations eri events during the Mocket ant Betellite

Conference.

ca 1 Cet 57 Poloakor, through Dafeskoy (3nd Secretary of the Soviet Fabessy
in Veshington, who served as interpreter), coafireed the irtecded uee by

the Soviets of 20 exd AO megacycles aa the wetering frequencies for the

Soviet earth satellite. Be described the keying of the tro frequencies as

follova: There will be.two transaittern, one watt each, in the eatallite. a
cus vill trenerlt fer 0.7 esconds cn 40 ecs., then similtencouly with the
svitch-off of the 40 aca. treusaitter, the 20 wes. traneuitter will come on

tor 0,05 gecemis. otel time for repetition cf the transsitting pattern is

thug 0.75 seccais. a .

Polostor stated, through Dollenkoy, that the pertol during which the satellite
would contimse to transit would be about three wrezs. According to cne
obacrver, Poloakoy first eaid in Russian when this question wes asrod, "t
don't vant to answer that qicstion,” “ut the official interpreter gave this
ag something Like, “This has not yet been decided.” According to om wuice,
tvo transxitters, even allowing then to be lighter ant slightly pore efficient
than US equipment, at 1 watt each, vould required about eight times as wich
battery in weight as the 0S satelitte, which would wean ecaethiag in the
neichtarbood of 25 ta 40 pounds of battery run) thus it would ert be murprieice
to tind thee larmchirg a sacellite cf 30-inch diapeter {neteed of avcrt 20,
as in the US natellite, :

Polostov pare, through Dulenkory, the exact frequencies to be used: 20.705 ECB.
andi 40,002 mes, Bince theee ere not exact parwouice, the Sovirte wust be
intending to deat a circuit in their receiver against one of these freqoonctcs
doubled tn order to wake their peesuresents. Poloek-w ale> salt tbat te

relative stability of the frequencies would be Sx 10-9; mduation wad
between the two transuitters. The ectellite

T7-type receiver end antenna. This cysteu of frequemies Ja wractly the
pese ag the coe used in the Soviet bigh~altitude 7o--.* progres. The satellite

in the case of the satellite. Polockoy gare the apparent chance in frequeacy |
due to this effect as S00 cycles for the Auce. ; i
the 50 acs, trensaitter. Approved for Reieass- SO
aie es Boge Oe
Date | } SSeP_ 1988

ii cal i Lee a es

DISSEMIMATION LADDER (19)

i £

5. Paleckor wade reference ts feoues ef the Soriet sagerins, Refiie, is ia
be efted qome publication of data on the Goriet axtelitte progrwa, la
epecifiesliy mentioned lesuce 7 ai 6 for 57, ecceording te Dutentey, wt
ectuelly qurtel from fegas 6. Poloetoy aja eatd thet ieece $ fer 19%
care a full technical description of the two treseniiters they will use,
bet Dwienkov wuld not comfire this statement.

& Seloskor gave ae the reaems for the Sories echaice ef 2 and bO ace. rather
then 106, the following: 3 f
\ ?
&. It would be posible to pick wm the satellite for tracking
somevnat earlier,

bd, The lower frequencies vould be sare efficient emi require
lees power. W

ec. They wished to use the satellites for loncepberw ectulies ani
used these two frequencies, aince they rere acre epyropriate
to theee probleme. They do at expect to get all of the 20
wee. trenexiesion thruugh the fomephare; cn oc~estion, the
4O wes, trunamige!on would come through when 2 won't,

7. When ashed how such time the US would have to prepare sonitoring equipeent
for the 20 and ho we, frequencies, Poloskoy gare a variety of anevers,
The official ome was this, “We will arnounce our plans in plediy of tise
for you to make the peceseary preparations.* Asotier veraicn, La which
Dulenkor wea fovolved, “If our attespta are successful, you will dere
plenty of time.” &t111 ancther version was, “If our launch fe ew ceeaful,
we vill announce it; ani if the satellite laste long enough, you'l) bave plenty
of tive to prepare your equipment.” Serrral mubera of the erp pressed
Poloskoy to say how long was “lorg enuugh,” to which be i ffered tye ficure

the ectunl life of-the satellite, FPoloskov eald serwral tiaee thet weight |
of the satelitte would be over 12 kg. : :

8. Re optical trucking, the following information wae obtefned from Priwkr,
through Dudenkoy, unless otherwiec stated: .

a. They expect to achliere on accuracy of 0.1 to 0.5 degreva in ’
poeitioning the satellite in ite arbit (deterwinetion of the +
orbit by observaticc, vot putting the estellite Into an crbit).

bt. They expect «a time accuracy cof 0.5 scone fur thels maeurernte.

c. Their optical stations will be crapoeed «ff en arma cf velo
ecopes in line normal to the meridian. These scopes ary stantad,
heaving en li-degree field of view. The telescopes will be set
at intervals of five degrees, center to center, providing
excellent overlap. A uxtel cf am cf theme telescopes wae
given to the 0S group, obviously a retary fir thea Sat tnemiag
gift of one of the W telescoped to Maserich last armving. It
can apparently be changed by awitchisg eyepieces t+ fietsa of
view of different extent from li degrees. Bech optical tracking
station will heave tvo lines of (tan!) these scopes there will
ve 65 stations end shout 30 workers ct each station. This
isplies ebout 2000 workers for the opticel trecking progres,
end cince there was no wention of apcteure in thia =rigws, (1%
only paid workers, the baiget fer the Soviet optical trecking
progrem most be rather immense. Poloakey drew « diagram
which iniieated a 70-60 degree inclination of Buviet satellite's
orbit. When preeeed for an exact figure, bo cirigsl. Karctha

qaid that it would be ristbie ea at least wae oc-astoms of Mirty
ani that inclination would definitely be over 60 degrees. Data

wain station. There wea no statosrot that the principel owpetation
center will be et Mbercw, They allow two days for data to de received
at Moscov, as compared with 46 eimte. for the Is dete reperting
tise, They will agpreciate belp in uteerretions from dmericem

a. The Soviet earth eatellite will de ued fr::
(1) of local variations in thr certh's wmaneatic
field; (2) ditto for the gravitational field; (3) toooespberic
experivente; (4) corpuscular rediations; (5) solar phencsena
obearvations; (6) auroral obeerrations; possibly ser othere,
including relativity experiments.

bd. The Bovriet high-altitule rocket program will cover the ease work
with the exception of fomospheric stodies, which ramort ell be
done with rockets, emi including high-altitate physical end eheuical
reactions, The rockets will beve two types of instrumentation con-
tainers—one outfitted for solar X-ray ext other vork, sami the
other outfitted for etuilee of crpuscular recietio, erure, end
phyeica. aod chewiceal reactions, Theee couteivery wLLi be provided
with phote recording devices whirh are tntented to be relesoed
froa the rocketa and recovered after free fall from about 200 kas

due gee ae

Ny

Shree rocket-firing areas namely Frans Joecf Lent, “widdle of the
USER,“ ani the Antarctic. . \,

Ce

,
We

ening ALA owe ae PE atm erctings Sn
aa ee

#.
ve

A, The eatallites ext rockets will both be trie, act then a decision
will te wate as to which wins{etc). 1S

e. The instrumentation of ea-h rocket or satellite wil denend
on the results cotained with the one preceling it. Thie fe, lack
of succeas with one type of instrumentation will dictat~ a vbange,
or some mucceas will dictate a repeet performaice % actiera more,
Le iretmmentation cf satellites will ale: te affented ty Uwe
reeuiis achieved with some cf the reckete.

Se endl npe,

i ee de

f. Tne Soviets pentioned a miLa sjectraseter Tar Use vith the wot

program, dut they pare no detaila of it.

se ea eeycta are on the eve of lmmching their first eatellite, wing
words which implied not next veek or next month, but = tim very clove in the

future--within days et the latest.

li. Bome data on the delegates ami cther Boriet ectentists was obtaloed ¢ Oct.

a. Kasetkin has pever been in che US befere, end bas traveled very little
up to now outside the Commmist bloc. Be bas a omesli occ ant
T niweclf the graniecn of « rather well-known Russian extist. The
vas attached in some way to the court of the last Tear,
Peter, but decause be preferred to paint ccmmn workera as subjects,

was accepted by the Commmict regime. In fect, be vea one of the
Ciret artists decorated by the Cowmanriets. Kasetkin hineelf
stalled at the University of Moscow eni describes himself os &
geophysicist and engincer. When be vas @ stuient at Moscow 25 years
oe Pasatkin vent on a scientific expedition to Frent Josef lent

aware

Se ——
~'-

Quring the Gul Polar Year, Se evomrrted thet the Seviets first
need redto—-osumt techariqnes on that erpedi ‘ies.

>. wh. I. Seder, EneatYtn said that Gadew te @ theeeticton, :
not ednsidered With bardwure for the acteliite pregras. Sedov te
figuratively in en ivory tower axl eumey et ef 14 enly whes be js ?
sent ty the dcadeuy of Sciences to spent emrvders ebeact onttars in .
“Ss field of theory. Me is concerned vith caleulating mene ef :
.eehlering ectual travel in epace, ant {? there fa ewer a trip in
the thon or ene of the planets, Seivy we be dtrertly irvalved in
that.

\

~\

@. Bilagocreavov ie Seeretary of tha Section of the Soviet Acudeny ef
Beiences dealing with Tectortcal classe, ant ae gach te fa practical
control of aodt aspects of the Acatouy imtarest 15 ‘ne earth satellite .
program. fSowe other sections have winct parts t+ play, end the Ly

, wilitary bas a large part,cf vitich the dewlery wrabere are kept
in couplete ignorunce, ’

d. From Kenathin's commente {t ecems thet the Line of dveerretion
detween the responsibilities of the Academy ani of the military
is at least unclear—there 19 some crerlap, spperentiy. /facree
comment: Rasstka'g ccuuenta_ce Retes my eco scomeltiaa seal Ow,
vat Kasetkin hes a well-controlled poker fare, ord {t fe herd to

sueee,

@. Poloskov 16 « doctor of ectence and mitotic» ani chiefly «
theoretictan, He is concerned grincipally with the geczpiyetcal
remulte to be obtained from earth sateliit> propre, Wea hae worked
eo far with bigh-eltitule reckrte ent f+ forinied in the Sowtet dele
pation to the present conference to corer icternei J petcusotation,

Poloskoy wede a statement during forwal meetinge 1 Ost to the effect that the *
Bovieta do not diecuse either in print or orally derelujerrts wder aurty by their
eclentiste util they can offer sclentific preef ef ralidity. ears, they will
not warn of the impending launching of their first eatellit«, but 1f it is auccees~
ful, they will eamounce others abead of time. As an example of th!s practice,
Fasatkin vase aaked by a Vestern delersate what ecrt of antetian they intended to use
for their satellite to acktews good resulta tn telemeteoring wit? the WO and 40
pese frequencies. Xasatkin replie! that they het «4 deeien which eppeared
satisfacto@y. The delegate followsal ip by eaying that thie was omething they
could describe then, to which Keextkin eaid, “No, the deste locke all right...
but we have etill to teat (t. If it Ja grod, we'll teli you «li edout it.* :
Nasetkin alec sald be did not know whether the 90 ad 6) we, treomeittere for ‘

the matellite had tubes or tranci store,

Kagatkin said that the tracking conditivas for the Scriet eatelifte wuld be

_ better than for the US satellite, Ite wiridility wlll wary consiAarebly because
there will be several types of eatell‘te, ALL af thew ahead be wre eietible than
the UG device by a fectar of at least tro or even mre, Kaeetdin ciated ite weight
would be about l2kg. or & little over ami satd that the ordit Urcv plemed for the
eatellite would be highly elliptical, at least for the firvt cre, all the
satellites will have epecular reflection, being costed with toe bew! reflectire
waterial the fovieta bave available. Kesttkin did mt identify tne ctating

waterial., XZaeatkin confirmed the excle cf inclination OF tne eateli ite erdit

as woch more than 60 degrees, giving it as declination from tue werldien rather wise
then inclination—-the figures ¢.ven were 10 to 15, or 2 degrees at the very fs
wost, off the weridian, 7

Poloskoy, in enewer to a questton in the formal seerion 1 Oct. ateitied that

there ware plans to locete Soviet Muonmatch stations exfficlenrtiy fer to thw

south in the USER tO see the US satellites. Be oaid thet toy felt {0 mrlibely thet
they would pick up the TS satellite, but thet if they did, they would cartainly

inform the 0S.

27.

SS

Paloskev stated there vill be © telesoepee in etch lime ct enrh aptical
teceting statin. ecue lines being ories‘ed north-esrb enl ese a¢ searty normal
as posatbls te the eatellite erbit. Plmekow wele the ctateurt that the Soviets
plz te Imexh emre then just ene er tvs satellites, easing thet Unir plans

aa a a aa - Lowel! mrt epectty further.

peritiens of their reckrts, Whether each prtiode will de neei with the

oxtallites er net, be did met know, Ensentkin weerticod « pebliertion by
Crewngmes eri Zeligumm (both phaartic} in which there is 4 f-o-ription ef
tae Boriet geophysical reckete.

\
Raestkin eate inforwal inquiries whether 1¢ would be presthis far the Soviets to
buy ratio equipernt of the type used to moritor the )66 ars. freynencies from
the US to equip a certain sumber of their emateurs.

Taeatkin aleo enid he believed thet fn the first hel? ef $8 the Soviets would be
ready to show off their IGY computing center, He saccestad the pousibility of
emother big weettag in the USER to ere the Soriat ecmputing corrter exi hold
ge TD a aaa 1.e.. sometion after ] Jan anxt dbefure the enti

of tm 58.

In the evening of 2 Oct 57, Kaestkin presented a peper which gxve i« exseptional
detail a description of Soviet mrtecrologies! rocirts. Be taaeld his talk on

& publighed paper but elded comaiderabty te the published d+ied]. Lnecthkin
vrote hig talk in the A, ML of Oct 57 eal gave it. isterpretad by Tatiar

in the evening eeacion. The paper Je scumrited fi tilowing brief daacri; Elon

of the metecralogical rochrt.

The rocket was developed in 49 ent 50, eni waa first firet ir DT. ant bas been
in use ever «ince for upper-etuceptere we teoralagieral studies. Ita justropentation

is staple wd reliable.

@. Lamch its - portable, comxiating af a rtee) perl without eter
special preperation, The Brrists use theese tn ary plece they wish ears
gppearentiy have-no worries abcrit where parta may fall.

b. Jets - 7 weters, Diemweter - 0.435 wetere,
C. Weight - at take-off without boceter - 680 kg.

4d. Fins - semure crose with swept--bech lealting avi tretliag olges,
Yin spen ~ 1,22 meters,

@. Booster ~- aalid propellect, of which Kasethin claterd net to Anow
the composition. Form - hhlev, 1.0., creme as atc experate tribes,
clustered around the tailptpe for the sustaiver charge. ‘Te tooeter
aseesbly extends to the rear of the rest ef the rectet act bee fins
which line up with aut inccwwase the affect of the rnriet'e om fins,
Booster weight - 235 kg. of witch 8 hg. ta pegalliant, Pripellent
burns out in two seconts. :

f. Srcstainer - ligsid charge, kervseor avi nitric ad. preewcrised by
ccmpreseed alr, Burn time ~ 60 seconde,

Lee? fe) ~ TONKA, the oli German onlf-clarting fuel iereloget at
Peenewnoende, ic ueel to ignite the eustatrer, ;

h. Thrust = 1370 kg. at 60 eeconis vith bowter, Broeter thrust is about
SOOO pounds. ;

%. Recovery ~- nowe ani mid-section separate at about 70 ke. altttuie.
Seperation 16 achieved by weens cf explceive balta at the joint between
nose exi body, tut the initiation of seperation wea sot described. In
®@ compartment which lies in the 10-~body jJairt are tuo prrechates,
one for each section. Theee open at eaperetion, 4.¢., befere the fall

&.

k.

1.

a.

Be

6.

i

6
altitute le reachet, The act of separatico wii« ateart 3) ertere per
second to the welocity of the noee eection, Since the rower cieete fa

dregged along in open position: over the peak of the trajectary, {4 serves to

stabilise the instruments fn this part ef their flight, Peak eltitude
is about 80-90 hm. ‘The chute 12 not such drag wnttl « return t+ on
altitude of ahout 60 kw., and it then deging to feortion, retacing the
lanting velocity ef the mes ea-tion tedust fru t- five meters per
secomt, The weight of ths nose onction {s 72 kx, Snty the neile
nose ant the batteries need ts be meplaced, while the rest af the
noe section can be re-used as eany as five tims,

Wid-eectian - deseribed by Kenatkin es esupoeed af stru-turally
streseed tanks, interconnects’. He drew a abetch which abewal three
spherical (oe near-epbericel) tents, free nose to reer in onler «
compressed air, keroeene, nitric ald,

Perechitea - came type chute for beth enia, Rectangular, aflk,
64 square wetera. Shroul lines eight wrtara long.

Launching - The launch stant is 30 eeters atat, hae four epirel

raile which wke ¢ turn in the lenght of the stant, Thia cives «
spin of about 20 rpm. to the rocket. The stent is set mon the
steel ped, ani the stami ie tilted to compenaete for wind effect,
vhich 16 measured beforehand by wreng of balloons. An atteapt is
waie to #0 coupensate for wint effect. that. the a-ctione laol egain
fairly near the launching aftr. asatvin stated that ibey often
recover within @ Kilometer: of the lemch site,

Ignition and burn~cut - Ad the bewater Ignites, the preawire valve
for the sustainer opens, ani ty the booster buru-ctt, the susteioaar
fe at full pover. Velacity at boceter burt (two seconde) ~

170 metera per eecomi. At burn-out cf custaimr (40 seconde) <
1106 eters per seconi.

Boee gection - needle nose ia 26 am. in diaecter, Th3 we, long.
It contains: ia

(QA) scar cieed Beret grees covering prea@ure renges fros
five am. presevre to § x 10~3 ox,

(2) 6.5 calibers back fros the tip there ara twy {rtercomected
pitot-type openings.

(3) Several openings connected to bermetric fresecrr gxigss,

(3) Four thermcruples of ko-xturen tengsten fer measurement of
borslery layer air tewpere‘ure,

(5) Four bolometers, located at the bese of the oradle mune,
(6) One therwoceuple for weaerrwent of noes ukin tesparsture.

(7) One thermocouple, loceted pear Peron! guages, fur correction
of the preasure seacurements,

The nose section ales contains four aymrhronised pootrerephic cameras
for tbe determination of instrment attitude during flight.

Metering - all the instrusmntation uses wabalance! Wheatatone bridge
eonmections, The diagonals cf the bridge are commectel to opponite
se gents of a 6O-ergeent commtator of which the brustes comect to
the trunentter, Voltages piched cff vary frou mimes 100 te plus 100
millcvolts. The frequency shift for the trunemitter 1¢ 50 k-.
Trenemitter output ie strictly FM. This arrengepent giree 3 avatleole
chamels which ere sempled every 2.5 eeconts—the asartater rtation
time fe five secomis. Power 1a obtained from catuiunm detteries,

gor ™~

+

Bh ep re

*

ot ee act

~”

$6: DAC sali een ORS a + Raye me, Es OT eres ON

Ple

Tae eetcring receiver bes eoacy frequency, axl Ue presentation of
the 6 phetngrephed wx fila vtich bee @

!
1
ih

>. The inatrumentation has tn-fliaht calitratier, od reVahbLty is
asqured ty recording eech datua four tere in eh 2.5 escesis.

qs | Preagure seasurements - frou TSdme. dove to 55, three meersrwannlt
are wate with miniaturisel susbrena guacté. he Peroni guages corer

Aitnough the use of thermocouples to eramcre bountey layer taweretare resale
(pee te peescrements, the Soviets claim te bare drveloyes sess of EMSOS
accurate corrections. Variations in tewperatures weasure! from cheot te ehect

are about 30 to 40 degrees C.,0f which Kaeatxin claizet very little represented

caattin stated that interferometric wethods af meseuring Tocbrt poe! Sesing bere
Zasathin #titn the Boriet geopiryeical reckets but eet with the ertearslogical

since 50 they dave fired over 100 cf ther extenreisgicnl rovkete endl St) fire
wore for the I0T. che aime of this rocket are about the sees as the eld A-5
ani smaller then Weseerfall.

The Soviets ase @ povtotheadslite fcr eessuring @& curnte altitude for their
Steen in vhich they aare a aivsot in clwaty weather or af Rent
they have used crate redio-locatioa wethods of altitole determination, dort
theT Pave kept aboots in which this ectbod wes eewrseary dows to ¢ winims.

Kamatkin eaid, In pest-seesion talks, that be could guarantee right nw that
the Boviets would de willing to exchange equipment: (Bo particular type ef
equipeent wes specified.) Bowever, be eould pot guarext-< thet ercSaaes vieite
of personel to all sites wuld be eccepteble, since eoan of (bs ites are con~

Acadexy bas no isluence. Tisits to such places ef Trent Joer’ i+. . cr oan
other out-of-the-way launch sites wich’ be arrenged, but bt would Lws ts :
investigate this, Yisite to the com tation ani date coxters wali be definitely
possible. Thess vac sows Mecrasian beteren Kaaathis ant Meaery of the UL.
regarding the exchenge of complete peterscligical rockete. The Wo oorerp trek

mo part in this, but Kaeatkin seewsl to feel ft wes warth diacaeio.

Polosker correctnd the frequencies wth were given for te ter aataliite
trensattters., The corrected figures are 20.5°5 wes. wrt 40.07 wre

Tasatkin vas asked ahout the Soviet aterepherZ.¢ mle] need in celonlatiag the tr
pateliite life. We ald they hed taken one frog Ki tra’e publication a< ea
mfarorable exurple, ant encther rhoer source wes widen ified end bed struck
pean, They calculated their eatellize life to de “over exerral veeks” (UB
calculations indicate gousthing betreen 9-10 wnths axl 8-9 years). The Boriet
gateliite will have no previeion for internal drag prarcresruts.

OTe ot tha 20 wce. signals frou refracting layers above the Ps The Soviets

2.

336

¥

Daring the ecectan oa 3 Oct Enexttin etated be would get be mre precias

fa giving rowbers ef exte)lites te be lamb by the TR then the
expresaion ‘a reepectable mumbwr, wore thas fuct «om er toy,” reperted
preriously, Xaeatkia aloe sald that tye Clercre ef 1D fe. wttcd ons ottriduted
te Poloakov og the wright ef the firet satellite 2 net detinteoe a2 all.
Tacatkin stated Cinsberg wule a art of calculations fur a axtali(te, wing
12 kg. a8 the hypethetion] watght, ‘ct thie fe mrt dectied on an the wright
ef gyri tic ler eatelliite, Actually vetaste wil) vary, bert tae viet  Lilty
of the enaliest will de as geod ea that cf the UH eeteliite, ant atl vill
definttely have epeculaer reflection, Kenntile alee «visti revi the greet
ipelination of the Soviet axteliite ortit. but refuses es this ecvacion to
limit 1% to valoee above TO degreee: Be elated tit 44 aight be thet ow er
wore vould here erbits fhelined at f&) drarves ar thareabarte te the eqntor,
but that {t was algo perfectly troe thet they were plenmiag exbite in gem ral
for inclinacions above 70 degrees. Kasetkin would give we definite flgrres
om gporee ~~ perigee except that pelther wuld be lees than 20° be. As te
satellite 1. +, Kematkim wae: 4 thet sisce they were providing fer »
three-week lf. for the trenamitter retterias, tony stuivcaly ergectadt’ the
eutallite to lut at least that lenge.

On leumching eetbote, Kasatkin bed aceciutaly orthing to ony.

On launching sites, Kesatkin refused to mke cosmeuts. Sowever, {t vas
pointed evt to him that ance the eaftisl)ite was taumciad and ebrervel cutatde
the Soviet Unico, 1t wuld be pceaiole to calculate te \acorh‘-g efte with
pretty pood accuracy frog the orti{ <7 “he satelitte, Kia reply wut “Tee,
wall, write down the que«tions you wat a:tewared asi we'll cy o give you
or eent you anevere to came of toe at least,*

Xesatkin uxiertook to walk from the Jtatler Bntel. t. the nertiag or J Oct

la the aftermen end arrims very late at about 160) burs, We bed bee
soucht by bot. US and Soviet groupe during the afagtnoon,. int Ned apperently
spent two bourse at least wetering abcut Washington. Be effered os
explanation, end it wes preeueed by cthere that he bat bew: mere er loos levt.

partoaZue worning of 3 Oct, Paloskcy gure a paper on fomepoeric meacremate,
wich he did not pretesd was @ progres, bzt only a opllectiaa ef ebvervetions.
In this paper he wentioned redar as a wos cf teaching high altitale Torkats,
without giving any real inforwaticn. He aleo stated that tha entallite
eppearel to the Soviets tm offer reletirely peor cheruwee of amking gext
observations of local foncepheris coditioue. Poleshor ales mwticod
relativity operieente., These were o: cr: tyose, witch were preeantad ef

if they were the only relativity eqerteerts witch the fowlets bol erioualy
considered. Ore would be the testing of the effects of reletietetis mechanics
on the satelitte crtit. They here calecletad task thie effect weild emorrt

to 150 erconts of art per century for « sate) lite at 209 bm. aitttaie. Since
the life of such « satellite woul! be anly three days. there wemid be no
chance of waking effective experim rte, cince other perturbations vould
certainly olecure any relativistl: effet, Ta. Deca of life pacesmry ta

&@ satellite to perult accurate enoagh calculetions of Ue erbit for tests of
reJativistic effects would be wery great. They expect to try thie, duet
reserve fudcmest on the Likelihod of eicees,

Poloakov also pentionad the testing of the relatiriacic effect detectable

in rewiio emfesions, bat diemisese thie es completely aasked by ths Doppler
effect. Polostov was asked if the Goviete het rameiderat testing the
previtetional “red shift’ with extremely accurate clecks, te wijse be replied
that they hadi looked inte this problem ani bet enutitered exer ef the English
clocks which afght be available, det thet these wore all toe bulky bo be
prectical for use in thei: satellites.

At ike ent of Polesbov's talk, Alegearavcr rose emi aidei even coments, weetly
00 orbite. Bince be gare this telk in Englich, be ves barter Se unteretand then

if he hed talked in Bossien axl let a goo! ioterpreter beip bie ort. The
giet of vhet be enid 18 of follows:

ae

@. The begisming ef the talk wes & etamtaré ovrt ef talk ou tha Saviet
calculations ef erbite, endl ot ca. at ene point, Sevree tas

Time, state, Thies
ves ouprutat difficult te eelse. as! ms ene ocald mmf iow ite

>, Blagcerevey euamarised the rewulte ef Geviet calruiationg teas; @
eateliite with diameter SO em, ert weight sf 10 kx. io an orbit ef
perigee 360 km. end apogee 800 bs. wuld havea i ’e ef 15 mothe,
Seme satellite, perigue 5X kr, amomee 14 Be. - Lite 30 years,
With perigee 200 be., apogee 40) ke. Lite is three days, The Soviets
have calculated that they can get a relatively arent increase fn life of
the satelite ef quite @ eemll increase im cot hy naing ertite in

aition of the satellite in its
orbit can be determined withir oeveral wetere, it can be used te
Gilere'n= Jere) gravimetric encmiles, To thie end be helieves the
Optical tracking methods will be a greet helr, 2

One of the US groupe repeatedly queri si the flovieta fur data an the 200 kn,
geophysic rocket. Finally ove of thee (which, not known) eaid evorntially

The session co 4 Oct produced no Infu-wtion ef Siquificence, Yorver, at the
Cocktail party given at the Soviet Febeeqy 10 + evening, toe woule grvup,
Soviets included, was astounded voen the deleqte, 9.7, Becwer, esihed for
permission to ware en armouncesrni en! congretuatal tne viet eerticte on
being the first to launch on earth es-eli‘te, Ths pews reiirialy bed pot
reached the Soviet Rabasay stefr aa ye*, T6 wae unleretoot by the US grwup
that Berkmer bad received information «a tL Soviet leaching fa a Hew

Your Timee repreecutative through encther UW delegate, With(n « short
time, the Soviets recetved notice on their owa encouat end cofirend Beriner's

annouxesent, _—

a
The 0S deleration left the receptiss early ecxl tack Swed late to: sor te alert
US tracking and obeervation stations. At 0600 boury, $ Ort, the mt :

tentative comclusiong hed been reache! regarding the B.v.e% satellite on che
beais of informtion ebtained frow TG--matralled cleervation al tes:

a. Leimch tioe: 1705 bourse Beater. Deyligtt Time & Oct ST,

be. Lauceh «ite: ecmevhat north ad alishtiy wert of the n-u' her, om af
the Carpiaan Sea.

Fired in ME direction at thee inidcetad (local widnigst), ge arce
statal that the e:mxcuncemert of tie leamed bed t-» he mde befice the
Tiret orbit was complete,

a. The Soviets amouncel thet the seteliite carried nothing but two

that this scunde like a lie to his tecaves thy slemle ere ot nearly
os eleple as would be muggested sy euch «3 arrengeeer*, Tot «gals
are keyed reciprocally, but they do oct eowzt Like « slepir caw of
reciprocal keying,

e It 1s believed that RCA picked up ent recorded elgmele fu the Seriet
@atellite on {te second passage.

T. The Soviet statement that the satellite lite wuld be three wake tg
believed ty source to refer to ite transi scior life (oattertzs). the
characteristics of the satellite should ingure ite coutioun! Flight

lodefinitely.
& It 19 wossible thet the trenamiesion power ia greeter then: wwe watt, :
Gore accluosge wes pickles «ele als ite ots feels ose ats ee
BEST COPY

AVAILABLE

~We
the pole, ever the Atleertio, ami rier were reeatved lun] tema waty
oa both 0B coasts.

a. The exact telomrtering frequencies ere ae given in the forme) evesien
@. toe conference: &6.002 wce, amt 20,005 acs.

accurete,.

Blagonrevov stated during the womting eeseion, 5 Oct 57, thet there hal been
two versions of the Soviet eatellite ready to

the USER to attend the present conference, but that he had not mews whi
was to be the actual choice, Be provided information in the fora of @ sketch,
showing the satellite with four equatorielly-eoserted wixlp antennae, shown

in @ eemt-folded position, suggesting that they are intended to be carried
folded in the vehicle, and steni out frou the eatellite bey when it g freed
from the vehicle, Blagonrevoy also eaid that he expecte the next eatallite
to be leaumched in about two sonths, :

The data published in news accounts on the satellite's charecterietics is
ell eccurate, Blagonravow said thet the rr-6 t+ eatellite carried @ power

tesperuture. The interior of the satellite is flied with dry nitrogen before
launching. No statewent es to pressure of the nitrogen was mule,

The life of the satellite iteelf is expected ty the foviets to be shout tuo
weeks. They have provided a power supply which scowld be euffictest for
vie life spen which they hope to attain.

The Goviet satellite, because of the orbit ¢ en, will peas over the tS

eeven times cach. hours. Yievel obeervetion ia essured, gince the satellites

Will be between Sth end 9th magnitudes (i.e., will deve the apparent brightness
4a a

of stare of these nagnitules).

Blagoaravoy stated thet on the occasioa of the 100th amnivereary of the

birthday of Tsiclkovsky on 17 Sep 57 a conference was held in the USER. ~
at which exhaustive reports were presented. Theee are being prepared in form

for publication eri will be furnished as en-aidition to the reperte of the .
present conference, They hope that thie first step will be all thet one might

wieh,

Srurce stated Blagonravor berated the US ani ite eciextista for bregging about
things vot remly to be done. Most of the delegates vere pot sur fapresecd
by thie, but the Irentan delegate to the present caference took it to heart
@xi vas considerably impressed.
