Argentina
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013613, dated 4 November 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013613).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NIE 91-67
87. December “=

DIRECTOR OF,

INTELLIGEN "BOARD
sverleaf 3-3
7 Decemk

4,

a Concurring:

: The Central ‘elligence’ Aga aa the 3 inilgence 0 orgenizations of the Depart :
"me ts f State and Defense, and the NSA. pus a : Be

“Bie: R. J. “Smith, for the Deputy Birector, Central Intelligence :
Mr. “Thomas L. Hughes, ¢ ‘the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State 25 Sn
Vice J Adm. Vernon’ L Lowrance, for the ‘Diredar Defense Intelligence Agency
- Ut. Gen. ‘Marshall s. Carter, the Director, National Security alee s

~ Abstaining: Rt cia me eas ee

Dr. Charles H. ‘Reichardt, for the alge  Ganeeet Ncncoee ‘Miele Energy ‘Com-

_ mission’ and Mr. William O. Cregar, for the ‘Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, | the subject being outside of their jurisdi ction.

es

the National Defense of the United States
‘aws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information
within the meaning of the es
mission or revelation of whi

CONTENTS
Page
THE PROBLEM: © 225)tia0isd. mate oes tedak atl een. d Meese Asse aurea te 1
CONCLUSIONS: 2.3)iaitatalceseG Oe heh ce wrwtnedaetehiniad cake eat 1
DISCUSSION: cssscescsesceg See tae bac inde 9 BU Sa a pee tata eed eee Bn are 3
J. THE UNDERLYING PROBLEMS ...........-.-.2 esc eee eee eee nee 3
II. THE CHARACTER OF THE ONGANIA ADMINISTRATION ....... 7
A. The President and His Advisers ..............0-0.e cee ee eee eeeaes 1
B. Onganfa and the Military ............ 000. c ccc eet e eee e ee 9
’ TI. ECONOMIC MODERNIZATION AND STABILIZATION ........... 10
A. The New Program ....0....0..000000 cece eee eeeceueeueeeeveeeees 10
Be Phe Record Sa-cves eee Ue caeten ene KO ee Renna eee past Il
LV. POLITICAL: PROBLEMS" iistycleceu vee een iad bie be evans teas 12
Vs OU POOR, tenet eed rie y a eens se Ge UR A te telat a te ei ty 14
A. The Shorter Term Prospects .......... 26.0000 e ccc eee cece cece ee eee 14

Be The Longer iin 2.54 peut. eh ied es oe ea ES ie each ces 15

ARGENTINA

THE PROBLEM

To consider the nature of Argentina's basic problems, the character
and actions of the Ongania administration, and the prospects for sig-
nificant economic and political progress over the next four or five years.

CONCLUSIONS

A. President Onganfa is bent on retaining power as long as neces-
sary to revive the country’s economy and, when that is accomplished,
to tackle its political maladies. The government has given priority
to a sustained attack on the most serious economic aberrations; it has
meanwhile suspended politics as usual, ordered all the political parties
dissolved, and put off indefinitely any attempt to come to grips with
the country’s most divisive political problem—Peronism.

B. Ongania’s administration has, for the most part, avoided re-
pressive actions, and, in the conduct of its business, it appears more
civilian than military. Most Argentines, though not enthusiastic about
him, seem quite willing to wait and see how his government performs.
We believe that Onganfa will continue to hold power over the next
year or so.

C. The administration has initiated a complex economic program
designed to achieve both financial stabilization and economic de-
velopment. It has sharply reduced the power of organized labor and
has taken positive action to reduce budget deficits, increase production,
and control inflation. These measures have attracted considerable
official and private financial and technical support from abroad. Over
the next year or two we look for additional progress in budgetary re-
forms, in stabilization measures, and in some aspects of development.

D. Over the longer run—the next four or five years—we doubt
that the regime can continue to keep Argentine political problems on

ae.

the shelf. We think Onganfa will have great difficulty in holding co-
hesive civilian support behind his program, and as time passes his mili-
tary backing is likely to become less solid. These factors will compli-
cate any attempts by Onganfa to come to grips with the Peronist
problem. Further, we do not believe that even over this longer period
of time Argentina will establish a representative system of government
capable of reaching a consensus on policies and tactics for dealing with
its social and economic problems.

E. We believe, nonetheless, that the government will make con-
siderable progress in reducing the impact of fluctuating harvests and
commodity prices on annual growth rates. Broader economic success,
however, will depend on the government’s ability to maintain con-
tinuity in its policies and to retain public confidence in their durability
over a number of years. We believe that the government's chances
of remaining in power over this longer run are considerably better than
even, but we are less confident that it will be able to adhere firmly to
a successful economic policy.

F. Onganfa’s anti-Communist leanings will continue to be a force
for close cooperation with the US. Among the issues which could
adversely affect US-Argentine relations would be a refusal by the US
to carry out what the Argentine military establishment regards as a
commitment to assist in the modernization of its armed forces.

DISCUSSION

Il. THE UNDERLYING PROBLEMS

1, For decades Argentina has failed to achieve the great potential of its human
and material resources.’ Countries which 30 or 40 years ago were Argentina’s
peers—Canada and Australia, for example—have moved far ahead both in
economic growth and in advancement of political institutions. The Argentines,
arrogant in their conviction that they ought to be the leading power among
Latin American nations, have increasingly resented their country’s failure to
progress rapidly and to modernize. They have been better at expressing these
aims, however, than in doing something to fulfill them. Argentines have seldom
been willing to make personal sacrifices for the collective good, and, in recent
years, have found it extraordinarily difficult to reach any political consensus.
From the overthrow of Perdn, in 1955, until the assumption of power by the
present government, there were five regimes in Argentina, and none of them
was long capable of decisive, consistent action.

2. The declared purpose of the present government is to provide strong rule
for as long as required to correct the country’s most serious economic aberrations
and to establish new foundations for orderly political and social progress.
Clearly this is a task of great magnitude and not one where results can readily be
achieved; thus, the most important tests of the government’s performance may
come only over a period of four or five years.

3. Argentina has basic economic problems that defy quick, easy solutions. The
population is more than 70 percent urban, and industry and services account for
more than 80 percent of gross national product (GNP) and total employment.
(See Figure 91-1, “Economic Sectors as a Percent of GNP”.) Yet the economy has
continued to depend on agriculture to earn the foreign exchange needed for its
maintenance and development. The conflict between the interests of the urban-
ized bulk of the population and those of the rural minority producing for export
has created a major dilemma in national policy for decades. For many years
Argentina has suffered from a stop-go pattern of economic growth, and from
budget deficits, a high rate of inflation, balance of payments difficulties, and
widespread inefficiency in production. Since the removal of Perén, the Argentine
economy has been unable to sustain growth for more than two successive years.

*These include a population (about 23,000,000) which provides one of the largest and
best educated labor forces in Latin America, an extensive and very fertile agricultural area,
a developed industrial base, and adequate petroleum reserves and hydroelectric power
potential.

* Military takeovers in Argentina are by no means a new phenomenon; since 1930 coups
have removed five civilian and two military governments. Each time the military have taken
power, there have been some among its leaders who wanted to retain it long enough to impose
basic political and economic changes. Until the coup of 1966, however, these views did not
prevail, and the forms of constitutional government were restored fairly quickly.

_ 3

PROVINCIAS

- Tucumdn
Santiago dei Estero
Chaco

Misiones
Catamarca
La Rioja
Santa Fe
Corrientes
San Juan
Cérdoba
14, Entre Rios
. Mendoza
17. San Luis
. La Pampa
. Buenos Aires
. Neuguén
. Rio Negro
Chubut
23. Santa Cruz.
TERRITORIO NACIONAL
24. Tierra del Fuego
CAPITAL FEDERAL
15. Buenos Aires (city)-

BNE OOMNa MAN

ARGENTINA

FALKLAND ISLANDS
CLK.) seeessames [nternational boundary

an : eRe wae Internal administrative
aC 527 boundary
exe. : @ National capital

(Claimed by Aigentina) Internal administrative
capita

Railroad
Road

Q 100 200 300 Miles

0) 160 200 300 Kilometers

57764 11-67

bead

Year-to-year performance has fluctuated widely, with GNP rising as much as
nine percent or declining as much as six percent in one year. The rate of growth
for the period as a whole has been slow and, since 1961, the annual rate of
growth in GNP has averaged only 1.7 percent—the same as the rate of popula-
tion growth. Demand for goods and services, however, has continued to ex-
pand—mainly as a result of politically motivated wage increases and increasing
budget deficits—and the cost of living has risen an average of about 25 percent
a year. (Figure 91-2, “Indices of Economic Activity,” provides these and other
economic data for the period since 1955.)

Figure 1
ARGENTINA
Economic Sectors as a Percent of Gross National Product
Selected Years, 1935-65
29.0% 31.7% Manufacturing,
| ar
: and Mining

Services

Agriculture

1935

57933 12-67

(0°8-9"2)

Lsy LO6T

pu LF €°68 1°83 0° 6° 9% S°68 0° Lg 8°0F o'r

e'ee G°8S BSS be 8° LS 9°ST 1°22 O'FIT 91g 9°FS
(esverou] o88yUI0I0d)
pu 6IT 6IT 80T 66 LOT SOT e0T OOT POI
(001 = 8961)

go0's o99's 26'S POL‘E 1726'S 04 pu Gore = GOT‘S
6Z— L81—- FL—- ¥6I— 118 SIt egi— 0sI- atd OFT

40% 63— ee 90%— 2 181 9LI—- WI est—- 18
40Z— 7o— L SOT L08 L8e ¥eg £92 L61 OL
g9% 022 23 BES Glo—- 989—- G0Z— I 69¢— s0e—

(SA. $ suoryrar)
6°LT T'6E BLT TL 9°23 Zee 8°2% 2°81 6°6T 8°6I
oI SOT SO! Z°01 TI 2°0r 0'6 L°8 6°6 9°83
¥°69 ¥°69 O'TL 8°02 9°89 9'°OL 6°69 6S PSL PPL
8°86 0°66 8°66 1°86 S°SOT TPOL L°10T = 6 "66 Z°SOT 8°Z01
(AND jo yu9a10d)

(I-) (8°8) (6°24) (@'e-) (LI-) (2°9) (6°24) (8°S—) (°L) (9°9)

OI8'ST OOO‘OT OTZ‘FE O8O'St OZI'FT O98'FT OOF'ET OZF'ZE OFs'EI OZE‘ZT
(SN $ suorrUr)

996I G96T PO6T £96 296T 1961 096T 6S61 896 LS61

cALIAILOV OINONOOT JO SHOIGNI» ‘8-16 TUNDIA

‘A[WO SUOTSSIWUO PUB S101 q
“Bad1AIOS PUB spood Jo s10duy pus sy10dxe uo oouR]eq snuTUT IO enfd GND +

8°ST sreees*(sgururesy Apnoy) ssw
O'ST —* (tHAX JOJOFvs9Ay) Buyayy Jo 480g

LOT Chee reer seseees seagEre qiodxa
ad sreeeesescngac UsIIOg TY.LOL
gI—- sreteses* (opMeTOUI—) sIAIos

-a1 Arejouow ul esusqo 3eN
Lt teeeeeeee esse grorssturo pus

Mole pus peydvo wr107-3104g
SEL seeeerescsamngaas peydvo Jony
T€I— ‘“occct***4unoo08 4yueLne JON

s}uem Ay Jo souelsg

LI 7° **4u0ur4SOAUT ON soWOp BEOITD
6 ‘t's uondumneuos quourmIaAor)
GL occ t wopydumsuoo oyvang

oo) a
[IGA SODIAJOS PU BPOO’ [8107

a * (e8usyo o8vyus0I0d [unuuy)

OZL'TT "7 * * seoptd GogT Ul IND
s|UNOIY [BUONeN

9S6T

4, The national budget has been strained by a combination of falling revenues
and increasing expenditures to cover the operating losses of the public enterprises
(mainly the railroads), which are overstaffed and inefficient. A long tradition of
inefficiency has also been evident in the industrial sector, where, supported by
subsidies in various forms and protected by the highest tariffs in Latin America,
producers have had little incentive to reduce labor and other costs, increase
productivity, and expand markets. Although the industrial complex absorbs
more than 90 percent of imports, its products generally have not been competi-
tive in foreign markets, and agriculture remains the principal source—more than
90 percent—of export earnings. Over the last two decades, however, the agri-
cultural sector has tended to stagnate because of insufficient investment: Profits
have been limited and investment incentives dampened by a combination of
increased operating costs and export taxes, which have run as high as 25 percent
on wheat, meat, and other commodities. Thus, in failing to adopt modern agri-
cultural techniques, Argentina has lagged steadily further behind its main com-
petitors, Australia, Canada, and the US, and has failed to expand sufficiently its
traditional exports.

5. The resulting trade deficits, together with periodic flights of capital, have
in turn, led to the accumulation of an extraordinarily large foreign debt.* The
tendency toward periodic crises in the balance of payments is now intensified
by the heavy lien placed on export earnings in order to service and repay the
foreign debt. Swinging between conditions of economic boom and bust, the
country has not been able to pursue consistent development policies and public
confidence in the future has been gravely eroded.

6. Among the country’s political problems the most divisive, in recent years,
has been the persistence of Peronism. Perdén’s creation of this political move-
ment had enabled a neglected sector of the Argentine population—its unskilled
as well as its better trained labor groups—to share in the exercise of political
power. By the end of his decade in power Perén had alienated many of the
other groups that had supported him at first—a wide variety of nationalists,
elements of the military, the Church, industrial and commercial interests. Never-
theless, and despite having been in exile since 1955, Perén (now 72) still exercises
a.strong influence over the rank and file of organized labor in Argentina. The
Argentine military leaders were clearly disappointed with the slow-paced approach
of President Arturo Illia (1963-1966) toward modernization of the nation, but
it was his failure to develop an acceptable strategy to meet the threat of a
Peronist victory, in key national and provincial elections to be held in early 1967,
that provided the occasion for the military seizure of power in June 1966.

7. Upon seizing power the military leaders prorogued the national and pro-
vincial legislatures, dissolved the political parties, dismissed the governors of the

* Total foreign debt reached a peak of $3.2 billion in 1963. Since then imports have been
held down and exports have been expanded, thus permitting foreign indebtedness to be
reduced.

6 > an

Vie.

provinces, and purged the Supreme Court. The military junta, whose members
were the commanders in chief of the Amny, the Navy, and the Air Force, also
concentrated all executive and legislative power in the hands of Juan Carlos
Ongania, a retired lieutenant general and former commander in chief of the Army
(1962-1965), whom they installed as President. In sum, the military leadership
decreed an end to political processes until some unspecified time in the future
when the renovation of the nation has been substantially achieved and Argentina
restored to its “rightful rank among nations.” In the following paragraphs we
propose to examine the character of the military regime, its program, and its
prospects over the next four or five years.

Il. THE CHARACTER OF THE ONGANIA ADMINISTRATION

A. The President and His Advisers

8. The Ongania government is a presidential dictatorship dependent upon
military support. The way in which it intervened in the national universities and
the overreaction of its police forces to student resistance and provocation led
observers to suppose that it would be as repressive as other Latin American
dictatorships have been. But since the summer of 1966 Onganfa has not re-
sorted to repressive action on any major scale. He has issued an anti-Communist
law under which a wide range of activities could be interpreted as Communist
and punished by severe penalties. This action was motivated by deep-seated
anti-Communist convictions which are shared by the military and other influ-
ential groups in society. The administration has a strong bent to prudishness
and has banned, for salacity, a number of plays and films that were accepted
elsewhere. Onganfa is also intolerant of either political satire or criticism of the
armed forces. The press remains relatively free, although the recent banning
of two small periodicals has revived fears regarding the government’s intentions.
Nevertheless, the press has continued to criticize official policies and actions—
albeit with a degree of self-imposed censorship. This situation contrasts with
the repressive and coercive measures employed to control the press during the
Perén dictatorship.

9. In the conduct of its business the Onganfa administration appears more
civilian than military. While retired military men have been placed in charge
of most of the provincial governments, of the Federal Capital, and of the National
Development Council, the day-to-day business of running the national govern-
ment has remained in civilian hands. Within the government itself, the Cabinet
Ministers and their principal subordinates are civilians, and economic policies
are now largely formulated and carried out by a team of civilian experts. The
Supreme Court was purged shortly after the military takeover, but the lower
Argentine courts have ruled against the administration on several occasions.

a 7

WOR.

10. Ongania himself is a taciturn professional soldier, widely respected for his
role in restoring constitutional government during the turbulence of 1962-1963.
He does not project great appeal for the general public and, in his reluctance
to court public opinion, he more nearly resembles the late President Castello
Branco of Brazil than the flamboyant Juan Perén. Ongania is neither a man
of broad intellectual background, nor a crusader in the usually accepted sense
of the word; indeed, he tends to be pragmatic and even cautious. He has shown
an ability to choose well among various options presented by subordinates, and
a knack for finding a reasonable balance among the views of competing groups.
One factor which proved detrimental in his first few months in power, and which
may still cause difficulties, is his long, close association with rightwing nationalists;
a devout Roman Catholic, Onganfa had previously participated in religious ac-
tivities—including retreats—with a number of these individuals.

11. As President, Ongania spends considerable time listening to and weighing
the suggestions of his advisers. There are within his administration varying
viewpoints, but most of the officials adhere to one or the other of two basic lines
of approach. Argentines refer to these two groupings as nacionalistas and
liberales. Both are nationalistic, but the nacionalistas tend toward xenophobia,
and are opposed: to foreign investment, particularly in the petroleum industry.
They are better described as statists, because they strongly support state control
of large sectors of the economy, many of them have previously belonged to
rightist organizations, and many have no faith that the traditional forms of par-
liamentary democracy can work in Argentina. In recent months Onganfa has
shifted away from his early dependence on the statists, although their views are
still represented in his administration by such individuals as Maj. Gen. Osiris
Villegas, the Secretary of the National Security Council, Guillermo Borda, Min-
ister of the Interior, and Mario Diaz Colodrero, the Secretary of Government.

12. The liberales stress the importance of free enterprise to the economy; they
are liberals in the 19th century sense of the term, holding to a conservative, busi-
ness outlook. They believe in constitutional democracy but are reluctant to
accept the lower economic classes and are willing to limit the suffrage. Since
December 1966, in spite of his continuing close personal relationship with various
of the statists, Ongania has clearly followed the advice of the liberals in deter-
mining Argentine economic policies. He has appointed the respected economist
Dr. Krieger Vasena to lead his economic team and other liberals to serve on it—
men who are reasonably international in outlook, are proponents of private
enterprise, and welcome foreign capital investment in all fields. The liberal
grouping also includes individuals who hold other key jobs, among them Lt. Gen.
Julio Alsogaray, the commander in chief of the Army, and his brother Alvaro, the
Ambassador to the US. Ongania has not, however, committed himself ir-
revocably to the liberals and thereby keeps the statists hopeful that they may
again have their turn.

8 “eee

B. Ongania and the Military *

13. The armed forces, and particularly the Army, are firmly committed to the
revolution ordained by the military seizure of power in June 1966, and support
Ongania. Initially, the military leaders had limited access to the President but
over the last year Onganfa has maintained a much closer liaison with them to
facilitate exchange of opinions. In the case of military criticism of the admin-
istration’s original economic team, for example, the military leaders were able
to bring about a change in the Cabinet. On some occasions the President acts
to keep situations from developing which would arouse military discontent,
especially in the Army.

14. Thus far, Ongania has been able to keep military leaders with widely
disparate views, such as Alsogaray and Villegas, among his principal advisers.
He has carefully balanced one with the other, to prevent either from becoming
a serious threat to his position. At the same time, through his control over
military promotions, retirements, and assignments, Onganfa has been able to
remove or neutralize potential rivals and to move supporters of the revolution
into key positions. In this manner, and while acknowledging that the armed
forces are the backbone of the revolution he is carrying out in their name, he
has been able to keep the direction of the government in his own hands.

15. Within the Army there are individuals and groups who are opposed to
Onganfa or his present policies, or both, for a variety of reasons including per-
sonal ambition and political differences. The impact of these individuals and
groups, however, is limited by their inability to unite and by their lack of a
leader or program able to draw support away from Onganfa. The present Army
leadership is agreed on the necessity of maintaining its unity and giving Ongania
a chance to get on with the modernization of the nation. Thus, while there
is still a possibility of a clash over who ultimately controls the government, the
commander in chief of the Army (Alsogaray) and Ongania have a common
interest in defending the present economic program against its opponents.
Furthermore, in the eyes of most military leaders, Ongania has made few serious
mistakes.

‘The Argentine security forces have a personnel strength of about 160,000, distributed
as follows:

ATUY. feiss gta de ASS hot Bra hen tna a 85,000
Navy see Be deen a Aieled tho intetn Gh omuayan we eoe eee 36,000
AID POree: Ai 6 Sneek oe os cost antecedent, webl al'ssglacah are Be veten 17,000
National Gendarmerie ..............00ccecccececceee 11,000
National Maritime Prefecture ............00..--.-000: 8,000

The Gendarmerie and Maritime Prefecture are largely border and coastal patrol forces, re-
spectively, but both are well trained paramilitary forces under military leadership and dis-
cipline. There is also a Federal Police Force of about 22,500 men. Some 11,000 of this
force are involved in public safety activities in the area of the national capital; they include
two units totaling about 2,100 men who have been trained in paramilitary tactics with US
assistance.

Ee 9

Ill. ECONOMIC MODERNIZATION AND STABILIZATION
A. The New Program

16. The present government took office with an awareness of the nature o.
the country’s economic problems and a determination to deal resolutely with
them. At the outset, however, Onganfa’s economic advisers had little or no
government experience and no clear idea how to begin. They made some
successful moves against such obvious targets as the inefficient and costly port
system and the work rules for the national railroads. These moves fell far
short of the expectations of those groups who had placed Ongania in power.
Before the end of 1966 it was clear that inflationary pressures were growing,
the economy was not moving ahead, and the administration’s economic efforts
were floundering. It was then (December 1966) that Ongania responded by
shaking up his Cabinet and turning to the new team of economic experts.

17. Goals and Tactics. The major goals of the broad and complex program
initiated by the new economic group in early 1967 are financial stabilization and
economic development. The kind of program Krieger Vasena has undertaken
requires careful timing and coordination to prevent the aggravation of problems
in.one area by the measures taken to correct conditions in another. To counter-
act the inflationary impact of a 40 percent devaluation of the Argentine peso—
which was designed mainly to effect an improvement in the balance of pay-
ments—an incomes policy has been initiated to freeze wages and to hold down
prices. The simultaneous lowering of tariffs also was meant to reduce the costs
of imports as well as to force an increase in investment and production efficiency
by lessening protection from foreign competition. Another counterinflationary
objective of prime importance is the reduction in the government fiscal deficit. In
the short term, this is being accomplished mainly by an increase in tax revenues.
Any sizable reduction in the numbers of government employees is being post-
poned until they can be absorbed into productive jobs elsewhere. To facilitate
their transfer and to counteract the recessionary effects of the stabilization pro-
gram as a whole, the government has enacted a variety of incentives to private
investment, both foreign and domestic.

18. The administration has repeatedly stressed its intention to reduce, and
where possible, to eliminate government involvement in those sectors of the econ-
omy where private capital can be induced to take over. Generous tax and
credit privileges have been provided for investments in agriculture, industry,
mining, and construction, and private capital has been invited into basic in-
dustries and services previously owned or dominated by the government.

19. At the same time, the administration intends to expand public investment,
primarily in the economy’s infrastructure. Its plan, which involves a variety
of power, transportation, irrigation and housing projects as well as basic in-
dustrial and agricultural programs, is to be financed through domestic savings
and foreign borrowing. These are designed to spur current economic activity
as well as long-term economic growth. The largest of these projects is the

10 wii.

El Chocén-Cerros Colorados hydroelectric development project which might
cost half a billion dollars over several years. Its purpose is to promote agri-
cultural as well as industrial development in the Neuquén-Rio Negro area, and
to help check the migration from the interior to the heavily populated metro-
politan area (see map showing population distribution). The Ongania ad-
ministration has announced that this project will be initiated soon even if the
World Bank does not provide the $150 million loan requested to finance part
of the costs of the imports the project will require. The administration has
indicated that it might call for European and Soviet assistance.

B. The Record

20. No economic miracle has been achieved, but major problems have been
identified, and action has been begun on many of them. Krieger Vasena has
sought the counsel of international agencies, has incorporated their suggestions
in his program, and has thereby enlisted considerable official and private finan-
cial and technical support from abroad. Thus far, the Argentine Government
has obtained about $400 million in the form of standby funds from the Inter-
national Monetary Fund, the US Treasury, and a consortium of European and
US banks as well as important development loans from international financial
organizations. Moreover, for the first time since World War II, arrangements
are being worked out to float Argentine bond issues in the European market.
The marked improvement in the financial position of the country is reflected in
the substantial increase in the Central Bank's holdings of gold and convertible
foreign exchange (from less than $200 million in early March 1967 to over $700
million by the end of July).

21. The effort to control rises in the cost-of-living index has not been so success-
ful. Prices rose by nearly 25 percent during the first 10 months of 1967. This
rise was due in large part to the 40 percent devaluation of the peso and to
food shortages caused by bad weather and speculative hoarding of wheat. The
administration, however, moved quickly to relieve winter shortages by import-
ing foodstuffs—including wheat from Spain and Bulgaria—and is doing so
again to lessen the impact of the October floods. The largest portion of the
price increases resulting from the devaluation has been absorbed, and current
progress in stabilizing wages and utility rates holds promise of limiting further
inflationary pressure. In addition, there is some indication that business enter-
prises are beginning to accept the administration’s view that future profits in-
creasingly will be determined by efficiency rather than inflationary price hikes
and protection from external competition.

22. The administration has, moreover, exerted an important stabilizing in-
fluence by its reduction of the budget deficit. For the first eight months of 1967
that deficit (43 billion pesos) was in real terms less than one-half the deficit
for the same period in 1966. Although 1967 expenditures are about 10 percent
higher, in real terms, than for the corresponding eight months of 1966, revenues
have risen 41 percent. Most of this increased revenue comes from the export

a . 1

aie:

tax and an emergency property tax, but improvements in administration are
also partly responsible.

23, The measures to encourage private enterprise have produced some signs
of a renewal of domestic business confidence. This is reflected in businessmen’s
positive response to the voluntary price-restraint program and in the successful
reopening of the Treasury Bill market (after a lapse of 20 years). Private in-
vestors are still very cautious and some pockets of depression still persist—un-
employment is now at about six percent. But the fact is that, despite the
strong stabilization measures the government has taken, it has averted an overall
recession. GNP per capita will probably rise in 1967 by about one percent.
Winning the confidence of the long neglected agricultural sector will be more
difficult for the government, though reductions in taxes on various agricultural
exports have been a useful first step.

IV. POLITICAL PROBLEMS

24. The country’s basic political problem continues to be the inability of its
leaders to establish a representative system that allows all political groups to
participate and is acceptable to the military. This problem predates the emer-
gence of Peronism but has been complicated by it. Perén, by giving material
gains, social benefits, status, and a political role to Argentine labor, won its
support as the popular base for his regime. Under Perén labor became a
privileged, rather than an exploited, sector of the society, and post-Perén gov-
ernments were not able to establish a new labor-management-government rela-
tionship which either labor, management, or the military would accept. Although
Perén’s control over the leaders of the trades unions has declined, he still has
considerable influence over the rank and file of labor and other elements of
the Peronist movement. That is a major reason why the movement is anathema
to the military. Many of the senior officers realize that Perén’s return is not
in the cards—they would not permit that—but they are equally unwilling to
allow Peronism to achieve a position of dominant influence.

25. The Ongania administration has postponed any serious attack on the
problems of a lack of political consensus and the persistence of Peronism. It
has ruled by decree and concentrated its energies on the economic front.
Ongania has refused either to work with traditional political parties or to set
a date for holding elections and relinquishing power. As a result virtually
all the country’s political factions are in opposition to him. So are the bulk
of the country’s intellectuals, including teachers and university students. The
political opposition has remained largely passive, however, and, in the main,
the general public has seemed quite willing to wait and see how the government
performs.

26. A major point of strength for Ongania continues to be the divisiveness of

the opposition. Formidable obstacles stand in the way of any effective coopera-
tion between the two principal political groups, the Peronists and former Presi-

12 Rca

ee ne
dent Illia’s Radicals.5 There are deep-seated personal animosities between some
of the Radical leaders and the Peronists; there are wide differences among the
various Radical factions; and there is little real unity among the Peronists.
Nevertheless, some exploratory conversations aimed at achieving a working
arrangement have been held between Peronist and Radical leaders, and the

members of the two groupings share many common views about what needs
to be done in Argentina.

27. Perén’s issuance of conflicting instructions, to various Peronists claiming
to be his spokesmen, has undercut attempts at Peronist unity and has enabled
him to prevent anyone else from assuming his mantle. Furthermore, as long
as Perén is the dominant figure in Peronism, the Radicals and other opposition
political leaders must consider the likely results of elections in which Perén
would probably have a decisive influence on the outcome of the voting. During
the last decade virtually all Argentine political parties, including the Communists,
have sought to win over the Peronist masses but none has succeeded.

28. The government's success in handling labor resistance has demonstrated
the present political weakness of the unions despite a membership of some 2.3
million. Labor leadership has been divided and few of the unions have gone
far in backing up those unions which have challenged the military govern-
ment. This lack of labor solidarity reflects the heterogeneous membership
of the individual unions (some representing highly trained workers while others
are made up of unskilled laborers) and the divisions within the leadership of
the General Confederation of Labor (CGT). It also reflects the basic dichotomy.
in the Argentine labor movement. Initially made up of unions with socialist,
Communist, and even anarchist traditions (derived from the massive immigra-
tion of Italians and Spaniards between 1880 and 1914), the CGT was inundated
under Perén’s leadership by the rapid organization of new unions. Many of
the members of these unions were native Argentines, who had migrated from
the provinces to the metropolis since 1930.6 These migrants from the more
conservative societies of the interior carried over into their union activities a
traditional attachment to a patrén. Perén filled this role for them then and
to a considerable extent still does.

29. The present government has reversed its predecessor’s largely laissez-faire
labor policies by decreeing obligatory arbitration in labor disputes affecting
the national interest. While other factors undoubtedly were involved, the

"In the 1965 congressional elections Ilia’s party polled about 28 percent of the total vote
and the Peronist-oriented parties some 37 percent. None of the other parties received more
than seven percent of the total vote.

*Between 1914 and the mid-1930’s migration from the provinces to the greater Buenos
Aires area averaged some 8,000 persons each year. During the rapid industrialization of the
1940's the number of migrants increased to an estimated average of 100,000 annually. In
the years from 1947 to 1951, at the height of Perén’s program of industrialization, that migra-
tion is estimated to have reached nearly 200,000 a year. It has continued to cause the popu-
lation of the greater Buenos Aires area to grow rapidly—increasing 118 percent between 1947
and 1960 (the date of the latest census), compared to the national average of 26 percent.

ae 13

eae.
government’s firmness in dealing with labor is reflected in the loss of fewer
than 200,000 man-days, caused by labor disputes during the first half of 1967,
as compared with more than 1,500,000 in the last six months of the Illia ad-
ministration. Over the last few years price rises generally have been matched
by wage increases. This probably has played a role in the refusal of the rank

and file of labor, despite its grumbling over rising prices, to risk a confrontation
with a strong government.

V. OUTLOOK

A. The Shorter Term Prospects

30. Ongania has made appreciable headway in a relatively short time. Over
the next year or two he probably will press on with the general program his
administration has developed, continuing to give priority to economic matters,
and hoping to leave the major political and social problems until later. We
think that, over this shorter term, he will retain the military support needed
to give continuity to his economic program and that he will continue to make
progress on Argentina’s economic problems.

31. Over the shorter run, the amount of growth and the degree of prosperity
in Argentina will continue to be affected by the size of the wheat and corn
crops, and on world prices for these and other exports such as beef and wool.
Either poor harvests or lower market prices would decrease the administration's
revenues and a combination of both would force it either to curtail sharply
its program of public works or to secure additional outside financing. Similarly,
should the manufacturing sector fail to pick up substantially, the administration
will be seriously hampered in carrying out the dismissals of government em-
ployees, particularly from the railroads, needed io effect further reductions in
the deficits of government enterprises. Under such conditions there would
be military and civilian pressure on Ongania to put the statists in charge of
economic policy. We think that initially, at least, he would resist such pressure.
If conditions did not improve, however, he probably would give the statists their
chance. Such a shift would be politically popular. It would mean, however,
that Argentina would be reverting to an urban-oriented economic nationalism
which would tend to renew the country’s: foreign exchange problems, discourage
foreign capital investment and pose obstacles to long run economic progress.

32. We believe, however, that Onganfa will continue to hold power over the
next year or two. No great enthusiasm for him or his government is likely to
develop among the general public, but there will probably be much more apathy
than outright opposition. The traditional political parties will undoubtedly seek
to exploit such discontent as exists, but we think that they will have only limited
success. Many among the intellectuals will continue to be antagonistic toward
Onganfa, and the administration will almost certainly encounter additional fric-
tion in its dealing with labor.

14 oe oe

33. But the very elements in the political sphere which are most likely to be-
come active in their opposition to Onganfa—e.g., some groups among the Peron-
ists, among the Radicals, and perhaps among the Communists—are the least
likely to find support or sympathy for their views among the military. Thus,
if there is a short-run threat to Ongania, almost certainly it lies in the military
establishment itself. Here Ongania must proceed with considerable caution in
order to maintain a balance among the senior officers and among the views they
hold. He has, however, several things in his favor: (a) He is clearly aware of
his need to retain the backing of key officers, and, as former commander in chief
of the Army, he has close knowledge of the individuals he is dealing with; (b)
he can control retirements and transfers so as to keep officers loyal to him in the
most important commands; and (c) no one in the officer corps at present has
the prestige or support that Onganfa possesses. And if Onganfa can show some
progress toward securing the return of the Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
from the UK, his prestige will be enhanced.

B. The Longer Run

34, We think that the government’s economic program has the elements neces-
sary for sustained, long-term economic growth. While that program is taking
effect, the Onganfa administration does have the advantage of a favorable credit
position abroad and sizable monetary reserves to help it ride out a crop failure
without sharply disrupting longer range development. Continuity in govern-
ment economic policies for five years—and perhaps more—will probably be
necessary to alter the inflationary psychology and skepticism that have developed
during years of “stop-go” approaches to the solution of deep-seated economic
problems. All participants in the economic life of the country must be con-
vinced that the incentives—and rules—that exist today will continue into the
future before they will change their patterns of investment, production, and
consumption.

35. Over this longer period, however, Argentina’s economic and political prob-
lems will become increasingly intertwined, no matter how much the government
tries to keep them separate. Either economic successes or failures are likely
to have heightened impact on political development: failures will produce pres-
sure for changes in personnel and policies, and successes will heighten demands
for elections and a return to representative government. F inally, as time passes,
Onganfa is likely to have increasing difficulty in maintaining military unity
and support.

36. For these reasons, and because of the instability inherent in Argentine
politics, we believe that Onganfa’s hold on power will eventually begin to slip,
and, at the least, he will come under increasing civilian and military pressure
to return to civilian rule. At this stage, there would be some increase in the
danger that he might resort to more repressive methods of rule, and that this in
turn, could produce further demand for a change of government.

- . 15

37. Assuming he continues in the Presidency, it is not clear what kind of suc-
cessor government Onganfa may eventually favor. He has not finally com-
mitted himself to the political solutions advocated either by the “liberals” or the
“nationalists.” It is clear, however, that he does not intend to return to the
multiparty system which the military overthrew in June 1966; and he may lean
toward indirect rather than direct elections for President. Furthermore, Onganfa
apparently expects the traditional party leaders somehow to “fade away” and be
replaced by new and more capable leaders of a two-party system into which the
Peronist can be absorbed.

38. Whatever else may occur, the gut issue for Argentine political progress
will be when and how the Peronists can be restored as acceptable members of
the body politic. Political consensus will be difficult enough when and if this
takes place; without its achievement, consensus will be impossible. Ongania
has mentioned his hopes on this score, but clearly more time must pass before
practical steps can be taken. If Perén were to die soon the chances for fairly
rapid progress on the Peronist issue in Argentina would go up significantly. By
and large, those among the Peronists who preach “Peronism without Perén”
are the more flexible leaders in the movement and more acceptable to other
Argentines. An arrangement could probably be managed with other political
parties and with military leaders to permit groups which these men headed to
come back in out of the political cold. Yet only part of the problem will be solved
when the forms and organizations of Perouism are no more; there will remain
the matter of somehow accommodating the attitudes and aspirations of a broad
sector of the population which had it unusually good before and wants to have
it unusually good again.

39. We do not believe, however, that even over this longer period of time
Argentina will establish a representative system of government capable of reaching
a consensus on policies and tactics for dealing with its social and economic prob-
lems. Some of those problems, of course, cannot be solved in four or five years.
A reasonable degree of economic success for the Ongania government will depend
upon its ability to maintain continuity in its policies and to retain public con-
fidence in their durability. We believe that the government’s chances of remain-
ing in power over this longer period are considerably better than even, but we
are less confident that it will be able to adhere firmly to a successful economic
policy.

40. We do not expect much change in the traditional Argentine foreign policies
of noninvolvement in great power struggles and resistance to any encroachment
on Argentine sovereignty. The strongly anti-Communist views of the Onganfa
administration have caused some shift from the strong stand Argentina has usu-
ally taken on nonintervention. Thus the Onganfa administration will be much
more sensitive than its predecessors to situations in Uruguay, Bolivia, and other
neighboring countries where forces it identifies as extreme leftist might pose
some threat. It would, for example, not long hesitate over intervening in Uru-
guay should Castro-Communist elements appear to be on the verge of taking
over there. It would, however, probably seek to act jointly with Brazil.

16 —/

41. The present administration’s strongly anti-Communist leanings will con-
tinue to be a force for Argentine cooperation with the US. One issue which could
affect relations would be a refusal by the US to carry out what the Argentine
military establishment considers to be a commitment to assist in the modernization
of their armed forces. Thus far, Onganfa has been able to persuade the military
leaders that they should set an example in sacrificing for the national program;
in particular he has dissuaded them from arranging the purchase of some items
of equipment from Europe. He is committed, however, to providing other items
such as medium tanks and naval equipment, for which negotiations are being
conducted with France and other European suppliers. Moreover, military pres-
sure for more modern weapons will continue and could become entirely un-
manageable should the US not be willing to supply what the Argentine military
regards as its minimal requirements. In the event that an Argentine President
has to choose between antagonizing his military support or the US, US-Argentine
relations will almost certainly be the loser.

42. Another issue which might cool US-Argentine relations would be a pro-
longed delay—or failure—of the World Bank to provide assistance for the El
Choc6n project. Many Argentines would believe that the US was responsible.

NORTH
16% Territory
11% Population
9% Electorate

ANDEAN
27% Territory
14% Population
14% Electorate

| eae
RIOJA.

CENTRAL-EASTERN
33% Territory

73% Population

75% Electorate

CAPITAL |
‘FEDERAL
ane ay a ae
ae eee

ENOS AIRES ©...
3 Bae gt.

NEUQUEN
we

METROPOLITAN
BUENOS AIRES
0.1% Territory
32% Population
34% Electorate

RIO NEGRO

ARGENTINA

CHUBUT Territory 1,100,000 square miles

SOUTH (excluding Antarctic and Atlantic

24% Territory , islands)
: Population 23,235,000 (1967 estimate)
2% Population a
2% Electorate Electorate 12,008,000 (approximate)
Gross National $15,810,000,000 (1966, in 1965
Product constant prices)

Persons per square mile
Oo 2.6 13 653 260 1300

SANT.
MSRUS oO ‘ 5 23 t00 SOO

Persons per square kilometer
Population density data fram 1960 census.

57531 11-67

TIERRA DEL FUEGO

=

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
_ DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This dscumeat was detecintiel by the, Central, intelligence genes This copy .
is for the information and use of the ‘recipient “and ‘of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional ‘essential ‘dissemination Lee A be authorized by the
following officials within their respective depart : .

Seer
a. Director of Intelligence and Reach: fot e ‘Department of State -
_b, Director, Defense Intelligence. hos “for’ the: Office of the marks of

Department of the Army *
. Assistant oie of Naval sats
- “Navy :

. Force
f, Director of intelligence: AE for. “the “Afom "Enetay ‘Comrise’
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the ‘Federal Bureau of Investigation aS
h. Director of NSA, for the. ‘National Security Agency ee aa
j. Director of Central Reference, “CIA, for’ vany’ ‘other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by ‘pursing In accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned - to ‘the ‘Central eines Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA. ©

3. When this document is disseminated “overseas, ihe “overseas recipients may
retain It for a period not in excess ‘of one’ year. . ‘At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, ‘returned to ‘the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. Se oS SE Ms

4. The title of this iioment men vied separately f from the text should be classified:

DISTRIBUTION: Pk a
White House
National Security Council

Department of State

Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission ae ; ‘
Federal Bureau of Investigation @ °° 0 2 toh
