Abwehr Activities in Canton - Espionage
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000112839, dated 1 January 1946.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000112839).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

fe go
OFFICE OF STRATEGIC SERVICES w
CHINA THEATER 3 ,3
X-2 BRANCH
REPORT

Office of Origin: SRANGHAT

Report Made At: Period Covered: tpg JK
SHANGHAL 12-27] pe sao ad

Subject: ABAEHK ACTIVITIES ANTOK Status:

Classification: Espio:
References: Keported dated Shanghai 2 Kovesber 1945 entitled
ABWEHR ACTIVITIES IM CHIMA, EHEHARDT BUREAU

Source G1 (FARRELL AND GRAY - Lavestigation in canton).
BUM:
SYAUPSIOB

Set forth in this report are the following, which ee ces
a report by FARHEL and GRAT made aij © m on 27 September 1945, re~-
erage dies their investigation of they#EISE OFFICE (EHRHARDT BUREAU in
that $ Bees tery

eeeeee ATTACHMENTS 0° REPORT seantitte es (Pages 5).
@ ; eas ae
ATTACHMENTS 1a), b), ¢)5 2a),b), 4. Sas Tae

4a), bd), Ag and 5a), bt, ce), 4 yah Ate .. (Pages 6-37 Anel )

Evaluationby souree: A-2 . Approved By:
Distribution:

2 Washington, 1 HG & HQ Det., & ghanighad (1-0-2). Officer in Charge

VIII. GESTAPO AGENTS IN CHINA

A. COLONEL JOSEPH INGER

ap

WIEDEMANN arrived in Japan the latter part of November, 1941. At
that time, Colonel of The Police Joseph MEISINGER was Police Attache to
the German Bubassy in Todyo. Himmler had as his trustees, one Police
Attache from every German Embassy, and MEISINGER was reportedly one of
the first men sent out for this kind of wrk.

WIEDEMANN wasn't sure of MEISINGER's exact duties at the Embassy, but
he thinks he was mainly interested in Counter-Espionage work, and to watch
the behavior of all Germans in the area. He also commnicated with the
Japanese Police regarding natsonal police matters

WIEDBIANN pmade use © MEISINGER official capacity during this
period. ‘There were suspicious in higher headquarters that WIEDEMANN 's
friend, Princess STEPHANIE HOHENE@E was of Jewish ancestory. During the
Party Rally in Nurnberg in 1938, EKISINGER told WIRDEMANN the Princess —
had no Jewish bahod. Subject stated that he learned to kike KEISINGER
in Berlin but was hesitant to contact him often,

MEISINGER wento to Warsaw in 1939. At that time he was the only Chief
of Police in the city. In 194] he was sent to Tokyo. 7. A

MEISINGER told WIEDEMANN he was sentax to East Asia because "HIMMLER
said he had had such a hard time in s.arsaw; he had to do such beastly things,
he should get a rest in Tokyo". :

Wile in Japan, MEISINGER worked with the Yapanese, and continued to
work with them after the fall of Germany. His office was in the Babassy in
Tokyo, and he did some travelling in Chinaas he is know to have been in
Shanghai several time. MEISINGER's wife, HERTA ELIZABETH KATENINA PACKENSER,
is presently working in a commercial hospital. in Shanghai as a nurse.

WIEDEMANN saw MEISINGER and his wife the last time at their home in
Shanghai in December 1941. His wife can be locate: through the Shanghai
German Consulate, Mrs. MEISINGER, had been KEISINGER's secretary in Warsaw
and had considerable knowledge of nis activities. ‘The two were married at
the suggestion of HIMMLER, one child resulting from this marriage who is
still in Germany. The two are now divorced.

MEISINGER's chief associates in his work were Major HUBER in Shanghai,
and CHARLES SCHMIDT in Peking. He was also always in constant connection
with the Japanese Gendarmerie. EEISINGER was suspected of giving the names
of suspected Germans to the Japanese Gendarmerie, these people being sub-
sequently arrested. Several people were arrested through this liaison.

ij ‘

WIEDEMANN gave Little information regarding MEISINGERS activities in
China, He believed MEISINGER had been in Peking and Shanghai contacting
khhs subordinates, CHARLES SCHMIDT in Peking, and Major HUBER in Shanghai ..
Both of these men took orders directly from MEIS INGER.

SEGRE

-~ SF -

SECRET.

Ce UNDERGROUND ACTIVITY THOSE LIKELY TO REMAIN ACTIVE

fhough WEIDEMANN claimed to have no information as to any "WERBAOLE"
organization in China, he mentioned the following men as fanatice and most
Likely to carry on Party activity underground: (SINGRIBD LAHRMANN, GSHanghal 3
<STRINZ, Tsingtao; PETER SS, Tientsin; CHARLSS SCHMID’, Peking; hiajor
Az. 8 Shanghais OHLWEIP} Tsingtao; and aLFR&i LUCKENHAU, Peking.) All of-
rerty activity Stopped in China upon the defeat of Germany.

DESCRIPTIVE LIST OF OUTSTANDING bk LINKED WITH THS PARTY IN CHINA

\.

SITeGFRIED ‘ANN, Party head. tie is 40 to 45 years old, 5' 10% in
height, 150 t@ 190 pounds, stout-square buila, blond and slightly bald, grey
to gray-blue eyes, ruddy complexion, and large bekly. He looks a bit brutal.
as a representatjve for .erman Railways, he operated from his ofiice in

VINSS , most fanatical iazi in Tientsin and possibly China, 45 to
4,8 years 1 meter 75 in height, sleuder bukld, pale face, bald.

RECHT, Hitler Youth Head in Tientsin, about 32 years old, 5! 10" in
heagat, dark-black nari, dark eyes, dark complexion, profile note: for the
sharp ‘angle between the foreheau and the nose. ile is sharp looking, dresses
well anu is empioyed at "DEFAG". He lives on vetring Lane (or Park) in

Tientsin.

COLONEL ee eee Colonel of the Folice, one of :BYDRICH's
three department cheifs, started with the tarty in Cermany in '33 or "y,
was chief ‘the bolice in .arsaw in '39, came East in '4l, opereted from
Japan. 6 wife is living in changhai.

UBbR, Major of rolice in Shanghai and .sISINGKHts subordinate in Unina
SS“atandard leader, connected with the embassy in Shanghai. ce is 6fficially
connectea with and reports directly to the Gestapo in Berlin.

CHARLES @CHMILT, Peking suborainate to KEISINGSR, 45 years old, 5! 11" in
height, brdéad ‘Yhouldered, prov blond nair, stout,.crude, very strong, and
drinks too much at times. ‘ie is a Nself-styled" police attache to the teking
embassy. °

FRAND#ARKS, Chancellor of the Consulate in Tientsin. ihe followiag
stateazent Was made about this asa, “Though all officials are Farty members ,
L4AnKS is the only one who was really 4 convined Nazi."

2

LUD. IG gaaHan.T, heac of tne ubrwenr in C..ina. He too. over wilitury
jintelligeagé activity Troi 3leRKIN, former heac of tne organization, «sis
heauguserters are in shanghai. He is abowt _' in height, stout, beely, blond

or brown hair. He is a member of the ueneral wtaff. Has been noteu as &@
heavy drinker et times.

LAEMR ACTIVITES LN CANTOR ta Page 1.
’ Aeport dated Shanghal, 7 Jamary 1946.

Diinli§s . |

Absolate proof is contained herein of the conplste collaboration | |
of certain Uexvuana with the Japanese in their prosecution of the aar against
thine and the United states after the forzal surrender of Cerzany.

The verman agenay immediately concerned with these hostile acts in
viina, which is herein exposed, is known as the AGNZKH, also as the KAEIOSOROAN-
LAsTicN, aleo aa BUREAU BHERARDT, locwlly in South China miom as OF FICS HEISE.

OF FIUE BBIsa had its headjuartars in the Jenaan vonsulate Building
in vanton antil the verman surrender. For purposes of ostensibiy divorcing
itself from the Leman Coaselate, it then mo w premises at 54 Shu plies si
Canton. fs ‘ od. :

contact vith perlin and Shanghel.

ee ce cca mt it RR Hae AR

7 te :

Ric used @ obey the ordere of the shenghal Geman Eabssey and
i phy ‘Geraan Consulate to centinus these hostile operations after the yer
surrender. It was only under stero presoure by the Canton Cerman
\ ate and the demands of the local Uestapo agent (vice-Consul ERHBERT
gTSCh) that mr. FRZS8 initially accepted exploynent «ith this office.

{ any oonsideratien of the persons iaplicated in this conspiracy must
the £

E i fe fe aa
; rR, dex leader in south China, «without xhose cognisgance
‘he sau activity could have existed.

s Canton, sho. recalvsd and carried,
ate, ed of the German in kgbasey,

has S>-
neabar,” Asatatant Searetary | Coiisan ‘consulate,/
e

_’;\ arrival of L.

fo think ef HAISS as a criainal witheut including DR.

ki. GLIETSCH, and ur. SISBEAT on terns of equal gailt with him, would be

like blasing solely a corporation's treasurer for a discrepency

caused by an exbesskment, the proceeds of which were shared by the chairman

of the board, the president and the treasurer.

4

LARGER, alias GAURARDT, who left Jerlin for

before the
; Raselans ep route. -

tt}

ynown as. the "BUTCHER UF uaRlan”, who was then in Shanghai.

RISKETZAKQER went to Harbin in august, 1943, to persuade
authorities there to allow him to employ agets, whom he already had operating
but

within the Kwangtung aren. Permission was denied,

wad of the aetivities of BUREAU EARARDT begins with the

aration of war between Germany and fuasia in 1941, and was almost

: ; peter ad . sits a
in hovenbar., 1942/4 5LSEHRN AR, was hand-picked for his
in espionage for the ZARKAZDT job by Colonel )JOS ssbb L KIER » set —

oTTo,

in the funds

Shanyhal just

a's agents :

KISBNTRAEGER
contimzed to operate in spite of thin under the acual cover of the *Gernan pusinpess
” £

The BUKaL ZHRHARDT andother Ceruan intelligences agencies in China

were finaneed as follows: ‘exittance money to the Far East was
eo-ealled “Frei Reiehsmarks", ond was arranged in china by the
shich hed branches in Skanghst, Canton, Hankow, Peiping,

Bank
seelin and tokyo. in China, uses paymente were sade in ChE or FAS
These currencies ware seqeived in exshange for ‘Japanese Yen from Tokyo out of

made in the

Deutsche-asiatische

Tientsin, Teingtes,
banknoter,

tremendous Yen credit balances held by the derman Government in Tokyo, ‘There were

a WSs :
dn various of pacities, including a buainess association with colenel
OKabA, head of th 750 KIKAM, with whom KEISE subsequently worked ¢ in
RELSE's wife divorced him for "sontinucus

tytn
whoa she pow resides in Shongbai. = in spite o

s
produced s son and a daughter. the 49 cow in Tokyo}

through the German Consulate. However,

its secre military n waa an inteliigense exchange ageney ‘wath
winoival funstion of wiich was to nent tor all chinese and
aixygrvund ocomunieations snd chart ‘Huap" traffic and plot the

the Japanese, the
American.
AEE ET

cape to China in 1929 and served as a military adviser,

mother. For further details as to HzISE’s blography refer te attach-
GFPLLE HLISH initiated operations in Canton on 22 Decenbder 1943,
it was rot until Septenber, 1944, that this office reached full scale operat.

Getensthiy, OFFICK REISE functioned as « radio station set up to halille
nessages of greeting ond inquiry between Cersens here and in Mvepe. Sua
handled this was a highly

Arrival in Japon,
” WEIDEMANN departed Buenes Aires fer Japan en the “Maxila Maru" en

September 20 er 21, 1941. The first stepever was in Yekshana, where he

arrived about Meveaber 1, ani fren there he proceded directly te Tekpp by

@padan Sip ohigyed in Tekye exactly three weeks, spending most of the time at the

German Eubassy, except fer twe er three days spent in a mexet 5

departing fer Chins.

While in fekye, he had seme discussien with Gene
Geman Aubasseder te Japan, since remeved, and is now ding in Peking. The
talks were academic and tat ef a pelitioal nature. OTT} net te friendly

with WEIDEMARE since he hed heard that he wes in disfaver’with Hitler. The

eebieot sdvised him cencerning gid pega eugeeserenras thet he had seen recently
emeny and en the trip ever. ed thet Off indicated in no way that

he hed knowledge ef Japendse ee te ee the way, but in this connection stated

I told our government thet the Japanese sword ia wery good for us Germans as

leng as it &s in the sheath.”

WEIDBUARHN recalled that a “News Conference” was held daily at the Kmbassy
he teel part in the cenferesces, One day, the Naval Attache, ddmiral
KER, odvised the Ambassador at the conference thet he thoukht something
WHE Sukingsplace as he hed obserxed an umisuel number ef Japs going te
e shrines. He stated that Embassy persenel was speculating as te whether Japan
¢% believe they hed specific information from
‘pet taken inte their cenfidense. He
¢ Military Atteche, whe asked hin
and as te whether he thought the Americans wuld
the Ketherlands Bast Indies, which he confirmed.

was geing to wer, but he sis
the Japanese, er if they aid,
was alse in centect with Ge
about hie experiexces in the U
ge te war if the Japanese att

The only ether indicatien he received while in Tokye thet the Japencsse
were planning seuething was received through an efficial ef the Rapanese
vessel, “Asaua Maru" to Germany carrying German wmen and ether persennel.
WEIDEMANN was advised, however, that the beat would not preceed as scheduled,

pet pe Testen we was if ivgpe he Jap jogicated he hed known this for seme tine,

a number of ple connected with the Geman Enbessy as well as a
ee RHEE a fereutry technican wapleged by the Japanese, whem he haf
previous wn in the UeBs, end a German aviation expert, sent eut as a
representative ef the Messerschmidt Werke te assist the Japanese on ation
matters. It wes said that this mgn wes the $ who treined nd eigenen
fer his flight te England. ie a

Tay

a

WEITEMANY also contacted (001) Jos.
then Pelice Attache te the RES o MEISINOER went out te dinner on one
eccasionp but néthing ef significance was Gineussed. He ebserved that he had
knewn MEISINGER for some time having first met him in Berlin, He recalled that
he fad asked MBISINGER te cheok on the ancestry of Princess
HOHENIOE in 1939, as there was some talk about her having Jewish bleed,
naorgrs @ié make sn ahha end advised him that she was net Jewish ct

Perty rally in Ee state however thet he
fa if pth contest inetr him in ure £p 4956; » tt ihe wes atraid he
~ AG -

he married in WIEDEMARN®S home in Tientsin, From talks with him at that
time, the thought that ZINSSER had not been implicated any illegal acti-
vities with either KHRHARDT or HUBER, He observed, however, that he has
always been a good Party man.

WIEDEMANN dismissed all the above contacts as being of no significance
since the contacts were made only because he was a German consuli It was
‘pointed out to him that a ‘number of agents had confided in hin to nature of
their activities. This he explained was due to the fact that the agents
were of low caliber and talked too mich.

4 2 a ed
Z OA Ah din had! if Y EF&IT2L Wilby atte

B. Connection with the Gestapo. ee as ee pee *

sentative in Harbin, he denies having ever furnished information concern~

ing anti-Germans or, on other, uatte a oe ,
He has known MEISINGER for 4 numbey of years having first mét him

Sxe
in Berlin while wIEDEMANN was adjutant to Hitler and :.ZISINGER was one of thes
the department heads of the Gestapo. He met MEISINGER again in Tokyo while P 38
enroute to China and went out to dinner with bim. He commented that iBISIN®
GER had always been quite friendly with him and he attributed his not being
reported to Berlin after making his "Anti-Nagi" speeches to this reason. He
stated that he thought KEISINGER liked him. ie later wrote him a letter
recommending that he assist the Jew, KNDERMANN, whose backgrouna has been
previously set forth in this report.

He apparently knew both riUBER and SCHMIDT quite well, sinc< he had gone
to them on several cases and discussed matters with them. SCHMIDT on several
occasions confided in him the nature of information contained in his files
on various individuals,

On one occasion, WIEDEMANN discussed Gestapo methods wit)
ticularly as to reporting on Germans in China and HUBER had i ated that
he did not agree with MEISINGER on this and preferred to having ftothing to
do with this kind of work but preferred to direct espionage and counter
espionage in a military sense. This talk took place in WIEDEMANN's office
in Tientsin in 1942 while HUBER was on tour of North China. He also toid
him at that time that his organization supplemented the Abwehr and that he
also reported military intelligence to Berlin. He had known SCHULTZE
when he was in Tientsin for a short time during the Spring of 1945. It
was through an unsealed letter to HUBER handed to him for delivery through
the diplomatic pouch that he learned the identity of\flkik, employee of the
MELCHERS firm in Tientsin, who was also working for } e Gestapo, supposedly
SCHMIDT.

He learned through HUBER and Consul General STOELLER, his predecessor
in Tientsin who is now the head of the German Embassy Branch office in Shang-
hai, that HUBER had his own code but sent his messages through the mnbassy
in Shanghai. He supposedly submitted all of his messages in clear text for
apppeval of STOELLER, but obviously could get around such a procedure.

~ oe? of - .

SEGRE

In Tientsin there were the usual face slapping incidents and WIEDEMANN
ONCE HEARD THAT THE JAP Gendermerie was torturing Chinese Prisoners badly,

He also r me stories about LEISINGEH but could not vouch for
their veracity. SINGER worked closely with the Jap Gendermerie and caused
the arrest of er of Germans. “e remembered two cases that might be of

interest. One was the came of a Captain of a German iierchant Marine..
MEISINGER, himself, reportedly shot this man during an alcoholic brawl in
Tokyo. ;

The other case concerned a itr,

GEL in Tokyo, who was a member of a
German o11 firm and was buying wall | ¥1 for the verman government. He was
a strong anti-Nazi and reportedly madd some remarks about the regime,
MEISINGER onlparning t is had the Japs ‘arrest him, He remained in jail
several weeks, was released and upon being told he was to be arrested again
committed suicide rather than gothrough the torture again.
