Some Perspectives on the Dominican Problem
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098265, dated 3 September 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098265).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

4734

/ }
— LEI LIBRARY fra
aa: al Mandatory Review

ead oe Case NITE BG 9 Pied
-_ Documen va gs

CENTRAL INDBULIGENGG AGENCY JE
OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

27 October 1965

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 24-65

SUBJECT: Some Perspectives on the Dominican Problem

SUMMARY

The Deminican Republic is in a state of suspended revolu-
tion, and the provisional government headed by Garcia Godoy has
the task, in effect, of reconciling irreconcilables. If he seems
to be favoring the rebel cause, he risks intervention by the
armed forces; if he leans to the other side, he risks new out-.”
bursts of rebel violence. The underlying political trend in the
D.R. is to the left, which erhances the prospects of a left-of-
center candidate, if elections are held as planned. If such a
eandidate won, his govermment would probably be anti-US and Conm-
munist-influenced. The military would likely seize power to
keep out this kind of regime, but a military take-over would cause
sizeable elements of the left to turn to systematic terrorism and
guerrille activity.

REE KEH HEHE

1.5(c); 3.4()(1)

6 JU 8 1396"

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

27 October 1965

SPECIAL MEMCRANDUM NO. 24-65

SUBJECT: Some Perspectives on the Dominican Problem

Background

1. Since the end of Spanish colonial rule in 1800, the
Deminican people have passed about one-third of their history
under occupation by foreign military forces (French, Haitian,
Spanish, US). Even when the country has been independent, it
has known only turmoil and civil war or military dictatorship.
The latest dictatorial rule -- the thirty years of Trujillo
which ended with his assassination in 1941 -- left new scars
on the old scars of the body mlitic. The Trujillo reign not

only prevented the development of political leaders and normal

political 11 e , (jill arenes
mms =—'-5(C); 3.4(b)(1)
aS
CCUG

1.5(¢); 9.4(6)(1)

HON Es ey” ee
SoC -RenaB..

©, The social-economic structure is equally unhealthy.
In these spheres, the D.R. has had no revolution and very little
reform. The Bosch government in 1963 kindled popular expectations
of dramatic economic and social change. But it actually acccm-
plished little during its seven months in office. Per capita GNP
in the DeR. is not much below the average for Latin American
countries. But the distribution of wealth and income is starkly
unbalanced. The upper and middle classes -- less than LO percent
of the population -- have almost all of vhat there is to heve. The
other 90 percent of the people are have-nots, the great majority
of them living in grinding poverty. Some tvo-thirds of the total
population lives outside the money economy, scraping by on sub-
sistence farming. Roughly one-third of the Dominican labor force
is completely unemployed, and under-employment is also prevalent.
In short, the basic economic and social conditions which determine
the lot of the mass of Dominicans is a potential source of great
political pressure -~- 4 source so far tapped to only a limited

extent.

3. The Dominican Republic's very high birth rate (3.5
percent) not only complicates the economic problems but also has

direct political impact. At present nearly half the population is

SCRE
under age 15. Many Dominican young people, especially in urban
_ areas, have already been attracted to the various parties which
cell for radical change. Teenage kids played an active role on
the rebel side in the recent fighting. Moreover, the size and
composition of the electorate is rapidly changing. The D.R. has
universal, obligatory suffrage for all citizens over 18 and all
married citizens of whatever age. This means that if elections
are held as planned in the late spring of next year there will
be about 350,000 qualified to vote who were not old enough to do
so in the December 1962 elections <= the only free elections in

Dominican history. (The total vote cast in 1962 was 1,054,944.)

4, Under the Trujillo dictatorship the armed forces became
8 praetorian guard ensuring the dictator's absolute control over
virtually every aspect of life. In return they received certain
perquisites, including a share in Trujillo's institutionalized
system of graft. During the last several years, however, there
has been increasing evidence that the younger, US-trained officers
are developing a sense of professionalism and reacting against the
corrupt and reactionary tendencies of their seniors, many of whom
were personally associated with the Trujillo dictatorship. Never-

theless, the military establishment as a whole still considers

-3-

itself an elite group not answerable to civilian authority when

its basic prerogatives are threatened.
Political Tendencies

5+ Dominican political attitudes and institutions are re-
markably primitive; the parties are young and highly personalis-
tic. A large proportion of the rural peasantry is not yet
politically conscious; a considerable number, despite their own
sparse lot, continue to yearn for the good old days of stability
under Trujillo, "the Benefactor." Even so, in December 1962
Juan Bosch drew strong support from the countryside in piling up
some 58 percent of the total vote and in obtaining nearly twice

as many votes as his closest opponent.

6. But there were special circumstances in that election,
and Bosch's image was then much brighter than it is now. it is
worth noting that in September of 1963, when the Dominican mili-
tary threw Bosch out, there were no significant public demonstra-
tions of protest. A political poll taken early this year (before
the rebellion began in April) indicated that former president
Joaquin Balaguer (who was not a candidate in 1962) would be a

more popular presidential candidate than Bosch. Balaguer has the

~h .

PR =~ gor ae
_- SORT

political advantage of popular identification with poth the

stability of the Trujillo era and the expulsion of the Trujillo

family.

7. #=‘The rebellion gave new impetus to the political awaken-
ing that was already underway. The basic trend is a movement of
political strength to the left. In terms of elections this would
give the advantage to a left-of-center combination (Bosch's
Dominican Revolutionary Party feRp/ and the extreme leftist
parties). Balaguer's Reformist Party (FR), as a center-
conservative party y) would have considerable attraction, but the
rightist parties probably would not command many votes. Thus
the rightists are coming to rely more and more heavily on the
armed forces as a counter to the political challenge posed to

them by the left.
Tribulations of the Provisional Govermment

8. Hector Garcia Godoy, an experienced diplomat and a
man of decent, liberal instincts, if not great strength of pur-
pose, has now held office as president of the provisional govern-
ment for nearly two months. Given the inherent inetability of

the situation, this in itself is no mean accomplishment.

Garcia Godoy was selected because he was acceptable to ell sides.
There was not much competition for the job. He hes the task,
in effect, of reconciling irreconcilables. There is no broad

political base at the center on which he can rely.

Qe Moreover, the Dominican adversaries have little common
ground; many on each side are clearly more interested in renev-
ing the battle than in reaching compromise. The struggle for
dominant influence in the university, in the labor unions, and
in various government-run enterprises is still going on. Shoot-
ing affrays are being perpetrated by both rebel extremists and
rightist vigilante groups. Garcia Godoy's every action end
appointment is carefully scrutinized: if he seems consistently
to be favoring the rebel cause, he risks intervention by the
armed forces; if he leans to the other side, he risks new out-
bursts of leftist violence. Many in the military are deeply
concerned, not only about the provisional president's appoint-
ment of a number of leftists to govermment positions, but about
his failure to use forceful measures to collect the rebels' arms.
Some military units may defy the govermuent's authority and set

out on collecting expeditions of their own.

10. The one important stabilizing factor is the Inter-
American Peace Force (IAPF), currently about 9,200 strong and
the OAS mission headed by Ambassador Bunker. Twice during the
elght weeks the provisional govermment has been in office the
intervention of Ambassador Bunker and the commanders of the IAPF
has been required to prevent the Dominican military chiefs from
unseating Garcia Godoy. The senior Brazilian officers in the
TAPF are, however, now becoming restive because of their sympathy
for the Dominican military's opposition to Garcia Godoy's policies.
This attitude may make it increasingly difficult to maintain the

international character of the IAPF.

11. The Institutional Act, upon which the authority of the
provisional government rests, specifies that presidential elec-
tions are to be held at some time between 4 March and 4 June,
1966. ‘Thus Garcia Godoy could have seven months more of trying
to keep his feet on the tightrope. The last three months might
be especially taxing because that would be the period of formal
campaigning for the presidency. (Garcia Godoy himself is not

permitted to run.)

What Might Come Cut of Elections

12. It is, of course, too early to make any very specific
election predictions. Indeed, the elections may not be held on
schedule at all. If they are held, it is not yet clear who the
candidates would be or what party combinations may be worked
out. Although there may be a candidate or two of the extreme
right (for instance » the exiled General Wessin y Wessin has been
talking about throwing his hat in the ring), most rightist backing
will probably be for Balaguer y running on the ticket of his Reform-
ist Party as a center-conservative candidate. Similarly, although
one of the Communist parties may produce a nominee of its own,
most leftist backing will probably go to the candidate of Bosch's
PRD party. It might be Bosch himself, Caamano, leader of the

revolution, or perhaps a party figure not so well known.

13. Some obeervers believe that Balaguer would win such a
contest over any man the PRD could put up. They argue that much
of Bosch's old magic is gone -- particularly because of his fail-
ure to return to the D.R. while the fighting was going on. ‘They
dismiss Casmeno as not politically shrewd enough. They note that

Balaguer still has much prestige and is widely respected, and

predict that many Dominicans will vote for him as the man who

might bring back order and tranquillity.

14. These are all points of some merit. But there are
some broader considerations certain to have impact. We think,
for example, that the expansion in size of the electorate <-
those who have politically awakened during the past few years
ard the large additional mumber of young people now qualified
to vote += will strongly favor the left. We believe that many
will vote for the "candidate of the revolution" because they see
this movement as their only hope for rapid improvement in their
depressed living conditions. The insistence by the PRD party
and the leaders of the revolution of their determination to re-
instate the Bosch constitution of 1963, with its provisions for
agricultural reform and various other measures to improve the
iot of the masses, provides a powerful initial issue for the
campaign. WNationalistic resentment against the US intervention
is also likely to favor the parties of the left. On balance 3
we think the candidate of the left will be in the stronger vote-

getting position.

15. If such a candidate won the election, his government

would probably be anti-US and Communist-influenced. The Dominican

military leaders would be likely to seize power to prevent the
installation of such a government. Indeed, if the election of
a leftist. candidate seemed likely, the military would probably

intervene before the voting took place.

16. In the event of a military tekeover, or even if _ : °
Balaguer or someone like him won the presidency, sizesble
elements of the left (and not only the Communists) would
probably turn to systematic terrorism and guerrille activity.
Although the military might be able to cope with this develop-
ment initially, their repressive actions would tend to antagonize

the people and to lead eventually to another round of revolution.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES :

ce 7 Chairman, ——- = =

. .* 10°
