Short-term Prospects in Haiti
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126955, dated 3 May 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126955).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BO LN Cer peerert me leer totem mt

7 June 1961

“SPECIAL”
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 86. 1-61
‘Gupplements SNIE 86. 1-60)

SHORT-TERM PROSPECTS IN HAITI

"Submitted by the”

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE a
The following intelligence organizations participated in ‘the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Stag.

Concurred in by the’ “ wets Le
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD .

on 7 June 1961. Concurring were The ‘Director ‘of Intelligence
and Research, Department of State; the Assistant Chie/ of
Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant
Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence) , ‘Department of the
Navy; the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF; the
Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff; the Assistant to the
Secretary of Defense, Special Operations; and the Director of
the National Security Agency. The Atomic Energy Commis-
sion Representative to the USIB, and the Assistant Director,
Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being
outside of their furisdlction,

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
1 0 NOV 1997

-SNIE 86.1-61

!

—

, as. ean by the Central intelligence Agency. This copy
‘use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
Addi nal essential dissemination may, be authorized by the
following officials within their. respective departments.”

SME Sete SPR

a," Director ¢ Of. Ini

e, >; Department of the Army
intelligence), for the _ Department of

See is

: Castel cars of N al Op ‘ations

ny Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

royed by burning in accordance with applicable

; bs a8 rr ned ane Central Intelligence Agency by arrangement
with the. Office’ Of, Central Reférericé, “CIA

Blip teste > SBF ETAL

as, ‘the overseas recipients may retain it .
oh ‘At the end of this period, the estimate should

fied

Tee agency, or permission should be oe

¢
j
}
:
i
i
i
4
i
4
3
,
vo
i
i
a
$
i
7
j
3
i
t
t
ra
'
3
f

ST

SHORT-TERM PROSPECTS IN HAITI’

THE PROBLEM

To assess the short-term prospects in Haiti, with special reference to the likely
consequences for Haiti of the assassination of Dominican dictator Trujillo.

THE ESTIMATE

1. THE INTERNAL SITUATION AND
PROSPECTS

1. In contrast to the Dominican Republic,
where the 30 May assassination of Generalis-
simo Trujillo was preceded by months of un-
rest, uncertainty, and intensified repression,
the situation in Haiti has remained essentially
static. President Duvalier has now conferred
upon himself a new six-year term in office,
two years before the old term was due to ex-
pire. In the 30 April parliamentary elections,
in which the voters were called upon to choose
among various hand-picked pro-Duvalier can-
didates, Duvalier placed his own name at the
top of the ballot, thereafter asserting that
he had been unanimously re-elected. Despite
the palpable fraud of this procedure, Duvalier
was reinaugurated on 22 May without protest,
in the presence of thousands of peasants
brought in from the countryside.°

2. By the forced retirement of some officers
and the reassignment of others, President
Duvalier has further ensured his control over
the military establishment, the principal in-

‘Supplements and brings up to date SNIE 86.1-60,
“The Situation and Prospects in Haiti,” dated
27 September 1960, which remains valid and pro-
vides a more detailed examination of the Haitian
situation.

* Haitian Presidents have invariably sought to per-
petuate themselves in office and have as regularly
been thrown out at the expiration of their legiti-
mate terms. Although Duvaller has got away
with this “re-election” at this time, he has laid
the basis for a coup attempt at the expiration of
his legitimate term in October 1963.

strument of political power in Haiti Al-
though the officer corps as a whole almost
certainly resents his divide-and-rule tech-
nique, he has put in the key positions men
on whom he relies. General Merceron, the
army commander, strongly resents the grow-
ing influence of Major Raymond, the com-
mander of the Presidential Guard, but has
been unable to curb it.

3. Underlying opposition to Duvalier will of
course continue. The President’s arrogation
to himself of a new six-year term has almost
certainly increased the resentment of church-
men, students, military men, and others of
the old mulatto elite, which has lost its power
and influence since Duvalier came to power.
Small exile groups continue to exist in New
York, Caracas, and Havana; inflammatory
broadcasts in Creole, directed at students and
the peasantry, continue to emanate weekly
from Cuba.

4. Nevertheless, the numerous opposition
elements, both in and outside Haiti, still ap-
pear to lack the strength, vigor, and cohesion

‘The army, which includes the smal! air force
(160 men) and coast guard (300 men), numbers
5,200, but its ground forces are scattered over the
country in small police and constabulary detach-
ments, except for an 800-man battalion at Port-
au-Prince and the Port-au-Prince police (730).
The Presidential Guard (400), is an independent
command responsible directly to Duvalier. In
addition, Duvaller directly controls two paramili-
tary organizations, a civilian militia in Port-au-
Prince (275) and a civilian “secret police’ num-
bering 750-1,000 in the country as a whole.

in”

to challenge effectively a man of Duvalier's
political skill and determination. A four-
month strike by students, who had been the
most active of Duvalier’s critics, collapsed in
March 1961. According to the Haitian Gov-
ernment, a small group of Cuban-supported
exiles were apprehended when they landed
in late April. Although significant pro-Castro
sentiment exists among students and other in-
tellectuals, Castroism still appears to have
had little impact on the peasantry.

5. An extremely impoverished country, even
by Latin American standards, Haiti has had
an unusually poor coffee crop this year, and
the dead season is approaching. Neverthe-
less, the population at large will probably con-
tinue to eke out an existence. In November
1960 US financial and technical programs,
which had been partially suspended earlier in
that year, were resumed and expanded. The
present level of US economic assistance (total-
ing about $13.5 million for the present US
fiscal year) appears sufficient to stave off a
foreign exchange or budgetary crisis. Thus,
current economic difficulties do not appear
sufficient to cause any significant falling away
of Duvalier’s support. Preliminary indica-
tions with respect to the 1961-1962 coffee crop
are promising.

6. In sum, we consider it unlikely that the
internal opposition will be able to overthrow
the Duvalier government in the short run.
However, the 54-year-old Duvalier is a diabetic
and has suffered at least one heart attack, al-
though his health appears to have improved
in recent months. His departure from the
scene—whether by natural causes or assas-
sination—would almost certainly be followed
by a struggle for power. There is no one
leader who could command the quick and
widespread support necessary for strong gov-
ernment. The military would be likely to seize
control of the government, but probably would
not be able to stabilize the situation. The re-
Sult would probably be a period of disorder
Similar to the nine-month hiatus preceding
the installation of Duvalier, when six provi-

In such an
unstable situation, pro-Castro elements would
certainly strive to gain control of Haiti.

sional governments rose and fell.

Il. CONSEQUENCES OF TRUJILLO’S
ASSASSINATION

7. The assassination of Generalissimo Tru-
jillo is unlikely to have any important direct
effect on the Haitian situation. Despite the
psychological encouragement Trujillo’s death
has almost certainly given to opponents of
Duvalier, it has not changed the presently
unfavorable situation confronting them in
Haiti.

8. If guerrilla operations develop in the Do-
minican Republic, they might spill over the
Haitian frontier, but probably not to such an
extent as to involve major clashes or to have
a serious unsettling effect on the position of
the Duvalier regime within Haiti. We con-
Sider it extremely unlikely that either Castro
or the present Dominican regime would under-
take military operations in or against Haiti
in view of the risks of US or OAS counter-
action. Major subversive pressures on Haiti
from the Dominican Republic would probably
arise only in the event that pro-Castro ele-
ments gained power in the Dominican Re-
public.

9. The unsettled state of affairs in the Domin-
ican Republic to his east, coupled with the
presence of a revolutionary Cuba to his west,
will probably reinforce Duvalier’s sense of de-
pendence on US economic, military, and dip-
lomatic support. At the same time, Duvalier
will probably attempt to trade on the notion
that the US must support him as the only one
capable of providing stable government in
Haiti. Castro and his Latin American sup-
porters will almost certainly seek to exploit
indications of US support for Duvalier as evi-
dence of US affinity for dictators. At present,
with the troubles of the Trujillo dynasty focus-
ing hemisphere attention on the island, such
Castro propaganda would probably do some
damage to the US position in Latin America.

sect
