SNIE 10-4-61: Probable Communist Reactions to Certain US Actions in South Viet
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012762, dated 2 October 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012762).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TS#142424-0
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

7 November 1961

SUBJECT: SNIE 10-461: PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS TO CERTAIN
US ACTORS IN SouTH VIESNAM

SCOPE

The purpose of thig estimate 1s to aasess Communist (Soviet,
| Chinese, and North Vietnamese) reactions and, where significant,
| non-Communist reactions to certain US military actions intended

to assist the Government of Vietnam cope with the Communiat threat,”

rey Seems

Other National Intelligence Estimates portinent to thie problem
are SNIE 10~2-61, "Likelihood of Major Communist Military
Intervention in Mainland Southeast Asia," dated 27 June 1961;
SNTE 58-2-61, "Probable Reactiona to Certain Courses of Action:
Conce ning laoa," datod 5 July 1961; NIE 14.3/53061, "Prospects
for North and South Vietnam," dated 15 Auguat 1961; and

SNIE 53-261, "Blog Support of the Communist Effort Againat

the Government of Vietnam," dated 5 Ootober 1961; SNIE 10-3-61,
"Probable Communist Reaotiona to Certain SEATO Undertakings in
South Vietnam," dated 10 October 196),

TOP
LIM 3TRIBUTION

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
DATE BAJAN 1992. 7

OSD-2B-78-046 - F] ALAA |

crn | a

{
\
H
t
sereqsind
\

The courses of action here considered were given to the in-

telligence community for the purposes of thia estimate and were

‘not intended to represent. the full range of possible courses of

action, The given courses of action are:

A, The introduction of a US airlift into and within»

South Vietnam, increased logistics support, and an inerease in

| MAAG atrength to provide US advisers down to battalion level;

-B, The introduction into South Vietnam of a US force
of about 8,000-10,000 troops, mostly engineer with some combat

support, in resp nse to an appeal from President Diem for assiut-

ance in flood relief;

C, The introduction into the area of a US combat

force of 25,000 to 40,000 to engage with South Vietnamese forces

" 4n ground, air, and naval operations againat the Viet Cong; and :

D, An announcement by the US of ita determination to

- hold South Vietnam and a warning, either private. or public, that

North Vietnamese support of the Viet Cong must coase or the US

| would launch air attacks against North Vietnam. This action

would be taken in conjunction with Course A, B, or C.

TRIBUTION

WR 204-34 70

LMT BUTTON

i ee : ~ THE ESTIMATE

e eee . I, INTRODUCTION

1. “The Snteresta of the Sovict Uninn, Communist Gnina, and
Communiet North Vietnam Avariap at many pointa but they vary con~
aiderably in intensity and urgency. To Hanoi, the ouster of
President Diem and the reunification of Vietnam under Communist
rule are panic objectives, Both objectives were aogoorded high
priority at the North Vietnamese Conmuniat Party Congreas in 1960.
The announcement of these objectives ended a preparatory phase
| and marked the beginning of a aharp inorease in Viet Cong guer-
rilla, subversive, and political warfare, During the past yoar,
North Vietnam haa made a substantial. investment in the campaign

againet Diem, and Hanoi is probably determined to prese for an —

early victory in South Vietnam, The North Vietnamese leaders

are convinced that they defeated the Yrenoh in the Indochina

War but were deprived of the fruits of their vietory at the con-
ferenoe table in 1954-1955. Recent eventa in laos have encouraged
the North Vietnamese leaders and given them {noreased confidence

in their “national liberation" tactics, They almet certainly

a

TOY
LIM, TRIBUTION

believe that, by those taotios, they oan in tine upset the Diem

government ond take over South Vietnum, They probably believe
that they could, provided that the war would. be confined within
the boundaries of South Vietnam, ronder ineffective a levol of

US military support to South Vietnan substantially in exeess of
that postulated in Course C,

2. Chinese Comminist intorests are more directly involved

in the Indoohina states than are those of t'e USSR, Peiping's

leaders appear impatient for onnorete Communist advances, particu- —

darly in areas of substantial US intorest. Moreover, Communist
China would regard any increase in the US onmmitment in South
Vietnam, and in partioular any introduation of US troopa into
the arca, a8 a serious challenge, The USSR, while aharing the

desire of North Vietnam and Commniat China to bring South Vietnam

into the Conmuniat Bloo, almoat certainly docs not regard this

as justifying the asaumption of serious risk,

3. Thus, we believe that the USSR would be inolined to a
tess militant reaponse than Communist China or North Vietnam to
any of the given US couraes of action. excopt poasibly in the case
of Course D, Mosaow would acek to maintain control of the situ-

ation and to restrain both Peiping and Hanoi fro any responses

a

ORR EET

likely, in Moscow's view, to run serious risk of expanded

hostilities and tha involvenent of Bovis forces. The Boviet

_ leaders would Probably bolieve that, 1 vite the US coun trent

under Course A, B, or C would tenporarily atrengthen South

Vietnan, 1t would only slow dow, not reverae, the trends

fovoring the Communists in that country. Thua they would prob-

ably seek to avoid substantial cacalation of tha fighting.

4, The Chinese, in our view, would be puch more senaitive
than the Soviets to the arrival of US forces in South Vietnan.
They also place a higher priority upon the early victory of the
Cormmmist cause in Bouthenst Asia, and would be considerably less
concerred nbout the possible impact on Cormuniot interests in .
Europe. While they are aluost certainly aee sensitive to the
consequences of general war then sove of their wore radical state-
vents indicate, their. concern over this possibility doce appear
to be lesa acute than that of their Soviet partner. They would
probably be wore inclined than the Soviets to believe that the
US would not undertake a further escalation. - Tua we believe
that they would argue for a rapid buildup of Local Cormmninst

capabilities and the vigorous engagement of US forces,

Mme thd

. a

i 5. Communist China ie presently faced with serious internal
| | e % problems: the aftermath of a periad of gross econonie nismanage-
ih &

pent; three successive bad harvests; and a substantial disruption

of the econoni.c developnent plan. Moreover, tension in relations
| swith the USSR hae reached a new high. Nevertheless, these develop-
nents are not likely to substantially alter Communist China's

attitudes toward nilitary conmmitnent in Southeast folio.

, « 5Q =

| Line@QPeraTRIBUTION

6, If tho Chinese and the Soviets reacted in these ways,

sone further strain would be placed upon Blno-Soviet relations,
already aggraveted by Khrushchev's indirect but atrong attacks

ot the XXII Congress in Moscow. The Soviets would not wish to
give Polping additional rensona to charge then with ineuffictent
nilitancy and boldness. Also they would be reluctant to back away
fron. Khrushehev's oft«repeated prouise of support for wars of |
"national liberation." at the sane tine the Soviets are deeply

dubious of Chinese prudence and would be reluctant to give then

a free rein. These strains would be acutely felt by the North

Vietnanese, who have thus far attenpted to avcld aggravating
either side and preserve for themselves ao oxinun freedom cf

maneuver.

II, PROBABLE COMMUNIST REACTIONS

gate “In: response to oithor Course A, B, or © the Bloe would .
initiate a Wwajor political ond propaganda canpaign in the UN and
worldwide to highlight and condemn the US action and to brand the
Us as an sasredber: The U8 would be aenounced for violating the
195% Geneva Agreenents and torpedoing the present Geneva Conference

on Taos, The intensity of this campaign would increase n6 the US

-~6 -

Re TBUTLON

dnvolvenent inercased. Its purpose would be to generate duter- -

national pressure to force a US withdrawal. ‘The Bice, particularly
the USSR, would consider that substantial political and propaganda
goins could be rede fron exploiting noneCasmniat eritieiun of

these actions.

8. It is likely that Courses C ond D in particular would

lend to widesprend derands for o conference <= for "negotiations"

to dininish the tensions and "settle" the erisia. The Communiat

‘powers, and particularly the USSR, would alnost certainly pranote

thio demand, and signify their willingness to negotiate. They
would do 60 in the conviction that such a procedure would provide

a period of tine in which they could pursue their efforts in Bouth
Vietnan, perhaps on a souewhat dininished scale, put sti11 with
foir succens and lessened risk, And they would probably also
calculate that, conditions being what they are in the area, alnoat -
any form of negotiated sett lonent would leave ther with substantial

opportunities to continue the "Liberation" struggle +

Course A. The 4ntroduction of a Us airlift into
and within South Vietnan, {neransed logistics sup-
port, and an ineranse in MAAG strength to provide

US odvisers dom to battalion level.
. ° 1 .

T ET
LIM’ STRIBUTTON

POP gua
LEME TBUTTON

. 9. We ao not believe that thig course of action would

(evoke a olgnifiennt military response by Moacow or Palping.

Hanoi would Probably presa forward with ite Viet Cong campaign,
infiltrating cadres and logiotiea support to South Viotnan through
the nountain routes of eastorn Laos, across tha Cacbodians
Vietnauose border, and by sea from North Vietnan,. Additional
regular North Vietnanese Arny unite probably would be infiltrated
into Bouth Vietnan and southern Taos. The Viet Cong would probs
ably atep | up tts exploitation of South Vietnarn's joeinadeea in
the plateau areag of South Vietnan seeking to establish a logise
tles base fron which larger scale (regimental level) oporations
could be mounted, [he Communists probably would augment their
efforts to build up tha eastern part of south Laos os Q major
aupply channel for the introduction of Blos equipnent into

northern ard central Bouth Vietnar, US supply and

acnivunteatt ons linea would be harassed and the Communists vould

inerease terrorLat and sabotage attacks against US Personnel and

installations. In certain arens US alroraft would probably be

Subjected to antigtrorart fire. The Cormunist airlift would

"Probably be expanded and extended to inolude airdrops and air-

landing of supplies in South Vietnan aa well as south Laos,

Course B, The introduction into South Vietnan of

a US force of about 8,000-10,000 troops, mostly
engineers with sone combat support, in response to
an appeal from President Dien for assistance in

flood relief,

10. The announcenent that US troops were being sent to
South Vietnam for purposes of flood relief would not be convin-
cing to the Cormuniat states or to non-Comuniat governnents. This
would be so even if the troops confined their activity strictly to
flocd relief work. Nevertheless, most governments would consider
that the flood relief announcerent provided opportunities for

disengagement. However, later disengagement by the US would have
serious effects {n Southeast Asia.

11. Moscow, Pelping, and Hanol would regord
thio US course of notion an o aignificant new indi-
eatiou of US intention to support the Diem governnent om to
defend South Vietnam. However, they alnost certainly would not —
respond by overtly oornmitting regular North Vietnanese or Chinese
Communist forees to a military attack against South Vietnam or
Laos. |

12. They would, nevertheless, probably build up their

‘readiness posture in the goneral Southeast Asia area. The Bloc

capitals would isaue strong thrents against the US to withdraw

= QD =

. 7 1
LI STRIBUTTON

W274 84 70 he

OE hae _—
- a tne.

‘

tts forcoa. The Coumunista would probably accept increased risk |
of exposure and introduce additional North Vietnamese forces similar
to those mentioned under Course A, into

“ /South Vietnan and southern Laos to etiffen Cormuniet forces there
and to protect courumt.cati.ons routes, Within South Vietnan,
Commnint-directed operations would probably be intensified through
out the countryside. The US forces would prcbably be subjected to
horasavient and arbush, the intensity and scope of such action de-
pending upon the extent to which the US forces vere threatening
Commniet-controlled arenas. The Chinesa Communists would probably
tneronse their ground cnd air forces dn south China and would posslbl;

introduce air unita into North Vietnarn.

Course C. The introduction into the aren of a
US coribat foree of 25,000-40,000 men to engage
with the South Vietnarese forces in ground, clr,

and naval operations against the Viet Cong.

13. The three Communist governnents would probably estimate
that the Viet Cong, with increased eupport, could succesofully
harass the US troops, avoid najor defeats, and continue to hold
the initiative and to score victories 4p many areas of Bouth

Vietnan. At the sane tine, however, oll three would recognize

= 10 «

TOP
LIMIT: TRIBUTION

ne 1A 3470 ths Hf is

ee ent can

toe

; that thio commitment had greatly i: ranared the Lnvolverient of US
prestige in the South Vietnamese o. ise and was a atrong indieation
that at a later stage tha US might o further 1? necessary to:

- prevent the defeat of that cause. she North Vietnanese and the
Chinese Communtots would view the |. oe fores as q threat
to their interests in Southeast As . and the reinforced US pres-
eree as 2 potential threat to thai security. ~The objective of
all three Communist powers would b to nadntain Conmmnist basea
and otrength in South Vietnam and, ventually, to terninate the
US intervention, The Chinese and i.orth Vietnanese Comni sto
would probably be keener on the lai ier point since their in-
tercots are wore directly involved the Soviets would prefer to
do it in a more gradual way, throu | attrition of US forces in

the area and diplomatic-political | easures eloawhere.

ac 14, Although an extrone uili! ry reaponse night follow thio
US course of action, wa believe it ore likely that the Cormuniat
whlitery reaction in South Vietnan vould be a eotiproni.cs “= oo0e-
what stronger than the Bovieta woul wich but otill linited
enough to keep the risks under tol rable control. Tha USSR would
alnost certainly try to take the lad in supplying whatever out-

side military assistance was neces..ary, in order to vaxinize its

~

control over the ailtuqtion, The N

this effort in order toward off an

. within thelr country. In any even:

pronise would be unstable, that th
to argue anong thenselves, and tha!
the crisis night result in Ped ping
role.

15+ However, on belance we b.

reactions would be diracted toward

Vietnan. In addition to an intens.

Communist response we have aatinat
of either Course A or B, we beltev
following actions: atrong and spe
declarations of their intention tc

Vietnon and sustain the "revolutic.

“and an inorease in the seale of Vi

the US forces; and possibly the i

or Soviet air unite into North Vir

‘th Vietnamese would support
nerease in Chineso influence
we believe that such a con~
three portnors would continue
the subsequent developent of

) assuning a ucre independent

Lieve that the initial Cormunict
1 holding operation in South
fication of the types of
1 woulda ensue fron the initiation
that Course C would evoke the
4fic Boviet and Chinese Communist
maintain the security of North
nary struggie" in South Vietnan;
.t Cong guerrilla offorts against

Lroduetion of Chinese Communist

Unan.

4,

Bee RET TAE RARE
mi aie
Xe Ans

16. We believe that the Commu, sts would have conaiderable
onfidence ‘that these measures woul in the long term rendor in-
ffective US arned assistance to fol..h Vietnan. If, however, the
3 action appeared to be seriously 1. rentening the Communist |
ovenrent in South Vietnan and estab shing a atrong wilitary
osition in the country, the Communi ts would suriously consider

roviding more direct armed support. In these ciraunstancea, the

SHDN NS AAT iia gy

amunists night commit major North ‘Lletnamese regular units in perch bie sa Paty ofthe gee Peons:

introduce
suth Vietnan and/Chinese Communist upport units into North

letnan, although they would recogni e that this action would
nise the risks of broadening the wi... It is possible on the
her hand that they would lower th tempo of military activity
South Vietnan with a view to rad: ing it at another tine or fe

t another place in Southeast Asia.

CASH

) . . ‘ . . .

{ : .

| . , a , can : pie dia e ta ety Sree
‘ . . ‘ . an

\ . :

- 129 -

T iT
ISTRIBU! CON

i

LUT LON

Courso Da fn announcement by tha US af ite determina
tion to hold South Vietnam and a w-rning, either private.
or public, that North Vietnamese support af the Viet Cong
“met. cease at the US would launch air attacks against
North Vietnam, This Churse would. be taken in conjunction

with Course 4, D, or C.

7. 4 spooifia warning of air attacks against North Vietnam,
whather conveyed privately or publicly, would evoke vary sorious
conoern among all threo Communist powerae & warning of air attacks

on North Vietnam would be taken particularly seriously if it wore
issued in conjunation with the commitment of substantial US trocp
atrength, as under Course 6. Moscow and elping would regard the
defense of North Vietnam againet aich an attack as imporativos
Thay would seck to. forestall such an attack to prevent military |
damage to North Vietnam cnd also to avoid the risk af exponded
hostilitics. If the US warning were given pravately, the Communist —
powers would probably fool that their interests could best bo
served by malcdng public the weming and oastigating it as a threat
to world peacee They would cxrobably see soneidaxebie advantage in
thia course and din bringing the case before the UN even if they

did not believe that the US WOR pre; rare to make good on its throak.

18. Moscow and VeLping would probably announce their detere

nenntton to defend the North Vietnam againat attaok and atreass that

any puch aetion would carry tho risk of general war, The Ondmind ot
powers would probably alao take certoin military moasures not

only to maka credible their position but also to provide for ime
proved air defense of North Vietnam. These measures would probably
inelude the stationing of Soviet and/or Ohinese Conmunist air~ |
craft and antinirorart unita In North Vietnam. It is also possible
that a “North VWetnamege! Air Force, complete with jot fightors,
might suddenly be unveiled. Tho Soviet leaders would probably
caloulate that thay could, ty such political and military measures,
generate sufficient worldwide prassures to dissuade the US from .
its throat, particularly if it could be depicted os a threat to use
nuclear Weaponge While not dosiring to preoipitate a major military
incident, the USSR and Communist Ohina would be determined to avoid
conducting themselves in such a nannar as to let the US conolude
that it had found a way to atop Commnist mannan of "National ibe

erentont movements.

194 If the US did subjoot North Vietnam to air attacks, the
USSR and Communist China would commit air powor to defend North
Vietnam. They would probably undertake retaliatory attacka aainst

targots in South Vietnam and againat the bases or oarriera from

~ 14

LIM RIDUTION

CAG hate: So Moos Be
eee Woda Bie ee ein ts

i.

Whtoh the attacks on North Vietnam had baon launched. These rotal~

t

fash * “A 34 70 Fas

EAT
v IA MAA lt
1 Thee. c eee ai ‘hh
pes tl PET, ene Steaed — i
a aaa
.

datory attacks would probably be mada by a "North Wetnans aot Air
Force which would, in foot, be a mixed on Similarly, a
nuclear attack by tha US would Wobably olicit sane nuclear

responac'.

206 The postulated courses of US action in South Vietnam would
have an impact ujon Communist tactioa in Laos. The Communists
would probably interpret the US action (except possi bly Gourge A)
a8 evidence of a stiffening Us attitude in Southoast Asia. Thay
_ Would probably drag their foot dn the negotiations at Geneva and
step up their efforts to consolidate and expand their military and
| politioal Position in Laos,

OD aa Sere
‘LIMIT HUTTON

, TIT, NON-COMMMNIST REACTIONS

21. South Vietnamese Most South Vietnamese would atroyigiy
“Welcome Courses A or Be In view of the seriousness of the
seourdty situation and ita adverse impact on national. morale,
we do not believe that a substantial increase in the rumber of
Americans in Vietnam would generate any apprertave concern that
the country was coming under US domination. While supporting the
introduction of larger numbera of troops auch as envisaged under
Course C, the South Vietnamese Gavernment would prebably desire
that they be used, at least initially, as a static defanse force
freeing South Vietnamese military unite for combat operations.
The introduction of auch a US force might precipitate some un«
favorable reaction within middle and lower echelona of the govern-

ment and within certain intellectual elementa. in Sal.gone

22. The people of South Vietnam would aluo strongly walcone.
a US announcement of determination to defond South Vietnan, but
would be apprehensive of Communiet retaliation against South
Vietnam cities should the US attack the cities of North Vietnam

23. Laos. Fhoumd and Boun Oum would probably interpret

Courses B, C, or D as a US deoiaton to harden ite position in |

i i, a

t:
te

i -*

a “Ean : :

en

P TO Bed se ae
LI IBUTION ae

‘Southeast Asia and aa raising the likelihood of US support of their
position in Laos, especially if hostilities were resumed in that
country. Souvanna Phouma would probably feel. that hie position
had become impossible to maintain and he would probably either
swing fully to the side of Hanoi or abandon the field to the
Pathet Lao. |

2. Cambodia, Sihanouk would be highly concer ned by any
increase in US military activity in South Vietnam, fearing that it
might lead to an expansion of hostilities in which Cambodia would
become involved. His traditional fear and auspicion of Thailand
and South Vietnan would color his views as to US intentions. He
would continue to be susceptible to Soviet or Chinese Communist

pressures to accommodate Cambodian policy to Hoe purposes in

_ Southeast Amias Sihanouk would, however, seek to keep the North

Vietnamese regime at arms length.

256 SEATO. With the exception of the UK and France, the
BEATO members would welcome Courses A, B, and C as evidence of US

- determination to defend its allies in Southeast Asiae The SEATO

members would be in varying degrees apprehensive of. eny US threat
to carry the war to North Vietnam. France would almost certainly
refuse to take part in any military activity in South Vietnam and
would probably oppose such US action,

TOR |

LIMI TION
26. Neutrals, Burma, India, and Indonesia would all take a
very alarmed view of B, C, and D. Burma in particular 1s acutely

conscious of Chincse Communist power and would be parti.cularly

—ausceptible to presaures from Peiping, India's criticism would

center primarily upon the violationa of the 195 Geneva Ascords
which would be involved in any of the given courses af US actions.
The ICC would file reports of tho US violations and its members
(particularly Poland and India) would seck an international con-

ference to resolve the conflict,

-~ 18 .

uy nT BUTION
