National Affairs - Urals Bacteriological Accident Suspected in 1979
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000100163, dated 3 August 1990.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000100163).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FBIS-SOV-90-172
5 September 1990

Defense Aspects of Union Treaty Discussed

PM0409141790 Moscow KRASNAYA ZVEZDA
in Russian 4 Sep 90 First Edition p 2

[Report by Colonel A. Belousov: “The Future Nature of
Defense”)

[Text] The future all-Union treaty is attracting more and
more attention. Consultations between plenipotentiary
representatives of Union republics and USSR Supreme
Soviet working groups were already held during the first
stage. It was deemed expedient to set up a preparatory
committee which would comrpise the top leaders of
Union republics, the USSR president, the chairman of
the USSR Supreme Soviet, and the chairman of the
USSR Council of Ministers. As for the expert groups
whose purpose is to assist the committee’s work, they
have already embarked on discussions of the all-Union
treaty’s details.

The group of experts on problems of defense, military
policy, state security, and border protection began its
work in Moscow 31 August. Representatives of the
Russian, Belorussian, Turkmen, Kazakh, Tajik, and Kir-
ghiz Union republics; USSR people’s deputies; and
USSR Ministry of Defense experts took part in the
exchange of opinions on that day. The conversation
began with a discussion of the main point: What should
our Armed Forces be like? Should they be a single
interlinked complex functioning on the basis of decisions
made by the top organs of USSR state power, or should
the republics autonomously decide questions of defense?

V. Panferov, acting chairman of the RSFSR Council of
Ministers State Committee for Military Questions;
Belorussian SSR [Soviet Socialist Republic] People’s
Deputies L. Privalov and V. Gribanov; Kazakh SSR
People’s Deputy T. Zhumasultanov; Turkmen SSR Peo-
ple’s Deputy P. Korotkiy; Tajik SSR Representative A.
Abdurozinov; and Kirghiz SSR Representative S.
Iskakov supported in principle the view expressed by
military experts headed by Lieutenant General of Avia-
tion M. Kuznetsov; Colonel V. Ochirov, deputy
chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet Committee for
Defense and State Security Questions; and I. Novoselov,
consultatant of a USSR Supreme Soviet Secretariat
Section; and spoke in favor of unified Armed Forces.
This was preceded by quite heated debates, and differ-
ences of opinions on individual issues emerged even
between members of the same delegations. Military
questions which are the exclusive province of union
republics also became topics of considered discussion.

G. Tarazevich, chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet
Soviet of Nationalities Commission for Nationalities
Policy and Interethnic Relations, addressed the repre-
sentatives of union republics and specialists 1 Sep-
tember.

The expert groups continue their work.

NATIONAL AFFAIRS 87

Urals Bacteriological Accident Suspected in 1979

- 90SV0013A Moscow LITERATURNAYA GAZETA

in Russian No 34, 22 Aug 90 p 12

{Article by Natalya Zenova, LITERATURNAYA
GAZETA special correspondent for the Urals: “Military
Secret: Reasons for the Tragedy in Sverdlovsk Must Be
Investigated’’]

[Text] “In the spring of 1968 in the American state of
Utah...not far from the military experimentation center
for chemical and biological weapons at Dugway, 6,400
sheep suddenly dropped dead.

“Military officials denied any involvement in this event,
maintaining an innocent air over the course of eight
months. Under the pressure of evidence, however, they
were forced to acknowledge ‘a slight mistake’ committed
while testing a new variety of weapon.

“Wind direction changed unexpectedly,’ an Army rep-
resentative stated, explaining that the sheep had entered
a lethal cloud.

““And what if the wind had carried it in the other
direction?’ a correspondent asked. ‘There could be a city
there!’”

Thus begins a frightening fantasy concerning the destiny
of a fictitious city written by American author Henry
Satton. A translation of his novel “Thunder Amidst
Clear Skies” (American title—“Vector”) was published
by NASH SOVREMENNIK in 1977.

Yes, There Could Be a City There

Magazine book excerpts lie on my desk, read and reread
with pencil in hand.... But not at all because the novel
staggers with its artistic sophistication—it looks ade-
quate from that point of view, but no better than that.
And in no way for the reason the editors had hoped for,
predicting that the novel “will attract the Soviet reader’s
attention by its antimilitarist orientation,” or that it
“truthfully reveals the inhumanity of the American
military-industrial complex...”

For me “Thunder Amidst Clear Skies” is not simply a
menacing futuristic warning. And the destruction of its
heroes is not just the death of literary characters. The
novel directs my thoughts far from “‘there’’; on the
contrary, it rivets them to something that occurred
“here.”

...At that time too it was spring. And people also fell sick
for unexplained reasons. And they too died in torment.
And even the number of victims was about the same.

Yes, [ am today firmly convinced that in the spring of
1979 a deadly cloud arose over our military center and
the wind carried it precisely in the direction where not
only “there could be a city,” but where my native
Sverdlovsk was.

88 NATIONAL AFFAIRS

Understanding the responsibility of such a statement, I
cannot waste newspaper space on emotion—I need to
use it for proof. For those who want to experience
psychologically exactly what happened, I refer to the
above-mentioned novel of H. Satton—everything there
is “one to one,” as many of the people from my region
believe.

And so it was April of 1979. At first rumors began to
spread of sudden deaths—“‘medicine doesn’t help at ali!”
Then conversations concerning some old woman who
sold the meat of either a sheep or cow that had fallen
dead, about a dug-up cattle burial ground. At the same
time warnings appeared in local newspapers: Cattle in
the Urals have been weakened by the difficult winter.
They are prone to infection and therefore it is possible—
you will note, just possible!—that there will be incidents
of malignant anthrax infection. And not a word here
regarding outbreaks of sickness of any kind among
animals or people.

But people were dying. Primarily men of healthy age,
and basically from the same area. And the area was a
very suspicious one—Chkalovskiy—where the so-called
{9th military installation is located. What was going on
inside the entry gate of this closed station along the
Sverdlovsk city line no one hada right to know; but there
were many, of course, who knew. In any case they knew
bacteriologists were working there. That is why, as soon
as the geography of the center was revealed, there was an
immediate drop in interest shown in the old woman with
the sheep and precautionary notices regarding meat. And
someone else heard “‘a voice from over the knoll” telling
of a “bacteriological explosion” in Sverdlovsk. Some
people saw with their own eyes how in Chkalovskiy
Rayon they were washing down the sidewalks, roads, and
roofs with soap; removing the topmost soil layer, and
rushing to put down asphalt in places where asphalt had
never been. It was also noticed that people in protective
clothing were taking some kind of samples near the
installation....

A panic grew....

I admit, none of us local journalists rushed out to the
ramparts at that time. I remember well how at
VECHERKA where I worked, the telephone suddenly
began to ring with its desperate, intercity ring and our
official secretary, alternately turning red and growing
pale, jumped out into the corridor. At this the entire
editorial staff gathered by the doors, gazing with horror
at the instrument by which a correspondent from some
American newspaper had just gotten through to our
closed city. The telephone rang again, and the most
despairing among us warily took the phone and said,
murdering the language: “Alo, who’sis? Well, ain't no
one here....”

Later everything calmed down. And for many years no
one dug up this burial ground of oblivion... But people
remained witnesses of what had taken place, and prima-
rily the doctors.

FBIS-SOV-90-172
- § September 1990

Doctors’ Testimony
N. Bezrukov, anesthesiologist, Hospital No. 20

“1 was in charge of a resuscitation division. Suddenly
sick people started coming in one after another diag-
nosed with ‘pneumonia.’ When five or six of them had
amassed, all with the same clinical picture and speed of
departure—to the morgue—we began to suspect some
kind of especially dangerous infection. You understand,
the symptoms were unlike those of pneumonia; every-
thing flared up instantaneously and went to emphysema.
The patients died on an artificial respirator, receiving
tremendous doses of medicine.

“Then a culture arrived from our laboratory—probably
malignant anthrax, but not absolutely for certain....
What struck us? The batch was painfully the same—men
somewhere around forty, although two women also died.

“And how were they buried? In the city there was talk of
lead caskets...

“The first six were buried in the usual manner—after all,
we did not have the right diagnosis yet and wrote
‘bacterial pneumonia.’ The last six went as ‘malignant
anthrax.’ There were no lead caskets—the coffins were
coated with black tar.

“Now we waited—expecting symptoms to appear very
soon in ourselves. After all, it was clear that the infection
was spread by airborne particles. We decided to stay here
so as not to take the contamination home. And everyone
stayed—all the doctors, all the nurses.... There was even
a pregnant one who never left her post. The days
passed—no one came down with any symptoms.”

“And what conclusion did you arrive at?”

“That genetic engineering was at work here, creating
such extremely effective bacteria that would sclectively
strike residents of a certain age, those capable of carrying
a weapon. And no one was being contaminated by
contact. To this day we do not know what kind of carrier
it was, by what means contamination occurred. If it were
the esophagus, family members would come down with
it. If it were airborne particles, we would have been
contaminated.”

N.A., doctor

“I am not a microbiologist, of course, but in my opinion
we were dealing with some kind of anthrax apparently
mixed with plague. The properties were similar to both.
And they were dead-end properties—it was not passed
on any further by an individual it had struck. One must
give it its due—it was an astounding thing. It struck
precisely those people who were needed.”

“What was this thing then in Sverdlovsk?”

“There can be no doubt—what we had was waste from a
bacteriological weapon.”

“You were at Hospital No. 40 at that time?”

FBIS-SOV-90-172
5 September 1990

“First I was at No. 20, then No. 40 as a member of an
emergency anti-epidemic commission. Everything began
during my watch. First I had three people die. The same
thing continued a second day.... Then we started soul-
searching and consulting our leading experts.... They
took a culture. Laboratory results led us to the idea that
clearly something was wrong here. Then we took a map
of the area and wind rose, looked at it, and saw that they
were all coming from the same place. From here one
didn’t have to be a genius—everyone knows we have the
19th military installation.

“Then came civilian people, military people. Although I
was on the emergency epidemic commission, we had no
information whatsoever, When we Started to ask ques-
tions, they let us know very politely but very firmly that
it would be better to be silent. I was especially struck by
a professor from Moscow. He was an expert, of course,
and had a very fine manner of speaking, but it is simply
amazing how he was able to concoct such nonsense—to
talk so prettily at length about nothing.”

“Do you have any figures to Operate with?”

“No. I can only say that about 500 beds were prepared
for hospitalization.”

“And how do you relate to how closed we are on this
subject?”

“What do we have, what do we not have.... Everyone
prefers to remain silent concerning bacteriological
weapons. It is indecent to talk about this in decent
society.”

B. Zislin, doctor of medical sciences, chief anesthesiolo-
gist of the region

“At that time I was consulting in the intensive care
department of Hospital No. 20. I saw several patients at
the same time with the same symptoms, and I was
convinced that this was a serious contagion with which I
was unfamiliar. It immediately affects all the organs—
the lungs, the brain, and the kidneys...”

“And did the people die quickly?”

“One woman was a little better off and still conscious,
She told me that everything began with a feverish chill,
and that soon she was short of breath. They quickly put
her on artificial respiration too and, like the others, she
died. I found this suspicious. I immediately telephoned
the regional public health department. I requested that
the military reveal whether this was their doing. A half
hour later they called me and said that everything was
fine with the military...”

“Several years have passed.... What is your opinion
today?”

“They were obligated to speak up. Secrets are secrets, but
I believe that more than 70 people died.... Perhaps they
managed to save some of them.”

NATIONAL AFFAIRS , 89

“But let us suppose, God forbid of course, that some-
thing similar happens again. How will you and your
colleagues react?”

“If I see something like that again, I will find out...”

“If it is something like that. But might you see something
quite different?”

“I do not think so. But if... I suppose that the military
people will not hide it in the future. They do not have the
right!”

An Open Secret
“They do not have the right...!"
Back then the military denied everything. And now?

This spring, the article “19th Installation” was published
in the oblast newspaper URALSKIY RABOCHIY. It
brought out into the open the military point of view on
the events of 1979. Journalist S. Plotnikov visited that
installation together with members of a representative
delegation. This spared me the trouble of following that
same trail and asking those same questions. Incidentally,
I have reason to believe that the “stir” around the
long-buried subject began after the interest shown in it
on the part of the LITERATURNAYA GAZETA corre-
spondent. But that is off the subject.

The article talks about the visit to the military installa-
tion or, more accurately, the military epidemiology
sector of the Scientific Research Institute for Microbi-
ology of the USSR Ministry of Defense. Yes, the military
admits, earlier “the institute studied the technology and
production of vaccinations for the protection of ser-
vicemen and the population froma number of dangerous
infections.” Today the center is on a cost accounting
basis, and as a result it is quite interested in cooperating
with “civilians”: It has communicated facts in detail in
the areas where it was possible. Such facts, of course, are
important. But I imagine that the residents of Sverdlovsk
were cheered up most of all by the news that production
of vaccinations “for defense of troops and the popula-
tion” ceased here in 1986....

But what happened when the previous work was still in
full swing? Colonel A. Kharechko, chief of the military
epidemiology sector, gives an explanation. I quote: “The
rumors which were going around the city in the spring of
1979 to the effect that an explosion took place on the
territory of our institution and that the anthrax pathogen
was discharged into the external environment do not
have any real basis, primarily because we have never had

- any explosions of any sort.”

But what about discharges? They happen on a regular
basis even to this day. A few paragraphs later it is stated
that “‘all discharges into the air and sewage are filtered
and monitored.” What good is correcting the termino-
logical inaccuracies? In the end, what is the main signif-
icance for the affected region of the means by which the
misfortune occurred—explosion, discharge, or exhaust?

90 NATIONAL AFFAIRS

But the colonel did not produce any further testimony,
and instead of arguments he substituted the following
psychological observation: “I believe that this absurd
story has circulated because the majority of people are
more ready to believe in fantastic things than in real and
natural explanations.”

I did not get the impression that the doctors with whom
I had talked were so ready to believe in the fantastic—
quite the opposite in fact.

On behalf of the educated minority with explanations, B.
Mikhaulov, sector specialist, addresses the fantasizing
majority: “In reality—-and this has been established—
the outbreak of anthrax illnesses among people was
caused by a previous outbreak of this disease among
agricultural livestock in many population centers of the
southern part of Sverdlovsk Oblast. Professor I. Bezden-
ezhnyye and V. Nikiforov wrote an article about this
which was published in 1980 in ZHURNAL MIKROBI-
OLOGII, EPIDEMIOLOGII 1 IMMUNOBIOLOGII....”

I looked up the article he had named, not without the
shudder of a dilettante: The journal is highly technical.
But the article by I. Bezdenzhnyye and V. Nikiforov—
the former chief inspector of the RSFSR [Russian Soviet
Federated Socialist Republic} who came at that time
from Moscow to the Sverdlovsk extraordinary event and
headed the commission that was created (its medical
unit}—seemed absolutely readable. Moreover, it seemed
that it would be more difficult for specialists in view of
the scarcity of facts.

1 personally had questions for the authors, and many of
them.

For instance, I read: “Sporadic illnesses of anthrax in
one of the areas of Sverdlovsk preceded the outbreak of
anthrax among agricultural livestock on individual
farms of the adjoining regions.... At that same time
isolated instances of anthrax illnesses among people
were reported....”

How were they isolated? What about the (approximately)
500 hospital beds that were readied? And the (approxi-
mately) 70 people who died? Let us recall that 12 died
almost simultaneously in Hospital No. 20. We will add
the 42 post-mortems with the same diagnosis in Hospital
No. 40—F. Abramova, a pathological anatomist who
attended all these post-mortems, gave this figure. We will
also add several cases which occurred at other medical
institutions. And these are all isolated ilinesses?

«and there were skin and intestinal forms of the
infection.” Why only skin and intestinal? What about
pulmonary?

I quote the article again: “That the disease is related to
anthrax was confirmed by the results of laboratory tests
of sick people and animals. The pathogen of anthrax was
isolated from meat taken for tests from two families of
patients. In both cases the meat had been purchased

FBIS-SOV-90-172
5 September 1990

from private persons. The strains of the anthrax patho-
gens isolated from the meat were not distinguishable
from the strains isolated from the patients.”

But does this prove that the events that are mentioned
are part of the specific chain of terrifying events that
shook the city back then? Are there really no grounds to
suppose that they existed parallel with them?

I had the opportunity to travel to the cemetery, visit the
houses, and resort to the archives of the registry offtce—
and I established that the first patients died at Hospital
No. 20 on 9 April. And the first articles about weakened
livestock and their possible infection appeared in the
local press on 13 April. Which preceded which? Does not
the conclusion suggest itself that the people died first and
then as a result of their deaths preventive warnings were
“superimposed”?

Why? | even pose this question within the bounds of the
scholarly article I quoted. Why, if it was “simply”
anthrax in Sverdlovsk, did people in military uniforms
play first violin in the investigation of facts? Why was
the whole story of the illness eliminated along with all
records and all documentation from “concerned” insti-
tutions? Why now, I1 years afterward, are officials again
visiting here and there on investigations? Is any other
answer possible?

I hunted down a private home in the suburb of the city
where a woman who died in Hospital No. 20, one of the
first, had once lived. I held in my hands her death
certificate which gave “bacterial pneumonia” as the
cause. Some people had come for that certificate and
wished to take it away, but the family would not give it
up: “It is ours. It is all that ts left to us.”

I visited another household whose head, a worker at a
ceramic factory, had died with the same diagnosis.

...I personally have an answer for all those “whys”—I
declared it openly at the very beginning. But however
well-argued it seems to me, I recognized that it is only a
private opinion and only a private investigation. Official
conclusions are needed. Quickly.

If there was a tragedy it should be called a tragedy, and the
guilty should be called guilty. And to the degree that the
information presented here is grounds for a parliamentary
investigation, on behalf of the editorial board the author
requests that our parliament create such a commission.

Otherwise we cannot ensure that lightning will not strike
from a clear sky again tomorrow.

[Text] For exporting co
abroad have long be
