The Outlook for the Dominican Republic
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000122101, dated 2 March 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000122101).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

cS

re

oe z Roniire

Seok my

%
’

Fd

:

FORT a Se
rN bee .

Rear
esha

rte ry
eRTT CEL

PITTere

usc

mission yorstevela tl
an sunsitho Peer
:

‘fo

WSF Atomic en

THE OUTLOOK FOR THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

THE PROBLEM

To estimate political prospects in the Dominican Republic in the light of recent

developments.

THE ESTIMATE

The Trujillo Regime

1. In our last estimate dealing with the
Dominican Republic (SNIE 80/1-59, 29
December 1959, paragraphs 7, 53-60) we
stated that the 30-year Trujillo dictator-
ship was in trouble, but concluded that
it probably would remain in power
through 1960. Since then anti-Trujillo
sentiment has gathered momentum and
the regime’s prospects have materially de-
clined. We cannot predict the time or the
circumstances in which the regime would
be likely to come to an end, but this could
happen before the end of the year.

2. A notable change in the country’s po-
litical atmosphere has developed since
the wholesale arrests in January, in
which members of almost every promi-
nent Dominican family were seized, in
many cases with great brutality, and
subjected to heavy fines and jail sentences.
Drastic action may in fact have been
necessary to break what appears to have
been an extensive revolutionary conspir-
acy; precise information as to how far
plotting to overthrow Trujillo had pro-
ceeded is stilllacking. However, the mag-

nitude and severity of the government’s
crackdown revealed the regime’s nervous-
ness, made it more intolerable to leading
elements in Dominican society, and alien-
ated the Catholic Church. The latter is
now Trujillo’s most outspoken opponent
inside the country.

3. Continuing arrests and new trials of
alleged plotters suggest that public un-
rest is spreading. Within the armed
services, which remain the mainstay of
the regime, a few new signs of rivalry
and dissension have appeared; six army
officers have been imprisoned and an air
force officer is the latest in a series of de-
fectors. The arrest of close relatives of
high-ranking officers and some terrorist
activities directed against individuals in
these forces are probably also having an
adverse effect on their loyalty to Trujillo.

4. Since our previous estimate, the eco-
nomic situation has deteriorated further.
Business is stagnant, and an increasing
number of people are suffering economic
hardship. In addition to some flight of
private capital, members of the Trujillo
family are reported to have made sub-

—

ee, 2

stantial withdrawals from the national
reserve bank—a development which
might seriously weaken the government’s
financial position. Even if these reports
prove unfounded or exaggerated, the
spread of rumors that such withdrawals
- were taking place would obviously con-
tribute to a decline in public confidence
in the regime.

5. On the other hand, Trujillo himself
shows no signs of relinquishing control,
and there is no information to indicate
that discontent in the military is wide-
spread. The plans of the internal opposi-
tion probably have been set back by the
regime’s repressive measures. The nu-
merous exile groups lack cohesion and
effectiveness, despite the encouragement
and support given them, not only by
Castro, but also by moderate leaders such
as Venezuelan President Betancourt.
There are deep divisions between pro-
Communist and anti-Communist ele-
ments within these groups.

The Succession

6. The character of the regime which will
eventually succeed Trujillo will depend
upon the time and circumstances of Tru-
jillo’s departure. In present circum-
stances, we think it unlikely that Trujillo
will be overthrown by a Castro-type in-
vasion or revolution. It is more likely
that Trujillo will eventually be forced to
leave by the military acting with the
encouragement and support of the upper
and middle classes and the Church. The
longer his departure is delayed, the more
explosive the situation is likely to become.

7. Castro has already failed in an attempt
to overthrow the Trujillo regime through
an invasion by Dominican exiles with

Cuban support. His agrarian reform pro-
gram has had no appreciable impact on
the Dominican peasantry, who remain
generally unaware of it. They generally
still regard Trujillo as the Benefactor.
The upper and middle classes, though
increasingly disaffected toward Trujillo,
are repelled by the excesses of the Castro
regime in Cuba. The military also are
repelled by what they have seen happen-
ing in Cuba. Thus there is now in the
Dominican Republic no important ele-
ment likely to support a Castro-type in-
vasion or revolution.

8. Nevertheless, tension is rising in the
Dominican Republic and the eventual
fall of the Trujillo regime will be increas-
ingly anticipated. In such circum-
stances, persons of property and military
officers, apart from Trujillo’s personal as-
sociates, will become increasingly anxious
to effect a change of regime before un-
controllable disorder develops. At the
psychological moment in this progression,
it would be in accord with Latin American
custom for the military to call upon the
dictator to depart before the situation
got out of hand. In such matters, how-
ever, timing is of the essence. A prema-
ture move could be fatal. On the other
hand, to hesitate too long would permit
an uncontrollable situation to develop.

9. If its timing were right, a junta with
military, upper and middle class, and
Church participation could probably take
over the Dominican Republic without se-
rious resistance. Such a junta would
probably also take over in the event of
Trujillo’s flight, natural death, or assas-
sination. Once in power, however, such
a regime would face serious difficulties.
The fall of the dictatorship would entail

aes.

Sone 3

a considerable amount of disorder and
confusion. Although its fall would mean
liberation to the upper and middle classes,
the new regime would not automatically
command the support of the urban prole-
tariat and the peasants. Returning ex-
iles, who are generally radical in their
political views, would probably seek to
incite these elements against a moderate
government. Within the government it-
self, there might be a struggle for power
between military and civilian elements.
Finally, the Trujillo family has so domi-
nated the Dominican economy that the
confusion attendant upon their sudden
departure would probably worsen an al-
ready bad economic situation.

10. Although Castro is probably inca-
pable of overthrowing the Trujillo dicta-
torship, the political turmoil which would
follow the fall of that dictatorship would
afford him opportunities for political in-
tervention in the Dominican Republic.
Castro would certainly do all in his power
to incite the masses against a moderate
regime and to call for a radical revolution
on the Cuban model. Unless a moderate
Dominican government received prompt
support from sympathetic governments
. of an undoubtedly liberal character (Ven-
ezuela, for instance), Castro might
emerge as the ultimate victor.

US-Dominican Relations

11. The fall of the Trujillo regime would
present new problems in US-Dominican

relations. Even among moderate opposi-
tion elements, there is considerable re-
sentment of past US support for and fail-
ure to intervene against the Trujillo dic-
tatorship.. Furthermore, almost any new
regime would feel a need to demonstrate
to the Dominican people and to other
Caribbean peoples that it was not under
US domination. However, a moderate
government would also be in desperate
need of US assistance. If the US were to
render essential aid discreetly, while tol-
erating occasional demonstrations of Do-
minican sovereignty, such a government
would probably cooperate in fundamental
matters. If, on the other hand, a Castro-
type government were eventually to come
to power, the US would inevitably be
presented with problems similar to those
it has with Cuba.

12. The Trujillo government has declared
that it will not renew its missile tracking
station agreement with the US at its ex-
piration in 1961. This may be an attempt
to extort US support for the regime in its
present difficulties. If Trujillo should fall
before the expiration of the agreement,
the attitude of a successor regime would
depend on the contingencies set forth in
paragraphs 10 and 1l above. A moderate
government would probably feel obliged
to demonstrate Dominican sovereignty,
but would also be influenced by its need
for US aid. A Castro-type government
would probably denounce the tracking
station agreement.
