Intelligence Memorandum
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000118650, dated 3 February 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000118650).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SEGRET C

No For n Dissem

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY -
Directorate of Intelligence
20 March 1968 =~ .

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

. French Actions in the Recent Gold Crisis
_ DE EE

summary

French government attitudes, and the actions of .-.
some French officials, were important factors wp me
contributing to the massive Speculation against
the dollar and the pound during the recent gold
crisis. In the weeks immediately following the
devaluation of the pound on 18 November 1967, the
French fanned the speculative flames by leaking
unsettling financial news to the press and may have
encouraged some countries to convert their dollars
into gold.* By mid-December, however, the French
government had become concerned about the deepening
crisis and subsequently has generally refrained from
unsettling actions.

Under De Gaulle the French government has con-
sistently opposed the dominant role of the dollar
in international finance, has pressed for elimina-
tion of the US balance-of-payments deficit, and has
called for an increase in the official price of gold
and the use of gold as the only international re-
serve. Over recent years, the French have converted

* Throughout the November-March erisis, the USSR,
Communtst China, and other Communist countrtes
played a small role in Western gold markets.
reported Communtst purchases of gold were about

$47 million for Communist China and $143 million
for the USSR and Eastern Europe. However, the
absence of these purchases would not have stgnifi-
cantly diminished the tntensity of the rush agatnsé
the monetary gold reserves of the gold pool members.

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
ft was prepared by the Offtce of Economie Research
and was coordinated with the Offtce of Current
Intelligence.

APPROVED FOR Per BASE

AUG 07 1997

rc SEGRET C:

ld, reduced their cooperation with the

inancial powers by withdrawing from the
London go.d pool, and delayed agreement on and
adoption of US proposals for increasing world
reserves through creation of new international
assets under the International Monetary Fund.

The recent agreement among gold pool members to
stop buying and selling gold in the private market
will not prevent the French from continuing to
promote the role of gold or from attacking the
doliar if they choose to do so. If they feel that
US measures are inadequate, the French will almost
certainly try to block reforms of the international
monetary system through the issuance of special
drawing rights by the International Monetary Fund.
Tne effectiveness of French policy, however, will
be limited by the small size of France's dollar
holdings, and the disdppearance of the French
balance-of-payments surplus. France's Common Market
partners seem inclined to cooperate with the United

tates in international financial matters if the
United States takes strong action to reduce its
balance-of-payments deficit. Future French moves,
moreover, probably will be inhibited by the desire
to avoid international monetary disorganization.

a
— SEGRET

some ee eee eee ST er ee ane a I

C SEGRET = |

The French View

1. Under De Gaulle the French government has
fundamentally disagreed with the United States and

a! eee

financial system. France's approath to international
finance is an extremely conservative one. France
-is opposed to arrangements (the so-called gold ex-
change standard) whereby the dollar and the pound
serve together with gold as major media of inter-
national settlement and as international reserves.

It opposes the domination of the world's financial
markets by New York and London.

2. Most important, France considers the per-

sistence of a US balance-of-payments deficit a

means by which the United States forces European
countries to hold dollars that are indirectly
financing the invasion of US firms in Europe and

US foreign policies distasteful to De Gaulle, such

as the Vietnam War. France has consistently pressed
for an increase in the official price of gold in
order to achieve a sufficient increase in the pur-
chasing power of world gold reserves to permit the
supplanting of the dollar as a reserve currency.
However, the French government has not desired the
devaluation of the dollar in relation to the franc,
because it believes that the French balance of pay-
ments could not stand the shock. A dollar devaluation
_would almost certainly be followed promptly by a ,
franc devaluation of equal or greater size.

Early French Actions

3. The De Gaulle government has expounded its
monetary views whenever a proper forum was available
and began taking actions to back them up several
years ago. French monetary and fiscal policies
have been designed to create surpluses in the French
balance of payments most of the time and in this
way to build up French monetary reserves. As these
reserves grew rapidly during the early and mid-1960's,
they were converted increasingly from dollars into
gold. This involved the purchase of $2.9 billion
in gold direct from the US Treasury. Direct purchases
from the United States ended in late 1966, when the
French balance-of-payments surplus almost disappeared

© SECRET C

and Prench dollar holdings had declined to about _ ay
one-half billion dollars. ae

4. Although after 1966 France no longer had _ .
large amounts of surplus dollars it could convert  —
into gold, it continued to promote the world role —
ort goid. Since 1961, France had been a member of
an informal group known as the gold pool (together
with the United States, the United Kingdom, West —~ | Co
Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, and
Switzerland), the function of which was to stabilize
the free market price of gold at $35 an ounce and... _
to distribute the burden of any losses according ~_ aan
to agreed on proportions. The French share was - Soe
9.3 percent. The arrangement worked well through ~
1965, with the pool members gaining as much gold
as they lost. In 1966, however, sales to private
hoarders and industrial users began to out-pace
purchases from new production and diminishing Soviet
gold sales. The members of the pool began to lose
increasing amounts of gold to the free market. In
June 1967, France decided to withdraw from the pool
in order to avoid continued easing of the strain on - , *
the US gold reserve and in the hope that its action .
would enhance the chances of an increase in the
price of gold. By agreement among the pool members,

French withdrawal was kept from public knowledge.

5. While attacking the dollar by buying gold and
ceasing cooperation through the gold pool, France
also used its influence to prevent adoption of US
proposals for reforms of the international monetary
system whicn could supplement and eventually supplant
both dollars and gold. After lengthy negotiations,
in the summer of 1967 France joined in the agreement
on creation of additional reserve assets -- the
so-called "special drawing rights" (SDR's) to be
issued through the International Monetary Fund.

But implementation of the agreement was left *
indefinite, presumably contingent on a reduction
of the US balance-of-payments deficit. Moreover, at
French insistence, the Common Market countries
received a veto power over the timing and manner
of implementing the agreement. Although France has
not been alone in insisting on a reduction in the
US balance-of-payments deficit as a condition for ..
implementing the agreement, it is clear that the
French position has been the most negative and that
French obstruction of negotiations has created
lengthy delays. These delays in turn have contrib-
uted to the severity of the recent gold crisis.

a .
- -
yr an rad

-~4-
sEgRET

TR ee ei ee

Se ee see ee eee -

SEGRET
French Actions Subsequent to Devaluation

of Sterling

6. As a result of the June 1967 war in the ©)
Middle East which closed the Suez Canal and tem-
porarily shut off some of the United Kingdom's
“sources of petroleum, plus a badly deteriorating
-balance of payménts and serious economic difficul-
ties at home, the British were brought inevitably
to the point of devaluation.

ew teedh eed ale tone’ Ledeen
: .

7. The devaluation of the pound on 18 November ~: *:-

1967 created serious uncertainties in the world's. _oowuw.

gold and foreign exchange markets. It was followed .-:

by a serious acceleration in private hoarding of 77

gold and parallel losses of reserves of gold pool

members. French: government attitudes and the

actions of French officials in the weeks immediately .

following the devaluation of the pound conftributed~...

greatly to the uncertainty and helped to precipi-

tate the ultimate gold crisis. .It is unlikely that

the French intended to create the crisis, however,

and after mid-December they tried to disassociate

themselves from it and to avoid unsettling actions.

The Le Monde Incidents

8. Late in November 1967, the Parisian press --
mainly the newspaper Le Monde, under the byline of
the respected financial writer Paul Fabra -- began
to publish accurate and unsettling news about
international financial developments. The most
stunning item was news that France had withdrawn
from the gold pool months before, with the United
States shouldering France's 9.3 percent share of
pool losses as well as its own share of 50 percent.
There were other items as well: that $1 billion
of the $1.4 billion pledged through the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund to support sterling after
devaluation had already been "mortgaged" and
actually was not available to dispatch outstanding
British obligations; gold pool sales volumes;

_ figures on British and US drawings against the
swap arrangements exchanged among the major central
banks; a whole series of reports on negotiations
for additional loans to the United Kingdom; and
exaggerated figures on increases in the members’
contributions to the gold pool. ro

wow

- ae
“yt ran

eee :
oo, sow. ae

rr ow Pn fe re Hn CE
neeenn ww? <r or .

9. All of this information had been closely ;
held. In fact, some of it was discussed only orally |
among the gold pool members at their periodic :
meetings in Basel, at which French representatives
were present. It appeared that the closed societ
of central bankers had a large leak,

C-

tty Le

sii)

er Sater) ei.

10. All this news rapidly became public -~- not .
only the leaks themselves, but also the alleged ~ —
source. The story was current that a small coterie
of overzealous Gaullists was attempting to push |”
the world monetary machinery over the edge to
_increase the price of gold -- which, in Gaullist _
“eyes, could be the only possible result of ani fo =
attack on the dollar... Pie ond ake

Other Developments

ll. Other events roiled the waters as well.
It was learned in mid-December that Algeria was
using $150 million (in dollars), bought with its |.
franc reserves in Paris, to buy gold directly el
_from the United States.

{.
3.4(6)(1)(8)

12. Most of these reports are probably fac-
tually correct. They indicate a continuation of "| 4
the general French policy of putting pressure on
the dollar. But they do not substantiate the
existence of a French plot to bring .down the. dollar
in the wake of the devaluation of sterling. “Some
of the reports probably represent isolated ploys ~

B(c)(d) 7

on the part of overzealous people

- gram stemmed the tide of deepening crisis for

C | sEgeET 2d

The weight of evidence, on the contrary, indicates
that by mid-December the French government had
become apprehensive about the developing crisis.
Presumably it feared that the crisis would lead
to unsettled conditions and severe monetary dis- se
turbances, which it wanted to avoid, even if the a
eventual result was an increase in the price of
gold. Some reports even suggest that firm in-
structions were issued from high levels within
the French government to cease any actions that
might add to the epccuiani ie fever.

13, . The real importance of all these develop-
ments, however, lies in the attitude of the public
at large, the public that actually bought the gold,
sold the sterling and dollars, and feared imminent
collapse of the world monetary system. This public
was convinced of official French complicity.
Moreover, the notion was daily gaining ground that
the oft-repeated Gaullist thesis was correct:
that the dollar could not hold out, that the US. ae
gold stock could be profitably assaulted, and that ,
the dollar devaluation that soon would yield gEeae

“profits to gold holders was indeed imminent.

14. Throughout the crisis, the position of
the French central bank, the Banque de France,
whose governor, M. Brunet, has been a particular .-
friend of the United States, seemed ambivalent. ot
Its strong inclination toward close cooperation 2 i
with foreign monetary authorities is inconsistent a
with some of the actions attributed to it during
the crisis. Senior officials of the Bank were
apprehensive about French government policies,
although it was also clear that the Bank was at
all times under the control of cue Finance Minister
in matters of policy.

15. The announcement, on 1 January 1968, of
President Johnson's new balance-of-payments pro-

only eight working days, after which the pressure

on the London gold pool resumed, slowly at first,
‘then with gathering intensity. From this point. ©
onward, however, reports of French involvement

diminished significantly. Moreover, on _an official
level, the French continued to act with ‘perfect =

qo SRBRET CG 2 ee

3 correctness. France even had an opportunity, as «0 7°.
4 2 result of substantial inflows of dollars GUuring <-). 9%,
4 November and December, to buy some gold directly -.

from the United States, which it declined to do,-.
preferring to label the dollars as “hot" money Q ome i © eee tg
that might all too soon leave France again. There _—s_.. Sas
were a few statements reiterating the old Gaullist a
monetary line and calling for an increase in the
price of gold -- some of these coming from De.
Gaulle's adviser on gold policy, Jacques Rueff. -
No solid evidence exists that the French government

engaged in covert activity to intensify the last, .. eo
most crucial phase of the gold/dollar crisis. . "bee cathe

What Will France Do Now?

16. It is not likely that the agreement of
the gold pool members to cease buying and selling
gold in the free market will induce the French
government to abandon‘its long-held view that tne
pxice of gold should be increased, that the United
tates should put its balance of payments in order,
or that the world should be put on something approach- .
ing a full gold standard for international settle- _
ments. The French will continue to press for
aGoption of international monetary policies and
institutions consistent with its view. The French
i have a number of ways to bring pressure on the
: pound sterling and on the dollar in the future.
Tnese include: ; a. e aS

a. Opposing the plan for setting
2 up Special Drawing Rights (SDR's) which fetes
will be taken up by the finance ministers .. --».
of the ten largest Western financial | 4.7.
powers at a meeting on 29 March to be ~>?9-.

held in Sweden. The SDR's would ease oiet een
the balance-of-payments problem of the ©. ey. as

United States and the Unitéd Kingdom, “2,70... |

since they would give these two coun- =» a. an

tries, as well as all other members Of .o eo: ish.
the International Monetary Fund, the os: Ju.
right to draw on additional amounts of. bi...

key foreign currencies for extended’ .-. 2:60 3+) sunt!
periods of times Bays ee ee Loge es AS Ae ae

wea 5 > bk, ea del RES REP eee y. gee SOS oy
ara ie Pose loti eet cst ee ails aan eo

ihe i me apt E : ’ 7 eee TRAE Ua a Me eB ge RU ae ‘
Oe iS ie Roeiieied dk ieee aed ee ae he ea el anes woe eb ta e oki tales poked

ect ee ek ee em es eet ek ee oe

Go pT Ge

-b.  Insisting on settlement of any.
.. balance-of-payments surplus with the .,
“United States or the United Kingdom in 2:2 0) -.
- gold and encouraging other nations EO ee
do the same. -Linked to this position 2.7. ° 0°
would be France's insistence on the... 3
right not to accept another nation's oe re
SDR's, if the International Monetary ©; ei oS
PUONe Tatifves Such a plan... Bt the
extreme, France could sell monetary =~.
gold obtained from the United States eee e
at $35 an ounce to private individuals, _
but this practice would create con-
siderable risk of detection if carried
out on any scale.

ec. Encouraging other nations with
whom France has financial or diplomatic
influence to minimize their holdings
of dollars and pounds.

ad. Taking advantage of France's Laots Hest Lee eee
strong reserve position and Common
Market leadership to replace London
in part with Paris as a center for
selling South Africa's gold produc-—
tion. Substantial advantages, how-
ever, still accrue to London and to
Zurich. A parallel effort would be
to make Paris more of a financial ee
center for Western Europe at the
expense of London.

e. Spreading damaging rumors
with respect to the pound and the
dollar. ,

17. There are, however, some major inhibi-
tions and barriers to French action. France
wishes to avoid dismantling the international
monetary machinery because this machinery plays
an important role in promoting international
trade, and in particular France does not want
the dollar devalued’in relation to the franc.
France may, therefore, cooperate to a degree
with the United States and other financial

PS and
Care

vt

om '
eee ees le ee ee ae a a ae eer cere ee ae ar rinses © Saye. a aes eg
~. - A “ — ”

ae er je cee

C.  SgGRET ©

powers to limit speculation in gold and dollars.
French leverage is limited by the fact that French
Gollar reserves are now small and the French
balance of payments is unlikely to be in surplus
for the next year or two. And France cannot
count on having an effective veto power over
aGoption of the SDR scheme. If the United States
takes sufficiently strong monetary and fiscal
action to improve its balance of payments, the
other Common Market countries may support the

SDR scheme in spite of probable French opposition.
