The Situation and Prospects in British Guiana
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119170, dated 3 March 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119170).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

”

SECRGAMOFORN SNIE 87.2-62
. | ee 11 April 1962

a

——

LBJ LIBRARY

7 Mandatory ea
Case # NLJ
SPECIAL | Document #

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
Number 87.2-62

The Situation and Prospects
in British Guiana

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf
11 APRIL 1962

APPROVED FOR RELEASE SECRAMOFORN N? | 2

SEP 11 1897

_ SECRET ORN

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimates. .=200. 372008 er eo

The Central Intelligence “Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, the Army, the > Navy, § the Air Force, The Joint Staff,

Concurring:
2 Director of Intelligence. and Research, Depertment of State

Director, “Defense Intelligence “Agency

_ Assistant, Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army

Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, | USAF so,
Director for. Intelligence, Joint Staff Woe
" Assistant Director, "Federal Bureau “of Investigation’

; Director of the National Security “Agency

secaghoronn

THE SITUATION
AND PROSPECTS IN
BRITISH GUIANA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the short-term outlook for British Guiana,
with particular reference to the political orientation of Jagan
and his party, the likely outcome if new elections were to be
held, and the nature of possible alternatives to the Jagan
government.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Racial conflict is likely to continue to be the basic factor
in the political situation in British Guiana. The two major
political parties represent the nearly equal East Indian and
Negro communities and party rivalry has increasingly taken
on a racial character. The British, who have exercised a
stabilizing influence, will almost certainly withdraw and
grant independence not later than mid-1963, since they ap-
parently foresee strong adverse reactions with unpleasant in-
ternational connotations if they try to extend the period of
their authority in the colony. (Paras. 5, 13-14)

2. Premier Cheddi Jagan and the People’s Progressive
Party (PPP) represent the East Indians, who are more nu-
merous than the Negroes and who have been consolidated
politically by the February 1962 disturbances. Jagan and
the PPP are likely to maintain control of the government,
whether or not new elections are held. However, any one
of a number of likely developments could precipitate another
period of violence. (Paras. 5, 11, 15, 18)

SECR GG AEFORN 1

SECRGSABFORN

3. The PPP leadership has a clear record of Communist
association and of Communist-line policies, but the evidence
does not show whether or to what extent they are under
international Communist control. We believe, however, that
Jagan is a Communist, though the degree of Moscow’s con-
trol is not yet clear. A Jagan government in the postinde-
pendence period would probably follow a policy of nonalign-
ment in international affairs, but would probably lean in
the Soviet direction. Its associations with East and West
would be highly opportunistic and strongly influenced by
its interest in obtaining aid for British Guiana. Its domestic
program would be radically socialist and reformist. (Paras.
6-7, 19)

4. The People’s National Congress (PNC), led by L. Forbes
Burnham, is supported by a large proportion of the Negro
population but by almost no one else. A PNC majority in
the legislature, even with the support of the small United
Force party (UF), is unlikely under presently foreseeable
circumstances. Ifthe PNC were to come to power its policies
would probably be leftist and neutralist, though somewhat
less radical and pro-Bloc than those of the PPP. (Paras.
8-9, 15) .

2 secyganfon

SECREL

FORN

DISCUSSION

I. BACKGROUND

5. For over a decade political life in British
Guiana has been marked by the racial split
between East Indians, who make up about
half of the population, and Negroes, who ac-
count for a somewhat smaller proportion.
The most powerful political force has been
the People’s Progressive Party (PPP), led by
the government’s East Indian Premier, Cheddi
Jagan. The PPP derives its strength mainly
from East Indians, most of whom live in the
countryside, but also has found some support
among the Negroes. In the August 1961 elec-
tion, the PPP won about 43 percent of the
popular vote, thereby gaining a 20-15 ma-
jority in the legislature.! Since the elections
it has demonstrated considerable political in-
eptitude and has failed to make headway
against the enormous economic difficulties of
the colony.

6. On the basis of available evidence, it can-
not be determined whether or to what extent
Jagan and other leading PPP figures are un-
der the control of international communism.
However, Jagan and many of his colleagues in
both the PPP and the government have long
associated with and indeed shown a predilec-
tion for persons and organizations identified
with the Communist cause abroad. A num-
ber of them have traveled to the Soviet Bloc
and to Cuba, where they have made a variety
of official and semiofficial contacts. On occa-
sion, they have publicly espoused the Commu-
nist line. Several of Jagan’s associates in his
party and cabinet have been more clearly
identified as Communists than has he. For
example, Ranji Chandisingh the Minister of
Labor, Health, and Housing, was once a mem-

‘The election in one constituency was set aside by
court decision as a result of irregularity and the
PPP majority is now 19-15.

ber of the British Communist Party, and
Jagan’s wife, J anet, has a long record of Com-
munist association. Jagan has shown himself
to be highly susceptible to influence by his
advisers. In general, the pattern of behavior
of the whole group suggests a deep attraction
to the Communist way.

7. Jagan’s behavior can be interpreted as
that of a national reformer of Marxist persua-
sion who has been led by the assiduous efforts
of Communists to see hope for his country in
Communist programs and associations but
who has not committed himself to the com-
plete discipline of a higher Communist au-
thority. Alternatively, it can be explained
as that of a convinced Communist who pur-
posefully refrains from acknowledging his
commitments and who seeks to maintain a
neutralist posture in order to maximize possi-
bilities for Western aid, secure independence
for British Guiana, and ward off Western in-
terference. We cannot read the evidence to
give conclusive support for either of these two
interpretations. We believe, however, that
Jagan is a Communist, though the degree of
Moscow’s control is not yet clear.

8. The principal opposition party is the
People’s National Congress (PNC) of L. Forbes
Burnham, a Negro who is a radical reformer
and who until 1954 was one of Jagan’s lieu-
tenants in the PPP and an advocate of ex-
tremist measures in government. The PNC
is supported by most of the colony’s Negro
population in the cities (including most gov-
ernment employees) and in the bauxite min-
ing areas. Outside Negro ranks it has vir-
tually no following, and among many middle
class Negroes its support is not firm. In the
1961 election it polled 41 percent of the vote
and won 11 seats in the legislature. PNC
policy has been largely that of opposing the
PPP, What we can say of PNC policy if it

secaggs@fOm 3

secriggoronn

were to form a government must be based
largely on Burnham’s statements and on the
content of his party newspaper. The PNC
in office would probably feature a more mod-
erate policy of domestic socialism than the
PPP. Likewise, in the foreign field it would
also be neutralist but somewhat less pro-Bloc
than the PPP. Burnham has a reputation
for opportunism and venality. His racist
point of view, so evident in the past, forbodes
instability and conflict during any adminis-
tration under his leadership.

9. An additional opposition party is the

United Force (UF), which seeks to be multi- -

racial. It is based largely on the small com-
mercial class (including the Portuguese mi-
nority) which fears that Jagan would trans-
form the country into a Communist state
after independence. It won four seats in the
1961 election. Had the UF not run, the PNC
might have won some of these seats but prob-
ably not all. In any case it would not have
gained a majority.

Il. FEBRUARY RIOTS

10. A tremendous increase in the racial
tension in British Guiana and in the poten-
tial for conflict came as a result of a week of
strikes and riots which shook the capital city
of Georgetown in mid-February 1962. The
immediate cause of the strikes was Premier
Jagan’s budget bill, but the riots were also
rooted in the longstanding racial antagonism
and in the dissatisfaction of many urban
groups, notably public service employees and
businessmen, with the policies of the PPP
government. As the disturbances spread,
they took on the character of a struggle be-
tween the Negro urban community and the
East Indian Government and its rural sup-

porters.

11. Paradoxically, the February crisis
strengthened Jagan by consolidating the sup-
port of his East Indian followers. At the
same time, it reduced his stature and tar-

nished his prestige as a national leader. His
economic and financial problems are more
acute now than before the riots. His govern-
ment is hard pressed to meet current expendi-
tures. Whereas before the riots almost 20
percent of the labor force was out of work, an
even larger number are now unemployed as
a result of the destruction in Georgetown.
Jagan’s plans for economic development have
been set back, partly because he has been
forced to trim his tax measures and partly
because uncertainties about his country’s po-
litical stability are inhibiting the flow of out-
side public assistance, on which development
is heavily dependent. The February events
have discouraged foreign investment.? Ex-
tensive capital flight is in progress and foreign
investors are doing no more than attending
to existing operations. A good many city
merchants, East Indians among them, are in-
clined to cut and run rather than to stay
and rebuild.

12. On the other hand, the crisis also left
the opposition with reduced prestige. Its
several leaders acted recklessly and in the end
tended to neutralize each other. Those un-
ions which are predominantly Negro actively
collaborated with the opposition parties, but .
the rank and file of the largest single union,
chiefly East Indians, did not. There have
been rumors of dissension in the PPP and re-
ports that the opposition might try to win
some of Jagan’s legislators away from him,
but sufficient defections to cause the legisla-
tive defeat of the Jagan government are not
considered probable in the near future under
existing circumstances.

Ill. PROSPECTS

13. The British presence is a check on the
violent political forces that seethe near the

*British foreign investment in Guiana amounts
to between $400 and $500 million and is mainly in
sugar production. Canadian investment (about $80
million) and US investment (about $30 million) is
mainly in bauxite and sugar.

4 seca torn

secygs Moron

surface in British Guiana. British departure
will be the prelude to a period of uncertainty
and possibly of violence during which the
country will be establishing its international
orientation. Nevertheless, the British appear
determined to get out. They are not anxious
to continue to put money into British Guiana,
and they calculate that the present cost to
them of $7 million a year would be increased
to $20 million per annum if they reimposed
direct government. They assert in private
that British Guiana is in the US, not the UK,
sphere of interest and they probably consider
that its future is not properly their problem,
but one for the US. At the same time, Lon-
don is less inclined than is the US to believe
that communism will achieve dominance in
the colony. Finally, it fears that to delay in-
dependence very long would arouse indigna-
tion in many parts of the world where colonial-
ism is a sensitive issue.

14. The British may see fit to hold on for
a time by postponing the May 1962 conference,
which was to have discussed plans and timing
of independence. Even if the conference is
held on schedule, independence may be de-
ferred. Jagan has agreed to an investigation
of the recent riots by a Commonwealth com-
mission, but the the scope of the inquiry is
such that it is not likely to necessitate much
delay. Independence might also be delayed
by the failure of Jagan and opposition leaders
to get together on a new constitution. A vote
of no-confidence in the government could
also hold up proceedings, but we believe that
Jagan will move cautiously on matters of
domestic policy to assure control of his ma-
jority in the legislature. In any circum-
stance, however, we do not anticipate that
the British will delay much beyond the end
of 1962.

15. For any of the above reasons, the UK
may find it desirable to hold new elections.
New elections held on the same basis as were
those in August 1961—with the same parties
and same electoral system—would probably

return a Jagan government again, even in
the face of a PNC-UF electoral coalition. The
PNC is urging a proportional representation
system, under which it believes it could turn
the PPP out, but the latter is unlikely to ac-
cept any form of proportional representation
that would seriously prejudice its electoral
chances.

16. After independence Jagan is unlikely to
be over tender about guarantees of constitu-
tional rights for the opposition. With the
British mediator gone, he will probably seek
to move toward consolidation of his control
over the country. No subsequent election is
likely to be as free as those that were held
under the watchful eye of the British.

17. Nevertheless, Jagan will be under some
restraints not to ride roughshod over the
wishes of the public—Negro as well as East
Indian. The size and potential strength of
the Negro community were well demonstrated
by the February riots, and Jagan will fear to
bring the Negroes into the streets against him
again. He is also aware that the rank and
file of his party—and indeed the East Indian
community as a whole—is not Communist and
may react against unpalatable Communist or
socialist measures. Furthermore, he has the
problem of developing and controlling a se-
curity force. He has apparently been con-
sidering a largely East Indian security force
of some kind, but must be aware of the dan-
gers implict in such a move, especially since
the existing police force is principally made
up of Negroes. Jagan’s impetuous enthu-
siasm for his own reform programs and the
temptation to work through and for the East

‘In addition to the 1,500-man local police, the
security forces in the colony now include a Volun-
teer Guard of about 500, some 200 British troops
normally stationed near Georgetown, and about 600
of those brought in at the time of the disorders.
Jagan has threatened to recruit his own police or to
create a national army and in response the British
are proposing to enlarge the local police by 500.

SECREENEFORN 5

secggPMoronn

Indian community may be moderated by the
realization that, if the country is to be held
together, important concessions must be made
to the Negroes. Still, his recklessness and
impulsiveness are notorious and could at any
time overrule his judgment.

18. We do not believe that we can project
our estimate very far beyond the period of
independence. Jagan will almost certainly
maintain his predominant position in the
PPP, and can probably prevent an opposition
government from taking over. However, any
one of a number of likely developments could
precipitate another period of disturbance like
that of last February. We see no prospect
for a coalition of moderates of both parties
and both races.

19. We believe that a Jagan government in
the postindependence period would be likely
to identify itseli—as it has in the past—with
anticolonialist and independence movements.
It would probably follow a policy of nonalign-
ment and seek to benefit from relations with
both the West and the Communist countries,
but would probably lean in the Soviet direc-
tion. For some time Jagan has been seeking
trade and aid from the West and he has ex-
pressed interest in joining the Organization
of American States and in participating in
the Alliance for Progress. He has also been
seeking trade and aid from the Bloc. He has
just signed a trade contract with East Ger-
many and other deals with Bloc countries are
likely to follow.

6 SECRESIMOFORN

"DISSEMINATION NOTICE

=

lcs 4a. "This index was : disseminated by the ‘Central Intelligence. “Agency. This ae

we ‘copy is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his inal
Lo - jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be a

_ oe authorized by the following officials within their respective departments: oe

®s

“ a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department, of State a
a b. Director, Defense intelligence Agency, for the Offic ice of the Secretary
“3 of Defense . tS Rt
_ ‘Assistant Chief of Staff for lnteligence, Bepariment of ‘the’ “asy, for
io: 7) the Department of the Army oO a oes
" d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations Gniegence), for the  Deprinet ao -, a

{ 57° (7. ef the Navy | ne
e. Assistant Chief of Sto nligence, USAF, for the Department of the -
: Air Force
a, ha Director for Intelligence, Joint staff, for the Joint Staff.
oe, g. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
“h Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

~ ars Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency - .
‘| | j. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department
~ or Agency »

2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

_ _3. When the ‘Index is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
index should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or_per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency t to retain it in accordance
with IAC-D-49/2, 22 June 1953.

; 4, The title of this Index, when used separately from the text should be
classified: FOR See ONLY oo

This material contains information effecting the National Defense of the United
States within the meaning of theMspionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, =
the transmission or revelatigf of which in any manner to an unauthorized person _

is prohibited by law. -

- DISTRIBUTION:
White House
National Security Council

’ Department of State
Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
