-
~~


82


Monday om [-
23 October 1978 a


6. Fotlow-up Action from STC Retreat of 29-30 September


(U) Mr. Hazzard sent a memo te EX0/DDS&T providing NPIC conments on .
the questions resulting from the Q@PRetreat of 29-30 September. All “
the actions pertain to personnel management. a


= 7. Support to Environmental Protection Agency


(U) Mr. Hazzard forwarded a memo to the DoS&T requesting approval for
NPIS te loan four light tables and associated optics to EPA for their —
use in a mapping program. Mr. Hazzard believes this is permissible assistance
*o a non-intelligence Government Agency as provided for in Section 2-309 of


FO 12036. ( 1 Nev
8. Requisition for EX Kodabrume [I Paper


(C) Mr. Hazzard approved the expenditure of for photo supplies.
This is the first FY 79 requisition of photo supplies by ISD/PSG. FY 79
budget provides a total of for this line item.


10. Levinson Seminar


(AlvO) DDSAT Admin reported today that ——- had been selected
as an alternate for the Levinson Seminar to be given in Devember. This
was the result of a selection made by Ofrks of DOS&T candidates. AEM
passed this word on to this afternoon.


. 11. Request froa Cr. , |


CISA) Last Friday RPH ran into Or. qm at Headquarters. Dr.
questioned whether MPIC was utilizing the imagery
Later on F y RPH met with Devall and asked


© IEG to prepare a short memo on what we were getting from this faa . Also
late Friday, Brugfon{ came up with a new rind iin


Monday
( 23 October 1978


wy


15. FOIA - UFO Request


(Al\v0) qyNA reported to AEM this morning that a local radio
station, WPGC, had broadcast today on an alleged UFO sighting in which
NPIC had become involved in 1959. Specifically mentioned were Arthur
Lundah}, the Steuart Building, NPIC and others who are involved in the
current UFO litigation against the Agency. AEH instructed A to
report this to the Office of Public Affairs. AEM also called ACL long
distance at his Michigan summer residence to advise him that this matter
had been aired over the radio today and that he might be in receipt of
some queries as a result.


16. Commendation for bl


( § ) Admiral Robertson, Vice Director for Production, DIA, sent a
letter to the Director, HPIC dated 6 October 78 expressing his appreciation
for the contribution made by of NPIC at the


17. Environmental Protection Agency Request for Support


(13 a Chief, Imagery Services Division, PSG, sent a
memo to the Director, NPIC dated 18 October 1978 stating that on 16
October Mr. Robert Holtz of the Office of Monitoring and Technical
Support R&0/EPA requested seven briefing boards of coverage
from photography.


MPIC was asked to produce
ecause EPA does not have enlarging capability beyond 10%.


it?


o
