Soviet Forced Labor: an Update
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000109013, dated 1 November 1985.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000109013).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

aos os ; , (on) intelligence
Soviet Forced Labor:
An Update
a A Research Paper

ae
Enproved

Dae,

ad for
r

Ralease
MAP 4867:

Directorate of
Intelligence

Soviet Forced Labor:
An Update

A Research Paper

Sec
~OFORN

December 1983

Summary

Information available
as of 30 November 1985
was used in this report.

Sec
YWOFORN

Soviet Forced Labor:
An Update

The Soviet Union maintains a large forced labor system that extends to
nearly every region of the country. In Soviet society. forced labor is not
only a penal system that supports the criminal codes but also a labor
system that supports economic development. Moreover, it serves to intimi-
date Soviet citizens into compliance with Soviet political norms. Because
the forced labor system effectively fulfills these varied functions, it is likely
to continue to play a significant role in Soviet life, and, on the basis of our
analysis of recent trends, we believe it will continue to expand qq

Recent analysis | indicates

that the number of forced laborers has grown from 4 million in the late
1970s to more than 4.5 million and now accounts for 3 percent of the total
Soviet labor force. Over half of the forced laborers are confined—most in
heavily secured camps; the rest, although not confined, are forced to work
on specific projects. Current analysis indicates that:

« The number of prisoners in forced labor camps has increased by 14
percent since 1977, and now accounts for more than 2 million out of the
2.3 million confined forced laborers. The others (250,000) are confined in
urban prisons and colony settlements.

The yearly growth rate of the camp population has averaged 1.9 percent
since 1977—a rate nearly twice that (1 percent) of the total Soviet labor
force over the same period.

New camps are being built primarily in regions undergoing economic
expansion: the Volga, West Siberia, East Siberia, and the Soviet Far
East.

The number of forced laborers who are not confined to camps has
probably increased at nearly the same rate as the number in camps and
now stands at 2.2 million.

Construction and manufacturing are the most prevalent economic activi-
ties for forced laborers, whether in camps or not. The number of forced
laborers engaged in logging has declined slightly, but some are exploiting
new timber areas in East Siberia.

iii ret

December [985

Sec
YOFORN

¢ Forced fabor products include general categories of wood manufactures,
metal parts, construction materials, and a few end products. Forced
laborers are also associated with some specific industries, such as oil,
chemicals, and concrete products; with mining of coal, gold, and other
minerals; and with isolated agricultural products, such as tea—but we
cannot determine the extent of forced labor contribution to specific

industries or export goods Qa”

We estimate that the forced labor camp population grew at a higher annual
rate (about 2 percent) during the period 1977-84 than during 1972-77 (1.5
percent}. We believe this higher growth rate reflects several continuing
economic, political, and social problems and policies:

¢ Soviet labor shortages, especially in unskilled labor or in unattractive and
difficult jobs, have intensified and require increased supplements of
forced labor.

Large-scale construction projects—industries, pipelines, and railroads—
and continuing economic expansion to outlying regions have exacerbated
the labor shortages.

« Campaigns against crime and corruption, begun in the later Brezhnev
years, intensified under Andropov and Chernenko, and continuing under
Gorbachev, have produced more forced laborers and required an expan-
sion of the labor camp network.

Crackdowns on dissidents—refuseniks, human rights activists, religious
nonconformists, minority nationalists—during the same period have also
added to the forced labor population gay

This assessment provides a benchmark at the outset of the Gorbachev era
on which to base future evaluations of the impact of his leadership on one
well-established Soviet institution—forced labor. The paper focuses on the
economic aspects of the system: it updates CIA’s previous estimates of the
Soviet forced labor population and assesses the current use of forced labor

_ in the economy,

Se
FORN

Contents
Page
Summary $ iii
Why a Forced Labor System? 1
Current Assessment of Forced Labor |
Forced Labor Camps 2
Prisons and Colony Settlements 5
Unconfined Forced Laborers 5
Role of Forced Labor : 8
Use of Confined Forced Laborers 8
Manufacturing/Industrial 8
Logging and Wood Processing 10
Construction 10
Mining and Construction Materials 13
Agriculture 19
Use of Unconfined Forced Laborers 19
Living Conditions 2}
Outlook 21
Appendixes
A. Products of Forced Labor Activity 23
B. kz :;~ __

FORN

Crime and New Laws

Crime, by Soviet definition, continues on an upsurge
in the Soviet Union, and the number and length of
sentences meted out to forced labor are also increas-
ing. The USSR Minister of Internal Affairs, V. V.
Fedorchuk, stated in 1984 that some crimes were
increasing, especially economic crimes and violent
crimes aggravated by alcohol. (U)~

Alcoholism—an extremely serious problem in Soviet
Society—is estimated to be involved in more than 50
percent of all crimes committed in the Soviet Union,
according to Fedorchuk. If persons are intoxicated
during the commission of a crime, Soviet courts have
the power to sentence such offenders to longer terms.
In May 1985, the Soviets added legislation making
drunkenness in public places or at work a crime
punishable by imprisonment or by correctional tasks

without confinement.

Economic crimes that divert goods and services from
the state have been highlighted in recent campaigns.
Many people have been arrested and sentenced for
embezzlement, bribery, black marketing, and corrup-
tion, as well as for mismanagement and wastefulness.
Criminal investigatory units and departments for
combating embezzlement of state property have been
Strengthened, but corrupt practices continue. Theft of
industrial and agricultural products and spare parts
is commonplace. Some crimes are committed for
economic survival; managers, for example, frequently
engage in illegal acts in procuring parts or materials,
not for profit but to make the system work. These
crimes are often ignored, but, if brought to light by
informers or audit commissions, can result in crimi-
nal prosecution

Social crimes, under which many forced laborers are
sentenced, are covered by an assortment of Soviet
Statutes. “Hooliganism'—defined broadly as actions
violating public order and expressing a disrespect for
Society—is still the most common crime in the Soviet
Union in terms of sentencing. Parasitism, also listed
as a crime against public order, covers vagrancy,
begging, and evasion of work over an extended period.
Other kinds of individual behavior considered crimes
against the state in the Soviet Union include: voiced

sone -: 2 Lorwrittencriticism against-the state; unauthorized-——dents-are-likewise-vulnerable-tothetaw

residence, internal travel, or requests for emigration;
unregistered religious activities; and unauthorized
assembly. The laws for some of these crimes have
been expanded and strengthened recently

Changes in the Soviet Criminal Code in 1984 broad-
ened the scope of some offenses and increased the -
criminal liability of Soviet citizens. Most notable
were additions to the definitions of treason to include
acts threatening “‘state security" and of state secrets
to include “work-related secrets."’ Almost any politi-
cal offender can now be charged with treason under
the broad Soviet definition of state security; likewise,
unauthorized transmission of almost any kind of
information to foreigners can bring charges under the
concept that the information is a work-related secret.
Another new article to the criminal code simplifies
the procedures for adding a new term to the sentences
of prisoners deemed guilty of “malicious disobedi-
ence’ of forced labor camp regulations, thereby tend-
ing to stifle politically active prisoners or to extend
their incarceration Jag

The wide range of crimes on the books gives the
Soviets ample opportunity to arrest and sentence
individuals. The vast majority of forced laborers are
Sentenced for purely criminal acts, theft of state and
personal property as well as crimes against persons
and destruction of personal property are the most
prevalent crimes following hooliganism. The number
of persons convicted and arrested, however, for cer-
tain crimes, such as hooliganism, often depends on
the Soviet attitude toward combating the crime at a
given time or on the need for laborers in a particular
industry. An emigre lawyer stated that the need for
workers in the Estonian oil shale fields in the late
1960s, for example, led directly to many more arrests
for hooliganism and subsequent sentences to forced

labor in that indus:ry/ QE

Political activists and dissidents are prosecuted for
Serious crimes against the state—anti-Soviet slander
is one of the common charges—as well as for lesser
offenses. They often fall prey to catchall applications
of hooliganism and parasitism laws. Refuseniks—
those who have applied for emigration and have been
refused, sometimes under the guise of possession of
State secrets—are particularly susceptible to parasit-
ism charges because they are often fired from their
jobs or prevented from working in their specialty
fields after applying for exit visas. Religious dissi-

ism because loss of employment is a common form af
Official harassment against them ga

Soviet Forced Labor:
An Updategggg

Why a Forced Labor System?

Forced labor has been an integral part of the Soviet
political and economic scene for more than 50 years.
During this time, other nations have frequently con-
demned the Soviet Union for maintaining a labor
system tantamount to slavery. The Soviets justify the
system on the grounds that corrective labor is the
basic means to reform and reeducate convicted per-
sons and that it reinforces the Soviet collective work
ethic. According to evidence from Soviet emigres and
defectors, forced laborers work and live in inhumane
conditions, dissidents are treated extraordinarily
harshly in forced labor camps, and the general popu-
lace is coerced by the system Gi

The continuing existence of forced labor, despite
international pressures because of human rights
abuses, indicates that the benefits of the system
outweigh the negatives. Forced labor gives the Soviets
flexibility to fill some of their labor needs while
punishing political views and activities unacceptble to
the regime as well as criminal behavior. The Soviets
use forced labor to supplement the regular labor force
in remote and environmentally hostile regions where

Figure 1. Scale model of a
txpical forced labor camp.
assembled according to for-
mer prisoners’ knowledge of

camps. aE

ORN

labor is scarce or expensive to maintain. In economi-
cally developed areas, the Soviets use forced labor to
fill difficult, unhealthy, and debilitating jobs. most of
which involve unskilled manual labor. Although the
productivity of forced laborers is reportedly very low,
their labor helps to offset some of the costs of the

Soviet penal system Sa

Current Assessment of Forced Labor

Our 1985 examination of the Soviet forced labor
system indicates that the total number of forced
laborers has increased to more than 4.5 million—
about half of whom are confined to more than 1,200
heavily secured camps, some 200 prisons, and over 25
colony settlements (figure | and table |

we
estimate that the number of confined forced laborers
totals slightly over 2.3 million, up from 2 million in
the 1970s." Although our estimates of unconfined

Wide World ©

forced laborers are much more tentative, emigre
reporting indicates that the current number has also
increased to an estimated 2.2 million 7 ‘

Forced Jaborers represent a broad cross section of
Soviet citizenry and include men, women, and juve-
niles. The majority are common criminals being pun-
ished for crimes such as theft, assault, rape, and
murder; many are punished for disturbing public
order under laws for “hooliganism.” Others run afoul
of laws criminalizing social behavior unacceptable to
the Soviets. Some are punished for economic crimes,
and even more are thrust into the system as examples
during campaigns of expanded prosecution for corrup-
tion, speculation, or other sublegal practices. Dissi-
dents are constantly under investigation and usually
end up in prisons or in forced labor camps i”

Forced Labor Camps?

? In this report, we use the term forced labor camp for what the
Soviets call a corrective labor colony. Although Soviet laws and
literature emphasize rebabilitative purposes of corrective labor, the
evidence indicates that there is lite rehabilitation other than
political indoctrination and regimentation. We therefore believe
that the term, “forced labor” more correctly characterizes the

syste

The Soviets classify their labor camps under four
confinement regimes—special, strict, intensified, and

general—in decreasing order of severity. Prisoners are
assigned to camps according to the type and criminal
category of the crime committed. Recidivists, danger-
ous criminals, and political prisoners, for example,
draw the special and strict regime camps where the
work and living conditions are the harshest; first-time
offenders and those with lesser sentences go to camps
with intensified and general regimes

All forced laborers are required to work full-time and
to meet assigned goals. Even though the cost of
maintaining the camps, providing the administration,
and maintaining the guard force may be high, the
Soviets recover some of this cost from deductions in
laborers’ wages for upkeep, from the goods produced,
and, indirectly, from the value of the labor expended.
Because most of this activity occurs in areas or on jobs
where normal labor may be considerably more costly

Pages: Fas c +

Exemptions: (b) ( us G) &)

or more difficult to supply, we believe that forced
labor camps yield a slight net gain for the Soviet

Government iam ne

Prisons and Colony Settlements
Prisons and colony settlements also house some forced
laborers. Forced laborers in camps may be sent to

prisons for violating rules or may be transferred to less

onerous colony settlements as a reward for good

behavior

Prisons are the strictest incarceration facilities; they
contain especially dangerous criminals, selected politi-
cal prisoners, and other incorrigibles, as well as
prisoners on their way to distant forced labor camps
and those awaiting trial or already sentenced but
needed as witnesses in other trials. In some of these
prisons, inmates work full-time at small industrial
shops within the compound or in cells set up for
manufacturing small items

We believe that the number of forced laborers in
prisons is small, probably in the 100,000 to 200,000
range

Colony settlements are the mildest form of Soviet
forced labor and add relatively small numbers to the
forced labor population. They operate with minimum
security, which allows the forced laborers some mea-
sure of freedom. Those sentenced to terms at colony
settlements have been convicted of crimes of negli-
gence or unpremeditated crimes carrying lesser sen-
tences or have been transferred from forced labor
camps. Colony settlements consist of enclosed bar-
racks areas, which are often located near forced labor
camps, and they are usually found in outlying regions
undergoing rapid economic development. Inmates are
forced to take designated jobs in the area; but their
restrictions are fewer compared to those in camps, and
they are permitted to leave the settlement compounds
for work and other privileges. With permission from
authorities, families may live with inmates inside the

compound iy .

Soft

From our 1985 survey, we estimate that the identified
colony settlements house about 32,000 forced labor-
ers. A former Soviet lawyer, however, estimated the
population in colony settlements at more than
100,000

We therefore
"believe other colony settlements probably are in the
country and that the number of forced laborers in
them could be close to the estimated 100,000. If $0,
the settlements are likely to be in locations with
forced labor camp concentrations. One such colony
settlement was newly identified adjacent to a forced

labor logging camp in the far northwes (ay

nm

Unconfined Forced Laborers

The use of unconfined forced laborers has grown

rapidly since its inception in 1964 and may now

account for almost half of the country’s forced labor-
ers. The many advantages of using these forced
laborers include:

* Deployment of labor to remate regions where no
work force exists.

+ Establishment of a labor force in northern regions
where wage differentials and incentives required for
free (not forced) workers are extremely costly.

+ Retention of a labor force in regions lacking the
infrastructure and amenities needed to keep free
workers.

* Much lower maintenance costs than at heavily
secured and guarded forced labor camps.

The threat of incarceration in camps may also offer

some incentive for unconfined forced laborers to work

more efficiently than confined laborers. In addition,
although the unconfined forced labor system removes
criminals from the settled regions, it introduces of-
fenders to newly developing regions, where they often

remain after their sentences expire a

By far the largest numbers of forced laborers uncon-
fined are parolees and probationers. When the first
such program was decreed by the Supreme Soviet in
1964, it was limited to prisoners from forced labor

ret

Evolution of Economic Use of Soviet Forced Labor

The forced labor system originated soon after the
1917 revolution as a modification of the prison
system that had existed under the Tsars. At first,
labor was associated mainly with camp upkeep.
However, some camps supplied workers to small
factories and workshops and to the construction
industry, and some prisoners convicted of minor
crimes worked on agricultural state farms. The
overall economic role of forced labor was initially

very small

The decade of the 1930s under Stalin saw the forced
labor system become a significant economic force.
The policy of collectivization uprooted millions of
peasants and added considerable numbers to forced
labor. At the same time, the first five-year plans
made ample use of labor from the system, which had
grown to about 2 million prisoners in the early 1930s.
Forced labor provided the physical labor needed for
large construction projects: canals, railroads, roads,
dams, and industrial construction. There was little
concern for protection of human life and many per-
ished—especially in inhospitable regions. Secured
camps were built along construction routes and at
industrial sites to confine the workers. At this time,
large numbers of forced laborers were used in ex-
panding the timber industry in the northern regions.
Timber and wood products were in high demand in
the expanding economy and, as a valuable export,
earned the Soviets much-needed foreign exchange

In addition, the Soviets used increasing numbers of
forced laborers in mining operations—especially in
the huge undertaking to develop the gold fields of the
Kolyma River area in northeastern Siberia. The
Soviet need for gold, for its purchasing power and as
an export, coincided with the availability of a large
and expendable labor force. Cruel treatment, inade-
quate food, the frigid cold, and damp working condi-
tions produced a high-mortality rate for these forced
laborers—estimated at more than 3 million during

ret

the 15- to 20-year period of intensive operation.
During the same time, the mining of coal, iron ore,
and other valuable minerals by forced laborers, while
second in magnitude to gold, probably contributed
considerably to the expansion of the Soviet heavy

industry

During World War II, large numbers of foreigners—
Poles, Balts, Romanians, and other displaced per-
sons—were deported to the Soviet forced labor sys-
tem or to forced settlement in outlying regions.
According to thousands of reports from Poles who
were released from camps to join allied fighting
forces in 1942, their labor covered almost every
economic activity: lumbering; construction of dams,
factories, and pipelines; mining of iron, coal, various
nonferrous metals, and nonmetallic minerals; main-
taining and building roads, railroads, and canals; and
working in machine shops, construction materials
plants, ore-processing industries, and oilfields. They
mainly performed manual labor, including loading
and unloading, earthmoving, and land clearing.
Later, German prisoners af war were added to the
forced labor system along with various non-Russian
minorities (Volga-Germans, Tatars, Checheno-
Ingush, Kalmyks, and Karachi} who were accused of
collaboration with the Germans. A total of some 15
million forced laborers, estimated in 1947 when the
system reached its peak, worked to reconstruct the
Soviet economy

With three decades of experience in use of confined
forced laborers, the Soviets instituted programs for
unconfined forced laborers in the mid-1960s. Selected
prisoners were released from confinement to complete
their sentences at large construction projects. Anoth-
er program involved sentencing selected criminals
directly to unconfined labor on major projects. These
programs eliminated or drastically reduced overhead
costs for facilities, food, and administration a

Figure 3
USSR: Annual Population
Growth Rates

Percent
2.0 Forced laborers in camps’
(2.06 million esi. 1985)
5
1.0 Total population
(276.3 1 Jan 1985)
Tota! tabor force”
0.5 (152.6 million 1985)

1 i b L L

0 197273 74 15 16 17 78 19

+ Average growth rate between surveys.
* Includes military and civilian.

80 8I 82 83 84

emigre recently estimated the number of persons in

this type of unconfined forced labor at 100,000.

Role of Forced Labor

Forced laborers make up an increasingly important
segment of the Soviet labor force in many areas and
industries. During | January 1977 to 1 January 1985
the total labor force grew from 140 million to [52
million—an 8.9-percent increase—while the forced
labor component confined in camps increased by an
estimated 14 percent and the total forced laborers by
an estimated 12 percent (figure >

We believe that more than half of the forced laborers
in camps work in manufacturing; others are engaged
in logging, wood processing, and construction. To a
lesser extent, forced laborers are involved in mining
operations and in agricultural labor. Large-scale con-
struction projects probably continue to draw heavily
from the unconfined forced laborers

Use of Confined Forced Laborers
On the basis of our sample survey, the use of forced
labor in camps has increased in all economic catego-
ries except logging since 1977 (table 3)

Manufacturing/ Industrial, Manufacturing uses the
largest number of confined forced laborers—1.2 mil-
lion in 732 camps—and has had the largest increase
since 1977. According to our 1985 survey, three-
fourths of the increase is accounted for by expansion
of older camps located in industrialized regions

camps, some of whom were designated eligible for
conditional release (parole) from confinement to finish
out their sentence in compulsory labor at construction
sites. On the basis of fragmentary data from former

‘ prisoners and Soviet lawyers. we estimate that about

one-half of all persons under confinement are paroled
before the end of their terms to serve an average of
two years as unconfined forced laborers. The number
of parolees has always been difficult to estimate, but
it has probably increased from the £00,000 estimated
in 1981 by various emigre and academic sources.
Recently, a knowledgeable emigre estimated that the
number of parolees working in obligatory labor would
be greater than 500,000. We believe that the current
total ranges from 500,000 to 600,000, and, if the
number of parolees from camps has risen in propor-
tion to the increase in camp population noted earlier,
the most likely estimate is near the midpoint of this

‘one

Sentences of probation with compulsory labor have
been increasing steadily since a 1970 Supreme Soviet
decree authorized courts to issue them as an alterna-
tive to confinement. As a result of a growing trend
cited by Soviet emigres with legal backgrounds, we
estimated that by the early 1980s about half of the

~t

sy

ocret

ss,

criminal court cases resulted in sentences to comaul-
sory Jabor without confinement. Given the recent
expansion in forced labor camps as an indicator and
the continuance of anticrime and anticurruption cam:
paigns, we believe that the number of probationers
probably has risen correspondingly. Our estimate of
1.8 million in 1981-

to about 1.6 mill
calculated at an anaual growth reve comparable +
that a: - ' at camps

The third type of forced labor without confinemes*
adds very little to the economic advantages of the
system. Termed correctional tasks without deprivation
of freedom, this aspect of the Soviet system permits
sentencing of persons convicted of certain minor
erimes to work at reduced (5 to 20 percent) wages
either at their regular jobs or at other designated
places within their district of residence, which allows
them to live at home. This type of punishment gives
the Soviets a supplemental labor resource to be
directed where needed within an urban area. A Soviet

s

Sphret

Figure 3
USSR: Annual Population
Growth Rates

Percent

2.0 ST mnenone—= Forced laborers in camps
(2.06 million est. 1985)

13

1.0 Total population
{276.3 | Jan 1985)
Total labor force?

0.5 (152.6 million 1985}

. i t 1 : i : . j
9 4972 73 74 7§ 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84

4 Average growth rate between surveys.
Includes military and civilian,

a

emigre recently estimated the number of persons in
this type of unconfined forced labor at 100.000. |g

Role of Forced Labor

Forced laborers make up an increasingly important
segment of the Soviet labor force in many areas and
industries. During | January 1977 to | January 1985
the total labor force grew from 140 million to 152
million—an 8.9-percent increase—while the forced
labor component confined in camps increased by an
estimated 14 percent and the total forced laborers by
an estimated 12 percent (figure > i

We believe that more than half of the forced laborers
in camps work in manufacturing; others are engaged
in logging, wood processing, and construction. To a
lesser extent, forced laborers are involved in mining
operations and in agricultural labor. Large-scale con-
struction projects probably continue to draw heavily
from the unconfined forced laborers

Use of Confined Forced Laborers

On the basis of our sample survey, the use of forced
labor in camps has increased in all economic catego-
ries except logging since 1977 (table 3)

Manufacturing / Industrial. Manufacturing uses the
largest number of confined forced laborers—1.2 mil-
lion in 732 camps—and has had the largest increase
since 1977. According to our 1985 survey, three-
fourths of the increase is accounted for by expansion
of older camps located in industrialized regions

Pages: I

Exemptions: 0) Ki 1G)

throughout the Soviet Union. To accommodate more
prisoners at old camps, the Soviets built additional
barracks or additions to existing barrac

The remaining one-fourth of the confined forced
laborers added in manufacturing are in new camps
near large cities outside the Central Industrial Region
and the industrialized Ukraine: Petrozavodsk and
Novgorod in the northwest, Yoshkar-Ola and Novo-
cheboksarsk in the Volga region, Kyshtym in the
Urals, Nizhnevartovsk in West Siberia, Ulan Ude in
East Siberia, and Khabarovsk and Ussuriysk in the

Soviet Far East

The distribution of new camps may indicate that
certain regions lack sufficient numbers of forced
laborers for their industrial base or that expanding
industries warrant a new influx of forced laborers.
Workers from some of the new camps probably
provide secondary support—making parts or compo-
nents for larger industries located nearby or using
byproducts from main industries for their own manu-
facture. Construction in 1979 of a camp at Novoche-
boksarsk, for example, probably has some association
with the nearby chemical plant—the only industry in
the city. A new camp in the heart of Yoshkar-Ola has
its own secured industry but is squeezed between two
other factories to which it may be subordinat

GE Two new camps on the outskirts of Khabarovsk
supplement other forced labor camps in the same
area, indicating that the existing industries can em-
ploy additional numbers of forced laborers. In fact,
one camp is built on the site of a former secured

working ci

Logging and Wood Processing. Most of the 400,000
prisoners associated with logging and primary wood
processing work at the 275 forced labor camps focated
at the southern edge of dense taiga forests in the
northern part of the European USSR and the north-
ern Urals. This concentration may be changing some-
what, however, as the timber industry of East Siberia
expands and the logging areas of European USSR
contract. In the relatively new areas, the past pattern
of forced labor usage seems to be repeating itself. For
example, in the outermost areas where felling and
hauling timber takes place, 10 or more camps are not
unusual within an area of a few thousand square
kilometers. In these areas, camps are built as logging

areas expand and are abandoned as timber is deplet-
ed. Camps at sawmills and transshipment points
phase out only after the entire area is logged out.

ef

Forced laborers are most often used in the timber
industry where transportation access is available or
where large timber stands permit concentrations of
prisoners in one general area. Consequently, most
seem to arrive only after the facilities, and especially
the ‘transportation access, are well established. This
may be the case in East Siberia where an area north
of an old section of the Baikal-Amur Mainline (BAM)
from Tayshet to Ust’-Kut is the scene of extensive
timber exploitation in virgin pine, fir, and spruce
forests. Some forced labor camps were already in
place in 1977—a particularly large concentration of
camps stretches along a branch line north from
Nizhnyaya Poyma near Tayshet—and the influx in
this sector of East Siberia has increased during the
last few years. Five new camps for timber exploitation
have been identified since 1977. Four of these are in
areas that have never had forced laborers: Nifant-
*yeva near Yeniseysk at the junction of the Yenisey
and Angara Rivers, Ust’-Ilimsk and Kezhma on the
Angara, and Novoselovo—the first camp along the
new section of the BAM located midway between
Ust’-Kut and Lake Baikal. The camp under construc-
tion at Novoselovo is adjacent to a huge secured and
tail-served area possibly destined to be a timber
processing center iy If the usual pattern of
forced labor use in the timber industry follows at
Novoselovo, we expect that several forced labor camps
will be built in the surrounding area to supply the
Novoselovo focal point with logs for processing and
for subsequent transport via the BAM

Construction. One of the most common and probably
more effective uses of forced laborers is in the con-
struction industry. The forced labor system has sup-
plied manual labor to build long-distance pipelines
and canals, large-scale industries, and urban struc-
tures. [It has given the Soviets a supplemental labor
pool in regions where the conditions choke off the
normal labor supply. About 160 camps with nearly

Exemptions: °2

240.000 prisoners are associated with construction
either as a sole or secondary function ~

Urban construction projects using forced laborers
include apartment buildings, hotels, and government
office buildings. Occasionally, entire new cities have
been constructed using forced labor: Shevchenko, the
site of a nuclear-powered desalinization plant on the
Caspian Sea; Navoi, the petrochemical city in the
natural gas region of Soviet Central Asia; and Maga-
dan, the main support city for resource development
in the Far Northeast. One camp at Shevchenko,
which was barely under construction in 1977, now
houses some 3,000 prisoners; in all, there are more
than 20,000 forced laborers in the city, most of whom

are engaged in construction projects I

Other forced labor camps associated with urban
construction spring up in established cities undergoing
expansion or developing new industries. Such is the
case with new construction camps at Karshi in Soviet
Central Asia, Yoshkar-Ola in the Volga-Vyatka re-
gion, and Chernogorsk in East Siberia. A new camp
built in the 1980s at Volodarskoye in Kazakhstan
“provides laborers for several secured
housing and industrial construction sites nearby.

_ CU

Industrial construction is another major occupation
for forced laborers. Two newly identified forced labor
camps were recently found at large industrial con-
struction sites: at an airframe plant across the Volga
River from Ul yanovs ‘and at a petroleum
refinery at Neftezavodsk on the edge of the Karakum
desert in Turkmenia . Some forced labor
camps identified during the construction phase at a
large industry remain after construction is completed;
prisoners probably perform maintenance or low-level
repair work rather than skilled work in the industry.

Transportation construction projects may use some
confined forced laborers for preliminary clearing op-
erations within the local area of their camps. Howev-
er, the absence of new forced labor camps along
construction routes of major railroads and pipelines
indicates a change from previous years, when such
laborers were used almost exclusively in large projects

13

Socfet

to build the Baltic-White Sea and Volga-Don canals
and the northern ratlroad to Vorkuta. Now, uncon-
fined forced laborers are available for this work.

Mining and Construction Materials. Mineral extrac-
tion and processing, once major forced labor endeav-
ors, now use a smaller but economically important
number of prisoners. From ouqg surveys, we
have located 128 camps adjacent to mining or mineral
processing areas where several important metals anda
variety of construction materials are being worked
(appendix A). We estimate that these camps house
180,000 forced laborers. In the absence of other
industry or economic activity in the immediate area,
we assume that these forced laborers work in the
mines or support mining operations. A Soviet engi-
neer, who recently worked at the bauxite mining trust
in Severoural’sk, reported in 1985 that prisoners did
not operate the mines but were used in auxiliary work
on the surface, such as cutting timber gy

Several new forced labor camps of this type have been
recently identified; two of them provide some insight
into the increased need for construction materials in
the Soviet economy. A camp in the late stages of
construction is located at a huge limestone extracting
and processing complex at Vasalemmia in Estonia
GN, Thc camp as it now stands adds more than
1,700 prisoners to the work force of nearly 3,500
forced laborers at two other nearby camps, making
this one of the largest concentrations of forced labor-
ers in the country. The limestone is crushed for
toadbeds or processed into cement. Another new
forced labor camp at Kharp, in the far north on the
railroad to Labytnangi, is located next to a crushed
rock and gravel plant. Kharp is one of the few sources
in West Siberia for this commodity, which is needed
for constructing railroads, roads, and structures serv-
ing the expanding oil and gas industry of West
Siberia. Arctic climate, isolation, and strenuous work
make Kharp a natural site for forced labor; these
conditions typically do not attract free labor.

Pages: LY -

Exemptions: (b) 4) C )

Agriculture. We can identi{ QM few forced
labor camps associated with agricultural production.

This category is limited to-camps sited in the midst of
agricultural fields where no other economic activity
occurs. A notable example is the tea plantations of the
Transcaucasus rein iy where we assume
that the forced laborers maintain the bushes or har-
vest and process the leaves. A former Soviet lawyer
with knowledge of the penal system reported in 1981
that prisoners at Gali in the Georgian SSR worked
chiefly on tea cultivation. Several reports show an
indirect connection between forced labor and agricul-
ture: a former prisoner at a camp near Astrakhan’
reported that his camp made crates for packing and
shipping locally grown fruits and vegetables.

We estimate that only about 27,000 forced laborers
from 21 forced labor camps engage in agricultural
work. This probably reflects the lack of need for labor
in this economic activity, as well as Soviet reluctance
to place prisoners near food products because control
of food rations is a major way of punishing and
rewarding prisoners’ work and behavior. Most of these
camps are located in the southern part of the country.
Although expansion occurred in five of the 11 camps
surveyed, we identified no new agricultural camps

during is | 9S 5 Ss

Use of Unconfined Forced Laborers

The Soviets use this large and mobile labor force
widely in construction and industry. Reports from
emigres indicate that unconfined forced labor is dis-
patched to virtually every kind of major construction
project in the country, but especially in labor-deficient
and hardship areas. These laborers are used mostly as
unskilled workers in building large industria! plants;
some, such as engineers and technicians, even work in
their specialties. Others work on large-scale housing
projects, major railroads, and cross-county pipelines.
In addition to clearing the right-of-way and preparing
access roads, parolees and probationers have been
used to prepare sites and build compressor stations for
major pipelines. A former Soviet engineer reported in
1985 that unguarded forced laborers from a nearby

19

colony setllement built compressor stations at Ivdel’
on the export gas pipeline (ay

Unconfined forced laborers—often called khinuki
(chemists) because they were sentenced to construc-
tion sites of chemical plants during the inception of
the program—frequently make up much of the un-
skilled labor force at construction sites. Emigres
reported that thousands of these forced laborers were
used in building the Kama truck plant at Brezhnev
(formerly Naberezhnyye Chelny). The reports also
cited large forced labor usage—probably unconfined
laborers because no camps were found along its
route—tin construction of the BAM, which is opening
access to the resources of East Siberia

Besides construction activities, the Soviets sometimes
assign unconfined forced laborers directly to large,
labor-intensive industries. Reinforced concrete prod-
ucts plants routinely employ these forced laborers,
according to a former Soviet engineer/economist.
because the difficult and low-paying work does not
attract enough free labor. A former Soviet lawyer
reported in 1980 that nearly all probationers sen-
tenced at Rostov-na-Donu were assigned to work in
the agricultural machinery plant, most of those at
Taganrog worked at a combine plant, and a large
number of probationers at Novocherkassk were as-
signed to a synthetic materials plant or to an electric

locomotive plant RE

Given Soviet labor shortages, especially in the eastern
regions, we expect the uses of unconfined forced
laborers to grow. These laborers partly fill the need
for manual laborers, a resource that is becoming
scarce as the population becomes more educated and
fewer people accept unskilled jobs. Unconfined forced
labor has several advantages: for the Soviet construc-
tion and industrial managers, it provides a source of
labor for difficult and unattractive jobs; for the
convicted persons, it offers a way to work off sen-
tences outside the harsh confines of the camps: and
for the Soviet regime, it provides an economically
efficient way to effect punishmen Ugg”

Pages: 2. 220
Exemptions: (4 Yi i) AG)

Living Conditions

Much of the information from former prisoners reaf-
firms that the Soviets maintain abominable living and
working conditions for forced laborers in camps and
violate basic human rights through policies that debil-
itate and degrade prisoners. Moreover, the camps are
a tool of repression, representing the threat of harsh
confinement for the Soviet populace as well as for
forced laborers not in camps. Unconfined forced
laborers fare slightly better, because they have some
choice in acquiring food and they live and work under
less oppressive conditions iy

In many manufacturing industries, prisoners endure
hazardous and unventilated surroundings: they often
operate defective machinery and wear no protective
gear. A 1983 report from a camp at an East Siberian
sawmill described daily accidents with power saws. In
his testimony before a US Congressional Subcommit-
tee in 1983, Georgy Davydov, a former Soviet prison-
er, cited frequent use of defective and poorly timed
punch presses or lathes and grinding tools having no

safety devices I

Working hours often exceed the normal workday
prescribed for Soviet forced laborers. Even though the
eight-hour day, six-day week work schedule is estab-
lished by Soviet law, some camp officials extend the
forced labor workday to 12 hours and work prisoners
on free days to meet production goals. Travel time to
worksites, which in some logging and construction
areas can be lengthy, adds several hours to the
workday. Moreover, some prisoners are forced to
extend their working hours to fulfill unrealistic pro-
duction quotas required to get full food rations i

The Soviet climate and terrain also add to the miser-
ies of forced laborers, especially in the cold and
swampy northern regions. Reports from former pris-
oners indicate that they work in almost all weather,
often without adequate clothing, boots, and gloves to
protect them against frigid temperatures. Sometimes
punishment involves prisoners being placed in isola-
tion cells without adequate clothing, according to an
inmate in 1983. The combination of exposure, un-
healthy working environment, and insufficient food
produces a high incidence of disease among prisoners,

21

Socfet

especially pneumonia, tuberculosis, ulcers, and other
gastrointestinal disorders. Medical treatment for
them is of marginal quality and is often arbitrarily
applied. Within the last few years, several dissidents.
who as a group generally receive the harshest treat-
ment in camps and prisons, have died as a result of
improper medica! care or a denial of treatment jj

Inadequate food stands out as one of the most inhu-
mane and widespread features of the forced labor
system. The insufficient supply and the extremely
poor quality of food help to keep the cost of camp and
prison operations at an absolute minimum. Moreover.
the Soviets deduct the cost of food, as well as clothing
and camp maintenance from prisoners’ wages. When
prisoners fail to meet assigned work quotas or violate
camp rules, the authorities reduce the already meager
food rations. A former prisoner described the strict
regime diet as “disguised starvation. (i

Cruel treatment at the hands of camp officials,
guards, and other prisoners adds another dimension to
the punishment of forced laborers. Beatings for minor
camp infractions or for inability to perform work are
not unusual: sometimes they occur at the whim of
sadistic guards and officials. Among prisoners, cruelty
and quarrels arise over space, clothing, and food; in
1985 an imprisoned refusenik at an East Siberian
camp described beatings of new prisoners by other
prisoners as a routine occurrence. This physical abuse
in an environment of overwork and lack of proper
nourishment often makes life so unbearable that
forced laborers protest by sabotaging industrial ma-
chinery or—in extreme cases—by committing acts of
self-mutilation or suicide Jj

Outlook

We believe that the size of the Soviet forced labor

population in the Soviet economy will continue to

increase at about the same rate as in recent years

because:

+ Campaigns against crime, corruption, alcoholism,
and slack labor performance provide a pool of forced
laborers.

Spot ae

¢ Difficulty in attracting free labor to unskilled jobs
in construction and resource development projects in
less developed regions of the country will maintain
the pressure to use forced laborers.

+ The use of unconfined forced laborers is an econom-
ical approach to punishment that supplements free
labor in selected industries.

* The underlying economic and political rationale for
the system has not been undermined to any signifi-
cant degree by international human rights
pressures.

The concentration of forced labor in the construction

and manufacturing industries will probably continue

because it has proved most useful to the economy.

Other uses of forced laborers—in logging, wood pro-

cessing, mining, and agriculture—are likely to persist,

although their contribution to the economy will re-

main secondary iy

Although the above assessment represents our best
estimate of the future direction of Soviet forced labor.
we recognize that changes in political or economic
policies under Gorbachev could directly or indirectly
affect the numbers and uses of forced laborers in the
near future:

« A drastic deterioration in political stability within
the Soviet Union requiring purges and mass arrests,
although unlikely, would cause the forced labor
population to rise sharply.

« The numbers of forced laborers could surge if a
need for natural resources forced the Soviets to
initiate extraordinarily large economic expansion
efforts in remote and undeveloped areas, where the
labor force is minimal and the acquisition of free
labor is costly.

An overall reduction in the forced labor system is
least likely. The need for forced laborers in the
economy would decline in the highly unlikely case
that Gorbachev's economic reforms reduce poor per-
formance and absenteeism, increase worker produc-
tivity, and produce more positive attitudes among the
rank and file. Likewise, the introduction of liberal

reforms, changes in laws, or authentic amnesties,
although unlikely, would lower the numbers of forced
laborers in much the same way it did for a short
period during the Khrushchev era following the harsh

Stalinist limes

22

Appendix A

Products of Forced
Labor Activity

It is difficult to determine how products of forced
labor are used or to quantify their value to any one

Information on specific products
manufactured by forced !aborers can only be obtained
from former Soviet citizens who either worked in
camps or were associated with them as guards or

drivers a

Information on products produced by forced laborers
has been sketchy at best and does not permit a
definitive picture of the scope of their involvement.
Often manufacturing camps have a working relation-
ship with large factories outside the forced labor
system; Camps produce and send component parts to
the factories for use in final products we cannot
identify. At other times, the end product—for exam-
ple, a generator or transistor—is produced, but there
is no indication how the product will be used 7

23

Little is known about the destination, or markets, for
specific products made by forced laborers. Some
former prisoners have indicated that their Output goes
to domestic outlets; rarely do they cite export markets
for their products. One former prisoner reported that
clothing made in camps is mostly of poor quality and
is sold only on the domestic market; others have stated
that some sewn goods—clothing, underwear, gloves,
and boots—are made for other forced laborers. Some
furniture, one of the most common forced labor
products, is produced for use in barracks or other
buildings of camps. More often, forced labor products
or components are sent to unknown destinations for
finishing or for further assembly. Frequently, prison-
ers make nondescript boxes or containers for shipping
a variety of products that probably are used through-
out the country. Raw materials—including minerals,
building materials, and lumber—may be the most
valuable forced labor output. We have no way to trace
the transport of these commodities; they could go to
Soviet enterprises or could be mixed with similar

items destined for expor UE

po
Pages:

ions:__ (5)G) B) 3)
Exemptions:

Economic Activity Involving Forced Labor

Manufacturing

« Parts and components-—agricultural machinery;
auto batteries, gear sets, mufflers, parts, radiators,
starters, tires; battery cases and parts: boilers;
capacitors; compressors, electric motors and
pumps, filters; hydrofoil parts; lathe parts, milking
machinery; molds and dies; oil; pump valves; pipes
and pipe fittings; pump parts; radio components,
housings, and parts; tape recorder cables; television
cabinets; tractor generators and parts; truck parts;
and water valves.

* End products—agricultural tools; ashtrays; bags of
cloth, paper, tarpaulin, woven material; barbed
wire; bed frames; bedsheets; boots, boxes of card-
board and wood; bricks; brooms; buttons; cash
registers; chemicals; chess sets; clocks; clothes; coat
hangers; concrete posts; cots; dishes; disks for agri-
culture; doors; drawer pulls; electric irons, heaters,
and outlets; elevators; fans; fertilizer; flourescent
lights; floorboards, furniture; glass chandeliers;
gloves; iron cutters; lamps and light fixtures, lids
for glass jars; locks; lumber; mattresses and
springs; mobile kitchens, nails; office safes; paper
products; picture frames; ranges and hot plates;

tents and tent trailers; toys; wooden barrels, door-
frames, handles, railroad ties, souvenirs, tables,
and wagons; watches; and zippers.

Construction

¢ Industrial planis—airframes, brick cement, chemi-
cal, concrete products, oil refinery, plastics, and
rubber.

«© Other facilities—apartments, bridges, dams. hospi-
tals, hotels, livestock complexes, pipelines, rail-
roads, and roads.

Mining

Asbestos, bauxite, clay, coal, gold, granite, gravel,
iron ore, limestone, manganese, molybdenum, peat,
sand, silver, stone, stone block (coquina}, and
uranium.

Industry

Agricultural machinery, concrete products, electric
locomotives, oil refinery, plastics, steel, and
synthetics.

Agriculture
Reeds and tea.

shoes; soap dishes; stoves; tanks for crop spraying; fa oo

25

Exemptions: (S) (i) &) (3)
