Possible Developments in the Trials of Oleg Penkovskiy and Greville Wynne
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012374, dated 5 April 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012374).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

3 A
PT tn Fw bere” G6 VY
3 May 1963

MEXOBRANDUM FORt Director. of Ceatral Iatelligence
SUBJECT: ss Possible Developrents in the Trials

countereazction,

ee ‘Stipizes sod maxiaun variants in Soviet prepagenda
oitetion: ; ae ae

ah ap is Hinines sxpleitetion:. If £he Seviet govern
mont: so deciges, it -¢an: try. @yane aad fenkovskiy separately,
the Jatter ins ciosed trial with no-publicity excezt for
Gh. enkouncesent of the -yerdict.ead sentence. The Soviets
committed theeseives, hoveyer, te an spen trial fer ¥ynne
whesn they chose: to cover his kidsappiny froa Hungary es an
eatraditien action. (Recent press reports heave specificaliy
engeunced that the “rane.trisl-wild be spex,) iIa this ninisus
publicity variant, Penkorskiy weuld probably act appear as «
witness din Wynae’s trinl and antielb. 5. and U. K. propaganda
would be Jinited, The Us 8. officials already. naned by tie:
Sovist press bat still ie. Hoscow. (Nontgenery, Oavison. and.
Gervan} might wot. be declared: persona non grata..

— pha, Mezaepe 2 repetense exploitation: «at the other
@exttenc, a. fuil show trisl- cou @ staged to provide ‘aaxiour

publicity te the exposure ef American and british esplosare
activity ageiast-the USSR, Here, Peukovskiy woald probably
eppesr as a witness in open court and aight sven be tried
befers: the save court or at a concomitant trial, In such a
Case, we expect that besides the U. S. officials already naced
in the pre-trial pobiieity, &ritish iavolvomext. would be. .
Spelled out in appreprigts detalii; Penkovskiy's case officers
would be identified {two of thes, Joseph J. Bulik and Rodney
He, Carison, have served inthe USSR
ond Suiik has since travelled there:

3 and eather eviderce in Sevier hands could

@ sursaced.: {for exanpia, the full toxt ef the letter we
wrote Fenkovakiy.in July 1962, of which a seajl part was
- printed in the Soviet press in Wovesber 1962, contains accon-
modation addrosses and taiephone uusbers in the U, 5S, and

in the U. K.) PHS action against ali isplicated American

re

4.8(a)(4)

feo
2! ss

and British officials still in Moscow vould aluost certainly
follow such a trigl.° It should be aoted, however, that
beyond providing extensive documentation to the charge that
a-high-eranking Soviet efficial cousitted esplonage in behalf
ef ‘8. S.'and British intelligence, there is titrie that could
be exposed in the trial, ‘Without extensive fabrication, alle-
gations of sabotage, assassination, covert political actioa,
etc., would be extremely difficult to substantiate cone |
vVincingly. =. ae. os

oe Review of ‘Probabilities: . Available evidence is.
insufficient to predict which COtirse of action the Soviets
will ‘choose ptarmis 8 Tecunt Moscow reports tead to indicate
that the stage is being set ‘for an Open, maxinua publicity
triai. (The ‘hati reportedly reserved for the trial of ¥ynue
has & seating ‘capacity of 360 und it Ass been announced that
the trial will be opon.) There 4s Some reason to think that
there have ‘been ons ‘or wore changes ‘of plan OY at least of |
timing since the case was ‘discovered dy Soviet authorities.
The initind burst of publicity in Neveuber and December |

1962 was: abruptl cut off; the Jong delay in bring Wynne

te triel cannot be explained by the need to couplete the pre-
trial investigation (fron the counterespionage point of view,
much of the investigation had te be done before the trap was
sprung en Richard Jacob on 2 Novexber 1962); pre-trial publicity
and bulidup (surfacing of the Popov and Olge Raue cases, etc.)
has been sporadic and diffuse, something very uncharacteristic
for the usuaily weli-ciled Soviet Propagands machine. Gne
possibile explanation is that the Soviets have had second
thoughts about the possible adverse effects that the
publicity of the Penkovskiy case might have on the Soviet
military establishient in connection with the recerat deportart
personnel changes in ths allitary hierarchy (the diszissal

and apparent arrest of General Serev, the replacezont of
Warshal Zakharov, etc.) ; .

4, Evaluation of propaganda imnact of Trial: Whatever
course of action the Soviets secon. TE appears that the aynne
aad Penkovskiy trials will present nore problems to the
Soviets than to us. As far as U. S, involvenent is concerned,
the Soviets have already fired their biggest guns in the
publicity following the detention of Richard Jacob; they can
use the trial to docuzent their Charges, but, they cannct add
anything substantially new by way of exposure. The British
situation is rather different in this Tespect. Sesides xyane
hiaself, thus far there have only besn vague allusions to ths

pe | ;

role played by Sritish officials in the case, synne is in
a position to iuplicate three or feur HI-6 efficers by truc
name aud the revelation that the prezgaant wife of s Sritish
Ewbassy efficer.was used for clandestine strect aectings
with an espionage agent azy weil have a sirony cfiect on 8
British press still smarticg from the trestwent it received
frow the Radcliffe Tribunsi. a 2

Sa «=mpact_ ef the Trial ja the Soviet Union: From
the Sovist aatat Gr view, the probiems presented by the
Penkovskiy afieir are such scre serious anc farereachizg,
For one thing, in teras of dauaze to Sovict saticaal
security, the case is unprecedented in classical espionage
kistery. It will be tremendously damaging to those whe kre
heid. responsible and since. Penkevshiy’s circle of friends,
patrons, and wavitting eccouplices was large and highly
piaced, the struggie to escape or affix respousibility
could. assume considerable proportions. Although it is
true thet this, struggle would take place in any event, s
goblic airing of the Pankeyskiy affair, no matter hou
carefully the facts are asnipulated, is bound to fced oxygen
to flanas thst are already rasching dangerously high. —

Richard Helus
Geputy Director (Plans)

Attachnent —

deve lopuants during the trial way rule out the actual use of
uy or all-ef the Saterizls now being propared, prteparaticy
is -andervay to ensure that if it ts desired to daplesecat the
plaas, the materia! will be at hacd to deo son .

1, General « Tatecy: The Purrose of eur counter-
Propagands © itt bets ~SaPhEsL ie the Pol lowing Pelats:

the Conauntst Party and the Soviet Security police, which has
salied the wilitary stuce isis,

ba
Soviet. internal le fais sy ther bave developed siace tha’
Cuban crisis in the fall of 1862. the failure ef Sevier
policy, bork toned af jtEd_fe
reatly he htezed ‘zt ‘teas longs mong the Sorfer leaders,
Pexkovakir is 2 pawn ine desdly cave of letrizue new being
plsyed saong yar ous Tections in the Sevlet leadership,
Although only x: :
eagipulators, it Sees “likely that the career officers of
arned ferces and the ailitery intelligences Service are |

the most likely Sargets. It ould he the Curtain raiser in
& cenpaion Ita Sos treyet sereaent Seview ailitary Jeattiatt,
the. way Palin ‘destroyed Tukhschevshiy snd kis Coherts ja
; . Se Ae OS ; a“

this trial skowld be Viewed in the context of

rectly reret, sethough 1 Bhould be handled as a matter not
direétly relevant to the: Peakovskiy case the threat to the
$X¢e werld of 3 shenia eget gence Operations aud Soviet mitt.
tary. intentions shoul i =

i A ote, JGetdeabaeg ans pestrictions for Publicity: These
Plans have Boca drawn up with the fellowing guldelines and
Festrictions;

-~2-«

a We materials Supplied to the HYess OF used in
the canpsign will confirm the Soviet allepatina that Penkovskiy
Was 4n agent of Axcrican and British Intelligence. =

- Be No information will be Supplied thar will tend
to confirea Soviet allegations concerning intelligence acti-
vities on the part of U.S. officials or the citizens af
estern countries whose nanes may be meationced in ¥elation
te. the case, : te a es

. “Ge. Infernatiog conceriag Penkevskiy svailable. to
a3 will be used extensively within these disitations,.ascrib-
dng its sources to persons in Turkey snd unnaned persons iz
the West whe have met .Penkovskiy er are-femiliar with.his
activities, including an “unnaned -forrzer Soviet official.

© has cefected to:the West." .

d,. Certain docuneats pertinent to the seseral.
subject of Soviet. espionage in the West willbe released. for.
surfecing provided it can be doue vithout risk of direct..et-
tribution to Penkorskiy,

3. Specific Plans;

: eo
An.articie will Be piacec:in Turkey hw. Gover reakevakiy
biography ar extensively: as: the ostensible SONTCOS will pereit,

be. Fellows WOR Initial Articie: The initial articte
Will be replayed ‘BRjOF wasters aedia to the greatest extent
possible, ‘Articies ef. comuestary and Opinion in which the
basic facts may be soxewhat broadened, citing Snnaxed acquaint-
akces of Penkoyskiy's or an unpaned Sevier defector, will

deadership sf the Conmunist Party and the sccurity police, etc.
Penkovyskiy will be cest in the role of a Patriot Struggling

ce Defensive Sricfings: Sone western cowtacts
of Penkoyskiy's even though ibe Lavolvenent was to eo. degree
couprosising, whe sight be cited in the trial, will be briefed
as to what they aight say about their relations with kie.in the.
pligepihsalets thay receive publicity and are asked by the press
or copmont. oY i Rg Meg es

Ss hte ad, WU. S, Official Statement end Kelease of.
Docunents: ‘In the eyent thst the triai takes a Strong anzti-
can turn in its propagenda, it may be appropriate fer a
high . S, Gavernsent spokessan to make a coanent. The out-
line for such a cémment following the guidelines and stratezy
mentioned in paragraphs 1 and 2 above will be prepared. in
addition, twe Soviet dacunents, GRU lectures On Soviet iatel-
licence tachaiques in the U. S. and ea the techniques used
for conducting meetings with agents will be prepared for re-
lease to the press as decumentary evidence of the nature of
Soviet espionage. The first of these documents 4s particularly
significant far its content, and the istter because the author
is currently assigned to the Soviet Embassy in Washiagter.

@. Further Release of Documents on Soviet Nili-
tary Plans: Although ents proposal will Fequire caresiul re-
view in the light of our leng-range publicity plans in
addition to numerous other considerations, the question of
the release of twe other documents is aise being given atten-
tion, One of these is an extrauoly belligerest expositien ef
Soviet strategy and the secend is a description of Soviet
cheaical warfare plansing. Release of these documents aight
be most appropriately effected through the Depertrent of
Defense. The release would ge 2 long way tovard supplying
documentary preof of the aggressive nature ef the Soviet regine.

& Plans for Long-Term Exploitation: Preliminary dis-
cussions between the British and Gursclves concerning lounge
tera exploitation have taken place already. Gur plens will
be reviewed in detail in conversations to take place in Londen
at approximately the tise of the Synne trial in Moscow. As
_presentiy foreseen, the major effort will be the preparation
of the “newoirs” of Penkovskiy, based upon the voluminous

inforastion from contacts with his, to present as thoroughiy
and as carefully as possible Penkovskiy'’s ows views oa tke

nature of the Soviet regine, its history and its prospects.

To accompany these mewoirs, appropriate decunents will be

selected from thease availiable to us for release to the public.

These two tess, the wesoirs and the docusents, would then be
A the explanation that they had been left in

made public wit

ae

the West in the personal possession of sg confidant who vas
charged hy Penkovskiy with uakinyg berg derieea in the event his
efforts to struggle against the party dictatorship in the
Seviet Union led to his arrest. This explanation will stress
the idea that Peakovskiy*s arrest and trial stessed aot fron
service as a4 western fatellisence agent, but rather. grox his
burning desire te fight the Soviet regiue as curroart ly
established. Ia addition to other considerations, putting
this plan into effect weuld have to await a final resolution
ef the fats of Kynne, In the meantine, however, Preparatory
Waxk on the meroirs has becun in Londoa.
