Probable Developments in the World Situation Through MID-1953
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119697, dated 1 August 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119697).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TOP SECRET INR/DDR
ot 6535

Nev State

SPECIAL ESTIMATE ||

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE WORLD

ed
eB

Asproved for Release rNRIDDE
SEP 1997 TNIDBE

SITUATION THROUGH MID- 1953

; SE - 13
Published 24 September 1951

78%
| 027 5°
tNR/DDR
6835
Now State.

n77739

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
RECEIVED

x,

~ *

x
\

pusecn of insellign® 7
ries? EPA (

TOP SECRET
~ SF

VASP IP <P
a1

“fD

—POP-SEGRET— 6335 °°

TO ALL HOLDERS OF SE-13

Revised Paragraph 2b of SE-13 Approved by the |
Intelligence Advisory Committee on 27 September 1951

b. Atomic Capabilities. ! While Soviet atomic capabilities will re-
main inferior to those of the US, it is estimated that the Soviet stock-
pile of atomic weapons (some of which might have an energy yield as
high as 100 kilotons) will increase as follows:

Present - 50
Mid-1952 - 100
Mid-1953 - 200

At present the Soviet air force has an estimated T/O and E strength

of about 600 to 700 TU-4 medium bombers capable of one-way missions,
carrying atomic bombs, to practically all important targets in the US.
Although there is no evidence that the USSR has developed aerial re-
fueling techniques, with such techniques these aircraft may be capable

1/ The following factors must be considered in connection with the
above estimate of Soviet atomic capabilities:

(a) The number and/or size of the production facilities postu-
lated as a basis for this estimate may be incorrect. The minimum
program, which is not inconsistent with the information available,
would provide a stockpile of about one-half the number of weapons
indicated. On the other hand, from the information available at the
present time, the possibility that additional or expanded production
facilities will be constructed during the period under consideration

cannot be precluded.

(b) The type of weapon postulated for calculating the stockpile
figures may be incorrect. It is possible by changing the weapon de-
sign to substantially increase or decrease the number of weapons in
the stockpile, given a certain quantity of fissionable material, Such
changes, however, alter the kilotonnage of the individual weapons

accordingly.

35 ~oR
Ge
8 ta t @

of two-way missions to most important US targets. By mid-1952 the
USSR may have approximately 1,000 TU-4’s and by mid-1953 about
1,200. By mid-1953 the USSR also may have approximately 100 long-
range bombers capable of round trip missions against nearly all

vital targets in the US. It probably will have by this time substantial
numbers of twin-jet high performance bombers capable of atomic
attack on Western Europe and US overseas bases, and possibly a

jet bomber capable of attacking the US. By mid-1953 the USSR
should also have sufficient stockpiles of nerve gas for sustained,
extensive employment.

~EOP-SRCRET™ AYO

TREE Pa mE oe
we et

’ ENR/DDR
6535
tex State

SPECIAL ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
WORLD SITUATION THROUGH MID-1953

SE-13

Published 24 September 1951

This estimate was prepared at the request of the Senior
Staff of the National Security Council as Appendix A to
Parts I and II of United States Programs for National
Security.

The estimate was prepared by the Central Intelligence
Agency in consultation with the intelligence organizations
of the Departments of State, the Army, the Navy, the Air
Force, and the Joint Staff. The Intelligence Advisory
Committee concured in this estimate on 20 September
1951.

—FOR-SECRELN

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
WORLD SITUATION THROUGH MID-1953

1, PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN SOVIET CAPABILITIES
AND INTENTIONS I

A. Probable Growth in Soviet and Satellite Capabilities.

1. The Soviet sphere will probably continue to increase its
military, economic, and political strength over the next two
years. Its absolute strength will be considerably greater in
over-all terms by mid-1953 than at present.

2. General Military Capabilities. The military strength-in-

being of the Soviet orbit should further increase over the

next few years. Of greatest significance are a probable im-
provement in Soviet capabilities for atomic attack and for
defense against such attack, the further development of Chinese
Communist military strength, and continued growth of
European Satellite military power.

a. Substantial modernization programs are continuing
in all three Soviet services and Soviet forces should
remain at a high state of war readiness. No sizable
increase is expected in the Soviet army, which now
totals some 2,500,000 men, including 175 line
divisions, and can probably mobilize an additional
145 divisions by M + 30 days. While the over-all
numerical strength of the Soviet air force is expected
to remain substantially the same, Soviet air power
will become increasingly effective through continued
conversion to jet fighters and bombers, improved

1/ Except in general terms, the position of Communist China is
discussed in Section II.

training standards, operational use of heavy bombers,
and acquisition of additional electronic equipment. More-
over, the USSR is increasing its strength in Eastern
Europe and the Far East to maintain its relative advan-
tage over Western strength.

b. Atomic Capabilities. 1/ While Soviet atomic capa-
pilities will remain inferior to those of the US, the USSR
may have aS many aS 100 bombs by mid-1952, and as

many as 200 by mid-1953. Some of these bombs might
have an energy yield as high as 100 kjlotons. At present
the Soviet air force has an estimated T/O and E strength
of about 600 to 700 TU-4 medium pombers capable of
one-way missions, carrying atomic bombs, to practically
all important targets in the US. Although there is no

A a
1/ Special attention is called to the fact that estimates of the
Soviet atomic stockpile are tentative and uncertain because:

(a) The number and/or size of the production facilities
postulated as a basis for this estimate may be incorrect.
The minimum program, which is not inconsistent with
the information available, would provide a stockpile of
about one-half the number of weapons indicated. On the
other hand, from the information available at the present
time, the possibility that additional or expanded produc -
tion facilities will be constructed during the period under
consideration cannot be precluded.

(b) The type of weapon postulated for calculating the
stockpile figures may be incorrect. It is possible by
changing the weapon design to substantially increase or
decrease the number of weapons in the stockpile, given
a certain quantity of fissionable material, Such changes,
however, alter the kilotonnage of the individual weapons
accordingly.

evidence that the USSR has developed aerial refueling
techniques, with such techniques these aircraft may be
capable of two-way missions to most important US
targets. By mid-1952 the USSR may have approximately
1,000 TU-4’s and by mid-1953 about 1,200. By mid-
1953 the USSR also may have approximately 100 long-
range bombers capable of round trip missions against
nearly all vital targets in the US. It probably will
have by this time substantial numbers of twin-jet high
performance bombers capable of atomic attack on
Western Europe and US overseas bases, and possibly
a jet bomber capable of attacking the US. By mid-
1953 the USSR should also have sufficient stockpiles

of nerve gas for sustained, extensive employment.

c. Soviet air defenses probably will be substantially
improved by mid-1953. A good all-weather interceptor
aircraft with adequate airborne intercept radar should
be available in limited to moderate quantities by that
time, and difficulties with ground control intercept
radars should be largely overcome. Moreover,
improved antiaircraft defenses with modern radar
equipment must be expected.

d. The USSR will probably considerably improve
its submarine warfare capabilities by mid-1953 in °
view of the known Soviet modernization and construc-
tion program. At present the USSR has an estimated
361 submarines, More than half are ocean patrol
and medium-range submarines of considerable
endurance, and of these over 100 have the capability
of patrolling in US coastal waters. Their operations
would include torpedo attacks against shipping and
mining of ports.

e. The Eastern European Satellite armies (including
the East German) are expected to increase from a
present 65 divisions to 117 by the fall of 1953, when
Soviet re-equipment programs are expected to be
completed. By that time these forces, despite some
qualitative deficiencies, should be capable of inde-
pendent operations with Soviet logistical backing or
joint offensive operations with the Red Army. The
East German Alert Police of 52,000 is capable of
rapid expansion, with Soviet help, to 24 Soviet type
rifle divisions. However, a force of only eight
divisions is apparently contemplated at present due
to the limitations imposed by the manpower demands
_ of the East German economy. Unless the Korean
war is prolonged, intensified, or broadened the
Chinese Communist forces should also be materially
strengthened with Soviet aid and technical support.

3, Capabilities for particular operations. The Soviet bloc

will probably by mid-1953 still be able to carry out almost all ee
of the offensive operations of which they are presently con-

sidered capable, except in the unlikely event that the effec-

tiveness of new weapons developed, produced and actually

deployed by the West should offset the present preponderance

of Soviet military strength on the Eurasian continent.

a. The USSR should still be able to overrun Western
Europe and the Near East by mid-1953, although growing
NATO strength will increase Western defense capabilities

-- and lengthen correspondingly the time required for
Soviet operations. _ ;

b. The USSR is already capable of an atomic attack on
the continental US. Although US air defenses will be
substantially improved by mid-1953, Soviet capabilities
for attack on the US may be even more significantly
increased, and the US will still be seriously vulnerable

to such an attack.

NS

4, Political and Psychological Warfare Capabilities. The
Communists will continue to have extensive propaganda, sub-
versive, and obstructive capabilities, both overt and covert, in
Western Europe over the next two years. Moreover, Soviet and
Chinese Communist capabilities in the Far East will probably
considerably increase.

5. Economic Strength of the Soviet Bloc. The over-all economic
strength of the Soviet orbit will remain far inferior to that of

the Western Powers over the next few years, and little change

is likely by 1953 in relative productive capacities, For example,
US, Canadian, and Western European raw steel output should
continue to be four times as great as that of the Soviet bloc,
rising to roughly 175,000,000 tons in 1953 as compared to an
estimated 43,000,000 tons for the Soviet bloc. However, the
Western Powers will continue to be less able than the USSR

to bring their over-all resources to bear on maximizing economic
readiness for war. The Soviet economy is already at a high
state of war-readiness and its productive capacity is at sucha
level and of such a character as to enable the USSR to maintain
a major war effort. Although the expansion of the NATO
mobilization base will substantially narrow the gap between
Western and Soviet economic war-readiness by mid-1953, the
USSR will still maintain a substantial lead. Continued large-
scale arms production and stockpiling during the next two

years will further increase Soviet economic war-readiness

and extend the period over which the USSR could expect to
conduct large~scale offensive operations. Increased industriali-
zation in the European Satellites and their further integration
into the Soviet economy will also contribute to Soviet war

potential.

6. However, certain sectors of the Soviet economy are highly
vulnerable to air attack and will probably remain so for the
period of this estimate despite Soviet efforts to improve their
air defenses, continued dispersion of facilities and a more
complete system of reserve stocks. Moreover, certain economic

weaknesses will still persist within the Soviet bloc, particularly

a shortage of merchant shipping and deficiencies in such items as
oil, crude rubber, certain machine tools and precision instruments,
some non-ferrous metals and alloys, and some electrical equip-
ment. Western trade controls already have some impact, and

to the extent that these controls are tightened such deficiencies
will become more important. However, apart from the effects of
US bombing, it is unlikely, in view of the Soviet stockpiling
program and the probable development of substitutes, that these
deficiencies will seriously affect Soviet capabilities for a long
war. Although inferior by US standards, the Soviet land teaser
net is probably also adequate for a major war.

7%. Internal Stability of the Soviet Sphere. Despite continuing

tensions within the Soviet bloc, Communist control seems
assured for the period of this estimate. The only appreciable
likelihood of serious internal strains would be in Communist
China if it remained embroiled in hostilities in the Far East
(see Section If.) While chronic difficulties will persist in the
Sovietization of the European Satellites, they should be brought
under even firmer Soviet control. Domestic dissatisfaction with
the deprivations created by the forced pace of industrialization,
agrarian collectivization, and rearmament will be a constant in
the Soviet orbit, but no serious threat to the USSR.

B. Probable Soviet Policies through Mid-1953,

8. Soviet Objectives. It can be assumed that over-all Soviet
objectives will remain the same as outlined in NSC 114. The
primary.short-term aim of Soviet policy will continue to be the
obstruction of further growth in Western strength and unity.

The USSR must be increasingly concerned with the pace of Western
countermeasures, which it doubtless views as an ever more
serious threat not only to the early accomplishment of its over-
all objectives but eventually to the security of the Soviet orbit
itself. In particular, the USSR must fear growing US military
power and its projection into a series of overseas bases

encircling the Soviet bloc. It must also be seriously disturbed
over the approaching rearmament of Western Germany and
Japan, both with potential revisionist aims vis-a-vis the Soviet
bloc. The USSR’s acute sensitivity to these developments is
amply evident from recent Soviet cold war moves. While the
USSR may still see sufficient opportunities to justify a con-
tinuation of its present aggressive cold war policies, mounting
Soviet concern as Western countermeasures develop further
may lead to a change in tactics by the USSR. With the rising
curve of Western strength, the possibility of such a change
will become progressively more acute,

§. Continued Aggressive Political Warfare. For the time
being, however, it appears likely that the USSR will continue

its present aggressive policy of political and psychological
warfare, Despite the increased strength of anti-Communist
forces, the USSR and Communist China probably see various
revolutionary and subversive opportunities still open to them,
particularly in Asia. They may be expected to continue their
penetration of adjacent areas, promoting Communist coups
wherever the situation seems favorable. The Communist
forces will also attempt through local strikes, propaganda,
and other means to obstruct Western rearmament and under-
mine the stability of free nations.

10. The USSR doubtless also sees possibilities of creating
rifts between the non-Soviet countries, given the present acute
stage of world tensions, and will make every effort to divide |
the Western Powers. Further Soviet initiatives to forestall
the rearmament and pro-Western orjentation of Germany and
Japan are almost certain. Against a background of continued
threats, the USSR will almost certainly intensify its propaganda
and diplomatic “peace offensive” to convince the world that
the “aggressive” course of the US and its allies is leading to
anew war, thus playing on Western fears and attempting to
weaken popular support of Western countermeasures,

, aa , cares
Riis SOCAL Ota Sat Say Sc Or ee
« eae Sema ;

ct BPS ae Lae

A438

11. While continuing its efforts to undermine Western Europe,
the USSR will continue to devote much attention to Asia, The
USSR and Communist China undoubtedly consider that favorable
revolutionary and subversive opportunities exist in the Near
and Far East, where the decline of Western influence and
control has created serious instability. The Kremlin might
hope that through stimulating local strife and civil war in such
areas, it could either expand its own sphere of control and
deprive the West of important resources or dissipate Western
strength in costly and inconclusive military and economic
countermeasures.

12. Further Soviet or Chinese Communist local aggression,
particularly in Asia, is also possible during the next two years.
Chinese Communist invasion of Indochina or Burma and Satellite
invasion of Yugoslavia are serious possibilities (see Section III),
To the extent that the Kremlin considers it necessary to
eradicate the Tito heresy before Tito or the West become too
strong, the USSR may feel compelled to act soon. If critical
situations arise in other areas, such as Iran, which offer
inviting opportunities, possible Communist intervention cannot
be discounted. However, a probable major factor in any decision
for or against any such overt expansion will be the Soviet and
Chinese Communist estimate of the resultant risks of general
war and their willingness to accept those risks, In view of the
US and UN reaction in Korea, the growing pace of Western
rearmament, and the ever sharper delineation of the East-

West struggle, the USSR probably now considers that further
local aggression would entail serious risks of general war.
Before deciding on such local aggression the USSR would
certainly consider not only Western capabilities in any particular
area but also over-all US capabilities against the USSR.

13. Although the USSR might under certain circumstances
deliberately precipitate general war (see paragraph 15), it
appears more likely that such a war, if it comes, would

result from Soviet misjudgment of US action in a given situation

ve

t

4

:

-fOP-SEGRER— 3
:

a,

Bt

Tee ee Frit art aie eghee a 7. Bote ee
7 + whe x ein
ig ae Sci ae Cae

or from the inability of either the USSR or the US to yield in
cases where they regarded their vital interests as involved, The
most immediate danger of such a development would be in event
of a prolongation, intensification, or broadening of the Korean
conflict. If under such conditions the Communist forces in
Korea were threatened with decisive defeat the Kremlin would
probably intensify its aid. This aid might well include the
introduction of “volunteer” forces. It might even include the
employment of Soviet forces to such an extent that a de facto
local war between the US/UN and USSR would exist. In the
event of critical developments in other areas as well as in
Korea, the increasing tenseness of the international situation
and the growing strength of both sides, which might lead to

an increased determination to defend what each considered

to be its vital interests, will make the danger of general war
through accident or miscalculation considerably more acute.

14. Possibility of a Major Shift in Soviet Tactics. While it
appears likely that the USSR will for a time continue its
aggressive cold war pressures, the further growth of Western
strength and counterpressures during the coming period may
produce a shift in Soviet tactics. Viewing the last three years’
developments, the USSR may consider that its postwar revolu-
tionary and expansionist opportunities, except perhaps in Asia,
are steadily narrowing and that continued cold war pressures
are unlikely to pay off. The Kremlin may consider that such
cold war pressures are only generating relatively greater
Western countermeasures, which might eventually, particularly
if they include German and Japanese rearmament, produce a
stituation dangerous to the vital interests of the USSR itself.
Therefore, if the USSR is to achieve its immediate primary
objective of forestalling a decisive increase in Western
strength, it may be increasingly faced with the necessity of a
shift from aggressive political warfare to some other approach.

15, Deliberate Initiation of General War. It is impossible to
predict whether or at what point the rising curve of Western
strength might lead the USSR to consider this trend so serious
a threat as to require a resort to force before the West reaches
a strength dangerous to the vital interests of the USSR. The
risk of such a development will become more acute as Western
defense programs progress, particularly in regard to German
and Japanese rearmament and the development of US overseas
bases. The USSR is increasing its already high state of war-
readiness and continuing its systematic domestic propaganda
campaign to prepare the Soviet and Satellite peoples psycho-
logically for possible war. Moreover, the USSR, with its
intense suspicion of Western motives, may consider present
Western defensive preparations as a prelude to eventual

action by the Western Powers to force a choice between war
and unacceptable concessions upon the USSR.

AOE ye 7
a dM tat de 2: a

16. The USSR presumably recognizes that its still inferior
over-all war potential, together with Western atomic superiority,
would make the outcome of a general war doubtful, despite
initial Soviet successes. Nevertheless, this consideration
cannot be accepted as necessarily controlling the USSR’s
decision and the period through mid-1953 will be one of

acute danger of global war. If convinced that the circumstances
described above dictated a military showdown with the West
during this period, it is possible that the Soviet rulers would
themselves precipitate such a showdown at a time and under
circumstances that they considered most favorable. It is
alternatively possible, however, that they would for at least

a period concentrate their attention on moves designed to
maximize their immediate readiness for the impending con-
flict, These moves would include further steps in the military
and economic mobilization of the Soviet Union and the Satellites.
At the same time, the Kremlin and its Satellites might undertake
local aggressions aimed at improving the immediate position.

of the USSR. The USSR would have to weigh the prospective

Les

gains in such local aggressions against the danger that such
aggression might touch off general war at a time and under
circumstances unfavorable to Soviet interests. But the Kremlin
would make its assessment in this regard against the background
of a belief that general hostilities were imminent in any event,

17. A Relaxation of Tensions. As an alternative to deliberate

’ Soviet resort to early general war, if the Kremlin considered
that there were compelling reasons against this course of
action, the USSR might decide to make a temporary shift, at
least in Europe, to new and less obviously aggressive tactics,
designed to lull the West into a false sense of security and
undermine growing Western strength. Considering that its
present aggressive postwar policies had reached the point of
diminishing returns and were engendering ever more threaten-
ing Western countermeasures, the USSR might see in this
alternative method of political warfare even better opportunities
of undermining the growing strength and cohesion of the West.
Such a tactical shift would not necessarily imply that the USSR
would suspend all its aggressive and subversive tactics; it
might adopt a softer policy in Europe, for example, while
continuing to expand in Asia. Moreover, a shift to such a course
would be only témporary, and it is impossible to say at what
point, if ever, the USSR might consider it necessary to adopt
it, or how far it might be willing to go. There are strong
grounds for believing that the USSR would in any case be
unwilling to make the major concessions which would appear
to be necessary to assure such a policy’s success.

ne ae

sie

Il. PROBABLE GROWTH OF NATO STRENGTH AND WILL TO
FIGHT

18. Except in the event of a marked reduction in US aid, some
improvement in Western European strength and morale seems
likely by mid-1953, although less than that anticipated from US
and NATO programs. Further progress toward achieving MTDP
goals, continued expansion of Europe’s economy, a more unified
and efficient NATO and intra-European effort, and the probable
integration of West Germany into the Atlantic Community will
all contribute to this improved position. Nevertheless, certain
countries will still be deficient in political initiative and popular
will to sacrifice and Western Europe will remain subject to
dangerous economic and social stresses. It will still be vulner-
able not only to Soviet occupation but to Soviet cold war pres-
sures through mid~1953.,

19, NAT Military Strength. By mid-1953 the European NATO
forces should be considerably stronger than at present if there

is a continued high level of US aid. European defense budgets
and military production will probably increase over the next
two years and although forces in being will fall short of phased
MTDP requirements, their morale, leadership and combat
readiness Should be markedly higher than at present. However,
available European NATO forces will still be insufficient to do
more than delay a full-scale Soviet attack, except in the un-
likely event that the effectiveness of new weapons developed,
produced, and actually deployed by the West should offset the
present preponderance of Soviet pay strength on the
Eurasian continent.

20. Broadening of the NAT Coalition. The formal or informal

association of Greece, Turkey, Spain, Yugoslavia, and Western
Germany with the NAT defensive coalition, which, despite vary-
ing degrees of European reluctance, should be consummated in
the coming period, will be a major increment to NATO strength.
The developing integration of these countries either directly or

ee

_~<3

>
,
roe
»* s
Hae
7,
in .
43

a

«

bon
eae
3

t
a
+
te
*,
fay
rea
4
se
so
a ;
oe
ws.
ae
=

a

eens ee

indirectly into the NATO structure and the strengthening of their
forces should help to offset the increases in Soviet and Satellite
strength. The southern flank of SHAPE should be materially
strengthened, partly by a greater availability of Mediterranean
bases. However, numerous political and psychological obstacles
will continue to delay the optimum utilization of Yugoslav, West
German, and Spanish potential and to postpone the date at which
these nations can make a full contribution to European defense.

It seems unlikely, for example, given the continuing obstacles to
a West German contribution, that a sizable contingent of combat-
ready German forces will become available befcre some time in
1953. Moreover, to the extent that the Western Powers do not
meet German demands for full equality, German cooperation may
be delayed.

21. Economic Burdens. Despite the marked degree of economic
recovery during the ERP period, Western Europe’s economy is
being subjected to new strains by NAT rearmament needs. In-
flationary pressures and raw materials shortages generated by
rearmament, persistent economic nationalism, and the contin-
uing reluctance or inability of many governments to take the
necessary measures to cope with economic maladjustments will
all hamper both optimum defense output and continued economic
expansion. Nevertheless, the next two years should see a small
rise in European production and a small and uneven increase in
living standards, despite rearmament drains.. Much will depend
upon how far national economic policies can minimize the econ-
omic repercussions of rearmament while maximizing European
defense efforts. Finally, a great deal will depend upon the ex-
tent to which not only US economic aid but US materials alloca-
tions and economic trends in the US itself permit a continued
expansion of European production. Because of a worsening
balance of payments situation in the UK, for example, increased
US aid may be required if a satisfactory rate of British defense
build-up is to be achieved.

-13-

~EOR-SECGREE—

22. Political and Psychological Factors. The poor state of
European morale, still deficient popular will to sacrifice, and a
lack of vigorous governmental initiative, particularly in key con-
tinental countries, will continue to hamper the achievement of
NATO objectives. Despite the marked degree of postwar Euro-
pean recovery there still persists in many continental countries
a serious lack of governmental and popular confidence in Europe’s
ability to solve its economic and social problems, and to defend
itself against external attack. Popular morale and confidence
will be bolstered as NATO and other programs develop, but will
long remain an uncertain factor, particularly in event of war.

23. While no seriously adverse internal political developments
appear likely in any Western European countries, a marked im-
provement in political stability seems at best problematical.
The chief areas of uncertainty are France and Italy, in both of
which the position of existing governments will continue to be
precarious, This in turn prevents them from dealing vigor-
ously with military, political, and economic problems. Never-
theless, some form of coalition should be able to maintain its
present controlling position in France and Italy, unless a seri-
ously worsening economic or international situation leads to

an acceleration of the trend toward polarization of the political
scene. The powerful French and Italian Communist parties will
probably maintain substantial strength, but their obstructive
role should be somewhat reduced unless rearmament creates
major economic stresses on which they can capitalize.

24. Progress of the Alliance. Supranational institutions of
European unity -- specifically the European Defense Force and

the Schuman plan administration -- should develop during the

next two years, but there is no indication that any European

State is yet prepared to form a true federation with its neighbors.
Within NATO the problems of rearmament will probably dictate

a further unification of effort by mid-1953, though among the

treaty powers and those associated with them the problem of con-
flicting national objectives will continue to hamper the develop-
ment of maximum strength. The continuing debate over the sharing

cer eran)

es

—tOR-SEGRES—

re

RIA A URS RELA Ve lee ALE

of rearmament burdens, the constant threat of rearmament to
social reform and welfare programs, the problem of trade with
the East, the struggle for markets within and outside Europe,
the part Germany is to play in the alliance -- all these will be
exasperating and sometimes frustrating problems with which
the West must deal. Added to all these will be the difficulties
always posed by an ambivalent Europe looking to the United
States for strength and power yet envious of American leader-
ship and often doubtful of the aims and methods of American
policy. Nonetheless, mid-1953 should find the alliance stronger
than at present and better organized than it is now.

25. On the other hand, if the USSR could remove some of the
fear of World War III and Soviet invasion, European popular
willingness to shoulder the burdens of rearmament would al-
most certainly lessen, and there would be strong pressure on

. the governments to divert resources from the NATO effort to
meet pressing economic and social needs.

26. In any case the US will continue to face serious problems
arising from the failure of its European NATO partners to meet
present rearmament goals. Even if the Western Europeans were
willing and able to assume a larger share of NAT defense bur-
dens, adequate NATO rearmament would still be impossible with-
out large-scale US military and economic assistance. In view of
the continuing uncertainties of the European situation, much will
depend therefore, during the period of this estimate, on US
leadership and support. A substantial reduction in US assistance
over the coming period would seriously jeopardize European
economic and political stability, as well as the creation of an
adequate NATO defense.

Ill. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE NEAR AND FAR
EAST

27. No decisive outcome of the East-West struggle in Asia
seems probable during the next two years, At present it appears

-~15 -

hnlikely that the US and its allies will be able to do more than |
maintain or perhaps slightly improve their present unsatisfactory
Rosition in the Near and Far East, while on the other hand there
Mis acute danger of major deterioration. The East-West conflict
has become increaSingly acute in the Far East, and will remain
acute so long as Communist China plays an expansionist role.
The threat of Communist expansion in the Near East and South
Asia is by no means as immediate, but in these areas as well

3s inthe Far East, the Western position is seriously threatened
by the anti-Western cast of the Asian nationalist revolution.

This anti-Westernism, combined with social tensions, poverty,
governmental and military weakness, and naiveté or lack of con~
cern about Communist objectives, makes most Asian states
vulnerable to Communist exploitation and complicates US efforts
to bolster them internally. In the Far East in particular, the
Communists have succeeded to a large extent in identifying them-
selves with the Asian revolution, and in encouraging its anti-
Western aspects. In those areas where Communism has gained
no firm foothold, Asian nationalism has expressed itself in acute
suspicion of US motives and a persisting trend toward neutral-
ism. However, the continued economic and military dependence
of the free Asiatic countries upon the Western Powers provides
them an inducement to align themselves with the West.

28, The USSR and Communist China will present a serious
threat to US interests in the Far East through mid-1953. Un-
less subjected to continuing economic and military stresses
from a prolonged, intensified, or broadened Korean war, the
Chinese Communist regime may be able to strengthen itself
over the coming period by modernizing and strengthening its
armed forces, by further consolidating its domestic control, and
by making some progress in solving its economic problems.
The Peiping regime will play an increasingly influential role in
Asian affairs by virtue of its growing prestige and through the
influence it exerts over Asian revolutionary movements. The
USSR will probably continue to provide substantial military and
‘echnical help, although its economic aid will almost certainly

-16 -

all far short of Chinese requirements, However, a
fi rolonged, intensified, or broadened struggle with the US and

ts allies might critically weaken the Peiping regime unless the
‘SSR provided much greater military and economic aid,

29, While frictions may develop between the USSR and Commu-
nist China and there remain long term possibilities of a major
clash of interests, it appears unlikely that any serious rifts will
develop in the next two years. Ideological affinity and mutual
antagonism toward the West, as well as common fear of Japanese
resurgence, probably dictate a continued close relationship, at
least over the short term.

30. It seems almost certain that Peiping intends to play an
aggressive, expansionist role in the Far East. While problems
of internal consolidation and development and a continued lack
of naval strength should prevent China through mid-1953 from
mounting a serious threat to the US-dominated offshore island
chain (except perhaps Taiwan), there will remain an ever pres-
ent danger of Chinese Communist aggression against such ad-
jacent mainland areas as Indochina, Burma, and South Korea.
While the Korean war has somewhat restricted Chinese Commu-
nist capabilities for operations elsewhere, such capabilities
should increase in the event this conflict is ended. In any case
Communist China will almost certainly increase its covert sup-
port of indigenous revolutionary movements. It may consider
that the prospects for eventual success by these methods, parti-
cularly in Southeast Asia, are sufficient to make unnecessary
overt intervention with its risk of war with the West.

31. The probable emergence of a politically’ stable and pro-US
Japan will help to establish an East-West balance of power in
the Far East. However, the revival of Japan’s power potential
will inevitably be a long term development and Japan alone will
by no means be able to counterbalance Sino-Soviet strength in
Northeast Asia in the next two years. Moreover, anti-Western
sentiment may develop in post-treaty Japan, and if Japan fails

217

to find markets and raw materials in non-Communist areas,

there may develop an insistent demand for economic collaboration
with the Asian mainland, Under these circumstances, there will
be a continuing substantial requirement for US assistance, parti-
cularly in the development of foreign trade. However, the con-
tinuance of a conservative anti-Communist government should
tend to support US interests, and over the next two years at least -
Japan should be a growing asset to the Western position in East

Asia.

32. The chief immediate danger of a critical development in the
Far East lies in a prolongation, intensification, or broadening of.
the Korean war (see paragraph 1 ). Even if some compromise
solution were reached in Korea, the US would still be faced not
only with the constant threat of renewed aggression in Korea or
elsewhere in Asia and the consequent necessity of maintaining
large forces in the Far East, but also with major reconstruction
problems in South Korea. The reconstituted North Korean forces,
together with the Chinese Communists, will have a continued
capability for re-occupying South Korea in the event US and UN
forces are progressively withdrawn. The rebuilding of South
Korean security forces and the rehabilitation of the prostrate
South Korean economy will in any case constitute formidable
tasks.

33, Southeast Asia will continue to be extremely vulnerable to
Communist penetration. There is no prospect for early develop-
ment of strong anti-Communist governments in the area and a

real danger exists that, with increased Chinese Communist assist-
ance or even overt intervention, indigenous Communist movements
may extend their control over more of Indochina and Burma within
the next two years. If these countries were to fall, Thailand would
doubtless prove unable for long to withstand Communist pressure,
and the situation would also deteriorate further in Malaya, Indo-
nesia, and the Philippines. In any event, all Southeast Asian coun-
:ries will remain weak and unstable during the coming period, and
may require increasing amounts of outside assistance, including

-18-

hea ub,

Ta PRC a ee ee Deter 2 ae ees

ate

—~TOP-SECREP—

military assistance, even to maintain themselves. In the absence
uf major Communist successes in Indochina or Burma, the situ-
ation in Malaya, Thailand, and the Philippines should improve by

- mid-1953, although long term problems of local insurgence, polit-
ical instability, and economic development will still remain.

34. The Nationalist military position on Taiwan should gradually
improve with US aid, Enhanced Nationalist capabilities for harass-
ing the mainland will require an increased allotment of Chinese
Communist strength for coastal defense. However, the security

uf Taiwan will continue to be hampered by the regime’s economic
difficulties, general inefficiency and corruption, and will require
close US control if US military and economic aid is to be effec-

tive.

wetter to mtatae sac

ae nn

B. Probable Developments in the Near East (and North

Africa)

35. In the Near East the serious possibility of a deterioration

in the situation overshadows the limited possibilities of im-
provement over the next two years. At present, except in Greece
and Turkey, the West is faced with a growing crisis in which the
chief motivating force is not Communist pressure but the anti-
Western nationalism of Iran and the Arab world. The growing
trength of Greece and especially Turkey and the widening sysS-
‘em of US Mediterranean bases should be positive favorable in-
‘uences inthis area. However, these factors will probably be
counterbalanced by continued Arab-Israeli animosity, further
4cterioration of the British system of alliances, and nationalist
soastility toward the West. Active Soviet intervention in the Near
vast seems unlikely, except possibly in Iran. More likely is a
farther growth of neutralism, which might limit US-UK utili-
zation of the area’s strategic position and petroleum resources.
improvement of the existing unsatisfactory US-UK position in

‘he Near East (except in Greece and Turkey) will depend largely
=pon the successful solution of the area’s economic problems
a:d upon the satisfaction of at least some nationalist aspirations.

- 19 -

{9

36. Developments in Iran will depend largely upon the outcome

of the current oil controversy, but in any event Iran will prob-
ably remain internally unstable during the next two years. While
successful negotiations with the British might substantially in-
crease Iranian revenues, it is doubtful whether effective use
would be made of these revenues, Failure of the negotiations may
well lead to economic chaos and increase the danger of a Commu-
nist (Tudeh) coup. Overt Soviet intervention remains unlikely
unless the UK intervenes with armed force, in which case the
USSR might occupy Azerbaijan.

37. In the Arab states social and political instability, anti-
Zionism, and extreme nationalism will hamper the achievement
of US objectives through mid-1953. There is little likelihood of
sufficient improvement in Israeli-Arab relations to permit their
joint association in Near East defense. Arab resentment over

. US support of Israel also creates problems for the US, Nation-
alism will continue to undermine UK influence and seriously
jeopardize British retention of their important Egyptian bases. é
However, despite the trend toward neutralism in the Arab coun- %
tries, there is some increased awareness of the Soviet threat
and, particularly if an increased Soviet threat developed, the
Arab states might more willingly cooperate with the West. i
Their price would probably be a sharp increase in the amount F
of US aid,

38. Israel’s ultimate orientation is uncertain, despite its econ- a
omic dependence on the US and its stated awareness of the Soviet
threat. Continued immigration and a paucity of resources pro- a
lung economic instability and there is some danger that Israel : :
might seek an outlet through renewed expansion at the Arabs’ ~

expense, ae

39. While violent explosions in French North Africa may not —
occur over the next two years, rising Arab nationalism, fanned
by extremists in the Arab states, will create increasing instabil-

tty in this area and also in Libya, and may affect the security of
US bases,

- 20 -

~G

C. Probable Developments in South Asia.

40, Developments in South Asia over the next two years will de-
pend largely on the outcome of the Kashmir dispute. Reali-
zation of the effect that war would have on the disputants might
result in greater readiness to compromise, and some de facto
if not negotiated settlement may emerge. The resulting in-
creased stability in the area would be favorable to US interests.
Pakistan may be able to give more positive expression to its
pro-Western leanings and, if given US support, may provide
bases and troops for the defense of the Middle East. Although
India is far less likely to abandon its neutralist policy, at least
so long as Nehru remains prime minister, continued Chinese
Communist penetration of Southeast Asia, especially Burma,
might lead India to adopt a more forceful anti-Communist policy,
On the other hand, if continued friction over Kashmir leads to
war, the resulting economic stresses and communal disorders
would leave both India and Pakistan prostrate and vulnerable to
Communist penetration. In any event, the deep seated social |
and economic ailments of the area, and particularly of India,
preclude the development in the short run of strong states
capable of adding significantly to the power of the Western
coalition.

IV. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN LATIN AMERICA a

41. The situation in Latin America through mid-1953 should
continue to be favorable to US interests, despite certain internal
problems and a persistent isolationist attitude among large
Segments.of Latin American opinion. The area’s trade position
has improved since the Korean war and is likely to improve
further, All but a few governments are pro-US, and only in
Argentina and Guatemala are there pronounced anti-US attitudes
in high official circles. The chief present problem in Latin
America is the maintenance of political and economic Stability,
both of which have been increasingly threatened in the last two
years, é

~ 21 -

ing Nab enter: crm thy: dena bf Ae adcaats etn np blend

42, Important obstacles to full Latin American support of US
policies are the persistence of isolationist sentiment and un-
willingness to make sacrifices in the East-West conflict, which
to many Latin Americans appears primarily as a struggle be-
tween the US and USSR.: The force of isolationist and nationalist
opinion, particularly in countries where important elections are
approaching, has obstructéd direct military aid to the UN in
Korea, and has caused pro-US governments to act cautiously in
US negotiations to secure strategic materials. Communist stra-
tegy has been to play upon this isolationism by attacking Latin
American bonds with the US, Soviet adoption of a more con-
ciliatory policy would increase the susceptibility of isolationist
groups and complicate the task of governments desiring to co-
operate with the US. Nevertheless, in the event of a major
crisis, most Latin American governments would act in the spirit
of the Rio Treaty.

ae) ee

-6»

cs cee nee

ABER Re

Eaten Ye

het SEM. wade
