Nassar and the Middle East Situation-nationalization of the Suez Canal-e Gyptia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011513, dated 2 June 1956.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011513).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NINE} Case r MAA. 8.7 LILA vnd FOR k,, . 2 La .
oe , pare LA QAR SSS 78: 2 a

Noe wat E al, 1 - §

—
r 30-3-56
. 231 duly 1956

SPECIAL :
"  NAPIOWAL IHPELLIGENCE EBTINATE |
NUMBER 30-3-56

RASSER AND THE MIDDLE EAST SITUATION
(Advance Copy)

. Suoaitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENFRAL INTELLIGENCE
The followin; intelligence orgarizotions participated in the
Preporatior. of this estate: ‘Ihe Central ee Ne

and the intelligence organizaticns of the
State, the Ar, the l, the Air Force, and The Jcirt Staff.

eee

oa 31 July 1956. Concurring. were the Speciol Assistant,
Intelligence,’ Deperttunt of State; the Assistant Chief of
Star, Intelligences, Departrent cf the Arny; the Director of

_ Raval Intelligence; the Mreector of Tatellicence, USAF; and
the Deputy Director for Intellivence, The Joint Staff. The
Atocte Ber. y Corriiesion Representative to the ‘Tac, ond the
Assistant Director, Pedaro) Bureau of Investirmtion, abstained,

the subject being outeite of their Jurisdiction.

Pr R RELEAS
1 2225 9 8

‘fe 1 . rr

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGEANH C

Peay Pee CREM Reh eet ee, ch oe 31 Juz 7 1956 e

SUDJECT: Su 30-3-56: NASSER AND U MIDDLE EAST STTUATICN

TE. PRODLEM

To assess the iuplications of Kyrtian notionalizatioc of
the Suez Canal Coupany and probable developoents in the resultant
( situation. i

CONCLUSIONS

A. by raticoalisation cf the Suez Canal Conpany, President . ;
Rosser hos for the tine being greatly strengthened his position, not = :
caly an leader of ape, but also ds the spokesman and bc! of Ara> a 1
naticnelten throughout the Middle st. Be has won wild eccloin 1
fror: the Ecyptian population, warn: support from the greater part of tie
Arab world, ord approval fron the USSR. This has happened, nore-

over, just os his policies had appeared to have suffered a hui 11at in::
reversal through the unexpected refusal of the 1S and UK, ond geer-ingly

of the USSR os well,.to finance the Aswan Ei h Dam project. i 0

D. It 1s not impossible fcr the E tiene to run the canal

with reasonable competence, although Nasser would alnost certoirly

— ——— gen

cone to use eentrol of the canal to advance his m policies. The
Frinary si-mificance of Nosser's rove lies in its politicol and
psychological aspects rather thon in the threat it poses to canal

' operations. Nasser's actior has strengthened onti-Western, anti-

colonial, and nationalist trends throuchout the area, and if successful,
will encourage future moves toword eorly nationalization or other
action against foreign-owned oil pipe lines and petroleuw: facilities.

C. The courses of action open to the West in this situation
range from acquiescence with os good gruce os possible, thouzh vecourse
to diplomatic representaticns, legal oction ir internati mal or other
tribunals, appeals to the Usited Nations, ond econceic sanctions, to
nilitary operatiors acirst Exypt. The UK bas already adopted ¢rastic
econoriic measures, freezing the blocked E,yptian sterling balances
(about 110 m1 pounds) and all other Exyption fironcial assets
in the sterling area. ‘hese actions my seriously curtail Exyption
trade with the West, since nearly all of it is conducted in sterling.
France hos fully suppcrted the UK.

D. The courses of net 10: pen to Nasser in countering: Western

meosures short of military action include seizure of Iritish and
- ii -

other Western assets in Evypt, harassuent of shipping in the canal
by delays ard hindrances, r. ful i clusure_cf the canal to Western
shipping. Major interference with canal shipping would not only

ees pag

reduce the canal revenu.'s accruing to pt but would probatly
also crouse the active éisfaver of a wide rane of rations, ine lud-
ing ces of neutralist ond anticulontaliet feeling. Tt vould also
provide just! fication for possible forceful. Western action to keep
the coral open. ‘Accordingly, Moser is likely to avoid such inter-

2

fereree except os an extreme neasure an retaliation for Western

actions.

0 E. Beth the UK and France on the one band, and nasser on the
other, have already taken positions fron which they are unlikely
to retreot ir the rear future. The prospect is for a prolonged
period of crisis, during “which existing netionalist and anti: N
Western sertinent in the Arob states, ord probably anong neutrolist ee
anticolorial peoples, will probobly be intensified.

F. he recent developments are morkedly to the Soviet
interest, opening as they do a wider gulf between Ryrt and the
West, between the Arab vorld end the West, and possibly arong

Western nations thenselves as they try to agree on concerted

e ili -

*

fo”

couuterneasures. The USSR will probally porticipate in any

_Tegotiated solution of the canal crisis, and thereby will err ag ——

ite influence in the Middle et. The USSR will Probably c

Nosser support, both Political and eccnomic, in his resistarce to
Western pressures. Nasser would welcoue euch support. Althouch

at the presert tine his interests appear te run parallel tc those

or the USSR, we still believe thot Moser - intends to avoid Soviet
accu nation and to refrain frou a fire. ond permanent aligunent mitn
citler side ir the East-West struggle. ö

G. In the event of Western cilitary action against Nasser,
ve believe that the USSR would unke every effort to avoid direct
involvenert, but short of that would intersify ite efforts to jive
aid to Naseer, including possible covert introduction of uilitary
advisers and specialists, and would also copitalise on this situation
in the UN and in the Arab and neutrelist countries.

H. Terosi will view with satisfaction the widened rift
between its principal Arab antagonist and the major Western Pers.
It will probably appeal for greatly increased shipuenta .of art:
such shipnents would alost certainly lend to violent anti-Western
reactions throughout the Arab world. We de rot believe, however,
that Isroel will attack Evypt, at leet during the ni phases of

ive.

this crisis. Nasser will probably feel it necessary to avoid con-

flict with Isracl while he is ercntod in his contest with (reater
“powers. Huwever, if Naseer everyeo d the vietcr in the present
crisis, he is likely to take on irereasingly tiff attitude touurd

Terael.

I. It is possible that on interm tic exch conference of the
eigrataries to the 1000 coovention and other interested porties
night produce o formule rec. in nationalization of the canal
coupany but protecting the rights of internationel transit, heb
would ve accegtable to the West, the USSR, ond other interested
user courtries. There would’ be many chetacles to achieving Ecyptian
adherence to ony new accord involvin;, itornata control,
particularly in the light of Masser's position that be would refuse to
accept ony neasure of such control. However, it would be difficult
for hin to reject a solution if the Western Fovers, the USSR, ana
Colonbo Powers, and the najor shipping povers agreed in urging it
upon hin, particularly if it fell within the franevork of the „

convention.

> fates

DISCUSSION

1. THE-NATIONALIZATION-OF-THE SUEZ-CANAL— ~~
1. President Nasser'e nationalization of the Sues Canal repre-
sents - for the moment at least -- a highly effective move to
extricate himself from whet appeared to be a humiliating setback
in an otherwise extremely successful foreign policy. By accepting
arms from the Soviet Bloc in September 1955, Nasser at one stroke 185
elevated himself to a position of extraordinary prestige throughout
the Arab world as well as at home. This, and a series of other
moves, alienated the US and UK from Egypt without completely
severing connections; and they signified that Nasser had accepted
the support of the USSR without subjecting Egypt to Soviet domina-
Hone Subsequently it appeared to 3 in the world, and it must
have appeared to Nasser himeelf, that the USSR and the Western .
powers were bidding against each other for his friendship. As the token rae
of thie competitive bidding, Nasser secured an offer from the US
and UK to finance the Aswan High Dam project, and he either ob-

tained, or at least gave the impression that he had obtained. a

corresponding offer from the USSR. Thus he seemingly demon -
strated the advantages to be gained for his own primarily Arab

~~ interests from playing both sides in the East-West conflict, *
and he caused some allies of the West to wonder if they had

chosen the most profitable course.

2. As things developed, however, the estrangement be-

tween Nasser and the Western powere grew until the US, followed
by the UK, withdrew its offer of aid for the High Dam. At the 5
eame time it appeared that the USSR either had never clearly made
an acceptable offer, or if it had done eo had also withdrawn it.
The project had been so publicized by Nasser abroad as to become
a symbol of his prestige in the area; its abandonmest would have
been a severe blow to his position. To this ee Ke Seshueided by
a Speech vigorously attecking the US and especially the UK as exe .
ponents of imperialism, and he announced the nationalizing of the

Sues Canal, promising that the revenues from that enterprise would
be used to finance the High Dam, and would be Gufticient for that
purpose. Nasser's announcement was greeted with enthusiagm ia
Egypt and throughout the Arab world. At least for the time being

oe

— . — — tate etnies — ise, anal St

it has strengthened his position not only as leader of Egypt. but

also as the spokesman and symbol of Arab nationaliam- through
eg — —

out the Middle East.

3. we believe that the nationalization decision was taken on

short notice. Although the Egyptian government had long been
5 planning for eventual assumption of control over the canal when
the company'a concession expired in 1968, Naser had given no
prior indication of desire to take over the canal abead of time,
and in fact had specifically stated that be did not winh to do ao.
Aiter the US-UK announcements, the Egyptians ahowed every
sign of expecting that the USSK which ned certainly Steplares
interest in Gnancing the dam, would come to the rescue wher the

245

possibility of Weetern assistance disoppeared.

4. In view of the canal company's otatus as 8 private orgam-
cation incorporated within Egypt and operating within Egyptian
ö territory and Nasser's proposal to recompense shareholders on the
basie of Paris Bouree quotations just prior to hie announcement,
it must have appeared to the Egyptian government that eeizure would be

3

Pol

difficult to upset on legal grounds. Mozeove r. if Egypt should

would be little basia for legal action by the using powers. Al-
though most of the liquid assets of the canal company are now
outeide Egyptian control, Naseer hae already threatened to

Le hold up compensation of shareholders unless theese aseets are
mads available to him. He has additional leverage by virtue of eo
the fact that the British, who are principal shareholders, are aleo
the principal users of the canal and thus have a etrong intereet

C iu keeping it in operation. Now that British troops are no longer

pe stationed in the canal sone -- the last contingents left only a few

weeks ago -- the British cannot undertake military action to re-

gain control of the canal except through outright invasion of

a

Egyptian soil.

5. Meanwhile, nationalization could dring Neseer important

advantages. Net annual revenues will probably remain ‘as bee |

low the $100 million cited by Nasser in hie 26 July speech. even
if he takes advantage of the lee way for an increase in tolls

provided by the present operating agreements. Nevertheless,

net revenues of $49 or $50 miliion would ease Egypt's financial

— . — eanremanted

position. d some work on the N Dam might be under-
“taken More imporiantly the paychologtcal initiative tsmporariiy
lost by Nasser at the time of 25 US-UK annouricements on the
Aswan Dam has for the moment been triumphantly restored,

both in Egypt and in the sarsounsing Arab states. The fact

that he has been able to otzike back on his own, without

acceptance of Bloc assistance, further enhances his appeal. ce as

6. Nationalization of the canal bas brought an angry reaction
from the: UK and France, bet of whom have formally protested.
the move; there have also been expressions of concern from
ather Western nations. The UK has alreedy retaliated by stopping

arms s shipments to ‘Egypt, and vy tkreesias ail Egyption -
“private and public assets under its control (including about 19
million pounds in sterling balances). France ie cooperating
in the canal company's refusal to valoda ite French-held liquid

assets to Egypt.

“ gtatue ae owners of che cout cbmpany (the British government

7. Britieh and French opposition arises in part from their

owns about 45 percent of the stock and French private investors

practically all „ as major users of the canal itself

or of products transported through it. The most important of

these is oil, which in 1955 accounted for 63% of the tonnage

through the canal; more than 60 percent of Middle Zast oil * rate, Meds
shipments, which now teralen about 90 percent of Western

European requirements & aod are wahr revenue producers for

the UK in particular, now: e ey canal rather than by pipeline.

In particular, oil from Kowait aod Qatar, which ia least likely to

be affected by oil nationalization moves, is wholly dependert on |

tankers for lifting.

8. Even if the ‘Egyptians were to recompense = stock-
holders and operate the canal fo good faith, their seizure of
the canal would pose a auer of dangers for obippere ané those bee
dependent on products ‘transported through the canal. It is un-

certain whether Egypt will be able to run the canal efficiently

or whether an Egyptian administration will 3 the amount
on canal improvements. which the increasingly heavy. traffic
burden is making necessary. Egypt could raise tolle to some -
thing like twice their 8 devel without sickens prpbent
agreements binding the company. Direct administration of
the canal, moreover, will fectiitate Egyptian | use of it as a
political weapon. Egypt's control of the, canal approaches bas
already enabled it to dei this, as its protubition ot 1. ships N
and its restriction of . to Israel have demonstrated.
With actual control of the adminiotrative machinery Egypt v
be in a position to impose delays and harassments against the

ships «ui unfriendly or uncooperative powers ofa  soxt aifficul: ae

to present for action * the UN 8 the World Court. i

9. The political and peyehologicel impact of Egypt's move
weighs far more uv! in British and, French thinking than e con- :
cern for the company's revenues or even the rike of interference |

with traffic. The British and French see nationalisation of the

a

“faa
ae
ONS.

_ series of attacks on Western interests i in the eres — ‘the most
— —— — ae

Suez Canal as but another, and probably the grevest, ina Jong

notable being Iran's nationalisation of the ofl industry and Egypt's *

unile te ral “abrogation”. of the: 1936 treaty with the UK in 1951.
They are almost certainly convinced that if Nasser's move goes
unchecked it will be followed by similar actions throughout the

Middle East, and the position of Western oil interests, which

dcs British in particular onsider vital to. their own » wurvival, 5

will be gravely jeopardiced. Moreover, they recognize wat
successful oaticnelisation of the css! m greatly | increase
Nasser e influence in the. other Arad etates and ie thus likely

to lead to a further erosion of Western prestige aod an increased

‘willingness on the part of these states to follow Egypt's dead 1

relations with the Bloc and the wet. 1. is primarily # for these

: ‘French as are en to demand the

8 menaures „t e Nasser from ene away with

it."

ee 2 22
Gawd 25

10. Reactions from other nations thus far have been less

— — — gil

F — intense. The nationalization’ announcement was generally bailed
throughout the Arab world, including Iraq. In Asia, the acceptance
of Egypt's right to nationalize has cous mingled with some ex-
pression of concern over the abruptness of the move and the

possibility of adverse effects on trade links with the West;

2
He

Ceylon's prime minister has suggested the possibility of a meet- ae
ing of the Colombo Powers to discuss the matter. Early Bloc
reactions have been favorable.

Il. POSSIBLE EGYPTIAN COURSES OF ACTION

u. The immediate outlook is for an extremely critical period

in which Egyptian moves will depend in great part on what actions
are taken by interested outside powers << including the UK, France, : 5
and the US, as well as the USSR and even Israel. Naseer is, however, :

not likely to make any major concessions because of Western

diplomatic persuasion or Western efforts to secure legal

29

redrese through international law. Indeed, to defy such limited :
Western efforte would probably at least temporarily strengthen
his position, since his actione could be made to appear as &
struggle against Western imperialist conspiracy. By the same
token, he ie not likely to make major concessions because of
Western economic eanctions against Egyrt, a boycott of the canal,
or the impounding of the Egyptian sterling assets in the UK, even
though such moves would create critical problems for Egypt ae
which is already short of foreign exchange and confronted with
difficulties in selling ite cotton. He probably believes he could
count on assistance from the Bloc and the Saudis in euch a situa-

tion.

12. If the UK and other western Powers should attempt to en-
force their demands by occupation or blockade, Naseer would

probably attempt such military resistance as he could, meanwhile

‘appealing to the UN. Although bs himself would realise the

hopeleseness of military action by Egypt alone, he would feel

compelled to make the gesture, hoping for assistance from the
Dloc, and counting or the revulsion of Arab and neutraliet

opinion against che West to bring him further aid.

12A. It is possible that an international conference of the
S 8185 to the 1888 convention and other interested parties
might produce a formula recognizing nationalization of the canal
company but protecting the rights of international transit, which
would be acceptable to the West, the USSR, and other interested
user countries. There would be many obstacles to achieving
Egyptian adherence to any new accord involving international

control, particularly in the light of Nasser‘s position that he

would refuse to accept any measure of euch control. However,

it would be difficult for him to reject a solution if the Western
powers, the USSR, the Colombo Powers, and the major shipping
powers agreed in urging it upon him, particularly if it fell

within the framework of the 1888 convention.

- 10a «

Egyptian Operation of the Canal

13. Nasser initially reacted to the UK's freezing of

— — . — —E— — Em em tom mmm —

Egyptian assets by threatening to close the canal to British

shipping. At present, he is emphzsizing Egypt's intention to

operate the canal efficiently and to maintain it in good condi-
probably

tion. However, he wouldfake measures to prevent the

passage of ships involved if he were confronted with a

persistent refusal on the part of major users of the canal

to pay tolls to Egypt.

14. If the West decides to accept Egyptian control of the
canal, or makes only ineffective protects, Nasser ie probably
prepared to abide for some time by current rules and practices
with respect to level of charges, freedom of transit, and the
like. Having taken the big gamble in seizing control, he would
probably prefer to avoid harassing measures against Western

shipping interests, at least in the near future, lest such actions

11

should serve as the final provocation célling forth violent ,

countermeasures by the West. 1 e he will be Bae

5 —— — —

to demonstrate the legitimacy of his action to other nations,

particularly the neutralist states of south and southeast Asia.

15. In time however, if he felt hie control of the canal to
be secure, the temptation to exploit his position to gain increased
revenue would probably become irresistible. Eventually, more- 158

over, Naseer might come to use control of the canal for poli-

tical purposes; for example, ae part of a campaign against
British intereete in the Middle East.

Actions with respect to Other Western Interests Within Egypt

16. Whatever the outcome of the Suez controversy itself, -

the tensions engendered by that affair can only increase . a

already e¢rong hostility toward * influence in the miaais”
East. In almost any event, hie campaign N Western in-
terests in the area will be continued. The actions already taken

by the British and French indicate that an intensified struggle
* 5 . a ae

is virtually certain to occur.

—ͤ— 2 2 — Maye HR we mR OO UNS:

2.
2

17. Nasser may move to take over private Western in-
te reste in Egypt. Such action would be particularly likely as
a form of reprieal in the event that sanctions by the Western
Powers resulted in a form of economic warfare between the

latter end Egypt.
Other E an Actions

10. Nasser hae for some time been clearly committed to
the broad goal of undermining Weetern influence in the Middle
East and Africa, The Nasber regime's active propaganda
against the West, both within Egypt and in other areas of the
Arab world and Africa, is virtually certain to contines: hae
Suec iseve may 3 ite appeal among anti-Western end |
noutralist elements, eopecially if Western senctica to the canal
ecizure enables Naseer to er either asa martyr to im- :

perialism or as pane who has successfully defied the Woot. oe

19. One important target of the Egyptian ees

paign will continue to be Western oil interests in the Arab states,
Nasser would probably like to eee a nationalization of the oil |

213

industry throughout tha Arab world, and in the longer run may

deszpected to.sncourage.auch a development. In. h hort

run, however, à more promising opportunity for undermining
the Weeterna oil position would be to promote fen by ofl
transit states aimed at weakening or terminating Western
coutzol over the oll pipelines fom Iraq and Saudi Arsbis to
the Mediterranean, Such action might be particularly appeal-
ing to Naseer since the unsettled situation in the Sues canal
increases the importance to the Weet of theses pipelines.

If Egypt seeks to bring about euch action, its chief hope
would be in Syris, where Egyptian influence is strong
arciong important factions in the anti-Western and unstable
government. Egypt aleo seeks to weaken the Western oil

| companies in the Middle East by promoting labor unrest and
nationalist-led e among employees of the c-
panies. |

ee ee |

— — yee

20. Other Egyptian action against Western interests in

the Arab etates will continue to include political supportfor r

— ——äẽ— — NN RTI Ne

anti-Western nationalists in Syria 5 Jordan, encourege-

ment of Saudi Arabia in ite already prohibitive demande on the
US as the price of renewal of the Dhahran Airfield. Naseer
will continue his efforts to diminish US and UK influence in
Libya and hia campaign against France in North Africa. Naseer
will aleo increase efforts to extend Egyptian influence in the”
Sudan. There is nothing new in this pattern of Egyptian action,
which hae been going on since Nasser emerged as ‘the Spokesmen
for nationalism in the ares. The chief danger tn the present |
situation, however, is 02 existing nationalist and anti-Western
sentiment in these erates . Ps intensified by sympathy for

the Egyptian leader 10. struggle over the canal iseue.

In such an event, Naseer's influence over other Arab governe

ments may ee

—— — 2 ——— — 1

acco centers — .

. ä ————— oes

— OA —

— —

21. Actions toward Israel. Naseer's hostility toward
lorael will not be lessened by his current conflict with the
Western Powers, and the Egyptian regime will continue to
exploit the Israeli issue as an effective means of gaining sym-
= pathy and support in the Arab world. At least in the immediate
crisis over the canal, Naseer will probably be anxious to avoid
serious trouble with Ierael, and is not likely to go out of his
way to provide the Israelis with an excuse for military action
against Egypt. However. if Nasser emerges as the victor
in the present crisis he is likely to take an increasingly stiff

attitude toward Israel.
I. THE ROLE OF THE USSR

22. The Soviet role in recent developments is obscure.
There 15 strong evidence that the USSR. did in fact offer to
finance the foreign exchange requirements of the High Aswan

Dam some months ago and that -- possibly with Soviet

216

— — — — ———

action on
Egypt took a. / . the offer in the .cxpectation of getting the

money from the West. Since the unexpected withdrawal of

the US-UK aid offer, the record haa been ambiguous, with
and Egyptian officials

statements by Soviet officials in Egypthteat the aid offer still

stood being matched by statements of Foreign Minister

Shefilov and others that the USSR was willing to support other

.

development projects, leaving the implication that it was not

hel
prepared to/finance the dam.

23. It is possible that Nasser‘s decision to nationalize
A the Suez Canal was taken in collusion with the USSR. We con-
sider this unlikely, though we believe that Nasser made his
. e with confidence that he would receive Soviet approval
8 and support.
R N probaly help Naseer in his palitical cnt .
ferith the West, by such methods as diplomatic support inthe
UN and elsewhere and economic assistance to alleviate the
effects of Western economic sanctions. It will alzaost certainly
continue to provide military aid, and help for industrial projects
and other enterprises of economic development, probably ine
cluding some assistance toward launching the High Dam project
if Nasser requests it.

ae

FF tree eeepc cea

oe ee ene

25. In the event of Western military action against Naseer,

De believe that the USSR would make every effort to hee AO ae:

direct involvement, but short of that would intensify ite
efforts to give aid to Naseer, including possible covert intro-
duction of military advisers and specialists, and would also
capitalize on this situation in the UN and in the Arab and |

neutraliat countries.

26. The USSK has recently made some efforts to cultivate

better relations. with Israel and certain Faghdad Pact members.

— — i — — — — — — — — —

Although it will almost certainly take advantage of opportuni-

ties for widening the brecht lithe ost to Heelt “te probably
considers that rapid consolidation of an especially close and

exclusive relationship with Egypt is not only unnscessary but

actually undesirable at this time in view of the probable ad- —
verse effects on its freedom of maneuver. It will probably
continue to avoid full endorsement of the Arab position on

Palestine.

in hostilities, will probably continue
27. Naeser himself; unless involved / to place important

Hmitations on the political commitments he would willingly
give to the Bloc. He probably believes that he can pursue in-
definitely an "independent foreign policy" and that the present
necessity of accepting heavy economic commitments to the

Bloc is a temporary proposition which can be brought back into
proper focus at a later pay he ‘iss reasonable precautions.
In so doing, Nasser probably overestimates Ef abllity to retain

-19-

1 r

‘dence on the Bloc Be might find himself trapped. However,

genuine Zreedom of action. Should the situation so worsen

as materialiy to increase his already great economic depen-

we believe that at least for some time to come Egypt and the
eubstantial

Bloc will be linked by a * though by no means complete

community of interest with respect to Middle East questions

rather than by any more binding tles, and that both sides will

continue to have important reservations about their mutual.

relationship.

27a. The canal crisis has clearly opened to the USSR the

opportunity of further expanding its influence in the Middle

negotiated . ;
East, since a Xesolution of the crisis is likely to involve the

approval and perhaps the participation of the USSR.

- 20 -

— — —— —

ne ee ae

oe

725

IV, REACTIONS IN PRO-EGYPTIAN AND UNCOMMITTED _ eee |
ARAB STATES

28. The initial public reaction to N88 action in
the pro-Egyptian and uncommitted Arab states has been
highly favorable. His dramatic act of defiance has raised
his standing in the Arab world to new heights. At least in
the short run, the action will have en intoxicating effect on
Arab nationalist sentiment similar to that engendered by the
original Egyptian arms deal with the Soviet Bloc. In addition,
certain Arab states may be encouraged, both by example and

persuasion, to take similar

anti- Western zctione in proportior as Nasser e action appears

to have been & profitable move. _ wails, Aree. nationalists will ah
Snel Ry lmageeem A — ere ee ss 4

generally approve Neseer's 1 acdees, the degree of concrete
support they will be prepared todfer Egypt will probably depend \
on the etrength of Western and general world reaction. More- ;
over, the ultimate effect in both the uncommitted and in the
ro-Egyptian Arab states will depend on whether Naseer can

carry through the action successfully without incurring severe

Western penalties.
29. Saudi Arabia, Nasser‘s decision comes at a particu: ©”

larly unfortunate time oo far as Western relations with Saudi

set a hich price for renewal of the agreement covering ne of the
US air base at Dhahran, and in the wake of Nasser'e defiance

of the Western Powers, it ia unlikely that Saud will come down

~ enough to meet present US terms. Failure to reach agreement

Concerning the air base would ceuse Saud seriously to consider
obtaining Bloc arms, although he would prefer to obtain arms
from the US or some other non-Soviet source. Meanwhile, Saudi
Arabia (and Yemen) will be encouraged by Nasser's action to
press territorial claims against the British and the British-

supported sheikhdoms even more atrongly.

30. at the same time, the Saudis will remain anxious to
avoid such a deterioration in their relations with the US a would
endanger their vital oll revenues from the Arabian American Oil
Company (ARAMCO). While the Egyptian action in taking over
the Canal Company will provide a powerful fillip to Arab inclina-
tions to nationalize foreign owned assets, the Saudis are aware
ison the Iranian experience of the great difficulties of attempt -

ing to operate an oil industry in the face of concerted Western

commercial opposition. Nationalizaticn of the TAPLINE facili-

ties (and raising rates) may be considered, but would probably

not be undertaken if ARAMCO threatened to retaliate by cutting
production. While an attempt to nationalize the oi! industry

as a whole in the next several years appears unlikely, the
Egyptian action might encourage the Saudis to raise their royalty
demands againet the company. Even here they will Probably
péoceed cautiously, however, and may counsel moderation ~~
should the Egyptians threaten to raise canal tolle to such an ex-

tent as to interfere with the Gow of oil.

21. Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon. Egypt's ally Syria will
8 Nasse r's action. Under Nasser's influence, Syria might
be encouraged to undertake nationalization of the oil pipelines _ |
traversing the country or, at least, seek to obtain larger reve-" ae
nues from the operating companies. Syria'e actions will be

— *

. in considerable measure by the N of 11

3

government. Conservative elements appear in recent weeks to
bave regained some strength, especially within the army.
224

However, Nasser's coup is more likely to strengthen pro-

P woukd-be-incined towsed anti-Western”

moves. On balance, unlces the Egyptians receive a set-back
at Western hanis, the chances of eventual actions against
Western pipelines and other interests appear to be better than

even.

32. The present weak Jordanian government is probably
unwilling to jeopardize its British support and subsidy, but will
temporize for fearcf the public reaction to any pro-Western
etand. It will be subject to strong internal pressures to give
Egypt maximum diplomatic and propaganda support. Jordan will
nevertheless probably continue secking to avoid Egyptian domina -
tion. Should the Egyptians decide to oust the US economic aid
mission, they might well urge other Arab states having such |
programs to follow a similar course. In such a case, Nassor's
greatest chance of euccess would be in Jordan, where US ad
hae already been sujet to severe nationalist attacks.

25

33. The Lebanese government will probably adopt @ non ·
committal attitude until it ascertains the degree of Egypt's
success in defying the West. While presently engaged in &
diepute with the Iraq Petroleuni Company concerning its share
of the pipeline revenues, Lebanon would prefer to avoid drastic
actions against Western interests because of ite own economic
self-interest ae @ trading and financial center in the area.
Lebanon will, however, find it increasingly difficult to resist
being swept along in any general wave of anti-Western senti-

ment and activities which may follow Nasser's action.

34. Reactions to Western Retaliatory Measures. The
reaction in = ro- end uncommitted Arab erates to

etrong measures against Nasser by the Western Powers would

probably be enerp.: eines of economic sanctions would

probably arouse sympathy for Egypt and eve further aer

to demands for anti - Western retaliatory measures. The Uke -
lihood of such effects would be increased in the event of
intervention dy Western military forces or a substantial

« 26+

Lye

K.

the Nasser regime. While her appears to be Little the Turko can i

increase i2 Western arms shipments to Ierael and wideepread
attacka on western lives and property might take place. Should
Naseer be forced to make 3 in order to reach a
settlement there would at best be a grumbling acceptance by
pro-Egyptian elements. Persons and groups friendly to the West
would, however, be encouraged to assert themselves more openly.
The Western position would accordingly be strengthened, but
further actions to bolster the position of friendly nations would |
probably be required if the gains were not to be lost.

V. REACTION OF TURKEY, IRAQ, AND THE PERSIAN GULF
PRINCIPALITIES |

35. The reaction in Turkey to Naseer's action has been un-

favorable. Relations between the two countries have not been good

in recent years = the present Turkish government would in all

probability favor strong Western retaliatory measures against

do ts influence the situation directly, they would give moral
support to Western countermeasures. On the other band, Western

- 27 «

ome *

2%

failure to act walld tend further to weaken Turkish faith in

the UK -- already somewhat under a eloud because of the foo

Cyprus issue -- ae a firm partr.or in the Baghdad Pact.

36. The situation in Iraq is more complicated. The Iraqi
prese and public has responded favorably to Nasser‘s action
but the Iraqi government hae so far acted with greater reserve.
In addition, some popular pressures may be generated for ~
nationalization of the Dritish-dominated Iraq Fes ele nn Company.
The opposition is virtually impotent to force the pro- Western
ruling group's hand, however, and in any case the pressures in
this direction are not likely to be significantly greater than when
Iran nationalized its oil industry, and hence should be containable.
In the event Nasser successfully ‘establishes bs control of the
canal, however, the anti-Western pressure on the ruling BFOUD eae . :

in Iraq will be greatly incensed:

37. Meanwhile, the Iraqi gevernment will try to turn the
West's attitude toward Naseer to their own advantage by privately

urging increased Western presuure an Egypt and more sympathetic

28

oak

“wider British protection. Nationalist elements will eyinpathiae |

consideration of Iraqi arms needs. The government would

regard strong Western measures against Nasser as a sign that
thei memberehip in the Baghdad Pact was not a mistake;

Western inaction would further disillusion them. Considering
the difficulties which they would face in effecting a physical
take-over in Syria, the Iraqis would probably not seek to carzy
out this long-time ambition unless the Syrians threatened to
take action with respect to the IPC pipeli * ‘which would 360
pardize Iraqi oil . The possibility of a British-
inspired Iraqi move against Syria designed both to divert
attention from Vitesse and to fulfill Iraqi ambitions should not

be entirely excluded. |

38. There will probably be Netle immediate — to the
moves involving Egypt in the of] producing shoikhdoms oe Ku- 1 1758

wait, Dabraia, and the omaller Persian Gulf entities which are 5 =

with Naseer, but anti-Dritieh actions · except possibly on as

Bahrain - will not immediately develop.

-29-

take euch action in Eaypt's interest, however much some of them

VI. ACTIONS OF OTHER ASIAN STATES

— 39. In Iran-reactions to the Nasser government's moves and
to possible Western 5 will be mixed. As a mem-
ber of the Baghdad Pact and oe the basis of ite own experience
with oil nationalisation, the iranian government is at to be
skeptical of Nasser's move. it will furthermore be concerned
over the possible effect on on ehipments through the canal.
Nationalist elemente which have long opposed the British will

sympathize with Egypt.

40. India, Pakiotan, and Ceyion wilt probably all feel eome
concern over the future status of the canal and the possible
effect on their economies of higher tolls which the Nasser regime
might seek to levy. At the same time, those three Commonwealth
members will tend to share the feeling that Nasser dae a right to

may disapprove hie abrupt methdds. The press and vocal public

in these countries have already expressed sympathy for Egypt's

position. Such Southeast Asian countries as Burma and Indonesia
« 30 -

can be expectod to give Egypt moral support ao a member of the
Pandung grouping. Their involvement will, nowever, be less
direct. On the other hand, Japan, which relies heavily on over-
seas trade, is concerned over the effect on its commerce of a
possible increase in canal tolls or any slowdown or closing of the
waterway, and might support Western efforts to correct the

situation. *

VI. ISRAELI REACTION TO THE SITUATION

41. The predominant reaction of Israel to recent events

has been one of satisfaction over the clear and sharp conflict
4

which has emerged between the Western Powers and lerael'e

aa ag Arab ay: 8 some concern leat ae in-

1 Bike achieve the power permanently to block leraeli eccens.
to the Suss Canal) lorael almost eertainly counts on being ate .

to Kehle re a net benefit from the situation.

42. In general, lerael may be expected to pursue the line ran ;

taat the more trouble the Western Powers have with the Arab
-31- |

states, the greater should be their support to Israel. The most
immediate objective of the Israelis will be to secure arms from
the West, hoping that the Western Powers’ resentment and dis-
illusion with Naseer wilt cause them to revise their previous
policies against arming Israel. Israel also probably feele that
the opportunity has come to focus attention on its own transit
rights in Suez and the Gulf of Aqabs, which Egypt has always
denied it (with minor exceptions in the case of vesecls of other |
nations carrying Israeli cargoes). Israel will probably seek to
aseociate itself with any multilateral international action taken
against Nasser on the canal issue, and will also press in the UN
and with the Western Powers for implementation of the 195] UN
Security Council resolution calling on Egypt to permit the transit
of Ilerseli ehipring eren the canal.

43. Israel would probably 8 Western enllitaty a action
An response to Nasser's .eeizure of the canal, The Israclie
would probably estimate that determined Western military action
would not only Jead to Nasser's downfall, but would also very likely

~ 32 -

|
4
am

—— . —. a ae cea

strike a severe blow at the potential for action of militantly

anti-Israeli elemente in Syria and Jordan. We believe that the
: chases are against Israel itself deliberately initiating war with
Egypt, at least during the early phases of the present crisis.
The danger of such action might materially increase if the
Western Powers undertook military action - in which case Israel
might seek to join them: or if Western relations with Egypt 3
deteriorated so drastically that Israel could feel reasonably con- |
fident of ‘Avoiding sevore Western punitive measures as a result
( of attacking Egypt -- presumably with the aim of destroying the
ae | Egyptian forces and toppling Nasser. Short of such situations,
Israel's military policy toward Egypt anc ite other Arab neighbors |
Je? N to resin confined to a tough one of retaliation for 1
barasements and eau. to den: if border incidents 2 expand
fato var. 1 ,

~ 33 «
