Nicaragua - Factors and Figures in the Process Leading to a Transition Governme
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096654, dated 4 August 1978.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096654).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

7

cath CANTER LISRARY . | AY, pr
MANDATORY REVIEW 1

CASE # NLC 225

DOCUMENT facie 7 September 1978

MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT: Nicaragua - Factors and Figures in the Process
Leading. to a Transition Government

Prospects remain dim for any internally generated
compromise in Nicaragua that would lead to a transitional
government. The political polarization, lack of a uni-
fied opposition leadership or program, and the general
perception that the US is the key to a viable solution
militate strongly against any peacefully agreed upon

transition among Nicaraguan principals alone.

We believe, however, that an active mediation role
by the US--even without guarantees to either side--would i
be a sufficient Catalyst to bring moderates, and even- '
tually most groups in the Broad Opposition Front (FAO) ,
to the bargaining table. Their receptivity to an ex
ternally aided resolution of the political crisis is
increasing as events unfold. For example, there is a
growing anxiety in opposition ranks that the present
Situation can only lead to a violent faceoff between
Somoza and the radical extreme, with the moderates in
the middle the big losers. This sentiment is strongest
among those with the most to lose--businessmen--but will
probably spread among the political components of the
FAO. Another factor is their belief that the US is dis-
tancing itself from Somoza; active mediation would be ;
read by the opposition as an implicit effort to budge
Somoza from his intransigence.

Members of the Nicaraguan Development Institute,
the country's largest business organization, have al-
ready contended to the US Embassy that they and most FAO
members would accept US or some third party mediation.
These representatives' views are probably close to those
of several other FAO principals--notably Nicaraguan Demo-
cratic Movement head and businessman Alfonso Robelo.
Rene Sandino of the officially recognized Conservative
Party has already risked opprobrium by meeting privately
with Somoza. Other Conservative Party factions and po-
litical middle-of-the-roaders, typified by Ramiro Sacasa

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
SEQGT 02 JAN 1997

mo COPY CARTER LIBRARY"

of the breakaway Liberal Party faction, would probably
follow their moderate instincts and participate in a
_- US=mediated dialogue. ie oe

Other anti-Somoza partisans, such as Union of Dem-
ocratic Liberation leader Cordova Rivas and opposition
newspaper editor Xavier Chamorro might cling to their
precondition that Somoza must go, but in the end would
probably prefer to be part of a mediation effort that
might involve, for example, both the US and the Church,
rather than to be on the outside looking in. Some of
the more extreme elements of-the FAO, such as the small
Socialist Party, appear to have been left behind by the
rush of events and would probably flow with the current.
The decision of the Group of Twelve might turn on the
current state of anti-Somoza agitation and the potential
role in mediation talks of the Sandinista guerrillas, for
which it acts as spokesman. If Somoza should hold his
ground through the strike, then US involvement and the
possibility of substantial pressure being brought to
bear on the President would offer even the more extreme
opposition the prospect of an outside catalyst that
might further erode Somoza's power base. These groups
nevertheless would be suspicious participants in a media-
tion effort, ready to pull back and charge bad faith.

The opposition is likely to enter into mediation in
the same disorganized and acephalous manner in which it
has operated to date. Attempting to agree on minimum
demands and a spokesperson beforehand could prove counter-
productive. Positions would settle on the least common
denominator--that Somoza must go immediately. Trying to
settle on a spokesperson would introduce new strain into

what is, at best, a fragile unity.
Ovvosition Personalities

The anti-Somoza movement is made up of numerous
and shifting forces. It is possible to identify the key
organizations and leaders, but exceedingly difficult to
assign relative strengths, since fortunes rise and fall
each week and the movement remains amorphous. The gen-
eral success, for example, of the current national strike
will determine to a great extent the future weight of
strike promoter Alfonso Robelo in the opposition's drive.
To some degree, the voice of the Group of Twelve waxes
and wanes with the level of Sandinista guerrilla activity.

x

Sz gh

pilates bres ete an ee ere Sa STF, ee

copy CARTER LIBRARY

pce ee ent ee Set si ge a ee rr

pte meee

The key coordinating mechanism for the opposition

in recent months has been the Broad Opposition Front

- (PRO)., which includes virtually every.anti-Somoza group
except the FSIN guerrillas. The FAO's sole point of
consensus is that Somoza must go. It is a loose coali-
tion of comvenience and opportunity and does not purport
to represent any of the other interests of its member
organizations. Consequently, the FAO could be a useful
conduit by which the opposition might be brought to the
bargaining table with Somoza, particularly if there were
some assurance that he might leave office early. After
that initial step, however, there could be some preak-
down, with private sector: organizations, traditional
parties of the right, and leftist groups espousing dif-
ferences in degree, if not in kind, over the details
and process of transition.

The leading figures in the private sector, which
has the clout to command a voice in negotiations over a
transition in government, are Manuel Jose Torres of the
Nicaraguan Development Institute (INDE), Alfonso Robelo
of the Nicaraguan Democratic Movement (MDN), and repre-
sentatives from the Federation of Chambers of Commerce
. and the Chamber of Industries (CADIN) .

Among the traditional opposition political parties
which would also have to participate are the officially
recognized Conservative Party (PCN), led by Rene Sandino,
and the "Authentic" and "Aguero" factions of the PCN,
led by Emilio Alvarez Montalvan and Fernando Aguero re~
spectively. The other less important opposition par—
ties--represented in the Union of Democratic Liberation
(UDEL) headed by Rafael Cordova Rivas--include:

-- The Nicaraguan Socialist Party (PSN),
with an old guard faction led by Luis
Domingo Sanchez Sancho and another
faction under Julio Briceno Davila.

-- The Constitutionalist Liberal Movement
(MLC) led by Ramiro Sacasa.

-~- The Social Christian Party (PSC), with
one faction led by Alvaro Taboada
Teran and another (not in UDEL) under
Tose Esteban Gonzalez and Roger Miranda
a Gomez.

Se COPY CARTER LIBRARY

——

Two additional opposition forces would have to be
included, chiefly because of their popular followings.
These are the newspaper La Prensa, whose director is
Xavier Chamorro Cardenal, and the Group of Twelve, which
might speak effectively enough for the FSLN guerrillas
to negate any claim for direct Sandinista participation.
Presumably because of/their diverse makeup, the Twelve
have no designated spokesman, but they ought to be able
to select, at the most, three or four of their number
to represent them.—

The Catholic Church, probably in the person of
Managua Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo, could serve
as intermediary, but would in any event be a very inter-
ested party. Although some student (Revolutionary Stu-
dent Front, FER) and labor (CGT-I, CIN, CUS) opposition
groups exist, neither sector is extensively organized,
and both have some representation through other organi-
zations.

Somoza's Backers

Somoza and his supporters are likely to enter into
mediation for one simple reason--the belief that it can
be turned to Somoza's advantage. Somoza's goal remains
to serve until 1981, and he will participate initially
with that as his bottom line.

The two chief elements in Somoza's active power
structure--the National Guard and the Liberal Party-~
have always depended entirely on Somoza's effective rep-
resentation and protection of their interests. If he
should be persuaded or compelled, however, to step down
before his term ends in 1981, both of these groups would
need independent assurances that their rights and priv-
ileges--as distinguished from Somoza's--would be safe-
guarded, at least through representation in any nego-
tiations leading to his departure.

This means that the Guard as an institution would
have to be consulted on the transition. General Jose
R. Somoza, the President's half-brother and second-in-
command, and Major "Tachito" Somoza, the President's son,
are probably too closely identified with the dynasty to
speak for the Guard as an entity under such unique and
unsettling circumstances. Of course, the rest of the
Guard hierarchy also has close personal ties to the Pres-
ident, but if Somoza were to leave office, most officers

- cory CARTER LIBRARY

Shin Vo ee re a

——

eet eenm emer

et

would be forced to perceive their own interests as di-
vorced from his. Some have been thinking in these terms
already—-looking ahead to Somoza's schétuled departure
in 1981--and speaking of institutionalizing and profes-
sionalizing the Guard in order to make it acceptable to
any successor.

We expect that if the. Guard as an institution is to
be party to a negotiated transition, the existing offi-
cial hierarchy will prove to be representative of the
Guard as a whole. In short, Chief of Staff General
Armando Fernandez would be rhe most likely and accept—
able single spokesman. for the Guard. He is respected,
intelligent, and by far one of the most capable officers 1.5(d)

- ;
 ———————— 1.6(d)(6)

Only one of the other five members of the General
Staff, General Jose Ivan .Alegrett, would perhaps be in=
clined to reject Fernandez' lead... Alegrett is ambitious, 1.

1

— He has been G-3, in command of ‘oper-
ations; for roughly seven months, giving him some control
over troops. He does not appear to have a significant
personal following. The. combat units in Managua, the
bulk of the Guard's fighting force, are presently under
Jose R. Somoza's command and presumably would not be
allowed to fall to a maverick Alegrett. The departmental
commands are less certain, but they are also less impor-
tant. Among retired officers, Minister of Finance Samuel
Genie and Ambassador ta Japan Julio Gutierrez are also , ;
widely respected potential spokesmen for the Guard.

The Liberal Party (PLN) is probably less certain
of its own interests as divorced from Somoza's. Over
the years, those Liberals who have argued in favor of
making the PLN something more than a personal vehicle
and control mechanism have had to leave the party ranks
and set up dissident Liberal organizations. Clearly
the party would like.to remain on the political scene
as a competitive force. Unlike the Guard, however, nis
lacks the physical might to assure itself a voice and
it probably does not have the image or hierarchical
structure to function independently of the President.
Nevertheless, the Liberals would have to have a voice
in any negotiations, presumably through their board of
directors. The board's chief officers, aside from Somoza

4
q

sree teaaties ee as ee a er aw eee

COPY CARTER LIBRARY

as party president, are: Vice-President Lorenzo Guerrero
Gutierrez, Secretary Alceo Tablada Solis, and Treasurer
Pabio- Rener. Among the 14 other boardwmembers, the

most important are probably Francisco Urcuyo, Orlando
Montenegro, and Cornelio Hueck.

Somoza has passive support in the government bureau-
cracy, among retired Guard officers, and in some business
circles, but their interests could be effectively repre-
sented through the Guard and the PLN.

Mediation Process =“

How long a mediation effort and possible accompany—
ing truce might last would depend upon how and by whom
it was conducted. Whether a week or a month, it would
eventually founder as it confronted the central issue-—
whether Somoza would step down before 1981. If the US
does not bring to bear whatever additional pressure is
necessary to prompt Somoza to agree to his early depar- ct
ture from office, then the mediation process will likely ;
fail, with both sides returning to the status quo ante, i
and the possible attendant violence.

From the lineup of Nicaraguan players and positions ;
and from our perception of the pivotal and unique US :
role, we are not inclined to see other third party or
multilateral mediation as offering much prospect for
success. There is some growing receptivity among Nica-
raguan oppositionists to an OAS or third country role,
chiefly engendered by the fear of spiraling violence.

However, an eventual solution to the underlying problem
of Somoza's continuance in office will likely still re-
quire the US to weigh in heavily. A multilateral vehicle
would help camouflage US responsibility, but not reduce
Le,

Presuming the US convinced Somoza that his best in-
terests dictated a negotiated compromise that involved
his departure, he would still bargain hard for every
point, every concession. Somoza would argue for a con-
stitutional solution as close to the scheduled 1981
elections as possible. He would resist strongly any
permanent ban on family members holding political office
or military command and attempt to keep his economic
empire intact. President Somoza would still not believe
that his family was finished in Nicaraguan political

t

a - COPY.CARTER LIBRARY

~~

life and would be calculating an eventual return. Such
tactics would also draw out the negotiating process and
Somoza, with an eye on US polls and the_1980 election,
would hope. this might operate to his advantage.

The converse would be true of the opposition, whose
demands would revolve around Somoza's quick resignation,
the departure of his half-brother and son from the Na-
tional Guard, and a transitional government leading to
early elections. If the Somozas were ousted, the oppo-
sition might be willing to observe constitutional proce-

_a@ures that would involve the--selection of a mutually

agreed upon Liberal Party successor to Somoza. The suc~
cessor would set in motion the legal procedures leading
to an early election.

Again, the US role would be critical. The closer
Somoza can come to holding out until near the 1981 elec-
tions and the shorter the time span between Somoza's
stepping down and the date for elections, the less ac—
ceptable will be the solution for the opposition. There
are some in the anti-Somoza ranks who would see the
President's agreement--underwritten by the US--to step
down even in 1980 as a significant victory. if they
believed the US stood firmly behind such a compromise,
they and others might Settie for such a deal rather than
risk the unpalatable alternatives.

_ Many in the opposition, however, would be inclined
to believe that if the US and the flow of events could
force Somoza to agree to leave office in 1980, then he
could be forced to leave earlier, and they would be mo-
tivated to hold out. The fear of again being outsmarted
by the Somoza clan would be an underlying factor that
would increase in direct proportion to Somoza's ability
to work out a plan that maintained him until close to
the US election in 1980. Such a plan would therefore
run a significant risk of splitting the opposition and
undermining prospects for a solution.

For these reasons, some transitional government not
under Somoza's thumb would be crucial to acceptance of
a compromise by much of the opposition. It would permit
a sufficient buffer to inhibit Somoza's interference in
the campaign and electoral process. - It also would allow
sufficient time to ensure that Somoza and his relatives
had indeed severed ties with their old power structure,

thereby reducing the chances that Somoza could at the
last minute undermine the election and. gamble that the

US presidential campaign would prevent decisive US
action.

Given resolution of all these basic issues--Somoza's
resignation, a transitional regime, and early elections--
the form of the transition process and such details as
the opposition's share of cabinet posts and electoral
tribunal seats would probably be more easily resolved.

In sum, presuming the US has the capability to per-
suade Somoza to step down early, it may be necessary to
carry that initial concession to its absolute Logical
conclusion. The closer the US can come to giving the
opposition what it wants--Somoza's early departure, 4
significant period of transition government to permit
political organization and campaigning, and free elec-
tions well in advance of the US presidential election--
the better the chance of a moderate compromise that will
have the time and elements necessary to take root and
grow as a viable democratic alternative to Somoza rule
or Marxist encroachment. The National Guard and the
Liberal Party can probably be brought to see their long
term interests as being served in this way. Conceding
to Somoza some of his demands on timing could blunt his
efforts to take his case to supporters in the US or in
the international arena, but it is difficult to see how
it would enhance prospects for the long term success of
a democratic opening. (S T NORMAN)
