Conditions in Pow Camps/attitude of Communist Personnel/pow Hospitals
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000139489, dated 3 February 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000139489).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY :

INFORMATION REPORT

a

- COUNTRY Ror th Kores

“gusuECT Conditions in POW Campe/Attitude cf Communist Person-
nel/POi Hoepitals.

-. I PLACE ACQUIRED |
: (or Souset! F (os)
way _ (ey segnce) :
¥: -

x ; ‘é

DATE (or 1m7o.) kugust 1953

DATE O1sTR. Sf Mar 34

NO. OF PAGES nu

jee vet war Ee STATES GI tese MET OTen es OF THLE 18 FECTION 1
See eee ee a NO. OF ENCLS.
catia OF (OE Cum reer TO Oo ESCLIOT O te wren tueereqn eee +

an Senn. Se eed han ena x
pie o

sure. TO

THIS 1S UNEVALUATED INFORMATION REPORT ~

ee

ae

Sane

. 4

bh Lt

cuk> SR .

\: } 1.. after the group had left fer the camps east of Manpojin,our group continued
> sf +

to discuss details with the communists until 0230 hours, wfter which we were
taken to some buts to sleep. The beds were bard but ciean. At O70O hours
we were up and reaty ea ve hed been told to be the night before. About 0900
+ 2 jbours soseone eppeared ind took us to breakfest. A sajor joined as bers end
HT; J etated that he represented Genenal Vang ‘ang Kvon, the commander of the

+ grieon camps.

Eventually, at 1100 hourvwe started for Pyoktong. Jt was & magnificent
@rive through narrow pountein tracks along the penk of the Yalu River end
through the hills to the south ef it. Unfcrturately the road surface strong
ly reserbled the bed of & strean and ves covered with rock falls. ‘The jeepe
kept up @ steady 25 mpb regardices of ruts end boulders ¢o cues eduiration

of the scesery wes ecmevhat impaired ty hanging on with une band and rubbing
one's bruises with the other. We stopped for an hour for lurch at 1600 hours —
and achieved the luxury of a complete bath in © cold mountain. strees. We
arrived eat a location 20 ka fros Pyoktong at app ~oximetely 200 hours,

We were put up bere in two buildings of @ scbeol ot opposite sides of &
recrestion yard. The buildings had obviously been specially prepared and :
were spotiessiy clean ‘The meals vere ver: osc a@ore than edequate and esrved 4
by slaves in long white night gowne with gause peds over their pouths. .

3
The next morning (7 Aug 53) it ecened to me poeeidly that we had arrived 2.
bere abeed of our expected, time ang that, : was fighting a delaying action. ts *
After @ lot of trouble I got bik ‘to doll @ setting .° 1000 hours vhich be ia ¢
eisted wes o preliainary one. He opened vith a long speech about how tired

sek

(b)C)

t
i: oes =
3 a ° mronyror Tevare Tose: T ene Trios —erCOomWaX_Toerer

ET

a r isc eel : va ; ks
: ie shes ee :
iy. en hey nehanedy ss alee he —savalotiperidbafed,
4? et poe gin Sag!

is

ye ak

7 2
‘

.

een aan
: apy
Bt cancel

5.

that we would oot be permi‘ted to ave through the campe freely.

Sk CMe: =

=2<

everyone must be after @o lone end trying a Journey and saying that
today we must have a goad reset, om fur @ walk acd beve a bath in the
river. I said that we were oaturally most arrious to eet oo with
our work in view of the fact that camps wer already being emptied,
and asled coce more for a distribution list of prisccers, @ sketch
map of cay locations and their distancee from here and @ progres of
repatriation. JI am acw convinced that no anewers were forthcoming
to questions because FY Ccomand bad told théir AC Teem nothing and
Chang Tr was afraid to aak. I said that ve would unvillingly agree
Wowday of rest totay provided that he wuld engage to devote sous
part of thie day of rest to entting the requirel information from

PY Cocemnd so that we could get started early the next day. Li chs
Taithen said they would try and aitenge « Sriefing session fF ihe
whole group by PY Command first thing in whe morning. I 414 not even
know how far thie piace was from the Cempf or in what direction they
were. Knowing Orientals fairly vell 1 fully sxpectad this mde of
procedure but that did not ease everyones feslicg of frustration, I
also know thet there wae abdeclutely Notning ow can do to hurry ean
Oriental except keep co genily nibdiing at him until he unexpectedly
caves in and dees smining. At tnie Tm™eticw we proposed the follow-
ing echedule:

@ Call oo xilicary authorities,

b. Meet POW Cam Crcmitter, ty dlacuss what could be done
for tina.

Ce Walk frecly throug. cam ang talk ta individual price
aocere.

4. Make arrangemcnta for Atetritu: tos of Red Croce gifte.

@. Inspection of cam.

2. Interview prisonsre wha destred te talk to Red Croes
personnel.

6- Doctors cf our group to discues teaith eof hygiene
with cam doctors.

We ales stated that we would like ‘% obrerve tne conditions of rows
end rail transport a-roem~iations to be used. Finally we stated that
we felt the eqeedy repatriation the first «suzideretion and 414 aot
Want anything to faterferes vith it.

It wae sgreet that (a) and (t) above casi be carried out, but as to
(c) we were tola at would delay the repatclatico and therefore the
Guthorities would call out eslectnd POW for interviews. (4) vas
agreed to substantially, ae vas (e) with the stipulation thet the
inspection would have to be urter guidauce. Ae to (r) tt was stated
that any POW wanting to speek aepeciaily to ua would have to seek
authority through the Camp Cousnder, (g) wes agread to.

The wordirg of the operating azceemert under which our whele aleaion
was conducted was suoh vhAt we could not demand that our proposal
be carried out completely. One thing wns qlt. evidect and that ves

At lunch time we received iadividusel invitations from General Wang Yong
Kwon to a barquet bere in the evering at 1% hour. All were varned = -
to epruce themeeives up as mach as prssible and tc remember that to
Chinese the word wine mane &) over provut epirit with much the eame effect
as @ depth charge. Whether these invitations wares result of our agita-
tion thia morning or whether they vere already vo the way I didn't know.

I hed so far been impreseed by three things: | a Fe
(bY) ae

Red,

SECMHET (b} 3)

-3-

" @ ° The absence of restrictions, which wre limited to
soldiers with automatic rifles, called
security guecus. Ty

b. The infinite trouble that 1s being taken for our com
. grfort. I believe that quite a high froportion of this
Se trouble is gengine and not eyewash. _

Co Fhe attitude of individnal members of the groun who
emir patient and cheerful in spite of frustration and
“who carry out the instructions of « foreigner
@mcothly, quickkty, end without any outward sign of alara,
= _ Gaspbnitency or mvolt, é

a)

Ate '

ww 9+ The banquet consisted of our used meal, but vas presided over by Wang
who made @ short apeech of Welcome. Se struck me es @ naety type with
>. particularly bed sthners. Dinner went on for only about an hour and @

: oh belt in stifling heat. The food was laid out on plates and grabbed fer,
pees & scorvhat difficult opération as the cable was eight feet vide and z
was in &.cbener. There vas no attenpt at passing anything and no attempt
to force liquor on us. The Oeneral ate very eparingly, did not touch
weet, drank hardly anything, but emoke4 continuously throughout the meal,

apes

aiden ons

Be did not speak throughout the meal. The party was very curtly dienis-
eed and told to go to the pictures, which were put on in the open atr and
consisted of two fllms,one showing the Kerean peoplea Gelegation to China ae
in 19$2 and the other the arrival end entertainment of the various proe “
vincial delegations ranging from Tibet t> Bact Manchuria at the Unity of i
China celebrations last year. An interpreter eat by me end breathed cone 3
tinuously into my ear a mixture of 10 per cent running commentary and 90 t
per cent garlic. sere 4 be
10. On 8 Aug 53,General Weng sddressed all members of the team. This con- 4
sisted of a statement of what had deen done for prisoner, Whetter true or eae
not could only be verified by observation and inquiry among prisoners. ie
Bis remarks appeared to apply to Non-Koreans, At the end I asked if z pce
might ask some questions but was told very abruptly thet the meeting wes 77
closed and that I should submit any questions through Chang. ra

Li, Wang told us the number of prisoners which hed been renoved fron : ‘3. 3
camps Ros. 1, 4, and 5, He did not refer to Camp 6 (Korean). He asked us ae
vo produce through Chang, particulars of how ve proposed to divide up
groups giving lists cf names and natinoslities, also of how we suggested
carrying out our dutien in campe, also our suggeated distribution of
Supplies. I thenget shold of Chaug and asked him if it wes hie Intention
that we should live here permanently and visit camps fron day to day or
that ib-teams should live and work in campat Did the General's state-
ment apply equally to Non-Korwans and Koreans? fle once mre said he
would sek the military authorities. We then went @vay to vork out
answers to the General's questions. They had to be translated into s
Chinese and Korean, submitted to the military authorities, considered s
by them, arrangements made for tranepert, cacy authorities varned ete., a
all affording limited opportunities for delay. Y felt thoroughly dis- ay
heartened once more but did not see vhat steps, if. any, ve could take _
to basten matters. ;

12. Chang called a meting at 1430 hours, ‘he meeting vent on for two and « 4 af
balf hours and each pint was argued more than thcroughly. It we- ig
clear that they were quite ready and would in fact be pleased to eit .
there and chatter over evey point until all prisoners had left. They 7 4

ae — (bY) t

(oy 3)

clearly had ea prearranged plan and in the end I agreed to it as I was
afreid that if all transport, escort, accoemodations and food arrange -
ments had to be altered it might be days befcre we really got etarted,

It mast be admitted that in this extremely difficult country, mountainous,
end virtually roedless, even a emall change of plan vasvery difficult for
them to arrangs. We arranged.to start for Camp No 1 (Changeong) (100 xa)
Qt 0900 hours on 9tH Adguet. ‘At 2145 hours] bad a message from Coron indie
cating that the position in hie area was exac’ly similar. At 2200 hours
Chang told me that evacuation of Cam No 1 was starting toscrrow and sug-
gesting an earlier start (0700 hours) to which I gladly agreed, :

; ie Merida (ena V4
aig ‘ idk a ela
s ren = ro a ‘

&

Oa 9 Avg 53 ve left exactly on tine - for the first tim = in sing jeeps

f -

i i

oy
var

Base 7 and five trucks. It wae raining hard and the drive vas even more hair
i. raising than the one from Man'po to Pyoktong as the track vas very slipe
er Sane ee pery as vell as being mre Mees viterocree ian @ road anyway. We urrived at
3 ! Camp Wo 1 at 1100 houreand were put up in @ amall Korean village the bute
7 of which had been pepered with nevspaper for our benefit. We hoped chat
BG the buga wouldn't have time to eat through the paper before we left.
rp. e Pook ae eae ; AV eS sear pe yg CT
ee -¥- : “~~ Qh. Chang called meeting et tvo and informed us tha’ the first grog bad deen
ae Toe bela he fivé for us to see them before they started. We vent up to
Bn: 1, camp (4kn) and were received by the commander vho was cooperative.

asked to see the representative prisoners who were immediately forthcoming
anf no restriction was placed in the way of talking to thex. They cone
eisted of 290 WS ané Britien all Corporels or below. They were very f.-
Gelighted to see us ae thera wae little tine before they started 1 asked

for them to be allowed to take an appropriate number of boxes of gifte

and cases.of cigarettes and to distribute them enroute, This was agreed

to. The convoy coneleted of 50 trucks and an ambulance, allowing roughly

16 prisoners to a truck. They went off in very good heart in spite of
pouring rein. Our suspicion that Li Cu. Ta: wes a senior officer end had’ -mx
nothing whatever to do with the Red Cross vas confirmed by the attic
tude shown toward Bim by the camp officers vnich 1s one of .respeet ‘and :
deference. Ha ia clearly responsible for ell details of our movements,

eeens to give orders %o the escort, arn acte like a dose of chlorodyne on
Chang's verbal ¢iarrhoes when he has had enough of it. I only wish be

would do i:,.of-ener and sooner. As ve vere here at 1100 hoursthere wes

No réasca why the convsy should heve been beld up 2111 1700 hours, _ wave

On 10 Avg 53 breakfast appeared at 0900 hour instea4’ of 0800 hours. At
O915 hous I asked Chang for his proposals {or the day; at 1C15 hour he
told we be would let m know when ne had once a decision. I sent a acse
Sees: sage beck that ve vere getting very impatient and vould he please hasten..
3. $S°45 at los poursbe called a meeting. At the meeting he said ve would be

% peceived by the camp mil‘tary authority as soon as tranc:cration arrived.
I then said “Mr Chairman, © think ve arc wasting a lot cf time. It te now
eight days since ve left Panminjom, and so far we have criy been allowed
to echiere exactly one hours work a:ony prisoners. The best part of
encther day hae now been wasted. We hove c duty tc the prisonere and ve
feel we are being prevented from doing 1%. If the presen: deliy is due

rh) ae

EAU EOL be! as

weep is . as . an
«

a ; totreasportation aifficulties we are perfectly prepared to walk to and
Ya i: from the can. We are grateful for yesterdn,3 opportunity to see the
i first group start from Camp Nol. Would it be posrivle in future for us
He a ee to de informed overnight of the suggested program for the following day?®
mom iF .- Thies drew the usual shower about misunderstamling the avful difficul<cies
< eee that they are working under, cna flat disagreenant tliat we are being in
an anyvay obstructed. The auggesticn about walking led to a long childish
ee explanation of how that would waste even more tim. I answered “We

ae : Sccept the Chairman's statementand are sorry if there has been any ais-
° understanding. You know now bow w are feeling and = bope that from now
on our work aay be continuote”.

a ay .), :

ae ‘

16.
eh a
27.
18.
19.
ak
ideo ‘ i

We then went to the cam, and vere > -iresice by the CO with the sane 018 {|
talk ebout the boman{teariagrin: pl+s ef the Komean Peoples Army end the ft:
Chinese People's wo.unceers. Be ther asked Chans, what he wanted to ao,!:
and Chang askeé hin vhat be vanted to do. The ball being once more :
paseed to Chang; he passed it to me and I told him exactly what we wante:
ed to do for the “i=pteenth” tim. Tor CO said Tight out, “Meet POW Club |
Tepresentatives this afternoon at 1430 brum and I will think about the 7:
rest--I am now calied avay dy other duties, anything more you want to : ee ..
know ask through your Chairtan*, We returned to the billets Zur lunch by -GOR:
121° tours, see

A reomrk committed to paper by o som das earlier vas a aisteake, It ae
was to the effect that repatriation was the first conaiferacion and that!

nothing we do should interfere with that, 1° unfortunately gave Me,
them @ useful reply to almost soy requtst ..¢, that it would in-:erfere [ ie
with the work of repatriation if ve vere tn do so and gc. Mos

At 1430 bourswhen traneport ond everyrne was ready Chanc called another ,~ ¢
meeting and state! tha: the coalug pectin: must be conducted in an “es
orderly maner *-4 therecore there mc. se _hres wry translations of Ve
every word uttered. We fought thio roncanoe for an hour and @ half with -
all the rest of the parcy hanging ebout ovetde and the Pow repatriates
weiting. I protes:ed tha: ve were Le ing ceniad Sree @ccese to the pri. -’
soners. Both cides refer:od Irsely .9 the olercuine eorserest whieb une
fortunately did not cover my contes.om ne it referre? cal, to :
Gppropriate meciings. Jo heve no cau: wee thet tne, -erenct follow.
ing the letter cf the acresezn! the: : ele; uerever, sar from the spirit ;
of it. The cheirmor's min POiny war ch. chis wis a jetnt 4ean and that
therefore ever;rone in it hat a Tight -o luow what ~no soing on and there-
fore three wa; tronelot‘ons wer: meescary. Thia wan unfortunately true
though 1t impeded any vork we vert 4 be Porting te ce JA 3 quite impose
aidle and entirely unre sefeary; pooner. Ir wns acw cerZissed chat condi-
tions in this cacp at any ra: were “ra puy as acvoriised hy General
Wang and there does not crpecr to Se nay cajun. anced of Red Croso services.
This evening ve attenlec a percormeas? Db: ucnads and dw. ers of the Chinese
Voluntary Act Group in the comp -heocre. I. wis cu ex -Llent and intere . - ~
@sting chow of Chinese orchestral mist: arc radi:ionel craces Trea several .
Gifferent parts of China. Ys vere Qiice «a Sortuvle ui Korean village mee
houses nov “hat it bed Steep. ssink.l. Son. eescerga mac beon unaveky .
with bed bugs. A barber and teuntr, fal hee: PTOvViZec and w> hed been rroe
mised a bath tcecisin. Food was ic-: Jerac: “Re, Tovar geile sare the;
were giving us ihe beow they ..ul4.

On 12 Aug 53 Chanz celled c meeting s1 O94 heur which went on vo 115 ours. 5
He said that we would dietribute Gif. wrticlis this ac.cing. [le taca went .
off into a long complnint abou. things wht, Towne sl: 4 to lave aald at ;
the meeting yecterday which vere construed, : “_ncullin: -weses to the 7
camp sutborities ang to the JRCT". Aliw.rc aciributasi- to faulty iavere
proting, whether deliberate or not 2 a: ursile to wae To explainet exactly —_
what I had actually said. Theos retrranh..ons woo. on intermimnhly but ;
we parted friends nt 1125 hour. I ee ca and they osreed that as it would
Ve sore time befor: we reached Comps and 4 nad che stores vhich are
@lresdy there should be disiritnved u, he coop aithoritics or @ acule
Of one hax of girt articles per 29 P.isoncrs ané two cartons of sigare
per prisoner. At 1000 hourrve vent to tke corp vhere th: etores were es
over in bilk to ‘ht priscnora w:-resentatives after one or tvs peck< F;
ages bed been checisd. So apar fra: uaving Zuaby to the first group to :priFe.
Jeava tho camp these few representatives are the oly POs whon ve have — o

(63)

am |

Nhe . i. -6.-

We did not know if these representatives hag teen briefed for the meet.

ing or if they vere in good atanding wi.h the camp suthorities aod vere

wie therefore not altdgether trustworthy. hey vere stated to have been m S
elected by the other prisoners by ballot. In any cose they vere unlikely ork x.
at thie stage in the proceedings to say amrihing in an open meeting which §
would jeopardize their chances of early repatriation. ace

20. A Korean steam bath had been provided for this aternoon but only four

meshers vere brave enough to try it. The rerainder preferred a bath in
the adjacent river.

21, On 12 Aug $3 at 0930 hoursChang told me tranapor: would take us to
inspect the camp at 1030 houra At 1115 hour, -Tenepor® appeared. Pri-
soners hed teen turned out of the hute on to e sxall parede ground but
we were evep: pest then. Difficulties involves vith dud interpreters
may be judged from the following mn. “There vere 1400 prisoners in

Lae ted tais cam. Were they all in these 16 bute”? Ansver, after peasing

: = through six transitional stages "Oving to the houniterien principles

: of the Korean Peoples Army and the Chinsee Peoples Volunteers the hute

are tiled", Question, repeated "Can ve see the recat of the living

quartere"? «= Ansver, “It is reining hard ant nearly one o'clock ve
will not see the other part of the cemp”.

“

| Oe re A+ edn Aenea va a a ”
. x Wee *
: .
mS
.

@2. It was in fact pouring throughout the day. When we bad seen the part
of the camp, we were allowed to, and the hospital, I asked 1f there
were @ cemstery. Ansver, "I am to ehow you the company lines and the
hospital, the inspection is finished”. Itiss soking @ good deal of us
to take this sort of thing froa a scruffy little Chinese subaltern but
that we what we are constantly having to put up vith.

3. AY my suggestion after standing out in the rain for some time the pris

| eoners vere alloved to return to their bute. Renainéer of the day :
was spent wet and ehivering in our mud huts. Once nore I cust omphacize
: that we were not able to check anything vith prisoners and that thore
& hed deen very ample tine for preparation for our inspection of a linited
" pert of the cam.

24. The following is what ve noted at Camp To 1 (Changsonc):

he
i ale

. },
‘Pee
a

+ ent kigtte ot

a
‘
ah
ee ora
~
eer
ee

td

‘
ead

@. Camp Ro 1 Changsong, contained 1427 British and
US prisoners all corporals or belov.

che

.

b. = Two companies (approximtsly /0C) houced in 15
wattle and daub tiled hu.s. Mo wire auyvhere but
Plenty of sentry poste. Huts subdivide) roughly
into cubes 9 x 9 x2 9 with six men in each in
Gouble decker bunke with bertboo fram work ape
porting thick strev macttin:. lia cleep, live end
eat in these rooms. Sooo huts contain,at intervals,
the cook house in sligh.ly ls-cer rooms, separate
food preparation room axl lis. Cooling vas minly
Cn covered coppers over vood fur-e. Ovenc provided
Outeide under open ehed. Coo!.c, ook houses and
utensile wera clean enouth. Coo.s voliatcer fray
among prisoners. Food unjer preparation loozed clean,
Qdequate, and about the otand-ré of a fairly good
non reguiar unit.

“waded
awa:

(412

RIE TS ee te

+h
x

q

a

we

“A
Be

ET
= T-.

All space in and around the lines vas planted with vegetables
@rown from seed supplied by the POW Conrnd and doing very well,
especially toamtoes. A large board shoved the regulations for
preserving order signed b; Yang Kvon. I was able to reed theee
through quickly and they seemed to me reasonable and the punishe
mente not excessive except perhaps thoee relating to ee-ape, and
essisting to escape.

In e44ition to the cook nouse there was a reading roos for each
coapeny in one of the living huts. There were two small rouns Lone
taining @ few English books or rather pore English translations of
Russian books. There vas also a mpply of Camunist Datly Papers
@aong which I noticed, People Worls, Patty worker, Cross Roads,
@nd National Guardian, many glosey picture papere published
in is. + A bulletin board in the lines showed

the eports progrem for the month which looked very afequate.
Mjacent to the lines each company had a large hut for a club.
The club contained @ pincpong table, three Chinese billiard
tables and numerous emall tables for other qanes. Leading off
the large room vas @ smaller one called a library but reughly
Gpproximating to the reading room described above. The library
@lso contsined the company sports store, Beth Pay representa-
tives aod the can authorities laid mich streee on the manner

in which the cocpetitive spirit had bean @ncouraged and gamete

of ali sorts provided to keep prisoners occupic. and healthy.

We were not permitted to speak to any prisoners dus their eppear-
ance in the mass most certainly gave no impression of huager or
iil health, There were plenty of grounds for association foote
Dall, wolley belj, net bell, etc,

@. The lines and hute were remarkably clean. Plenty of litter recepe
. tacles were provided and used. Several wells vere in ‘be line for
w.ter, The hospital was in what appeared to be « temple on the
hillside ebout a quarter mile from the lines. The medical ward

hed 25 beds, the surgical vard 1C beds, the post operational ward
two beds, and isolation ward two beds. The aurses office con-
taining specimen ourse making out spesinea temperature chart,

; Tuere was @ specinen pharmacy vith specimen pharmacist making

3 Specimen pilis and specimen laboratory vith ®pecimen laboratory

" essietant gazing into a microscope. The ocly thing missing was
one or two specimen patients. I have nevor seen a more glering
example of inspection “eye wash" but i+ scemed an adequate
e@atablishment for ite job for all thet. Doctor stated that there
had deen very fev patients, due to the health induced by good

-!,, food and an adequate sports program, but Gepecially since chances

of repatriation grew more real. I see no reason to doub* his state-
ment. We Caw no indication of POW markinge against alr attack.

wv? 13 Aug 53 was © blank Gay, except for the doctors who conferred vith the

Otam Goctor in the forenoon. They reported as follows:

On Thursday, 13 Aug 53 from 1030 hours to 1215 hours, the 10 doctors of the
JRCT (five Deses, one South Korean and four Chineec) assembled In confer~
ence with the thee camp doctors and the camp cuthcrities. Questions from
Our side about water supply, sanitation measures, propuylactic waccinae
tions, epidemic diseases in camp, general health of prisoners, faculties

SEMRET

{eX 3)

er, Ce ae

a gee

Ct Coen eed

n veedhee es ot hy
,

}
$
xX

a.

Pa ae)
1)
nated

‘

nas
a.
cet

ore

Ne ae de

vi

tate tlle
»

%
mae
‘.
“ a. camel

SECMET :

(bL3)

7 for medical end surgical examination and treataen: vere ansvered courteous.
a ly end freely.

_ 1. The water supply wes good, froc several deep, stone-set i od oe
welle protected against seezice by large concrete encese- -
wents and covers. Special buckets were used for dreving
water from the welle. The vater was examined bacteriolo-

_®ically at regular intervals and if the tests were unsate
iefuctory, the vells were closed temperarily.- In edditfon,
the prisoners bad been told to boll all vater to be used for
dQtinking. We inspested the wells and found them accord-
ing to description. One well was closed at the tim.

iw

Pome’ tes ;
Ware bee el

ore

2. Qne or more times yearly, all prisoners vere vaccinated

against ecall-pox, typhoid, paratyphoid, cholera, dysen-
, tery and plague. There had been no outbreak of epidente
‘ Gisease in the camp at any time.

3. There had been no nev cases of tuberculosis reported in
. the camp but a few old cases had flared-up. These were
-Gatected early and the patients ieolated at once.

= 4.  Regulationsfor kitchen and latrine perscnnel were shown
to us and seened senaible and sufficient, We inspected
the kitchen and found it and the cooking utensils clean.
The viande vere protected agains: flies by geuse netting.
Thare were covered containers for garbage c.eposal,

bi

oo Gy : : . ne Lee : '
oe le ogy bape rhs:
ay ay a a Be = ; as Honea

.

3« latrines of common field type vere clean and orderly. Lime
. wes used generously. All latrines vere located at adequate
i aistances from the kitchene end water supplics. Camp authorie
: . ties stated that both kitchen and latrinc areas vere sprayed
regularly with DOT and a similar Chinese Product No 666.
Prisoner interest in sanitation was encouraged by veetly sani-
tation conteste between companice and by seasonal senitat‘on
Grives for which everds vere given both on the group and camp
levels.

SD ee? 6. Pools of stagnant water in and around the caqp areas vere
drained and filled in order to prevent the breeding of mosqui-
toes.

Te All reeds vere removed for a Aistance of 150 mters from che
living quarters to prevent the harboring of mosquitoes, mites :
' and other insecte. v4

eee ire
. * we

8. The camp hospital of 34 beds wns inspected together vith Brigae
eat ge ater Jerram. We were told that i* had been established at the -
Peg bes same tine as the cenp. Minor surgery including nppendectary
. was performed there. The operating rooa seemed adequately fur-
Bished for this. Major surgery and sercre medical cases vere
transferred to the general cary hospital at Pyokteng.

9. Three case histories froa the cory hocpital medical records
ae vere shown to us. The treatment in each instance appeared to
be competent and up-to-date, e.g. streptomycin and pere-amino-
eelicylic-ecid treatment for acute tubercular pneumonia, A
score of latters from grateful patientsvere 1lso shown to us,

a (3)

° ert mea A, ,

Fy
4
z
:
«
3.
&
z

gos
.-

SE Y ha (03) et

-9-

10. It was stated that no patients had died frum disease fa this % ae
camp and that the general sick-rate among the priecoars had been —
7.6 percent. We received the impression that everything possible -
bad been done to prevent diseace among the prisoners and to treat ..
the sick adequately. / . 0 FF.

4 Aug 53 we were informed at 0730 hours that ve vere moving to Camp jat
1000 hours. In spite of repeated requests to be informec overnight of the
ing dayt progres this request was never granted,. I em inclinéd to think that 1%
was aot Ci feult but thet he has to do exactly vhet the ailiteary authorit nee
vel him and they do not tell bim anything till the last possible moment. I Qe
suspect that Li knows but that be also does not tell Chang. : ;

8

: ="
On the way we pessed the compounds of Camp Bo 1 ‘Ach we had not been alloved oe
eee, We 30.0 that altuough they usd ve. c.pty for some days thay eppeared <
go be far below the standard of the camps we were shown. Camp Bo 3vee 17 Ke iff-a **
gereral direction south of Carp Fol. Itvss in @ gorge vbere @ emall river §*

ren under @ bridge into what locked Jike @ fair sired lake. Neme of the place? 2
is believed to be Chuthchang. We bed only very emall mage and it i¢ extremely ee .

Gifficult to judge even general direction on these twisty mountain tracks free: =. +
quently vith no sun. . - oe

7 tk CE
15 Aug $3 ve vieited Camp No 3 (Chumsang). ‘The cocmander here wes tamed Kung 7:
Sun, A meeting vas called at vnich Chang Ik, the Red Cross Bepresentative of:!: —+

The Democratic Peoples’ Republic of Korva daiivered a long speech. Be stated
that the POW movesent froe south to north Korea wae being conducted in @ most > |
parbarous fashion, the ships being grossly overcrowded, that trucks were ioet-* tak
ed vith 6C men anf no senitary facilities were provided. He aleo stated that | 7
the southern teen was being subjected to indignities. . ios,

ope
hy
e

ee

later, the same day, we vere told that camp was due to be evacuated at 6500 .
boursthe next morning. We sav the prisoners having @ farevell dinner. This
camp contained 852 US men, 21 British, 11 Censdian. It vas located in a deeu
ful site on the shore of @ lake surrounded by mountsina about 80 Kn from Kyok-%
tee other areas (five in all) of thie cam vere situated within e redius ;
of Ka. z Z

he second ecapeny of this camp held about 200 men ic tiled vettle ani dad i

tote in poor repair. These vere scattered irregularly along the etyore of the “30>
Jake so from the air they might be taken for @ normal hillside village. Rute Se
were sub-divided as in Camp 1 but hed smaller rooms and only tvo or three men «@
per rooa in single beds. Fach man hal a mosquito net. There were no wire |
enclosures. The roeds ran straight through the camp. A sanitary dispensary
wes shown us. The club room vase fly proof. The prisoners in this ceasp +
deing mostly US, sports were those popular in the US. We were told that. a
religious eerviccs were dependent on some one being willing to leed them.’ Ho |

air markings were evident, but it was etated that there were eves and sirens

were wed if needed. os 7 .
Oa 16 August 1953 the 10 doctors and the joint AC tesm met with the one on duty
at this camp, and saw the hospita.. It contained 16 beds and wee quite simi- ~ 98

lar to one at Camp Fo 1. Preventative measures vere eaid to be the same alec. :3

Phone
«ee eS
nie “x

Rete

SE ET (4X3). v

- 10 + .

32. Prison Camp Ro 2 (Pinchauli) wns located *tnr> Lo Kw fern Pyoktong. nF
had 472 Pies, moatly Avericans, and included officers up to the rank of * _
lieutenant colonel. ae

Sp ar
Ho

33. Priconers were heused in huts or buildings lite e-novle. The rooms hat: is
double deck bunks with 18 prisoners in rvons 2h! x 14' x 10'. Bach - 4
room had a wood stove for heating. :

38. Before June 1951 medical help and supplies were inadequate but since, -
the PO@ reported, the; had been plentiful and their services excellent. ae
The men enjoyed good heal<h after diarrbees and dsencery hed been eliaiegr.
nated by education in water precautions. The only epidezic hed been a Sn
slight one of flu. gOe

35. This camp had ¢ reginental chaplain who after some initial dif- 5
ficulties held services on Buncays. Tnose Pegve wilktd to nem w =
feel chet the discipline was fairly administered and punishment was not -
overly severe. P

36. Om 10 Aug 53 ve were advised tha: the evacuation of the area vas come A:
pleted and vere asked what we would like to do. We proposed a visit tog, =.
~the General Hospital for the Proktong area. Thies vas agreed to soon . .
the 19th we did seo che hospital. aS

a,

37. It wes in bute perched on the eide of « lake 200 to 35 feet up an the”
Bill. Wards vere concertrnced is o emll area on a steep incline with =
high crumbly etepe of stone and elippery mad banks betveen then. There |
vere three wards of BO beda each,in three different buts, each divided in
cubicles containing two beds. There were also several other smaller wad

36. The x-ray, pharmacy, dental laboratory, operating room, ete. were ecate
ter? sommd the vard area, They vere clesn and eppeared adequate for ~
thelr purpose. In each department we were subjected to identical speeches :
oeverai different tines, They were substantially as follows: hog 3

“Tale departeent in eo well equipped with instruments and drugs sade in
China thac vo never have Ac.’ any trouble. Al! operations have been suce 4
ceesfl ané ve fever have icat @ patient. All POT have elways expressed.
their appreciation either orally or by letter". As wo saw BO mortuary, -€
we felt poseib.iy they had lost no patients. The Gociore cf our teas | ee
thought the equipment apponred in such good condition it could not bave :

deen in use very long. The dental equipment was of Geman origin. Bo. <Saae:
e‘atistics were given and questions vero not e.couraged. a.

39. Finally ve vere then taken to a but called the Bchitition roam expecting |
to see ari evhibitn in jars. It had, hove-er,a red banner cutetde uro

various velfare projects, for instance, number and type of musical {instruc
mente issued, organization of PW committees, athleti: reccurds, number eni J
type of inoculations, numbers attending religious services etc. The lat
ver provided the only opark of humor of the day. It had four headings
Pretostant, Catholic, Islan, ané St Patric:s Day which was descrited as - 7
a "religious custom of the Irish people”. The exhibition also contained ©
@ large display of photog-aphe of POW activities and a selection of let- © :
ters of appreciation from POone of which was sigred -- “Member of the <
Percanert Peace Committee’ He was one of the PW representetives produ ae
for us et Camp 1. It is difficult to avoid the con:lusioa that this shor

Al,

ll fe

was put on for our benefit and ours alone. All the exhidits were nev,
ell were in English only,as were the various direction signs. Who else
could everbave <:teaded it? Cinema and still cameras were wich in evi~-
dence while we were being herded round and every detail of every dis-
q@rta etplained in Korean, English, and Chinese. There was a PY adr
warking on @ flat topped roof in the town. It 1a possible that this
afforted protection also to Needquarters, PY commmrd,ang the inhabited
portion of the town.

I must admit that conaldering the handicaps under which they worked I
felt the chairman and oar opposites on the teans tried to do all they

eoul4 for our comfort, The food our party had was generally good « tit

very monotonqus. The accommodations were clean considering the country
we were in.

Having accomplished @1i we could Gur return to Mmnpolin wae delayed two
days oving to heavy rains that had caused slides, washed out bridges
and othervise made the trail, umucable. Finally we Gid get to Manpojia
on 23 Aum 53 a@dout 1700 hours, The other group hed been waiting there
for two days, . We left shortly after arriving and reeched
Kaasong at 1100 hou the naxt morning.

eeaend-=-

VU bed ees

—

Ss Re RN LE A

ri

‘
4:

Mag et

%

-,
+ Gener
