Soviet Capabilities and Probable Soviet Courses of Action Through 1960
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012826, dated 2 April 1955.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012826).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

me re ae
' qe =z ae & a Oa
aa NIE 11-3-55
oP preyed as 17 May 1955
SAS Tae oo as 102081-t
ie S2F2.. _

CIA HNUES WATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER Ill - 38 - 55

SOVIET CAPABILITIES AND PROBABLE SOVIET
COURSES OF ACTION THROUGH 1960

(Advence Copy)

Submitted by the

: DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
“ “he following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, The Joint Staff, and the
Atomic Energy Cormission.

ar
“6

Concurred in by the
INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY CCMMITTEER

on 17 May 1955. Concurring were the Special Assistant, Intel-
ligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2,
Department of the Army; the Director of Naval Intelligence; the
Director of Intelligence, USAF; the Deputy Director for Intel-
ligence, The Joint Staff,;—and the Atomic Energy Cormission
Representative to the IAC. The Assistant to the Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside of
its jurisdiction.

Approved for Rel

fr
er
RN:

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

17 May 1955

NIE 11+3-55: SOVIET CAPABILITIFS AND PROBABL™ SOVIET COURSES
OF ACTION: THROUGH 1960

CONCLUSIONS

pa. The totalitarian character of the Soviet political
system is unlikely to be altered in any important respect during
the period of this estimate, It appears that a struggle for
personal power, probably in a context of differences over policy,
has been going on within the small ruling group and is as yet
unresolved, Although this struggle may be sharpened during the
period of this estimatey we eoneiaue to believe that it will be.
confined to the small group at the apex of the power structure,

and will not result in open violence involving the police or

military forces. (Paragraphs 1-5)

B. The relations between the USSR and Communist China are
probably now conducted as between allied powers having common
interests and a common ideology, but also separate and potentially
conflicting national objectives. Despite the possibility of some
frictions between the two countries, they will almost certainly
maintain a-relationship of elose epee throughout the period
of this estimate. The continuing dependence of Communist China
on. the USSR for support of its military and economic programs
gives the USSR great influence over Chinese policy, but this would
probably not be decisive in matters which the Chinese believed

involved their own vital iibeneeee se (Paragraph 11)

*
Pac vaee

Ecctforzie
C. Soviet economic policy during the period of this estimate
will almost certainly be directed primarily toward a continued rapid

growth of basic economic and military strengths and the maintenance

1/ The representatives of the Director of Naval Intelligence and the Deputy

~ Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff, consider that this paragraph
overstates the degree of independence which Communist China enjoys in
matters of major policy. They believe, therefore, that the last clause
should be deleted, and the following substituted; "We believe therefore
that the Soviet leaders would almost certainly be able to apply sufficient
pressure, including the curtailment, and if necessary the withdrawal, of
economic and military aid, in order to obtain Chinese conformity to Soviet ~~
views,"

of high peacetime levels of military production. Heavy industry
will continue to be the primary focus of Soviet economic activity.

(Paragraph 20)

D. The rate of growth of the Soviet economy has been
declining in recent years and will continue to decline during the
period of this estimate. We estimate that the annual increase in
Soviet gross national product (GNP) by 1960 will probably be
slightly less than five percent, compared to a seven percent in-
crease in 195). Although absolute defense expenditures apparently
are to incrcase markedly in 1955 over 195), we believe that they
wil probably increase henceforth at a slower rate and will be about

15 percent higher in 1960 than in 1955. (Paragraph 22)

E. The cxpansion of agricultural production and the procure~
ment of foodstuffs for the cities are nroblems which will continue
to plague Sovict leaders during the period of this cstimate. Some
of the more recent agricultural measurcs Like the new lands program
and the corn cultivation campaign appear to be less realistic than
the measur:s announced carlicr, Although the results achieved will
almost certainly fall far short of plans for a nearly 100 percent

inervase, wc cstimate that, with avcrage weather conditions thore

Ge

ET

will be approximately a 30 percent increase in agricultural
production in 1960 over 195i. Per capita consumption will probably
rise, although at a rate far more modest than that held out to the

people in the goverment'!s statements of 1953. (Paragraphs 36-l;1)

F. We estimate that in 1960 Sovict GNP will be roughly two-
fifths that of the US, as compared with about one-third in 195h;
however, the US economy will probably continue to draw ahead in
absolute terms, the dollar gap between the two economies increasing
from $228 billion to about $269 billions. The USSR allocates an
exccoptionally large volume of resourcos to investment and defense —~
in the case of investmmt about four-fifth and in defense about one-~
hal’ the amounts allocated to these sectors in the US economy.

(Paragraph 21)

G. The Sovict regime will, in the pursuit of its objectives,
continue to face difficult choices in resource allocation, On the
one hand, increasingly heavy investment outlays will be needed in
order to maintain high rates of eetaaade growth. On the other

hand, military requirements constitute the chief competitor for

the resources on which investment must draw, Consequently, if the

Soviet regime should choose to increase military expenditures at
a rate substantially higher than we have estimated in paragraph D
above,.a.reduction.in.the rate of growth of the economy as a whole

and in consumption levels would result. (Paragraphs 22, 35)

Military

H. We believe that, generally speaking, the personnel strength
of Soviet and other Bloc forces will remain substantially unchanged
during the period of this estimate. However, the over-all effective-
ness of these forces will increase, mainly because of the following

factors:
ae

wit

a. Introduction into the Soviet Air Force during the
present year of supersonic interceptors, jet heavy
bombers, and four-engine turbo-prop aircraft, possibly
heavy bombers. An incrense in the number of all-

weather fighters and jet_medium bombers;

b. A great increase in numbers of nuclear weapons, and

in the range of yields derived from these weapons;

ec. A great increase in the number of long-range submarines;

-5 -

de Generally improved and modernized weapons available

to Soviet ground forces, together with changes in
organization and tactics designed to adapt these:

forces to nuclear warfare.

If the USSR in fact develops the guided missiles which we estimate
to be within its capabilities, these will provide a significant
increment to over-all Soviet military effectiveness. (Paragraphs

1G, 117)

I, fit present the main Soviet offensive strength lies in
the capability to mount faraeaseaie ground attacks against
Western Europe, together with air attacks against Western Europe
ha the UK and an extensive submarine campaign to disrupt the
flow of reinforcements and supplies from North America. During
the period of this estimate the additions to Soviet air strength
listed above will increase very narkedly the ability of the
USSR to launch air attacks against distant targets, including
the continental US. The growing submarine force will also pose
a greatly inereased threat to allied naval forces and shipping.

(Paragraphs 106,107,111)

Je During the period of this cstimate the Bloc air defense
system will probably be substantially strengthened by greater
operational.cxpericnce.and by the introduction into operational

units of new fighter types (including all-weather), now antiaircraft

weapons, improved carly warning and GCI equipment, and guided missiles,

Hovevcr, in vicw of the increasing capabilities of offensive woapons
and improved techniques in countermeasures, Soviet air defense capa-
bilities will probably remain inadcquate to prevint attacking forces

from reaching critical target areas ofthe USSR. (Paragraph 110)

K. The chief limitations on Soviet armed forces are likely
to arise from the vast size of the USSR, the grcat distances
ae main interior sources of supply to several main operational
areas, the relatively inadequate road and rail nctwork, and the
acute shortage of Bloc-regist«red shinping, The Soviet rail system

would &:.. valn-rable to air attack in general war, and Soviet armed

forccs would cventually suffer logistical difficulties, and especially

in operations in the Far Rast. Other’deficiencics during the period
of this estimate will probably be in experience md training for

long-range air operations, ani in certain equipment for air defensc,

together with lack of capability for long-range amphibious

and surface naval operations. The questionable political relia-
bility and relatively low combat effectiveness of many of the
Satellite forces wil continue to limit their usefulness to the

USSR, especially for offensive operations. (Paragraphs 76, 77, 97)

Probable Courses of Action

Te We believe that the principal.immediate objectives of
Soviet external policy during the period of this estimate will
be (1) to promote the political and economic instability of non-
Communist states, and to render them incapable of decisive action
by pe aner ee and exploiting neutralism and dissensions within and
among them; (2) to bring about the withdrawal of US power from its
present advanced bases around the periphery of the Bloc; (3) to
impede or offset the rearmament of West Germany and ee association
with the Western Powers; and (44) to detach Japan from the sphere of
Western influence and encourage its closer association with the
Sino-Soviet Bloc. At the same time the USSR will continue to pursue its

fundamental aim of expanding Commmist influence and as.:opportunities

develop, of extending the area of Communist control. (Peragraph 131)

~8-

M. The Soviet leaders probably now believe (1) that general
war would present formidable hazards to the survival of their systen,
and. (2)..that. they. can make-progress toward their objectives by poli-
tical action, and in some cases by localized military action.
Therefore, we believe that during the period of this estimate the
Krenlin will try to avoid courses of action, and to deter Communist .

a nanan |
China from courses of action, which in its judgmert would clearly

involve, substantial risk of general war. The Soviet leaders are
unlikely to believe that Soviet, Communist Chinese, or European
Satellite forces can be used in open attacks across recognized state
frontiers during this period without running such a risk. However,
the, SSR or one of the Sino-Soviet Bloc countries might engage in
indirect aggression or take action which would create a situation
in which the US or its allies, rather than yield an enone
position, would take counteraction which could lead to general war.
We believe, moreover, that the Kremlin would not be deterred by
the risk of general wer fron taking counteraction agairst a
Western action which it considered by Sere threat to Soviet
security. This, general war right occur during the period of this
estimate as the climax of a series of actions and counteractions,

initiated by either side, which neither side originally intended

to lead to general war. (Paragraph 132)

~9-

N. We believe that the USSR will, despite the growth of its
nuclear capability during the period of this estimate, continue to ;
try to avoid: substantial risk of general war, since the Soviet leaders
will probably still fp te Oe ee eee
with nuclear weapons without exposing the USSR to an even nove devas-
OPE Counter plows Aer? as their nuclear capabilities grow,
Soviet leaders may come to estinate that the US, because of fear for
itself or for its: allies, or because of pressures exerted by its
allies, will be increasingly deterred fron initiating the devastation
entailed in a full-scale nuclear war. They may therefore come to
believe that local wars will be tebe likely than at present to expand
he eae wor, and thus that superior Bloc military capabilities in
certain local areas can be exercised without substantial risk of

provoking general war. (Paragraph 134)

0. We believe that Soviet diplomacy during the pericd of this
estinate will not be directed toward a general settlenent between
the USSR and the West. It will almost Gertainly continue to combine
noves intended to ease international tensions with other roves which

{nerease such tensions, and with political warfare pressures calculated

ks ae

to play upon.the non-Communist suevata fear of war. At present the
USSR is engaged in very active diplomacy on a nimbecr of important
issucs -= Austria, disarmament, Yugoslavia, Japan -- and has fee
important concessions, though no apparent important sacrifices as
yet. Wo believe that the current Soviet diplomatic efforts arc
dirccted primarily toward preventing the rcarmament of Germany in
closc alliance with the West, and that the ground is being prepared
fom new Sovict wroposals on this. subject, perhaps at Four Power
mectings during this summer. We also believe that in connection
with the forthcoming peace treaty negotiations with Japan the USSR

is likely to make some concessions in the hops of promoting frictions
intho relations of Japan with the US and encouraging Jepancse neutral~

ism.

Pe. 4b is possible, however, that the Sovict leaders also desire
a substantial an“ prolonged reduction in international tensions that
would not only prevent Gorman rearmament but so furth:zr their other
objectives, including US withdrawal: from advanecd bases and a reduction

of the inecntive for the West to maintain its present defense efforts,

The Soviet leaders may also feel_that such a reduction of inter-
national tensions is desirable because of the pressure of their own
internal problems.

Q. The principal objective of Soviet policy in Europe is to
obtain a solution of the German problem favorable to Soviet interests.
Prevention or slowing down of West German rearmament and blocking the
development of West Germany's ties with the NATO powers have first
priority. Tb achieve these aims, Soviet policy will almost certainly
make great efforts to influence the situation in West Germany itself.
The Soviet leaders probably calculate that by sedulous encouragement

of German hopes for unification they can, for a limited time, increase

%

neuttalist feeling in West Germany, complicate the reletions of the
West German Government with its NATO partners, and undermine unity

of purpose within the NATO alliance. The settlement of the Austrian
problem, together with the recent Soviet proposals on disarmament and
the current advances to Yugoslavia, may indicate a Soviet willing-
ness in the course of further negotiations, to give up control of East
Germany in exchange for a guaranteed neutralization of united Germany

and a Soviet share in international control over German armament. We

AD 2

2/

believe that the chances of such a. development are less than even.

(Paragraphs 138, 139, 142)

R. If euch eneunes did not, in the soviet Hew: siecsea an
countering the developing threat of West German rearmament, we be-
lieve that. the. USSR would. turn to more rigorous policies, including
a sharp build-up of Soviet and Satellite military capabilities.

They might also adopt more threatening courses of action against
Berlin, orin the Par Hest, or elseuttere, with the purpose of arouning
fear of nuclear war in the West and causing Western peoples to demand
thot their governments pursue a cautious policy. We believe that even
at this- stage the USSR would still avoid courses of action which in
its sudenent clearly entailed the probability of general war.

(Paragraph 141)

a/ The Special Assistant, Intelligence, Department of State, believes

= thet the estimate contained in the last sentence of this paragraph
should read: “We believe that the likelihood of such a development
is small, primarily because it seems to us that its uncertainties
and disadvantages, from the Soviet-pcint of view, would far out-
weigh its advantages.”

eel ae

S. We believe that the USSR is in substantial agreement
with Chinese Cormunist objectives to destroy the Chinese

Nationalist Government and to goin control of all territory held

by it. The primary Soviet interest in issues arising in the area of —

the Formosa Strait is to exploit them in such a way as to sow dis-
trust of the US among neutral nations ard to promote a maximum of
discord between the US and its allies. We believe that Moscow
might see certain odvantages in clashes between Chinese Commmist
and US forces, provided it believed that the clashes would be
limited and localized. However, we also believe that the USSR will
seek to restrain Peiping from adopting policies which in the Soviet
view, Would carry grave risks of mejor hostilities between the US
and Communist China since the Soviet leaders prebably believs thet
such hostilities would also entail grave risk of Soviet involvement.

(Parcercph 145)

T. The Soviet leaders probably consider that if major hes-
tilities between Cormunist China end the US. should cecur, the USSR
would be presented with extremely grave choices. They would
probably give the Chinese Cormamists support in weapons and meterial,
and the scale of this aid would probably increase in proportion to

the threat to the Chinese Communist regime. As hostilities expanded

athe 42

=p |

and the threat to: the Chinese Communist regime increased, they

would probably engage Soviet forces in defensive operations, to

the extent that they felt they could plausibly deny such eas
ment. Should the conflict-progress so far that destruction of the
Chinese Cormmmnist regime appeered probable, we believe that the
Soviet leaders would recognize that open intervention on their part
sufficient to save the Chinese regime would involve extremely grave
risk of general. war. with the US with.its consequent threat to the
survival of the Soviet system. In deciding upon a course of action,
the Soviet leaders would have to weight the strengths which they could
bring to bear in the struggle against those which would be opposed

to then, and the dangers to their own regime of a possible global
war with the US cgoinst the strategic and psychological consequences
to them of destruction of the Chinese Communist regime. We believe,
on balance, they would conclude that loss of the Chinese Communist
regine would be sufficiently damging end final to cause them to re-

sort to open intervention to save that ceca S) (Paragraph 146)

3/ The Director’ of Naval Intelligence, and the Deputy Director for

~ Intelligence, The Joint Staff, believe that the last sentence
overstates the willingness of the Soviet leaders to risk their
own regine and would substitute for the last sentence:

"On balance, we believe that they would not consider the
elimination of the Chinese Communist regime sufficiently damaging,
or final, to warrant the risk to their regime which open inter-
vention would entail."

See es

U. Southeast Asia will almost certainly appear to the USSR
to be the most profitable field for the extension of Communist BB es
fluence, at least during the early period of this estinete. The
Soviet leaders will probably continue, in concert with Communist
China, to support Communist subversive ectivities, end possibly
localized military action if circumstances are favoreble. (Pera-

greph 147)

= 1604
