The Net That Covers the World-by E H Cookridge SpiroO Edward)-functions of The
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014794, dated 4 April 1974.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014794).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

30 MAY 1974

THE NET THAT COVERS THE WORLD

By E. H. COOKRIDGE (Pseudonym)

Published by Henry Holt and Company,
New York, 1955

315 Pages Index

The author, whose real name is Edward SPIRO,
is by his own definition a "special correspondent
for British and American newspapers between the
Wars." i This book deals extensively with the functions
of the First and Second Directorates of the MVD, and
also presents accounts of individual Soviet espionage
agent cases. The author appears to have taken much
of his data from documents of unspecified origin as
well as from the Canadian and Australian Royal

*Other editions:

British (original): SOVIET SPY NET, published by
Frederick Mueller, Ltd., London, 1955, 264 pp., index.

German: ZENTRALE MOSKAU ~ DIE MACHT DES SOWJETSCHEN
GEHEIMDIENSTES (Moscow Center - The Power of the Soviet
Secret Service), published by Sponholtz, Hannover, 1956,
416 pp., index.

Spanish: EL SERVICIO SECRETO SOVIETICO (The Soviet

Secret Service). published by Editorial AHR, Barcelona,
1955, 408 pp., index.

[S30

Commission Reports,* on the GUZENKO and PETROV
revelations. He also seems to have acquired
considerable information from personal experience
{unspecified]. He mentions two hundred and sixty-
two persons as being connected, to a greater or
lesser degree, with Soviet intelligence as staff
members, agents, collaborators or targets.

In discussing the MVD directorates, the author
says that the First Directorate is an intelligence
organization in the Western sense. The Second
Directorate funtions in a more "sinister" sense,
that is, kidnappings, assassinations and terrorism
at home and abroad. In this connection so-called
special centers, "Mobile Groups for Special Tasks,
the "Avanposts" (outposts, says the author, a. spy
ring comprising usually two or more networks abroad),
and the work of special inspectors are discussed.
Attached to this memorandum is a breakdown of the
organization and functions of the two directorates
as of i as presented by the author.

One chapter is devoted to a near obsession of
the Soviets with indexing, and two chapers to the
recruitment and training of agents, primarily those
slated to become staff members of the MVD. Commissars
of the MVD exist in all government institutions to
spot and recommend candidates who in turn undergo
three different levels of training before being
assigned to minor posts on the border for further’
testing.

*See CD-633 and CD-707 respectively.

The so-called atomic espionage case in the

U.S. (Dr. Allen NUNN-MAY, Klaus FUCHS, and Julius
and Ethel ROSENBERG) is discussed from the point

of view of Soviet intelligence operations. Also

of interest is the author's account of the ruthless
stalking and final assassination of Ignace REISS

in 1937, after REISS had written an abusive letter
to Stalin and had left the Cheka.

Throughout the book the author refers to the
directorates of the MVD and to most of their
predecessors as the Cheka for continuity and because
their functions have remained basically the same in
‘spite of many reorganizations and changes of title.
Attached to this memorandum is a chronological list
of these organizational changes until 1954.

Organizational Functions (1954)

The (First) Directorate of Counterespionage _

1. Foreign Division: Intelligence research,
collection and dissemination. Controls secret
agents, sets tasks and targets, and collates
incoming reports from networks abroad.

2, Operative Division: Organizes and directs
operations of the secret service. Appoints resident
directors, selects agents for work abroad, controls
networks, looks after communications and takes
measures in case of exposure.

3. Information Division: Studies every aspect
of human activities outside the USSR. Scrutinizes
newspapers, sifts rumors and gossip, monitors
broadcastin, and maintains a "descriptive central
index"

4. Secret Division: Has sepcimens of genuine
documents from every part of the world. Produces
forged documents, passports, and seals for secret
agents and couriers. Invents aliases, codes, and
ciphers, and arranges accommodation addresses and
post office boxes

. a

S. Recruiting and Training: Responsible for

all aspect of recruiting and training.

6. Communications Division: Carries out the
routine business of maintaining communications with
the networks and deals with any special transportation
problems that arise, such as the escape of Soviet
Gerhard EISLER from the U.S.

1. Propaganda Division: Aims at the
destruction of capitalist countries. Maintains
secret contact with Communist parties abroad, with
the main object of creating fifth columns.

2. Special Division: Responsible for the
execution of individuals and groups at the order of
the government. Includes "Section Nine" which is
concerned with individual murders and kidnappings
abroad.

3. Individual Division: Supervises the
reliability of Soviet citizens at home by prying
into private mail and monitoring conversations by
telephone taps. Surpervises the activities of all
Soviets aborad, whether diplomats, officials, ~
members of trade delegations, or individuals sent
abroad for special purposes. Special agents watch
ordinary state security staff members.

4. Allied Division: Deals with Seviet
satellites and Communist countries. Plaens state
security officials in governments of such countries
and attempts to control such countries' ministries
of state security.

1917

1922

1923

1934

1935

1936

1938

ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGES [until 1954}

December 20

February 11

November 15

we eee ee eee

July 10

October 8

September 27

December 8

CHEKA (all Russian Extraordinary
Commission for Combatting of
Counterrevolution and Sabotage) ‘
Chairman Feliks Edmundovich
DZERZHINSKY)

GPU (State Political Administration)
Chairman DZERZHINSKY

Vice Chairman M, A. THILISER

Vice Chairman J. UNSHLIKHT

OGPU (United States Political.
Administration) cee

President DZERZHINSKY until

his death 20 July 1926 succeed by
Vyacheslav MENZHINSKIY until his
death 10 May 1934, succeeded by
Genrikh YAGODA

NKVD (Peoples' Commissariat for
Internal Affairs)
Commissar YAGODA

NKVD now includes a special
department for State Security. .
Commissar YAGODA until his arrest
in June 1936

NKVD
Commissar Nicolay YEZHOV until
his disappearance in December 1938

NKVD

Lavrenty BERIYA appointed Peoples'
Commissar for Interior and State
Security

194]

1946

1953

1954

February 3

March

March 8

NKVD and NKGB
BERIYA in supreme control.
NKGB headed by Vsevolod MERKULOV

Commissariats resumed "Ministries"
NKVD MVD Ministry of Interior

NKGB KGB Ministry of State Security
BERIYA in supreme control

MVD under Sergey KRUGLOV

KGB under Vsevolod MERKULOV until
1950

KGB under V. A. ABAKUMOV after

1950

MVD and KGB merged into Ministry
of Internal Affairs and State
Security under S. N.° KRUGLOV as
Minister and A. I. SEROV as
Vice-Minister

After execution of BERIYA, a
Board of State Security was
established to coordinate the
internal security services under
the chairmanship of A, I. SEROV.
S. N. KRUGLOV remained in charge
of MVD

THE WORLD'S GREATEST SPIES

By Charles WIGHTON
Published by Oldham Press, Ltd., London, 1962

319 Pages Index

The author presents fifteen short narratives
about spies whom he considers to be the greatest in
the world. Six of the narratives concern Soviet
intelligence activities and primarily involve the
following cases or persons: Ernest WOLLWEBER,
Richard SORGE, the Red Orchestra, atomic spies
Dr. Allan NUNN MAY, Dr. Klaus FUCHS, and David
GREENGLASS, the case regarding Colonel Rudolph ABEL
“and Lucy from Lucerne.*

~—~“¥Analyst's Comment: The author presents bizarre
speculations about facts which are not contained in
other sources. The speculations are discussed in
each chapter, as pertinent. Wighton apparently used
other books as source material. .

Ernest WOLLWEBER :

WOLLWEBER was a veteran of undercover activities
in Western Europe. He was born in 1898, the son of
a poor miner, and served as a stoker in the German
Navy from the time he was eighteen years old. In
1918 he took part in the mutiny of the High Seas
Fleet at Kiel in the Baltic Sea. In 1920 he joined
the German Communist Party in Hamburg. In the early
1920's, Dmitriy Zakharovich MANUILSKIY, a Soviet
member of the Comintern who was at that time visiting
Germany, persuaded WOLLWEBER to go to Moscow for
training in pelitical studies at the Lenin Institute.
WOLLWEBER did so, and after graduation received
intelligence training in undercover operations abroad.
He then became an agent of Soviet state security.
He returned to Germany and rose to a high-ranking
position in the Party. In 1928 he was elected to
the Prussian Parliament and in 1932 became a member
of the Reichstag. .

From the time of his return to Germany he
began to organize a maritime sabotage group under
cover of the Communist-dominated International
Seamen and Harbor Workers! Union. At the time Hitler
came to power and the Party was outlawed, he began
forming the nucleus of the underground Communist
movement. He worked both as a member cf the Comintern
in Western Europe and as a resident of Soviet state
security in Germany. His sabotage network was
composed of Germans, Danes, Swedes, Dutchmen, Belgians,
and one British subject and the organization expanded
rapidly. The network's centers were in Hamburg,
Brenen, Danzig, Rotterdan, Amsterdam, Copenhagen,
Oslo, and Riga. In 1937, WOLLWEBER barely escaped
arrest by the Gestapo, at the time when ahout 4
dozen of his collaborators in Hamburg were seized

in a police raid. He moved to Copenhagen and
continued his work from there. In 1940, after the
German occupation of Denmark, he established his
headquarters in Stockholm. According to a 194]
report by RSHA (German Security Headquarters) chief
Reinhard Heydrich, WOLLWEBER's organization was
responsible for the successful sabotage of a total
of twenty ships, of which sixteen were German, three
Italian, and one Japanese.

As a result of German diplomatic pressure, the
Swedish authorities agreed to arrest WOLLWEBER and
his accomplices. He was sentenced to three years’
imprisonment. The German authorities made the claim
that WOLLWEBER, as a German citizen, was wanted for
numerous acts of sabotage against German shipping,
and requested his extradition. The Soviets then
intervened on his behalf, because his network was
of high value to them. Through diplomatic channels
the Soviets put forth the claim that WOLLWEBER, as
a Soviet citizen, was wanted in the USSR for the
misappropriation of large sums of state funds. The
Swedish Government yielded to the Soviets and released
WOLLWEBER in 1944. He was transported by air to
Moscow.

After the war, WOLLWEBER, was appointed head of
the shipping directorate for the Soviet zone of
Germany (i.e. East Germany). This assignment provided
him with cover for further organization of sabotage
activity. Some postwar acts of sabotage in the
U.K., France Germany, and Canada have been attributed
to his organization. In 1953, after the riots in
Eest Germany, he succeeded ZAISSER as Minister of
East Germany's state security. According to the
author, ULBRICHT did not like him, and almost
irmediately crdered him fired, after threatening
him with arrest. Moscow intervened in the matter

however, and WOLLWEBER was able to retain his post
and to carry on his maritime sabotage work. As of
1962 he was still holding that post.

Richard SORGE

The author's account of che case of Richard
SORGE appears to be based primarily on information
in Hans Otto MEISSNER's book AE MAN WITH THREE FACES.
WIGHTON's account contains some allegedly new
information and, at the same time, differs from
other overt sources. :

Analyst's comments on a comparison of

WIGHTCN's book with other sources:

1. WIGHTON repeats MEISSNER's
conjecture that SORGE may still (1962)
be alive and says, "Some well informed
Western experts believe that. If he
is, then he is certainly one of the
top figures of the Soviet espionage
service." Chalmers A. JOHNSON, in his
book, AN INSTANCE OF TREASON, rejects this
speculation.

2. WIGHTON and JOHNSON cite the
date of SORGE's departure from Germany
for the USSR as 1925. MEISSNER, who is
customarily vague concerning dates, cites
1820. According to the Hearings before the

Committee on UN-American’Activities,
House of Representatives, Eighty-
Second Congress, First Session,

August 9, 22 and 23, 1951, p. 1175
entitled "Hearings on American Aspects
of the Richard Sorge Spy Case" the date
was 1925.

3. In describing SORGE's travels
as a Comintern agent before 1929 neither
WIGHTON nor JOHNSON make mention of
SORGE's stay in the U.S. MEISSNER
maintains that he spent some time in
Hollywood, California ca. 1928. The
Hearings cite SORGE's confession as
having been in the USA in 1933 an
1935%

4, Both WIGHTON and MEISSNER
misspell the names of Soviet Generals
BERZIN and URITSKIY, which they give
as BELDIN and ULITSKI.

5. According to WIGHTON, the
clandestine radio operators assigned
to SORGE were WEINGART in China and
BERNHARDT in Japan during the first
year. According to JOHNSON, BERNHARD?
was the operator during the entire
period. MEISSNER makes no mention of
either WEINGART or BERNHARDT.

6. According to WIGHTON, Agnes
SMEDLEY was a GRU agent. JOHNSON
repudiates this assertion.

7,  WIGHTON and MEISSNER maintain
that Max KLAUSEN joined the SORGE group
in China. According to WIGHTON, KLAUSEN

was in a Soviet internment camp from

1933 to 1935 as punishment for ineffiency.
He does not mention that SORGE was accused
of having a love affair with a White
Russian, anti-Soviet emigre. According
to JOHNSON, KLAUSEN did not join the
SORGE group until 1934. Other variations
between sources in dates of KLAUSEN's
activities are: MEISSNER cites him as
having been in Shanghai in 1930 and as
having been recalled to Moscow in 1933.
According to the Hearings, KLAUSEN was

in Canton in 1931 and in Harbin in 1932,

8. Concerning SORGE's employment
by the Frankfurter Zeitung, WIGHTON says
that SORGE was appointed correspondent
for that newspaper with the help of
Agnes SMEDLEY. JOHNSON states, on the
other hand, that SMEDLEY was fired from
the Prankfurter Zettung immediately after
Hitler came to power. It therefore
seems unlikely that her recommendation
would have deen of assistance to SORGE.
MEISSNER does not mention SMEDLEY in
connection with SORGE's employment
by the newspaper.

9. According to WIGHTON and
MEISSNER, SORGE appiied for NSDAP
(Nazi Party) membership in 1933 while
he was in Germany. JOHNSON and
Various Soviet press reports say that
SORGE joined NSDAP after his arrival
in Japan.

6

10. WIGHTON suggests that SORGE had
a protector in the Nazi heirarchy, but
provides no name or identifying data.
(See page 15, paragraph 3, for a
reference to WERTHER.)

ll. According to WIGHTON, German
Ambassador OTT in Tokyo appointed SORGE
to the post of Press Attache in the
Embassy. JOHNSON says that the German
Foreign Ministry offered the post to
SORGE but that he refused to accept it
on security grounds. Soviet news
accounts state that SORGE was the Press
Attache, but make no reference to the
manner in which he procured the position.
The Soviet news accounts add that in
that post he had had access to the
Embassy's secret files.

12. WIGHTON's version of the
detection and arrest of the SORGE
group agrees in all detail with that
of MEISSNER, and both state that the
head of Japanese counterintelligence
and a beautiful nightclub dancer
played the main roles in the denouement.
JOHNSON, on the other hand, says that
SORGE's downfall was precipitated by
MIYAGI. A former landlady of MIYAGI's
in 1932 in Los Angeles and member of
the Communist Party of the US, arrived
in Japan in 1940.. An arrested Japanese
Communist [unnamed] turned police
informant and denounced the former
landlady as a Communist and a spy. She
was placed under surveillance for a
year and finally arrested. When

/o-155

Me,

interrogated concerning Japanese nationals who
had lived in the US and had returned to

Japan, she named MIYAGI, among others.

MIYAGI, who was on a police list of

persons associated with OZAKI and SORGE,

was placed under surveillance and

eventually arrested,

dapech aaa cenit ge sinc nTime SH

WIGHTON appears to have depended upon Wilhelm F.
FLICKE!s book, SPIONAGE GRUPPE ROTE KAPELLE (Espionage
Group Red Orchestra) as his main source of
information for this account, although in WIGHTON's
condensed version key facts and persons involved in
the case are omitted.

WIGHTON begins by recalling the background and
says that in 1937 GRU networks in Western Europe were
almost nonexistent. Most of the GRU's leading
operatives were at that time recalled to Moscow and
disappeared in the purges. Most of the agents in
the German Communist Party were liquidated by the
Gestapo. Moscow decided to revive the espionage
system in Western Europe as quickly as rossible and
to direct operations from Belgium, Holland, France,
and Switzerland, border nations of the Third Reich.

According to WIGHTON, Leopold TREPPER, whose
true name was DOME, was selected to be the GRU
resident. He hed formerly been a Comintern agent
with experience in Poland, Palestine, and France.
He had transferred to the GRU, studied for two

years at the Lenin Institute in Moscow, and, after
graduation, received thorough training in intelligence.
In March 1939 he went to Brussels and, assisted by
sevecal subordinates, immediately began to organize

a network, He expanded the net to Holland and France,
where Leo GROSSVOGEL, his longtime friend and a

former Comintern agent, became his chief collaborator.
TREPPER set up a cover firm called the Simex Company
which, at the same time, carried on a legitimate
business and had branches in France, Belgium, Holland,
and Sweden. Through this firm, nis agents were able

to penetrate the German occupation administration in
France and Belgium, and also Todt, the Nazi construction
combine. Communications with the Moscow Center had
ulready been arranged through the use of couriers

and by clandestine radio. The radio communications
channel was to be activated’only on orders from

Moscow. The order came in the late 1930's, at the

time the Germans began the concentration of their

forces on the Soviet border.

The net supplied the Soviet high command with
information concerning strategic plans of the German
high command, and the operational plans of the German
Air Force, including reports on the movement of
German units and on bombing targets.

Several years before the German attack on the
Soviet Union, the GRU operative in Berlin had organized
an espionage network. Its key members were Arvid
HARNACK, a high official in the German Ministry of
Economy, and Harro SCHULZE-BOYSEN, an officer in the
German Air Ministry. The group, which began to be
expanded in 1929, had an excellent potential and
was of great interest to the Moscow Center. After
the Russo-German war began, the group ran into
communication cifficulties with Moscow. The Center
ordered TREPPER to detail an expert from Brussels

O

Mare Bren

a cD-735 i.

\

coe ee a
to Berlin to alleviate the situation. The radio
message containing the instructions’ to TREPPER
jncluded the names and addresses of HARNACK and
SCHULZE-BOYSEN. The order was carried out, but
the elementary violation of security committed in
the cable was later to prove fatal to the. Berlin
group.

The beginning of the end for the Red Orchestra
group came in the second half of 1941. Contributing
factors were the perseverance of the radio detection
surveillance mounted by the Germans, and the
phenomenal number of security violations in the
messages between the Center and the groups. The
Gestapo raided the clandestine radio establishment
in Brussels, arrested several accomplices, and
seized sufficient material to decode some of the
messages. Among the messages was the one concerning
the Berlin group containing the names of HARNACK
and SCHULZE-BOYSEN, The Berlin group was broken up
immediately, and the Belgian and French groups were
similarly dealt with in 1942. The last member of
TREPPER's group was arrested in Marseille.

TREPPER himself was arrested in Paris in 1942.
He made a full confession and for a period cooperated
with the Germans. He eventually escaped from German
internment, fought with the Maquis, and in 1945 was
recalled to Moscow.

10

oa ee

Pas :

uw i aoe
a,

se es

Atomic Spies °

This short narrative concerns Dr. Allan NUNN
MAY, Dr. Klaus Julius FUCHS, and David GREENGLASS.
According to the. author, NUNN MAY, a British svoject
was probably recruited by Soviet intelligence in
1937 when, after graduating from Cambridge University,
he visited the Soviet Union and spent some time in
Leningrad. Later, in 1939, he became a professor
at the University of London. In 1942 he worked with
a group of physicists at the Cavendish laboratory in
Cambridge. In 1943 he joined the first group of
British scientists delegated to the United States to
cooperate with American scientists on the atomic
bomb project. In 1945 he spent some time at the
Argonne laboratory. As a result of the revelations
of Igor Sergeyevich GUZENKO, the Soviet defector in
Canada, suspicion fell on NUNN MAY as having possibly
been the atomic scientist working for Soviet
intelligence. NUNN MAY was watched by the Special
Branch of Scotland Yard and was arrested on 4 March
1946. He confessed to having been a Soviet agent,
but refused to name other collaborators in the U.Kk.,
the U.S., or Canada. He was sentenced to ten years'
imprisonment.

FUCHS was born in Germany where he grew up to
become a member of the German Communist Party. In
1933, at the age of twenty-two, he fled from Germany
to England. He studied at universities in Bristol
and Edinburgh. In 1940 he was put in an internment
camp on the Isle of Mann with other German citizens
and later transferred to a similar camp in Canada.
In 1941 he was released, went briefly to Edinburgh,
but soon accepted a job in Birmingham at the atomic
research center ther. According to the author, it
was during this period that he was recruited by

il

KREMER, a member of Soviet military intelligence.
From that time he delivered to the Soviets on a
regular basis valuable atomic energy data to which
he had gained access in England and the U.S. Until
1947 he managed to conceal his Party membership.

In August 1943 FUCHS became a naturalized British
subject and, after successfully passing a routine
security check, became a member of the tube alloys
organization which had been set up to coordinate the
work of the British atomic energy research teams,

In 1943 he was selected to be a member of the British
team of scientists visiting the U.S., where he
remained until 1946, spending most of his time at
Los Alamos. Before his trip the GRU had arranged
for him to be contacted in the U.S. by a special
operative who had been sent to the U.S. for that
purpose. When FUCHS returned to England he became
head of a department of theoretical physics at the
new atomic energy center at Harwell, where he worked
both as a scientist and as an espionage agent until
the last half of 1949.

In January 1950, he was arrested and sentenced
to fourteen years' imprisonment. In the early 1960's,
-he was released and went to East Germany. In 1962
he was allegedly deputy director of the East German
Nuclear Energy Research Center in Dresden.

GREENGLASS, a GRU agent at Los Alamos, is
mentioned only briefly in the book, in the context
of his also having had Harry GOLD as his contact
man. The ROSENBERG's are mentioned in this chapter
only in connection with the fact that Ethel
ROSENBERG was GREENGLASS' sister.

Colonel ABEL

The book contains comments about ABEL's personal
and family background, but does not indicate the
author's sources. The author says that some
[unspecified] sources have maintained that ABEL
was born in the White Russian town of Minsk, the
son of a printer, According to WIGHTON, other
sources have speculated that he was born in southern
Russia ca. 1900, the son of a wealthy Jewish intellectual.
ABEL's father had to flee from Russia to Switzerland
in 1906 because of his leftwing connections, and
there he allegedly met Lenin. The family then moved
to Germany and settled in Leipzig. After the Russian
Revolution the family returned to Moscow. ,

In 1923 young ABEL became a member of the
Communist Party. He studied for three years in
Berlin at the technical university. After graduation,
he returned ta Moscow and underwent intelligence
training. Using the alias AVOLKIN, he was assigned
to Berlin as an Assistant Commerical Attache in the
Soviet Embassy. For a period he also posed as a
German engineer in the Zeiss optical works in Jena.
After taking additional intelligence training in
Moscow, he was again sent to Germany to undertake an
intelligence mission and operated in the Berlin-
Dresden-Leipzig area. Due to the fact that he was
of a Jewish appearance, he did not blend into the
Nazi environment, and was transferred first to
Palestine and later to Switzerland. In Switzerland
he allegedly met RADO, the local resident. At the
end of 1944 he was said to have been in Tehran.
After the war he spent eight months in East Berlin
engaged in conducting a series of missions directed
against West Germany, France, and, on eccasion,
England. He was then recalled to Moscow for the

13

purpose of preparing himself for an assignment to
Canada and the U.S.

In 1948 ABEL arrived in Montreal using the
alias Andrew KAYOTIS. He then moved’ to New York,
where he assumed the identity of Emil R. GOLDFUS,
a photographer.

-WIGHTON provides little data about ABEL's
intelligence activity in the U.S. He mentions only
one contact with the COHEN couple in 1950 in New
York. The contact then stopped because the COHENS,
who were part of the ROSENBERGS' ring, had to leave
the U.S. in haste due to the fact that they had
been compromised by the arrests and confessions
of FUCHS , GOLD, and GREENGLASS.

WIGHTON's condensed version of ABEL's detection
through the defection of HAYHANEN, his deputy, and
ABEL's arrest, sentence, and exchange for POWERS,
the U-2 flyer, agrees in detail with the more ample
version given by James Britt DONOVAN in his book,
STRANGERS ON THE BRIDGE.

[ABEL died on 16 November 1971. ‘On 22 August

- 1972 a Washington Post dispatch from Moscow reported

that Western newsmen had stumbled across ABEL's grave
marker in a Mascow cemetery, engraved: "Fisher, William
Genrykhovich-Abel, Rudolf Ivanovich." The dispatch also
reports from ae "reliable unofficial source" that he "was.
born and raised in England,"]}

14

Lucy from Lucerne ,

This account concerns a Soviet espionage network
in Switzerland during World War II, called by the
Germans the Rote Drei (Red Three).* The main
protagonist of the story is Rudolf ROESSLER, called
Lucy, the most valuable member of the net. RADO,
the resident director, and Alexander FOOTE, his
deputy, play only minor roles,

According to WIGHTON, ROESSLER had been a
member of Czech intelligence before his arrival in
Switzerland. He adds that ROESSLER probably fought
with the Czech legions in Siberia in 1917-1918 and
against the Hungarian Communists in 1918, He
maintains that Czech intelligence was in contact
with Soviet intelligence beginning with the
revolutionary period of 1918.

WIGHTON speculates on the identity of WERTHER,
Lucy's most valuable source within the German high
command. He suggests two identities: one, the
Catholic organization with access to the German
military inner sanctum; or two, a Communist in the
highest echelon of the Nazi Party. WIGHTON suggests
two possibilities if Lucy's source was a Communist
at the top of the Nazi Party: one, that Richard
SORGE had had a protector in Germany, and that

*Analust's Comnent: It would appear that WIGHTON
took the essentials. of his narrative from the book
HANiBOOK FOR SPIES, by Alexander FOOTE, although in
the first two editions of his book FOOTE misidentifies
Lucy. He has added conjectures and speculation of
his own. (Published by Museum Press, Ltd., London,
1949, 1953, 1964, 190 pp., no index -- see CD-652.)

i$

that protector could be WERTHER; and two, that if
Martin BORMANN, Hitler's deputy, was a Communist,

as has been alleged by Rear Admiral Wilhelm CANARIS,
then BORMANN might have been WERTHER.

WIGHTON's version of the uncovering of the
Swiss net agrees with FOOTE's version in HANDBOOK
FOR SPIES, althcugh WIGHTON's story is in such a
condensed form that it lacks discussion of direct
or indirect reasons and causes behind the net's
successes and downfall.

ROESSLER was arrested in 1944 and eventually
released as a result of the interventicn of the
Swiss General Staff, with whom, according to the
author, he had cooperated closely. He was, however,
again arrested in 1953 on suspicion of working for
the Czech intelligence service. He was sentenced
to one year's imprisonment and died in 1958.

16
