EstimatedD Pub Date) Short-run Economic Effects of the Soviet Occupation of Cze
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126878, dated 1 August 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126878).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

“-LBJ LIBRARY 7 Soaxc ~
Mandatory Review

Case # NL AHISS
Document # UX

DIRECTORATE OF |
INTELLIGENCE.

Intelligence Memorandum

Short-Run Economic Effects

- of the Soviet Occupation of Czechoslovakia

Sot

ER IM 68-114
September 1968
APPROVED FOR RELEASE ;

2 0 NOV 1997 Copy No. 22

enitaning of Title

Its transmissigaser"revelation of its
sist an unauthorized person is prohibited

C | rr

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE .AGENCY~
Directorate: of. Intelligence .
'12 September .1968°.. ~~
INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

Short-Run Economic Effects of the Soviet Occupation.
- : of Czechoslovakia . To —

‘Summary

The Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia seriously
disrupted. the country's economy during the first week
to ten days. In the confusion of the first few days,
a great’many factories and shops either failed to
open or, if open, were largely inactive. All public
buildings, communication centers, and financial insti-
tutions were occupied by Soviet forces. A Czech source
estimates the total damage to the economy during the
first week of Soviet occupation at $250 million. Sub-
sequent losses undoubtedly raised the total losses
substantially.

The greatest strain on the economy resulted from
the disruption of transportation. Municipal transport
Slowed almost to a halt, and international transport
ceased for at least a four-day period (21 to 24
August) as border crossing points were closed. MTrans-
port disruptions interfered with all aspects of
Czechoslovak economic life -- the supply of provisions
to the population, the supply of raw materials to in-
dustry and agriculture, imports and exports, and the
general movement of the country's citizens. As a
result, losses in industrial output were surely sub-
stantial. With the possible exception of hops, damage
to crops probably was minor because the grain harvest
had already been largely completed.

Note: Thre memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
It was prepared by the Office of Economic Research
and was coordinated with the Office of Strategic
Research.

(SBE

By the end of the first week in September, economic
life had not yet approached normal. Many factories:
were not in full operation. Rail and road transport
had resumed, although civilian traffic was still
restricted to daylight hours, and civil air transport
was largely inoperative: Some significant lossés,
such.as a sharp decline in hard currency earnings
from Western.tourism, could be quite prolonged. Re-
sumption of normal transport schedules is critical
to the avoidance of further serious economic damage.
With the resumption of foreign trade and general.
economic activity, with the impending harvests of
potatoes and sugar beets, and- with the accumulated
backlog of freight, great strains will be placed
on the country's transportation net. Additional
strains undoubtedly will be created by the supply
. needs of the occupation forces, whose number is

estimated at about 250,000. ; ;

=

Overall Loss

“vl. The total damage to the Czechoslovak economy
during the first week to ten days of the Soviet
occupation, when disruptions were most severe, can-—
not be estimated independently, but it was surely |
very substantial. Subsequent losses undoubtedly add
substantially to the total. A report attributed to.
the Economic Institute of the Czechoslovak Academy of
Sciences estimates the damage to the economy at 4
billion crowns ($250 million)* for the first week
of the occupation. Damage to the economy of Prague .
alone was estimated by the Prague Municipal Statistical
Office at 200 million crowns for the first three days
of the occupation and 65 million crowns for each
additional day. “Economic experts" in Vienna have
put the cost at $10 million per. day, basing their
estimate on the loss of export business and the tourist
trade. Various financial estimates of the damage in
Specific regions and sectors of the economy are now
appearing in the Czech press. The matter of reparations
for damages to the economy reportedly is one of the
items to be taken up in the discussions over economic
matters to be held with the Soviets in mid-September.

Property Damage

2. Property damage resulting from the Soviet
occupation of Czechoslovakia cannot be assessed in
value terms, but does not appear-to have been heavy.
Reports from Prague have stated that several street
cars were destroyed and some buildings burned and
that damage ran into millions of crowns. Such damage
was not widespread. It apparently was limited to
those few places where the occupying forces were actively
resisted -- for example, in the vicinity of radio
transmitters (both legal and clandestine). There
have been no reports of damage to railheads. The

* At the offtctal exchange rate, 7.2 crowns to

US $1, the 4 billton crowns would equal US $556
millton. Apparently the conversion was made by
using the tourist rate of 16.2 crowne to US $1,
whitch more nearly reflects the purchasing power of
the crown.

SEC RRL

( Sper '

only reported damage to railroads involved the

Czechs' tearing up tracks on a bridge over the Danube
River at Komarno. These rails probably could have

been replaced within a few hours. Because of heavy

tank traffic within the country, damage to road sur-
faces could have been extensive. Only one bridge

has been reported destroyed; it collapsed from the.
weight of a Soviet tank. (It now bears the name | ~
"Bridge of Czechoslovak-Soviet Friendship." Previously,
it had been nameless.)

Transportation

3. The Soviet occupation of Czechoslovakia is
greatly disrupting the flow of transportation within
the country and across its borders. Immediately
following the invasion, all air and commercial rail
traffic and all road transport crossing the frontier
halted. Road transport.within the country. was
seriously disrupted: the prevailing uncertainty re-
stricted operation to daylight hours, and fuel short-
ages substantially reduced the flow of traffic.

4. Rail transport has since resumed operation,
but, along with road transport, is still restricted to
daylight hours. Restrictions on international trans-
port reportedly were in effect from 21 to 24 August,
when all border crossing points were closed. There
are indications that foreign shipments did not resume
to any extent until 26 August. As of 4 September, |
commercial air traffic had not been resumed, although
reportedly it will be in operation in time for the
Brno Trade Fair, which is now scheduled to open on
_15 September.

Food Supplies

5. The interruption of internal transportation
almost immediately affected retail food supplies in.
the cities. Nighttime and early morning deliveries
of perishable foodstuffs were halted by the uncertainty
that prevailed in the large population areas. Con-
sequently, deliveries of bread, fresh meat, and milk
to retail stores were delayed several hours. Many
shops remained closed during the first two days of
the occupation (21 to 22 August). Moreover, the

temporary closing of border crossing points (21 to
24 August) added to the shortage of fresh fruit and
vegetables, particularly from Hungary and Bulgaria.
Thus there were shortages of some items and long
queues for most. Not until the sixth day of. the.
occupation (26 August) did the supply of provisions
become more or less normal and the queues begin to
grow smaller and fewer. ,

_ Industry =

6. Industrial output was particularly hard~hit

by the invasion. During the first two days of the
occupation, the situation was very unsettled. Some
reports indicate that occupation forces had surrounded
some factories and would not let employees enter;
other reports suggest that employees had gone to the
factories but attended meetings instead of working.

On the third day of the occupation (23 August),

Prague factories were open, but appeared inactive.

As the situation stabilized, factory operations
gradually resumed, but because of a public transporta-
tion shutdown in the evenings, factories were unable
to maintain a full afternoon Shift, as workers sought
to get home early. Third shifts were shut down
entirely. A similar situation was reported to exist
in Bratislava.

7. After a week's occupation, industry also began
to feel the effect of the cut-off of imports, as
many plants began to report raw material shortages.
In particular, it was reported that Soviet deliveries
of coking coal, natural gas, and iron. ore had shrunk
since the occupation. In a radio interview on 26
August, Deputy Premier Lubomir Strougal indicated that
the country's steel works were dangerously short of
coke supplies. On 30 August, factories in the Ostrava
region were reported to be working at 65 percent of
capacity, and in other areas there were reports of
plants running at one-half capacity or less. Ina
move to make up for lost production, special shifts
were scheduled in some plants for the weekend of 31
August; such action may be repeated in the weekends
to come,

Agriculture

8. In spite of reports to the contrary, agri-.
culture probably was not serious ly damaged by the
occupation. Most of the country! Ss grain crops should
have been harvested and placed in storage before. the
invasion, so that damage would have been minimal.
Potatoes and sugar beets are the only major crops
still to be harvested. These harvests will not begin
in earnest until mid-September for potatoes and October
for sugar beets. Some early potatoes may now be ready
for harvesting, but a few days delay should not harm
them,

9. The harvesting of potatoes and sugar beets
in Czechoslovakia is a labor-intensive activity.
Continued transportation difficulties and the em-
ployment of workers on special weekend shifts in
factories may deprive agriculture of the necessary
extra Manpower to assist with the harvest. The
continued interruption of transportation could
seriously affect the timely sowing of winter grains,
as great demands are placed on the transportation
system for the delivery of required fertilizer.

10. The interruption of transportation could have
harmed future output of livestock to the extent to
which deliveries of commercial feed may have been
held. up. Nonrecoverable losses were likely to have
been incurred where delays led to spoilage of milk
and other perishables.

11. The hop crop may have been damaged by the
occupation. There have been reports that Soviet
tanks had been driven in fields in the hop-growing
area northwest of Prague. If a large share of this
year's harvest was indeed destroyed. or severely
damaged, the consequences for the Czech beer industry
could be severe. Moreover, a valuable axport will.
have been lost. In 1966, hop exports earned about
$10 million in foreign exchange for Czechoslovakia,
of which more than $8 million was in hard currency.
In an attempt to save this year's crop, a reported
10,000 volunteers have gone to the fields to help
with the harvest.

Foreign Trade

12. Czechoslovakia's foreign trade was completely
disrupted by the country's invasion. For four days
(21 to 24 August) all shipments into and out of the
country stopped, and as late as 30 August Yugoslav
exports to Czechoslovakia reportedly were being
turned back by the Hungarians. On the other hand,
it appears that the flow of Soviet crude oil, par-
ticularly to the Slovnaft refinery near Bratislava,
continued uninterrupted. In addition to the temporary
losses in export earnings and the strain on domestic
supplies as imports were stopped, the Czechs also
lost nonrecoverable foreign exchange normally earned
on goods shipped through Czechoslovakia to other
countries. For example, goods destined for Berlin,
East Germany, or Poland had.to be rerouted through
Austria and West Germany.

13. A further effect of the occupation will be
the delay in the delivery of Czechoslovak exports,
particularly to the West. Although no orders from
the West are known to have been canceled, short-
run disruption of Czechoslovak imports from the West
has been indicated in an interview -- conducted
by Dun and Bradstreet analysts -- of "key business
organizations doing business with the Eastern Bloc."
Those interviewed in eight West European countries
stated that they will put a "temporary stop on all
contracts and shipments to Czechoslovakia, pending
further clarification of the situation there."

14. Tourism, at the height of its season, is
dead. The Prague-Ruzyne Airport was still closed to
commercial traffic as of 4 September, and 10 of 14
Czechoslovak civil airports were reportedly still
occupied by Soviet troops. The only foreigners now
permitted to enter the country are diplomats and
businessmen who have invitations to visit Czechoslovak
firms or who are to attend the Brno Trade Fair.

15. The Brno Trade Fair was originally scheduled
to open on 8 September, but has been delayed for one
week. According to Associated Press reports, inter-
national flights are expected to resume in time for
the fair's opening. There have been signs of hesi-
tation, however, among some Westerners who were to
have exhibits at the fair. Indeed, the present climate
is not conducive to a heavy turnout.
