National Foreign Intelligence Community Support for Assessment of Persian Gulf
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000100064, dated 4 May 1991.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000100064).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY SUPPORT
FOR

ASSESSMENT OF PERSIAN GULF ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE

20 June 1991

ICS 3641-91

oved Relegse
oa gE iS07

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Executive Highlights. ........4.4.4.46466
BO@CKOTOUNG.. f° G44. (4 4 gd Ge Sk SR aa See
Other Expressions of Interest and Concern.

Early Community Response.

Direct Intelligence Contributions...

The Immediate Need: More and Better Data.

Potential for Further Intelligence Contributions.

Attachment

Data Requirements and Sampling Overview:
Kuwait Oil Fires .......

tive Highlidl

fe) This report to the Congress conveys the findings of an
Intelligence Community task force established expressly
to evaluate the capabilities of National Foreign
Intelligence Program (NFIP) assets to contribute to US
Government assessments of the nature, impact, and extent
of environmental damage resulting from oil fires and
Spills in Kuwait.

oO Director of Central Intelligence priorities that guide
the Community's collection and analytic efforts are
consistent with the high-level of interest US
policymakers have expressed in environmental damage from
Iraqi sabotage of Kuwait oil facilities.

fe) The task force concludes that the fires are presently of
foremost concern, and that the most immediate
requirement of environmental scientists and analysts is
for systematic collection of data pertaining to rates of
emission and combustion, and the chemical composition of
the pollutants which result.

oO Computer models used to simulate and project dispersion
patterns for atmospheric pollutants are available to, .
and have been applied to, the Kuwaiti problem by both
the Central Intelligence Agency and the Department of
Energy, Sandia National Laboratories.

ra) The task force ascertained that the NFIP possesses no
unique collection resources able to quickly resolve the
existing uncertainties over both the quantities and the
qualities of burning oil from the Kuwaiti fields.

fe) Community analysts do believe, however, that meticulous
study of data collected by civil satellites and national
technical means will eventually produce accurate
estimates of the rates at which oil has burned, and the
amount. Technically innovative collection concepts have
been proposed, and are being evaluated within the
Community, which would enable intelligence sensors
designed for other purposes to be applied in ways which
might abet this process.

fe) It is uniformly agreed that resolving uncertainties over
the chemical composition of the products of combustion
from Kuwaiti wells requires systematic, near-source
sampling within the oil fire plumes. Existing NFIP
aeric. sampling assets were found unsuitable for that
purpose.

National Foreign Intelligence Community Support
for
Assessment of Persian Gulf Environmental Damage

Background

Congress, in a passage contained within the Persian Gulf
“Dire Emergency” supplemental appropriations bill, strongly urged
the Director of Central Intelligence to review capabilities
embodied within the National Foreign Intelligence Program (NFIP)
in order to identify and employ those systems and resources which
might be applicable to supporting US Government assessment of the
environmental and ecological damage resulting from Iraqi sabotage
of Kuwaiti oil facilities.

An interagency Intelligence Community working group was
formed and convened to determine the status and objectives of US
Government activities already under way and the needs and
priorities of the engaged scientific community. National Foreign
Intelligence Program (NFIP) resources and capabilities were
reviewed to determine what has been done and what else might be
done to assist in US Government assessment of the nature, impact,
and extent of the damage resulting from the Kuwaiti fires and oil
discharges. New lines of communication with other US Government
agencies studying the Kuwaiti problem were opened, adding to
regular contacts already taking place. This paper, prepared in
both classified and unclassified versions, constitutes the report
that Congress has requested.

Other Expressions of Interest and Concern

Congressional interest in utilizing intelligence
capabilities for damage assessment of the extreme pollution event
in Kuwait was subsequently broadened to embrace support to
environmental research in general. Senator Boren, Chairman of
the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, endorsed and
forwarded to the DCI a letter from Senator Gore, of the Senate
Armed Services Committee, recommending that actions be taken to
begin discussion between intelligence officers and environmental
scientists to investigate ways and means by which intelligence
data collected for other purposes, but nonetheless potentially
useful to environmental scientists, might be shared.

Concurrently, within the Executive Branch, the Assistant to
the President for Science and Technology was emphasizing to the
Department of Defense the research importance of the Kuwaiti oil
fires in better understanding atmospheric processes and improving
prediction of human health risks, and requesting t!..t DoD continue

its assistance toward meeting those goals. Similarly, the Senate
Armed Services Committee was encouraging routine DoD involvement
in environmental issues by way of a Strategic Environmental
Research and Development Program. Thus, with the initiation of
the DCI‘s Congressionally directed review, those components of
the NFIP which are organizationally vested within the Department
of Defense have been responsive to dual avenues of inquiry
concerning capabilities--primarily, collection capabilities--
which could be applicable to the class of environmental problems
for which the Kuwaiti experience serves so dramatically as case
in point.

Early Community Response

Sensing a mounting interest among US policymakers in
environmental matters, the CIA Directorate for Intelligence
established an Environmental Issues Branch (GRD/EIB) two years
ago--well in advance of the acute pollution episode which was to
occur in the Persian Gulf. Initial emphasis was placed on the
political and economic aspects of environmental issues. Within
the Office of the President, reports and briefings on these
issues have been provided to council chairmen, special counsels
and assistants, and the Office of the US Trade Representative.
During its brief tenure, CIA's Environmental Issues Branch has
responded to policymakers at all levels in the Departments of
State, Treasury, Commerce, Energy, and the Environmental
Protection Agency.

At the broader community level, the Foreign Intelligence
Priorities Committee of the Intelligence Community Staff
(ICS/FIPC) was also responding to a sense of shifting interests
among policymaking consumers of national foreign intelligence.

In 1990, a major review was undertaken of “US Foreign
Intelligence Requirements Categories and Priorities,” the
document which sets forth the DCI's basic substantive guidance to
the Community for the operation, planning, and programming of the
overall US foreign intelligence effort. Among the many revisions
that this review produced was creation of a new subject category
on health and the environment. Kuwaiti oil fires and slicks were
subsequently assigned a high priority within this new category.

Direct Intelligence Contributions

In the building momentum of planning for Operation DESERT
STORM, the possibility that the about-to-be evicted Iraqi
intruders, turned vindictive, might use oil as a defensive weapon
was not overlooked. In response to the threat this prospect
might hold for both the well-being and tactical effectiveness of
coalition militar: forces, a couple of important activities were
initiated.

Sandia National Laboratory, under the auspices of the Office
of Foreign Intelligence, Department of Energy, formed a
multidisciplinary team to provide preliminary potential optical
effects, ecological stresses, and reservoir damages that would
result from the demolition of wellheads in Kuwait oil fields and
from the discharge or ignition of oil from nonreservoir sources
such as oil storage tank farms, man-made oil-filled trenches,
pipelines, and oil tankers. Best-case and worst-case scenarios
for the oil fields were considered. The approach in this study
was to perform a series of time-phased analyses, each stage of
which generated not only immediate results, but also the
requisite inputs, or source terms, for the succeeding stage. For
example, reservoir analyses provided source terms for combustion
analyses in addition to estimates of reservoir Gamage; combustion
analyses defined combustion products, posed oil-filled trench
issues, and provided source terms for atmospheric processes;
atmospheric analyses generated potential optical effects and
provided source terms for ecological analyses that, in turn,
provided estimates of ecological stresses.

Also, within the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), a
fast-track initiative was undertaken to adapt an existing
contractor-developed, multidisciplinary, atmospheric dispersion
computer model to the Persian Gulf threat. The resultant plume
model produces tactical forecasts of soot and other pollutants in
the air at ground level from which short-term impact on human
health can be projected more than two days in advance. The model
has been further applied to estimating the cumulative effect
throughout the Middle East and adjoining regions of extended
exposure to combustion products generated by the Kuwaiti fires.
Projections so derived comprise the central thrust of the
analyses currently under way at CIA. Again, human health is of
major concern, and CIA's Office of Medical Services (OMS) is a
regular participant in analyses of the toxicological implications
of pollution from the Kuwait fires. Other ramifications such as
agricultural production are also receiving analytic attention.

As Iraqi destruction of Kuwaiti oil facilities moved from
prospect to fact, attention initially focused on the oil slick
and assessing the oil slick threat to Saudi desalinization
facilities became a foremost concern. The Remote Sensing
Applications Staff (RSAS) at CIA was called upon to develop and
apply unorthodox new imagery sensing techniques to this problem
on a priority basis. Using civilian satellite (AVHRR) multiband

imagery, RSAS was able to determine and describe the location,
movement, and dispersion of the Gulf oil slick weeks earlier than
it could be tracked by teams operating within the region. This
early tracking facilitated planning and activation of preventive
measures, such as positioning of booms to protect sea water
intakes, as well as the subsequent cleanup efforts which were led
by the US Coast Guard. The information also allowed a running
start for the oil slick monitoring activities of the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration.

While the environmental damage from oil discharges into the
Persian Gulf was by no means trivial, the extent of the damage
never reached the proportions to which the Iraqis aspired.
Clearly, where pollution is concerned, the proverbial “ounce of
prevention" is indeed worth a pound of cure. In truncating,
quickly and precisely, Iraq's capability to pump Kuwaiti oil into
the Gulf, US military forces provided the prevention that was
needed. And the Intelligence Community, in contributing to the
detailed targeting information that was needed to execute US
preventive air strikes successfully, played a significant role in
containing Iraq's attempts to pollute Gulf waters.

Later, as the threat from oil slicks waned, focus shifted to
the smoke plumes from the oil well fires. On both points, slicks
and plumes, imagery and maps using the new techniques evoked a
strongly favorable response from senior US Government officials,
as well as from concerned analysts both within and beyond the
Intelligence Community. Application to the oil fire smoke plumes
of the same techniques used against the slicks was able to
provide US policymakers, scientific analysts, and the American
public with unprecedentedly graphic evidence as to massive oil
field damage and the scope of the spreading smoke.

The bulk of CIA's effort has been invested in developing and
applying their plume model. Both CIA and DOE continue to seek
data in an effort to improve upon the validity of their modeling
projections. CIA notes that, in its present form, the computer
model it has employed has substantial growth potential in being
amenable to steady refinement to improve predictive capabilities
as additional field measurements become available. If additional
resources were made available, CIA would apply the funds to
further validate the computer model on which its analysis is
based and acquire additional LANDSAT imagery-~-which has also
figured importantly in CIA's work to date.

The DOE analysis, which follows up on the Department's
earlier work in estimating the regional toxicological threats,
has three closely related thrusts: dispersion (plume) modeling,
health effects projection, and a monitoring program. The
dispersion model used in the DOE study was developed under
contract to the Environmental Protection Agency, and is widely
used for estimating pollutant concentrations. The health effects
projections were synthesized from EPA's National Ambient Air
Quality Standards and from a National Academy of Sciences study
on particulate polycyclic organic matter. DOE's monitoring
program has been designed to address the Significant levels of
uncertainty associated with the dispersion model calculations.
This uncertainty is due principally to uncertainty in emission
factors. Implementation of a properly designed monitoring
program will reduce these uncertainties. Health effect
projections are also replete with uncertainties at least as
significant as those associated with the dispersion model.
Consequently, in DOE's view, acquisition of acute health effects
data (e.g., hospital census data) should be an integral part of a
monitoring program.

The Immediate Need: More and Better Data

Scientists have viewed the Kuwaiti oil fires as providing an
Opportunity for an unplanned, large-scale experiment, and
stressed the importance of seizing the opportunity to advance
scientific understanding of both atmospheric processes and health
effects. The purpose of an experiment is, of course, to make
observations: to generate and record data which can then be used
to (1) identify the things that matter, (2) describe how these
variables relate one to another, and (3) test the relationships
to be sure they are correct. However tightly reasoned and

insightful an analysis may be, absent data it must retain a
flavor of supposition.

Within the scientific community studying the Kuwaiti fires,
general agreement is manifest on two very basic points. The
first regards analytic approach. There is a broad endorsement of
the essential importance of computer models in projecting
patterns of dispersion, exposure, and transfer; considerations
which are in turn prerequisites to further analyses. This
consensus on methodology applies to a wide range of atmospheric
pollution events; from a Bhopal to a Chernobyl; a Mount St.
Helens to forest fires, whether in Yellowstone Park or the rain
forests of Brazil. Numerous such models have been constructed,
and each has won its set of analytic proponents. The analytic
problem is that the results often diverge, and there is no way to
know why until more information about the Kuwaiti fires is
recorded. Hence the second point of consensus: data is surely

needed, first to better define "parameters" (i.e., the “inputs*“
upon which all computer models feed) and then to-establish the
accuracy or lack thereof of the projections a model is producing
(i.e., to test the "outputs").

This is the generic opportunity environmental scientists
have seen in the Kuwaiti fires: the chance to acquire data which
could lead to advances in understanding for a whole class of
pollution events. Until that is accomplished, it becomes
difficult to envision how a productive dialog over the myriad of
substantive issues might unfold. In the argot of intelligence,
first and foremost, environmental scientists face a "collection
problem."

Collection and sampling requirements against the Kuwaiti
fires, as set down by the DOE's Sandia National Laboratory, are
presented in the Attachment. These requirements have been
reviewed by CIA and others and--modified only to include
determination of thermal properties, such as flame temperatures
and heat release rates---may be interpreted as reflective of
common needs across the environmental analysis community.
Logically, the kinds of data that are needed to improve present
abilities to project dispersion patterns--which is in turn
prerequisite to sound assessments of the ultimate toxicological,
climatological, or ecological implications of the event--fall
into three categories:

(1) Meteorological Conditions

(2) Source Emission Factors
~ Quantitative (rates and amounts)
- Qualitative (composition)

(3) Down Plume Conditions

Measurement of meteorological conditions and emission
factors (i.e., how much oil is burning, where, and what precisely
is the chemical composition of the products of this combustion)
provide inputs to the computer models. Down-plume measurements
are necessary to verify the accuracy of the projections the
models are producing and provide a basis for methodological
refinements aimed at improving forecasting accuracy.

One fundamental need for emissions data pertains to the rate
at which oil is burning. CIA has estimated the initial overall
Capacity of the Kuwaiti wells to have been on the order of four
to six million barrels per day. This set an initial, worst-case
upper limit on the amount of oil that might be afire. As yet,
however, there is no solid, empirically derived estimate as to
how much 011 is actually burning, or how that rate is varying
over time. As the wells continue to vent, the natural pressures

which drive emissions lessen. And, of course, wells are
gradually but steadily being extinguished and Capped. Millions
of barrels of oil are still burning each day, but it has yet to
be determined just how much.

tai Poumisener-g arenas ae

Review of existing NFIP capabilities has revealed no unique
intelligence means by which to quickly resolve the analytic
impasse over emissions data. Intelligence sensors are for the
most part highly-sophisticated devices specialized for purposes
distinctly different from that of measuring the parameters of the
Kuwaiti fires. Although US intelligence has no "breakout" data
collection capabilities against the Kuwaiti oil fires, work is
under way and new ideas have emerged--some quite unorthodox and
innovative--that may provide information of considerable value to
US environmental scientists.

As noted above, substantial uncertainty exists over the
amount of oil that is burning in the Kuwaiti fires, and a second
critical set of unknowns is the composition of the contaminants
that the fires are producing. DOE considers this uncertainty
over qualitative “emission factors“ to be the most significant
source of estimation error in its analytic work to date. CIA,
which has sponsored some test burns to generate the emission
factors that its model employs, also places a high-value on
acquiring better data about the composition of the products of
combustion at the several Kuwaiti fields. Specific emphases of
analysts vary somewhat according to which particular computer
model they are working with, but generally interest centers on
soot (both amount and granularity), oxides of nitrogen and
carbon, sulfur dioxide, and benzene.

Gathering these data, which are so sorely needed to advance
scientific understanding, presents a formidable--and indeed
dangerous~-collection challenge. Scientists agree that samples
must be taken as near as possible to the sources of combustion,
which means entering the very heart of the smoke plumes--not once
or twice, but repeatedly in accordance with a carefully worked
out, statistical valid sampling plan. Moreover, since the
merging of plumes may alter the chemistry of the pollutants,
measurements from individual well fires will need to be
complemented with samples taken in areas where plumes are joining
together. So far, acquiring the qualitative “source-term" data
analysts seek has proven an elusive and frustrating task. Only a
few samples of near-source emissions have been acquired.

Inasmuch as low altitude flights directly into the oil fire
smoke plumes, whether with fixed wing aircraft or helicopters,
inherently pose substantial risk to crews and aircraft, Air Force

intelligence has proposed the use of unmanned systems to
penetrate the plumes and collect the samples which analysts

need. Several options are being weighed, all of which would
employ one or more remotely activated sampling bottles aboard an
unmanned carrier. One alternative would be to use a modified
military RPV--Remotely Piloted Vehicle. But at a cost of $10,000
to $50,000 apiece, use of RPVs for any extensive sampling program
could become prohibitively expensive unless it is assumed the
vehicle would be routinely recovered and reused. Under the
scientifically ideal case wherein collections would be made right
at the flame-smoke boundary, this assumption could prove
unfounded.

A second complication, common to any sampling approach that
involves complex, close-in launch or retrieval operations from
the ground, lies in the danger of conducting such wide-ranging
activities in the immediate vicinity of the damaged oil fields.
A clear threat to the safety of sampling teams remains present in
the combination of unexploded munitions, oil-soaked terrain, and
the heat, fumes, and curtailed visibility resulting from the
fires themselves. Although it is to be emphasized that these
unmanned air sampling options represent ideas, not fully
evaluated concepts~-much less existing capabilities--the Air
Force is prepared to pursue further investigation, tests, and
demonstrations, if so directed and funded.

ICS 3642-91

Data Requirements and Sampling Overview: Kuwait Oil Fires

Meteorological] Measurements

Collect data hourly (as is done routinely by airport weather
services) or as needed (i.e., more frequently if hourly data show
large changes) at altitudes, latitudes, and longitudes

appropriate for correlating with source~-term, downwind airborne,
satellite, and ground-based measurements. Data include:

o Wind direction and windspeed
o Ambient temperature

o Humidity

Oo Pressure

o Visibility

o Sky condition (cloud cover)
o Solar insulation

Oo Weather

Source-Term Measurements

Collect data for individual (single wellhead) plumes using
airborne collection platform, satellite imaging, and well site
measurements. Data collection modes should be coordinated in
time. At least twice daily sampling using: .

o Airborne Measurements

- Plume injection height; plume cross-sectional area
(using lidar)

- Speed and direction of motion of plume

- Primary pollutant! concentrations and emission
factors (develop data base for using soot as a
tracer, i.e., to infer concentrations of other
pollutants from that for soot)

- Optical properties, such as scattering and
absorption coefficients (to tie together satellite
image and soot concentration).

Oo Satellite Measurements
- Locations of sources and a real extent
- Images from which to infer soot concentrations

Oo Well Site Measurements (check for consistency with
airborne data)
- Oil/gas flow rate
- Oil/gas composition (in particular, carbon content)

i Primary pollutants are generated at the burning wells and
include soot, H2S, NOz, SO2, CO, COz, and volatile

hydrocarbons. Other, secondary pollutants are then generated by
the reactions of primary pollutants in air.

>

Downwind Plume Data

o Downwind Ground-based Measurements (monitor ground-based
exposure levels)
- Pollutant concentrations (including secondary
pollutants)
- Particle geometry and size distribution (soot)
o Downwind Airborne Measurements (validate model
predictions; correlate with satellite data)
- Pollutant concentrations (including secondary
pollutants)
- Plume orientation and dimensions
o Satellite Measurements (tie in with airborne data,
establish feasibility of routine use of satellite
imaging in infer tracer, i.e., soot, concentrations;
note that, potentially, archived images may be examined
to infer concentrations at early well burning times for
which no other data are available)
- Soot concentrations
- Plume orientation and dimensions

Li ;
Statistical Experiment Design

o Ground-based, receptor site Measurements

- Using existing receptor sites (viz, the existing
USIAAT sites) and data to obtain a preliminary
estimate of the spatial variability of the
pollutant dispersion process.

~ Using this information, determine the number and
location of additional receptor sites that would
provide a significant improvement in the
measurements; perform cost/benefit analysis.

- In general, receptor network design should provide
for continual monitoring along transects that run
perpendicular to the expected path of the plume and
at sites located (whenever possible) within
population centers.

o Airborne Measurements

- For source-term measurements, select the wells to
be sampled by random sampling of burning wells
within each major oil field (stratified random
sampling approach); sample size for each field will
be determined using statistical method for sample
size determination (e.g., representative sample
method: if 38 well plumes are sampled in a field
then one can be 9° percent confident that 90
percent of the true values of a measured quantity
will fall within the range of the smallest and the
largest measured values).

- Expect selected statistical experiment design to be
modified somewhat by operational considerations
such as aircraft availability, allowable flying
time, safety considerations, visibility,
accessibility of single plumes, etc.

- In general, sample by flying transects above and
within plume at near-field (for source-term data)
and far-field (for downwind plume data) locations.

Parameter Estimation and Model Validation

o Examine a number of dispersion models that possess
certain commonalities with respect to the modeling
parameters (e.g., pollutant emission factors, oil/gas
flow rate, plume injection height, windspeed and
direction, etc.) that are used and focus on those input
Parameters that most sensitively affect predicted
pollutant concentrations.

~ Provide estimates of these input parameters
{estimated using appropriate measurements; e.g.,
meteorological data and source-term data that serve
to define physically realistic ranges of values for
these parameters) to each model and compare
predicted concentrations to measured
concentrations; use criterion such as minimization
of mean square error to assess quality of each
Simulation.

~ Change values of input Parameters (but keep within
physically realistic range) and run dispersion
Simulations. Repeat this process noting which
model provides best results over the parameter
Space (i.e., over the range of physically realistic
values for the Parameters).
