The Current Situation in France DiscussesS Strategic Importance of Fran Ce; Co
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000009968, dated 3 November 1947.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000009968).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

.

Harry S. Truman Cibrary
Papers cf derry S. Truman a
Presidant's Secretary's File re

nie: Someone = Kamaaagilie

3. Sreatrarc Insporrance oF France.

tary potential, its cultural and intellec'

Mediterranean, and would make Us

: 4m World War I.

political means or force
in the Low Countries an
Europe is lost.

is essential to European economic

pled rapidly Byun

diversion of {orce'and effort.

2. Prozaig DavELorMEnts.
Continued Communist attempts

forth ax Enclosure “A”.

* {THE CURRENT SITUATION IN FRANCE

French Worth Africa wit: obvious impli
rent Situation in French North Africa).'
of importance to US security are located in other parts of Africa, tt
Far Fast, and the Indian Ocean, ‘The most vital of these could be neutralized or occu-
the US but would, if con/rolled evn te

expected. While Communist extremist acti

Note: This report has the concurrence of the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
the Army, Navy, and Alr Force. A statement of dissent by the Departmest of State ts set

France is of greater strategic importance than any other continental Eurpean
country except the USSR. It is important because of its geographic location, 5:8 mili-

tual leadership of Western Europe, its key posi-

tion in the European Economic Recovery Program, and its control of French North
Africa and other outlying areas which, in the hands of a hostile power, would provide
bases for military action against the US. ,

‘Access to France's airfields, Atlantic, Mediterranean, and Channel ports, and
transportation net are essential to the successful prosecution of @ war in Western
SBurope. ‘Their control by @ power hostile to the US ‘would provide that power with
bases for mounting amphibious attacks against the JS or US-held bages in the Atlantic,
would permit naval and aircraft to operate against US shipping in the Atlantic and
‘counteraction extcemiely difficult. ‘The cost in
manpower and matériel of forcing such & hostile power out of France was demonstrated

tm addition to an army which could be raised to 1,000,000 men, if the necessary addl-
fiona} matériel is acquired from abroad, France’s military potential Includes @ good
navy and @ fair air force. Given external logistical support, the three services would

‘in any attempt to attack the US.

Recent violent efforts of the Communists to disrupt, French economy in order to

prevent or retard the European recovery ‘program
USSR regards the French position in ‘that program.

An unfriendly government ‘in France would, ‘at the outset.of war at least, control

cations for US security (see ORE 63: The Cur-
Other French possessions of varying degrees
the Weet Indies, the

mporarily hy any ememy, cause

to sabotageeconomic recovery in France can bz

on will be likely to. reduce the size of the

pon poem etiape aar aTeot

Communists’ electoral following, stiffen the purpose of non-Communist elements in the
French labor jaovement, and lessen the possiblity of the Communists’ eventual return
to the Goverriment by legal means, the Communists are now openly committed to an
antinational gtand. Their actions will continue to be guided by Moscow as an integral
part of the t Soviet offensive against the European recovery program.

As French opposition to the Communists intensifies, the Communists may be
expected to draw their forces together n'a more closely knit unit, to intensify the
training of Communist para-military formations, and to make a greater effort to
conceal their activities xhort of going underground. Growing resistance to Commu-
nist control of labor has already restilted in the secession from the CGT of non-Comnmu-
nist leaders and the establishment of em pew national labor organization, the Force
Ouvriére. "The trend of labor is away from the Communists, so that in the next few
months, the number of workers represented by the Force Ouvriére, autonomous unions,
and the CFTC (French Ccnfederation of Christian ‘Workers) may equal that of the
CGT. The Communis‘s, therefore, will probably not attempt within the foreeable
future to seize control of France by force. ‘They will probably conserve their strength
until the return of De Gaulle appears imminent when they can’ be expected to make
an all-out effort ic create disorder in an attempt to prevent his accession to power.

"The Schuman Cabinet, a centrist coalition government, by its'success in. breaking
@ wave of strikes that seriously threatened the nation’s economy, has strengthened the
Government’s position and has indicated ‘a: capacity to cope successfully with Commu-
nist attacks. For the time being: at least, the Government appears to be secure —
Communist attempts to bring about its: downfall. :

In order further to promote y
Government, Schuman, havin
the budget and control inflati
realistic rate of exchange with :
a stimulus to the volume of Frénch

If the Government should fail to meet the’ exigencies of the current’ sttustion, how-
ever, the return of De Gaulle would be practically assu.ed, although he prefera not to
take power until the present critical ‘winter is ove. A\government headed|by De Gaulle

would be the last line of deferise agairist Communist. accession to power. Bhould .

De Gaulle fall to bring order arid recovery, the peHidulum: might swing back sharply to
the extreme left, thus bringing the Communists to power.

3. Pournicar Srrvarion.

Domestic French politics are dominated by two factors: the existence of a multi-
plicity of poutjeal parties, and the'physical and psychological damage caused by war
and German obeupation.

Because ofthe widely differing shades ef political thought Tepresented by the
numerous and ‘diverse political parties (at the present time, for example, the French
Assembly is made up of representatives of 12 differcit parties), no one of them receives
an absolute majority in elections. : France, therefore, has usually been governed by
coalitions. ‘This has rendered very difficult the type of ania Cn charae-

M4

LENE AREER RIED SOE
Se ee aT a Gee

SE RCTS EIT Bi

BESS RISO
Seeds

sihnsoentpitpsbnnaenialinats

2 Sa aI EE ABE

a?

teristic of the US and the UK political systems and makes it very hard for a French
government to cope with a political or an economic crisis.

‘The Ppysical and psychological damage caused by the war in France ts much
greater than was at first realized. Political differences existing before the war were
intensified and embittered during the occupation, and a general decline ix. public
morality Mfused by the conflict is now reflected in a continuing decline in political
morality.

‘The French Communist Party has the Jargest representation in the National
Assembly—roughly 27%, exclusive of the minor parties which foliow the Communist
Mine. The political power the Party held during the past two years has recently been
threatened as a result of the Octobér municipal elections, largely fought on national

‘Whether General De Gatille can’schieve power and, if he does, will adopt the neces-
sary measures of stabilization and ition government:
has planned, remains uncertain.
characteristic inflexibility and his ni
might take un authoritarlad 4 democratic approach. The positive action of
the Schuman Government In dealing with the present strikes may have reduced the ap-
peal of De Gaulle as the only strong leader who could bring France out of economic and
political chaos. ;

4. Economic Sirvation. ; :

‘The recent strikes and work etoppages have posed immediate) problems which
overshadow by their urgency the fundamental problem of long-term ecunomic rehabili-
tation. ‘The realization of the Monnet Plan has been pushed even further into the
future. The question now is whether the Frerich ‘politico-economic mechanism can be
repaired and made to operate until the European recovery program has had time to
take effect##tn a moment of gteat crisis French political parties have temporarily set
aside theingliffezences to combat Communism and to prevent national collapse. The
tuture of France depends on the ability'of the non-Communists to continue cooperating
Tong enough to consolidate in the field of economic: the victory they won in the field of
politics. The loss of produc.ion in November and December has accelerated inflation
‘and increased the public sensé of insecurity about the whole future of the nation. The

totte:ing French economy, highly vulnerable to Comsmunist-inspired strikes, has already
received such a setback as a result of the strikes* that French leaders may be unable
to succeed without substantially increased interim aid. Such aid, of course, is not of
itself a pan ed that French economy will survive.
In April 2947, French economy appeared to be on the way to substantial post-war
recovery. ‘The subsequent decline has reflected multiple basic deficiencles in a French
economy acufely affected by the world-wide economic distortions growing out of World
‘War II. The nation’s gold reserves are dangerously low. Exports have not provided
the projected returns in foreign exchange, particularly bard currencies, to pay for
needed imports. The upper and middle classes, the farmers, and labor have gone their
separate ways in pursuit of self-interest, resisting investment and tax coliection, hoard-

ing farm produce, and demanding higher wages, all of which have contributed to the
inflationary spiral. :

Essential to economic recovery are fiscal and currency stabilization plus foreign
ald. The aid is required over the next three or four years to assist in obtaining imports
of consumer's goods, raw materials, and equipment now in acute short supply. Given
these requisites, and & reasonable degree of political atability, France is capable of main-
taining without foreign aid, & relatively stable economy oriented to the West. For the
present, however, the situation remains critical.

$. Tae Muurrary Srrvation.
_ ‘The armed forces of France, although unable to resist aggression by any major
power, are capable of maintaining order at home. Insurgence and disturbances in the
French Empire have necessitated maintenance of relatively large military establish-
ments overseas, resulting in an added drain on the nation’s economy.
‘The French military potentia!, including a trained reserve, is estimated at 1,000,000
men, but in the foresceable future the nation lacks {

to sustain with modern equipment such a force or §

Revers became Chief of Staff, however, such infiltration is negligible.
Of the total French Army of half a million, 110,000 are actively engaged in opera

tions in Indofhiina and another 18,000 in Madagascar. ‘There are an estimated 212,000
in North Afri¢a ‘and 45,000 in the Occupation wones. A rough éstimate of the total

TEatmated to have cost at least $90,000,000, over two million tons‘of coal, and » general
decline of 40% in over-all production in November ‘as compared with October.

‘

inland ainda mew
Ms SMA AEA BNE SR A ESCH

aie ci
ASAT NLAT itis

re anomsiarnr ote
*

ees

ALAR SLE REE

operational troops in Europe and North Africa organized into tactical groups is prob-
ably around 100,900, but all units suffer from sriadequacies of equipment. Currently
stationed in .F’«nce are mobile groups equivalent to at least one armored and two
infantry di plus some thirty-odd territorial battalions fairly eveuly distributed
throughout the country.

The Navy, including the Naval Air Force, composed of about 57,000 men scattered
throughout tige¥rench Union and metropolitan France, is almost totally void of Com-
monists or their sympathizers. ts loyalty to the present Government is unquestioned.

‘The Air Force currently has o strength of approximately 63,000 men. Because of
Communist direction of the Air Ministry immediately. following the Liberation, this
pranch of the armed forces, particularly the gorund crews, has the highest incidence
of Communism. Current reports indicate that approximately 85% of the Air Force
officers are strongly anti-Communist, 30% politically “neutral,” and 5% fanatical
Communists. Although the prestige of Communists is not high, such individuals stra-
tegically placed might very well render the Air Force ineffective in the initial phases of

an operation.

remain loyal to France.

The morale of the Army and Navy is good. The morale of the/Alr Force is poor
because it lacks modern equipment with no prospect of obtaining any domestically for
at Ieast years, and because the Air Force lacks real leadership at the top.

French politics become more stabilized.
Every finance minister since the liberation has sitempted reduction but all have been

6. FormanPoucr... *
“3

‘ithe forelga policy of France ts dicected at two primary objectives: (1) security
agatast possible future German aggression, and. (2): restoration of French prestige in

their industries; E :
all French moves in European politics. are infl
ofa resurgedit Germany. ; ; ;

With regard to national security in general, France has always tupported the prin-
ciple of collective security.and will continue to seek freedom from aggression through

{nternational agreemer's.and the UN:

‘To this end the French have supported and will continue to support in the UN any
measures or guarantees which will further world peace in general and collective security
in particular. ,

Toward the US, France maintains a policy of friendship and cooperation in the
hope that thes would again come to her assistance in the event of another world
war. The French, however, entertain serious doubts of the ability of the US to do so in
time to save them from another and possibly fatal invasion. In addition, they knov
that their hope of restoring stability to their economy Gepends on the US. French
policy will reflect that knowledge so long as the Communists do not take power.

A similar policy will be followed towerd the UK. The French realize that their
hopes of achieving their colonial objectives, and the restoration of their prestige, ns well
' as of carrying out their intentions sgarding Germany, rest largely on the support of
' the US and of the UK.

4 Toward the USSR, its satellites, and Spain, French policy will follow that of ‘the
oa ‘US and the UK as far as possible.
e ‘Toward Italy, French policy will be dictated by a desire to remain at peace but will

: be tempered by the recollection.of Mussolini's “stab In the back,” the traditional
' instability of Italy’s foreign policy, and the type of government which happens to rule
an J the country.
= France has attempted énd will continue to attempt, through the DN and by other

q means, to rebuild its prestige on the European continent. Emerging from World War

> Ti as a second-rate power, France sought to do two things: prevent becoming once more

: a battleground, and enhance ite own international position. Therefore, and in view of

oo ee the widening rift between the US and UK on the one hand and the USSR on the other,

a ; it attempted to act as arbitrator of the political conflicts between the USSR and the

4 Anglo-Saxon powers. This attempt failed, and the French felt compelied to cheose

RY between the East and the West. Following tradition and apparent self-interest, they

“at vf . chose the latter and will attempt to continue in that way so Jong as the French Govern
a ment continues non-Communist, ’

pa? é France views its colomiles aa indispensable to its prestige. the French are attempt-

q ' : ing through a program of colonial reforms to retain their present overseas possessions

oil within a proposed French Union which ‘will admit of some — ot local autonomy.

ENCLOSURE “A”
DISSENT OF THE INTELLIGENCE ORGANIZATION
=e OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Section 1, Strategic Importance of France.

The Section presents an unbalanced view of France's strategic importence to the
United States. It begins by adopting a broad interpretation of the word “strategic,”
as evidenced by mentiou of France’s cultural and intellectual leadership and her key
position in the European Recovery Program. From that point, however, it confines
itself almost exclusively to France's role in a future war, thus slurring over the vital
and dynamic contribution which French political leadership and economic potential
are expected to make to US strategic.aims for peace. .

Additionally, the section prerents an overly pessimistic view of the probable
consequences of Communist domination of France.

Section 2, Probable Developments.

The phrase “all-out effort to create disorder” appears to mean the uitiization of
Communist para-military forees for the initiation of civil strife. We cannot agree with
such a view of Communist tactics to prevent General De Gaulle’s return to power.

Section 3, Political Situation.

General De Gaulle “would” rather than “might” take an authoritarian approach.
The evidence for this is not merely the General's “characteristic inflexibility and his
sense of a ‘mission’” but luo. the content of his epeecies sinos the adoption of the
present Constitution.

Section 4, Economic Situation. ‘

‘The section (1) overplays the effects of the November - Decomiler strikes and work .
stoppages; (2) fails to zen ‘th nomic aimiculty with greatest imornediate political
implications, namely the
freeze of last winter and last summer's drough' (3): Gives an erroneous picture of the
causes of Franc::'s deficit in its belance of' ‘payments ¢ on current account; and (4) neither
explains the Monnet Plan nor gives France the merited credit for positive accomplish-
ments under that Plan.

Section 6, Foreign Policy.

The section fails to aiscuss the prime intesest of France in rebuilding and knitting
together Western Europe —— as a bulwark for peace if possible, in war if necsssary — and
in becoming the leader of such a grouping.

the Westward shift in France's international actions can ‘be understood only
if attent is called to the recent fsolation of the French Communist Party on the -
——
ee
