The Estimative Record on Cuba with Attached Estimative Chronology on Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132570, dated 2 October 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132570).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

~ CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE IN FULL 1997

co Freese rethrn

- -SBGRER pele OVE /L

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

CEFICE CF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

15 November 1960

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR a

SUBJECT: The Estimative Record on Cuba

~ nae

1. “Attached for your information 1s a chronological listing
of estimates ond ONE menorandum touching on the Cuban situation over
the last eight years and of their principal estimtive findings.
This estinative record is briefly summarized in the paragraphs be-~

low.

2- In the three pertinent estimates produced through 1955 >» we
stressed the growing pressure for political, economic, and social
change in the Caribbean and Iatin American areas but made only passing
reference to Cuba as such. However, we did note (1954) that Batista's
regime was generally unpopular and dependent on army support and that
the Cuban Commmnist Party was the largest and most influential in the

Caribbean.
&

3- The growing difficulties of the Batista dictatorship were
treated in three estimtes and one ONE menorandun to you between

April 1957 and December 1958, just before the regine's collapse.

Castro was fron the start identified as Batista's chief antagonist,
though up through Novenber 1958 we held that Castro probably could
not take over in the immediate future and that Batista was nore

likely to be replaced by a nilitary junta. Our Decenber 1958 esti-
mate was an extrenely gloony assessment which concluded that: (a) the
situation had deteriorated even nore rapidly than anticipated; (b) the
denoralized arned forces, if they took over, would have to offer a
political solution satisfactory to Castro unless they were given the.
large-scale outside assistance required to suppress hin; and {c) fail-
ure of high political and nilitary leaders to take drastic action to
sten Castro's nonentun would lead to widening strife in which the
possibility that the nilitary would turn against the government could
not be excluded. Both the April 1957 and the Novenber 1958 estinates
noted the opportunities for the Coommists in the situation, the lat-
ter estimate pointing out that the Castro hovenent's nationalist bias
obviously lent itself to Cormmunist exploitation despite the lack of

sufficient evidence on the actual degree of Cocmunist penetration.

4, The Castro regine was assessed in five estimtes between

March 1959 and June 1960.

&

ae The relatively brief treatment of March 1959, while

noting the anti-US bins of soue of Castro's advisers and the measurable

RES

“Sherer

ioprovenent in Concunist prospects, depicted Castro as a flanboyant
nationalist who tight find the US g convenient whipping boy but ~.
reading between the lines ~~ would not necessarily becooe an in-
Placable and pro=-Communist foe of the US, However, subsequent esti.
nates laid progressively incrensing stress on Castro's dictatorial,
pro-Communist and anti-US policies, even though we have never reached

the conclusion that Fidel Castro hinself was actually a Cocmunist.

b. The June 1959 estimate concluded that the opportunity
being provided the Communists was the nost dangerous aspect of the
situation, noting that while they probably did not control Castro

they were certainly in a position to influence the regine.

c. The Decenber 1959 estinate characterized Raul Castro
and Che Guevara as pro-Comnunists if not actual Communists, indicated
the likelihood of increased Cuban dependence on Bloc assistance, and
concluded that the Communists had little reason to nake an open bid
for power or formal participation in the governrent since Castro's

attitude and policies favored their ains.

ad. A special estinate of March 1959 stressed the parallelisn
&
of Castro's views with those of the Communists, his growing propensity
to accept Communist advice and support, and the increasing role of

Communists in Cuba -. though it concluded that Castro hinself was

-3-

~SECGRED-

still the ultimate arbiter of Cuban policy and that his regine could
not be described as detconstrably under the donination or control of

the international Commmist vovenent.

e. Our cost recent estimte, in June 1960, in effect argued
that it was immaterigl whether Castro hinself was in fact a Cocmrnist
“~~ thot Cuba had becone a base for communisn in Latin Anerica, that
the Commmists were more deeply entrenched than in Guatemla in 19k,
and that the increasing power and initiative in the hands of Comn-
nists was close to giving then de facto control over the regine,.
However, the estimate reiterated the view that the Communists would
avoid moves which would place Cuba denonstrably under international

Commnist control within the meaning of the Caracas resolution.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES ;

/
¢

CAL, WIN anes ow

SHERMAN KENT
Chairnan

Tee ee ee ee.

“GECRET™

ATTACHMENT TO MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR
"The Estinative Record on Cuba"

ESTIMATIVE CHRONOLOGY ON CUBA

1. We have reviewed the National Intelligence Estimates
and ONE memoranda having to do with Cuba over the past eight years.
The following paragraphs contain the major. estimative judgments

applying to Cuba -- either specifically or generally.

2. NIE 80-5i, "The Caribbean Republics," 2 August 195:
This paper indicated that the traditional ruling elements of the
Caribbean republics were being faced by increasing demands for
social, economic, and political change, coming from urban middle
class elements with growing popular support. (The disturbance of
the traditional order had been referred to also in NIE 70-52,
"Conditions and Trends in Latin America Affecting US Security,"

12 December 1952) How orderly eventual change would be depended
in large masure on whether existing regimes could bring themselves
to promote progress or whether, through statio repression, they

made virtually certain an eventual violent explosion.

.
3. We stated that the pressure for change had been effective

to a considerable degree in Cubase There the stability of the

"generally wpopular" regime of military strong man Batista depended

Attachment

upon the continued support of the Armye We also stated that the
Communist situation in Cuba was far from satisfactory; the Cuban
Communist Party, the largest and most influential Communist Party
in the Caribbean, had successfully penetrated other parties in-

cluding those of the dictatorship, labor unions, and the bureaucracy.

he NIE 80/90-55, "Conditions and Trends in Latin America."
ends in satin America,

6 December 1955: This was a broad brush discussion of the area,
whose only specific reference to Cuba stated that the prospects

for stability there were not good. We included in our discussion
references to the effects of military predominance on Latin America.
We felt that military predominance generally tended to have a
stabilizing effect, but that over the long-term military leadership
did not have the capacity or means to solve national problems in an
orderly, progressive fashion. Even though in the short term
military leadership precluded leftist regimes based on mass support,
this leadership's repressive tendencies in the face of mounting
pressure for change rendered more likely the outbreak of revolution-
ary violence. We believed that in the long run, as social pressures
increased and if economic problems remained unsolved, at least

temporary reversion to demagoguery and extreme solutions for meeting

Attachnent

national problems was vrobable in some cases, with consequent
strains on the inter-American system and on Latin American cow

operation with the US,

5s NIE 80-57, "Political Stability in Central America and
aa els Fon tical verabitity in Gentrel America and

the Caribbean throuch 1958," 23 April 1957s Here we indicated that
aR ORDA: San lene Matti Seotienneat A A
during the past eighteen months the position of Batista had been

eae
considerably weakened by growing unrest, that his regime was in
jeopardy, and that Fidel Castro was his chief antagonist. Because
we believed that Batista could not fully restore public order or
check the emergence of new opposition, we gave him only an even
chance of surviving through 1958; we saw a military-dominated junta
as his moat probable successor. Again, we pointed out that the

Sizable Cuban Communist Party was having some success and it was

likely that its capabilities would increase.

6. Memorandum to the Director, "The Situation in Cuba,"
rr nr ore nae ath nr ee ad UUs

13 June 1957: This paper's main purpose was to express our feeling
that Batistats position had further weakened Since April and that
serious unrest would probably continue. At that time, it Beened
unlikely in the event of Batistats downfall that Castro (or

ex-President Prio) would achieve a dominant position. We did

Attachment

indicate then that Castro's supporters had become sonewhat bitter

toward the US for its lack of supporte

7.  SNIE 85-58, "The Situation in Cuba," 2h November 1958:
Again we referred to the general dislike of Batista in Cuba and
stated that Batista had resorted increasingly to authoritarian
measures. We noted that the recent national elections had had <«#
little effect on the political and military impasse in Cuba.
Moreover, the Cuban armed forces could not suppress the guerrillas
without extensive improvements in their military posture. Never-
theless, the Cuban armed forces remained the most important element
capable of breaking the political deadlock, by deposing the regime
and establishing a junta. Such a junta almost certainly could
not restore peace to Cuba in the next few months unless it could
convince the revolutionary opposition that it would accord it
significant influence.

8. We estimated that Castro probably could not overthrow
the government in the next few months. At this point we noted
that since nid-1958 rebel propaganda has stressed the supppsed US
preference for dictatorship and charged that Batista and some 0S
officials were scheming to bring about US military intervention

against the rebels. While we had insufficient evidence to establish

oe ee

Attachment
the degree of Communist influence in the 26 of July Movement in
late 1958, we did say that the situation lent itself to Communist
exploitation. Fidel Castro's control was not so firm that he could
prevent infiltration even if he so desired. Je characterized the
nationalistic and anti-dictatorship line of the movement as tta
horse which the Communists know well how to ride." Moreover, a

few alleged Communist gympathizers held moderately important ee.

She
positions in the rebel movement, especially among Raul Castro's
troops, and some Communists were undoubtedly in the lower levels of

the rebel organization,

9. SNIE 85/1-58, “Developments in Cuba since mid-November,"

16 December 1958: This Paper indicated that the position of the
dictatorship had deteriorated even more rapidly than was antici-
pated a month before and that the armed forces were showing
increasing signs of demoralization. We believed that a military
junta would not by itself restore peace and stability. Tc
accomplish a quick pacification, the junta would have to offer a
political solution satisfactory to Castro. To suppress Castro by
force, the junta would require large scale outside assistance. We
&

also stated our -belief that if high political or military leader-~

ship failed to take drastic action to stem the momentum of the

-S.

Attachnent

Castro operation, the civil war would be likely to spread at an
ever increasing rate. "In this situation, the possibility cannot
be excluded that the aruy in the field ..... might turn against the
governnent, either pieceneal, by going over the rebels, or in an
organized way." We concluded that should denoralization of the
aruy reach such a point that even a nilitary junta would be unable
to control the situation, or should Castro eventually win the civil
War, & prolonged period of instability and aisorder would alnost

certainly ensue, with consequent peril to Anerican and other lives

and property in Cuba.

10. SNIE 100-3-59, “Threats to the Stability of the US Mili
tary Facilities Position in the Caribbean Area and Brazil," 10 March
1959: At this tine we stated that Castro was a nationalist, that |
sore of his top advisers were antagonistic towcrd the US, and that
these could count on extrene nationalists as well as on the Commu- -
nist Party, whose overall prospects had peasurably improved. It
was probable that Castro would display considerable independence and
flonboyance in his foreign policy and find the US a convenient whipp-
ing boy. While be would probably stop short of seeking cessation or
najor linitation of US use of the Guantanano Naval Base,” it was

likely that he would sooner or later ask for major increases in

benefits from the base.

Attachment

ll. SNIE 8-59, "The Situation in the Caribbean Through 1959,"
30 June 1959: This estimote stated that Castro was ruling Cuba as a
dictator. We considered the nost dangerous aspect of the Cuban site
uation to be the opportunity which it gave to Coonunists. The Cou-
runist Party had succeeded in identifying itself with the Cuban
revolution, and was exploiting the situation to penetrate the bureau-
cracy, the aruy, organized labor and the agrarian reforn institute,
in sone cases at top levela. "The Coonunists probably do not aoa
control Castro, but they are in a position to exert influence in his
regine and to carry on further organizational work eee” We also
said it was unlikely that dissatisfied elements would challenge Castro
successfully during 1959. Should Castro believe that the US Govern-
nent or private interests were exerting pressure to bring about a
nodification of his policies, he would probably react strongly, pos-
sibly threatening the US Naval Base or expropriation of other large
US holdings. We also stated our belief that Castro would continue to
assist revolutionary exile groups in Cuba to invade their respective

honelands.

12. SNIE 80/1-59, "me Situation in the Caribbean Through
" 99 Decerber 1959: In this paper we gave Castro at least

an even chance of remining in power through 1960. We considered

Attachnent
that Raul Castro and Che Guevara were "both pro-Coommists if not
actual Cocmunists" and that they probably would assume control if
Fidel Castro were elininated. However, it seemed unlikely that
they would be able to mintain control for long, and Cuba would

almost certainly be in for a period of violent political upheaval.

13. We estimated that Communist influence would alnost certainly
continue to increase 4 in 1960. Nevertheless » we did not believe that
during 1960 the Communists would be able to force Fidel Castro to
adopt policies to which he was Opposed. On the other hand, We be-~
lieved that Castro's attitude and policies would further the objectives
of the Connunists. “In fact he probably will becone increasingly de-

pendent on then and he may turn nare to the Bloc for assistance."

14. We believed that Castro would alnost certainly continue
to maintain a strong anti-US position and would probably continue
to nove away fron Cuba's traditional alignnent with the West in the
UN, Also, he would probably resune diplomatic relations with the
USSR and recognize Communist China. He night also enter into wide-

ranging agreenents with the Coonunist Bloc.
&

15. SNIE 85~60, "Communist Influence in Cuba," 22 March 1960:

This SNIE pointed out that Fidel Castro remined the doninant ele-

ment in the regime and expressed our belief that he was not disposed

~ 8.

“EGE
Attachnent

to accept direction fron any foreign source, "His Susceptibility
to Cocmunist influence and suggestion and his willing adoption of
Communist patterns of action springs fron the parallelisn of bis
revolutionary views with the current Cormmmist line in Latin
Anerica, fron his conviction that conmmnisn offers no threat to hig
regine, and fron his needs for external support..." We stated our
feeling that for sone tine Cormmmmist leaders would avoid any chal-
lenge to Castro's authority or any clain to formal party participa-
tion in the government. Also, that the Cuban regine was in practice
following the line set for Iatin Anericon Cocmunist parties in Mos~
cow in February 1959 and that it would continue to pursue polictes
advantageous to the Communists and to accept Coomunist assistance
in carrying then out. We believed that Fidel Castro and hig govern-
nent were not then, nor would they soon be, denonstrably under the
domination or control of the international Communist mnovenent » in
part because we felt that under the circunstances international
cormmunisn did not desire this. Finally, we thought that the uSSR
would not hesitate to write off the Castro regine before involving
itself in a direct military confrontation with the US over Cuba, or
~- at least during the “present” state of Soviet policy -- in a

major diplomtic crisis with the uS.

Attachnent
16, SNIE 85-2-60, "The Situation in Cuba," 14 June 1960:

At this juncture, we felt that Fidel Castro would alnost certainly
remain in power for the rest of the year. Without Fidel Castro,
his brother and Che Guevara would probably seek to carry on, but
& crisis probably would develop in a short time. Under such cir-
cunstances, there would be a better than even chance that the country

tage oe
would be thrown into a period of widespread disorders and bloodshed.

17. We said that we could not determine whether Castro hiuself

was a Communist, but that "Communists are deeply involved in the re-
nodeling of Cuba -= nore so than in Guatemla in 1954 += and the
country has becone a base for communism in Latin America..." We
again said that Cormunists and their supporters were in positions of
importance throughout the revolutionary governnent. "Indeed, the out-
look is for Castro's increased dependence on Communists and they will
continue to be able to make many decisions and take pany actions with~
out consulting hin, If this trend continues, the Communists will gain
de facto control of the Castro regine, and are near this point now."
We continued to believe that Communists would avoid noves which would
place Cuba denonstrably under the domination or control of the inter-
national Communist novenent within the meaning of the Caracas resolue

tion. We estimated that recognition of additional Bloc governnents,

- 10 -

Attachnent

including Communist China, was likely, and that Cuba would probably
support the seating of that country in the UN. Bloc aid, probably

including some nilitary equipment, was likely to grow.

18. We foresaw no significant change in Cuban foreign policy
in the next six nonths or so. It was alnost certain that Castro
would continue his extensive propaganda amd proselytizing activities

in Latin Anerica.

19. Menorandun for the Director, "The Cuban Pot Boils Over,"
15 July 1960; US economic sanctions and Khrushchev's blurt warn-

ings against US intervention in Cuba were now a part of the Cuban
picture. We believed that these developments had strengthened Castro's
hand over the short tern. It was clear that the US sanctions had
greatly increased Cuba‘s economic dependence on the Bloc. Moreover,
Castro, backed firnly by the Bloc, surrounded by pro-Communist ad-
visors and faced with US reprisals, was alnost certainly more inclined
to destroy remaining ties with the US than to back down. We believed
that harassnent of the Guantanano Naval Base would increase and that
there was a good chance of Cuba's demanding US withdrawal ,frou the

base.

20. We believed that a mjority of Latin American governvents

was likely to support the US against the Cuban charge in the UN and

Pa

Attachnent
to support consideration of the Cuban problen by the OAS. Much
would depend on whether or not the US wholeheartedly supported a
strong Venezuelan nove in the QAS against Trujillo. Finally,
even if a condemnation of Castro in general terms could be ob
tained, we believed that the US would have aifficulty in securing

enough OAS votes to cause multilateral sanctions against Castro.
