Prospects for Stability in the Dominican Republic Over the Next Year or So
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013598, dated 4 March 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013598).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

~
' -
o— -

S : NIE 86.2-67

ce ee 2 cane ISSEM 20 April 1967
AFR 23 Hoop LBJ reat
« 53 i Vi af a.
pete, we, be Ue “a
Case # NUJ_4 3-87
Document Ae |

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 86.2-67

Prospects for Stability in the Dominican
Republic over the Next Year or So

Submitted by

— AatAnoroibt tebe
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

20 April 1967

Approved f
oie LE 7

S

Authenticated:

6 EXECUTIVE SECRETARY, si

CONTR DISSEM

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:
Vice Adm. Rufus L. Taylor, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence
Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State
Lt. Gen. Joseph F, Carroll, Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Lt. Gen. Marshall $. Carter, the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. William O. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

e National Defense of the United States
, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information aff
within the meaning of the espiona
mission or revelation of which j

GROUP 14

Exel from off
dow /

declasviammD

CONTENTS
Page
GONCISUSIONS (sha. distin toy ers tans eh ne Sele fe atauslnte See ed ens |
DISCUSSION cet cheeses Set Ear ecl eae nig oles ent ecient eae Bd 3
I. THE BALAGUER ADMINISTRATION ............60000 ccc cee eeee 3
The Continuing US Role: .s.ce.ha vis oh eet aan eoeew ede egw ee 5
I]. THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT ..............0....0020 0 ceca eee 5
Ill. THE POLITICAL OPPOSITION ...............0.6 feces eee e ee 6
IV. THE DOMINICAN ECONOMY .......000 0.000 o coe cece 8

VO THE “OUTLOOK: sees dace ibiekgs see es aul gt SC Apel cl ae Yay 9

weer

PROSPECTS FOR STABILITY IN THE
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC OVER THE
NEXT YEAR OR SO

CONCLUSIONS

A. The tensions and turmoils which are endemic in Dominican
politics have recently been exacerbated by developments following the
attempt to assassinate General Antonio Imbert Barrera in March.
Chances are, however, that President Balaguer will continue to ma-
neuver adroitly enough to retain power during the period of this
estimate.

B. The military leadership will probably hold together behind
Balaguer. We do not think that these men have given up the idea
that the military establishment is the final political arbiter, but they
accept Balaguer’s policies and they see no viable alternative to him.

C. Balaguer’s political opposition on the extreme left is in disagree-
ment and disarray and likely to remain so for some time. One or more
of the Communist splinters may again undertake sporadic urban ter-
rorism; any attempts they might make at insurgency in the country-

side will probably be unsuccessful.

D. We see more reason for concern in the possibility that Bala-
guer might become increasingly vulnerable to charges of neo-
Trujillismo. ‘This is an issue on which he is already under attack
from important civilian elements of left and right. These opponents
of Balaguer will almost certainly seek adherents among the military;
however, we think it unlikely that they will enlist enough military sup-
port during the period of this estimate for a successful coup.

E. Even so, the combination of political and economic pressures on
Balaguer could impel him to adopt a more authoritarian mode of
government.

WEiie.. 1

F. The performance of the Dominican economy will continue to be
spotty—better than the bad year 1966, but with a high level of un-
employment and a large trade deficit. Balaguer will almost certainly
come under increasing pressure to raise taxes and perhaps to devalue—
either of which would intensify his political problems.

G. Any economic progress will depend on a continuing substantial
flow of US economic aid. A severe cut would not only have major
economic repercussions but would undermine Balaguer’s political
power position as well.

DISCUSSION

1. In a speech in late February, President Joaquin Balaguer likened Domini-
can politics to “a nest of tarantulas.” We would not fault his judgment on
the matter, Intrigue, venality, corruption, arbitrariness have long been the rule,
not the exception, among Dominican officials. Plotting against the government
has been a favorite national pastime, and since 1961, when the assassination
of Trujillo ended 30 years of absolute and brutal dictatorship, there have been
seven changes of government.

2. Much the most serious outbreak was the revolution in April 1965 which
came near to full civil war; order was restored only after the landing of US
troops and the stationing in the Dominican Republic of an Inter-American
Peace Force, numbering at one stage some 26,000. In June 1966, Balaguer was
chosen President in an orderly election and since then political affairs have
moved in a smoother fashion. But the fears and enmities of the past are still
operative and much of the government’s time and energy must go to efforts
simply to keep the lid on. In March 1967, the attempt to assassinate General
Antonio Imbert Barrera brought a revival of tension.

I. THE BALAGUER ADMINISTRATION

3. Despite his past close association with the Trujillo dictatorship, Balaguer
is personally honest and is regarded by most Dominicans as an intellectual.
He is eager to advance the general welfare and believes that the Dominican
Republic needs strong leadership. Lacking a strong political base, he conceives
of governing primarily in terms of political maneuver and manipulation of
the individuals and interest groups with the most political weight. He tends
to be highly suspicious of any he sees as potential rivals; he does not typically
appoint strong figures to Cabinet posts; he delegates little responsibility and
then usually only to his inner circle of influential advisors, who probably even
more than the President, distrust the opposition and lean toward authoritarian
methods. Oftentimes his motivation in making a new appointment or in under-
taking some more complicated maneuver appears obscure, perhaps because he
seems to act in response to pressures from the inner circle. He is intensely
concerned about all actions and tactics of opposition parties, and he has come
to regard a number of the leaders of Juan Bosch’s left-of-center Dominican
Revolutionary Party (PRD) as little better than Communists.

4. Balaguer has had fair success in his various maneuvers to keep organized
opposition groups divided and off balance. He has neutralized a few of their
leaders by means of Cabinet jobs or other patronage, and he has quietly done
what he could to encourage their natural tendencies to fragment or simply
become less active. However, his political style and policies have encouraged
the “outs” to collaborate in opposition to the “ins.”

Vi 3

5, The Balaguer administration’s program has not attracted wide political
support. Balaguer’s lack of political appeal comes partly from his austerity
measures, such as tighter controls on imports, reduction of government budg-
etary expenditures, a trimming of some salaries, a cutback in the number of
unnecessary employees in the big government sugar enterprise, a harder try at
collecting taxes. To convince the vested interests of the necessity for such
unpalatable measures is never easy and Balaguer’s style of governing has not
made it easier. Efforts at economic development are gaining momentum, but
such efforts are concentrated in the countryside with little being either under-
taken or accomplished in Santo Domingo. Also, because of the continued
political violence, important political segments have been alienated. Perhaps
the strongest thing going for him in the broad relationship of his government
with the politically influential elements is their reluctance to take the risks
of another civil war.

6. In concentrating on various political manipulations, the Dominican Presi-
dent has foregone any systematic effort to turn his Reformist Party (PR) into
an active, enduring political base, and he lacks the personality to enhance
his mass appeal. The fact that Balaguer carried some 57 percent of the vote
in the elections of June 1966 does not mean that he has anything close to
that degree of effective political support at present, because the great majority
of Dominicans tend to be politically apathetic between elections. Political
interest is, of course, sustained to a much greater extent in Santo Domingo
than generally in the countryside, where Balaguer’s strength has been greater.

7. A major weak point for Balaguer is his vulnerability to charges of neo-
Trujillismo. Although most Dominicans (including Bosch) absolve him from
the excesses of the Trujillo era, a number have a real and passionate fear of
a possible return to the brutal Trujillo methods, and a number of others find
convenient political ammunition in the issue. Moreover, certain of the govern-
ment’s actions have lent themselves to ominous interpretations by opponents
both on the left and the right. Sometimes they picture him as the leader,
sometimes as the captive of a neo-Trujillista clique. As evidence, they point
to his former chief military aide, Colonel Neit Nivar Seijas, and several other
Presidential advisors, who are trusted Balaguer colleagues from Trujillo days.
They also cite police excesses—specifically the roundup in late January of
500-800 “leftists” suspected of plotting. And they express alarm at a series
of political murders which the administration is seemingly unable to prevent.
Some of Balaguer’s opponents have gone a step farther and charged that his
government’s resumption and conduct of relations with the Duvalier govern-
ment of Haiti is also a sign of Trujilloist tendencies.

8. Neo-Trujillismo has become the most important issue as a result of the
assassination attempt in March against the perennial rightwing plotter General

The population is predominantly rural and less than 65 percent literate. In the Dominican
elections in December 1962, Juan Bosch won with a higher percentage of the total than did
Balaguer in 1966. Yet when the Dominican military leaders ousted Bosch in September
1963, there was no significant public protest.

4 ar

We

Imbert. In an effort to squelch widespread rumors that the assassins were
backed by some of his own advisors, Balaguer has taken several actions to
show his determination to solve the crime and deal resolutely with the perpe-
trators, His administration has offered a $25,000 reward. He has appointed as
new Minister of Interior and Police, Luis Amiama Tio, Imbert’s longtime
associate and fellow survivor of the group that killed Trujillo. And he has
said that Amiama would have a free hand to carry out the investigation.

9. However effective in quieting immediate criticism over the Imbert affair,
the appointment of Amiama to Balaguer’s Cabinet has admitted a highly dis-
ruptive influence into the government. A man with political aspirations of
his own, Amiama represents elements of the anti-Trujillo oligarchy whose pre-
rogatives have been limited by Balaguer and who have long been at swords
point with him and his intimates because of their past roles in the Trujillo
government. Amiama has already managed to force out of office one of his
old enemies, the chief of the national police. And he is causing the investiga-
tion to be pursued in the military establishment so intensively as to produce
considerable resentment. Apart from official maneuverings, Amiama has also
been meeting with PRD Secretary General Jose Francisco Pena Gomez whom
he may hope to use to further his own ambitions.

The Continuing US Role

10. The Balaguer government realizes great advantages and some problems
from the strong US role on the Dominican scene. It finds the US Embassy's
counsel helpful. Its economy depends upon a continuing flow of US economic
aid. It has a powerful prop in the realization throughout the Dominican
Republic—and particularly within the military establishment—that the US
remains firmly behind Balaguer.

11. On the other hand, Balaguer has the problem of reconciling strong
dependence on the US with a posture of national independence. He is keenly
aware of the increase in anti-US sentiment among a number of elements in the
population since the April 1965 revolution, Although he publicly concedes US
influence, he finds ways to avoid the appearance of being entirely the US
puppet. He is by no means timid in negotiating many aspects of aid agree-
ments. He speaks of the independent-minded Frei of Chile as the Latin
American leader he most admires. And he tries to play up any political
differences with the US; for example, after the conference in Buenos Aires of
the Organization of American States, he announced that the Dominican delega-
tion had opposed the US by voting against formation of a permanent Inter-
American Peace Force.

Il. THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT

12. Balaguer has been able to make certain changes which have improved
his position vis-a-vis the military: he has dismembered and dispersed within the
army the powerful Fourth Brigade (Wessin y Wessin’s old outfit); he has sent

age 5

abroad, retired, or reintegrated the residuum of Constitutionalist military; he has
replaced the Chiefs of Staff of the Air Force and Army; he has reduced the
influence of certain of the former military cliques by retiring some officers and
sending others into “golden exile.” Finally, many officers have come to feel

that they can best protect their own positions and that of the military estab-
lishment by a reasonable degree of cooperation with Balaguer.”

13. It is quite clear, nonetheless, that Balaguer does not completely trust his
top military commanders, nor they him. This is reflected in the President’s
connections with the Trujillista Colonel Nivar, formerly his chief military aide
and at present commanding officer of the First Brigade in Santo Domingo;
Nivar is widely suspected and despised within the armed forces. Many of
the military leaders who support Balaguer do so because it is advantageous
to them at present, because they approve of many of his policies and because
they see no better alternative. At the same time the armed forces have con-
tinued to function as a powerful interest group, and we believe they have not
given up the idea that the military establishment is the final political arbiter
in the Dominican Republic.

14. A key position in the military is that of Secretary of State for the Armed
Forces, who acts as Minister of Defense and has also assumed certain preroga-
tives of the Service Chiefs. As a buffer between the President and the Chiefs
of the Services, he has the task of reconciling what hitherto have been irrecon-
cilables—a civilian chief executive and the Dominican military establishment.
At present, the position is held by General Enrique Perez y Perez, who was
appointed under the Provisional Government but who seems fairly responsive to
Balaguer and has so far managed to retain the support of the Service Chiefs.
Perez y Perez has been subject to growing criticism from below, however,
particularly for his cooperation with Amiama in pressing the investigation
among the military of the Imbert shooting. The present Service Chiefs of the
army and navy appear to be loyal to the government and to have reasonable
control over their officers. The air force is traditionally less disciplined and its
officers are more susceptible to rightist coup overtures.

Hl. THE POLITICAL OPPOSITION

15. The leading opposition party, Bosch’s PRD, has lost considerable ground.
It is still suffering from the shock of defeat and the defection into Balaguer’s
Cabinet of some of its conservative and moderate leadership. The PRD’s at-
tempt to take a position of “creative opposition” was rejected by the administra-
tion. PRD leaders were harassed by the police, party stalwarts have been fired
from government jobs, and its minority representation in the legislature has been
all but ignored. The PRD was especially bitter over what it regarded as gov-
ernment persecution in condoning if not actually initiating police attacks on
former Constitutionalists. Except in Santo Domingo, the party has lost much

*The Dominican military establishment consists at present of some 19,000: an army of
about 11,700; a navy of 3,700; and an air force of 3,600.

6 8

one

influence in its former bailiwicks. It no longer has a stronghold in labor or
in the State Sugar Council, and its hold on the Santo Domingo city government
is under attack from the government as well as from party dissidents.

16. The feeling of persecution, combined with the defection of key PRD
moderates, has enabled a more militant group to take over the leadership. The
elder statesman of the party, Juan Bosch, now in voluntary exile in Europe, has
more or less abdicated, and his young protége, Jose Francisco Pena Gomez,
has taken the helm. The new PRD leaders have responded to Balaguer’s offer
of a “dialogue” with them by saying that there could be no dialogue until Bala-
guer took steps to end persecutions and eliminate corruption. The PRD’s
former partner on the democratic left, the smaller Revolutionary Social Christian
Party (PRSC) cautiously agreed to a dialogue, but remains basically critical of
the government. Although the PRD has threatened that it would organize a
“resistance movement regardless of ideologies” if the present situation continues,
it has also said that it would not work to overthrow Balaguer unless all other
forms of protest were silenced. The meetings with Amiama suggest that the
PRD expects that a move against Balaguer may come from the right.

17. The extreme left, always divided, has further fragmented. The three
major extremist parties still exist: the Revolutionary Movement of 14 June
(MRI1J4), the Dominican Popular Movement (MPD) and the Dominican Com-
munist Party (PCD). The MRIJ4, largest of the three, and the only one
permitted to participate in the June 1966 elections, has suffered the greatest
setback. Its percentage of the vote was far below the minimum required to
keep it a legal party. Since then some of its leaders have defected to the MPD
and have urged that that organization now be regarded as the true party of the
proletariat. MPD strength has suffered, however, from the expulsion of a group
for trying to act as a “Red Guard”; this splinter proceeded to institutionalize
itself into the Communist Party of the Dominican Republic (PCRD). The
founder of the MPD had been ousted earlier; he has formed still another group,
the Orthodox Communist Party (PCO). Despite their differences and small
numbers, the extremists have some strength or influence among students and
in labor. Leadership of one labor confederation, FOUPSA-CESITRADO, is
divided between representatives of the MPD and the MRIJ48

18. The most distinct threat to Balaguer in the short run comes from his
opponents among the economic and social elite. Many of them were former
members of the defunct National Civic Union and controlled economic and

*The actual number of adherents to these various extremist parties is hard to determine
accurately, since their memberships are in such a state of flux. Our best estimates are:

PCD: easged cid Setia gaa 100 PCO! ee. gd bees obunsuds 25
MPD? oo tick aces pete tey 250 MBI]! nicki pee oer ea 600
PORD © fies tarintdees aa 50

These five parties vary widely in the extent to which their ideology and aims can be identified
with those of foreign Communists, whether Soviet, Chinese, or Cuban. One or another has
solicited support from each of these external sources, but without significant success.

WEEE 7

Sd

political life during the tenure of the Council of State and under the Reid
government. They more than other groups chafed under Trujillo and after his
death took a far more anti-Trujillo stand than did the PRD. Aligned with
this grouping are Amiama and Imbert, the two surviving members of the con-
spiracy to assassinate Trujillo. The potential of these elements to embarrass
Balaguer is high, but their potential to overthrow him depends, more than any-
thing else, on the amount of support they can obtain among the Dominican
military.

IV. THE DOMINICAN ECONOMY

19. Blessed with some of the most fertile land in the Caribbean, the Dominican
Republic has been cursed by the inability of generations of Dominicans to use
it effectively. The ratio of people to land is already fairly high, and the rate
of population growth (estimated at 3.5 percent annually) is probably one of the
highest in the world. Agriculture absorbs ‘half the labor force and produces
some 35 percent of the GNP. Per capita GNP is considerably below the average
for Latin America. The problems of underemployment in agriculture and un-
employment in the urban areas are chronic.

20. The economy was seriously disrupted by the revolution of April 1965:
GNP fell nearly 15 percent, unemployment rose to perhaps 30 percent of the
urban labor force, sugar production decreased, and there was a sharp drop in
export earnings. Recovery has been painfully slow: it remains a major aim of
the Balaguer government merely to restore the economy to the level of 1964.
In 1966, the GNP increased modestly but probably less than the growth in
population. There was no significant reduction in the level of unemployment.
The administration of economic affairs suffered from ineptitude in the bu-
reaucracy and from Balaguer’s insistence on personal supervision over most
financial transactions. The government was not able to realize its goal for
public investment, and private investors held back to “wait and see.” In spite
of an unusual increase in the Dominican sugar quota for sale to the US, the
total value of Dominican exports remained below that for 1964, and the trade
deficit was the largest in Dominican history. In short, even with an infusion
of about $70 million in US economic aid, the overall Dominican economic per-
formance was poor.

21. On the positive side, the government has provided some encouragement
to private investors and has started a number of its own development projects,
primarily in the basic agricultural sector. Efforts are being made to improve
the technical level of Dominican agriculture, improve the farm credit system,
rehabilitate the irrigation system, extend and improve market roads, bring new
land into cultivation, diversify production, and to improve the general level of
education in the countryside. It is too early for these projects to show much
accomplishment but some results are evident, and a foundation is being set for
future progress.

8 as:

SECRET

22, The government also has established basic policies designed to prevent
inflation. Budget deficits have been held within limits that could be financed
without internal borrowing and a substantial number of surplus workers have
been discharged from the public payrolls and from the government-owned por-
tion of the sugar industry. Most wages have been held in line, although Bala-
guer found it prudent to rescind earlier cuts in salaries of the military and high
government officials. The fiscal and wage restraints undoubtedly slowed the
pace of economic recovery, but were probably necessary in view of the unusual
danger of inflation in the Dominican economy.

V. THE OUTLOOK

23, The major issue intensifying divisions between pro and antigovernment
groups will be neo-Trujillismo. As the contest between these groupings con-
tinues, the likelihood increases that military officers will be drawn in on one
side or the other. Certainly one of Balaguer’s main preoccupations during the
next year or so will be to prevent the emergence of a rightist civilian-military
combination against him. Although he will attempt to maneuver around and
through rightist civilian groups, he may eventually be forced to make a hard
choice among them. The combination of the political situation and his austerity
program could impel him to a more authoritarian mode of government.

24, While we foresee no expansion of Balaguer’s limited base of mass support,
we see no substantial growth in the strength of the left-of-center political opposi-
tion either. Relations between the government and the PRSC are likely to
continue cool but not hostile. Relations between the government and the PRD
will almost certainly deteriorate further. We think it unlikely, however, that
the PRD, as a party, will choose during the period of this estimate to go into
violent opposition to the government and make common cause with the extreme
left. A small number of radical PRD members may, of course, do precisely that.
A more likely course for the PRD leadership would be de facto collaboration
with Amiama and some elements of the anti-Trujillista right.

25. We think the divisions and dissensions among the far leftists will persist
and will sharply limit their capabilities to make trouble. The evident disarray
of the several Communist parties could even serve to discourage further such
an enthusiastic, would-be backer as Fidel Castro. The Communists may resume
sporadic urban terrorism, particularly in Santo Domingo, but any attempts
they may make at insurgency in the countryside will probably prove unsuccessful.

26. The marriage of convenience between Balaguer and the military leader-
ship will probably remain essentially intact for the next year or so. There will
be frictions, and a few in the military are likely to engage in plotting with anti-
Balaguer politicians. The military may come to exercise a somewhat greater
degree of influence on the President than it does now; in any case, he is likely
to move cautiously, if at all, on policy changes which would directly affect the
military, e.g., the military budget, the salaries and allowances, accepted devices
for graft, plans to restructure the military establishment. On most other matters,

SECRET 9

wa:

however, Balaguer will probably continue to reach decisions without military
counsel although he will, of course, keep military attitudes in mind; we do not
think he will become a “prisoner” of the military.

27. The economy will do better in some ways in 1967 than it did in 1966,
but the improvements will not generally be of the kind that bring political divi-
dends. The recovery in GNP will probably be at a higher rate than in 1966,
though the level of GNP is unlikely to exceed that of 1964. The amount of
investment, particularly in the public sector, will probably increase. At the
same time, the value of exports will remain relatively low, and the trade deficit
could run more than $80 million, its level in 1966. Import controls will have to
be maintained, and the inflationary pressure, contained thus far, will probably
grow. Balaguer will almost certainly come under increasing pressure to raise
taxes and perhaps to devalue—either of which would pose major political prob-
lems, particularly with respect to Balaguer’s rightwing opponents.

28. In any case, US backing will continue to be an essential pillar of support
for Balaguer. This backing cannot insure that he will retain power, but loss
of it would hurt him badly. If, for instance, the Dominican military came to
feel that the US was withdrawing its backing or becoming lukewarm about it,
the chances of a coup would rise precipitously. A severe cut in US economic
aid would thus not only have major economic repercussions, but would under-
mine Balaguer’s political power position as well. In a way, the US aid relation-
ship to the Dominican Republic has become similar to the Soviet aid relationship
to Cuba—though on a much less expensive scale.

29. Assuming continuation of US support, chances are that Balaguer will
maneuver adroitly enough in the primitive arena of Dominican politics to retain
power during the next year or so. Nevertheless, charges of neo-Trujillismo
could weaken his tenure by producing a new and stronger alignment of forces
against him. Furthermore, assassination is still a standard political tactic in
the Dominican Republic, and Balaguer has his full quota of political enemies.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a.

b.

Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the

Department of the Army

. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the

Navy

. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air

Force

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
h.

Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
JAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4, The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

sific TA

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Depariment of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

T
CONTRO ISSEM

DISSEM
