Probable Consequences of US Adherence or Non-adherence to the Baghdad Pact
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000045913, dated 5 November 1956.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000045913).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

iS roFod

Acproved for Release.
Pale, DEC 1993

x COL Ce ato
an e 4¢

©: BE
(4

ot
B

ria

ee

PROBABLE CONSEQUENCES OF US ADHERENCE OR
‘NON-ADHERENCE TO THE BAGHDAD PACT

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the consequences of alternative US courses of action with respect

to the Baghdad Pact.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The effects of US adherence to the
Baghdad Pact would largely depend on
subsequent US policies in the area. Nev-
ertheless, we believe that US accession to
the pact would be widely regarded, at
least initially, as a strong indication of
US intention to oppose more actively and
directly the extension of Soviet influence
in the Middle East and to take a firmer
stand against the efforts of Nasser and
others to undermine the Western posi-
tion in the area. The self-confidence and
prestige of the Baghdad Pact govern-
ments and of Western-oriented elements
in the other Arab states would be consid-
erably enhanced and that of their oppo-
nents reduced. US adherence would en-
able the US to assume leadership of co-
ordinated military planning and training,
thus remedying a weakness which has be-
come especially apparent with the decline
of UK strength in the area. It would
probably also facilitate US access to bases
in the pact countries. (Paras. 9-10, 12,19)

2. On the other hand, US adherence to
the pact would involve particular respon-

sibilities and hazards. The pact countries
would almost certainly regard US ad-
herence as acknowledgment of their
claims to preferential economic, military,
and especially political support. Nasser
and his supporters, with Soviet encour-
agement, would probably try to strength-
en their hold on Syria and Jordan and
intimidate pro-Western elements in Iraq
and Lebanon. We believe that Egypt and
Syria are already going about as far in
the direction of involvement with the Bloc
as they now deem prudent, and that fear
of losing their independence will continue
to serve as a restraining influence. How-
ever, if US membership in the Baghdad
Pact, and subsequent US policies in the
Middle Eastern area, should later con-
vince them that the US had turned
against them and firmly aligned itself
with their local rivals and that they could
no longer profit by playing the US and the
USSR against each other, they would
probably be less prudent in their rela-
tions with the USSR than they have
hitherto been while still attempting to

eae ;

preserve their independence. The Asian
neutrals would tend to lose the disposi-
tion they have recently shown to sup-
port the US position on Middle Eastern
matters in the UN. (Paras. 13-16, 18)

3. The effect of a decision by the US not
to join would also depend very largely on
subsequent policies which the US might
follow. By staying out of the pact thé
US would probably retain some extra
room for maneuver in dealing with Arab-
Asian nationalism and with the USSR.
However, effective cooperation in situa-
tions in which their interests are not
identical with those of the US by Nasser
(Egypt), Nuwar (Jordan), and Sarraj

4, Uncertainty about US policy in the Middle
East, as exemplified particularly in the US
relationship to the Baghdad Pact,? has been
an important factor in the complex power
struggle which has been going on in the
Middle East over the last two years. Despite
its failure to join, the US has shared in the
opprobrium vented against the pact and its
members by the USSR, by India and other
Asian neutralists, and by Egypt and its Arab
friends. Opponents of the pact have directly
and indirectly sought to discourage US ad-
herence. Its Middle East members, in turn,
have repeatedly pressed the US to make a
firm and open commitment to the pact. Al-
though this pressure abated somewhat after
the US decision in early 1956 to participate
in the economic and countersubversive activi-
ties of the pact organization and to sit in

‘The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, believes this sentence should read as fol-
lows: “As a political association, it would prob-
ably be kept alive by its Moslem members, but
only for a short time, even if they were given US
support.”

*See Appendix for major provisions of the Bagh-
dad Pact and summary of the development and
present status of the pact organization.

were given US support. *

DISCUSSION

(Syria) is highly unlikely even if the US
refrains from joining the pact. In view
of the present disrepute of the UK in the
Middle East and without full US par-
ticipation and support, the Baghdad Pact
would almost certainly lose its potential
as a military component integrated with
Western defense arrangements. As a
political association, it would probably be
kept alive by its Moslem members if they
In the absence

of US adherence or some effective alter-
native US policy, the member govern-
ments, especially Iraq, would be in an ex-
posed position in the face of Egyptian
and Soviet pressures.

(Paras. 19-22)

as observer on the military side, these states
remained unsatisfied. Pressure for US ad-
herence was again applied following Egypt’s
nationalization of the Suez Canal at the end -
of July 1956 and, in the wake of the Anglo-
French military intervention in Egypt, has
now been renewed with special urgency by
the four Middle East members of the group.

5. The present members of the Baghdad Pact
group joined it for widely varying reasons.
While Turkey and the UK, and to a lesser
degree the other members, were influenced by
a genuine desire to develop a more effective
defensive posture vis-a-vis the USSR in the
Middle East, each adherent also hoped that
membership would advance its special na-
tional interests in the area. The ruling groups
of Iraq, Iran, and Pakistan probably expected
to gain additional external support for main-
taining themselves in power. Iran also hoped
for a US security commitment with increased
military aid. Pakistan was primarily moti-
vated by a desire to improve its military
position vis-a-vis India, and to extend its in-
fluence in the Moslem Middle East. Iraq ad-
hered mainly in hopes of increasing its influ-
ence in the Arab world, obtaining a politically

aaa

more acceptable form of defense agreement
with the UK, and assuring an increase of
US military aid. The differences of interest
among the members and the anomalous posi-
tion of the US have inhibited the development
of a strong organization. ,

6. Nevertheless, the Middle East governments
- in the pact organization have for one reason
or another all felt that their political and
national interests would be best served by
close ties with the West and with the US in
particular, and that adherence to the pact
was the best means of assuring increased US
interest and support. Their present leaders,
who are for the most part conservatives with
pro-Western leanings, distrust the type of
nationalism represented by Mossadeq and
the RCC regime in Egypt. Their feeling that
positive US action is needed has been greatly
intensified in recent weeks as a result of
Nasser’s success in riding out the interven-
tion storm, the increased power and influ-
ence of the USSR in the Middle East, and the
intense bitterness which has been generated
throughout much of the Arab-Asian world
against the Baghdad Pact’s sole Western
member, the UK.

7. Opposition to the Baghdad Pact has been
various and complex in motivation. Although
the pact is only one factor among many which
have caused strains and pressures in the Mid-
dle East, it has served as one of the focal
points for anti-Western sentiment in the area,
and as a target for propaganda attacks on
the West. It has been included in Nehru’s
criticism of military pacts in general as tend-
ing to create discord and diminish the pros-
pects of peace. It is also considered in India
as further evidence of US support of Pakistan
vis-a-vis India. Nasser has viewed the pact
as a threat to his leadership in the Arab world
and as a new intrusion of Western colonialism.
Egypt and Syria have both regarded it as a
UK-US device to build up Iraq, and have
used it as one justification for looking to the
Soviet Union for material aid. Many Arabs
have seen the pact as a means by which the
Western Powers might attempt to force a
peace with Israel. The USSR has probably

regarded the pact as a step toward the exten-

sion of the area of Western bases along its
exposed southwestern flank.

8. On 29 November 1956 the US issued a state-
ment reaffirming its support of the Baghdad
Pact and asserting that it would view any
threat to the “territorial integrity or political
independence” of Middle Eastern pact mem-
bers with the “utmost gravity.” This state-
ment will probably provide the Baghdad Pact
governments with some added sense of secu-
rity, and give them some assistance in reply-
ing to domestic criticism. However, it will
almost certainly not satisfy their demands
for US adherence to the pact.

Consequences of Early US Adherence
to the Baghdad Pact

9. Early US adherence to the Baghdad Pact
would be regarded at least initially as a strong
indication of US intention to oppose more
actively and directly the extension of Soviet
influence in the Middle East, and to take a
firmer stand against the efforts of Nasser and
others to undermine the Western position in
the area. As a result, such a decision would
have a considerable effect in dissipating the
impression of US indecision which, over the
last two years, has discouraged the Baghdad
Pact governments, weakened the will of
friendly or uncommitted elements in other
Arab states to stand up against Egyptian or
Soviet-inspired anti-Western pressures, and
encouraged greater boldness on the part of
those seeking to undermine the Western
position. :

10. At least initially, the self-confidence and
prestige of the Baghdad Pact governments
and of Western-oriented elements in the other
Arab states would be considerably enhanced.
Waverers and opportunists among the Arab
leaders would probably be more cautious about
contracting ties with the Bloc. In time, other
Middle Eastern countries might adhere to
the pact. The pro-Western government in
Lebanon, for example, would probably be in-
terested in joining if convinced that it would
achieve sufficient backing to protect Lebanon
from probable counterpressures. Although
Saudi Arabia has opposed the Baghdad Pact

LIANE RNAs et ota 4

Sc pofhisote WRC

in the past and has followed a generally
pro-Egyptian line, King Saud is desirous of
strengthening his country’s ties to the US.
Recently King Saud has become concerned
about the revolutionary and pro-Soviet aspects
of Egyptian and Syrian policy and about the
financial ill-effects of Egyptian sabotage of
the Suez Canal, and it is possible that this
opposition to the pact may diminish. How-
ever, at present it appears unlikely that Saudi
Arabia could sufficiently reconcile its conflicts
of interest with the UK and the Hashemites
to permit it to join the pact. It also appears
unlikely on the basis of present evidence that
Jordan could be induced to join.

11. US adherence would be welcomed by the
UK, France, and probably most other West-
ern European countries as an indication that
a forceful US policy on Middle Eastern mat-
ters was emerging. It might lead these coun-
tries to believe that, despite US disapproval
of Anglo-French military intervention in
Egypt, the US would cooperate in other meas-
ures to protect the special Western position
and interests in the Middle East.

12. The effect of US adherence to the Baghdad
Pact on the military situation in the area
would depend mainly upon the concrete per-
formance of the US under the pact. The US
would from the time of joining be enabled to
participate in and assume leadership in co-
ordinated military planning and training; this
would remedy a weakness which has become
especially apparent with the decline of UK
strength in the area. US membership in the
pact would probably facilitate US access to
bases in the pact countries. However, any
effort to establish effective indigenous defense
components in the pact area as a whole would
be a difficult and lengthy, and probably costly
process. If the US attempted to meet the
probable demands of the individual pact coun-
tries the cost would be greatly increased.

18. US adherence to the Baghdad Pact would
also involve particular responsibilities and
hazards. US membership would be effective
over any appreciable length of time only if
it were the first step in a more positive regional
policy. The Baghdad Pact countries would
almost certainly regard US adherence to the

pact as acknowledgment of their claims to
preferential economic, military, and especially
political support. They would probably re-
gard the US as committed to support them
against their rivals in the present arms race
in the area. If the US did not give broad
support to the pact members, their present
misgivings about the wisdom of a pro-Pact,
pro-US policy probably would recur and might
become intensified. There would be a growing
tendency to regard the act of adherence and
any minor aid received in connection with it
as empty gestures designed merely to propi-
tiate the Baghdad Pact group.

14. US adherence to the Baghdad Pact would
arouse bitter opposition in Egypt, Syria, and
Jordan. Nasser and his supporters would re-
gard such a move as a threat to their interests
in the area, and would probably react with
efforts to strengthen their hold on Syria and
Jordan and to undermine and intimidate pro-
Western elements in Iraq and Lebanon. They
might resort to organized sabotage of Tap-
line, ARAMCO, and other US properties in the
Middle East. They would almost certainly
consider the US move as justification for an
intensified anti-Western policy. We believe
that Egypt and Syria are already going about
as far in the direction of involvement with the
Bloc as they now deem prudent, and that fear
of losing their independence will continue to
serve as a restraining influence. However, if -
US membership in the Baghdad Pact, and
subsequent US policies in the Middle Eastern
area, should later convince them that the US
had turned against them and firmly aligned
itself with their local rivals and that they
could no longer profit by playing the US and
the USSR against each other, they would
probably be less prudent in their relations
with the USSR than they have hitherto been
while still attempting to preserve their inde-
pendence.

15. The USSR has long regarded elimination
of the Baghdad Pact as an important goal of
its Middle East policy. US adherence would
probably increase Soviet fears about the ex-
tension of US military power in the area.
Although it would almost certainly provide
additional deterrents to direct Soviet military

ARN irate veinereansstciadbiotsdilthheralede lbp

Phos Merte

Tor RE EAE WIE DUPRE olen ee + nF

intervention in the area covered by the pact,
the USSR would probably intensify its activ-
ities in other Middle Eastern countries. The
USSR would almost certainly encourage Egypt
and Syria in their efforts to counteract the US
move, and would probably furnish, or offer
to furnish, increased amounts of military
equipment and technical personnel. Local
competition for arms would probably thus be
stimulated. The USSR would almost certain-
ly intensify its efforts to identify itself polit-
ically with the Arabs in opposition to Israel.
It is possible that the USSR might seek to set
up military alliances with Egypt, Syria, and
Jordan, though we believe that the Soviet
leaders would prefer to remain free of
treaty commitments to these countries. So-
viet leaders would probably issue new warn-
ings to the West, possibly underlined by
threatening military gestures. We continue
to believe, however, that the USSR would seek
to avoid actions involving a serious threat of
a major military clash with the West.

16. US adherence to the Baghdad Pact would
almost certainly be strongly condemned by
the Indian government, and probably by other
neutralist governments as well, such as Cey-
lon and Indonesia.

17. US adherence to the Baghdad Pact would
probably not of itself have any appreciable
effect on Israeli courses of action. In that it
would represent a strengthening of US ties
with one element in the Arab world, that led
by Iraq, it would cause some concern and
probably some protests in Israel. However,
the Israeli leaders would probably consider
US adherence to the pact as a move in the
direction of a harder policy toward Nasser and
would therefore at least privately see some
merit in it. On balance, the Israelis would
probably view the US commitment as an in-
direct contribution to their security, particu-
larly in view of the Soviet Union’s present
highly critical attitude toward Israel. How-
ever, they would probably take advantage of
the situation to bring new diplomatic and
propaganda pressure on the US for a security
commitment to Israel.

18. The timing of US action in joining the

Baghdad Pact would be of great importance.
On the one hand, the leaders of the Baghdad

.
“a
‘ 5

Pact countries are under increasing pressures;
the pact is now imperilled and might collapse
at an early date if the US does not join. On
the other hand, by joining the Baghdad Pact
at the present stage in the Middle East crisis,
the efforts of the UN in the area would be at
least temporarily complicated, and perhaps
badly hampered. The difficulty of getting
Nasser and his friends, backed by the USSR,
to agree to an acceptable settlement of the
Suez issue would probably be increased. The
Asian neutrals would tend to lose the disposi-
tion they have recently shown to support the
US position on Middle Eastern matters in the
UN. Many UN members would consider that
the US had introduced a disturbing factor into
the midst of delicate negotiations. These ad-
verse effects could be offset only if the US were
able to convince UN members that its joining
of the Baghdad Pact would contribute to the
achievement of Middle Eastern stability. It
would be difficult so to convince them were
the US to join the Baghdad Pact in the midst
of the present crisis.

Consequences of Continued US Refusal
to Adhere to the Baghdad Pact

19. The consequences of continued US refusal
to join the Baghdad Pact (and to support it
vigorously after joining) can scarcely be esti-
mated without some knowledge of, or assump-
tions concerning, the alternative US policies
which would be followed in the area. We have
no such knowledge or assumptions. A few
points can be made, however, even without
postulating US policy alternatives: The Bagh-
dad Pact concept has shown surprising vitality
in the present crisis. In view of the present
disrepute of the UK in the Middle East and
without full US participation and support, the
pact would almost certainly lose its potential
as a military component integrated with West-
ern defense arrangements. The US would
thereby lose the present opportunity to devel-
op and organize the military strength of the
pact area as a whole. As a political associa-
tion, however, the Baghdad Pact would prob-
ably be kept alive by its Moslem members,
if the US, without joining the association,

fini tblini Raider Delite Sia

ty Fgh eh) tonalite v7

RIND: Rial ANE eng ss al

should nevertheless provide encouragement
and support to it, and give some preferential
treatment to its members. *

90. In the absence of some effective alter-
native US policy, the member governments,
having unsuccessfully urged the US to join,
and being already dissatisfied with what they
have considered US unwillingness to support
its friends, would be in an exposed position
pecause of the increased pressures from Egypt
and the USSR and the sharp decline in the
strength and acceptability of the UK as a
counterweight. Iraq’s government would be
in a particularly precarious position because
of its relative isolation in the Arab world and
its vulnerability to criticism for being tied too
closely to the British. Conservative elements
would probably try to retain control, but the
eventual result would probably be the emer-
gence of an unstable government, with a pos-
sible decline in Iraq’s. reliability as a source
of oil for the West. While the problem would
not be so acute for the other Baghdad Pact
members, the Shah of Tran would almost
certainly have increased misgivings about
Iran’s exposed position vis-a-vis the USSR and
would probably face increased domestic crit-
icism for having veered away from Tran’s tra-
ditional neutralism. Pakistan’s leaders would
almost certainly face increased domestic
criticism led by leftist and reactionary reli-
gious leaders. Although the pact has little
popular support in Pakistan, Iraq, and Iran,
elements throughout the Middle East disposed
to look to the US for support would be further
weakened. Failure of the US to take some
positive action in the Middle East would al-
most certainly arouse misgivings elsewhere
in the free world.

21. In staying out of the Baghdad Pact, how-
ever, the US would avoid various disadvan-

2The Deputy Director for Intelligence, The Joint
Staff, believes that this sentence should read:
“As a political association, however, the Bagh-
dad Pact would probably be kept alive by its
Moslem members, but only for a short time, even
if the US, without joining the association, should
provide encouragement and support it by giving
some preferential treatment.”

tages inevitably entailed in joining. It would
refrain from giving the neutralists this new
ground for accusing it of preoccupation with
military alliances; it would remain free of a
new association with the UK in a colonial
area context; it would not be aligning itself
with certain Middle Eastern countries against
{heir local rivals; and it would avoid a new
source of friction with the USSR. Thus the
US, staying outside the Baghdad Pact, would
probably have a better chance of retaining the
credit it has won in the Arab-Asian world by
its stand on Israeli, British, and French mili-
tary intervention in Egypt. Moreover, . by
refusing to make a firm treaty commitment,
it would retain some extra room for maneu-
ver in dealing with the Arab-Asian neutralists
and with the USSR, and it might be in a
better position to seek a comprehensive accom-
modation with the forces of nationalism and
anticolonialism in the Arab-Asian world. It
might also help preserve a more favorable
atmosphere for efforts to resolve the Suez and
Arab-Israeli disputes in the UN.

22. Abstention of the United States from for-
mal membership in the Baghdad Pact would
not contribute materially to a general detente
between the US and the USSR regarding the
Middle East; adherence would probably wors-
en US-Soviet relations and would adversely
affect our relations with India and other neu-
tralist states in Southeast Asia. Achievement
of effective cooperation in situations in which
their interests are not identical with those
of the US by Nasser (Egypt), Nuwar (J ordan),
and Sarraj (Syria) is highly unlikely even if
the US refrains from joining the pact. Ad-
herence at this time — because: of its effect
on Nasser — might complicate pending nego-
tiations respecting the Suez Canal. Neither
joining nor refraining from joining the Bagh-
dad Pact would in itself help materially to-
ward solving the important Middle Eastern
problems, but a decision as to the timing of
adherence might have important significance
depending upon the nature of the US pro-
gram for dealing with the issues among the
Arab states and between the Arab states and
Israel.

| as 1

APPENDIX

THE BAGHDAD PACT ORGANIZATION

1. The Baghdad Pact organization is an out-
growth of the “northern tier” concept of
regional defense advanced by the US in 1953
following the failure of previous Western ef-
forts to develop a regional defense grouping
based on Egypt and the Arab states. The
“northern tier” concept first materialized in
April 1954 when Turkey and Pakistan, the
two “anchor” states, joined in a loose agree-
ment providing for limited defense coopera-
tion. This was superseded on 24 February
1955, when Turkey succeeded in persuading
Iraq to sign the present Baghdad Pact agree-
ment. The UK adhered to the pact on 30
March 1955, Pakistan joined the new group-
ing in September, and Iran, after much hesi-
tation, adhered in November 1955. British
efforts to secure Jordanian adherence in De-
cember 1955 backfired badly, and the strength
of the organization has remained at five
members.

2. The “Pact of Mutual Cooperation” con-
cluded at Baghdad between Turkey and Iraq
is essentially a declaration of intent and con-
tains no binding commitments. However, the
parties do pledge themselves to “cooperate for
their security and defense consistent with the
UN Charter” and to determine what specific
measures should be taken as soon as the pact
enters into effect. The pact, which remains
in effect for five years and is renewable for
additional five-year periods, permits accession
by any member of the Arab League or any
other state (Israel implicitly excluded) ac-
tively concerned with the security and peace
of the Middle East. The pact provides for
the formation of a permanent council at the
ministerial level. It also contains the usual

undertakings not to interfere in another sig-
natory’s internal affairs and a pledge to settle
disputes in accordance with the UN charter.

3. An exchange of letters between the Iraqi
and Turkish Prime Ministers at the time of
Signing the pact recorded their understand-
ing that the pact would enable their coun-
tries “to cooperate effectively in resisting any
aggression directed against either of them”
and “to work in close cooperation for effecting
the carrying out of the UN resolutions con-
cerning Palestine.”

4. At the time of its adherence, the UK en-
tered into a subsidiary base agreement with
Iraq to replace the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty of 1930.
This special agreement ended Britain’s prefer-
ential alliance with Iraq, specifically exempt-
ing Iraq from obligations outside its own ter-
ritory, and providing for Iraqi assumption of
command over the existing British bases in
Iraq. However, the agreement obligates the
UK to come to Iraq’s aid in the event of
attack or threatened attack and provides for
close and continuous collaboration between
the armed forces of the two countries, includ-
ing assignment of British instructors to the
Iragi armed forces, joint military planning
and exercises, and technical assistance in the
installation of an antiaircraft warning sys-
tem. The agreement also gives the UK the
right to store military supplies in Iraq and
permits overflights, landing, and servicing of
British military aircraft in Iraq. British
maintenance personnel are stationed in the
country and visiting squadrons of aircraft are
permitted in Iraq under the agreement.

5. Following Pakistan’s accession to the pact
the permanent council was convened in Bagh-
dad in November 1955, with the US Ambas-
sador and other ranking US officials present
as observers. The session decided that minis-

awe
Gas ,

terial meetings would be held at least once
a year. The members appointed deputy rep-
resentatives with ambassadorial rank to meet
more frequently. The organization’s seat is
at Baghdad, where a permanent secretariat
has been established. Military, economic, and
countersubversive committees have been set
up. Following an offer of assistance by the
UK, plans to establish an atomic energy train-
ing center were announced at the second
meeting.

6. Although the US is not formally a mem-
ber of the pact organization, it has partici-
pated in its activities since April 1956, when
a delegation headed by Deputy Under Secre-
tary of State Loy Henderson attended the sec-
ond Council meeting in Tehran. The US is
represented on the economic and counter-
subversion committees of the pact, has estab-
lished a military liaison group at the pact
headquarters, and has contributed financial
support and personnel for maintenance of the
permanent secretariat.
