Bolsheviks and Heros: the USSR and Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000109059, dated 2 October 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000109059).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SPECIAL
MEMORANDUM

BOARD OF
NATIONAL ESTIMATES

Bolsheviks and Heroes: The USSR and Cuba

Secret

2) November 1967

APPROVED FOR RELEASE ; © UE N\

12 FEB 1997. ---- ev Tres sonnets STR T

WARNING

sument contains information affectipgsb@ tational
defense o mites) States, withjase® meaning of Title
18, sections 793 and
Its transmpissposeetir

wey an unauthorized person is prohibited by la®

> Code, as amended.

Fam
Daae cy

CENTRAL INTELLIGE NCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

21 November 1967

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 10-67
*

SUBJECT: Bolsheviks and Heroes: The USSR and Cuba
INTRODUCTION

Brezhnev thinks that Castro is some kind of idiot, and

Castro probably isn’t very fond of Brezhnev either. This is

still supposed to be a secret, but other symptoms of serious

strain in the Soviet-Cuban relationship have become publicly

conspicuous. The bonds which join them still seem to be much

stronger than the issues which divide them; nevertheless, the

Soviets may now be close to losing their patience, and the

Castroites never had very much to begin with.

* This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared
py the Office of National Estimates and coordinated with the
Office of Current Intelligence and the Office of Economic Research.

m automatic
and

Bolsheviks have always proceeded from the fact that
socialist revolution is not ... a conspiracy of a

group of heroes .... Experience shows that ...
manifestations of national insularity inevitably

weaken the positions of communists in the face of
the class enemy .... Marxists-Leninists have always

understood that socialism cannot be transplanted
from one country to the other by means of armed

‘force ....
-- Brezhnev, 3 November 1967

1. The mixed blessings of alliance with Castro's Cuba

have never been so dramatically demonstrated as during the
events surrounding the USSR's 50th anniversary celebrations.
For one thing, the Cubans directly affronted the Soviets by
appointing a member of Castro's third team to head the Cuban
delegation to the Moscow festivities after the Soviets had

officially announced the planned attendance of Cuban president

Dorticos. For another, either because of Soviet insistence or

Havana's resistance, this worthy did not even deliver the customary

congratulatory address to his Soviet hosts. Next, the Cubans

compounded the insult by boycotting the traditional diplomatic
reception in Moscow presided over by Soviet chief of state
Podgorny. And finally, lest anyone miss the point, the Cubans
were the first to leave Moscow after the celebrations were over

(presumably racing the Rumanians to the airport for the honor).

2. The Soviets for their part demonstrated little of the
restraint that has heretofore characterized the public handling
of their recalcitrant Caribbean ally. Just prior to the anniversary
gathering in Moscow, Soviet publications carried obituaries of
Che Guevara, and also articles by two of Moscow's more obedient
Latin American communist party leaders, that seemed to challenge
the value of Castro's revolutionary philosophy and to convey ~~
concerning Guevara's death -- more of a smug "we told you so"
than an expression of sympathy to the bereaved. In any case,
the Soviets reacted to the Cuban diplomatic snubs during the
anniversary celebrations with a measure of acrimony. For example,
in his lengthy discourse on the achievements of the "Great
October,” Brezhnev took an oblique but unmistakable swipe at
Castro's support of rebellions elsewhere in Latin America and
even at Castro's personalized and heroic style cf revolution

(see quotation above).

3. Clearly, a low point has been reached in the relationship
of the two communist partners. The question thus arises as to
whether the divergencies that have been accumulating over the
past few years and have now broken more blatantly into the open

augur any fundamental change in Moscow's support of the Cuban regime.

~-3-

oN

4, Although Castro himself has in the past alluded to
attempts by Moscow's supporters in Latin America to persuade the
Soviets to join the "economic blockade" of Cuba, apparently he
has long judged that Moscow could not afford to suspend or cur-
tail its economic assistance. In fact, Castro has evidently
felt so confident of the USSR's inability to abandon support of
Cuba that his spokesmen have in effect endorsed Albanian criticism
of Soviet assistance as a “yoke on the shoulders" of recipients,
thus demonstrating Cuba's ability to defy the hand that feeds it.
True, Castro has at times displayed some sensitivity to Soviet
views on one issue or another, but Moscow's official positions
are rarely an overriding consideration in his pursuit of causes
either at home or abroad. Indeed, the modest Cubans have
specifically criticized the USSR's management of its own affairs,
its interference in Cuban affairs, its handling of the Vietnam
war and the Middle East crisis, its aid to Latin American
governments, and its attitude toward revolutionary tactics in

the Third World.

5. A number of reports suggest that -- in the face of all
this -- the Soviet leaders are now prepared to get tough if

Castro does not mend his ways. One of the more interesting and

-h.-

reliable reports cites a Brezhnev conversation with leaders of

a European communist party during the height of the Middle East
crisis. Brezhnev is aaid to have launched into an emotional

tirade against Castro's domestic and foreign policy "fantasies."

He claimed that the Soviet Union has never had such an "expensive
friend" as Cuba, and then threatened that if Castro did not soon
come to his senses Cuba "cannot last," since the Soviets were
unprepared to keep the Cuban leader "afloat" indefinitely. At

one point in the conversation, Brezhnev went so far as to compare
the Cubans unfavorably with the Chinese -- a line that was recently

echoed in Pravda by a Latin American communist party leader.

6. This is not to say, of course, that the Soviets do not
see some advantages in their alliance with Cuba. Surely, they
are pleased to point to their sponsorship of a socialist "beacon"
in the Western Hemisphere, and they are well aware that Cuba
stands as a symbol of Soviet willingness and ability to provide
support even to remote allies. They recognize that their relation-
ship with Cuba serves as a reminder of the USSR's status as a
globel power and as a propaganda device with which to taunt the
US. They are also happy at times with Castro's nuisance value

vis-a-vis the US.

7. By now, however, the Soviets must be increasingly
impressed with the liabilities associated with their support of
Castro's Cuba. They are painfully aware that their economic aid
alone has cost them an average of roughly $300 million annually
since 1961 (a figure including drawn credits and grants as well
as the sugar purchase subsidy). They know that Cuba's importance
as a model for other fledgling nations has greatly diminished.
More important, they have found that Cuba does not afford them a
good foothold for incursions into other Latin American states.
Castro's alienation of a majority of Latin American communist
party leaders, his insistence on the need for revolutionary change
through violent tactics, and his refusal to cooperate with less
militant and non-communist forces of the left in Latin America

have created more difficulties than opportunities for Moscow.

8. The Soviets! relationship with Castro thus provides
them with a continuing demonstration that the burdens imposed by
commitments to small allies can exceed the benefits. But how to
disengage when the political and economic costs of a commitment
exceed the returns? Specifically, how could the Soviets pull
out of Cuba and look at the world or themselves in the morning?

It would be a confession of monumental failure -- the first and

only socialist enterprise in the New World abandoned -- and it
would seriously damage Soviet prestige and be widely interpreted

as a victory of sorts for the United States.

9. It is true, however, that the Soviets have had some
considerable ete ee experience in these matters -- in
Yugoslavia, in China, and in Albania. A special set of circunm-
stances governed Moscow's actions in each of these cases, but
there were some similarities in Soviet behavior. In each instance,
the Soviets sought through subversion or economic pressure or both
to bring the other party to heel. In each instance, of course,
the Soviets failed and then withdrew. Public disclosure of the
seriousness of the situation and an open exchange of insults
aid not occur until the relationship had already passed the
point of no return. The Soviets, of course, insisted in each case
that their withdrawal had been compelled by the sins and crimes
of the other side. Finally, in each of these cases, the Soviets
were willing to withdraw even at the risk of great harm to their

‘national prestige and the unity of the communist movement at large.

10. Cuba is, of course, a special case and poses different
problems. Moreover, times have changed, Khrushchev no longer

reigns in Moscow, and the present Soviet leaders are surely more

-7-

|

i
t
{

ON ae ee,

|
i
i

cautious than he. Then too, given his personal peculiarities
and enthusiasms, there can be no assurance that Castro's upset

will persist. Relations between Castro and the USSR almost

reached the name-calling stage after the Soviet withdrawal of
missiles from Cuba in 1962, tut in May 1963 Castro journeyed to -
the Soviet Union and there proclaimed that he had received a
"magnificent impression of Comrade Khrushchev .... without a
doubt one of the most brilliant intellects I have ever known."
Thus, Castro in 1967, having just snubbed the 50th anniversary

ceremonies, might conceivably travel to the USSR in 1968 and

put his fickle arms around Brezhnev. The Soviets for their

part could swallow their pride and accept the embrace. For that
matter, assuming no effort to make up, it is conceivable that
the Soviets and the Cubans could maintain their alliance in some

kind of repair for the indefinite future, even if their quarrels

should break completely into the open.

11. Given the strong motives of each side to maintain their

relationship, we do not believe that Soviet-Cuban difficulties
will come to a head in the near term or that Soviet-Cuban ill-will
is likely to lead to a break in relations comparable to, say, the

| Sino-Soviet split. But with each side apparently believing that

the other cannot afford to become really obstreperous, either or
both could easily make a major miscalculation. The emotional
content of the quarrel, obviously intense on the part of the
Latins, now seems to have assumed considerable proportions on the
Russian side as well. The effects of this emotionalism cannot
be predicted, but symptoms of stress should be watched for. If
the quality of Sino-Soviet polemics is an indication, then it
would appear that, once exposed, Communist nerves are as raw as

everybody’ else's, maybe rawer.

12. If the Soviets should threaten to curtail their economic

support unless the Cubans behave themselves in Latin America --~
and perhaps Kosygin dropped a hint of this when he visited
Havana last June -- Castro's reaction might be unrestrained.
The Soviets, in turn, might not be of a mind to humor any such
lack of restraint. Perhaps indeed, they have already entered
just such a process of moves and countermoves made in hurt and
rage. Perhaps in the end, if the Soviets really do get tough,

Castro might feel impelled to make important concessions. That,

orm
'
z

at any rate, would seem to be the way to survival. But a high
faith in his ow skill and rectitude might blind Castro to the

costs and risks of defying the Soviets.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES :

ee ee AIP

SHERMAN KENT
Chairman

- 10 -
