Political Crisis in Czechoslovakia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119584, dated 2 November 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119584).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LBJ LIBRARY Lk

Mandatory Review pe

Case # NLI_A£2135 _ OCI No. 2487/63
Nocument #4 : .

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 5

Directorate of Intelligence
24 December 1963

Lk

——

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT: Political Crisis in Czechoslovakia
Summary

The tense Czechoslovak political situation appears this
week to have reached an acute stage. Recent, unusual high-
level meetings have included Czechoslovak and Slovak central
committee plenums, a gathering of top government leaders,
and, apparently, a meeting of senior military officers; the
press has failed to mention President Novotny in connection
with any of these meetings. Growing concern over the state
of puBlic order has also been in evidence during the past
few days, A confrontation between Novotny and his many op-
ponents may. thus be in progress.

The Soviet leaders, who have become directly involved

in the leadership crisis in Czechoslovakia, may try to keep
Novotny in office with the understanding that he would con-
tinue to alter his policies in a liberal direction. We be-
lieve, however, that such a solution will be no more success—
ful than similar attempts in the past, and that, as was nec-
essary in Hungary in 1956, the Soviets eventually will have
to acquiesce in his removal and replacement. The replacement
will have to be someone more in tune with the anti-Stalinist
feelings in the party and among the populace, and someone who
will deal effectively with the grievances of the Slovaks,

Whether or not the Soviets decide to support Novotuny's
replacement in 1964, we believe that a marked if gradual
change in the policy orientation of the Czech regime is likely
and that its policies will become (as they already show signs
of becoming) more liberal, flexible, and independently in-
clined than in the past. The economic system is likely to
evolve gradually in a liberal direction. We expect that ex-
ternally the regime will encourage better relations with the
West, and make efforts to improve the quality of its products
to make them more marketable in the West.

Such developments are certain to complicate Moscow's
problems of authority in the bloc.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE void

8 SEP 1597

1. The curious visit to Czechoslovakia of
Brezhnev, the Number Two man in the Soviet Presid-
ium, during the course of an important Soviet cen-
tral committee plenum, and so soon after Czech
leader Novotny had taken a delegation to the USSR,
is the latest in a series of developments suggest-
ing that a leadership crisis has come to a head in
Czechoslovakia, The unusual circumstances of
Brezhnev's visit indicate that the Soviets have be-
come directly involved and are seriously concerned
with finding a solution,

The Background

2. Much of Novotny's present problem has been
of his own making--especially his heavy-handed
treatment of the issue of de-Stalinization. Behind
this was his fear that if the latter were allowed to
go too far, it would very likely affect him and many
of his closest associates, who were deeply involved
in Czechoslovakia's own Stalinist purge in 1951-54,
Novotny's clumsy response to Khrushchev's de-Stalini-
zation speech at the 22nd Soviet Party Congress was
an attempt to blame his popular predecessor, the
late Klement Gottwald, for Stalinist crimes in
Czechoslovakia. This attempt misfired and caused
much resentment among the party rank and file, who
held Gottwald in high regard. This action and No-
votny's purge of a popular rival in the party,
Rudolph Barak, together with dissatisfaction with
the condition of the economy, almost cost Novotny
his position in 1962, but with Soviet support he
managed to survive a crucial party plenum in March,

3. Novotny's position again came under fire in
1963, as a result of a train of events set in motion
at the Czechoslovak party congress in December 1962.
At that time a party commission was appointed to in-
vestigate the Stalinist trials in Czechoslovakia, *

*Such a commission established in 1954, under the

chairmanship of- Rudolph Barak, has led to the re-
lease of many victims of the Slansky trials, but
not their exoneration,

The result was the rehabilitation of many victims
of the Slansky trials, most notably those involved
in the trials of "Slovak Nationalists.”

4, These rehabilitations added strong stimulus
.to a lively political and intellectual ferment which
was already under way, especially in Slovakia. .Much
‘repressed nationalist resentment was released, in-
terviews with the rehabilitated victims were carried
in the press, and Slovak publications became quite
outspoken in demands for rejection of Stalinist
practices, and for punishment of those responsible
for Stalinist injustices, including those on the
highest level in Prague. A public attack on Premier
Siroky for his role in the 1954 trials of "Slovak
Nationalists" was carried in the Slovak party organ,
Bratislava Pravda, in June.

5. This revival of nationalist feeling in Slo-
vakia and cultural ferment was accompanied by in-
creaSing criticism of the leadership's economic: policy
and of the economic system itself. Czechoslovakia,
once considered a model satellite which had sustained
a very high growth rate in an economy which was al-
ready industrially advanced, during 1961-63 experi-
enced a rapid deterioration of its economic situation.
Agricultural production and living conditions stag-
nated, investments fell, and--of crucial importance
to the regime-~industrial growth first slowed down
and then, in 1963, stopped altogether. A reduced
rate of growth was inevitable in any case, but the
extent of the decline and the difficulty of the
needed readjustment were caused by over-optimistic
aggressive policies of which Novotny had been the
chief architect.

6. As a result of growing economic difficul-
‘ties, the regime was forced to abandon the Five Year
Plan for 1961-65 and has been unable to devise a co-
herent plan even for 1963 alone. Recent economic
failures, uncertainty over economic goals, and the
lack of strong and confident guidance have damaged
the morale of economic managers, workers, and party
members, Criticism of the leadership's "dogmatic"
economic policies and of its inept handling of cur-
rent economic problems has been widespread. This
eriticism has been especially strong in Slovakia,
where the economic slowdown has been most marked and

i -2-

-t Khe: regime's attempts to cut inefficient produc-
tion most resented. Meanwhile the failure to im.
prove living conditions and shortages of meat and =
dairy products have caused considerable public dis-
satisfaction. .

7, Throwing the unpopular Slovak party leader,
Bacilek, to the wolves in May was ineffectual in
containing the pressures from liberal and Slovak
elements in the party. Eventually, in September,
Novotny was forced to remove his closest associate,
‘Premier Siroky, in a major reshuffle of party and
government organs, and to replace him as premier
with a popular 40-year-old Slovak untarnished by
Stalinism or the Stalinist purges. Only shortly
before this, Novotny had endorsed Siroky in public,
Several other Slovaks were brought into party and
state administration at the same time, along with
young Czechs of more liberal outlook. Some attempt
was made to preserve the old look; a number of No-—
votny retainers kept important party and government
positions. However, it was especially significant
that one of the chief rehabilitated victims of the
"Slovak Nationalist" trials, Laco Novomesky, ap-
peared as a member of a party central committee com
mission on cultural matters. Only four months earlier
Novotny had publicly declared that although Novomesky
had been juridically rehabilitated, he was still con-
sidered guilty of crimes against the party. His ap-
pearance on a party central committee commission
thus was a particularly ignominious concession
forced on Novotny, and bespoke the general anti-
Novotny nature of the September reshuffle. *

8. These events and the Brezhnev visit sug-
gest that the weakness of Novotny's position and the
serious condition of the economy have reached the
point where the Soviets have had to involve them-
selves directly in an attempt to resolve the leader-
ship crisis. The public statements concerning the
visit suggest that the Soviets may be trying to keep
Novotny in office and to seek reconciliation between
him and his opponents. However, we believe that such

*Not long atter his release, Novomesky in a public
interview in Slovakia demanded further retribution
for the crimes against the Slovak Communists.

a. solution will be no more successful than similar
attempts in the past, and that, as was necessary

in Hungary in 1956, the Soviets eventually will

have to acquiesce in the removal of the top man,

We believe that if existing problems are to be
solved, it will be necessary for the Czech leader-
ship to make a clean break with the pas t--some-—
thing which cannot be done under the leadership of
Novotny. Such a solution will not be easy for the
Soviets in these heady days of Leninism, sovereignty,
and “equal rights for socialist States," and the
Soviets would doubtless want a respectable period of
time to elapse to avoid the appearance of blatant
interference in Czechoslovakia's internal affairs.

Probable Nature and Orientation of a
Successor Regime

9. In choosing a successor to Novotny, the So-
viets would be concerned to find a man or a combina-
tion of men who would symbolize a clean break with
the past and would also be reasonably acceptable to
the liberals in the party, especially the Slovaks.
Jiri Hendrych, who has long held a position of au-
thority in the regime, is a top contender for Novot-
ny's position who could be used in combination with
other key appointments to provide an element of
Stability. On the other hand, the Soviets could
choose Rudolph Barak, who was purged by Novotny
early in 1962 because he was becoming too powerful
a contender for Novotny's position. Barak had gained
some popularity in the party in 1954, when he was
instrumental in causing the release from prison of
many victims of the Stalinist trials, but the extent
of his current support in the party is uncertain.
Another possibility would be Party Secretary Drahomir
Kolder, a younger man now popular in the party be-
cause of his recent role in correcting past Stalinist
abuses and his advocacy of liberal policies,

10. Whatever alternative Moscow chooses, we be-
lieve that a successor would have to break with the
Stalinist past and adopt more liberal policies, The
fundamental nature and urgency of the economic prob-
lems in Czechoslovakia will force Novotny's succes-
sors to search actively for effective reforms. The
chances are small that anything as drastic as the
introduction of partial market socialism, decollec-
tivization in agriculture, or a large redirection of

-4-

SHMRET

trade toward the West will occur in the near future.
However, an evolution of the economic system in a
liberal direction, with increasing reliance on eco-
nomic incentives at the expense of direct orders, is
quite likely. It is also probable that strong ef-

. forts will be devoted to making Czechoslovak exports
more salable on Western markets, as well as better
Suited to current Soviet needs,

11. Having come to power on an anti-Stalinist
and anti-"“doctrinaire" platform, Novotny's succes-
Sors are likely to follow more liberal practices in
internal policy. For that matter, Novotny himself
already has been forced by strong pressures in the
party to liberalize his policies to some degree. As
has occurred in other Satellites, the powers of the
police will probably be curbed. Debate in artistic
and literary circles will continue to be tolerated-—-
perhaps even encouraged. Last summer the cultural
thaw in Czechoslovakia was so intense that Western
observers were moved to Speculate on the parallels
with Poland and Hungary in 1955-56. The debate con-
tinues in the party press, especially in Slovakia,
and has become so widespread in some fields (e.g.,
economics) that the regime apparently no longer
feels able to oppose it directly. Thus, the regime
may Still find, as did Poland and Hungary in 1956,
that spontaneous intellectual ferment, if encouraged
from above, can easily get out of hand,

12. There is another force present in Czechoslo-
vakia with which both the Soviets and a successor
regime will have to contend--the revival of Slovak
nationalism, In the intensity of its fervor, it re-
sembles in some respects the burst of Polish nation-—
alism which preceded and accompanied the events of
October 1956, Both were Spurred by an accumulated .
Sense of grievance, caused by genuine injustices suf-—
fered in the era of Stalin. They differ importantly,
however, in that the Polish nationalism of October
1956 was anti-Russian in its direction, while Slovak
nationalism is directed mainly against its traditional
target--the Czechs. In this respect, the factor of
Slovak nationalism, in an ethnically and historically
divided country, now is unique in Eastern Kurope,

13, The strong clerical nationalism and sepa-
ratist inclinations of the Slovaks have long provided

a factor susceptible to exploitation (as under Hit-
ler) against the Czechs. The Communist regime at-
tempted to neutralize ithis factor by pretending that
. the country was being run jointly by Czechs and Slo-
vaks, when in fact it was being run, as in the past,
by Prague. In playing this game, however, the re-
gime permitted the creation of parallel government
and party structures in both parts of the country,
with the result that a Slovak administrative appara-
tus and a distinct and separate party organization
was created. In fact, part of the present trouble
started when the Prague regime suppressed a mildly
nationalistically inclined administration in Slovakia.
Rehabilitation of the victims of this repression has
resulted in a re-"Slovakization" of the party struc-
ture in Bratislava. Communist party members are
leading the Slovak fight for redress of wrongs to
the Slovaks and for liberalization of internal policy.
Novotny has tried to deal with the problem by bring-
ing many Slovaks into the joint party and government
administration in Prague. The problem, however, is
far from solution, and a successor regime would some-
how have to placate the strong autonomist desire of
the Slovaks--Communists and non-Communists alike--
without causing the break-up of the country.

Implications for the Bloc

14. For all these reasons we believe that a
successor regime in Czechoslovakia would be likely
to follow a more liberal and practical course in in-
ternal policy and also likely to encourage contacts
and closer ties with the West--both tendencies which
Novotny had, until recently, long resisted. Such a
regime, if it were successful in neutralizing the Slo-
vak problem, probably would be more independent of
mind and less disposed to look .to. Moscow for guid-
ance, Gradually, it would probably adopt internal
policies somewhat akin to those of Kadar. It might
even look to Yugoslavia for inspiration in solving.
some of its problems.

15. Such developments almost certainly would
have an effect in East Germany, where the Ulbricht
regime has previously shown considerable apprehension
over the possible spread to the GDR of the intellec-
tual ferment in Czechoslovakia, The downfall of
Novotny could easily cause demands among Kast German
youth, intellectuals and party members for a similar

26>:

1%

removal of Ulbricht. Ulbricht is vulnerable to
much of the same criticism as is Novotny--e.g.,
rigidity and unrealism in economic policy, and
Stalinist policies in the party--although, like
Novotny, he has been forced to modify his policies.
Nonetheless, the presence of Soviet forces makes
the position of the Pankow regime far different
from that of Prague, and, as in the past, the So-
viets would be likely to support Ulbricht in any
measures necessary to achieve the firm. Suppression
of dissent and controversy in the GDR.

16, For the Soviets, the instability of the
Czechoslovak regime,’ the continued intellectual fer-
ment, the strong force of revived Slovak nationalism,
and the poor condition of the Czechoslovak economy —
already constitute serious problems. Moreover, the
Soviets have other problems in Eastern Europe, not
to mention elsehwere in the Communist movement. The |
most notable of these is the deterioration of their
authority and control over the satellite regimes, as
exemplified by the recent independent behavior of
Rumania. The replacement of the Novotny leadership
by an anti- Stalinist regime in Czechoslovakia, which
perforce would be less dependent on Moscow than its
predecessor, can only complicate these problems fur-
ther...
