Panama
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013609, dated 4 April 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013609).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LB} LIBRARY

Mandatory Revie
Case # NLJ 31
Document #.__12

, SNIE 84-67
os 2 4 May 1967

2

MATE

TRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf. :

4 May 1967 °°?

Authenticated: . . : Date

UTIVE SECRETARY,

T (8)
CONTROMMD DISSEM N° 1

The following intelligence organizations partici
this estimate: oes

The Central Intelligence Agency and dhe ‘intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, eee the "NSA !

Concurring: © ae |
Dr. R. J. Smith, for r the Deputy Director; ‘Central intelligence _ ee

Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence “and Reeeret Depart

of State —
Vice Adm. Vernon L. Lowrance, for ihe 5 Director, Defensé nligence Agency
Mr. Oliver R. Kirby, for the Director, Notiang! Secu ity. Agency

dneteining:

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant t General Manager, “ Momic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. William O. Cregar, for the’ Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the subject ‘being outside of thelr oor

WAR : ;
This material contains information aff e National Defense of the United States

within the meaning of the espiong 5, Title 18, USC, Secs.. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelenion of whic manner fo an unauthorized person is prohibited.

CONTENTS

Page
THE: PROBLEM: \ tenis decd tac kuhcA a vecuedy dvanie rand een acl Bacek eek ]
CONGELUSIONS © jes fae ae es alae eels deb Sl Bete tude dba Ben Rees 1
DISCUSSION ee ee ee een ee ee eee eee AR ete kages 2 2,
I. BACKGROUND ON THE NEGOTIATIONS ................2000-0.. 2
If. THE POLITICAL CAMPAIGN ........ 0.0. c cece cece cece ce eee 3
Parties of the Elite 2.0.0... 000 ce cee ccc ence ee eeees 3
Arnulfo Arias and His Panamefiistas ............... 0. cceeeececeeceee. 4

Ili. THE TREATIES AND PANAMANIAN POLITICS: SCENARIOS
OF INTERACTION © sciscsckcsstene Woke etl betas had aceon naeeeglen 4 5
Case A: Treaties Submitted to the Assembly by September 1967 ........ 5

Case B: Negotiations Completed Before May 1968 but Treaties not
Submitted for Ratification .............0. 0000.2 e eee cece, 7

Case C: Negotiations Not Completed Before the Election of May 1968 .. 8

IVS POSTILUDE.. S08 6 tas uae rendre ato da dy 2 heated ata a alan! 8

PANAMA

THE PROBLEM

To consider the prospect for political stability and for the Canal
treaties between now and the seiauled inauguration of a new presi-
dent in October 1968.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Increased tension and political turbulence are likely as the presi-
dential campaign and the issue of new Canal treaties impinge on a
situation none too stable in the first place.

B. The small number of elite families, long in political and eco-
nomic control, may be hard pressed in the elections of May 1968 to
keep one of their own in the presidency and to retain dominance of
the National Assembly. The challenge will come from Arnulfo Arias,
whose anti-elite Panamefiista Party is the country’s only mass move-
ment. The danger of serious disorders will probably become some-
what greater than at present, and could become much greater.

C. Although there are a great many important political variables
in Panama, the timing of the completion of the treaty negotiations will
be a crucial factor in determining the extent of political unrest as well
as the chances for ratification and implementation of the treaties.

D. In view of such uncertainties on the political scene, there will
clearly be major problems in getting the Canal treaties completed,
ratified, and then held to by the government succeeding that of Presi-
dent Robles. Unless the treaties are ratified before October 1967,
there is small chance of getting satisfactory treaties completed until
after a new administration takes office in October 1968.

~~ 1

DISCUSSION

1. The coming 18 months looks to be, at best, a delicate period in Panama’s
political affairs and in its relations with the US. The political campaign for
the election of a new president and National Assembly in May 1968 will become
fully active later this year. And the issue of new Canal treaties with the US is
likely to reach a crux during this same period. The interrelationship of these
two factors, as well as their combined impact on a political situation none too
stable in the first place, is fraught with a wide range of implications.*

2. The terms of the Canal treaties as they are finally worked out will, of
course, be fundamental to the way the Panamanians react. But the timing can
also be of great importance in the interaction of the treaties and Panamanian
political developments. So after sketching some brief background on the prob-
lem of the treaty negotiations and on the way the political campaign is shaping
up, we shall consider the different implications of three timing possibilities.
(See III below.)

I. BACKGROUND ON THE NEGOTIATIONS

3. Underway nearly two and a half years, the present negotiations aim at
supplanting the basic treaty made in 1903 at the time the US established Panama
as an independent country. Panamanians years ago came to regard the old
treaty as exploitative and debasing, Three separate documents are now under
negotiation: (a) a new treaty governing the administration, operation, earn-
ings, etc., of the present Canal; (b) a treaty that would provide the basis for
eventual construction of a sea level canal; and (c) a treaty on base rights and
status of forces. It is the plan of the negotiators on both sides that for purposes
of approval and ratification the three treaties be completed at the same time
and considered as a single package. In view of the nature and number of the
issues involved, there are obvious difficulties in reaching agreements which can
be passed by both the Panamanian National Assembly and the US Senate.

4, The negotiations have been difficult and protracted, because of the com-
plexity of the issues involved and the importance of these issues, especially to
the Panamanians. Almost all Panamanians, rich and poor alike, have a strongly
emotional attitude toward the Canal. They feel that the US has special obliga-
tions to Panama which it has failed to honor; they think they should have more
jobs and a lot more money from the operation of the Canal—which they rightly
regard as their country’s greatest asset. (It generates some two-fifths of

1¥or the US, there could be repercussions beyond Panama itself: other countries, particu-
larly in the hemisphere, will be interested in whether or not new arrangements can be made
between the US and Panama in tidy, civilized fashion, and some provisions of these new
treaties may come to be used as standards for other international negotiations. Moreover, the
question of compensation to Panama raises the question of an increase in Canal tolls—a matter
of great economic importance not only to shipowners but to various Latin American countries,
especially Chile, Peru, and Eeuador.

2 gr

Panama's gross national product and two-thirds of its foreign exchange.) They
want explicit recognition of their sovereignty everywhere in their own country.
They want a new arrangement as to US use of military bases on their territory.
Finally, they believe that the present Canal, and a new sea level canal if con-
structed across their territory, should sooner or later belong to them.

5. The US has been forthcoming on many of the points at issue; its offers
represent for Panama substantial improvements over the existing treaty arrange-
ments. At the same time, negotiators of each side have recognized that the posi-
tions of the other are circumscribed by practical limitations, and progress in the
negotiations has been encouraging in recent months. Although major points of
disagreement persist, there is hope that these can be worked out fairly soon—
perhaps in time for the treaties to be presented to the Panamanian National
Assembly for ratification by September 1967. The Panamanian negotiators at
present are confident that they can secure ratification of the treaties, provided
the negotiations are completed early this surimer. Yet the attitudes of many
Panamanians and of. the Panamanian press make it almost certain that, however
generous the treaty provisions seem from the US point of view, there will be
major difficulties in obtaining ratification by the National Assembly. These diffi-
culties will increase as the political campaign gains momentum.

Il. THE POLITICAL CAMPAIGN

Parties of the Elite

6. The small number of elite families who have long controlled political affairs
(and most of the economy as well) are likely to have more trouble than usual
electing one of their own as president in May 1968. They continue to control
almost all the officially recognized political parties, but these elite parties are
small, personalistic, lacking in ideological content, and without strong identifica-
tion on the part of their members. They win elections by coalition. President
Robles was the candidate of an eight-party coalition. They also use government
patronage and pressure, powerful private interest groups, superbly complicated
electoral and balloting procedures, their control of the Electoral Tribunal, and
their control of the Guardia Nacional—Panama’s only uniformed security force.
One problem for candidates of the elite is that they do not do well among the
younger voters—and a considerable additional number has become eligible since
Robles manipulated and squeaked to a disputed victory in 1964.

7. Robles has displayed political courage. He has tried to instill integrity
in the government and to effect financial reform and economic development.
Yet he has not obtained much popular support. The economy has made strong
gains in GNP and personal consumption during his administration, but urban
unemployment is still high. The masses in Panama City and Colon remain
sharply conscious of the differences between their lot and that of the elite—
and the differences between their lot and that of Americans living in the Canal
Zone. Robles still has considerable political leverage by virtue of his influence
in selecting the governing coalition’s presidential candidate (Robles cannot

ae 3

succeed himself). As time goes on, however, he will lose leverage in the gov-
ernment, in the National Assembly, and within elite party circles where maneuver-
ing to choose a candidate has already begun.

8. The number of would-be presidential candidates among the elite is narrow-
ing down to perhaps four or five serious contestants. All or almost all the elite
parties may finally agree to swing behind a single one of these, especially if their
leaders think that Arnulfo Arias’ chances of election are good. Such a degree of
unity would be least likely in the event that General Bolivar Vallarino, com-
mander of the Guardia Nacional, insisted on running and obtained the support
of several parties. A major split among the elite parties would be highly advan-
tageous for the big, anti-elite Panamefiista Party.

Arnulfo Arias and His Panamefistas

9. Arnulfo Arias heads the only political mass movement in the country.
Even the official returns in 1964 gave him 38 percent of the total votes cast for
president.2 (The largest of the elite parties individually had about a third
that percentage.) Loosely organized, the Panameiiistas are more of a protest
movement than a political party. Their strength is among the underprivileged
and the young, especially in the towns and cities. They have no well defined
program; they want a better shake for themselves and they are against the elite.
They admire Arnulfo’s oratory and forceful manner, and they look up to him as
the only important politician in Panama who has held firm in his opposition to
the oligarchy. He generally has the use of several newspapers and radio sta-
tions owned by his family and friends to keep up contact with the faithful.

10. Arnulfo himself, now 65 years old, is an unpredictable and opportunistic
person who inspires either great loyalty or great hate. He has oceasionally made
speeches and taken actions contrary to US interests, and from time to time has
sanctioned a measure of cooperation between Panamefiistas and Communists.
Nevertheless we believe that he is not sympathetic to Communist ideas, and that
he recognizes the practical necessity of reasonably good relations between his
country and the US. Educated as a physician (he is a graduate of Harvard
Medical School), he has been active in Panamanian politics for more than 30
years. He has twice been president and twice been removed from office—among
other reasons, for using authoritarian measures and trying to change the con-
stitution to expand his powers. Many influential Panamanians fear that if he
regained power he would use it to disrupt their patterns of control and to settle
old political and personal vendettas.

11. Out of office, Arnulfo has shown considerable caution, restraint, and tactical
skill. In office he has proved himself difficult and authoritarian. He is regarded
by many as basically a combative man with a compulsion to dominate. It seems
important to him to demonstrate the qualities of virility; he is vain and enjoys
the role of demagogue. While he has a number of devoted aides, he runs the

*The Panamefistas, however, have only about one-fourth of the seats in the National
Assembly.

4 or

ae

Panamefiista movement essentially as a one-man show and has designated no
successor to his leadership.

12. Persisting in his claim that he was robbed of the presidency in the tabula-
tion of the election results in 1964, Arnulfo has refused to recognize Robles as
the legal head of government. He has maintained that since the Robles gov-
ernment is not legal, neither are its actions. And he has made this point specifi-
cally and repeatedly about the Canal treaty negotiations with the US. Thus,
while he has not been strongly critical of the US or the offers it might be making
in the course of the negotiations, he has established a beginning position for
attacking the government. He is not so much opposed to the treaties per se
as to the Robles regime. Conceivably some kind of deal might be made whereby
he would not attack the treaties; this might happen, for example, if he could
be convinced that the presidential elections of 1968 would be free and fair.

lll. THE TREATIES AND PANAMANIAN POLITICS: SCENARIOS OF INTER-
ACTION

13. We mentioned earlier the importance that timing with regard to the
negotiations would have on the likely future course of developments. Here
we will consider the outlook in three different cases: (a) if the treaty negotia-
tions are completed this summer and the treaties submitted to the Panamanian
National Assembly by September; (b) if the negotiations are completed, but
the Robles government chooses not to submit them for ratification before the
election; and (c) if the negotiations are not completed before the election.

Case A: Treaties Submitted to the Assembly by September 1967

14. In spite of the major issues still outstanding, the Robles government hopes
that the treaty negotiations can be completed in June or not long thereafter.
It plans to call a special session of the National Assembly to consider ratifica-
tion, and to call it before the regular annual Assembly session which convenes
the beginning of October. The administration’s chances of keeping the Assembly
under control would be significantly better in a special than in the regular
session, both because the rules of procedure would make obstructionist tactics
more difficult and because election campaigning would not have reached its
highest pitch by the time the special Assembly met. Robles and his lieutenants
have begun to plan for systematic means of lining up support in the Assembly
and informing the public about the treaties, especially their most favorable
aspects.

15. It is nonetheless difficult to predict what the outcome in such a special
session would be. Robles’ supporters claim that they can swing more than
two-thirds of the members on issues of vital importance. Yet Robles has not

*The Panamanian Government is not yet certain how many votes will be required to secure
ratification. Panama’s Constitution specifies that only a simple majority is required for the
ratification of treaties, but some argue that the procedural rules of the National Assembly

require a two-thirds vote.
war 5

ae

had strong Assembly support on any measures for a long time, and at the end
of the last regular session in January the Assembly overrode administration
objections to pass several minor bills of highly nationalistic content. Robles
claims, however, that he decided not to make a fight on the latter occasions
and to reserve his strength for Assembly action on the treaties. In connection
with his visit to the Inter-American Summit Meeting, he managed to get a vote
of confidence from his coalition parties for his government's handling of the
negotiations. We do not doubt that one way or another Robles can bring
strong pressure to bear on most of the deputies, but working against this will
be a desire of many of them to enhance their own political fortunes. And in
Panama the nationalistic, anti-Yankee stance is the time-tested vote-getter.

16. Arnulfo would probably open up with propaganda charges against what-
ever features of the treaties seemed most vulnerable—while still insisting that
the whole business was illegal. He might call upon the Panameiiistas for mass
demonstrations at the National Assembly building, or he might “permit” these
to occur spontaneously. In either event, Panama’s small Communist groups,
whose strength is concentrated at the University, would almost certainly become
involved and would probably seek to encourage any tendencies to disorders
or rioting. Panameiiista demonstrations of major size would put additional
pressure on assemblymen to vote against ratification. Such tactics succeeded
once before: in 1947 the National Assembly, responding to the presence of a
protesting mob all around the building, rejected a renewal of the wartime base
agreement with the US. The chance of these tactics succeeding again might
depend on whether an incident occurred or was provoked which raised anti-
US feeling to a high pitch. Without such an incident, General Vallarino’s
Guardia Nacional probably can control demonstrations so that the Assembly can
deliberate and vote in relative peace.®

17. There are cogent reasons, on the other hand, why Arnulfo might choose
to avoid so vigorous a challenge to the government at so early a date. He has
recently been acting with considerable discretion, and apparently regards his
ability to get votes as good. At the present stage, the Guardia Nacional looks
strong and unified; certainly it would be prepared for trouble in connection
with the special session of the Assembly. Arnulfo ‘might see considerable

‘The Communist parties are small and illegal. The party which leans toward Moscow
has no more than 500 members, of whom perhaps half are activists. The pro-Peking group
has less than 100, most of them students. The importance of the Communists is in their ability
to intensify and broaden civil disturbances already begun; they do not have the ability, which
the Panamefiistas probably do have, to tum such disturbances into a popular rising against
the government.

’The Guardia, Panama’s only uniformed security service, has a personnel strength of some
4,400. It is a disciplined and fairly competent organization; its training and equipment has
improved appreciably over the past year. The Robles government has usually called the
Guardia into action as promptly as required, and it has dealt effectively with civil disturbances.
In the event of prolonged and widespread disorders, however, the Guardia probably could not
maintain control without US assistance.

6 ee.

advantage to himself in deferring his major challenge at least until the elec-
tion campaign was in full swing.

18. Ratification of the treaties would be a political coup for Robles and would
markedly improve the chances of a candidate of the elite to win the elections.
Attempts by Arnulfo to upset the results by force would almost certainly be
put down. If the treaties should be submitted to the Assembly and rejected
entirely or in major part, however, they would have to be renegotiated at
a later date and under different circumstances. The Robles coalition would
begin the campaign with a serious defeat and this setback would probably
tend to accentuate frictions and the possibility of violence. Anti-US sentiment
would probably increase as Panamanians accused the US of having attempted
to foist unacceptable treaties on them. Since the prospect of negotiating new
treaties would not be good for months to come, insistent demands would
probably be made on the US for more generous dealings under the present
treaty in the meantime.

19. If Arnulfo should be elected in May 1968 and permitted to take office
the following October, he would probably find one means or another to call
into question any treaties that had been ratified. He would want to put his own
imprint upon the results of negotiations he had previously denounced as illegal.
He might demand additional concessions from the US. And, in any event, it
is likely that the aftermath of the elections, especially if they were close, would
be troubled. Thus we would anticipate a tense period from May to October
next year, with some chance that Panama would not hold to all the provisions
of the Canal treaties even though they had been duly approved and ratified.

Case B: Negotiations Completed Before May 1968 but Treaties not Sub-
mitted for Ratification

20. If the treaties should not be presented for ratification by September of
1967, they would become the de facto campaign platform of the elite party
coalition. In the unlikely event that the elite candidate won an honest popular
election on this platform, the treaties would doubtless pass the Assembly after
October 1968 with considerable political and even popular support. But the
situation, it seems to us, would increase the opportunities for Arnulfo and
others to make effective political attack, and would, at the same time, maximize
the chances for a split in the elite.

21. Arnulfo could probably manage to use the regular National Assembly
session which convenes in October 1967 as a sounding board for criticism
of the Robles administration. Opposition campaign meetings, as well as
demonstrations undertaken by the Panamefiistas on the one hand and the Com-
munists on the other, would tend to have a heightened anti-US content. There
would be danger of sizable disorders in Panama City and Colon, and perhaps
of riots spilling over into the Canal Zone. In this situation, chances would
go up that Amulfo might win an election victory so large that it would be
difficult to steal except by the most transparent devices. The elite might

WE. 7

thus be faced with the choice of permitting him to win and take office in
October 1968, or using the Guardia and risking large-scale violence to keep
him out or throw him out once he took office.

22. In short, we do not think the prospects which emerge in this Case B
look at all favorable, either in terms of Panamanian political affairs or in
terms of the likelihood of obtaining durable approval of the treaties.

Case C: Negotiations Not Completed Before the Election of May 1968

23. By the time of the elections, it would be nearly three and a half years
since the negotiations began—most of the tenure of Robles’ administration. The
government would be attacked for incompetence and lack of diligence. Robles
might choose to defend his record by breaking off the negotiations and denounc-
ing the US for allegedly having delayed them unnecessarily. On the other
hand, he might try to explain that they were extremely complicated and that
his government had proceeded with caution to avoid jeopardizing the interests
of Panama. In either case, some of the elite, and some of the politicians
running for seats in the Assembly or otherwise actively engaged in the campaign,
would probably assail the US for recalcitrance. The anti-US content of the
political campaign would probably be high, and some among the elite might
encourage anti-US demonstrations or incidents.

24. The elite coalition would nevertheless be in a fairly strong position to
respond to attacks by Arnulfo. He could accuse it of trying to sell out the
country’s interests, but not of having done so. Indeed, it could counter by
claiming that its determination to protect Panamanian interests made quick
agreement to US proposals out of the question. Arnulfo, for his part, could go
back to the claim that he and only he could negotiate fair and enduring
treaties with the US. While there would be danger of serious disorders, we
believe it would be less than in Case B.

25. In the event that the elections should bring a new elite government to
power, future treaty negotiations would be complicated by such anti-US
positions as members of the elite might have taken during the campaign. The
delay itself might lead the Panamanians to seek larger concessions from the
US, and a new set of negotiators is not likely to be more reasonable than
Robles’ group has been. There would, even so, be mitigating factors. The
domestic pressures would be somewhat lower on a government which had a
full term ahead before the next elections. And in this case no government,
whether Arnulfo’s or the elite’s would have campaigned against specific pro-
visions of treaties already agreed upon which the US would be negotiating once
more with Panama.

IV. POSTLUDE

26. In sum, there are bound to be difficulties in securing new Canal treaties
and, at the same time, maintaining political stability in Panama. The political
climate will almost certainly become more volatile as the presidential campaign

8 al

swings into full activity, and the danger of serious disorders will probably increase.
Prospects, both for stability and for the treaties, will, of course, vary with
circumstances—not all of them predictable. With respect to the timing of
completion of treaty negotiations, we would note that the disadvantages in
Case B above are more apparent and the advantages less apparent than those
in the alternative cases.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
. DISSEMINATION NOTICE =~
1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential. dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective _ departments : regen aa

a. Director of Intelligence and ‘Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence “Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff a
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army ae vane Cae at Lo
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence). for the Department of the

Navy i on pean cole TT Soir hate :
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the At
Force. wat OE gee gee ate St :
¢. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
_ Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
i. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

5 oe ik Paes

sa

9. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency fo retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be classi-
fie

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

T a
DISSEM «=>
