CURREND-INTELLIGENCE WEEKLY REVIEW

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRA 23 June 1960


 RELEASE AS SANITIZED PART II

 1997 NOTES AND COMMENTS

 CUBA

 The resignation  of two under Agreements for trade, tech~
 secretaries in the Cuban Foreign nical assistance, and credits
 Ministry, announced on 17 June, totaling $120,000,000 have been
 appears to be the precursor.  of a signed with the USSR, Czechoslo-
 general shakeup that is likely vakia, Poland,  and East Germany
 to end in increased Communist in- since last February, The effects
 Zuence over'Cuba's foreign of these agreements will be in-
 policy. Foreign: Minister Raul creasingly felt in the latter
 Roa apparently has been held re- half of the year, but the credits
 sponsible for various recent will mot contribute substantially
 foreign policy. failures, includ-~ until 1961,  Realization that
 ing the collapse of Cuba's effort Soviet oil shipments to Cuba
 to sponsor a conference of under-~ will significantlyrediice Vene-
 developed nations; he will prob- zuela's share’of thé Cuban market
 ably be removed shortly. has already led to a sharp reac-
 tion from the Venezuelan minister
 One of the newly appointed of mines.  He said Cuba could
 under secretaries--Hector not count on access  to Venezuelan
 Rodriguez Liompart--is believed erude o11 in the future  if it
 to be a Communist; the other reducéd imports now.
 recently voiced strong anti-Us
 sentiments during a tour of Latin A Cuban economic  mission
 America, Both may have been headed by agrarian reform di-
 selected by Raul Castro,  who has rector Nunez Jimenez has reached
 played a key role in Communist a series of agreements in Mos-
 inroads in the military,  organ- cow giving substance to the
 ized labor, and other areas. Soviet-Cuban trade and aid agree-
 ments.concluded last February.
 The Castro regime, with the It also concluded a cultural ex-
 support of the Soviet bloc, is change accord,  the details of
 making evident progress in imple- which are to be worked out later,
 menting its long-standing goal of and reached agreement on a
 reducing Cuba's’ traditional eco-. Khrushchev-Castro exchange of
 nomiz dependence on the United visits.
 States, Cuba, which used to ©
 conduct as much as 70 percent  of No formal announcement of
 its foreign trade with the. United dates has yet been made, but
 States, now is turning to the Soviet Ambassador Bazykin-in
 Soviet bloc for many of.the prod- Mexico is quoted by a progovern-
 ucts” formerly ‘bought elsewhere. ment radio in Cuba as saying
 Data for the first three months that the Soviet Union will open
 of this year indicate that 1960 its embassy in Havana before
 imports from the United States Khrushchev visits Cuba "in
 will probably be half what they August." The mission arrived
 were in 1958, the last full year in Warsaw on 19 June, and is
 before Castro came to power. also scheduled to visit Czecho-
 The decline results only partly slovakia and East Germany to
 from an over-all reduction in negotiate for the implementation
 imports to conserve foreign ex- of the agreements  signed with
 change’. those countries,
 "


 aaoees aed MATIO AND ANID
 ff


 CURRENT INTELLIGENCE WEEKLY REVIEW

 23 June 1960


 The Communists will domi-~ Youth, and World Federation of
  nate the Castro-sponsored Latin Trade Unions.
  American Youth Conference,
  scheduled to open in Havana on Invitations were also sent to
  26 July. According to a usually some non-Communist organizations,
  reliable source, invitations to probably to camouflage Communist
  attend the meeting have been control of the conference. The
  sent covertly to 17 national Communists of Latin America will
  youth organizations outside thus be given another opportu-
  Latin America,  including the nity to coordinate their efforts
  USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia, to win sympathizers among stu-~
  and Communist China, and overtly dents of the hemisphere with the
  to the Communist-—dominated In- guidance and assistance of inter-
  ternational Union of Students, nahaere Communist reer,
  World Federation of Democratic


RELEVAN™
NOT


 PART JIT NOTES AND COMMENTS Page 2 of 18
