The Outlook for Iraq
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000026758, dated 2 May 1957.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000026758).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

The foncowe intelligence organteattons

participated
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency”
and the intelligence ae oy the Departments = ws

" erELLagence’ ADVISORY ‘COMMIT TE or

en
pokes

"om @ June 1957. Concurring were the Special

’ Intelligence, Department of State; fhe Assistant Chlef of -

“Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Director of * “
: Waval Intelligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; and : pat

- the Deputy Director for Intelligence, the Jotnt Staff. ‘The “.

Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the IAC, and the -

_ Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, adstained,

en ee ee ee His

1. Iraq has emerged from the Suez crisis
with its internal stability unimpaired and
its policy of cooperation with the West
unchanged. Use of reserves and borrow-
ings from the Iraq Petroleum Company
have enabled it to continue its economic
development program despite the shut-
down of the pipelines through Syria (now
operating at about 50 percent of capac-
ity). Recent developments have lessened
Iraq’s isolation from the other Arab
states, especially Saudi Arabia and Jor-
dan. (Paras. 6-9)

2. Iraq will probably retain its present
political stability so long as Nuri Said
remains active, either as premier or as
the power behind the scene. However,
undercurrents of opposition to the regime
will probably require continuing reliance
on authoritarian methods and, over the
Jonger run, demands for broader par-
ticipation in governmental affairs will
probably become increasingly forceful.
(Paras. 10-11, 13)

3. Political stability would probably de-
cline if the 69-year-old Nuri were to dis-

THE OUTLOOK FOR IRAQ

THE PROBLEM

To assess Iraq’s prospects for stability and economic progress and its probable
role in Arab and Middle East affairs over the next few years,

CONCLUSIONS

appear from the scene. Although con-
Servative elements are likely to retain
control at least initially, the ruling group
would probably be weakened by internal
rivalries, and would probably face in-
creased demands for reform and ultra-
nationalist pressures both from within
Iraq and from abroad. A successor regime
might not be able to retain the present
tight controls. (Para. 12)

4. Iraq’s development program is just
beginning to show tangible results, and
future economic prospects remain bright.
Although Iraq’s economy could at present
be endangered by new Syrian interference
with the oil pipelines, this vulnerability
could be reduced within the next few
years by development of new pipelines
and other alternate means of delivery.
(Paras, 14-16)

5. Over the next few years Iraq will prob-
ably continue to consider its interests
best served by maintaining close political,
economic, and military relations with the
West, even though its ties with Britain

have been weakened and its reliance on
US support correspondingly increased.
However, Iraq’s willingness to support
Western policies and objectives in the
Middle East will continue to be tempered
by its sharing of general Arab aspirations
and its desire to avoid becoming com-

pletely isolated from its fellow Arab
states. On the central issue of Palestine,
the Iraqis share the general Arab hos-
tility toward Israel and will continue to
demonstrate their loyalty to the Arab
cause by anti-Israeli pronouncements or

gestures. (Paras, 17-23)

DISCUSSION

IRAQ AND THE SUEZ CRISIS

6. Iraq continues to occupy a special position
in the Arab world, Among the principal Arab
states, Iraq alone has both extensive economic
assets and a sound development program well
underway. It has resisted the temptation to
adopt an extreme nationalist Policy and has
retained close connections with the West.
Iraq is the only major Arab state still having
close ties with the UK and the only Arab
member of the Baghdad Pact. Furthermore,
its government has refused to accept Egypt’s
claim to leadership in the Arab world. Polit-
ical contro] in Iraq remains in the hands of
an established oligarchy of professional poli-
ticians, wealthy landlords, businessmen, and
tribal leaders. The dominant political figure
is the veteran prime minister, Nuri Said, who
has the important backing of the Palace.
Iraq’s relatively high level of political and
economic stability and its prospects for eco-
nomic growth give it a potential importance
out of proportion to its present five million
population.

7. The Israel-French-UK invasion of Egypt
imposed a severe strain on Iraq’s foreign policy
orientation. The success which Nasser had had
in his political efforts to establish a militant
nationalistic anti-Western bloc with Syria,
Jordan, and Saudi Arabia had already isolated
Iraq in the Arab world. Relations with Saudi
Arabia were also affected by longstanding
dynastic differences. With the outbreak of

the hostilities against Egypt, the Nuri Said
government came under violent attack for its
continued association with the UK in the

Baghdad Pact. Egyptian and Syrian pres-
Sures against the Nuri regime increased,
Ultranationalist and leftist demonstrations
broke out after the invasion and contin-
ued intermittently until late December 1956.
Syria’s sabotaze of the Iraq Petroleum Com-
pany (IPC) ripelines in November forced a
virtual shutdown of most oil activities and
cut off the source of about 68 percent of the
Government’s revenues. Grumbling in Iraq
over Nuri’s suppression of opposition activ-
ities and his personal dominance over the gov-
ernment increased. In these cir: umstances,
many moderate elements, including some
army officers and even some of the prime
minister’s erstwhile supporters, felt that Nuri’s
long identification with the British and his
sponsorship of the Baghdad Pact mude him a
liability.

8. Nuri felt compelled to make some gestures
to offset the charges of treason to the Arab
Cause and the demands for withdrawal from
the Baghdad Pact. The Iraqi government
supported Egypt’s case in the Suez controver-
sy and emphasized its solidarity with the other
Arabs in opposition to Israel. For a period of
time Iraq took the initiative in excluding the
British from Baghdad Pact meetings, and other
aspects of Iraq’s British connections were de-
emphasized. However, Nuri made no real con-
cessions and succeeded in riding out the storm
by taking advantage of his firm hold on the
army and on tne machinery of government,
his mastery of political maneuver, and the
support of the Falace. Serious economic con-
Sequences from the virtual stoppage of oil
revenues were avoided by utilizing reserves

Cay 3

and by borrowing from IPC, thus allowing
the development program to continue. ?

9. US condemnation of the attack on Egypt,
the promulgation of the American Doctrine,
and thé US decision to join the military com-
mittee of the Baghdad Pact strengthened
Nuri’s foreign policy position both within Iraq
and in area affairs. Day-to-day relations with
the UK, including Baghdad Pact cooperation,
are back to normal. For the moment the Brit-
ish tie has become B less sensitive issue, though
British prestige and influence have suffered
@ net decline. Meanwhile, recent develop-
ments have decreased Iraq's isolation In the
Arab world. The forces now in control in
Jordan under King Hussein include those Jor-
danian elements most friendly to Iraq. The
recent visit of King Saud to Baghdad appears
to show at least a temporary submergence of
the dynastic problem between Iraq and Saudi

Arabia and a recognition of common interests. '

Relations with the controlling elements in
Lebanon are friendly.’ More importantly,
these countries appear to share a common ap-
prehension of Egyptian interference in their
internal affairs, of the growth of Soviet in-
fluence in the area and of the rising influence
of local Communists in Syria and Jordan.

INTERNAL POLITICAL PROSPECTS

10. The Iraqi government will continue to be
a major target of Egyptian and Syrian propa-
ganda attacks and subversive efforts. There is
unlikely to be any notable decrease in the op-

‘Although the sabotage of the IPC pipelines
through Syria and the closure of the Suez Canal
resulted tn deficits in the regular and develop-
ment budgets, Treasury and Development Board
reserves totaling about $350 million in fully con-
vertible sterling alowed the government to cover
these losses. The substantial restoration in of]
shipments, coupled with an IPC combined ad-
vance and loan of $70 million, should see the
government on the way to full finariclal recovery
by the end of the present Ireqi fiscal year (3)
March 1958), While the Suez crisis caused a rise
in consumer demand and an upward movement
of prices, as well as some unemployment, the
Government's economic stabilization measures
were generally effective. The total effect on the
economy was thus limited, and there was little
interference with normal economic activity.

position to the regime which exists among stu-
dents, urban Inbor groups and, to a lesser
extent, among professional people, military
officers, and ceztain tribes. Elements among
these groups are susceptible to the emotional
appeal of Nasser as a champion of Arab in-
terests against Israel and the “imperialists.”
Nuri finds it difficult to show the advantages
of Iraq’s policies in a way which has an equiv-
alent appeal. The government will probably
consider it necessary to continue strict limita-
tions on political freedoms, including the ban
on political parties. A certain amount of cor-
ruption in government ministries will be tol-
erated, and the strong conservative opposi-
tion will continue to delay tax and land tenure
reforms designed to spread the economic de-
velopment program's benefits.
en

12. In the event that Nuri, now 69, were to die
or become disabled within the next few years,
conservative elements would probably retain
cov..rol, at least initially. However, the de-
parture of Iraq’s dominant figure would re-
lease internal rivalries which are now either
submerged or held in check by the prime min-

ister’s virtually unchallenged control. The
relative strength of the conservative and mod-

erate elements will continue to be threatened
by growing pclitical consciousness among ur-
ban groups and by peasant agitation for im-
proved living conditions. Political instability
would be likely to increase under a successor
regime, which might not be able to retain
such tight controls. The Communist Party,
though now demoralized and ineffective as a
result of firm repressive measures,? probably
could under these circumstances develop in-
creased capabilities for creating disturbances,
and would seek to participate in political af-
fairs, probably through forming fronts with
other oppositicn groups. Extremist pressures
from other Arab states would probably have
a greater effect on internal Iraqi politics. The
army, which has in recent years been remark-
ably nonpolitical by Middle Eastern standards,
might emerge as an active factor in Iragi
politics. $

13. Over the Jonger run, the natural develop-
ment of factors already present in Iraqi society
will probably confront the present tightly con-
trolled system of rule with increasingly force-
ful challenges by elements demanding a
broadening of the base of public participation
in governmental affairs. Moreover, the coun-
try’s economic progress is likely to increase
the force of such agitation for readjustments
in the political system.

ECONOMIC PROSPECTS

14, Even though poverty, disease, and igno-
rance are still widespread, Iraq’s agricultural
and pastoral economy is relatively stable and
its long range outlook is potentially bright.
Assuming that the IPC oil pipelines across
Syria are not cut again for any extended peri-
od or that alternative transport is developed,
the rising demand for Middle Eastern oil
should provide adequate revenues to finance
Iraq’s ambitious development plan. Seventy
percent of Iraq’s oil revenues are earmarked

?The Communist Party's leaders are in jail or in
hiding, and its present numerical strength has
been reduced to some 600 members and 2,000
active supporters. The party attracts its fol-
lowers principally from the young urban intel-
ligentsia and industrial workers in the port cities
and oll industry centers.

*See also paragraph 26.

for development expenditures, which are pro-
jected at more than $1.4 billion for the period
1954-1960. The result of such development
- will probably be a marked increase in the

standard of living. In an effort to correct ihe
principal cause of poverty — inefficient use
and unever. distribution of land—the Iraq
Development Board is concentrating on ir-
rigation, land reclamation and flood control
Projects rather than on industrialization.
The Development Board --composed of the
prime minister as chairman, the Minister of
Finance as an ez officio member, and six non-
political executive members, including one
American and one Briton — received $133 mil-
lion of the oil revenues in 1956. Iraq also
receives US technical assistance and will re-
ceive a modest increase in American aid as a
result of the Richards Mission.

15. Following a long preparatory period, the
development scheme is just beginning to have
an impact on the public, and the Development
Board is making some adjustments — as in
building more low cost housing —-to pro-
vide additional tangible evidence of progress.
Some much needed flocd control projects on
the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have already
gone into operation, and the next few years
will probably witness an expansion of health,
educational, and other benefits both in the
cities and in the countryside. Iraq will prob-
ably continue for some years in the unique
situation of being underpopulated in relation
to its land, water, oil, and mineral resources.
Development plans provide for the extension
or irrigation from the present 6.8 million acres
to about 13.6 million acres, but unless pres-
ently unforeseen political developments re-
sult in a large influx of Palestinian Arab
refugees, Iraq will for many years lack suf-
ficient peasant manpower to take advantage
of this situation. As economic growth con-
tinues, Iraq will also continue to feel a shert-
age of skilled and semiskilled labor, tech-
nicians, and managers which may slow the
carrying out of the development program.
Nevertheless, because of its stable government,
its relatively effective development program,
and its assured oil income, Iraq will almost
certainly make more economic progress than
any other Arab country.

16. Oil Developments. The Syrian sabotage
of the IPC pipeline and the growing impor-
tance of Middle East oil in the European econ-
omy have raised for active consideration the
question of alternative routes for the ship-
ment of Iraqi oil. Private Western interests
are actively discussing the construction of ad-
ditional pipelines. One would run through
Turkey to the Mediterranean; another would
run southward to the Persian Gulf and would
possibly be linked with lines from Iran, These
lines would require up to three years to build.
Out of deference to Arab opinion the Iraqi
government is unlikely to promote the Tur-
key pipeline project actively, and may balk
at efforts to obtain international treaty guar-
antees regarding the uninterrupted flow of oil.
However, Nur: Said has privately welcomed
discussion of plans which would decrease his
country’s dependence on transport facilities
through Arab states whose policies are now
or may become hostile to Iraq. Development
of additional fields in southern Iraq and port
facilities on the Persian Gulf would permit
greater oil exports. The IPC, which handles
all Iraqi oil exports, enjoys good relations with
Iraq. Under Its basic agreements the IPC
would have to adjust its arrangements in con-
formity with any important modification in
concession terms in other Middle Eastern
countries, especially in case of any breach of
the general 60-50 profit sharing formula.
However, barring a political upheaval in Iraq
or a new tide of extreme nationalism through-
out the area, nationalization of the company
during the next few years appears improbable.

. Iraq's willingness to cooperate with the
West, however, will remain contingent on con-
tinuing Western material and diplomatic sup-
port. Iraq’s leaders have certain bonds of
sympathy with the West, but their pro-West-
ernism is based to a considerable degree on the
expectation that they will obtain tangible
benefits in return for their cooperation. They
will almost certainly continue to press for
continued and probably increased Western
support, both diplomatic and material, for
thernselves and the Baghdad Pact organize-
tion. Should substantial backing not be forth-
coming, their enthusiasm for the Western
tie and their willingness to work closely with
their Western partners will decline. Iraqi
disillusionment would be particularly strong
if Egypt and Syria appeared to be deriving
substantially greater benefits from their Bloc
connections than Iraq was getting from its
Western ties.

20. Iraq’s willingness to support Western pol-
icies and objectives in the Middle East will
also continue to be tempered by its sharing

of general Arab aspirations and its prudent
desire to avoid becoming completely isolated
from its fellow Arab states. This sensitivity
to currents of opinion elsewhere in the Arab
world would almost certainly increase in the
event of Nuri’s departure from the political
scene. On the central issue of Palestine, the
Iraqis share the general Arab hostility toward
Israel and will continue to demonstrate their
loyalty to the Arab cause by anti-Israeli pro-
nouncements or gestures. Iraq, having with-
drawn its troops, did not sign an armistice
agreement with Israel in 1949, but the absence
of a common boundary limits the opportun-
ities for trouble between the two countries.
There is little likelihood that Iraq would be
willing to accept @ sizable number of Pales-
tinian refugees except as part of a generally
agreed plan for their resettlement in the Arab
states. Although Iraq will probably seek to
avoid another outbreak of fighting between
the Arab states and Israel, it would almost
certainly not make a separate peace.

21. On North African and colonial issues, Iraq
will probably continue to identify itself with
the Afro-Asian coantries. It is thus likely
to continue its hostile attitude toward France.
Even in Middle Eastern matters in which its
own interests are similar to those of the US
and the West, Iraq's attitude will depend to a
considerable extent on its assessment of Arab
reactions. Iraq’s willingness to stand openly
against Nasser will thus continue to be af-
fected by variations in the latter’s prestige
and influence in the Arab states. If Nasser
should find another opportunity to identify
himself with Arab nationalism, as he did in
the Suez crisis, Iraq would probably feel com-
pelled to pay at least lip service to his cause.

22. So long as Egyptian and Syrian subver-
sive pressures continue against Iraq and its
neighbors, some form of collaboration between
the “Three Kings” — Feisal of Iraq, Hussein
of Jordan, and Saud — will probably continue,
with the pro-Western element in Lebanon also
associated with this grouping. Since the con-
tinued ascendency of anti-Western elements
in Syria poses a continuing threat to the Ipc
pipelines, as well as to the stability of the
Iraqi government itself, Iraq will probably

continue to exert what influence it can to-
ward the establishment of a friendly govern-
ment in Syria. Iraq will continue to support
King Hussein. Should his regime be over-
thrown by extremists and a breakup of Jor-
dan appear imminent, however, Iraq would
probably feel compelled to occupy adjacent
Jordanian territory for the protection of its
own interests. Iraq will also probably con-
tinue its quiet efforts to develop ties with the
generally moderate governments of Libya,
Tunisia, Morocco, and the Sudan. While
there have occasionally been discussions of a
“Greater Syria” comprised of Iraq, Syria, and
Jordan, this is not an active factor in current
Traqi thinking.

23. Iraq’s prospects for influence and leader-
ship in Arab affairs will probably remain
limited for some time to come. Despite its
long-range growth potential, Iraq still lags
far behind Egypt, its principal rival, in most
visibie aspects of natione] power and prestige,
including population, military strength, press
and radio propaganda facilities, and cultural
influence. Also, King Saud may continue to
harbor some suspicions regarding the Hashe-
mites and is likely to be influenced against
strong commitments to Iraq by a desire to
smooth over inver-Arab differences and ex-
ercise greater leadership in his own right.
Iraq’s appeal in other Arab states will prob-
ably be diminished by the suspected subser-
vience of its leadership to the West and by
indecision and fumbling such as marked its
policies with respect to Jordan and Syria.

MILITARY OUTLOOK

24, The Iraqi military forces, numbering about
56,000 men,‘ are capable of maintaining in-

‘The army is organized into three infantry divi-

sions and various independent units, the most
important being the Royal Bodyguard Brigade,
three medium tank regimerits (equivalent to US
battalions), ani four artillery battalions. The
organization of a fourth division, armored, is
planned.

The air force at present consists of five fighter
bomber squadrons, including 28 jet fighter-
pombers and 43 piston fighter-bombers. Its
personnel strer.gth 1s about 2,700, including 62

ternal security and could probably defend the
country against an attack by any neighboring
Arab state. However, the capabilities of the
Iraqi armed forces to contribute to defense
against a mejor force are limited. In the
event it were called upon to support opera-
tions outside Iraq, the Iraqi army would face
severe logistic problems and would probably
be incapable of keeping more than one divi-
sion in an area of operations outside its bor-
ders without jeopardizing its ability to main-
tain internal security.* ‘The small air force
is fairly welt equipped, but poorly trained and

supported.

25,

trained pilots and about 450 pilot trainees. The
air force has an ambitious four year plan for
expansion. ‘

The river force consisting of four river gun-
boats and 193 men, which is based at Basra, 1s
used exclusively as a unit of the army.

For internal security purposes, the armed
forces are supplemented by & mobile police force
of some 4,000 men, organized into nine batta-
ons, with headquarters In Baghdad.

“as a result of the Jordanian crisis Iraqi forces
at the H-3 pumping station, 40 miles from the
Jordan border, have been increased to 8 divi-
sion minus one brigade—about 6,000 men.
However, even this Umited deployment forward

has placed considerable strain on Iraq's logistic

system.

SECRET
