EstimatedD Pub Date) CIA Presentation to the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 30 July 196
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126910, dated 2 June 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126910).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

-~SHEREF-
| 15
CIA Presentation to the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
30 July 19563

I. SOVIET MOTIVES IN THE TEST BAN

In your third question, you suggest a num-:
ber of factors which may have led Khrushchev to
agree to a limited test ban at this time. I
want to give you our views on the probable work-
ing of these factors in the Soviet decision, be-
ginning with the question of proliferation.

Proliferation

We regard the desire to halt the spread of
nuclear weapons as a significant but not over-
riding motive for the Soviet switch on a test
ban. (The Soviets see no advantage to themselves
in proliferation. They want to have a nuclear
“monopoly in their own camp. Outside their
camp, they see certain dangers to themselves
in proliferation, especially when they contemplate
the prospect of a nuclear-armed West Germany.
The Soviets are very susceptible to fears on
this score, and they probably hope that a test
ban will raise the obstacles against this possibi-
lity. The relationship is an indirect one; they

hope, beginning with the present agreement on

00000348
APPROVED FOR RELEASE ~SEGREL—

Date 3.9 OCT 1997

NND 942079

hs
>

oe fae wd
Sa ae .
POD TE Uwe Seo aN

co te a pe

‘“SEGRELT—

testing, to create a political climate in which
greater pressures can be mobilized against any

of the ways by which the Germans might move to-

ward a nuclear capability--an independent effort,

cooperation with France, or participation in a
multilateral force. This, however, is part and
parcel of a large set of political objectives
which the Soviets are seeking, and to which I
will return later.

Beyond the German matter, Khrushchev al-
most certainly recognizes that while he can now
berate the French more effectively, he canna
[pardly hope to\halt de Gaulle's nuclear program.
With respect to Communist China, the Soviets
took a big step in 1959-60 when they cut off
their aid to the Chinese nuclear program. Since
that time, however, they have really had only
one direct means of affecting this program: the
use of force against Chinese nuclear installa-
tions, which they would regard as a momentous
.and dangerous undertaking. Certainly, Khru-
shchev understands that any test ban negotiated
with the West will not dissuade the Chinese

from pursuing an independent nuclear capability.

-2-

NND 942079

00000347

SEGCREF-

The Sino-Soviet Conttict

Communist China enters disycalculations in
another way, however. At the present stage of
bitter conflict, the Soviets have an interest in
proving what the Chinese deny: that a Communist
state can reach agreements with capitalist coun-
tries which are not capitulations but in fact ad-—
vance the cause. A limited test ban can be rep-
resented in this way, and from Khrushchev's view-
point it is particularly appropriate because he
can relate it to his side of the Sino-Soviet
polemic over nuclear war. Furthermore, he has
now set up a situation in which’ the Chinese,
when they come to stage their first detonation,
will have to appear in a worse light among those
for whose loyalty Moscow and Peiping are contend-
ing.

Soviet Detente Tactics

I come now to what we consider Khrushchev 's
chief immediate concern: the political gains
he hopes to achieve in Europe by bringing about

a general relaxation of tensions. These center

in the first instance on Germany, where four

‘years of threats and pressure have failed to

a . NND 942079

yield any lasting returns. He begins with the
desire to get Western endorsement of East Ger-_
many, and most of his current proposals, such
as the non-aggression pact and those relating
to military forces in the two Germanies, are
designed to this end. But he also knows that
if he can induce the West to acknowledge and
accept the division of Germany, he sets up ten-
dencies in the Federal Republic toward a ques-
tioning of present alliances and thereby creates
the preconditions for drawing West Germany away.
from NATO.

This is only one of the specific objec-
tives which Khrushchev hopes to move forward
(onl by bringing about a general atmosphere of
detente. He probably has considerable hopes
for this course of action, which he has not
seriously exploited since the Camp David era
that ended in May 1960, for he realizes that
in the meantime new potentials--such as de
Gaulle's aspirations for France and the new

A
fludity in German politics with the departure

of Adenauer-~have accumulated in the - meantime.

~4.

SEGRE. 00000849

Fn at oo NND 942079

4

SHECREL-

It can be taken for granted that, in pursuing
this line, Khrushchev intends to strengthen
the case for various Soviet proposals in the
field of arms control, such as nuclear-free
zones, and to encourage a general relaxation
of NATO military efforts.

In this connection, we should be mindful
of the unhappy fact that it is easier for the
USSR to sustain military programs in an atmos-
phere of reduced tensions that it is for the |
West. During the coming period, the Soviets
will go forward in incorporating into their
nuclear stockpile the design advances made in
their 1961-62 tests. They will continue a
vigorous program of research and development
in advanced weapons, It may be that this ef-
fort will bring them to what they see'as the
threshold of some important military advance,
say in the anti-missile field, which requires
nuclear testing for its consummation. In this
case, they would be tempted to find a pretext
for withdrawing from the treaty. Their de-
cision at such a time would depend upon a

complicated weighing of military, political,

000003514

ne . NND 942079

and even economic factors in circumstances which,
unfortunately, we cannot now foresee,
Further Possibilities
You have asked yet a further question: does
Khrushchev's agreement to a limited test ban
Signify a genuine desire for detente with the
West? If by this is meant, has Moscow made a
new determination of fundamental policy to
close out the cold war and accept the present
limits of Soviet power and influence, our an-
Swer is a quick and emphatic no. But if we ask
whether Moscow may be coming to see the competi-
tion in a more complicated way and reappraising
the USSR's methods and prospects in that competi-
ia tion, no such short answer is sufficient.
First, I want to return to the question
of Sino-Soviet relations. -We are persuaded
that the division is real and deep and that it
arises not only from ideological differences,
Yehich might after all be narrowed or eliminated
by a change of mind or leadership on one side, \

but from national rivalry and a straightforward

power struggle for control of the international
-6-

SReR ER. 00000352

Te NND 942079

“SECREP-

Communist movement. We think that the Soviets
fully understand this, particularly now that

the Chinese have raised the question of national
borders unjustly imposed on China by the Russian
tsars.

This being so, we believe that China's
stance and its success in extending control over
other Communist parties in Asia, must eventually
make inroads on some of the fundamental Soviet
conceptions about world politics. The proposi-
tion that international affairs is essentially
a bipolar struggle of two social Systems, that
one must eventually prevail and extinguish the
other, is becoming increasingly unrealistic, and

ad the Soviet Union is a realistic power. AS these
conceptions get blurred, the Soviet leaders will
: find it difficult to refer to a dogmatic ideolo-
gical framework in order to determine, on each

new issue, who is the enemy and who shares a

Ct 0s) eee Es ey Saray

common interest with them. Already they must
a be aware of the danger of isolation between two
hostile fronts, East and West.
Economic Pressures
We do not know how far this process has gone

in Khrushchev's mind, but we think it plays a
: -7- . .
| - SEGREL- 00000353

Se nn eee : .-  NND 942079

%.
te
ee

Feet Nowa le | Cte chee hanes Mme AM be cea ase ee

SHEGREF.

greater role in Soviet thinking than was the case
during the last period of detente tactics. There
is, however, a second factor involved in the ques .
tion of genuine detente which is not quite so
conjectural. This is the impact of military and
space Spending on the Soviet economy. Five years
ago, Khrushchev seemed supremely confident that
the economy could provide a military force which
would be capable of wringing political conces-—
Sions out to the West, and at the same time sup-
- port a big investment program and regular, tan-
gible increases in consumer welfare. Little of
this has come to pass. Soviet military capabili-
ties have been greatly strengthened, but West
Berlin still stands and Khrushchev found the US
readier than he to fire the first shot in the
missile crisis last October. Meanwhile, Soviet.
economic growth has distinctly faltered; the
growth in GNP has slowed down in recent years,
investment increases have been smaller and
Smaller, and agriculture remains virtually
Stagnant. Our analysis indicates that mili-
tary and space spending have been the most in-

portant single cause of this general slowdown,

00000354

ne

naan NND 942079 —

We note, for example, that military production
is having important effects on deliveries of
machinery and equipment to the economy. These
civilian deliveries, which were rising at about,
14 percent per year in the years before 1958,
when production for the military was stable or
declining, have since grown at an annual rate
of 9 percent or less while military production |
has been increasing by about 13 percent per
year.) |

Thus the economic case for a check to the
arms race has been gaining strength in the USSR
for the past few years. Last winter, however,
our evidence on economic policy suggested that
the response to the Cuban crisis was to be a
reaffirmation, and perhaps even a strengthening
of the primacy of defense over other economic
needs, This was at a time: when our political
-information indicated that Khrushchev's stock .
among his colleagues was relatively low. Since
about April, we have noted a Steady gain in

his political authority, and at the same time
a shift in ‘Ann, Sognomic policy pronouncements.

Wotan Bone SUAALR
Those revising- the 1964-65 economic plan have
nw

NND 942079

00003355

wee Baas

SEGREF

been directed to give primary attention to the
consumer and agriculture by upward revisions in
the chemical industry. Grandiose plans for
fertilizer production have been announced, and
even though they will not be met on schedule,

a serious beginning on them can scarcely be
made without some general readjustment of other
sectors. Khrushchev has told Western officials
that the USSR is “over the hump" in military
spending and can now direct new resources into
agriculture,

This is not conclusive proof of a major
turn in economic policy. We think it possible,
however, that these developments reflect a re-
appraisal of priorities which is closely re-
lated to the test ban. If Khrushchev wishes
to check military Spending for the sake of in-
vestment and consumption, he is under some con-
straint to bring about a reduction of international
tensions, lest he endanger Soviet security or
give the appearance of doing so. In this case,
his present intention is probably to sustain the
detente line for a considerable period. [
Stress "his present intention" because, even

if this argument is correct, future changes
-10-

SECRET 00000356

NND 942079 ~~

Skee Ohade dade of ible! cee

we elieitical

Pe eat ae PA

SEGREL-

within the Soviet leadership or a new crisis,
arising for example out of Cuba, could greatly
alter the circumstances.

We are not trying to suggest that, if Khru-
shchev's Chinese problem and economic problem ,
make his present move toward detente more ser-
ious than previous phases of this sort, he will
come to us with any sort of acceptable overall
settlement of East-West issues. Indeed, he
would in this case pursue the same sort of
tactics on Germany and arms control questions
as I set out earlier, with only this difference--
that he would be ready to come somewhat closer
to Western terms on particular agreements, or
that he would be willing to let these issues
lie on the negotiating table for a prolonged

period without resorting to new tensions.

Reduction of Soviet Forces

One final point about Soviet policy is the

matter of reduction of military manpower. Khru-

-Shchev's reassertion of authority in the Presidum,

pilus the emergence of a detente line in foreign

policy, automatically forces us to reconsider

“this possibility. Khrushchev has never been

convinced of the need for ground forces of the

~1l1-

SEGREE- 000008

OR

NND 942079

Cit
a]

SHLGREF-

the present size, and he suspended the previous
reduction program in 1961 only because of Steady
pressure from his marshals, combined with the
crisis generated by his Berlin demands. So far,
we have only rumors, accompanied by very little
evidence, of a project to withdraw Soviet forces
from Hungary, but we would not be surprised at
the announcement of a new unilateral force re-
duction, undertaken both for economic reasons
and: put futher impetus behind current detente
tactics. Such a move might possibly involve
a reduction of Soviet forces in Kast Germany,
although Khrushchev may wish to hold this card
in reserve for bargaining purposes.
SE. Ii. EFFECT ON THE NUCLEAR POLICY OF OTHER COUNTRIES
Aside from the three signatories, the coun-
tries most immediately concerned with nuclear
programs are Communist China, France, and Israel.
I have discussed the Chinese earlier. France
will {almost certainly not sign the partial test
ban agreement, at least until it has a thermonu-
clear warhead for medium range missiles. If de
Gaulle were given complete designs and materials
for producing such a warhead, he might possibly

then agree to the test ban. . However, de Gaulle
-~12-

“SECRET. 00000358

NND 942079

SEGCREL-

is as interested in the political effects of
being known as a thermonuclear power as in the
military significance of the weapons. He would
be reluctant to forego the test which would
demonstrate that he had produced a thermonuclear
weapon,

Israel has embarked on a nuclear program
which is heavily dependent on French aid, and
we have estimated that Israel would attempt to
produce a nuclear weapon some time in the next
several years. In the new Situation, we think
that Israel will probably sign the test-—ban
treaty but continue its development program up
to the testing stage. This would put it ina
position either to test underground if it felt
the need to do SO, or perhaps even to withdraw
from the treaty and test in the atmosphere, if
a situation developed in which the Israelis be-
lieved themselves threatened by Arab military
superiority.

Elsewhere in the world, a limited test
ban agreement would be a political and psycholo-
gical deterrent to the acquisition of nuclear
weapons\by countries other than the three al-
ready mentioned, « Except for the few Communist

~13-

00000359

aaa 7 oe NND 942079 ~~

c!

Dee se kN

aoe
tol abst os wettetrtwawey aera

Iii.

SEGREL-

Bloc nations which back the Chinese Communist
Venda ty

position in the Sino-Soviet aispote jain other
countries will probably support’ the partial test
ban. Once having signed, they will find it dif-
ficult to renounce the pact at a later date if
they should decide that new conditions made it
desirable for them to have nuclear weapons.

India is a special caSe, however, due to
its border conflict with China. Nehru has an-
nounced that India will adhere to the treaty.
But once China explodes a device, and particu-
larly after Nehru has gone, India will be under
strong domestic pressure to embark on a weapons
program. Whether the government would bow to
this: pressure, would depend on a number of factors,
but most crucially on the course of Sino-Indian
relations.
EUROPEAN REACTIONS TO TEST BAN AND DETENTE

Whether or not the partial test ban has a
divisive effect within NATO, or pushes the French
and West Germans closer together in a nuclear
weapons program, depends as much on the forth—_
coming discussions about European political is-
sueS as on the test ban itself. While all NATO

countries except France support the test ban,

~14-

SERRE 00000360

rr as NND 942079

pong

SEGREF-

there is considerable opposition in some of then,

especially West Germany, to any arrangement which

. implies .a freezing of the status-quo in Europe.

Both West Germany and France will almost ;
certainly oppose a non-aggression treaty which
requires individual NATO and Warsaw Pact nations
to sign it, arguing that such a procedure would
be tantamount torecognizing Rast Germany. West
Germany and France will probably also oppose any
other non-aggression arrangemen --such as a simul-
taneous declaration by NATO and Warsaw Pact con.
nanders--\nless the West at the same time gets
additional concessions on the Berlin question or
on the broader issues of European security. The
French government probably also believes that by
Supporting West Germany On the non-aggression
issue, its own isolation on the test ban question
may be reduced,

If West Germany and France come to feel that
they are being pressed into an unsatisfactory
non-aggressSion arrangement by the US and the UK,
they may feel compelled to make common cause on
this and other policy questions to a-much greater
degree than they have yet done under the Franco-

German treaty. One field where they might get
~15-

SEGRE | 00000361

NND 942079

together in the future is obviously that of
nuclear weapons. (I should emphasize that
we have no reliable evidence that joint Franco-
German activity on nuclear weapons is under-
way at this time.) To the extent that US or
British motives in the non-aggression talks
actually do differ from French and West Ger-
man motives , therefore, the talks may accelerate
divisive tendencies within NATO. [ The impact
in Europe of the test ban and the future non-
aggression talks thus quite clearly depends
in large measure on US policy in coming months |
Beyond the non-aggression agreement, of
course, are the other subjects on which Khru-
math Shchev has said he is willing to negotiate with
- the West. In the prolonged period of discus-—
Sions with the Soviet Union which we may now
be entering, [problens affecting the future of

both Germanies and Berlin are likely to be con-

Pry ere oe

stantly in the spotlight. |The West German gov-

ernment will be acutely worried that any steps

Ae Meteo

toward settling Central European problems will

vast dowdeaie.

be taken at West Germany's expense or will make
the German goal of reunification even more un-—

attainable than it is at present. Bonn's confi-

dence in the United States and the NATO alliance

en | | |
00000363

NND 942079

aa

a ee es bay . ae
Cobar WAN Cle win ARR Gat ee

SECGREF-

probably will face very severe trials. Through-
out the negotiating process, France will pre-
Sumably be ready to benefit from any West Ger-
man disillusionment with the US or NATO,

It is obvious that the test ban agreement
and the relaxation which the Soviets intend to
introduce in East-West relations will generate
a great deal of optimism in the West. It is
probably safe to predict, however, that the
French government, and the West German govern-—
ment under Adenauer, will not be fooled into
thinking that the USSR's long-term goals have
changed. Even after Adenauer, the German gov-
ernment will, for the near term, at any rate,
probably take a hard-headed view af Soviet
policy. Elsewhere, in NATO, and eSpecially in
Great Britain, there may be a much stronger
tendency to believe that long-term Soviet goals
actually have changed, and that everything pos-
Sible must be done to encourage the thaw in So-
viet relations with the West. Similar feelings
will be more widespread outside official circles

in most NATO countries than within the govern-

ments themselves. As Khrushchev hopes, an

-17-

00000383 \

_ a NND 942079

—SEGREL-

™.

atmosphere of detente will, for example,\| make
it more difficult for West Buropean govern-

ments} perhaps even including the French gov-
ernment, \to maintain their defense establish-

ments at planned levels.

-~18-

00000364

NND 942079
