EstimatedD Pub Date) the Cental American Concept
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000137474, dated 1 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000137474).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

‘ THE CENTRAL AMERICAN CONCEPT

The five Central American republics of Guate-
mala, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa
Rica were, in Spanish colonial times, under the
loose control of the Captaincy General of Guatemala.
They adhered to Mexico when that country declared
its independence from Spain in 1821, but this union
lasted only two years. In 1824, a federal consti-
tution was decreed for a Federation of Central Amer-
ica. Local factionalism, however, again triumphed
and within fourteen years, the federation had
dissolved.

A confederation of El Salvador, Honduras, and
Nicaragua was attempted in 1848 but failed within
two years because of strong opposition from Guate-
mala. In 1870, a Guatemalan strongman tried to
unite the area, but failed. Persistent friction
among these states led the United States and Mexico
to sponsor a meeting of Central American leaders in
Washington in 1907. This resulted ina treaty of
peace and the establishment of a Central American
Court of Justice to arbitrate local disputes. The
court functioned until 1917. Further efforts to
achieve integration met with little success although
the ideal af Central American unity continued to be
written into new constitutions of the states of the
area.

First Conference of Foreign Ministers of Central
merica

The present Organization of Central American
States (ODECA) came into being as a result of a
meeting of the foreign ministers of the Central
American countries held at San Salvador on 8-14
October 1951. Chief among the accomplishments of
the conference was the adoption of the "Charter of
San Salvador." The charter makes clear that the
Organization of Central American States is to oper-
ate strictly within the framework of the United
Nations and the Organization of American States.
The organization was to function mainly through a
meeting of foreign ministers to take place every

APPROVED FOR RELEASE : -1- SECRET

JFK LIBRARY
Date 3.9 OCT 1997_ MANDATORY REVIEW

. CASE #NLK-_7s5 -.3/
DOCUMENT #__/o&

“two years in the capital of each member state in
turn. Provision was made in the charter for Panama
to join when it so desired. A permanent secretariat,
called the Central American Office, was established
with headquarters in San Salvador. Provision was
also made for the establishment of an Economic Coun-
cil composed of delegations from the member states.
The charter also provided for an eventual meeting

of the Presidents of the Central American states.

Extraordinary Meeting of Central American Ministers

ODECA fell into a semidormant state soon after
its foundation. It came to public notice again in
1953 when Guatemala withdrew from the organization
in protest against a Salvadoran proposal at a meet-
ing of foreign ministers to discuss means "to counter-
act the subversive action of international communism."
The proposal was aimed at the Communist—dominated
Arbenz regime in Guatemala. An extraordinary meet-—
ing of foreign ministers took place in Managua in
July 1953. It reaffirmed democratic principles in
Central America, condemned international communism,
and set forth in general terms the means by which
the latter would be combatted. No change was made
in the structure of the organization, and it was
decided that Guatemala would be allowed to re-enter
when it so desired.

First Regular Meeting of ODECA

After the overthrow of the Arbenz regime, the
Guatemalan government of Castillo Armas called a
meeting at Antigua in August 1955. Guatemala atoned
for having endangered the organization two years be-
fore by playing an active part in the proceedings,
indicating its support of Central American unity
and democratic ideals, and its concerted opposition
to communism.

This conference broadened the functions of the
Economic Council of ODECA, permitting it to seek
joint solutions to common economic problems and to
coordinate work and studies looking towards the in-
tegration of the economies of the Central American
countries in such matters as tariffs, monetary and
fiscal systems, communications, and statistics. The
conference also added two subsidiary organs: the

p=

as

, Central American Commission of Jurists to study the

problems of codification of the legislation of the
Central American States, and the Cultural and Edu- -
cational Council to coordinate and develop the edu-
cational systems, science, and culture in Central
America.

First Meeting of Central American Armed Forces
hiefs of sta

At the invitation of President Ydigoras of
Guatemala, the first meeting of the Central Ameri-
can Armed Forces Chiefs of Staff and a representa-
tive from Panama was held in Guatemala City in Sep-
tember 1961 to counter the Castro-Communist threat.
The resulting "Declaration of Guatemala" asserted
that the armed forces of Central America "are obliged
to unify and coordinate their efforts in defense of
democratic interests...in the face of the totalitar-
jan threat of Communism."

The Declaration recommended the creation of a
permanent Central American Defense Council, com-
prising a naval committee to deal with the problems
of coastal defense, security of navigation, and pre-
vention of contraband, and a central intelligence
service. The Council is still on paper only.

Central American Economic Integration

The movement toward economic integration began
at Tegucigalpa in 1952 with the formation of an
"Economic Cooperation Committee of the Central Amer-
ican Isthmus."" The committee declared itself a part
of the Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA)
of the UN. The signing of the General Treaty .of
Economic Integration in December 1960 by four of the
nations launched the Central American Common Market.
Costa Rica joined in 1962.

Ambassador Gonzalo Facio of Costa Rica has
stated that while the Central American Common Market
does not have political unification as an immediate
objective, “economic integration will lead us to it."
Among the accomplishments of the Common Market, Facio
points out the elimination of trade barriers in half
the goods traded between member countries, standard-
ization of external tariffs on more than 80 percent

. of all commodities, the establishment of a regional
pank, and the establishment of machinery to settie
disputes arising among members.

The Economic Cooperation Committee now has
under study various projects aimed at complete inte-
gration, among them the establishment of a customs
union, economic ties with the Latin American Free
Trade Area {LAFTA), and customs duty equalization.

Reorganization of ODECA

In November 1962, President Ydigoras of Guate-
mala threatened to pull out of the Organization of
Central American States, expressing strong discon-
tent with its functioning and charging its secretary
general, Marco Tulio Zeledon, with incompetence.

The threat to withdraw came a few days before a
scheduled Central American foreign ministers' meet—
ing in Panama which had been called to discuss the
reorganization of ODECA. Panama postponed the meet-—
ing because Zeledon failed to transmit on time the
documents necessary to hold the conference. Follow-
ing the postponement, a special informal meeting of
Central American foreign ministers was held in San
Salvador on 15-17 November 1962. It proposed a re-
vised charter for the organization.

The revised charter was signed at Panama on
12 December. It established an executive council,
composed of the foreign ministers or their delegates,
and a legislative council which consults on legis-
Jative matters and is studying the possibility of
unifying Central American legislation. A Central
American Court of Justice was proposed to deal with
judicial matters. All other bodies dealing with
Central American integration are to be brought di-
rectly under ODECA, including the Central American
Economic Council, the Central American Cultural and
Educational Council,and the Council for Defense of
Central America.

Prospects for Unity

The Central American republics bave made no
headway towards political unity primarily because

_ they lack foundations of representative government.

They would be incapable of operating the relatively _
complex federal institutions that would be necessary
to bind them together. Moreover, the divisive fric-
tions and rivalries among them, which at times have
approached open hostilities, show no signs of abating.
The other four republics have long feared that Guate-
mala wants unification in order to establish its
hegemony over then, and the Costa Ricans fear that
closer association would jeopardize their superior

‘standard of living. Economic cooperation, however,

has increased despite these rivalries, and this is
likely to continue.

COSTA RICA

CURRENT SITUATION

Since the 1948 revolution, Costa Rica has been
comparatively stable. Possessing a large middie
class and the highest literacy rate (80 percent) in
Latin America, the country has been able to avoid
many of the economic and political troubles which
have plagued most other underdeveloped nations.
Military influence in Costa Rican politics has not
been great. t

Political Situation

President Francisco Jose Orlich, elected in
February 1962 for a four-year term, is a member of
Costa Rica's most firmly unified political party,
the National Liberation Party (PLN). Founded by the
nation's best known politician and Orlich's close
friend, ex-President Jose Figueres, the PLN has held
a majority in the 57-member Legislative Assembly
since 1953. However, its majority at present is
only one seat. The PLN, like its opposition, rests
more on personal than ideological loyalties, . with
President Orlich, party chairman Figueres, and For-
eign Minister Daniel Oduber its principal leaders.

The PLN's main public support comes from the
laboring classes, who are attracted by its policies
of strong government intervention in the economy,
Central American economic integration, and opposition
to the conservative elements of the business
community.

Principal legislative opposition to the PLN
comes from the Republican Party, with 18 assembly
members, and the National Union Party, with nine.
Both vigorously oppose Orlich's policy of close gov-
ernment control over the economic life of Costa
Rica, and there has been talk that the two might
merge for the 1966 election. However, both are ham-
pered by internal frictions.

Communist Strength
The Communist party of Costa Rica, the Popular
Vanguard Party (PVP), has been illegal since 1948.

ee

COSTA RICA

It has only about 370 hard-core members and fewer
than 10,000 sympathizers. Its immediate potential
as a political or subversive force is limited, largely
because of the country's stable internal conditions.
The party's pro-Communist ally, the Popular Demo-"
cratic Action Party, which has about 3,000 members,
managed in 1962 to elect one assembly member, who
has since made frequent use of the assembly floor
and mass media to promote extreme leftist, anti-US
views. However, his efforts have been largely ig-
nored by the public and ridiculed by assembly mem-
bers of all other parties.

Until recently, the Communists had consider-
able influence in the Costa Rican labor movement
because of their superior organization. However,
the government has refused to recognize two recently
organized Communist labor organizations. Member-
ship in such organizations has also dropped sharply.

The Orlich administration cracked down on local
Communists during the Cuban crisis in October 1962,
but there is some question how well the government
comprehends the nature and degree of the Communist
threat in the area. Further, the country's only
armed force, the quasi-military 2,500-man Civil
Guard, probably would be incapable of quelling any
large-scale violence instigated by the Communists,
much less a planned guerrilla campaign. The Civil
Guard has performed poorly in handling past minor
incidents involving agitation against the government
and US companies.

Relations with the Communist Bloc

Costa Rican relations with the Sino-Soviet bloc
are minimal, and the government is a strong supporter
of US and OAS political and economic action against
Cuba. Costa’ Rica maintains diplomatic relations
with Poland, but their dealings are handled through
a Polish representative resident in Mexico. All
major political parties in the nation oppose both
Communism and Castroism, an attitude which has pub-
lic support. Trade with Bloc nations has been vir-
tually nil.

eh

COSTA RICA

‘Central American Integration

The Orlich administration has made Central
American economic and political integration a key
objective of its program. Ratification of Costa
Rican entry into the Central American Common Market
is expected soon,

Despite its announced desire for greater re-
gional unity, the PLN has long been critical of
certain of its neighbors, especially Nicaragua. It
views the Nicaraguan government as dictatorial.
There is strong protectionist sentiment among Costa
Rican conservatives, which, together with the prob-
able difficulties of implementing specific Common
Market programs, may slow Costa Rica's approach to
closer economic association with its neighbors.

Economic Situation

Since his inauguration in May 1962, President
Orlich has been preoccupied with an.inherited finan-
cial crisis which has produced a current govern-
ment deficit of about $100 million. His administra-
tion is trying to meet its current obligations and
at the same time initiate programs to deal with
growing unemployment, a narrowly based agricultural
economy, and a shortage of capital for industrial
development. Orlich's frustrations have been in--
creased by difficulty encountered in qualifying for
a loan of $10 million from the US. For technical
reasons, the Costa Rican request has twice been re-
turned by AID for redrafting.

Costa Rica's predominantly agricultural economy
has been comparatively stable, put is heavily de-
pendent on production of coffee and bananas, which
together account for 90 percent of exports. Since
1954, world prices for these commodities have been
declining, and Costa Rica's hitherto steady rate
of economic growth has slowed. This is reflected
in an increasing imbalance of trade, the shortage
of local capital, a fall in real wages, and a grow-
ing government deficit. There were record trade
and revenue deficits in 1962, and the paucity of
local capital has discouraged new private foreign
investment.

es =

COSTA RICA

Costa Rica shares with many other Latin Amer-
ican countries a shortage of trained managerial and
technical personnel. This has handicapped the gov-
ernment's effort to diversify agriculture and pro-
mote new industry and services. The economy is
closely linked with that of the US, Costa Rica's
principal customer and source of imports. Concerns
owned and operated by US interests are the country's
main employers, and their operations have an imme di-
‘ate impact.

The factor of greatest long-term significance
from the standpoint of increasing pressure on de-
veloped resources, however, is Costa Rica's high
rate (4.5 percent) of population increase. This
factor alone accounts for much of the severity of
the government's present financial problems.

Recent estimates show that in order to main-
tain a minimal rate of economic growth during this
decade, Costa Rica will need to provide not less
than 1,000 new jobs monthly until 1965, and 1,400
monthly thereafter until 1970. Increases of this
magnitude will require greatly increased volume,
efficiency, and diversity of production. Such gains
will in turn depend heavily on Costa Rica's partici-
pating fully in regional economic integration.

During its brief tenure to date, the Orlich
administration has increased luxury taxes and taken
other revenue producing measures, has established
a planning office to coordinate the Alliance for
Progress and other long range economic programs, and
has secured some outside financial help to reduce
the accumulated deficit. The 1963 budget of $413
million is slightly below that for 1962.

Much of Costa Rica's more serious labor agita-
tion in the past has been directed at the United
Fruit Company subsidiary, the largest single em-
ployer in the country, and its principal competitor,
the Standard Fruit Company. These concerns are
easy targets for nationalist and Communist attacks.
An effort to build a strong and responsible non—Com-
munist labor organization for workers in these enter-
prises is being made by the International Federation

COSTA RICA

of Plantation, Agricultural, and Allied Workers.
Unless and until this program begins to show re-.
sults, the heavy US role in the Costa Rican economy
is likely to be subject to increasing attack.

The Orlich government, however, is favorably
disposed toward the US and has voiced genuine en-
thusiasm for the Alliance for Progress and other
hemisphere efforts at self-help. It is sensitive,
‘however, to the widespread feeling in the country
that the US is preoccupied with communism in Cuba
and is insincere in its professed desire to assist
Latin American economic progress. :

GOVERNMENT

COSTA RICA

(Capital: San José)

President

First Vice President
Second Vice President
Minister of Foreign Affairs

Minister of Economy and
Finance

Minister of Government
Minister of Education
Minister of Agriculture

Minister of Public Works

Minister of Labor and Social
Welfare

Minister of Public Health
Minister of Industry
Minister of the Presidency

(and Acting Minister of
Public Security)

Sie

Francisco ORLICH Bolmarcich

Dr. Raul BLANCO Cervantes
Dr. Carlos SAENZ Herrera
Daniel ODUBER Quiros

Raul HESS Estrada

Francisco URBINA Gonzalez
Antonio VARGAS Bonella
Elias SOLEY Carrasco
Fernando A. ROJAS Brenes

Alfonso CARRO Zuniga

Maximo TERAN Valls
Hernan GARRON Salazar

Mario QUIROS Sasso

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

-13-

8, 5

\&h

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

“16— SEorReL

-17~-

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1){6)

ie Sere

1.5(c)(c)
3.4(6)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)}{d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

-22~

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

ie psy a

EL SALVADOR

CURRENT SITUATION

With the inauguration of Lt. Col. Julio A.
Rivera as President on 1 July 1962, constitutional
government returned to El Salvador. The event fol-
lowed a two~year period of acute political instabil-
ity marked by two coups d'etat. For the first time
in its history, the country has a government, backed
by the military, pledged to social and economic reform.

El Salvador is the smallest of the Central Ameri-
can republics and has the highest population density
in Latin America after Haiti. Most of the population
lives at a bare subsistence level, and this majority
is deeply conscious of the contrast between its con-
dition and the conspicuous privileges of wealthy cof-
fee planters who, with army backing, have hitherto
run the country.

Rivera has committed his government to the Alli-
ance for Progress and has made definite advances in
school construction and public health. El Salvador's
‘first labor code, adopted last month, contains bene-
fits for industrial labor, but it does little to im-
prove the lot of rural workers, who constitute the
majority. Rivera is pressing legislation for tax
reform in order to raise more revenue needed for fur-
ther programs, but he has encountered opposition.

Political Situation

The short-term outlook for political stability
in El Salvador appears to be good, but the long-term
prospects depend on Rivera's ability to maintain the
momentum of his reforms. Rivera has won the cooper-
ation of the growing entrepreneurial class and has
the support of the majority of organized labor. Ex-
cept for a few die-hards, most members of the entrenched
upper class appear to be adjusting to the new situation.
There is no evidence of serious discontent on the part
of any significant group among the military, which has
traditionally furnished El Salvador's executives.

Thus far, however, the government has failed to

win the support of students and intellectuals. Nor
is there a grass-roots political organization which

-~24-

eR aed ated ede ae

ke

EL SALVADOR \d

would back the government in any contest with pres-
sure groups.

Communist Strength

The Communist Party of El Salvador is one of
the oldest and best organized in Central America.
Although it has been suppressed by the government,
the party has shown remarkable recuperative powers
in the past, and it retains some potential for caus-
ing trouble in the future. Its record of subversion
goes back to 1932, when it fomented the first major
Communist-inspired peasant uprising in Latin America,
resulting in thousands of deaths. The strength and >
overt activity of the Communist Party have declined
in recent months, primarily because of the enforce-
ment of a strong antisubversive law passed in Sep-
tember 1962. However, the party is still strong in
the University of El Salvador, where a known pro-
Communist has just been elected rector. It also con-
trols about 3,000 workers through a Communist-domi-
nated labor federation.

Economic Situation

The economy is primarily agricultural and has
been excessively dependent on one crop, coffee. Ef-
forts to diversify crops have been made, and the value
of cotton and other agricultural exports has. been ris-
ing steadily in the past few years. In 1955, coffee
accounted for 86 percent of the value of exports, but
by 1961 it had declined to 56 percent as the value of
cotton and other exports rose. Further diversification
and more efficient agricultural methods are being
encouraged by the government.

The flight of capital during 1960-1961 has been
checked, and El Salvador's currency is stable. A num-
ber of new industries are being established. The coun-
try has several economic assets which set it ahead of
its Central American neighbors. It has good roads,
available power, a substantial accumulation of capital,
a skilled business class, and an adequate, although
still unskilled, labor force.

-25-

\dh
EL SALVADOR

GOVERNMENT
(Capital: San Salvador)
President Julio Adalberto RIVERA
Vice President Francisco R. LIMA
Minister of Defense Colonel Mario ZACAPA
Minister of Economy Jose Salvador JAUREGUI
Minister of Education Ernesto REVELO Borja
Minister of Finance ' Alvaro MARINO
Minister of Foreign Affairs Hector ESCOBAR Serrano
Minister of Agriculture Mario “SOL
Minister of Interior Colonel Fidel SANCHEZ Hernandez
Minister of Labor Alberto ULLOA Castro
Minister of Justice Humberto BERNAL #.
Minister of Health Dr. Ernesto R. LIMA

Minister of Public Works Julio NOLTENIUS

.~26-

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)({d)
3.4()(1)(6)

= RL,

-29-

1.5(¢)(d).
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

GUATEMALA
CURRENT SITUATION

Guatemala has long been a leader of the move~
ment for political and economic integration of
Central America, possibly out of national pride in
its heritage as the governing center for the area
during Spanish colonial rule. However, its own
slow development has impaired respect for its leader-
ship elsewhere in the area. President Ydigoras'
maneuvers to maintain himself in power have appeared
particularly suspect to the other Central American
countries. Guatemala's large Indian population,
still economically and socially isolated, and the
illiteracy of almost 70 percent of the population
are serious obstacles to development.

Political Situation

The reform philosophy of the 1944 revolution
has been lost or corrupted, and although many Guate-
malans would like to recapture its positive spirit,
they are not willing to pay the price in respon-
sibility, hard work, or sacrifice.’ Instead, they
want a strong leader who will do it for them. This
may partially explain the appeal of ex-president
Juan Jose Arevalo as a presidential candidate after
five years of the pragmatic, but corrupt, "city
boss" government of Ydigoras.

The reluctance of even educated Guatemalans
to assume the responsibilities of democracy and
their willingness to depend on US aid since the
overthrow of the pro-Communist Arbenz government
in 1954 have contributed to neglect of both politi-
cal and economic reforms. Most Guatemalans do not
object to Ydigoras' authoritarian rule or to the
excesses committed under it unless they are personally
affected. For his part, Ydigoras feels he can trust
no one and devotes his energies to the political
chicanery and payoffs necessary to stay in power.

The leading contender in the presidential
elections scheduled to be held late this fall will
be Arevalo, His contacts with Communists and
aversion to the US are well.known, but do not bother
most Guatemalans. They tend to.reeadl his 1945-51

~32-

GUATEMALA

presidency as a period of reform ati@ etonomic boon,
forgetting its failures-and leftist drift which
paved the way for the Arbenz regime. The opposition
to Arevalo, never cohesive, was further ‘fragmérted
by the poor showing of organized political parties
in the important elections for the mayor of Guate-
mala City last November. The ensuing scramble for
new political‘alignments revealed little awareness
of the need for cohesiveness and a progressive reform
program to defeat Arevalo at the polls. Rightist
military officers are determined to prevent Arevalo's
return. Despite the failure of the revolt by the
air force last November, some officers have continued
to plot to oust Ydigoras in the belief that a mili-
tary take-over is the only way to deny the presi-
dency to Arevalo, —

Communist Strength

Communist influence in Guatemala continues
strong in the universities in Guatemala City and
Quezaltenango. Communists or Communist-supported
candidates won all student elections there in 1962,
and Communists drew further advantage from the 7
bitter antigovernment riots last spring when several
students were killed. The Communist party (PGT),
with an estimated 1,250 members and. 2,000 sympa-
thizers, also had considerable success in the labor
field in 1962, supporting the winning candidates
in the important railway workers' union as well
as consolidating control of the Communist-dominated
labor federation. The PGT is not believed capable
of mounting an all-out general strike or over-
throwing the government by itself, but it neverthe-
less presents a serious threat to the stability of
Guatemala because of its influence on:.other politi-...
cal interests and its encouragement of antigovern-
ment activity.

Economic Situation

The economy is heavily dependent on fluctuating
world markets for coffee and bananas, and is almost
stagnant. Per capita GNP, $175 in 1961 and 1962,
is not expected to rise above $178 in 1963.
Decreasing revenues have put the government in serious

ss. —

GUATEMALA

financial straits. A recent decline in coffee
earnings and reductions in the large US aid grants
made since 1954 have not been matched by reduced
or more efficient government spending. Adminis-
trative bungling and corruption continue, with
emergency assistance providing only temporary
relief. The ratio of population to resources is
favorable and there are large areas of land not at
present being utilized, but there is a shortage

of managerial and technical talent.

~-34-—

\d

GUATEMALA

GOVERNMENT
‘ (Capital: Guatemala City)

President Miguel YDIGORAS Fuentes

(There is no vice president. Three presidential designates

or alternates are nominated by the President and approved

by the Congress each year. Congress convened on 1 March and
has not yet designated the new choices, but Ydigoras report-
edly favors Defense Minister Peralta for First Designate)

Minister of Foreign Affairs Jesus UNDA Murillo
Minister of Defense Col. Enrique PERALTA Azurdia
Minister of Interior Col. Alfredo CASTANEDA Ordonez
Minister of Economy Col. Raul REINA’ ROSAL
Minister of Finance and Lt. Col. Jorge Lucas CABALLEROS
Public Credit
Minister of Communications Col. Gildardo MONZON PUELVE
and Transport
Minister of Education Col. Ricardo PORRAS
Minister of Labor Col. Jose Luis AGUILAR de Leon
Minister of Agriculture Col. Victor BOLANOS Cardona
Minister of Public Health Maj. Roberto AZURDIA Paiz

-35-

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1){6)

~39-

1.5(c)(d)
8.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

“ SEsRE

-41-

1.8(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

\¢

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

~42-

HONDURAS

CURRENT SITUATION

Honduras has a long history of revolution and
government by dictatorship. This pattern has shown
signs of evolving into a semblance of constitution-
ality only since 1957. Honduras, a ‘member of |
the Central American Common Market, is the least
developed of the Central American countries. Its
economy has stagnated in terms of per capita income
since 1958.

Extreme poverty, growing unemployment, and
inadequate public health protection are the norm
in most sections of the country. The vast majority
of the two million Hondurans lives at a bare subsist-
ence level with little opportunity for improvement.
Two-thirds of the population is illiterate. .

Political Situation

A general election is scheduled for October
1963, and political maneuvering during the next few
months is likely to be intense. The opposition
Conservative Nationalist Party is split and has yet
to nominate a presidential candidate. The choice
of the ruling Liberal Party has narrowed to two
major contenders: Andres Alvarado Puerto, former
foreign secretary who has the Support of President
Ramon Villeda Morales, and Modesto Rodas Alvarado,
president of the Honduran Congress. The pre-elec~
toral period could bring violence if the Army ,
heretofore a supporter of Villeda as the constitu-—
tional President, were to attempt a coup or throw
its support to a Nationalist candidate rather than
remain neutral. There is a strong rivalry between
the Army and the Civil Guard (in effect the military
arm of the Liberal Party). The functions of the
two forces are not clearly distinguished, and fric-
tion between them threatens the country's stability.

Communist Strength

The Communist Party of Honduras (PCH) is illegal
and comparatively ineffective because of factionalism
and a shortage of funds. However, its 1,500 members
and few thousand sympathizers appear to exert con-
Siderable influence in the ministries of justice and

-43-

HONDURAS

education, a few local governments on the North
Coast, and the Standard Fruit Company union. Al-
though President Villeda seems to understand the
dangers of the international Communist movement,
he evidently does not associate local Communists
with whom he has had contact for several years with
this movement. From time to time he has acted to
curb Communist activities when forced to do so by
national or international pressures, but measures
taken have been superficial. Villeda regards the
Nationalist Party as a greater threat than the
PCH.

Economic Situation

The economy of Honduras is primarily agricul-
tural and dependent on two crops--bananas, which
account for 50 percent of the value of exports,
and coffee. A recent agrarian reform law allows
the government to expropriate unused agricultural
land~-a provision which the United Fruit Company
finds objectionable unless legal recourse is
guaranteed. The company has threatened to cancel
its $15-$20 million investment program in Honduras
unless this is granted. President Villeda has
promised to amend the law in the near future.

Economic growth has been inhibited by factors
which are not likely to change in the near future.
The absence of a transportation net, of a developed
internal market system, of a productive labor force,
and of political stability all tend to discourage
private investment. The rule of law is practically
unknown in Honduras, and institutions normally
associated with economic development are desperately
inadequate.

~44-

HONDURAS

GOVERNMENT
(Capital: Tegucigalpa)

President

Presidential Designates

Secretary of Defense

Secretary of Economy and
Finance

Secretary of Education

Secretary of Foreign Affairs

Secretary of Government,
Justice, and Public

Security

Secretary of Health and
Social Welfare

Secretary of Labor and
Social Security

Secretary of Natural
Resources

Secretary of Public Works
and Communications

ee

Jose Ramon VILLEDA Morales
‘Juan Miguel MEJIA

Jose MEJIA Arellano
Francisco MILLA Bermudez
Col. Roberto ZEPEDA Turcios

Jorge BUESO Arias

Dr. Jose MARTINEZ Ordonez
Dr. .Roberto PERDOMO Paredes

Ramon VALLADARES Soto

Dr. Rafael MARTINEZ V.

Amado H. NUNEZ

Rafael PENA Guillen

Ricardo ALDUVIN

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1){8)

4.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

-47-

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

49-0 Seek

NICARAGUA

CURRENT SITUATION

The events of the next year will determine
whether Nicaragua will continue on the path to-
ward a “transition to democracy" or whether it
will revert to the strong rule of the Somoza fam-
ily, long dominant in Nicaraguan affairs. General
Anastasio Somoza, Sr., either held the presidency
or controlled the man who held it from 1937 until
his assassinationin 1956. The:sons of the dictator
took over the reins of power after their father's
death, Luis as President, and Anastasio, Jr., as
director of the National Guard. Luis has charac-
terized his government as a "transition to democ-—
racy" and will turn the presidency over on 1 May
1963 to Rene Schick Gutierrez, a member of the
Somoza-led National Liberal Party (PLN), but not
related to the Somozas.

Political Situation

During the past six years the Somozas have
relaxed the rigid controls of their father's dic-
tatorship. Members of the Traditionalist Conserv-
ative Party (PCT), the principal opposition group,
are allowed to hold political meetings and rallies.
There is almost complete freedom of the press. The
newspaper with the largest circulation in Managua
is controlled by the PCT and publishes strong at-
tacks against the government. The secret ballot
was used for the first time during the election
held on 3 February 1963. President Luis Somoza
had promised a free and democratic election of his
successor. He negotiated for several months with
Fernando Aguero Rocha, presidential candidate of
the PCT, and other PCT members in an attempt to
bring about their participation in the election
and to provide a relatively effective opposition
to Schick. An impasse was reached over the ques-
tion of electoral guarantees. The PCT decided to
abstain from the election, making Schick the vir-
tual winner two months before the actual balloting.

Schick is a former minister of education and
former foreign minister who has had extensive ex-
perience in the Nicaraguan government. Although

NICARAGUA

he was nominated as the PLN presidential candidate
with strong support from President Somoza, he is

not regarded by nonpartisan observers as a puppet

of the Somoza family. Schick conducted an aggres-
Sive campaign for several months, visiting every
province. An honest man with no financial resources
except his salary, he is respected by members of

the opposition.

The Somozas will continue to wield strong in-
fluence in Nicaragua even though no member of their
family will hold the presidency. They own about 10
percent of the cultivated land, control the nation's
only airline and shipping line, and have extensive
cattle interests and substantial investment in sev-
eral industries. Luis will become a senator in the
new National Congress, and Anastasio, Jr., will re-
tain control of the National Guard, the country's
sole armed force and police unit. The National
Guard also operates the communications network, in-
cluding radio and television, the National Meteor-
ological Institute, and the bureaus of customs and
immigration.

Political opposition’:‘to the Somozas is.:
fragmented. There are two Conservative parties--
the larger, more organized PCT and the splinter
Nicaraguan Conservative Party:. There are alsoa dissi-
dent Liberal group, a Social Christian Party, and
a number of smaller parties. The PCT, the most
effective of these groups, is itself divided, the
rich and conservative landowning members having
lost control to a younger, more progressive, and
more active group. During the recent campaign,
the old guard tended to accept Schick's election
while the younger group, led by Aguero, resorted
to violence and abstention. There is increasing
evidence that Aguero in his frustration is turning
more to the left and cooperating with Communists.

Communist Strength

The membership of the Communist party of Nic-
aragua, known as the Nicaraguan Socialist Party

NICARAGUA

(PSN), is small, with a hard core of only about
250-300 members. Although the PSN is illegal, it
operates politically through a front group called
the Mobilizacion Republicana (MR) which has an
active following of between 1,000 and 2,000 sym-
pathizers. “Communists are strong in the labor
movement, in certain government ministries, and in
the National University. Four Communists or Com-
munist sympathizers will be members of the National
Congress after 1 May. The Somozas have the typical
Latin belief that they can control the Communist
movement and at the same time use it for their own
purposes.

Communists have infiltrated exiled anti-Somoza
groups, and Communist-led guerrilla groups are ac-
tive on the Nicaraguan borders with Honduras and
Costa Rica. These groups reportedly receive aid
from Cuba in the form of training, money, and arms.
They will probably continue their attempts to infil-
trate armed men across both borders and to provoke
violent incidents inside Nicaragua. However, the
well-trained National Guard is capable of contain-
ing any outbreaks. 3

Economic Situation

The largest of the Central American countries,
Nicaragua has an economy based on agriculture. Cot-
ton and coffee are the leading exports, but sugar
is becoming increasingly important, and Nicaraguan
cattle growers raise the best beef in Central Amer-
ica. The country is relatively underpopulated, has
fertile soil, large unexploited forests, and un-
exploited mineral deposits. Although there is an
uneven distribution of income, there is a relatively
high degree of social mobility and the extremes be-
tween wealth and poverty in Nicaragua are not so
pronounced as in other Latin American countries.
Negative factors include a poor system of taxation
and fiscal administration, a high rate of illiteracy,
a lack of effective national planning, and a need
for further rural development.

-52-

NICARAGUA

GOVERNMENT
(Capital: Managua)

President

President-elect

‘Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Interior
Minister of Economy
Minister of Finance
Minister of Education

Minister of Development and
Public Works

Minister of War, Navy, and
Air Force

Minister of Agriculture
Minister of Public Health
Minister of Labor

secretary of the Presidency

~53-

Luis A. SOMOZA Debayle
Rene SCHICK Gutierrez
Alfonso ORTEGA Urbina
Ignacio ROMAN Pacheco

‘Gustavo GUERRERO
Carlos HUECK
Eliodora MONTES Gonzalez

Manuel AMAYA Leclair
Col. Alfonso MEJIA Chamorro

Enrique CHAMORRO
Francisco URCUYO Malianos
J. Antonio TIJERINO Medrano

Orlando BUITRAGO Mendez

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1}(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(¢)(d)
9.4(b)(1)(6)

~56§-—

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

ses B= all

tt

PANAMA

CURRENT SITUATION

Panamanians are obsessed with what they con-
sider unfair arrangements regarding sovereignty in
the Canal Zone and income from the Canal. The anti-
US sentiment this generates influences government
policy, foreign and domestic. It also serves as a
convenient cloak for demagogues and a cover-up for
corruption and ineptitude.

Dissatisfaction with the last round of talks
with the US is still fresh in mind, and the pros-
pects are for another outburst of nationalistic
fervor in which the US will be the whipping boy.
Foreign Minister Solis has asserted that Panama
would oppose US use of nuclear devices to dig a new
sea-level canal across Panamanian territory and
has said that a new treaty would in any case have
to be concluded before 1970. There is a good
chance that former foreign minister Aquilino Boyd,
now Panama's delegate to the UN, will raise these
questions in New York. He has already asked for
UN technical advice on the use of nuclear devices
for a sea-level canal.

Political Situation

Political power in Panama is concentrated in
the hands of a few wealthy families who oppose most
political or economic reforms. Their maneuvering
for dominance has produced chronically unstable
politics. The present coalition regime has con-
tinued only because President Chiari has not inter-
fered with the division of spoils by those holding
high office. National elections are more than a
year away, but spirited jockeying for political
advantage is already underway, with no less than
fifteen political parties maneuvering to form a
winning combination. The popular US-baiting dema-
gogue, Arnulfo Arias, who has twice served as presi-
dent, is expected to get in the act soon.

Communist Strength
The Panamanian Communist party (PDP) is small

and disorganized. Communists, however, have con-
siderable influence among students, who traditionally

tee Wie ead,

-58- Senel

ee a a a te uate Deets ae ab ew el ta bert ee ete be ole ee uk ce a Aah

PANAMA

have played a leading role in street demonstrations,
and are increasingly active among peasants and the
unemployed. Pro-Communists control the student or-
ganizations in Panama's only university together
with those in several large secondary schools,

More active in the pursuit of Communist objec-
tives than the Communist party is the Vanguard of
Revolutionary Action (VAN), whose leaders receive
support and training from Cuba. While there is
bitter rivalry between PDP and VAN and both groups
are weakened by factionalism, their joint effort
to infiltrate and manipulate non-Communist parties
of the left constitutes an increasing danger.

Economic Situation

Economically, Panama has recently maintained
a fairly steady rate of growth. Its per capita
income now stands at $422 per year, but this figure
is less favorable than it appears because income is
distributed unevenly and Panama's cost of living is
comparatively high for Latin America.

Panama, moreover, is. plagued with unemployment ;
one out of five workers in Panama City and in Colon
(terminal cities at either end of the canal) is out
of work. The Situation is aggravated by widespread
under-employment due to generally low levels of la-
bor training, technical know-how, and organization.

The interior regions contribute little to the
country's economy. Agricultural production has re-
mained Stagnant, thanks in large part to lack of
roads and to the concentration of arable land in
the hands of a wealthy few who have permitted large
tracts of potentially productive land to lie fallow.
Farmers, mostly tenants relying on antiquated meth-
ods of cultivation and using primitive equipment,
produce little more than is required for their own
needs. The lack of roads discqurages attempts to
grow truck vegetables, fruit and other crops for
domestic sale. Consequently, Panama has come to
depend on expenSive processed food imports, despite
a natural potential for production of foodstuffs
which could be consumed domestically and even ex-
ported.

Charen ay

PANAMA

Panama so far has been reluctant to participate
in efforts to promote Central American integration

or to join the Latin American Free Trade Association.

This is due to the Panamanians' view that their
country has unique problems and status arising out

of the US presence in the Canal Zone; they are, thus,

not bashful about approaching Washington for special
economic privileges. Panamanian officials are also
constantly soliciting support for their claims
against the US, particularly among Latin American
countries, although they usually follow the US lead
in international affairs. _

-60-

Id

GOVERNMENT
(Capital: Panama City)

President

First Vice President
‘and Minister of Health,
Labor and Social Welfare

Second Vice President
and Director of Colon
Free Zone

Minister of Foreign Affairs

Minister of Agriculture,
Commerce, and Industries

Minister of Government and
Justice and Acting Minis-
ter of Finance

Minister of Education

Minister of Public Works

Minister of the Presidency

-61-—

Roberto CHIARI

Dr. Bernardo GONZALEZ RUIZ
Jose Dominado BAZAN

Galileo SOLIS
Felipe Juan ESCOBAR

‘Marcos ROBLES
Aifredo RAMIREZ
Max DEL VALLE

Gonzalo TAPIA

1.5(e)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c){d)
3.4(b)(1){6)

~63- See —T

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
%.4(b)(1)(6)

-88- Sesre

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b){1)(6)

1.5(c)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

_67- —-

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

-68- Seer

1.5(¢)(d)
3.4(b)(1)(6)

69. Sere
