The Ukrainian Problem As It Showed Up in the War Between Germany and the Sovie
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011646, dated 3 January 1949.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011646).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ve : a - HARRY S, TRUMAN LIBRARY
Records of the
.| NATTONAL--SECURITY
" LOUNGE: i ee ae

in

VE. . _ a “3 Feoruary 9, 19?

The URRAINIAN PROSLEY AS Te : SHOWED UP I THE TER

BRPVEEN GERVANY oD THR SOVIET UNTON (1941~1945)

i Introduction

Among the states belonging to the Jaion of Sovist Socialist Seeds ies ne

Uxralne de seeves special attenticn both dn peace and in war pecause of tune impor~
tance of its) SeEH NOG Gs political, and secnonte - position, The purpose of the

present study is to deal with the ar ee ant sconomle espects of the Uxrainian :
: etre
\ e

_ S eeiians 3b showed | up in the war setween “Gommany’ a and the Soviet vation, 19h1-1945.

l
5
é | Understending ‘the » vsyehologteal ‘and tactical vlunders committed by the Germans in: | oa 6

dealing with the Ux cradne may _ help other opeonents of the Soviet Union to avoid”

=e

similar mistakes if a war with the Soviet Union should occur, With this An. ning, -

Sore een nett me ee eee nee fe

the question of Uicradihan national conseLousness wil be exanined in particular,

'_ IL Divergencies of German poitcy foward the Ukraine

x hance - after Germany's WI experiences in the Ukraine, one one could have expected that

fees bers fighting the Soviet Union in 14d the Gorman Rovernnent would elavorate a e

the Ukraine. But this did not occur to eet He unleashed war uithout saving =
aede political pragarations, Therefore, a uniform, German poltey toward the trains
did not aist; bhe views of individual ¢ srmaa authorities dealing with the Usraine

meat were heterogenous and often Ganetrically opnoseil, Deep peanTouceatcs prevailed”

not only oectween various governmental ins fitanions put even among officials of :

tne sane institution. Contradictions - -flowrished and developed so much the more

as they were personally favored by Hitler hose policy aimed at creating :

: a P ae ry ar

7 a arocaitor Release - ee ee a
: ‘Date re 4 ‘| ee Be OO? bee gid eM Ws gh

short time,

_ Germany needed sO badly in her

» ; 2 ; eas eee we bee : aa ee
eS . HARRY S, TRUMAN LIBRARY
: . | Records of the

j.| NATIONAL SECURITY

disss 38 ions and dividing reeponzivi lities, This policy mestlbed ina jumble of

contradictory and arcitrary measures a

fe

ppiled vo the Uxraine ahich were deeply re-

~ sented vy the Usrainian ; peop tLe whe had expected that | the POrnan ss: after Mborating :

them fron the Bolsheviic yore, would alloa cher bo otek ‘their douestic: affairs,

The chaos which arcee as 3 eens oe understood vnly oy ‘recognizing the diver-

gert opinions neld on the Ucrainian issue by. ; German oe lita dana on the one hand,

as Hitler, Rosenberg, and coe

> and ae the > German Foreign vee _and the German
Army on the other. a =e
a. Adolf Hitler 7 : 2 z
Entering war against ‘the soviet “Union, Hitler was convinced that he: would

‘defeat the Red hemy and drive it_past the Volga, -_ not peat the Urals, in a very

Then, he believed, Stalin would

be no sities ina goetics to offer

further resistance, : : ae Fe ee

7 — Hitler thought that the Soviet Union: could pe e defeated by military means alone,.

The necessity ox political warfare never oceurred to him,

he repeatedly Resulted the proposals of his wi litary and

ize the friendly feciinde with “ahich the Uxrainian population met German troops at
wr.

the beginning of the Camszian. ite was nossessed with ‘the fear ‘that aEUOT: the war

the Usrainian people would present hits a oilljfor tha help they rendered Cerminy.

“oreover, ae wae alraid that if a critical situation arose for German cecupstitén

troops in Suviet territory, the “intigenous: ‘population ‘idl immediately change

t 28. otisteeen,
its mind and turn against the Germans. a “

aa ‘Hitler cons

idered “the Usraine an appropriate object for eplenian exploitation,

He wes determined to utilize the Ukraine asa supplier of caw materials which

warfare against the “estern Powers and would have”

era 2

carretera

craacanss

Tene enitilectaee

yith particular vehenenee

political advisers to Beil" i:

comme 30 a See as

pana fagettite « pacteerte
TORENT tte SES
rnp eal SN or err seen.

TH

Troe

pond otras vekeeaiieibes =

semen a ate wR ee aee “

eR a
: HARRY S, TRUMAN LIBRARY
Records of the

NATIONAL SECURITY

ieee Bfbes She iar fev secs hex oc eo cnemiva’ ay “inde pened ave wot ne rest-of

ce

: an ~ oo... tho world. Theryfor?, Ritler never intended Lo Bx ant suto oon to the Ucraine or
, ry, ; . = oe Shue = P Ke

: i ~ to ngke it un ine; peident etea

t te e 2 >

de Jace = E

2 AS rejurds Gali ivla or A eat Uaties 2 ohhe ch until . world” yar t be Slonged to

END sub ronuniige List snl ifbe ruards to veland, Wwitler refused te recognize

Atocs un inte: ay) par
ernnent General of roland."

strong blow to their national feelings,

P it B, ALtred Rosenberg ; “a ag

although Rosenverc, held the post of winister for the Occupied astern 1 Ter

>

care -* . ivories, Wis influenee on the events in those countries was rather insignificant.

FA 3s fase a The directives for the Béuioike | “exploitation of che Nepean were issued either by

wees the Adninistration for the Four-Year rlan supordinated | to Goering or ey ‘an acon~" :

tee | onic staff created ee Lhe special purpose of dealing with the “economic questions

the ad: ainistration tHore. was, fondled vy Commi sears:

Ps ~

appointed oy itler pers gonally, sere aacuiely occuoield tigh posts in the ae

in the coccupled torritories.

Wasi hierarchy uri, consequently,

¥ ; directives, but ruled entirely user pete van judgicr.

” . .

. tusenberg, of Germano-£ Sronian sen was born in Estonia shen that, “country

was still a part of the old russian suipire. a charucturistic trait of his sen~

‘tality was 4 strong resentment | Seatnst Greater “Russia cand the, Groat Diesians

themselves, His politica) aim was to- destroy Russian hegenuony by dignenbering the

; =f,
- . Basberr colossus: into its national parts Beas in his ‘opicion should become ae

te fo — aaa —_

Eee tie eye ; - ovlwark against a possible resurgence of itussian imperialism, "However, his. prow,
aR

: Cae : - eee : z ae Me ae
graa did not enviesge the grant of incependence to the sinorities. His intention ©
ed fo! - wes to trensforn tien into a kind ‘of German colonies which should enjoy a , certain

The Uxrainians deeply resented this step shich was a-..-

did not feel any obligation to follow Rosenberg's

HARRY ‘s “TRUMAN LIBRARY
re rare
Records of the

wutonoay only.” ta this. resseet He was siliiny to arant karger

CuNCSSELONE Ge Lhe

= Pe 2 de

_ ubhen the
Ye

“suce shan and “harkestaaan. peoples than to the Ukrainians, Only

itary situation of Geriany deteriorated more end inore tid Rosenbers
~ pia al . .
realize thas, inioc

to keep the cunlideuce and allegiance of the minorities in

the Soviet tndon wae would have £9 promise them a srant of indegendence in the.
event of German ee For that purpose, ‘representations of the

Caucasian and
- + Pursestanian peo; nls ; BELG  astaolished in Berlin in 1942,

A | Ukrainian Soamittee
_ fellowes in the

diaver oF Lyyh-45, The latter 3 was headed Oy _, Beaerely Shandruk,
average Uxrainian @uigrant, who was fae less popular with his compatriots than

ether Uxraiqian Leaders es, for apie. Kelnik or 2

any

vandera, shom the Cemans did

net sliow Lo Join the Usraiaian Voumitbee, ” ‘This Committee was a liaison stuff_be-

tween tlie Unicn of Useainian sationalis - (OUN) and Usraingan insurrection. army (upg
ani the Cenann suthorities, pene the war, the OUN and tha UPA,

working partly
Legally any partly ille cally, uc

Cceded in unifying all national Ukrainian

in une single Orgaiizabion, §fter the- re-occupation of the Uxraine by

the ssovenent oecane entirely illegal. Its hea-iquarters wis located in Galicia, . the

cradle of Uxrat

ja rties |
Soviet troops

&
Nisan nationalisn, Significant for the activeness of the ‘CUN ata”

the fact that as Late as LAA, Hhey corivened, _Somew
-- dlbbegal con mess

-- Une UPa was here in Galteta, | an

attended by rencusentatives Bs ulaost all minorities » one Soviet.

Union, : > :

bee 22 os : eee
C. Erich Koch os os ; -

seich foch, Reichsccmmissar for the Vireine, vas one of the most -:ninous-
See CMM LS sar

— Sersomlities anon thegd tho _enjoyed hitler's snrecial confidence, ‘He Wag
—=— ant omblicit alveraisy oF any concessions to the Ukraine and +o the Ukrainiang -".

Bete Sateen Ws ae SES gy oe ake
ere we nt we NO Oy ited x

met Records of the

-| NATIONAL ShCurnte

whom he considered as slaves destined to labor for the benefit of their German

masters and +O earn only as much as s thoy needed to maintain thee working Perera:

Fe salotaccd every attempt to ameliorate the living standard of the Ukrainian

ae péool or to grant them certain coultural,, ral rights. He tried_to amihilate the

oresent Ukrainian intelLigonteia and to prevent the formation of a new one.

ve

ue: Therefore, only elementary four-grade : Behoats S$ were permit tted in the Ukraine.

“This measures embittered the Ukrainians s to the UpROR this so much the more as

- even the Soviet ove-nnrent could not be blamed _for having neglected public

: ~~ education. ; : Sa SS ; neat Be dea HS

D. German Foreign Cffice

ao [y litler's order isened in 1942, +, the 2 Foreign Office was excluded from all |

questions corcerning toth the Ceocupiced Eastern Territories. and the future

structure of the Soviet Union. The opinions cf Corman experts on Russian

affairs was therefore of theoretical valve only. They considered var acainst

the Soviet Union a calamity which should have been avoided in any case. After
- . & S
*. the outbreak of war they asserted the opinion that_the Soviet Union could not be

defeatcd Ly military means alone but ony: with the help of the non~Cormunist ,

part of her s0.ulation. me. "or. ee

‘inee the rejority af ‘the peop? 'e a the Soviet ‘Union hated the Stalin regine,

ihe. Cernen side enjoyed a unique opportunity to tronsform its war ageinst the a -

_ Soviets into a civil wer, the only possible neans of overthrowing the Soviet
Loe
Bovernment. The Germans enened this o.portunity, since hey did not realize the

--~ necessity to fulfill the proreqiisite, ie “e+ winning over the sympathy and the_ a ai

confidence of the Ukrainian people by appropriate r reasures such as Jus creabment =

of the popelation, abolition of the hated collectivization, and nd _the Eanes of

oe a ae pe ee a agtty

AIEEE rTNY Tn,
by ae : if HARRY S, TRUMAN LIBRARY
= +3 Records of the

\.| NATIONAL SECURITY

‘ future independence. Permanently runaing the risk of severe punishment for

their cppositica, the experts on Russian affairs tricd to pereuade Nazi leader—

ship of the necessity of altering its oisinous policy ‘toward the people of ‘the

Soviet Union in genero) and the. Ukvainians in particular, They advocated a

graduel establishnent of self ~adninistration in the fikpedns and the erane of a

large autonomy to the Ukrainians. Lut all their efforts | wers absolutely in veins

political SE PEESS TUE ONnE 88, stupidity, stubbormaéss, and cruelty continued in

all dealings with: the occupied Soviet territories.

: E. Germen Arny : : ae 4 te - iss

i : _o
i

The views of the German Arnay substantially conformed to. those of ¢ the Foreign

bo Office. Very soon after the outbreak of hostilities, officers and men engaged

in warfare against the Sévict Union became aware that. because of the vastiess | of

. that country and its natural resources , the Soviet Union could not be defeated

».e- Jby military means elone but_ only with the help of the Soviet population which,

at first, showed an explicit putes s to collaborate wath the Gerrians. Only

when the Ukrainian seople peehized the eanteyer ains putdued by the Razis did
vartisan groups Heuin to fora groups which inflicted considerable harm upon German

troops stationed or operating- in the Ukraine,’ Therefore, Army Jeaders persistently

tried to change the policy that produced such harmful results. But the etubborn-

“ness of Hitler and his heachmen proves i stronger than calculated expediency.

t seems astounding that.,: in spite of binns blunders 3 committed by the German

authorities in the UREAInGs a vast number of Ukrainians recained willing to fight

side by side with the Germans against the Red Army till the very end of the ware

“HARRY S._ TRUMAN LIBRARY
Records of the
[NATIONAL SECURITY

This fact proves that the hatrod of Palelign vis vas stronger thon the resentment

aroused Ly the Gernan abbitude. Voluctery a of Ukrainians were formed
t

ana ata scale. After hitler fortade tio, German | military leaders / under their

owm Pesponsibility /utilizea peneenans: in he frenevork of German formations or

in small Ukrainian units. . ; ae ae: se

FE. The Vlasov movement : ~% _

in the spring of 1942 the Russian Gonoral Vlasov fell into Cerman captivity, -

Although he oroved to te a Petiaere, anti-Communist and offered the Cerman

“government his end his a nee _sugport tn: | combating: ene fied ALLY y_ neither the

Gormon Foreign Office nor

a

he esaen ship of the deep could at first p persuade _

4 3 . pein TNS
ois itler to accent Viasov’s proposals for the establishriont of a Russian National . os

Committes and the formation of cae eaey units of iiuesian volunteers. Gnly when’

—~defent faliawes cefeat ond the general situation deteriorated to a threatening,

degree did ‘Himmler, the j GESRE or the ss and Suareme Shief of the Yolice, succeed |

1

“in pers sanding Hitler to agree to ostablish Vlasov as the political end military

an leadcr of Rus’ians willing to Light Bolshevism. &

The Ukrainians met the nomination of Vlasov with ever’ oistrust ts Lor his

' pure Russion orip¢in made him s suspect : in > Ukrainitin eyes” of ursui ing Creat Russian

3 < m ~ af ' od
see, #5 - Ee = ca -
ee - : =A : . " : setch cB E

Pa

Vlasov hinself poncetedty emphasized BOR: the Ukrainians ‘should be granted”
right of, self-determination following the collapse ps the Stalin regime. Accord=

‘ing to Vlasov, this goal, however, could be reached only oe & common effort ofall |.

the osonles. of the foviet Union. “Thee rofor e he considered outordination of the

cor ETAL

Ukrainians a his leadership indispensable. In % their turn, the Ukrainiens Heeleres

ry

j
. that a although they vere willing to collaborate: with Viasov on equal RoE they
'Pefosed to subordinate th eiselves to him. Gn this Sisshien various German © ~
SUvBDrans es ale aibpeeced opinioas. Opinions! were contradictory even among neabers

: ce

2 of a Barre: in aheeuelon: there were sone who realized ae truth of Viasov' 8 Logis
. i

‘ when he said, # One cannes ‘strike with oin38 rs apert, but has to form a fist before,"

tf, ‘ y

‘and eencts who aupertea the seneratiat tenden¢ios of the Ukrainians end thus stil
nore, weaned the Viasoy movenent.. The eventual utter failure of tho movemex’ wes due
to the foot that Germany ot that. tine was void ‘of, any moral and material means to

+ sustain it. .

and how
as: é 3 i
ee SEEee sonusi ved their pastes Status

In enavering this question the fact must be held in n mind whee the Ukraine wy
itself is not bs unified vhole but consists of three ‘parts which are distinguished

by their geographical position and i historical apvetopnent. These’ parte are the -

“following: i. A: 7 &

“Fongarian 1 a was after Yorla, dar I tects into Poland ana in 1939

“annexed to the Sovict Union.

*: : Volhyiia, which till 1917 had beonasgart of th the Russian Tnpire, was ~after Sorld.

Yar I incorporated int oO Poland, to which it botongea $311 1939 mhen it was

-amnexed to the Soviet Union.
deals a : i ‘ .
t

- Eaotern or Soviet Ukraine, which since 1654 i been a part of Russia, enjoyed

a BhOEY period of meucpendence (1917-1922), whereupon at Was incorporate od into

VE sete p the ANBAR MEST

oN.

OS srpempregmresrenipieeete sapere

Lions yy eae ee eee ;
HARRY S,. TRUMAN LIBRARY
{| Records of the

-P NATIONAL SECURITY

oo of Soviet

Perr’

A. Galicia’

rt ~ >
Until 1914, when the First Vorld Var broke out, the U:rainiens of Calictia
had enjoyed all the rights which the lustro-llingerian government granted the

aA 5:

wb inhabiteted that rmire. Along with other European

Tole notions litics
peoples, the Galician Ulrcinians wore scized by the vave of nationalisr which

‘sorcad ever all Eurove in the nineteenth combur, end reached its clinax during the

of the bucvideth eavbesy. Jhibe cLeir ecltural devoloaosrt was

gpepienebicaily advanced by suo Augtroe onpetion adiaistresiou, tho fe.
-kreinians nonetheless had to stend firm against the -oles who tried tc subjugate

then, Thue, Ukrainians were strengbhened in their nationalistic fcelings by their —

a

fight aroinst lolish acliticel espirntions. Incited by democratic idens which

had panetroted inte Galicia fror: ‘estern Lurope, the Golician Ukrainians in 19138~

1920 chempionod the fight against Eolshevist -ussia and Poland. éMer thay had

esc Poreibly incozporetod imto roland, estern Ukrainicna dogredl:; fovght against

erate Lubitioas of pol wt

fight their nolionsalisvic Laclings
y &

7 i >, fein gece ee
TMG TG, OO RU Tod

wt

wG& Generuce an Lndenerdert
*
ut

Jarcinioa otate. Thercvore, wien German troons puched through to uvov in Saptembor

borei.uens were convaneas thre

1235, they were received with ovthusiazsz by the Ukrainian vowulation. The cecsion
aaa 5

of the Calicion part of the Ukreine to tha Soviet Union deenlr disapointed the

Gizieio. Ukrainians. . Leverthelesu, wi

in June 1941 German trooxs omtered Galicia

Jor the gecoud + 22 flmaed up again, so nush the mere because in

~-—WAth the iste

. 200 dive

we TEN tg»

order, Calioic

a PUrther, how
Tt “OVenernt .

Measurag & Psy

istanee

oreenization,

cee

‘dang os

Vers bros

over

8Fabed fj the

ent Flawed 2D and grr

this undergcound hover

“HARRY S, TRUMAN LIBRARY
Records of the

[| MATIONAL SECURITY

rule Foula re
inien exse
ted sven.

horn Teshlesuly than the

‘Ubitente of os

2 Youle, a

eeinge arrested there,

dually

Bean Zor Shar
Betatdonsy. Ey kr

)e led Covernrent Genarn?

“ASL osH Chr g

developag in

Me oP Poland

Pole baeasal yes

ne vag
axSional
esuit of these

Tenet h and

"e2 did not Contact the Joviot Side,
ale Slogan of + 2@ Uhraje tian Picticans xr, ends vow Tight every oonres.
of ass Source," Votenor

Mesistense Ploverient wor

the Polic

UEP intens Lake

thas the ¢£

These hoses

vherg his oe kad hes,

Sefore “orld war I.

NAtionalitios. T

Was cons siderebly mi

Selician volunteers

Peabers to join se.

Waulg@ obtain orae tice An

wre vend gat : O13 ing "toed

GC; and the SS,
che th,

SY would ere;

Bene Ste

Nanks to pt

tigated.

to Pier

the Uky

chy ig the fact

pri *nGipally ieee

“syaults
2 Amy Syn:

ually bes

‘ened to 1

“AS abtit

These organi zatic

using Nodetn “say

@iniias |

Showed cong

Ct ivities of the

iracteq aekinst the Corman

a

BAinst German br

SOPS were in

Pathi ved with -

noir ins ang Since

&ble to Chanpy Certs

engthened when -

when -Oacht op wag *2pointed Cover

be Govarror uadex

Picuous ahils¢

ude tovarg the Ubry,

ary, the | our and the UPA ox,

ns hoped thet in this wey rer

for the same reason,

t> cater the Peniany Anny a

eae,

'lpathi zed

in dealing wh

dere

fsion, regardless

Uicrainian

aince the

thoy honed

min policy toverg Bien,

Tor of Lvov,

th foreimn

the i

r
as Voluntece

TARRY S. TRUMAN LIBRARY | |
‘| Records of. the

.| NATIONAL SECURITY
i} COUNCIL | ae

ONPL

“hen Soviet troops re-entered zestern Ukraine in 1944, the OU and the UPA
made & strong oopenl to their adherents to fights the Greet Bussien, oe
the Bolshevist forces.- The "SS Division Galicia" couregeously fought side
ty side with the Germans Spates the deuren foo. After Sovies troops had
‘neaeaed all of Golicia the majority of the Ukrainian volumbeers remained -
behind Soviet Lines tind joined the forces of the UPA which ontirely deninated
the flat country. The Soviet Aray thus kept control of only the principal

valilroads, highweys, and towns.

Reproasomtatives of the OUN and the UPA dedlared thot in case of a renewed
German advance they would refrain from any resistance against the Germans and
vould fight oily the Russian oppressor, provided that the German government .
guarantees the establishment of an independent Ukrainian state after the defeat

of the Russian Eolshevists.

Thug, the nentality of the Galician Ukrainians may be summarized as follows:

.

l. they are convinced champions of an indepondent Greater Ukraine;

2. they reject dominesion whatever, whether Polish, German, or Russians

we “4 ; F ; :
3. they are fanatic adversaries of the iden that Vestern Ukraine should becore
an autonomous part of a Soviet Ukraine dominated by Koscow, i.e., the * .

Great Russian Eolshavists. | we

B, Voimmia

-
os

oe
In Volhynia, which t113 1917 belonged to the old itwssian Empire, Ukrainian
nationalion wag much lees developed than in Galicia. Although the Ukrainians |
of Volhynia were deeply attached to their native country and its traditional

customs, their national feelings were weak in comparison with those of their

we oe
_ ¥ STARRY Ss. “TRUMAN LIBRARY
7 Records of the
pore SECURITY
. COUNCIL ates :
. fp Gi abe
7 CON yaaa
oe =" Ng as 12 me =

Jestern neighbors. “hen, according to the peace treaty of 1920, Volhynia was

annexed to Poland, the Ukrainians made contact with their Gelician brothers who

at once initiated strong and rather successful nationalistic propagerida ‘in Volhynia.

The incorporation of Volhynin into the Soviet Uniqn in 1939 aroused mixed
foclings exong the Ukrainians of Volhynia. On the one hand, they were glad to ,
_ escapes the terror oxercised against them by the Poles, but, on the other hand,
they were frightened of the prospect of becoming victims of tho Soviet collectiviza-
tion syatem--outs of the frying pan into the fire, Their ottiitude was determined

rather by economic than by nationoalistia considerations.

The German occupation.in 1941 seemed to the Volhynian Ukrainians an escape

from the dreaded collectivization, principally. The ideas hela by lower classes

ae
'

with regard to the future political: structure of their copntry were vague, uhgreas | _
in the middle classes tie lonsing for an independent Ukrainian state was rather
vivid because they considered the Soviet Union nos only an economic but a notional
oppressor as well. .

Bocause of the methode eoplied by Erich Koch, ‘the Germans lost the prestige.
they initially hed enjoyed with the Ukrainian people of Volhynia. Nevertheless,
the OUN and the UPA did not become as popular ‘with the. Ukrainion population in .
Volnynie as in Galicia, A certain proportion of the Ukrainians, disappointed by
the German attitude toward them, even joined bce ocspemewadd partisan groups.
The re-establishment of Soviet rule in Volhynia in 1944 aid not moet on active

resistance on the part of the population. t

cer : nee 3 oo, Pe eR a ee A . Ge Aegean ee Ce ceeeeee nents teh oaeeamened imps mete roe Earornnion Sy dre
Seemed bere iment eevencrreattnn peat parte 7 erent Secu es , Ee sl Get oe s - 7 re Z - . .

7 ns pe Se eee - Sei ga bs IS - ape te a ns i > a! Sete oon a She, eae e . mee
er . . os u 7 nc cance me - is ee " 33 7 oe

The mentality of the Volhynian Ukrainians may Le therefore summarized as.

follows:

eee ch

-| NATIONAL SECURITY
ti) COUNCIL

epee Fy a Hy HARRY S. TRUMAN LIBRARY
- \ yf

24

Greet Russian imperialism; :
3. “Shey dread the Soviet Union more ag the bearer of the colleativiention thad as
the exponent of Great tussianisan, .

&. Soviet Ukraine

s

Yhen German troops entered Soviet Ukraine in 19411949 they

inprossea by the hearty welcome they received from the Ukreinion population, whibh

acclaimed the Germans ‘ng Tiberators fron the Eolshevist yoke. That the majority of

tho Urrainiana hated the Stal

1 pet reritnsteeete capeee ra area

The reason for this hatred was primarily the collectivization system which veg |

éxtromoly Yepugnant +o the Ukreinians,

“The German Army roalized at once that the abolition oF collectivization Wes

the gonditio Sine oun non to win over the Ukrainian people definitely and to

F ensure their support against the Bolshevinte,
the same view end used every

owmership had at

‘ : a
Senerals vere defeated by the Bolshevikg because they defended the interests of
tig landowers. : ; 7

The demands of the German Arty ang Yoreign Office to abolish the collectiviza~
tion system and to re-establish private ownership of land in the

Ukraine met

Sect ede

eee

pore re WA tate oe

2

’

Was no’ ‘animosity anong then agai + Great

. “the regime and goually heated it. It “i pon that t

-: tions to which the Ukrainians in the

,Sonsidorebly lessened their interest in such political pro

end some influential Mazi economists.

»

k system of collectivizetion was en

and of seizing the products from

the xeagsants. ;

atk

| Foreign Cffice eventually succeeded

eulgate the so-called “Nev Aged cultural

The tas? of clabsrating cn % conferred upon br. Gite

eirteulture: Atteshs ta ubassy in ioesew, rho hae

experts on Rusa

Veen the “Loi nging

cede ‘who aeeeeDs equally under
the severe suffering and priva-

Soviet Ukraine nad been exposed since 1917
| a
oblems as Ukrainian
4 ‘exert| torard
they must susmit and primarily none Lor en ea aaa of

of $hinking was deteraned rather by economic thea by

A he te gete eee
cysbar Ww Tash NIG

The Ukrainien intel? sipentsin was eplit in its national feslings.
B pik Re

the intelligentsia, as well rete of the yorking ¢

terpenes

} HARRY S, TRUMAN LIBRARY
es : | Records of the

-E NATIONAL SECURITY

~~ 15 -

e Stalin regime in so far as it offered then adequate living and

Ws

S
oo

&

Ke:
ps
cr
ce
a
0

educatiounl conditions. The Russification process operated on then gradually and

There was, however , onother part of the intelligentsia which realized the”
dangers involved in euch e ents it felt a strong repugnance to Creat
| Russian aing but vas unable to vent its feelings because the Koscow terror
| tolerated national consciousness only as long as it did not harn the intérests

of the Soviet Union as & whole,

In addition, the Soviet Eovernment, in the course of time, suscesefully

intersperged the Ukrainian intelligentoia and the Ukrainian vorking Siege vith |

Great Russians who were transferred to the Ukraine in connection with the

wh

acconplishment of the Five-Year “lans.

Thus, the ienbality of the Ukrainians in the Soviet Ukraine Lay be summarized
as follows:

L. their national consciousness is roti-er woal;.
c ib
s

we existing potential possibilit of raising this national consciousness are ee

small because of the Soviet government's vigilance in exterminating separatist -

wy? :
tendencies ; :

e

3. if the Sovist Union were to become involved jn on armed conflict with the

outer world, the Soviet Ukrainians vould probably at first show o cautious =
reserve but later sunport the Sovice Union's adversary if it succeeded in:
proving its ability to guarantee tha dissiatts the abolition of collectivize=

tion and a vaising oftheir standard of living.
