Meeting no 36 - 30 September 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012416, dated 6 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012416).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Meetinz to. 36 - 30th Se et euiber. 1961.

Subject was picked up at RV Point No. 1 by prearranged schedule
from the last meeting at 20.00 hours cn 30th September by Roger and G.
It was raining slightly and the pick-up was effected with very great
speed with absolutely no-one in visible distance. It appears that RV 1
is an ideal pick-up point. .This is also Subject's opinion since his
accessibility to it from his end is also effective in his ability to
observe foot surveillance, and car surveillance is impossible since he
crosses the footbridge across the Ssine. It has been contemplated to
establish an additional RV point which is on the other side of the Palais
de Chaillot. As soon as Subject was picked up he also expressed the
opinion that RV Point No. 2 stoula be abandoned because on his last
approach thereto WYNNE had @roppsd him eff too close to the Soviet Embassy
compound and Subject felt that 57 chonze someone in the future could spot

him walking toward RV 2. Tho: vas cur intention anyway, so while driving

to the safe apartment, Roger dsl >srately drove slowly by the new RV
Point No. 3 which, like RV 1 2.5 the advantageous feature of not

permitting car surveillance cir:+ the lcst few hunired yards are up a
lengthy staircase which the ceniuotine ease efficercan observe throughout
its entire length prior to meco.n3 x Subject and escorting him to the car
which will be parked at a hicncy elevation enly a short distance away.
At the end of the meeting Savscct was Ci iid off in the area of his hotel
but he was accompanied by if J. and "Jckn" and again RV Point No. 3 was
; pointed out to him for additioucl oriontetion.s

e @) Subject arrived at the sc.. apariucnt at 20. 20 hours. As he desta

he mention2d what a small town ./RIS wes, since he had spotted J., and G.

who were with "John" and L. @riniing coffee on the Champs Elysees.

Subject had walked by without bettinc an eyelash. This was a fortuitous

circuustence since it served os an cxanple in reverse to Subject to indicate
hew casily he too can be cpotted by nis EOD surveillantse G. explained

to the other case officers abv:t Subjsct's avoprehension of RV No. 2 which

[re had.seeo

APPROVED FOR RELEASE |

§ iMAR 1992

-2-
we had just dropped and mentioned his orientation on RV No. 3 and
suggested that on the return trip RV No. 3 be pointed out again from
the ‘passing car from the other side to be sure Subject would know it
thoroughly even at night. This was later done as stated above.

Het Yes, this is a good thing and we have scrubbed RV 2 anyway.
Subject was shown a sketch of the area where he had just been and he
identified the exact location thereon.

G) Subject then reported as follows:

S.: For the past two deys I have syoken on each day to the Rezident.
His attitude to me is very cordial and pleasant. He gave me operational
funds yesterday and offered me more so that I could entertain my contacts.
He even invited me to his home and I will visit him one of these days.
Iwas also invited by LAZANCEQH. IT also spoke to GRIGORIYEV and FROKHORCV,
who said that they would have lied to heave invited me but they cannot and
I can meet them in the offices ard have a bottle of wine with them there.
This is because the French surveille tron and this would be awkward.

It is because they have overt li... positions. GRIGORIYEV did not become
Captain 2nd rank yet, althoven it hts beon submitted. He is still a
Captain 3rd rank.

he y Ge: But you can visit th: Resident and others officially.

S.: Yes. Because h2 has the cover of a Counsellor and I can also
visit ANANYEV and KUDRYAVISSY.

Ge: When will you visit CFUREDIYEV?

8.3 He didn't tell m2 when yet, it could be for dinner during the
day or in the evening. SCLOV'EY also invited me, he is the GRU officer
who works in the group on sciences and technology under KUDRYAVISEV.

And KUDEYAY?SEY also invited me to visit him on Sunday. Also tomorrow
I have to meet a delecation of 1! pecnls vho have just arrived. I will
reoort to you on them in a moment. thoy just arrived today and I have
not met them yet.

5./ S.: Let me say now what itezs of in-ortance came out of my

conversations The GNU officers sare voritins

very cetively in PARIS.

/The Rezidenteese

- 3 -
The Rezident, ANANYEV and FRCKHCROV all told me that one can run
clandestine operations successfully here. The counter-intelligence
activities are ineffectual (netwva2'{sirovannyye) and in effect it
does not exist. The French coumter-intelligence is very weak and
surveille us in a primitive manner. If we ever go out of town by
car their surveillance car is right on our tail and will not fall
behind more than 600 metres. It is a demonstrative surveillance.
In tom here althouch they wetch us in the Exbassy and in our homes
and follow us it is no problem to break surveillance and we can work
here as we please. There are millions of handy places through which
surveillance can be shaken off. This is the evaluation of the Parisian
atmosphere that they have given me. Neetings, passage of information,
etc. is no problem at all. Dead-drops are used very rarely since
it is so easy to make direct contact. FROKHOROV said that by
comparison with Turkey it is crite simple to operate here. There are
only two complications hero when ons avoroaches a Frenchman directly he
usually reports at once to French counter-intelligence that a Russian
is interested in him. He reports all conversations and all questions
or requests mace by the Rucssizn. C2 course, when we get a solid
spotting report on a perticular intivicuel then procedure goes along
smoothly. This is where cur Communist cocrades give us tremendous
help. They both spot tarzcts for us and in many cases make direct
introductions. Secondly it is difficult for us to get at a target of
considerable interest unless we heve a Cormunist's assistance in
spotting or actually introcucing the tarret of interest. Therefore
almost all contacts are held koro in PARIS, the agents are called to
PARIS since it is so easy to work hore.
6. Ge: What is the status of their mission uccomplishment?

5.3 They do not fulfil them in full but there is plenty of work to

[Get eooe

- -

Get What is the MOSCOW evaluation of their work?

S.: They are not being criticised for not fulfilling every
Single mission and the work of the strategic intelligence Rezidentura
in France is considered to be an active anid useful one. They even
have illegals here.

7. Set In connection with this, I want you to write this down.

“Today PROMMORCY asked me if I ever had run into YERMOLENKO. He was a

Captain and an engineer by education who graduated from the M.DeAe
together with GRICORSYEV and myself in 1953. GRIGORGYEV told me with
absolute certainty that YERMOLSNKO was an illegal and that he is now
sitting in some country to which he has been sent. He is slightly
shorter than I and rather thin.. He was a particularly good friend
of GRIGOR#YEV's, that is why GRIGORIYEV Imows about hime

Geo: Fow would GRIGOX YEV lmov that YERMOIENKO is an illegal?

Set Ve knew this when we were studying at the M.D.A. and several
months before our graa@vation he was taken out of town to a special
safe house to be trained.

Ges He has never met him here in France has he?

Se: Noe He dous neu mer where he ise

Get What languages dves he szecialiss in?
5.: Eis prime languace Was Enzlish and French was his secondary
lenguage. But of course Goa only Inows how he may have been re-orientated
laters |
8. Se: Another inter resting item hich dovetails with the report
I mace earlier that the Rezicents are no longer the Military Attache,
and that GRU officers see other cover than the Attache's office is
emphisised by the fact that Ton. Maior SUXCLOV dees not have an Assistant.

Actually he is helned iz ‘iS Vitery Attache by other Attaches

such as by GRICOR, “SEV and to sore extent by FROKHOROV. This is because
there are no other Attaches rovple, the others are all under cover like
LAZAROFUKe Just look what a cemsarison this is with the huge Military

° — - - /httacheeecoe

Attache group which existed under Gen. MASLOV. ;
9. So: I also want to emvhasise that on the same second floor where
the GRU Rezidentura is located, beyond the next partition is the KGB
Rezidentura. Both are blocked off from other, non-Intelligence offices.
And one can use the far stairs or the stairs at the right to go to the
second floor so that one can reach the GRU Rezidentura at either end of

ts suite of rooms. The KCE also have a buzzer system to admit them to
their area. The entire area has been checked, rebuilt and made suitable
ae ttue Ct ae ee

ve for use as Resticmtaris. So much for that.

10. Se: CHEREDEYEV must mow thet I have good standing with SEROV and
he is being very accommodating.

G.s How could he know this?

Se: I think as the result of his visits to MOSCOW he knows that
my father-in-law was a General, that my distant relative is a General and

that I know other Generals. He receives me much better than Lev did in
LONDON.

Get When official word arrived here announcing your TDY trip, how
would the KOB here in PARIS rezot to this faet, which they would
unavestionably lmow , with respect to their watching you. Would they
not automatically be charged with doing this, particularly since you have
come alone and not as a member of a colevatione

S.: The XGB could cortainly co tis on their own decision and they
would kmovw about my arriving here eutematically. In addition, since I
have come myself and have a travel docuaents that is fairly high level, it
would in@icate that I enjoy tho trust of the ox, cgenisation that sent me and
of the Central Committee. Eovever, not only on their om part locally,
but as the result of a direct oz¢sr thay may watch and write a report on
me reflecting on my behaviour heres. =Eus thus far I havé not seen any
surveillance on me and I aa checking for it all the time. They do know
where I live and they have my telephone number.

Cet Of course, if you hed a lorzs delegation here withwhon you were
involved, there could be a co-opted E23 informant in the delegeti-n who
wenld report on youre.

Se: Irresp2ctive of that and such an informant's report, the local

/KGBoeoe

KGB here would make their own report. Today, there are such @

large number of Soviets in PARIS due to the Exhibition that they have
a problem watching everyone, but they did ask all about me at the
Exbassy. They do know from simple observation what organisation I
belong to since they see with whom I speak and whom I visit at the
Embassy. At any rate my work and relations at the Embassy and at
the Exhibition are getting alonz well.

(x) Sei However, I recuest your help in seeing if I can make
contact in the electronics ficld since both CHEREDEYEV, and ANAN 'YEV
have asked me that if possible would T please introduce them to such
@ specialist before I leave. They hope to get even a bit of assistance
from all others who coze here like I do to help them fulfil their
missions They will advise me about ny itinerary after the Exhibition
closes and of course their prime interest is that I should visit some
plants which are concermed ~ith electronics and chemistry. So please
help me to at least acecrarl ich a little bit here. I have given them
another little packaze cf brochurcs ond will give them more later.

The greatest interest of 211 for ‘them is the firm BAGNEUX. You gave
me two little items from this firn, one was old and they mew about

it but the other one was of creat intcrest. hat interests them most
of all about this firm is that at works exclusively on military orders.
No Soviets are permitted to visit this firm. In the vant the few

who did visit were guidcd to one side and were given no brochures.

They Gon't even have a catalojue of this firm. They requested me to
pick up a catalogue so they could gece vhat the firm is manufacturing.
Since it is such a restrictive firm thore is certainly no point for me
to go there since for me to succeed in this would look very unusual, as
a mere traveller in Frence. Howover, a few brochures from there would
be most valuable if I could set then through @B@PRor through WYNNE. .
Arother firm of interest to them whose catalogues you have given me,

~

is the firm ACTA.

- 7 _-

12. S.: Now, with respect to HOOK, I will represent him as an
acquaintance of WYNNE's and I need basic background information on
HOOK. I did not write it dow. I do not think it wise to have
HOOK meet anyone in the Enbassy personally, after all he is an
American businessman ani representative here and not a pure Frenchman.
I can get some materials een him, some contacts and I will write
it up that way, and that is all. With respect to White Russian
emigrants I have kept avay from all of them who are visiting MOSCOW
from here, even though I had many opportunities to meet them. And I
Will also stay away from them here in PARTS - it is better that Waye

G.: Wait and see to whom HOOK introduces you and when you go
on your trip you may meet peonle.

Se: All I need is some basic data on HOOK so that I can report
on him in terms of who he is in ecntact with and where he works but
if I do not offer him as 2 possible contact, they will leave him alone.
136 Subject now lcoked txrouch his many pieces of paper and notes and
said "Please write this dem. The Chief of the INTOURIST representation
here in PARTS is anetoliy 7!lcioyevich DUDIN, who is a KGB man. His
office number is RICHelicy 2.729 ex? his home telephone is TRIanon 14.45.
I bumped into him today because he is concernsé with all the delegations
which arrive here. He is a LGR officer, but I do not lmow his rank.
I can also give you the telcnhone muxber of SOLOV'YEV who lives in the
same house with several cther intellivence officers. It is PASsy 42.31."
dy. He: How long is your delesation going to be here?

Se: They came for tivelve dais beginning with today, but I'm
not going to spend a great deal of tine with them, but of course I will
meet them and go around rath thom a bit. The delegation is being taken
care of on their trivs by frons-Tour. they are staying at the Trianon
Palace Hotel, the phone is Diivten 86.10. The delegation consists of ten
automotive engineers and four of then are experts on (energetika) power
engineering. I have not met them yet, I will do so tomorrow and

/their. coo

-~8-
their itinerary is already set by Trans-Tour, but I do not have to go
with them; I will take them to, the Exhibition and introduce them to
whoever they will be concerned with. I will find out everything
tomorrow and then report to you. I will also check out which ones of
these are on my list and possibly there may have been some new ones.
15. 5S.: By the way at my hotel they moved me from Room 15 to Room
114 on the 6th floor. It is 25 frances, but they promised to move me
to a better room later. © Don't forget I need some more brochures from
England end particularly regarding this Symposium on the paper
manufacturing processes at OXFCRD.

He: It hes been ordered, we are waiting for it. (Actually
the Symposium closed on 30th September).

S.: There is another big firm here, it is called the Syndicate
for Electric Motors and Electronics; it is headed by a Monsieur FROUAS
who has been in NOSCC.  “Thile Giscussing personalities in MOSCOW with
GRIGORIYEV and FROXHORCOY I mentioned how much trouble PLYAKHIN had
with his kidneys ard they reccu.mended that he get in touch with a
Doctor VARSHAVSKTY in MCZOC." who is very famouSe

Get let me cony doa the telcuhone and address of the Chairman
of the Frenco-Soviet Friendshin Secicty. (It was Marcel WACHPRESS,
Association France-U. de S.S.R., 8 Rue Ge la Vrilliere, PARIS Le.
Phone. GUTemberg 32.20).

16. Set By the vay Iam going to fly home and not go by train.

In the first place, why snovld I waste two days in a train going home
and secondly they told me at the Ztbassy that since my passport is not
diplomatic but a service passport (siushebnyy) it would be foolish
for me to cross Belgium end Vest Comcony with it and the visas would
probsbly take seme time, whelcas dislometic passports would be given
visas quickly. Thirdly, there is no Soviet plane leaving on Sunday
15th Octeber fron here, so I will Sly on a foreign plane, and it will
be much smoother to travel that wuy with my suitcases, with no other

Soviets to . “ther me.

[iT ecoe

#36

-~ 9 ~
17- Se: At the Exnbassy they had a little bit of conversation in
comection with the BERLIN question and here is what I found out.
All Rezidenturas received ETE niyo) which arrived during
the period of time after I left LCNDON and prior to my arrival here.
The order stated that during these sees of October and November, a
special security care (bditel'nost') should be taken in going into
tom. Officers should go in pairs em not alone and better still in
vehicles, Unnecessary agent contacts should be avoided during this
period and provocations shoulda be avoided at all costs. This, the
Rezident said, in discussion operations with his case officers.
This procedure is only for this time period end it is not a categorical
order by KHRUSHCHEV to susrend ell’ agent contacts such as the one he
issued at the time ef the U.2. incident. Thus all unnecessary
contacts should not be made and those that are indispensable must be
carried out with great precaution. The impression there is that the
Peace Treaty will certainl: be sicned, but anything thet will evolve
therefrom is pure guesswork.

G.: Did the KGB receive a similar order to the one. you
mentioned?

5.3 I have not been told so but I am positive that they did
because they must since thes: soiseies are all Ssxevalneied at the
highest level. They voulé not be seraitted to operate and fall into
provocations while we carefully wait. This is what I wented to
report of which I did in the oast tro days.

18. 5.: I have just remonbereé that both PROXHOROV and GRIGORTYEV.

~

oday expressed great disolensure with the policy at home of

Ch
Cc
a
ch
ct

serapping the Naval Surfece Plest. they consider that the development
of a submarine fleet was too one-sided, They appreciated the ee of
Submarines, as experienced rarinerg woulé, but they said that all naval
officers were disappointed at the scrapping of the Surface Fleet.

They would have preferred for the e:isting fleet to have been put into

/& LOSCTVCsses aS

~10-
a reserve status, but not scrapped. GRICGORIYEV quoted from a French —
paper which he had in his hard that according to an article by
Admiral GOLOVKO, our Soviet Adiniral, the Soviet submarines are better
than those of the U.S., have a greater speed and are better equipped.
Despite this GRIGORTYEV remarked that strong as the submarine fleet
is, it is still one-sided, and now a new surface navy cannot be built
rapidly because it requires much time and money which is not available
and even many of the shipyards and doc’:s have been reconverted for
submarine construction. Even with respect to submarines they
considered that they were in insufficient numbers yet.

G.: Did they mention anything about atomic-povered submarines?

S.: No. There vas no conversation about these at ali. This
is all I have.

(:3.) G.: We havea-.little surprise for yous a first rate technician
of ours has arrived an¢ hz wents to show you equipment that can be
available for you in the noar ficure, even though you will not receive
it now and you will see what could be employed to complete our
communication arrancem: onts ror t.co-vay contact.

5.2 That is very vine. Toi very hapry.

(At this moment J. went to advise "John" to enter and during the
fow minutes prior to "Johnuts" centering, wine vas served and G. engaged
Subject in innocuous comvireaticn acliberately. When "John"
entcr and was introdme:l ond a fo. lore words of conversation followed,
"John asked G. to exmloin te Subject that while the introductions were
being made over 2 rerica of 23 seconds a @Mcroun message was being
transmitted. Subject svc.ted that le heard no sound whatever and then
being duly impressed “Joi.:" removed the transmitter fron his clothing,
showing Subject exactly hov 2¢ hed been fastened end ea detailed
briefing bezan).

( Subject was then shovm how the short ro7.oaQjaue. sransmitter
overates. Every unit mas explaines to him including the keyer which

/magneticallyeecee

-i1-
magnetically iaeheeas numbers on the tape, the spring wound
tape sending mechanism which is conrected to the transmitter and the
battery power pack unit. After going through this and having, Subject
examine every unit he was told that in the future the three units,
namely the power pack battery, the transmitter and the antenna
matcher could be incorporated into one package. Subject's comments :
were then solicited. He said that the single package would be highly
desirable for him, and very correctly and with a display of
understanding he suggested that the on-off switch of the transmitter
be placed in such a manner in the connector from the transmitter to
the tape-sender that by releasing the tape for transmission with the
release button, this could only be done when the transmitter is in the
Cn position. This would avoid the possibility of activating the tape
release for sending and hot have the transmitter in action. Another
slight modification he requested was to eliminate the letters on the

keyer-dial since he would only use numbers anyway

Se oe

The balance of this acmonstration was devoted to discussing from
wheat points in MOSCCY on « radius of roughly $M metres from the U.S.
| : Embassy, he would transinit. He was shovm why he should face the
recsiving staticn while sending to avoid his omm body's insulation
effect ana the reason why WP mosres was chosen was explained to hin,
namely that in view of possible obstructions of a structural nature
between his sending position and the receiving station, the effective
maximum range of QPF cires on a lime of sight basis was reduced to
be sure his message would be received clearly ani yet this would be the
adonted minimum safe Cistence axiay Prom the receiving point from which
he should send. It was oxpleincd that if he. found a position which
would afford a line of sight troncsigsion, namely by simply being able
to see directly the top of the U.S. Enbassy, he could transmit at a
convenient distance betvecn QB -cstcce ax7ay and i> metres away. He

understood that his tape cowld be re-sent at any time if either he felt

unsure that his messaze was properly sent or sent from the right

/positiones eve

position or if after an established receipt signalling system .would

be in effect, no such receipt signal would be given. The button to
emanate a signal for the receiving station's automatic recording
mechanism was shoym to Subject and he was told that he must press
this button for a minimum of ten seconds prior to transmitting.

. Various areas in MOSCO7 sere examined on the map with differences of
opinion as to the exact distance from the receiving station, but the.
principle was clearly established and Subject would check the
approximate distance of the ground.

@) Subject's reaction was both favourable end enthusiastic. He 7
stated that this would complete the communication link which had still
been missing and that he would hire a dacha and find an adequate safe
and weather-proof cache for the equipment. The dacha would only be
at a @istance of one hour's travel so thet no delay in transmitting
vital information woulé be beyond a fevr hours needed for preparing and

coding the messose, picking up the ecuirment and sending the message

i

Subject requested a supplemental demonstration on the scheduled meeting

;

No. 37 to be held on Monday 2 Cctobers "John" coneented to be present
since Subject was well- impressed with "John"'s demonstration. A final
summary of the operation plac. for Subjees to be given his equipment at
a future date with full written instr ctions for its use will be
described after details are worked out at the next meeting. At this
point it apnears that when the equipncnt has been assembled on a hand-
tailored basis for Subject ena completely tested it could be Gelivered
to the British Embassy in MCSOC’! by tag and subsequently passed to
Subject in a secure manner by “INNS or other secure means.

(:.) After the demonstration Evbject was asked about the voltages of
the electrical circuits he could be involved with in the MOSCOW area.
This would of course involve omiy the re-charging from a wall-plug of
the battery-power pack. Sebjeet stated that all arcas beyond the city
limits of MOSCOW, which would include the location of his proposed

rented dacha, are now on 220 volts. MOStCY, however, particularly in

/NIS ATEaeece

his area, still operates on a voltage of 127 voltse Gradually

the entire MOSCOW area is being converted to a 220 volts circuit,

but since this process is a lengthy one Subject requested that the ae
power=pack be adopted to use either voltage. Since this can be done | |
provided the settings are made for the proper voltage, “John" told

Subject that this feature would also be included. q

After the demonstration Subject said: We have not talked over —
the first batch of materials which I sent to you via WYNNE. There
may be additional questions there, but I must see my originals.

G.t We have asked some aieeeieas already, but we have the
rest of them all prepared and we will get to them later.

(Subject's graduating class photograph of the DZERZHINSKIY
Academy, VAK Rocket courses of 1 May, 1959 was, brought out and with
it was a tissue paper template on which the facial outlines of all’
persons in the photographs were traced in the exact position that they
appeared in the photograph. All these outlines were numbered to
facilitate identifying all individuals in the photograph as described
by Subject. The Fhotograch and template were placed on a well~
illuminated table and Subject proceeded to describe the officers as
follows: )

Se: Probably at this moment from memory I will identify possibly
ten or twelve persons, but I will give you the categories of all of them.
Later at home, since I have another photograph like this I will try to
write out all the names. from the notes that I have at home. ie von
ready? .

G.: Yes.
25e Set Noe 74 - This is Gen, Lieut. TRETYAKOV, the First Deputy
Chief of the Academy and he is the Deputy for Scientific Researches
Due to this position, he is the First Deputy. He is the author of
many works and has particularly been noted for his work with

conventional artillery. He lives on Gorky Street across from the

telegraph office. He was promoted to Lieut. Gen. tyvo years ago.

He is an expert on artillery ammunition.
[Get ooee

oo

-~ lk -

G.t Does he write manuals?
S.: He may contribute certain sections of manuals, but he

certainly is on the editorial staff.

26. Sot Noe 75 = This is Colonel NskeoLe!TArsenyevich FILIFSPOVICH. ~

He is the Chief of all VAK courses. He lives in the same house as
General TRETYAKOV on Gorky Street. I have been at his house ‘and he
is very nice to me. He even said that one day I may take a short
supplementary course to learn about new rocket developments. In the
VAK programme there are short courses of a month's duration, three
neat courses as well as year courses. |
27. Se: Noe 76 - This was Subject's picture. aad

He: Why were you setting there? |

Se: That is because I was the Sergeant Major of the class
(Nachalnik Potoka). The next two are also students and that is all
of those who were students in the first row. They are sitting there

with me because all three of us were the senior colonels in the class.

(Subject now asked for one of his original notes which were handwritten

and in which he had several of the names of the individuals in the
photograph. This was found and given to him for reference).

28. Se: No. 77 - A Colonel of the Engineer troops, CHERNENKO.

I told you about him in LOMDO and said that he was Chief of a Scientific

Research Institute which is related to both VARENTSOV and MOSH

KALENKO :
VLA L Fle CAue GVALCIM
and is located near SOKOIMIXI. He lives in an apartment on—the-Frunze.

Naberezhnaya together with VARENTSCV's former Adjutant. This former
Adjutant who is a Tdeuts Colonel now, works in the Organisation-
Mobilisation Otdel of GUK4RT under VARENTSOV. While CHERNENKO =
taking these courses a reduction in personnel strength was talking
place and he had formerly been the Chief of an Otae2 in GAU prior to
going to the VAK courses, but due to these reductions and also due to
his bad relations with ZEDAMOV, the latter did not want to take him
back to his former position after he had graduated. He asked me

very earnestly to speak to VARENTSOV so that he could get a®-

/Dims cee

Bb Gtk Tes ash batioe nS wate Be:

i ate S

wwe Ee ed ete ee

I
q
J
i
t

-15-

him and VARENTSOV did this and made him the Director of this.
Scientific Research Tasti tue: .

29. S.t No. 78 - This is a Colonel whose name I do not recall
at the moment and, as I mentioned before I have o list of ell these
names at home and another photograph and I will work this up for yous
In the meantime of those I do not Imow at least I will tell you who -
was a student and who was an instructor. This Colonel was also -
formerly a worker in GAU and now he is working in a training centre

' dn the Ukraine, the name of which I have ree you previously.

30. Se: No. 73 - Here is the Senior Instructor in both the Academy
and for VAK courses. He is the one vho gave me the photographs of

the rockets which I gave to you. He first gave them to me as
supplementary information to paste into my notebook. He is the author of
lectures on all TRA installations. He is an Engineer Colonel. These

afe all installations for free rocket launching. For example, GAU

provides all descriptions of a technical nature for TRA, and launching

installations. He works up all this material for lectures and to .

clearly describe all items of equigment and supervises the setting

up of the actual equinment in the laboratories for instruction.

I'll get you his name later also, but iis ehectadaey is exclusively

on TRA ard launching equinnent.

31. Se: No. 72 - An Engineer Tt. Colonel. He is an instructor on
electronics. 7 will also give you his name later.

32, Set Noe 71 - This is Engineer Captain SENYR'. He gives
lectures on all electrical esuinment and circuits for guided missiles.
He is concerned with teaching about all the control assemblies (pul tty)
and panels in the missile as well as all of the electrical testing and
checking equipment and panels used at the tecinicad: position. He is
concerned with the electrical circuits and equipment for all guided
missiles. He is a very intelligent officer and we were very pleased
with his lectures. He appears as & Senior Lieutenant in this picture,

fout h€eece

en

mT eee were eet erento thee

whe le SEI

: ete panies arose

Sivan ache oS ie ee

-~-16-

but he is now a Captain.
336 Set Noe 70 ~ A Lieutenant Colonel. He is the Chief of
the Assignment Section of classes under FILIFPPOVICH. .

Ge: What do you mean by "Assignment Section" (Uchebnaya Chast‘)?

5.3 He is in charge of the scheduling of classes and
arministration work in generale
Zhe Set No. 69 ~ This is Engineer Colonel NESTEROV. He is a
senior instructor and he is exclusively in charge of all surface
rocket handling, transporting end mounting equipment. He is the one
who prepared all the lectures for the various cranes, carriers,
towers etc. He is a very well-prepared and intelligent perioes whe
hes had considerable training. |
356 5.3 No. 66 = Now will come a whole row of students - this one
is Engineer Colonel YEMILYANOV. He was a worker in GAU, but I do
not remember where he was assigned after graduation.
36. Ses No. 59 - This is Colonel VYTNOV. He is the Deputy Chief
of the Artillery School in KUIBYSHEY.

Ge: What is his present position?

Set He was returned to the same position graduating.
Rowever, they wanted to transfer hin to the SARATOV Artillery School
and possibly he has gone there already. This is because the present
Chief at SARATOV is ill ani they wented to send Colonel VYTNOV there
as the new chief. At least that was the proposal.
37e Set The next rows numbers 2, 3, 4 and 5 are all students,
unless I see an exception ebout which I will tell you in a minute.
38. Se: Noe 9 ~ Here is Lieut. Colonel of Engineers BONDARENKO.
He is the one I told you about who has just been assigned as the
Deputy Commander of a Brigads for technical ries which is located
in KREMENCHUG. This is the Brigede of mies R~1l and R-12 battalions.
39. S.: Now, with the exception of BONDARENKO, No. 9 and No. ll,
both of whom are students, the remainder in the last row are all
laboratory assistants. They are mostly Senior Lieutenants and Captains.

/In additionesses

ons,

ai = - ne

Tn addition to these please mark down that in the other rows Nos.
22, 25 and 26 are also laboratory assistants. After lectures are _
given by the instructors and senior instructors, the laboratory ©
assistents give us our practical work and practical demonstrations.
O. Set No. 61 - This man was elected as the Party Secretary of
our class. |

G.3 How does this work out, is he merely elected for the
duration of the courses? ) .

S.: Yes. there must be a Party meeting evéry month
according to the regulations and Party activities must go on, 50 he
is elected the Secretary of our Party group, but after graduation
that is all over and he would rejoin the Party organisation of
whatever unit he was essigned to.
kl. Se: This is all that I can tell you about my class at this
moment, but I will send you supplenentary identifications later.

Ho’ That is very fine and I think that that is about all
we should do tonight.

S.: Tt is only 23.00 hours; we can work a little mores
Don't you have any questions prepared?

Ge: We have a whole mass cf them, but we want to handle them
at another time. )

Se: Well, we can do part of them now if you like»

G@.: Tecan give you just the first short group of questions because
it could serve a dual purpose. In addition to your answering the sn
questions, if you mow the answers, the questions will also serve to
guide you about what we are interested in and what you can find out
for us possibly from the Soviet Enbassy here in PARIS

S.: That's fine, let me have them.

42. Gos First of all. What were the reactions to KENNEDY's
speech on the part of officers of GRU or any other Embassy officials
who may have expressed themselves to you?

S.: The only reaction I have heard came from Ivan Pavlovich

/KUDRYAVISEV oe

~ 1p

KUDRYAV@SEV the Colonel who is the Deputy to the Rezident for

Science and Technology. He said that it was very lousy the way

the Pravda article reported. It was completely abridged and nothing
4s clear in it whatsoever. He did not have a chance to read the full
text which is always put out by the TASS bulletin but not published
in Soviet newspapers. We have a journal called 'Za Rubezhom' in
which everything is printed in full. This journal has an extremely
narrow circulation and is circulated only to top Farty leaders and is
hard to obtain. The Ambassador of course gets his full text speech
report through TASS channels. In addition I told you before thet
there is a White TASS and a Red TASS. Neither one nor the other are
fully printed in the Séviet press. The Red one is always complete and
is for the Central Committee, the White one is somewhat abridged.

It is considered more as a review (obzor). Only Party leaders will
see the full text, the people will not be able to read it. So
KUDRYAVTSEV did not get the speech from the French papers yet and he
only mows French, not Polish. So his reaction was that the speech
was completely condensed with many parts omitted so that the people
could not read it.

43. Ge: Did MOSCOV not ask them to evaluate the speech?

Set Nos NOZIGY dia not ond would not ask this. In the
monthly report that the ivbassador senis in there is a political section
jn which he will write up reactions, but in this report he will speak
of the reactions of the French and other foreigners here.

Ge: Did you hear ebout what their evaluation was of the French
reaction to the speech?

Se: I don't mow, they dida't speak about it. Of course this
is one of the missions of every Avbassidor in whatever country he my
be eccredited to. He mest cive all opinions ani all evaluations of
a political nature of the p2ople in the country where he is stationed,
but only two days have gone by since the speech ana I have heard
nothing yet. This will uavestiony ly be done, and the Ambassador

may write up the report himself or sections thereof and he will work

Jin concertecee

t -~ 19 ny

in concert with his political counsellors. These will be neither
GRU or KGB but strictly political Souusevicns:

1° Get Do you know what they may have reported to MOSCOW
regarding the French attitude towards the BERLIN problem?

Se: I have not heard anything on this either, but beginning
with tomorrow morning I will keep my ears open for any conversations
along the line that you have just mentioned.

Get This is all I have for questions for today and ee.
were asked because this is something you might get additional
information on here in PARIS.

So: Yes, Iwill try. And it is certainly indicative how the
Soviets do things, whereas the Vestern press quotes KHRUSHCHEV
completely, here an important policy speech by KENNEDY is deliberately
withheld from the people because much material therein runs counter
to the policies advocated by the Central Committee and KHRUSHCHEV.

Ge: That is very obvious since the concept of the so-called
Iron Curtain is not to keep the foreigners from ccming in but to keep
the people inside from coring oute

Se: Yes, and the people would certainly like to kmow what had
‘been in the speech.

Ge: These are all the ovestions for tonight.

45.) Get By the way ¢id@ you call that French ietesoneter?

S.: Yes. I called her the dsy before yesterday. I told her

that I was one of her frienis from !CSOOW and was the one who gave her @

dictionarye She remerbered mo and whon I asked her if I could see her

Rete

and take her out she asked me to call her again Monday or Tuesday because

she was very busy at this time. ; ; ;

Subject was warned to be carcful because there was no way to tell
whether she was involved with either the KGB or the French Service, but
insofar as Subject had inet her officially in MOSCOW and was speaking to

her on his ow, there cowld be no groat harm even though it is doubtful

as to how reliable any contacts througn her could be considered by Subject.

/the nextecer

The next scheduled ee having been Plrsedy established, © an

, Subject was taken from the asee epastnent at 23-15 hours by car
to the area near his hotel. He was accompanied by M. J. and “John” _
who drove him by the new RV point as stated above and he was

delivered to the drop-off point Without incident. _

---0000000~-~
