The Danger of Subversion in Honduras
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013603, dated 4 January 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013603).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

—

\ uy. SNIE 83.2-64
16 January 1964

: SPECIAL |
NATIONAL "INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

- NUMBER 83. 2-64.

Te Danger of Ssbveron Hondo

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Cencurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

16 JANUARY 1964

scp

‘
D DISSEM N° 2

CONTR

SECRET

ws “The following intelligence organization participated in the preparation of
- this estimates (3.0%)...

d The, Central Intelligence haoney: ead ‘the intelligence Gaanisations of the ae
oe ments of iSite, pereney the e Army, | the ale ihe Air Force, and NSA.

Concurring: we St : eee
es Director, of intelligence snd Sane Depron ‘of State ae een a
oF Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

cal Assistant Chief of Staff for intelligence, ‘Desctinant of the ‘Army

a a Assistant Chief of Naval Operations tesetiaen) cabal of i a he
Bas ” Assistant C Chief of Staff, ‘Intelligence, USAF |

: 2 Diedot of the National secu Agency oe

© Absiining

“The Atomic ee Commission ‘egress to te USIB, and the Assistant Di-

: “rector, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
vrisdiction. ae Pe

we:
This material contains information affecti
within the meaning of the espio
mission or revelation o

afense of the United States
e 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
ny manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

JMeputomatic
gq and
Brication

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 83.2-64

The — of Subversion in Honduras

wae

THE DANGER OF SUB-
VERSION IN HONDURAS

CONCLUSION

In the short run, the only potential threat to the military regime
in Honduras would be a falling out among its leaders. There are
indications of growing tensions within the ruling group. Iso-
lated terrorist acts will almost certainly continue, but, unless
and until the Communists and pro-Castroites improve their own
capabilities for subversion and gain the cooperation of the de-
posed Liberals and other political groupings, the regime can
handle any subversive threat they try to mount. The Liberals
and the mass labor organizations, for their part, will probably
avoid violence so long as they have reasonable grounds to hope
for an eventual return to constitutionality—which the regime
now promises for mid-1965. Should they lose this hope and
conclude that the Lopez regime is bent on indefinite tenure and
suppressive rule, they would in time probably join with the ex-
tremists in subversive activities.

DISCUSSION

I, BACKGROUND

1. Honduras is still a typical “banana republic.”! Its first real
experiment with representative government took place during the past
six years under the administration of President Villeda Morales and his
Liberal Party; this experiment came to a sudden end when Villeda
was ousted by a quick but bloody military coup on 3 October 1963. Even
under Villeda, the military forces, traditionally the final arbiters of Hon-
duran politics, retained a constitutionally privileged position above civil-
ian control. While the Villeda regime made only meager progress toward
the establishment of a truly representative government, its performance
was a considerable improvement over the political despotism, widespread
corruption, and inefficiency that characterized earlier Honduran gov-
ernments.

Hl. THE MILITARY REGIME

2. The October coup was led by the Armed Forces commander, Colonel
Oswaldo Lépez, now head of the regime, and the Air Force commander,
Lieutenant Colonel Armando Escalén. The military leaders expressed
concern about the Villeda government's failure to take strong measures
against the local Communists. Their primary motivation, however, was
concern that their privileged status would have been endangered if,
as appeared almost certain, Modesto Rodas Alvarado, the Liberal Party
candidate, was chosen as President in the elections scheduled for 13
October. Villeda had a modus vivendi with the military leaders, who
were traditionally in sympathy with the Nationalist Party, the chief
rival of the Liberals. Rodas, however, gave the military reason to fear
that he would try to build up further the Liberal-oriented Guardia Civil
at the expense of the Armed Forces. Military units had clashed with
elements of the Guardia Civil ever since the latter was created in 1959.

3. The military quickly consolidated its power and is now in firm con-
trol of the country. The Guardia Civil has been replaced by a Special
Security Corps under Escalén, who is now the Defense Minister as well
as commander of the air force. The regime has also arrested some
Communists and exiled others, and in general has disrupted the activities
of the relatively weak Honduran Communist Party. Finally, in response
to internal pressures and in the interest of gaining US recognition (which

1Honduras, with some 43,000 square miles, is a little smaller in area than
Pennsylvania. The Honduran population, of about two million, is predominantly
mestizo (90 percent) and about 65 percent illiterate. The economy is the least
developed in Central America (GNP: US$420 million, $209 per capita). It depends
heavily upon exports of bananas, coffee, and timber.

2 Wim

gee,

was granted 14 December), Lépez has issued a plan for restoring con-
stitutionality by mid-1965.

4. In the short run, the only potential threat to the regime would be
a falling out among the military leaders. Important military figures
(as well as several civilian cabinet: members), resentful of the influence
of Lopez’ longtime chief adviser, Ricardo Zufiiga, may have requested
his ouster. Zuifiiga has antagonized them by interposing himself be-
tween Lopez and their counsel, and by placing his own supporters in
many key positions. Most notably, this has offended Escal6n, an ambi-
tious and forceful figure, who eventually might lead a coup against
Lépez. If he should do so, he might receive support from some dis-
gruntled Nationalists as well as from some Liberals. There have been
indications that several military leaders—including Lieutenant Colonel
Enrique Soto Cano, second in command in the air force, who may speak
for Escal6n—have conferred with Liberal leaders on the possibility of
ousting Lépez and establishing an all-party government.

5. The Security Forces. The Honduran Army numbers about 4,500
men, the Air Force about 350. The projected strength of the Special
Security Corps is about 2,000. There isno naval] force. The army main-
tains a battalion in the capital area, but the bulk of its forces are widely
dispersed. The air force’s well-trained and disciplined personnel, as well
as its 40 planes—which includes 18 piston fighters—are concentrated in
the Tegucigalpa area. These forces are capable of maintaining internal
security under normal conditions. Shortcomings in communications
and mobility would limit their ability to counter effectively any sizable
guerrilla activity which might develop. Without outside assistance, they
could not cope with well-organized, widespread disorders, nor could they
prevent a determined intrusion by Castro-Communist elements.

il]. OPPOSITION FORCES

6. The Liberal Party (PL). The PL is the major opposition force
confronting the regime, but its leadership is now separated and off bal-
ance. Former President Villeda and presidential candidate Rodas have
gone into exile, while most of the other Party leaders are still in Hon-
duras. Rodas’ plans, as well as those of the radical wing of the PL
that strongly supported him, are not yet clearly defined; some radicals
in the PL favor subversive activities against the regime. In contrast,
Villeda, who had bitterly opposed Rodas’ nomination, may entertain
some hopes that eventually he can himself return and regain control.
The top level PL leadership in Honduras has accepted the regime’s plans
for a return to constitutionality and has agreed to serve on the Electoral
Commission. In April a PL convention will choose the Party’s leaders
for the next two years. The choices made will be indicative of the
Party’s future attitude toward the regime, and, in turn, will condition
the military’s attitude toward the Party.

as 3

CARIBBEAN SEA

HONDURAS
Q

50 100 Miles
100 Kilometers

50

PACIFIC
OCEAN

BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION [8
NOT NECKSSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

INDEX TO DEPARTAMENTOS

International boundary

1. Copan 10. La Paz
Departamento boundary 2. Ocotepeque Tl. Francisco Morazan
F ‘ 3. Santa’ Barbara 12. Valle ; ‘
®@ National capital 4, Lempira 13. Islas de la Bahia
@® Departamento capital 5. Cortés 14. Colén
. 6. Intibucd 15. Olancho
Railroad 7. Atlantida 16. El Paraiso
Road 8. Yoro 17. Cheluteca
9. Comayagua 18. Gracias a Dios

~~,

7. Labor. The labor unions initially condemned the Lépez regime
and have refused to serve on the Electoral Commission; Celeo Gonzalez,
President of the North Coast Labor Federation, even hinted strongly
at calling a strike. At present, however, he appears to have accepted
the more moderate counsels of the Liberals and of Oscar Gale, head
of SITRATERCO (the largest union in the United Fruit Company and
dominant member in the Federation). Without SITRATERCO, a strike
is not likely and would not be effective if if were tried. Even with
SITRATERCO, a strike might not be successful because the unions lack
organization and control in key transportation and communications
sectors.

8. The Communists. Before the coup there may have been as many as
2,000 members in the Communist Party (PCH)—including around 1,000
Young Communists (JCH). Of these only around 250 could have been
considered hard-core. In addition, there were some 3,000 sympathizers.
The Communists control the University Reform Front, one of the two
principal student organizations, and have some influence in a newly
formed Liberal student group. The PCH also exercises strong influence
on El Cronista, the daily newspaper with the largest circulation in
Honduras. Although the PCH still has influence in the unions, before
the coup they had lost control of SITRASFRUCO, the unaffiliated and
largest union in the Standard Fruit Company. Since then another
union (SIPFA) has ousted the leading Communists from its ranks .

9. The PCH has several weaknesses—practical and theoretical—that
militate against an immediate resort to all-out subversion. It has not
been a true revolutionary party, having avoided subversive or other
provocative action in order to obtain a measure of toleration under
Villeda. (Its lack of revolutionary zeal has been criticized by other
Central American Communist parties.) Moreover, the PCH has been
weakened by internal dissension caused by the personalistic and avari-
cious tendencies of its leaders, Dionisio Bejarano and Luis Zufiiga (no
relation to Ricardo). The Party has also been hampered by lack of
funds and of a well-developed communications system, which has hin-
dered effective central control. .

10. Nevertheless, even before the coup, there were indications that
the PCH—largely because of pressure from the more extremist JCH—
was moving toward a more active and independent position: it had
increased its activities among the peasants with some success. It had
strengthened the quality and militancy of its membership by sending
to Cuba over the past two years well over a hundred Hondurans, some
of whom received guerrilla training there. Thus far, the results have
been more apparent in the field of propaganda than in revolutionary
action. Recently, however, a loosely organized group of youths, students,

s Git»

Communists, and left-wing Liberals known as the Integrated Movement
of Liberation (MIL) has carried out some bombings in the capital.

11. The National Liberation Front (FLN). The FLN is an amorphous,
ragtag group of guerrilla bandits operating in the wild and remote re-
gions around the Honduran-Nicaraguan border. This group, which
has received support from Castro, is composed of Nicaraguan exiles,
Honduran malcontents and adventurers, Communists, and perhaps a
few Cubans. The Cuban support has been primarily in the form of
training, propaganda, and some financial aid. FLN activities have been
directed almost exclusively at Nicaragua rather than at Honduras. The
FLN has had no notable success in undermining the Nicaraguan Gov-
ernment. With the military in power in Honduras, the FLN may be
able to recruit disaffected elements and promote guerrilla forays in
Honduras.

IV. SHORT RUN PROSPECTS FOR SUBVERSION

12. No opposition group now appears both willing and able to mount
an effective challenge to the regime. The extreme leftists have already
shown themselves capable of some terrorist activities and will almost
certainly continue them. In general, however, extreme leftist subver-
sion has scant prospects for success in the short run. The PCH will
need some time to regroup its scattered assets and to recast its strategy
along subversive lines. Furthermore, so long as the PL and the labor
unions refuse to accept subversion as a means of opposition, we do not
believe that the radical left can mount a subversive campaign effective
enough to weaken the regime in any significant way. For some time
at least, the Liberals and organized labor are not likely to cooperate
with the extremists, if only because they believe that their prospects
for regaining power are best served by nonviolent opposition.

V. LONGER RUN THREATS TO THE PRESENT REGIME

13. In the long run, subversion by the extreme left may find more
fertile ground. Honduras has many of the classic ills of its area—a
large proportion of the population is ill fed, ill housed, and ill clothed—
and a rising level of aspirations exploitable by extremists. Moreover,
the Communists, though temporarily put off balance, have not been
destroyed. With its quasi-legal position gone, the PCH is more likely
to resort to insurrection. The deportation of old line Communist leaders
has already given the pro-revolutionary and pro-Castro JCH elements
dominant positions in the Party. It will certainly intensify its efforts
to infiltrate and to influence the labor unions and the radical wing
of the PL. It may also cooperate more closely with the FLN in anti-
regime activities. These efforts would be facilitated if an inept mili-
tary regime were to alienate public opinon.

Saga 5

eit

14. The Communists will probably be able to obtain a sizable number
of hand weapons, since most Hondurans possess them. There may
also be some Communist caches of weapons in the country. There is
an increased possibility that, if the PCH gives evidence of being fully
committed to subversion, Castro—or possibly extremist groups in Guate-
mala or Nicaragua—might attempt to provide it with arms and supplies.”

15. The military regime will take more forceful action against sub-
versives than did Villeda. Its antisubversive efforts will be handicapped,
however, by Honduras’ poor transportation and communications system.
The countryside affords numerous safe havens for guerrilla forces.
Moreover, the new Security Corps is untried and untrained in checking
organized subversion and, in combating it, might resort to such repres-
sive measures as would antagonize the general population.

16. The seriousness of the situation in Honduras will depend largely
on whether labor and the Liberals continue their nonviolent tactics
or turn to cooperating with the Communists. The crucial factor in
this situation is the regime’s own actions—not those of the Communists.
If the regime resorts to excessively repressive measures, the general
population would become more susceptible to revolutionary incitements.
Furthermore, should the Lépez regime attempt to perpetuate itself in
power or to install a Nationalist regime by manipulation or outright
violation of the electoral process, the Liberals and the labor forces would
probably turn to subversive action and be receptive to Communist assist-
ance and influence. If it chose to, however, a united Honduran military
could probably maintain itself in power against that kind of opposition
for an indefinite period.

* Honduras is less than 400 miles from Cuba. Its long, largely unguarded north-
ern coast is open to the clandestine introduction of arms, supplies, or even per-
sonnel. There is already extensive smuggling, possibly including some. arms,
into Honduras from other Central American states and Mexico. (See map,
facing page 1.)

. the Department of the’A
“Assistant Chief of Nc

> the Navy " -

th. Director of NSA, for the x te Fase $ eae
i. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department 0 or

> Bganey: «

2. This document: may be retained, ‘or estrayed by burning In aesdane with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the ‘Central Amtelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.” shy

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, ‘the overseas ‘recipients may
retain It for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency t to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. ae fe ere ;

ra

is document when ue separately from the text should be clas-

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
