The Situation in Panama
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013606, dated 5 October 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013606).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

,L. November 1968 on

DIRECTOR
; - es f
red. Maby the,

s

fe

CE
fg

-dissém nati6n, will be made. °y
Authenticated: _ ies

XECUTIVE SECRE

By

he followin j intelligence
‘ : Hee er
Lee a
eines igence ‘organ

Fifag. a Soa re |

¥anc o8
onde SOEs! sys ss

g the. National Defense’ ‘of the United States
itle'18, USC, Secs.” 793 and 794, the trans-

janher, oan uniau orized pen is cornet

= iva ig
a “, S
»

1 od
IC DOWNGRADING
sh. TION

.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
1 November 1968

SUBJECT: SNIE 84-1-68; THE SITUATION IN PANAMA

THE FROBLEM

To assess the character and the short-term prospects of the

military regime.

CONCLUSIONS

Ae Military rule of Panama is likely to continue for some
time, perhaps a year. The provisional government, headed by two
former colonels, is mainly a front for the leaders of the coup,
who are now in command of the Guardia Nacional. But the situation
is fluid, and relationships among the new leaders of the Guardia

and between the Guardia and the provisional government are subject

to a variety of strains.

B. The Guardia staged the coup of 11 October in order to pro-
tect its own position rather than to carry out any specific program
for Panama. The new regime has pledged a return to constitutional
govermment via elections, but has not specified any time-table and

the procedures it has outlined could cause a considerable delay.

C. It is unlikely that any effective opposition to the new
regime will develop over the short term from supporters of Arnulfo
Arias, extreme leftists, or the oligarchy. We expect the regime ard

most of the oligarchs to adjust gradually to each other.

D. Although it is eager to secure recognition by the US, we
doubt that the regime would be very responsive to pressure from
the US, particularly with respect to a time-table for elections. A
prolonged delay in recognition would bruise the feelings of the
leaders of the new regime, but they would not be likely, in any

case, to encourage blatant anti-Americanism.

E. We doubt that the military regime will act upon the draft
Canal treaties which were widely criticized in Panama. The regime,
however, might move to open discussions looking toward revised

agreements which would be signed and ratified only after con-

stitutional government had been restored.

DISCUSSION

1. On 11 October the Guardia Nacional overthrew the govern-
ment of Arnulfo Arias, who had taken office on 1 October and was
attempting to establish presidential control over Panama's only
security force. This marks the third time the Guardia has thrown
Arias out of office. Starting with the second deposition in 1951,
and continuing until the past year, the Guardia had abstained from
direct and forceful intervention in national politics. Its leaders
had served as the loyal supporters of successive administrations
representing the oligarchy, and had concentrated on using US assis-
tance to improve the professional skills of their forces. In a
series of crises preceding and following the presidential election
of May 1968, however, the Guardia made it clear once more that it

is the final political arbiter in Panama.

2. The coup of 11 October was swift and effective: Arias,
the leader of Panama's largest political movement, was not able to
rally his supporters and at this point appears to have little or no
chance to regain office. So far, no serious threat to the control
of the new government has developed from any direction, though in
the immediate wake of the coup several protest demonstrations,

sporadic minor violence, and some ill-organized resistance by armed

bands along the Costa Rican border did occur. Nonetheless, the
situation in Panama remains unsettled. The leaders of the coup
probably are themselves uncertain how long they wish to stay in
power and what policies they should pursue. And while there is
now little overt or organized resistance to the new regime, most
groups, including the traditional business and political elites,

are unsure as to the best means to protect their interests.

3. After the two previous coups against Arias, the Guardia
had quickly turned the reins of government back to the politicians.
There is evidence that such was the original intention this time.
But the desire of the leaders of the coup to prolong military con-
trol of the government has clearly grown stronger over the past
couple of weeks. Their announced intention to hold elections and
return to civilian rule seems largely motivated by a desire to
speed diplomatic recognition from the US and other foreign govern-
ments, and to discourage active resistance. They have been vague
on the timing of the elections, perhaps because they have not
thought the matter through or are divided in their opinions. Of
late, their private statements imply a period of military rule of
at least a year. In any case, their plan to undertake first a
studied revision of electoral procedures would require a con~

siderable delay before elections were held.

a

I

4, he principal architects of the coup, Colonel Torrijos
and Lt. Colonels Martinez and Boyd, have established themselves,
in effect, as the new leaders of the Guardia; they have also set
up a provisional government directed by a junta composed of two
former colonels, Pinilla and Urrutia.* The junta has appointed
a civilian cabinet composed mostly of men who had not previously
been politically prominent. The provisional govermment is mainly
a front for military control. The exact relationship between the
junta and the new Leaders of the Guardia apparently is not yet
settled to the satisfaction of all the men involved. Both Pinilla
and Urrutia have probably suffered a lost of prestige within the
Guardia because of their indecisiveness during the period immedi-

ately preceding the coup. At this point the new leadership of the

* At Arias' insistence, General Vallarino, longtime conmanding
officer of the Guardia, reluctantly retired on 11 October and
appears to have lost most if not all of his influence over the
officer corps he once firmly controlled. Pinilla, who had been
second in command, was also pushed into retirement from active
military duty on 11 October. Urrutia, who had been elevated to
commanding officer by Arias on the day of the coup, has retired
from the Guardia since assuming his position on the junta.

The present top-ranking officer, Colonel Hassan, faces early re-
tirement; Torrijos, now chief of staff, is in effective control
of the Guardia. Martinez and Boyd serve as deputy chief of
staff and executive secretary, respectively. All three coup
leaders are expected to move up the command ladder with the
retirement of Hassan.

ea

Guardia is the dominant voice in all important matters, particu-
larly with respect to appointments to government positions, and
is consulted regularly on many day~to-day decisions. But we ex-
pect some tensions between the Guardia and the junta as the latter

attempts to exert increased independence in goverment matters.

5. At least for the moment, Colonel Torrijos appears to be
the strongest figure in the new regime. We believe hin to be a
reasonably forceful » intelligent, and effective officer. He was
bitterly opposed to Arias and worked tenaciously to keep him out
of office. He has also expressed antipathy toward those he blames
for Arias' victory and for Panama's overall political "ness":
General Vallarino, most professional politicians, and most men-

pers of the oligarchy. His attitudes are strongly influenced by

a middle class background which sets him apart from the oligarchy.

6. Martinez has long been a faithful follower of Torrijos;
he, too, comes of a middie class background, but is considerably
less well educated. Boyd, a member of one of Panama's most in-
fluential families, is also apparently close to Torrijos. Hence,
we see no immediate challenge to Torrijos within the military
leadership. Nevertheless, Martinez has shown a penchant for in-

pulsive and irrational actions, power relationships in Panama are

~ ko

still. in a fluid state, and troublesome and divisive issues are
bound to emerge. In consequence, we cannot rule out the possi-

bility of serious dissension among the military leaders.

T- What style of rule do the new leaders intend? ‘The
original impetus for the coup probably was entirely defensive:
to preserve the perquisites of the officers of the Guardia and
its position as final political arbiter. Thus, we doubt that the
key conspirators started out with any positive program in mind.
The junta has since publicized a series of policy objectives.
These, though vague and general, sound reformist and anti-~
Oligarchical, even though for many years the Guardia cooperated
closely with the civilian elite. The various public and private

stetements of the new regime could indicate possible moves against

the influence and corrupt practices of oligarchs and olde-line poli-
ticians, a strengthening of the integrity of the constitutional
system through political reform, and an improvement in the welfare
of the peasadt and laborer. The charges of corruption and favori-
tism against the Panamanian elite ring true, but are nonetheless

remarkable considering that most officers of the Guardia partici-

pated in some of the same practices to the extent they could.

8. We think it is too early to reach a firm judgment on
the regime's intentions regarding policy. We doubt that the new
leaders are themselves radicals, or particularly susceptible to
radical influence.* Indeed, the provisional government has con-
spicuously pronounced itself to be anti-Communist and has kept
under arrest 100 or so radicals of various stripes. Yet we be-
lieve there is a genuine antipathy within the Guardia, especially
among its lower middle class officers, against many among the
Panamanian elite, particularly the political warhorses, whose in-
eptness and venality the Guardia blames for the series of crises
over the past year. The oligarchs and politicians who backed
Arias (cynically in the Guardia's view) are probably special

targets for the hard feelings of the leaders of the new regime.

9. We think, however, that the junta’s proclaimed objectives
were initially put forward for largely tactical reasons: that is,
they were intended to mollify the masses, and perhaps to frighten
the political and business elite into cooperating with the mili-

tary regime on its own terms. Some individual oligarchs closely

* Torrijos' younger brother is an extreme leftist. Their per-
sonal relationship is close, but we doubt that Torrijos is
much influenced by his brother's radical views.

aS

identified with Arias may be harassed by measures directed against
them, and there may even be some jargely cosmetic "social reforms;"
Gee, price controls on consumer items and some modest new tax
levies against the wealthy. What the new regime will do about
constitutional and political changes is unclear. In any case,
Panamanians have demonstrated an ability to corrupt and abuse any
set of institutions; that is » the fault lies mainly with the men,

not with the mechanisms.

9e On balance, we believe that the dominant impulse of the
new regime will be to make peace with key figures in the civilian
elite, and not to try to destroy it. The military leaders appar=
ently realize that they need the support of a good part of the old

establishment to help run government affairs » settle the political

situation, and ease the financial difficulties brought on by the
disruption of business in the wake of the coupe. They are already
making overtures to some leaders of the business community and of

the old political parties.

10. Both these groups, however, are exercising caution
about any accommodation, Most members of the elite hold the
offieers of the Guardia in some disdain and would like the period

of direct military rule to be as brief as possible. They may

-T-

also be alarmed by the anti-oligarchical tone of junta propaganda.
In any case, they are not yet resigned to possibly having their
affairs and their books audited by colonels and majors. Yet be-
cause the new regime is demonstrating its will and probable ability
to stay in power, we think most members of the elite who are invited
to participate in the regime will eventually accept. At least some
will conclude that they can best protect their interests through

cooperation with the new government rather than resistance to it.

11. The lack so far of serious resistance to the new regime
is indicative, in our view, of the general apathy of the population,
the poor preparations for an emergency by the Arias faction, the
timidity of stude@tts and other groups traditionally opposed to
military rule, and the skillful handling by the Guardia of the
disorders that did occur. To discourage public protests, the
new regime arrested a large number of radicals, Arias stalwarts,
and other potential troublemakers, and instituted stringent
security measures including tight controls over Panama's often
inflammatory news media, The Guardia used a minimum of force

in controlling the protest demonstrations in the cities during

the first week after the coup, and thus created no martyrs;

they were considerably more forceful in discouraging armed

resistance by pro-Arias peasants in some outlying areas.

12. Some of the special security measures have been
relaxed, but we think rather tight controls over selected
news media will continue for some time. Most of those
arrested have been released, though known radicals have
not. Even with somevhat less stringent security controls,
the regime will probably not have much difficulty in main-~
taining order over the next several weeks. We doubt that
supporters of Arias, radicals, or students can cause more
than local difficulties at this time, and these the Guardia
should be able to handle. Members of the oligarchy who are
harassed by the new regime may also attempt to provoke inci-
dents. Because of their financial resources and their stake
in preserving their privileged positions, they might over
time come to be the main source of disaffection. Even in
the longer term, we anticipate that any incidents will be
limited and local, though we do not exclude such desperate

acts as attempted assassination of members of the regime.

13. The Arias forces might, over the coming months,

try to cause trouble for the regime through guerrilla actions.

The small groups of poorly armed peasants who participated in
resistance along the Costa Rican border right after the coup
were not trained for insurgency and dispersed after a few days.
We doubt that any such group could seriously challenge the

Guardia's control of the countryside.

14. The military regime is obviously anxious to secure
diplomatic recognition by the US as soon as possible, probably
hoping thereby to speed the cooperation of the elite and the
normalization of political and economic conditions. It is
probably confident that the US will soon extend recognition,
but it is probably concerned that a delay in recognition of
a month or more might encourage an increase in at least passive
resistance by a variety of forces and exacerbate economic
problems. Even so, we doubt that the regime feels under any
immediate or urgent necessity for acceding to pressure from
the US on such matters as elections and security measures.
Moreover, we are not confident that the regime, once recog=
nition was gained, would honor any commitments made in response

to US pressure, especially on a timetable for elections; it

would be too easy to devise excuses for postponement.

ees

15. A prolonged delay in recognition would bruise the
feelings of the leaders of the new regime. While Torrijos
and company have always professed to be staunchly pro-American,
we do not know how sincere and deep their feelings run. We
feel that the younger officers in particular have become in-
creasingly nationalistic over the past few years. Yet we do
not expect blatant anti-Americanism to become the Guardia's
stock in trade, at least over the next year. The regime
realizes that the anti-US issue is potentially the most
volatile one in Panama, and probably would not feel sure
it could control an aroused populace. Finally, after recog-
nition, the military leaders will be anxious to renew not
only the flow of economic and military aid, but also the

traditional close ties with US armed forces.

16. We doubt that the military regime will act upon
the Canal treaties negotiated in 1967 by the administration
of President Robles, The new leaders are aware that the

treaties, for good reasons or bad, were widely criticized

in Panama, and that the Guardia, generally considered to

be under strong US influence, would be accused of selling

out if the treaties were now accepted. Since the junta has

suspended Panama's National Assembly, moreover, the question
of the legitimacy of any new treaties would prove embarrassing
for both countries. The regime, on the other hand, might seek
to activate through executive agreement some of the terms of
the draft treaties which are clearly favorable to Panama, such
as increased annual payments for the use of the Canal, and
might participate in opening negotiations for a new set of

treaties to be signed and ratified after the return to

constitutionalisn.

1k, This ‘document was. disseminated by the Central intelligence “Agency. : “This ¢ copy,
Sa epee rte ne a a an
is for “the” ‘information and use “of ‘the’ recipient and of persons under his” “jurisdiction” ona.

3¥ Snes we Om ee

tieed-to-know: * basis." ‘Additional essential’ ‘dissemination , may be! authorized “by the

se Nea,

“respective de artments

hig he Bette
‘

ud, A sistant ae roa e Operations inligec), for the Ce. of the .
aah weiss! :
Intelligence, |
ane
Se Bay
Director’ ‘of. Intelligence, A

ae Director, F
of NSA, “for “the. ‘National aon Agency _

she

2. This document may’ “be retained, or destroyed by Barhing: in eecordance: with ees
oh applicable’ Security, regulations, or “returned 4o the Central Intelligence Agency by
erangenent with the Central Reference Service, CIA. bao NOE ee

he

“at a Tr : an
3: When’ this” document - is disseminated “overseas, the: overseas recipients: may —
retain it ‘for a period not. in ‘excess of ‘one year. At the end of this period, the.
_ document should either be destroyed, ‘returned to the forwarding agency, or per-

mission "should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
1AC-D-49/2, 22, June 1953. oman ete eae Bn

4. The title of this decument wheel eel | seperately from the text should be clas-

sified: a

DISTRIBUTION: © 7 oe
White House | ,
National Security Council
Department of State —
Department of Defense _
Atomic Energy Commission ©
Federal Bureau of Investigation

S

eh

Sara
Css
