Status of Quest for U.s. Mia's Updated
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000046638, dated 6 January 1992.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000046638).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Page: 1 of 10
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
Document 1 of 2 Page 1

Classification: UNCLASSIFIED Status: = [STAT] _
Report Number: FBIS-SOV-92-036 UDC Number:

Headline: Status of Quest for U.S. MIA’s Updated

Source Line: MK2202123092 Moscow NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA in Russian 22
Feb 92 p 4

Subslug: [Vladimir Abarinov article: ‘*‘Investigation: Prisoners of
War Have Own Archipelago. U.S. Prisoners in Former USSR
Still Not Martyrology’’ ]

FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:

1. [Vladimir Abarinov article: ‘‘Investigation: Prisoners of War
Have Own Archipelago. U.S. Prisoners in Former USSR Still Not
Martyrology’ ’ J

2. [Text] The search for U.S. servicemen who disappeared on USSR
territory in various circumstances has been stepped recently. We
would remind you that NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA first addressed this
problem last August. Since then there has been virtually no progress.
However, available information and experience of similar searches
gives us every reason to expect success.

3. For starters I must repeat some figures, since those doing the
rounds in our press are imprecise and do not differentiate between
prisoners of war [POW’s] and those missing in action [MIA’s] and are
often rounded up- presumably, for the writer’s convenience.

4. During the Korean war the United States lost 8,177 MIA’s and 954
people who it is known for certain were captured and did not return
home alive or dead. After the war in Indochina the Americans were
missing 2,273 men, of whom 1,678 disappeared in Vietnam, while none
of the 500 or more airmen brought down over Laos were repatriated.

5. Air crews downed near the Soviet borders-there were 86 of them in
the fifties and sixties-form a separate category of MIA’s. Moreover,
in most cases the entire crew disappeared.

6. A considerable proportion of the prisoners dating back to the
Korean and Vietnam wars were evidently never held on USSR
territory-the exception being people of some operational interest.
Americans ‘‘liberated’’ by the Red Army from Nazi jails in the
Balkans, in Poland, and East Germany (and incidentally from Japanese
jails in Manchuria) are another matter. Some 20,000 of them failed to
return home.

7. Last, officers abducted by the Soviet special services in Berlin,

Approved for Release
Date

UNCLASSIFIED ©

7 a a oe Page: 2 of 10

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
Document 1 of 2 Page 2

Vienna, and certain other points in the Soviet occupied zone during
the early postwar years form a special group of MIA’s. There are 18
such people in my file.

8. So, where should we look for them?

9. The countless references to the Gulag are totally incorrect: This
is quite a justifiable euphemism for U.S. journalists, but for
national journalists it is a true indication of incompetence. There
were never any POW’s in the Gulag-they were dealt with by another
main commissariat of the NKVD-MGB [People’s Commissariat of Internal
Affairs-Ministry of State Security], namely the Main Directorate for
POW and Internee Affairs, which had its own camps. People convicted _
of espionage and other real or imaginary crimes are another matter.
They not cnly could have but should have ended up in the Gulag (which
was until recently called the GUITU, now the GUID [expansions
unknown]).

10. They dealt in the same way with people who did not agree to be
recruited or to cooperate in other ways and also with those whose
services were no longer needed. The story of Stanislaw Swianewicz is
typical; he escaped execution in the Katyn forest in 1940 at the last
Moment owing to a request from the USSR NKVD Main Directorate for
State Security. Sitting in the inner Lubyanka jail, he wrote a
treatise on the economy of the Third Reich (Professor Swianewicz was
an unsurpassed specialist in this field), after which he was
convicted and sent to a camp. These people were often kept in special
jails as a ‘‘special contingent’’-for example, before being exchanged
for Rulof Abel, Francis Gary Powers served time in Vladimir jail.
What is more, a foreigner could be under investigation for as long as
they liked. Prominent Wehrmacht and SS officers captured at the end
of the war were only sentenced in 1951-1952. Throughout these six or
seven years they were kept in the Lubyanka jail, often in solitary
confinement, both before and after sentencing. The same thing
happened if there were any special circumstances: That happened, for
instance, to Raoul Wallenberg’s cellmates and fellow defendants.

11. There are known cases of prisoners (under investigation) being
summoned from their cell ‘‘with their things’’ and disappearing
without trace. That was the fate that befell Brigade General Leopold
Okulice, commander of the Krajowa Army, who was sentenced to 10 years
in the camps in June 1945 by the military collegium of the Supreme
Court. Okulice’s personal prison file was declassified recently,
revealing that he died as a result of a failed surgical operation.

12. There were cases of a prisoner liable to repatriation not

returning home either. That was the fate of Lieutenant General Reiner
Stagel, one of the butchers during the Warsaw uprising. Sentenced to

UNCLASSIFIED

. ‘ ‘ Page: 3 of 10
7 UNCLASSIFIED :

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
Document 1 of 2 Page 3
25 years in jail and then amnestied, he did not reach the fatherland:
The last document in his file is a burial certificate from one of the
transit camps. You only have to destroy this last document, and the

disappearance of the repatriant would be shrouded in mystery forever.

13. Quite often on his release a prisoner would remain under open
surveillance, have his movements restricted, and be given a Russian
name. The example of the former Greek Communist Party General
Secretary Nikos Zakhariadis, who lived in Surgut under the name
Nikolay Nikolayevich Nikolayev and committed suicide in 1979, is not
entirely typical: His party colleagues knew of his situation. More
often a prisoner did not have an opportunity to make himself known
and, when the opportunity did arise, he was already as a rule totally
assimilated, had a family, and could not even imagine returning. The
author knows of several people like that, including people who are
currently prospering-admittedly not Americans.

14. Last, a prisoner might have been executed under Article 58 of
the RSFSR Criminal Code (usually charged with espionage or terrorism)
or under the decree of 19 April 1943 if the accused were Wehrmacht
servicemen or an ‘‘accomplice’’ of the occupiers. I have already
written about this hitherto secret act, which has presumably lost its
legal validity, that made provision for death by hanging. As far as I
am aware, the Belgian national Yermak Lukyanov [name as
transliterated] was executed under the draconian decree in May 1984.

15. The idea that U.S. pilots could have fought in Korea and Vietnam
under assumed names, as was the practice in our country, must be
considered groundless. U.S. Army Field Regulation FM 21-76
(‘‘Survival, Avoidance of Capture, and Escape from Jail’’) in the
chapter ‘*Conduct Under Interrogation’’ recommends that a prisoner
give his true name, rank, number, and date of birth. That was how the
surviving crew members from the RB-47 aircraft downed over the
Barents Sea 1 July 1960 behaved. Their story could serve as a model
of what did happen or might have happened to U.S. pilots brought down
near Soviet borders. 7

16. Second pilot Bruce Olsted and navigator John Makkoun [surnames
as transliterated] spent almost seven months in Lubyanka. The
interrogation indicates that investigator Colonel Pankratov prepared
the trial on the basis of the Powers trial. The pilots were freed
right after John Kennedy’s inauguration as a ‘‘goodwill gesture’’ but
only because no confessions were extracted from them. So Americans
most likely gave their real names, although prisoners were nearly
always given different names in jails and camps.

17. There is another specific difficulty. People of German,
Japanese, and Italian descent served in the U.S. Army. It is quite

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 4
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
Document 1 of 2 Page 4

possible that these people could have gone to a camp on the basis of
‘national allegiance,’’ especially since the Soviet Union never
committed itself to complying with the Hague and Geneva conventions
whereby military uniform is the crucial indication of citizenship.

18. In short, the practice of Soviet punitive organs illustrates
that anything could have happened to prisoners. Yet there is nothing
fantastic about the hope of finding Americans alive or at least
traces of then.

19. The reports of Americans in Soviet camps and jails are specific
enough to be able to start checking them out. There was a camp
somewhere in Belarus in 1945 for black soldiers-nearby inhabitants
would hardly have forgotten such an exotic detail. Colonel Gordon,
arrested in Vienna in 1949, was seen in Lvov transit jail in 1953.
An unnamed lieutenant and NCO [noncommissioned officer], participants
in the Korean war, were seen at a phosphorus mine near Yakutsk (Camp
No. 307) in 1960. Lieutenant Warren Sanderson was seen at Inte, and
Pilot Joe Miller was seen at Karabas in March 1947-he had been
brought down over Berlin in 1945. Colonel Jackson, arrested in
Berlin, was seen in Dubrovlag (the report is dated mid-1953). The
crew of a B-29 brought down over the Sea of Japan 13 July 1952 (13
men) were kept in Khabarovsk POW Camp No. 21 (October 1951), while
one of the members of a crew brought down there 6 November 1951 was
seen in a military hospital north of Magadan (1954). This pilot
served 25 years for espionage. In both cases the reports have come
from repatriated Japanese.

20. Dzhezkazgan, Magnitogorsk, Perm, Norilsk, Novosibirsk, Omsk,
Pechora, Potma, Tayshet, Verkhneuralsk, Vladivostok, Vologda, Vrangel
Island, Yavas, the renowned Vladimir Jail OD-1/st-2 [expansion
unknown]-familiar names. Sometimes an American is cited by name,
often not, but in these cases minimal additional information is
given, for instance: date and place of capture, rank, category of
troops. The most detailed information concerns the Vorkuta camps:
Mine No. 40-William Bizet [surname as transliterated] from Korea, a
lieutenant or NCO convicted under Article 58; Camp No. 6-Major Robert
Shvarts [surname as transliterated], abducted in Kassel in 1949;
Convalescent Camp-crew of a U.S. Navy Privateer aircraft brought down
over the Baltic 8 April 1950 (10 men); Colonel Davison, abducted in
Vienna in 1946, is also there.

21. Dmitriy Volkogonov has recently provided documentary
confirmation once again that U.S. World War II prisoners were kept in
Tambov’s ‘‘Rada’’ (No. 188) POW camp. The colonel general was clearly
hasty in declaring his discovery a sensation: In this case it is a
question of Americans who served in the German Army (there were at
least 108 such people in the Tambov camp, according to ‘‘special’’

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 5 of 10
UNCLASSIFIED

FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1992
Document 1 of 2 Page 5

archive figures).

22. I must particularly point out that documents concerning POW’s
and MIA‘s are still secret in the United States or have been only
partially declassified. That is why in a number of cases we do not
know the names of the Americans concerned or the source of the
information- this information is carefully obliterated when the
documents are declassified.

23. There is a great deal of shady business regarding the problem of
POW's and MIA’s. At one time NEZAVISIMAYA GAZETA reported on a
photograph that had caused a sensation in the West. It showed three
U.S. pilots brought down over North Vietnam and Laos in 1966, 1969,
and 1970. The photograph was dated May 1990. I remember a Pentagon
spokesman saying that the photograph was a montage. The journal from
which the falsifiers (‘‘Cambodian opportunists’’) cut the pictures-
SOVETSKIY SOYUZ No. 1, 1990-was even named, and it was indicated that
it had even been taken out of the Soviet Embassy library in Phnom
Penh. It is hard to believe that the mother and the wives of the
MIA’s did not recognize their close relatives, but that is not the
point: This journal is lying in front of me and there is nothing
resembling the Cambodian photograph in it.

24. Late last year a KOMMERSANT report that one of the pilots
brought down over Vietnam was still living in Kazakhstan caused a
great deal of ballyhoo. The reporter for some reason decided not to
disclose the pilot’s name, however he gave the date that he was
captured, from which it is easy to elucidate that he is Navy Lt.
James Kelly Patterson, born 14 July 1940, who lived in Long Beach,
California, before the war. I have something to say about Patterson.
Patterson was a navigator in the crew under the command of Captain
Eugene MacDaniel, now the prosperous founder and president of the
U.S. Rehabilitation Institute, who spent six years in a Vietnamese
jail. He said in an interview last year that he had once received a
telephone call from the National Security Council asking him to stop
making public statements about MIA’s.

25. It is no wonder that the search has as yet had insignificant
results.

UNCLASSIFIED
