Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013621, dated 4 February 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013621).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

March 1968:

ie gd sy"

Mandatory Review.
Case # NLJ“T'23t

Q ie oe
NIELUIGENCE

a Bid = ; :

” DIRECTOR ‘OF ‘CEN
: : Concutred

The Central Intelligence Agency and the jaralligence ¢ Seqanizarions of the Depart
, “ments of State ‘and Defense, and the NSA.

e

me nie Vice’ ‘Adm. Rufus. Tayl or, De puty Dire OF, Central tteligence

feel Bir orig Ai & : “-

Mr. Thomas L Hughes, the 1 Director Of Intelligence. and Research, Deparment

#,4ee

mission. and Mr. ai 0. Cregar, _for “the Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau

CONTENTS

Page

THE: PROBLEM: siitccne tt andaa ver Dag dtaewarqe ae Sewae Cheenti tans 1
CONCLUSIONS oo... ce tne ne teen es 1
DISCUSSION i:.0 048. cere nee tee be ea ee es Pee bite eee oe 2
I. BACKGROUND .... 2.00066 nee 2
II. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT VERSUS STABILITY ................ 3
Tle: NATIONALISM 2%. socuis ov ied 5 9 CRE aaa ee thee eta cae 4
IV. DEPENDENCE ON THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT ............ 5
V. CIVILIAN OPPOSITION ...... 222.0 7
VI. THE OUTLOOK: fie Hite Pte oe eS Ade a ae 8

BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the situation in Brazil and the prospects for the next
year or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The Costa e Silva administration has many things in common
with that of Castello Branco, but is relaxing some of the more stringent
economic controls which the latter had imposed. It is also tolerating,
and to some extent responding to, a greater expression of nationalistic
feelings, which for the most part have long had an anti-US cast. Yet
such policies will probably not bring Costa e Silva appreciable new
popular support; instead, a troubled economy, plus political restraints
which are not likely to slacken, will tend to diminish his popularity.

B. Civilian opposition will probably increase, but it is disorganized
and unlikely to coalesce very effectively in the next two years. The
military establishment probably will urge further restraints on civilian
political dissidence, insist upon stronger leadership by the government,
and press for the present moderate program of arms acquisition. The
President will probably act strongly enough in these respects to satisfy
most military opinion. Hence he is likely to stay in office until the end
of his term in 1971, and his administration is likely to become some-
what more authoritarian.

C. Brazil’s economy showed some progress in 1967, but its prob-
lems are too fundamental, too numerous, and too interrelated to permit
any great gains in the next two years. Problems of inflation, the
budget, and the balance of payments will be manageable, but will
nevertheless remain serious. The restraints required to maintain a
reasonable degree of financial stability will keep increases in production
at modest figures. Thus economic improvement will not be sufficient
to provide for much higher levels of living or to permit extensive social
reforms or advances.

ae 1

es

D. Despite Brazil’s increasing nationalism, the Costa e Silva gov-
ernment will maintain a much friendlier attitude toward the US than
the Quadros or Goulart regimes did. It will not, however, follow the
US lead in international matters as closely as Castello Branco’s did,
and we believe it will be less sympathetic toward the US role in Viet-
nam. It will probably continue to oppose ratification of the inter-
national treaty on nuclear nonproliferation in its present form.

DISCUSSION

1. BACKGROUND

1. During almost four years in power, leaders of the Brazilian Revolution
have consistently found that innovative zeal and firm convictions are not enough
to make a revolution. The role of the Brazilian presidency has been changed
from that of a broker among the country’s economic and political interest groups
to that of an executive endowed with near-dictatorial powers. In an effort to
preserve democratic forms and do away with the confusion of the old multiparty
system, two new parties have been created: a government party, the Alliance of
National Renewal (ARENA), and an opposition Brazilian Democratic Move-
ment (MDB). Congress is divided about 2-1 between them. Power passed
smoothly from the Castello Branco administration to the former Minister of War,
Arthur da Costa e Silva, who was elected by Congress and took office 15 March
1967, and a new constitution effective on the same day has institutionalized
many of the Revolutionary decrees.*

2. Progress has been greater in restructuring the government than in develop-
ing new political attitudes, and popular enthusiasm for the Revolution has
steadily decreased. Inversely, a nostalgia for the growth and optimism of
Kubitschek’s “fifty years of progress in five” has increased. Much of the gen-
eral disaffection has stemmed from the austerity program launched by Castello
Branco, and some from Brazil’s close pursuit of US policy leads during his
administration. Few politicians, however, have the ability to profit from such
discontent. The government of the Revolution showed its determination to
prevent any political challenge by depriving many old-style politicians of their
political rights for 10 years; the list includes all three presidents of the years
1956-1964: Juscelino Kubitschek, Janio Quadros, and Joo Goulart. It has since
employed this type of proscription to intervene in state elections. The most
active and articulate opposition figure at present is Carlos Lacerda, a former
favorite of the military establishment, one of the engineers of the Revolution,
and once the enemy of the presidents mentioned above.

* The new constitution provides for the President to be elected by an electoral college com-
posed of the national Congress and delegates appointed by state legislatures. By contrast,
governors and congressmen are elected directly. The power of the President vis-a-vis the
national Congress has been greatly strengthened.

2 Saal

:

3. Costa e Silva has been well aware of the need to attract popular support.
More pragmatic than his predecessor, he began, even before his inauguration,
to talk about “humanizing” the Revolution. On coming to power, he moved
to soften somewhat the austerity of the economic program. He has also tried
to broaden his appeal by “governing” from different state capitals. Yet the
very nature of the Revolutionary policies limits the humanizing he can carry out.

Il. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT VERSUS STABILITY

4, Under Castello Branco, economic growth and social reform were for the
most part subordinated to greater financial stability. His restrictive credit, fiscal,
and wage policies were principally responsible for reducing the rate of inflation
from nearly 90 percent in 1964 to 41 percent in 1966. This program produced
an average rate of growth of only 4 percent during 1964-1966—or barely 1 per-
cent per capita—and was accomplished mainly at the expense of urban labor,
whose real wages continued to decline while unemployment increased. Efforts
to implement agrarian and educational reforms, as well as a public housing
program, fell far behind goals. The stabilization program was also largely
responsible (along with a poor harvest) for an industrial recession in late 1966
and early 1967.

5. While Costa e Silva recognized the political advantages of relaxing the
austerity program, his advisers regarded many aspects of it as economic neces-
sities. After analyzing the state of the economy, they argued that production
costs rather than consumer demand had become the principal force behind
inflation. They consequently emphasized the necessity for: (a) reduction of
business costs by lowering interest rates and taxes and by holding down prices
of raw materials; (b) increased availability of working capital; and (c) stimu-
lation of consumer demand to bring about higher, more efficient levels of
industrial output.

6. The new administration took various measures along these lines. Costello
Branco had held down subsidies to coffee growers, partly to reduce their high
returns and partly to encourage diversification of agriculture. The Costa e
Silva administration has raised these subsidies almost 40 percent, for reasons
both political and economic. It has also raised price supports for such staples
as rice and black beans. To stimulate industrial output, the government granted
a grace period for payment of excise taxes on most manufactures; this amounted
in effect to a 30-day interest-free loan in the amount of the monthly tax liabilities.
Bank credit also was made easier for many firms to obtain. The government
doubled the basic amount of personal income exempt from income tax, and
limited the amount of permissible increases in rents during 1967. As a small
concession to labor, the government made a minor change in its wage formula
to take account of anticipated inflation, but this has not prevented some con-
tinuing decline in real wages.

7. By the second half of 1967 industrial production was rising, a fact which,
along with an excellent harvest, contributed to an estimated growth in gross

See 3

domestic product of nearly five percent for the year. Bumper food crops also
helped to hold the increase in the cost of living in 1967 to 25 percent. The
administration’s success in bringing the economy out of recession, however, en-
tailed increasing difficulties for the budget and balance of payments. The
federal budget deficit in 1967 was probably twice that of 1966. The trade
balance was damaged on the one hand by a decline in coffee export earnings
and on the other by an increase in imports resulting partly from the economic
recovery and partly from liberalized import laws. In contrast to a trade surplus
of $237 million in January-October 1966, the surplus was only $25 million for
the corresponding period in 1967. As a result, a considerable loss of foreign
exchange took place during 1967. To forestall a further deterioration of the
balance of payments, to prevent speculation against the cruzeiro, and to main-
tain the competitive position of Brazil’s exports, the government devalued the
cruzeiro, in January 1968, for the second time in a year.

8. The government’s general economic strategy, as distinct from the short-
term measures taken to combat the recession, has been set forth in a three-
year plan (1968-1970) of July 1967, which calls for a growth rate in real terms
of six percent per year, together with increased gross investment. The goal
of relative price stability occupies an important place in the program. Yet in
contrast to Castello Branco’s program, which set forth specific but unrealistic
year-end targets for the rate of inflation, the new program seeks only to reduce
the rate of inflation each year. There is now greater emphasis on development
than on stabilization.

Ill. NATIONALISM

9. Another important divergence from the policies of Castello Branco has
been a greater recognition of, and responsiveness to, Brazilian nationalism. This
nationalism has for many years been grounded in the deeply held conviction
that because of its size, population, and natural resources, Brazil is destined to
be a great power. Nationalist sentiment has always cut across social lines and
ideologies, and despite a reservoir of good will toward Americans has in most
of its forms long had an anti-US cast. Leftwing students and academicians
condemn US programs with the Ministry of Education as “cultural imperialism.”
Some businessmen accuse the US of trying to undermine or take over Brazilian
enterprises. Some politicians charge the US with trying to subordinate Brazil
to its foreign policies. Many Brazilians, civilian and military, feel that the US
fails to give it the favorable treatment to which it is entitled by reason of its
past support of the US and the prospect that it will be a powerful US ally in
the future.

10. Brazilian nationalism is sharpened by a sense of dissatisfaction over the
country’s lack of progress in many areas and an apprehension that it is destined
always to be the land of the future. Some Brazilians, already concerned over
what they consider to be the ubiquitous role of the US in Brazilian affairs, have
been ready to accept a variety of allegations. Various politicians (including
a former governor of Amazonas, an appointee of Castello Branco) make head-

4 we

-_

lines by charging the US with sinister designs on the Amazon region—from
looting its radioactive ore to planning to settle North American Negroes within
it. Leftist students have joined conservative elements in denouncing birth
control programs (allegedly supported by the US) in the backlands. An ultra-
conservative newspaper chain which had previously opposed Time-Life's efforts
to expand its interests in Brazil was responsible for widely publicizing this birth
control issue; its newspaper articles implied that the US wants to make Brazil
a weak underpopulated satellite. Even some priests augmented their usual
religious arguments against the programs with strong nationalistic arguments.

ll. The Costa e Silva administration, while so far avoiding involvement in
such extreme cases, has some favorite nationalist causes of its own. One is its
insistence upon Brazil’s sovereign right to develop its nuclear energy resources.
Despite the infant state of Brazilian nuclear research, both the Castello Branco
and the Costa e Silva administrations have resisted the arguments of the nuclear
powers that nonnuclear states should forgo research involving nuclear explosion.
Costa e Silva and other Brazilians have argued that the draft international non-
proliferation treaty discriminates against the underdeveloped nations by not
distinguishing between nuclear explosions for peaceful purposes and for the
production of nuclear weapons.

12. The Costa e Silva administration has taken account of nationalist senti-
ment by assuming a more independent stance in its foreign policy. Like its
predecessor it advocates trade with all countries—regardless of ideology. But
in contrast to the statement of a former Foreign Minister that “what’s good for
the US is good for Brazil,” this administration specifically rejects any subordina-
tion of Brazilian to US policy interests. Castello Branco enthusiastically sup-
ported the concept of a permanent Inter-American Peace Force (IAPF) and
endorsed US policy on Vietnam, but the present Foreign Minister, José de
Magalhies Pinto, in a bid for popularity, has backed away in both cases. Stating
his lack of enthusiasm for an IAPF, he has reiterated that defense and maintenance
of order in any country are the responsibilities of its national armed forces. He
has outlined Brazil’s position toward Vietnam, in a message to Congress, as
“complete neutrality and abstention.”

13, Magalhaes Pinto, a former governor of the state of Minas Gerais, has built
a successful career around his ability to sense a political trend. He sometimes
presses the nationalist-independence policies farther than Costa e Silva’ seems
prepared to go, but he is a popular national figure whose presence in the govern-
ment is valuable. Moreover his own inclinations on these matters are of particu-
lar importance because he is using the Foreign Ministry as a vantage point from
which to launch his campaign for the presidency in 1971.

IV. DEPENDENCE ON THE MILITARY ESTABLISHMENT

14, The administration’s changes in policy have not.succeeded in attracting
civilian support. The government’s political creation, ARENA, has not become
an effective arm of the Revolution and is still a diverse aggregation hungry for
patronage. The intention that it become a national party, organized from munici-

——«€ 5

ar

pal to regional to national directorates, has not been fulfilled, even in politically
conscious areas like the State of Sio Paulo. Where it has been effective, it has
had to depend on the political machinery of the former parties. Although groups
have been formed within ARENA to support the Executive's retention of special
powers under the constitution of 1967, most of the party probably favors a quick
return of previous congressional powers and prerogatives, and a relatively early
return to direct presidential election.

15. Costa e Silva has displayed little intention to develop and work through a
political base, and instead has chosen to rely on a few civilian specialists, some
politicians, and trusted military advisers. Despite the value he sees in the
presence of such influential civilians as Magalhaes Pinto in his cabinet, he realizes
that his only solid base of support lies in the military establishment. Costa e
Silva now shows signs of expanding the military role in government. A law
recently proposed by the President, and certain to be passed by Congress, will
widen the internal responsibilities of the National Security Council and increase
the military representation in that body to nearly half.2 In another move the
President appointed a military officer to head a special committee on education.
Such actions have increased civilian fears that Costa e Silva intends to put the
armed forces almost completely in charge of policy planning and government
operations.

16. Costa e Silva retains strong prestige and influence among the armed forces.
He was their candidate for the presidency in spite of the wishes of Castello
Branco. He has a shrewd sense of moods and trends within the military estab-
lishment, and he has firm control over the military machinery and over promotions
and assignments. Nonetheless, there are elements within the military—espe-
cially the “hardline,” a grouping that was once enthusiastic about Costa e Silva—
who have become disenchanted with his administration.®

17. Such officers have been particularly concerned about the President’s lack
of firm leadership. They feel that his preoccupation with “humanization” is
jeopardizing progress toward Revolutionary goals. They suspect that he may
be tolerating some corruption in high places and fear that this will tarnish the
reputation of the military. They look back approvingly at the starker admin-

* Opponents have especially feared aspects of the decree that seem to delegate much of the
authority and responsibility for foreign policies and for economic planning to the Security
Council, The decree would also increase the importance of the Chief of the Military House-
hold (who serves as secretary-general of the Council), and require that heads of divisions
of security and intelligence of civilian ministries be either military officers or civilian graduates
of the National War College.

*The armed forces, like other institutions in Brazil, have traditionally been split into fac-
tions. With the Revolution, leftist factions were purged and a “hardline” came into promi-
nence. The hardliners were field grade officers who were among the first to plot against
Goulart, and who had a puritanical zeal to purge the country of “subversion” or “corruption”
wherever they saw it. As War Minister, Costa e Silva was closer to them than Castello
Branco was, and worked on numerous occasions as a buffer between them and the President.
By the end of Castello Branco’s term, the power of the “hardline” had been considerably
diminished.

6 a

ees.

istrative measures and economic program of Castello Branco (whose reputation
among the military has increased since his death in an airplane crash in July
1967); they would like to have Costa e Silva replace several members of the
present cabinet and crack down on his most vocal political adversaries. In par-
ticular, some among the military are pressuring the government to move against
Lacerda.

V. CIVILIAN OPPOSITION

18. Though opponents of the Revolution are able to discomfort the military,
opposition to Costa e Silva is actually weak and in disarray, and has stirred few
Brazilians out of political cynicism or apathy. The MDB is divided and con-
fused as to its role under present conditions and as to its ultimate purpose. As
an amalgamation of most members of the former Labor Party (PTB) and some
followers of Kubitschek and Quadros, it is even less an entity than ARENA, and
of course lacks patronage. Its program, based on nationalism and constitutional
reform including the restoration of direct presidential elections, has caused little
stir, and its organization at the grass roots is nil.

19. A problem for government and opposition alike is the “Broad Front,” a
hybrid grouping headed by Lacerda and the proscribed former Presidents Kubit-
schek and Goulart. It has denounced the government and has called for re-
democratization of the country in far sharper terms than has the MDB. The
presence of Lacerda as the Front’s spokesman puts it in a sort of political no-
man’s-land. On the one hand, Lacerda has alienated most of the members of
the military establishment who were his enthusiastic backers when, as governor
of Guanabara, he was an original conspirator against Goulart. On the other,
few of his former enemies, such as the Vargas family and Janio Quadros, are en-
tirely convinced of the value of aligning themselves with Lacerda. Although some
members of the MDB have been attracted by him as much the most articulate
opposition spokesman (there is none of any national stature in the MDB), the
party as a whole has stood warily by. The government is similarly perplexed
over how to deal with Lacerda; it probably would like to go along with military
pressures to deprive him of his civil rights, but it recalls his past effectiveness in
creating severe crises when under attack.

20. Communists and radical leftists are also weak and split over doctrine as
well as tactics and strategy. The small orthodox Communist Party under its
septuagenarian leader, Luis Carlos Prestes, has limited itself to issuing dutiful
pronouncements about the inevitability of the masses rallying round the party
against the dictatorship. It has expelled a dissident wing led by a former mem-
ber of the Central Committee, Carlos Marighella, for advocating armed revolu-
tion and Castro-style guerrilla warfare. Marighella is younger and more dynamic
than Prestes, but it is hard to judge how successful he has been in attracting
followers willing to undertake the risk of violent opposition to the government.
The “pro-Chinese” splinter that broke off from the Party a few years ago has
itself splintered and become virtually dormant. Most former leaders of the radi-

eee. 7

,

cal left such as Miguel Arraes and Francisco Juliao are scattered in exile. The
only one who has been active to any purpose has been Leonel Brizola, the former
governor of Rio Grande do Sul. From exile in Uruguay, Brizola has managed to
sponsor sporadic guerrilla forays which have been quickly routed by the Brazilian
security forces.

21, Beyond the rather nominal opposition of the organized political move-
ments, there are notable pockets of disaffection, especially among labor and
students. The government promised a dialogue with students and labor (as part
of its humanization), but it has done little to alleviate their specific grievances.
Labor has born the brunt of the stabilization. Its organizations have always been
subject to a large measure of government control. Long silent, it has recently
tried to escape from political impotence by campaigning against the govern-
ment’s restrictive wage policy and the continuing inflation. This growing anti-
government attitude has, moreover, made it easier for Communists and other
leftists to regain a part of the influence they enjoyed in key unions before the
Revolution. The government’s budget does include a higher appropriation for
education, but partly because of an ineffectual Minister of Education nothing
has been done to assure students that the government is acting to cope with such
basic problems as overcrowded classrooms, underpaid teachers, and a lack of
space for those eligible to enter the universities. Furthermore the Revolutionary
leaders have shown little interest in attempting to attract student support. Despite
half-hearted efforts of the Castello Branco government to set up a pro-Revolu-
tionary student organization, the Revolution has only succeeded in driving the
proscribed leftist National Student Union underground.

22. Inspired by the teachings of liberal European Catholic philosophers and
by recent papal encyclicals, elements of the Church have gradually taken a more
active role in advocating and sponsoring social reform. Before the Revolution,
rural unions organized by the Church did much to undercut Francisco Juliao’s
Peasant Leagues in the Northeast; more recently energetic prelates have sorely
irritated the military establishment by denouncing social conditions in that region.
Some priests have further strained relations between the Church and the armed
forces by siding with leftist students and criticizing the Revolution. Outspoken
critics of the government like Dom Helder Camara, the Archbishop of Olinda
and Recife, have nevertheless kept eager opposition politicians at arm’s length.
Both the government and the Church are extremely wary of taking each other
on as opponents and efforts toward an accommodation are being undertaken.

VI. THE OUTLOOK

23. The Costa e Silva administration has poor prospects for developing broader
popular support. Pressures from within the armed forces will tend to restrain
the government from making further significant concessions to the interests of
civilian groups. The civilian groups themselves, whether political parties or
student and labor organizations, will probably remain too docile and fragmented
to pose any serious threat to the government. They will press on with efforts to

8 ce

Cee

induce a retum to direct presidential election, but the government will almost
certainly hold to the present system at least through the election of January
1971.

24, Economic difficulties will continue to hamper the administration’s efforts
to gain popular support. The kind of program it is pursuing needs time to show
results and is thus politically thankless. It calls for forebearance and a sophisti-
cated appreciation of Brazilian problems when the people simply want prompt and
tangible economic gains. The country’s economic difficulties still are too funda-
mental, too numerous, and too interrelated to permit such gains with reasonably
stable prices and a tolerable deficit in the balance of payments. Dramatic moves
in one sphere would quickly intensify problems in others, delaying necessary
reforms and making them still more difficult. If the government continues to
stress growth in production, for example, it will almost certainly have to relax
further its effort to contain inflation. If it cannot find means to improve its bal-
ance of payments and strengthen its fiscal situation, it may have to retrench
in its expansionary program.

25. The government will probably fall short of achieving its goal of a growth of
six percent in gross domestic product in 1968. It may, however, match last year’s
growth of five percent, which reflected a particularly good harvest and recovery
from the recession. Agricultural production will be encouraged in 1968 by
increased support prices but even with favorable weather will not increase as
much as in 1967. Expansion of exports is not likely to be significant, and export
earnings will be depressed by low world market prices for coffee, which constitutes
45 percent of the total value of Brazilian exports. Some progress has been made
in diversifying exports but it will be many years before Brazil can substantially
lessen its dependence upon export of coffee. Debt servicing obligations will
reach a peak of $494 million in 1968 or about one-fourth of projected export earn-
ings. The outlook for industrial growth is uncertain. Although gains were made
in 1967, progress in 1968 could be inhibited if exchange difficulties resulted in
restrictions on industrial imports.

26, Brazil's perennial problem of maximizing its earnings from coffee exports
has once again produced friction in its relations with the US. The recent dispute
has concerned Brazil’s infant soluble-coffee industry, which for a variety of reasons
has been able to undercut the competition of US producers of soluble coffee.
At one point the issue appeared to jeopardize renewal of the entire International
Coffee Agreement. A settlement has since been arrived at, but many Brazilians
have been disturbed that one of Brazil’s successful attempts to develop new
exports, in accord with the precepts of the Alliance for Progress, could in practice
be so effectively opposed by US companies.

27. Disaffection within the military may grow and plots will be rumored, but
a coup is unlikely. As in 1964, political diversity and geographic distance be-
tween armies and commanders make planning a coup a complex matter involving
a near unanimity among the military—and Costa e Silva is not likely to earn
such a hostile consensus. He obtained the presidency through military con-

Grae 9

al

sensus, and his tenure depends on the continuing support of at least the majority
of the military establishment. On most matters, he and the military will manage
to compose their differences. He will, for example, agree to some, though not
all, military suggestions, and will make a few changes in his cabinet. And if
opposition criticism becomes particularly grating, he might go along with military
recommendations to act in some manner against Carlos Lacerda.

28. On matters closely affecting the interest of the military establishment
itself, the administration probably has little room for maneuver. After years
of making do with obsolete equipment, military leaders are determined to proceed
with the reequipment program now underway. In the unlikely event that Costa
e Silva rejected military opinion on important aspects of the content or pace of
the program, he would risk a major internal crisis. In fact, there has been no
disagreement on the basic issues of reequipment between the president and the
military establishment. But some difficulties are likely to arise because of ex-
ternal factors.

29. Costa e Silva has, for example, soft-pedaled the issue of the request from
the Air Ministry for Mirage airplanes; he would prefer to have F-5s, though with
some additional components. This would of itself probably not pose a critical
issue. But the situation is complicated by recent US legislation intended to
reduce expenditures of certain foreign countries for “sophisticated weapons sys-
tems.” If, in consequence of this legislation, the US refused to furnish this
hardware, Brazil would purchase at least some comparable equipment in Europe.
Even if this did not cause a cut in US economic aid, Costa e Silva’s confidence
in the US would be shaken. A cut in US aid, apart from its effect on the economic
program, would make the government vulnerable to attacks by the civilian opposi-
tion and tend to create dissension among the military.

30. These issues, combined with the latent anti-US attitudes discussed above,
will make Brazilian-US relations less harmonious than they have been. Costa
e Silva would prefer to maintain cordial relations with the US, but his dealings
with it will be complicated by nationalistic issues. For example, Brazil is likely
to continue to oppose ratification of the nonproliferation treaty in its present form.
While the tone of Brazilian foreign policy under Costa e Silva is unlikely to be
as stridently nationalistic as it was before the Revolution, Brazil is less likely
to follow the US lead in international matters than it was in Castello Branco’s
time. There would now, for example, be less chance of Brazilian participation in
a situation like that which prevailed in the Dominican Republic in 1965-19686.

31. Whether “hardline” elements force a more authoritarian rule or the gov-
ernment permits greater scope to civilian politics, the military establishment will
continue to be the central dominating factor in the Brazilian Government well
beyond the period of this estimate. The effect of the Revolution on politics and
political movements has been so stultifying that return to effective civilian rule
will be at best a gradual process—perhaps as a small step in that direction the
Revolutionary leadership could pick a civilian as its presidential candidate in 1971.

10 ae

ee ee

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by th ihe Coniral Tisalligates Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. “Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the.
following officials within their respective departments: :

a. Director of Intelligence ‘and Research, for the Departiusct of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army aie Sees

d. Assistant Chief of Newel Operations (ntalligence), for the Department of the
Navy ~~ .

e. Assistant Chief of Sta ntligence, USAF for the Department of the Air
Force - ,

f. Director of infelligences AEC, for the Asciie Baergy Commision

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency Pe

i. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency fo retain it in accordance with UNE ate 22
June 1953.

4, The title of this document wea used separately front the text should be clas-
sified:

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense:
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

Miertied asthe, halle. reeneiniieddindetaoeae
