EstimatedD Pub Date) Nicaraguan Support for Salvadoran Insurgents -- Interagenc
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115487, dated 1 February 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115487).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CN

Pe

NICARAGUAN SUPPORT FOR SALVADORAN INSURGENTS
KEY JUDGMENTS

We believe that the Sandinista Directorate views
support of the Salvadoran insurgency as a key element in
the solidification of the Nicaraguan revolution. This
priority explains Nicaragua's wide-ranging support activi-
ties for the insurgents since the Sandinistas took power
in July 1979 and the high level of arms shipments during
the period October 1980 - January 1981--despite the pros-
pects that such activities could embroil relations with
the United States.

!

In response to US diplomatic: pressure and enhanced in-
terdiction measures, air shipments of arms directly from
Nicaragua to El Salvador have apparently stopped since early

February. Moreover, land and sea shipments, which are more
difficult to monitor, appear to have been cut back sharply.

a wide range of other support activities--
R training, secure
e of “volunteer”
Nicaraguan combatants in El Salvador, and assistance in the.
_areas of planning, intelligence, and communications...

BR ec eRe ee eo aN pes EVES PEER ASIN S EP OR dete cluding some, from
_ Be Sasha RCE EDULE Rae Ok rare ny RN POLO cOnT eld ab Lees Hate ee eer Tere ane
Se NS Se Se Ha GT ua neeentt hile sto rs Lore; pO sp ARO PRAY gag EL N ES
Bee _ receive additiona for the insurgents and ~ *Warex er
PIR «. Cie sits xe. ee wef : irge : . v ~
rene 2 Sep Vgently “arran evroutes, and methods<of:s--:'"
. tg TT TE 5 SGT SO

Despite th to bear by the United
States so far, and the Sandinistas' anticipation of increased
pressures, we see no change in their commitment to the

an TY SS ESET AT PREY MA = AES AOR TEE RE EE SRP RE

Salvadoran insurgents. Temporizing tactics may continue for
a time; but, if forced to choose, the Sandinistas will very
likely give a higher priority to supporting the insurgents
than to appeasing the United States.

TES SR SPE IRR TSE oP NE RCS Ae ame erm

If, as is likely, the present level of military action
continues in El Salvador, we expect to see at least inter-
mittent arms shipments from Nicaragua, directly and in-
directly over the next several weeks or months.

In sum, little short of a sharp change in the revolu-
tionary character of the Sandinista regime or termination
of serious combat in El Salvador would be likely to force
the Nicaraguans to cease or indefinitely curb their support

activities.

° DISCUSSION
I.  SANDINISTA MOTIVES AND PATTERNS OF SUPPORT

Motives

1. We believe that the Sandinista Directorate, in
effect the government of Nicaragua, views support of the
Salvadoran insurgency as a key element in the solidifica-
tion of the Nicaraguan revolution. The Sandinistas share
the belief of the Castro regime that, in a region long
dominated by the United States, the ability of revolutionary
governments to withstand antagonistic foreign pressures is
linked to the fortunes of other Latin American revolutionary
movements. Additionally, the Sandinistas feel a personal
debt to the Salvadoran insurgents, who provided arms, per~
sonnel, and financial assistance to the Nicaraguans in their
struggle against President Somoza.

2. The calculations of the Sandinista leaders--all
former insurgents themselves--reflect practical concerns
about the survival of their regime as well as the ideology
of revolutionary solidarity. They are acutely sensitive
(even paranoid) about their isolated position as the only
revolutionary government in Central America, especially
vis-a-vis the hostile military-dominated regimes on their=.: .
northern flank. By assisting the insurgents, the Sandinistas
seek, in the near term, to tie down the Salvadoran military

_ and over time, to contribute to the victory of a like-minded
sees er MORGUE AS Oks ants ng Lats aragtane pets Ces
tae ees nerabilities. "=" Sil a i aaa

: ee Lalit tc ot shan Re OE gee L tol gtearcaar sg 2 RMI. lo a eee ERE ag ee

"3. dhis Geabination of -factora--ties of revolutionaryess-~--=
solidarity, moral indebtedness, and concern for self-defense--
has led the Sandinistas to provide clandestine assistance to
Salvadoran insurgents ever since they seized power in July
1979. The close personal ties and clandestine networks
forged by Cubans, Sandinistas, and other Central American
revolutionaries during the Nicaraguan insurrection provided
a framework for rapidly building a support mechanism for the
Salvadoran insurgents. In cooperation with Cuba and with
other regional revolutionary groups the Nicaraguans have

provided military training; secure transit and safe haven;

tyolunteer" combatants; intelligence, planning, and communi-
cations support and arms and military equipment. We believe
that only the last-named has varied much in intensity over

time.
Training, Transit, and “Volunteers"*

4. Soon after the Sandinistas took power they began
to train Salvadoran insurgents--a few hundred of whom re-
mained in Nicaragua after fighting against Somoza's forces.
Most, if not all, the training has been provided under the
direction of the Nicaraguan military, often in regular Arny

camps.

5. Apparently, Cuba and Nicaragua have developed a
two-stage process for training revolutionaries from El
Salvador and other Latin American countries. Basic instruc-
Ve tion is frequently given in Nicaragua to prepare for more
advanced courses taught in Cuba. Last August, for example,

alvadorans reportedly began six weeks of basic train-
ing in Nicaragua; afterward, the most promising trainees
were to proceed to Cuba for a four-month advanced course. —
Between June and September, 12 Salvadorans started a three-

’ month pilot training program i to be completed
- in Cuba. A Salvador stated in early
November that he had trained in bo countries. " "="

Ns 6. In addition to secure transit to and from Cuba for

why sain wpec nyse Stivadonan trainees, the Sandinigtas have, prov! Seo ean sma
HrAseina e~ leader ee Nicaraguaneorsicials: haverappargne LYS Laged sai Le

i rescue missions into El Salvador to transport wounded

Gio aa guerrijles_bo Nicaragus. fox treatment os gee ee ene 2 a
nal é

7. The Sandinistas have also encouraged experienced
Nicaraguan guerrillas to go to El Salvador to serve as com-
batants and advisers. Several sources have described
canvassing by Cuban and Nicaraguan officials for volunteers
among security force personnel. A Nicaraguan
Reg EE ee said he and 40 other
Nicaraguans had been recruited by the Sandinista military
in November 1979, given five months' additional training,
and sent to El Salvador to fight.

Planning, Intelligence, and Communications*

8. The Sandinistas, along with the Cubans, have pro-
vided assistance in the planning of insurgent strategy and
tactics and in intelligence and communications. The
Nicaraguans provide false documentation to facilitate the
movement of guerrillas throughout the region. They
apparently also facilitate communication by pouch and =
radio signal.

9. The Salvadorans operated their own radio station
(Liberacion) within Nicaragua from 13 December until
€ February, when US pressures forced it off the air. By. .
locating in Nicaragua the insurgents for the first time 2°"
gained the security necessary for establishing a semi-
permanent facility powerful enough to broadcast throughout
_..the region. er ee ee ee
DEERE Se

SA:

penne —_ :
- 2a ak ia 7

= “Eng ae

ae TS ";

TEP eae 0, Until last_fall, direct Nicaragua participation Z0:--

in facilitating the flow of arms to El Salvador was rela= =
tively modest. Several reports indicated that in the spring

of 1980 weapons were being ferried in small boats to El
Salvador. Fragmentary information suggests that the

_ Sandinistas also used land and air routes, but our ability
to monitor these operations was limited by their intermittent
nature, as well as by the likely frequent alteration of
routes and carriers and the limited size of individual

deliveries.

11. The Sandinistas' desire to mask their role pre-
sumably accounts for their decision in early 1980 to
establish a support mechanism in Costa Rica for channeling
arms to El Salvador. By late summer, however, exposure of
that supply network forced Havana and Managua to relocate
most of this operation in Nicaragua.

Accelerated Support for the January 1981 Offensive

12. Moreover, the Sandinistas greatly accelerated the
transshipping of arms directly from Nicaragua last fall, as
the Salvadoran insurgents readied themselves for a major ~~
military thrust. Starting in September, Cuba substantially
increased the frequency of flights to Nicaragua to accommodate
a sharply augmented flow of military equipment that had been
collected from a number of Communist “and ‘radical countries>"

13. aie nee in November --after i=

nothen)
the .Sandiy

oe

Ne: ated. , 7 nuar gu J:
small fleet of Cessnas“and Pipers’ with!

9 aes
C-47s.

14. The Sandinistas also stepped up the use of sea
infiltration routes last fall. Small launches operating
out of several Nicaraguan Pacific ports traversed the Gulf
of Fonseca at pight carrying arms, ammunition, and personnel.

invaded El Salvador's sou
offensive almost certainly came from Nicaragua.

15. In addition, overland arms shipments through
Honduras almost certainly increased early this year. §

Ce a
a
. oe ———

II. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

Responding to US Pressures

16. In response to US demarches early in 1981, the
Sandinistas have cut back their support to the Salvadoran
insurgents. In addition to US diplomatic pressures, the
Sandinistas probably are also reacting to fears about
greater prospects of detection, and recognition that in
the present phase of reduced combat, the insurgents have
no pressing need for the large volumes of supplies provided
to support the January offensive (some 200 tons).

17. Radio Liberacion ceased broadcasting in early
February. Various sources of information give us a high
confidence that the Sandinistas have suspended air deliveries
since late January. As in the past, we are less able to
monitor land and sea shipments. Some supplies originally
from Nicaragua continue ‘to“move into El Salvador from ~"
Honduras. But we have no hard evidence of fresh shipments
from Nicaragua, and fra evidence indicates that land
and.sea deliveries have amply ‘curtailed snd poerbang. ..

ne ~-2i%,Circumventing US Pressures »=-~ Oe eee
X. DRESSER Te S07 eee err RRS OO oS ge
f 18. In our judgment, Nicaraguan assistance in areas
difficult to detect and against which the US has not made
4 representations very probably continues roughly at past

levels:

y the Salvadoran
in Nicaragua,

Peo eR ythe
as continue to travel between the two
countries.

-- We have no reports on the recent dispatch of
"vyolunteers,™ but there are strong indications
that Nicaraguans continue to fight in El Salvador.

there are some indications of plans to expan¢
training in Nicaragua.

19. Moreover, there is abundant and persuasive--if
fragmentary and indirect--evidence that the sandinistas
are pursuing with determination the establishment of alterna-
tive routes and methods. This evidence indicates that they
are working to develop a capability for resuming or expanding
military deliveries, with greater potential for escaping
detection or for providing plausible denial of Nicaraguan
complicity: ° .

-- Nicaraguans have been working with the Cubans,

: and with.Costa Ricans long involved in air flights
of arms in Central America, to reopen supply
flights from Costa Rica--using Sandinista-
supplied aircraft and pilots trained in Nicaragua.

Foca teeter eee Soon ee

pedo > yeah nti eee already Large Nicaraguan ‘stockpiles --
of weapons and supplies for the insurgents probably continue

By ee fe e Finally, we believe that
Nicaraguans in Honduras are still active in the processing
of arms deliveries from there to the insurgents.

pone "

Net Judgment” CbRtle gece oT TNs are.

21. In sum, we conclude that the Sandinistas very
probably continue various efforts in support of the
Salvadoran insurgents. They have either cut out or cut
back arms deliveries. But they are taking steps to resume
or expand these, if and when they so decide. 7

oH Eh the former seeing the need-to rel

SPREE
ERR TE LT EET By PEN ST EE RE a Te
Y ere “FRR RECOV On a ome ap ENE Pe:

ee

JII. OUTLOOK
Reexamining Nicaraguan and Cuban Motives

22. The net impact on the Sandinistas and on the
Castro regime of the recent, more forceful us policy regard-
ing El Salvador is difficult to anticipate with confidence.
Nicaraguan leaders are aware that US power and influence
could make an already dismal economic situation more desperate,
and could add muscle to security threats from neighboring
countries and domestic sources. Cuban leaders also face
intractable (if less serious) domestic problems and are
more concerned about potential forceful US moves against
their interests than at any time since the early 1960s.

23. We believe, nonetheless, that Managua and Havana
remain determined to support the Salvadoran insurgency.
In effect, they hold a “reverse domino" thesis about revolu-
tionary fortunes in the region. Both countries would see
stabilization of a pro-US government in San Salvador (whether
conservative or moderate) as a setback to their interests.
Especially the Sandinistas would see such a development as
leading to US supported efforts by El Salvador, Honduras,
and Guatemala to move against the Nicaraguan revolution.

--* -9¢> “Conversely;a revolutionary regime in El Salvador-~
and even the continuation of a vigorous revolutionary
challenge--would be seen by Managua, and Havana as reducing
their vulnerabilities, vis-a-vis ,foreign an
Par Toa ee Fi Choxmol Pree’ eVeloppentssha at
SPopablys broug nether and nia TAR onal ana = ClOge

- . on.Castro!s -counsel _aid,and protection

2.) OD ERS Sag mn eae ene ie Rei a EE ee ee: ee

25. While the current tactics of reduced support may
continue for some time, only a fundamental change in
Nicaraguan leadership or a far-reaching change in the
priorities of the present Directorate would alter the
government's underlying commitment to revolutionary success
in El Salvador. Neither development is more than a remote
prospect over the next six months or 80. Moreover, while
there is some evidence of increased factional strife within
the Directorate, it has not yet clearly surfaced on the issue
of aid to the insurgents, and we see recent Nicaraguan
activities as an indication that Directorate members still
are largely agreed on priorities.

ey

Salvadoran Developments

26. The most likely near-term prospect is for contin-
uing military stalemate in El Salvador: neither side is
likely to deal a deathblow to the other. But with programed
US assistance, the momentum could shift to the government
and the insurgents could be put increasingly on the defensive.

27. Under these circumstances, the Sandinistas will
weigh carefully their intense commitment to the insurgents
versus their fear of antagonizing the United States. As
indicated, the Sandinistas have already taken preparatory
measures for stepping up their arms support and have con-
tinued other forms of direct assistance. Their preference,
reflected in their mix of current activities, is to attempt
to mollify'Washington while continuing more circumspect aid.
Nonetheless, if forced to choose they would very likely give
a higher priority to aiding the insurgents than to appeasing
the United States. :

28. If the insurgents were to gain the momentum, we
believe the Sandinistas would throw caution to the wind and
dramatically step up their assistance, with little regard
for the consequences. If, in contrast, the insurgents do
very poorly in military terms, the Sandinistas would prob-
ably increase their pressures on the insurgents to turn to
political means (including negotiations) to preserve their
influence. In these circumstances, the Nicaraguans would .

St oP Saree and .slowl Xe
Bf care =} } ane ae . xe vi pha

Dealing With US Pressures

29. The Sandinistas would probably like to put off any
showdown with the United States for as long as possible.
Toward that end they might continue the current partial pause
for some time or even take overt propitiatory measures, such
as issuing ambiguous declarations against outside interference
in El Salvador.

30. We judge, however, that they realize they cannot be
certain that the United States too is not stalling for its own
purposes, before moving more aggressively against their
interests. They may respond to sharper US pressures with
a quick expansion of aid to the insurgents, to show that

they have not been intimidated.

31. Wwe conclude that no serious decline in the present
level of support of the insurgency is likely, and that very
probably increased activity in arms support will occur over
the next several weeks or months.

| 1
