Proponents of the Doctrine of Total Espionage
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000044627, dated 2 November 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000044627).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PROPONENTS OF THF DOCTRINE OF TOTAL
FSPIONAGE

{Following is a translation of an article by F. Sergeyev
, “in the Russian-languege Journal Znamya (The Banner),
No 12, Moscow, December 1964, rages 710-279.7

Nobody gets rleasure from disecting the souls of traitors, But
every instahce of treason, no mtter how seldom such cases occur, 18 always
instructive, They make it rossible to judge what sort of rersons are
recruited by the enemy and to learn our mistakes in selecting individuals
for membership in units which are of interest to enemy Intelligence, We
are now speaking of an officer who served with Soviet troars abroad, Wea
will only use the firet letter of this traitor's last mam because his
family, which tad no rart in his fout actions, still lives among us,

The former officer of the Soviet Army, Lieut-rent Colonel P, i
was shot two years 460. pan e earlifer -- five yerrs ore
tais, during the time when he began to collaborate with American Inteliigence,
He died a little each day from his fear of discovery, from self-deerecation,
from self-alienation, Each day, he would put on the overcmt of his uniform
and rerort for work, greeting his comrades, But he was their enemy.
The informtion which he collected am! rassed to American Intellipence
worked against the very country which he served, During monthly meetings
with his chiefs from American Intelligence, he received ins*ructions
together with envelores containing the Judas ray he tas piven in return P
for his notes, But things didn't reach the stage of rassing notes at
once,

During 1958, while stationed in Vienna, P got involved in a love
affair with one Fmilia Kohanek without the knowdedge of his family and
comrades, She was just right for P.: She mde no claims on him, asked
no questions, was obliging, and (P., of course, didn't notice this) she
was shrewd, The Lieutemnt Colonel didn't hide from her his admiration
frr the "bright" life of Vienra, for the show windows of exrensive shors,
for the splendour of lwarious cestaurents, When he was transferred from
Austria to a city in Fast Germany, Emilia bepan to write him, She didn't
miss the orrortunity to send a birthday card remining him of the hapry
days they had srent together in Vienm, Other times, her lett rs were
sad, but all sounded sincere; She did not conceal her desire somehow to
-* meet amain to remtnice about old times, "to relive the rast, if this
was agreeable to P, All this seemed so convincirg that Emilia anceeeced
in getting P. to agree toa secret meeting. It was arranged thit Emilia
would travel to West Berlin and that P, would arrange for temrorary duty
cerders to the Fast German capital,

After he arrived in Berlin, P. changed into civilian clothes and
secretPly left his station for the Western Sector in order to ment his
loved fbne, Emilia Kohanek failed to anrear at the prearranged place,

But there were others there: Two hefty American Military Police agents
arrested P, When they were dona with him, it was not P, who returned to
the Fast German capital, but the American agent "Max™, "Max" told the
following story during subsequent interrogationsf

\

= ee

f
ty, he

one Su NZ AT lo

"On the day we had set, I arrived on temrorary duty in Fest Berlin,
from where I went to Weat Berlin without the authorization of my commanding
officers, However, rather than Kohanek, two unknown men in civilian clothes
approached me at the rrearranged spot am) presented credentials of the
crimiral rolice, After telling me that J was in the area of some sort
of secret installation, they invited me to go with them. I lost my head,
got into their car, and, after a few minutes, was at the headquarters of
the American military rolice, During the interrogations, which lasted
six hours, the Americans told ma that I had been caught red-handed as a
Soviet sry and that, should I refuse to coorerate with them, I would be
sent to the West. Moreover, they told me that, since I had crossed the
zoral border without a pass from my corrander, they had every reason for
either telling the press of my escape from the USSR or for returning me
to the Soviet authorities as a rerson who had asked the Amricans for
political asvlum, Either way, my family would have suffered, Having
no way out, I accerted the rronosal to become their agent.”

From his fitness rerorta, this traitor seemed to be rractically a
living angel, But, as sometimes harrens, the reorle who wrote the rerorts
were aware of his true character, They failed to give timely attention
to hig nerative qualities, which could be cangerous under certain conditionse
It was known that P, waa egocentric and secretive, that he lacked common,
everyday conrage in relations with his comrades, that he was a obviously
weak individual, All these qualities, taken within the context of the
comlicatéd: situation in which ha worked, attracted the attention of
"hunters" and made hima target of American Intelligence. And he was
weak, surrendered, and became a traitor.

"The American Intelligence officer who recruited "Max", Lieutenant
Colonel Sharnhorst (really Gary Grosmen), told him that it would be his
fob to collect information on our armed forces and, more precisely, to
betray our state secrets, His chiefs gave him secret writing mterials,
code books concealed ina hollowed-out srinning bobbin, and cormunications
4nstructions, And he worked for them until he came to the attention of
the organs of State Security, And this is how it haprenedi

Russell August Lenghell{4 worked at the US Embassy in Moscow, Aas
a dirlomt, the father of three children, am an attentive husband, he
led wmt seamed to be a comletely decorous life to those around him.
Every morning he would set out *or work at the Embassy; in the evenings
Me would familiarize himself with the city and, on nice deys, he would
take excursions with his family, Nothing, it seemed, would indicate that,
besides his administrative and mamgerial duties, for which Lenzhelli was
accredited to the Embassy, he had other concerns, But a number of Lenzhelli's
actions convinced State Security that his official position wis merely a
cover for other functions.

Once, during the summer, a special miniature container holding in-
structions and money meant for an unknown American intelligence agent, was
found to have been left by Lenzhell4 under the handrail of a atairway
leading from Lenin Hills to the Moscow River, lLenzhelli covered this
“oneration" by an innocent stroll with his wife and children,

And thus the innocent family man came under even closrr scrutiny
by the Chekists., He continued to stroll about the city during office hours,
when he should have been at the Fmbassy. Frequently, his wife accompanied
him, Cleary there was a purrose behind this -- the wife served as a look-
out for the intelligence officer, The behavior of the American woman showed
this, Once, atopring hia car, Lenzhelli boarded the Metro with his wife
and rode back and forth along a rather complicated route without any clear

i ca

ae

>, purpose, Such behavior might seem odd to the uninitiated — after entering

a car on the Metro, Lenzhelli would sudderly jump off, pulling oren the
already closing doors, ami run to another platform, But the professionals
had no doubts: Lenzhelli had detected aurvedllance, After finally getting
off the Matro, he anrroached a bus stop an’ stood next to a Lieutenant
Colonel, For an instant, their arms and hands touched. A small rackege
suddenly arreared under Lenzhellj's3 arm. This Lieutemint Colonel was

the same "Mix", Up to this time, nothing was known of his relations with
Emilia Koharek, about his trin to West Berlin, or about his subsequent
meetings with American Intelligence officers, Pe. was now placed under
observation together with Lenzhelli.

A documentary film has been made entitled Sneva_po chernoy trore
(Once More Along the Black Path). Some scenes in this film are taken
from the Lenzhelli-"Max" affair, though the erisode concerns another of
their meetings -- in the entrance of the “Astoriya” restaurant (now
called the "Tsentralnyy") on the corner of Gor'kiy and Nemirovicha-
Danchenko streets in Moscow. ;

The camera shows a crowd of Moscovites strolling along Gor'kly
Street. A young man has his arm around a girl; an old mn is orening
a rackage of ciparettes; two men are conversing near the window of a
book store; finally, we see the hurrying feet and shoulder boards of
a Lieutenant Colonel and then a full view of his faces Something is
bothering the officer, The camera moves enly infrequently to the other
peonle -- the Lieutemnt Colonel is the center of attention. He
arproaches the door of the restaurant and plances inside, It is clear
from his exrression that somebody is late for an aprointment. He
nervously races the sidewalk.

An automobile of foreign make slowly moves along an ally. Stopring
the car, the man behind the wheel geta out ane offers his hand to a lady
gettine out the other side. The camera takes in the entire scene. Then
44 zercasifn on the hand of the man; he hugs the won tenderly around the
waist and, with quick fingers, takes something, a stall racket, from the
rocket of her Jacket. The rair enters the vestibule of the restaurant
and "tax", with whom we are already acquainted, rapidly follows them,

A long-range shot (for obvious reasons), taken through the large
glass door of the restaurant, shows a rublic telerhone. Arrarently, the
Lieutentat Colonel and the mn who hes just driven ur want to use the
rhone at the same time. What's this? The sare racket, which we caw in
the hanes of the foreigner a moment ago, is now held by the Lieutenant
Colonel. But they don't seem to know one another. In any case, the
camera, which has had them in view the whole time, didn't notice that
they greeted each other or pave any other sign of recognition. And
they serarated like comlete stranfere. But we already know, as they
say, that they have met before “behind the scenes’. "IMax™ told all about
this during the investigation: "In April 1958, Sharnhorst introduced
me to an American Intelligence officer, who used the nseuconym "Danial",
in Perlin, This was done in case I were to be sent back to Moscaw.
"Daniel gave me a private telerhone number in Moscow and two set nhrases
to be used to call him to a meeting....”

The reorle filming this documentary had no doubts that this P.
was a traitor and that Lenzhelli was the person to whom P, was nassing
esriomege infornation.

29 os

But thie is not enough, It waa necessary to catch the crimirale
red-handed, The "sincere indienction end rertubation” expressed by
certain American dirlomts, when they are «coused of unlawful activity,
4g well known, Irrefutable proof in necesiunry. And it was gotten quickly.
As usual, at 8 o'clock in the norning, Larshell£ left for the bus stop
on Kutuzovskiy Prospect on his way to the Tmbassy. "Max" was vaiting
for him at the bus stop. Standing in differant places in line, they got
on the sam bus, A Ghekist jummed on the bus after them, At the
rement when Lenzhelli moved toward the exit, passing the Lieutemnt
Colonel, the two exchanged racknges unseen by the other rassengers. The
Chekist pave a rnrearranged signal to his comrades, who were waiting at one
of the stors. On leaving the bus, Lenzhelli, together with the rackage
which he had received from the spy, was instantly usherec into their
car, Two stors later, "Max" wos also arrested red-handed, Thus enced
the short-lived collaboration of "Max" with Arerican Intelligence.

* * * ’

In their book The Invisible Government, the Anerican Journ liste
D. Weiss and T. Ross write that "US emb:ssies aroun the world have secret
floors or dern-rtments where c4A missions are located, Fach mission is
headed by a chief and inclules 3everul intalligence officers. CIs
employees are included among State Department or dirlomtic personnel,
This is their "cover". Ia further proof necessary of the imlisnutable
fact that, following the examle of Nazi Cermany, the ruling circles of
the United States have transformed their cinlomtic arraratus abroad
into a tool of espionage? In crude violation of generally accerted
standards of international relations, the Central Intelligence Agency
ig increasingly subordinating American dirlomtie renresentations to its

own interests.

If this is characteristic of the US dirlomtic service in other
countries, it is particularly so with regard to the American Fmtassy in
Andumilitary attaches in the Soviet Union, What are the facts? There
are as many ag you want. What relation to the conduct of dirlomtic
functiona can the following lines from the diary of a diplomt possibly

have?

"8 January, Monday: Drove to the southern aipe of the city in
search of antiaircraft batteries, but found nothing in the new regions.
1° Janmrry, Friday: Drove all morning with Tornal and Abbel through the
Boutheastern rart of the city in new areas. Didn't see a single anti-
aircraft battery, but collected some food information about the locality.
20 Janiary, Saturday: Bush and I drove for three hours through a snow
Storm in the eastern and southeastern rarts of the city; arotted three
antiaircraft batteries. 27 January, Saturday! Pecause of roor visibility
we didn't carry out any reconmis-:ance; wrote two letters and a rerort
on the locntion of the antiaircraft batteries in order to have them ready
for the dirlomatic rnouch, 28 Jamuary, Sunday: Gut un at 10, had break-
fast, then took the Metro to Ring B, strolled for an hour in the arra
of Frunze Acacemy; didn't seeranything new if you don't count the old
calvery stables where several horses are arrarently kert. 15 February,
Thursday! Tornal and I carried out discreet observation in the incustrial
regions in the northern rart of the city, but failed to locate a single
antiaircraft battery. 24 March, Saturcay: Tornal and I checked the rre-
gence of antiaircraft batteries, two of which have teen removed. An
industrial enterrrisea is under construction at their old locetion™.

-4-

|

X

Thase lines are taken from the rersonal diary of a former U military
attache in Moscow, Major General Robert Grow. The diary, which was lost
by the unfortunate general and eventially was mde public, can be called
sort of a “bible” for American intelligence officers. In it, Grow had
written “our intelligence orrans must constantly seek to discover and
rerort both the strong aml weak roints of the enemy. Our attrck mst be
directed to the enemy's weak srot. Although the military services are
rrimrily concerned with the question of wearons an’ methods of waging
battle, we must unlerstand that this js total war and it mist Le fought
using all means. We can win this game 4f we orzanize an attack of 4
rolitical, rsycholorical, economic, end subversive character, we must
understar’ that it is rermissable to hit below the belt...e" Indeed,
Grow not only was without scrovrles when choosing where to strike, but
waa not adverse to collecting the most elerentary tyres of infor atione
For evamrle, during a trin to Yasmya Polyom, he noted the numbers
of military vehicles and located military equirnent; when visiting
Rostov-on-Don, he determined that "the bridge across the Don ia the best
tarvet in the south of Russia", and the 11<3., Crow orerated rather
crudely: he wes caught several times with the goods and, as a result,
became the center of an international scanddad, One would think that
Grow's incident would serve as 4 arning to the reorle at the US
Embassy in Moscow. But not as they say, the leopard can't chanre his
arots. Here are only a few of the facts!

1954: Lieutenant Colonel Heward Pelehin, the assistant military
attoche, and Ya jor Walter Me kid n' ts the aséistant air ettache, were
exrelled from the USSR for collecting military information during trins
within the country. They got into tronble by losing their notes and even

the original cony of their intel: igerce acsignine nte

_ 1955s Assistant military attectes John Rengon, Cantain William Stroud
and Captain Walter Mile, who were actively angaged in collecting military
intellipence information, were declarad persona non pratas

1956: Assistant air attaches Hubert Tensey and Cartain Charles
Stokkel, who rereatedly attemmted to renetcate areas where militery units
are Located, airnorts, and other military targets, &8 well as the border
zone in the area of Brest, were expelled from the USSR.

1957: Assistant military attaches Paul Uffelman and Lieutenant
William Lewis, who were arrested in Leningrad while rhotograrhing defense
enterrrises, were declared rer ana non arita.

pal Sci JE ore rl

1958: Military attache, Colonel Clyde McBride and seveh other
emrloyees of the offices of the fdlitary, Air, and Naval attaches were
found guilty of the same activity. gm

NZ was caught red-hande’
during a clan estine meeting with an American sry, Was asked to leave the
Soviet Union.

1969: Embassy attache Russell anzhelli, who

1960: Air Attache, Colonel Edmund Kerton, and his assistant, Major
Irving MacDorald were 6xré led from the USSR for rereated attemrts to pene=
frate areas occupied by militery and military-industrial targets. when
they were arrested, a film containing rhotograrhs of military aircraft

and defense enterrrises was found on them.

And this 13 what took rlace in October 1962 in Leningrad. Workers
Vv, A Nikitin and M Ay Nikolayev, the chief of a life-saving station,
. AI Val'ter, and a diver, L. M. Kravchenks caught 6 suspicious rerson in
the vicinity of a military target. He wns acting strangely -- domatimes
talking to himself and then suddenly beginning to clay with the lapels of
his jacket, The workers surmoned the Militia, They told their nrigoner

-5-

to unbutton his raincoat and jacket, where they found a smell tdack in-
strumnt and white cloth rouches skillfully concealed on hia chest. The
farther they went the more they discovered, The pouches turned out to
contain diagrams, charts, mrs, liste of notes; the pocket of the coat
held binoculars and some sort of arall ear phones were attached by tape
to the cloth rouch of a micronhon, from which fine wires ran to the

black instrument.

The rrisoner turned out to be the assistant US Naval Attache,

Raymord Smith, He carried rlans of the rorts of Leningrad and Tallin,

ae reR marks had been mde, giving the pracise locations of moorings,
pasoline tanks, rerair shors, and enterprises related to nort activities.
The intelligence officer's portable recording anraratus held a tare with
almost two hours of recording on it — Smith had dictated the results of
hig observations during a stroll in the area of the military targets. In
addition, Smith was found to te carrying a ministure Minox camera, containing
an exrosed film of an intellirence mture, am! high-rower binoculars, which
permitted him to observe interesting installations from 4 grent distance.

Following Raymond Smith, his namesake Edgar Smith, the Assistant
Air Attache, was caurht in the beginning of 18. Together with two
emrloyees of the US and Pritish air attache offices, Edmund Fvetim and
Commander Anthony Davis, he was trying to carry out reconnaisance of military

tarpets in the Tula area.

The unscrurulous use of the dirlomtic service by Amrican Intelligence
was shown by the scandolous case of Richard Jacob and his collegues, who
misused their official nositions. A secretary-archivist at the US Embassy
tn Moscow, Richard Karl Jacob was caucht red-handed when he wis taking
espionage rerorts, hidden by the traitor Pen'kovskly, froma secret cAChe «
At the same time, Soviet State Security orang found that other employees
of the American Fmtassy had a rart 4n this case. Extraordimry facts were
uncovered: in anticiration of a peearranged call from the spy, Second
Secretary of the US Emmssy, Ralrh Jones, and Attache Hugh Montyomery
stood watch for hours at the telearhone; nt the first sigmil, the Fmbassy
doctor, assistant Air Attache Alexis Davison rushed to a light role with
the sry's mark; assistant arpricvltural attache Rodney Karlson mintained
rersoral contact with the any and received stolen mterijal from him, It
seered that almost all the inhahbitan 8 of the Fmtassy tuilding on Chay-
kovskiy Street wera encared ina single encevor -- servicing the any
Pentkovskiy. In league with their husbands, the wives of the cirlomts
also actively surnorted secret contacts with the traitor, using children's
playfrounds on the boulevards of Moscow and embissy clubs, dirlomtic
recertions, arartments, and «ven washrooms for this rurrose. And although,
in accordance with the rules of dirlcemtic {mmnity, none of these reorle
arrenred on the docket in court, where Pen'kovskly ané his Fnelish nartner
Grevill Wynn ended up, the world learned hew many unusual "“dirlomts”
fhe GIA used to direct the American Embassy in Moacow.

MEK BEM

We live in an enormous and very beautiful country, offering any
foreiener a tourist route to satisfy the most diverse tasts. We hive
much of interest to offer admirers of anticuites. A trip throusth the
USSR can afford great rleasure to the art co ymisseur and to reonle who
are int rested in mture, hunting, fishing, and touring by car. Of course,
this does not exhaust the interests of travellers -- increasing numbers
ef reonle from all over the world want to see with their own eyes the first
Soviet socialist state in history.

- 6 -

True realization of the Leninist rolicy of peaceful coexistence has
resulted in the anrearance of many new rhenomen4, unknown to us during
the rersomlity cult, and among these is foreign tourism in the Soviet
Union. Foreign tourism te growing, each year; more ani more countries are
rarticirating and tha number of puesta who visit us is ancreasing. The
atate is showing them ereater attention on the theory that the more reorle
who see the Soviet Union with their own wyes and get to know its roorle,
the more difficult it will be for bouwgeois nroraganca to grread all
sorts of eock-and-bull stories about the azressivaness of the USSR ard
about its desire to unleash a new World War. Motels and camring sites,
hotels and sanatoriums, pensions and museum, theaters anc concert halls
serve our “oreign guests. Tourists are received with traditional Soviet
hosnitality and we hore their tina in the USSR will be well-spent, that
they will see and learn much, Most tourists, on their return hore, correctly
and kindly tell about the Soviet Union and its peonle, about their cares
and hores. And this helrs to strengthen motual understanding are trust
among reorles, to convince reonle that neaceful coexistence is not 4a
"tactical move” and not 4 "Communist rronmecan’a trick", but a natural
objective rrocess in the develorment of international relations in the

modern world. :

Is this not why tourism has become 4 tarpet of attack for those

who are orrosed to peaceful coexistence? Imrerialist {ntellivzence takes
a two-sided position with regard to foreign tourism 4n the USSR: on

one hand, thay try to use 4t as a loor-hole to carry out intelligence
activity and, on the other, they try to discredit the idea of tourism
4tself, Exrloiting cases when their agents and intelligence officers

have been caught in our country, they hore to frighten honest. reorle out
of their desire to visit the Soviet Union and to get to know the life of
{ts reonle, Placing agents among the tourists, American {ntellizence would
like to rrovoke Soviet authorities into changing their nosition with regard
to foreign guests, into the astablishment of barriers erainst this human
anflux which unites countri73 with aifferent systatse

But, no matter how incenious the arrraaches taken by the CTA lenders,
they cannot force us to 7o tO ms Tren’ Se le have, once enc for all, freed
ourselves from the gusricion Viich roisored our lives in former tines.
This does not mean, hovever, that, when doing avay with the vestiges of
the rersonality cult and the situation of manifold cistrust which went
along with it, 4 narrow-minded cormlacency and jaring about heve taken

{ts rince., To the contrary, the 20th and 22nd Congresses of the CPSU

ane the new Party Prorram ve tought us to tell our real friens fron
our enemies. The whole world knows that the vreat strength of the

Soviet state, its scientific anc technical advances, ite nrowess {n such
great accommlishments, Say, 48 SsMmace research, give our inmerialist enemies
no neace, In the political, economic, ani st-ategic fields, jmeerdalist
circles sre extremely interested 4n renetrating our rAny secrets, Let

Us recall that Allen Dulles was thindng gracifically about tourism when,
during an address at & dinner of the Aeromutical Institute Sn New York,
said as early as January 1960 that "at the rresent time, the outside world
can obtain more information inside the Soviet Union than in the niste

Thia is mrticularly true of infornation concerning the develonment of

the Soviet economye....e How this is actually accommlished cin be easily
seen in cases when State Security organs have uncovered American spies
visiting the USSR with tourist visas and trying to lose themselves in the
mss of reorle who gincerely want to b come acquainted with our country,
with its exranses, its beauties, and ite reorles.

-~7-«

ae

thera anreared 4 shabby Remult auto-
mobile, driven by a 30-year old ship's rachinist from Amsterdam, [bert
Reydon, ami carrying Lou_de Yakher, @ 25-year old merchant rarine navigator,
Sa rassengere Tourists are tourists am their itinerary was generally
typical of all automobile touristst Uzhgorod - Mev - Khar 'kov - Zarorozh'ye®
- Yalta - Odess4 ~ Kiev - Livov =- Vahgorod. If you take this route, you
can see the beauty of Kiev rising from the ashes, 7reen Khar 'kov, the
etable nature of the Crimea with its re~

gigantic Dnerroges, the unforg
mrtable resort cities, and ancient L'vove Sitting around a carm fire

at a camping site in the evening, you can spend many hours in rleasant
and interesting conversatione Ard there's much to photograrh -- in the

cities, the stepnes, forests, and constal regionse

In this influx, however,

All this is nossible wees But Reydon and de Yakher were lest of
ttracted by

all interested in antiquities and lardscarese They were not a
hearty get-togethers around camrfires ard ly the ovrortunity of getting
to know the “Russian miracle’, about. which there are now SO rany rumors
not only in their rative Amsferdem, yut in rerts neor and far which they
have visited. Too often, Reydon and de Yakher tried to deviate from their
{tinerary, too evident was their desire to get into nlaces where Soviet
citizens do not wiah to allow {ndiscreet, foreign eyese The rassengers

of the shabby Remult had a reason for such behavior. Their return

was avaited nt by the relatives and friends who usually fligng themselves
gfeedily on friends returning from distant lands. American Intelligence
residdnts, who had outfitted them for their esnionaze VOyAl®s waited for
the seamen. Long before their trin to the USSR, Paydon and de Yakher
commleted so-called “training” trins. Here tg what Ebert Reydon had to
say about them during the {investigation following his arrest:

We also drove to the rort of Rotterdom. The rurrose was to rractice
photocranhy from a moving car and also to give 4 detailed descrirtion
of an American destroyer at anchor in the rort. De Yakher and I", con-
tinued Reydon, "studied albums of photograrhs showing various military
targets: rocket and radar installations, various tyres of tanks, jet
rlares, srecial vehicles for hauling rocket equirmente They showed what
a rocket base, an airport, a tank storage field should look like. I re-
call that most of the vhotograrhs came from military ard air rarades in
Moscow."

The American intelligence officera outfitted the “tourists” with
unusual care and, it must be said, with considerable foresight: four
cameras, dozens of color and black-arnd-white- films, a surply of telesconic
lenses for long-ranre rhotograrhy, Coma sses y powerfuz binoculars, rort.able
transistor radio receivers, and many other things which might be useful
4n carrying out their esrionage missions And their wission wad very crecifle

_ "We were to try", said Je Yakher after his arrest, "to remeirive Ah
airrort and automobile nlant in the region of Drerro-etrovsk and Zaporozh lye
and, for this rurnose, they showed us MAPS drawn on tracing mirev, of the
gurrosed locations of these targets. We were given sinilar assignrents
with regard to Umani and Belaya TserkvaeesIn tne region of one village,
the mme of which I can't recall without checking my notes, we-were to
find and photogranh an enterrrise which was surrosed to produce rocket
fuel...In the area of Uzhgorod-L'vov, they orcered us to locate, descrivce,
and rhotograrh railroad lines, trains passing through and being forred
there, bridres, racar installations, high-voltage tra srission lines, and
also branch automobile reads leaving the min route...» And go on ard 50
forth...» The gries familiarized themselves with photocories of the Crinean
coast, with a chart of the rort of Gdessa, and were even advised to go to
a ricture pallery, from which they could most safely secretly rhotograrn
the installations at this norte

«~ 8 -

In actuality, “ulfillment of thia mission wie not 80 sirrle as
vere the "training trirs’. In one instance 4 militiaman returned Reydon
and de Yakher to the road when they tried to turn off toa reint, shall
we say, "not listed in the tourist guide”. Another time, emrloyees of
"Infurist" exrlained that there ig no easy access road to the village with
the rare "which is difficult to remember". On the third, fourth, and fifth
tries, they sinrly told them that "foreign tourists are not allowed".
‘nvartheless, the uninvited miests were able to comrile esrionave notes
which were far from unimrortant to our security. A customs check at
Uzhgorod turned un a diary in the nossession of "de Yakher. He had jotted
down colorful notes such a8 w kn - radar tower to the left, __km - viaduct,
__kn - airrort on the right, km - convoy of military vehicles, _.a =
turn to the right to 4 forbidcen zone".

The search of these two tourists wis a rather unrieas: nt rrocess
for our customsmen. It doesn't enter their heads to search the thousands
of honest and well-meaning foreigners who rass daily through control roints
on the Soviet border. But Peydon and de Yakher were so nervous at the
customs house, behaved so suspiciously, tint they attracted attention.
There's no roint in saying thet there's no smoke without fire eesee

We'll skin the details of the espionage epopee of Reydon uixl de
Yakher, which sre, rerhars, not without interest -- how they fell in the
laps of American Intelligence, how, in rorticular, the "tender-nearted
Yankees" cama to chose carefree seamen, how they convinced them that an
espiompe vovage to the Soviet Union would be little more than 4 re~
creation] trip, similar to one that Reydon had taken rreviousiy in Shanghai.
In this article, we are interested in sovetning else: American intelligence
persistently tries to use every possibility for esplomge against the USSR.

In the western countries, there are imany peorle who rmssiomtely
hate our country. One of these is Adolf Werner , who once headed a cerart]-
ment in the store of the Schneider firm in jarlsruhl. He jointa the Nate
sonal Socialist Party as early as 1940 and remined in it until 1945,
until the morent when the Americans captured him. Up to this tire,

Werner served for a fairly long reriod of time ina “Death's Herd! infantry
brimde of the SS, fought apainst our country, received first ani secon
deprea Iron Crosses, aml, when the Soviet Army smashed Hitler's military
mchine, barely had time to escare to the heste During the postw:r yesrs,
he truned to journalism and, Cron time to time, published travel notes

in the best German rress about trirs in various countries) mostly, in the

capitalist world.

The Americans didn't lose sight of Werrer. Convinced that nis Nazd
yast wns sufficiently forgotten and his reim3 as 4 journalist firmly
established, they suggested that he mike a tourist trio (with the americans
paying the bill, of course) to the USSR for the nurpose of writing "travel
notes", This bs how it was at first only, however. lIater, as verner
admitted during the {nvestigation, the representative of American intelli-
gence, Mfohnson (really Paver) didn't hide the fact that he expected Werner
to provide information of a military-intelligence mature. In mrticular,
Jonnson-Tauer insisted that Werner "travel slowly through the USSR, be
observant and attemrt to locate am) describe military targets, airports,
military units, radio stations, radar installations, movement of troops,
and also bridges and other structures". However, according to Johnson
and other American intelligence officers, who nrerared Verner for this trip,
this “can be done eaaily and would involve no danger". ‘Nevertheless, they
provided the sry with a srecial ball-roint ren before hig cerarture era
exnlained how it ig used. "During instruction", said kerner Jater"I wrote
several secrat writing notes for rractice, And when they develored “nem
for ma, I saw the words I had written". To ensure that Werner's trio would
go without serious incidents, the Americans fave him a srecial address
"Syeden, Samtorium Agra, Titsina, Elke Khannelora Detmers", to which he
was to write every week and send hyrothetical post cards fron "Adi",

- 9 -

L

In his own Volkswagon, Werner and his wife, Hermina, set out across
Austria, Hungary, and Rumania to the Soviet Union. Soon, in the region
of the highway from Kiev to Kharkhv, Werner was arrested while taking
photographs of military equipment. An examination of their baggage
found an espionage diary. Between the lines of ordinary text were hidden
notes written with the pen described above. "In sesespart of the city
a radio tower" "In oeeee ed radar installation". "In, 22S aw soldiers of
the air force’. "At kilometer number eeveanother radar installation."
“Trucks numbers eeeeecarrying troops with black arm patches".

Nothing could help Werner and his wife: not their intelligence
instructions, nor their ball-point pen for secret writing, nor the
address in Sweden. Having been found in the act of espionage, they were
sent to court and tried.

Life shows that American intelligence officers experienced in
hostile actions against the Soviet Union "have forgotten nothing, but

have learned nothing.

Speaking about the CIA building in Longley, wo should mention
ong item which ta of great importance for tho entire systoan of American
esplonogo. The authors of the book The Invisible Govermiont write
about this as follows: ‘Among the special structures is oa sclentifio
laboratory the construction and equip,ing of which cost 200,00) dollers,
Here the CIA is porfectin: some of {tea miniaturized types of weapons
end {8 developing inviaible inka, spectnl explosives, and other dovices.
One of the really astonishing tuetrumente at Lencley ig tho electronic
bruin, which stores and iasucs mountains of infomation which arrives
at headqusrters.... This brain ig celled ‘Walnut’ and wae developed
especially for the CIA by IBM, A neces ary document 1s planned before
the obsarver with the help of the photo-tape operation of tha ‘Intsllofax.'
The ‘Walnut’ aud the ‘Intellofax,’ unlike man, operate without error.”

These so-called allent sirvices conoti tute technical ucans of
intellicoance. ‘The development of such means loans on the entire
technical might of the US, as wall es on the principle of sparing no
dollars’

First among thy chiof ieona cf technical intelligenca, undoubtedly,
is aorial tnte'ligance. Iwsiediataly after World War II, spucial aerial
units of tie VIA began systenatic fliehts along the Soviet border, and
they later tried to ponetrota Soviet air space. In May 1960, thea
mapezine Slectronica gave tatoresting data in this regard: Since April
1950, the US had attempted 81 times to penetrate thu air space and
territorial waters of the Govlet Union. The magazine noted rith
unconcealed raprot that in all casas tha violators were met by tho
defenders of the Soviet borders and that 20 of the aircraft-violotors
did not return to thoir basas.

In 1954, a spactal extonsive provran of serial photography of Soviet
territory becan which involvod the us3 of high-altitude drifting balloons
and spy planes. The first attempts to penutrite for intelligunce purposss
the air space of the USK and the comtriey of the soofalist canp with
the uso of the billoons wore undertakon in 1986, But despite the
oxponditure of vast funds, the calculation on the balloons was not
justified. The air defense covored the Soviet sky well. Thon the stress
switchod to the use of strategic alreraft: jet aircraft which wore
modifications of the B=47 bomber, as wall an recunnaissance variations
of the B-52 and B-58 bombers. The Americans created tno types of high-
altitude aircraft, the Lockhacd U-2 and the Martin RB-57D, specially for
Teconnaissance flighta,

Tie Soviet people know from the materials of the trial of the pilote
spy Gary Powars, who was shot down over Sverdlovsk on 1 May 1960, how
well “pleted the “sky esplonece” was. The intelligence servicus spared
no efforte to obtain photographs of Coviet militery objectivea. The
CIA heade were supported in this nattor by tho heads of American

-ll -

Rewer erent

diplomacy. Christian Herter, US Jeeratary of State at that time,
reported to the Senate not with ut roason that "the bonefit derived
fron aoritel reconnaissance juatifies the risk involved.” It should
be considered that the technical aquipment of the "sky spies" penilts
then to obtain photographs fru high vltitulss. Life thus described
the enpobillties of tho ap;aratus on ths notorious U-2: The perking
place of motor vehicles is empty when the caera shutter clicks,
However, the developed nogative claarly shows the tracks of the motor
yohicles which were there before the photoyraph was taken. a person
reading a newspaper in his garden is not vinible to the pilot flying
at an altitude of 40,000 fovt. But the caneri in the aircraft takes

a picture in which one can reed ‘he hoadlines of the newspeper in the

erson'a honda."
p

The CIA 18 not satisfied vith this and continues to pertact the
moano of “sky espionage." At Edwardes Daso (in California), tests rere
held in 1964 the purpose of which, as tha Ausotlatod Press rep rted,
vas to "take high-quality spy photographs curl y flight at a eceod
of 2,000 miles per hour."

Following the olrcraft reconnaissauce ran the cosmic recornalssance
which woe bogun in recent years. The ClA, with the help of the Anericasan
Air Force, is developing reconnaissance satellites (by 1962 tha US
had launched nore than 100 satellites of various types, including, 40
of nilitery significance). The plane for sich aatellites were ;ivon
various names: Big Brother, Sentry, etc. In 1059, the Sentry ylan waa
divided into two programa: ides -- satellites for the long-ren¢e
detection of iC laumches; and Semos -- spy satellitos for tho
reconiaisssance of ground taorots (aircraft :ases, ICBM bases, industriel
objectives, the sea fleet, ete.). A apeciul aerial photo apparatus ei ther
automatically or cn eaimsnd fro. tuo ground photographes ground objectives
fron on orbit 220 lan in heicht, «© -tinsuisring ot Jocts one meter in length.
For ae 15-yeor program from 196) i 1973 it wes pleaned to launch 119
such spy satellites (49 in 1959-1154, 78 in 1965-1970, and 30 in tre

following 5 yeors).

Another type of technicnl equipment usod by the CIA is radio
intelligence, or the systen of "long-range eors." It consists of 1
network of radio-monitoring posts alony the border of tha Soviut Union,
Rast Cermany, Czechoslovekia, Hungry, on other socialist countrivs.
YThoy are ongaged in radio intarcept, paying apsacial attention .o
commiunications among units of the Soviut Amy in order to disclose the
loecotion and chief tactienl ond technicul data of Soviet radar stutions,
cuided-missile direction systems, radcivenevizstion systens, antiaircraft
defonse facilities, etc. Radio intelligence ia conducted both fron the
ground and from aircraft of the U-2, <J-57D, RB-47, RB-52, and RB-08 types
which make regular flights along tha Soviet borders.

- 12 -

The central point of important technical facilities is the NSA,
the mo3t hush-hush American intelligence soryice. But, a3 to known,
a secret svonor or later boc.mes known. Wi litem Martin and Vornon.
hitehell, employees of thiu sgency nho recently rejected their
Americnn oltizenship and asked the Soviet Union for political asylum,
soid that the NSA is otudying top secrets of aach stato -- the cipners
end codes for secrat comiunication. wore taan 10,000 employoss of the
agency occupy 8 building tho size of which 13 analler only shan tha
Pentovon. quipped with modern hanchinery ard instruments, including
large slectronic computers, and using more than 2,000 intercopt posts,
they record all the coded renorts and raports sent in open text of alnost
all the countries of the world, including, urkoy, Italy, France, Indonesia,
the United Areb Republic, Uruguay, Yugoslavin, and others.

"In September 1958," iartin snd itchall reported at a icoscow preas
conference, “an American C1) erosgad the 3oviot border fron ‘urkey and
trespassed into Soviet Armenia. Tria wdireraft did not return. ‘The US
governmsnt, as uSial in such caso3, rapertad ih a ‘covor' story that the
aircraft had ellavadly beon cetiering scientific data and had violnted
the Soviet border by accident. Tha US maintained that the C-120 had
been shot down over the territory of the Soviet Union for no food reason.
In the second helf of the day, »-t Gen Join Saaford, the director of NSA,
{in speaking on the internal radio broadcasting network of the afuncy,
denanded that the employees refrein from discussion of any questions
regarding the flight of the C-120." wNorgover,a highly-pleced omployee
of the agency told Martin that «n board the C-130 were electrorics
specialists and equipment, for int. ree;ting the signals of Soviat radar

stations.

The American intellicence services are literally doing everything
to learn Soviet military-technic:1 secrets. Here is one such exnomple.

"The Ruosian commercial liner Aeroflot Lad just lernded and tie
porkors of tho Vienna airport boarded the plane to clean it up bsrore
the return flight,™* seys E. Tu ly in hls vook. “While the aircraft
was being readied, a man ino dal sult approached the man who cullected
the creepings and unnoticoably give ht) monay. Aftor this, the collector
cathered the suvepings fron tt) -uvriet sirecaft, put thom in a hand cart,
and guided it to iis room. Cuddor cy this maa appsured there and clolied
the box containing tho aweepi «5 [rem she Soviet aircraft. He put the
box in the back seat of the car and wnt hone, Bebind 4 closed door he
corefully examined them: tom magazines, paper napkins, onpty bottles,
breed crusts, broken plates, and a bent clothes heuger. Several days
later, the banger wes delivered to one of the large offices at CIA head-
quartors in Washington. The peroon rho signod the receipt for obtaining
the hanger was delighted. For many nonthse thoy (American intellicance
services = @ S.) had worked to gather inforintion on a new Soviet long-

- 13-

ee ETE RR ES RT

ronee bomber. They hed cathored much informaticn on the aircraft but
were unable to learn onything about ity raacge and bow load. Hovever,
they knew that the shavinge which remained after mecienical procossing
of the wine were reneltod and used to manufacture 4 s:oclal type of
clothes hencer. finally they had such s henger. with the help of
spectro and chemical enolysis, the exourta were ablo to learn whet

type of motal alloy was used to manufacture the hanger. with this
formuln at their diaposal, the OIA dotoimined from whot the bomber wing
was iiade, and little was noeced after this to caleulete the range and

bomb load of the aircraft."

The Americon intelligence sgorvices could flatter themselves with the
success of this experience. However, to the chogrin of its agents, the
hangor hod not been made from tha shavings obtained in processing the
bomber wing. Nevertheless, it ts important to note tho scrupulougnes3
with which tha American intellirence 3arvicea gather infor.iation which
intereste them, as well as the many hopes which they ontrust with their
"silent sorvices,™ which the vast Anerican menopolios give to the CIA,

a Sonerhsre in the CLA arcnives is e photurraph of tha spy iantkovskly
whicn {3 not needed nom by anybody. A similar photo;rnph is gathering
dust in the safes of British intelligence. Moth photoraphs wors taken
on the anme dey snd hour, at the ca.e place, by the same photo:rapher,
and, evidently, on tho seaie film. The difference consints only in the
fact that in one frane the spy was photoyrmphed in the unifon: of an
Anerican army colorel, and in the other, in the uniform of a British
colonel. One can imagine 4 pathetic picture or recruitment: Tro
full-dress uniforms wore laid out before the spy as if »wromising him
dual protection. fosing befors tho lens, the traiter dressed in the
uniform of one, then tho other, state, calculating on wiich horse it
‘ 16 more profitable to mount. Of course, each side in this unusuel
, spectacle, which occurred in London at a secret abode of iritisn
intellirence, secretl: felt that the main catch would fall to them.
But the reoruiting agents were pursuine a, 30 to speak, higher political
goal: This masquorade, in the conception of its organizers, syadolicelly
personified a now atage in the development of an Anoricon-firitish
intellicence slliance.

In 1947, Allen Dullos wrote in a monorandum in heunor of the future
American intelligence services that the newly created intellignace
organization, the CIA, must bacome o "univorsally recognized organ
which maintains ties with tha central tntelli¢-ence services of other
countries." Sixteen years later tha sama Dulles, who has alroady been
dismissed from leadership of the intelligence sorvices, noted in omming
up the results of wiiat has beon done that “one of the most gratifying
foatures of our intelligence activities recantly ia the inorersing
cooperation between the Anorican intelligence services and their

-~ 14 «~

ee rs oe

corresponding orgenizetione in all countries of the free world which

are united with US eee”

Of course, the ex-chief cf American intelligence hes in mind
tre union under the flag of W.L0, SRAPO, and other blocs of forces which
are operating against the socialist camp. The Atlentic union of
intelligence services exists just as does the Atlantic rdlitery-political
ploe of governacnts and gonerol staffs. Andjust as the US is the
leader in the bloc of governments and staffs, the CIA, which is expending
every effort not to lot the ruine out of its hends, pleys the main role

in the intelligence olilieands.

Since the very boginning of its existence, tho CIA has tried to take
{in hond the intelligence sorvices of England, «est Gemany, Frencse,
Felriun, Holland, and Canada in order to use their rusources iu the
interests of implementing their own ctrates.c plans. Ties with the
CIA are quite extensive. In the staff of tho high cornand of the 1ATO
arned forces in uurope thore i3 a Special Intollicgonce Administration.
Under the central organ of the Atlantic atratecy there 1s a *Fourcent
Group of the :Ulitary Cormittee of NAYU," end in vashington there 18
a “Suropean Coordinating Coruiit:as" for exchanging intelligoncs.
Doninating, tho coordinating administration which directa under.rsimnd
netivitios against tie countries of the /arca® Pact are the CLA and the
Intelligence Departrent of the US Dejertmont of pefense. Intellizence
services also exist in the comiand steffa at “theatres of military
activities of WaTu -- North Europe (Norway, Donmark!, Cential Bureype
(Jest Germany, Frence, Belgium, Holland, Luxembiurs, Englnnd), South
Europe (Italy, Greece, Turkey), aid the Nediterranean comiand (tha
lediterranoan Sea and the straits).

In 1949, american intelli ens survices ecquired the risht & assign
their representatives to intel li .ce organs of MATO countries. iioreover,
the US hoe bilateral intelli; 9ec) agracsnients rith the covernmantas of a
nuiber of states. In 1957, coibin3ad com .issions of representatives of
American end British intelligaico services, which had existed duving the
ror, wore restored. A joint intolligencs canter is operating in London,
the so-called “Joint Intelligence Bureaus of thres countries -- the
US, England, and Canada. There is also a "Japanese-Anerican Coruittee on
Security hatters." When there is no agreewant on cooperation, tha oTA
prectices an “exchange of informatio..." Such are te varied foims of
control of the CLA over the {ntelligence services o° the countries which
balon: to the moin imperialist blocs -~ NaTO, SeAvo, SENTO, end tho GAS.
Activoly used for intollicence interests, of cours63, are various types of
{nternational subversive organizations supported by American inteliigence
services, such as the “Cormittes of Free furope,” the "Anti-Cormunist
League of Asian Peoplos," the “Inter-American Conference for the
Protection of the Continent,” otc.

ZAG. 6

A spocial place in this total offunsivoe of Americon intelligence
services has beon occupied and centinues to be occupied by the long,
complex, and highly contrndictory relations «ith the intelligenca services
of wast Carmany. It is well known that in Vast Germany immediatly after
the war, the Americans secured for thonselves the intellicence organization
of General veinherdt Gehlen. This neane agein appeared recently on the
paces of the Western preas in connection with the "sansational change"
in the leadership of the Geren espionage organe. In order to judge
what is being concenled behind thie fuss, wo will look into somo facts,

Gehlen i939 one of the omjious proéucta of the brown Nelch, a .erson
who always presents, and mest prolably is prenented, inn halo of mystery.
In the 10 years after the war, tie wostem press did everything to create
more of a baze sround this persons lity anu to make him, and at the same
time the “vast-Cermaon intollic¢encs services restored by hin, a derk end
olso a romuntte clory which arou 6: ‘ntere:st, admiration, and feur tn the
rin in the street with a weo'ness for sansetion. Utilized here are
falsificaticna of his biography and the dlasemination of stunning
legencs about nobdle orlgin, about the former "genaral fron ecplona;e,"
about tho fantastic present life of the “man behind the scene", tho
“doctor,” “imwaber 30,7” “Schneider,” the “an without a foce," and cod

knows what elas,

However, Gehlen's past diffore little from the past of many rosred
under German militarism. “he dizzy careor of the chief of modern UGamnan
espicnace was preceded by on ordinary officor'a biography. He was born
in 1902 in the femily of on obdor-lieutanant in the Kaiser's amny, ha was
too young to appear in world ‘lor I, he trained in the Reichswehr, nud he
bocame an officer and an adjutunt. He served for one year ae adjucant
oO: the firet deputy chief of the manersl staff of the ground forces and
later continued his service in operations headquarters under Generel
von Ionstein. In 1940, Captain Gehlon was commmicsations officer
betwoon Amuy Comander-in-Chief von Brauchitsch and Sush, coiviande: of
the 4th Army, and the tank groups of von Goth and Guderian. Ad jutent
and staff duty brought Gehlen no militory glory, but instead it expounded
his ties in the hicier circles of the jehrmacht and dsteruined his
future career, Judging by everyth.ng, Captain, then -‘ajor, then, during
the offensive against the Soviet Union, Lieutenant Colonel, Gehlen a3
that intermodiate figure who organized both tho military caste and the
Nazi-Cestapo environient. As o true national-soctalixt and not an outsider
from the OS which stuck to the military uniform, but a rogular soldier
by heredity, he was on good terms with both the 6ene-els and the
Reichsfuelirer clique. From Brauchitach he trunsfered to adjutant to
General Halder, and from Halder, to the operations headquartors of the
gonerel staff, where Heusinger appointed him loader of the "East"
group.

In the spring of 1942, Colone) Gatlen held the post of chief of the

- 16 -

dopartment of "Foreign Amiles of the East” in the general ateff of the
ground forcos, The new leader of front line intellifonce mide no

atteipt to undermine Aduiral Ceneria, chiof of the Abwehr, altiough in

his position he could be considered his colleague and not his subordinate.
The sonior and fimior collesgues shared spheres of influence wher sby
Gehlen used in every way possible the experiencé, ties, ond advice of

the adniral. Thus, at the advice of Conaris, he engaged not only in the
traditional collection of information in tse aphero of the interosts of
the amailes to which he was attached, but al6o in thorough secret-servi ce
activities in the East, the oryonization of eabotaga and underground
propaganda acainat the Soviet Union, and also intre-srny counterintolligence
and police tracking of the personnel of the Cemnan stuffs ond units.

Thus, the ordinary aray intollijonce department undo> Gehlen's leadership
bocase a powerful, essentially indepoendcont intolligenca-sabotage antl-
Soviet organization supported by its own police servico. Cehlen was
flexible. With all his anbition, ho did not ignore or avoid any of his
suporiora. lle cooperated with both Canaris end Himmler, and thereby
operatod his strongthening secret service woll throuvh all the troublos

of internal dissontions. Hitler ond Himmler valued the activities of

hia secret service, which was fro. of legsl’and moral norms and which
ruled in occupied territories without mercy even for its own regular
intel.icence officers, less for the militory prisone-s and civilian
population. As ig asserted in the biocraphy of Gehlon, who was called

by Himnler's men the "Grey Hand," it wus his spy service which carried
out tie entire operation with the traitor Vlasov and his people. It ia
not surprising that Gehlen, resourceful and gifted not only in espionage
but s190 in manouvering on the hirher level, was ablo on the complete defeat
of Fasciut Germany to retain in his control the nucleus of the socret
police, its connections, and, apparently, the main documents. He was

a “prisoner” not as 6 war criminal) who deserved tha ro ps long aco but

as one :ho enjoys luck end the waiting mercy of the victors, in the role
of a potential collaborator whose services the victors undoubtedly needed.
Gehlon had considered beforehand the trand of the post-war policy of
American imperialism in relation to dita military ailiss. All the

secret advances of the American intellivence services toward Canaris,
himnler, and the "general opposition” were yell known ic him, but be did
not gat mixed up in such dangerous contucts before it was time. hen

the time came, he brought to Americon-British reaction 1 ready-made .
organization which depond on him complotely and was irofirective without
hin. This permitted him to escape the noose. After gethering the
archives of his departuent, Gehlon surrendered to the American authoritiss
and asked to be put in touch with the heads of the inte:ligence sorvices,

Tully states that "in Washington the government understood well that
an extremely Important military prisoner had fallen into the hands of the
Americans. Gehlen was irmediately put to work. He worked for 18 montha
to syetematize his materials on the Soviet Union and to compile indexes snd

~ 17 -

master indoxes in the Snglish la: ;uaso Cor their use by American
intelligonce, Hoe was then ¢ivou the task of eroating a smell amny of
socret agents. ile was allocated several million dollars and was esked
to head espionage in the Soviet sone for the berefit of the US.”

A new, extensive spy organization sprang up under Gehlen's leadership,
Its staff was Located in Pullech, neer liunich, and for severel yeors
the spy netvork served as the chief weapon of American intelligsnce
in subversive activities against the Soviet occupation troops in Germany
and against the young German Democratic Republic.

In the history of the secret war there have been previous ilatances
of cooperation of intelligence services of two or sevoral countries
(for exa:iple the US-Zneland and Cerrony-Italy-Japan). But not once did
it reoch the point where the intellirence organization of one stata
(in this case the Hitleritea state) on the whole, with all its live
and dend inventory, transfor to the services of another country (the US).
The creation of this wiprocedanted “symbolsis,* as ne saw it, wos not
unnatural. To say nothing of the cynupathy of long duration of Amarican
intelligence heads for the experience of the Gernsan intelligence sarvices,
the union of Reinhardt Cohlen and Allon Dulles after world var II net
the urgent interosts of the most reactionary monopolist cireles of the
US ond Vest Corny. In all this they had their o.n, impertoliat logic:
Becouse the American imperialists had taken a cour3o toward the
"antico'.iunist crusade,” they simply needed the help of the former
sorvices vf Hitlorites, thoir black experiance, thoir practices, o:.d methods.
Such figures in Nazi intelligence as Cehlen understuod purfectly tliat
it was the American militeriatsa who restored and retained their apparatus,
Allow humiliation, soarvice, toadying work under any colonela and gonorela
from acrvoss the ocsan, but to maka up for it there in the perspective of
changing in the future from servants to “jmior partuors,* then to the
role of equal partnors, oud lator, siiuply .adepandert colleagues in the
near future, In brief, the end justicied :16 moans, Gehlen played a large
gaine with @ long-range coal. Sverytiing tiat he did, going first tron
lackey to "junior partner” of Allon vullos, rapeated in miniature tho
came of Adenauer, Se also for a short time wis simply a servant of
t'e US but later enthered the strongth end became an independent figure
in military and political relaticns.

Gehlen operated with the cunning: and inatdious modesty characteristic
of hii. Fron June 1945 to early 1950, his organization existed on funds
of the US military intelligence, and then the CIA besan to subsidize it.
The oxact amounts cf American funds spent by Gohlen are not knorm, bu:
competent people have ovaluated tham at 20 million marks (5 million dollars
por year). The correctness of this evaluation can ba judged by comparing
it with the 1956 budget, when Cehlen's service was transfered to Vest
Germany and received 23.1 million marke per year, ora little less than

- 18 ~

Seer ee og ew

Se ot Ol eed

6 million dollars. Let us ruomber that the intelligence service of
Canarias spent 31 million marks in 1943, or 11.7 million dollere.

After 1956, Gehlon's budget began to erow fast, ond in 1965 it reached
58.1 million marks (more thon 14 million dollars), The Bonn intelilgence
mochirory now receives more funds than Hitler spent for tho intelligence
services of Caneris at the height of World jer Il,

Thus, Gehlen ond his revanchist inspirere deftiy twisted their
overseas patrong around thoir little fingers, using their potronace
ond millions of dollars to retain and restore the litlerite military
intelligence services, already more poworful end under o new, modern
mask. ihe Jest-Gemwn government did not naed any additiunal forces
wien it decided to legalize Cehlen'sa organi=-ation and chance it
officinliy to the "Fodorml Intellic¢ence Sorvice” (fiw)., This is also
unprecedented, Thoso who nursed Fascism, evidently, for good reason
are celebrating the victory in such @ lone cane with Anerican intelligence,
the neture of relations with which is now dotermined not dy waslirgton
but by Bonn. The memory of the mak with which Gehlen escaped with
the help of the Americans can be rotained stemally by him snd his
descendants, But the cause is tirat nd foremost. Thore 1: no juntor
partner. ‘There is an intelligonce systorn whose activities :ust be seon
with apprehension by Allen Dulles and his successor, John iicCone.

Of course, both intelligence services remain partners in anti-g
Soviet matters. But the "Federal Intelligenae Service” is a successor
of the Abwohr just as is the Bonn state -- a continuer of tho expansionist
schomes of the Third reich, Today tho point ia turned toverd the Tast,
tomorrow Lt can be turned tovord the West. This has happened in the past.
Thet 19 why contradictions are evidently rending tho heads of American
intellivence., who is better, a new heod of ,ost-Cerman intelligence or
the old chiof, who 18 crafty but who ores his life to his pretectors? The
US now supports the old chiof. «tren voices vere raised in 1963-1964
concerning the necessity of “romoving Gehlen,” the Anericans insisted
that he ramgin in his post.

such are the relations now within tho Intelligence alliance in the
Atlantic asyoctation. The law of the junclo is now operating here more
atrongly then in any other fieid of political life of the vestern vorld,.
Yoars pass and tiankind will learn the sruth about the ‘inter-f'amily life*
of what one would think are very solid impertelist alliances. Low
monolithic the Barlin-Rore-Tokyo Axia appeared, how many joint bloody
octions were undertaken by this Axis ayainst tho couse of peace and
arainst all mankind, how onthuéinstical ly and wianinously admiral
Canoris and Genorel Ritter cooperated in organizing tha putech of Franco
against the republican government in GSpainit But in Czechoslovakia, from
the tine of the now fanous Black Lakes, supersecret archives of the
Hitlerite intelligence services were recovered and the entire norld
learned that the so-called Axis was not so solid, It turns out that

idmmler conducted intellijjnce operations not only sgoinst
their military onemies but also scainot their loyol accomplices. It

{a learned thot the Gostapo had to follow not only the porticipents or the
opposition ond the partisans, but evon Count Chiano, idnister of roreim
Affairs of Fascist Italy, and Later Iiussolini himself! Is there any
reason to suggest that these sans lawa of the juncle do not also

exist in the present alliance of the imperialist world? Of course they
exist, and we do not bave to wait lore for exposure of the present

discord ond contradictions. They are deity, revenled each day, snd there
43 no nood to sink to the botton of nev Black Lakes for the fecta which
charactorize the mutual discords in the carp of the purtners. The Westem

fron time to time generously prasents then, ac:utimes in pursuit
tha analysis of which

Canaris and

press
of sensation snd sometimes for other secret reasons

there is no sense in sponding tite.

4@ bove spoken above about the disclosures tiade by tho two workers
of oA, iitchell and iwartin, in 1960. They revealed to the world certain
secrets of tha intelitgence activities of the US govemient. Awng thease
secrets is espionage against their own allies. Here sre certain excerpts

fron 6tetements by litchell and kartin: "‘#rgm our wor experience at
NSA, we know thet the Us ig successfully reading thy socret corresponde.ice
Of wore than 40 countries including its allieser.g.. Vha NGA has a
'Helio” dorartnen* which studios the codes and cipherir3 systen of the
US allies and noutral countries.... The American govelmnent has gone
so far that it hos bagun to recruit agents from anong those who serve
{ta allios.... The US government gave money to a ciphar clerk working
{in Vashington in the embassy of one of the allied coun‘ries for information

which helped to decipher coded telerraoms of this ally.”

This was confirmed in a statement by fornor HOA employee V. Uamilton,
who stated that e worked in the “Hello” department and that “this
departnent is encaced {n deciphering correspondonce of countries of the
Liiddlo Taat, including Iren, Turkey, Scypt, Libya, ‘iorocco, Athiopia,
the Cuden, and Greece. All their corresponduice is intarcepted by a
vranch of MCA in Cyprus. Intercept stations are also located in Beirut
and on Crote. All the intercepted telorrais ore sent by radlo through
Tangier to the US, where ve deciphered and translated then." Hamilton
soid tiat “all conversations botweon military units of Jorden, fraq;
and Turkey were intercepted by NSA regardless of the text -- cleor
or coded." Hamilton also i.saintained that NSA is working to reveal the

codes of othor allies of tHe US.

In 1961 on the pages of four newspapers -- the French Conbat,
English Daily Herald, Turkish Cumkuriyot, end Italian Giustitsia -- there

appeared letters which were similar in content by an anonomous employee
of American intellignnce services. The suthor of the letters also

Gara ean 4 etaneso ot as0i :
reported instances of espionage by the US against their own allies.

= 30s

wee

In particular, he sent to the four eiitorial toards photographic coples
of o bulletin of Amorican {ntellicence of 13 July 1959 which contained
intelligence data on British troops in tho wiiddle ZSast. Similar
information on tho armed forcos of Wost Curmany wes reported in a

documont of 22 January 1960.

"The US,* stated the respectable Dutch aawspaper De Telogref on
9 March 1964, “is conducting espionare not only against the communist
and enemy countries. It ie alco conducting esplonege against ita
NATO allies.” The newspaper quoted fro. 2 vock by Sancho de Gramon
entitled The Secret War and published in 19635. The author prisunted
examples of US intelligence activities eceinst tolland.

If these are the facts which characterize the attitude of American
intelligence toward states uhich are allies of the US, what {a its
attitude toward copitalist countries which do not pelong to NAT?
Buch is known edout CIA activities aceinst the legal governent of
India, Ceylon, Cyprus, Burma, Prozil, Canbodia, and other stetes.
other words, the doctrino o! “tocel aspicnace™ has beon adopted by
Americon intelligance officials Jru. !e64s und his accomplices with all
its attributes. as Allen Dul o.3 statad jaaoy times in domanding that his
subordinates gather informnation “about all countries,” life is such that
it is necessary to conduct "espionauge all against all." Old history
is being repeated in a now way.

In

There 19 a concord of Western intelligenca services, of course,
but the contradictions among them, just as among their governnents,
are not ceasing. In the present situation of hegeneny of Americn
imperialism, the main line o° these contradictions passes betueon the
CIA and all the other bourgeois intelligence servicos, especiolly between
the CLA end the BND.

Quite recently, on 29 Auguat 1964, the “rench journolist Goo.¢6
Anderson published in Combat an article under the oxprossive title
"The Cermmon Secret Service Turne ivny From Waahington.” Andersen wrote
that “the rivolry botwoon varis and .ashirgton in the strugele to
croate with conn a political, diplomatic, and stratogic axis has entered
6 new phase and threatens to spread to one difiierlt sector which can
ensure final victory. “e are not speoking about Adenauer's note or hie
telephone talks or about the Munich piot against Erhard-Cchroeder, vut
about tie reform and crew leadership of the German espionage OFrjanS.ese
Little by little the BND organization (vaderal Interligence Servicos),
hoaded by Gehlen, has apsorbed the iw organization (counter intelliyence)
which is responsible for military sacurity and for protecting the Bundeswohr,
ond it has severely limited the rights of the Federel Organization vor
Protecting the Constitution. Until now, only the By. was subordinate to
the chancsllor through the mediation of his atate secretary, which was
Globke. Recently, without any of the publicity characteristic for such

Pay) ae

operations, which are connected with the Abwohr (intelligence), the

Bonn Council of idnisters made organizationel chanese Yenceforth

the Mw will not 06 subordinate to the office or the federal chancellor
but will? be under Heinrich Xrone, “who 18 yosponsible in tho covernnent
for complex planning and for the coordination of national defonso."
Svorytody Mos that Krono ig one vf tie closest friends o2° Adenauer,
whon he sould prefer to have a3 hid succOssleces Even ofter the
fodceral government took this orgnization under ita control, the former
Abwehr, known 89 a Very efiieicnt organization {n the field of exploring
tho ground end gothering inforretion im Zest aurope, constantly supplied
voiuabdle information to its colleagues in London and Jashingtone These
two capitals fear thet henceforth the invisivle army of Genoral Cenlen
will turn its vack to them ond engage in activities detrinenteul to them
-- working for the cause and axis dear to the heart of Aderouvr, Strauss,

and their friends."

More is nothing gurprisiing, aveut this, of course. It mikes no
no difference whether Gehien or krone heads Jjost-Golren espicnugo. vhie
cub.ot even be eunsiderod a3 ‘le west stim er a doparture from
subordination of tho revonchist orjuniza tion nurtured by the anerican6.
You must reap whet you have acwn. The discord) with the West- 3nsen
militariats constitute merely a vory vivid moni fectation at tie preacent
stare of the effect of ell thoso wolf laws wignin the wolf'a oump.
Preeioaly taot which was stated in the Yarty Program occurs with strict
regularity: “Tha main contrudiction of the proseant world -— %1.3
contradiction botwaen socialisin end capitalism -- does not relieve the
deep contradictions which are tearing epart tho capitalist world."

Although the crushing defert of Coldwater shows that the anerican
votor favors peaceful ocexistence and cp,0538 War, WS cannot but consider
tue fact that Coldvaterisn rep r3seacts 8 roal denver and that it signifies
an intensification of Taacist tendencies in richt-ting circies of the US.
The process of becoming more conservative, of course, ca..not but
involve the most reactionary formation of the yovercnientel appalatug
-- Auoricon intelligance services -- and the intelligence sorvicos
above all are close to vory extreno anti-Comuunisn. This is their food,
their fuel, their motive powor.

ye have covered the brief history of th» eraution, foration, and
endies3 reorg: nizations of the contanporory ayst3a2 of Anorican totrtal
espionage. In all the fuss end shock waich bafall this syeter, .% would
bo naive to se0 only attempts to improve organizetional form and :iwthods.
“hese shocks are necessary, they cra dictated by the facts of life,
independent of Dulles or NoCone. ‘The series of failures, miscalculations,
and scandalous exposures aro the result of tha fact that eny total
-exnansion, including total espionage, is rasisted by the mighty
wall of the socialist comp which endures each and every assault. It is
invincible, no matter how muoh dist, poison, oF bile is thrown on it by

the numerous "theoreticians" and apologists of American imperialism.
Hundreds of books are sent overseas which attempt to clarify or deny

a particular failure in the activities of the CIA and other organs

of American intelligence. But all the authors of these "works"

agree on one thing: The socialist camp by its nature is such that no
means and methods of sabotage and espionage in the struggle against the
bourgeois states has a great and lasting effect on it. One cannot
argue with this. Hitler and his spies came to a bad end as will their
successordes

There is no force in the world capable of changing the tide of
history. Many who sought to turn back the wheel of history have been
dumped. A similar fate 4s in store for the successors of the Hess
doctrine of "total espionage" from Langley. Against then stand the
logic of history and the tireless revolutionary vigilance of the
Soviet people and of all progressive mankind.

See sa EEEnNenaeneeneeenennentnnememnnaennananal
