The New Look in Chinese Communist Aid to Sub-saharan Africa
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096659, dated 1 August 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096659).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

L3j LISRARY | (apie.
Mandatory Review Se
Case # NU 1 a3, : ‘Sopret

% a a
red a

. ao
DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE
Intelligence Memorandum
The New Look in Chinese Communist Aid
to Sub-Saharan Africa
e
ER IM 68-108

SEPTEMBER 1968

Copy NE 18

OBS NOP

j tates, within the meaning of Title
and 794, of the US Code, as amended.

oLY
NO | GN DISSEM

>

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
September 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

The New Look in Chinese Communist Aid
to Sub-Saharan Africa

Summary

: Communist China's agreements within the past
-year to help construct the. Tanzania-Zambia and
Guinea-Mali railroads represent substantial new
efforts to enhance its influence in Sub-Saharan
Africa.* The Tan-Zam railroad will involve the
largest single foreign assistance outlay in Sub-
Saharan Africa. These agreements have already won
Peking some propaganda gains and may have influenced
both Tanzania and Zambia to vote against the
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in the UN recently;
the only other votes against the treaty were by
Albania and Cuba.

Especially since Chou En-lai's extensive visit
to Africa in early 1964, China has used economic
aid programs to extend its influence in Africa.
Although initially successful, the program back-
fired to some extent in 1965-66 because of Peking's
heavyhanded treatment of some countries and be-
cause military coups in several other countries
brought a rupture in diplomatic relations with
China. As a result, China has concentrated its
economic assistance in the Socialist-leaning states
of Guinea, Mali, Tanzania, and Congo (Brazzaville).
The signing of the railroad agreements now brings

* For the purposes of thts memorandum, the term
Sub-Saharan Africa includes all countries on the
continent of Africa except Algeria, Libya,
Morceco, Tunista, and the United Arab Republic.

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA.
Tt was prepared by the Cffice of Economic Research
and was coordinated wtth the Office of Current
Intelligence.

SE
NO GN DISSEM

VIDS +7

total Chinese aid in Sub-Saharan Africa to about $665
million, nearly one-half of Peking's total aid extensions
to all non-Communist countries. About four-fifths of

the African aid -- an estimated $550 million -- has already
been committed to specific end uses.

For the most part, Communist China's economic
assistance has been well received by the Africans.
The terms of China's aid compare favorably with
Western and Soviet practices. Most Chinese~-sponsored
projects are operating satisfactorily and appear to
represent a net gain to the recipients. However,
actual aid expenditures to date -- about $120 million
through mid-1968 -- have been too small to have
substantial economic impact. Despite the large out-
lays needed for the Tan-Zam and Guinea-Mali railroad
projects, their construction will contribute relatively
little. to overall economic development for many years.
Resources and population along the proposed routes
are sparse, and there are few profitable investment
opportunities in these regions, even with lower
transport costs.

1. Communist China's recent announcements that
it will help build the Tanzania-Zambia and Guinea-
Mali railroads greatly expand the extent of Peking's
economic aid activities in Sub-Saharan Africa (see
the map, Figure 1). With these projects, Sub-
Saharan Africa will be receiving nearly one-half of
Peking's total aid extensions to non-Communist
countries. By undertaking the railroad projects,
Communist China apparently hopes to firmly establish
itself in Africa, as well as to improve its image on
the continent. In any event, this new emphasis on
Sub-Saharan Africa apparently has already won Peking
some gains. Peking's willingness to build the Tan-
Zam railroad may have influenced Tanzania and Zambia
to vote against the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
in the UN recently. The only other UN members to
vote against the treaty were Albania and Cuba.

Introduction

2. This is not the first time Communist China
has attempted to increase its presence in Sub-
Saharan Africa by sharply expanding its economic
aid program. Peking's aid program was initially
designed to support the overall aid efforts of the
Communist countries in Africa, as well as to achieve
political recognition for Communist China. By 1963,
however, economic aid was being employed by the
Chinese as an instrument of competition to counter
Soviet as well as Western policies in Africa. As
part of this effort, and to develop relations with
African countries on the official level, Premier
Chou En-lai made an extensive tour of Africa from
late December 1963 until early February 1964. His
goal during the trip was to convey an image of
China as a large and powerful country which had
more in common with Africa than did the USSR or the
West.

3. Following Chou's visit, Peking offered aid
to several Sub-Saharan countries. During 1964 the
number of states receiving Chinese assistance rose
from four to eight, and the total amount of aid
extensions to these countries increased by about
160 percent. Despite. these efforts, Peking
suffered a number of political reversals in 1965

pe

and 1966, in part because of its heavyhanded
approach, which was evident in Chou En-lai's
repeated references to the "excellent revolutionary
prospects” in Africa and in Chinese support for
_antigovernment activities in some countries. Some
Chinese representatives were expelled from Kenya
in 1966 for providing funds to leftwing elements
there. Furthermore, military coups in a number of
countries, such as Ghana and the Central African
Republic, brought to power conservative regimes
that subsequently broke diplomatic relations with
Peking.

~~

4. Although these diplomatic. setbacks restricted
Chinese influence in parts of Africa, Peking has
maintained a strong position among the Socialist-
oriented countries. The Chinese are well established
in Guinea and Mali and have a considerable presence
in Congo (Brazzaville). Peking's position in main-
land Tanzania has steadily improved over the last
few years, and the Chinese continue to wield con-
siderable influence on the nearby island of Zanzibar.
Peking has recently added Mauritania and Zambia to
its list of aid recipients. Even before the two
railroad projects were announced, about one-third
of Communist China's aid to the Free World was
committed to Sub-Saharan countries, and during 1967
two-thirds of its economic technicians serving in
non-Communist countries were in this area.

5. African governments have accepted Chinese
economic aid for a variety of reasons. Most im-
portant, it is seen as a way to help reduce their
financial and economic dependence on their former
colonial rulers and to help replace declining aid
from non-Communist sources. Some African leaders,
such as Guinea's President Touré and to a lesser
extent Tanzania's President Nyerere, feel ideologi-
cally akin to the Chinese and are well disposed to
accept Peking's economic assistance. Some countries,
including Uganda and Kenya, initially accepted Chinese
aid as a means of expressing their policy of nonalignment
among the world powers.

Scope and Nature of Chinese Economic Aid
6. Since 1959, when Communist China began its

aid program in Sub-Saharan Africa, Peking has ex-
tended or agreed to extend aid amounting to an

spent

Pa yoluzy ¥2205 pooyioy
rey) at Joypoyy {

; ws
anend3st pay :
ae orn) Iw exe,
: : ONVIUZVMS ° c tuojd Buysses0sd-00) ay us
' : Aiea chars a Asouyjos 10Bng
H : JAY® SIATY A .
a gggresuee | Rees f i ae eee Asoya0y Boys Y
-, in a ‘ ; eweyrs BuimosB ea1y
isamninoc \ 3 :
Lig . Rrra atid JOpWsuUDIy CIPO i es
oe yin aa ~ | Botle in uywsuny opoy
’ amdtowvzowf MYaNAeas —— Shcaee wets «ee Asoja0y YOW

“ Wan ets . W410} ejD}s JOJUSWIsedx;
eyesn] a :

Gek€

VIGWVZ weg
IMvvn al aks tue) z Asojr0y 944040617

VICONY

Ayepiy

VINVZNVL 4 «,
aye 6
taNNhyNRe OONOS FHI ‘OpAezzBLe

OoNOd : ’
vonvay 40 o1enday cal :
diivua0N30 40 noavo 7 . nts
J </ . ' v3nino
“aaa awiworvnd: . “a

aiGnaae neous f
NYDIUSY WHLUBS f oe i j
|
SP an 2 £59515) 0 CTY
ans, i AWoMeN)
he

=

) \WNVHY

be

verity
utindds

aren aemanntiiainceeas Litton ht solemettents

“seul

Zi ire: >

1bADYP 16-qns: ules

‘Lipp uyy, ‘u
Bad

eunBr4

wk

Sarecd pope o1 ©

de We, bea,

ae a rane

14D .Pa122)9S..

SECRET

estimated $665 million to this area. About four-
fifths of this total -- an estimated $550 million --
has already been committed to specific end uses.
This compares with US commitments in this area of
more than $2 billion since 1959 (see the chart,
Figure 2). China's aid, however, is. heavily con-
centrated in a relatively few countries. More than
90 percent of total commitments, including aid for
the railroads, is to five countries -- Guinea, Mali,
Tanzania,. Zambia, and Congo (Brazzaville). Although
Ghana was a major recipient of Chinese aid, all
Chinese projects there were suspended following
Nkrumah's. ouster in early 1966. Peking's small

aid program in the Central African Republic was

also ended following their break in relations. The
balance of Chinese assistance is spread among Kenya,
Uganda, Somalia, and Mauritania, but commitments

to these countries amount to only about $20

million.

7. More than one-half of the aid promised by
Peking is for the two regional railroad projects.
The 1,250-mile Tan-Zam railroad, estimated to cost
about $300 million,* will be the largest single
foreign assistance outlay in Sub-Saharan Africa and
China's largest undertaking in the Free World. The
200-mile railroad connecting Guinea and Mali may
cost more than $50 million and will be the largest
foreign aid scheme in these countries. Peking's
other aid projects have consisted of moderate under-
takings of a type readily absorbed by an underdeveloped
economy. Most project aid has been used for small-
scale plants producing light consumer goods or
processing crops grown on related agricultural
schemes. The largest plants are a few textile mills
costing about $7 million or $8 million each. Chinese
project assistance has also been used for improving
economic infrastructure, such as electric power
facilities and roads.

* Exzeluding the cost of rolling stock for the
ratltroad and expanding the port at Dar es Salaam.

8. Peking usually provides commodity credits
to defray local costs of its projects, including
local materials and labor, and about 10 percent.
of its country-to-country aid commitments* have
been for this purpose. Most of the technical
assistance provided by Peking is used in constructing
or operating Chinese-sponsored projects. Only a
‘relatively few of the nearly 3,000 Chinese economic
technicians employed in Sub-Saharan countries during
1967 were used to support social services such as
medical and educational activities. In addition,
Peking has agreed to provide nearly $60 million in
cash and commodity assistance to relieve trade
deficits and reduce budget deficits (see the table).

Total Chinese Communist Aid Commitments, by Type
as of June 1968

Million US $

Project assistance 490
Railroads 350
Other 140

Balance-of-payments and

budgetary support 60
Total 550
9. By and ieeeer, African nations have been

pleased with the aid they have received from
Communist China. Almost all of the industrial

* Country-to-country assistance does not include
the railroad projects, since these tnvolve more
than one country.

SpcRET - Figure 2

~ ESTIMATED FOREIGN AID COMMITMENTS

TO SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA, BY MAJOR DONOR
Totals for Fiscal Years, 1960-68

MILLION US 3

FRANCE 3,500

INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATIONS *

UNITED STATES
UNITED KINGDOM
WEST GERMANY

COMMUNIST CHINA**

SOVIET UNION

“Including the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and affiliates,
UN aid programs, and the European Economic Community Development Fund.

**Including an estimated $350 million for the Tanzania-Zambia and Guinea-Mali railroad projects.

59736 8-68 CIA REIGN DISSEM

SECRET

projects involve labor-intensive operations and
therefore employ large numbers of unskilled workers
who otherwise would be unemployed. Agricultural
schemes have stressed production of needed food
crops, especially rice and sugar. Africans have
also been favorably impressed with China's
technical aid. Peking uses large numbers of its
own technicians when undertaking a project, there-
‘by reducing the burden on the limited skilled man-
power resources of recipient countries. Moreover,
the willingness of Chinese technicians to live
without the luxuries usually expected by other foreign
technicians has projected a favorable image of the
Chinese among Africans.

10. Recipients have also been impressed with the
generous terms of Peking's aid. Its credits are
generally interest free, provide a. 10-year grace
period, and permit repayments to extend at least 10
years. _Unlike Western aid provisions, repayments
can be made in the commodities of recipient countries.
In contrast to usual: Western and Soviet procedures,
the Chinese generally finance a large part of the
local costs of their projects. These liberal terms
place little strain on the limited financial re-
sources of the African countries.

Economic Impact of Chinese Aid

11. Communist China's economic assistance to
Africa is useful, but the level of aid received by
the Africans has been too small to have a significant
economic impact thus far. Of the $315 million in
country-to-country aid promised through mid-1968,
excluding the two regional railroads, about $120
million has actually been drawn, and more than half
of the expenditures have consisted of cash and
commodities. Only about $55 million has been spent
directly on development projects, many of which
are still under construction.

12. In several countries, longstanding Chinese
credits have gone almost completely unutilized, while
in a few others a substantial share of the aid has
already been drawn. In Uganda, for example, plans
to implement the $12 million credit extended in 1965
are only now getting under way, while in Kenya no

spoxiT

SECRET

projects have yet been initiated under a $15 million
credit extended in 1964 and probably none will be
started beforé the credit lapses next year. Small
cash credits to Uganda and Kenya, however, have.
been largely used. By contrast, Guinea, Mali, and
Tanzania (including Zanzibar) have received a large
share of the aid promised to them. Together these
three countries account for more than 80 percent of
the total Chinese expenditures in Sub-Saharan Africa
to date and are the only countries where significant
projects are under way or have been completed (see
the chart, Figure 3).

13. Those Chinese-sponsored projects that have
been completed are performing reasonably well.
However, some industrial plants are encountering
shortages of raw materials, which can be made up
only through imports. Equipment failures have also
“occurred, and some Chinese-built plants probably
require government subsidies -- not unusual in
Africa. In any case, the difficulties that Chinese
projects have encountered are no greater than those
of most other foreign aid programs in Sub-Saharan
Africa or elsewhere. Moreover, the Chinese have
been working in a difficult atmosphere. The’
countries where they are most actively involved
suffer from inadequate economic infrastructure,
undeveloped domestic markets, and lack of trained
personnel needed to carry out development projects.
This situation is further aggravated in Mali, Guinea,
and Zanzibar by government efforts to exert greater
control over the economy which have led to general
economic deterioration.

14. Mali has probably gained the most from
Peking's aid. All of the $53 million in country-
to-country assistance extended by China has been
obligated to specific purposes, and about $34 mil-
lion has been disbursed. Several Chinese-built
plants are now operating, including a match factory,
a cigarette factory, and a sugar refinery. The
cigarette factory (see the photograph, Figure 4)
apparently is operating profitably, but the sugar
refinery has had difficulties in obtaining adequate
supplies of raw materials. The largest Chinese
project in Mali, a $7.8 million textile complex
that came into production in 1968, should allow

SECRET

Figure 3

CHINESE COMMUNIST ECONOMIC AID, EXTENSIONS AND DRAWINGS*

CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC

CONGO (Brazzaville)

GHANA

GUINEA

KENYA

MALI

MAURITANIA

SOMALIA

TANZANIA

UGANDA

ZAMBIA

59737 8-68 CIA

Totals for 1959-June 1968

MILLION US $

350

EXTENSIONS

RAILROAD PROJECTS

0.5

DRAWINGS *

Extensions
Drawings *

*Drawings are rounded to the nearest $500,000.

SE
REIGN DISSEM

the country eventually to reduce its textile imports
by at least $1 million annually.. (see the photograph,
Figure 5)...” Chinese efforts. in the,agricultural
Sector, particularly rice cultivation, appear to be
relatively successful, primarily because of the
large number of Chinese technicians employed. Rice
production increased from an estimated 180,000 tons
in 1960 to about 210,000 tons in 1965, but declined
in 1966 because of adverse weather conditions.
Peking has also provided $11 million in foreign
exchange to Mali to help pay for imports.

—

Figure 4. Nai: Chinese. Commiunist-Buile
Cigarette Factory, 1966

Figure 5. Maki: Chinese Communist- Built
Textile Mi22Q, July 1966

15. More than three-fourths of the nearly $40
million Communist China has, disbursed in Guinea has
consisted of cash and commodities. The only im-
portant projects that have been completed are the

oe: ae

SEGRET

_SEGRET

$2 million Kinkon hydroelectric dam and a $2.8

million match and cigarette factory complex near
Conakry that employs more than 600 persons (see the
Photographs, Figures 6,7, and 8). The performance
of the cigarette plant, which operated above its rated
capacity in 1967, is remarkably good compared with
other industrial plants in Guinea. The match

factory is operating at about 30 percent of capacity --
about the average for many Guinean plants. Other
significant Chinese projects in Guinea include a
tea-processing plant, which was completed in 1966,

and a textile mill now under construction. Al-

though the Chinese plan a number of small projects,
mostly in the agricultural sector, under the $22.4
million credit extended in late 1966, only a few

minor ones have been started.

16. ° Except for $13 million provided by Peking in
the form of cash and commodities, Tanzania has so
far received few economic benefits from Chinese
aid. About $15 million has been drawn for projects,
of which about $8.4 million was for a large textile
mill that came into production this year (see the
photographs, Figures 9 and 10). A number of other
projects are either under way or have been completed,
but none are of economic significance. Nearly one-fourth
of the roughly $28 million spent by Peking in Tanzania
-has gone to Zanzibar, where China is the major aid
_donor.* Although Chinese aid to Zanzibar is higher
on a per capita basis than in any African state, it
has been of little help in reversing the trend of
economic deterioration on the island.

Railroad Projects

17. Chinese Communist aid for the Tan-Zam and
Guinea-Mali railroads is unique in its scale and
complexity. Both of these projects will be costly
and difficult to carry out, although well within
Communist China's technical and financial capability.
Their construction will require large numbers of
Chinese technicians, even if most of the labor force
is derived locally. In the case of the Tan-Zam
railroad, completion will probably take at least

* Although, in April 1964, Zanzibar jotned with
fanganytka to form the United Republic of Tanzanta,
the tslands earry out part of their foretgn aid
negottations directly with foreign powers.

= Jo: =

SECRET

SE

until 1975. Unlike their performance with respect
to other aid agreements, the Chinese have moved with
considerable speed to implement the September 1967
agreement under which Peking undertook to build the
Tan-Zam line. Within four months of Signing the
agreement a preliminary survey team was in the field,
by mid-1968 more than half of the 680 technicians to
be used on the design and engineering survey had
arrived, and survey work is well under way.

18. Although the proposed railroad projects
have attracted considerable attention, they will
provide little benefit to the local economies. Both
railroads are substitutes for existing railroads
and will probably not reduce transport costs. The
chief economic gain to Tanzania from the Tan-Zam
railroad will be revenues derived from handling
Zambian foreign trade shipments. Although the
government hapes to develop the relatively fertile
Kilombero Valley in the southwest, through which
the railroad will pass, large investments and
numerous skilled personnel will be required and
both are in critically short supply in Tanzania.
There are also some relatively large mineral deposits
in the southwest, but because of their low quality
they are economically unfeasible to exploit even
with lower transport costs. [In any case, the Great
North Road, which is being improved, would be
adequate for foreseeable Tanzanian transport needs
in the interior. Zambia's gains will be mostly
political, since the new railroad will provide a
transport route for its foreign trade that does not
pass through white-ruled Rhodesia, Mozambique, or
Angola. Zambia's northeastern region, through
which the line will pass, has little development
potential and is Sparsely populated. For the most
part, the land is infertile and can Support little
more than subsistence agriculture, while deposits
of manganese, coal, copper, and a few other minerals
located along the proposed right of way are small.

19. The Guinea-Mali railroad offers no promise
of stimulating significant economic development.
There are no potential industries or resources that
could be developed along the right of way in either
country, and trade between Mali and Guinea is too
small to warrant the investment. The total volume
of Mali's foreign trade in 1966 was less than
300,000 tons, of which Guinea accounted for only

- il -

SEGRET

Figure 6. Guinea: Generators at the
Chinese Communist-Built
Kinkon Dam, Completed .
ain 1966

Figure 7. Guinea: Contnrok Panel fOr
the Kinkon Dam

Fagure 8. Guinea: Interior of a
Chinese Communiszt-Built
Cigarette Factory,
4n Operation Since Late
1964

Figure 9. Tanzania: The Chinese Communist-

Built Friendship Texti£le Mile, ,
March 1967

Figure 10. Tanzania:

Advisers at the Friendship Textile
Mi2L, Eanky 1968 :

Chinese Communist Technical

ee TS: ee

_SECRET

SECRET

about 1,500 tons. Moreover, considerable expendi-
tures will be needed to upgrade the existing rail-
way in Guinea between the port at Conakry and
Kouroussa, where the new railroad would connect.
Nevertheless, both countries consider the railroad
a political imperative. Mali's prime reason for
wanting the railroad is to have an alternative to
its present major access route to the sea through
Senegal. This route was closed to Malian traffic
from September 1960 to July 1963, during which time
most. of the country's foreign trade was diverted
by road through the Ivory Coast. Also, Mali hopes
the new route will reduce freight costs to the sea.
Guinea's President Toure, for his part, wants the
new railroad as a means to tie Guinea and Mali
closer together politically and economically.

Outlook

20. Communist China's aid disbursements in
Sub-Saharan Africa will remain relatively small at
least until about 1970, when actual construction
on the Tanzania-Zambia railroad is expected to
Start. Meanwhile, the bulk of aid expenditures will
continue to be heavily concentrated in Guinea,

Mali, and Tanzania; and it is likely that Peking

will extend additional aid to these three countries

as existing credits are utilized. Although the
Chinese will try to extend aid to additional countries
to take advantage of changing political developments,
actual drawings probably will remain small for many
years.

21. Communist China's aid will provide only
marginal economic benefits for the African recipients
even after those projects now under way are completed.
Although Peking's assistance will be generally use-
ful, it will do little to overcome the scarcity of
natural and human resources that hampers significant
economic growth. Moreover, the detrimental economic
effects of domestic policies in Guinea, Mali, and
Zanzibar will tend to dilute the gains that might
otherwise result from Communist China's economic
assistance.

22. Peking should continue to obtain substantial
propaganda benefits from its aid efforts. The
period of years needed to complete the railroads
and their political significance May serve to
enhance China's position in the recipient African
countries. Peking may also be able to exert a

aaa ae

_SEGRET

_SEGRET_

greater influence over some aspects of foreign
policy in*those countries where it has become a
leading aid donor. Many African governments,
whether receiving Chinese aid or not, will use
Peking's aid overtures as a lever to encourage
Free World donors to help finance projects they
consider to be politically important. Congo
(Kinshasa), for example, has already requested
several countries, including the United States and
the Soviet Union, to finance construction of a
500-mile railroad, which would reduce its dependence
on transport routes through Portuguese Africa.

- 15 -
