The Situation and Short Run Outlook in Laos
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028779, dated 4 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028779).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SNIE 58-3-61
28 September 196]

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIM.ATE
NUMBER 58-3-61

THE SITUATION AND SHORT-RUN
OUTLOOK IN LAOS

Submitied by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIC ENCE

The following intelligence organtzations participeted tn the
preparation of this etimate: The Central Infelliger.ce Apency
and the intelligence orpantzations of the Depariments of State,
the Army, the Navy, fhe Aly Force, and The fotnt Stof.

Concurred tn by ihe
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 28 September 1961. Concurring irere The Director of Intel-
ligence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant
Chief of Staff jor Intelligence, Deparimeni of the Army; the
Assistant Chtef of Naval Operations tfsteliigence:, Depart-
ment of the Novy, the Asslscand Calef cf Staff, infeligence,
USAF; the Director for fatelligence, Joint Steg; the Assistant
to the Secretary of Defense, Spectal Operations, end the
Director of the National Security Agency The Alomic Energy
: Comission Representative ic the USIB, ana the Assistant
Director, Federal Bureau of investigation, absfained, the sud-
fect being owlside of thelr Jurisciction.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE |

* pare 2.8 JUN 1985 —~
Approved. ga{foier’? yy y
Dote 0 é :
Ne 410

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICL

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Cunteal Intelbgence Agency. Shis copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his gurisdiclion on
a need to know basis. Additinad essential dissemination may be authorized by the
fullowing officials within Uncir respective departments,

Director of Intctlgence and Research, for the Department of State
_ Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army
Assistant Chicf of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of
the Navy
_ Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for The Joint Stat
Direetor of Intelugence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
_ Assistant Dircctor, FBI, for the Fedcral Bureau of Investigation
_ Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, for the Department
of Defense
Dircctor of NSA for the National Security Agency
Assistant Director for Central Reference, CiA, for any other Department or
Agency

2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable
security regutations, or returned to the Central Intellipence Agency Ly arrangement
with the Office of Central Reference. CIA.

4. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it
for a period not in excess of one year. Al the end of this period, the estimate should
“ther be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be requested
ine forwarding agency to retain at in accordance with IAC-D-69/ 2, 22 June 1953.

4. The title of this estimate when used separately from the text shoute de classified:
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

age

-=me Gg

a

WARNING

This material contains Information affecting
the national ¢*fense of the United States
aithin the meaning of the espionage jaws.
Title 18, USC, Secs. 193 ang 744, the trens-
mission of reveration of @hich in any manner
lo an unauthorized person Ls prohibited by law.

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Gecurity Courncll
Depariment of Slate
Nepartment of Defense

Atomle Frergy Commilasion
Federal Bureau of Investigaucn

THE SITUATION AND SHORT-RUN OUTLOOK IN LAOS

THE PROBIEM

To analyze recent develupments in Laos and to estimate the political and military
prospects in Lacz over the next two or three months.

CUNCLUSIONS

1, Within the next few wecks the Laotian
crisis will probably enter a new phase con-
sisting either of a political arrangement
of some sort, renewed efforts in Laos and
elsewhere tu find a political solution while
the tenuous cease-fire remains, of a gen-
eral breakdown of the cease-fire. (Para.
11)

2. Prospects for a political arrangement,
either at Geneva or in Laos, are only fair
because of the wide differences remain-
ing between Westecn and Bloc positions
and the suspicior.s and conflicting objec-
tives among the Laotians. Such an ar-
rangement would almost certainly have
to ke based upon a coalition government
under Souvanna Phouma, As Prime
Minister, Souvanna would acquire some
sources of independent strength and
probably would try to pursue a neutralist
course, at least al the outset. The Com-
munists, however, would be able to bring
very strong pressures against him, and
we believe that his control over the gov-
ernment would become increasingly it

clfective. Over a period of time it would
be increasingly unhkely that he could
prevent the Communis:s from acquiring
direct or indirect control, (Paras. 11-74)

3. In the absence of a political arrange-
ment in the next few weeks, hostilitics
are likely to be resumed by either the
Phour:.. forces or the Pathet Lao sce.
Phoumi's relative political and military
situation remains weak, and he probahly
believes that his only remaining hope is
a reneval of hostilities with outside as-
sistance. In any event, the Communist
Pathet Lao will probably undertake
limited operations designed to increase
pressure for a povitical settlement and to
further consolidate their contro). (Paras.
15-17)

4. We do not believe that the Lao Army
can achieve a military solution in Laos
or even force a north-south partition of
the country without sizable and long-
term outside military support. If the
Lao Army were to take the initiative and
were able to concentrate sufficient forces
for a major altack on any key Commu-
nist position, it probably could make some
initial advance. It would not, however,
be able to sustain a major effort, with-
stand a serious counterattack, or prevent
Communist seizure of the principal Lao-
tian towns along the Mexong River in a
very shart time. (Para. 18)

ra
i
4

et ed tin get tn

;
|

ae

DISCUSSION

f. THE SITUATION

5. At the tine of the tenucus "cease-fire" in
Loos und the opensng of the Geneva Confer-
eroain May, the combined Souptanouveng
Pe Set Lag and Savanna Phouma Kon Le
armed furces duminated the military situation
in Laos, At that (ime. the Laotian Aroy
under General Phoumt was disorganized and
demoralized: if (he Pathet Lao Kong Le forces
had continued their attacks, they probably
could have seized the important towns along
the Mekong River--Luang Prabang. Vientiane,
Thakhet. Savannakhet, and Pakse—which
still remained in the hands of Prince Boun
Oum’s Ro, al Laotian Governinen?,

6. Nevertheless, the Communist powers de-
cided to accrol a erpse-fie and international
nepuliations, Thai decision probably re-
flected considerable concern for US prepara-
tions for nulitary intervention in bags, @ con-
tingency which Honoi Peiping, and Moscow
probably all wish to avoid. Moreover, the
Communists had achieved a strong position
from which to mak. further gains: the Pathet
Lao already held most of north and central
Lao . and they held envuph of southern Lis
to facilitate Hanoi's Communist Vict Cong
effort against Present Dicm and his govern-
ment in South Vietnam, As dur the rest of
Laos, the Communists probably estimated
that, in view of the military situation in Laos,
they could nepotiate an agreement which
world interpose no serious obstacle to event val
Communist domination of the Laotian Gov-
ermment through pelitical means.

7. Although there has been no dramatic
Change in the situation in Liss since the ceuse-
fire, there his been a steacy improvement in
the overall position of the Consmmunist element.
The Pathet Lao armed forces have undergone
extensive reorganization and hase substan
tially augmented their equipment Through
local recruitment ang remnferce.nent from
North Vietnam, Picthet Dag treop strength has
been greatly increased = They have mide
considerabhe  propieess toward consolidating
then nulitary postions an north and central

buos and have anereased their military
strength an the seuth alone to at least 7500
troops. They have made an extenoive propa-
gandy and political effort which has expar ed
the arca of Communit prasstoots contrel

& The position of the Souvanna Kong Le
group Fas been seriously undermined.  Seu-
yenna has no independent potitical apparatus
ob any signaficunce at hus dhaposel and Kong
Le’s armed forces are weak mm comparison with
cither the Phoum’ or Pathet Lav forces.
Morcover, the Souvanna Kony Le forces are
almost cumpletely dependent upon the Pathet
Lao and the Bloc for communications, trans-
port, Jogistical, and financial support. Sume
of the group have become increasingly resent-
ful of theiz Communist allics and have at-
tempted to prevent the Communists from
achievine a dominant mifttary position and
expandiag their political influence in the
countryside. However, they have not had the

“resources to inatch the Communist effort.

9. During the cease-fire, Princ. Boun OQum
and General Pheumi have concentrated on re-
building the Lao Army and redeploying it in
the Mekong Valley. As a result of US train-
ing efforts and the continued influx of equip-
ment and -upplies, the offensive and defensive
capabilities of the Lao Army have been im-
proved. The present number of troops in com-
bat units of the regular Lao Army is 29.200,
and there are 33.800 full-lime Auto Defense
{ADC) troops, These figures, however, ind:-
ecle a greater military capability than is actu-
aHy avaiable. Although army units have
demonstrated some effectiveness in’ liniited
clearing. operations and the morale of the
troops hus apparcally improved, the Laotian
Government's logistical support of is troops in
the field continues to be poor and the field
companders are for the most part mdecisive,
weak, and poorly motivated. The major
operaticnal successes since the cease-fire have
been seore:b by Mog pucrodhe mnits which have
etter tively harassed Conmupunist lines of cant
Nenenwen i the Plaine des Jarres area and
forced the Comniuni ts to divert a coussder-

ain ci oe “on al

Ba! ae Rea ete ty, Leaks itinehcacet eisai *

able number of .cuops in an cfort ts climi-
nate the Men bases.

10. On the basis of recent ane incomplete
evidence we bebeve that there haus been a
sharp oncrease an the strength of the forces
opposing Ube government forces im Laos. Our
vest estimate at present is (hat they number
about 31000. In addition to about 16,000
Pathet Lao, this @aure inchides 1,600 North
Vietnamese cadre and speciatist personnel who
Operate the Jopistics and) comnyunications
systems, man the field and antiuircraft
artillery, apd prov.de technical and tactical
guidance at all te eds of the Pathiet Luo Kong
Leelfort, four North Vietnumese infantry bat-
talions ¢about £.600 men) servine as special
assault forces: 4.000 troops in Kong Le’s com-
mand: and 4.060 in Phony Saly under Kham
Ouane who, tike Kong Le, is responsive to
Souvanna Phouma.

it. THE PROSPECTS

HH. Within the next few weeks the Laotian
crisis Will probably enter a new phase con-
sisting either of a political arrangement of
some sort, renewed ¢ifarts ia Laos and else-
where to find a pelitical solution while the
tenuous cease-fire remains, or a general break-
down of the cease-fire, At present, Lhe pros-
pects for a political arrangement are only fair.
There are wide differences between the West-
ern and Blue positions on a number of major
points at issue at Geneva, Although the
Communists have recently displayed a con-
ciliatory attitude and have shown sume will-
ingness ta campromise on minor issues, the
Bloc powers, particularly Peiping and Hanol,
appear confident in their strong bargaining
position, and have shown no inclination to
make majet compromives for the sake of
reaching agreement.

12. Moreover, gencrat agreement among the
major Western and Blor powers at Geneva
would hot necessarily assure a pobticat “solu-
tion” in Laos because of the mutual suspicions
and conflicting objectives among the Lu stian
elements represented by the three princes,
Souphanouveny, Souvanna  Phouma. and
Boun Oum = Souphanouvonge represents the
Communist position, Souvanna Phouma days

¢laim to > neutralist posiucn but he is de-
pendent upon the Commurust for support and
could not agree to terms which were not ac-

ceptable to the Communists. He works with
Souphanouvoeny on a basis of equuliiy but is
unwilling to accept equal status for Phoumi.
Phoumi is still hoping for a military solution
in Laos and probably weuld net accept a
pohtical sctllement which would be accept-
ub'c ta Souvanna Phouma unijess the US
furced him to du so. Fur these teasouns, Boun
Oum and General Pho..mi almost certainty do
not intend genuinely to seck a negotiated po-
litical settiement.

13. If the present crisis moves into a political
phase as the result of arrangements made at
Geneva and among the three Lantian Princes,
it would almost certainly have to be on the
basis of a coalition government under Sou-
vanna Phouma. Souvanna probably has
aspirations for performing a role as a neutral-
ist leader in Laos and in Southeas* Asia.
However, Souvanna is not a free agent and it
is untikely that he would be able lo steer a
truly neutral course. As Prime Minister, he
would probably try at least at ihe outsct to
maintain a neutralist position and to reduce
his near total dependence upon the Com-
munists. He indicated in his talks with
Ambassador Harriman an awareness of Com-
munist strength and intentions in Laos and
a desire to avoid Communist domination.
However, the Communists woutd still be ati
io bring very strong pressures against him.
Although control of the government would
give Souvanna some sources of independent
strength he toes net now have, the Commu-
nists would retain a Jarge part of their armed
forces and them political apparatus, either
overtiy or covertly, te insure their continued
deminance of major parts of the country, to
influence any future elections, and to main-
tain Communist pressure against South
Vielnam.

14. Souvanna’s ability to resist Communist
pressures on him and to offset Communist in-
fluence in the countryside would depend both
upon the achievemens of effective interna-
tional cantro’s te insure Laotian neutrality
and upen the full support and cooperation of

a a el

A bet

ro

ar

the Boon Oui Pisum clement with Sou-
vine be provide firme resist ince lo Po het Lao
demands and pressure. We do not beheve
that the Comeiumst powers particularly
Peiping and Hann, would eyree to effective
internationibcomuets. Although US pressure

on Boun Qum and Faeumi might force them |

to accept a coultion government under Sou-
vanna Phouma, they would not willingly sup-
port Souvanna and probably would seck by
every means they epuld te undermine him.
Consequently, wthough a ceabtion govern-
ment under Souvanna ought at first appear
to be holding a neulralist course, we believe
that Sousanna’s control over the Laotian Gov-
eriment would gecame increasingly inetfec-
tive. Over a period of lime it would be in-
creasingly unlikely that he could prevent the
Communists from ecequiring direct or indi-
rect contre,

5. A continuation of the present lenuaus
cease-fire line, or gry attempt ty formalize or
consolidate it, would probably not be tolerated
by Peiping and Hanoi unless i were backed up
by subsvantially increased non-Conmmunist
military force, A durable partition of the
country would almost certainly require a long-
form con nmutment of outside force: ancluding
US troops, te the defense of the Mckong
Vatley. Any effort by US or SEATO forces to
expand the area under non-Communist con-
trot would run sertors risk ef intervention by
North “iclnamese (roops or volunteers,!

16. Ifa political arrangement is not reached
in Uae next few weeks, we believe it Likely that
the cease-fire will break down, Hostilities

See SNIE TG 2 61, TLakehhood of Mayor Commu-

mist Muiletuery YTraterveusRbom We Mainiond Southeast
Asis,” dated 87 June 193) TOP SECRET, NOFORN?.

might be renewed by wither the Phoumi forces
or by the Pathet Lay Kong Le side. Both
have certain motivations. General Phourni'’s
political and military situetion remains weuk
and he probably belicves that his amy te-
maining hope is a renewal of hostilities in
which he would have outside assistance. I
he thought he could resume hostilitics in such
a manner 4s to bring the US inte the conflict.
he almest certainly would do so. Morcoter,
General Phoumi is somctinies disposed ta mis-
interpret the extent of US co:nmitment to hin

17, We do not believe it likeiy that within the
next two or three months the Communists wit
undertake conventional operations to scize
and hold key cities inthe Mekong River Valicy.
Instead, they orcbably will inctcase their
limited operations to maii.ta:n pressure for a
political setllemen’. and to consolidate further
ther control. They probably will increase
ther cflorts to eliminate Meco resistance in the
Plaine des sarres area and increase the scale
of their own guerrilla activitics in arcas under
nominal Lag Army ccatrol. The Communists
thus will be able to further consolidate their
“yn o] im northera Laos and, al the same time.
prevent the Lao Army from preparing for at-
tacks on key Commenist-held areas.

18. We do not believe that the Lao Army can
achi¢ve a military solution in Laos or even
force a north-south partition of the country
without sizable and long-term outside mili-
tary support. Hf the Leo Army were to take
the initiative and were able to concentrate
sufficient forecs for a major attack on any key
Communist position, it probabiy could make
some initial advance. Ht would not, however,
be able to sustain @ major effort, withstand 3
scrious counterattack, or prevent Communist
seizure of the principal Laouian towns along
the Mckong River in a very short time.
