The British Position in Egypt
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010476, dated 1 September 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010476).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

aA ° ce 5
= ae

3 CaN vg
Pagcd gas
Seer. ORE pies wor
RE Ae cus fas ae wee tees eS
i 7 Ee ae Tn ee ri i

«

em See

y oe a
ER a ee
Bogs Sex Sse e Nas
pao ese peers *
Fed 8
“aN eiy
hee

ie Oe od

BD ate EE

age

=

TT kt Beis RAE

aoe
= pe wre
=. ee teal is

ENS Ta
sed A Deane Teams 2 eres
cae of Stk 2 cs PF, “ ae = 4 wee .
- . : ‘ ay _
ae) Bet ete ee
we sn A

ot a
to as Se ae
wos

REE Bo EEE.

ea
tee to

ang. 3
biished
EA

“FS

Pr
je Shae Tae PES

eg LEAS Re peepee

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's

office who require the information for the performance of their official duties.

Further

dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-

tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized oy the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-

ment of State
. Assistant? Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army
. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

Q * 8 & oO S&S

Department or Agency

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar-

rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION (NIE Series) :

Office of the Fresident

National Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State :
Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Alr Force
Atomic Energy Commission

Joint Chiefs of Staff

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Development Board
Munitions Board

4
sesame
ot

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

THE BRITISH POSITION IN EGYPT

NIE-44

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,

the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff

participated in the preparation of this estimate. Al] mem-

bers of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in
this estimate on 11 October.

THE BRITISH POSITION IN EGYPT

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the strategic significance of possible changes in the British position

in Egypt and the Sudan.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The present British base in Egypt is
extremely important to Western defense
of the Middle East and of the Suez Canal,
and the West could not adequately com-
pensate for its loss by the development
of other bases in the area.

2 Continued Western control of this base —

is jeopardized by mounting . Egyptian
pressure for the withdrawal of British
forces and for Egyptian control of the
Sudan. This pressure has now resulted
in Egyptian steps to denounce the Con-
dominium Agreements of 1899 and the
Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936.

3. Unless the Egyptians can be induced
to negotiate further, it is probable that
Egypt will initiate political action to
secure the removal of British troops and
adopt administrative and economic meas-
ures designed to make the position of the
British forces untenable.

4. As a result, a bitter struggle might
develop in which the British would face
an eventual choice between (a) aban-
doning the base and (b) openly defying
Egyptian efforts to expel them. In the
latter case serious civil disorders might
break out, the consequences of which can-
not now be foreseen. In either case a
protracted dispute between the British

and Egyptians would probably result in
a deterioration of Western relations with
the Arab world.

5. It is possible that a settlement of the
base problem might be achieved by
means of a multilateral arrangement un-
der which the base would be turned over
to a Middle East defense organization of
which Egypt was a full mernber.

6. However, in view of the fact that even
under & multilateral defense arrange-
ment, British troops would probably have
to comprise a significant part of the gar-
rison force in Egypt, there is grave doubt
that a satisfactory compromise of the
base issue can be reached unless, at the
least, substantial concessions are made
to the Egyptians on the Sudan issue.
The Egyptians will make every effort to
link the two issues because they realize
that their bargaining position on the
Sudan is weak.

”. Failing agreement, the British have

the capability of maintaining their pres-

ent position in the Suez base. The UK
could be expected to refrain from major
military action except in case of extreme
provocation in either the base area proper
or the Canal area in general.

or tree

ni ete se remem a $e aman aemmegt

SECRET

DISCUSSION

Strategic Significance of British
Bases in Egypt

8. The present crisis in Anglo-Egyptian rela-
tions is of particular importance to the US
and the West because it involves the keystone
of Western defense capabilities in the Mid-
dle East—specificalty, the maintenance of a
base in the Suez Cansi area for the deploy-
ment and support of defending forces for the
Middle Eastern area. Moreover, regardless of
the outcome, a protracted Anglo-Egyptian dis-
pute will probably affect adversely the rela-
tionship of the Westerm Powers fo other Mid-
dle Eastern countries.

9. The existing base is of unique value for the
following reasons. It is sufficiently removed
from the Soviet orbit to be reasonably secure
against Soviet surprise attack. It is so jo-
cated that it could be readily reinforced to re-
sist an overland campaign. At the same time,
it can support lang-range bombers capable of
- attacking key areas in the USSR. It is so Jo-
cated as to provide protection for the impor-
tant communications centering on the Suez
Canal. It is supported by a partially indus-
tralized area with adequate internal commu-
nications (including ports and airfields), and
a large, if not highly-skilled, labor force.
Finally its facilities and stores are already
well-developed and are even now capable of
supporting military operations. These facili-
ties and stores are easily expandable.

10. If the Egyptians gained contro) of the
base, it would almost certainly deteriorate
rapidly. Even in the unlikely event that it
were adequately maintained, Western forces
would not be able to establish themselves
therein without corsiderable loss of time.

11. No other bases in the Middle East-Eastern
Mediterranean area, either individually or col-
lectively, could compensate for the loss by the
West of control of this base, even if such other
bases were further developed. Furthermore,
it is questionable whether the UK would be
prepared or able tc assume the expense and
face the political difficulties involved. A val-
uable base area could be established in Israel}

by developing the port of Haifa and utilizing
Israel’s pool of labor, but would be more vul-
nerable to attack than Egypt and could not
be used as a major staging area. A base in
Libya, while less vulnerable than an Egyptian
base, would be too far west to support effec-
tively the defense of the Middle East. Fur-
thermore, the use of such a base would be
limited by inadequate port facilities, poor in-
ternal communications, lack of labor supply,
and the generally undeveloped nature of the
country. Bases in Iraq and Jordan would not
only suffer from the same disadvantages but
would also be much more vulnerable to So-
viet attack. Aden and Cyprus are suitable
only as specialized bases.

The Present Situation

12. The British defense position in the Suez
Canal area and the British authority in the
Sudan, which are presently governed by the
Condominium Agreements of 1899 and the
Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936, have been

under steadily increasing pressure from Egypt ~~~

since the end of World War II. Negotiations
for revision of the Treaty, under way for the
past five years, have resulted in deadlock. The
Egyptian Cabinet has now submitted for par-
liamentary approval four decrees providing
for denunciation of these agreements. Such
denunciation will greatly reduce the possi-
bility of a negotiated settlement between
Egypt and the UK and might eventually ob-
lige the UK to choose between withdrawal of
its troops and open defiance of Egyptian ef-
forts to expel them.

13. The Treaty of 1936 undertook to establish
& permanent alliance between Egypt and the
UK and suthorized the UK to maintain in the
vicinity of the Cans) 10,000 land forces and
400 pilots, together with necessary ancillary
personnel for sdministrative and technical
duties. The Egyptian Government has ex-
pressed willingness to permit British troops to
use Egypt as a base in time of war, but ob-
jects to their presence in Egypt in time of
peace. It is expected that Egypt will demand
that the British withdraw their forces imme-

SECRET 2

diately on Egyptian denunciation of the
Treaty.

14. The British Government considers that its
forces and installations in Egypt are main-
tained not only on behalf of the British Com-
monvwealth but also in the general interest of
the West and of the Middle Eastern countries.

The British hold that Egypt is the key to the

Middle East, that it is certain to be an ob-
jective for any aggression against that area,
and that it is irreplaceable as a base. They
have maintained that to be effective in time of
war these defense arrangements require the
peacetime presence of British forces to insure
the readiness of bases and equipment. While
the UK has offered to withdraw all its land
forces from Egypt by 1956, it has insisted in
return that British civilians be permitted to
maintain the base installations on the Canal
and that RAF units be permitted to remain
permanently as part of a joint Anglo-Egyptian
air defense organization.

15. With regard to the Sudan, the Treaty of
1935 reaffirms the provisions of the Condo-
minium Agreements of 1899. The latter pro-
vided that the Governor-General (who is ap-
pointed by the King of Egypt on the recom-
mendation of the British Government) should
continue to excercise his powers on behalf of
both Egypt and the UK. In fact, the UK exer-
cises effective control of the Sudan adminis-
tration. Egypt deeply resents the continuing
control by the British of territory once held
by Egypt. Furthermore, it fears that any
foreign control of the Sudanese portion of the
Nile might subject it to diversion of Egypt’s
vital water supply. The Egyptian Govern-
ment dernands the end of the present British
position in the Sudan and the union of the
Sudan with Egypt under the Egyptian crown.

16. The British, on the other hand, refuse
to permit what they regard as one of their
most successful colonial enterprises to be
ruined by anticipated Egyptian incompetence.
They reject Egypt’s claim and maintain that
the Sudanese, who are making progress to-
ward self-government, have no desire to come
under Egyptian control and should have a
major voice in any decision concerning their
future status.

17. The UK has tried on several occasions to
separate the Sudan issue from the base prob-
lem, largely on the theory that while it was
prepared to make concessions on the base
problem for the sake of an agreed settlement,
it was not prepared to make substantial con-
cessions on the Sudan issue. Egypt on the
other hand, has consistently joined the issue
of British evacuation from Egypt with the
Sudan question, because it realizes that its
bargaining position on the Sudan issue alone
is weak and because it regards the basic ob-
jective of freeing Egypt from British influence
to be involved in both questions.

18. Anglo-Egyptian relations are further com-
plicated at the present time by conflict aris-
ing from Egyptian restrictions on the ship-
ment through the Canal of strategic materials,
primarily oil, destined for Israel and by Brit-
ish desire to have the issue brought before
the UN Security Council. Although this prob-
lem has no direct bearing on the Treaty issue,
the friction it engenders reduces still further
the possibility of compromise by either side
on the defense issue or the Sudan question.

Major Factors Affecting Egypt's Attitude

19. Egyptian nationalism, which pervades
nearly all the politically conscious elements
of the population, is a dynamic factor work-
ing against compromise in negotiations with
the British. Public opinion in general has be-
come greatly inflamed as a result of national-
ist agitation.» As expressed through the press,
in Parliament, in public demonstrations, and
in statements by Egyptian leaders, popular
feeling makes it almost impossible for the
government to Surrender, at least openly, its
position with respect to the questions at is-
Sue with the British. Political leaders are ex-
posed to the danger of assassination by ex-
tremists if they attempt to act counter to na-
tionalist demands. It is highly doubtful
whether any Egyptian government would
dare to pursue & policy less nationalistic than
that of the present government.

20. Sentiment throughout the Arab world
has the effect of reinforcing the Egyptian Gov-
ernment, The Arab countries are hypersensi-
tive regarding foreign political or economic

SECRET- . 3

i
\

i
t
N
t
$
!
|
'

*

Mt

hi

Fe ROR AYO oetire NeNNB HEY 8688 BD.
oy ey z F he

eR i Lee Led |
Che ag

ae

t

~ force.

influence. Consequently, the press and the
governments of these countries tend to side
with Egypt in its conflict with the UK. The
binding factor in all Middle East nationalist
movements, whether economic or political, is
common opposition to the same imperizl
power-~-Britain. Hence the prevalence of the
slogan, “get the British out.”

21. In Egypt, as in the rest of the Middle East,
fear of World War III and doubt. whether the
West would in fact defend the area against
Soviet attack has led to the growth of nev-
tralism as a possible avenue of escape from
involvement in the East-West conflict. Neu-
tralist feeling thus reinforces the demands for
British evacuation from Egypt.

22. The extent to which the Egyptian Govern-
ment might reduce its demands would deperd
at least in part on its estimate of Brit‘sh wil.
and power to defend the present position by
force and on its estimate of the probable atti-
tude of the US. The Egyptians undoubtedly
interpret the complete British withdrawal
from the Iranian oil industry as an indication
that a determined Egyptian stand will be more
fruitful than appeals on legal or moral

' grounds and as an indication that the US is

unwilling to support the UK in the use of
Egypt may hope that the US will sup-
port its national aspirations and probably ex-
pects that the US will use its influence to re-
Strain the British from using force.

‘Major Factors Affecting the British Atitude

23. The British refusal to turn over the Sudan
and the Suez base to Fgypt is hased on a com-
bination of strategic and domestic consider-
ations.

24. Convinced of the strategic importance of
the Canal area to Middle East defense and
Commonwealth communications, the British
hold that capitulation to Egyptian demands
would gravely weaken Western defense.
While willing to share with Egypt and other
powers in organizing Egyptian defenses, the
British have no confidence in Egypt's capacity
to defend itself.

25. Concern for prestige has hardened the
British position. The British fear that bow-

ing to nationalist pressure in Egypt will com-
pound their difficulties elsewhere, not only in
the Middle East but also in other areas where
they are confronted with nationalist feeling.

26. The UK’s attitude on the Suden issue is
determined by moral as well as strategic con-
siderations. On the moral side, the British
believe that they have an obligation to the
Sudanese and emphasize the economic and
political progress which has taken place under
British administration. This attitude has
been reinforced by the conviction that the
¥eyptians would exploit the Sudanese and
that the Sudan would suffer economically and
politicaly. Strategically, control of the
Sudan bolsters the British defensive position
in the Middle East and Africa. The Sudan
is valuable to the UK as a communications
link, especially by air, and in a genera) war
could provide depth to the defense of the
Suez Cans] end East Africa areas.

27. The UR’s sensitivity about its prestige
and strategic position in the Middle East has
been heightened by the poiitical situation in
Britain itself. Conscious of its political weak-
ness, the Labor Government is anxious, par-
ticularly on the eve of national elections, to
avoid further criticism of its conduct of for-
eign affairs. The British public, which is
making sacrifices in order te preserve as much
as possible of Britain’s world position, would
resent policies which involved further sur-
render of positions or abandonment of re-
sponsibility for subject peoples like the Su-
danese. Al)though Laborites, particularly the
extreme left, are somewhat more sympathetic
than the Conservatives towards nationalist
aspirations, in the case of Egypt the view that
right and reason are on the British side js
common to the major parties. Furthermore,
the British refuse to admit that the Middle
Eastern countries should be permitted uni-
laterally to default on their treaty obligations.

28. Many British leaders, Conservative and
Labor alike, tend to discount Egyptian de-
mands on the theory that Egyptian nation-
alist agitation is largely an artificial creation
of ambitious politicians and a venal press,
and is designed primerily to divert public
attention from growing domestic grievances.
Furthermore, the view is prevalent in Britain

~GECBEL., 4

ee en TORTS ay ery
Cath date ches nuitealienaetecine. thantindehbaar ened
riers ONE EO RIE NE ot ATI OO RRE AE SER IE OORT ae HY Oe wie. deedel api saape ca ®
‘ 7 ' . ae ~~ “1
’

Pee eM ang

pean

BECREF

that Egyptian politicians will, as in the past,
respond to firmness, particularly a show of
force. In this connection, the British be-
lieve that maintenance of the Western de-
fense position in the Middle East requires
complete US support of the British policy in
Egypt. The. British believe, moreover, that
the Egyptian Government's action in seeking
abrogation at this time stems from a desire

to obtain domestic political benefits in antici- ©

pation of a Middle East Command offer.

Probable Future Developments .

29. In submitting legislation for denuncia-
tion of the Treaty of 1936 and the Condom-
nium Agreements of 1899, the Egyptian Cabi-
net has undertake the Srst mejor step in
a policy designed to secure the withdrawal
of British troops from Egypt and to end Brit-
ish control of the Sucan. It will be extremely
difficult for any Egyptian government to re-
treat from the policy to which the present
Egyptian Cabinet has committed itself. The
cabinet enjoys strong popular support, and
no other leadership has a sizeable following.
The King cannct appoint a more concilia-
tory cabinet without appearing to use his royal
powers to contravene nationa] aspirations.
While Egypt’s leaders, and particularly King
Farouk, probably have qualms about initiat-
ing a course of action which might lead to
hostilities between Egyptian and British
forces or to demonstrations and violence
which might be turned against their own
property and persons, there is no apparent
way in which they can reverse the present
trend of events. :

30. Egyptian denunciation of the Treaty of
1936 will of itself have little immediate effect
on the British military establishment in the
Canal area. It will, however, provide the
Egyptians with a pretext for declaring the
presence of British forces to be illegal and for
enacting military and administrative meas-
ures against them. Denunciation of the
Treaty of 1936 will also enable Egypt to deny
any further obligation to grant assistance and
immunity to the British forces, to provide
facilities and access, and to construct and
maintain roads and raiiway lines for them.

31. After denouncing the Treaty, the Egyptian
Government will probably not take immediate
action to expe) the British forces but instead
will await British reactions or possibly appeal
to the UN. If it gains nothing by waiting,
it will probably initiate political action to
secure the removal of British troops and
adopt a series of administrative measures to
isolate and inconvenience them. Such meas-
ures might include:

a. Forbidding Egyptian nationals to work
for the British forces, a measure affecting the
approximately 60,000 Egyptian laborers s0
occupied at present; :

b. Interfering with British shipping
through the Canal;

c. Denying port facilities to ships carrying
supplies to the British forces;

d. Ordering the exclusion of British forces
from Egyptian controlled ports, including
Port Ssid and Suez;

e. Denying the use of Egyptian currency
for British military expenditures;

f. Forbidding traders and contractors to
Geal with the British forces;

g. Forbidding or delaying the movement
of British military personnel within Egypt;

h. Encouraging non-cooperation of Egyp-
tians with the British forces by intimidation
and pressure; and,

i. Instigating local sabotage.

32. In reprisal, the UK could impose punitive
sanctions against Egypt. It could reduce
white oil (gasoline and kerosene) supplies to
Egypt and impose financial restrictions on
Egyptian trade. Such restrictions, while
they would damage the important British cot-
ton industry, would also have 4 serious effect
on the Egyptian economy. Other non-mili-
tary measures which the British might em-
ploy against Egypt include the withdrawal of
such British nationals as are still serving in
various technical posts in the Egyptian Gov-
ernment and industry, and the severance of
trade between Egypt and the Sudan. Such
measures would probably damage the Egyp-
tian economy and aggravate the economic
stringency which already exists. Although the
Egyptian Government, arming itself with
emergency powers, could probably maintain

Sean va OnE Tu TENTS aaa eeineatienehe Bitetieemett anes dna ainsi)

vee ee

SEOR ET

control of the situation, it is possible that
social unrest and economic misery might lead
to violent attacks against the regime, the out-
came of which cannot now be foreseen.

83. It is unlikely that non-military pressure
by the British would induce the Egyptian
Government to yield. The application of
punitive measures by the British would un-
doubtedly arouse resentment in all the Arab
countries and might make the Egyptian Gov-
ermmment even more uncompromising. —

$4. The UK, through its control of the bar-
rages in the Sudan, could seriously interfere
with the normal fiow of Nile water and thus
deal a severe blow to the Egyptian food supply.
It is unlikely, however, that the British would
employ such a measure in view of the fact
that it would do irreparable damage to Anglo-
Egyptian relaticns, would provoke humani-
tarian indignation throughout the world, and
would tend to vindicate Egypt in its demands
for control of the Sudan.

35. The Egyptians would almost certainly
take no major military action against the
British positions in the Canal area, although
Egyptian troops might well be used to man
checkpoints and might even seize certain iso-
lated installations. The Egyptian Govern-
ment’s chief concern would probably be with
internal security; consequently, the Egyptian
forces would probabiy be kept in reserve to
support the police in case of demonstrations
and disorders.

36. The UK alsc could be expected to refrain
from major military action except under ex-
treme provocation in either the base area
proper or the Canal area in general. The
British would probabty feel justified in tak-
ing major military action in the event that
the Egyptians interfered seriously with Brit-
ish shipping through the Suez Canal or in
the unlikely event that Egypt attempted to
expel the British garrison by force. Under
such circumstances, the British could and
would turn back any Egyptian attack and
might also seize control of the entire Canal
zone. Although the British could swiftly
seize control of Egypt, a unilateral British
resort to force would accentuate hostility
toward the British throughout the Arab

world, might severely strain British relations
with Pakistan and India, and might well lead
to censure by the UN. In the absence of an.
imminent threat of general war, the UK is
unlikely to risk such consequences.

37. It is unlikely that the UN could resolve
the conflict between the UK and Egypt. The
Security Council was unable to agree on any
resolution when Egypt submitted the issue to
it in 1947, and the elements have not changed
substantially since then. The British have
been consistently averse to bringing the UN
into the picture. While Egypt might try an-
other appeal to the Security Council, it
would do so not so much in the hope of a
favorable decision as with the expectation of
gaining propaganda advantage in preparation
for subsequent unilateral action against the
British.

38. The recent decision to include Greece and
Turkey in NATO and the prospective estab-
lishment of a Middle East Command provide
an opportunity for a fresh approach to the
problem. Under this approach, Egypt will be
asked to grant base rights not to the UK but
to a Middle East defense grouping (including
the OK) of which Egypt itself would be a
member.

39. It is doubtful that a result satisfactory to
both Egypt and the UK could be achieved
through a multilateral approach. Before
aprecing to the establishment of a regional
defense system, the Egyptians would require
assurances that the 1936 Treaty would be
abrogated and that a settlement of the Sudan
satisfactory to Egypt would be reached. In
the actual negotiations concerning 4 regional
defense force, they would almost certainly
demand that Egyptian forces be extensively
equipped by the West so that Egypt could
fill its new role; that the new defense forces
be truly international in character; and that
the base area be under Egyptian command.
The UK would probably agree to abandon the
1936 Treaty and to make limited concessions
on the administration of the Sudan. The
UK would be also willing to share responsibil-
ity for the maintenance of the base area with
other powers and to give Egypt a nominal
share in the command, but it would certainly
reject full Egyptian control over the Sudan

aed Rena aeahiet al italia tee SEE. oe
whee .

vee pen hema aide aida taatate sane sae TT
OMS Auth ese 4.

@
Oo

nh iein se

SECRET

and even under a multilateral defense ar-
rangement would insist on the Jeading part
in control of the Suez base.

40. In view of the likelihood that, even under
& multilateral Gefense arrangement, British
troops would be expected to comprise a signifi-

cant part of the garrison, there is grave doubt
that a satisfactory compromise of the base
issue can be reached unless, at the least, sub-
stantial concessions are made to the Egyp-
tians with respect to the Sudan.

APPENDIX

British Military Forces in Egypt
(1 October 1951)
1. Number of troops (2 Brigs.; 4

Regts.) .. 222-2 eee ee 27,400*

2 -AUCTAIt ee es ele kee ae. 148
a. Jet fighters ............. 81
b. Conventional fighters.... 13
ec. Transports ............. 40
dG. Reconnaissance ........ 14

* An additional 19,000 British troops are sta-

tioned in Cyprus,
Eritrea, and Aden.

Libya, Jordan, the Sudan,

Egyptian Muilary Forces
(1 October 1951)

1, Number of troops ............... 73,000
a. Army (1 Div.; 9 Brigs; 4
Regts.) 2.0... ....0. 60,000
b. Royal Frontier Corps... © 400
c. Royal Bodyguard ...... 1,600
d. Coast guard .......... 4,000
e. Territorial Army....... 1,000
2. Aircralt) osc. es Pe eee 290
a. Jet fighters ........... "29
b. Conventional fighters .. 46
c. Light bombers......... 17
d. Transports ........... 28
e. Communication, train-
ing and liaison....... 170
3. Nava) vessels ................2.. 57
a. Destroyers ........... 2
b. Smaller craft ......... 9
c. Minor combat vessels... 46
SECRET

{¢-Ol “wid OBOE
YW

TWINAQINGS
woud) pr] “40S F Ting 88005 OOO'ORO'I:1 1s499 Sve

(UCD ————--— AID ‘Oualdees ‘eBemyouy

Asses ‘peoy but ‘Pisa
eOjuai> “Pisgary

380) Optlugs ‘peodie” -——~+~ Arenas ‘preany

' SaWoUudouay |
YlL1I30 JUN 3HL

Olned mOsi8u “peosyey

*O@4

og y H
y Thee ae a !
Pesosia yy in vy
f « - ¢ { ~ a

ort 2 - tue - we tO i

, ; é ein Sd) TAN [

, ‘ ; y uvage a Whine |

2 = 3 ~~ J t <a Aaa . + SS)

; des x ~=ly , } os “an — VisQnexa f

So, 6 3 oe ‘ hap Son

j ae, . ’ 2 a
: S : nee (es 4 + 4
5 , s ae ee Bet SE wae 4
« . Pecan F . sN Dae all ° ~

TWNOISIAOdd

bak amr ys
ov Of oe as 0a |
sou ] |
| or of oe oF ( |
{ 000'OOr' 1:1 a925
QSawes YOG et 8282) S1QNOP ‘peasuny —~——e-

(G6 “Wid teOZT

a

ui { Ci Hy

ween) boots, panes) ays hy pare a iy
Oye G0 bees gh We potadrasurs Apsara ner f fran eftadage
He emmiayl Raeepeny pouleeurese Oyj i

by

HE Hl a

pie
iy
i ey

Leip yf

ih
HEY
He

:

| NVGHOL/ ¢ /
( )

A)
\"

Mad Wd

Vav us!

ye '‘
NONYUa'1 dings CHE
5 fo - ne
- cn Vai Ss me
SMA ,

aN

, TST he
esuig, |

,
a. a
qua, Guapo |
pe ay a fee bes

neha! ‘
+?

ne 4
goad:

i

’
»
'

ASeiitioon —

Batu a) Arad

ey a

Masiva‘er Red
ae

i

4)
BDO RIA

° Se ee ML ane Ss A 4 NS YOY Do ETD » eRe 7 ees n

\ OTE Org. we Ent
Bema Sew iete viveney utes ayy

{ .
10 OAC sewers reno 5311
\e a
.

vasne|
aq s¢syve

Anta

|

vin 1 Ly7zsiza
|
l

TOGT reas ‘Rerpely op esye Boer crewiey ‘OND'DN0'*T |
(oem yep CPS © MER) VERA LS.TIV VYNTHD VIO 2598

epeyminnne

NWAS

“purenetanccy ret

-fore: sermpenog my of sere? yo +
Sou EP dew fy) Se UmoyT seepe
spare Sun pur sirodoe ueiocen ha Tass Sin . —
dwems woe | : C
: : PIOAY om :
on paid are Aauyasto O | “ANAWSVID) “ae
eR PIO m . tt ns
Yerg = Suyssesoxd 11e5  O pops ANY tet» |e
weg ow = Buu pieudsoug @ Syhetyey aN > _ oom
feues oe Bururuy osouezuew ° e i, LIE ef SOON ——
ONO) WEAEIED ee ysodap voy : . wee
peo. view Suu ‘pes w iz eng
peomes view ——— — ysodap usddop |

ON3937
