The New Meaning of Treason by Rebecca West-the First Half of the Book
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014793, dated 1 May 1973.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014793).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

88 JUH 973

CD-830

THE NEW MEANING OF TREASON*
By Rebecca WEST
Published by The Viking Press, New York, 1964—

374 Pages Index

~

The first half of this book deals with the life and
career of the British traitor, William JOYCE ("Lord Haw
Haw"), and with several other minor characters who were
tried for treason after World War II because of their
collaboration with the Nazis. The rest of the book is a
series of accounts, in varying degrees of detail, of the
Soviet agents whose careers have become known to the public

“through trial, flight, or testimony, in Britain and .the
United States, since the end of World War II. In chronological
order these are: Alan NUNN MAY and the others involved in
the Canadian atomic energy espionage ring; Klaus Emil FUCHS
and the Americans involved with him (i.e. Harry GOLD, Ruth
and David GREENGLASS, and the ROSENEERGS); Bruno PONTECORVO,
Donald MacLEAN, Guy BURGESS, William MARSHALL, Colonel
Rudolph ABEL, Anthony MAYNARD, Brian FREDERICK, Gordon
LONSDALE, Harry HOUGHTON, Winifred GEE, the KROGERS (aliases
of the Morris COHENS), George BLAKE, and John Christopher
VASSAL. The PROFUMO-Stephen WARD-Christine KEELER affair is
also discussed. :

In 1946 Dr. Alan NUNN MAY, a lecturer in Physics at the
University of London, Canada, was tried on charges of having
given the Soviets secret information about atomic projects
on which he had been working for the British Government. The
spy ring in Canada, for which NUNN MAY worked, included many
other British and Canadians and concerned itself with matters
other than scientific ones but mostof the persons in the group
were scientists. After NUNN MAY's trial and conviction, a
hue and cry was set up by certain scientists who felt that
a member of their profession could do no wrong. NUNN MAY,
they claimed, had given out purely scientific information
"in the spirit of true science."

® RK revised and expanded version uf THE MEANING OF TREASON,
The Viking Fress, New York, 1947, 307 pages, index.

[74s

i ERRNO RRP ASN IES NERNEY RACED OIE a} ER OG MS 4
.

eo RCE HORROR LI “Tae nei,

CD-830

In 1950 Klaus FUCHS, head of ‘the theoretical division

of the atomic energy establishment at Harwell in the U.K.,
was arrested and brought to trial for giving atomic infor-
mation to the Soviets. This case was a sore point between
the United States and Great Britain, because FUCHS had been
iven a security clearance by the British eyen though, at
the beginning of the war, he had told the Aliens Tribunal that
he was a Communist. Working at Los Alamos before returning
to England, he had a knowledge of the atomic program such

as only the top American scientists possessed, and this

fact made his betrayal doubly bitter. ;

In the months following FUCHS' trial, seven other
persons were arrested who were connected with this particular
american spy xing. One of these was Harry GOLD, who, under
arrest, broke away from the Party and became a Government
witness. Under instructions from YAKOVLEV, his Soviet contact, |
he had been in touch with Julius and Ethel ROSENBERG, and
with Ethel's brother, David GREENGLASS. Under arrest GREENGLASS
testified against his sister to save his wife from prosecution,
The ROSENBERGs were sent to the electric chair in 1953. FUCHS
himself fared better. He was given a prison sentence. When
he was released in 1959 he went to East Germany and worked
as deputy director of the East German Central Institute for
Nuclear Physics. -- - wee “

Shortly after the conviction of FUCHS in 1950, relations
between the United States and Great Britain suffered a further
jolt when a physicist named Bruno PONTECORVO tan Italian
by birth, but a British citizen by naturalization) left the
atomic energy establishment at Harwell under mysterious
circumstances. After his flight it was discovered that he had
been a Communist for many years and that he had developed
strong ties with other Communists. Yet he had been screened
five times by British security: three times after the
revelations of GUZENKO and twice after the conviction of Dr..
NUNN MAY. This situation raised highly critical conment in
the United States and caused both countries to view their
security organizations with distrust.

Another case of flight that was planned and executed in
such a way as to cause the greatest possible amount of talk
and thus to sow mistrust and apprehension inthe West,
came to light a year later. On 25 May 1951, when Donald
MacLEAN, a counsellor in the British Foreign office and Guy
BURGESS, a second secretary in the junior branch, sailed from
the U.K. on the ship, Palaise, from Southampton to St. Malo.
They then made their way to Rennes and vanished. The flight
became a paper-chase rather than an escape. Everything about
jt raised public interest and surprise. The two men apparently

es

x

; - CD-830  "
yntended to leave one glaring clue after another and to
ensure the maximum amount of talk. Inasmuch as the British
roreign Office preserved a discreet silence on the matter,*
jt was left to the newspapers to try to discover the facts.
qhen, © compound the mystery, MacLEAN's wife, Melinda,
disappeared two years later. The author beiieves that most
of the information the men supplied to the Soviets was of
yery little substantive value.. Their flight, and that of
MacLEAN's wife, which served to discredit the West in its
own eyes, was the real service rendered to the Soviet Union
by BURGESS and MacLEAN, ; i

In the summer of 1952, William MARSHALI,a‘ radiotelegraphist
jn the British Foreign Office, was arrested and tried’ for
handing over official documents to a Soviet diplomat. His
short Career as an agent was so full of flagrant breaches of
security that the author finds it impossible to believe that
the Soviets were making a serious effort to control hin.

She suspects that he was sacrificed to divert attention from
the activities of a more valuable agent, Colcnel Rudolph ABEL,
so that the British and American authorities would think they
had plugged the leak that had been troubling them.

Colonel Rudolph ABEL of the Soviet State Security Service
was arrested in New York City-in 1957. He had operated there
for nine years, and probably would never have been caught
if had not been sent as an aide and courier, HAYHANEN, an
alcoholic and a psychopath who turned him in. ABEL was
convicted and sentenced, but was_released in 1962 in exchange
for Francis Gary POWERS, the American U-2 pilot.

In 1958, two minor espionage agents came into the limelight.
One was Brian FREDERICK, an electronics engineer working’for
the British Government. He had agreed to supply Colonel PRYBYL,
the Czech Military Attaché with classified drawings for pay.
This relationship was under the surveillance of a British
Government security agency almost from the very beginning. For
a time he was permitted to bring out documents that had been
faked by his superiors. Then he was arrestec and sentenced
to fourteen years’ imprisonment.. , g  &

The other sirall-time agent was Anthony MAYNARD, a dissatisfied
British airman. He contacted SOLOVYEV, who, according to the :

*Tater in 1955, the Foreign Office published a white paper ,
entitled, REPORT CONCERNING THE DISAPPERRANCE OF TWO FORMER
FOREIGN OFFICIALS (DONALD MacLEAN AND GUY BURGESS). (Her
Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 8 pages -- see CD-937).

‘ -3-

CD-830

‘ ; :

author, was an intelligence officer at the Soviet Embassy,

jn connection with a possible course of study at the State |

tnstitute in Moscow. MAYNARD, when interviewed about these

meetings by British security authorities became annoyed, fled

to East Germany, and there broadcast propaganda against the

west. He then went to,Moscow and was enrolled in the School

of Engineering Construction. Falling out with his Soviet

nandlers, he was sent home where he was sentenced to three

years in jail. "
In March 1961 five members of the so-called Portland

spy ring were brought to trial in London. Gordon LONSDALE,

a Soviet whose real name was MOLODY, was their contact man.

porn in 1922, LONSDALE had lived.with relatives in Berkeley,

California as a boy. He had then returned to the USSR where

ne attended an espionage school, He entered Canada illegally

aboard a Soviet grain ship and stayed there long enough to

acquire a Canadian passport under the name of LONSDALE. , In

Fngland, posing as a sort of entrepreneur, LONSDALE established

an espionage network with the active collaboration of Morris

and Lona COHEN, who previously had been associates of both

the ROSENBERGs and Colone] ABEL in the U.S. LONSDALE was

sentenced to twenty-five years' imprisonment, the COHENs to

fifteen. The latter sentence was also imposed on two other

agents, Harry HOUGHTON and Winifred GEE. In 1964, LONSDALE

was exchanged for Greville WYNNE, a British businessman who

had been sentenced by a Moscow court fo eight years’ imprison-

ment for espionage, allegedly as a colleague of Oleg PENKOVSKIY.

George BLAKE was born George BEHAR, son 6f a Dutchman
who claimed British citizenship. As a boy he lived in Cairo
with an aunt. He returned to Rotterdam to finish his education.
When the Low Countries were invaded in 1940 he was interned,
escaped, and joined a resistance group, known as Orde Dienst.
In this organization he became involved in Operation North Pole.
Thus he became connected with British secret services, parti-
cularly with the Special Operations Executive (SOE) (where
BURGESS also had worked). After a while BLAKE was ordered
by an SOE officer to make his way to England, There he
established his British citizenship, changed his_ name to BLAKE,
and was given a temporary commission in the Royal Navy as a
reserve officer.

In 1944 he was sent to SHAEF headquarters and then went to
Hamburg in charge of a unit of Naval intelligence. Back in
England he ended up in the Foreign Office and was sent to
Downing College to study Russian history and language. In 1948
he was appointed Vice-Consul in Seoul, Korea, a cover for his
real job as an MI-6 representative. He was arrested in 1950 and

aes

Yd

: . CD-830

en hoyle

wound up in a prisoner-of-war camp near Pyongyang, where he
“guffered ill-treatment and brainwashing. At last he went

to his captors and cffered to work for the Communists without
pay. From then on he was a Soviet agent.

Spt fie! Mp RS

After his return to England, he was sent to West Berlin,
again as a representative of MI-6. There he got in touch with
one Horst EITNER, who was handling a team of agents, Eventually
EITNER was arrested and, when brought before a judge, claimed
that he had become a double agent at the instigation of a
British official, who was a double agent himself. He described
this person as a Dutchman who had some connection with the
Royal Navy. Later, Colonel ALSTER, head of the Polish secret
police, defected to the West and told thé authorities that he
knew of agents who were working for the Soviets in Berlin. One
of the names he gave was that of BLAKE. During his trial,
BLAKE Claimed that, while in the prisoner-of-war camp in Korea,
he had become persuaded that Communismwasthe right road.

The author believes, however, that the Communist Party had long
had a hand in BLAKE's career, perhaps from the very beginning
of it. Be that as it may, he was sentenced to forty-two years'
imprisonment in 1961,*

a

an

¢

Se tegen ae

William Christopher VASSALL arrived in Moscow in March of
1954 to serve as a clérk in the office of the British Naval
Attaché, A homosexual,VASSALL had had an affair with a certain
NIKHAILSKIY, a junior interpreter and administrative officer
at the Embassy. By autumn he was regularly taking documents
from the Naval Attaché's office and passing them to his new
friend, who photographed them before they were returned to the
files. He returned to England in July 1956 and worked for
British Naval intelligence for two years. He then worked in ,
the private office of the Civil Lord of the Admiralty, and, in
October 1959, was posted to the Fleet section of Military
Branch II, where he stayed until his arrest in September 1962,
During these years he photographed classified material and
Was well paid by his Soviet employers. He was tried and
Sentenced to eighteen years' imprisonment. ~ ;

The famous case involving Stephen WARD and Christine
KEELER was only on the fringes of espionage. It is uncertain
exactly what WARD's aims were in connection with his professed
interest in Communism, but they led to the downfall of
John PROFUMO, the British Minister of War, and to WARD's own
death by suicide while in jail during his trial. WARD had kept
what amounted to a house of prostitution for wealthy patrons.
The affair as it unfolded in the press Was extremely sordid,
but the author believes that probably no espionage as such was
involved.

¥ BLAKE escaped from prison in 1966, after the publication of this bev:

me sey neteningen sate one meet mp tt“ ame cone
o

8 rede ein ey

ms

vere,

=
