Intelligence Memorandum - Czechoslovakia's New Policy in the Soviet Bloc
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119583, dated 3 November 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119583).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

aa

wf

”

“

“a

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
8 SEP 1997

» +
° X
n
> -
' v
<
r 5
”
rr “a
4
ie
5 -

& 4

‘cdecucsLOyAxiA's NEW POLICY,
INTHE SOVIET BLOC .

au

“4

Copy. ‘No. ©

ar

a

~

“

a

ve

ad

v

ba

vod No. “poonees,”
“8 Se

s

~

¥ “

’ “<

.

- “

. ~
or

Y
é

e

OCI No. 2065/64

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
16 December 1964

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

Czechoslovakia's New Policy
In the Soviet Bloc

SUMMARY

The former "model satellite" Czechoslovakia
is embarking on a policy of reducing its longstand-
ing subservience to the USSR. This change is es-
pecially evident in the support Prague gave Khru-
shchev after his ouster, in the recent publica-
tion of a draft reform economic program which in-
cludes broader use of the market mechanism, and in
attempts to improve economic and political rela-
tions with the West.

The change that has come about was an out-—
growth of the domestic liberalization forced on
old~time Stalinist leader Novotny by dissident
elements in the party, in response to longstand-
ing political grievances and a severe economic
crisis, The new Czechoslovak policies, like
those already being followed by Poland, Hungary,
and Rumania, are based on a realistic appraisal
of national needs and desires, and reflect a
further decline of Soviet influence in Eastern
Europe,

oN

1. The Czechoslovak party is embarking ona
policy of reducing its longstanding subservience
to the USSR. This assertion of national interests
is an inevitable outgrowth of changes in Czecho-
slovakia brought about by pressures from liberals
in the Czech and Slovak parties and by the desire
of the public fcr some improvement in day-to-day
life,

2. The necessity to reduce Czechoslovakia's
subservience to Moscow and to assume greater free-
dom of action in bloc affairs was bound to emerge
as the old-time Stalinist party first secretary,
Novotny, acceded during 1964 to pressures both in-
side and outside the party for a more objective,
rational organization of society and for a responsive
national leadership. Khrushchev's ouster gave the
regime an opportunity to speed up the process, which
otherwise would probably have taken place gradually.

3. Novotny's new stand was illustrated by
the presidium and central committee statements
supporting Khrushchev, issued in Prague after his
ouster, by publication of a reform economic pro-
gram just two days after the ouster, and by No-
votny's refusal to attend the 7 November anniver-
sary celebrations in Moscow, These steps have met
with enthusiastic support in the central committee
and greatly enhanced Novotny's position as an in-
dependent and flexible national leader.

4. Unlike.Rumania, which began to assert its
national interests primarily in reaction to spe-
cific bloc economic policies, Czechoslovakia is
responding to internal political and economic
pressures which, gaining a momentum of their own,
finally confronted Novotny with the choice be-
tween abandoning his past hard-line policies or
being forced out of office.

Growth of Political and Economic Pressures

5. The roots of the new policy go back to
early pressures to de-Stalinize, which appeared in

CzechoSlovakia, as elsewhere in the bloc, after
Stalin's death; Novotny and his party apparatus,
however, Successfully Suppressed them until the
late 1950's. At that time a movement in the party--
probably centered around the then Interior Minister
Rudolf Barak-~sought to counter if not eliminate
Novotny's hard-line leadership. Novotny purged the
would-be renegade Barak in 1961, but pressures from
within the party to de-Stalinize, probably abetted
by Moscow, nevertheless continued to grow. Aban-
donment of the Third Five Year Plan (1961-1965) in
mid-~1962, forced by economic failures, was a se-
rious blow to Novotny's prestige. By the 12th party
congress in December 1962, liberal elements of the
party central committee had gained enough influence
to put through a resolution favoring at least some
tentative steps toward de-Stalinization.

6. During this period Czechoslovakia's econ-
omic difficulties became the most severe in the
entire Soviet bloc. Gross National Product was
barely increasing. The growth of industrial pro-
duction had slowed drastically, from an average
yearly increase of about nine percent in 1958-60
to about two percent in 1962-63, and industrial
production actually fell in 1963. Net agricultural
production had shown a downward trend since the
late 1950's. Capital investment declined both in
1962 and in 1963. Per capita consumption and real
wages remained nearly constant.

7. The main reasons for the sharp economic
Slowdown were deepseated. Reserves of productive
capacity in industry and transportation were exhausted,
and agriculture had been milked dry of competent labor.
Industries producing finished goods, which account
for the great bulk of Czechoslovak exports, became
increasingly obsolete because of inadequate techno-
logical progress and the high concentration of invest—
ments during most of the postwar period in industries
producing basic materials. Foreign and domestic cus-
tomers became less willing to accept products of low
quality. In agriculture, collectivization led to an

( SEGRET (

inefficient use of investments.

The strain in the economy was aggravated
by a series of unexpected events: the military build-
up occasioned by the Berlin crisis of 1961, a bad crop
and the collapse of trade with Communist China in
1962, an unusually severe winter in 1962-63, and a
Shortage of electric power in 1963.

8. In 1962 and 1963, Czechoslovakia could not
at the same time achieve a rapid rate of industrial
growth, maintain the standard of living of its people,
and balance its foreign payments. Unable to obtain
credits from the USSR and burdened with drawings on
its own credits of the order of $50 million a year,
Czechoslovakia had to balance its payments by in-
creasing exports much faster than imports. The rise
in exports and the holding down of imports took place
mainly at the expense of capital investment and indus-—
trial production. The regime, seriously concerned
with rising public dissatisfaction, decided to keep
food supplies as stable as possible by increased food
import.

The Political Crisis of 1963
a NE AOD

9. As a result of these political and economic
developments, the Czechoslovak regime in 1963 found it-
self in its period of greatest instability since 1948. Vir-
tually every facet of the party's political, economic,
and social policy was publicly questioned. This was
inevitably accompanied by a breakdown in party dis-
cipline. The liberals began to exercise meaningful
influence in party affairs, stimulated to greater
efforts in part by the worsening economic situation.

A further contributing factor was growing ferment
among the intellectuals, reminiscent of 1955 and 1956
in Poland and Hungary.

10, The liberal movement was greatly strengthened
by the bold Slovak drive to regain some degree of
autonomy and to rectify past injustices against the
Slovaks by Prague. By and large the demands of Czech
and Slovak party liberals coincided, calling for
specific changes in administrative, legal, cultural,
educational, and economic procedures, for redress of
past Stalinist excesses, and for the removal of Stalin-
ists from the regime.

C SEGRET (

ll, The political and economic disarray was
accompanied by increased public discontent, prompted
by the poor economic Situation and the breakdown in
party discipline. Czech-Slovak national animosity
re-emerged as a crucial problem, adding to the insta-
bility.

Novotny Capitulates

12. Novotny reluctantly and clumsily began
to de-Stalinize and to liberalize economic policy.
Demands on him increased, however, until he was forced
to purge several leading Stalinists--mainly Slovaks
unpopular in Slovakia--and he himself was in danger
of being toppled in late 1963. The Soviets intervened,
despatching Brezhnev to Prague to resolve what ap-
peared to be an imminent leadership crisis in December
1963. A period of retrenchment followed, during which
Novotny remained in the background while many of the
liberal changes were codified and a degree of order
was restored through a series of compromises favoring
the liberals. The struggles within the party from
then on focused on solution of domestic economic prob-
lems, as Novotny fully associated himself with plans
for economic reform. By virtue of these compromises--
which helped ensure Khrushchev's continued support--
Novotny was able to reconsolidate his power by the
summer of 1964.

13. The Czechoslovak leadership in October
announced a draft program for liberalization of the
economic system which goes beyond reform proposals
anywhere else in the Soviet bloc. Until the latter
part of 1963, Novotny had advocated tighter economic
controls and blamed the partial decentralization of
1958-60 for some of the regime's economic difficulties.
As early as 1962, however, his liberal critics claimed
that the decentralization had failed because it had
not gone far enough. By 1964 criticism had become
more intense; a large number of leading Czechoslovak
economists were urging replacement of the Soviet-—type
command economy by a form of market socialism. These
economists argued that the Soviet-type system was
effective in mobilizing resources, but was inefficient
and inflexible in the detailed allocation of resources.
An advanced economy like Czechoslovakia's, which had
exhausted its reserves, could no longer function
efficiently under this system.

14. With the announcement of the reforms the
liberals had won a partial victory. The steps actually

-4-

T

taken up to that time to improve the economy had been
marginal--even by comparison with many other bloc
countries--except for the abandonment of taut planning
in favor of a more flexible and realistic approach,

The new program, however, contains the general outlines
for future reforms which reflect many of the views of
the liberals, while at the same time providing for re-
tention of whatever controls the regime may consider
necessary. The program provides for:

a "scientific" approach to economic plan-
ning and management, using mathematical
methods and procedures borrowed from
Western corporations;

a delegation of authority over most
short-range planning and current pro-
duction to enterprises and trusts;

the basing of enterprise incentives
On current income instead of on ful-
fillment of plan assignments;

increased flexibility and greater
rationality of prices; and

a partial substitution of financial
regulations for direct orders as instru-
ments of state control.

Investment and foreign trade policy are to
be governed by more careful evaluation of economic ad-—
vantage than in the past, and less by political or
ideological considerations.

Relations with the West

15. In response to liberal demands and to eco-
nomic necessity, Prague for more than a year has been
seeking improved relations with the West. Although
the party has not always been unified on this policy,
the regime has increasingly taken measures to improve
its image abroad and expand contacts--political, social
and cultural as well as economic--with the West. Prague
has taken a number of specific measures to liberalize
entry regulations, to guarantee the safety of Czech-
born US citizens traveling in Czechoslovakia, and ‘to
raise the level of diplomatic relations with numerous
countries. It has tried to broaden cultural-educational

exchanges with Western Europe and the US and has gen-
erally been more cooperative in official contacts with
the West,

16. Despite these positive changes, there have
been and will probably continue to be some isolated
lapses, probably due to the influence of regime members--
Particularly in the security apparatus--who remain
Opposed to rapprochement. The Foreign Ministry has
found itself embarrassed by police actions on two re-—
cent occasions--the attack on the US Embassy in pro-
test over US policy in the Congo, and the arrest of a
US citizen on espionage charges--which have conflicted
with the regime's professions of good will. Signifi-
cantly, however, the regime continues to support the
Foreign Ministry in its general policy toward the West.

17. In need of Western currency and desirous of
more favorable trade relations with the West, the
Czechs have sought realistically to settle outstanding
economic differences--mainly claims issues--with West-
ern European countries and the US. In some cases they
have met with success and moved on to cultural agree-
ments or negotiations for improved trade relations.
Other steps aimed at broadening economic relations
with the West include measures taken last year to at-
tract Western tourists; the provision of some special
incentives to exporters; and a greater stress on eco-
nomic criteria rather than political expediency in
elaborating foreign trade plans,

18. This interest in broader economic relations
with the West has not yet had much practical effect.
Trade with non-Communist countries in 1963 was lower
than in 1961. It came to Only 25 percent of total
Czechoslovak trade, as compared to about 30 percent in
Hungary and Rumania and about 35 percent in Poland,
Steps such as those described above--and of course
Western credits--may lead to some increase in the share
of Western trade over the unusually low levels of re-
cent years. Nonetheless these steps will not overcome
the principal obstacle to expanded trade with the West--
the low quality of most Czechoslovak manufactured goods.
In sharp contrast to Rumania, Czechoslovakia can spare
few raw materials and foods for export. Consequently
it relies predominantly on exports of machinery and
manufactured consumer goods, many of which are no longer
competitive in the West.

19, Any substantial increase in the competitive-
ness of Czechoslovak manufactures in the West will take
sustained efforts for many years in adapting the struc-
ture of production, making planning and management more
flexible, and improving marketing and servicing abroad.
Changes along these lines are implicit, and in some
cases explicit, in the regime's broad program for the
allocation of resources and for economic reform, It is
likely in particular that large Czechoslovak producers
will be allowed more direct contacts with foreign cus-
tomers; that bonuses in the production of goods for ex-
port will be based at least partly on earnings in for-
eign currency; and that the structure of domestic prices
will be brought closer to the structure of prices on
the world market. Even if implemented vigorously, such
reforms will not necessarily cause a substantial re-—
orientation of Czechoslovak trade, but they are likely
to increase its flexibility considerably by broadening
the alternatives to trade with the bloc.

20. The regime now is seeking some Sign of west-
ern support for its more independent policy toward
Moscow. Novotny needs this to impress the Soviets as
well as his own party. Even more importantly, he needs
increased trade with the West, foreign currency and
long-term credits to gain and maintain a more secure
economic position. With the example of Rumanian suc-
cess in mind, Prague is vigorously pursuing this goal
in France, Britain and the US.

Relations with the Bloc

21. Prague's increased interest in economic re-
lations with the West does not appear to have weakened
its trade ties with the USSR. The USSR accounts for
nearly 40 percent of Czechoslovak trade (as compared to
about the same for Rumania and around one-third each
for Poland and for Hungary). This is a higher share
than a few years ago, and accounts for a large part of
the materials needed by Czechoslovakia. Plans are being
drafted for a substantial increase in trade with the
USSR, and technical cooperation is closer than ever.
Nevertheless, there is probably widespread resentment
at the failure of the USSR to extend credits during the
economic crisis, and there is implied criticism of the
USSR in the complaints about inefficient industries,
many of which were built to process Soviet raw materials
or to meet Soviet specifications.

22. Prague also has been one of the principal ad-
vocates of closer intra~-bloc cooperation under CEMA and
probably is disappointed with the Slow progress in this
direction. Like most other Eastern European countries,
however, Czechoslovakia probably is unwilling to give
much control over its economy to supranational bodies.
As a highly developed country, it has been interested
in CEMA mainly as a means of promoting its exports of
manufactures, in return for which it imports needed raw
materials and foods. This approach to cooperation was
a major cause of the recurrent frictions with Rumania
over the past several years, inasmuch as Rumania's main
desire was to develop new manufacturing branches.

23. For many years, Czechoslovakia has had no
real alternative to a predominant economic dependence
on the Soviet bloc. The original reason was political,
but with the development of the Soviet-type economic
system in Czechoslovakia and of a structure of produc-
tion tailored to meet bloc needs, economic reasons were
added. Largely cut off from world markets, Prague
came to regard exports to the bloc, many of which were
of low quality, as vital for the support of its indus-
trialization. In recent years, bloc customers have be-
come more discriminating, and the Rumanians have even
turned down Czechoslovak machinery on the ground that
it did not meet world standards. Thus trends in the
bloc as well as domestic difficulties and the attrac-
tiveness of Western technology have pushed Czechoslovakia
toward intportant changes in its economic structure and
its economic system,

24, Czechoslovakia now is fast approaching a
degree of autonomy in the bloc comparable to Poland
and Hungary, and has taken to the policy of realistic
economic planning adopted by these two countries after
1956. Both of these countries and East Germany are
ahead of Czechoslovakia in actual economic reform, but
their programs for future reforms are clearly intended
to increase the efficiency of the command economy,
while the Czechoslovak program puts a great deal more
stress on the use of the market mechanism.

25. The changing atmosphere in Czechoslovakia
wrought about changes in Prague's relations with other
Eastern European countries permitting an exchange of
ideas which have had further effect on Czech policy.
In his efforts to demonstrate his flexibility and wil-
lingness to de-Stalinize, Novotny began some time ago

to woo Yugoslavia and to imply a desire to emulate
certain Yugoslav practices. Even though a great deal
of this was purely for the sake of improving his image,
closer relations did in fact develop. Now the Yugo-
Slav system-~political and economic--is being discussed
in Prague as the model for changes in Czechoslovakia.

26. Similarly Czechoslovakia has drawn closer
to Poland and Hungary, conscious of Budapest's recent
successes in gaining popular support without sacri-_
ficing discipline or public order. Prague has scrupu-
lously avoided expanding its relations with Rumania,
however, and has refrained from any public mention of
‘Dej's independent position within the bloc. Presum-
ably the Czechs have been fearful of the Rumanians'
boldness, but this may change now that the Czechs them-—
selves have taken a bolder line.

27. The developments of the past two years within
Czechoslovakia have not been well received by Novotny's
Stalinist neighbor Ulbricht in East Germany. Nonetheless,
the "new, flexible" Novotny has made no attempt to allay
Ulbricht's fear, and relations between the two parties
have gradually deteriorated.

28. Steadfastly loyal to the Soviet Union and
a strong supporter--albeit belatedly-~-of Khrushchev's
Chinese and Yugoslav policies, Prague has adopted the
attitude that loyalty to Moscow does not preclude and
must not infringe on Prague's right to make its own
decisions. Emphasizing Czechoslovakia's contribution
in exchanges of views with Moscow and the value of
reciprocity, the joint Communiqué issued after Novotny's
30 November - 4 December trip to Moscow stressed the
ideas of full equality of socialist nations and "strength-
ened national sovereignty." In the communiqué the
Czechs also subtly dissociated themselves from the full
endorsement given by the Soviets to the 2lst CPSU con-
gress--which attacked “"revisionism"~-presumably to avoid
offending the Yugoslavs.

29. Unlike Rumania, however, there is nothing
expressly "anti-Soviet" in Prague's position today,
and there is no de-Russification as there has been in
Rumania. It is unlikely that the Czechs will engage
in an anti-Soviet campaign as long as they can effec-
tively demonstrate their decision-making freedom with-
out one. Novotny, upon his re-election as president
in November, publicly reassured the Soviets that

-~9-

Czechoslovakia would’-remain a member of the Warsaw
Pact.

Prospects

30. Czechoslovakia apparently believes that
the Russians~--particularly under a new regime whose
Stability is far from certain--will not or cannot
interfere with Prague's assertion of national self-
interest.

31. Internal and foreign policies, therefore,
will probably continue in the direction of liberali-
zation and independence. [In its bargaining with
Moscow, Prague will probably press for Some conces-

sions from the Soviets, such as credits and-generally

more favorable trading terms. CzechoSlovak and
Soviet interests may conflict on the size and opera-
tion of the Czechoslovak aid and penetration program
in developing countries, by far the largest such
program conducted by any Eastern European country.
Frictions over CEMA policies may arise, but there
are no reasons for Serious differences with the
USSR unless the Soviets try to transform CEMA into
a truly Supranational organization--an unlikely

event because of widespread oppoSition within Eastern

Europe. Concomitantly Prague will continue its
efforts to expand trade with the West.

32. Although differences over such matters
probably can be amicably negotiated if Moscow takes
an enlightened view of Prague's positions, Czecho-
Slovakia nonetheless now can be expected to press
harder than ever to protect its national interests.
As a result, political problems are bound to arise
between the two allies. Moreover, Novotny, who
now has staked his political career and prestige
on a program designed to serve CzechoSlovakia's
national interests, will be little inclined to sSub-
ordinate his policies to the needs of Moscow should
a conflict of interests arise.

33. In international Communist affairs the
Czechs now are wedded to the rapprochement with
Yugoslavia, whatever position the Soviets may take.
The Sino-Soviet dispute is unlikely to become an
issue with Moscow, unless the USSR changes its at-
titude toward China to the detriment of the Soviet
bloc's rapprochement with YugosSlovia. Although

-10-

Prague will continue to Support Moscow's general
foreign policy line in bloc and international
councils, as time goes on it will hold out for sery-
ing its own interests. This of course does not
preclude specific anti-Western steps from time to
time by Czechoslovakia if Czech relations with Mos-

cow make this tactically advisable.

34. Looked at from the viewpoint of the
Soviet bloc as a whole, the new trend in Czechoslo-
vakia demonstrates anew that the pattern of rela-
tionships between the countries of Eastern Europe
and the USSR has been radically altered over the
past decade. The westward flow of Soviet exploi-
tation and control has been tempered by an eastward
flow of political pressure. The vast network of
Soviet agents, military, and police, and of East-
ern European party leaders and functionaries who
owed their first loyalties to the USSR and Stalin,
has disappeared.

35. Each Eastern European leader now is free
to test the limits of Soviet hegemony and to choose
the course which appears to be the most promising
for his own country. In all of these countries
except East Germany and Bulgaria, this choice is
more and more likely to reflect national and even
European interests rather than those of the USSR
and the bloc.

36. While these countries do not yet exercise
the freedom of a Yugoslavia, a resemblance is emerg-—
ing. Indeed, the entire process has an air of in-
evitability; first Poland moved, then Hungary,
Rumania, and now Czechoslovakia, each in its own
way. It would seem that Khrushchev's Successors
have little choice but to acquiesce as gracefully
aS possible in the tide of nationalism currently
rising in the Western reaches of their empire.
