General: Operational - K Program; Specific: Talk with DeletedD) to Guatemala Wi
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135815, dated 1 May 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135815).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

VIA
cify Air or

Spe
Sea Pouch)

GENERAL Cperetional - K Progra
SUBJECT { SPaOTFIC Talk with( to Gast enala

ers ( }8 sune 195h

Attached is ( 9 repart on the above subject. The:

rough report was forwarded to LIRICOLA with reference dispatche

ose ish | ( | )

Distributions

Wash (2) w/att. in duple
Guat (2) w/att. in dupl.
wfatt. in triple

Files

DISPATCH 2 Eure 1035)

a

K-frosram - falx with

1. he meoting ronortes on in this dispatch took place at

tne ( in «uatemala City on Sunday, 6 June,

lasting sive nours. - “Jwas in attendance os{ } consult-
ant and intorpreter. During our talks the tirst secretary of tho
imoassy drop 0d by and. both ( Jand ( Jvero introduced to
hin.

2. “3 second (_ . ) served the curpose 3f

passing in review the events leading up to the srosent impasse be-
twoen tho United States anc ~untemala, to elicit €

estimate of tin0 caurrecit ettuaticy., nis assessnont of the comaunist
tureat omanatin: Croa cGevolopuonts $m Tuatonala in particular so
fur as it concerns tho sec.wity of = , and
to join him in &@ cu éy ox the factors tuat could ba brought to boar
wpe an offuctiva sclusion oF tie oxistius,. -rorlets, esrecially trc
sontritation tus United “tates sould rondor.

3, In any ovaluation of the vasue€ ) exsressod ke
pnould ve ome in aindg shat(
2 nati n wate: from all accounts can coast
an outstancin™ zvecordé of consistent and irreconcilable nostility to
corwwn2sn.

. a It
gnoule furtner ve bor.e in “ind that C Dis unfauiliar
woth PatiUcTass ane tne etratezic concent uncer yin it.
. It is «ay understancin: suat, oma strictly - overmaental
ulons webweern and tho united States ard wot

°

at te ve. Wits, in part, may serve to ox:lain C
1

«

study oL Lucto unt syawtois of Growin: communist ascendancy in
Suitenaia. ‘le in wiouktedly aware of tho nature ef our strate ic
irtero2zts ia tte oGiaaa Sanal Lone arc able to view Jnited States
nreoccusavion wltuin whe Larser context of our worléwide comiutmenic
bat neituer arc dcetor..imeit cacvora in :i9 analysis.

s.(

tt of canplete undorstanciny; of Ynited Jjtetos roreict:
policy; relatin ts caatesaia. ¥ :ile by down ad=is-
gion ie 4s canoictely curversany witi the views oi ( )
{wnich, a6 sar as Panterals is concerned, ho is undcauntedly instre-
mental in faniionin,) his approach 4s or needs circunscrited by 46
narrow nrojection of -is cnmbtry's specific needs and Tears vv &

BSUCCESS

»)
J
)

ao Ta

a Lu
G6. Ond June l Jonce more broached to ( )
the issue of meeting an Acorican and tunis time ¢ gd atsey yee
some intorest - “otnor engagesents permitting" =< in tniking to me.
> )told him that he had met me in C Jand that

hy would attempt to invite me to come to Suatemala on the undor-
standing that during ay sojourn I would be the suest of the

In coumientin upoa my observation that at tits
perticilar juncture the uoetin. would trike place under tho worst

conceivable conditions, ( Yconcurred that recent de-
velooments woule in iact roduce the purpose of any noeting to tell-
ing what ¢ himself had told Frosident Arbenz

tnnumcrable times, witnout my Lela able to adduce any tangible
avidence of United St: tos Gaternatination to meet the communist chal-

Jone in tuaternala. ( >)
LG polluting out % he nad

escabiishoa ior almself a recore of freeadship zor Guatemala which
ho was loatn to iam, 2ia wiole -ersonal future in bveinr

pound up with a success. oF tite méssion in this country.

7.( ) acreed that my position would to an alto-
yetaor stroicer one if a meetin: witht and ( )coulc be
Jaia o:: in the wake of a series oi: incicents suggostin growing
resiste:ce strenicth and crowing, Jatited Cbateus involvenont.(

a Oe ~R,

Jit any ve portinent to .1¢

S40n ones ors tual Lhe exiressed the Lima conviction
that any meetin: vetween ( and va ab tais toe could be pre-
sucwid to orjoy wse active $u5..sors:ip of Ppesidcent aroenz.

et -oatl Sane, € ‘Yy na. net with Chancellor TER «LO
for a.o.t 40 minates. ‘Sst WO exudec exifidonce (not futcored)

.@ requesteu ) to souvey to that re-
latioig ovctveen Suatemala anc the United vitutes were .omsal and
tnat iis conversations with /m-assacor veurifcy, to ve followed vy
several nore, fad contributed bowarG ther end. Got cube Purtuer
confided tat ue had “a master card to slay" in conjurctio: witn
the oropoaal advanced by “neatdent Ticueres of vsosta iiea ta covone
e mootin:. of Presidents and/or tneir foreicn ministors in Panama.
FORTELLO would »ropose thet, retner tnan making this a rounc table
conference, the United “tstes anc ‘uatenmala join the conference 43
litigants, with Arcontina, Grazil, Yexico, Ciuile and E ‘Salvador
arbitrating all outstanding issues. tle asked to

eg GPresiccuss
present this idea to( pana have him second it.

S, Tne recent arms shipment has strongly aroused the suspi-~
cicus of the Central American nations and a development of acute
friction 1s only a mtter of time. It was wiso on the part of the
united States to let tae Alfhnem get through (sic). The arms shi p-

mont nas served to weaken - Sustemalals international’ position,
inasmuch as 2,000 tons of evidence can now be adduced in support
of the aitherto unoroven ellegation that there is a direct link
between juatenala iron curtain countrios. Hspecially( \>
over the last 50 years a bulwark avainst cuatenaian penetration
attoupts, is srofoundly disturbed as a result of this event which
“sharpens up the picture of cannunist penetration based on Guate-
rials." Nobody snoulc be decéived by ( )'s show of neu-
trality which is a simle tine-savini, aevice, enavling the fie. bLic
to gird itself tor the anticipated Cuatemalan onslaught. A break
wit: _ cuatemala 4s ebsolutely unavoldeble and will necessarily lead
to an open conflesration. Any sucit Gevelosment will be arovored by
cpatemala. In about six to eight months, once Guatemalan troops
nave been fully trained in the application of their nen weapons,
Guatemala will be free to move,

10. The ams siipuent ass of course iad a very beneficial in-
fiuence uyon the orale of tuc Army wilech up to tnat time had suf-
fered’from symstorns cf aschyxlation. Their reactions are vietum lly

snditioned by the “morbid nalionelisa"” pervacing custenmala. Tne
possession of ths a:mis makes tiem UWiinit that they are stronréthan
actual conditions would justify - a very cangersus ciate of affairs
Uppesitio: slemonvse i: Guatesuaia arc stagrering uncer the impact of
these develonments and there nas undoubtedly occurred an alarsaing
Gros in tieir morale.

T4150 ) hes been srovided with, a tlow of intomaation
m the comtonts ol the arms siiprnent, but since not everytiing has
been umpacked veus @2 accurats guantitutive estinate won't vecors
availacle for sone time. ‘Lhe si:ipuent inciuded 20 assault cars,
120 ms mortars used in the Horean tneater of war, 75 sm artillery
piecss of Krupp mmiuiacture, bazookas, flamethrowera, lerge quanti-
ties of antomaiic rifles reso submachine guna, antiaircraft rurs.of
20 m: (dual surccse) and 57 mu calibcr and “enormous” quantities of
nand rrenades there is a sufficient supply o: seall arms to arm
three éivisions of 15,600 men each and this, according so
) shoul ce considercd a coiservative estimate.

12. Tne arms deliveries rushed by the United States to threa-
tenec Central Amcrican nations fail to impress Guatemalan military
experts. They reason that Honduras has no Army, Kicaragua no re-~
servos, being forced to keep 5,000 militaries out of a total of
7,000 in the coumtry to saintain control over the internal situa-
tion. #1 Salvedor - they reason ~ has 4,500 men under arms plus a
ational Guard of 1,500 men. Guatemala's strategic plans call for
the disorganization of the deployment of the Salvadoran Army through
Sbree or four air borbardments, designed to tnrow the civilian popu-
lation into panic. According toC ) the operations plans

~
< ry

R RSIICABSS

ee

of tne Guatemalan Army, which two years ago he had an opportunity
to study, list air bombardments of Salvadoran targots as an indis-
vensavle requirement for military victory. According to(

the Suate:;alan Aray realizes that in any encounter of
grounc troops, the SGuatemalan Army “would be made hash:of." ;
C - J*qithout question" has a better Army than Guatemala, one
oi the reesons being that the troops arc thorougniy indoctrinated
and can be counted upon to shed their last drop °° blood in defend-
ins: ( Jagainst comaunist ageression. ( ) nen-
tioned as an intorest’ ng sideligns that the Guatemalan fray in turn
is oqually aware of the fact that ‘uatenaia would be highly vul-
nereble to air attacks, her military objectives being concentrated
in a fow areas, end their communications Deing easily disruptible.

13. <wnile the Guatenalen covernnent obviously appreciates tno
fact that in any conflagration fnvolving Guatenala ana ( > e
the Uniteé States would not stand by idly, but come to the aid of
( > (vessibly intervenine étrectis), this inC
ovinion will prove no deterrent to attack, bdecause tne leading fac-
ston within the vuetenalien “ayerment is coapletely {rresponsible.
Pnety reasonin: woulda =e Alois, the lines shat by fanming into flane
the latent conflict between Tuaterzala ané ( ), they will
consolicate the recime's vosition ‘itormmally om what woule purp rt
io ve @ national issue.C Detressed once nore that his
fovern.acnt cozsiders a conflict unevotzauie anc that it is engaged
$n lavtz. ite defense plats on tne suwoosition tnat the United
“tates "Will do nothin: to halt “sustesalan tondencies."

14.€ J wontioned tnat iris qoverrment has in recens
Gays susmitted its military reaq.irene.ts +5 the united [tates tarour:
the A:soussacor in . panda tnat tems of saysont nave peen
tae: unaer acvisevent. C Jacdecd that 4nascnch as iis
country is willing to pay for the stutr, ne trusts that there won't
be ary ~ador substitutions for items roquGstc:, fnplyin > thas re-
quirements have been iTrawk: Wp conservetively anc in full awareness
of Js tratosic« si tuation.C Jiurther put in
a .lea for ccublinc oF greblin: senolars -ips “ranted to oificers arc
Ciilisieé sen by tne U.S. Aray, in particular to step up aviation
and neavy aris training.

15. Whe oatery against tae ams snipaesnt 1as imaeasurably
stren7tie rea tne intornal nosition.o- the recite, the co mmists
beinr most successfai in 5ivine the arivanent a nationalist twist.
“ng suntesnian Covernnent 45 now convinced that it will be atle to
weatuer tne stori, “that the nelent of the tide nas pagsed," “that
the air is out of the balloon.” (eneTsLLO quotes). An indication
or this conriaence is thet rresident zrsenz and four or five cvoniss
nave just decided to invest 2,000,00) dollars 1: a long-range pusi-~
ness venture. nis coafidence is to some extent based on the sud-
Aosition that tho United States would rather spend itself on two or
three years of fruitiess nezotiation than going it alons.

1€é. As regards economic sanctions, the Guatemalan Government
takes this possibility into consideration without seriously be-

lieving that it will te applied. iIn( -Y opinion tLe
inited States has behaved in a much too lenient fashion vis a vis
Suetunale, As they say in( ): The United Status is like

@ big das:e allowing its tail to be bitten by a small woolly dog.
fhe Juatemalan Government is further convinced that economic sunc-
tions, even if iaposed, vould have no teeth, freedemzof trade in
the United States militating asainst ite effectiveness. bBoyond
Goubt, the curtailment of sasoline supplied would in short order
have a crippling effect and wisht brin: anout the collapse of tue
rezime. “nly s“all rasoline BY wowolies reach fuatemala via “1 3al-
vacor. The salk comes throuch San Jose.

‘17. ne “uatemalan Uovernment is satisfied that its latest
swoop operation has effectively decavitated the opposigion fin
cuatecala. In d*s opt-ion, opposition is latent and
without cavacity to act. The Cuateralan ‘overnment is ‘convinced
tnat an invaston is in the cards, is afraid ox air bombardments,
and is comvwinecd that United Frift is actively supporting the
YESLSLMucG.

13. two years BoC hac access to vhlius, prepar-
i::c for tue organ tion of syndiecrte siiock units. He is soiviticed
(wnat EP an causseeney AriseB, tire canupesinos and syndicates wili be

armed. -ven Army representatives no lozter deny that this vroba-
oility now extsts. Obviously such torces would be eriective only
ror surneses: oF intemal revuression. If rdered by fresident Ar-
of those elements woul uot be o»posed by the Arny
Wile: at tits stare identifies itself witi: tne twovernmme:it. Th
Aray wouls ce conplotely obifvious of tne fact tnet it is signs
its ow. ceath warrant. The arnins of the cacresinos would of
course be resorted to orly in ean extrane crisis...C

goubts that casesine elements coulic be successtuily interrated
into sac Ama:. tuey would cvey their inbor leaders. Ji:ce armed
2% woulc ve jsenr inpossible to disarm taie., once the emerrency is

bong, Gio axesk.sn,

+0

passed THe Geelsion to ari cayvsesinos would be take. by sresidentd
POENS “En, corsuitation with Colonels Sae:chkez and Diez. Yne reac-
ton Gn Sach a move on the court of the wuntecalar Government anenr
AiG Juonulace would be a violent one. ‘They would undcer-
Pased. aan Se araine of on pee O8 Doses a direct threat to tneir

curity. Tne Government waulé inmadiately move 10,606 -
8 to tne Suaetemalen vorder in oréer to defend itself
nent ettack,

o3

{}
fo w
je
is

17)
ctr
ea)

{

R

fa

19. Orie of ( )'s tnfornants, a Jeoonmunist,
tele him tnat Lhe communists coulc take over Guatemala today
they so wartec. However, it Coes not suit them at this time. For
‘ore thing tuey are sure thot it woulec orovoke outside intervention.
it is alsc doubtful in € 3 opinion whether the Army
‘iigh Uommand would countenance such a move and for that reason he
eoes not share the view tnat the cocxnunist could establish then-
Bseives in pover without encounterin 26, resistance. Since the comm-

nists are maxince effective use of the Anay in carrying out their
a.

vvD QTIMNA BOA o

aT

enn bye
/- “BS o aM ‘eels.

designs anyhow, there is no reason why they should wish to pre-
cipitate @ snowdown «

20. io cvidense has come to hand jet that tne ake a aid
are passing, arms to oF positional elements tn ©
( ) belteves thet it will take quite a while pefere tais
comes to ass.

SL. ‘fno Rintexalan sovernnent refuses to believe tae the
united States would risx incurring aie Anerican Spprobriun vy
wuniletoraily tntepvoning in fuatemal Tnoy are also Gulvs conn
vinced that collective action will £ foil.

2246 ), based on its knowledge of ‘six or seven
veslsta;ice co rters in Guatemala,” ang o1 the strength of some rather
saeahee experiences with resistance ele .cits, is inclined BO dis-
eci > their potent. al cifectivenesée Jovermient nersecution may
poonerate touch, because more and sore faallics are baling craw:
tuto its vurviex, with gons an friends Gisarnesring in, the covern-

mentis Guice wis.

23, one snoul not entertain eny SLlusions
Getaraipatio: vo oe the resime i: cas af a
ALL plans ogee ae reat account the Pe
boyd i eta a
J4%e@ SPAY

v

9
ert 23 wanwi atu
tytiian uors.sine.
mn
af
TG

o
> sae. as D ial eateons uprisings in widely scat-

tereé comrn: of the Hevubiic, acco aviec by acts of sadvotarc,
witeh “wicht » the hea to terns. fs lone as tnere GELSES B {906
possloiiaty Hire Po! “ime may mastor the situation, the Arty as

a wiole wiil ene Llovsl to ite Hewever, tnere ay be croups oF
erenver ox ieseor Lapertaice associntiu tueriscives wits the upris-
int xerod tise start. In sum, the he-w's peagtion will Gene en-
sirely “wi how che tning mocs." Ts is quite Likely t28% the Ana's
reaction will ve correlated to marifess evidence of Imitedc States
sagiiu , peckucy they wouLG reglize tat tuey are O- tne lesin:’
sice.

ae ts 7 ~ «we -? 2 oa and
Din SD CLG 4d yy te ens8@ 02 a cCaetic

Paced with tue sost serious propia 2h

: Sts Links are whic tne urban sopileation. -8fy

Bibs i 4qere are nouveau PicnesG. An ectusl physi fcal
eonfli/es wAlld of course olly arise @.c0re “4erg are CE&PPisous, nou
tn villares were camcesino siocK crooys wouls nG@ in cemnand of
she situation.[{ Jnes been told that in certain out-
lyin, villeges ove "tion Torces are peering to otter resistance
to caimesing gioch troops. Trcre is 2 voss oility tiat im fone
towns tue arsy Will remain neutral if v is gzoulé come to esse

264 bY uprising woule “encounter its Pirss resistance on the

Seetie of the Guardia Civil which $5 totally dosinated by communists,
put wrose combat effectiveness is very low.

ics}
ak
leks rarer ee

Pr ene ee Cee

26. Cc } is unable to conceive of a successrul over-
throw of tne rezime es a result of internal action only. Conversely
he is certain that the Govermnent could not cope witu an internal
uprising and a simultaneous invasion. He cid concede that thete
might be some orospéct of success sor a civilian insurrection "de-
pending on its seave3" (this taken in conjunction with (

“gs low estimate of the resistance's sotential ospecially as ea
result of the recent o:rse, wale still leave the outcome in doubt.)
if, si the other haid, we are aimins ror an iimiediate favoranle
solution, a simiultanecus invasion is cuite indisvensable.

27. in t: eory an invasion of Guatemala could be launched by
eituer Houduras or £1 Salvador. The tovograchy of the i:nduran/
Guutenelan porder area doses not lend itself to a successful invasion
in either cirection and action woule soon grind to a halt. Should
Guatemala at any time launch an invasion asainst Honduras, 1 Salva-
dor would instantaneously rush to her eid arc invade Gudtemals.
Biiowld, on the other hHanc, iinnduras trovoLe a contlerration with
wuatenaile, cL Sulvecor's reaction mi. fit be smuswaat loss instanta-
neous, She nAistorical invasion route ia tor the Salvadoran
flatlands.

Lue ( ) statec that he could

it OV
vasion of -niatenele by ¢ ), excent under aod
trome orcvecetion.” Ne = -i-te@ ont tust 4

im vist reanect ars similar to those of bie American :
am ocviour anc violent alas in tne Face would enoender a oresin cus

fies a. OR See He F en 7 tay nt 4 Pais ee ae
Climate Cor military action. Only nanifest iravocation would do
tea ph wet =
ix ustilnte
0) = as Russ 4 “ash 234 a 3 Si “ at Piduseudat eyed fang iearetnee 3
Sse ~Uestion: riven tne Lolhowin atrpcumo.wauces, wast wouba
= t if wy
beC & reaction’?
* f Sur* )t : 2% et -4 ne Cet it a eee os : oi
*&. & eivillan uprising, cosnetently »olanned, centrnily
ah Seaet an ., vibe . toe: fia hore dae Lae tage - yeas Seeukee caer Pane a
Conv oli Gc, Wate Oy Buale 24581) oi Boas fo: aie ele is
. eye a Pa Ne
stavted in luatemala;

pad tr. + + ~ Vs ae Sry = eS eee ee Soci Aree sags ee Oe ee ere her

ve ame -uacvemalar “Goverment mac ut to vilis time stucisust:
stained Prom -ivins sr: eotton t5 «
BOCAS 2Doa s ims ©wrovocavzon 15. >

oe oC, ~)is filly couversant with the uprising's
PrOcress anc witua the backing behind it ana as cetermined as
ever tc heln in the Liquidation of cor-munism in Jucterale.

50. C d's redly: Gn an off cial vasis ¢ )
would do niteing. However, ispsrtant srours of © Ss Acitizaus
Gecicated to Pinntinc comnunism and anxious to contribute their
fSiare to tus overtnrow of the Arbenz regine, would imnediately join
the fray. The t 3 ) sovernment would sin by omission and woul
lend itself as a vase for assistance, ( ) osaphasized

SSUCCESS

that his statements could be accepted as reflectin:, the views of
President ( ). ‘fhe burden of their frequent conversations was
the situation in cuatemala. ‘They were exspletely at one in the
conviction that a norazalization of relations wit. the Arbenz re-
gime was cozpletely out of the question. For one t.:ini,s «FS.
Aroenz mace it impossible to come ty any king of desirable uncer-
standins. She shoulda be c:nsigerec at least an instrument of ¢o1-
mumism. It wes well known that many Salvadoran co.wunist in ‘uate-
malan exile Llixea Prom her personal handouts.

31. ‘Yhe followin: “undiplomatic™ question was bub to
C with the clear understanding that it saiould not be con-
strued as reflectinzs the tiiniins of anyone i: respousivle position
in the United &tntees jovermnent: Under wiat coiditions and on tne
strength of waui soecifie assuraices siven by the United States
Soveriment would re orepared to srecipitare ex invasion
ot Juatemala? -ovld, as an exawie, an S~y> clad united ofatea
maaranitce to conshcer any miiltary getbach in sch Giiterorase 2

s.teh
tt . Ss ie ee | IPT AS : : “Ay. sg dicqen wee a. >
caszs velli" auc sufficienc cause Por Catan LO UG gis. o1
: ae. 4 to. toot ~t Tas, f= yn SF
C ), -£ a pHopesivia: worth Lookin into?

32. ( Ywitnout a moment
this was detisstely a matter worth disc
rerrosentative of tie dnited “tates Jove

&

t

Ran. 7 im ya a L ¢ oes copa ant
BSari wet OS. avr oiPici
.
a

hesitation replied that
al

over vaent" snd President
¢ ) _tnee an uidessta cian Detweor tne United “teatss anc
C Ge 2 veacnec “the vanulacture of a luatomalair vl wvocan
tion" could ersil: o- resolve. after all, vere was Lisvoric
prececentu in ) --tstoxy Yor the marufacvare of srovovation.

inc Jine Lator€ > - pesi€entC ), Wie Cus. 5 OmnBNncEed
j ¢

troops in the vorcer Gistrict, arraicec for 4 pombardment of C

C ts soil by Guatemala: troopa. tad it noi see. Tor Une inver-
ventio: of tact ), wisn stosped the ( ). advance
12 kilometers inside ef tnatenale, Ywe could aave voor lunch in:
seacer.ill; in usntemale city one week ister."

on Dia brinicn: cut loud auout tue vossiole
course of sovents, snoula tuare be © anrising U.. ‘watesala, mace
tne rollowin ovservatiois, Wiich i Auave 0b tried to place in
their coroner cotext and wiileh “re set dove cere

a, nee elements of
Gea at voints alow: tag Paul Pie . Atlantic coast and

en possession of a Lew termorbaat centers, CALLIGIATS woule
lare himseli imnediately the ec xigtitucionel covernment of
+

7

2 & fo &
BS RS

enala. bis soverasent wouleé cain inmediate rocamnitiai
rou the United States and a number of Latin -merican nations.
oy >

a ee ha..

tn tne United States rollowing suit.

chin ky.

referably two or three Latin Amoriean nations should tate

B. An interior uprisink would result in considerable
blocdlettinz.

oO. Althoush the nistorical invasion route is via the

RATA ARGS

Salvadoran pleinsg, an invasion of Guatemala based on Honduras
would be aseful diveraion. f the : sapene tee invasion of fuate-
mala should turn out a fatlure (as siost likely it will), -uate-
mala would undoubtedly reteliate and se in turn would bring
1 Seivador into the act. In other words, en invasion based

on Londuras anc desi.mec to fail misht ve en effective curtain

ue United States anoroval of Une uncdertasit:: cvuld best
be simnified by sendin,, sterile bonbers over -vatoneala and oy
bovrbine military objectires.

Ge Sita sald as the Arbensz ro: time voulc ve. a Porercone
cu:clusio:, if we could orranize a civilian .prisin::, accome
reanied oy widely cestiered acts of saboetare and an i-mvasion
atte mt basec upon idicdurac.

FP. Given all otner Tactors, overt Univec Ctates icter-=
va;:tionm could be cispernasd with.
. “Gnee Guatemalan troops set foot on Tonduran secil,
oven if tney da so in the defense of Guatenalan soil aneinst
unvrovoked .9 duran a7 wession, Ti Salvader would heve no choice
but to inteurvone.

.—
personal jealous. between RANCIIT: and i: -
Sor the -realaency. “Th at ee oy ‘wEtsnaie's a:ficers ara not
im favor Of cotaiilan. <<Aiy the ees, Wide. they nave veen
receiving Prom resiGenat .ro

a4, C Desniirnec taiat vnere exists ec.:sideresle
; aa ef

GAS Bre oausith: thom ty act the way the,
a9, “re urschase™ of ost of the ~ oi Pisers is ilkewise an
ate] Gactor. 376 s<..vassacor has neracial iniowledce ol sizeabdic
f eaven vy G60 8, FEA, and LS, especially their sart-

new Endusurice., come a: ii.e test lanas cearvoé ont rrom
ginecas, enc valuscle uproar cp scortlen Have been turned over
fi 2 Sua Si 7 Sone Soe SC unre vara Die real, veice voi,
CLS YATE se

wd . PMae ree.) ee aes pe Sop geet: i. 2) ie TIT a Ae
PES SLOWS Solo: 1645 BABA, be SRP: ang UADLO DIAS.
rad
2

not canununists, tut cample- ely wicer tue thums of .iresicent
SPDOAS VEO Shey WOLtAL Ss eh = sietiius Mealy vecause he exc -Llea in

the -seuela soliltecics."

3G. sere is io cGoaunu

Seo Coarsaanc woule respond
manifestations would als

Tement™ anon: paucomale re

n ( Ys aind tuat the arny
Ses of gtrenucti:. Sucn
iuence won the "bystander

oe ct be
Of
:
s

Q
[I~ <

37. Yne opeat majority of the ‘matemalan people still hope that
the Unitec tates will act. Failure to do so nas caused consiceravle
cisiilusfonnent. )eannst conceive of any effective,
1.8.5, practicable formule energins, from an ofS conference. hat wil
emercze is bound to be "a romantic, not en effective formula." In

a re

een

Ty af? Ss ’ OL
viewin: the prosnects ot such a eoiference ie entertains the sane
grim Torebodincs that were with iin prior to Caracas.

3u. C - -) enphasined that there are strong forces
in Letin &uerica to won anileteral united States interven ition is
anetnema. Cousequently unilateral United States intversention
s..ould ve “the last cara in tno: Geci." ot ua exhaust all other
methods first. Tis is not in contlict with the realization that
in goa sectors of Suatonmla mic of otner Latin American cowitries,
creat hooves ore veins onterteinec tha. the united States will ine-
Seurvene wiiletsraiiy.

38. C d's personel opisior: 1f a6 a last resort
the Jnited ‘.vates s:oula i.vervene unileterally, it would be ‘quite
eas." to Co.vincc woPLGé omliton tuav t.is move nes the approved of
the ~ijority oF the ruatenale:: nesple. Fue reception whien will
be accorden to Americun vroone ov the ‘uatensglen ropulace will
ienve 19 doubt om that score. © > “nas heard a thousand
Bee Oe see ES See eee eS properly set for in-
She imived “tates Lab ne Left noldin7 the oat.

&G.o of tao suabena.d 3 Lace support the idea or
intervontion, the avifastation of ponular joy,

‘6, $2 55 stimlatec,” would sake such an Dapaet on
that other counbrl as would nave a9 cholece but to

ne tty: united “paves -@it Eire rtov vO UGe

23 ewkints  pinelpal cujective in cucvemaia 2. to
ectasl s soil an ove:raviois pase, 20t necessurily to gain
CRP TE EY) -overicnent, Juatomala is on tns ro ac& to oveconine
the con © 4tetion and subversion airectec avainst otier
ventrar pee BULteS Che ¢ivst vcase, Gesipica to soiten us

EtGS. fy
tne governments of tisse st ., nas alreacy comenced. im Sentral

a+b - i .
iz, theory av least tn
: ya ees

Go LRU Si Because

OL
a: at sus."

ate
America, comcunisomts ariicioel tart ig noi€ Yout
)». Gentral America wiil ¢ Ll icto tne Kremlin's lap, the aay
tne Gotti nts tiave gveceecedc i: ecfbenine 2p one penetracinz: one
yer ment of C )}. gne senetration ef C¢ pias es ius
nal. objececive ty outfiani au. wxcicse C >°
21. .oesanler “licy 22 2 is rather gtiupia. 1387
have made suci a Show ob strer: bint everyvody has by i:oW Leen
utoon jwar., ot only the Univea vuRtes bu also ¢ Ps
§

4)

su 8
“8

®

ae

a: Arsy carla still stem the advance
“Lis accquel ied Wit. tas comiunist

ae

42, fo my questio:: if Axviui% offers to contain comsunism in
cuetemila, what shoule our reaction bey © J vave the
following terse answer Dontt believe nin hoe Guacemala: ~overi-
“16NBb, if 4t wonted to eaatr 51 communisn at esuieG do so. The “nate-
“ple: fiovercment does not want to Sey communism.

43. © 2 mersoually Pavors a racical solution of the
communist dauvesou In Guatemala. ie shares a widely held conviction
that the best communist is a dead communist and that cosrun. tgts are

wmaAantnal tabla. Qis

Gretererinn te
te PN a Ed

44, sould an offfielal stetenent on tho part of the United
Steltes woveranent to the effect that rresicent Arbenzg and his
reine arc cowuunist and tiat the regine's continued existonce
threatons “niteée States cecurity end that of the western nemis-
pnere be of any senofitt Auswer: Nemes no tulk.

45. C 2 hes sone 30Q nenetrat fons of the cosrmu-

mist sai VO ment ir. cungtenuaia. in particular has ne been adle to
kee, avreast of the plans and activities of a cozmuricet cell
cpcidacee ts tic sole tasi: of supvertin-( : + This var-

Gicular coli is also resao:s ule :o” several noortive attoxrpts
Qcuinst tue life of “residentC \ While this cell is not
overtly Linked wich the Guatecjslan Joverisaeit, there can be 10
vouut tnat it. araws sustaiuancs feoa “St. Tts most important men-~
vers ure:

biconciads Misuel wie) . lores, labor Jucpe in Jazgdmtenaiso
- ®
veero Giubplesu, Lau or eorkii: so> .4AK
nverte Cautellaiss “hivo, wis is the caief cooreulnator
32 ail supversive activities ulvrectad azsainst C >)
job ARO
te (Lig “ROFPS, Wil LS CaPesiCil in tosecow
te 3 DQ overs on. is avarc of ine activities of the Juate-
eta. Le nis Aebie se Ge Dan “Le use te vrovide ssi
HOGS SS US: Se or ee ae,
Bo. “aa cownent:

vf

. » "“Socay they are pro-communist be-
causo they belleve that the fresidort is oreecoamrilst. ‘Po-
morrow, if a triest is clected i'rosident o1 vuatenala, the
Bare yeopia Will show unm as secristais.”  ¢ contradtstinc-
tho, tio states the ( Yane are iitgary individualistic
ang articuinte in volcin,, tucir molitical opinions not always
ir. line «1th those entertained by the Govarnmoent.

me «=8at Bhould Surtiter be vorne in mine that
ui gel le presicentiel tiiwber anc avowodly in the’ wuyyiing.
“GC 2s tuirty seven yoars of ace anc in ausrer to ny cuestioa,
nue ola ac wotlea ve as restau of © » ho renartced:
wo ana &@ hali years older.

en 4 Jconside ss C Jee ore os the most
Sores: ive satin oliticturs eo nuns ever met Vitiout ade-

e
GuLUG Sla wards of comparisso:, Twist. to associato crysolr
witli: tuts cimracterizetion co the extant crat T snare the
Ladiiwsdo. aad ( ) is @ ils. ip ioetivacedc i:divi-
Gash wate: S9es now rule on Girt cle is nt Une sate Linc

eah fy View Ju bs soblitical Tsencos.

de. Vnete is no doust in wy mince that ace ter as the cori-
“uu nt tareat t9 uls cwitmy te soisermed, £ ): is
.

ee

im ceac eamwse anu thac, if lie belicves tie L£ssues War-
rue Dy kG WAY over iv ay Ob: 5: yittend neck.

we h @owset wiebluer Cc
Boo Pas 4% O72 pOP Gand Ly BQ BX.

pelourae i . Ween

wdhitienl “sdlosapny
wid. VG vw oad cuites. ar ail ths orelle@w wivn wiich we
Al[@ wo.ca:me&e i SOG OL lc issues riisexc 16 aay aVG ed
LE ieWiat suet OF ans COst.., ea ef Cupsevatio. En cur attowst
v4 GQLUVELIO taro. uci A cuisisvent _ over oi le nec as stun

Was beyou. ureaise, ~:47
-rou ie bory EVE Ta diy £4
“G YAS ud SAY.

tl. quillfications seated in tne ine
Wa ow. Worl gour wiile te stucy wi.at

sone 4 a .
: am OG SS
