El Salvador: Performance on Certification Issues-interagency Intelligence Asses
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000027928, dated 3 June 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000027928).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Director of
Central Intelligence

EF] Salvador: Performance
_on Certification Issues

Interagency [Intelligence Assessment

Approved for Ralease
Date

1983

spree

" NIC M 83-1001]

EL SALVADOR: PERFORMANCE
ON CERTIFICATION ISSUES

Information available as of 1] July 1563 was
ued in the preparation of this Asesmment

t
~

KEY JUDGMENTS

.-The government of El Salvador has made continued progress on
most certification issues during the past six months. Progress in achiev-
ing substantial control over the armed forces and prosecuting those
responsiblé for the murders of six Americans has been

TSTTE ro

Improvernent has been most evident in the area of government
reforms. Agrarian reforms have made steady advances, particularly in
the distribution of land and titles to thousands of new beneficiaries.
Recent banking laws also have completed a process begun in 1980 to re-
organize financial institutions and reallocate credit to the general
public @

Cooperation among moderate elements in the government has
increased over the last six months, with an attendant erosion of extreme
rightist influence. This has enabled the administration to step up the
process of democratization, especially evident in the enactment of an
amnesty law that has reduced the number of political prisoners by 70
percent. Other advances include the cr-ution of a Peace Commission
charged with seeking political reconciliation with the guerrillas and
completing the draft of a new constitution @e

Major weaknesses remain, however, in the gavernment’s ability to
safeguard human rights, particularly in the countryside. Killings by
rightwing death squads and elements of the armed forces continue.
Efforts by the military high command to instill respect for human rights
among the rank and file have had some effect in elite units, but little in
poorly trained garrison units and civil defense forces EA

The cases involving the murder of the six US citizens have yet to
teach trial stage because of continued legal and procedural bottlenecks
in the weak criminal justice system. Conspirators in the killings of two

m0 Pr TD nce ret te sete een Se me ee te ae ge ee pn ee ST TT ine

US labor advisers, moreover, continue to avoid prosecution following
appellate court decisions to drop current charges until new evidence can ‘

be developed. €

teas

ital
'

to

el ae

reppiihuatadurrgrnn tie oT

Suis Mae

rat,

.

AAV URIS Aaa tas renee bee Se tana Aerie ees
*

heen .
r ae ©

oT

*

aan. a neg oe

eSATA Ey

m.

»

Z Human Rights

® “Making a concerted and significant ied to

. comply with internationally recognized human

* rights.” (Criterion for judging Salvadoran Goo-

. ernment’s performar.ce.} (u)
t . During the past six months, the Magana adminis-
4 tration in El Salvador has continued to make progress
; fon some human rights issues, particularly as evident ip
3 @ amnesty law 4

r the recent implementation of,

t=

y oe ma ebeeeowever, the measure-
ae ment of progress in E! Salvador is @ relative thing,
j complicated by abuses of prisoners before detention in
a government facility and the use of violence by
extremists against their perceived political opponents.

ad

2 ‘The insurgent war has intensified this year as the
guerrillas have stepped up efforts to broaden their
areas of control and inflict major damage on the
country’s already cripp ed economy. The rate of com-
bat deaths on both sides has increased, but the rate of
civilian political deaths ' has not changed substantially.
According to US Embassy reports, figures for the first
six months of 1983 show a slight increase over those for
the last six months of 1982—-178 civilian political
deaths versus 160. The average so far this year,
however, is well below the monthly death rate of 217
for all of 1982. (See accompanying chart’

: :
. the mem bm Mey

ee rn ee a

7 3. The trend toward improvement is also reflected
in the recently enacted and swiftly implemented
‘ amnesty law. Since it went into effect in May 1983,
: the authorities have relzased more than 500 of the 733
* political prisoners in jail at the time amnesty went into
t effect—querrillas and labor leaders as well as leftist
{ intellectuals suspected of subversion and detained
: under the emergency decree. Most of those released
i haa aaa
‘Politica! deaths are those that take place outside & mone of
combat and which clearly suacst « political motive—for cxamole,
divillans murdered because of suspected complicity with the insur-
geuts Civilians billed as 0 result of being caught in a crosfire or
other milltary-related activities are clanfied as combat death:

a batt,

eI,

Re aE ap TET

eT, rt

DISCUSSION

had been held at the relatively moder Mariona Prison
outside the capital gp :

4. US Embassy officers visit the facility frequently
and report that the prisoners are well fed and are
ecceiving excellent treatment, including access to
schooling and rights to conjugal visits in private donmi-
tories. In addition, US officials who recently visited
the Hopango Women’s Prison indicate that more than
half of its 92 political prisoners have been released
under the amnesty. Conditions there are reported as
good, and some of the common criminals stated they
are denied privileges that are extended to political

detainees QP

5. We believe the government may eatend the
amnesty beyond its mid-July cutoff in an effort to
attract political exiles and disenchanted members of
insurgent groups inside the country. Despite the unex-

eres ee ee
El Salvador: Insurgency-Related Civilian and

Military Deaths, 1985-June 1983

Toil Number of Cividian Deaths
Monin Aveegge Number ol Military Killed of Wounded

ret hiterohretaristoeoire Faw

i98!

pectedly high number of political prisoners who have
benefited from the law, it reportedly has attracted 30
far only about 200 guerrillas and camp followers
Nevertheless, the president of the government's Hu-
man Rights Commission—which is currently investi-
gating reported cases of abuse of civilians by both
guerrilla groups and armed forces units and attempt-

ing to locate over 100 missing persomi—appears opti-_

mistic that others will toke advantage of the law. He
notes that guerrillas are requiesd only to sign & formal
request for amnesty, and that they are not interrogat-
ed or required to provide details of their past actions
Like the released political prisoners, insurgents seeking
amnesty are free to remain in the country or to leave.
Meanwhile, the Amnesty Commission's recently estab-
lished rehabilitation committee is assisting beneficia-
ries in finding work of in resettling on land belonging
to the agrarian reform agencies. Those desiring to
leave El Salvador are offered free passport

. : en eS ee we
» 6. Despite these and other efforts—including a
massive publicity campaign—we believe that fear of
: reprisals from the extreme left or right will inhibit
= most guerrillas and political exiles from taking advat
tage of the amnesty. The government hopes that fair
treatment of insurgents turning themselves in will
spark additional defections, but this may be offset by
accounts of former political prisoners of abuses before
their internment. :

7. These abuses apparently are continuing. Accord-
ing to the US Embassy, government and military
officials disavow responsibility for actions employed
by the Anny in combat situations before prisoners are
transferred to detention centers. The positive effects of
the amnesty program could be further offset by recent
death squad activity against some prisoners who had
been released before the amnesty @

Control of the Armed Forces

“Ig achieving substantial control over all ele-
ments of its own armed forces.” (9)
SAU ae set te reportind
f the armed <orces he Se ay a

Slindicates that the performance of the

control o
es

ta Sol ee os Cats ie See ens oe BE ae

ee ae

military remains miaed. The military is stepping up
efforts to professionalize its ranks and instill respect for
human rights. Nevertheless, the intensity of the guer-
rille war—particularly recent massacres of captured
soldiers—and its influence on domestic lawlessness
probably have generated continued abuses by armed
forces elements against the civilian population. e

" @ Military leaders ‘are maintaining their efforts to
reduce human rights violations within the armed
forces. Moreover, reporting indicates more precision in
the last six months in fire control during fighting in
populated areas, particularly on the part of combat
pilots and artillery uni

10. Improved fire discipline also has been notewor-
thy among US-trained infantry battalions that have
been engaged in heavy counterinsurgency campaigns
in San Vicente and Morazan Departments According
to US defense attache reports, ] troops moving into
guerrilla base areas and occupied towns are treating
local inhabitants with greater corsideratio

11, Treatment of captured prsoners—whose Dum

- bers remain small—continues to improve, According
to the US defense attache, the Anny increasingly is

treating wounded guerrillas and interrogating them

humanely. They are then evacuated to San Salvador

rather than being left in the hands of local command-

_ ers: Some of those captured have related the concera

of guerrilla leaders over the superior performance of
UStrained units and their ability to generate more
positive attitudes among peasants toward the govertr
ment. :

12 In addition, the new Defense Minister has
issued a human rights manual to all military units in
the country. Similar guidelines have had only limited
impact within the security forces over the past two
years. Nevertheless, this action help: reinforce the
commitment to curb abuses by field commanders and
their troops Ge

apes

poor recordkeeping and lack of reporting within the

~

‘tae

\

wean:

De emt MLS cites MEM T tT ta gygpteny punk glercter id ta gt Oe |

Cab ees ae

a

Salvador
ee

eee ed Ua A BT

military institution itsef frequently reduce the avail-
ability of information. US officials have found that
military personnel are regularly discharged from the
service for human rights offenses and other criminal
acts, pending trials in civilian courts. These cases cease
to be the responsibility of the military and quickly
become buried in the ‘abyrinth of ‘civil and criminal
justice proceedings. In one eastern department, for
cxample, US Embassy officials identified 17 civilian
court cases involving former military personnel. All
had been separated fram the armed forces for serious
crimes such as assault, rape, kidnaping, and murder.
Most cases were still pending, although two bad
resulted in acquittals, and a few others in convictions.

; “~~ "y4° Government efforts to investigate mass slayings

that occurred last fall have stalled because of a lack of
witnesses—a frequent problem that underscores the
continuing climate of fear and polarization in El

1. Another widely publicized mass killing under
investigation occurred in February 1983 in Sonsonate
Department. Accord.ng to US Embassy sources, at
least 18 peasant farmers were shot in and around the
farm cooperative of Las Hojas; there is one report that
as many as 60 more may have been killed. According
to peasant spokesmen, the victims were members of
the National Salvadoran Indian Association who were
targeted by local ca:tle ranchers following land dis-
putes. Individual members of the local civil defense
foroes and some 200 regular troops led by an Army
captain were involved. The captain was placed under
military arrest in Apail pending further investigations
by government prosecutors of charges that his depart-
mental commander, Colonel Araujo, ordered the kill-
ings. He has since been released. Araujo has publicly
admitted sending his troops to Las Hojas on search and

destroy missions against “known subversives.” Accord-
ing to US Embassy sources, civil defense peronnel
attached to Araujo's command have threatened wit-
nesses with death, thus prompting peasent leaders to
peck protection from the National Guard. ‘The local
Guard commander has promised to patrol the ladian
cooperatives and provide them with weapons for sclf-
protection. ¢

ies eee
tary eiemments continue to engage in random acts of
violence. Disappearances and unidentified bodies still
are reported in areas controlled by specific units of the
armed forces 7 i Nga

ei lake 3

Progress on Reform

“Te moking continued progress in implement-
ing economic and political reforms, including
Ind reforms.” (vu)

LT. The Magara administration hat made steady
progress in economic, political, and land reforms
during the last six months. This period has been
characterized by increasing cooperation emong the
major parties in the government, reflecting a growing
maturation of the still-fragile democratic system as
well as the erosion of power of some extreme right
elements

18. The continuing movement toward reform was
not affected by the recent power struggle in the
military, which resulted in the resignation of Defense
Minister Garcia .n April. Although Garcia had been a
primary force for moderation and had earned the
enmity of extreme rightists for his support of reforms,
his replacement by Ceneral Vides represented both
the transition of power through established procedure
and the continued dominance of the pragmatic main-
stream of the officer corps. Furthermore, the impact

of the crisis in the military was defused by the
intervention of President Magana, who, in requesting
Garcia's resignation, asserted his civilian authority a4

constitutional head of the government

cognizant ‘ot the need to renee the moderate
policies of Magana—in part to satisfy US policy
requirements—and we believe that the military under
his command will continue to support the govern-
ment’s efforts to strengthen reforms

20. Neither factionalism in the military nor escalat-
ing insurgent attacks have deterred the armed forces
from keeping agrarian reform on track. According to
the Agency for International Development, as of 17
June there were some 194,000 beneficiaries in Phase I
(redistribution of large landholdings to peasant cooper-
atives), while Phase [il (land to the tiller) has benefited
some 305,196 formecly landless peasants." Since Octo
ber the government has exceeded most of its immedi-
ate goals with regard to title application nd distribu-
tion. Applications for new titles, for example, have
climbed from a curnulative total of 38.615 in October
to 64,637 as of 17 June 1983. During the same period,
cumulative distribution of permanent titles to Phase Il
properties has grown from 400 to 2.455, suggesting
that changes made last year in management of the
program are now paying dividends. While the govern-
ment is still behird in its schedule for distributing
provisional titles, the rate of distribution has increased
markedly since January from a cumulative total. of
44,674 to 42.415 Qe

21. Progress on land reform continues to be clouded
f large-scale evictions

* This number incledes direct beneficiarie and their dependents
teased on # formule od dia individuals pet fumily

f i

is about to undertake a survey fo determine the
number of illegal evictions, and it recently began @
nationwide publicity campaign to discourage such
actions. Meanwhile, US Embassy reporting indicates
that the armed forces continue their efforts to returo
evictees to their new lands. As @ result, any heretofore
unreported evictions are HOW more likely to come to
the attention of the authorities & ;

22. The ability of Magana to continue reforms in
que face of rightist opposition has been reflected in his
handling of economic issues. This spring, for example,
the administration implemented the final step in
reforming the banking system by offering up to 49
percent of the equity in nationalized banks to private
investors, with limitations on the amount an individual
investor can purchase. The offer capped a three-year
struggle to take control of credit out of the hands of a
few wealthy families. In a further sign that extreme
rightwing influence is waning, the Assembly recently
defeated 2 campaign by mar coffee grawer to
weaken the powers of the National Coffee institute,
thereby contributing to equitable retums {or small
producers :

23. The inability of the far right to prevail on
economic issues 5 mirrored in its overall reduction of
power in the government during the past sit months.
In February a dispute in the assembly concerning rule
changes and a cabinet appointment sparked increased
cooperation by moderate right and liberal deputies
against obstructionist parliamentary tactics by far right
leader D'Aubuisson and his party. This enabled Presi-
dent Magana te replace a rightwing minister with @
moderate from 3 nongoveming political party, thereby
reducing the share of power for D Aubuisson’s faction
and strengthening executive leverage with the Assem-
bly. Subsequent maneuvers by moderates succeeded in
eliciting D’ Aubuisson’s public declaration to resign
upon completion of the new constitution

Elections and Negotiations

“Is committed to holding free elections af an
early date and, to that end, has demonstrated
. good-farth efforts to begin discussions with
all major political factions in Et Salvador.” (U)

24, Planning for elections has been hampered by
partisan differences over Dosts to be contested and the
eligibility of candidates, a5 well as disruptive changes
in the electo-al timetable. Nevertheless, the US Em-

. bassy reports thet the major parties in the government
have informally agreed to hold the presidential ballot-
-. ing on 13 November. A major hurdle, however, will be
~ tbe promulgation of the constitution, without which an
electoral code cannot be developed nor the structure

of a pew government determin

. 25. Other problems such as funding and organiza-
— tion for the electoral contest finally are being ad-
sO dressed by the five-man Election Council. Although
5 the Council remains insistent on devising a new
ve registration system before November, some political
Toe leaders now acknowledge that such a program almost
certainly is not feasible. Officials of the rightist Na-
“tional Republican AlNance and the liberal Christian
Democratic Party, for example, recently have indicat-
éd that they will eccept open registration—such as
“existed during the March 1982 elections—for the sake
of expedienc:

+2. 26 Gyen registraticn may inspire postelection
: x charges of fraud among partisan groupings, but it
: should help encourage another large turnout on the
part of voters unable or unwilling to return to specific
- y municipalities as would be required with formal regis-
* tration. Turnout will still be determined to a consider-
able extent, however, by the ability of the five guerril-
ls factions to coordinate their efforts to sabotage the
balloting more effectively than in March 1982 @

a?
ta

SVM eebenthe tHe

i

27. The government's Peace Commission reported-
4 ly has made recent contacts with political spokesmen
curt. for the insurgent alliance in an effort to determine
:' + their interest in the amnesty program and participa-

~-
dare

L Senay

% "98 We believe, however, that efforts to generate

.. °.£ positive leftist interest in the balloting are likely to

t ' 3 prove ineffective. The insurgents continue to reiect the

+ * £ ; electoral process in favor of negotiations leading to a
Wa t. cad

*
power-sharing arrangement. Having increased their
military pressure, the insurgents now are engaged in
major diplomatic lobbying for a dialogue with the
governments of El Salvador and the United Suic cea

Murders of US Citizens

“Cood-faith efforts to tnoestigate murders of
xix US citizens and bring to justice those respon-
sible for thase murders.” (U)

29. The case of the five National Guardsmen
charged with killing four US churchwomen in 1980
hes again been set back by judicial procedures. A
lower court decision to begin trial proceedings was
overturned this spring by an appellate court, which
cited irregularities in the presentation of physical
evidence. Technically, this only postpones an inevita-
ble jury trial and allows prosecutors more time to
organize their cas

ae

90. Two other National Guardsmen have confessed
to murdering two US representatives of the American
Institute for Free Labor Development (AIFLD) in
1981 and are due Lo stand trial following an appellate
review of the evidence. The court, however, has
rejected formal requests by the Attomey General to
prosecute two other participants in the crime, Lt
Lopez Sibrian and businessman Hans Christ. Accord-
ing to US Embassy sources, the government has one
year to introduce new evidence or the case will be
officially closed. Reporting indicates that the Magana
adminstration is pressing for prosecution and probably
will appeal to the Supreme Court. @

31. Lopez Sibrian, meanwhile, remains on active
duty but in administrative detention and is not al-
the country z

a

a }Another conspirator, Captain Eduardo
Avila, remains in hiding subject to arrest at & murder
suspect and Army deserter. ;
