Communist Matters-mcnutt Russell Alton-report Gives Results of Interview with M
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014639, dated 6 August 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014639).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

LA GrhaCIAL DISPATCh. »

Soe DISPATCH NO. __.eageamamauesmeamas
(Gpscily Ag or Sea Peach)

Ara POGG

DOG. MICRO. SER. |

S Comma Eatters
é .
_ Russell Alton Wehurr ea

—- ~ Be

35. Frere is abteched for your Inforuatlow fees
by a special agent of the Federel Bureau of Mivestinatios regarding
guajest. You will note that this report seta forth ti rekits of
inteeviess with Hex0TT in Rew York City p4 16 dine aml 2 195d.

ntton of the U.S. Attorney,
Grote he fort

?.- For yare Information, it wt th
Soathexa District ef New York, to sutgoes.
Federal Geani Jury in that district Fae
fopsver, pricr to kis teing sujaiiited th a
it a3 leamed that }
on July oP, BLAS . ae

COTE

{ DOC. MICRO. SER. |
OCT a 1971

FORM HO. 51-29 -

ION 1949 APPROVED FOR RELEASE ae ee ee A:
pet ft Date_[O:NOVe 1).

ft

Ad

Synopais of Facte:

"Subject in interviews aie and 23/51 furnished fol) back=
pees information, Subject believes be first net _Jolius
"_ ROSENERSR at his parents’ fara in Haddam, Commer ticnt.
~ Subject stated be cuca wisited with ROSENASRO at ROSENHERO's
hore when he sade arrengesants to drive hin to to fare in.
Hadden, Comecticont. Subject admits visiting at ROSZNESRO's
nachine shop, tat denied having ay business conversation with
ROSENBERG on behalf of hisself and Raymond Lore. Although -
subject stated he and Faynond LOPEZ enterei’a Gertnerstdp to
eegace in ieport-export trade, they ectually never did sny
busimass. Subtect stated he never gave Information concerning
his work at the Kellex Corsoration (Vanhatton ercireering
project) to Julius RISENERRG, and that ROSMEREEG never questioned
hin about tha work, Subject stated he Joined the Federation
of Architects, Engineers, Chemists and Technicians at NIC in
approvimately 191. Subject would not enseee eny questions
rezaniing present or past CP affiliation,

Details:
a .

"On July 18, 1960 David GREENGLASS advised that Rasen] MeNJTT was an -
asstciate of Julius ROSERESRI; aualpossthhy involved in Soviet espionage.
aaa advieed thet when WoruTt contested HOSEHEERG during 196

erning the poastbility of acting as South Averica export recresent-
ine for the G and B Sngireering Comey of Hew York City, EcxUTT was
accomanied by a 'parimer’, According to GREENGIASS, EeSUTT onl his
‘nartrer! visited the G and K engineering Company a mucber of times while
the exoert proposition was being planned. The tpartuer', through his
inowledge of Spanish, ws to make the mwessary business contacts in
South d4serica, The 'parteer! was to be paid by McNUTT one-half or onp-
third of EcNUlT's eslary until the export business got going, For '
reasons wkeoen to GREESSLASS, the export business never want into
eee :
eas
N > *Tre tnartoer'’ referred to above has been identified as Ramond

OPRZ, a Unite: ted Sietes citinen who is presently tesiding at Caracas,
Yeresmalas . Sere

“It is noted that Julius ROCENSER? has been convicted for conspiracy
to commit ospicnage on vehalf of the Soviet Goverment, and during fnril, 1951
sas civen the Geath sentence, David GRESAGLASS entered a plea of zuilty
and during Avr#], 1951 was given a sentence of 15 jyoars. :

Zdveation

Sine subject attemied grads school & La Cygne, Kansas; high school,

Indevemience, Zsnsasy Junior College; Jndependence, Kansas (1932-1933)3

ry

Kansas Stata College, Manhattan, Kensas (193); Brooklyn Polytecimic
Tnstitata, Drooklyn, Few York, 1937 1910 (attended evening sessions
ami pooslyed a Civil Engincering degreo).

Exoloysents

*

UNEUTT stated ba has hed the following exoloynentss

*Rorks Project Adainistration in New York Citys
1935 or 2936 te OD.

WHow Yorke State Civil Service for the Borowh
President of Manhattan, 1939 to February 19h2
as an assistart empimcre

SPeyahlic Steel. Corporation, Post Heary, Hew York,
Pelruary 19)2 to October or Foverber ihe. (Bile
exployed uy Reyublie Steel forsoration, he resided
at Yori, ad West Port, How Torke)

Efmpeical Conskenetion Carporabion, @ subsidiary of

isuricw Cyanasid Corperation, fro Hoverber whe ta
eporoxizately Hovesber 193. Suiject advised tint he was ‘
engaged in streetaral. steel e@esipning work avi that he

was exoloyed ab Hew York City for tha greater period

of tize, bat recalled that be was assigned to a project

at Caoctas Ordnance at Dumas, Texas for soproximately

three nenuths.

The Zellex Corporation, a subsidiary of ¥. He Fellocrys
233 Broadway, New York City, from Noveaber 193 to Jone or

‘July 1915. Be stated toat in comection sith his work

for Phe Kellex Corvoration, he verforned structural design
of water cooling flumes ab Oak Ridge, Teanesseee Ke
stated, however, that for the eroater part of tine he was
exployed in the New York Gloy office.

NJadnstrisl Planers ami Designers, Ine. (7P@, ine.),
13! “roadway, Hew York City, from Joly 19hS to damary, 17h7.

eHeNUTS sata that be invested approxizately $500.00 to $600,00 in the
“TUITE EPS, Ince at the tize of ite formation, and that ha was wade President of

ensues tatemsimate poeta gh

-o comeein, Ze advised that IP&D, Inc. was nade up of a Eroup of arcritects,
Bice ee eee aa and draftesen who all had office space at 181 Broadway. McNUIT ;

area that he continues to be a stockholder in 1/2, Inc, tut that be was
osiieved of all dates and obligations of the concern at tia tim he weol

PMAUIT explained that while with IFAD, Ine., be sas prinarily engaged
oi a project at Yorktowm Halghts, Few York, knom as the Yorktom Dovelep-

ED, Ince, decided to fora the Yorktam Developsent Corporations Fe

copeonding to MCNUTT,
= eerly fall of 39h5.
=. as te mae it attractive te buyers.

“Ho atylacd that they constructed a water supply line, installed
———oataaya, construtted a swimming pool and added otier features that would
wan the uroperty emdoctive to better Living. He stated that the Yorktosn
vee nrojeet sas not a success bocause mediately after tte var, wailding —
oe tepials ant supplies wero scarce aml the project proved too costly.

ennai and teams i ASG

Soman cedhi SN oat

We added that the Yorktom Develoguent Corporation is still sa
oon ative orgeniaation, end that be continues to hold stk in the concer.
TEUR? advised that aporoximately $16,000.0 to 316,000,00 was
nested initially in the Yorktown projet, He stated that some or the
cose oo ontseksl@ers in the Torktom Develoouent oration were Signnnd DIAMOND
"Se MORES brothardn-Lav), Max SIMON, Harry KOHL, (aloo an officer of
LUD, Ing.), Phillip SIvON (a brother of Max Sila), avi JuTs aS RCESHEERG,

=== 205 twested approcdmately $1,000.00 to $15,000.00 in tha Yorktom
“ao ovelopsent Corporations -
WeNUTY stated thab be dows nob recall how Julins BIS@IRERG became

terested in tha Yorktown Development Corporation, bub-believed he asked
: OSENEERG to purchase stock in the corparation,

+

"Ravsond Concrete Pile Company of Venesvela
fron Janvary, 1947 to April, 1919, at Caracas,
Vernsuelae

MMNUE? advised that in December, 1915 he uade application for
se ioyment with the Raypoad Concrete Pile Company, 10 Cedar Street, Hew -
iar City, for a position with Raymond Concrete Pile Compaty af Venesuela,
_o advised that he received the position of office ongincer ab Caracas
=r4 lef the United States during Jamery, 19h7. He said that as office

_ ou... tastreer for the Raymond Goncern, he was responsible for ail enginee rirys
+. + re geodng through the main office ab Caracas, He also made all local

aoe asehaseas for the concems

brother, aldo Mexur?,
cne who took ROSENBERG

Us eaid that 1t was posaible that Waldo was the
to the farm for the first times, MOE? thought
wnat he sew ROSENEER at his parents! fara on several other occasions,

ai then stated that it was possible that he visited

“SEHEERG at his hows shows 19h0 or 191 when he arranged to drive

wes Mving at that time and did not recall whetiar ba eas living at
Snickerbocker Willsce or elssvhare. eu

"MONUT? said that

after modting ROSKHEERG, he veealled that on one.

secession ROSENESRO, soma tina about 1949 or 19h 6, Visited at EcdUTT's office

Sis Visit ca the part

adeay, Now York City. He ssid that tho porpons of —.
of POSEISERG was to solicit work for his (SOSENESRGTg)

xachine shop on the lower Kast Side of Bex York City.
"UcNUT? further advised that he onca accesosnied ROSEHREIM to his

shoo om the lower Rast

Side of Bow York City, at which tiue he looked over

SMOBUT? said that

he did not renember meting David GMEENGIASS at the

=che of secompanying ROSENSERG to his shop, He denied having any buriness
Souversation with ROSEHEERG amd stated that when he Visited ROGENSER, he

HUTT) wes alona,

"AL this mint a photograph of Reyaced A. LOPEZ eas exhittied to

LouUTT snd he readily
hey were working tega

identified it. Us said that be first met U FEZ while
ther at the Kellax Corcoration at New York Gity,

2 afivised that LOPEZ left Kellex during 19)), to take a job with Grovas «

“rake, Ine, at Caracas

» Venezuela, Ha said that in that commection, LOPEZ

SSS engaged in the constroctim of on epeduct for the Venezuelan EO vettie

coment ab Csracas, MexUr?S wivised that LOPEZ next returned te the United

svates Some time during 19h6. He said that LOF2, after returning to the
oo Tted States, called hin (MeNUT?) by telephone from Tampa, Florida, Ee _

ae cnportunities in Bouth

=srther advised that LOFSZ at a later date cans to Hes York City end
““montacted him, at which time he gave hig ‘glowing aceanntst of business

faeries,

“Shen it was brought to KoNUTT!s attention that he had forsed an

SMI amert-export firm, ke

recalled this fact and advised that LOPEZ, after

~2-ling hin of the 'zlowing accounts?! of business opoertunities in South

~~ ——-<¥iTitas and he entered into 4 partnership to engage in the inport-espert
3 constraction business gn South Azeriea. Hs seid that they entered a

orate registration for tha firm af EoNCE? and LOPSé, or LOPS and MONUTT,
wt, hew York City ab the time of forming this partnership, He said that

“ciney advertised their

business on ona oetasion in tha "New York Sunday Times',

“SCHUS? said that in comestion with this partuershipy ho and LOPEZ

eet dsenssed business
~ business fins, Ha

pessibilities with asproximately 15 to 20 individ
said that even though they had made these verio

SR pr es

business contacts, he end LOPEZ had noves performed actual work of ay
lind abereby they received a comlestén, salary or any remineration, |
Ug addad that the firm did not perform any dutdes whatsoover. '

*YMUTT waa then acked if he recalls visiting Jolius ROGET Ath
accomsenied ty Raytond A. LOYEZ at the & and & Engineering Company oa ts
tomer Best Side of Kew York. WelfT? stated that bs does not recall ever
coins to tha O gel R Engineering Company sccompenled by Raymond LOPZe
He further stated thet ha could not recall any egree=ment to share te
orofitgs with LOPEZ, ed could not recall ever discussing with ROSENEER
any plan te export miterial to South Awerica, throcgh which LOPEZ was to
roceiw one-half or one-third of the profits or salery received by MchiUT?
as a result of tha export lusiness engaged Jn on the part of McNUIT and
IOPS2 for the ¢ ani R Enginesring Company. a

WAt this point KcNUIT wold neither affira nor deny that LOYSZ visited
2OSEVERE at tha G and R Engineering Company, stating that lw could not
recall say sach insteme, :

é

MVRUTT stated that LOPSZ is presently employed as Chief Engineer
for the Sales Desartwont of the Creole Petroleum Corporation ab Caracas,
Veneswala, He sald that LOPEZ travels quite often for tha Creole Petroleun
Corporation, but that he maintains his residence «hb Coraceas,

Sit will te farther noted that fevid GEFETGLASS also advised that he
recalls that he onee wont to am architect's office near Columbus Circle
znd Soth Street, Hew York Citysto mske a payzent of zbout 31,000.00 on
the shares in @ laid development provosition at Yorktown Heights in
Cestehester County, Bow York on behalf of Julins ROSERSRG.

tciUT?, shea questioned concerning thm above, stated that ho does
nob recall avid GRSERGLASS or any one else ever delivering a package
containing auproximately $1,000,00 to the offica of Imicstrial Pleamers —
snd Designers, Inc. '

PUSUT! forther aivieod that be believed be once recaived a letter
fron Jul4us ROSESESS9 while in South America, Herecalle!] that ROSPRHERG
nade a rewest for th: liquidation of his interest in the Torkbosn
Development Corporation, é

information Concerning Subjects
Exoloysent with The Kellex
Corporation CGlanhattsan Engineering
Project) _

Bie cree ee

TUORUT? advised that he vas vorfomming drafting work on concrete
flieses wile eaployed by The Kellex Corporation at Oak Ridge, Tenresses
ond New York Clitye

"lg stated that in cormection with the work performed at Kellex, he
€i4 not mow what he was working on. Ee was asked what bs thought he was

EG

23 +o ¥het he and bis fellow-workers Snought they wera working on, he
enswared that he and his fellow-engineers thought they were working on a
bioh ortane gasoline refinery or on a synthetic rubber plant. Hoe stated
thoy theaght it cowld be a synthetic rubber plant because there was a lot
of talx and nmewepaper articles about syathetic robber at that tine.

*}% was esked what necessity there ves for coucretea cooling flimes in
eithes a high octena gasoline or synttetic rubber plant, and he atated ha
did ust lower, He was extred if be knew about the usaufacturing processes of
tieh oetena gas and synthetic rubber today aod be stated he did not know.

Kit was pointed oat to hia his specalation as to the work he was
dning did not appasr Ingieal und he ataitted that this was possible and bs
forther adaitted that the size of the concrete flees he was working on
nate It spoarent that the Instellation in which they were to be used was
one “hich would generate tremendous quantities of beat. However, be still
refused to adeit that bho keew vhat be vas doing.

"Be stated that ha had never discussed his work with Julius ROCSHBERG
cr ay one elso, and that not even bis wife kmed vhat bo was doing. Ha
stated that be awl all otter employees of the Kellex Corporation were .- |
sermad not to discuss their work with any om.

¥H> said that he newer pavo any inforusiien eanceming his work at
Eellex to Joling ROECTSEEG, ond thet ROSSHSORG never questioned hin
comerning his work.

information Camerning Subjects
Co-Omershio of Indian Lake Lodge,

Dhen it was browh to BcNUTT?s attention, Ia adaitged that he purchased

the Kellex Corporation in Mew York City, and that he would go to the lodge
on ¥fekends to assist with the operation of ite

“Bo stated that he am] HEIMER rede purchase of the lodce through a
real estate agent at Glens Falls, Kew York. He said that a $5,000.00 dom
oaynent was mocossery aml that he and REDIER each paid $2500.00 as his
crave of the paynent. BoNUTT stated that at the time of purchase be hal
euprosizately $1,000.00 em? it was then necessary for him to borrow
71,500.00 froa his wife's parentss

TUNUP? cxplaimsl that the lodse hed accomodations for eporoximately
100 people and that they obtained guests by advertising In newspapers
and ty means of Inviting associates to the ledge,

®Yp said that in the fall of 1976 ba and FRIVER decided to eall
Indian Leke ledge and received h,000.00 for it. Ho advised that they
nore represented vy a lawyer numed Hy COLD, xho hal offices at 225
Sroadway, Mew "named te at the tine af the "19h6 transsction, Ha recalled

that a dentist

BETSS (ph) heal this lodre.
HESS A ph) pore

Fie said “hat to the ak of his nowledze, Jalius ROSEN EERO newer
visited Imii.m Loke ledse. Bet0T? further advised be could not recall
ever inviting HOSERTESG to wislt this lodge.

SENUT stated that he was a uamber of the Pederal of Architects,
engineers, Chewists and Technictens (FAvCT), having joined the organization
tn Hew York City in spproxivately 1910, Ue advised that be coulda not
recall the identity of the individual whe solicited his membership in
FASC?. Ha eaid that he attended zestings of the FARCT at a nesting hzil
somewhere dowitowa Bow York City, and could nob recall which brench or
walt of the organization he belonced to, EcNUTT eaid that he never knew
tulivs ROSESEGRG to be a member of the FASCT,

*Concerming the FASCT, tho folloving is noted, On page 151] of the
book entitled “4A. Story Gf The CIO' by Benjamin STOLUERI spoears the following:

Stely fowe CIO wiiens are under
complete castrol of Stalinist
offictals,? 4

"According to Renijarin STOLUERG, liste among these four mions is the
Sederation of Architects, Engineers, Chemists end Tectnicions,

®The followiza information regarding the FASCT smvears on paces 26
znd 265 of the abowe mentions] book by Hr, STOLBERG:

(Tie Federation of Architects, Engineers,
Cresists aui Teclmicias was organized in
193) mainly frog the technicol staff in
thee Borks Project Aduinisteation. Fron |
the “waxey beginning the Federation hes been
vider Stalinist leadership, and its renk and
file are chiefly Cammnist Party followers.'

ee Lopraphy Acne Orned
iy Subject

scumeiinesiatitaniiamnic dain ec

"YeNUIT was asked what type of photo aquizeant be med and advisad
that dn about 1938 or 1939 he purchased a Volgen 116 camra end Later
purchased an Avgo-Flex cumera and a Nevers motion picture camera. Ho
stated that when he first took up :hotegraphy, he purchased some equinsent

to do ids om dsreloping and printing. He stated that he made a few
prints md theresfter discontinued his own developing LcNUIT stated that
he rever performed eny type of phote copying work for valins ROSES BERG

ef any Gi
