Cuban Policy Toward Latin America: National Intelligence Estimate Volume Ii --
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115451, dated 2 June 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115451).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Cuban Policy Toward
Latin America

Natlonal Intelligence Estimate
Volume [1—Supportiag Analysis

cr 277

Aoproved tor Retwagc
pate} JUN 1995

CONTENTS

Poge
1 THE INTERNATIONAL SETTING... cc cccccceccceccesesssecessonssenenestseee i
I. THE DOMESTIC CUBAN SETTING Wo cesecscscececrcseetsmneeereessenseee 2
HE. SUPPORT FOR REVOLUTIONARY CHANGE uu. cceaseecneneee 5
A. Cuban Doctrine. cccccccssecssscessccssssasestsccessssccecsssssessescssessssstecsecsssseseece §
B. Support for Insurgent Croups.....ccccceescssscsrsesssesssescecessatscvecsenessensenearens 5
Gy. Revolutionary Cover nments...ccccccccecccsssscssescserevecstssssssssassnsseeseusssseceneas 6
D. Progressive Governments and Move ments ......cccccccccssccssstscesestenseacsens q
IV. THE SOVIET ROLE occ seesescessssscssessssssssersesessaserseanseteresesseces 9

VY. PROSPECTS FOR CUBAN SUPPORT FOR REYOLUTION IN
CENTRAL AMERICA... ....cccccccesccetesscceres cccesssscacseseseseassasserssnsessessaeene 10
A. EJ Salvador and Guatemala... cccccccceseessscssssescssscsesessetssesenstnasees 10
BL Nicaragua....ccccccseccssssssesesesccecssssecceseserescessssssencetesvesesesetesesescescersecaceesont ij

VI. PROSPECTS FOR CUBAN POLICY AND RELATIONS

ELSEWHERE IN LATIN AMERICA .u..cecccccscccscerstsssssesssssstsecsssenes 12
VIL CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR THE UNITED STATES 13
A. Relations With the United States 13
B. Castro's Extreme Opthote.un..cccscscsccscssesssecsessesecssusecasssssnsssssssseresuease M4
C. Cuba and the Regions... ccccicccscsstssscssessecsessestessecsescsesssscsssseassaseneacanse 15

4

CUBAN POLICY TOWARD LATIN AMERICA

SUPPORTING ANALYSIS:

1. THE INTERNATIONAL SETTING

L. The kongstanding abjective of Fidel Castro's
padicy beward Latin America and the Caribbean has
been lo uadercut US influence and enhance his own,
ultimately through the promotion of cooperative fever
lulionary governments. In addition to a deep commit.
ment to revolutionary causes and a strong desire to
expand his personal prestige, Castro's regional policy is
influenced by his clase ties with and dependence on the
USSR. Castro's underlying attitude toward the United
Slates is one of hostility and fear; and he sees US and
Cuban interests in the region as irreconcilable. In
effect, therefore, he sees a compelling need to expand
Cuba's influence in order to curb Washington's [ree-
dom of action to isolate and bring pressure on Havana.

2 Over the past lwo years, the Castro government
has sharply revised the emphasis and tactical priorities
of its regional policy. In contrast to mast of the period
of the 1970s, Cuba is now giving much heavier
emphasis to support of revolutionary Insurgents, espe
cially in Central America, and placing less importance
on cultivation of diplomatic and commercial tles with
moderate and conservative governments.

4% Changing perceptions of international threats
and opportunities were probably one key factor that
moved Cuban leaders to revise their regional policy.
Cuba's international influence and prestige had never
been higher than at the end of 1979, after nearly a
decade of sustained and sometimes spectacular suc
cesses. Military interventions in Africa had markedly
enhanced Havana's International standing, and a num-
ber of governments there and in other regions had
come to borrow from Cuban organizational models, to
emulate Cuban policies, and to solicit, Cuban
assistance.

4. In 1979, two of Castro's most sought-after foreign
policy goals were achieved: his campaign to help

- create a sibling regime In the hemisphere was doubly

—_—_——

* Jalormation as of £3 June 1961 was used la the preparation of
Volume —Supporting Analysis.

fulfilled, when pro-Cuban revolutionaries were viclo-
rious in Grenada aud in Nicaragua; and, in Septerber,
he assumed the leadership of the nowaligned movement
(NAM) at ils summit in Havana. Buoyed by thee and
other victorics, he traveled to the United Nations in
October in a virtuoso role he had rehearsed foe years,
and was able with some credibility to pase as spokesman
for the world’s underprivileged and oppressed.

§ In the accomplishments of the 1970s, the original
romantic and nationalistic impulses of Castro's forvign
policy converged with the pro-Soviet policies that he
had adopted in the 1960s. Because of his diplomatic
and political skill, the burden of Cuba's increased
dependence on the USSR and willingness to perform
proxy services did not substantially undercut his ma-
neuverability. Thus, Castro seemingly was able to
perform simultaneously as & loyal Soviet ally, an
eminent Latin American statesman, and a world-class
spokesman for revolutionary and nonaligned causes.

6. lronically, Castro was able to relish these tri-
umpls for only a short time, before the delicate
balance of his foreign policy was upset by the Soviet
invasion of Afghanistan In December 1979. No event
In more than a decade so unequivocally exposed
Cuban subservience to the USSR and the limits that
relationship Imposes on Havana's ability to pursue an
independent line. Cuba's dutiful endorsement of So-
vet actions and its success in blocking efforts by some
NAM members lo censure Moscow have sharply un-
dercut Castro's international prestige. Havana in-
curred almost immediate direct damage when It had
to withdraw its candidacy for a coveted UN Security
Council seat after It lost the support of a number of
NAM countries, and Its quest for a seat was frustrated
again In late 1980. Castro's plans to exploit his three-
year term as head of the NAM have also been badly
damaged. As long as Soviet troops continue to occupy
Afghanistan, he probably will have to be content to
thaintaln a relatively defensive posture in the move-
ment, to protect Soviet Interests.

7, Moreover, heightened international tensions be-
cause of Afghanistan—and, more recently, Poland—

t+: aed

have increased Cuban fears of the United States.
Cuban leaders are more concerned than at any time
since the early 1960s that Cuba could becume a pawn
in great power rivalries. Castro Is not convinced that
the USSR would defend Cuba against US military
actions, especially in the absence of a formal defense
treaty with the Soviets despite his efforts to secure one.
Cuban leaders realize their country Is vulnerable as
the mast cxpused salient of Soviet power and are
alarmed that a consensus may be emerging in the
United States in favor of tougher ‘policies. Even before
Afghanistan, Castro apparently had come to believe
that US national security officials were attempting to
contrive pretexts for punitive actions against Cuba. In
1980 he became even more concerned about the
prospects for sharper confrontations with the United
States under a Reagan administration.

8 Developments in Latin America have also helped
to alter many of the assumptions and circumstances on
which Cuban foreign policy was based during the
1970s. Even before Afghanistan, Castro had suffered a

number of setbacks in the region that undermined the ‘

policies espoused by such leading pragmatists as Vice
President and Politburo member Carlos Rafael Rodri-
guez. By the end of the decade, after efforts to
negotiate commercial treaties with several major coun-
tries were rebuffed, Cuba's only significant trading
partner in the region was Argentina.

9. The moderate policies that the Cuban regime
pursued during the 1970s also [ell short of achieving
the important objective of cementing its legitimacy as
a Latin American regional power. Although a majority
of countries established diplomatic relations with Ha-
vana, Brazil and a number of others did not (see map).
Havana's hopes to expand. its influence with many of
the governments with which it has formal relations
have also been frustrated, especially in the Caribbean,
because of fear of Cuban subversion. Castro has also
had to accept the unpleasant reality that the benefits
of carefully cultivated relations can be transitory. He
was particularly irritated when the special relationship
he had developed with Venezuela deteriorated after
Luis Herrera Campins succeeded Carlos Andres Perez
as president early in 1979.

10. Certain dramatic regional developments favor-
able to Cuban interests reinforced the pressures of
these adverse developments in prompting a reap
praisal of Cuba's regional doctrine, priorities, and
methods Thus. as the Sandinista guerrillas began

serlously to challenge the Somoza regime in Nicaragua
by early 1979, Cuba's commitment to violent revolu-
lion as the prefemeu avenue to expanded influence
began to intensif;. The Sandinista success, the triumph
via a coup of radical revolutionaries in Crenada, and
the escalating vivlence in El Salvador and Cuatemala
presented Havana with enticing new opportunities for
expanding its regional role precisely as the returns
from the pragmatic policies of the 1970s were
diminishing.

mis These revised calculations and Castro's anger
and frustration arising from foreign and internal set-
backs have evoked greater militancy in Havana's
regional policy, which in turn has stimulated stronger
fear of Cuba. Confrontations with the Bahamas. Co-
lombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Peru, and Venezuela
intensified already rising concern in the region over
Cuba's military might and growing influence. In a
sharp departure from his relatively conciliatory tactics
of the 1970s, strident and repeated criticism by Castro
and the Cuban media of about a‘dozen Latin Ameri-
can governments or leaders has further aggravated
relations.

il. THE DOMESTIC CUBAN SETTING.

12. Along with increasing International pressures,
Cuban leaders have had to deal with escalating domes-
tic problems over the last couple of years, which also
contributed to Castro's frustrations and his interest in
new policy departures. After two decades of revolu-
tionary government, the economy is stagnant and
dependent on massive Soviel assistance. Moscow pro-
vides the equivalent of about $3 billion annually—
about one quarter of estimated Cuban gross national!
product. Yet, living conditions remain austere. Most
consumer goods, including food and clothing, are
rationed, and popular items are frequently unavail-
able; housing, transportation, and other public services
are seriously deficient. During 1980, the frustrations of
both the population and the government increased: the
first because of exposure to the well-being of visiting
Cubaa-Americans; the second because of setbacks to
agricultural production from diseases and hurricane
damage.

13. Warned by their leaders not to expect signifi-
cant relief before the end “of the century, Cubans in
increasing numbers have become alienated. Worker
productivity has declined during the last few years.
corruption has spread, and crime has increased dra-

|

ae -

United States

Cuba-Latin America
Diplomatic Relations

BEE Oiptomatic relations
WHE Suspended retstions
() No aiplomatic relavons

Estadtcreds
Broken Measleduaned

Argentina 1962 1973
era?

ie7a°
1964
1e44
$064, 1973 1978
1961 rr
1961, 1001 terre
1900°
1948
1962 tere!
ioe
1979

1972

1672
Price le 1988
1970
yer

1972
970°

weve
tera® 4 :
Dass : Atlantic Ocean

104! were"

© ewe airet embetamhe etaies o Mee Tet

© ewe atret embed, weds 3 Cryer

© Beamens sripendied Worch 198!

€ Comet welt ory

0 a trl embeiede wits a Cornnte

6 Regrreentenen wth ed me Charge weet lotoay 19481

CC ee erent ot Can on Chard Femrierion meta
oo Flas ate areeney ett ed

matically. We believe that well over 1 million Cubans
would emigrate to the United States if they had the
chance We estimate that a few hundred thousand
have formaliy applied to leave Cuba. Asa rule, they
have been stripped of their jobs and educational
privileges, and at times their ration cards. They have
become in effect an outcast minority, although re-
cently the government has taken steps to reintegrate
them.

14. A large number of the openly discontented
belong to the post-Castro generation. It was widely
presumed—in Cuba and abroad—that the ideals of
the revolution had been successfully inculcated in the
youth and that they constituted a bulwark of support
for the regime. Many. however, after receiving prefer-
ential treatment while in school, are disillusioned
when they enter the bleak job market and fully
encounter unpleasant ecunomic realities. Their disaf-
fection and other evidence of popular apathy and
disillusionment have angered and embarrassed Cuban
leaders, because it discredits the government's preten-
sions that the Revolution has produced a thriving
socialist society.

15. It was against this background that Castro de-
cided to adopt harsh civil measures, and in December
1979 appointed Ramiro Valdes as Minister of Interior.
Valdes, who previously served in the post during the
1960s, had earned a reputation as the regime's most
prominent advocate of repressive measures. During
the 1970s, he and the hardline policies associated with
him were eclipsed by more pragmatic leaders and
programs. Thus, his return at a time of increasing
social unrest was a clear indication that Castro desired
to pursuc a tougher line internally. Policies almed at
reducing crime, vagrancy. occasional acts of sabotage,
and other expressions of antiregime sentiment have
been instituted. Valdes’s penchant for brutality was
evident Jast year, when block committees were mobi-
lized to herass and physically attack would-be emi-
grants. Since then, however, some pragmatic innova-
tions aimed at increasing productivity and morale
through economic incentives have also been adopted.

16. Other hardline leaders concerned primarily
with foreign affairs have probably also become more
influential during the last couple of years. Manuel
Pineiro is head of the America Department of the
Communist Party's Central Committee with responsi-
bility for coordinating relations with leftist and revolu-
tionan: groups in the hemisphere. While chief of the

foreign intelligence service during the 1960s, he di-
rected Cuban subversive activities In Latin America
and elsewhere. His cronies—most of whom also have
clase wacristions with Vualdes—are concentrated in the
Intelligence and security establishment and the Amer-
ica Department. Several are ambassadors in Caribbean
Basin countries.

17. Their special interest and expertise in Central
America and the Caribbean date to efforts during the
first month: of the Castro government to sponsor
revolutionary movements in that region. They have
been more conspicuously represented there than in
other areas of Cuban foreign policy. Thus, as condi-
tlons more conducive to revolution in Central America
have emerged, Castro naturally has relied on them
more. His trusted companions since the guerrilla cam-
paign against the Batista regime in the 1950s, they are
closer to him personally than leaders from other
backgrounds. Their loyalty to him and Wo the revolu-
tionary process as he defines it probably are the major
elements of their political creed. Mast of them also
have clase ties to Raul Castro and the defense estab-
lishment, and they frequently reflect his views on
domestic and foreign affairs

18, We believe that the hardliners hold that armed
struggle is the only effective way to achieve revolu-
tionary change and, thus, justify—less critically than
other advisers—Cuban risks on behalf of insurgents.
They probably are convinced that the “correlation of
international forces” now favors the Communist camp
and that objective conditions in several countries are
more encouraging for revolutionaries than they have
been in many years. Although they probably share
with more pragmatic Cuban leaders a concern that the
United States again may adopt punitive policies to-
ward Cuba, they probably believe that US threats will
strengthen domestic support for the Castro regime,
and that US actions can be countered effectively. Over
the longer run, they probably believe that the security
of the Cuban regime can best be enhanced through the
consolidation of revolutionary regimes elsewhere in
the hemisphere.

19. Castro himself has been attracted to more active
support for regional revolutionaries, in good measure
because of his frustratior and anger over domnestic and
foreign policy setbacks. Nonetheless, he has avoided
any sweeping steps to upset the balance among his
various advisers and leading interest groups. Officials
accused of being “soft” toward crime have been

aa

replaced in all the top positions in the areas of internal
security and justice, but pragmatists retain their influ-
ence and positions in other areas of the bureaucracy.
None of the pragmatists lac been disgraced, and there
are no indications that Castro Is considering a purge or
is searching for scapegoats—although the influence of
the pragmatists on foreign policy issues Is in at least
temporary decline.

Itt. SUPPORT FOR REVOLUTIONARY CHANGE

A. Cuban Doctrine

20. A cardinal tenet of the Castro government from
its inception has been that support for revolutionaries
elsewhere in Latin America Isa right and a duty of the
Cuban Revolution. The levels and types of support
have fluctuated through the years, however, as revolu-
tionary doctrine has adjusted to changing circum-
stances in Cuba and the region. During most of the
1960s, Cuba backed only groups that employed rural
guerrilla methods, but after repeated failures—cul-

minating in Che Guevara's death in one such cam- -

paign (in Bolivia in 1967)—Castro adopted the more
flexible approaches advocated by Redriguez and other
pragmatists and urged on him by Mascow. The prag-
matists’ view—that revolutionaries should choose
among various methods {including elections) to reach
power—prevailed until the end of the 1970s. During
that period, all forms of support for insurgents and
terrorists in the hemisphere were at low levels, and
nonviolent “patriots”—even priests, bishops, and gen-
erals—were praised as true revolutionaries.

21. In the most recent doctrinal shift, Castro once
again seems to have reverted to the view that it Is the
duty of all revolutionaries to “make revolutions”
through violent struggle. This more militant line was
most explicitly enunciated in July 1980, in his speech
on the anniversary of the Revolution. In the most
forceful statement he has made on the subject of
violence in over a decade, Castro said that “the
experiences of Cuatemala, E} Salvador, Chile, and
Bolivia teach us that there is no other way than...
revolutionary armed struggle.”

22. Unlike the situation in the 1960s, when simi-
larly aggressive policies brought Cuba and the USSR
into sharp doctrinal conflict, there is now at least a
partial convergence on tactics, with both countries
endorsing more militant methods in Central America.
Authoritative Soviet spokesmen have questioned tradt-

tional doctrine that orthodox Communist parties must
play the vanguard role in Latin American revolution-
ary struggie< Soviet authors have indicated that the
most appto,fuile ccurse—especially in Guatemala and
El Salvador, where the Communist parties are eclipsed
by more radical groups—is through the creation of
broad political-military fronts. Parties that refrain
from cooperation with other leftist forces have been
criticized, and the Salvadoran Communists, who have
adopted violent methods and broad front tactics, have
been praised.

- 93. Like the Sandinista National Liberation Front,
such amalgams are seen as @ revolutionary vanguard in
the hemisphere. Cuba and the USSR support the
inclusion of “progressive” groups in such fronts with
Communist parties and insurgent groups. Social deino-
crats, socialists, advocates of liberation theology and
other radical Catholic thought, as well as other quasi-
Marxist leftists who we critical of the United States
and of capitalism are considered sufficiently revolu-
tlonary—or malleable—to help carry out revolution-
ary change, particularly in Central America. In addi-
tion to other benefits, this approach attracts West
European support for Latin American revolutionaries.
In contrast, Castro's antipathy toward Christian
Democratic and other center-left reform parties seems
to have intensified during the last year or two.

24. These and other changes in Cuban revolution-
ary doctrine have had diverse repercussions among the
Latin American Communist parties. Some have has-
tened to conform, while others have eltber hesitated to
change their longstanding policies against violent
struggle or have divided over the issue. The main
Cuatemalan party thus far has refused to join in the
Cuben-sponsored unity talks among guerrilla groups,
or to condone insurgent methods. The Honduran and
Costa Rican parties have solit over the issue of *
violence.

B. Support for Insurgent Groups

25. El Salvador and Guatemala are the high-prior-
ity targets of Cuban subversive efforts. Virtually all
types of support to the insurgents have increased
during the lest year or 9, including a dramatic
upsurge in assistance to Salvadoran revolutionaries
during 1980. Statements-by Castro and other evidence
indicate, in addition, that Cuba's interest in insurgent
and radical groups extends to several other countries.
Even in Chile and Colombia, where the prospects for

near-term revolutionary success are slight. Havana
now is apparently committed to the primacy of violent
methods and to assisting radicals in organizing more
effective vuppositiun tu the present governments.
Cuban interest In expunding ties with and influence
over the extreme left in Bolivia, the Dominican Re-
public, and probably a few other countries also has
sharpened.

26. Havana's commitment to assist the revolution-
ary process in El Salvador has been trumpeted pub-
licly with little equivocation since early 1980. Cuban
leaders believe that the potential for another revolu-
tionary success is greater there than anywhere in Latin
America, and the prospects of another pro-Cuban
regime in Central America is a powerful inducement
to help. Castro has played an important role in
persuading the five Salvadoran guerrilla groups to
establish a joint political-military directorate and to
collaborate with “progressive” political groups. Cuba's
propaganda support for the extreme left and its
backing of international initiatives against the govern-
ment have also intensified.

27. Cuba. the USSR, and Nicaragua during 1980
orchestrated a major supply effort that transformed
the formerly ragtag Salvadoran insurgeuts into 2 rela-
tively well-armed and well-equipped force. The deliv-
eries—-mostly originating in Eastern Europe, Ethiopia,
and Vletnam—Included semiautomatic and automatic
rifles, machineguns, recoilless rifles, mortars, and rock-
et-propelled grenades, as well as explosives, uniforms,
medical supplies, and communications gear. We esti-
mate, in addition, that during the last year or so, over
1,000 Salvadorans have received guerrilla training in
Cuba and {rom Cuban advisers in Nicaragua. Cubans
also assist the insurgents in the areas of combat
planning. intelligence, and tactics, essentially from
within Nicaragua, but probably through fteld trips to
EF] Salvador as well.

28. Cuba's commitment to Insurgent groups in Gua-
temala and efforts to gain greater influence over them
have also increased over the last year. Havana has put
pressure on leaders of the four principal guerrilla
organizations to enter into a “popular and democratic
front.” Rivalries and tactical differences among the
guerilla chieftains remain strong, however, and tm-
pede Cuba's continuing unification efforts. Several
hundred Guatemalans have received military (raining
in Cuba, and a small number of Cuban advisers
apparently have been in the field for short periods

with Cuatemalan guerrillas. The growth of Cuban
propaganda in support of the revolutionary left has
paralleled) inese developments; and efforts, largely
through diplomatic channels and in international fo-
rums, to discredit and isolate the Lucas government
have increased.

29. Armed revolution in Honduras has also become
a long-term Cuban objective. This is in sharp contrast
to policies pursued by Cuba during the 1970s, when
the Castro regime periodically made overtures to
Honduran military leaders with the apparent objective
of establishing commercial and perhaps diplomatic
ties. Cuba’s change of policy probably helped precipi-
tate a split in the Honduran party in 1980; when about
half of the members organized a separate group that
espouses violent methods. Cuba provides Honduran
revolutionaries with guerrilla training and increased
propaganda support. Cuban leaders are,urging Hon-
duran Communists to reunite, and Havana meanwhile
maintains influence with both the orthodox and break-
away group. .

30. In addition, Havana has helped exiled revolu-
tionarles return to Chile during the last year or so, in
hopes of resurrecting revolutionary struggle against the
Pinochet government. The guerrillas—members of the
Movement of the Revolutionary Left. who fur years
were discouraged by Havana—probably intend to do
rudimentary organizational work and to engage in
sporadic terrorism that could result in more unified
atlempts to undermine the military regime. Although
there are no insurgent groups in Bolivia loday, official
statements strongly sugzest that Havana would like to
help organize violent opposition to the military
government.

31. Recently. Colombia was added to the list of
countries where Cuban assistance is sharpening the
challenge of revolutionary insurgents. Havana helped
train, arm, and transport M-19 insurgents—who pre-
viously had concentrated on urban terrorism—in their
efforts, early in 1981, to open rural guerrilla fronts.

C. Revolutionary Governments

32. As support for. violent revolution has increased.
Castro has also reverted to more demanding defini-
tions of revolutionary processes and governments.
After Cenerals Velasco of Peru and Torrijos of Pana-
ma took power in 1968, populist and reform regimes
were often viewed favorably in Havana. Castro consi-

dered them “revolutionary” because they adopted na-
tionalistic positions on such issues as foreign ownership
in their countries, supported the NAM(s interuational
policies, and veice!d cviticisns of the United States.
Cuban doctrine became even mere pragmatic following
the election ot Marxist Salvador Allende to the Chilean
presidency in 1970. Rebellion was no longer the sole
means of winning revolutionary power, assault on the
class structure was nol ati immediate priority, and
Marxist or socialist ideology was net essential.

33. The Cuban leadership now appears to believe
that only Icaders who win or consolidate power
through violent means, and who eliminate the military
and other power centers that could force them from
office, can achieve a genuine revolution. In this re-
vised view, revolutionary governments should at least
be inclined toward Marxism and should consider
Cuba, and by extension the USSR, as their natural
allies and be willing to demonstrate this preference
publicly by taking strong “anti-imperialist™ stands. By

these more stringent standards, only the Sandinista,

regime in Nicaragua and the Bishop government in
Grenada qualify as revolutionary.

34. Since the coup led by Maurice Bishop in Gre-
nada, Havana has been the dominant foreign influ-
ence in that small East Caribbean nation. About 250
Cubans are helping in the construction of a new
international airport, and Cuban teachers, medical
personnel, military, security, and other advisers are at
work there. An unknown number of Grenadian stu-
dents are receiving training in Cuba, and Bishop and
other leaders of his New Jewel Movement are
attracted to Cuban political and social models. Gre
nada's reflexive support for Cuban international post-
tions was illustrated in early 1980, when it was the
only other Westem Hemisphere government to vote
against the UN resolution condemning the invasion of
Afghanistan.

35. [is in Nicaragua, nonetheless, where Cuba has
made the most dramatic progress in inspiring and
helping to mold a sibling revolutionary process. Cuban
influence is more pervasive there than it has ever been
in a Latin American country, especially through the
presence of from 5,000 to 6,000 Cubans who are active
in virtually all areas of public life. Numerous high-
level Sandinistas, perhaps including the members of
their nine-man Nationa! Directorate—the ultimate
tuling body in Nicaragua—are assigned Cuban
advisers.

36. Although the Sandinista leaders have been wary
of repeating mistakes made by Castro during the
initfal stages cf (ie Cuban Revolution (open conflict
with the United States. emigration of the middle
classes), they have moved aggressively to consolidate
their power with a strategy drawn directly from
Cuban experience. Cuban military and security per-
sonnel are assisting the Sandinistas to organize effec-
tive Internal control mechanisms. More than 1,000
military advisers provide training in leadership, orga-
nization, tactics, and military sciences. All seven San-

“dinista regional military commanders have personal
Cuban advisers, and a number of other officers prob-
ably do as well. Cuban security, intelligence, and
police advisers are helping to organize the Nicaraguan
Interior Ministry, the police and intelligence forces,
and the people's militia. Military and intelligence
training is also provided in Cuba.

N

37. We believe the two countries are bound by a
secret mutual defense pact that provides ‘for Cuban
assistance in the event of foreign aggression against the
Nicaraguan Government. Both regimes probably also
interpret the agreement as a Cuban pledge for support
if the Sandinistas are threatened by internal opposi-
tion. Consistent with this alliance, Cuba has supplied
modern arms and equipment, in cooperation with the
USSR, to upgrade Nicaragua's military capabilities.

38. Cuban advice and assistance penetrate many
areas of Nicaraguan civilian life as well. The largest
effort is educational. Approximately 2,000 Cuban
teachers operate in Institutions throughout Nicaragua.
Over 1,000 Nicaraguan teenagers participate in work-
study pregrams in Cuba, and others are attending
Cuban specialty schools. Cuba has provided from 200
to 300 medical personnel, an estimated 750 construc-
tion workers who are engaged in roadbuilding and
other public works projects, and several hundred
advisers who are assigned to various Nicaraguan
Government agencies. The Marxist content of much of
the Cuban training has become a matter of contro-
versy with the Nicaraguan Catholic Church, and in
other sectors. .

D. Progressive Governments and Movements

39. The Mexican Government, and occasionally the
Panamanian, uccupy a special category in Cuban
rhetoric because they are considered “progressive.”
The two have frequently joined Nicaragua and Gre-
nada in support of Cuban initiatives. In Castro's view,

“progressive” regimes have attained an intermediate
stage of “liberation from imperialism.” In contrast lo
the moderate doctrines he held during the 1970s,
nowever, Casts apparently naw holds that even “ pro-
gressive’ regimes must complete their development by
advancing through a more radical and violent stage,
which presumably would eliminate conservative influ-
ence and result in encompassing redistributions of
wealth and power.

40. Since the mid-1970s, Mexico’s increasingly in-
dependent and energetic foreign policy has often
paralleled Cuba's. President Lopez Portillo dramati-
cally demonstrated his willingness to bolster Castro's
sagging prestige when he visited Cuba last August and

called for an end of the US trade embargo and use of #

Cuantanamo. Mexican governments for years have
supported in principle the need for revolutionary
change in Latin America, and many top officials
believe it is Inevitable in Central America.

4). Mexico over the past year has developed close
ties with revolutionary groups in El Salvador and has
come close to breaking relations with the junta govern-
ment. It is providing economic and political assistance
to the Sandinistas, is pressing Guatemalan leaders to
broaden the base of their support, and is courting
other countries in Central America and the Caribbean
with offers of political backing and guaranteed oil
supplies. Mexico's rising interest in the area has a
double edge for Cuba, nevertheless. It poses a chal-
lenge to long-term Cuban objectives by using its
energy wealth to promote a politically pluralistic and
economically pragmatic allernative to the beleaguered
Cuban system.

42. Although Castro and the Cuban media some
times depict the Torrijos government as “progressive,”
relations with Panama are motivated by abiding cyni-
cism on both sides. Castro no longer has any iHusions
that Torrijas will become a dependable Cuban ally, or
that he will institute fundamental social reforms.
Castro also realizes that Torrilos and other Panama-
nian leaders continue to place their relationship with
the United States above all others. Castro has been
disappointed, moreover, that Torrijos—who worked
with Cuba against the Somoza regime—has played
both sides in El Salvador rather than lending unquali-
fied support to the insurgents. Torrijos maintains
contact with revolutionaries throughout Central Amer-
ica and provides some of them with clandestine
support. But he és less inclined now to collaborate with

Havana in these efforts, because of concern about
Cuba's growing influence In the area.

44, Developments in Jamaica, where the moderate
Labor Party unseated the “progressive” government of
Michael Manley in elections last year, have\probably
contributed to Castro's renewed emphasis on the
primacy of violent methods. Under Manley, Jamaica

» moved steadily closer to Havana and became the

centerpiece of Cuba's policy of expanding [ts influence
in the Caribbean. Before the elections, some Cuban
leaders probably hoped that Manley and radicals in his
ruling party would abandon the Westminster political
system, in order to preserve their power indefinitely.
Now Castro has resigned himself to the loss of an
important friend and to a broad deterioration of
relations with Jamaica under the Labor government.

45. Elsewhere in the Caribbean, Cuba's efforts to
increase its influence and to promote “progressive”
leaders and groups have had mixed results. Havana
employs generally cautious political and propaganda
techniques to augment its standing with labor and
youth groups and with intellectuals and selected politi-
cal figures, especially in the English-speaking coun-
tries. Assistance programs aimed primarily at those
sectors are also designed to advertise Cuban organiza-
tional and development models. Cuban leaders most
likely are disappointed with the results of their efforts
in countries other than Grenada. however, and appear
toa have underestimated the resiliency of democratic
and conservative traditions in the area. Castro {s
probably optimistic, nonetheless, that long-term trends
in the Caribbean favor progressive or revolutionary
change and an expansion of Cuban influence; and he
continues to probe for advantage in such openings as
the unstable military government in Suriname and the
preindependence government of Belize.

od

IV. THE SOVIET ROLE:

46. The Saviet Union and Cuba share similar objec-
tives regarding Latin Amenca and the Caribbean: to
embroil the United States and ie uudercat its influcnee
while enhancing their own, ultimately through the
advent of cooperative revolutionary governments. The
extent to which Moscow influences Havana's regional
policy, therefore, is difficult to assess. Cuba's extensive
activities, and the survival cf the Castro regime.
ullimately depend on massive Soviet economle and
military aid, and thus on Soviet approval. Castro pays
heed both to Soviet interests and to the limits of
Moscow's tolerance on tactical matters. As a rule,
however, Castro acts essentially on his own initiative in
Latin America, as contrasted with greater Soviet von-
trols over Cuban activities in Africa and the Middle
East.

47. Over the years Muscow has placed a lower
priority on the region and sees it as a less immediately
important component of its competition with the
United States than does Havana. The  viets have
more consistently sought to develop diplomatic and
commercial ties with existing governments as a means
of expanding influence. Until recently, Moscow had
not encouraged the small orthodox Communist parties
to engage in violence and had not given much direct
support lo the groups that have turned to insurgency.
As previously indicated, Havana's aggressive support
of insurgents in the 1960s caused sharp conflict with
Moscow, in good measure because the Soviets saw such
support as premature and as damaging to the interests
af the orthodox Communist parties. Castro's cutback
in aid to insurgents during the 1970s was largely in
response to Soviet pressures.

48. Castro's vigorous support of Central American
revolutionaries since 1979 probably is essentially a
Cuban initiative. but one which the Soviets have
encouraged as now more consistent with their own
abjectives Miscow apparently expects and prefers
Havana to take the lead in advancing regional revolu-
tionary causes—both in deference to Castro's greater
‘understanding of local political dynamics and to shield
the Soviets from a hacklash from the United States and
from the larger Latin American countries where they
have a bilateral stake. Thus, other than their general

underwriting of the Cuban economy and military
establishment, the Soviets played a relatively minor
role in promoting the Nicaraguan Insurgency.

49. The Surwiosea success in 1978 probably both
surprised and impressed the Sovicts. Not only did
Cuba largely supplant US influence, but in a country
where Moscow had had no official representation it
soon enjoyed diplomatic, economic, cultural, military,
and even party-to-party ties. Soviet leaders apparently
concluded that the prospects for the success of revolu-
tionary forces in Central America were brighter than
they had calculated, that the United States was unable
to counter these forces effectively, and that greater
Soviet attention to the area was therefore justified.

50. Under this revised perspective, the Soviet at-
titude toward armed struggle in Central America
shifted. Moscow urged the Central American Commu-
nist parties to form military units and to join more
powerful insurgent groups in broad political and mili-
lary fronts. For the first time in many years, local
Communists were provided with guerrilla training in
the Soviet Union. The most dramatic indication of this
upgrading in Soviet interest was Moscow's effort in
1980 to arrange for broad support to the Salvadoran
insurgents, especially arms and military equipment
from four East European countries, from Ethiopia and
Vietnam, and from the Palestine Liberation Organiza-
tion. Moscow also provided directly some Jogistic
support and probably some funds to the supply
operation.

51. Hf the United States were substantially to raise
the costs and risks lo the Soviets of their troublemaking
in the region, they would be likely ance again to
reassess the costs and benefits of their activities in
support of insurgents. There are some indications that
Moscow now sees reduced sbort-term prospects for
new revolutionary successes and greater risk of dam-
age to the entire range of interests at stake in US-
Soviet relations. In Latin America, the Soviets would
wish to avoid provoking intense US pressures against
Nicaragua and especially Cuba, and any crisis with the
United States that would erode the benefits Moscow
derives from ties with such key countries as Argentina
and Brazil (foodstuffs and other trade), Mexico (politi-
ca! and diplomatic), and: Pery {military sales).

52. In short, the Soviets would be likely to adopt
more circumspect tactics to exploit opportunities in
the region if the United States seemed ready to

ad

exercise its political and military advantages. While
the change could prove short lived, Moscow would be
likely to avoid sharp increases in ils own limited direct
assistance to insurgents, and to employ greater discre-
tion in efforts to stimvlute assistance from Eastern
Europe and other nonregional scurces The Soviets,
moreover, would be likely to recommend greater
tactical prudence to Havana and to underscore their
strong desire to avoid a US-Cuban military confronta-
tion. But subject to these cunstraints, Moscow almost
certainly will continue to encourage and support some
level of Cuban assistance to insurgents—to maintain a
degree of revolutionary momentum in the region, to
keep the United States embroiled there and with its
allies in Western Europe over how to respond, and to
exploit any resurrection of the Vietnam syndrome in
the United States.

53. Such a shift in tactics by the Soviets would not
imply a change in long-term objectives to erode and
supplant US influence in Latin America, but simply a
recognition of the obstacles to their ambitions under
present power realities in the region. Nor would
tactical prudence on the part of the USSR necessarily
imply any reduction in its determination to retain its
stake in Cuba. In fact, Moscow is likely to see any US
military threat to the Castro regime as a major crisis in
US-Saviet relations. The recent sharp increase in So-
viet military shipments to Cuba probably is intended
to make this point, as well as to facilitate the supply of
arts to the Nicaraguan regime and to regional tnsur-
gents. In addition to other measures, Moscow would be
likely to counter such a threat by increasing its efforts
to cereale anti-US pressures throughout Latin America.

V. PROSPECTS FOR CUBAN SUPPORT FOR
REVOLUTION IN CENTRAL AMERICA

A. El Salvador and Guatemala

54. The strenathening of the revolutionary regime
in Nicaragua and promotion of revolutionary insur-
gencies, especially in El Salvador and Guatemala, will
probably continue as the paramount objectives of
Cuba's regional policy during the next year or two.
Cuban Icaders almost certainly will persist: in their
effarts to bruaden and bolster the political-military
fronts and guerrilla groups they back tn E! Salvador
and Guatemala, and they probably will employ similar
tactics in allempling to stimulate the still-nascent
revolutionary forces in Honduras Covert action, prop-

10

aganda, and diplomatic initiatives aimed at isolating
and subverting the military-dominated governments
of the three countries, and at generating international

support for revolutivns =, movements, are almost cer-
tain lo contiue at present or higher levels.

55. We estimate that Havana will continue lu pro-
vide insurgents in El Salvador with supplies of small
arms, munitions, and other light military equipment as
well as training and planning and intelligence support.
Ata minimum Castro probably will underwrite suffi-
cient external support to sustain the insurgents’ capa-
bilities for debilitating and destabilizing small-unit
raids, terrorism, and economic sabotage He probably
hopes’ that expanded US involvement will increase
Latin American and European support for the revolu-
Yonaries and provide cover for continued Cuban
support operations.

56. Other types of support are also likely to be
provided by Havana, especially if the pryspects of
revolutionary movements improve in El Salvador and
Guatemala. We believe that Cuban advisers have been
temporarily assigned to assess the needs of insurgents
in both countries and that there is a good chance that
some have remained in El Salvador since the January
1981 insurgent offensive. If fighting intensifies in
Guatemala and larger amounts of Cuban materiel are
sent, some Cuban advisers may remain with the
guerrillas there also.

57. We believe the Cubans have also been instru-
mental in arranging the participation on the side of the
Salvadoran insurgents of small numbers of combatants
from Nicaragua, Costa Rica, and other Latin Ameri-
can countries. These international “volunteers” are
intended tu assist diplomatically as well as militarily.
by underscoring the “legitimacy ~ of the revolutionary
cause. Cuba most likely will try to enlarge the role of
these international “brigadistas™ incrementally.

58. Decisions involving these and other forms of
relatively inconspicuous support are likely to be made
by Castro largely on the basis of his evaluations of the
needs and prospects of Central American revolution-
ary movements. Consideration of a more blatantly
interventionist policy in El Salvador—including same
combination of greatly increased assistance in the form
of arms, materiel, advisers, and international “valun-
teers"—will be influenced” by his assessment of likely
US reactions and other external forces and circum-
stances that tend to constrain him.

o

59. Changes in the regional and international envi-
ronment since 1979 have diminished Castro's maneu-
verability and credibility and have made it more
difficult tor hua ty marshal direct Latin Ainerican
support for violent revolution. A number of govern-
ments and leaders have been soured by the course of
postrevolutionary events In Nicaragua and have be-
come more suspicious and critical of Cuba; and several
that collaborated with Havana or acquiesced In its
support of the Sandinistas now often work against
Cuban interests in Central America.

60. Castro is restrained In particular by the reluc-
tance of other governments in the region to break
relations with the Salvadoran and Guatemalan regimes
or to provide unqualified public support for the
insurgents. During the Salvadoran guerrilla offensive
in January, and on other occasions, Mexico was under
popular pressure to recognize the revolutionary front
but relations with the junta government continue.
Panamanian officials also have close ties with Salva-
doran leftists and have provided them with clandes-
tine support while maintaining diplomatic relations
with the government. If these or other Latin American
governments were publicly to switch sides in Central
America, Cuban objectives and prospects for eventual
victory by revolutionary forces would be considerably

enhanced.

61. Paradoxically, Castro may realize that his hopes
that Mexico eventually will support revolutionary
fronts in Central America may best be advanced by
avoiding more conspicuous or confrontational Cuban
involvement. Mexico's long border with Guatemala
traverses sonie of its most backward areas; and mili-
tary and other relatively conservative leaders probably
are concerned about a spillover of revolutionary senti-
ment and activities. Apprehensions about Cuban activ-
ities most likely would be aroused in Mexico if revolu-
tionary violence were to increase in Guatemala to the
extent it has in El Salvador, and if Cuban support for
Guatemalan insurgents seemed to enhance their pros-
pects significantly. In that event, the Mexican perspec
tive of seeing a need for revolution in Central America

would probably be modified to take account of more

practical concerns

8. Nicaragua

62 Castro’s determination to promote insurgency
in E1 Salvador and Guatemala is also complicated by
his even more intense determination to protect the

revolutionary regime in Nicaragua. He has seen that
conspicuous use of Nicaragua as a base of support
before the Jatver, effusive in El Salvador produced
sharp strains in Mansgua’s relations with the United
States. This could lead to a retraction of desperately
needed Western economic aid and Increased opposi-
tion to the Sandinistas at home. Castro's hardline
advisers probably counsel that confrontation between
Managua and Washington is inevitable under the
Reagan administration and that a much more serious
challenge to the Sandinista government would result if
the Salvadoran insurgency collapsed.

63. Starting in February, and apparently with
Cuban approval, the Sandinistas sharply reduced the
flow of war supplies to El Salvador, in response to US
pressures. The flow has recently begun to expand
somewhat over new, more circuitous routes. Large war
stocks intended for the Salvadoran insurgents stil] are
stored in Nicaragua and fresh supplies probably con-
tinue to arrive via Cuba. Both Cuba and Nicaragua

“remain committed to the success of the Salvadoran

insurgents, and—though wary of US countermeas-
ures—will continue to work to augment the supply
flow. ' :

64. In any case, Cuban support for Nicaragua will
concentrate during the next year or so on assisting the
Sandinistas to tighten their political control of the
country. Mililary, security, and intelligence forces and
mass organizations responsive to Sandinista dictates—
all patterned closely on Cuban models—will be
strengthened. Cuban support, especially in the mili-
tary and security fields, is already increasing. includ-
ing more sophisticated equipment supplied from
Cuban inventories and transshipped from the USSR.
Castro is likely, furthermore, to urge key Sandinistas to
establish more effective and centralized contro! over
their movement and to isolate or remove suspected
“counterrevolutionaries.” Thus, reported Cuban coun-
sel to avoid confrontations with the private sector, the
Church, and Western foreign aid donors will continue
to be contingent on the Sandinistas’ ability to control
all the essential levers of power in Nicaragua.

65. Castro's commitment to the survival of the
Sandinista regime is so strong that he would probably
be willing to take substantial risks to defend it and to
sustain major damage in hts foreign policy generally
by doing so. Hf the Sandinista government were seri-
ously challenged by either Nicaraguan insurgents or
foreign military forces, we believe Uhat Castro would

be strongly motivated to defend it by supplying Cuban
troaps. He could probably be deterred if he thought
that US anilitary retaliation were likely, or if he
encountered strong Suvict upposition. In additiun, he
would be concerned about inserting Cuban military
forces in a conflict in Nicaragua that could result in
large numbers of casualties, particularly Cuban, or ina
prolonged struggle. He probably hopes that if the
Sandinistas are challenged, C:uban military and secu-
rity personnel already stationed in Nicaragua could
provide enough help without the need for reinforce-
ments from Cuba. With this—and his objectives in E]
Salvador—in mind, he probably has already aug-
mented those forces over the past year.

VI. PROSPECTS FOR CUBAN POLICY AND
RELATIONS ELSEWHERE IN LATIN
AMERICA

66. Castro is likely to receive conflicting advice on
the preferred course of Cuban relations outside of
Central America. His pragmatic advisers are likely to
counsel that further antagonizing these governments
would undermine his Central American objectives of
fostering revolution at low risk of US counteraction.
His hardline advisers will have little patience with this
reasoning and will recommend continuation of recent
belligerent regional policies.

G7. We think Castro will tend to view the hemi-
sphere as polarized between groups of friendly and
antagonistic governments. Denunciations of military-
dominated regimes in South America have become
more frequent and mordant over the last year. Attacks
on the military governments of Chile. Bolivia, Uru-
quay, anid Paraguay have increased, and propaganda
as well as covert and diplomatic efforts aimed at
isolating and undermining them could become a more
itaportant element of Cuban policy during the next
few years. Cuban criticism of the Brazilian Govern-
ment has been muted, however, and is not likely to
increase appreciably.

6&8. Argentina is the oulstanding exception to tis
policy, nonetheless, and probably will remain so al
least in the short term. Cubs continues to draw against
a $1.2 billion Argentine Government credit, negoti-
ated in 1973 with the Peron regime to purchase 2
variety of industrial goods. Largely because of the
econamic benefits from the relationship. the two
countries have averlooked furxamental political and

ideological differences and other problems since 1976,
when the Argentine military returned to power. Those
benefits are fikely te remain the principal determinant
of relations over the next few years, although more
conspicuous Cuban support for violent revolution in
the hemisphere would add new strains.

69. Castro will work hard to preserve good relations
with Mexico, which he sees as his key regional ally in
restraining the United States. In Panama, while in-
creasingly disdainful of Torrijos’s susceptibility to US
pressures, he will probably work lo keep relations from
worsening, because of Cuba's valuable intelligence and
trade links there. We believe that Castro will tend to
perceive most of the elected civilian governments In
the region as allied with the United Slates and “reac-
tionary” interests, and that he will adopt more critical,
and in a few cases more antagonistic, policies toward
them. Evidence of Cuban support for the M-19 has
recently led the Colombian Government to suspend
relations with Havana. .

70. Relations between Culva and the Social Chris-
tian government in Venezuela have deteriorated
rapidly over the past year; in the autumn of 1980
Cuba withdrew al! of its official representatives from
Caracas. Rising enmity and escalating differences
between the two governinents have increased the
probability that they will adopt even more hostile
policies toward each other.

71. For his part, Castro probably will attempt lo
weaken the Herrera administration through the use of
sharper propaganda and criticism in international
caucuses. In these circumstances, the prospects would
rise that Cuba will seek to expand its Ues with the
small and divided guerrilla groups and other leftists in
Venezuela in the hope of helping to promote an
effective radical oppasition force.

72. Relations with Costa Rica have also been severe-
ly strained since 1980. The Carazo government had
cooperated with Castro in supporting the Sandinista
insurgency, but subsequently grew alarmed about the
extent of Cuban influence in Nicaragua and its inter-
tions elsewhere in the region. San Jose broke off
consular relations with Havana in May 198]. and
bilateral tensions will probably not soon be relieved.

73. Castro probably has few illusions about the
prospects for expanding Cuban influence with the
civilian governments in Ecuador and Peru or for
developing beneficial commercial ties. Havana's hopes

eo

to establish a fishing center in Ecuador have been
frustrated, and the Quito government is not inclined to
expand relations beyond their current minimal level.
Casire probally does not expect to be able tu restore
the affinity with Peru that developed when Gencral
Velasco was in power, but he has refrained from harsh
criticism of the Belaunde government. Moreover, rela-
tions with both countries have been strained over
incidents involving Cubans seeking asylum in the
Havana embassies. We believe that Havana will en-
deavor to maintain normal state-to-state relations with
both countries, but there is a chance it will also lend
propaganda support to the creation of broad “auti-
imperialist” fronts there during the next year or two.

74. Cuban relations with the Labor Party govern-
ment in Jamaica almost certainly will be strained and
could become conflictual. Castro strongly desires that
the moderate Scaga government not succeed with
Western backing in bringing a measure of prosperity
and stability to the Island. This would not only show
up Manley’s pro-Cuban approach, but would strengthen
the hold of moderates throughout the English-speaking
Caribbean. Especially if Jamaican radicals show po-
tential for confronting the government, Castro will
lend encouragement and assistance.

75. Castro will be constrained from aggressively
pushing more confrontational policies in these and
other regional countries and from allowing state-to-
state relations to deteriorate sharply by a variety of
international and domestic forces. He bs likely to be
restrained by Moscow's probable preference that he
avoid provoking a major crisis with the United States
and the jarger Latin American nations in pursuit of
adventuristic policies.

7G. Influential groups of Cuban officials strongly
prefer that he concentrate his and the regime's enet-
gies on Cuba's enormous damestic problems rather
than on a more stressful foreign policy. Soviet leaders
would almost certainly be dismayed if Rodriguez and
his associates—who have been Moscow's most trusted
intermediaries with other Cuban leaders—were to be
eclipsed by hardliners. Many of the latter probably are
still viewed critically in Moscow because of the poli-
cies they pursued during the 1960s.

<7. Castro és also likely to be generally constrained
by a longer term view of Cuban prospects in Latin
America. Even where tension and confrontations have
marred relations with other countries, he probably

hopes that leaders more sympathetic to Cuba and its
policies will replace those currently in power. He may
hope, for instance, that more “progressive” leaders
will wie elecuons during the neat few years in Ven-
ezuela, Costa Rica, and the Dominican Republic.
Cuban leaders have close relations with officials of
opposition pertles, such as Accion Democratica in
Venezuela, and with more “progressive” factions of
governing parties. Castro can be expected to seek
expansion of these ties and to weigh future policy
decisions regarding those countries with an eye on how
they might affect the prospects of groups he favors.

Vil; CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR
THE UNITED STATES

78. In addition to Cuban domestic politics, events In
Latin America and Havana's relationships there, and
support and pressures from Moscow, US policy toward
Cuba and the rest of Latin America will have an
important impact on Havana's regional policies. First.
developments in US-Cuban relations are likely to
influence the Castro regime's regional game plan—not
its ultimate objectives, but matters of priorities, tim-
ing. and tactics. Second, US policies toward Latin
America, including US responses to Cuban activities,
will affect Castro's appratsal of the potential benefits
and costs of whatever policies he pursues.

A. Relations With the United States

79. Castro repeatedly indicated last year that he
desired talks with the Carter administration on the full
range of bilateral issues. His pragmatic advisers have
long ads “cated the benefits of a reduction of tensions
and limited rapprochement, and several actions taken
by Cuba last fall were intended to relieve tensions and
probably to enhance President Carter's chances for?
reelection. Castro's central objective probably is to win
implicit or explicit assurances that the United States
will not initiate hostile actions against Cuba or the
revolutionary governments and movements it sup-
ports. As previously indicated, Cuban leaders sense 4
growing sentiment in the United States for a tougher
anti-Cuban policy, though the pragmatists, at least,
probably believe that ‘the Reagan administration
should be probed to see if the late 1980 progress
toward reducer tensionfcan be resumed.

80. Castro has used such probes early in preceding
US administrations. He is also interested in winning an

end of the trade embargo, acquiring a market in the
United States for Cuban goods. terminating US recon-
naissance overflights. arranging a reliable meane for
exporting disgruntied Cubans, and, ultimaicly, in gain
ing US evacuation of the Guantanainu Naval Base. He
probably has no coherent negotiating strategy, how-
ever, and may believe that he can gain some of his
objectives without making major concessions in return.
From his point of view, again, even US recognition of
Cuba's agenda of bilateral irritants would serve to
increase the legitimacy and security of his regime.

81. In our view, there is no reason to believe that
Castro's antagonism toward the United States has
diminished or that he would make significant conces-
sions in areas of major concern. We believe it highly
unlikely that he would agree to reduce or even be
willing lo discuss his commitment to the USSR, or that
there is much flexibility in Cuban policies and doc-
trine in other critical areas. We believe, morcover, that
he will continue to place a higher priority on promot-
ing revolutionary change—particularly in Central
America—than on improving relations with the United
States.

82. Ta foster serious bilateral negotiations, Castro
might lemporarily reduce the actual level of Cuban
support to regional revolutionaries, and he would be
less likely to opt for the more openly confrontational
policies in Latin America preferred by his hardline
advisers. But even in the event of reduced Cuban-US
tensions, he would still not trust the United States; and
he would continuc to be atlracted to strengthening the
revolutionary governments and insurgencies he sees
both as the key to lasting security from US pressures
and as a means lo justify and possibly increase Soviet
aid and support for Cuba.

$3. US rejection af negotiations and increased US
nonnilitan pressures would give Castro some pause
(as seems to be the case in the reduced level off his aid
to Salvadoran insurgents), but not force him to back
down far long or to forgo probes for new revolutionary
opportunities (as recently in Colombia) Castro's reac-
tion to US military threats fs more difficult to predict.
He would be under pressure, probably including some
{rom Moscow, to modify his behavior until the threat
passed. But his natural inclination would be to show
defiance in arder to test US will and to bring domestic
US and intermational (including Soviet) pressures to
bear in Havana's favor.

\

14

B4. In sum, we judge that under most circum.
stances—certainly anything much short of fear of
impetaliee GS mililan activa thal Uhbreuatened his
regime's survival—Castro will probably continue his
support of regional revolutionaries. In his kogic, mili-
tancy and defiance will be seen as the best course far
keeping the United States at bay and for creating
sufficient revolutionary siblings in the region to insu-
late him over time from US pressures. The issue of US
military threats aside, unl) a combination of decisive
setbacks to the revolutionaries he supports, increased
Cuban Isolation In the region, greater strains at hame,
and Soviet pressures would be likely to induce a
substantial change in Castro's regional game plan
anytime soon.

B. Castro’s Extreme Option

85. We estimate that there is a small chance (about
20 percent) thal even in the absence of US punitive
measures, Castro will become so frustrated by combi-
nations of events and conditions during the next year
or so that he would heed the advice of Cuban
hardliners and adopt confrontational policies on an
even braader scale than Indicated by our estimates
above. In a sense he would conclude futalistically that
increased hostility with the United States was inevita-
ble and thus discount the international benefits of
relative “good behavior.” While he still would be wary
of a direct military confrontation, he would increase
efforts to frustrate and undercut US initiatives
throughout the region. There also is some chance that
he will impulsively confront the United States. or
certain Latin American countries. on a scale large
enough to result in serious damage to his interests.

86. A number of factors could be invelved in such a *
change of course. One important one would be the
degree to which Castro feels that the gains made by
Central American revolutionaries during the last two
years are threatened. Other factors would be worsen-
ing domestic problems or serious disagreement with
Moscow over, for instance, the evtent ta which both
countries should support the Sandinistas if US policy
toward them becomes more hastile. In this scenario.
Castro would, out of frustration and anger, reject the
option of retrenchment in the face of setbacks and
seek to recoup instead through greater aggressiveness.

87. Under such a course, Castro would be willing.
even more blatantly and recklessly than he is now, to

help Latin American leftists organize and launch
guerrilla campaigns. ta provide training and other
support, and to disgatch Cuban advisers ta tare
counteie. A hurer namber of cuuntrics perhaps in-
cluding Costa Rica. the Dominican Republic. and
Venezuela, would then be added to thase where Castro
already actively supports armed revolutionary struggle
and bread “anti-imperiulist” fronts. In effect, he
would be reverting to the policies of the 1960s, when
Cuba was dedicated to promoting revolutionary
change even in countries where “objective canditions”
were unfavorable.

8&3. Purely vengeful actions against rival regime
leaders would also be more likely, as would resort lo
terrorist. techniqnes—assussinations, bembings, and
other violence—aimed at embarrassing and destabiliz-
ing adversary governments. More confrontational poli-
cies aimed at placing the United States on the defen-
sive in bilateral relations would also be more likely.
Another sudden exodus of disgruntled Cubans could
be initiated either by sea or directly into Guantanamo.
Subversive, even violent, activities in Puerto Rico and
other types of harassment could also result. Hf he took
such a course Castro would vigorously and publicly
seek assurances from Moscow of Soviet strategic
support.

C. Cuba and the Region

89. Whatever shifts in bilateral and regional poli-
cies Cuba and the United States may adopt over the
next few years, Castro will almost certuinly continue to
portray Cuba and the United States as rival pales of
influence. He will retain the support of vocal and
influential groups in the region for his anti-US senti-
ments, particularly among students and intellectuals as
well as nationalists and leftists of varying outlooks. If
forces impelling political instability in Central Amer-
ica and parts of the Caribbean strengthen. Cuban
prestige and influence will continue to be strong.
almost regardless of what Castro dors.

90. Castro has impressive assets for exploiting op-
portunities that advance his interests in the region at
the expense of the United States He benefits from
massive Soviet military and econatmic support. Policy
decisions are swifth carried out by the Cuban leader-
ship, and it has the ability to adjust tactics readily to
suit changing circumstances and favorable develop-
ments. Castro has formidable diplomatic, propaganda.
intelligence. technical assistance, guerrilla training.

and military resources for a small country. Moreover,
Havana has established dependable political and clan-
destiow net.arks carougheut the region aud will retain
influence with leftists and opposition groups even in
countries where stale-lo-state relations are currently

poor.

91. Paradoxically, we judge that Ure more prudent
Castro's activities in support of Latin America cevolu-
lionaries the more likely Cuba is ta make significant
and sustainable gains in influence in the region. The
continued weakening of the established order in Cen-
tral America and the Caribbean—in the face of
mounting social and cconomic problems—and the
growing strength of radical forces could produce one
or more new revolutionary regimes over the next
several years in which Cuban influence will be either
dominant or high. By orchestrating broad palitical and
international support for revolulionary Movements, as
in Nicaragua in 1979, Cuba risks competition with
other countries for influence. with the new govern-
ments, but it decreases the prospects of successful
intervention by the United Stales or action against
Cuban interests by antagonistic Latin American gov-
ernments. Over time, moreover, nonrevolutionary
changes in some governments (for example, Venezu-
ela) could produce improved bilateral relations for
Havana as well as greater support for revolutionary
movements in the region.

92. In contrast. Cuban adoption of a policy of
reckless and indiscriminate support of revolutionaries
would tend to isolate both the Castro regime and the
revol-iivaary movements it supports. Vigorous Cuban
support foe revolutionary groups in South America
would especially stimulate movements by key regional
countries to curb Castro's influence. Thus, if in this
environment pro-Cuban forces were to seize power—
in Fl Salvador, for example, or in one of the Caribbean
islands—they might have difficulty in consolidating

their regimes in an environment of regional hostility.

38. Even if, in these circumstances. Castro sharply
alienated moderate and conservative regional govern-
ments, the United States would face difficulty in
organizing broad anti-Cuban fronts either in the Orga-
nization of Ainerican Slates or through other multilat-
eral forums. Even in the more conservalive countries
of the region, nationalism and suspicion of US inten-
tions run high. The increasingly complex international

relationships of most Latin American countrics and
the changing orientations of a new generation of
leaders and clites have sharply reduced the US ability
tes siespee For these and other
reasons, we judge that a majority of a. cntries—includ-
ing nearly all of the most important ones—would
uppese any US efforts to organize multilateral actions
or sanctions against Cuba, except In the most extraor-
dinary circumstances. ,

events tibiterally.

94. This is not to say that governments that adopt
aunti-Cuban policies would not seek US encouragement
and ussistance in holding Castro at bay. What they
would wish to avoid is direction of anti-Cuban senti-
ment toward particularistic US objectives, especially
reinstalement of “excessive” US influence in the re-
gion, efforts to isolate Cuba completely in hemisphere
affairs, and frontal attacks against Cuban diplomatic
initlalives on issues involving the less developed and
the industrial countries.

95. US manuevering would also be complicated by
destubilizing tendencies in Latin America. resulting
from heanting 5 cit! aad economic pressures in many
nalions. Aithough traditional clites will remain domi-
nant In most of the region, forces for dramatic change
will become stronger in several countries in the 1980s.
In some, fundainental change may be imposed frum
the top down by elites employing new methods. in
order, in effect, to “steal the thunder” of radical! leftist
movements,

96. Greater US political, economic, and security

involvement in the region can only slowly alleviate the

root causes of instability and assuage the pressures for
change. But this increased US enzagement could work
in the interim to reduce Cuban ability lo gain further
advantage—by helping to address pressures through
nonrevolutionary political change, by shoring up be-
leaguered governments, and by raising ie costs and
risks of Cuban militancy.
