The Political Prospects in Nicaragua Over the Next Year or So
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013604, dated 4 September 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013604).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

per Ape a.
S
12 October 1967 ie

one ae: ales

ee ee

ee LBI: LIBRARY
oe Maridato Review;
5S Cas Ke De

NUMBER 83. 33-67,

. Submitted by

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf

12 October 1967

Approved for Release
Date

Authenticated:

T

CONT D DISSEM

. The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate: ee aes 8

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA. , aa

ae

Concurring: . hae ee ee ee

Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, Deputy Director, Central intelligence

Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of Intelligence and Research, Department
of State - .

: Maj. Gen. Robert R. Glass, for the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Dr. Louis w. Tordella, for the Director, National Security Agency

veda eke Se So ee |
Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
“mission and Mr. William ©. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their {urisdiction.

@ National Defense of the United States
laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
in any manner fo an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information,
within the meaning of the
mission or revelation

C2

Gutomatic
Bing and

sification

a

CONTENTS
Page
CONCLUSIONS. - f2scuictiteck Be oh oe Peat ee eee inn SER a ee na eee 1
DISGUSSTON? | sds 3 Sik TM hoes net oy hee ae a Gk) aah eee oh Oe eo te 2
T, (BACKGROUND) 8 oho 4 hike eee diene beled Qeace Dahtedaleeneraad dn Mees 2 2
Il. THE POLITICAL SITUATION .............0.. 0000 ccc cece eee 2
A. The Administration ......000.0. 0... ccc ec eee cee eee teenies 2
B. The National Guard .... 0.0.00 ee cee nne 4
CG. The Opposition 2. ss:3 s20cnegg be hae ee oa eet en La 4
TIL THE ECONOMY .......... 0 ccc ccc cc cece bene et een eneas 6
TV; “PROSPECTS. oie sine bat ore Ae Saar ae HERAT wegen keg a See 7

wa

POLITICAL PROSPECTS IN
‘ NICARAGUA OVER THE
NEXT YEAR OR SO

CONCLUSIONS

A. President Anastasio Somoza is in uncertain health, but the
chances.are better than even that he will remain alive and active dur-
ing the period of this estimate. He is not likely to alter the basic lines
of Nicaraguan foreign policy, though his regime may become somewhat
more authoritarian, and the incipient friction in his relations with the
US is likely to grow.

B. In the event of Somoza’s death within the next year or so, mem-
bers of the country’s inner political circle—from the Somoza family,
other propertied interests, the Nationalist Liberal Party (PLN), and
the National Guard—would probably work for a constitutional suc-
cession with excellent prospects of success. The resulting government
would probably be more Aeablen in domestic policy and easier for the
US to deal with.

Cc. If, however, Somoza became incapacitated but remained active
enough to insist on continuing in office, or if he undertook a series of
ill-advised, disruptive moves and then died, the sequence of events
would be more unsettling. We regard these contingencies as possible
but not probable.

DISCUSSION
I. BACKGROUND

1. Over the years US influence and the impact of US policies have been very
great in Nicaragua. Indeed, for two decades (1912-1933) the US and the US
Marine Corps were largely responsible for such public order as was maintained
there. When Anastasio Somoza—father of the present President—seized power
in 1936, he acted from his position as commandant of the Nicaraguan National
Guard, which had been organized and trained by the US. He and his family
maintained close ties with the US, and saw to it that the political party they
molded, the Nationalist Liberal Party (PLN), did so too. The principal polit-
ical opposition, the Traditional Conservative Party, has also favored friendly
relations with the US as the soundest course for Nicaragua.

2. While sometimes embarrassing the US by the fervency of its embrace,
Nicaragua has given little cause for concern during the past 30 years about
its political stability. The first Anastasio Somoza was virtually a one-man gov-
ernment. The regime was autocratic, arbitrary, and frequently repressive. Pres-
ident Somoza used his power to increase greatly his and his family’s fortunes.
Nevertheless, he carefully maintained the forms of representative government
and kept in close touch with the public. After his assassination in 1956, there
was a gradual shift to a less arbitrary process. Under the administration of
his older son and successor, Luis, a limited but significant loosening took place
in the Somoza family’s domination. For example, Luis had the constitution
changed so that a President could not succeed himself or be succeeded by any
close relative. The political opposition was permitted more opportunity to
express its views, and a larger inner circle—Somoza relatives, key figures of
the PLN, others of wealth and social position—came to have more influence
on the government’s decisions. This tendency continued during the Pres-
idency of René Schick (1963-1966), Luis’ chosen successor *

3. The current President, Anastasio Somoza Debayle, one of the old dicta-
tor’s two legitimate sons, is not in good health and has a penchant for arbitrary
and disruptive actions. Thus, an element of uncertainty is introduced into the
situation. In the paragraphs below, we will discuss pertinent aspects of the
political and economic pattern, consider the prospect if this Somoza remains
in power for some time, and estimate the consequences of his death or removal.

ll. THE POLITICAL SITUATION

A. The Administration

4, Although Luis Somoza’s expert skill at political organization and maneuver
probably could by itself have guaranteed Anastasio’s election to the Presidency in

* When Schick died in 1966, the remaining months of his term were served by Lorenzo
Guerrero.

2 | a

saa

February 1967 in a fair contest, Anastasio resorted to widespread fraud to
ensure himself and the PLN an impressive majority. Anastasio also succeeded
in alienating a number of people by his tendency to regard the Presidency as
his by right and to label any opposition as “Communist.” Some party members
supported him because they thought that Luis would be in a position to exert
a moderating influence on the new President. But Luis died of a heart attack
in April 1967, shortly before Anastasio’s inauguration; his death foreclosed
that possibility and for the time being ended the dialogue with the opposition
which the predecessor governments had maintained.

5. The reputation of the younger Anastasio Somoza before the election and
certain of his actions since then, indicate that he will not govern in the style
of Luis Somoza and Schick; his inclination seems to be in the opposite direction.
He has inherited his father’s fondness for power, though not his skill in its use.
While Luis was becoming adept in the political forum, Anastasio was pursuing
a military education and solidifying his position as commander of the National
Guard. Here too his headstrong quality has been apparent; as a result of
the oppressive measures he carried out when his father was assassinated, he is
feared and hated by many of his opponents.

6. The 41-year-old President’s own health problems—of which a kidney af-
flication and gout are apparently the most serious—have been exacerbated over
a long period by excessive eating, drinking, and general debauchery. Medical
treatment and a more careful regimen during the past year or so have kept
them from becoming appreciably worse, but it is not easy for a man of Somoza’s
temperament to check his appetites or to control his reactions to the pressures
of government.

7, Somoza deeply resented the US Embassy's neutral position during the
election campaign. He is convinced that this was far cooler treatment than
was accorded to any of the Somoza family’s previous candidates, and he seems
to think that this means the US will be less cooperative and forthcoming with
his administration than it was with the others. This does not mean he is
likely to change the basic lines of Nicaraguan foreign policy—the pro-US and
sharply anti-Communist stance, the eagerness to cooperate with others against
the Castro regime in Cuba, the commitment to work with neighboring coun-
tries in the Central American Common Market and other economic entities.
But it probably does mean a degree of friction in his relations with the US.

8. A few of Somoza’s appointees are carryovers from former administrations,
but a number of the most important positions are held by politicians more no-
table for their professional competence than for their political standing. Many
of them were trained in the US. Some are regarded as “leftists” or worse by
the opposition and by disgruntled conservative elements in the PLN as well.

*For example, Francisco Lainez, president of the Central Bank, José Marfa Zelaya, presi-
dential private secretary, and Roberto Incer, secretary of the Presidency, have been singled
out as “dangerous leftists.” Lainez, a holdover appointee, has earned respect for his
abilities in public finance but is widely distrusted for his political ambitions and influence
with Somoza.

es 3

BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION [8
NOT NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

\Waspan
Weis oae teas RACIAS A DIOS

&” ~
” en Coa

a
mee
‘ Puerto
‘4 a : abezas
Z /
SALVADOR Ss ae ane
sanl J a3 m2 so" ; Go
eMigtel 4, ‘<} :
oI F . ; . ‘. 4 reiPrinzapolca
it Mebsed %, /

»Matagalpa J

orazan : “MATAGALPA \
At EGA *
‘iy aa

Se mn

Poneloys
: used
PACIFIC MAU A Pa’ a GHONTALE
he in @Juigaipa- ~~ a Rol
| q

NICARAGUA

arses §=international boundary del Sur
——— a Departamento boundary
® National capital
® Internal administrative capital
Railroad
Road

i
|
25 50 Miles
25 50 Kilometers |
|

8

6

Base 54354 10-65

No little part of this suspicion, however, derives from the shifts and displace-
ments in the bureaucracy which have been undertaken by the “technocrats”
with Somoza’s backing. While political discontent has grown, the bureaucracy
has been made more responsive to presidential control.

9. Unlike his father and brother, President Somoza has apparently decided
he can govern without the close and willing cooperation of the PLN. He has
made little effort to insure the continuing backing of any of its factions.
Making appointments on the basis of technical competence rather than politics,
he has antagonized many Liberals, including some faithful Somocistas. Thus,
even though in general the party’s representatives in the Congress were hand-
picked by the Somoza family, Anastasio may receive less than enthusiastic sup-
port there.

B. The National Guard

10. The ultimate source of Somoza’s power is the National Guard, ‘the organi-
zation in which the nation’s military and police forces are combined. For
some two decades, following his graduation from West Point, Somoza has main-
tained excellent rapport with US military officers. He has held top positions
in the Guard and has been its Jefe Director since 1956.5 The most important
positions in the Guard are held by appointees who have demonstrated their
loyalty to him. Brig. Gen. Julio C. Morales, who as chief of the General Staff
is in charge of operations, has just returned from 14 years in Washington and
has no personal following in the Guard. (Brig. Gen. Gustavo Montiel, Somoza’s
stand-in as chief of staff during the election campaign, was one of the most
capable and respected officers in the Guard. He has been shifted to the Pres-
ident’s Cabinet as Minister of Finance.) Responsibility for the personal security
of the President is entrusted to Somoza’s half-brother, Brig. Gen. José Somoza,
a recently promoted and loyal follower. The National Guard is probably cap-
able of handling any disorders short of a well coordinated and widely supported
revolt.

C. The Opposition

11. Over the last three decades, political opposition in Nicaragua has focused
on ending the predominance of the Somozas. There are still vestiges of the
traditional Liberal-Conservative rivalry, which has mainly a regional basis, but

* The three principal factions are: the Somocistas, loyal to the Somoza family; the Sacasistas,
who represent the economic and political interests of the important, and related, Sacasa fam-
ily; and the Quintanistas, followers of Julio C. Quintana, a former Cabinet minister and
perennial aspirant to the Presidency.

*The Guard has some 6,000 officers and men distributed as follows: air force, 300; coast
guard, 30; 3 tactical ground units totaling about 1,500; and the remainder in police companies
and in such service functions as Customs and Immigration.

*In mid-1966, in accordance with constitutional requirements, Somoza resigned from the
National Guard, leaving his former key positions in safe hands. Once inaugurated as Presi-
dent, he quickly resumed the directorship of the Guard from the outgoing President Lorenzo
Guerrero.

4 WE,

~~.

there is not much difference in the political ideologies of the PLN and its prin-
cipal opponent, the Traditional Conservative Party. Both represent the country’s
propertied class. A large part of the rural population is apathetic and tends
to vote as directed by local political bosses. The other opposition political
parties are small and ineffective, and labor and student organizations have had
very little political influence under the Somozas.

12. Formal opposition to the Somozas is still seriously divided, despite the
formation of a National Opposition Union (UNO) to contest the election of
1967. The elder Anastasio and Luis fostered the existence of the main opposi-
tion political party, the Conservatives, and sought its participation in election
campaigns, because they were confident that the Conservatives could be beaten
and that at the same time their participation in electoral contests would blunt
foreign criticism of the Somoza regime. When the Traditional Conservatives
boycotted the elections of 1957 and 1962, Luis encouraged the formation of a
splinter conservative group, the Nicaraguan Conservative Party; this maintained
the tradition of Conservative opposition but ensured that it would be coopera-
tive. To avoid a repetition of that experience, the Traditional Conservatives
joined in 1967 with the smaller Independent Liberal and Social Christian Parties
to form the UNO. But the three groups were soon fighting over their shares
of the seats in the Congress (one-third) reserved by the Constitution to the
opposition parties.

13. The Traditional Conservative Party’s leadership is generally incompetent
and rent by personal animosities and ambitions. The present party chief, Fer-
nando Agiiero Rocha, campaigned vigorously in 1967 as the UNO’s Presidential
candidate. Late in the campaign when it became apparent that he would not
win, Agiiero instigated disorders and unsuccessfully called upon the National
Guard to turn against the government. His admitted hope was to cause the
US or the OAS to intervene for the purpose of guaranteeing fair elections. It
is highly unlikely, however, that he would have won even in a fair election.

14. The Communists are similarly split by personal rivalries and disagreement
over how to oppose the government. The Nicaraguan Socialist Party, which
follows the Moscow line, is illegal and probably has no more than 250 members.
It supported Agiiero’s candidacy but not his instigation of disorder. Then, in
April 1967, a small group of dissidents critical of the party’s inactivity succeeded
in ousting its top leaders. Subsequently, under the new leadership, the party’s
central committee has advocated cooperation with all armed groups against
the Somoza government. Thus far, however, the party does not appear to have
become actively involved in insurgency. It has the usual student, labor, and
political front groups, but none of these has been noticeably effective in ex-
panding its influence.®

*A number of the party members have received or are now receiving training in the
USSR or Eastern Europe.

whi 5

_/

_ 15, There is a Castro-oriented organization, the Sandinista Front of National
Liberation (FSLN), which has from time to time fielded guerrilla bands and
has had some success in carrying out individual terrorist acts and robberies.
Several of its members also participated in the disorders of January 1967. The
FSLN membership is small, probably fewer than 100. These include some
members trained in insurgency in Cuba and Guatemala. Although the Castro
government has proclaimed its support for armed revolution in Nicaragua, there
is no tangible evidence of present direct Cuban support for the movement. The
FSLN’s present capabilities for conducting armed insurrection appear to be small.
In August 1967, National Guard patrols killed some members of an FSLN band
encountered in the mountainous north-central area. Other guerrillas, under
the FSLN leader, Carlos Fonseca Amador, are being sought by the Guard.

16. Nicaraguan student and labor groups have been kept under control by
the Somozas and have been largely impotent. Although many university students
are particularly antagonistic to the present administration, they are divided into
rival Communist and Social Christian organizations and have little stomach
for challenging the National Guard. Organized labor, which represents only
some five percent of Nicaraguan workers, is even more seriously split and is
vulnerable to the legal controls available to the administration.

lll. THE ECONOMY

17. Nicaragua’s major economic asset is its plentiful supply of arable land.’
From 1961 to 1965 the extension of the road system and considerable govern-
ment technical and credit assistance enabled cotton producers to capitalize on
a modest rise in world cotton prices. A recovery in coffee prices, and some
diversification of exports, also helped to push gross national product (GNP)
upward. In 1961-1965 it reached a rate which we estimate at an annual average
of more than 8 percent or about 4.5 percent per capita. The rapid expansion
took place without adversely affecting the price level or the balance of payments.
It was accompanied by sizable foreign and domestic private investment in the
industrial sector and by a smaller but growing public investment program aimed
at developing transportation and electric power.

18. Great disparities in wealth and income in Nicaragua have persisted; for
example, we estimate that the 60 percent of the population which is dependent
on agriculture receives at most one-third of the national income. Yet recent
progress has clearly provided some material benefits for a large proportion of
the population and the cotton bonanza added some new members to the small
group that controls most of the wealth. Nevertheless, the holdings of the
Somoza family are still clearly predominant. Their business interests are esti-

"In its land area of some 50,000 square miles, nearly two-thirds of the agricultural land
is still unused. The population of some 1.7 million is predominantly mestizo (about 68 per-
cent) with white (15 percent), Negro (9 percent), and Indian (5 percent) minorities. About
half the population is illiterate, and educational facilities are largely concentrated in cities of
the southwestern third of the country.

6 ~~.

SECRET

mated to account for some 10 percent of the country’s stock of capital, including
many of the largest manufacturing and commercial firms, the only locally owned
airline and steamship line, a significant part of the country’s communications
media and possibly as much as 10 percent of all the land in farms. The largest
newspaper, however, is owned by one of the principal opposition families.

19. Over the long term Nicaragua’s economic prospects are favorable, but
at present, the economy is in the doldrums. As a result of the drought of 1966,
production of cotton and coffee, the major exports, fell 11 percent and 16 percent,
respectively. That decline, however, was partially offset by sharp rises in minor
exports such as beef, copper, shrimp, and industrial items. The annual rate
of increase in GNP was down, though at about 3.6 percent it was still enough
to match the annual rate of increase in population. Even so, increased Nica-
raguan imports in 1966 produced a sharp rise in the deficit in balance of pay-
ments on current account (from $22 million in 1965 to $51 million in 1966),
and net international reserves fell from some $28 million to $16 million by the
end of 1966. Cotton and coffee crops have been larger in 1967, and GNP is
probably growing at a slightly higher rate than in 1966. Owing to. the poor
export performance, however, the country’s balance of payments has continued
to deteriorate,

20. These problems now confront the new administration with the need for
some kind of remedial action. At the same time, Somoza is strongly interested
in carrying out a development program of considerable scope which would be
directed especially at bringing economic and social improvements to the rural
population. His adminisiration is in a favorable position to borrow money
abroad; on the other hand, the balance of payments situation is likely to impel
him to some austerity measures. He hopes to add to the income side of the
budget by improved collection of taxes. These measures would hardly be
popular politically, and some of the burden will have to fall on the political
inner circle of Nicaraguans, perhaps even on the Somoza family’s own interests.

IV. PROSPECTS

21, President Somoza’s health will have a strong influence on the course of
developments in Nicaragua. It might deteriorate slowly, and incapacitate him
for several days at a time. It might even collapse suddenly, but we have no
evidence that any of his present ailments is likely to cause his death or more
than temporary incapacitation over the next year or so. What is more likely
is that the particular nature of his complaints, and the difficulty of sticking to
the regimen prescribed, will make him irritable and arbitrary. Beyond the
realm of natural causes, there is, of course, the possibility of assassination:
Anastasio has more than the usual quota of enemies, and in indulging his various
appetites he has sometimes neglected the strong security protection which he
ordinarily regards as essential.

22, All things considered, we believe the chances are better than even that
Somoza will stay alive during the period of this estimate, and well enough to

SECRET 7

=

govern. He will have to cope with budget and foreign payments difficulties
since the economy is not likely to perform a great deal better in 1967 and 1968
than in 1966. There is some danger that Somoza will come to feel frustrated
by the lack of rapid economic progress. Some discontent in Somoza’s own party
and antagonism on the part of the opposition is likely, but we doubt that the
situation will develop so adversely as to compel him to become harsher and
more authoritarian. The danger is that these problems will become more serious
because of the actions he may take. If, for example, he should become dis-
appointed in his development program or suspect that he is being conspired
against politically, he would be likely to become somewhat more arbitrary.
And he might thereby produce precisely the kind of situation he was bent on
heading off.

23. Somoza’s approach to foreign relations is heavyhanded. We would an-
ticipate some increased difficulties in Nicaraguan relations with the US while
he is in office.8 He strongly resented the neutral stance taken by the US during
the election campaign. Since assuming office he has indicated that he expects
the US to help finance his development program but to play little or no part
in its formulation. Somoza’s tendency to credit his administration alone for the
results of US-supported projects is likely to continue. At the same time, his
methods may raise political tensions to the point where it will be difficult for
the US Embassy to maintain contact with the opposition. He might also pro-
voke disturbing incidents by meddling in the domestic affairs of neighboring
countries.

24. If Somoza were to depart the scene, much would depend on the how, and
particularly the when of his going. If he were removed during the next year
or so by death from natural causes or by assassination there would be some com-
plications, but they would probably be manageable.® Indeed, we believe that
the chances for a constitutional’ succession would be excellent; this kind of suc-
cession would probably have the support of members of the inner circle—from
the Somoza family, other propertied groups, the PLN, and the National Guard.
It would even have the support of some of the opposition. And in such a situa-
tion, the views of the US Embassy would almost certainly be sought and given
considerable weight.

25. The Constitution of Nicaragua provides that when the President dies or is
permanently incapacitated in office, the Congress shall choose a successor from
one of the two Vice Presidents—in this case Alfonso Callejas Deshén, Minister of

* Maj. Gen. William P. Yarborough, Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence Department
of the Army, believes that the rapport between Somoza and US military officers provides an
additional means through which US-Nicaraguan affairs may be influenced.

'* We think it important to note here that the case of Nicaragua, at least at this stage of
the game, has little in common with the case of the Dominican Republic prior to the crisis
of 1965. Nicaragua has a reasonably cohesive political inner circle which was lacking in
the Dominican Republic; the big Nicaraguan opposition party is conservative rather than
sharply to the left as in the Dominican Republic; and the Nicaraguan National Guard is
better officered and more unified than the Dominican Republic military was.

8 ee.

@—a..

Development and Public Works, and Francisco Urcuyo Maliafio, Minister of
Public Health.’° Both men are loyal Somocistas. Although Callejas is clearly
the abler of the two men and has wider public acceptance, Ureuyo is more easily
influenced and might be preferred by some political leaders. We doubt that
either Callejas or Urcuyo would attempt any sweeping changes in Nicaraguan
domestic or foreign policies. We think, however, that chances would be good for
at least a temporary closing of ranks within the PLN, the reopening of a dialogue
with Traditional Conservatives, and a return to easier relations with the US.

26. A more difficult situation could develop if Somoza were in fact incapacitated
but remained active enough to insist that he was still capable of governing.
There probably would be differences in the Congress and more generally within
the establishment about what action to take, and a stalemate might develop.
This would allow time for maneuver by ambitious individuals not in accord
with a constitutional succession and eager to end the Somoza dynasty. Fermando
Agiiero, the bitterly anti-Somoza leader of the Traditional Conservatives, might
be tempted to try to line up support for a coup. If he should, his chances for
success would be slight, but the administration might in its turn overreact. This
might cause some opponents of the regime to resort to violence. Even so, except
in the unlikely event of a split in the National Guard, that organization would
probably be able to deal with any disorders which might arise.

27. Yet another, and at least equally unsettling, sequence of events is possible.
If Somoza should undertake a whole series of ill-advised and arbitrary moves,
these could destroy the cohesiveness of the present political inner circle, under-
mine the unity of the National Guard, and cause responsible elements of the
opposition to despair of further nonviolent tactics. And if, after such a stage
had been reached, Somoza were removed by natural death or assassination, a
chaotic situation—of essentially unpredictable outcome—could ensue. We be-
lieve this to be an unlikely course of developments; we note it, nonetheless, as
the worst plausible case.

*It should be noted that the Constitution prohibits a President from being succeeded
by any close relative (specifically by anyone “within the fourth degree of consanguinity or
affinity”) during an interrupted term and the following term. The Constitution further
provides that the President must be over 25 years of age. The eldest sons of Luis and
Anastasio are, respectively, 20 and 16 years of age.

1. This Ascniant was hae by the ‘Cont intelligence Agency. ‘This ‘copy .

. is for the information and wu: use @ of the fecipient and. ng Under | his jurisdiction on a”
“ be_ authorized by the

following officials within ines respect re “departments:
vere

h, for the De 7
“for ee Office of the: Secrefary ‘of os ae

a
b. Director, Defense Intelligence » J
_ _ Defense and the organization ‘of the
c. Assistant Chief of Staff. “a

dA

Navy ©
e. Assistant Chief ae Staff, Intelligence,

Force * 7. 8°" a
. Director of intelligence, for. net Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau fl Vestigation oe
h. Director of NSA, for the Na i | Security Age ce aoe
i. Director of Central Reference CIA; for any other Department or Agency ee

oh

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed ‘by ‘burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or ‘returned | to the Cenjral isi ae Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA. :

3. When this document is disseminated ‘overseas, “the. overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess’ ‘of one year. | At ‘the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, “yeturned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency) to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69 /2, 22 June 1953. , Tn cen OSS .

4, The title of this aseumant when used separately from the text should be classified:

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State

Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation -
