The Situation in Bolivia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011780, dated 4 August 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011780).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SENT pepe 35,

Ror:
See
ey
ee T te

er ee

Fem

oe ¥ iS eae
SAUCE: Sepa) ESOP

pet i

CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM ............ igtage. BAe ao Se rea Rg ota ash Ro odessa oie) a8 1
CONCLUSIONS .......... is i ene Mt Bete aie a ae Mn Mea aang cle gO De Dt igs eas 1
DISCUSSION ........ Arrrsitt, fol es Aes ape ort cea ee aoe orgie AS ead, bal 2
I THE INSURGENCY: o2.0855 2G fe eed deecied tate se Seca ae 2
I]. THE POLITICAL BACKGROUND ............. 0000000200 ce ceeee 4
Jil. THE BARRIENTOS REGIME ......2.2-. 0.26. e eee ee eee ees wh 5
TV DAE MIGEEARY dr d cower tend oes kay Diabet aati ed aes e re beet 8
Vo THE: OPPOSITION: «02:5 vie saad ene bene bet eh dd ea 9
VI. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PROBLEMS ............2.2.2020000005 9
VII. THE OUTLOOK ............. VERGO Ep kete wand at ety Pe guetta oie 10

BOLIVIA
GUERRILLA ACTIVITY

——e vem international boundary
Departamento boundary

® National capital

®

Departamento capital
—th———+— Railroad

—_—— Road
727 Salt flat

50 100

150 Miles
100 150 Kilometers

def 8 "
t Peupit~ |
4

t
4

pnt

aombetel

ee

56986 8-67 CIA

J BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION is
Sino NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE
bee] Area of guerrilla operations
_

Possible other guerrilla activity

4.3(2)(4)

|

THE SITUATION IN BOLIVIA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the situation in Bolivia and the probable impact of the
present insurgency on it, over the next year Or so.
1.3{a)(4)(5)

CONCLUSIONS

A. The present insurgency in Bolivia is organized and supported
by Cuba. Its seriousness lies in the possibility that the insurgents may
eventually provide a rallying point for many disaffected elements which

hitherto have been unable to coalesce. [__

B. Over the next year or so, there is little chance that the insurgents
will be able to bring about the overthrow of the Barrientos regime,
but it is also unlikely that the regime will be able to stamp out the
insurgency.

C. A prolongation and expansion of the insurgency would impose
severe financial and psychological strains on Bolivia, greatly hindering
the economic development and social amelioration that are essential
to the achievement of stability in that country. Defense costs for a
protracted guerrilla war would add heavily to the already serious deficit 9.3(a)(4)@)
in the national budget, would further limit public investment, and
would threaten the government’s stabilization program.

—|

D. If the government’s counterguerrilla operations are protracted
and unsuccessful, that would encourage other disaffected elements to
undertake more active opposition to the government. It would also
seriously damage the morale of the military. In these circumstances,
the tenure of the Barrientos regime would become precarious.

L |

DISCUSSION

I. THE. INSURGENCY

1. Armed resistance to central authority has long been commonplace in the
Bolivian hinterland. Concern regarding the present insurgency is a consequence
of conclusive evidence that it is organized and supported by Cuba. From this
source the insurgents have received leadership and training, modern automatic

weapons, and a body of revolutionary doctrine. I

2. In March 1967 a Bolivian army patrol clashed with a guerrilla band north
of Camiri, in southeastern Bolivia (see map). A month later Jules Regis Debray,
a French intellectual, and Ciro Roberto Bustos, an Argentine Communist, were
captured in the same area. Debray is a friend of Fidel Castro and a publicist
for his revolutionary theories; his arrest in itself ensured worldwide publicity
for the Camiri band. Debray and Bustos added to the sensation by declaring
that the leader of the guerrilla movement in Bolivia was none other than Ernesto
(“Che”) Guevara.

3. “Che” disappeared in March 1965 under circumstances which raised some
doubt that he was still alive. Since then there have been scores of conflicting
and unconfirmed reports and rumors’as to his whereabouts. Somewhat stronger
evidence has recently become available: it suggests Guevara’s presence in Bolivia
at some time during the past year. But whether or not “Che” is in Bolivia, it
is clear that the Camiri guerrillas are led by someone who keeps in contact with
Cuba and who is well versed in the Guevara doctrine of revolution.

4. A main theme of the Castro-Guevara-Debray doctrine is that city-bred
“revolutionary” parties cannot effect a real revolution—that, as in Cuba, the
revolution must originate as a guerrilla movement in the remote hinterland.
By its survival and continuing defiance, such a guerrilla movement will demon-
strate the powerlessness of the regime and will draw to itself true revolutionary
spirits. Eventually the guerrilla movement will win the sympathy and support
of the oppressed population and will itself constitute the basis for the develop-
ment of the truly revolutionary political party. This theory is, of course, a
recapitulation of the Cuban experience from the Castroist point of view.

5. The available evidence indicates that the Camiri band numbers only about
100 men. Although the nominal commander is a Bolivian, it is evident that
the cadre is composed of Cubans and of Bolivians trained_in Cuba.

an It appears that the
group had planned to spend more time in recruitment and training, that it
was discovered before it was ready to begin active operations, and that its
Jeaders realize that its consequent dependence on its Cuban cadre may prove
politically disadvantageous by provoking a nationalistic Bolivian reaction.

: r

4.3(2y AV

4.3(a)(4)8)

—

6. Since their discovery these guerrillas have operated in an area extending
from Camiri northward for 150 miles to Samaipata on the Cochabamba-Santa
Cruz highway (see map). This area lies in the eastern foothills of the Andes;
the elevation varies from 1,500 to 9,000 feet. It is sparsely populated; the
availability of supplies, especially food, is meager. Access is limited by the
north-south pattern of the ridgelines. Moreover, thick foilage .on the slopes
provides concealment for the guerrillas. They are well protected from observa-
tion and attack from the air. Army patrols approaching on foot up rugged
streambeds are highly vulnerable to being ambushed.

7. Counterguerrilla operations in such terrain would be extremely difficult for
well-equipped, well-trained, and well-motivated forces.

The
guerrillas have several times managed to ambush army patrols, inflicting casual-
ties without permitting the army units to close. The guerrillas, however, have
been compelled to abandon their base camp, and the Bolivian army has re-
cently killed or captured a few of them.

8. The Bolivian army numbers about 15,000 men, of whom only about 5,000.
in MAP-supported units are reasonably well-equipped.! Its effectiveness ‘is

limited by the fact that its conscripts serve only a one-year tour of duty, leaving
a minimal period of service after the completion of basic training. The army
has committed more than 2,000 men to containing the 100 Camiri guerrillas,
but few of them are from MAP-supported units. LCL. :

na

9, Several small guerrilla bands, in addition to that in the Camiri-Samaipata
area, probably exist in other similarly inaccessible areas (see map). Some may
be composed of ordinary, undisciplined Bolivian outlaws, but there are indi-
cations that two such bands (those in the Alto Beni and Chaparé areas) may be
organizationally connected with the Camiri insurgents. As yet they have engaged
in no active operations, but they could of course be used to divert and dis-
tract the Bolivian counterguerrilla forces.

10. It is evident that the initiative in launching the Bolivian insurgency came
from Havana rather than from any of the three local Communist parties.2]

Since the Camiri band became engaged,
the Central Committee of the pro-Soviet party has publicly endorsed the guerrilla

4.3(2)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

"In addition, there are 2,400 men in the air force and 1,400 in the river and lake naval force. 1.3(a)(4)(5)
* See the table (pp. 6 and 7) for brief descriptions of political organizations in Bolivia.

LC

movement|

[in short, the guerrillas are quite willing to accept local Com-
munist assistan s and when it suits their own plans, but are careful_not to

identify themselves with or subordinate themselves to any local Communist
party. ‘In accordance with Cuban doctrine, they expect to organize the true
revolutionary party on the basis of the guerrilla movement itself.

11. It is unclear whether the guerrillas have won the sympathy of the sparse
rural population in the areas in which they operate, although it is notable
that they have paid well for the food supplies they have taken and have pro-
vided medical services to the villages they have entered. Their greatest poten-
tial source of recruits is the large number of unemployed and bitterly disaffected
tin miners, but the miners are generally reluctant to leave the Altiplano and
so far only a small number of them have actually been recruited. The distance

of the guerrilla zone from urban centers discourages the participation of dis-
affected students.

12.

a

i. THE POLITICAL BACKGROUND

13. Bolivia experienced a real political and social revolution in 1952, but the
resulting governments made only limited progress toward solving basic political
and economic problems. The fervent nationalism of the revolutionary leaders
could not transform the country into an integrated nation. More than half the
population are Indians who speak Quechua or Aymara rather than Spanish; there
are strong geographical and cultural barriers to the development of national unity.

14. Initially the 1952 revolution, sparked by campesino and miner militias and
directed by the National Revolutionary Movement (MNR), attempted to alter
radically the existing social conditions.* It nationalized the tin mines, expecting

* Although it is a major producer of tin, Bolivia’s per capita gross national product (GNP),
_ about $150, exceeds only that of Haiti and is well below the $400 average for Latin America.
Bolivia’s population is about 60 percent illiterate.

rl

1.3(a)(4)5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

thereby to gain the means to carry out its other intended reforms. It freed the
Indian from the control of absentee landlords, gave him land and the vote, and
sought to give bim education. But the nationalized tin mines produced deficits
instead of profits + and agricultural production fell. These factors, combined with
fiscal and managerial irresponsibility, produced a staggering inflation. The gov-
ernment’s efforts to control inflation and to rationalize tin production were bit-
terly resisted by the miners, who virtually controlled the mines, as well as by a
left-wing faction of the MNR under Juan Lechin Oquendo. Cc

ae By running for a third presidential term in
1964, Paz drove a sizable faction of the MNR (including former President Hernan
Siles Zuazo, 1956-1960) into opposition. Forced thereby to seek military support,
Paz grudgingly accepted the Air Force commander, General Rene Barrientos
Ortuno, as his running mate. Mutual suspicion grew between the two, and Paz,
unable to control increasing resistance to his rule, was finally ousted by the
military leadership in November 1964.

lil. THE BARRIENTOS REGIME

15. Although the discredited MNR leadership was thrown out, the military
leaders who took control pledged continuance of the MNR revolution. The two
main figures in the provisional government were General Barrientos and General.
Alfredo Ovando Candia, who became co-presidents. Barrientos enjoyed con-
siderable popularity, based largely on the bold bearing he had shown in the face
of several previous attempts to assassinate him. He prepared for election to
the constitutional presidency by presenting himself as an advocate of Christian
democracy and by forming a coalition of miscellaneous political fragments called
the Bolivian Revolutionary Front (FRB) —see table. In the election held on 3
July 1966 Barrientos won 61 percent of the vote. This impressive victory was as
much a tribute to his skillful manipulation of disparate political forces as it was
to his popular appeal.

on

‘The government tin enterprise, COMIBOL, suffering from low world tin prices and worn
equipment, was further plagued by a high level of mismanagement and corruption. As a
result, production fell from 27,000 tons in 1952 to 15,000 in 1960 and the mines lost $1 million
a month in the latter year.

1.3(a)(4){5)

BOLIVIAN POLITICAL PARTIES

The Bolivian Revolutionary Front (FRB)
(Dissolved, July 1967)

Popular Christian Movement
(MPC)

Authentic. Revolutionary Party
(PRA)

Party of the Revolutionary Left
(PIR)

Social Democratic Party
(PSD)

This party was created by Barrientos as his personal
vehicle for the 1966 presidential election. It is com-
posed of his personal followers without much regard
to ideology; its popular support is drawn almost ex-
clusively from the campesinos of the Cochabamba area.

This party is an off-shoot of the MNR. It is led by
Walter Guevara Arze, a moderate who left the party
over Paz’s decision to seek a second term in 1960.
It then polled 100,000 votes, but since then has
dwindled.

Although it was started in the 1940’s as a Marxist
party and still professes those leanings, it is now far
more moderate than Lechin’s PRIN and among other
things recognizes the need for US aid. The PIR has
an estimated membership of 2,000 and is strongest
among students in Cochabamba.

Founded as a discussion group after the MNR revolu-
tion, by businessmen and professionals, it is considered
conservative in the post-1952 political context. Its
present membership is estimated to be 1,000.

Non-Communist Opposition

National Revolutionary Movement
(MNR)
(Outlawed in 1967)

Revolutionary Party of the Nationalist
Left (PRIN)
(Outlawed in 1967)

Bolivian Socialist Falange
(FSB)

Christian Democratic Party
(PDC)

This is probably still the largest political party in
Bolivia, but is split into three factions led by Paz,
Siles, and Andrade, with the first two in exile. The
Paz faction won 5.5 percent of the vote in the 1966
election; the Andrade faction, 8 percent. The Siles
faction did not participate in the election.

This party was formed in 1964 as a vehicle for Juan
Lechin’s aspirations after his expulsion from the MNR.
It drew its strength from labor, being most influential
among the miners, but its influence has declined
since 1965.

Begun by upper and middle class elements in the
late 1930’s, it originally drew its inspiration from
Spanish and Italian fascism. During the MNR era
it was constantly plotting against the government, even
to the extent of launching an insurgency. It has re-
gained some prestige since the 1964 coup and now
is the only opposition party with substantial representa-
tion in congress. In 1966 it polled 12 percent of
the vote.

Never influential, the party is now bogged down in
dialectics between youthful activists and old prag-
matists. It has flirted unsuccessfully with Barrientos
and with most opposition parties.

be

Communist Party of Bolivia
(“Pro-Soviet” )
| (Outlawed in 1967)

Communist Party of Bolivia
(“Pro-Chinese” )
(Outlawed in 1967)

Revolutionary Workers’ Party
(POR)
(Outlawed in 1967)

|

[

BOLIVIAN POLITICAL PARTIES (Continued)

Communist Opposition

This party has an estimated membership of 5,000.
Politically it has been relatively docile, having been
content to cooperate with Paz in the past and being
seriously limited by lack of funds at present. Most
of its strength is concentrated in La Paz, the region
around the mines, and Cochabamba. A leftist front
organized by this party received 33,000 votes in the
1966 election, 3 percent of the total.

This party split from the PCB in 1965, largely because
of personal rivalries within the PCB leadership. Sub-
sequently it accepted Chinese recognition and financial
aid and so came to be labeled pro-Chinese. Its present
active membership is estimated at 500 to 1,000.

After being split for several years, this “Trotskyite”
organization theoretically has been unified since Feb-
ruary 1966. Its total membership is not more than
a few hundred. The POR is most influential in the
mining region and among La Paz factory workers.

5
A ae

16. The electoral arrangement between Barrientos and the FRB proved to
be no more than a temporary expedient. Barrientos’ sure victory gave patronage
and second wind to parties hitherto destined to oblivion. In return he was given
political respectability and legitimacy. Despite constant avowals of support for
the Front, Barrientos showed little subsequent interest in it. He prefers to rule
as a sort of constitutional caudillo. Opposition parties, on occasion, have nego-
tiated with him about joining the government, but he has rejected overtures from
both the Bolivian Socialist Falange (FSB) and the Andrade faction of the MNR.
As his most crucial support comes from the military, the breakup of the Front
in July 1967 and the reshuffling of the cabinet in August were of little real import.
The individual parties of the former coalition continue to be aligned with the
Barrientos government and their more important leaders are in the new cabinet.

IV. THE MILITARY

: al

ad

18. Both Barrientos and the military realize that they depend on each other.
Barrientos could not have become president and could not remain in office with-
out the united support of the military. The military, for their part, doubt that
they could control the country without such political and popular support as
Barrientos is able to contribute to the partnership. Both the military leaders and
Barrientos realize that a split within the military would spell disaster. Both are
therefore careful to avoid provoking such a split.

i9. T_

1.3(a)(4)(5)

1.3(a)(4)(5)

20.

VY. THE OPPOSITION

21. Cut off from patronage and influence, Bolivian opposition parties are frag-
mented and powerless. They represent regional or special interests and find co-
operation with other parties difficult. Even the MNR is now divided, leader-
less, and with little influence in important sectors of the population. Paz is in
Peru, Lechin in Chile, and Siles in Uruguay\__

4.3249

=a 4.3(a)(4)8

22. Opposition parties have sought to take advantage of the government’s un-
popularity among students and miners as well as its inability to end the insur-
ae Elements of the FSB have from time to time attempted to form alliances

After the outbreak of the insurgency the MNR and PRIN
were outlawed along with the three Communist parties.

23. The Bolivian Communists are as fragmented as the non-Communist oppo-
sition. During the MNR era the PCB maintained a live and let live relation-
ship with the Paz Administration. he

Tit behaved
prudently enough to maintain its legal status{” ;
The
1964 coup caught the PCB just as it was about to split into “pro-Soviet” and
“pro-Chinese” factions. A further blow was dealt to the party in May 1965, when
the government occupied the mines and arrested Communist and leftist labor
leaders.

VI. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL PROBLEMS

24, The revolution in 1952 was followed by a protracted period of economic
deterioration and a raging inflation. Since 1962, however, the economy’s growth
rate has averaged over five percent annually, prices have been relatively stable,
and international reserves have climbed from a low of $4 million in 1962 to $37
million in June 1967. For the most part, this recovery has been spurred by sub-
stantial growth of imports and exports, increased domestic and foreign private
investment, and large inflows of economic assistance. .

EE a“

1.3(a)(4)¢

bin

25. High tin prices have contributed to this improvement, but so has the gov-
ernment’s economic policy.’ Barrientos has pledged his government to a pro-
gram of stabilization and development and has instituted fiscal policies that seek
to bring public revenues in approximate balance with public expenditures. He

has also taken advantage of his freedom from doctrinaire political commitments
to seek new foreign private investment, a heresy to most Bolivian politicians.

26. Nowhere has this effort to improve the economy been more evident than
in Barrientos’ policy toward the state enterprises. Prior to the 1964 coup these
enterprises constituted a major drain on the economy.* Now their efficiency
has been increased, and in the case of tin has combined with higher world prices
over the last three years to produce an operating surplus which has been used
for public investment. On the other hand, the overall fiscal situation has
weakened since 1964 because of the growing budgetary deficits of the central
government. These deficits have had to be financed increasingly by the central
bank since the elimination of US direct budget support. This inflationary form
of financing has risen from less than one percent of central government expendi-
tures in 1964 to 10 percent in 1965 and about 16 percent in 1966, but has not yet
had a marked effect on prices.

27. For most Bolivians, however, stabilization and development programs have
little meaning. The 1952 revolution raised expectations, but did not permanently
improve the standard of living for many. Impatience over the Jack of progress
in fulfilling its goals has created pockets of resentment in urban areas and among
students and miners. The 1964 coup not only ended the domination of labor
over mine management, but the government’s subsequent efforts to achieve effi-
ciency threw hundreds of miners out of work and cut wages drastically. Al-
though Barrientos has subsequently raised miners’ wages, their political emascula-
tion by him has left deep hatreds. While it succeeded in forcing the miners
back to work, the government’s decisive and ruthless suppression of demonstra-
tions in May and June has intensified the miners’ disaffection.

Vil. THE OUTLOOK

28. The Castro regime, during the session of the Latin American Solidarity
Organization in Havana in July and August 1967, once again publicized its
determination to encourage violent revolutions in Latin America. Fidel Castro
probably regards the opportunities for the insurgents in Bolivia as more favorable
(at least_in the long run) than is the case with other active insurgency move-
mentsf 2 eee we believe
he will make special efforts to sustain the guerrilla operations in Bolivia through
financial and technical aid. This does not imply substantial logistical support.

*In 1965, tin exports accounted for 72 percent of foreign exchange earnings from commodity
exports. The average world price for Bolivian tin rose from $1.13 in 1963 to $1.50 in 1964,
reached a high of $1.74 in 1965, and dropped to $1.61 in 1966 and to about $1.50 in mid-1967.

‘In addition to COMIBOL, the most important public enterprises are the National Petro-
leum Corporation, the Bolivian Development Corporation, and the Bolivian National Railroad
Enterprise.

: ae

1.3(a)(4)(5)

Ld

The guerrillas will be operating in almost inaccessible areas. Moreover, Cuban
doctrine anticipates that, once launched, they will live off the country, obtaining
even arms by capture. In any case, the ultimate success or failure of the Bolivian
insurgency will depend on its ability to win adherents from the already disaffected
elements of the Bolivian population.

29. Over the next year or so, there is little chance that the insurgents will
be able to bring about the overthrow of the Barrientos government. They
themselves contemplate a more prolonged operation. The government is in
firm control of the vital areas of the country: La Paz, Cochabamba, and the
mines. It will probably continue to receive the united support of the military
establishment, on which its tenure of office depends; the fragmented political
opposition is not likely to be able to combine effectively against it. But it
is unlikely that the government will be able to stamp out the insurgency.

30. The longer the guerrilla movement survives, the more it will tend to
undermine the Barrientos government. Up to now guerrilla activity has had
little effect on economic performance. Defense costs for a protracted guerrilla
war would add heavily to the already serious deficit in the national budget,
would further limit public investment, and would threaten the government’s
stabilization program. Prolonged insecurity would also discourage the foreign
capital investment that Bolivia needs to exploit its untapped resources. Moreover,

labor unrest, especially in the mines, would hinder production, with widespread.

economic repercussions.

31. A protracted and futile counterguerrilla campaign would encourage opposi-
tion elements to increase their opposition to the government, whether or not
they allied themselves directly with the guerrillas. Even some of Barrientos’
present political supporters might defect. The government itself could stimulate
resentment and opposition (as did the Batista regime in Cuba) if, through its
frustration over the insurgency, it reacted brutally to student or miner protests.

32. Military morale would also be seriously damaged by a long and unsuccess-
ful campaign{

Repeated failure against the insurgents,

combined with strain in maintaining contro] at the mines, might lead eventually
to disaffection in the army. particularly among junior officers

33. Barrientos will almost certainly seek mcreasing aid, principally trom the
US, in coping with the insurgency and with its economic and financial con-
sequences. Although eager to obtain increased technical and material military
aid, he would be extremely reluctant to sanction a military intervention in
force, by either the already concerned neighboring states or by the OAS, lest

that cor a nationalistic reaction and make patriotic heroes of the insur-

gents.

J

4.3(a)(4)(8)

4.3(a)(4i&)

1.3(a)(4)(5}
