Gary Powers TextT of Indictment)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022360, dated 2 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022360).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BY

Ao APTA

CMUNE? SEYING IN Brastu

U.S. ANBASEA

Meseaw, Sovie. Eurepesn Service in Fiomieh, Avg. 3, 3960, LTR Seit--b

er

(8 + the U.S,
o i mopped uo bri {
i ina oo: i" ,
B.ETeat gut ?
police. Tas i
Cubyt is said to have tirned iH
bis diumiasal frem the country is demandes. a

“ S ek as
‘Although the neysig coarse, it cannot nowedays he said to be sensational.

American spies so often get trapped. First toere wes «he U-2 and vren tae.

SB-b7 soy Flights. Yesterday there were pact in the Woscow FEpers :
CY American any aquipment eollectad in she USSR.

kes beecse systenetic in America's policy is proved ty the

statug of Ambassador Cabot, Who waa caught spying in Bracil. Here

again we see how honest U.S. diplomacy is,

first that Cabot

jai U.S. Whohs Who it svete
a art he United dtates 3
r

: s quoted ae say
interfering in the affairs of ot
¢

t z
Cabos saw Pit to advise the Brazilian Rovermment
interests Arericen monopolies and how tos ade or net ora
other cuuntries. Bracil regarded these activities ot a diplomat as
inherterance in the inhernal affairs oF snovber aoumtry and A weve
protest swept the country. This August proved even more unfortunace
Cabot. -Be was disclosed as ea spy."

Qur listeners vay have seen the hero of Shis short commentary of ours
Finland, for he was there as tht U.S, ecbassador.

7

ne 200
U.S. COMMUNIST--BRAVDA on Aug. 7 carriescan article by W
4 Glorious Leughtear of the American People, " on the Toth

attarsor,

rot ome

ot tha leaders of the 0.5, Camumist Party and Plenter fo
+ Flyor. She ig marking this happy aay in =

cheine of hepet

¢ the great Lenin broxe t! .
z wed the teaciah empire, eveaned the invincible fomily of
mations, ani is now directing it toward unlimited ecotcmio and cultural
progress, ta the bright future of » eomnise world. (boscew, Hae,

Aug. 7, 1960, 0900 GHI--L) :

Approved for Release
Date “fg SEP 8 a

i
Ps a

tial
ae

ef PPE

(Texs}

2 of the USER law

iadistinct).
Cz. MALY a 283, a

in tne Tedzhile

ao & LOWERS

plane whith vil

large indust
Wnion.

Biticude of 25,000

The infomeastion which has bean obtained leave
premeditated insvusien inte

case there Was &

intentionga.

In view of 1
plane. Carrri 128
defense, at c&55

down the above-mentioned plane & an altitude of 2

region

or Everdlevs

estab) ished t

ATES «

Me

he snamines

oa OF SPL

Cese nunber---~(blank--Ed.):
indictment of Francis Gary Rowers for
oa responsibility

~ O5365 hours M
vinlavedths USSR state berger ane a ne oint 20 kilometers
SSR and penetraved Week &

JGSR air defense units.

ia, whe
out thig order,.one of the subunits or
hours, Mosecw time, with the first rock

eg Ban
place where the Soviet
by parachirte and waa detained.

he was Francis Geary Povers,

ion of the remnants of th

ace

PILCT POWERS

tyoe in

nowaxrd the inte

Soviet Government

a distance of nore

the ve

Russian oo

Srivinral case concesming the

the crime stipulated in erticle
for erimes against the state (word

My

gave the orter to st elatouvamey coniee)

border wes crossed.

USGR INFERRADIONAL AtFATRS
Aug. 4, 1660

4
i
;

i

an unidentiried plane
soutLeast of Kirovabed
ivspace av an altitude of — G00

territory.

for of Serriat

Glated the Soviet border was concinucusly wa tened by
This revesied that the plane's ce las crer

vial centers and isperuans decense targets im che Govrlet

fhe plane, quring the entire mourse of its 71.8 +t, flew at an
meters, an altitude at which ao: civilian planes fiy.

eal

ghis

s no douht thay
USSR airspace with hestile

the
ee eee air

O00 Rete ss

fears

than 8,000 ui irony the
The pilot of the plane bailed out
ry first interrogation do was

ar etl

sere

g odtigen of the Uniued

@ plane and the special adaipment

it carried eateulir hed that it was an Amexicanplane of the Lockheed U-e

type,
service.

altitude,

deslened Tor high altitude flights, eqnipyed Tor
For this purpyse it was fitted with equipment fer
aerial pheLugrapha and caweyinyg tarth yaAdin vacennalsrancs et

reconnmeissancs
talsimg:
a high

-~ BR 23 - YSBGa SPICNAL AFFAIRS
Aug. oo

Among the recess or the Bb
as

were Tound photographis films of

Soviet airfields 2 bent tary and ia Sur gEts
Soviet Union. maemetic %
av gome Soviet radar 5 wig Zound.

eseriad aut in come|ctic We

for g

eagtabliahed

an! tra miowledge of che Gover:

a2 special American intelLbigeace subucit based in
the code name of "10-10."

y gous

bien
the ext, =

mer

fay %, 1950, Latovmutica wie given about this ba
a a

wear ost a .
a ES. Khrushehev, cheiruaa of the USSR Toun
sien of the USSR Supre Soviet, the U.S, Suate
tive on the same day acimovledwed that tas infringene

rere
USSR frontiers by an American planes "is ful. pose ible’

anaidantaL, wipremedi tate NEUE»

Asecording to the State Departrent announcement, che Lockheed U-2

plane was supposedly earrying out weather observazion, “(word indistinet}
oF aiv" in she upper Jayers of tue atmospiere in the vegion af the
Soyieb-Turkish Irontier on May L, aid due to faulty oxygen suToly
pilot lest his course. Purther, in this announcement of the State
Department Li was indicated that it was possible thas ta
have Jost consclquenées and the plane, guided by the automatie pilot,
fley into Soviet territery.

Trig yversio., Was on the saue day confirmed by the announcement of the
U.2. Mutional, Aeronautics and ppece Adminietresion (HAS!) (that?) Wie

eae

named plang was carrying out raseaceh for the study of atmospheric

]
conditions and wind guats at Ereat heights. The anneunceanent of
MAS. abieges that the searen Tor tre missing. Tankhesd U-d plang Was

orvarized in the Lake Vad region’ (Durkey--TASS). The game version
was phated in tue note of the U.S. Embassy in Moscov. warded to the
USSH Foretm Kinistry on vay Hof this year.
end of the Soviet dovernaent, N.S. x a
york tb the session of the USSR Sumreme Bovist, wee EA
of tiis version ang brought foruard ixrefutable and concrete fects
whica indisputably show the premeditated, perfidions, and pandit-Liks
nature of the viblation of USSR airspace -by the American Lockheed U-2
plang, as well as the aims of intelligence flights, inadmissible ia
view of the elementary requirements in walataining normal etate
relations im times of peace,

om May 7 the he

fay

ce steet s aeets eipe mee Be ee orem meneame

lid
he
td
1
+3

3
ite)

aarp ehat?
sea tee

ues obliged im its nev
the enplonage ta
wwever, that 7

heh

stipslagin

sor
recs

Tr the announe
question of the direct 2 eipebion of

above-mentioned impudent act of aggression against the Soviet Union,
any doubts in this connection were ramoved by the ennouncement of

Herter, U.S. secretary of state, on Mey 9 on penalf of the U.S- Government.

Lemay unprecedented In the pietory of
tecretary of State Herter declared thay wu
nz national security, from she morent his aot
President ELsenhower introduces directives on conductint |
z arcivities ines the Soviet Union. on tim basia of
io divecbives, iy W328 indicated by Herter, programs wera worked out
and implemented waich envisaged the encroachment of American inhellicenca

Herter's statement was (word indistinet) cn May li, and U.S.
President Eisenhover himself (also admitued?) that the flights of
American Bilreraty over the serritery of the go et Union were and
revsin a “ealouleted policy of tue United States of Amerivs." The
name was declared by the Government af the United States of Anerica
in a note to the Soviet Covernment on May 12, 1950.

tar

Particularly insolent and shangless Wes the etatement by U.o. Vac
President Nixon, made on & Mer 15 Ty¥ broadcast, in which ne mot only
confirmed the declarations«-which were eynical and violated the norns
of inbermational riante--rade varlier py Herter and Fisenhowes that

the Pliguts of American aireratt over the territory of bhe Soviet Union
are a calculated policy of the United States of Amer. a, but he went

even Sustier- 3

{word indistinet) that the United States finds an “on imherruptac

pragcaa” of esploanuge activities meceasary, ana justified the goby lous

Lie, eovtained La the atatenent of the U.S, State Department on May oe
about "netereological observations carries out by the Lockheed U-2
plene"—that is to ay, we defended the right of the United States to Spy.

BE OGG ADPATES
- GES - 7

vye dan
Les Union

Lon by

ore ned MT

Lge @uolanes

GOVE MAL

sonainions wien
enhower 's wert aS
since January i924;

Joverarene

ean only
(word indistinct) are in a state o
president of the United States, se
Eoviet Uniou.has made several prot
oi violation of USSR

nimanrinn of i

pen

Ere commecte
Auerican military cos

Protesti

soak actions, the USSR Govern:
repeated 3 notags tnet = violets One
rude inf tary and norm a4
{note de SL BASS), ary
actions the United St 3, 08
tens Lon Uaton and the United Sts .
wily 10, U.S. Government con? ined pureay

formal replies to bhese notes.

Cortiuinus cases of violation of Soviet terpinory by Amer
airplanes ara a seandnlous Lreaen: or universally recogn:.

af inuernetional rights estaviishing uli and exciueive
cf azth guste over the aivspadée shove the territory ef th

pha, under which "eaca sate has Sul and exchasi
over the airspace above its territor, ," was aise
ernst, Lone convention og air navi Solan rene
at (word ine wat) can
+, ad agai ah the invernatio
bien in Chisago an Dec.

7
ba

Tye same peincipie of waulete and axelusive ruven eiguty of states
over tsa airspace above taely lari nacies nas been innagrated ia The
aviation laws of several countries, jnnbwing the Soviet Union and
the need States (Le5 act of U.S. Cougregs on ate teyda ana Tadeo aes
eft 2 on stvil aviation--TASS).

Reece

Pee

te

= ate eer ree

Soar ee mil ” s u

a eae ail

Se,

Toe First article of the 193° che USSR also establishes
the Soviet Unio tas ful ao are ee zot tne

ef the Soviat Uniode ri { govereignuty is

and inviolable ia foverss

Herter, whe “2 othe 20° ;
the USSR by the Agericae Air Fore {wepexted?) viclets
principle of state (two words indistinct) the Uaiied States,
cannot ba taken in any other way than. as ep open dee gration regardiog
the unwillingness of the Governgent- of the United Statas to teke isto
soneideretion the basic, Universe); qemnd of loternational

ay, vitacus which sormel relatia

Law, %

—casmetemabinejtaifLtpe scence penne me = Sie peice in

mh

dhe yepeated intrusion by the Awerican Air Force into USSR girerace,
and iu particular the flight of the Lockheed U- please on May iof

the current year, are « grosa violetica cy of the USGA
ani ug act of aggressic Law aed
the Lotiy principies of

the United States, “a Baan ath

With the presegt level of militery technclogy, ace when
States--as it has bean many tic stated by responsible
leaders--constantiy keeps in the aiz duty tesbers wi

and nydrogen bomba, reconnaissance flights, photogres
bombing targets, and the sapping (vyyavleniye) of radar stations are
intez-al parte of a militery sir attack.

Inq the sbvovermeotioned conditicns, the iotrusion of a forefgn plane into
Sovies alrspace cap always be 4 sign of the tegioning of an armed,
attacs, Furthernore, there dan be no guerentee that any such place
which appears over Soviet territory ices ooh darry 3 dea todeeling

loed. The aggressive act of the U.S. (Air Forest), in the form of

the inowlest intrusion of the American pilitary piaog into Soviet aiz-
space, velongs to the category of actions which constiuute a adiract
threat to univeraal (yauce?). In circumrteaces when some states

possess oucLesr weapens #o2 mans for delivertag thea at almos*
Lightening speed, the aggressive ach coomitted by the United States

4
1
“¢
ty ch
th rt
ar iy
“ 5)
m
cu
at id
i %
‘ 5 e
yD ch cr och a
eagt jae Rey aot
= ih 4
So H a
ad a ui
£o 0 ib & rH
Fay (2 ps fa Yr
Bot po
oa & ye
och ED .
roe y
i
je je
ooo + 25
is
ra
4
as

co Key i, 1940, against the Soviet Unies could have Led to most @rave
consequences fox humanity.

In the above-mentioned statements of the Teaders of thr Governmeat of
the Coited States, as well gs in the note of the U.Se Goverament of
May Le, of the current year, it 1s (relherated?) that the Lockheed U-e
plane xhich wie shot cown tear Syerdtovek wes allegedly s civitian pianes

Ae

ow pet
se
er

a = Tide
Bea aE wwe

aning of his
om rr Force, Px

the Uo, Ais Foree as @

Further on, asked bow one should consider the establishaent ia which

he worked, ubether itis wilitary ey civilian, Powers replies:
"ry 42 2 (acmbiantion?} of civilian eon a firce service, HASe
woe me nace, evbunit 1o-1c."
eoxinatelv is Apeih 1960 the air fvaget}
ee by the chief of staff of the
-euinily to inspest che

itery personalities, besides General Alene,
visited the base at Ineixlikx, Powers said thas duriog his stay at the
airbase in Incirlik, General Everest, cocmanter 14 aed “et ug.

air farecs ia Rurops, and (ether?) Auerieza generals ¥
base twice, Therefore, it was estabiis het shat the Lookhess U-# shot
Gown op May 1, 1960, belonged to the Ose “Rar Force.

mM. orloingl violation by the U.S. Government of universal

international rights ig one t the clengots of the aggresst™

in the foreign policy implemddted by the U.5+ Goveraneat. T

aggressive policy bas haan repeatedly foraulated by g.5, sta

ene is pertieut ar, oy a Pore U3, seorghary oF state,
Dulles, aa "the soliey of strength, : "yolley of intimidetica,” ane
"policy of balancing oa the becinke of wars

oniy In Jely 2959 Nicen, the Yiee president, in an a7 ticle pubaisnes
in IDFA wayavine highly praised the aoaceized neliey oF Dalanviag on
the orink oF war, aod declared that this pvlicy ia one ov the cads
crintiples of the Unitek Status, Even OlWe

The manifestation of thia policy gredluead, a5 is kncwn, tne goncLusion,
under the aegis of the United States, of ageressive pacts and yo ions
in almost all parts of the world, the arma rage, the oreation cf 3
nerwerk wi ailitary tages on the bortders of the Ceviet Uniaa acd otn
socialist eountries, aud choer ace gasgive arhions chies bewi ne onivevsa lL
peace and security.

tad

er

: me

WAL AFFAIRS

d wis the
Boviet tarritory S. mili THLBIE Sy
wLolatien ct May 1, 1966, by the -asverican Lockheel iU-@ plane.

tivities of t .
ales in revise me complics
@ Gover un :

aa the inpihene
Sovieh Union anc have
uu military bases, and

against the USSh .

4

Ag was cateblished during the imvestigatics, the violation by the _
american Lockheed U-2 plane on Mey i youl have been impossibie without
e use of military aivkases on territories porsering the Jeviet Vnisn,
in purtioular Turkey, Pakisven, and Norway, since the range of the
Loskheas U-2 prevents its use Tron U.S, beses.

Tt hes heen established that the reconnalesance subungt LO-LG, in which

Powers Located, at the American-Turkish @ir bese in

Taciriit U.S. Air Forse Colonel Shelton is the commanier of this

subunit. The Lockheed U~2 plane which violated Soviet territory on

Hey Lor this year was transferred from the Iscirilk base +o the allitary
mh

air base
Union.
sovereignty--over the territory of which flew the @oove-men
sirpians+-without knowledge of the Afghan Governnent.

Asked waat emergency (2apasnyye) airfields were provided for the hay a
flight, Powers answered: "y sould use any airfiele in herway, Pohis tao,
cr Tren a3 sn energency airfiglA."

es

Th was eleo agreed that Powexs, after completing the flight, was ta
land on the military sirbese-et edca, in Norway, whicr ves previously
vied by the LO-19 reconnaissance. subunit.

Sere?) dbrcunstage’s have been asnertained by Porers! evidence, the
yoman found en him, and ouher moof.. The instructions reegived
py Powsrs also provided for she possibility at violating tha covereiguty
of stner states. concerning this question powers gestified: "In case
twas guort of fuel to fly to Murtuangk acoorling wo tae itinerary, Tr
could, tefore reaching Kangalaksha turn left and fly--ever Finiead--
to Norvey, toward Bodoe airfield,"

cee ee ee

- BB 2o -

The instructions given to Powers provided for the posal
if seefed, on an airfield in Finieand cx Gweden. Powers Y Ghis

webies: ‘{lovds indistinct} situate th preen
ranted on the flurh. : ") make &
es) id me

C&EE soy) wh ib vas better thay to anc
eo tek territory. Fe also sain tact ig W6wle ba beuter
UG mor Norway, bus preferably 2 Moxrways'

This evidence by Powers is also confirmed by marks made on the Plight map.

Go the investigation concerning the present case has proved once again
bet at territories of cartain forelg
a

StAteh abe a meunee be peace antl (avvereigaty?) of peoples.

For the im, lerentation of the aggressive and spy-iike p:oLicy arainst the
Soviet Union the U.g. Goverment and military comand have conducted,
Por a mumaber of years, echivities invelving the seleation and training
ef the necessaxy cedres. For thig purpose also Franc is Gary Powers,

the accused in the case, was enrolled.

During the investigation Pavers naguified that in 1950 he volunteered
for American militery service, undecyent training in tue air force 1
at Greenville, Mississippi, and then at the air force 2ase in the suburbs
of Phoenix, Arizona. After training he served as an elmman at various
U.S. Aix Force tases with the rank of first lieutenant.

Tn April 1955 Fovers vas engaged by the U.S, Central Tatelligence s gency
to carry out special amtelligegce tasks in specially equipped hieb-Thring
planes, During job interviews it was. explained to Powers what kind of
vagks he would be called upontto perform. In this repare Povers said:
Pt was told the in the oain by stork would aonsiet of flying alon; the
USSR frontiers wita a view to coblecting information about radiolocation
ingtallations and rade transmitters, 4 well as other Information.
duos, TT

Twas alse tela that in the Twuure, provided everything went well, I

oe farm fa we "
misht be given other tasks.

fat F

Aftes this he concluded a secret agreaicent with the W.9. CIA, headed by
Allen Dulles, and signed fa de mmeni?) about keeping iis collaboration
secret. Powers wad warned that if he violated secrecy and spread date
concernins; the achivities of American inteliigence he would ha sentenced
under orimins) law to (107) years! imprisonment or a 10,000-delisr Fine,
or beth. Indeed, Chapter 37, “Saying end Censorship,” of the Ual.

eoge of laws contains peramraph 795, Which provides this Ising of sentence
for the said (crimes’).

- Bb + US THSERUAVEIONAL APPAR 5
Aur, 9, Losey

Aceording to Pavers, Zor carrying out the spying tenis of fmer.can
intelligence he yeceived a monthly salary of 2,500 ds jars, While -
during his Army seryide be bed ceen woaid 7oo duliars mombaly « ‘

wo

ecreLlel with Anericaa intell

peace ~ et go. airport located in the
wri ah the tima a part oD

a ye

a rt r
WHS weined for tve end e half months in mastexing @ hichefiying piane,
tha Lockheed U-2, and jis equiqpent Por the juzerception of radio ana
radiolocetion sigals. In nianes of this type Powers made training

flights at great heights and, (sreat Gigtances?) over Celifornie, Texas, ei
aid the northern pert of the United Utates - - ae |

Tt by. at
Wows EOS
gizfield were given false names. = pertichiar, Powers wos known there

nt t6 geerecy, the spy HiLGts wndergoang treluing a7 that
i

os Talner, After the spacial training Powers was sent to the Amexican-Turkcish |

military ovietion base Treirlik, situated nesr Adana, Vere ves locates,

the imteliigence pubdivision Eacim under the code nane "V0-10" was

Jocated. :

his subunit, deaigned for reconnaissance work againgt the Ussn throug. -* :
3

reconnaissance airplanes gent into the airspace over the URSE for
collection of information en military, industrial, and other inportant
objecta, wes lis ted for secrecy wiler NAGA.
Concerning a certificate found on kim and issued in January 199%, Povers
stated that in this certificate "ib shows that TZ have the right to tly
us. Air Forse planes. Tt was given to me at the guomit 1C-LO at che
airbose in Incirlit. This certificate is given to us in the mame of NAGA.
t
Under orders fran the Subunit 10-10, Powers had since 1056 -systematicelly
done high-altitude Flights intthe Lockheed J-2 atong the Soviet Union
torders with furkey, Iran, sud ADGghanistans

ave evidence on these flights as follows: "ra fool off from
Incl atrialsé and flew tothe ast to the city of Van, on the snores
of Laie Van. Aftervards VE set cur COUrHe for “eheran, the capitel of
Tran, and atser & flight over Teheran flew to the east, south os ube
Caspian Oca. Rotexwards we usually few suuth of Meshed, crossed tae
Tran-Atghanistan frontier and then flew alongs the Avghanistan-Soviet
frontier +. (TASS ellipsis) Some distance fren nha eastern frontier
of Palistan we turned and returned to Imiriik by the same soute.

Later ve started turning after deeper panctration of Afzthbeniatan
sercitery, abows 200 miles."

Powers

- a as
Renee

re tim for the gLighss Shelten war accompanied
the personnel of ihe Gubunit 10-10. Anotnacr
OQ flew the specially fisted Loekhued U-a

of Hay 1, 1940, tvo and a baly Lours
pret ag crdec frou Shelton to fly over GSR
norts at a height of 20,000 meters aveording ta the 7
Peshawar, Avel Bony Overdicvsk, Kirov, frens
in Morvay ab tic E.dos eirfiell.

Tu ecsordence vith instru g wyor the Soviet Unica, lad.
to evitch on at dutinite Li poaratua in oiraeragn fo7
aasial photography and (i wines) work of radar stations of bho
UnSGR aotlair defanse syeyvedl. ording to Zaclsents orfers Povors {hea

to pagt} particular attention to 4 nunver of s¢etore on bis rowie

ane, to two poimtc--on ene a Gierd indistinct} rocket aunehing piateormm
was supposed 40 be Loguted, and on tae other aa iapartace dofense
iestalleations. All

esq instruvtions were accurately frifilied by Pevers.

ek
B
o

Powers took off im the Lesnkned U-2 trem tha Peshewar gitvage, reached

20,000 cee flew over Afghastielen, end vielated the alrspace of

the Soviet Union more than 4,00) kilometers from the frentier. During

the flight the navigation equisne nb and special Spent Reis worken Faultlassiy.

Pa ela Plight Fovers Pslh normal aud esbared on tae Dhying chert
ntelligence Gatae tn tar region of Sverd aoe Powers? alreratt was

sees énum by Sovies (aatiatz gefensat) Pores

353
- BB 32 - ; SSR TNTORMAT OAL Ag?TAL.
eagr 9, L9ED

order vies olreumstances the (word ipdtetines) airerafs waa shot
one sontied: “Unexpectedly, T huera a wedfled explosion
orange flegh. Cae sirorars gnadenty (woras indistinct).

o Wings aod tail suppert were breken off. ib ie

no Alrect Ett on the airerags, bat thes the
ephioth

ot
a
u
at
io
f
Ea
ct

what the

wt

és

aft, This oocurred at prowimale height
4“ dosn approh 4 south om s6v a
moment Z was ngokranely, accoraing

I was prossed te the instrument panel and
was therefore wnadle to use the ejectlen equipment. But I reised
the canopy, opened the nalt, acd eravied out of the elrerals from the
top, The gervacnute openes automatiad lly.

By the statement of tne accused, material evidence, aad the findings

of exp2rts, Ty was getervineda thet the aircraft piloted by Powers

was eqgripped with especial ayplosive charges $0 that the pilot could

plow ib up in case oF 4 foreed landing on USSR terxitory. in addition
to thie, an explosive apparatus was also installed in the magnetic Tape
recorder dusignad fer (intercepting?) signals from Soviet radar stations.

Poyers was carrying 4 special needle with a powerful poison of the
euvare group, ‘This neecie wes given to him, Powers stated, to commit
suicide in the event of sorhure, All these scheaes and carefully
envissgod measuras and precautions were designed to avoid diaclosure of
the aggressive policy of leading cireles in the United States and to
deceive the worid publice

In addition to the necdle, Powars was given & pistol with 4 silencer,
cartridges, a Finnisn knife, a collapsable rubber boat, a complete.

sot of topcgraphia maps of the Paropcan useR and (word

indistinct’ belonging to it, meas for Ligntiog a fire, signal flarec,
a flashlight, a compass, & Sau, S{ehing tackle, and otacr ob jects,

as Well as Seviet moncy in the sum of 7,500 rubles, gold coins, rings;
and watches, which, 82 stated by-Fowers, Were hnended to him by

felonel Shevton ca entering bhe aizere®h, They were for use in brining
Sevier poocle in the evans of a forced Landing on VESR territory.

ALL these [erticles were Found?) on Powarg 3% the tine he was debained.

fyorés indistinct) and many others who watcbed the shooting down of the
U-2 by a rocket near Sverdlovek and who detained, rilot Powers, who
eame down in a parachute, gave the following testimcny:

{HEEPNATIONLL AFPATRG

prea

ae {
ndistinet) autonib.ie.--
tamediately showe- hin
he would Land.
etlipsis}

ia

f
of the cH
ye watched t
eyidens that he wo
stream near 4 hnign-vTolta

aay dnd we rove

cu

ne

a

feu reas c
chut. ed.
L.A, Chushaiin: "When we the interrnone che tee lia

i
she parachutist smoke Lo us
gsiued him vac he wag and he

he wase-({TASS da.

g reply ay all. 4 ve wnueretand that
Bly

mas) a foreigner. This pub us on OUT quara and tuen

the long-barraled pisto. that was hanging in & leather

as ty gigm language v6 3 ed whether he vec sione,
& by suage replied that he was. Seeiny Sue, the par ahutist
Was--(TASS caches) a foreigner, we dacided to catel

Pp, B. (Sebinj :"As he hit the ground the parachutist fell. 58 shat Ris
parachute would not drag him on the ground, I heid him and {yards incistinet)
parachute, in so far as he knew ali azout it, es in thea pack he hid
served in the air force. At that time, my acquaintances ; Anatoliy Cheremiein,
Leonid Chuzhakin, pod Viadimir Surin came ranging up and helved whe
parachutieat to his feet. T helped him remave the parachute, and Chere
a, en burin removes. the interghoné heagnet ag whe helmet
When the parachutist was free of the jeer, he seid something
to We asked him who he was ang whet has hecpenes,

ma

MY
. shock hin head. We apderstved taat
tain him."

a
ified ws

Yass Ls

bug. 9, 19

ATTOMAL APPA

“aapin ang I took the apprehendsd parschutiet by the
a girtomopdle which nad é Chut
‘ 2 OhUeLS auton Ee
ip his possession.”

nat

& Gane re
parts or the
plane were i area of about 20 kiloneters.

Powers, the sccused, when he wee shown the perts of the destroyed air-

Dlane and asked what kina of airplane it was, anew . "This ia & -

Ce indistin ~2 in a very ¢ Asked whether
Ae Plane he on May i, f muced Powers

reyi "T think it is the same airplane whics ‘Lew on Hey i, 1960.
DB.

i

i

Zo be More precise I would have to examine the airplane cabin, if 1t has
been preserved...” (Tass ellipsis)

Avter tnis the accused Povers was shown the praseryed part oF the
girplane cabin. fo the question: "Be you secognize this part of the
eiyplane?” He answered: “yas, I recognize it. This is the canopy
of the pilot's cabin. I am sure that it is the cancny from the cabin
of ny eirplane...." (TASS ellipsis}

Tha experts who examined the remains of the airplane Lave ogacludad

that it ig @ single-seater (word indiatinet) recohnaissance 2irplanc of
the U-2 type of the Aweriean Lockheed firm, with a siughe wu. io jet
engine. The airplane had no goverament taantifieation mavks. Apparatus
for photography and radio technical recornalsnance were installed on

the airplane, including 2 tyo-Tens aerial camera with @ foonl distance -
of 26 inches, and an aporatus for detection of radio waves of three~
centimeter, sen-centimeter, anc meter-reange waveLengihs .

Aleo instaliad in the plane +25 & remote control axplosive charge
folok poirywa) vith a content oF L.4 kilograms of axplosive materia.
mtne fuselage: and parts of the airplane exigt merks of various Amerie

firms, end in particular, 4 ture iet angina of the firm of Pract ani
Wndtasy, a starting aeseamcly, erd an electric supply aseemoly made DY
the firme Eamiiton-handerd, Genera. Blectria, and others. There are
Riso warks cn the fuselage showing that it belongs to the wer department
of the United States, For instance, the assembly tor radia tecnoiaal
reconnaissance, made by the ira Howlett-Packard and the (He grins? }
laboratory, nas 3 special index number showing that it belongs to the
U.S. war department.

ass

TRS

ay Re TRS ETT TTA ATI ATT
Wasp TH TOREAY SL Ona: drs TS

The aomence of government ownership marks, tha presence of complex
poeciai {word indistinct) radic tecuniea? (iord indistinet), and
+

noo of the explosive charge for the destruction of the aLrplane,
oven ite reconnaissance SuUrpose.

thls case ba
a

vote words

aviation fane

apeciat

esurcted with the epparatus for radio radiation with :
ferromagnetic Film for eight hours of uointerrupted operation. The
magnesia Gape recorder was marked index No. 12570, serial No. 765,
with a mozor, fone or two words garblez) mechanism of constant
eorronh (auoplied?) by the ‘Amerienn fire of (name indistinct)

in Ohic.

‘he dicipaered records of the impulse signals on the farrocagnetic
iln proved that these are gignals of radar stations of the radar security
ysten of the anbisireraft defense of the Soviet Union. Ey these

ata it is possible to determine the length of the radio waves with
which (word indishines) the rajar stations are working, the frequens)
af the impulsas, the tine She vader station detected the plane and i+
Location et the time, end the number and oparating procedure oF the
radar stations.

‘ma intellgence character of the flight of the Leckheed We2 airerat
over the territery of the U5ah jig @isa confirmed by sechnical knowl
and examination of the photographic equipment of the aircrart.

we
ae
wise

The axperts have determined thet the camera for aerial photography,
model 73-B,No. T3200, waleh waa found us beard the Lockbeed U-2, is a
special intelligence photographie camera designel to take photographs
ron a great height (one or two words jndistinet) of 160-200
Rilomevers. 2

Tovestigations have estymlished that during the flight over the territory
a? the Soviet Union Powers photographed the Loontions of industrial,

miidcary. aad other immortant installations. 4 considerable part of
Aha film taken from the plane had not besn exposed and is was possible
to develop it.

Examinations of the aerial photographs taken showed that the area
photographed srom the alceraft by .the Long-range camera eavered the
territory from the region (south?) of Tashkent to gverdolysk in the
Soviet Union. This film showed a number of military and aivil
girfields, as well as important industrigt installations in the soutnera
Urals.

3x7

~ BB 36 - USSR DIFTERNATTONAL AFFATRS. ;
Auge 9, Lo60

Th hes beor deberwined by the findings of exporys and other
avidencs collected shat the aeriel phobosraghs taken doring the
flight of whe Lookheed U-2 aireratt piloted by Powers contained
fone arto words indispincet) inieliigense informeuion in regard
to industriel and military installations Located o1 the photo-
Sor dothyliigence porposes)

or éetermiaing

a

arapaed qorrdtor

as well as far compiling topes caphice | onarhs @25

{words indistinct) military installations.

The ichelligence characteristic of the flight of the Lockheed oa
ico aircraft is also confirmed by the statements of the accused
Powers, meade at the preliminary hearing and in bis signed declarstion.

jars, interrogated anacrding to tha charg? submitted, pleaded
uilny and stated: ny wdsit being guilty of having flows over

the terribory of the Soviet Union and over locations indicated to ma.
Saring the Flight + turned on and off the switches of tae

spacial equipment instelied on my pinne- tT gesume that this was

done for the purpose of obtaining intelligence anformation about the
Soviet Unione” :

And further: “Under the (agreement?) concluded footwacnt!

Ta ang ae, (words indistinct), IT am a pilot of the special

air force subynit (a-TS7) which ia engeged in eollecting information
on existing radio shetions and radar stations on the territory

of the Soviet Union, asd alsa, 48 T assumed, the location of
rockets «

fhe guils of Powers (few words indistinct) is confirmed oy
neterial and written evidence, the conclusions of experts,

and the depositions of witnesses, On the grounds that the
said Franels Gory ~ Powers, porn in 1929, 4 citizen of the United
Shates ef America, @ native Of gha vow OF Jenking, Keotecky,

with bigher education, 4m aizman of the special 1o-10
reconneissanes subunit undet she UeS, CiA+-engaged by the U8, OFA
in 199€--is beiog charged with active asplonage activity against
the Soviet Union, whics is she expresaion of the aggressive

policy condurbed by th. U.S. Government.

- ke 37 - ‘BSH TORSO TMIAL arrak

ey, I”
wa ee Dass
cf a strabects
on the 4! or pocket 3 Ag, radar

ber oon th aes
networks, and other highly important -
objectives of the U2Sa, inte! svitute
midizary secrets of the Soviet Union, an ing penetrated inte Soviet
heztitery to a ceptn cf more than 2,08) kilometers de with the aid
of apscial equipment photographs of a numser cr the dbova ative
ned reaeried the signals of radar stevions. ard aise avi
deta of sepionede churactar. ;

He

The offenss aommirted by the Gefaniant, Francia Cary Potere ,
pruriaed oy Article # of the USSR law on the erimi;  biskiiit,
oy state orimes.

“he indictment was compiled on duly 7) 1960, in Moscow.

= Chairman of the State Security Comaittee under wae USSR
‘quncil of Ministers (name indistinct).

{Baitor's Nete--M: Several parenthetical cross references te page wri
paragraph numbers in the printed text of the indictment bLil were
omitted.)

re 2G

OCMPRESSORS FOR MUBA--The Tashkent branapext machine -muilding plant
racentiy-sens four compressors To. Usvana, and on aug+ 3 the ster.

-
anterpris# reported that the Cuban order has been fulfilled, These
acupressers can te used in uviiding bridges, riliveys, an® highways +

used in th: mining industzy- (Moscow, Home,

They are ¥
60, 130) C80--L} CUCLASSIPIE : :

a
bug. 9, 25

ORM Oo BACEHIVES HASSTMSH. -On Aug, 9 USSR Minister of Porsign Affairs
jrirey Greomyka reevived ‘ble secrabary gumerel of the Arab League,

Abd ai-Xhalig Hessumah, sad tad a talk with him. (Text) (Moseer, TASS,
Bussian; Aug. 5, 1960, 1868 oMp--L)  (iucyassTeren)

|
|
|
|

peers wn

A ale a

(Tart) MuseoueeThe CPSU Centred Comitves of
have adopted a deoioion on measures for

oF that the omuntrny
Bole The cise MSE . are gn BVEry
for save and varative + svatems ta fudy and betver

cenand

t=
A
+5

i In 1959 retai] trade turnover in the U
2953, ang $8.e. 20 consumer Goote BRIE B

ty acrordencs with the decision, 105 ,0OG ure shops
2 Savlet Onis Bees gon 19655 LT) 345 G00 , COO ral
turing this periou the construction of trade and
warehouses, anc ie storage houses. a

the CPSU Certrel Commitsee and the QsoR Council of
properal of the board or she Tsentresoyus : d
catering establishments, and warehouses of anoparative organ: ations be
taiit at A tetal cost of 12.7 billion rabies with funds of the consumers
cooperatives, which operate mostly in the countryside.

pra a 2 2 .
wéer the seven-year plan, the volume 2F retail, trade turnover in the
UBER is te increase by 62 pergent
seek shen quthines praccicel deasures for improving the work oT caterlag
: introauciay advanced and more anonomic trade i
aah aa oumpt OF adga aueiboy J ss0e oy dasa

iasve-senle partis ayeice

rs wenial

& ASuas ary c
WOE IGES y ceomniic, aod housevives in ecnerollin, the ueading

%
esnablichments.

seruched Ua import a oe
the con

Tue Ministry of Foretan Trade has been ir
pea teent vf high quality yoods te aahic

10
