Special Memorandum - the Ad Split and Venezuelan Democracy
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126958, dated 5 July 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126958).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Cu FJ DL bot:

PET Im mare
“4E LISRARY
TSUNCStOry Review,

Case # NLT 75-/35
arses varaet 2 4h

eZ SPECIAL
| MEMORANDUM

BOARD OF
NATIONAL ESTIMATES

The AD Split and Venezuelan Democracy

Ss

2 August 1968
No. 18-68

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
10 NOV 1997 4

18, sections 79}. S Code, as amended.
Its transypefion or revelation of it

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

2 August 1968

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 18-68

SUBJECT: The AD Split and Venezuelan Democracy*

Late last year, Luis Beltran Prieto, one of the most popular
leaders of the Democratic Action (AD) Party, bolted the party,
apparently carrying with him a large part of the former AD faith-
ful, and launched his candidacy for the presidential election of
December 1968. This split in the AD Party threatens the end of
its domination of Venezuelan politics and raises questions about
the future of constitutional democracy. Over the past decade of
AD rule, neither leftist insurgents nor disgruntled rightists in
the military have been able to upset the progress of civilian,
reformist government. Presidents Betancourt and Leoni both were
able to get their measures through Congress with reasonable ease,
at least during the opening years of their administrations. But
the forthcoming election now is likely to be contested closely by
at least four presidential candidates and seven or so congressional
slates, and the next president will face the difficult problem of
organizing an effective coalition government. If the new admin-
istration (March 1969) is hampered from the start by uncertain
control of Congress, leftist insurgents and, of potentially graver
significance, interventionists in the military would be likely to
become more active.

* This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared
by the Office of National Estimates and coordinated with the
Office of Current Intelligence and the Clandestine Services.

1. To most foreign observers the AD Party and the develop-
ment of constitutional government in Venezuela are almost synonymous.
Since their student days in the 1920s, its members ("Adecos") have
been primarily responsible for Venezuela's metamorphosis from what
Simon BoVivar called a “barracks” to a constitutional democracy.
AD's Romulo Betancourt was the first freely elected president in
Venezuelan history to serve out his term (1959-1963), and turn
his office over to a freely elected successor; Raul Leoni, also
an Adeco, is now in the fifth and final year of his tem. Both
administrations have not only been successful in placating poten-
tial military interventionists and combating Communist and Castroist
guerrillas, but have also used the country's abundant petroleum
resources to foster social and econamic reforms. In short, AD
governments have provided the population with a relatively high
degree of economic prosperity and political tranquillity, at
least by the standards of this generally troubled continent.

Yet despite this, as the election of December 1968 approaches,

AD faces the possibility of being voted out of office.

2. The AD's fall from favor has not been a sudden but a
gradual process. Over the years it has lost ground with the voters
poth through the defection of important elements from the party and

through the emergence of well organized competing parties. It

slipped from an & percent majority of the popular vote in the
election of 1945,* to a 49 percent plurality in 1958, and from
there to 33 percent in 1963. Despite its minority status since
1958, it has been able to govern relatively effectively in coali-
tion with one or more of the other parties. Even when formally in
the opposition, these parties, fully cognizant of the tender roots
of constitutionalism in Venezuela, have generally been more con-

structive than opposition groups in most Latin American countries.

3. Reflecting both his personality and the political demands
of his situation in Congress, President Leoni has been a compromiser
rather than a crusader like his illustrious predecessor. Yet he has
guided the country reasonably well through a difficult period: when
he took office the insurgents were still a relatively potent force,
and many military officers were not yet reconciled to the concept
of civilian rule. His government's resolution in prosecuting the
counterguerrilla effort has had the effect of sharply reducing the

size and effectiveness of the insurgency and gaining the confidence

* In 1945, when the AD and junior military officers overthrew the
remnants of the longlived and notorious Gomez dictatorship, the
AD presidential candidate, Rémulo Gallegos, faced little in the
way of organized political opposition. In 1948, however, he was
thrown out of office by Péreg Jiménez, whose military dictator-
ship lasted ten years.

of the military to the extent that serious coup plotting has
noticeably diminished. He has also continued and augmented
social programs begun under Betancourt. To many, however,
Leoni personifies the image of “bueyes cansados" (tired oxen)
that the AD has acquired with the passage of time. Despite its
strength with organized workers and peasants, the party has not
yet been able to attract much support from two elements which
play key roles in elections: the slumdwellers of Caracas and

the new voters of age 18 and over.

4. Concern within the party gradually led to the emergence
of a faction seeking to return the AD to its old militancy. Over
the past two years, the conflict between these Adecos and the party
wheelhorses grew more bitter. A party split became inevitable in
September - October 1967 when the leading challenger, Luis Beltran
Prieto, demonstrated his popularity by winning an overwhelming vic-
tory in a series of party “primaries” for presidential aspirants.
When the AD's executive committee remained unyielding in its
efforts to sidetrack Prieto's candidacy, he bolted the party,
established his own political vehicle, the People's Electoral
Movement (MEP), and at least initially won the allegiance of a

large number of the former AD faithful.

~-

oe

5. Betancourt, the man most responsible for AD's rise,
during this sequence of events was a promoter not of party unity
but of the movement to block Prieto's candidacy at all costs. Un-
like other political leaders after their terms of office, Betancourt
had sought to minimize his influence on his successor by living
abroad in self-imposed exile. His influence was further minimized
by the law that disqualifies former presidents for two terms after
leaving office. Nonetheless, he has not lost interest in internal
AD politics. Possibly because he is looking toward the election
of 1973 and wanted party control to center around his old cronies,
or more probably because of his distaste for the men around Prieto,
Betancourt returned to Venezuela to stop the Prieto surge, and se-

cure the AD nomination for his friend, Gonzalo Barrios.

6.  Superficially, the AD split appears to represent an ideo-
logical schism between a rather doctrinaire socialist wing (personi-
fied by Prieto) and more practical men like Barrios and Betancourt
who, in order to facilitate economic development, have tempered
their attitudes toward private domestic and foreign investment.

Most Venezuelan commentators are inclined, however, to see the
split as largely a reflection of conflicting personal ambitions

and old personal grudges; according to this view, Prieto and Barrios

-5-

re

administrations would not differ appreciably in policy. More
than anything else, it seems to be their political images that
set them apart. In contrast to the suave European-educated
Barrios (who nonetheless cuts an awkward figure on the stump),
Prieto, a mulatto, is more the man of the people. Almost
Lincolnesque in his homeliness, Prieto has portrayed himself as

an “old fashioned Adeco" with an overriding concern for social

justice.

Te In any case, the AD split has given new hope to the
other parties. Rafael Caldera of the Christian Democrats (COPEI),
in his fourth and perhaps final run for the presidency, is hopeful
of improving on the & percent of the vote he got in 1963. ‘The
leaders of three parties, who together received 4 percent of the
presidential vote under separate candidacies in that election, have
recently united behind an attractive but relatively unknown as-
pirant, Miguel Angel Burelli. It is unlikely that the coalition
will again take such a percentage of the vote, especially since

each party plans to run independent congressional slates.*

* The three are Arturo Uslar Pietri's generally right-of-center
National Democratic Front, Admiral Wolfgang Larrazabal's left-
of-center Popular Democratic Front, and Jévito Villalba's
centrist Democratic Republic Union.

~ 6 -

ae <o

Soe a

8. We foresee a closely contested election; prediction of

the winner would be hazardous at this time, if only because of the
a possibility that Venezuela's amoeba-like political movements may
oe split or readhere in still new combinations. At present, each of
the four candidates has his own particular strengths. Caldera's
COPEI has the strongest youth movement and has recently acquired
the backing of a major newspaper chain. Burelli's coalition has
pane access to the financial support of the business ccmmunity and to
the stump appeal of two former candidates who did very well in
Caracas. MEP's Prieto is reputedly also popular in the ranchitos
of the capital city and has carried out of the AD party a wealth
of political talent, if not of actual supporters on election day.
Finally, the AD under Barrios probably retains the backing of
peasant organizations, and its control of the govermment and

patronage will be advantageous.

9. As things now stand, the winning candidate will gain
only a spere plurality of the vote, probably little more than 25
percent. He will have to follow the recent Venezuelan practice of
governing by coalition, but because of the relatively small size
of his own following in Congress (again it is unlikely to be much

more than one-fourth the total members), he will probably have a

very difficult time coming to terms with potential partners. Un-
like the AD in 1958, and to a lesser extent in 1963, the president
will not be acting from a position of relative strength but may
have to deal with runnerups who lost only by a few percentage
points. The jostling for cabinet positions and other patronage
may place enervating strains on any govermment as well as on the
leading party. Similar strains could also exacerbate divisions
within the other parties. The partners in the Burelli coalition
have little in common save opportunism, while within COPEI a grow-~
ing conflict between older, traditional Catholics and youthful
radicals has only been papered over for the election. Finally,
there probably will be a sharp struggle for leadership within
either AD or MEP, depending upon which party does more poorly in

the election.

10. There will be some possible saving graces for any future
government. O11 revenues will probably remain fairly constant over
the next couple of years. All the parties will probably be in
essential agreement on most major lines of policy and all, or
nearly all, will be anxious to protect the constitutional system
from its enemies on the far left and right. Nonetheless, the

problem of forging an effective coalition may prove overwhelming,

and political frustration and even total stagnation of congres-
sional action may characterize the new government from its start.
Under these circumstances, the next administrftion would be ham-
strung in its efforts to move forward against the complex social
and economic problems still outstanding in Venezuela: housing,
education, jobs, improvement in rural conditions. Also, intense
political bickering could produce blatantly chauvinistic action
on @ number of already nagging problems in foreign relations: the
border dispute with Guyana and the dispute with the US over

Venezuela's share of US imports of petroleum.

ll. There looms thus the possibility, and for the present
it is only a possibility, that the AD split could lead to a
serious weakening of political democracy in what has been one of
its few showcases in Latin America. If civilian constitutional
government demonstrates that it cannot cope with Venezuela's
problems, leftist extremists would be encouraged to try to step
up the insurgency. Of potentially graver significance, in re-
action to this, or to the general political malaise, same mili-
tary leader might decide that the civilians are incapable of
running the country after all. Most military officers have been

concentrating on professional rather than political matters in

-9-
sSretiq-1

recent years. Uarfortunately, Venezuela's great wealth, which
has facilitated the reform measures of the constitutionalists,
makes control of the government a tempting prize for a would-be

military caudillo, just as it is for Cammnists, Castroists,

and other revolutionaries.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES:

~10-
