East Africa KenyaA, Uganda, Tanzania)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011832, dated 4 February 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011832).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE -
NUMBER 70.67

were

SORECTOR c 0 CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE _
: *“Coneurrad’ in by the

“UNITED ‘STATES: INTELLIGENCE BOARD

i hs indicated overleaf

Penny re? = Spree tre ne ee, Acie dee Et eR 0 oo eee ee Te

Tarrant nacntearnte re a AIMG SEA MRR aR, SACRA SER on SIMS SES RC A EN Me NS HS St

x

“oer stot tayeas meee

r
i
|
5
4
A
i

0 RCE? gage

separ mcenresy usb ote ep RT

Ger Eger

|
i
|
i
r
i

CONTENTS

Page

EHE PROBLEM Gicid line. paquets Wiciasavhbadylees uae copies geass 1

CONDEUSIONS stitiia.o Atti oie ba ghumieins ahem , hese 1

DISCUSSION sta iscus ed. ii dais eiigudl dag Wonder dois cng, Ga@2S o 3

I. THE REGIONAL SETTING... see,

I. NATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS. 6

Pe GCemeg a io ee Ess danas blu cbubeahocedowe pup bevundectace 6

Be ROMA ros aM getty sWscieh On rad Ao cng 6

SUGAR 55 iG ae cesSreatehand ec ta liieas aie ddins tegen ce 8

Ds PAWN i Ei hate Shae dandininumuahe Pada t wrth oo. 9

IIL EAST AFRICA AND THE WORLD POWERS ................-.... ll

TY QUTLOOK, 3 onde nets Mawel hel Med biel pee ial cele, 14

A. Regional Cooperation 0.0... .14

B. Political Stability 20.0000 Ener 15

C. Foreign Relations 0. 16
ANNEX:

THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY
Summary of Key Proposals of the Philip Commission

a a io

i
{
|

a ; |
= !
;
wing oF ;
TLANTSESC
Pct < ey
hs

ayes

uty.

iret ate SAY eo ee nS

55596 1-67

NN SRE BL SE IIE BIT EE EM THEY ANE APE ITE COR i ce SPM MART

serena

a a ee

THE PROBLEM

_ To estimate the prospects for regional cooperation and political

stability in East Africa.’
CONCLUSIONS. | |
A. During the colonial period, Kenya, Uganda, and Tanzania
shared reasonably effective regional economic institutions. Since in-
dependence, these have been whittled down. To halt this decline
in cooperation, the three countries have been considering the estab-
lishment of an East African Community (EAC) which would en-
compass the existing common services and customs union and 4 new
regional development bank.
B.

C. Even if the current trend of events were to be reversed and the
essence of the EAC arrangements adopted, East African regionalism

*Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director, Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
while joining in the estimate, believes that its focus and terms of reference, concentrating
on the traditional geographic area of British East Africa, tend to subordinate developments
of potential significance which do not St easily into this increasingly artificial framework. He
considers that the evolving political and economic relationship between Zambia and Tanzania
is a case in point, a dimensions which cannot readily be reduced to the interplay of

i personalities. ;

En i SEIN SAR  dN te O La  BA

i
£
t
E
:
é
&
i
&
é
te
H

stn Besar ant inse

ESSERE i er eos

would still not run smoothly. national leaders could, if they chose,
find many pretexts to delay or disrupt the progress of any regional sys-
tem. In particular, Tanzania's problems and Nyerere's impulsiveness
would tend to bring difficulties

>.

eaeoyenyen er OEP?

s
2
e

eter ens: Deseo

DISCUSSION

|. THE REGIONAL SETTING
1, Under British rule, Kenya, Uganda; and Tanganyika? were bound to one

- another by important regional ties. Regional economic institutions included

a customs union, 2 common currency, and a common services organization for
transport, communications, and various other activities. Most of the industry
and commercial farming of the region was concentrated in a relatively compact
area served by reasonably well developed lines of communication. Within this
“core area” (see map), commercial intercourse among the three territories was
substantial. Among the educated people of the region, 2 common language and
similar governmental institutions and problems had encouraged political as well
as commercial exchanges. Indeed, in the early 1960's, as the colonial period drew
to a close, considerable support developed for the formation of an East Africar
political federation.

2,

r
L

ome

4, Kenya does, in fact, reap the largest direct benefits from East African
economic cooperation. Most of its manufactures gain free entry into the markets
of the other two states, with which it ran a favorable balance of trade of $30
million in 1965.° . The headquarters of most regional organizations are in Kenya.

* Tanganyika federated with Zanzibar in 1964 to form the state of Tanzania. Zanzibar,
however, participates to only a minor degree in regional organizations. Its relations with
mainland Tanzania and with East Africa generally are discussed in paragraph 29.

* Throughout this estimate, dollar Bgures mean US dollars.

/
y
7
i

i]
4

POUNOARY SEPRESEMTATION 1® = 4g
nor MECESBARNLY AUTHORITATIVS *

MAL ETHIOPIA a
“Ae :

ee

Nene,

oe

“gee EEE RRS

ITED 0 aD 00 MENTED 05 REID ow CERTED 04 GEIR 96

ra

tok sane aR cay reg eA a lag Pe a

INDIAN

OCEAN

EAST AFRICA
ECONOMIC CORE AREA

| Core area

—+——— ‘Railroad

Principal road

200 300 MILES

300 KILOMETERS

55595 1-67

Tanzania and Uganda, nonctheless, also receive important advantages. The
savings in scarce capital resources and trained manpower which are inherent
in joint ownership and operation of basic services are more vital to the economic
well-being of the less developed partners. The latter, more over, receive various
indirect subsidies that compensate for their losses in revenue on duty-free Kenyan
‘goods. The operating losses of the railways and other common services in

Tanzania are covered by profitable operations in Kenya, while the favorable.

rates on rail shipments of agricultural products to the Kenyan port of Mombasa
are of particular benefit to landlocked Uganda.

EAST AFRICAN INTRARECIONAL TRADE, 1965

Minuons or US potiaas
Exports Imports . Balance
Kenya) ot ted do areh sebastien mince 82.4 92.8 _ 19.6
Uganda. icin tiacliceoes i aeaedas 2 pte 7.2 46.7 —19.5
Tanzania (excluding Zanzibar) ........ 0 .... 16.6 46.7 0.1

5. Tanzania, as the poorest partner, probably has the most to lose economically
from a breakup of the regional system. Yet it was at Nyerere’s insistence that
the East African states decided in 1964-1965 to permit restrictive quotas on trade
in industrial goods within the customs union and to establish separate national
currencies. Nyerere claimed that these measures were needed to enable Tan-
zania to control its economic development. Kenyatta responded with. threats to
pull Kenva out of the common services and terminate East African cooperation
altogether.

6. In August 1965, however, the three Presidents agreed to establish: a special
commission (the “Philip Commission”) to recommend measures to preserve
and strengthen regional ties. By early 1967, considerable progress had been
made on a treaty which would establish an East African Community (EAC)
encompassing the common services, the common market, machinery for co-
ordination of national monetary policies, and a new regional development bank.
(See annex for a summary of the key proposals of the Philip Commission.)

1. The proposed treaty had gained considerable backing from the economic
and finance ministers of the three countries. They appeared to believe that
more private foreign investment and assistance from Western governments and
intermational lending institutions would be forthcoming if regional ties were
strengthened and a regional market for their industries assured. The East
African presidents, on whom acceptance of the treaty ultimately depends, had
not yet revealed their attitudes on the Philip Commission recommendations.
But there was a growing feeling that the remaining differences between the
countries would soon be ironed out and that the presidents would approve the
treaty during the first half of 1967.

Rec akg temidbatane on a but it is commonly called
the “Philip Commission,” after Dr. Kjeld Philip of Denmark, the chairman.

\
i
i
{

—
peeene |

Ik NATIONAL DEVELOPMENTS
A. General

POPULATION BY RACE IN EAST AFRICA, 1 JULY 1965
(Estimates of the East African Statistical ‘Departvent}

Taovusanns 07 Prorie

Indiass Arabs
anc

Africans Europeans Pakistanis Other: Total

Kenya .......00000.0...... 9,097 41 186 4 9,365
Uganda ........0000....., 7452 9 3 4 7,551
Tanzania (excluding Zauzibar) 10,046 7 86 30 10,179
TOTAL «2.0.0.0... 2... 26,595 6t 358 r/) 27,095

B. Kenya

reside in Kenya, where their skills buoy the efficiency of the modern economy
and the government services. European farmers, for example, produce three-
fourths of Kenya’s commercial crops. Seconded British officers and British

6

training missions help sh» pe the Kenyan security forces into reasonably competent
organizations.

il.

14. Kenyatta’s government is also subject to growing economic pressures.
Kenya's economy has expanded only slowly over the past decade, largely because
of the decline in capital investment which was brought on by the political un-
certainties surrounding independence. At the same time, independence stimu-
lated popular expectations. Now, in greater numbers than the economy and
government programs can accommodate, tribal farmers call for more land, stu-
dents for places in secondary schools, secondary school praduates for posts in
the bureaucracy. Meanwhile, unemployed and underemployed urban residents
seek jobs and those with jobs clamor for higher wages; this is more apparent
in Kenya than in the other two states. :

15. These demands from Kenya's impatient Africans are forcing a modification
of Kenyatta’s policies on multiracial cooperation. The Asian community of about
190,000 is immediately vulnerable. The Asians (Indians and Pakistanis) pre-
dominate in small-scale commerce and occupy many of the middle positions in
the governmental and industrial bureaucracies—the posts the Africans now de-

OST SATA RO NCR eR ha

SER SIREN tree tin erannter man oninnaiecmanmineint Ragmerecnrsna iin aWresiewinns hth tute i sageuetvanutene tag tinea tn se

mand for themselves. Most Asians¥ave not become Kenyan citizens. | j

16. The Somali insurgency in Kenya's remote and sparsely populated North
Eastern Province is adding new pressures to the government's already strained
resources. The province is occupied almost entirely by some 130,000 ethnic
Somalis, mostly nomads; its border with the Somali Republic runs 420 miles.
The insurgents are trained, armed, and supported by Somalia, which hopes
to force Kenya to cede at least part of the territory. Since early 1966, the
hit-and-run raids of the insurgents have increased in frequency and boldness.

In response, the Kenyan Government has launched g “ ification” program,

preempting funds and manpower from other areas.

Consequently, pro-Somalia sentiment in the area probably is growing.

17. The prospect of a prolonged Somali insurgency places a heavy burden on
Kenya's small security forces. About 3,000 men, one-half the total forces of
the army and paramilitary police, already are engaged in the North East. In
order to prosecute the anti-Somali campaign as effectively as possible, Kenyatta

is maintaining British officers in key posts, despite protests from African offcers.,

=

GC. Uganda
18. Unlike Kenya, where Kenyatta already has established the authority of
his government, President Obote in Uganda is struggling to consolidate his con-
tro] over a badly divided nation. Obote's principal antagonist has been the
Baganda tribe, the dominant political force during British rule. The inde-
peadence constitution established a federal form of government and permitted
the Baganda aristocracy to retain control over a territory which contains more
‘than 25 percent of Uganda's population, along with the richest farm lands and
the national capital. The Baganda are Bantu, as are 75 percent of Ugandans,
but-the other Bantu tribes either fear or reseat them, and the Nilotic tribes of
Northern Uganda view all Bantu with suspicion. Religious and partisan divi-
sions, often crossing tribal and ethnic lines, further complicate Ugandan politics.
19. Obote, a Nilotic, became Pritne Minister by skillfully playing off rival
poidal groups. By early 1966, however, not only the Baganda aristocracy,
but also several of his cabinet ministers and the Bantu leaders of the army were
plotting against him. Obote took advantage of their lack of resolve to jail
the ministers and replace the disloyal officers with Nilotics. He then decreed

8

¢ 06) -

)
(a)(8)

113 Ca)
(4)(s)

a unitary constitution, establishing himself as executive president and abolishing
the special status of the Baganda. In May 1966, when the Baganda tried to
reverse the tide through armed resistance, Obote crushed their forces, killing
several thousand and forcing their leader to Bee the country.

_ 20. Obote still lacks a sufficient base of political or popular support with which
to legitimize his regime and establish effective control of the countryside. Many
Ugandans, including the more moderate of the Baganda, approve the general
direction of his constitutional changes, but nearly everyone abhors his arbitrary
methods. Motivated largely by fear, the parliament solemnizes his legislative
measures, and the national bureaucracy, run by Baganda, keeps the government
services in operation. Most Baganda tribesmen seem content for the moment
to express their opposition to Obote by nonpayment of taxes. But some tradi-
tionalists are engaged in antiregime plotting, and there was a recent attempt to

. assassinate the President. :

21. Obote also faces major economic difficulties. Uganda's economy’ is fairly
soundly based on productive small-scale farms and exports of cotton and coffee.
But recent declines in world prices for cotton and mismanagement of the funds
set up to insulate the economy against price fluctuations have caused heavy
strains on the government budget and foreign currency reserves. Nonpayment
of taxes and flight of capital because of political difficulties exacerbate these
stringencies. Obote has chosen to move forward with an austerity program to
relieve financial pressures. But his boldness on the economic front -probably
is creating additional sources of political discontent. .>

22. In these circumstances, Obote must rely heavily upon the support of
Uganda's security forces. The army of some 5,000 men is badly disciplined, split
by tribal animosities, and led largely by poorly qualified former noncommissioned
officers. The police force, in contrast, is reasonably well disciplined and com-
petent and is led by loyal officers. In matters requigj gZ a show of force, Obote
turns first to its 1,000-man paramilitary unit. 2

Small numbers of nuilitary technicians from Communist China
visit Uganda time to time, possibly to service the weapons Peking has been
providing under a 1965 agreement.

D. Tanzania -

23. Julius Nyerere presides in mainland Tanzania without serious challenge
to his position or significant tribal problems. His efforts at national _develop-
ment are frustrated, nopetheless—by the poverty of the country and

As compared with its East African neighbors, Tanzania's
population is more and its lines of communication less developed. Its
agricultural output is restricted by unfavorable natural conditions; its nonagri-
cultural resources are little developed. As a result, Tanzania's tax base is small
and it is more dependent than its neighbors upon foreign assistance to finance
not only development projects but the ordinary costs of government services.

9

SETI PNAL NHR NERE i ELSAS EP S ROR ORES OR RN

EPP RRR PES ERIS

&
Ye

ry
XY

27. Nyerere has been expanding Tanzania's security forces. He 1s almost
entirely dependent upon external assistance for training and equipment. A
Canadian mission trains the army and the air force, and Nyerere from time to

*_ time professes interest in additional military aid from the West. But the buildup
of the security forces over the past year has been sponsored mainly by China.
Nyerere probably has favored the Chinese partly because they respond quickly
and generously to his requests for help. More important, he almost certainly
believes that China is more likely than any Western power to continue its as-
sistance in case of a confrontation with Portugal.

i 28, The Chinese already train tbe paramilitary police and provide a short

sensei MyonaMeRO RRR nt

pancnoneieg pian nie Bate eC SA

i course in military drill to the regular police. They are supplying the army with
modem weapons and will probably soon begin to train some units. They bave :

delivered patrol boats and instructors for a marine police unit. Finally, they
are helping to train civilian militias and to organize several fortified villages
along the Mozambique frontier. The USSR, peshaps in order to lessen Chinese

10 SE

ee Ae TP 28 NTE PR

spon pone ep hieerRtpene tee a

pperene  EeyRN

influence, has also provided some pous for the army and has agreed to supply
motor toroedo boats and instructors for a coastal navy.
29.f

we

lil, EAST AFRICA AND THE WORLD POWERS.

30. Before independence, East Africa looked to the West, particularly the UK,
for economic, technical, and military assistance, as well as for expost, markets.
Soon thereafter, all three states sought to expand relations with Communist coun-
tries, in order to manifest their political independence, to lessen their economic
dependence upon the West, and to obtain greater total benefits by capitalizing
on Cold War rivalries. The Communist countries responded by establishing
diplomatic relations and extending offers of assistance in all fields.

31. The USSR's activities in East Africa probably reflect its general policy to
expand its influence in the former colonial world, to reduce whenever possible
the position of the West, and to counter any possible upturn in China's prestige.
We believe that China's interest in East Africa is essentially similar to that of the
USSR, but is infused with greater messianic zeal for destroying Western influence,
countering Soviet “revisionism,” and spreading Peking’s own brand of Communist
revolution. Both the Soviets and the Chinese probably attach some importance
to Tanzania's position as a headquarters for African insurgents‘and nationalists.
The Chinese may see some strategic significance in establishing a position on the

Western littoral of the Indian Ocean. Their growing financial generosity with ~

Tanzania also may reflect the fact that, since most other African countries cur-

rently are unwilling to deal with them, Tanzania offers the best opportunity for *”

a significant political breakthrough in Africa.

—Ti1

13
Ca)

(4) (s)

ie pee
- ee ‘
ee ce Hoe on a f)
s se i

| i. 3
| a
8

Je Ra IRENE Sen CIENT nee recom

SSS pt ge reer oaarya ttt enn angen ity ePSE MER NNE sete onat ag SERENE sonnet ote ae

33. In 1964-1965, Uganda signed agreements with the USSR and China for
a total of about $30 million in economic assistance. The only obligation to date
has been of a $3 million grant from China, Nevertheless, Obote, in response
to growing economic difficulties, may now be seeking commitments for Specific
loan projects. He has recently been pressing for emergency assistance from the
West, the traditional source of Uganda's foreign aid. Under military agreements
signed in 1965, Uganda has received some weapons and supplies for the army
from China. Prospective Ugandan air force pilots are training in the USSR
and Czechoslovakia, which presumably are to supply jet aircraft at the com-
pletion of the training. Obote almost certainly attempts to keep tabs on the
activities of all foreign representatives in Uganda, including Communist divlo-
mats and technicians.

HA.

st

36. Nevertheless, the great bulk of mainland Tanzania's export trade is with
non-Communist countries. Moreover, Western governments and international
agencies sponsored by the West have continued to provide much of the main-

13

|

land’s economic aid. In particular, the West is the principal sponsor for con-
struction of medern lines of communication between Tanzania and Zambia. For
improving the Great North Road, the principal link between the two countries,
the US has already obligated some $2 million (in Tanzania)® and the IBRD
(World Bank) some $10 million {in Zambia), and further assistance is in prospect
as engineering studies are completed. Italian banks have pledged $45 million
for an oil pipeline from Dar es Salaam to Zambia’s Copperbelt. The Chinese
have done a feasibility study for the Tanzanian half of a Tanzania-Zambia rail-
way, but have not, so far as we know, agreed to build it.

3%. The Communist countries have obligated no assistance to East African
regional organizations or to the East African countries jointly. China probably
opposes any expansion of regional cooperation as a threat to its growing position in
Tanzania. In contrast, since 1964, the UK, the US, and the IBRD have obligated
some S70 million in loans and grants in support of East African regional in- -
stitutions.

IV, OUTLOOK

A. Regional Cooperation

a OR

ae

39. It will be difficult for the three countries to reestablish a workable scheme

" for regional economic cooperation. Until now, all three East African currencies,
have been maintained at par value with the pound sterling. But the impact
of nationalization of the banks is likely to cause Tanzania's currency to depreciate
in value. Western banks and exporters already are withholding credit, and pri-
vate investments are being cancelled. Meanwhile, Kenya and Uganda are
establishing their own exchange controls to guard against accumulation of Tan-
zanian shillings. In consequence, the volume of regional trade will decrease,

*This and all other US aid projects in Tanzania could be in jeopardy if Tanzania refuses

to compensate an American citizen for property it expropriated in October 1966. Under
existing US aid legislation, the US may be required to suspend its aid in April 1967.

14

ig aa a

perhaps substantially. Moreover, though some of the common services are likely
to continue, their efficiency will probably decline, at least temporarily.

40. Even if the current trend of events were to be reversed and the essence
of the’ Philip Commission recommendations adopted, the course of East African
regionalism would still not run smoothly. The national leaders could, if they

‘ chose, find many pretexts to delay or disrupt the progress of any regional system.

In particular, Tanzania's problems and ene impulsiveness would tend to
bring difficulties.

41. With or without regional cooperation, the East African countzies will be
indefinitely dependent upon foreign private investment and foreign govern-
mental assistance for the bulk of their development funds. Even if these are
forthcoming, the individual countries will probably run into periodic difficulties
in their foreign payments, since exports outside the region still consist very

. largely of agricultural products subject to sharp Huctuations in price on the world

market. The pace of Africanization will also be a matter of continuing .concem;
the number of trained Africans is increasing only slowly, and any sudden exodus
of Europeans and Asians would have an upsetting effect on economic stability.

B. Political Stability

42. In Kenya, political tensions will probably not ntially eased, at least
until the issue of succession to Kenyatta is settled

that the odds still favor’ an eventual rupture of Kenyatta’s multitribal —
alliance over the succession issue. In this case, there would be a danger that
political controversy would become so bitter as to lead to widespread unrest
and impair seriously the effectiveness of the government. There would be some
chance of major tribal violence. Political pressures against European land-
holders and civil servants would probably intensify.

43. In Uganda, we think Obote has no better than an even chance to survive
in office over the next two years. Much will depend upon the boldness of his
enemies; he has few reliable friends. Although he may attempt to rebuild a
wider base of political support, at least for some time his regime is likely to
continue-to be arbitrary and his control of the country shaky. . He probably will
seek to handle minor political disturbances through the police. If he is com-
pelled to use the ill-disciplined army against the Baganda, major tribal bloodshed

would probably result. Also, once called out, the army might turn against his

regime.
44.

13@
O&)

L_ | | _| 5)

erreur anise

C. Foreign Relations ,

45- Kenya will probably retain its close ties with the UK and the West over
the next two years. A continuance or intensification of the Somali insur
would lead to increased reliance on the West and antipathy toward the USSR
and China, both of whom extend military assistance to the Somali Republic.
Over time, effective East African cooperation would probably improve the pros-
pects for preservation of Western influence in Kenya and for a tolerance of
Western interests in East Africa generally.

46. In Uganda, President Obote will probably continue to court the favor of
both the UK and the US in order to strengthen his position at home, although
not to the exclusion of some additional Communist assistance. If, however, he
came to believe that the West rejected his regime, he would turn for assistance
wherever he could come by it.

ra a

mm

16

RGAE Reb chai, AU EES

SERRA 8 2S aes a aw Lr ER PERN eA YANN NUTONE EE IES SERBIA nS a NGF REE METRO E HEEIE PEE ES SORES TEN TOP TBAT SUMTER ERED

THE EAST AFRICAN COMMUNITY

er of Key Proposals of the Philip Commission’

L GENERAL .

aE hia neers bs to soplce the exitig East Alan”
Common Services Organization and the East African Common Market, and is
also to include a. Development Bank and machinery for coordination of monetary
policy. a

1, COMMON SERVICES . ,

The jointly owned and Sperated services, more or less as at present, will
include:

1, Corporation Services (self: Snancing): Railway Corporation; Harbors Corpo-
ration; Airways Corporation; Posts and Telecommunications Corporation.

2. General Fund Services (Financed by the EAC from the portion of taxes
and customs duties allotted to it under the treaty): Income Tax Department;
Customs and Excise Department; Directorate of Civil Aviation; East African
Coust of Appeals; Meteorological Department; research institutes (e.g., agricul-
ture and forestry, fisheries, tropical diseases).

Ii. COMMON MARKET

1. EAC member states will maintain common external tariffs. Interna] quan-
titative restrictions on trade in industrial products will be permitted only during
a crisis in a member state's international payments.

2. In order to equalize industrial development within the EAC, a member
state running a deficit in regional trade in industrial products will be permitted
to. charge a “transfer tax” or protective surcharge against industrial imports,
provided that: the category of goods taxed is actually produced or about to be
produced and the rate charged does not exceed 50 percent of the corresponding

17

SAS eta en peer c iments iniencpibseesanretemmenyrontinataratacenns-mnnncn vee uo

4
?

IV. DEVELOPMENT BANK *

The bank's objective is to equalize the levels of industrial development within
the EAC. It is-to be capitalized through transfers from the pension fund of
the Common Services, equal subscriptions by the member states, and external
loans and grants. Drawings will be for industrial projects that serve the entire
EAC market and will be apportioned as follows: Tanzania—38% percent;
Uganda—38% percent; Kenya—22¥% percent.

V.. MONETARY POLICY

The member states will exchange national currencies at par value and per-
mit free movement of currency on current account. The governors of the
national banks will meet regularly to harmonize monetary policies.

VI, RELATIONS WITH ZAMBIA

The treaty provides for possible Zambian association with the common market
or with any of the self-financing common service corporations.

18

foisperaontacen

SR rN ene anh ee uta ete atsnyancopekooot

i
i
4
i
i
i
¥
