Soviet Union - Consequences of Alleged 1979 Sverdlovsk Anthrax Outbreak Explore
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000100167, dated 3 January 1991.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000100167).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

th

20 SOVIET UNION

seem Dy Our specialists in India, for example. We nee
dired working links with units of military physicians
infectus diseases specialists. The collegium situn
said thd we need to galvanize the work of reg
institutes ring their research topics right out “yar
open,” andNprint articles for physicians in sp@
journals and Nist of do's and don‘t's for the

There must be \Yricter hygiene measures. 7

Anantiplague service
There must be unin
accurate information

Reestan, Astrakhan,
Autonomous Soviet

The fact that local aut
Guryev, and the Kara-
Socialist Republic do not at
state of their antiplague ce
epidemic forecast in these rg
fying. If properly equippegy
referring could (and shoul@,
from spreading. but aly

being transmitted to hyg

fis. despite the adverse
ions, is completely mystt-

t not only the plague
ious diseases from

afput off until tomdrrow. A plague
reak out after the ANmenian earth-
Ao the joint efforts by sp cialists from
astitute, Armenian infecthqus diseases

quake only than
Saratov’s Mikrg

F the collegium sitting. | thought of so
Been recently: Some young boys in Mdgcow
% sticks hard against a garbage container—gnd
running out. Not a very pretty picture, but d
ich | had seen long ago. after the war, and had na&
expected to see again...

Consequences of Alleged 1979 Sverdlovsk Anthrax
Outbreak Explored

GIWNOL6GA Minsk ZNAMYA YUNOSTI in Russian
24, 25 Oct 40

{Article in two installments by Sergey Parfenov: “The
Secret of the ‘Sarcophagus’: reprinted from the maga-
zine RODINA No 5, 1990]

[Text] There are several cemeteries in the city. But
hanging like a sword over one of them, Vostochnyy, 18 a
national curse...

No, this place is still filled with visitors, especially on
parents’ day. People wander through the lanes and paths.
They ery. thes are stlent. they remember the deceased.
Just as they do everywhere else.

Hut nobody is hurrying to Sector No. 15. Here. asa cule.
there are no peuple, and a somber silence prevails. There
are dozens of graves. Many have been forgotten and
neglected, and they are overgrown with weeds. Nothing
is taken out of here (old wreaths and dry and mown
grass, for csample, are burned) and any digging or

é

JPRS-TEP-91-001
23 January 1991

cultivation of the ground here is strictly forbidden The
sector is inspected periodically by workers of the SES
[sanitary-epidemiological station}. The high officials of
Sverdlovsk and the oblast know about the “sarcopha-
gus”: they say that on the city map this corner of the
cemetery is marked with a red cross.

What secret is kept in Sector No. 15 of the Vostachnyy
Cemetery, what is it that evokes fear to this very day?

The Official Version

Early in the morning on 4 April 1979 in Chkalowskiy
Rayon in Sverdlovsk (not far from the 19th military
compound where the laboratories of the Scientific
Research Institute of Vaccines of the USSR Ministry of
Defense is located), some incomprehensible things
started to happen. The telephones in the first aid service
would not stop ringing: Al! of a sudden, for no apparent
reason, people were becoming disabled and weak. their
temperatures shot up to above 40 [degrees centigrade],
they had bouts of coughing and vomiting... The patients
were taken to city hospital No. 24—some of them from
home and some of them right off the street. Soon there
were no empty beds there (the only treatment facility
could take only 100 people) and they began to send the
afflicted (with what nobody knew yet) to the neighboring
hospital No. 20...

Margarita [vanovna Henko. the head physician of city
hospital No. 24. says:

“Ten years ago we actually did not have a hospital, we
lived and worked in crowded conditions. Such a tlood of
patients was quite unexpected and we sent some of them
to the ‘Twentieth.’ And all of a sudden the head physi-
cian, Yakov losifovich Klipnitser. called me from there:

“Listen. Henko, we had two of “yours” dic on us...”
“| was taken aback:

“The diagnosis?”

“Seemed to be pneumonia...”

“After a short period of time the phone rang again. It was
Klipnitser:

Margarita [vanovna, Tam in a state af panic: Three
more have died”

“From what"
Toxic pneumonia...”

“S{y word of honor, | broke into a sweat. For uf the

disease was not prolonged, and i during that time there

were no complications, no “shp-ups.” fam sure that a

trained medte ts well aware of the fact that pneumonia ts

practically never fatal. And here we had an almost

instantaneous. eatremels severe form! People were dying
from pulmonary hemorrhage.

Apsroved for Release,
3 ,
Date, fh

id

: «
2 _ MAY 1097:
tae 7

JPRS-TEP-91-001
23 January 1991

“and then it dawned on me: God. this was sume kind of
infection!..

“But what kind?

Roza Khaziyevna Gaziyeva, the head of admissions of
hospita. No. 24, recalls:

“As senior therapist. | was on duty that terrible night.
They kept bringing people in. There was nowhere to put
them: we had to put them in the corridors. Some of them
who felt better after first aid tried to go home... They
were later found on the streets—the people had lost
consciousness. And there was a problem in the building:
A man had died. A woman was critical. [ brought her
back to lite with mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. To no
aval. During the night we had four people die. 1 could
hardly wait until morning. | was frightened...

It was in the air: infection, infection, infection. Gaziyeva
could barely stand on her feet: She had three small
children and she herself was still young—she wanted to
live. But this feeling came a little later, and for now her
head was splitting into pieces: What was happening. why
were people dying. how could they stop it? By the ume
M.1. Ienko came into the reception room, Gaziyeva was
almost in tears. Her rounds were simply a nightmare. In
the wards the dead and living alternated...

M.1. Henko:

“L understood why the personnel were in shock: I looked
at a patient—he was as good as dead. But even two or
three minutes before he died he looked at the doctor
calmly. as though nothing had happened, although all the
patient’s body (from somewhere on his back) was cov-
ered with the typical spots of a corpse. A moment later
there was blood in his throat and he was gone...”

Two days later—finally!—they woke up “upstairs.”
Diagnosis anthrax! The situation had changed abruptly.
All medical services in the city were put to work. Organs
of the sanitary-eprdemiological service, veterinary ser-
vices, fire departments, military services, enterprises and
organizations of Sverdlossk. The emergency became the
subject of large-scale investigations in the oblast and
upper echelons of power. Highly placed leaders of the
USSR Mintstn of Health, including the country’s chief
sanitary physician PLN, Burgasoy, came to the Urals.

The medical workers of hospitals No. 20 and No. 24
were given an order: to move all patients infected with
anthras to city clinical hospital No. 40. to the infectious
diseases facility. The collectives were to begin vacci-
nating the population and decontaminating the area of
Chkalovskiy Rayon,

The people were moved. All the patients ended up under
the constant scrutiny of medical personnel, the best
specialists in the oblast. But..they continued to dic.

In 1979 Galina Aickseyeyna Lyashchenko was working
as chiet af the office for services (funeral sersices) for
production combine Now t:

SOVIET UNION 21

“What was especially etched on ms memos? The situs
ation itself surrounding the outbreak of anthray. Peaple
were nervous and did not understand things vers well,
There was ! innuendoes. pantie... And. of course,
immense sun the tragedies of families. Palone had tu
bury no less than 90 deceased. They were mainly middle-
aged men...”

In spite of the minimal amount of information, rumors
about the emergency spread rapidly through Sverdlovsk.

Witnesses to these events remember that April well, the
atmosphere of wild fear among the population. the
panic, the many alarming rumors (right down to the
point of saying that IT “broke out” in the 19th military
compound and dragged the poison through Chkalovskiy
Rayon). People tried not to cat meat, sausage. or frank-
furters, they avoided going out of the house, they locked
up the windows and doors, and they limited their con-
tacts with one another. The local newspapers published
explanatory articles with recommendations on how to
Protect oneself from anthrax.

But many people did not believe the official version.
And with some justification. Thus when patients would
come to city hospital No. 4Q they were asked if they had
anything to do with the 19th military compound. A
limited group of Sverdlovsk residents more or less that
behind the strong army fence in a secret scientific
subdivision they were doing work related to the vaccine.
Is this not where the mystertous disease came from”

According to the figures of the military screntists, “the
cattle belonging to the citizen Perewalos from the village
of Averinskiy in Sysertskiy Rayon fell ill with anthray
and mass death of animals began here at the end of
March.” This. they said. was the source of the tragedy.

But here is the hutch: From the staustics that were given
for the spread of anthrax—159 outbreaks—it quite det-
initely follows that this “plague” has afflicted livestock
and passed humans bv. Why was it thatin the spring of
1979 at hit us so selectively and fiercely? There ts no
answer,

Incidentally, here is what the head state veterinary
inspector for Sverdlovsk Oblast. Valentin Petrovich
Yaroslavtses. has to say (he has been working in’ this
position for many years and as avery qualified: spectal
sth:

“When we found out about the emergency and the
diagnosis that had been given. we immediately put our
people to work. conducted careful research, and did
hundreds of analyses of the soil, feeds. and gir So T shall
be brief: We did not tind ans source of the disease or
cause of the Gutbreak of anthrax in our service...”

FALSIFICATION?

Here isa fact that draws our attention. In practieadly all
of the documents, articles. and reference works troclud-
Ing in the statements trom the melitany ) peruarnarg to the

22 SOVIET UNION

sad events of 1979 in Sverdlovsk, there are always
references, quotations, and figures from the article of
Professors ILS. Bezdenezhnykh and V.N. Nikiforov, “An
Epidemiological Analysis of Anthrax in Sverdlovsk,”
printed in No. 5 of ZHURNAL MIKROBIOLOGII,
EPIDEMIOLOGH | IMMUNOBIOLOGII for. 1980.
And this practically the main argument of the propo-
nents of the official version of the outbreak.

But let us reread this article.

“The sporadic cases of anthrax in humans in one of the
rayons of Sverdlovsk were preceded by an outbreak of
anthrax among agricultural animals on certain farms...
The animals were probably infected through feeds.

“In March-April there was a marked increase in the
slaughter of cattle on certain farms and the meat was sold
on the outskirts of the city through private business.
Moreover, one cannot rule out the possibility of the sale
by the private sector of meat from animals that had to be
slaughtered..."

This requires a brief commentary.

In the first place, for such serious scientists who are
drawing far-reaching conclusions (the infection of
humans with anthrax occurred through the meat of
domestic cattle), arguments like “probably and “‘it
cannot be ruled out” are hardly acceptable.

In the second place, one would have to be completely
ignorant of the rural way of life and the psychology of the
land-owning peasant to assert that in March-April he
could decide to cruclly kill all of his domestic livestock.
Never! In the country livestock are slaughtered in the
autumn, when the first really cold weather comes, and
then in the middie of the winter, but always keeping in
mind that the herd must reproduce itself and there can
be no losses.

We quote further:

“The distribution of the victims according to the dates of
their illness, taking into account the duration of the
incubation period, made it possible to rule out the
possibility of infection through meat which was centrally
provided for the public food supply. {f that had hap-
pened one could expect outbreaks of the disease.

“From meat taken for examination from two families in
where there were victims we isolated the pathogenic
organism for anthrax. In both cases the meat was bought
from private individuals at unofficial marks and the
strains of the pathogenic organism of anthrax isolated
from the meat were the same as the strains isolated from
the afflicted humans...”

And what does this prove? In the opinion of 1.8. Bezden-
ezhaykh and V.N. Nikiforov, it proves that the infected
meat was the cause of the infection of the humans.

Yuriy Mikhaylovich Gusev, the director of the Sverd-
favsk plant for ceramic items:

IPRS-TEP-91-001
23 January 1991

“| know that there is this version: The workers suffered
because of meat bought from private businessmen—but
it was really purchased by an enterprise in an organized
way. This is not so. [n the eve of the holiday we actually
did acquire some meat from the Kadnikovskiy sovkhoz
in Sysertskiy Rayon. We have long-standing and good
relations with this farm and the collective helps the
sovkhoz., especially in harvesting the crop. But I can tell
you with complete certainty that the meat was inspected
by the veterinary service and it had a stamp, that is, their
conclusion was positive.

“We must look for the source of the disease somewhere
else. And the cause as well. Because at that time the plant
lost more than two-tenths of its workers. And this was in
peacetime...”

Specialists go on to write:

*. Individual cases of anthrax among humans have been
registered, and there were skill and intestinal forms of
the infection. The anthrax-lixe nature of the illness was
confirmed by the results of laboratory examinations of
the humans and the animals.”

What do they mean by “individual cases” Seven-tenths
of our deaths (according tu incomplete data, the Vos-
tochnaya cemetery is not the only place where they are
buried)—what about that?

And why do the authors name only two forms of infee-
tion. Anthrax in humans is manifested in three main
clinical forms: dermal, pulmonary, and intestinal, The
intestinal form appears asa result of cating the meat of ill
animals. The dermal form the causative agent enters ata
point where the skin has been injured, mainly on
exposed parts of the body (face. neck, fingers, forearms).
We admit that both of them “occurred” tn the spring of
1979,

But why did Bezdeneshnykh and Nikiforov not even
mention the pulmonary form of the infection! Perhaps
there were no cases of thiv? There were. and we are
convinced of this by the evidence from medical workers
of hospitals No. 20 and No. 24.

The problem is apparently that with the pulmonary form
the infection is aerogenic when the patient is working
with materials infected with spores of the anthras baci.
The disease progresses following the pattern of serious
bronchial pneumonia. fs this not the riddle of the strange
tragedy of 1979? In order to fall ill this way, to put rt
crudely, you have to inhale something, that is, aucrobes
that are in the air in “suspended” form!

From a conversation with Farina Afanassesv na Abramova
(former docent of the faculty of pathological anatoniy of
the Sverdlovsk Medical Institute):

“In 1979 7 was already on a pension but thes asked me to
come and work in hasprtal Na. 400 as a pathological
anatomist. So Premember well the sad exents in Apa.

JPRS-TEP-91-001
23 January 1991

“Once on Saturday—it was the end of the month—a
strong young man was sent to us and on Monday he had
already died. They asked me to examine him: They said
IL was a very complicated and incomprehensible dis-
Case...

“ALL right, We did an autopsy. One wis struck by the
intectton of the lymph nodes and the lungs. But | also
paid attention to the hemorrhagic inflammation of the
encephatr and we discovered a so-called “cardinal’s
cap What is that? Ptold them it was similar to anthrax.
But beth the clinicians and the infectious disease experts
who were present had their doubts: Enough about this
anthrax, we finished with that long ago ..

“Lashed: ts everything clean in the city, are there no
infections anywhere? And then someone admitted:
Instructions had been given to prepare a ward, they were
warting for patients, so there was something.

“We decided to conduct a bacteriological investigation,
called the department for especially dangerous infections
of the oblast sanitary-epidemiological station, and sent
the body there. The microscopic sections were filled with
anthrax microbes! And things took off...

“St turned out that in hospital No, 20 there had been an
outbreak and several deaths from pulmonary infections.
But the diagnosis was different: pneumonia. They sent
an appeal to the chief of the oblast public health depart-
ment N.S. Kikiforov. And the pathological anatomists
and court medical experts were all told that this was
indeed anthrax. We believed this and started our hellish
work,

“All the people who were infected were taken to hospital
Na, 40, With cach suspicious case in other regions of the
city we would go to the location immediately. To be safe,
during the first days the medical personnel took antibi-
otics. We had to handle a very large number of corpses,
[know for sure there were 42 bodies...

“What happened fater, after the outbreak had been
conquered’? Something that was unique in all respects. In
the highest medical circles (with the knowledge of P.N.
Burgasov) they decided “while the case was still hot™ to
prepare and publish a monograph (and in Sverdlovsk).
We planned a candidate's dissertation about this case.
Working on it with me was Lev Moiseyevich Grinberg,
who was working at that time as a pathological anatonist
in the tuberculosis hospital.

“We gathered the materials and went to Moscow,
worked another two weeks on it there, and then wrote it.
We left it there, including 80 or 90 color slides. The
morphological picture was very rich, But we never heard
ansthing more about the monograph (dissertation)!
‘Twice {| was invited to give papers about the emergency
and anthras—in Moscow (at the Botkin Hospital and in
Sverdlaysk at the oblast seminar ior pathological anato-
mists. But both times at the fast minute b heard: The
arranvements are canceled. anthras is) not included
among the especntly dangerous infections...

SOVIET UNION 23

“L have left as a ‘memento’ of those days an engraved
watch—a gift from the Sverdlovsk oblispotkum [oblast
executive committee] and the conviction that the infec-
tion of the humans in April-May 1979 was mainly
acrogenic.””

A Virus From the Department
Comments from Margarita fvanovna Henko:

“No, that was not anthras, Jam a protessional. an old
and experienced medic. The patients | siw hid pulmo-
nary and respiratory infections. Plus there was the
amazing speed with which the disease took ats course
What were we dealing with? It seems to me that it was
some microbe grown under specific conditions. And |
am very sorry that the truth about it was suppressed from
the very beginning. It would have been possible to avoid
many mistakes, incorrect actions, and fear.”

The head physician of the Scientific Research Institute
for Protection Maternity and Childhood, Tamara Fedor-
ovna Kireyeva:

“We received lists of people in the rayon from which we
are categorically forbidden to admit obstetrics patients.
They took from us to hospital No. 40 a nurse-
anesthesiologists, and through medical channels we
learned that patients from the “zone” went there—mainly
with pulmonary infections...”

What were these lists? There was a surprising pattern: An
especially large number of the names were of people
brought in from Sverdlovskaya (16 people). Eskadron-
naya, Lyapustina, Poldnevaya, Voyennaya, And agro-
nomicheskaya streets (we are speaking about hospital
No. 24)... Why? If you look at a map of the city iis nat
difficult to note: all these geographical points are...to the
south of the 19th military compound! Of the enterprises
of the rayon, workers of the ceramic items plant sulfered
especially.

The people recall: The wind during the first days of April
1979 blew mainly from the north to the south...

On 17 February of that year there was what was perhaps
an unprecedented event in Sverdlovsk. The collective of
the sector for military epidemiology (SVE}—one of the
structural subdivisions of the Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Microbiology of the USSR Ministry of Defense,
created in 1986 on the basis of the scientific research
institute of vaccines of that same department—opened
the doors of their laboratory to civilians. Invited to visit
the military scientists of the 19th compound were USSR
People’s Deputy V.1. Shmotyey, the first secretary of the
Sverdlovsk party city committer VLD. Kadochatkoy,
representatives of the rayon authorities, screntists at the
Uralsk Branch of the USSR Academy of Sciences. ceoal-
ogists, and journalists. There was an tnspection of the
heretofore classified facility and a press conference And,
of course, the conversation touched upon the events of
1979,

REN Leer ee eee Sek a Bok Mg 2
a a RDC SEE)

24 SOVIET UNION

For example, thes question was asked:

“What is the sector for militan epidemiology and what
ie

functions does tt perfor today?

“Qur sector ts a scientific research institution of the
USSR Ministry of Defense.” answered the chief of the
SVE, Candidate of Technical Sciences Colonel A.T.
Kharechko. “The serentific subject matter envisions the
solutions toa broad complex of problems in the area of
anttbactertological protection. This is the development
of means and methods of disinfection of the locality,
military equipment. arms, and various military prop-
erty, means of individual and collective protection of
humans from biological aerosols, and also means of
rapid discovers of harmful substances im the environ-
meat. We also conduct research and study of the mech-
anism of biological damage to military equipment, that
is, the influence of various natural micro-organisms on
the constituent materials of this equipment for tn nature
there are also microbes that are compatible with tech-
nology which destroy metal and plastics..."

“How does one evaluate the sector's actuviuy under the
conditions of the recently changed military and political

situation in the world” Is this work not superfluous”

“No.” objected Anatohy Trofimovich. “Research in this
area is being conducted on a broad scale in: Western
countries, although, truce, notin private laboratories but
only tn tndustriatones. And if vou look at the regulations
of the armed forces of these countries, as before they
envision measures for anubactenological protection, so
it would be unjustifiable carelessness for us to halt this
work unilaterally...

“Residents of Sverdlovsk sul! link this outbreak of
anthrax in the spring of 1979 to the activity of the
institution located on the territory of the 19th military

aye

compound. What can vou say about this?

“That opimon is profoundly nustaken. The rumors that
made their way around the city in the spring of 1979
about some outbreak that was supposed to have occurred
on the territory of our institution and the discharge of
the causalive agent of anthraa into the environment had
no real grounds. Mainly because we never had anything
todo with the outbreaks. In our laboratories there simply
were no substances, materials, or processes which could
have led to the outbreak. E think this absurd version
became widespread because the majority of people are
more inclined to believe in certain fantastic things than
in cealand natural explanatians. The ven unusual and
tragic nature of the situation apparently demanded
equally unusual and sensatronal causes. The regimen of
seerees: and the notorious departmental interests also
played no small rale here.

“Sad asttmas be. the fact that this subject 1s being raised

again now can most ttkels be captained by the caistence
of certain groups and individuals who are trying to gain

JPRS-TEP-9 1-00
23 January 1991

recognition and popularity by awakening a negative
attttude toward the army in the community. This a
destructive policy...”

And so the specialists of the sector of military epidem-
ology assert: The discharge of anthrax causative agents
trom the termton of the 19th military compound never
happened at all, nor was there any kind of outbreak

Yes, there were rumors about this amorg the population
But the discharge of poison could occur “on the quict —
through the ventilation system, for example. Betore Ease
the sector and prior to that the scientific research insu
tute engaged in the development of technulugs for the
production of vaccines for protecting the country’s
troops and population from a number of dangerous
infections. But where there 1s a vaccine there are also
Strains of virulent cultures of causative agents which
were used in the laboratones. Including anthras,

This is not the only disturbing thing. During the first
days of the outbreak medical workers paid attention
Most of the people who suffered from it were men. At the
news conference. incidentally, workers of the SVE gave
these stauustics: During the emergencs 96 people fell il
Of these 25 percent were women and 75 percent were
men. One child was also athivted.

But what does all this tell us? First of all at tells us about
the strange selectivity of the disease. ft “mawed daw”
the adult, most able-bodied population. and amany
men—in the age group from 3) to 40 veurs of age
(matnily). How does one captain all this’ Only by the faet
that, say. on that fateful day uninspected meat was
brought in to sell at the ceramics plant? Or perhaps it was
a virus that broke out randomly or was it programmed”

Look. Considerable forces were dispatched to clean up
after the outbreak. This was already discussed bricths
above. But in addition they mobilized (there 1 probably
no other way to put it) to the region of Viorchermet
automotive transportation enterprises, the city planning
service, students of the Sverdlovsk Medical {nsutute.
and so forth and so on. In the region of the 14th mualiaary
compound people in gray-green protective sults took soil
samples. In some places, particularly in the region of thy
former collective gardens behind the ceramtes plant thes
removed the upper soil layer. Certain streets were coe:
ered with a new layer of asphalt. Firemen washed dhe
roofs, sidewalks, large buildings, and houses...

Mt. Henko:

“When they began to pour a special solution everywhere
(which was intended to kill the rest of the anthras
agents), the situation, in my opinion, became worse

What was the matter? Medical eaperts assume that bs
the time of the mass work for disintecting the territory ol
the rayon, the aerosol Gf vou accept the “leakage”
version) or the so-called “dust” had alreads setled: and
been buried. And now it has been raised up inte the ait
again. The rest is understandable. Unsuspectiny people

JPRS-TEP-91-001
23 January 1991

swallowed the fatal “dust” and it infected the mucous
membrane of the upper respiratory tracts and the lungs.
Bronchiai pneumonia was the lethal outcome...”

Ask the Dead the Price of Life

One question will not leave me in peace: Why did the
military suddenly become so communicative? Of course.
today one has to deal with public opinion. USSR Peo-
ple’s Deputy GE. Burbulis showed an interest in the
events of 10 years ago in Sverdlovsk. But the main thing
is that in 1989 the sector changed over to economic
accountability. It could deliver nutrient medium to lab-
oratories on a contractual basis. conduct the most com-
plicated chemical analyses for medical experts. sterilize
instruments and materials. engage in subject research,
conduct bacteriological certification of the location, and
conduct ecological obsers ations After all the SVE has
equipment civilian laboratories could never dream ot.

But this requires partners, one must have an irreproach-
able business reputation, and in all matters one must
profess not only advantage and commercial gain but also
hunesty and confidence. This 1s probably one of the
reasons why they held the news conference in the 19th
militan, compound in February.

SOVIET UNION 2

But neither before nor after it was there any confidence
that the development of events in the spring of 197%
proceeded precisely the way the official version claims
For example, the military clearly hint that the emergency
was on the conscience of the service of the sanitars-
epidemiological stauion and it was because of their
thoughtlessress and carelessness that the anthras sproad

Well in the spring of 1979 in the outskirts ot Sverdlossh
in Sysertskiy Rayon, cases of infection of domestic catle
with anthrax were registered. But 1 ts equally probable
that this outbreak coincided in time with the “hackfire”
of the Scientific Research Institute of Vaccines and this
was subsequently used by the military department tor tts
own alidi.

The author by no means claims that his sudgmenats ate
final. And 1t would be premature and irresponstdly tee sas
the least to draw hasty and categorical conclusiens Baur
the discussion of the tragic story ot the Vanthras ut
Sverdlovsk had to occur one way OF another \nef tet
now the Soviet citizen has nu certaints that the imfertira-
tion given to him from official sources and the seeret
departments 18 objective and reliable. Examples’ The
fate of the Aral, Chernobyl}. the chain of bloads. terrbis
neglected conflicts in the Transcaucasus, the bloods
April in Tbilisi. And where 1$ the guarantee that we are
nol sitting on another bomb today.
