Scientific Intelligence Report -- the Soviet Space Research Program: Monograph Ii Objectives
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124246, dated 21 August 1959.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124246).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE REPOR

\
\

THE SOVIET SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAM

MONOGRAPH I
OBJECTIVES

21 August 1959

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE

approved for Releas° ie
Date

Bene
Scientific Intelligence Report
_ Beg THE SOVIET SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAM
MONOGRAPH II
OBJECTIVES
:
‘|

21 August 1959

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE

PREFACE

The objectives of the Soviet space research program have
been obscured by frequent and variant Soviet statements, often
by responsible officials. Nevertheless, the immediate and long-
range dbjectives can be determined to a considerable degree by
a review and evaluation of Soviet statements and activities re-
lating to principal astronautical goals, the purposes of current
space projects, and the political, military, and scientific aims
of the USSR. In considering Soviet statements, the greatest
weight must be given to those by officials and scientists who are
in a position to know Soviet plans and who have proved to be
fairly reliable spokesmen in the past.

This monograph is based on information available to 15
May 1959 and is one of 12 monographs (listed below) on the
Soviet space research program. Monographs II through XII
are designed to support the conclusions found in Monograph I,
which will be an overall evaluation of significant Soviet space
research capabilities and will be published last.

Monographs on the Soviet Space Research Program:

1 Estimate 1959-74 VII Telemetry, Communica-
ee tions, and Reconnais-

II Objectives sance Instrumentation
III Organization, Planning, VI baa Support Facili-

and Control

IX Space Medicine
X Space Biology and
Astrobiology
V Propulsion System XI Astronomical Aspects
XIL Current Status of Prog-
VI Guidance and Control ress

IV Space Vehicles

CONTENTS

n Page
BiEGE 4 lee Ee Oe ee Pee ae

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS . sds ie Be eh, A ee ah

DISCUSSION .
introduction

&

4

4

4

Ea

a

| Principal Astronautical Objectives .
Manned Interplanetary Flight .
Unmanned Controlled Vehicles .
Interstellar Flight .

Current Space Project Objectives .

Recovery Problem .

Navigation, Ecrmunicacions Guidance, Control,
Tracking, Data Handling, and Calculations .

Propellants and Sources of Power .
Bio-Medical Problems

Space Environment Research .
Radiation Shielding . :
Lunar and Interplanetary Probes ‘
Artificial Satellites

an Pee Re wD LY

Overall National Objectives .
Political Objectives
Military Objectives
Scientific Objectives .
Objectives Relating to Sino-Bloc Participation in the
Space Program . Pe oe «2
Communist China .
The European Bloc .

a
own eo ANAK aaun

rt
Poe ee

APPENDIX A— Biographic Information .
I. The USSR. . .-
It. Other Bloc Countries and Communist
China. 2 a

APPENDLK B — Sino-Soviet Bloc Statements Relating to
the Space Program . - - . . . -10A

b>

|
>

Pa ona ee ee ee.

THE SOVIET SPACE RESEARCH PROGRAM

_

\.
\

MONOGRAPH II

OBJECTIVES

SUMMARY AND

The Soviets are fully aware that their pene-
tration. of interplanetary space will present
unique opportunities to advance their na-
tional objectives, particularly those of a
political, military, and scientific nature. At
this stage of their conquest of space, they
probably have not béén able to formulate
cetailed plans along these lines, but there
are indications that they intend to take full
advantage of opportunities as they arise.
Since there are many unknowns in space re-
search, the Soviets will undoubtedly find it
necessary to reexamine their space program
from time to time.

One of the objectives of the USSR space
program which became apparent at an early
date was the use of Soviet accomplisnments
for political propaganda purposes, especially
in an attempt to convince the world of the
superiority of the USSR and the Communist
system and to intimidate the rest of the world
by the missile capabilities implied by space
successes.

The Soviets have been cautious in speaking
of the military objectives of their space pro-
gram, but they have discussed them, and it
is believed Bal oe we use spare venicles

for ofeusive and de

CONCLUSIONS

military communications, electronic counter-
measures, navigation, and reconnaissance.

The early Soviet space efforts, particularly
Sputniks II and III, demonstrated a strong
Soviet desire to advance basic science and to
increase knowledge of the earth, the solar
system, and the universe. In the fields of
astronomy and geophysics, immediate Soviet
objectives include greatly improved observa-
tions by means of instrumented satellites and ~
probes; fundamental physical experiments
have also been planned. Much of the scien-
tific interest appears to result from Soviet
objectives to find methods of tapping new
energy sources in space and exploiting the
natural resources of the moon and planets.
Some of the immediate practical objectives
of the scientific program in space include im-
proved communications; weather observa-
tions; geodetic measurements; sea-ice and
polar surveys; high precision cartography;
nuclear test detection, and the determination
of environmental radiation hazards.

The principal objective of the USSR in the
field of astronautics is to place manned and
unmanned controlled vehicles into inter-
planetary space. For manned controlled ve-

nicles its projects concern: (a) the vehicle
recovery problem; (b) space bio-medical prob-
lems; (c) protection against radiation haz-
ards; and (d) space environment research.
For both manned and unmanned controlled
vehicles, the Soviets are developing: (a) space
navigation communications, guidance, con-
trol, tracking, data handling, and calculating
devices and procedures; (6) more powerful
propellants and sources of power; (c) lunar
and interplanetary probes, with Venus and
Mars as the most probable early planetary
objectives; and (d) artificial satellites for sci-
entific, communications, and reconnaissance
purvoses. The Soviets have indicated that
some of their current projects will lead even-
tually to the establishment of multi-purpose

stations in space and on the moon and
planets.

The Soviets have discussed the problem of
sending probes beyond the solar system into
interstellar space, but there is no evidence
that such a program is being seriously con-
sidered at this time.

Indications are that the Soviets intend to
continue to use the resources of the entire
Bloc area in space research and possibly to
encourage some high-altitude-rocket sounding
programs in other leading Bloc nations.
Communist Chinese reports that they will
launch research rockets and artificial earth
satellites probably indicate that the Soviets
are considering assisting in such a program
for political and propaganda purposes.

DISCUSSION

INTRODUCTION

Events leading directly to the Soviet
launching of Sputniks I, II, and Ii and the
Lunik, Mechta rocket are generally Known.
Much less known, however, is the history of
astronautics in Russia, which dates from the
end of the nineteenth century, when L V.
Mescherskiy investigated theoretically the

f rocket flight.'7 Although Tsiolkovskiy is
credited by the Soviets as being the

his contemporaries also made fundamental
In 1929, Ya. I. Perel’man,
Fortikov, and other followers of Tsiol-
kovsxiy founded a rocket organization known
as GIRD (Group for the Study of Reactive
Motion}. Some of the papers produced by
GIRD indicated a high degree of technical
competence in the various aspects of rocketry
and space exploration.» Members of GIRD
who are still very active include I. A. Merku-
lov, Yu. A. Pobedonostsev, and M. K. Ti-
khonravov.

‘U

The Soviet Government is reported to have
organized a rocket research program in 1934,
only five years after Germany had done so.5

The Soviets have supported an aggressive
rocket research policy since 1945. They ap-
propriated most of the German rocket fac-
tories and test facilities and put several hun-
dred German rocket experts to work for them
in the USSR. Subsequent developments in-
dicate that the Soviet effort has been more
than an extension of the German program
and that it is based upon independent think-
ing and research.®

By 27 November 1953, the Soviet program
had advanced to such a point that A. N.

“Nesmeyanov, President of the Academy of

Sciences, USSR, was able to make confidently
the following public statement: ‘Science has
reached a state when it is feasible to send a
stratoplane to the moon, (and] to create an
artificial satellite of the earth... .”7
Soviet interest in space flight was further
emphasized by the action of the Presidium of
the Academy of Sciences, USSR, on 24 Sep-
tember 1954 in establishing the K. E. Tsiol-
kovskiy Gold Medal for outstanding work in
the field of interplanetary communications
(travel), to be awarded every three years be-
ginning with 19573 The name of the first
winner of the award was withheld, probably

for security re2sons.
anes ~ . ne Peet vam

tS

ime

ations: :
yy will

eartir
Soviets”
ogramn

obably
Sue. Bes

i Astronautics -Seetign.ijeidqthe V. P.

hkalov Central -Aeroaluh;.9 okie, USSR was
2rganized ay in 1954. Its stated ee

fignt for?
Seabee taehiaeat chairmati rhatign area
32! Botonravev! ita. Merkiiy 2a. D. Ser-
zpbt, R° P*Starydkowed ves: Knilebtse-
Sich’ id thtérnationa®? Astibitatitics Prize
PAS ABiiterrifer ds eesie. +. E

weil. Gat Wioic

Soe Apri the Sewetsanngunced the
fen ony ormationsof- the: Interagency. -Gemmission for
| Tabaplantiany Conaiagtetae ere) com-
posed of outstanding Soviet scientists and
=a engineers, . ~L. 1. Sedov, a leading hydrody-
* yfamicist” “Seas: “nathed chain: and M. K.
- ‘Tikhontavov: whd-as early"fs 1934" ‘designed
nd Sdctesstétty* ‘Yaunchéd? Hquid:propeliant
atmosplieric‘résearch rockef§ ‘was appointed
" vice“ thiitman: One~ of* She“ first tasks
vassigned: to.-Ehe? “group’ “was <the: “creation
of ao automitic idboratory, for. ‘scientific re-

tees peo pase aegis
;

“the’ “field ot astrorauties ion’ A national scale.
The’ ‘ICIC- acts ‘asa’ coordinating” ‘committee
to dizect* “thee activities ‘ot the Farious insti-

age pst i gpg
ie Ge PS

» 2. The: ese announcement: of} 29. -July 1955
“that: it intended:-to-launch-an-earth: satellite
during: {he International . Geophysical Year

- -($957-38 ded tonmuch -speewlation: concern-

27 > ing gnc capabilities and plans in this field,

t the Suan refused to. disclose their in-

” S ¥enti t th rat fime. A Strort‘time * ‘later, on

* 2 August, “Sedov: nel “a> ptess*conference in

vhich ne. ee a guarded Statement indicat-

-

NAAT teat cl eae op prainennantetinte retin etimtthe ape pete oe dengicen pe Fn eet da

“free assist larger. than that “or the United

States 46 %e atiiched mth“ coifiparatively
cea eudarercs: ucal zones and would

‘2 into oroit an unscectmed number cf arti

carryt Rh eghive Soviet satellite program was con-
““Etmed on it September 1956 by Academician
1 LuP.c Batdin \chairmari ‘of thedIG¥cNational
>Cornmittee of the USSR, .duringia: meeting of
athe: Comite. Special .de:tdnnen Geophysical
> Epternationele (GSAG). it Barcelona, Spain.
te Bardin, stated ethats the 2WSSRiaintended to
oon jBunch a satellite. forppem ataospheric re-

fe
‘

enters,

hen’

search during ‘the iey, but he declined to
outline the Soviet program or to disclose fur-
ther details? — -

In 1956, the Academy of Sciences, USSR,
applied for membership in the International
Astronautical Federation (IAF) and was ac-
cepted during the Seventh International As-
tronautical Congress in Rome in September
of that year. The Soviet’s lone delegate, L. I.
Sedov, was elected a. vice president, but more
than a year passed before the USSR complied
with the by-laws of the IAF and submitted a
description of the- piademy: s ICIC and a list
of members,!3 :

In December dees tina Soviets disclosed de-
tails of the extent nd nature of their upper
atmosphere - rocket ‘research program. This
came about when a delegation of 13 scientists,
headed by Academician A. A. Blagonravov,
attended the first International Congress on
Rockets and Guided Missiles in Paris. Papers
presented by S. M. Poloskov and B. A. Mirto¢
revealed some unique features of Soviet upper-
atmosphere research rockets, and the presen-
tation by A. V. Pokrovskiy indicated an ex-
tensive Soviet experimental aeromedicine pro-
gram. Subsequent to the release of this in-
formation, various articles appeared in Soviet
newspapers and Scientific journals supplying
additional information on the Soviet rocket
effort. Among the significant items was the
Soviet admission that .rocket studies of the
atmosphere had been conducted since about
1937. 413

The Soviet rocket and satellite program for
the IGY was outlined in a general manner in
June 1957 in a letter from I. P. Bardin to IGY
headquarters (CSAGI), Brussels. The pro-
gram indicated that the Soviets would fire
125 meteorological research rockets from
three different geographical zones and would
place into orbit an unspecified number of arti-
ficial earth satellites.'*

On 1 June 1957, Nesmeyanov was quoted
in the Soviet press as saying that the neces-
sary equipment and apparatus had been cre-
ated to solve the problem of artificial earth
Satellites." A week later, Nesmeyanov stated,
“Soon, literally within the next months, our:

.+.- iplahet will acquire another satellite. . The
. osttednnical difficulties that stood in ‘the way of
-l.. <the solution-of this -grandiose-task have been

overcome by our scientists.” 18 Other indica-
"RisiCtPor’s of At Wmpetiding satel{té:laitnching in-
cluded announcements in Soviet astronomical
‘atid’ radio journals “giving instructions on
-cmethads of. obserying satellites. and-receiving
theit.- transmissions.® °° : These crimdications
Saas eres eeaalis —to. few Se -Western
@antries. « SO) Oye Som

oe On 27 August, 957, ‘the’ "Soviet press carried
ee we “announcements, that successful ‘tests of an
: ' “intercontinental ‘ballistic missile had been
“carried out “in conformity with thé plan of
“scientific research work in the USSR.”
_Then came the successful orbiting of Sputnik
“On 4 Octdbér 1957, followed by Sputnik I
:ron:B Noyember 1957,-and:Sputnik-TII on 15
a May: 4958..:>These-launchings:introduced the
“new. space age.and: impressed.the world with
= Aovicl, scientific. and... military. eccomplish-
-. ments, thereby -scoring.a major .prapaganda
and-_psychological: triumph-... Sputnik III in
particular-has ‘been eV USED ass mace sci-
; entice -accomplishment.** pein sta

Added

’ "The next important Soviet step ‘in the space
résearch field was the launching of the so-
called cosmic rocket on 2 Jdnuary 1959. There
fs little doubt that it was intended as a lunar
rocket, considering advance statements by So-
viet newspapers and astronautical experts,
tue 82-hour itfe of the power, supply, the sig
nificance ut “tie? Grofficiai riame —~Luaik,”
the scientific experiments planned, “and the
a “rharker carried for the purpose of leaving evi-
dénce.of the-first_rocket to impact on the
oon.*-*5 _ Thé Soviets were. clevér €nough to
orient their propaganda, line tke it became
azens that the rocket, would no t Strike the
deawti” “hits an orbit
durid tHe sit by the *gtavitational attrac-
; on Ot E tha? body. At first, some began to call
hterstellar ‘Mechta. ”** Thereafter they referred to
it as thé first cosmic rocket, the first artificial
: planet, and the: first ‘s0lar rocket: Th spite of

ate abe shu MRF SehS

er “Lunik’ isa coined: word, a. play - on the word
Y Shttnik: meanings lttie*mdon of w*mivdri satellite.
7 Se ee ceferted fo, theacake ne “tunalet”
(moonship_ or moonflight) «7 2

“let eMechin” means !an uiNteaintife teeara,

failure+o achieve its lunar mission, the rocket
demonstrated that. the Soviets were making
-PTOBTESS * -in thelr space Tight 5 program.

: PRINCIPAL- ASTRONAUTICAL OBJECTIVES:

“Manned. “Interplanetary_ Flight

-Mannéd- space - flight.on an’ interplanetary
scale isthe. announced:goai-of the Interagency
Commission for Interplanetary Communica-
tions (ICIC), of the Academy of Sciences,
USSR.*° Various spokesmen have repeatedly
confirméd this’ as a principal Soviet objec-
tives Controlled flight in vehicles capable
of returning to earth is implied in the ICcIC
Statement. _

Unmanned Controlled Vehicles

--Av-number of leading astronautics experts,
have mentioned the desirability of using un-
manned controlled vehicles in interplanetary
space_exploration, pointing out that the use
of such devices eliminates many of the basic
difficulties — such as biological, shielding, re-
covery, and excessive weight problems — en-
countered in manned vehicles. The develop-
ment of unmanned space vehicles is expected
to continue to receive a great deal of atten-
tion by the Soviets because their initial in-
vestigations of space will be conducted with
such vehicles. Highly developed unmanned
rockets and satellites, therefore, will be im-
portant stepping stones in the accomplish-
ment of mannéd* ‘space flight and, , accordifig.
to some Soviet views, they will always be
preferable. because of cost and safety factors
for certain types of space exploration. A. G.
Karpenko, V. I. Krassovskiy,*7 and Yu. S.
Khlebtsevich * ** have’ advocated’ ‘the use of
vehicles of this type.

-of Sciences, USSR, reportedly is Seg on
‘associated Eecplees ae

“Interstellai “Flight Pres ar

es __ Responsible Soviet “sciéntists have not en-
solar Stee into thterstellar: space is attain-
able in the foreseeable future. Typical of the
statements relating to this problem is that by

The Institute of Auto- —
“Mblics and.” Telemechanics, of the Academy
