The Soviet Space Program
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012997, dated 4 February 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012997).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ee =e s, NIE 1-1-6747,
wos EBPLIBRARY 7° 2 March 1967,
eet ‘Mandatory Review, 9

PM jG oe
ponies mre iaatert a

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE -
NUMBER - 7 ~67

The Soviet Space Program |

ue .

x

Handle_ Via Indicated Controls

DEPUTY DfRECTOR OF-CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
_ | Coneurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD. oe,
wc As indicated ‘overleaf

. 2 MARCH 1967

. Authenticated: - ; pues iy Ad fe Q BL
a ree ; Date

si Pages 38
CUTIVE SECRETAR

Copy No. ‘i

1.3(a){4)

a ra aa Yoel er eg +
PP EL LE SLI LE EEE EOP EEL LEP CLE OEP EE EL

‘
-
«
. : .
. >
a wh yer gia At * . , : fate at teas : se : : :
ees ieee : ‘ i wuts F, *
SGM capers la ; tan ge wheel | sd 4 “3 z
ee a ‘ 1 oe ae . ogee . * y
sae pees : : : . :
iy oy * nt 1 4 Rare + te 4 L u , - . i ‘
Te Sa eee ARE ae . a rs ee Tera eo ae 1k a hed fie ; Fti a : ; ~
" : ae ‘ . sz ibeaeeal on i sah .

CONTENTS
Page
THE PROBLEM ......-..-.2-.2.00-- ices Cuan inet ycsoesea sates atess 1
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS .........00 0.0.2. e seen eee ees ome |
DISCUSSION “vsieas doh east co New actin hed e eee At sop et 4
I. SOVIET SPACE LAUNCHES OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS ....... 4
A. General ....... per hee et eae See f Be sh telainatinan etl Tae eet nee ate 4
B. Manned Flight ....... aie eels at rend. canta slay Si site tastes SAR aie aha Be 4
C. Unmanned Scientific Satellites ... 2.20.00... eee eee ee,
D. Lunar and Planetary Probes ........ 20.0000. 0 0. cece eee eee 5
Es Applied. Satetites: o..0 sano ces eee y deen vairewts Roh. 2204 6.
Meteorological Satellites ............ Reedy c taurine A 2 fo
Communications Satellites ........0. 000.0. c cee eee ee ioe 8
F. Military Systems .................. nd taatih gale ea aay einai Led es
Photoreconnaissance 2.0.0.0... cee ee nets 7
Space Weapons .....-- 2... ccc eeen eee t eee eee ee teees 7
G. Uncategorized Space Launches ...........0...0 cee cece ee eee 8.
Il. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FUTURE |
PROSPECTS i324 Aepctiieceep ag diniia cate Mal leone eiucees Ekg Est 8
JIL. OTHER FACTORS ...... 0.000060 .0ccccec cee eececeeeceeeeeeaeenees 15
IV. OUTLOOK FOR THE NEAR TERM (1967-1972) ...............0. 17
A. General ............. seetunseiedat Netw. any leis me sel calstierea sar ae sep 17
B. Manned Lumar Landing ..................000.4- er eh ane th 18
CG. Manned: ‘Space: Station: 0.2 vis Seat ivie s Sa ws ee 19
D. Manned Circumlunar ..... eT EY ee et ee ee ee 20
E. Lunar and Planetary Probes ............. Beeb eae Rae pny a inh. eokee 2 20
Be Applied Satellites”. 2 inccsccvasoe bea eae rk enyee is Hest og bre Gis 2)
G. Possible Soviet Military Useswof Space ..............-...-0--000--- 22
H. Unmanned Exploration of Near Space ............-.... 00-2005 005- 24
V. THE LONG-TERM OUTIBOOK ....:.....--....----- ate igh nS SP fe 24
Pi, PACtORS MCCUE: os ot fats id sey Pa ghinae Say haw ae yep eerie ees 24
B. Possibility of Soviet Cooperation in Space Matters ................. 26
C. Possible Undertalongs: oi ...5 sia eee adel wae bee Cee tape et eetes 26

ANNEX:

ESTIMATED TIMING OF MAJOR SOVIET SPACE EVENTS
SOVIET SPACE LAUNCHES SINCE 1960
HISTORY OF SOVIET MANNED SPACEFLIGHT PROJECTS

HISTORY OF SOVIET LAUNCHINGS OF LUNAR AND PLANETARY
PROBES

qAlay(a)

et. ots tale

srormenensl | 1

THE SOVIET SPACE PROGRAM

THE PROBLEM

Tfayigy

To estimate Soviet capabilities and probable accomplishments in *

space over the next 5 to 10 years.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

A. The space program has retained a high priority among Soviet
national objectives. The number of space launches attempted during
the past two years was nearly equal to the total of the preceding
seven. Nevertheless, Soviet achievements were less spectacular than
previously. For the most part, the Soviets exploited existing hardware
_ to carry out unmanned space exploration and intensive satellite recon-
* naissance, and to expand space applications. There have been no

manned flights since March 1965.

B. A continuing high level of development activity and construc-
tion of major new launch facilities suggest that a new series of ad-
vanced space missions is likely in the next few years. Until mid-
1965, the Soviets used military boosters almost exclusively, but they
are now developing launch yehicles, specifically for the space pro-
gram. They have tested a new booster with a thrust of 2.5 to 3 million
pounds which was used_tg launch the Proton satellites. And they are
building a major new launch facility (Area J) at Tyuratam that will
be able to take vehicles with a first-stage thrust in the 8,000,000-
16,000,000 pound range; it will be completed next year.

C. The Soviets have probably planned some form of space spec-
tacular during 1967 in connection with the 50th anniversary of the
October Revolution or the 10th anniversary of Sputnik I. This might
involve the orbiting of a 25 ton space station, a new manned space-
craft, or some activity involving both. We cannot predict the precise

—emereres) | - | ASfayay

2 ome _| 43a)

nature of the spectacular but believe that the event will be confined
to near-earth space.

D. Costs of the Soviets space program have risen sharply over the
past few years, but now appear to be leveling off. The program will
continue to take a significant share of resources of the same type re-
quired for strategic military programs and for economic growth.
While the present Soviet leaders may try to effect economies in cer-
tain sectors, we consider it unlikely that they can effect any basic
changes in the overall nature of the program for the next five years.
As for the longer term outlook—5 to 10 years hence—we doubt that the
Soviet leaders have yet come to firm decisions as to the scope and
pace of their space program; certainly we have no basis for detailed
estimates of Soviet space activities during this period.

He

E. In view of competing claims on their resources, we believe that
the Soviets will not be able to undertake simultaneously all the projects
within their technical capabilities. Further, we do not believe that the
Soviets will seek to establish a large space station and to achieve a
manned lunar landing concurrently. The dates estimated for these
ventures are based on technical feasibility; we cannot estimate the or-
der in which they may be attempted.

F. Manned Lunar Landing. Two years ago, we estimated that
the Soviet manned lunar landing program was probably not intended
to be competitive with the Apollo program as then projected, ice.,
aimed at the 1968-1969 time period. We believe this is still the case.
There is the possibility, however, that depending upon their view of
the Apollo timetable, the Soviets may feel that there is some prospect of
their getting to the moon first, and they may press their program in
hopes of being able to do so.. Considering the Soviet technical capabili-
tiés, the status of construction at Area J, and the various techniques
that might be employed, we estimate that the earliest the Soviets could
attempt a manned lunar landing would be mid-to-late 1969. We be-
lieve that the most likely date is sometime in the 1970-1971 time period.

G. Manned Circumlunar Flight. The Soviets will probably at-
: tempt a manned circumlunar flight during the next few years. They
probably consider this venture one of the few within their capabilities
that could offset some of the propaganda value of a successful US
lunar landing. We consider it unlikely that the Soviets would attempt

L | ome] | 1.3(@)(4)

this mission before the first half of 1968, although it is conceivable that
they would accept the high risks involved in making the attempt as
an anniversary spectacular in late 1967. _

H. Manned Space Stations. We believe that the establishment of
a manned space station is also a Soviet objective. A space station of
about 50,000 pounds weight and capable of carrying a crew of three
or more could probably be orbited in the first half of 1968. By using
the launch vehicle under development for Area J, the Soviets could
orbit a space station weighing 200,000-300,000 pounds by about mid-
1969 at the earliest, but we believe sometime in the 1970-1971 time
period to be more likely. _

| eons] | 3. dB(ajy4)

I. Military Systems. The expansion of the Soviet satellite recon-
naissance project over the last two years shows that projects of demon-
strable strategic value can and will be funded. The Soviets will prob-
ably continue to support this program at about the present level and
provide it with improved collection and data-handling systems over
the next few years. They will probably give increased emphasis to
systems which have both civil and military support applications, in-
cluding communications, meteorological, and navigation satellites.

J. During the past year, the Soviets have conducted fight tests
% ~~ which could lead to a strategic space weapon system. We estimate
that a fractional orbit bombardment system could be deployed in small
numbers by late 1967 or early 1968. We cannot at this time estimate
the likelihood that the Soviets will choose to deploy such a system.
On the one hand, it would complicate the US defense problem; on the
other, it would be more complex, more costly, and less accurate than
ICBMs. If such a system is deployed, the Soviets would probably
regard it as a supplement to_existing strategic attack forces and would
deploy it in relatively small ‘numbers. In view of Soviet agreement
to the treaty on peaceful uses of space as well as the operational dis-
advantages of a multiple orbit bombardment system, we do not believe
that the Soviets will deploy and maintain weapons in space during
the period of this estimate.

1.8{a)(4)

ome JL OS

u

q 4 | |

4310)
DISCUSSION

i 1. SOVIET SPACE LAUNCHES OVER THE PAST TWO YEARS

; A. General

_ 1, During the past two years the Soviet space program has retained its high
priority among major national objectives. It has placed significantly increased
demands on the economy for scarce resources of the same general type and
quality as those required for strategic military programs and for investment for
economic growth. The number of space launches attempted in this period
nearly equals the total number of launches attempted in the previous seven years.

2. The Soviets scored some dramatic “firsts” during this period, including the
spacewalk by Leonov during the flight of Voskhod II, the lunar soft landing of
Luna 9 and the lunar orbiting Luna 10. But in general, their achievements in
space were much less spectacular than previously. For the most part, they
exploited available hardware, especially boosters, to engage in unmanned space
exploration, an intensive photoreconnaissance program, and an expansion in the
scope of their space applications.

ay

3. The Soviets have, however, given a high priority to research and develop-
ment (Rand D) on new space systems. Three new programs were brought to
flight phase during the past two years: the heavy (27,000 pound) Proton satel-
lites, which were launched with a new 2.5 to 3 million pound thrust booster; a
; maneuverable satellite capable of small orbital adjustments; and a system which
: probably relates to the development of fractional orbit weapons, depressed
trajectory ICBMs, or both. In addition, construction of major new launch
facilities and R and D on associated hardware for more advanced future missions
has continued at a rapid pace.

4. The Soviets have failed to carry out certain activities which we consider
4 essential to, their manned space program and which we believe they could have
5 undertaken during 1965 and 1966. They have not attempted rendezvous and
docking, although test of unmanned maneuverable space hardware since Decem-
ber 1985 may relate to the development of this capability. They have not under-
taken a long duration manned flight (e.g., of 2 to 3 weeks duration), but a
manned flight scheduled for the spring of 1966 and later cancelled may have
related to this problem, and there was a 22 day flight of two dogs earlier in the
year. No high speed reentry tests to, simulate lunar return problems have been
conducted, and no water landing and recovery techniques which probably would
be required on lunar return have been demonstrated. Most notable, however,
is the hiatus in manned space flights of any kind in the nearly two years since
March 1965.

B. Manned Flight?

5. The only manned flight conducted by the Soviets during 1965 and 1966
was Voskhod II, a two man mission which was launched on 18 March 1965 and

*See Annex for history of Soviet manned spaceflight projects.

|. : somcrens| | alae)

.

ee .

successfully deorbited the following day. The Voskhod II incorporated an air-
lock which allowed one of the cosmonauts to perform the first extravehicular
activity or spacewalk ever attempted. Cosmonaut Leonoy emerged from the
vehicle via the airlock and spent some 10 minutes outside, attached to the space-
craft by an umbilical line but without any propulsion aid. Leonov experienced
some of the discomforts subsequently noted by several US astronauts. ea

|The manually controlled deorbit resulted in about a
700 n.m. “overshoot” of the planned recovery area.

6. In February 1966, the Soviets launched Cosmos 110 which was a Voskhod-
like vehicle containing two dogs and a variety of other biological specimens.
The Cosmos 110 environmental control system was probably intended to support
a month-long flight with dogs, the equivalent of 12 man days.

ae

7. In view of the importance of the manned space effort in terms of system
development, cosmonaut training, and national prestige, we do not believe that
the Soviets originally planned a gap of as long as two years in their manned
space program. Available evidence provides no certain explanation for this
hiatus. It may be that a combination of technical and political considerations
caused the decision to cancel the Voskhod flight scheduled to take place during
this period. It appears that the Voskhod spacecraft has been exploited to about
its limit. Rather than risk a more daring venture than the Voskhod II fight,

{which at worst might have resulted in failure or at best compared unfavorably

with the achievements of the US Gemini program, the Soviets may have decided
to forego further manned missions until they had a new spacecraft, which we
believe to be under development. An earlier gap of 16 months in Soviet manned
space flights occurred in 1963-1964 while minor modifications were made to the
Vostok capsule to upgrade it to the Voskhod.

C. Unmanned Scientific Satellites

8. The rate of launching from Kapustin Yar of the unmanned, Cosmos series
of scientific satellites has proceeded’at a fairly deliberate pace since the program
was introduced in late 1961. There have been no major changes over the past
two years in launch vehicle~eenfigurations or orbital parameters. The three
Proton satellites, launched from Tyuratam, were almost certainly used for cosmic
ray research, but the primary purpose of these firings was probably to test the
new 2.5 to 3 million pound thrust booster.

D. Lunar and Planetary Probes”

9. For the past two years the Soviet program of lunar exploration has con-
centrated on two objectives: soft lunar landing and orbiting the moon. Both

objectives have included photographing the moon’s surface. Six attempts were

*See Annex for history of Soviet launchings of lunar and planetary probes.

cower LE

43fayay

1.

a

3(a)(4)

nae }
é secscorer| “| :

made to soft land a vehicle on the moon’s surface, of which the last two were
successful: Lunas 9 and 13 succeeded in putting 220 pound packages on the
moon which transmitted 360° panoramas of the moon’s surface and the photo-
graphs were of good quality; Luna 13 also tested the firmness of the surface.
Three lunar probes (Lunas 10, 11, and 12) successfully orbited the moon, but
only from Luna 12 do we have evidence that a successful photographic mission
was carried out. The photographs were of poor quality.

10. The Soviets attempted three Venus probes in the past two years, all in
1965. Only two of these launches were even moderately successful: Venus 2
transmitted no data as it few past the planet, missing by about 13,000 n.m.,
and Venus 3 allegedly impacted on the planet but no signals were transmitted
during the terminal phase.

11. Until recently the Soviets had used every opportunity available to launch
probes toward Venus and Mars since their interplanetary probe program began
in 1960. They did not, however, take advantage of the “window” to Mars which
opened on J January 1967 and closed in February. Failure to capitalize on this
opportunity may indicate that the unprofitable planetary program—16 consecu-
tive failures—has been curtailed in an attempt to reduce expenditures for space.
On the other hand, the Soviets may have elected to standdown their planetary
program temporarily until a new system is ready for use in that program.

E. Applied Satellites
Meteorological Satellites

12. In the past two years the Soviets have orbited four, possibly five, satellites
in their meteorological ESV program. Cosmos 118 and Cosmos 122 both pro-
duced usable cloud photographs. Some of those from Cosmos 122 were sent
to the US last fall pursuant to the 1962 bilateral agreement to exchange satellite-
collected weather data. This satellite ceased transmitting on 28 October. The
TV and infrared photography is of about the same quality as that produced by
similar US systems. On 28 February 1967, the Soviets placed Cosmos 144 in
orbit. While the Soviets haye not yet announced the purpose of this vehicle,
Ce is a meteorological satellite. If so, it may be the aia)

st of an operational system. ~ 1.

tee
oT. SL

Communications Satellites :

13. In the past two years, the Soviets have successfully orbited four com-
munications satellites of the Molniya class. These satellites have been used
experimentally to relay high capacity, multichannel telephone and telegraph
communications, television, and other information forms between Moscow and
distant areas of the USSR, mainly Vladivostok. They have also been used to
initiate a link with France for the exchange of television programs, and to serve
as a platform for an earth-scanning television camera. The Molniya system
has not yet been put into routine operation but is still under development and is
being subjected to extensive tests and experimentation.

_ ba: E soos oe aatay4)

F. Military Systems
Photoreconnaissance

14. The Soviet photoreconnaissance satellite program has continued at a high
rate (about two launches per month) over the past two years. This program
has enjoyed one of the highest priorities in the entire Soviet space effort, ac-
counting for almost half of all space launchings during this period. "The high
priority and the use of time-tested hardware, have made the photoreconnaissance
effort the most successful of all Soviet unmanned space programs. The program
involves two basic types of reconnaissance vehicles. One payload weighs about
10,400 pounds and performs a low resolution photographic mission (i.e., a ground
resolution on the order of 10 to 30 feet under average conditions) and probably
collects Elint as well. The second type of payload weighs about 12,000 pounds;
it conducts a higher resolution photographic mission, and we believe it achieves
ground resolutions on the order of 5 to 10 feet under average conditions. Under
ideal conditions the resolution could be somewhat better. The Soviets recover
the photography acquired by both systems by deorbiting the entire spacecraft into
the Kazakhstan recovery area after missions of about eight davs.

15. General considerations Mead

us to judge that this extensive Téconnaissance program was probably undertaken
to accomplish the following:

a. To precisely target US nuclear strike forces, especially ICBM sites; to
monitor their status, and to detect new deployments.

b. To map areas of general military interest, especially those bordering the
USSR.

c. To monitor the development and testing of new: military systems, not
only in the US but also in Communist China.

d. To monitor large-scale military and naval activity.
Space Weapons

16. During the past year, the Soviets have conducted R and D tests involving
a system (which we have designated the SS-X-6) which could lead to a strategic
space weapons system. This “system (the SS-9 ICBM booster with a new third
stage and reentry vehicle) has been used in two types of tests.

17. On 19 May 1966, in the last of three suborbital flights, the second and
third stages and the reentry vebicle were launched on a 4,600 n.m. ballistic tra-
jectory having an apogee of only 120n.m. (Soviet ICBMs fired to the same range
on normal trajectories would reach apogees of 450-680 n.m.)

21a)

ast

| Bey

amet | TO

toe Te Ga nee See bite

oo

This suggests that this was a test of components and techniques for .

a weapon system.

18. In September and November of 1966 and again in January 1967, the same

type of system was used to put the second and third stages, and the reentry
vehicle, into low earth orbit. We think that a deorbit was intended during
the first orbit and that the vehicles were to impact on the Kapustin Yar range. Le

the reentry vehicle being deorbited in the January test and believe
that test was successful; the other two tests were probably failures.

19. We believe that these tests relate to the development of a fractional orbit
bombardment system, a depressed trajectory ICBM, or both. Either would serve
to degrade the value of the US BMEWs and complicate the US problem of
developing effective ABM defenses. The tests could also relate to the develop-
ment of a multiple orbit bombardment system.

G. Uncategorized Space Launches

20. Two satellites whose complete mission is yet to be determined have been
launched from Tyuratam under the Cosmos series designation. These vehicles
are Cosmos 102 and 125. these vehicles em-
ployed a new propulsion device for injection of the payload into orbit. Another

— system was probably used to effect minor changes in the orbit.

A probable mission of these satellites
was to evaluate the injection and orbit-adjust maneuver propulsion engines and
the vehicle attitude control system. Such systems may be incorporated into an
improved manned spacecraft.

21. Since 1964 the Soviets have launched seven multiple payload vehicles
whose mission cannot be determined. The launch system employs a reignitable
second stage which places 2 to 5 payloads into selected orbits. These launches
may be associated with the initial phases of a communication/navigation satellite
program.

a
=

il.. SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL FACTORS AFFECTING FUTURE |
PROSPECTS ee eee

22. General. Soviet capabilities in the basic and pplicdia sciences will probably
be adequate throughout the period of this estimate to support an ambitious space
program. Any difficulties encountered are more likely to arise from tech-
nological than from scientific limitations. Space payloads designed by the
Soviets have historically been much heavier than their US counterparts, in part,
because of their early decision to develop boosters of very large thrust and
in part because of their tendency to use cumbersome, but proven components and
subsystems rather than develop new, more advanced hardware specifically for

space.

a

1 468(a)(4)

4.3(a){4)

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

ime 4B. 4

23. The weight penalty imposed by the Soviet practice of using heavier, and
simpler equipment in space payloads is not critical for near-earth operations.
We believe that current Soviet technology could be extended with comparative
ease to conduct further operations of this type. In more ambitious programs,
such as a manned lunar landing, the saving of weight assumes greater importance.
Advances in miniaturization, packaging, and other weight saving techniques as
well as more powerful propellants would be needed to make more complicated
missions practicable. Development of such technology is almost certainly under-
way at the present time. :

j #.8fa)(4)

24, High Energy Propellants. A study of Soviet open source literature indi-
cates an interest in high energy propellants such as liquid hydrogen and fluorine.

A.3{ay(4)

To date, no Soviet fight tests or space Jaunches have been detected which
' used high energy propellants in any of the stages. However, we believe some
phases of static testing are now being conducted and flight testing could begin
in 1968-1969, possibly as part of the development of the system intended for
Area J, and that about 1970 or shortly thereafter high-energy upper stages could
be man-rated and available for use with existing or more advanced space launch
systems. Such upper stages will increase the capability and efficiency of the
launch systems available to the Soviets and permit considerable flexibility in
planning future space missions.

25, Launch Vehicles. In all their major space activities from 1957 through
yhid-1965, the Soviets used military boosters fitted with additional upper staging.
The present Soviet inventory of boosters and the wide range of their payload
capability have allowed them to pursue a diversified program. To undertake more
complex space missions in the future, however, the Soviets are evidently now
being forced to develop large boosters specifically for the space program; their
military vehicles are not adequate for such missions. The chart on the following

. page depicts the various launch vehicle configurations the Soviets have used to
date and shows the SL (space launcher) designations we have assigned to each.

26. The booster designated SL-9, which is used in the Proton satellite program,
is the first Soviet booster which we believe will be used solely as a space launcher.
It is possible that this booster- was originally to-serve as a delivery system for
the 100-MT nuclear weapon (of which Khrushchev boasted in the early 1960's)
as well as for space launchings, but we now believe that the former is very
unlikely to be a present Soviet objective? The SL-9 system has an estimated
first-stage thrust of 2.5 to 3 million pounds and has demonstrated an earth-orbit
payload capability of about 27,000 pounds. There _are reasons to believe, how-
ever, that this system will soon be modified.

=

co 2.
wef Jb oa

4, -aovas ay
2. SAQNTONI
7

£ INES =;
@ ‘EL RININdS *

LB“ LOaOd °

ee

seetenngseeeyig renee

4 3TAILIOW
SHG

*

‘ “Y 0004
$vL ‘ol SOWSO)D

* ot '6 9 ‘sy MINNdS
NOIRE |,
‘-qyoi90108OTW
NODHU SY MOT.

i ooo'eroo0%
AGVOWWWd 9-X°SS

: >

aovis
i AaVIINVid

ae ee NOISOA > *
ek -Mooo's-ooozt (2sv‘aa)avNAT .
: oe oe dite I GOHNSOA-} zi 535
o i NO? NODga ‘saa HOIH 2“). 5S : 7

. BMS g ” wAIntiow eae -, . OFESOWSOD a .
*e OL MB 000E Hag. : AMWUUNYId OL. | BOUL Son 7 _ :
F é Ask: NO1OUd - (Supied) aynnt ~ os ae :
2 1 aig 2 ee z BEES ag nee eS - (speojAeg Pp ej;e Wea) a

10

. | 7 | SS 19IHSA HONNV1 AOVdS LAIAOS

eet | 7

We therefore estimate that a third stage will
soon be employed with the basic SL-9.

27. The SL-9 with suitable upper staging would provide the Soviets with
the capability to attempt a variety of advanced space missions, including manned
space stations and manned circumlunar flights as well as more ambitious un-
manned planetary missions. The addition of a third stage employing con-
ventional ¢ propellants, would allow a payload of some 50,000-60,000 pounds to
be placed into near-earth orbit. With this in-orbit weight and a suitable in-
jection stage, also using conventional propellants, a payload of approximately
15,000 pounds could be placed into a lunar transfer trajectory. We estimate
that a payload of this weight would be adequate for the Soviets to attempt
a manned circumlunar flight. The use of a high-energy third stage would allow
a 70,000-80,000 pound payload to be orbited,

__|We believe that initial unmanned firings of the SL-9
with a conventional third stage will occur in the first half of 1967. Manned
flights using this system could begin some six months to a year later, depending
on the rapidity and success of the unmanned testing.

28. The construction of Complex J at Tyuratam makes it clear that the Soviets
have under development another and much larger booster. Complex J is a
very large launch facility which appears to be of the same magnitude as the
US Apollo Jaunch complex at Merritt Island. It has been under construction
for the past 344 years and we estimate that it will be ready for initial launch
z operations in the first half of 1968 at the earliest. |__

will accommodate vehicles with a first-stage
thrust in the 8,000,000-16,000,000 pound range. It is possible that the system
utilizing the J-Booster will incorporate the SL-9 as its second and third stages.
If such a combination were to be launched initially by about mid-1968, it
could be ready for manned space missions by about mid-1969. If the entire
vehicle is new, however, and uses conventional propellants in all its stages it
could probably not be man-rated before 1970 at the earliest. Either combina-
tion would permit payloads of 200,000-300,000 pounds to be put in near-earth
orbit. The use of a high energy propellant in the out-of-earth-orbit ejection
stage for either of these combinations would allow them to be ready for manned
flight about 1970 or shortly thereafter.

29. Spacecraft. A new manned spacecraft which may be capable of rendezvous
and docking has probably now reached the early, unmanned flight test phase.
On 28 November 1966, and again on 7 February 1967, the Soviets used an SL-4
to launch Cosmos 133 and 140. The Cosmos 133 payload was deorbited on
30 November and Cosmos 140 on 9 February. During the flight of Cosmos

‘We define conventional propellants as those which have been used thus far in the Soviet

eee, oh te

launch vehicles.

1.3fayay

4.3(a)(4)

1.3(a)(4)

| 1.3(a)(4)

12 omeens| |

140, inplane adjustments were in the orbit. This
ead us to believe the Soviets are testing a
new spacecraft.

30. We have insufficient data to evaluate fully the characteristics of this new
spacecraft. The weight the SL-4 system can place into near-earth orbit is limited
to about 15,000 pounds. We think the Cosmos 140 vehicle weighed some 12,000-
15,000 pounds. These firings probably were for the purpose of checking newly
developed capsule subsystems as well as testing an entirely new spacecraft.

31. A new maneuverable spacecraft, about the weight of the Voskhod but with
more usable volume, would be a very valuable adjunct to some of the space
ventures, such as a manned circumlunar flight, in which the Soviets have
expressed interest. Such a vehicle could be designed for rescue, ferrying, and in-
spection purposes and thus could be useful to support a long-lived orbiting sta-
tion. It could also be adapted to an unmanned reconnaissance mission. If
Cosmos 133 and 140 were, in fact, the first test of a new spacecraft, an initial
manned flight could occur by mid-1967. We believe the Soviets will develop
still larger and more efficient manned space vehicles which will allow more
sophisticated and venturesome missions to be performed.

32. Command and Control for Near-Earth Orbit. The Soviet capability to
undertake complex earth orbital operations is limited by certain major weak-
nesses in the USSR’s command and control network. Some existing deficiencies
relate to point-to-point communications within the USSR; these will probably
be eliminated in the near future as the internal network of long distance com-
munications becomes operational. Although we believe the internal command
and control network generally will be adequate to support most single missions,
the lack of a worldwide tracking and communications network may handicap
the Soviets in the performance of some orbital operations and will be a severe
handicap if the Soviets attempt to control several operational systems, each
consisting of several orbiting vehicles. Major improvement to Soviet tracking
capability would result from additional tracking stations almost any place outside
the USSR. Soviet interest in acquiring tracking stations abroad has been high.
Cuba, where the Soviets have installed an optical tracking station and are going
to construct a Molniya receiver station, may, be the site of the first Soviet
land-based tracking station outside the territory of the USSR. Soviet efforts to
establish a tracking station in Australia have been frustrated. Current Soviet
activities in the UAR and Somalia may foréshadow attempts to establish tracking
stations in one of those countries.

33. Command and Control for Deep Space. The deep-space tracking facilities
located in the Crimea and currently used in unmanned lunar and planetary
flights limit tracking and communications to interrupted schedules. The actual
time available for tracking and communications for lunar probes depends upon
the lunar declination and varies from about 8 to 16 hours a day. We believe that
the ability to track and communicate with manned lunar flights on a 24 hours
per day basis is needed to help insure the safety of such missions. The Soviets

i 2 Ve J

Saley

1 Slayiay

- —_
. ; '
. é : ;

momceeiei| “| 13

could, however, undertake manned lunar flights even with their limited tracking
and communication capability by accepting the calculated risk of not being able to
communicate with the spacecraft for certain periods of time If the Soviets
constructed facilities in their Far East areas, they could increase significantly the
time available for contact with their lunar missions There is no evidence that
any facilities comparable to those in the Crimea are being installed elsewhere,
however, and we believe their construction would require at least two years.

4.3(2)(4)

34, The Soviets could also extend the time available for communicating with
their lunar mission by using appropriately equipped ships as relay centers between
the spacecraft and the control center. To be effective, such a system would re-
quire a high capacity communications link between the ship and the control
center. Without this high capacity link, communications would be limited to _
relay of verbal instructions and system status summaries and would not permit *
positive mission control. We have no evidence that the Soviets have installed
the necessary equipment on any of their surface ships as yet but the develop-
ment of a system using such shipborne relay links is well within their capability.
The Soviets could conceivably use communications satellites as relay links be-
tween surface stations for deep space flights.

35. Rendezvous and Docking. Critical to many advanced types of manned
space missions is the requirement to develop techniques for rendezvous and
docking of vehicles in space. New Soviet spacecraft, unlike the Vostok and
Voskhod, will probably be designed for rendezvous and docking and will incor-
porate the necessary equipment for maneuverability, engine restart, and hook-up.

: Soviet technology is sufficiently advanced to make available the various sensors
required for such spacecraft, ie., radar and transponders. If Cosmos 133 and
140 were the initial tests of a mew spacecraft designed for rendezvous and
docking, the Soviets could conduct initial manned missions of these types using
currently available launch systems within the next few months.

36. Recovery. The point of reentry into the earth’s atmosphere of lunar return
trajectories would lie between 27° south and 27° north latitude on the earth’s
surface, depending upon the declination of the moon at the time of the flight.
The Soviet land mass lies well north of this band. Thus, any spacecraft which
did not incorporate some means for altering its reentry trajectory could not be
recovered within the USSR. Since we believe having an on-board propulsion
system for altering reentry- trajectories would be impractical, the Soviets need
to develop a spacecraft having some aerodynamic lift characteristics or, alterna-
tively, to develop a water recovery capability. There are no firm indications that
the Soviets have conducted aerodynamic reentry tests or that they are develop-
ing a water recovery capability but tests of either could begin at any time.
We believe that the time required to develop a recovery technique would not
be a limiting factor in the Soviet manned lunar program. ,

37. Reentry. Some Soviet scientists have indicated that reentry at lunar
return velocities is one of the major problems confronting them in their lunar
program. The angle of reentry into the earth's atmosphere must be kept within

F 7 a as

14 —romensner| od ABtayay

very narrow limits. If the angle is too steep, accelerations would be too great
for a manned spacecraft to withstand. On the other hand, if the reentry’ angle
is too shallow the spacecraft would “skip” off the earth’s atmosphere back into
space. :

38. An additional reentry problem is that of heating. The ablative material
used on the Vostok would be adequate to protect a spacecraft having no aero-
dynamic lift characteristics. Heat shielding for a spacecraft having some degree
of lift presents a different problem because the heat absorbed is greater. Further-
more, the higher aerodynamic forces exerted on the spacecraft would tend to
strip away the heat shield material.

39. We believe that the Soviets will have to test their new spacecraft, whatever
its shape, under conditions expected on lunar return trajectories. Boosted re-
entries from earth orbit or from high altitude ballistic trajectories could produce
some necessary test data, but for full scale simulations of lunar return velocities,
the Soviets must conduct an unmanned circumlunar flight or wait until the Area J
vehicle is available.

ay

40. On Board Power. The majority of Soviet spacecraft fown to date have
used chemical batteries or solar cells for electrical power supply.
_poviet chemical battery] _Weight-efficiencies of about 55
watt hour/pound, which compares favorably with current US capabilities. The
Soviets could increase this figure to 70 watt hour/pound if they feel the need
to save weight. Radioisotope/thermoelectric conversion systems which were a
used in two Soviet satellites orbited in 1965 delivere isa of electric Vy,
power respectively, a capacity far too small to be used in a life support system. y

41. During the past 2. to 3 years the Soviets have been pursuing intensified R
and D directed toward the development of fuel cells. Performance testing of
fuel cells using the hydrogen-oxygen reaction principle is probably underway

e estimate the Soviets could
have fuel célls suitable for short space missions now.

42, Biomedical. The Soviets probably now have. sufficient biomedical data to
plan with confidence a manned flight of 1 to 2 weeks; this would be adequate
for either a manned circumlunar or lunar landing mission, At present, however,
the Soviets appear to be concerned with the effects on ‘human beings of con-
siderably longer duration flights (i.e., about 30 days or more). There are few
indications of how they will solve the biomedical problems associated with
flights of that duration, but we believe that practical solutions should be ready in
time for long-duration projects in the next few years.

43. The Soviets have numerous facilities for simulating various aspects of space
environment including centrifuges for G stresses, low pressure and low tempera-
ture chambers, suspension devices for simulating reduced gravity, and various
devices and equipments for experimentation with men and animals in closed

| - | aor-ceenen|_ | Taya

—aneceret| _| 15

environments. These facilities and activities are probably adequate to support
any of the various manned space ventures they may attempt.

44, Life Support Systems. In their manned space flights the Soviets have
employed a life support system based on an air-like mixture of oxygen and
nitrogen at a sea level pressure of one atmosphere (14.7 psi). The Soviets have
apparently been able to scale up the system to a 30 to 40 man-day limit. They
probably can adapt this system and their experience to a small, manned earth-
orbiting station as well as to a manned circumlunar mission. For future missions
in which weight would be a greater limiting factor or in long duration flights,
such as a manned lunar landing or a large space station, wholly new techniques
probably would be required. These could be partial regenerative or closed loop
systems. The first Soviet flight with such a new environmental control system
would probably be experimental and probably would involve limited objectives,
primarily biomedical in nature.

45. Orientation and Stabilization. The Soviets have demonstrated a high
degree of precision in the orientation and stabilization of spacecraft when the
mission requires it. On those payloads where such pointing accuracies are not
required, the Soviets have utilized spin stabilization or have tolerated random
tumbling. All Soviet space vehicles requiring accurate earth orientation have
been provided with fully automatic systems. In manned vehicles, the automatic
system is backed up by a manual system which can override the automatic
system when necessary. The manual system is capable of accuracies consistent

with the safe recovery of the manned vehicle.

iil. OTHER FACTORS

48. Aside from the scientific and technical considerations which we have dis-
cussed, there are a variety of other factors which will-influence the scope and
pace of future Soviet space endeavors. These include such things as the effect
of past decisions, the views of the present Soviet leaders on the benefits to be
derived from their space program, costs, the need for regaining lost prestige,
and Soviet views on the US proeram.

47. :

pa Broad policy directives on all space matters
are probably issued py the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
We believe that these directives are implemented by a high-level commission
composed of both government and party officials. This commission probably in-
cludes Party Secretary D. F. Ustinoy—also responsible for defense matters—L. V.
Smirnov, Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers, and M. V. Keldysh,
President of the Academy of Sciences. The Ministry of General Machine Build-
ing, headed by S. A. Afanas’yev, supported by the industrial ministries such as
defense, aviation, radio, and electronics, probably is responsible for the develop-

ment and production of space hardware. . The Academy of Sciences provides -

scientific expertise to the entire space effort, controls scientific programs, and

we

Flay (4)

Sayan

maf [_ Blew

16 srommrens:| “|

acting principally through the Commission for the Exploration and Utilization
of Space (CEUS), sponsors representatives at international meetings.

48. The Soviets almost certainly have already decided the nature of their |

space program for the next five years and have probably established an approxi-
mate timetable for the various activities related to that program. While it is
possible to stretch out a program over a longer period of time than originally
planned or even to speed up a program somewhat to meet new deadlines, it is
extremely difficult to re-tailor a program in its late stages to meet an entirely
different objective than was initially established. While the present Soviet
leaders may try to effect economies in certain sectors, we consider it unlikely
that they can, at this late date, effect any basic changes in the overall nature
of the program for the next five years

soy aa we estimate

that expenditures in the Soviet space program have been rising at an average
annual rate roughly equivalent to US $1 billion from 1962 when about $1 billion
were expended, through 1966 when about $5 billion were expended. Much
of this increase is accounted for by the major launch systems at Tyuratam and
the associated program represented by the construction of Area J. Area J is
not yet complete and the booster for use there has not yet been seen, but we
believe that the program is sufficiently advanced to permit the overall cost of
the Soviet space program to level off shortly and hold at about US $5.5 billion
per year for the next few years. These costs include our estimates of both the
military and nonmilitary portions of the Soviet space program.

50. The recently signed Outer Space Treaty is not likely to have a significant
effect on the military or nonmilitary aspects of the Soviet space program. The
treaty prohibits the establishment of military installations, the testing of any
types of weapons, and the staging of military maneuvers on celestial bodies.
It also bans placing nuclear weapons in earth orbit and on celestial bodies, but
it does not prohibit the development or testing of delivery vehicles for an orbital
or fractional orbit weapon system. Further testing of the SS-X-6 system would
not be contrary to the treaty as Jong as such tests did not involve putting a
nuclear weapon in orbit. Deployment of an operational system on the ground
is not prohibited. ;

51. The treaty permits the use of military. personnel and equipment for the
peaceful exploration of space—for example, in a manned space station or for
conducting scientific research on the moon. While there is no specific mention
in the treaty of satellite reconnaissance, the Soviets made no effort to revive
their old charges that such activity is illegal and they seemed to accept it as
legitimate.

52. The extent to which the treaty will help the USSR supplement its own
space tracking capabilities is uncertain. According to the treaty, parties to
the treaty “shall consider” requests of other signatories to be afforded an oppor-
tunity to observe the flight of the requesting state’s space objects; the nature

CJ 3

4.324)

4

4.3(a)(4)

1.3fay(a)

mS EGRET [ _| 17 4.3(a}(4)

of this opportunity, as well as the conditions under which it would be afforded,
would be determined by agreement between the states concerned. However,
other signatory nations are not obliged to grant any Soviet request for observing
its space objects when they are out of view from Soviet territory. |

53. The Soviets probably feel that during the next few years they must take
steps to regain some of the prestige they lost to the highly successful US Gemini
program. Furthermore, during 1967 two important anniversaries will be ob-
served in the USSR, the 10th anniversary of the Sputnik I and the 50th anni-
versary of the October Revolution. The Soviets probably have planned some
form of space spectacular to celebrate one or both of these dates. Somewhat
later they will be confronted with the necessity to at least partially blunt the
international impact of the US Apollo program. For these reasons and con-
sidering the capability of the space hardware which they are now developing,
we believe that the next five years will be a period in which the Soviets will

attempt space ventures far more complicated and spectacular than heretofore
undertaken.

iV. OUTLOOK FOR THE NEAR TERM (1967-1972)
A. General

54. In considering developments in the Soviet space program over the next
five years, we can estimate feasible extension of all current projects but it is
difficult to determine which specific missions will be flown. We do not believe
the Soviets have at hand all of the necessary technical and economic resources
for undertaking all projects simultaneously. We therefore believe that some
possible projects will not be attempted, others will be slowly paced, and sub-
stantial resources will be committed to only a few. The expansion of the re-
connaissance project over the past two years shows that projects of demonstrable
strategic value can and will be funded. While it is clear that useful missions
can still be accomplished with existing hardware, it is equally clear that more

- spectacular and sophisticated missions will have to await the new hardware
now under development.

55. The Soviets in their many official and unofficial statements about their
space program, have given no indication of what the order of priority is to be.
Indeed, much of what is said is conflicting or ambiguous. In arriving at likely
dates for specific missions, ve have assumed a high but not complete level
of success and a sharing of priorities among several categories of projects. In
general, the likely date for any given mission would be a year or so later than
that which we consider to be the earliest practicable date. We note that delays
and failures have occurred and have sometimes plagued the Soviets for long
periods. Such difficulties can recur at any time—especially upon the introduc-
tion of hardware based on new and more complex technology—and could delay
achievement of a specific mission by a year or two.

56. The Soviet manned lunar landing program and the large manned space
station program are large-scale undertakings, both of which require the use of

weet oo] TO

Se ee Re ace i cha en aa dneltvensnaneah asec tlenils dittadedc ad ane dh daareaiebdaciadcha dundhannackate ote toe acer rT a TE. |
" "

18 qomerers:| _|

the system intended for Area J. The dates we believe these ventures can be
carried out are based on technical feasibility and do not take into account the
order in which they may be attempted. We do not believe they could be under-
taken concurrently. It must be understood therefore, that the one which is
given priority may be carried out at the time indicated and that the other will
be deferred for a year or so.

B. Manned Lunar Landing

ST _\we estimated that the Soviet manned lunar landing pro-
gram was probably not intended to be competitive with the Apollo program
as then projected, ie., aimed at the 1968-1969 time period. We believe this
is probably still the case. There is the possibility, however, that depending
upon the present Soviet view of the Apollo timetable, they may feel that there
is some prospect of their getting to the moon first and they may press their
program in hopes of being able to do so.

58. Several factors militate against their being able to compete with the Apollo
timetable as originally planned. The status and pace of construction of Area J
indicate that the launch system will probably not be ready for test until about
mid-1968. When a launch vehicle is available, we would expect to see a series
of tests for man-rating the system extending over at least a year before a lunar
landing would be attempted. In the meantime, the Soviets will need to check
out a new spacecraft, to test reentries at lunar return velocities, and perhaps
to develop a water recovery capability. Depending upon the technique selected,
they may also need to test rendezvous and docking techniques and equipment.

59. Some Soviet scientists have criticized the Apollo technique and stated
that their lunar flight will go directly from earth to the moon’s surface and
return without any orbital rendezvous required. We estimate.that any lunar
landing mission which involved a single vehicle using conventional propellants
would require a booster developing considerably greater thrust than Area J can
accommodate. The Soviets have also discussed a technique involving the
placing of components and fuel on the moon by two or more very large vehicles,
.then having cosmonauts assemble these components on the moon into a vehicle
and fuel it for direct return to earth. This-technique is risky since very accurate
-guidance is required to place the manned vehicle sufficiently close to the landing
site of earlier flights and there is ne provision for an abort of the manned flight.

60. Other techniques could involve rendezvous and docking of two or more
very large vehicles in earth orbit for assembly and fueling the lunar vehicle,
before proceeding to the moon. The Soviets could also carry out two launches
to the moon, one for landing on the moon and return to lunar orbit, and another
for lunar orbit and return to earth. Either of these missions could be attempted
within the capabilities we believe the Soviets will have when the Area J system
is available.

61. If, however, the Soviets were to develop high energy propellants for use
in upper stages of the Area J vehicle they could use any of a wide variety of

Ea ee

Blayay

aye

1.Blayray

eed ‘

mission profiles to put a man on the moon and return him to earth. We have
estimated earlier that man-rated upper stages using high energy propellants
could be available about 1970 or shortly thereafter.

1.3(a)(4)

62. All things considered, we estimate that the earliest the Soviets could
attempt a manned lunar landing, would be mid-to-late 1969. We believe that
the most likely date is sometime in the 1970-1971 time period.

C. Manned Space Station

63. The Soviets are continuing to voice generalities about manned space sta-
-tions. They refer to them by a host of terms, such as cities in space, giant flying
laboratories, scientific research institutes, refueling stations, etc. Soviet state-
ments frequently identify two broad space station functions: to pursue research
} objectives, and to serve as a launching or an assembly base for manned lunar *
and planetary missions. References to military applications of space stations
. have been conspicuously absent.

64. Neither the interim nor ultimate configuration of a space station® has
been defined by the Soviets. Prerequisite techniques for a long-term space
station would be maneuver, rendezvous, docking, and extensive useful EVA.
None of these techniques have been demonstrated in the Soviet manned space
program to date, although the Soviets have been reporting a variety of laboratory
simulations involving multiman crews for long periods of time.

65. Based on our expectation that the SL-9 with a conventional propellant upper

stage will be used in the manned space program, we believe that this system

‘Awould be employed to orbit a manned space station or components thereof. A

space station weighing approximately 50,000 pounds and capable of carrying

a crew of three or more could probably be placed in earth orbit in the first half

of 1968. This could be attempted in Jate 1967 as an “anniversary spectacular”

but only if the Soviets press this development. With a new spacecraft, rendez-

vous, docking, and extravehicular operations could extend the operational life-

time of the station to several months and perhaps as long as a year. Alterna-

tively, the Soviets could attempt a mission in late 1967 wherein the SL-9 would

be used to orbit a large unmanned platform and the SL-4 could be used to put

the new spacecraft into orbit to rendezvous and dock with the platform already

a in orbit. The crew could be augmented or exchanged by a man or two at a
{ time by subsequent launchings.~~

ec

66. We believe that the Soviets will probably also develop and establish a
very large manned space station. This development will probably be one sep-
arate from their manned lunar landing program and probably not be conducted
concurrently with that program at Area J. It appears likely that the booster

* We define a space station as a multimanned, nonrecoverable orbiting vehicle intended for
prolonged use (a minimum of a month). The crew could be recovered by deorbiting a por-
tion of the vehicle; alternatively crew recovery or resupply could be carried out by a ferry

ame _ | | J 1.3{2)(4)

vehicle.

; onset |

being developed for use with the Tyuratam Area J launch facilities will be
capable of placing on the order of 200,000-300,000 pounds in near-earth orbit.

A weight budget of this magnitude is sufficient for a variety of activities about -
which the Soviets have spoken. A space station of this size would permit a _

permanent or semipermanent space laboratory to be placed in orbit by mid-1969
at the earliest. We believe the most likely date is sometime in the 1970-1971
time period. Rotation of personnel and resupply of the station would be ac-
complished by spacecraft having a rendezvous and docking capability.

D. Manned Circumlunar
67. We think it probable that the Soviets will attempt a manned circumlunar

flight as a step in a program having more ambitious objectives as its subsequent

goals, such as a manned lunar landing or manned flights to explore other planets.
The Soviets have sometimes described such a flight as one preliminary activity
leading up to the manned landing. They may also consider that an early manned
circumlunar flight would pay important dividends in terms of prestige, and
could be a means to offset some of the propaganda value of the US Apollo
program.

68. The Soviets could attempt a manned circumlunar flight by using existing
hardware. In order to do so they would need to add a Venik upper stage to
the SL-9 system, man-rate this combination with an SL-8 final stage, and modify
the Voskhod spacecraft to give it a midcourse correction capability. This com-
bination could put a payload of about 15,000 pounds on a circumlunar trajectory,
which would permit the Soviets to send a crew of two on a.circumlunar flight.
Alternatively, the Soviets may choose to utilize a new conventional-propellant
upper stage designed to be flown with the SL-9 system and the new spacecraft
with a midcourse guidance capability inherent in its design.

69. We believe that an attempt toward a manned circumlunar flight would
be preceded by at least one unmanned mission utilizing the same mission profile
and hardware. We believe that test flights over a period of about six months
would-be required to man-rate the system and to test the equipment and recovery
techniques for water landing which may be required for a manned circumlunar

flight. f

70, Optimum “window” conditions for a Soviet manned circumlunar flight
occur during the first 5 to 6 months=of the year when the moon is at a
northerly declination. For this reason, we believe that the earliest the Soviets
would attempt a manned circumlunar fight would be during the first half of
1968. It is conceivable that they would attempt such an operation as an
“anniversary spectacular” in late 1967, but because of the grave risks involved we
believe that it is unlikely that they will do so.

E. Lunar. and . Planetary . Probes

71. The systems utilized for the current phases of unmanned lunar exploration
are probably adequate for a variety of missions in the near future. Lunar surface
analysis, seismographic, and gravity instrumentation equipment may be incor-

 ~r,

1.8(a)(4)

&
-

1Blayeay

sonccenet| _\ 21

porated into the missions of future soft-landers. But if the Soviets continue to
employ existing lunar probe vehicles, weight limitations probably Sire prevent
the inclusion of all three experiments in the same mission.

72, Existing photographic capabilities probably will be used to provide high-
resolution photographs of the moon to aid in selecting future landing sites for
ed vahided
ayload weight could be increased to allow a lunar mapping mission in
the orbiter program; such a mission was possibly intended for Luna 12. Scientific
measurements acquired by lunar orbiters will be necessary to give an account
of the hazards the moon’s environment will impose on lunar cosmonauts. Orbiters
can also provide a determination of the moon’s mass, size, and anomalies in its
gravitational field. Thus, the data obtained by lunar orbiters would support a
manned circumlunar mission as well as a manned lunar landing.

73. Many of the techniques utilized by Luna 9 and Luna 13 in soft landing
on the moon have obvious application to a manned lunar landing mission.
However, very extensive modification of the descent and landing procedures used
by the recent soft-landers will be required for manned lunar landing. Luna 13
provided more refined data on.the physical characteristics of the lunar surface
which will be useful in determining techniques and weight tolerances for a
manned lunar landing.

74. The Soviet program for unmanned planetary exploration probably has
two principal objectives: to collect photography and scientific data by fly-by
probes, and to make planetary atmosphere and surface measurements. In spite
-4 of the failure of the Soviets to launch a probe toward Mars during the recent
“window” early this year, we believe planetary exploration will continue. The
Soviets will probably avail themselves of the next “window” to Venus in mid-
1967, possibly using the SL-9 launch system. The SL-9 launch system, with its
considerable payload capability, will allow a variety of other interplanetary
missions to be attempted as the period progresses. These could include Mars
and Venus orbiters, Mercury and Jupiter fy-by probes, and Mars and Venus soft-
landers.

F. Applied Satellites ~

75. The Soviets have started construction of] Ane" ground terminals
in the northern and eastern-areas-of the USSR as part of their project to integrate
the Molniya communication satellite system into their communications structure.
We believe that all of the new terminals will be operational by November 1967
to receive satellite relayed transmissions. We believe that this network will
probably continue to expand as more sophisticated communications satellites are
developed and that stations will be equipped to handle a broad range of com-
munications services. By 1970 the Soviets probably will have tested the feasi-
bility of broadcasting directly to home receivers or to relatively simple community
TV antennae.

76. We estimate that the Soviets will launch meteorological satellites in in-
creasing numbers during the next five years; there are indications that they plan

samennd Se On

Btayray

te

22 —ioerereres) =|

to launch about 25 of these vehicles during the 1968-1971 period. The Soviets
will probably develop more sophisticated instrumentation for use in their meteoro-

logical satellites to obtain information on such things as atmospheric temperature,

humidity, and precipitation. Meteorological satellites may also be used to conduct
additional observations such as geological mapping, crop surveillance, and ice
reconnaissance. :

G. Possible Soviet Military Uses of Space

77. Throughout the period of the estimate the Soviets will experiment with a
variety of space systems which could be used for military purposes. New mili-
tary space applications will be introduced as Soviet technology advances and as
requirements for such systems are developed. A military role for man in space
may emerge prior to the end of the period, particularly as the ability to operate
manned space stations grows.

78. Military Support Systems. The launching of recoverable photographic and
Elint reconnaissance satellites from Tyuratam and Plesetsk will probably continue
at about the present rate until similar missions of longer duration, or manned
orbital reconnaissance platforms, are employed. To improve data handling
time the Soviets will probably develop an improved photovideo system or a
multiple film capsule recovery system for long duration missions; they will
probably also use communication relay satellites in an attempt to achieve near-
real-time data handling between widely separated points. A satellite with
limited maneuver capability for electromagnetic and photoreconnaissance may
be develéped to meet military needs in the next few years.

79, The high priority evident in the recoverable photographic reconnaissance
satellite project will probably be extended to other selected military support
systems which the Soviet leaders decide are essential; these will probably include
systems for improved global communications and TV relay, weather observation,
and navigation.

80. Offensive Weapon Systems. On the basis of Soviet tests of the SS-X-6
(see paragraphs 16 through 19), we estimate that a first generation fractional
orbit bombardment system using the SL-11 Booster could be deployed in small
numbers by late 1967 or early 1968. It could be deployed in silos indistinguish-
able from those associated with the SS-2ICBM. This system,

could have a CEP on the order of 1-3 nm. depending on the range
and could deliver a warhead of about 3,500 pounds.® A short-lived multiple orbit

*We believe that if this system were to be fired on a northerly trajectory toward the US
covering about 5,500 nu.m., the CEP could be on the order of 1-2 nm. If, however, the
Soviets were to launch the system on a southerly trajectory covering some 16,000 n.m. to
attack the US from the south, the CEP could be on th er of 1.5-3 nm. This judgment
is b on our estimate of Soviet technical capabilities

We have no firm basis for judging what the accuracy of this system would be in
an operational mode; it could be. somewhat less accurate at an early IOC. If, in the future,
some means for trajectory correction were to be incorporated in the system, the CEP could
be improved somewhat.

Col

yaa

1.3{2)(4)

4.a(a\4)

sere. 4 i

bombardment system could be developed from the same hardware and deployed
in the same manner but we believe that such a development is unlikely.

81. There is no identified program which indicates that the Soviets are
developing an offensive space weapon system that would be deployed and
maintained in orbit. Several new system components would need to be de-
veloped, including a long-life power source and an attitude reference system.
However, much of the space technology and hardware currently being tested by
the Soviets could be used as a basis for the development of such a system.

82. For the foreseeable future, we think that a multiple orbit bombardment
system deployed in space will not compare favorably with ICBMs in terms of
effectiveness, reliability, vulnerability, average life, and susceptibility to loss of
control due to accident or countermeasures. The Soviet leadership probably
would recognize that the deployment in space of a nuclear-armed orbital
bombardment system would be an act of major international import which would
intensify greatly East-West hostility and give a strong new stimulus to US mili-
tary programs. In view of these factors, the much greater cost of such orbital
weapons, and Soviet agreement to the treaty on peaceful uses of space, we be-
lieve that the Soviets are unlikely to deploy a multiple orbit bombardment sys-
tem in space during the period of this estimate.

83. We recognize that the Soviets might reach different conclusions as to cost
and effectiveness and that altered political considerations in some future phase
of East-West relations might lead them to a different decision. Even in these
_jcircumstances, we believe that they would regard space weapons primarily as
a means of supplementing existing forces, of introducing additional complications
into US defense planning, and of supporting Soviet claims to strategic parity or
even superiority.

84. Defensive Weapon Systems. The Soviets almost certainly have con-
sidered systems for use against satellites. The deployment of some of the Hen
House/Dog House radars, and their technical characteristics indicate that they
could be used in support of an antisatellite weapon system. :

a eer of a coorbital intercept
system would be a major undertaking, but because of the added capability of
inspection and the greater operational flexibility against satellites at higher alti-
tudes provided by such a system, the Soviets may explore such an approach
in addition to, but not in place of, a direct ascent antisatellite system.

85. The Soviets have demonstrated, as part of their missile and space programs,
many of the necessary technologies, subsystems, and capabilities applicable to
a coorbital interceptor development. These include the precise control of launch
time; some of the operational procedures required for rendezvous; orbital transfer;
stability and control systems; and an engine restart capability. These provide
the technological base for the Soviets to develop an initial unmanned coorbital

wet LL | t8t00

1.3fayiay

24 —roresrenes | pal

system by the time the Hen House/Dog House radar system becomes fully 4.3(2)(4)
operational, i.e., in about 1968. Such a system would be very expensive and

would probably be severely constrained in target selection by a limited plane

change capability, and inspection would be limited to TV. For these reasons we .

doubt that the Soviets would develop such a system. We do not exclude the

possibility, however, that the Soviets may elect to develop a more efficient

unmanned coorbital inspection capability at some time later in the period.

86. A manned coorbital system could be developed in the early 1970's as
an outgrowth of the Soviet manned space program. Although the costs of such
a system would be high, operational advantages—including opportunities for
inspection, nondestructive neutralization, or dismantling—might justify its de-
velopment. :

87. The interference with orbiting satellites is prohibited in the space treaty

but the development of a capability to do so is not. We believe that the Soviets
would realize that any use of antisatellite systems in peacetime would risk opening
their own military support systems to retaliation. We think it likely, therefore,
that the Soviets would use antisatellite systems only if they believed that war with
the US was imminent and that neutralization of our military support systems was
consequently an overriding consideration. There might also be other special cir-
cumstances in which they would use antisatellite systems in peacetime; for
example, they might believe that they were retaliating against US interference
with their own satellites. .

H. Unmanned Exploration of Near Space

88. Scientific exploration of near space to date has been given a low priority.
Nevertheless, Soviet scientists have identified a wide range of scientific problems
to be studied by means of satellites and space probes. Their stated plans include
; vertical probes and satellites for observing solar electromagnetic radiation,
corpuscular streams, cosmic rays, radiation belts, “magnetic fields, the upper
atmosphere, and infrared and ultraviolet radiation. Many of these objectives
have been and will continue to be carried out by the small Kapustin Yar Cosmos
satellites. Additional satellites may be launched from Tyuratam to collect
scientific data at great distances from earth. ~

V. THE LONG-TERM QUTLOOK ~~~
A. Factors Affecting

89. We have little evidence concerning long-term Soviet objectives in space,
and can estimate the likely scope of the Soviet space program 5 to 10 years
hence only on a very tentative basis. Some cosmonauts, scientists, astronomers,
and other Soviet space enthusiasts have often referred to possible future projects,
such as interplanetary exploration, but the political leadership during the past two
years or so has made little public reference to space activities, and has avoided

a joe ey.)

aml _| 25 1.3(a)(4)

any open reference to any particular programs beyond 1970.7 | The leadership
has probably not yet decided which particular ventures to emphasize beyond the
manned lunar landing era, and almost certainly has been unable to gauge with
any degree of precision the amount of resources likely to be available for space
programs in the next decade.

90. The question of resource allocation is a central one in Soviet politics.
Competition for resources has intensified since the late 1950’s, when the marked
slowdown in Soviet economic growth began, and political infighting, in part
based on this competition, has become characteristic of life within the leadership.
The post-Khrushchev collective leadership has not indicated any substantial
ability to resolve problems associated with the establishment of economic
priorities; it has as yet been unable to agree on the final version of the current
five-year plan, which began more than a year ago. In the meantime, competing
claimants—military and space, growth and consumption—have all, in effect,
been assured high priorities.

Ne

91. One of the principal causes of economic difficulties in the USSR during the
1960’s has been the preemption of highly skilled human resources and top-grade
material resources by rapidly growing programs in advanced weapons and
space. Among other things, these programs have impinged on the quality and
effectiveness of investment elsewhere in the economy, and the present collective
is surely aware of this. Aside from efforts to achieve marginal economies, how-
ever, the leadership has not sought to attack the problem by reducing or even
leveling off expenditures in these areas, and we estimate that it is unlikely to
do so over the next four or. five years. If important programs must be cut,

civilian claimants are the most likely to suffer, as in the recent past.

92. Whether the Soviet leaders will be willing to approach the problem in
a new way in the 1970’s will, of course, depend on many factors: the state of the
economy, the international climate, the composition and nature of the leadership,
the interplay of domestic political and economic pressures, the progress of
specific military and space programs, the progress and scope of comparable US
programs, and the leadership's calculations as to the costs of the program
versus its probable returns, scientific, military, and political. The latter factor,
the political, is likely to be of particular importance. The propaganda and
psychological benefits of the program, both ‘at home and abroad, have always
been of prime interest to the Soviet regime; the USSR’s pioneering accomplish-
ments in space added greatly“to its international prestige and probably helped
to justify the regime to its own people. It may be, however, that such benefits
will diminish with time and familiarity, and that Soviet prestige is less likely
in the future to increase significantly on the basis of individual exploits, such as
Sputnik.

*Even the guidelines for the current Five-Year Plan (1966-1970) are quite brief and are
specific only concerning the application of space technology to uses on earth: “To provide
in the five-year plan for . ... the further study of space and the application of the obtained
results for improving radio communications, radio navigation and television, for weather
forecasting and for other practical purposes.”

comer, = LC

1.3(a)(4)

26 a—roncecner| | se Y4) |

B. Possibility of Soviet Cooperation in Space Matters

93. Until recently, the Soviets had staunchly refused to offer any indication that
they were willing to cooperate in any field of space activity. In 1962 the Soviets’
agreed to exchange satellite-collected weather data with the US, and in August
1966 passed the first of their data to the US. This step plus the cooperative
Soviet attitude evidenced during the recent discussions on the UN treaty regard-
ing peaceful uses of space and the agreement with France on relay of TV and
other cooperative space projects lead us to believe that the Soviets will become
more willing to exchange various scientific and technical data with the US and
other nations as the various programs progress. They may, for example, be
willing to exchange such data on radiation belts, solar effects, gravity anomalies,
and additional and more detailed meteorology.

94. Apart from technical difficulties, there are three factors which would tend
to limit the extent of Soviet cooperation in space. First, the prestige of being
the first nation to accomplish various space missions continues to be important
to the USSR. Second, the prospective gain in cooperating beyond the exchange
of scientific and technical data would have to be convincing to the Soviets as
long as major international political issues remain unresolved. Third, the close
association of military and civilian space programs in the USSR would restrict
the areas of cooperation which the Soviets would be willing to consider. We
believe, however, that if the advantages to be gained are persuasive, the Soviets
may agree to some ventures in which compatible equipments could be launched
by the USSR and another nation and link together to perform functions of mutual
benefit, e.g., a communications system covering a large portion of the globe
or a worldwide meteorological system. We consider it unlikely, however, that
within the period of this estimate the Soviets will be willing to cooperate to
the extent of exchanging space hardware.

95. We have considered the possibility that at some time beyond the lunar
exploration era the costs and technical complexity of more extensive planetary
exploration may be so great that one nation would not consider it feasible or
practical to undertake it. We believe it less likely that the Soviets would be
willing to join the US in a bilateral venture than to participate in a program

’ sponsored by a group of nations, e.g., one under the aegis of the UN.

C. Possible Undertakings be (omen

96. Because we are unable to estimate Soviet intentions in space over the
long term, our consideration of possible space activities must rest heavily on
our estimates of likely Soviet capabilities in the field. Moreover, even on this
basis, we must make the assumption that the various projects the Soviets under-
take in the near term will for the most part be successful and that long-term
ventures will be able to proceed from earlier achievements.

97. Soviet writings and oratory have addressed a broad spectrum of potential
undertakings in space but have failed, probably deliberately, to highlight any
particular one or ones as those likely to be pursued by the USSR. However,

2b jewel J

7, Fa) (4 f

sors | 27
certain ventures are mentioned more often than others and this repetition may

provide the clue to future Soviet undertakings. A review of Soviet writings,

speeches, and interviews over the past two years shows that the following possi-4 .3(a)(4}
bilities are the most often addressed:

a. wh expansion of the applied satellite program in the fields of communi-
cation, meteorology, geodesy, and navigation.

b. Exploration of the sun and planets.

c. Large complex space stations, to serve as scientific research bases, as
launch platforms for other space ships, as astronomical observatories, etc.

d. A lunar base or “laboratory” to serve a variety of functions including
astronomical observation, a launching station for deep space probes, meteoro-
logical observations, as well as providing a base for the exploration of the
moon itself.

98. Normally missing from their official statements is mention of programs
with direct military applicability. Nevertheless we believe that they will con-
tinue to explore military applications of space.

99. In discussing the lunar base or “laboratory” the Soviets are obviously re-
ferring to something far more extensive and complicated than a rather small,
two or three man, short duration installation. In these discussions, the Soviets
do not describe the means of putting’such a station in place, but restrict the
discourse to desirability of a base of this type and the scientific advantages to
_be gained. The construction of a manned lunar base of the size and nature
“implied in the Soviet discussions would be extremely complex and costly, and
would require the Soviets to develop equipment and techniques far more ad-
vanced than we believe that they will be able to achieve within the next 10 years.

100. A time table for the Soviet manned planetary exploration program has
probably not been established. Soviet development of a capability to success-
fully launch manned vehicles from an orbital space station launch platform
could eventually lead to manned fly-bys of Mars, Venus, or other planets. In
this connection, the Soviets are actively engaged in the investigation of advanced
electrical propulsion devices, which would be efficient means of transporting
large payloads over interplanetary distances.. The Soviets claim to have tested
such a device for attitude contral_of the Zond II spacecraft, which they launched
toward Mars in 1964. However, the Soviet lack of a suitable nuclear power
source for an electrical propulsion system-would preclude sending a very large
payload to a planet before the mid-1970’s at the earliest. The period 1976-1978
is estimated to be a period of decreased solar activity and therefore a favorable
period for such flights. We believe, however, that it is unlikely that the Soviets
will have advanced sufficiently far in their programs to attempt any such flights
by that time, chiefly because of the problems inherent in the development of
a life support system capable of supporting manned flights of the several years
duration required for interplanetary travel.

Z a i “i 1.3(a)(4)

=
eo 8 re mee

28 onsncne | _|

101. There is no evidence that the Soviets are developing a nuclear rocket
engine for interplanetary propulsion, although they are continuing research
which could be applicable to such a development. It would probably take
the Soviets some 5 to 10 years, after initiation of the program, to develop such
an engine.

102. The Soviets are believed to have a program aimed at development of
a nuclear reactor/thermionic convertor power source. Such a system would have
greater efficiency than thermoelectric systems and an output of hundreds of
kilowatts of electric power. The development program is probably in an early
stage, and such a system will probably not become operational until the
mid-1970's.

103. Various factors—scientific, technical, and economic—will probably re-
strict the exploitation of so wide a range of possibilities as is indicated by Soviet
open sources. However, the steps taken toward these programs are so interrelated
that any step taken in any one program would be of benefit in others. Priority
projects will probably be undertaken, but we have no evidence upon which to
base a judgment of which program or programs will be assigned what priority.

.tP

T.3fayay

ae

1.3(ayi4y

ANNEX

ESTIMATED TIMING OF MAJOR SOVIET SPACE EVENTS
SOVIET SPACE LAUNCHES SINCE 1960
HISTORY OF SOVIET MANNED SPACEFLIGHT PROJECTS

“HISTORY OF SOVIET LAUNCHINGS OF LUNAR AND PLANETARY PROBES

someone | i \ 12a

30 is blank)

is Page

31 1.3(a)(4}

ea

VID £9-€ 9z8S9

at

"4841} USXxDLJepuN aq

I] Yd1YM Of sp ajowtyss PI}DA b exHW JoUUDD OM ing Ajjuasinouos UarxbJ4epun aq ,

up swiniBoid Buipup) Jou) peuupw pud uoljDjs sonds abun} BY} BAB!]8q JOU Op BM /|
*uped ayy jo

SYIUOW 9-G 4841} Bulinp ein syyBI]} JoUN|WNodI9 Ja1A0G JO} ,SMOPUIM,, WAWHdO

i UusyDJJepun aq ol

Ajax!] aso ean syosloid ay, UdUM Of SD aJDWI sa Jno syuasoidas

Bulppys 18>J0p ey] *UaxDJJapuN aq pjnoo sjoaloud ay} SAdt|aq
8M SOIDP a] qissod jseljine ayy suaseidas spain papoys Ayiy6r ayy

Bulpup]
Joun] peuupy

: _ (41 000’00¢-002)
1° uolpys aonds af107

}
ee 4481) 4
dounjuinodin) peuuoy

(41 000’0s)

Uol}pIg aonds

[Jous 4o 4461p 4
peuuow uoljoing Buoy

L335°OUd

€Zél CLE 1Zél 026 6961 8961 £961

tee é

_

SUV3AA SAA LXSAN AHL YUSAO SLOArOUd

LHOM4 3DVdS GANNVW LAIAOS HYOPrVIW SHL AO ONIALL GALVAILSS

“ie

32 —ror-seenen| a 4.304)

MAN IN SPACE PROGRAM ! H
Manned Satellites

Unmanned “Capsules and
Dog Satellites

DEEP SPACE PROBES
Mars

PHOTORECONNAISSANCE;
SATELLITES i

SCIENTIFIC SATELLITES
(Launched from Kapustin Yar)

COMMUNICATIONS
SATELLITES Molniya Program
"i

MULTIPLE SATELLITES

PROTON
(New Launch Vehicle)

UNCATEGORIZED i
(See poragraphs 20 and 21 of text) *

™ SUCCESS .
~ There are varying interpretations of

© PARTIAL SUCCESS the degree of success achieved in
these cases.

. 65926 3-47 CIA

HE HEE HEGRE.

ad,

spaces nae ORERE GYR Dn bearer ne TY ana amen
* The Tirst Soviet earth satellite. eatin De was launched in 1957,
Between 957. and 1960 the Soviets. lounctied gleven space vehicles. .

j cent
es: Out. of nine attempts, two “were successful. nike 3: Jaunched
fn September 1959, was the. first ‘probe to: impact on the moon. Lunik 3,
inched j in 1 Octobei

Oe an

(aya)

an comm]

HISTORY OF SOVIET MANNED SPACEFLIGHT PROJECTS *
(Through 28 February 1967)

(Note: Although there have been a number of failures in the Soviet program, we have no evidence supporting the failure
of any Soviet manned spacecraft.)

1Blayey =

of human reactions to extended space flight,

. especially cardiovascular deconditioning.
Vostok 6...........0065 16Jun 63 19Jun 63 | 48 Payload: 10,340 Ibs. Tereshkova; along with
Vostok 5 first test of male and female subjects
= : under generally similar conditions; first flight of

: : Launch Recovery Recovery
Desiscavion Date Date Orbit pata
Korabl’ lo... ......20- 15 May 60 18 May 60 48 Payload: 9,988 lbs. First known Soviet use of the
(attempted) expression “Cosmic Space Ship.” Retrorocket
; failure: decayed Sep 62.
(Unannounced)......... WJul 60 ......... atu Fatturel am 1.3(a)(4)
Korabl’ 2 (Sputnik)... .. 19 Aug 60 20 Aug 60 16 Payload: 10,120 ibs. Cofifained two dogs and other
: biological specimens. First successful recovery
| of Vostok-like spacecraft. Comprehensive bio-
| telemetry experimentation; in-flight television
monitoring of dog; effects of acceleration, weight-
| lessness, radiation on animals, plants, organisms
‘including immunological, pene eS and
; cytological studies.
| Korabl’ 3 (Sputnik 6).... 1 Dee 60 2Dec 60 17 Payload: 10,038 lbs. Similar to Korabl 2. Burned
; (attempted) up on reentry. Two dogs.
(Unannounced)..... 22. 22Dec 60 BMcereees gadeee oy aoe ee 1.8(a)(4)
| Korabl’ 6 (Sputnik 9).... 9 Mar 61 9 Mar 61 1 Payload: 10,340 Ibs. Contained one dog. Con-
’ tinuation of man-rating of Vostok.
| Korabl’ 5 (Sputnik 10)... 25 Mar 61 25 Mar 61 1 Payload: 10,309 Ibs. Contained one dog. Con-
tinuation of man-rating of Vostok.
‘ Vostok 1........02 2006. 12Apr 61 12Apr 61 1 Payload: 10,395 lbs. Gagarin; first manned
t orbital space flight. ;
Vostok: Qu) 2c5 pee esos 6 Aug 61 7 Aug 61 17 Payload: 10,408 Ibs. Titov; first one-day mission;
demonstrated human ability to eat, sleep, and
. work under conditions of space flight; vestibular
disturbances suffered by cosmonaut.
Vostok’ 3). oo. cs-ietctee llAug 62 15 Aug 62 64 Payload: 10,412 lbs. Nikolayev; along with
A Vostok 4, the first test of two subjects under
generally similar conditions of space flight.
| Vostok 4..........-.-4. 12Aug 62 15 Aug 62 48 Payload: 10,425 Ibs. Popovich.
| Vostok 5..........--.45 14Jun 63 19Jun 63 81 Payload: 10,340 Ibs. Bykovskiy; further evaluation
{
|

a nonpilot.
_ Cosmos 47 ©............ 6 Oct 64 7QOct 64 16 Voskhod with dummies. Computed payload same
: io 7) as Voskhod.
i Voskhod 1>...........- 12Oct 64 13O0ct 64 16 Payload: 11,730 Ibs. Col. V. M. Komarov, Dr.
i Loa B. B. Yegerov, and Eng. K. Feoktistov; first
oa - . flight without spacesuits; first flight with direct
inflight medical observations, including sampling
: of body fluids. -
| Cosmos 57............- 22. Feb 65 ecescsveeee: Gesteres Voskhod with airlock for EVA. Unmanned.
1° Burned up. ;
Voskhod 2...........++- 18 Mar 65 19 Mar 65 17 Two passengers—EVA.
Cosmos 110......  asthca thas 22Feb 66 16 Mar 66 324 Two dogs. Extended duration (22 days) biological
experiment.
Cosmos 133............. 28 Nov 66 30 Nov 66 33 Probable unmanned test of new spacecraft.
Cosmos 140............ 7¥eb 67 9Feb 67 32 Probable unmanned test of new spacecraft.
: * All launchings have employed the SS-6 booster. Vostok-related flights (15 May 1960-16 June 1963) employed the
i Lunik upper stage. Voskhod-related flights, beginning with Cosmos 22 on 16 November 1963, have yed the Venik
upper stage. Payload weights are those announced by Soviets, 1 S(ay(4)
i b Six days prior to the launch of Voskhod, Cosmos 47 provi flight qualification of the new spacecraft.

constituted the only full flight test of the Voskhod carrying all of its associated subsystems. Four other Cosmos operations
; _ « (22, 30, 34, and 45), in addition to performing their primary reconnaissance missions, served to man-rate the Venik pro-
j pulsion stage and possibly provided testing of Venik/Voskhod compatability and of Voskhod structural integrity.

orcererer| | 1.3(a)(4)

~{

34 aoe “| . 4.3(a)(4)

HISTORY OF SOVIET LAUNCHINGS OF LUNAR AND PLANETARY PROBES
; (Through 28 February 1967)

(Note: All launchings have been from Tyuratam)

Launch Payloads

Use of Direct-Ascent Technique «
4Dec 58 Moon 1,000 Launch failure.
2Jan 59 Moon 1,000 Lunik I, Missed moon and went into orbit around sun.
18 Jun 59 Moon 1,000 - Launch failure. .
12Sep 59 Moon 1,000 Lunik II. Impacted moon.
4Oct 59 Moon 1,000 Lunik TIT. Circumlunar. Successfully photographed
. hidden side of moon:

15 Apr 60 Moon 1,000 Insufficient velocity. Nearest approach to moon was
100,000 miles. ce
Beginning of Parking-Orbit Technique *
10 Oct 60 Mars 4 ; \parking orbit

not achieved.
14 Oct 60 _ Mars 7 parking orbit 1,.3(a)fay

t achieved.
4Feb 61 Venus a USSR announced an ESV;

12 Feb 61 Venus 1,400 USSR announced success; communication failGre during
the interplanetarv-coast phase.
25 Aug 62 Venus 1,900 WUnsuccess ‘

1Sep 62 Venus 1,900 Unauce ;
12Sep 62% Venus 1,900 > UnsucosSSFa;[

24 Oct 62 Mars 1,900 Unsuccessful

=a]

1 Nov 62 Mars 1,900 Soviets e Mars I; , 1.3{a)(4)
communication failure with the probe in

March
4 Nov 62 Mars 1,9005 Unsuccessful;
4Jan 63 Moon 3,100 Achieved par rbit; 4th stage failed.
3 Feb 63 Moon 3,100 > =» \parking orbit not achieved.

2Apr 63 Moon 3,100 unik IV. Passed within 4,000-8,000 miles of moon
a after midcourse correction.
11 Nov 63 Unknown Unknown Cosmos--12t2— Probable engineering test of planetary
probe. Failed to eject from orbit.

19 Feb 64 Unknown Unknown Probable engineering test of planetary probe. Vehicle 1.3taytay
zid not achieve orbit.

21 Mar 64 Moon 3,100> wlperkin orbit not achieved.

27 Mar 64 Venus 1,900 > nnounced as Cosmos 27 after 4th stage failed.

2Apr 64 Venus 1,900 Zond I. Initial trajectory would have caused probe to
, pass within 24,000 miles of Venus. Soviets announced
two midcourse corrections (3 April 1964 and 15 May
1964) ; miss-distance increased and contact apparently
lost before passing Venus.
See footnotes at end of table.

Ce 2 ee

. | 1.3(ay(ay

HISTORY OF SOVIET LAUNCHINGS OF LUNAR AND PLANETARY PROBES

(Through 28 February 1967) 1.Sayiay
(Continued)

(Note: All launchings have been from Tyuratam)

Launch
Date.

Payloads | -_
Target bs.) ; Remarks

Beginning of Parking-Orbit Technique « (Continued)
20 Apr 64 Moon 3,100> parking orbit not achieved. 1.3{a)
30 Nov 64 Mars - 1,900 © ond II powerencountered difficulties in first day on (4)
: flight. Arrived in the vicinity of Mars during the
early part of August 1965. é
12 Mar 65 Moon Unknown Fourth stage failure. :
10 Apr 65 Moon Unknown Third stage failure. 4
9 May 65 Moon 3,250 Luna 5—soft-landing attempt failed.
8 Jun 65 Moon 3,180 Luna 6—soft-landing attempt failed (midcourse cor-
a _ rection malfunction). :
18 Jul 65 Moon 2,200 Zond II—Soviets released pictures of lunar surface
taken during fiy-by. :
4 Oct 65 Moon 3,320 Luna 7—Lunar soft-lander attempt. Failed at retrofire. :
12 Nov 65 Venus 2,120 Venus 2—Partial success: Venus fly-by (first use of
: 52° parking orbit).
16 Nov 65 Venus 2,160 Venus oo success: allegedly impacted on the
planet

3 onseerer| | - 35
|

. 23 Nov 65 Venus Unknown Cosmos 96. Venus probe attempt. Failure,
: ; 3 Dec 65 Moon 3,420 Luna 8. Soft-landing attempt, failed at retrofire. -

i 31 Jan 66 Moon 3,490 Luna 9. Successful soft-landing. LBlaygy
i nig 1 Mar 66 Moon Unknown Cosmos 111. Lunar probe attempt; vehicle failed to

: eject from earth parking orbit.

. 31 Mar 66. Moon 3,520 Luna 10. Lunar orbiter. No pictures.

24 Aug 66 Moon 3,620 Luna 11. Lunar orbiter. No pictures. .

23 Oct 66 Moon Unknown Luna 12. Lunar orbiter—transmitted pictures of lunar
surface,

22 Dec 66 Moon Unknown Luna 13. Successful soft-landing.

» All direct-ascent launches used the SS-6 booster and the Lunik upper stage. In addition
to the launch attempts noted in this series, we believe that there were three launch failures
two in the fall of 1958 and one in early 1960.

> Payload estimated. Other payloads were announced by the Sovied|

' * All these launches have used the 88-6 booster and Venik upper stage to place into earth 1 3(a)
orbit a 15,000 pound package totigisting of the payload and its propulsion stage. This stage ‘ (4)
(known as the 4th or ejection stage) is used to eject the payload from earth orbit and to place

it on a trajectory towards ita target.

rf
F ¢ Payloads unknown. Believed to be the same as the 1,400 pound announced by the
| : Soviets for the Venus shot of 12 February 1961.

~roncecnsr| “A a | ~ | 1.34)

Sa,

1.3(a)(4)

w

4.3(a)(4)

‘CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following’ officials within their respective departments: , ,

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Diréctor, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army #

d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the Department of the

' Navy , ; ,

e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air

Force : 8

. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic. Energy Commission

. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

. Director of National Estimates, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

a IQ on

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the. Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the. Office of National Estimates, CIA.

3. When. this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency fo retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. ‘

4. L-

1.3faya)

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

_-TOP SECRET .

L

Hu sy os rR ¢ ‘ ‘ ~~ . Ne

a A NS SO ALN YO \ x. Ng
a . a “ a N . Ss : s ae

. a " sis

a
NOX

Wee Fi

~~ X

NOX.
aS

SERS

aoe.

TOP SECRET 7

woot ee Py A Me A a el
’ poe of nal ae POEL SIS Oo t
