El Salvador: Performance on Certification Issues-special National Intelligence
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000027929, dated 5 January 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000027929).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ay, Directar af

: & Centr
5 | ;
3 é| So dntellagenee

El Salvador: Performance
on Certification Issues

Spacteb National intehtgence Estimate

Approved fer Relaasé

Date AUG 1989

EL SALVADOR: PERFORMANCE
ON CERTIFICATION ISSUES

Totormation avatlutle us of 13 Junuaey 18) was
wed In the preparaion of Has Esthinale

THIS ESTIMATE iS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE.

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE BOARD CONCURS,

The follewing Intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of the
Estimate:

The Central tnteliigence Agency; the Dalense Intelligence Agency, the National Security
Agentyr ond the Intelligence organization of the Deporiment of Store

Also Farticipating:
The Assviant Chief of Stoll for Intelligence, Daportment of the Army
The Director of Naval Inteligence, Degariment of tha Navy
The Assistant Chlof of Staff, Intelligence, Department of the Air Force

The Direcing ch intelligence, Headquarters, Moring Corps

KEY JUDGMENTS

During the past six months we dive secu sins of madest progress
iy some areas, atid no sizes of backsliding en the part ot Ure goverunetit
or the iibtary in their commitment ta improve the hares chit.
situatton nod reinforce democrutic institutions in EES: valor. Neverthe:
less, positive efforts by the government inal areas tod
hindered by derp-seate

‘The government hus made Hmited progress on humid sigehits issanes
in the past six months, although frat least one area-~the rate of civilians
deaths—the hnprovemert has beea sebstantial Other positive trends,
stich as gexxl treatment of political prisoners, remain overshadowed by 3
virtually nonfunctional criminal justice system that has proved unidbk:
to indict and prosecute the accused {4

Althongh some pragress has been made in curbing abuses Ly the
armed forces, E) Salvador continues to have serious problems in this
respect. Major problem areas remain the tack of fire control in
populated combat zones and arbiary violence committed by ansiuger
vised security forces. Nevertheless, the military has increased efforts ta

‘ S : a P ‘
educate and discipline subordinate officers and troops, and inte}ligetice

support has resulted In more selective targeting. In addition, regabince
ment of a few commanders has been followed hy a subsequent
improvement in the human ciglts records of theie unit. Morcover,
hefore Inunching operations some field conmanders reportedly tave
recelved specific tnsteuctions to respect the rights of the local civilian
population and ta take guecrilla, prisoners. “Fhey increastudy have
adhered to these arders In operations of the pust six mantis. :

The government ins demonstrated advances ta political aid
economic programs, particularly ta Phase HE of the agrarian reforms,
and the parties have shows a willingness to cooperate on maior issues. A
tunity pact signed by the major parties has led to establishment of
political and hinnan rights commissions and a new Central Elections
Council. A new constitutian Is scheduled ta he conipleted this spring.
and oresictentiat elections are scheduled For March L984.

"Yhe government continues its interparty discussions on recancilia-
tion On the issee of negotiations, the positions of all government ancl

military elements have coalesced against seerrifle toems tor dialogue,
bat they wilt discuss a role for the guerriilas in the ongoins palitical
process. San Salvedor hes renewed offers to the deft to compete in
elections und Is drafting an amnesty law to help convince teftists ta cad
the fighting The government leaves the deer apen bar possible
informal talks to that cade

The killers of the US churchwomen have been ident fied. iadicted.
ett huve been remanded €or trial in elvilian crimimd courts. There is ne
evidence of higher level complicity in these murders. Two members at
the Nationaal Guard have contessed to killing twe US representatives
from the Americun lustitute for Free Labor Development (ATE LD) and
the president of the Sulvaderan fund reform institute. “Phey have been
ordered to stund trial However, the three accused authors of these
crimes~-tvo military officers and a husinessman—remain tree

See,

DISCUSSION

L. The hitliigence Comnianity has atteruptedl dia.
tow the posi amonths te broaden its coverage of El
Salvador darts to mevt quolifteatlons far coutaued
uicl sot forth by the US Gorigeess.f

Human Rights

is Congress cellerlon for hidging Salvaduvan
Govermnent’s perlarmurce: “Making a eancerted
and sianificunt effart te comply with internation-
aliy recognized human raghts ”

Z Over, the Soleudetin Government bas made
lieted prearess en hima rights bssues ie the past sis
months relative to the period covered in the last
report, although in at lecst ene ureg—the cate of
clyvillan deaths—the impravement his beer sibstuce
tial, Given the virtually nonfunctional e¢luinad Justice
system En Eb Salvador, the standard far measuring
progress In this regacd is 2

2}. The government's record on treatment of prison.
eos, however, i L Thase abuses that do occur,
suolly happen during
the process of arrest am net during detention. Por
eomople, the government claims te have under deten-
tion approsimately BOG politleal prisoners. We know
that same 700 are housed ot the retatively modern
Murlona Pelson oulaide thy conlial Thess prisoners
forge im status fram captured guecriflas ta lefts:
intellectuals suspected of 4: bversion’

a they
are well led and recelve excelent treatment, melding
access to schooling, use of oan industrial shop, and
nighis to comjugab visits i geivate cdorintaries

4 The government fs attempting to expedite trial
nroceedings for political neisoners and is drafting a
new snimesty flaw Chat will furtlier help in reducing the

‘

niaber af detuinees The estubtsbunent at an arieesty
commision ale is heing camaderedh te asepsece the
reader Issue of wetiilation guecrilla delectar ites
the paltticat and ecananrie midasteeuis as ane ahaa ol
a democeatic sifution to the deesarpeat war A vesey
member hrnnan rights crecteission was appoited an
early Decenther, churged with Gareiulatiow aan paste
vitional mechanisa thar will peamele and protect
human rlglits”

5. The insurgent war has iibensdfied since fats. aie!
the rate af contbut deaths an bath sides has ie-reavea!
The cate of civilian political deatti, leewwever, bas
continued to declhie mackedly.’ The mouth seetiue
of politicu! deaths fn 1981 was ahout 540, lat for 1052
a dropped to QT —a decrease of ST percent: Since
filly the death rate dias dapper nese than dt
from that of the first sic months of (a2

erect

Control of the Armed Forces

"ts achieving sulistanth:) eantral aver all clement
af its awa anued forces”

military lead:
ers contuiue to
subardinate element

7. For example, the ceneral atofi remains birwely

-~Ineflecthys in promating fire cantco! ainong condi

units, although some improvements have heen tude
months, Ee :
por planniiyg and corelessttess
on the part of same Salvadoran commanders durtig

"Pohtloal deaths are thow what take ghice anatide a sone af
combat wal which cheady suppest a politicuf aeive, for syangde
eins ouedercd becuse of suspected complicity with the cave
gents Cisthins kiMed gas ce cerctt af beta eancht ia crowtin
athe itlizary -cobitesd activities ace ckictibted cvs citi chew

Vena darrebantits aed hireescale siveepa aah: eaeeritle
struiadhokls seatetacaes resah i euvitian tess ot fife cand
be sco destanmees maremer
sotibatant and noncsnbcel ane

thestean tes ab papery
the distinetiag betwee

1

tome Phased Q

after inelide Tiittaite. HEGRE suppart peranutel,
eunp Colbesees, and innoceat civilians trapuedd i the
Peattles gran :

HN Vhe teres aie! re itar nemeaigent cantret of
scuiag obfiores ver elements of the paranulitery securi
ty forces art critic ieresulars is a canting cane
lor quicente Repaniog aa hiunan cights vialations by
mildary personel largely reflects Bie excesses of these
senall rurat-hased comstutniary forces, fn tsalated! areas
pecially, where hiwlessuess isa way of bife, seaniiter-
vie procinel fed by a comporal ar a sergeant all tan
atten ase the ides af prasegutar, jacte, and excce-
pester

H osenior military leaders, Nesvever, are continiing
there efforts ta avercome lagmun rights ass Over
The hist sis sronths, members of the bigh commane
have senped up visits to pests ia the taterio: emplia-
siztow te subersdinute officers Wie necessity of diseiptia-
ing troaps guilty af aliases. The high comuenand appears
increashialy concerned that cnbat afficers set a good
eutule for their teocps, The cephacemeat ata few
commanders has been followed by a subsequent: ine
jraveriient ai the haniwan rights cecord of their antes

10 Defenw Minister Garcia continues to take a
feuding cole bo curbing milaary abuses bs Octaber
Wih2 he andured a conference tu San Sulvadar ot nearly
AO focal commanders essentiatiy all enlisted: persat-
nel—and reatftrmed the high command's cannuitesent

to haan cights und the penalties for commailting

brite

1. Nevertheless, Garele’s efforts to discipline and
educate the military fruave showiar some positive, al-
though uadramatie, resulis. Before launchiog an oper
ation, some field comntandess reportedly fave re-
ceived specific instructions to respect the elulits of the
loval civilian population vid ta lake guersilky prison:
ecs Shey incrensinuly Nave edhered to these orders in
operstions of the past sta aiouths They continue to
take priscners and Interrogute them bea more profes-
siarral eecuiee

able

Progress on Reform

“Es nahin continued progress in implemented
essential economic and political cebucaiw elu
treet hated reforan.”

sation dadtcutes that the ROCCE UE Ents tae fetta,
Fess He see ares of podtiesd and econ: Hi tetas

but dais accomplished tithe tn ezhers.

13. The function of gowecrment reviius hatupe ral
hy continulog tensions beheeen the VuOR parties
Increashig ustertivencs: by President Magara, b aves
or, has forestulled the kind of deadlocks that prewicead
iti Use First mondhs of his adininistration The, despite
periodic flareuns within and anon the deere pobt
cal groupings, moderates and diardliness fase hee a

fend off veis theoush H*CMELT TT CEEEL EN

PL Vhe ability of the parties tu Couperin ea crise
key issues was underscored by the stzniee in Argent ot
the “Pact of Apunece”—a unity document in alich
the muder parties pledged ts couperate on political,

socish and economic refarias. As stipetated ty the
wpreement. hus ight:
since huve been faced and ace fitctioning with tbe
fitter setting a formal timetable for deatinice ate
ratilying a new constitution be early TUM nd ached:
wing presidential elections for Miureh 84 Vhe far.
tation of a

ard patilicad CORMUEOL states

Fevetaies
soiredt in partisan contrage My OVET ES Compuesttien ane
misstoty it reportedly will be formed by Felony. ba!
Slagaia now envisions it AS He: ray ay suabrcatianittes ef

Pence comlbasion, lawever

the political contmission

16. Problenss with forcing the peace camudsian
have been caused fargely hy intransigence on the part
af the extreme rfalit, ted by Assembly President
DY’ Auluiscon. bis hictics, how ever, hive beouglit anal
t effort to unit his infleence
tite the coutition guvern-
ment remains vulnerable to partisan In-fshting, the
overall trend points te itecreasic
formulation and implementation.

th pohes

16. The anifitary rematns the key ta stabllits in San
Salvador and continues to support the Magase adiin-

isteations Maganas efferts to effect some degree al
‘ompprotnise have enobted the high coueseid to re.
chice (is hivedvenient in eiviting peditteal battles aver
the lust six niu. Deapite the recent dispute witli
the mileory! he armed forces will remain
oy force for meferation. Shout o change (ne

the pro

the Pytemse Shcistey tnke place in the nest few

months—as eas appears prabulite : :
officer canes will again select ab pragiatist to assuiaie
the portfolicd

WW White esculatio® lasurgeot attacks hive pat aes
sean tar thie ecanamy. Chey have net deterred the
arnt fecces fram keeping the agraian refoaray proce
essan track. Ga balance, the celutlomshin between the
peasant onsezations and the molltuey dies bapraved.
and the land cefarin pracess in ceceut umes fias not
met with die kinds of sethacks ancl cortreverss that
oocurrest followir the March electian, whea feraier
Tanda ners Healy evicted severad) Hicusare) pease
betelicnaries

4% Prewress de Phase PE (lard to the ditiert bias been
porthouherky upgparent since atm Aut catoidel was
gppolntol te head its adaniistration aged a pap peasant

feacer wos muted to the presidential commute aver:

seelow legishitive ection ay had rete

Salvador, 180 apptications foe dand titles were sube
mitted in Aggust and Seplember, amore than Hirve
Vines the figtere (454) far the previous two sionthys

19) Such increases alsa are alteibuteble toa poverne
ment publicly campaigu te inform eligdde recipients
af beneftis and procedures As of b Octaher, applica
tiens for new tiles since the beginning of the reform
program totaled J88be mince elo.
her, the government reportedly has set the wea! of wip
additional 22.00%) sitions by the end of
perce nore than TL EGOO new
heen received by year’s enct, indicat-

appticntions |
Ing that gaverninent efforts are on track. Menuvhile,
as af 1 October, 92.082 provisions) tiles bitd been
distebuted. The govertinent hopes in increase this
figure by an additional PLO by the erect af Maret
1985, bot hy year's end the total bad tereased by ants
1.729, suggesthig that the government is well hehing in
reaching that goul to addition. 157 peemanent lose
lttes were granted under Phase TH ductus the past atx
months, bringing the total number of permanent tithes
granted to niore tian fC}

Elections and Nagotiations

“Is commnithad to hrf tree eleetians ad in
vurly dtate acd, Go thet ened, fits detaciustrated

wood-feith efforts do hesin disceosians wyth wi
major politiouh Lactions Tee Lb Salsactor 7

20 ‘The governeten: ule! railitury sqapedt eaumit
ted te holdiog presidtutiat eleetios. om schediute da
Merch PS8-1

Novertber, the coustituent asscadly appointed areca

Piri a speciab pherary sesien ue

Ceutral Elections Council fo avenee the elected
process. The five polities pacties represented as the
asemiily each fave ogie aediber and age tertais
servi on the Council he president of viet tody

elected hy bis celleugnes-—represeats Che aiaderste:
Denrocettic Action patty. whtele curcenth hold no
posts tn the provisions pawccuinen! ee

210 ‘Vhe Council is charged priciirily with
— Draftinse anew electoral kos

— Preparing at aew eater registry

~~ Authorizing political party activities

— Promoting the election process

-- Nesudating its awn trlercusad fnicticans§

92. The Council frees same fundauentdl hard «
Jiowever, iachiding its teaporacy status ated Uae pos
belity chat it cauld be resteactuced Lefore (he ist
election. LW atso currently: lacks Hnancrd and isateria,
resources, sHCh as nea cosputers to assure pest aad
accurate voter tallies dts nredeee sats athempts te
design oHew voter registration systen: proved Otvatie
aatlonally anfensitte disci the bast efecto
whly alsa will be bevondl reach tor 19st

vad gual:

23. Nationat interes? ino the BRAD election. rag
while, ds already eviceot in the wtteraghs al ge pane.
to organize. To the disadvantage of EF Aubuiaer 9
conservallve splinter purty has onerced with eamids:
able private Fuaiting sod has succesfully nyndered
with well over the required OG) sguatuies Tae
ledating center-right groups and ane t
party also plang te participate in 19h ¢

24. ae & government and the wiltary are
willing ta make some attempts at recancthation with
the left hefare the presidential election Vhe Magane
administration repeatedly has dated its poles at
altuwing Telit parties ku register, cutpann, ant dedi

teat comer

istrattan Magana’s efforts to effect some cearee ol
Tampompise base enabled the high couse tas ee
duce ts disobvemeot ia civilinn politica) battles aver
the hist sic ninaths Desulte the recent dispute «hic
Whe oil cry He onmied Forces will ronte
the precy force for moderation. Shodid a chine din

the Deters Slinistey tuke ploce be the neat few

monthe-as eow appear orotate
officer core will agade select a progiuatist ta assune
the peartfitiedg ;

YO White esculti@?! insurgent attacks fae pot nes
stra ete the ecouamy, they have vet deterred the
armed forces tram keeping We amrickin ceforin prac
es an teick, Gn balance, the relationsiig: between the
pewaat arganizetions and the military bus Improved
aid the land cefari process to receat mouths has nat
aeeh with the kinds of sethacks and cantroversy that
ocurred following the Mirch election, ween former
fundowaers Hhewallp aviered several Uhousand preasaeat
heahicnuies

WS Prewress ia Pliase WE (land te the Wer has heen
parthouherl, appacremt sinee am Acuiy
appolntel te head tts adininistration and atop peasant
Jeacder wes named te the presidential ec
seeing lewisl

\
cotoned) wits

wie

Salvucae, LOSO apphcations for harsh tithes were suh-
mite) in Angust and September, mere than three
ttaies the fipuce C540 for the previous wo mantis.

1) Such inereuses also are attributuble too govern
ment publicity eampatge to inform eligitte recipients
of benefits and praceduces. Asal b October, anplion
tings for new Files since the beginning of We reform
progr tainted 38.6L5 Since Octo
ber, the gevernment reportedly has set the geal af vey
additional 22.000 new appheations ly the end of
March HOS) yore Cian §1000 new
applications had heen received hy year’s end. iudicat-

ing that goverment effects are on trick. Meanwhile,
as of 1 Qetober, 92.052 pravisionsl tales tad been
distributed. The overiuineit fiogses. le tnerease this
figure by an additional PAW) ty tie end af March
$083; hot by year’s end the total leat increased by only
1.729, suggesting that the government is well hehine is
reaching that gol. tn addition. (57 permanent bad
titles were granted uncer Phase Wb dunia the past six
months bringing the total number of permanent titles
gronted to more than ACM

Elections and Negotiations

“ts vonmmmoaittedl ta dradidiese free alectean al an

warty date acd, tothe cod) has cesyomdtrated

woosd-Eaith efforts ta begia discussion wah of

inajor politica! factions da Gb Sabor |

BO ‘Whe servernenens. aneb satliterry cgrieas eames
ted te dholdiag gresich util electior. am schedude fs
March (S84
November, the coustituent aseiathds appoiuded anes

Ditrig ou specnl pletiary; sesinn ae
Central EXections Cannel ta oeermee the eclertard
process. The five piolitical parties copresented aa ths
wsembly euch fave ane aenmiber and ane alterna
serving of The Council The presidcat cb tat body

elected hy hiis colleipies—repiresenty thee tuacseler ste
Dentocnttio Action party. whleh curcenth beddk ie
posts iu the prravisiaral KOCCTUCE

21 Whte Coaetl ts Giarwedt printacihy with
— Draltinw anew electoral his

— Prepuritig a aew rater rewistes

— Aathorizing pobitseah oats activa.

— Promoting the election process

—~ Hewuhuling ta aw ditecaak fact

92. The Council faces some fonchitentel tinh .
However, iichiding its Teaiyiaru ry status ated he poss
bility that it ceckd be
election. Tt also currently Jacks Hoan! and materia.

cestrughared Letoce the Gust

Fesucrces, such as new COMTpAtCes for assttce qicoresypt aed
accurile voter tatlies Ttx predecessor's allesagts la
design a lew vater registealian system pacacedt area
aationally infeasible during the best election aud peal
ably alsa will be bevonid reach dar HIS 4

23, National jiterest in the K+ election, uta
while, is atretdy evident inthe attengds ot new quate.
to aorgunizve. Yo the adlistdvantage of (2 Aahuiser a
comservadive splinter pacty has cinerked with card
able private Funding and dhas saceesdully ccsederca
with well over the required 3.000 sigaatuies Tae
fledyling conter-right groups and one |
party also plan te participate in 1954

24. We Seen
willing ta make same attempts wt) recancilamon wiih
the left hefore the prestdeatial cleetian. Whe Mapana
adininistration repeatedly Mas dated its paties at
atlowing leftist parties lo register, qumpanin, and held

eat center

e goveriupent and the auldac are

jae:

candidates fue office, Nevertheless, governinent md
iteiey fenders af all stebpes colect any prapesals for
mopmintives aimed at achieving a power-siurlog ar-
mavement astsdte the angoing palitical proce
: he five parties bi the
vealebrted the issue and appear to agree
on (hoee inajor points:

awembils

— Pielogie and/or negotiatlons at the ldilative of
the left cre unaccentubte,

— The left mst canpete for power tn dediocratic
elections.

— Any talks promoted by the government shodd
have as their only atijective the pari
the left hu elections cr fis surrender,

tefpation ef

25. The left’s negotiation efforts have been lurgely
propagarilisticg

! The teft seeks to regain fost
upport—domestlicuwky ark interneltonsll —by por

truying Wself as the mare legitimate governing alter:

native to the civibiailttary power structure in San
e Salvador, The Marxist-Leninist majorlty af the wisat
gent Aiiance vlews negotiations as a means ef under-
mining the unlty of the government and the acilitary,
while alse huying thne tor the guerriilas ta strength.
en thelr pollticul and aititary organtzations. Even
the concept of power sharlng-—totally unacceptable
te auercilla hardliners—ts percetved by the css
doctrinsire asa temporary phase befose Finut victory.

26. Nevertheless mi some leftist ele-
menle- dich az Guillermo Dig and bis small coterie
of moderate soclalists—are sancerely interested in
tointng the electoral process and may be cousidecing
the pasubilities for arranging a separate peace with
Sun Sulendoe

untomenta) goals of the
government and the Morsbst-$.eninist insurgent fead-
ership anpear trreconellahle If electlons tuke place,
therefore, they are likely io be held once again in an
ahaaiphere of vlalence!

Murders of US Citizens

“Gaad-fatth offarts to bavestinite murders of dy
{US citizens) aod below ta pistice thase ressondhh
far Hose murders.”

29. ‘The flee Notions! Guord aeeehers aecused ue
the slayings ef four US churchevomen dase yet tage te
Ital Courtappointed defense altorneys continds

have apneated the prosidinse guide’. erie te hears
trial proceedings en the basis of the avaiable es iden =
The apper! precess is tikely do be completed by de
end of Jaaniary and will determine whether the tral
heatns prowptly or must be pas
Investigation,

treed poeulits

hertler

ae = : ‘hewitt +
hos Implied that the jimior sergeant accused of pla.
olog ond directing the killings might have oat sy-
gested they were under “higher orders,’

to elictt the cooperation of his peers

Presta,

32. Two members of the National Chau hue
confessed to Wi sasy tove US representatives fron Uae
American Insthtute for Free babar Develops
(AIFLD) and the president of the Salvadoran lore
reform institute. They have been ordered te stunt
trial. The three accused authors of the crime—amilean
officers Lit. Lapez Sthatea arct Cagptaia Asitn ae
businessman Hans Christ—rerain fredg

AL The whereabouts of Captaln Aiki and Eyes
Christ are unknown. Cliist fled tm FONE te Murad.
where he was detained by US authorities peniise
evtradiiion ta Eb Salvacdar on criminal chares
Charges were dropped be the Salvadoran Coverutient
for tack of evidence ail setth thean the request tar
extradition, Christ may have left the United States fer

ee

Europe or South Ainerlen. Captaln Avila, meanwhile, country. and the goverment has appeuled tee releue
Tec the country fn September following his polygragh a decisica sees
by FRE offictats In San Salvadar, A elvilign justice
alfictal tneicates that Captain Avila’s uncle ts one of
the most eaverful members of the Supreme Courtand — (stite-of-sege law} and detate bint under he tereerac

has work oto block formal iadictinent proceedings Clause far his rote tia gathical crime suai a puta
. . 4
offtelak Success In this effort will depend aa te

hudgrient of the Sapreme Count, which «
4 The cuse of Lt. Lopez Sibrlan, who Js currently wanna employing Ue stiule-of- siege uw

oo active daty, has underscored the enplinulug weak- ,

nesses of the fidictad process. Fle was twice ordered

released fron military, detention by two clvittan

judges, ever ile ant Tim was

formidahlebg

Ether agigest Heil.

attempt tocemipley Decne 57

against his nephew

rrenthy pe

3 efor hack of sufficient
evilence was a “travesty” af fustlee, anc a senior
military offfcer has alleged that the civilian judges
were intimidated and bribed by rightwing ckenicuts.

3 Senior government end military officials ore
presing the Salvadoran Judiciary to rescled! te releuse
order und renaw teal procevdings. The high command
hos dienled Lopes Sibzinn permission to leave the
