The Arab-israeli Arms Problem -- Relative Capabilities and the Prospects for C
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000026759, dated 2 August 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000026759).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Bek

bed

THE ARAB-ISRAELI ARMS PROBLEM — RELATIVE CAPABILITIES
AND THE PROSPECTS FOR CONTROL’

THE PROBLEM

To estimate present and future relative military capabilities of the Arab states
and Israel and the likelihood of hostilities, and to examine the prospects for control
of Arab-Israeli arms and reactions to and consequences of implementation of an
arms control program.

" i } 4 eu ” ay RS J
ELE IE LET RE TERS
- Dark Bre faa? be ot 5 OP age

CONCLUSIONS

Bi He
"ae y

PR
ma

1. We believe that an outbreak of Arab-
Israeli hostilities is possible at any time,
and that the chances of such hostilities
are increasing. They could begin as a re-
sult of an Israeli decision to call for a
showdown before the Arabs gain military
superiority or as a result of developments
in or interaction between a number of
dangerous situations, among which the
instability of the regime in Jordan is curg
rently the most delicate. A continuation
of the Arab-Israeli arms race will increase
the danger of war.

2. We believe the Israel Defense Force is
mow more effective militarily than any

combination of Arab forces likely to be
opposed to it and could probably defeat
the Arab forces if Israel retained freedom
of air action. The UAR, however, has the
advantage in weapons and available man-
power. Assuming that present sources of
supply to both the UAR and Israelis con-
tinue open, the degree of improvement in
Arab training and morale will become a
major factor in relative Arab-Israeli mili-
tary capabilities. Thus at some point,
probably not far in the future, as Arab
military proficiency rises, Israel may be
faced with Arab forces which, though in-
ferior on a man-for-man or unit-for-unit
basis, are superior to the Israel Defense
Force.

3. Shouid Israel not have freedom of air
ection, the capabilities of its ground
forces would be substantially reduced.
We estimate that the UAR air forces could
achieve air superiority if they could in
the future develop personnel capable of
exploiting their advantages in equipment

Approved for Release

Date 1 Q MAY 3992

and widely dispersed air fields, Even if
the Israelis maintained freedom of ac-
tion in the air, logistic and economic dif-
ficulties would prevent them from hold-
ing extehsive Arab territory for long. In
any event they probably could not over-
run more than the Sinai Peninsula, parts
of Jordan, southern Lebanon, and a por-
tion of southwest Syria, not including
Damascus.

4, An embargo on the fiow of arms to the

Arab-Israeli area would probably reduce
the danger of war, although it would not

be so important in this respect as other
factors of a political and psychological
nature.

5. With strong US and USSR support
there would he a good chance that a
UN-sponsored arms limitation agreement
could be reached. Such an agreement
could be effective, however, only with the
support of the US and USSR and the co-
operation cf Israel and the UAR. We be-
lieve that the chances for such support
and cooperation are slim,

DISCUSSION

1, ARAB-ISRAELI MILITARY RESOURCES ”

6. The Arab armed forces surpass the Israel
Defense Force both in numbers of men under
arms and in weapons of most categories, but
Israel enjoys & distinct superiority in combat
effectiveness and has the advantage of geo-
graphical and political unity. Israel has an
army of 55,000 and can, within 48 hours,
mobilize another 145,000. Israel could not
maintain this larger force mobilized for moze
than a short time without severe economic
strain. The UAR alone, in contrast, has 165,-
000 men continually under arms and the
other Arab states have at least another
135,000. The UAR surpasses Israel in tank
armament, the difference being particularly
notable in medium and heavy tanks. The
UAR has substantially greater holdings of
medium artillery and anti-tank weapons,
though Israel has more light artillery and
rocket launchers. The UAR has 326 jet air-
craft, of which ‘70 are light bombers. Israel
has 109 jet fighters, 20-odd jet fighter-bombers
which can be used for long-range ground at-
tack and bombing missions, and 9 light piston
bombers. Israel’s arms are a mixture of West-
ern types, with French types making up all
its anti-tank missiles and a large proportion

*Tables shoving present Arab and Israeli hold-
ings of arms are appended.

of its artillery and light tanks. The UAR
retains some Western arms but is approach-
ing standardization in Soviet weapons. Most
other Arab states are armed with a mixture
of Western weapons types.

%. The Israel Defense Force, despite its in-
feriority in arms, continues to excel the Arab
forces in organization, training, leadership,
morale, and the will to fight. Itisina better
state of readiness than the Arab forces, which
are handicapped by low levels of technical
proficiency, organization, training, and lead-
ership, Unlike Israeli military leadership, the
effectiveness of Arab military leadership is im-
paired by its involvement in politics, both in-
ternal and inter-Arab, and its discipline is
much weaker. Although the capabilities of
Arab military personnel will continue to im-
prove with both Bloc and Western training
and continued Arab political and diplomatic
victories will improve morale, it is almost cer-
tain that the Arab states could not effectively
combine their military forces under a central
command im the next few years.

8. In order to maintain its military superi-
ority, Israel is seeking to obtain sizeable
amounts of arms from the US and other West-
ern countries, including fighter aircraft from
France (now Israel’s principal arms supplier)
and submerines from the UK. ‘Vhile Israel

will probably be able to obtain additional
arms, there is a definite limit to the arina-
ments which its available personnel can man.
he Israelis are aware that as Arab military
proficiency rises and if the Bloc continues to
provide arms, there will come & time when
the Israel] Defense Force cannot match the
combined Arab armies howevet many weapons
Israel may have obtained. Israel is particu-
larly interested in acquiring nuclear weapons
and ballistic missiles and has been conducting
nuclear research with some assistance from
France and the US.

9. Egypt received substantial shipinents of
arms from the Soviet Bloc in 1956 and 1957,
but has not added greatly to its arms inven-
tory this year, except for three Soviet sut-
marines, Syria, however, has continued to re-
ceive shipments. The Egyptians and Syrians
probably have more weapons than they can
now effectively absorb, so that the limit upon
their military capabilities is the proficiency of
their personnel rather than weapons holdings.
When the UAR forces have further need for
arms, we believ2 the Bloc will arrange to pro-
vide them.

10. The armed forces of Saudi Arabia, Leb-
anon, and Jordan have no Soviet Bloc weapons
and have little or no capability for offensive
operations, Ireg has had no weapons directly
from the Soviet Bloc, although the UAR is
probably transferring some such weapons.
For the iznmediate future, we do not believe
that Iraqi armed forces have any significant
capability against Israel. While Bloc arms
have been supplied to Yemen in quantities
which are considerable in relation to Yemen's
size, we do not believe that Yemen’s military
capabilities in relation to Israel are of any
significance,

Il, DANGER OF RESUMPTION OF ARAB-
ISRAEL) HOSTILITIES

11. The Arab-Israeli war in Palestine in
4948-49 has never been effectively concluded.
The Israelis Lave sought to establish their
state as a normal and accepted element in
the area. The Arabs on their part have re-
fused to accept Israel or acknowledge their
defeat in the Palestine war. Both sides have

helped maintain a state of hostile tension, the
Arabs by blockade and harassment and Israel

py raids and intimidation. Another round
with Israel ard the fulfillment of Arab “laims
to Palestine have remained implicit in Arab
thought and conduct. Hostility to Israel has
become a principal force behind the Arab
unity movement and overt expression of that
hostility has become essential to success in
Arab politics. In these circumstances there
has been and continues to be grave danger of
war,

12. Stabilizing factors. In the midst of the
bitter emotions and crackling tensions that
characterize Arab-Israeli relations, we believe
that there are some factors which tend to
stabilize and to prolong the present situation.
The Arabs are afraid of Israeli military abili-
ties; the Israelis are aware of their yulnera-
bility to Arab air attack. Another and per-
haps equally important factor is the prevalent
belief that the US is committed to the preser-
vation of Israel and that the USSF is com-
mitted to the support of the UAR and its
allies, a belief which leads each side to ques-
tion whether a real victory over the other Is
now possible. On the Arab side there has
been a growing belief that time is working
in the Arab behalf and that circumstances
will ultimately lead to the downfall of Israel.
The presence of UN representatives in the
area has had a stabilizing influence, particu-
larly the United Nations Expeditionary Force
in the Sinai and Gulf of Aqaba area.

13. Search for external support. Both Israelis
and Arabs will evaluate their situation and
make their decisions with respect to each other
in the context of their understanding of the
intentions of the great powers, Both will seck
to mobilize world opinion on their side and to
gain a position in which support could be ob-
tained by UN action. Israel will continue to
seek a security guarantee from the US. In
the area it is currently seeking to develop
special ties with Turkey and Iran, Nasser and
the Pan-Arab nationalists will seek to obtain
both Western and Soviet Bloc support against
an Israeli attack. If such an attack does come
they will hope to have assurances of Soviet
support stated in such terms as to deter West-
ern powers from assisting Israel.

14. Prospects for war. Despite growing Arab
military capabilities, Israel’s sense of military
peril is probably not now so acute as to induce
it to disregard the dangers of resort to pre-
ventive war. For his part, Nasser will wish
to avoid a showdown until he is convinced that
he has achieved military superiority. Even
then he might be restrained by the knowledge
that the Israslis would remain capable of in-
flicting serious damage on his forces and by
the prospect of Western support for Israel.

15. Nevertheless, the growth of Arab military
strength relative to that of Israel is increasing
the chances of a deliberate resort to war. Ti
the Israelis became convinced that the time
was approaching when they could no longer
defend themselves effectively, they would be
likely to think once again in terms of & pre-
yentive war Lo assure survival, relegating in-
ternational political and psychological factors
and economic considerations to the back-
ground. If Nasser’s Pan-Arab group believed
it bad achieved clear military superiority over
Israel, it would be greatly tempted to blot out
Israel.

16, At any time other circumstances leading
to major hostilities might develop. A collapse
of the shaky regime in Jordan or an attempt
to establish by coup d’etat a pro-Nasser re-
gime would probably lead to Israeli action in
the West Bank area of Jordan. This, in turn,
would probably result in a clash with Jor-
danian and perhaps also UAR forces. The
Israelis might also move into the West Bank
area if a pro-Nasser government were to come
to power by generally peaceful means, Should
the UAR become embroiled in serious diffi-
culties internally, in its relations with other
Arab states, or in its relations with the West,
the Israelis might consider the opportunity to
destroy Nasser too good to pass up. Con-
versely, Nasser might seek to escape domestic
or inter-Arab troubles by focussing attention
on Israel. Finally, there will be continuing
danger that local friction over one of the nu-
merous trouble spots on the Arab-Israeli bor-
ders or in the Gulf of Aqaba, could lead to
major hostilities, especially since Nasser is
likely to use his growing military power to
attempt to intimidate Jsrael and forec conces-
sions from it.

17. Thus there are a number of ways in which
war between Israel and one or more Arab
states could start. These circumstances, plus
the general instability of the Middle East, and
the high tensions prevailing there, lead us to
the conclusion that an outbreak of Arab-
Isracli hostilities is possible at any time, and
the chances of such hostilities are increasing.

lil, MILITARY CAPABILITIES OF THE ARABS
AND ISRAELIS IN EVENT OF WAR?

18. In estimating relative Arab and Israeli
military capabilities we are aware of the dem-
onstration of the superiority of Israeli military
personnel in the Palestine War of 1948-49 and
the Sinai campaign of 1956. We are also
aware, however, of the present UAR advantage
in arms, and particularly in jet aircraft and
num2rous widely dispersed air fields. Israel's
smaller air force, on the other hand, must
operate from fewer bases in & geographically
restricted area. We believe that if the UAR
air forces had competent leadership and air
crews they could, whether or not the element
of surprise were involved, probably gain air
superiority in the event of war with Israel.
We are unable to assess precisely the present
capabilities of UAR air forces personnel; We
bulieve that they are now inferior to Israeli
personnel but that they are improving.

19, In present circumstances, if the Israelis
were to maintain freedom of action in the alr,
Israeli ground forces could probably by D+20
seize and hold the Gaza Strip, West Jordan,
southern Lebanon, and the southwest corner
of Syria, At the same time Israel could prob-
ably seize and hold strategic points in the
“We beleve it unnecessary for purposes of this
estimate to seek to differentiate between situa-
tions im which Jordan and Iraq were and were
not involved. It is likely that Jordan would be-
come involved whatever the position of its gov-
ernment because Israel would move into the West
Bank area. Even in that event, however, we be-
Lieve that the bulk of the Jordanian Army would
stay on the East bank. Under present clrcum-
stances we believe it unlikely that the Iraqi
Government could spare or support significant
forces for use against Israel; Lebanon, Saudi
Arabia, and Yemen are also unlikely to be able
to maxe any significant military contribution
in a war with Israel.

Sinai Peninsula and gain and maintain con-
trol of the Straits of Tiran and the Gulf of
Aqaba, though it might not be able to control
the sea approaches. The Israel Defense Force,
with freedom of action in the air, could prob-
ably defeat Arab forces in Jordan and Syria
while holding the Egyptians on the Sinai
front and doing considerable damage to their
forces. Thus the Israelis could effectively re-
duce the Arab ability to make war and for
some time remove the military threat to their
own country.

90. It is unlikely that the Arab armies would
be able to engage in effectively coordinated
operations. They probably could, however,
defend the Suez Canal line and Damascus,
though perhaps not Amman, if Israel simul-
taneously engaged with Egypt, Syria, and Jor-
dan, The Aras could severely harrass Israel
with fedayeen commando attacks.

21. As slready noted, these judgments on
relative Arab-"sraeli military capabilities are
based on the premise that the Israelis retain
freedom of action in the air. If, however, the
UAR air forces achieved sir superiority, the
offensive capabilities of the Israeli ground
force would be substantially reduced, More-
over, whatever the situation with respect to
control of the air, Israeli logistical difficulties
would prevent maintenance of forces in ad-
vanced positions outside the country’s borders
for more than two or three months. Thus the
Israelis might not be able to hold these posi-
tions for long if hostilities were protracted.
Even though the Israelis were obliged to with-
draw to their frontiers, however, we believe
that the Arabs would be unable to overrun
Israel.

22. The pattern of arms acquisition by both
Israelis and the UAR has been too erratic for
trends to be plotted or for future holdings to
be precisely estimated. Perhaps the most im-
portant aspect of the situation is that, so long
as the Israelis and the UAR retain access to
their respective sources of supply in the West
and in the Bloc, military hardware is not like-
ly to be decisive in determining relative mili-
tary strength. Should one side or another
obtain marke2dly superior weapons, such as ad-
vanced types of jet aircraft or missiles, it

would of course have an advantage, but only
so long as the other side failed to obtain com-
pensating equipment. Given the probable
attitude of the USSR toward the UAR and of
the major Western powers toward the Israelis,
we believe it unlikely that such an imbalance
would long continue.

23. Under these circumstances, the likelihood
of a significant change in relative military
capabilities will depend in large part on the
extent to which the UAR succeeds in realizing
the potential of its far greater military man-
power. It is probable that, for some time to
come, the Arabs will suffer from deficiencies
in individual skills, organization, leadership,
and morale. Nevertheless, the ability of tne
Arabs to use modern equipment will almost
certainly improve as they gain in training and
experience. Moreover, increased confidence
in their professional abilities is likely to result
in higher morale and possibly in an increased
will to fight. Thus at some point probably not
far in the future, as Arab military proficiency
rises, Isracl may be faced with Arab forces
which, though perhaps still not equal to
Israeli forces on a man-for-man or unit-for-
unit basis, are superior to the Israel Defense
Force.

IV. CONSEQUENCES OF CONTINUATION OF
PRESENT ARAB-ISRAELI RELATIONSHIP

24. Political and psychological, A continua-
tion for the next year or so of the present
Arab-Israeli situation and relationship, in-
eluding further build-up of arms on both
sides, is likely to magnify present tensions and
increase present dangers. An increase in the
military strength of the UAR will also enable
it to move toward other goals in addition to
that of matching oF surpassing Israeli
strength, Such an increase would enable Nas-
ser further to extend his influence and au-
thority throughout the Arab world and to
exert additional pressures upon the remaining
conservative governments,

25. Economic, The economies of Israel and

the UAR are severely burdened by the cost of
their military establishments, which seriously
restricts economic development. Arms pur-
chases use up a considerable part of the money

contributed to Israel from abroad, thus reduc-
ing the amounts avai-able for economic devel-
opment, This diversion is, however, offset to
some extent by the tendency of foreign con-
tributions to go up in times of military threat
to Israel. Furthermcre the Arab blockade in-
creases the cost of Israel’s imports and pre-
yents the realization of Israel’s potential as an
area trading and manufacturing center. The
UAR is trading large quantities of cotton for
Soviet Bloc arms and has in addition accepted
heavy Jong-term crecit obligations. It is un-
likely, however, that within the foreseeable
future expenditures fer arms will cause €co-
nomic breakdown in either country.

96. Attitudes toward US and USSR. Pro-
longation of present Arab-Israeli relations and
continuation of the arms build-up over the
next year or so is likely to have further signifi-
cant and clearly recognizable effects upon area
attitudes toward the great powers. The US
is likely to be more clearly identified in Arab
eyes as the enemy of Arab nationalism and
the Soviet Union as its supporter, If signifi-
cant military supplizs are provided Israel by
the US, prospects for re-establishment of good
relations between the US and the bulk of the
Arab area will be reduced, Since, however,
the Arabs have long believed that the US is
supporting Israel, relations between the US
and the Arabs are likely to be more seriously
affected by US involvement in inter-Arab con-
flicts and those involving the Arabs and Us
allies.

27. Prospects for a settlement of the Arab-
Israeli problem. We believe that in the pre-
vailing state of tension and mutual suspicion
in the Middle East neither a general settle-
ment of the Arab-Israeli problem nor agree-
ment on major individual issues can be
brought about. Even if the US and the USSR
were to agree on the desirability of a settle-
ment, basic animosities would continue, and
prospects for a settlement would remain poor.

V. PROSPECTS FOR ARMS CONTROL IN THE
ARAB-ISRAELI AREA

28, The Arab-Israeli conflict existed before

the spiralling arms build-up and arms control

would not, in itself, solve the basic problems

behind it. The arms race does, however, con-
tribute to bitterness and suspicion. It greatly
increases the danger of the outbreak of hos-
tilities between Israel and the UAR and, along
with other factors in the situation, obstructs
progress toward the improvement in the gen-
eral atmosphere which is a prerequisite of a
settlement. Because of the way in which it
encourages the identification of the entire
West as the enemy of the Arabs and the So-
viet Bloc as their friend, the arms race
diminishes the chances for an improvement in
US relations with the majority of the Arabs.
A cessation or limitation of the arms build-up
would reduce but not eliminate the dangers
implicit in the Arab-Israeli situation.

29, Arms embarga. An arms embargo would
be the most direct and most effective means
of halting the Arab-Israeli arms race, but it
would require agreement between the West-
ern powers and the USSR. If the great powe7s
agreed to impose an arms embargo on the
area they could probably bring influence or
pressure to bear on other arms producers
which would greatly reduce the flow of arms
to the Arab-Israell area. Both the Arabs and
Israelis, unless they were persuaded to join in
an agreement to limit arms imports would,
however, seek arms from irregular sources and
by devious channels in an attempt to improve
their positions, The establishment of an em-
bargo would facilitate the development of &
general arms limitation agreement for the
area under UN or other auspices.

30, Effects upon Arab-Israeli capabilities of
an agreement to limit shipment of arms to
the area. In the event of such an agreement,
Israel would enjoy an advantage in that it Nas
better facilities and skills for the manufacture
and maintenance of arms and ammunition
than the Arab skates, There is, however, a
definite limit as to quantity and nature of the
armaments which could be manufactured.
The Arabs, on the other hand, would probably
be in a position ultimately to increase their
military capabilities beyond their present level
by improving the ability of their military per-
sonnel effectively to utilize the equipment
which they now have. Limitation of the flow
of armaments to the Arab-Israeli area would

probably not have as much effect upon the
likelihood of war as other factors of a political
and psychological nature.

31. UN sponsored agreement on limitation of
armaments. If a UN body were constituted
to study the limitation of armaments in the
area, the Israeli and Arab governments would
probably cooperate with it at least to the ex-
tent of discussing the problem. Yet no Arab
state would be likely to take any step in the
matter until the UAR had made its position
clear: after this happened the rest of the Arab
states would probably follow Nasser’s lead.
There would in any event be great difficulties
in reaching any useful agreement. Both
Arabs and Israelis would be disinclined to al-
low UN inspectors access to their military in-
stallations, even on a temporary basis for pur-
poses of setting up a control. Arabs would
almost certainly refuse to negotiate with
Israelis on arms limitation as on other sub-
jects; the UN would have to deal inde-
pendently with each side, and neither cide
would be likely to agree to anything until
assured that its adversary had made at least
a commensurate agreement. The whole busi-
ness would prove very complicated.

32. With strong US and USSR support there
would be a good chance that a UN-sponsored
arms limitation agreement could be reached.
Its effectiveness would depend largely upon
the willingness of the USSR to implement it.
An inspection system made up of UN teams
at the main seaports, air fields, and communi-
cations centers and witn aerial inspection
rights could prcbably determine whether an
agreement to limit arms imports were being
carried out, but only if the UAR and Israel
were willing to cooperate. Intelligence sources
could probably provide the US with a reliable
check on genera: adherence to any agreement,
but it would probably be difficult for the US
to prove any violations (€.g. before the UN)
without compromising at least some sensitive
sources.

33. Soviet interests. We believe that the
Soviet Union w.il seek to exploit its position
of influence and prestige in the Arab world,
and is unlikely to enter into or support any
agreement which would detract from the posi-

tion which it has achieved. The Soviets will
probably calculate that a prolongs.tion of ten-
sions in the Middle East, dangerous though it
may be, is like'y to intensify strains between
the US and Arab nationalist regimes, and
thereby continue to advance Soviet interests.
Nevertheless there are reasons why the 5o-
viets might consider entering into an agree-
ment on the limitation of the flow of arms to
the area. They have several times expressed
their willingness to work out a joint embargo
of arms to the Middle East. If negotiations
were embarked upon it is likely that the So-
viets would seek to include Turkey, Iran, and
Pakistan in the embargo area and take the
position that the US would have to withdraw
from military bases in the area in order to
make the embargo complete. it is possible,
however, that the Soviets have some interest
in a more limited 2mbargo and might not
press demands which they knew would be un-
acceptable to the US. However, it woun
probably oppose effective enforcement meas-
ures. We believe that they do not desire a
general war at this time and that they may
wish to reduce the dangers implicit in the
Arab-Israeli situation. ‘They might also value
an agreement between themselves and the
West on arms limitation in the Middle East
because it would enhance their own standing
as a power with interests and responsibilities
in the area. And they may also feel that the
revolutionary social and political situation in
the Middle East, which they have for some
time been exploiting with considerable suc-
cess, would nat become less profitable after an
agreement on arms limitation.

34, Arab reactions, The Arab reaction to a
great power arms embargo and a UN spon-
sored arms limitation agreement would prob-
ably be generally adverse, They would regard
such moves as attempts by the great powers
to arbitrate their affairs and to limit their
freedom of action. They would fear that the
West was involved in some devious scheme to
provide an advantage for Israel or to halt the
progress of the Arab military build-up so as to
retain Israel’s present position. Use of the
UN would not allay Arab suspicions because
of their tendency to regard the UN as an in-
strument of the US. They would also suspect

the motives of the Soviet Union. It is possi-
ple, though unlikely, that all these objections
might be overcome in Nasser’s mind by other
considerations. We believe that Nasser re-
gards the possibility of a joint Israeli and
Western attack as the greatest danger that
confronts him. He might conclude that an
arms limitaticn agreement participated in by
the US and the USSR would protect him
against that eventuality. He might also cal-
culate that during a period of arms limita-
tions the Arabs could make greater gains in
military strength than. the Israelis.

35, Israeli reactions. The Israelis have al-
ways cherished their freedom of action and
have been particularly proud of their ability
to defend themselves. They would almost cer-
tainly not accept any reduction of their mili-
tary strength and at present would probably

oppose auy limitation on imports of arms.
However, with the continuation of the
situation with which they are pow con-
fronted —~ i. one in which virtually the entire
Arab area is hostile and in which Western in-
fiuence is greatly reduced — the Israelis might
conclude that they can no longer hope to re-
tain indefinitely the capability for defeating
the Arabs. They might therefore come to
accept an arms limitation agreement spon-
sored by the UN and linked with a great power
understanding on the area, They might hope
that it would provide greater security than a
continued race for arms superiority over the
Arabs, as well as releasing funds sorely needed
for development. They would accept such an
agreement, however, only if they were satis-
fied that they had a firm and clear security
guarantee by the US.

4p Blea y-haVv

-g1OYDUNYT 7S{SOI peyTMOUT Yous, WME 24N}-Ze Ts SUTIPNLOUT«

-ATOVUAAUT STUY UT GUBTaM 4q) Savoy se DAUIESEIO ax8 “P

got pol ¥Il Prat 18 6
00z'T GPS Tet « Let rad 8
suodeas, Ug, ‘doid isaseieiey wuIoL ‘doid
ssaq[jooau ~LS Tes pot SL as
a slaljaune'y
4a00W
YaRyyuy Asah4v Pahl

(ag6l iequiaydag og JO S¥)
_RMOLNZANI SINGNVANY GELOATZS

SOLJUGA
poroully
“OSTA

gUUNS-UMTpaU YsNOnYs “SHUEY UOTINJUSD
“Paq}TaIo 139q BART] SUIO}T Hafosqo WYELIID +

cer Sst [avis]

eiquiy preg
wawsz,
woLLegeT
mepiog

ber]

avn (FOL

THE ARAB-ISRAELI SITUATION (As of 30 September 1958)

Jo ae Se as

oe
Strength of Ground Fouces, Jacluding

Reserves, Deployed in Areas Adjacent Total Sirength of srab Arples
to Israel zs
UAR Egypt 12,506 UAR Egypt 100,000
UAR Syma 40,000 UAR Syria 65,006
ee ee a eT
Total UAR 62,500 Total UAR 463,900
iraq 1,800* Trag 60,000
Jordan 50,300 Jordan §0,300
Lebanon 4,000 Lebanon 6,800
Saudi Arabia §,000 Baudl Arabia 15,000
fot ee Poti a ee
Israel §5,000

(M448 hrs=200,000)

* Located near Jordanian-Iraqt border at pumpite station H-3.

11

ATR FORCE
(As of 30 September 1958)

FIGHTER BOMBSR TRANSPORT CTHER TOTAL
COUNTRY JET. CONV: JET. CONV: JET. CONV: JET, CONY: TOTAL A. F. PERS
UAR Egypt 178 15 70 3 48 10 10 3y4 4,315
UAR @yria 50 16 ae = 10 rT 106 200 1,259
ee ee Jone ee SS
Total DUAR 228 $1 70 2 58 28 176 BL4 5,334

Nee bee Sh = ee ee ee
Trag 48 38 _ _ 6 = 19 17k 3,252
Jordan 12 _ _ —_ _ 2 20 $4 675
Lebanon 10 = — 4 _ 4 21 3 400
Yemen —- $c _ - 3 — 12 45 UNK
Saudi Arabia 20 = —_— 3 it —_ 44 3 197
tl 0 a pe eS ee ee

Total Arab 318 $9 70 id 18 34 842 958 10,158

Israel 429 39 _ 9 22 13 119 33) 2,948

NAVAL FORCES
(As of 30 September 1958)

Motor Total

Patrol Torpedo Mine Amphib. Naval

Destroyers Vessels Boats Craft Subs Craft Other Pers.

UAR Egypt 4 6° 25 & _ 8 8,000
UAR Syria — 3 7-9 - - 3 5 697
ee ee a eae ee ee
TOTAL UAR 4 9 : §2-34 8 é 3 14 8,697
ce a ee ee en ne
irag — 4 — — — an _ 193
Jordan —_ _ _ —_ _ _ 2 120¢
Lebanon _ _ _ _ _ 2 3 100

Saudi Arabia
ge he oe es a ee ae
Total Arab 4 13 32-34 8 é 5 19 9,170
a Ss Se a eae
Israel 2 8 15! — — 20-22 " 6 3,720

aTwo in reserve.

* Two, or possibly five, PT’s are puilding in France.

*One LCVP is under construction in Italy.

‘These personn2l are officially assigned to the Army.
