Gary Powers ConclusionN of Powers Trial-over View of Events)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022336, dated 1 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022336).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Pa omen ee er

But the peopies of the world'r

7 - BB1-
USSR IBTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

‘

= Aug. 22, 1960

REPORT ON CONCLUSION GF POWENS TRIAL
CVhseees Feb ade 7 witenkd spédebe Po FE ee roe

Moscow, Soviet Home Service, Auge 19, 1960, o922 ‘OMt--L

(Speech for the prosecution by USSR Procurstor General Radenko, et the trial

of Francis Powers, read by announcer}, * Ree e .
(Text} Comrade Judges: I came to wake the speech for the prosecution
The

at this trial in full consciousness of its immense significance.
present trial of tye American spy-piiot, Powers, exposes 6 crime
perpetrated not only personally by the accused Powers. It also fully
reveals the criminal, aggressive actions of ruling cirzles of the United
States, the true inspirers end ‘orgenizers of monstrous crines directed

ageinss ‘the peace and the “Security of the peoples. | 7

fn eee

It has een shown’ once more et this trial ‘thet: the réacticnary forces if ee
of the United States, in the struggie against the forcas of peace, heve

not shrink from using any methods and have criminally viclated the
elementary norms of international law and the national sovereignty of ©

other states in order to pursue the tankrupt policy of balancing on the
brink of var. ‘ 4 fare _ =} Fixe

enenber very well the horrors of World .
War 12. The Soviet people took the main weight of the Hitlerite a
aggression on themselves. On fields of battle that were of an :
ey @efended and succeeded in

unprecedented scale and ferocity, the
defending, with perseverance and courage, the honor, freedca, and
indeperdence of the homeland and saved the freedom-loving people.-from

the dread peril. of fascist enslavezent. The world followed the course

of this struggle of the Soviet people an@ its anved forces with admiration,

History will never forget ite Be Ea Dens “

mee oat

tre Soya
s ard villeges razed, the tears of 77.
“and the unheard-of-sufferings of _—

millions and tens of williéns of people who fell victin to the fascist” -
barbarism, We remeuber all this so as never to allow a repetition of ~

the horrors of a world war. The Tima determination of the Soviet people,
the Soviet Government, and its head, Nikita, Sergeyevicn Knrushchev to ;

prevent a new war expresses the willof all progressive pankind, of all the
common people of the globe. ce

We will resenber forever the town
the wives, children, and mothers,

~~

? rn ne APPROVED. FOR RELEASE ,
| _ ~ pera, OR
ee

O
O - BB 2 ~ USSR INTRANATICNAL AFFALRS
Aug. 22, 1960

(he peace-loving peoples of all countries follow with ceep satisfaction
and unabated attention the measures of the Soviet Gevernzent for ap
easing of international tension and the preveotion of the threat of 5
new war, and creation of conditions for the peaceful coexistence of
states with different scclal systens- The Goviet Union is unsverv ingly
@efending the cause of peace andbas gudeitted to the United Netions

a plan Zor universal and complete disarmnent which includes the destruction
of eli weans for pursuit of 4 pocket or nuclear Ware
Consistently pursuing & peace-loving policy, the Soviet Government

hes unilaterally reduced the arzed forces of the Soviet Union ont-
third. In the Soviet country, the great seven-year pian of peaceful
construstion is being successfully fulfilled, The Soviet people, Whe .
are building & communist society, are engaged in peaceful creative work
ard hete wer, nae ‘

qhe ruling circles of the United States are pursuing # coupletely
different policy. These reactionary, aggressive eiocles have set up their
military bases on the territories of many countries who Bre participants
in NATG. They constantly keep planes in the air with loads of atom and
hydrogen bocbs and declare their intention to resume underground tests

of nuclear weapons. They have entered into a conspiracy with the

Adenauer, revanchist government about arming the Euncesvehr with nuclear
weapons, and stubbornly oppose measures On universal gusarmanent and the
destruction of rocket and nuclear weapons.

Striving to maintain their policy of war ‘rinkmanship, the leading :
circles of the United States ere wakking the road of Gangerous provocations.
The piratical, aggressive raid of defendant Fowers on May 1, 1960,

was just such & provaction.

rom the ros*rum of the USSR Supreme Soviet session
the head of the Soviet Gévernmen® announce’ the ageressive intrusion of
the Auerican military Lockheed U-2 plane into the airspace of the

Soviet Union, the whole world was sheken by the ayeachery of leading

U.S. statesmen. The peoples of the world branded with shame these
provecative, dnsiduovs actions of the American ruling circles. It is’
cormon knowledge that after the aggressive intrusion of the plane into
the confines of the Soviet Union vas announced there cane a whole series
of merdacious, ¢ynical, and contradictory statenents end assertions from
he leading statesmen of the United States. ‘ : oa

Comrade Judges, when f

gute tree ot

Ise

(3,5, Btate Secretary derter mde official stetemoats:
aa the history of “tnternasional relations to the effect t
of the sovéreignty of the UESR ard the aggressive esplons.e

foc aces i ek» ae

eerie

t

the “suzmit ‘conference, the chairwan of the USSR Cour

+, hO, the, breakdown | of ‘the swonit, conference-.:

~ BA 3 - USSR INTERATIONAL APFATRS
Aug. 22, 1960

In the beginning, they tried to present #21 sort
covering up versions to conceal their true eins from the
avoid resporsibility. Exposed before the vbole world in
agercesive actions, U.S. ‘President Eigenbover, Vice

4S. aircraft over the Soviet territory vere carried out
instructions of the U.S. Governtent

they are the calculated state policy of the United States.

eae was the Eas of “fanocencey ‘period vhich the governo
nited, States vainly ‘tried to avoid respon
world publi¢ opinion, torn off. Stiiving

g of comoufleging and

world and
their deliberate

President Nixor:, ond
of 6 kind unpre:

hat the violation
flights of
om direct

“ont and the President hinself ond ttat

ent of the —

sibility before Averican and

to avert the breasdown of
cil of “jinisters,

conference of the

Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, speaking at 2 prelimuary
16 this ye4r,

heads of govérhifents of the four povers in Paris on vay
stated that in spite of the provoca
os Paiset States, the Soviet Union.
oe conference on condition that the government ©
sear font Ens unbtard-of provocation thet had been perm
Viet'Union, apologize, and punich the culprits.

noo Eisenhower rejected these fair and legitirate
Peres Union. By, this very fact,
a spd teak to the whole world its reel dnveni
Eee intrusion of-the U-2 aircraft into the con
ened a as a pretext for sabotaging the summit conf
tance g the world once sgein into a state of cold war,
sion in international relations, and of freezing the

negotiations on @isarmanent. ~. © 0+ 7 7) Sse

id

ct eee conference torpedoed by the governre
Gece pe Pris was. so, Covious trat even certain em
peuigt reed to, admit that the summit. conference b
eg burideah of the United States, Here I am rete
Fulbi eel speech by the Chairman of the Senate Foreign

Fight, on the results of the investigation into the

mich, SERA: iy, ety RE eater oh UNS RS Mg
a is quite clear that the U-2 incident end our
eg direct reasons. for the faijure of the conference.
it is quite cut of place to argue that, w

he had decided to prevent the holding of the conference-

tive actions of the government of
conridered it possible to take part
f the Unite States
iited against the

Jerands of

the goverrnent of the United

n of using the

fines of the

erance, of
of exacerbating
great porers’ .

nt of the United

tnent U.S. statesmen ,
ad been szpoteged bY.
rring to the very

Affairs Comittee,
events that ied

ees

attitude “goward it were
In this connection,
hen Kheushehev arrived in Faris.

A decisive °-

factor in the determination of this position vas the U-2 incident which

took place two weeks before the conference.

iv?

adnate nee oS ee am ee ete ee ate

; | Ss

INTERN AUTOUN, AFFATRS
a fer, . se 22, 1550
Aj tag : s :
Subsequent events beve shows vhat dangerous, apa agcressive course the |
U.S. Government is pursuing in not discontinuing its provocative actions
against the Soviet Union and reaaining true to its policy of war
brinkmanship. A vast wave of indignation svept the whole world when the a7",
: insidious actions of U.S. leaders, vbo on July 1 sent the military bomber
“ i and reconnaissance RB-47 airplahe on a criminal, "provocative flight into ~
: - the confines of the Soviet Unioh; became known, This happened, #6 is
known, after the U.S. President, Eisenhover, gave, last May, assurtinves —
of the discontinvance of U.S. spy planes fligbts into the confines of tke
Soviet Union. . ; po gees A A ee leg oe a: :

= ery we Le

~ BBA ‘ is
A

abbas

Comrade judges, the present trial has attracted the attention of millicas es
of people the world over. The case of the’ exposed American spy pilot, 7
Francis Gary Powers, bes produced ‘such a sharp and angry reaction frag tos -
i ‘Soviet people and all peaceable peoples because the exposure of one of the
* agents of U.S. intelligence, caught red-handed ané@ brought down during ap
aggressive espionage flight on Nay 1 in the area of Sverclovsk, wes, at
the same tine, an exposure of the reactionary governing circles of the
United States whe have made the state policy of their country a calcu?
_poligy of treachery, provocation, amd espionage, & policy of war
brinknanship for the sake of the interests of the capitelist menopolics.

~

ated

, These reactionary political circles who have proclained « policy of

H intimidation, a position of strength policy among the highest political

princkples of the United States, and who ergarized the criminal aggressive

intrusion of the military plane into the Scviet Union, have shown

every>ody the criminal methods to which they resort, hethods which constiter.. -

a direct threat to all mankind. - . 7 :
The criminal actions of the accused Povers, by reason of their own
significance and by reason of the dire consequences vinich they have i.
already brought and, moreover, could have brought, go far beyond the
framesork of the usual criminal offense. It is not only the Sdviet Union,
‘against which the criminal encroaciments vere directly aimed, dut #11

) pankind that is interested in a correct appraisal of these actions and
the adoption of geil possible measures 16 avert them in the future.” |

The ebreus tances of this case, thoroughly examined in the preliminary
investigation and at the open trial, the whole course of the bandit Tligtt
of Porerst plane over the territory ef the Scviet Union, cannot but bring
every nan of common sense, vho strives to preserve peace on carth, wo,
conclusions on the aggressive ains of the policy of the United States,

on the violation by the Anerican brasshats of all the commonly ha
recognized norns of international lav, and on the crininal violation of
the national sovereigaty of other statese ~ 7, Bente, Ae as

4 Le ‘

euiRalenet

eee ee na

- HBS - USSR INTCRMATIONAL AFZAIRG
Auge 22, 1950

see it, the task of the court in this case cannot be
restricted merely to establishing facts relevant to thé acts with which

the accused Powers is directly sharced and which vere earried out by his

persorally. Of course, a6 in every criminal case, you, conrade judges,
in precise accordance with the lav, are obliged to bake an all-around,

full, and objective evaluation of all availeble evidence with a view to
establishing the truth an@ sbtaining an answer to the question of what crine
is “contained in the actions of the eccoused Powers. : :

This is why, as we

significance not only for the
personal fate of the accused Povers. A verdict of the court, pased on:
materia) povided in the preliminary and court investigations, will once
again convincingly expose, to the vhole world the crininal and aggressive -
policy of ruling circles of the United States. There is no Goubt that your
verdict will play its part in the struggle of the forces of peace against
the forces of ageression, in the struggle which is e::tending more and more
throughout our planet and on the issue on which the future of pank ind

But a verdict in this case will be of

depends... eat hee

the actual circumstances of the case with en
idence which, put together, not only exposes
the accused and the crines eomitted by him but also exposes the

organizers and inspirers of these crimes, The eriminal actions committed by
Powers have been fully established by evidence which it is inpossible
either to refute or, to shake. The fact alone that the American military
spy plane .as brought down on Hay 1 by Soviet rocket troops in the area of
Sverdlovsk and the very preseace in the dock of the spy pilot of this
shot-dowm U.S. aircraft, Povers, herve in Moscow, is irrefutable and
convincing proof. The charges ageinst the defendant are nov fully founded
on extensive and objective evidence. Defendant Povers hinself voderstands
this, Ile has, therefore, made no attempt to dispute his guilt of the

erimes he has committed, - 5 e

Permit ne row to pass on to
analysis of the extensive ev

Caurade judges, you know of the evidence ‘given by Povers az the. :
preliminary examination and at the court evanination when explaining the
marks made on the route maps. He spoke in detail about the tesks which were
put to him by the commander of espidnage detachnent 10-10, U.S. Air Force”
itch he had to pay -

Colonel Shelton, in pointing out the places to wh :
particular attention to obtain inforation about rocket bases and ‘other

especially important defense objec
established that this detac
‘Turkey; ‘and it vas in that detacinen
eapacity as‘spys “77 0t si pa

ts of the Soviet Union. Jt has been |
tment ves based at the Incirlik Airbase in)...
t that the accused Povers served in his —

- BBS - "USSR DITERNATIONAL AFFAIN

< wee a Aug. 22, 1960
4 <
+7 an:
ea he piretical eggressive flight on May 1,, 3960, was the iest in Powers!

; espionage career, which he begsn as fax back 86 1958 when he signed @ |
secret contract io thé U.S. capital, Washington, with the U.S. CIA and
sold himself to Anerican intelligence for 2,500 dollevs & month. |

ik a i ih a ee aa ee i
It vas expldiied to Powers that his duties would include thet of waking _
‘ reconnaissance flights slong the frontiers of the Soviet Union aod 8150 °

7

. G: oy Os
(ite a in he Rana

hele eect

| ;
cin tee mins om

f

|

_, been carried out slong the borders of the Soviet Union for r
‘ purposes. I consider, Povers stated, thet that constituted

the perfcrmance of other special missions. It was from precisely this
nonent that Powers became & regular spy pilot, prepared to commit any
crine in the nawe of the doterests of the American brass hats who sre is
the service of monopolist cepitel, Nee racy gait ars : ‘

You remeaber, comrade Judges, the deposition of the sccused Povers which
be gave in the preliminary investigetion end herd in court on the
preparetion for flights fo U-2 aircraft at the Las Vegss atomic Firing
range (poligon) in the Nevada desert and the training io the use of
special reconnaissence apparatus. Jn charge of this treining was ; :
Colonel (Perry?) who headed (word indistinct) the 10-30 subunit. Colonel
Ferkins?), Major (Kodja?), aod the recruited spy pilots were trained in
flying the U-~2 spy planes by representatives of the Lockheed company, Which
produced these aircraft, and also by militery pilots. -

' < : 2 é
Eere is a vivid exemple of the criminal conspiracy of e anjor Agerican
capitelist company, of ex espionage and reconnaissance center, and of the
military of America. During their training e1l recruited pilots vere given
false surnames for purposes of concealrent. Powers wes known by the
name of Falmer. .
In the sutumn of 195$ the personnel of the 10-10 unit wer? moved to the
Agerican Turkish eir force bese in Incirlik, near the tovn of Adana in
Turkey, vnere the forsation of this unit took place eva from where it
had to engage in direct espionage activity. Jt was frow bere that Powers
and other pilots of the 10-10 unit started to make systematic flights
for reconnaissance purposes along the frontiers of the Soviet Unioa with
Turkey, Iran, end Afghenister, and siso in the erea of the Blick See,
using special reconnaissance equipment for this purposts Powers Baia,
in evidenze that Colonel (Perry?) told pilots of the 10-10 unit that: they
would als> make flights over the territory of the Soviet Unione ©
s6e large number of flights have -
econnaissance
the principal -

Then Povers testified thet since 19

vork of oar unit.

DAD pa ene dete Ree nth nea Stes ead ome tide tae aces Fekete obs gee ee

i ee CG | jo!
ed S me oe - BBY ~ “-" USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

° ” : Auge 22, 1
Annually I flew several times along the borders betveen the USSR aod.
‘ , urkey, Iran, end Afghanistan. During 2956 and 1957 froa 3 to 4 flights

were ¢arried out over the Black Sca; I tearried out 1 to 2 fLlights,;-in

1957 there were 6 to 6 of, these flighte, in. 1958 10 to 15, in 1959.10 to
15, and during four months in 1960 1 or 2.° Al) these flighte I carried out
; Other pilots of the...
10-10 unit also. flew.for the same purposes. se32 eau" ton bewiMacras E452
sap uaeth 2 «kell: edt its fot piovaes Fe Sua vet: pose? csr!
We took off from inclrlik airfield and flew to the town of Yan ona”.
_,, thé shore of the lake with the came name, thea we set our colrse ror ~.
7 “"" Meheran, the, capitalof_Iren, and after Flying over feberan we flews -"
in en, easterly direction, ‘south of the Casp7én Gea, Then I cevaljy 2“ -*
flew sov.sh of the town of Meshed, crossed the Tranlan-Afghan border *~

and then flew along the Afghan-Soviet borders eS

eo.

_Not far from the ir:

eastern border of Pakistan's turn was rade and the same route was used
to return to the Incirlik etisfield. - Later we turned earlier after? s+!"
penetrating roughly 200 miles into the territory of Afghanisteds 27:

be

webcpopeg tents Git wetoth isco ee ve ere erat. ee
Such ig the testimony of the defendant Powers on his espionage activities
prick to the flight on May 3, 1960. During «bis dnterrogetion aa. -2 |

_ aefepdant, Powers confessed that {n’accordance with the covtract which".
he scigned with the U.S. CIA, he was 4 pilot of 4 special aerial unit | -.
whore work it was to collect information about radio stabior, and-ri7.

rédar installations in operatios on the territory of the Soviet Union

wT

ee ce ne ete ner rman eben ie encetn tnd?

_and also about rocket sites, o...7 2 meget eo reve. te
In Ms testinony Powers spoke fo “aetell about the method with which the
- spy-pilots were trained for the possibility of suddeniy receiving 4° ""-
special espionage mission, For thie they were trained under tie so-called
Special flight schedule alert, or0 018 Leo SUI Se Lone gee ds
4 boise dallere st ppbteb woes t eat cee Ye Bal eet g ROS Mart
There is no doubt that the aggressive fotrusion into the depth of the oa

: territory of the Soviet Union ou May 1, 1960, was planned by.
U.S, intelligence a long tim age . As far back as io August 1958 Powers
received the assignment to take @ U-2 aircreft from the Incirlik tase---
to Bodoe, the very seme airbese in Norway where be was to have 227 8220
ended his Mey 1 flight<' On his way there Powers flew over the route reer
Atbers-Brindist {Itely }-Rome-Frankfurt-Stevenger (Norway )-Bodoe e167 27"

Be Here he was expected by Colonel {Birley?}, the new commander of the”
10-10 detachment who occupied this post till 1959, and a largé group! .s'

of servicing personnele-t: £ : “A Burts gevi pastas.

epee! wre F « teh, Bo =
euiist: BE eutt tlece trl Pibee ak gis

nfvLis

eae sed

fe Drees ie ee

ee ee Ee en, eres

: This confirmed once more that the U.S, evpionage U-2 mirc

» BB By USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 23, 196

rrom the Bodoe airbase the pilots of the 10-1) detactment carried out
several fiights in U-2 aircraft. Powers stated tbat he flev from the =
“neirlik airbase to the American airbase in the area of Wiesbaden, Wert .

Germany, from whére be took a U-2 aircraft to the U.S. Air Force base in
Plattsburg, New Yorks -2: «~ 2 le eee arte en ve aan

one
St

yaft were besed
on West German territory and carried out flights from there. Adenauer's-
even find it necessary, es did.
TO, to file a protest on this matter  ,
Jior Adenauer hestened to be the
first to expréss his approval of the criminal aggressive spy flights” ~
of the U-2 aircreft, Of Course, no other statenercs could have been ~
expected from this follower of Bitler.*: ele Te RS re

@“ar7' = Cg ie ha
ee a ee ee yell one,

Carvyiag out espionage flights, Powers and big masters uncerenoniously
violate! the sovereignty of otber countries. U-2 aircraft flew over
various countries dragged by the United States into their aggressive
expansionist policy, who permitted their airbases to be used for,U.5.  ~
military aircraft to land and take off. With even greater insolence -
Powers-and other spy pilots violated the sovereigaty of neutral countries,
in particular Afghanistan, using their technical euperiority for this --
purpose. « edt . ore Pe Ba dees ARG PEA a OS 9 BE ane
Such was the development of Povers' espionage career UP to April 27, 1960,
when the coumander of the reconnéissance unit, Colonel Shelton called &
briefing of the personnel and ordered Povers and another pilot and 4 large
party of servicing persornel to fly on the same day to the base at

’ Peshawar in Pakistan, where they arrived in @ pilitary transport ---

aircraft, the U-2 sircraft being delivered sonenbat Jeter, A detailed -
testimony vas given on this by defendant Powers during the preliminary _

- 7 coo Pa

investigation ..~ eroooyo ie gturdre ad RI

Pa td nee ad a? za
a ne

ae ee a ee i at . a0
On May 1, 1960, early in the porning Powers was avakened as he had been
many tines before during training under the "flights schedule atert."
This time, however, Powers wes given & special mission, Tor *xhich he bad
been trained for several years. This mission provided for carrying out 6
reconnaissance flight over the territory of the Soviet Union for the --" -
purpose of collecting important information about military and industriel
objects. The route of the flight vas from the Peshawar besé inn. -*)
Pekistan, over the territory cf Afghanistan, & considerable part of the:
territory of the USSR, ana ended at the Bodve bese in Norway. .

Pernit ne to turn directly to Powers testimony. This is what be himself
testified concerning the mission which he bad been given dy Colonel
Shelton: After a few minutes the colonel drought tbe maps and showed then
to me. He told me that the route of ny flight bad been marked on the maps.

4

4
[iit

i
io
4

i a re t ‘ ate

ev
mee

a el ee eee

ge

“

ea ee ey ae See a ere ae Ean

Pelt

ea
nf

ee es

ob

}e3

“Ang: 22, =

tr. ee = +
These were the route maps which vere wikassucntt found in ny Siseranes
The colonel told me that “he bad some’ information about several airfields A
and that if-I so des sireal | could mark thed dA‘ my" ‘imep 71 expressed. the~ ;
desire t6 do ‘so and marked “several eirfieldé.* Be also knew 6 ‘prace, - ‘As "be
said: i "Where I could ’see“d pad for "Waunchidg’ gided “afésiies." 7 alaots -

: marked that placé “on py” map. in addition the Colonel sheved he #& ‘place

where in his opinion "there" should’ be “something,” ‘put what exactly he < .
aid not “knew. I alsé “marked that place.*"I was, _ testifies Powers, to-*" ~
follow “a’ route “which wag parked “on thé bap with “dG red and blue pencil fod ©
at points indicated Gn thé mip I’ was té switch on aid off the required: a: :

switches foxy the equipment. =

Thie is Powers’ ‘own déscription ‘of the espionage targets for the collection
ef information atout particularly important defense and industrial objects
in the Soviet Unior which bé bad been given before the flight of May 2, |
But. the instructions “yedeived by” Povers and “the “peans “put eb ay Aisposal
to fulfill the espionage ‘mission were “not, cénfined to this? ~ :

PAS ak gee ‘es i Le aes whl? Ths) are a

ete arash i

Povers. testified ‘furttier: * whe Pcolehat "~o14 “ne tbat “be had cccaured
burdles of Soviet money “and gold coins in Case ‘sometbing happened to me.
The Dundles were put into the pockets of “my Plying suit. He also shoved
me a silver doller vhich held a pin. The colonel told me that there was
no danger of any kind, for the USSR did not bave aircraft or rockets which
eculd reach the altitude of By flight. “Iv, however, “something happened Bnd
I wag arrested and tortured and could got stana up to it, T would have
the opportunity of committing suicide vith ‘thé sid of this’pin which ~~

aerial Petson., ue

* et ort tie ret ae leas oe
SL LG tS t. 2 zou Te =i .

ics ‘bavi “bought Francis “Powtrs “for dollars, end bav ing nade his ‘an * es
accomplice of dirty crimes, ‘the U.S; ‘intelligence’ gervice had envisaged’
beforehand the possibility ‘of its agents’ failuré, ard, striving te -
keep frém being exposed,’ ‘Suggésted to'hin the inev: beanies of suicide
should be find nimself ‘alive on Soviet "eerritiony +

entice Piel Geer maton

welt oe SE
ca Ssyiet o fe Vw let pe

dee we SSH Se ee he ade!

Eere’ "it is,’ the beastly misanthropi¢ morality of ie: Dulles sa “eonpany
to count the life of a ‘man serving the dollar, that green devil--as’: =
nothing. It should be mentioned that the U.S.
to cover ‘up the traces of the “erike not only by ‘supplying such 4 ‘pin *to™
 ‘Powers* ‘testimony,’ paterial evidence, thé “sorélusions of - the’ £
experts. show that ‘the Lockheed u-2 fs which Powers. ‘left, ‘on his” espionage <<
flight was! a ‘special ‘military, reconnaissance plane ena Was equipped 3 with au
a special device’ for the” pilot: to plow up 4 the Plate in’ case of 6 forged ‘Tana

* rey
6 Bear ae Dia Meta ote gait

6: on the ee of ‘the! USSR 2 See i : Progr hh os =

intelligence service intended

‘*

“cae

- wide .

res: }

aed

at bee et a

he

the flight in visual observations, entering the res

dedicigd al joatuaencs Naanaat tn, ttt: ta, ‘

- BBC - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAINS
Aug. 22, 1960

An explosive device was siso instaliea in the tape recorder intended for
the recording of signals of Soviet radar staticns. ha

Afte> Povsrs received his last oréers and instructions, he took off from

Peshavar tarfield, gained an altitude of 20,000 neters, flew over -..

Afghanistan, 1nd, intruded ints the, eirspece of tte Soviet. Union. Powers : .

pleaded guilty to having flown over Soviet territory and to gwitebing on-

and off, according to the places masked on hie flight route, the appropriate —

levers of the special equipneat instalied in bis _sirplape.. There were

in all five such switcbes. Ali the reconnaissance equipment on doard the -

plane worked norwaliy and smoothly}, in addition, Povers eugaged during ie
wits on the flight *

map. : : . wee
As is known, Powers’ plane crossed the state frontiers of the USSR at
0536 Moscow tine to the southeast of Kirovabad, Taizbik SSR, and from -
that moment until he’ was sbot down by Sov et rotket troops in the
-Sverdlovsk area he was under constant, observation by antiaircraft units

of the USSR. The vhole nature of Powers’ fight pointed to its - |
provocative and aggressive dims. The pilot flew the plane at an aititude
of 20,000 neters, an altitude at which no civil airplane flies. The

route of the plane lay over large industrial centers and important defense

objects of the Soviet Union, Since this was ap intentional intrusion
the Soviet Goverment

anto Soviet airspace with hostile aggressive aire,

issued the order to shoot dom the plane and at 0855 (as received) Povers’
plane was shot down with the very pirst rocket at e beigat of 20,000 neters
In the Sverdlovsk area, more than 2, GOO kilometers from {he point vhere

he crcssed the frontier of the Soviet Ynton-. CE ;

at a beight of 68,000 feet in the
rceeding 20,000 neters, ne savean. -
an to fall. During his fall he
Land could not wake use of the

f the cebin, unnitched his

|
Powers testified that while io flight
Sverdlovsk area, that is at a height «
orange flare, after which his plane bea
was pressed against the instrusents pane

wjecting device. . He released the canopy o j on
barness, an@ clisbed out of the plane through the top. . gre parachute |

epenced Automatically. Many people vere direct witnesses of the
explosion which took place at 8 great height, efter which rements. of @ su

plane fell to earth and 8 parachute appeared ip the skys. 012! 2:

¢ e

SE odo ted WER Oe Beasts 00, te Ee oe ees oN, ea alee pees
Comrade judges, the participants in the, capture of the Anerican spy...
is still fresh in your memory,

vere exénined in court, and their evidence
- Soviet people, ‘boundlessly. ,
as alvays, shown inherent vigtlancé
_ after bis landing dy. parachute, ‘took
for villainous murlersé,

Joyel to their motherland, bawing this. time, .. -;
nee, detained the spy pilot Powers. 0. !
pis holselese pistoi specially built. ..
and rendered thé “spy: barnless.. eae ee eee

ema ae cone

or ai a ees Se oe eto ieee

° _ Z - BB + USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
jen Oe Aug. 22, 1960

Here, in court, you were told abcut this in detail by the following
witnesses: e-servicenan of the Soviet Air Force Petr Yefremovich Sabin,
ariverc Viedirir Pavlovich Surin and Leonid Alekseyevich Chuzhakin, and
the Eoviet worker Anstoliy Fedorovich Chereiiisin. The goverment oS
revurded thea for’ their bravery and valor: This was truly an object
lesson, ' vhich has. shovm Powers and his madters that in the Soviet Union” a
money and goid cannot cave any spy frog yetribution,’ and this goes for
(spies?) from the country where the dollar is all important, 20. |
pene ek, Sage gine Re oe aes aaa aa Pe
Comrades judges, you recall that, in official statements made by the +1. -.
State Departuent and by official apokespen in the United States 1b was”
strongly emphasized that the’ shot -dom, U-2 aircraft was & eivil eircralt
and that Powers was a hired employee of the Lockheed Aircrart Corporation.
Thase statesents are mendacious. _ the testinony ef the defendan: Pcovers
about’ the circumstances of his enroLivent for intelligence serv fe@ oo ese
demonstrates that’ the orgacizing and carrying out of aggressive 1.00. |
espionage flights into’ the confines of the Soviet Union were carried cut
directiy under the jeadership of the U.S, CIA with the knovledge asd
consent of the government and President of tbe United States, Eisen et.
As is ‘chown, the U.S. CIA, led by chief spy Alien Dulles is directly ~- =
subordinated to the U.S. President and is 4 tody of political and pilitary
intelligence which is at the bead of the so-called “intelligence community,"
a kind of espionage combine which includes 611 branch {atelligence bodies
of the United States, including militery air inteliigence. Individual —
couponants and units of tae U-2 aircraft had warkings indicating that they’
were the property of the U.S. Department of Defense. | All U-2 flights ..
were carried out from bases of the Air Force and under the Jeadership ‘of:

officers of the U.5. ‘Air Force. 1. eel. gc a. bent ffee 2B UE a

sta ees - a Dem

qhe defendant, Powers, “testified that the 10-10 unit was created jointly”;
by the CIA and the U.S. Air Force and constituted a éczbination of these
two organs. Povers himself was given the identity certificate number AF. .-
1/288/966 having exblem of the U.S. Departnent of Defense with the “words.
"U.S, Depattnent of Defense," by the unit 10-10: Amorg the docunents - 93 4.
belonging to Fowers, “a certificete Ves also found which wes jesued by the”.
Naticnal Acronautics aud Space Adm?nistration QWSA). This document .-y-.
stated that Powers vas suitaole for service as'& pilot of NASA planes.
The cextificate envisaged the possibility of Povers using military Gee
planes under the ‘special instructions of the Usk? end gave him pemhission |
. to land an@ take off from bases of the U.S. Air Force. Regarding this...
document, Powers testified: Disofar as “I bad “ne perscnal ‘rélationship” Poe
to NASA, “ZI believe that this ‘document sas ‘given ‘me Bsa Cover,  eénceal es

the real aims “ef, the 10-10 geconnaissancé unit. - mer 3
eet we owe st Milde ip att ome. Sweets nu
Ft pon :

¥ +. pot ie
Te ee ete deed oe | wey

«

You, comrede judges,

Avg

to the defendant, Powers, here.

April 1960 inspected by_ no

U.S, Air Force, General” gnomes White, in

was arranged. The 10-10 v

the U.S, Air Force in Europe, General Everrett.
voi st Tociriik Base vas visited rot only by t

the U.S, Air Force, but 91

‘Tt Te wlso knows from the testimony, of Powers that

> BB 1? - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

. 22, 2

have seep these dccuents, and they were sbowd

the 10-10 unit io

pe-other’ than’ the ehief of staff of The

“whose honor a° special reception

nit was” inspected twice by the ‘commander of *

Inc idently, the 10-10
be highest ranks of

sD by some congressmen who evidently had

special access to such: spying organs. Eves Cardia

not neglect to pay attenti
the 10-10 unite oT

on to the base at tocirl

To whet conelusion then ao I arrive on the basis o
deta already given?, The hateriel of the present +t

sbovs that despite all the
quick changing act is Alle
of the 10-10 unit, in whic
similar woits, “is sufficie
its activities, this unit
jotelligerdes ~ 7° one

Tere is also po doubt tha

especially equipped emi se

‘attempts of the U.S. mi

al Spelinan did
ik. He also visited

{ the enalysis of the
rial convincingly
Jitary to put a -

p Dulles! vaudeville shov, the real character

h the defendsat Povers 5

erved, and other

otly clear. . Regarding the special task of

was nothiog but sp oTgat

t Powers’ plane vas a mi
nt with aggressive espio

the airspace of the USSR, while Powers continued t
ities, a military pilot fuifilling the

the character of his activ
duties of a military intel

Ligence agent and spy.

adits thet be was ¢ civilian pilot in the service

Ip sctusl fact, this is nothing else thap © spy

the CLA and the military 1

by the figleaf of NASA. ~~

The espionage ‘aims of Powe
confirmed by, all ciroumsta

otelligence of ‘the U.S.

4 a
Le a7 .#
© . “« i

rst “flight over ‘Soviet t
nees of the case, includ

of the defendant and extensive material evidence.

‘ emphasize that the stateme

statesmen, in which they 6
and violation ‘of the sover

pts I mentioved earlier
amittea before the whole
eignty of other countrie

' of the United States, ia the light ef Povers! erin
uner examination, attela e@ procedural significance
of the legal evidence. | By this evidence,

by the above-mentioned statesmen themselves, it 1s

that the U.S. Government was the, inspirer end orga
committed by the defendant Powers, and others like

evidence in the present ca

reason to consider the above-mentioned statesments

St.

of military

litary plave
nage aims over
oa rerain, regarding

Povers himself.
of the U.S. Air Force.

-hybrid, the child of

Alix Force, disguised

erritory are.

ing the testimony

XT mest especially.
rade by leading U.S.
world that espionage
g is state policy
inal case at present
@ and are @ part

that is by statements nade”

fully, esteblished
nizer of the crines °.
him. There is every —
a9 indisputable ©

See

eee ak Pad

- BB 13 ~ USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
: Aug. 22, 1960

The material ev idence.

Comrade judges, in fulfilling ay duty as etate presecutor I consider it
necessary to give @ description of the extensive material evidence in thia
cese, AS & reguit of the examination of thie materfal evidence and its ;
detailed tnvestigation by experts in « veriety of fields, undiased end * --
irrefutable data wag pleced at the dispose) of the state prosecution ahich
cen with renewed force confira the indictment put forward aga inst defendant
Fowers and the intentional aggressive neture and the espionage aims of
Porers' criminal mission, The material evidence wag exhibited for public
viewing; 325,000, Soviet, people and over 20,000 foreigners were given the
ovportunity to personally examine this visual proof: wmascking the aggressive
policy of the U.S. ruling eireles who organized Powmers' piratic flight. ©
At the place where the Lockheed U-2 atreraft crashed, parts of the efrerdft 5.0
its equipnent were:found scatgared Sver an area of roughly 20 square Hilcaette
Amng them were: The front pert of the fuselage with (vulkhead?) an? tha 3+?
ecbia with equipment, a turbojet engine, the planets teil, end other (pertss:.
These itenis_were perts_of & singie-seat, high alti tude, subsonic, U-@ type
reconnaissance aircraft of the Aseric4a Lockhoed firm, The result of an
inspection sarried out, on individual parts have shown that nonerous firms
in the United States took a hand in developing. the U-2 spy plane and that
scme of the perta are the property of the U.S, Governsent, _ The aircreft'a
turbojet engine was made {several words indistinct}. The radio-technical
reconnaissance apparatus was made ty ihe Hewlett-Packard Company and
Huggins Laboratory in the town of Menlo Park, California. © This apparatus,
like several other_items, have identification warks showing that it belongs
to the U.S. Department of Defense,- This is particularly important for the
refutation pf the mendacious assertion that the U-2 aircraft was a civil -
and not a military aircraft, The instruments, communications, and electrical
and radar equipment vere also made by various American firms. This was...
The aircraft is fitted out with
a special recote control explosive charge, .model 175/10/A, manufactured by
the (name of firm indistinct). cut: ed oenitet aie EN ae pe

Ca Ce aes aya
- a ee! . wate
ce a a Le rer are -

Welsh wyatle ot pene. gel. ! z

‘tion of the special maps, photographic fils, and other material
a deliberate and previously prepared
reconnaissance espionage Purposes.» ‘This:
ied map bearing the flight route of the ..”-
From the Palistan area, Pesnaear - 5

_the Tadzhik, Uzbek, Kezakh +

toward Kirov, then in the 7.

Kola Peninsula and along its”

cee ae mee oe eee,

Cy : . Cc : itt

- BBE =- + USSR INTERRATIOSL ATFAIRS
: "Auge 22, 1960
: : wee bo ee oa

The acalysis of the flight map iudicates thet from the Peshever srea to”
the Sverdlovsk ares the eircraft followed the presuribed route. This
fe confirmed by the films taken of certain localities, and the wariings  .
of the course and the sctual' place of the aircraft with ipticetions of -
time mad* oo the map by band vith red end Dlue pencils. * There ere -..-
parkings ou the wap isade beforebend, “Jodicatiog places to seitch om-L7.
and off the slrereft equipment during ite flight over the territory: 0 tf
of the Soviet Untonets 1 faq ciwd at... BS Fates cet TOF ma?

aoe OIE Tua bts

plop Meat Tif eet ons 8 Be ei EEE ee et
Meteriel evidence estadlisbes beyond a doubt that the flight of the -
U.S. airereaft over USSR territory was premeditated. As emerges from *
the conclusion of the experts, the map ef the fiight acd colevlations --
of pavigation data were prepared op the ground before the take off."
During the flight, the pilot knew where he was. He systecatically
controlled the flight by “pinpolntiog positions and strictly conducted ak
bie flight eccording to the previously’ given routes.) 0

be ‘

Soran aTotatauss: oes opel diet 20 : tT
During the flight over USSR territory, the pilot entered fofornetion =
of ap inkelligence nature on the map., Of particular juterest as proof
exposing the espionage purpose of the. Y-2 eircraft flight is the 3
photogrephic eauipwent of the eircraft, end the incédiate resvits —
of the photographic reconnaissance cerried out py defendent Povers
during the flight ‘over the’ territory of the Soviet Usior. Technical :
experts established that the éerial cemera, model 73-8, installed :

oo the U-2 aircraft 16 # specisi recoonaissence aeriel caters ioterced
for photographing a strip of territory from great heights. The film
used in ‘the aerial camera is # special kiod of photographic material
intended for purposes of serial photographic recoonaissence of military
and photographic objects while flying at’ great heights.’ :
a ete Boe bee Bile eo ee . e

- ri
tense theca ts 3 < f
ree cee. ie pte Me Sake

The pilot, photographed the territory of the Soviet Uvton for fotelligtnce

purposes. ' The “examioation ‘of the developed filo and identification of
prints from it helped éstablish. that the photographie? iccality is 6 --°
territory of the Soviet Union, The aerial photographs contain oo: ¢ 7
intelligence information regarding industrial end militery objects

of the USSR. ‘The megnetophone and’ magnetic Sape discovered ip the ° 7
area of the aircraft crash vere submitted to expert investigation; 2 ou,
so vas on optic instrument; 811 in their turh important materiel -- - 7°
evidence’ of the espionage purposes of the U-2 aircraft flighte- “oer fan

fepee yevna arriane, : goer Es ies i
An examination of the ‘tupe recorder showed that it had @ special «1. ”
explosive ‘device for its destruction, Tt'wes estadlisned during the to 7”
examination by tre experts ‘that part of the tepe was ina goot > sR .

conditicn apd completely preserved, After the decoding of the ~~~ *¢

"recording, it was found thet the recorded signals belonged to -

raday stetions on the grourd within the radar system of the Soviet
Union's antiaircraft defense. : .

cars domi

mee een cuentas ams

seaside
Satlacete a Sita

O 3 O 169

.. @ BB 15 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIAS
ees ae a Rae Avg. 22, 1950

The tape recorder is part of the radio-teéhnical reconnaissance apparatus
on board the U-2 aircraft. Experts have established that the U-2 aivcraft -
was @quipped with a spectal radar ecrambier to create inverference for
redar stations incercepting and directing fighter wircraft. Tnere fg 0. |
doubt thet such équigent is ‘installed {nan eneny alreraft intruding Into

the confines of another country with aggressive ains., peigeesaen We rhe

qhe radio receiver and transmitter, which is an Anerican serial command
station for radio communications over short distances with ground stations |
and between aircraft, "sas subjected te expert scrutiny, , The absence of...
long-distance radio‘ equipment on the u-2 aircraft fs another piece of 2 oi.
evidence indicating that the organizers of the aggressive intrusion took
measures to conceal the piraticat flight of the U-2 plane and to avert the
possibility of its discovery over USSR territory. “2” ee eee

we Te get REE! SSL OS EH GES ae Tee OE og tears ces
Courade judges; I have already mentioned that the U-2 aircraft was equipped
with a special explosive deVice to insure the destruction of the plane in.
the event of a forcéd landing on USGA territory. It was established during -
the investigation that remote control over the explosives charge was set up
in the pilot's cabin,” Among several ofner inscriptions on the instrument -
panel is the inscription "explosion

" (vzryv).. Thus, the pilot was fully. .
informed of the presence on’ the plane of a special explosive device and
the ways to use it, The explosive ¢

harge found in the wreckage of the U-27
ta important material proof of the aggressiv

end *

eet

@ espionage eima of the flight.
I have already mentioned in ‘my “speech the poison ‘jeedle taken from the
accused Powers, If the mission given | 4 not been criminal, -
Powers’ tossés would not have equippe die. it has
been established by examination and +
needle taken from the accused Powers that there as ‘W' substance,
point of the needle which, Judging from its effect. on animats, in toxie . .
ancunts and physical, quelities, can be put’ in’ the curard” group, the. 22.7,
strongest and fastest of all known, poisons. +7 477 ere) ase aes .

Poe aes

wide eds Ue ae Pty ef oD eer a TI eae an ee oh ata miptecd
Taking inté Gonsideration its high degree of: toxicity. the experts came toy rs:
the conclusion thst a’man would suffer’ {nstantaneous death.if pricked by: es +."
less pistol taken from Powers '

established that it is a semiautomatic 10- poor eee ae
: oO eeteack =

rounds of ammuniti
Gemee eat

- proposition has been laid, down both in @ nu

- BB 16 - USSR INTERIATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 22, 1966

Courade judges, analyzing #11 this data, I cone to the conclusion thet this
case hag such an aggregate of materiel evidence--mute testimony which fully,
imnutably, and objectively establishes completely the erlme comrit+ed

by the defendant Powergs--it fulky unmasks’ the inspirere* and organizers of
these crimes end places in the hands of Justice evidence of great force. -

apgetheee es in Me =

je gte ee F Ras 4 ner Mee

EF ees ark ct.
The act of aggreesion against the Soviet Union.
Comrade Judges, ¢valuating the gravity of the erimes couritted by Powers -
we cannot for one minute forget that he directly fulfilled such specially
dangerous and criminal tasks which were an immediate threat to general + ;
peace and could result “in a terrible catastrophy for mankind. The aggressive,
intentional... nature of the flight of tho plane piloted by Powers was. ;
completely obvious from the moment he crossed the frontiers of the Soviet
Union and began to penetrate into the depths of Soviet territory, flying
at a tremendous height over important defense and industrial objects.
And, obviously, nobody could determine from the ground whether thig eneay
plane was or not carrying # lethal iced, having unceremoniously and .
insolently intruded into Soviet airspace. Thus, it fs quite obvious -
that in elfeumstanceg when some states bave nuclear weapons and the weans
of delivery to the target with near lightning speed, the aggressive act /
perpetrated by the United States'on May 1, 1960, against the Soviet Union
belongs to’crimes jeopardizing the security of all mankind and could result

in most serious consequencea for the entire world. ©. liv. - -"

The presert case uncovers the criminal violation by the U.S, ruling eireles_
of the generally recognized standards of international Tae. ° fin thie

connection, I consider it éssential to consider in the prosecuting speech
some questions of international law which have a direct relationship to
the crime of the defendant Powers arid his masters... _ tk ee

Ped & tee

An indisputable principle of international law, which has never been: s+. . 2.7

contested by anyone, is the principle of Gomplete and exdlusive soverefgnty .

of a state over its'own territory, tncluding #11 the airspace over it. This
mber of international conventions

and in the internal legislation of practically Sli states, including the’. te

United Stakes and the Soviet Union, 7" Ope ae Si ie Se 2 ns

! :
| a BOR og SE ee ey .

The Soviet Government hag more than once made protests concerning the illegal

violation of Soviet airspace by U.S, planes, and it has warned the U.S,- itu.
. Government of its responsibility for the gravest consequenzes which may = |
follow upon such violations. Honever, the U,S. Government did-not react
to these’ protests, and true to character, hag continued its eold war polic
and the gross violation of the sovereignty of other states,

0 annie

2A arena iene tell,

%
Note

“eas.

- BB i? - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFALRS
Be oi aoe Aug. 22, 1960

rr rt
. -

It is known that the Sovfet Government in its note of July 10, 1960,

to the U.S. Government mide a protest concerning the violation of

USSR airspace by U.S. wilitary planes, The Suviet Union's permanent
representative at the United Nations ‘to a letter of July VW khis year.
acquainted ‘the Secirity Council with these Sacte.” In its reply of
July 19, 1960," the U.S. Government “hypocritically denied the facts of”

the statement of the Soviet, Government, vas mistaken. “1...

ate me OG RE BE bi eeten ee geen te Fo ST
Such a tvo-faced policy was adopted by U-S- leaders in all sach cases
until on May 1, 1960, they were caught redhanded and were forced to. .«
admit the facts of the ‘criminal incursion into USSR alrspace, which o + ..
they had forcerly blatantly denied- 77. : : .

Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev; in appraising the crininal eggressive © -
intrusion of the ‘American U-2 plane into, the boundaries of tne USSR
states with ‘every reason: The principle of sovereignty is a sacred |
and unshakable principle in “International relations. And the actions
aimed against the sovereignty of the Soviet state are unheard of and -

unprecedented - ie Spear aes eee ees

are - Par : ’ %
Eo Pe ee ae ee =

This principle vas expressed in the convention o8 the regulation of
air traffic, signed in Paris on Oct. 13, 1909. Art. 9 of this
convention states as follows: Each power has full and exclusive
sovereignty cver the airspace above its territory. A confirtation
of this same principle is contained in the international geen e
1920,
in the Interrational Civil Aviation Convention signed in Cnizago on.
Dec. 7, 1944, ‘and ina series of bilateral agreenents detweea states.

The above principle has been fully adopted in the internal legislation
of nearly all states; in particular, Para. 176 of an act of the’. | _-

U.S. Congress in 1926 on comercial airflights states: The .0° 0.0 re

United States possesses and exercises complete and exclusive . -:-.. 2.

precept is laid dow by the Amer ivil aviation of 1938... =:
The aty code (vo2zdushnyy kodeks} of ‘the USSR of 1935 leys down an te

airspace of the USSR:,

the first céce ‘of unceremonious treatoent of international lay. . ie pat
American thécreticians haveevyen established ‘a special {brief passage i.
indistinct}. : i a A ee PEE Ei ;

a ~ BB 18+ USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
a" Aug. 22, 1960

But the principle of complete and exclusive sovereignty of a state
over the (airspace?) above ite territory is so indisputable that it
has even been unreservedly recognized by American international law.
This is what the above-mentioned (Hyde?) wrote when sumaing up an -
examination of 12° conventions and laws having @ bearing on the :
question: We have’ ao mich evidence showing that states are unanimous |
in asserting their right of control over the airspace above their
territories that it is enough to conelude that it can be Jooked upon
as & recognized principle of internatioral law--Par- 191, page *
tte American (head of7} state personifies the sovereignty and dignity,
of his country. Ft fe quite inadmissible for one head of state to
encroach upon the sovereignty of another state, and it is even Tess
pdmissible for hia to assert his right to do so. It is not possible
to imagine a different solution of this question. It is clear to all
reasonable minded paople, and not only to specialists in international -
lav, that the principle of nationel soverelenty and # state's control
of the sirspace over its territory, Like the princ tiple of national
sovereignty in general, is the basis for normal relations between states
in pedceting. There can be no doubts on the matter. The way the
practice of international Lav solves the question of the conduct of
guilty states in cases similar to the aggressive intrision of the

u-2 girplane is equally not devoid of interest.

fhe British professor Oppenheim, In his treatise on international lay,
published in 1948 by the Moscow Publishing House for Foreign Literature,
points out that if persons ia official positions or military and naval
armed forces of a state commit actions illegal from an international
point of view, that state must, first of all, refuse to recognize such
acts and must repudiate then, expressing its regret or even apologizing
to the government of the state which has suffered.’ Second, losses
must be indemified if a demand for indemnification is Lodged. -And ©
finally, the violators of the law must be punished in accordance with
the circumstances or the case--pages 335, 333-. . +. sy .

It is understandable, hovever, that he who. ralses crime 1d ‘tie status
of calculated state policy consciously runs the risk of being caught ;
redhanded during the time that the crime is being’ committed, He also.
recognizes the position of strength policy as the highest principle ~ |

of state policy. He, without 4 twinge of conscience, dees not reckon ; +
with the generally accepted international practice, which has found .. -
ite expression in ‘the high principles of international jaw, and ||;

substitutes arbitrariness and lawlessness for law.” - eee ar

tions meerracilh

; | This concept of Dulles apparently conti

a ee

C «493

Bae ye - BB 19 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFALRS
to _Aug. 22, 1966

In its note of May 16, 1960 to the U.S. Government the Soviet
Government stated with the utmost clarity and distinctness that the

brazen intrusion into the confines
_.on the sea, or in the air, cannot |

of euother state, whether? 05 jand,
be considered otherwise thaa as 8D

- ‘act of aggreseion, and the attempt to justify and legalize these -
actions is merely nothing other then the preaching of aggression, & .

policy of throving aside the elementary noras

of internationel law and

order and the principles of the U.N. Charter. 2: .

Sy tt a eee eer ee att
_ The planned American reconnaissance on the.

the iDlegal intrusion of American military
* and particularly the intrusion of the Lockheed U

_ Powers on May 1 of this year; were not ooly crimina

“sovereignty of the USSR but acte of sggression.

These bandit.actions reflect the old estaolished
United States of balancing on the brink of war,
on for many years by the former secretary of sta

and which has been tirelessly warmed up by the Fe

war. Yo his book "War or Peace,” Dulles wrote:
future jt appears that the danger ©
period of the very greatest danger”

“US. foreign policy.

It seems to me necessary to examine the question
intrusion of even one airplane into the do

is an act of aggression. There is every reason to

conclusion that the intrusion of a foreign piene
of the U-2 spy plane, is undoubtedly an act of
doubt, in contemporary circumstances the intru
of any state by even one plane threatens cates

ata? c

The experience of World War. II ‘shows thet flight

pléies usually preceded an air attack. If this vas
iiorld War Ii, then inder present conditions the 4
reconnaisseace’ plancs is # ‘considerably greater danger.
knows--ond Tésponsibld military leaders of the Un

_. than’ Once'stated st for, all to hear--that the Un

“keep airborne squadrons of bombers on duty carry

orders of the U.S. Government,
aircraft into USOR airspace,

-2 aircraft plioted by
1 violations of the.

policy of the :

which was carried
te, John Foster Dulles,

ntagon champions of
"Tf ever ia the near

f war has passed, that will be the
a-American edition, 1950, page 267.
nues to form toe foundation of

of whether the

undaries of another country

come to the

» Athe the intrusion

ageression. Without 4.
sion into the airspace
trophic consequences +

s of reconnaissance __,

the case during ...-
ppearance of similar

Everyone -- 7
ited States have more |
ited States always 2. 7°
ing atomic and hydrogen ..

“bombs.’ Thus.the™appearance over Soviet territory of even one”

., reconnaissance plane, can alvays be the forerunner of an air attack. ied

But even’ whet squadrons of bomber’ planes are not
recolinaissance® plant” innediately, the flight of :
serial photograph’ and reconnaissance of the soda
antiairerafk defense of the USSR carricé out by
elements of an sir attack.:

following the". -"s
such a plane ana the- .
eosystem of the: \-- 1.
it-are integral” —

ahr se

a Page a

C C 1H
‘« BB 20 - SR UFTEPWATIONAL AFDAIRS
: Auge 22, 1950

The Anerican nevspaper Des Moines REGISTER justly wrote: Let us assume
that a Russian in charge of the detection. system (sisteua obnaruzhivent~;
interpreted pilot Powers’ flight de an attack and pressed the button for
&@ retaliatory blow. In a fev hours, those who had survived would have
found themselves “in Hell. When will we‘at ‘last understend that espionage,
counterespionage, and other Adiotie things of this wre are part and parcel
of the dead Past. > BeBe ot Sages .

“Leading statesmen ‘of the ‘Unitea States vould not de oath to cover up thei:
criminal aggressive actions by allegedly peaceful intentions. However, al
know the price of thé sincerity of such staténents. As is known, the road
to Hell is paved with such good intentions. -The words ut tered by

President Eisenhower et the concluding session of the conrerence of heads
of governeent of the four pevere an Geneve Tive years ago, on duly 23, 1997,
now sound Aas phones. sre . ow Fetes

He said hens ‘I have come té Geneva because I think that rankind is
thirsting to de rid of war and the rumors of war. I have cone here becaure
I have @luays believed in the decent feelings and conmonsense of the people
that inhabit our vorld, Tonight I as returning hone with en unsrerving
confitience in this, and with a prayer that the hopes of narkind will in tics
be realjzed. These solemn words vere pronounced at a tine when the progns
of military espionage and erfuinal violation of the sovereign’y of other
States confirned by him was in operation, right from the start of the vork
of the Government of President Disenhover,.

Courade judg zes, the ‘statenents by the President, Vice President, and
secretary of state of the United States, mentioned by we, eaphasized that
tthe flight of the U-2 plane on Hey 1, 1960,.and other insimnces of the
intrusion of Auverican planes into UGER airspace, which took place prey foul:
did not Pursue anovessiva Simei, but, it was alleged, vere defensive
measures,-'-". 4.3 wo 8 toe 2

eo Te at TEAS bites ¥* 7 .

The Anerican aggressors, these nev initators of Hitler, tried to justify
their provocative policy by saying that they are pursuing it, allegedly,
with a view to avetting the so-called danger of the threat af conmunisa,-

but this ig riot'a new argument, if you will pardon the expression. .

It bears a striking resenblance to the armaments in the arsenal of the
Hitlerites end the Japanese militarisis. It is know that et the Tokyo
trial the Japanese war criminals tried to cover up their criminal activitics
by defense Leasures. The international military tritunal in Tokyo, trying
the major Japanese var eriivinals, pointed out in its sentence that the
leaders’ of Japan alvays trie@ to justify their aggressive military adventures
by declaring. that they were eR eeicie International Trial of the

Main Japanese Var dross veer Vioe: of § Sefencen Pol Tshing House, |

7 ie ~ BB Zl ~ “USSR IVTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
EB oe ais Me Aug. 22, 1960

_ It is known that the attempts of the Hitlerites to. justify. their ajaressive
policy against, the USSR by Feferring 1 the “danger of the menace of
caumunisy vere coupletely exposed by the international cilitary tribunsl
in Nuremberg, The U.S. prosecutor, Jackson, in his concluding speech at the
‘trial of the: Dain” German” “war “erininals * 58 iar. ‘Cértain “of, “the accused declare
thet the vars‘Veré not aggressive ‘and “thefr atm was td pro Leet Geruany
against, the possible daczcer of the menice of communisny,. vhich vas a peculiar
obsession of Jrany Kazis,*. This “ar fue ut of self-defense “fails Figns frceu the
start--Collected Nateriels” ‘on the: “Nacenbérg pristy, "Vol me % Pag ge 420.. Z

on The emis

. Now U- S. sta iesuen ‘are trytig® to Veduscitate thé Gbsesa én o or “the penace,
of comunisn that has been refuted by any. years of history acd ee tase s
couplete failurel7 7 ie 8 ;

bd a gto mee Ws a aa = De Oe ee

* oe ae og He

Canrade suages, T T ‘think 1 ‘that Gt is hecdssary “to dell nang shes” ioposeent:
question that “is tor “‘titerest ‘Pras, ‘thé’ ‘viewpoint ‘of “inter: ‘na tional eriminal

lev. In the “case” of Povers that ‘you “ave ‘examining there are’ pecul! ar
instances of interdational ccaplicity present. As tag estadl isned in the
 Scaeraonld and court investigation the ‘aggressive, “espionage f} ights by
U.S. aircraft over the territory cf the USSR, and specifically *he flight |
made by Povers in the U- 2, could not have’ taken place if states ly ing close
to the USSR, in this case Turkey, Pakistan, and Norway, had net nace their
‘territory available to the American brasshate. The paz: foug Icng-distance .
capacity” of the U-2 ‘would not have perbitted it to ‘operate ‘directly from
U.S. territory. This plane,” like “all 20-10 espionage ‘units, was besed et
the Incirlik Air Base, in Turkey... ” Povers* plane set out on ‘its piratical |

flight fron atoll in’ Pakistan.” the plane was “te finish its Plight .
The #8 ciised, cee “eestified

ights, along the

iia Satees

See

ene ces mem cen oly eee eee eet bite ee

* Iran were indi¢ated as energency” ait ‘bases, During

Powers could have used aay air base fn Norway, Pakistan, “and Tren as.
a emergency landing places...” Ke ‘could also have landed et te” “airbase at. -..
7 ' §odankylee in Finland, Colonel Shel ton, howaver, warned, hin that this vas_-
& poor airbese” and that he sh6uld uce’ it” only” in the évent ot an extrene
emergency, since’ that’ would! set ube detter than handing, sgpetinere ta

Soviet’ ace ee * Mee aa * pee - oe r

a
soe
. et

r 3 best; “put, woruay “the ‘nore de sirable,

ae ees

If one is td” net Sige rat cage, ceed ehnasé, ete siéeplanee vith thes

teaching on complicity, then one ought to view as accomplices in the crine
of Povers those who organize’ and 4anspired this cfimne and also those vho as
accessories coviously contributed to the cawission of 8 erine by the
Provision of 5 neans and pa renoval of peerane cas ; , ‘

. i
oe ae . ' e
: cat epee eee

t

. : = BB 22 +. USSR INTCRUATIONAL AFFAIRS
7 o Aug. 22, 1960

6 pn nere ‘than one occasion warned the tes
ked by military blocs with the United States }

about tho danger created for these countries by the setting up of ti
U.S. military bases on their territory. Phe present trial clearly shows ©
a & Government ver@s | ae

1

i
i . ‘oa Ce ee gt we
i The present trial reveale the aggre
ruling end military circles, vito do not Ajedaio tramplirg unierfoot
{ the sacred principles of internationel lav in the name of their dirty
3

sins, in order to continue the dangerous practice of brinkcanship. ; ”

sdive pas-tsting policy of thé U.S."

wieit Row fet neo

| . However, “peace-loving ‘pecples ‘throughout fhe Thole world at present have
H
i

no other more acte and burning problep than the problem of preserving
peace on earth end averting the threat of a new catastrophic var.

At present the correlaton of forces in the world is such that peace
partisans, all people of good will, all peace-loving gankind, can restrain
the aggressors and, ecting as one ban, Anflict a poverful rebuff to the

lack forces of aggression.” "TOL sees
{he lecal qualification of the crine.. 7, --,
= Conrade Judges, I ax now going over to the legal evaluation of the :
actions dicriminating the defendant Povers. According +2 the indictment,
defendant Povers is accused of the following: Having been recruited in
: 1956 by the U.S. CIA, he carried on active espionage activity against the
: Soviet Union, which is an expression of the aggressive policy pursued by .
the U.S. Government. On May 1, 1960, he, Povers, with the knowledge of the -
U.S. Governnent and on the instructions of American intelligence, which *
puts into effect the above-mentioned aggressive policy, intruded in a specially
equipped Lockheed U-2 reconnetssance plane into the sirspace of the
Soviet Union vith the aim of collecting date of » strategic nature goncerning
rockat ‘pases, sirbases, the radar netvork, and other very inpertant defense
and industrial objects of the USSR, cata which is a state and military secret
of the Soviet Union. Ke ‘fle over 2,000 kilaseters into Soviet territory.
Be photographed a hunber of sbove-nentioned objects with the help of special
equip.ient, as’ vell us recorded signals’ of yadar stations, and also collected
other data of an espicnage nature. Mhese ections by the deferdant, Fovers,
ene are envisazed in article two of the lav of the USSR on sriminah
responsibility for a state crime. Each point in this fornulation of the

charge is fully established ‘by all existing evidence in the ces@. |, ot

ae ces
amet a woe Pliner Dh ahaa as nah oe ae
1

elo eee
eee meee vm
s
Nl

AD nee Renters:

a

2 tees

<n Ah A a is

ae re et nt

Ce. | Cx? 499

USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 22, 2

cree ae - BB 23 =

secsratig to article two of the above-nentioned lew, espionage is
coneidered 86 the theft or collection with the aim of bending over to

@ foreign state or foreign intelligence or their agency deta which is

“‘@ state or militery extrety ad well aa the handing over oF collection

_Purposes ghlraen to the autere ete of the USSR. | | ase

et the instructions of foreign fatelligence of oth¢r data to be used for

seo Peer +e . hol 4
ee tgs Aer a Pye

dee en at Sie one we ae A eet

As a state Figosecuter; I ae ‘po doubt that ‘every reike “of this crine
is present in the sctions of defendeat Powers The fect that Povers .

" bas been stealing or collecting information constituting state or military
-“secrets haa been ebtablibbed beyond doubt. Where “is no need to dwell -

a ats ‘as ‘a “guarded “state end military secrete t; es hea

: cring has beén carried ‘out by a “foreigners”

“upoa the question as the whether the inforcation concerning military and

economic ‘instellations of the Soviet Union, ‘ite airfields, radio location
network, #nd others, which Powers collected ‘during his aggressive flight
on Hay 1, 1960 over the territory of the Soviet Union, constitutes 8
State or military secret. Infornation of this sind is cee ja any

pe ee att Be, we fea te » me

qheré is ‘elke po doubt that the ata of ceuidstiok “this informa tion by .

Powers kas to hand it over to @ foreign state, ALL the circpmstances

+ were established with utmost completeness and clarity at the preliminary
‘and eburt hearings, and the defendant, Povers, himself does not deny

thet he collected that information on direct orders from the American
intelligence service acting “in conformity with the progran sanctioned

by the ueee Governvent., oe. “Esse: aoe ile ere pfu. me ty :)

There is iso in evidence another elenent of the crime covered by. ...
arti tele two of the sbove “sentioned jaw: That is the fact thet the ie

ae Ale od ee Te ah ve Fees ‘eo ow ee
.

a "From thé polit of view of “soviet crimtaal” low; Fover's ‘Goptondge “guilt
hag been’ proved beyond a doubt, but I would like’ to stress that under

a

the legislation of the United, States és well had the “ec tions of {7

defendant’ Powers taken “place | “4n' the United States:exd had they” been,

dtrected against “the “United States, “they! ‘would also ‘have been régarded
as espiondge ond would hdvé entailed ‘severe ~punishwent. | Y am referring
tothe legal code of the United States issued in 1958 and published io

‘! Washington in 1959, volume’ Ee Section 18, pete rier 37) under Une, heading
. "Espionage and Censorship.’ | ae ewe amps ES ot *

ret éa. ee
ah oe

ne ke emi thie
warns

“The” law ‘of the United “states” "states thet’ every ‘perésa wha “enters; D pene-

‘trates, [lies Over, or by “any other’ ‘beans, Yeceives defense information
which may be used to the detriment of ‘the United States or to the advan~ -
tage of any foreign state is to be held responsible for the crime of
eepleneaes.« This lew eevainaenes ® vast ligt of ‘esplonage objectives...

cee meee pnt cn einlhnaen ln Bln cee ate nese ip ee te am ihueaneatt adhe Conareettnib cree anda ee atambire okor oe

O a

. a af ~ BB 2h = USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

Among them are mentioned, fer instence, docks, canals, railways, factories,
wines, butidiags, offices, research laboratories, Bnd 60 ORs Any sketches,
| photographs, negetives, drawings, plans, waps, models, or notes oF anything
that is connected with wpetionst defense are elso Listed

° te 2

es

i

| : _ tives of esplonegee-. 5 curiptint s+ giver. te ae

: en se EY SN et hee ge Rp nT res ae owas rote Ce eee

: thus, the lew of the UYoited States, with the otmost thoroughoess, provides

i for eriminal responsibility for the slightest infringesent of the security

‘of the United States. J ccc t orn a 7 A,
eo ge epy t eto fer Bemus “alee ip lop ft fa ete Te .

Why, if they have so strict 6 oroceduré: 19 their own countrys are U.S. .

“ ruling circles unwilling to taxe into seccoupt similar procedures set up :

"fn theiz own countries by other states? _Wby do they Antenticoally,
dnsolently, and crassly traople underfoot, laws issued by other states
73 in the interests of their eecurity?.--0 ee for ai iwicty tte ge ERS

pefendent Povers Hes committed a ‘grave crize against our country. He

es must be tried with all the severity of the lew of the Soviet state, gust
‘ os any other country would A0en. ep oe: - _— :

i in ban fF -_- oo . . ae ie
Comrade judgeé, in winding up the speech for the prosecution I must agela
revert to the question of the very serious consequences which Powers”
crininel action could entail for peace and meokinds While Powers?
eireraft was crossing the USSR state border aod dntruding deep into the
airspace of our territory, nobody could know what further aggressive
actions he could herald and what tethal freight he wes carryinge

i
|
|
Defendant Powers, whose crime was 5° generously paid for by the U,5.
intelligence, is not a simple spy, but a speciel end carefully drilled
; criminal, ALL the actions teken by Povers show thet he is fer froa
being a pesskve and blind weapon, & robot in the hands of U.S. inteLligencé
m for espionage, subversion, and sgeression.
, : hat he was forced to carry
out an order. It was of his own free will that he sold his honor, his

eonsctence, and alk of hinself for dollars, and promised to carry out
‘acted from selfish and low motivese , :

and the Pentagon, used by them f
He is a dangerous criminals He“céninot clein t

* any criminal actions--that is,
i _- He conmitted his,crimes pot just in "away which is generally dangerous,"
ee - as the law defines the circumstances of heaviest responsibility, but in
- : a woy which is fraught with danger for millions and millions of people.
He consciously decided to commit a erine the severity of whese ¢onse-
"quences cannot be measured “dn the dimensions we dre accustoned, to use
Sige Os ae ee gee ier ee

“ :
vey &

x

wd
a eas

Ponareee

Tee tae

C co : 19

~ BB 25 » USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
so Aug. 22, 1960

Such is the true face of defendant Powers. If bis boss2s had tried to
start # new world war, 1t would be Powers", nurtured “eo4 educated ia
the so-called "fre world," who would be ready to be the first to

‘drop atom aod hydrogens bombs on peaceful soil, as vas done ty similar
Povers' who dropped the first atom bombs on the peaceful Anhabitants |
of the Cefenseiess cities of, Riroshim aud Negasakts "2° oe oe

oe é:
we ee eet. obtat elie .

Pe ee ee eal my ‘.
-_ ee

er tne iG ane miffed. 7s ay ee a
Comrade judges, the aggressive spy ight which defencant Francis Gary

Povers embarked on at, the direction of U.S. ruling circles, in & y-e
aircraft on the early morning of bay 1, 1960, from the Peshawar Airbase
vas interrupted by,an accurate hit of a Soviet rocket. Tbe hour is”...
drawing nearer when the criminal will bear the court’s Sentence. May —
_your sentence be 4 serious warning to al) those who pursue 8a eggressive
policy, criminally trample underfoot the generally recognized norus of.
ioternat{onal_lay and the sovereignty of states, apd who proclaia that.
the cold war and espionage policy as thetr state policy. Nay this. .-+
sentence also be & serious warning to the other Powers’ who, at the "|
directive of their bosses, would try to undermine the cause of peace
‘end would attack the honor, dignity, and inviolability of the great USSR.

* ooo wr. TL lEn Foe twee Ursa mage Se nate ties i a
Comrade judges, in afférming to the full the state indictment io the. is
Powers, case io accordance with article two of the USOR Lev oa Criminal -
Responsibility for Crimes Against the State, I bave every right, to ask
the court to apply to defendant Povers an exceptional peesure of, a
punishment, But, taking the sincere repentance for his crime which.
Powers displeyed before the Soviet court Into account, f do not fasist
on the death sentence and ask the court to sentence defendant Pover’ 7

to 15 years imprisonment, ©. es PRS eee ee ee

& ” ie vince . Pe

de Fetes

ee : “Reletives Visitl'-- oe as
ce teas ee ape 4hb rt gh TAS Peo

- we

Moscow, TASS,’ Radioteletype in Russtan te Europe, Auige19, 19605 7. 2s
1720 GeO--L seagate a Ce Gee eee a

(Text) Moscow--Soon after the pronouncement ‘of the senténce, the, father,

nother, sister, wife, and mother-in-law of Francis Povers had a”, :
rzeting with him in the building where the trial took place. _ The
weeting lasted one hour and 15 minutes."-* Eg Sy Vie re eee

S the qlee

Moscow, Soviet Rome Service, Aug
(text), We transmit the sentence

Supreme Court in the eriminel case of the U.S. spy-pilok Francis Gary
Powers, | BOR Ge 7

wo

ce

Re pt ee : BE ee iy -
ve pce ee ogee ne eee ce ee al te ale ee nT 8

ae - BB 26 - USSR TTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
ae Aug. 22, 1960

2 A ge
Ligh owe as” Slt fe ce St
eee oe OW ee a ee,

In-the come of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republice,-the ollitary
collegium of the USSR. Supreme Court, consisting of the presiding judge,
chainwn of the military collegium, LieGtenant Generst of Justice | -
Borlsoglebskiy, and people's sssessors, "Ma Jor ‘Gederel “of Artillery
Yorobye¥ end Mejor General. of Aviation Zakharov; in ¢Hé ‘presence of the
secretary, Major of Administrative Service Afangsyev; with the participe-
tion.of the state prosecutor, prosecutor general of the USSR, active
State Councilor of. Justice Pudenko; and'of the defense, meuber

of the Moscow city collegium of lawyers, Griney, in an open court
session in the city of Moscow on Aug." 17 to 19, 1960, studied the cese
for the charge against citizen of the United States cf America, Powers,
;Franeis Cary, born 1929, native of the town of Bourdyne, Kentucky state,
of higher education, pilot of the special reconnaissance 10-10 unit of the
Central Inteliigence Agency of the United Stetes of Awerica, according
to article @ of the law of the USSR concerning criminal responsibility

. ee ee

2 Gutads voy! Qo Ta wt -

et Se , as +
t

It is established by the materials of the case studfed by the court
Session thet on May 1, 1960, at 0536 Moscow time, & milftary unit
of antiaircraft defense of the Soviet Union ta the area of K1 rovabad,
Tadghik S58, detected ata height of 20,000 meters, not accessible to an
airéraft of civil aviation, an unknown aircraft which had violated the
state frontiers of the USSR, Military units of antiaircrart defense of
the country vigilantly followed the movements of the eircraft, which flew
over major industrial centers and important defense objectives,"and |.
only when the violating aircraft had penetrated Into the confines of

‘the Soviet Union by 2,000 kilometers and when the 4il-fotentioned —
nature of this flight, fraught with the (threat?} of thermonuclear
weapons with disastrous consequences to the cause of universal peace,
became cuite obvious, et the order of the Soviet Government, & battery;
of antizircraft rockets et 0855 hours shot ‘down the aggressor sircréft
in the srea‘of ‘the ‘city of Sverdlovsk. —- pers i

bed io : ees : es er eae
The. pilot of, the aircraft ejected himself with a parachute add at the ® .
moment ‘of landing was deteined. To questioning, he named hicself es -
Powers, Francis Cary, citizen of the United States of America,” By ‘an
inspection of the fragnests of the fallen aircraft it ves established
that an mireraft of U.S. production, especially designed for flight

at great heights and fitted with various apparatus to f.17111 spy-

reconnaissance assignnents, bad been shot down. BP Yash cence

vteste toa out

| a eiggis, aac es : is

oF ett Ret OE and Paes as
In this connection, pilot Powers wes arr and was brought.to , . .4
& Union

criminal responsibility, accused of ‘espionage’ against the Sovi:

a

~

C : C 18}

- BB eT - USSR LHTERNATICNAL AFFALRS
_ Aug: 22, b :

eat
bien dae pare ert ae wale ans or — we smeeree aro

In the court session ‘defendant Powers gave: detatied evienes of his :
espionage activities and the élreumstances Linked with bis incureson into -

i the airepace of the USSR ‘on My Ly, 1960./-+"- = qetat fe
a (oe fie Becht ATi OW Be GAT aed Oa! te Pe eae es

-{ _ a ‘Yo Pouers “entered ‘pb & u.br Aimy 26 6 Voldnteer, graduated from the *~
| “Sir force’ seBOd1;" served as o pilot at various U. 3. Air Force bases with.

H the military ronk & firgt Lieutebant. In April 1960, Powers wes recruited

i by the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States to carry out
. iat Feconnaissanced “assignments "dn high-altitude aircraft. .'-

eee oe 2 eager Ke tend a eae Pd we Pateeye elt tle |
YU. 's. central nf

v Intelligence” ‘Agency, Povers wis given & high selary; 2,500 dollars &-" --
mouth, for éspionage~ “apy activities. He underwent special training ~- rat
and wag sent, td an intelligence ‘aviation unit under the code rane 10-10
stationed at the. v ‘S. “qurkisb pase Incirlik pear the town of Adara, Boe

we kee PL

tte “ew gee ES} a. + ees

' qhe” court” sas established that! the 20- 40 unit ‘represented a special +
| coobination | of mil itary and civilian gnteLligence services of the United

7")

States and ‘dts purpose was spying op the USSR with the aid of reconnaissance
plasés s sent “into Soviet eirspace. - Since 1956, Powers on orders from... +
the commander of the 10-10 ‘unit, bas systenaticaliy carried out spy flights
along the USSR borders with Turkey, Iran, and Afghanistan. In lByY> 1956,-
Powers ‘extended his secret’ contact with the Central Inteliigence Agency
of the United Stated for tuo years, ond in Jatuery 1960 for another yeare-
It bas teen established frou the docur ents of the case Bnd from the... -
testimony by the defendant that the criminal intrusion into the Soviet
1 Union' rr girspace ‘carried out > Fovers on May, 2 canes was huge ss
d Well “in ‘advance = : 1 hnger
wa he od fe Boe Tae going - ae ae “pais =
On Apr; 2h, 1960, ‘Powers, with the commander of the 10- a0 ae U.S: -
Colonel ‘Shelton, ‘and a “group” of technic fans appointed to prepare the -f-":
at U-2 plane for flight, ‘fléw on “a U.S, Air Force. transpcrt plane -from'-: --
Incixlix pase *o Pesbewar, ‘airfield in pakistan.” "On Apr» 30 another pilot
brought the u- -2 plane frog Turkey to this airfields’ in this plane Foner

z
3
“| was *9 invade USSR airspace. acer ete ee

n
re

a id During the nigne’ ‘of Yay 2. "1966," Colonel. “Shelton. ‘ordered ‘Powers ae
fly over, Soviet. Union territory at 3 height of 20,000 meters elong the ~
route Peshawar > > the “Aral bea- -Sverdlovsk- -Kirov- “Prhangelsk-Turnensk, © ana?
to land in ‘Norway: ‘at. Bodoe , airf feia “which Powers “becane acquainted wits oe
as far Back ag 1950.7" Flying ‘gver. ‘soviet, land, “povers, on shelton’ 6:7 ae

itch’ on special “ins Lrunents taking * ne
1
t

: orders, at certaig ‘points _ was, “to? “sv
aerial photographs: | and | "registering, the signals, of radio “Jocation | stations -

of the USSR eir defenses: ‘Powers was ‘to pay. ‘special ‘attention ‘to tvo *F
points--at oné of them the U.S, intelligence service expected 40 -find >"

«.. Maunching sites for rockets, and oe the second, a Lees inportant :

aes enge object (obyekta). ’. :

rec es iee eAe o

*

FA Se ee

2

Papi ee ee te iceetp st iy. Pisa tht Cuba
tet. Neha, decadent oe ne te a, Sata ated

’ suicide if he vas captured by the Sovié

- BR 23 ~

Material evidence has established that Power
task ertrusted to him. Having takes off fr
Faxistan, Povers flev, over Afghanistan terri
of the Soviet Union along the ordered route.
this is confirued by the U.S.
by the navigator of. the, 16-30 wit,

teatcorrtay eso octet 23 Lat
During the entire flight up_te t
Powers operated speci#i intelligeuce apparat
iuportant defense objects acd recordings of
installations, of the country's antiatrerafs ,
the developnent of; the aerial photo © jin, wh

: established that the accused Povers pholog-ay

industripl and military objects in tue USSR,
conmunication roads, railway bridzes end sta
lines, eirfields, troop areas aml pilitary ¢
pimerous photographs of USSR territory, take

height of 20,000 meters, and-now et the dispos

plane and. subsitted to. the court, and notes by Povers, on the rou
punder of important USSA defense sites seen by Dime > |

now

we a 3: Pgatieeh hice =
e nasent the aircraft was shot down,

USSR LVTLRNATIONAL LFFAIRS
Aug. £2, 1960

§ carried out the criminal

ao Peshavar airfiele in

tory and over 2,000 kiloueters
Apart frou Povers’ testimony,

flight chart with the route parked on. it -
flajor (Dulec?) and found in the U-2

te chart of a

us, toos phctographs of
the signais of radio location
defenses. As a result of ©

{ch had been preserved, 1% was,
phed from tle U-2 airplane, —
“works, stores, ofl duaps,
tions, pover transpission
quigment-stcrage ereas, The .
hn by the defendant from a :

al of the military collegius
to define the nature of the

of the: 15SR Supreme Court, moke it possible ’
y bridges, he gumber and type

industrial enterprises, the design of railva
of aircraft on the airfields, the peculiarit
equipnenst, . Povers recorded on 6 tape record
location stations in the USSR, with fhe ain
antiaircraft defense systems i: 20,2 00.-°

‘i 1g Le .
feet a: .

In the e:

during his flight on May 1,° 1960 inside Soviet airs /
mititary secret of the Soviet Union specially protected by lav.

testifiel before the court that the U-2 plan

devices Jesigned to destroy the plane in the

in Soviek territory, and that before the f2i
Colonel Shelton implanted the idea that it v
~ be tortured... ~

In conelusion, Colonel Shelton gave hiv a special po

MNS LAL. WIL SD a Lo ote ae
ts’ opinion, the infornation gathere

t authorities and that he would.

tes and purposes of military
ey the signals of several radio
to discover the country's

4 by defendant Povers
pace vas a 6tate and.
Povers

@ was equipped vith explosive
event of a forced landing
ght on Nay 1, 1950, 9
as essential to couit’

ere neo wet at an
Pa ei re eer Sete ee Doda

isored pin . aces

192

C .
_ - BB 29 - USSR INTERNATICHAL AFFAIRS  / $3
: hug. 22, 1960

Ele itiivel® semi Gates es

The session of the military collegius of the USSR Supreme Court studied
other evidence which coofirmed that the plane shot down on May 1, 1960

by a Soviet rocket unit belonged to the U.S. Air Force, cespite the fact’
that national identification marks were sbsant, the experts, on the basis of

- a gtudy of the: remnants.of. the plahe’ snd the equippent init, concluded thet:

** thie plane’ was a7{sdnic?): reconnelssance’ airplane of the U-2 type oc. ct ect
Oust f+

‘ produced by the U.S: Locked. firm,’ with e’single turbojet engine ~
the equipment and ports|of the airplane were Siscovered tradcaarks of -
various U.S. fires, from which it és determined in particular thet
the turbojet’ engine was manufactured by Pratt and Whitney, and Yhe -.

machinery. for op2rating the electrical equipment by Hamilton-Stendard ic: a. -
there were identification marks showing .:

v'and General Electric: Moreover,

" reconnaissance plane yeprésents

that the equipment belanged to the Defense Department of the United States.
The material evidence was shown to the defendant, and Powers acknowledged - :
_t ag belonging Lo the U-2 plane, in which he, Powers, on May 1, 1960 |
: tntruded into the airspace of the. Soviet Unions. 2 oat eiiinnct ee
cour GY Pegmip gaat rt eed Serban tee le a ae
On the identity paper taken from the accused and presented in the case,” ~
bearing the nusber AF 1288069 in the’name of Powers, Francis Gery, there --
ts the endlem of ‘the U.S. Defense Department and the inseriotion .. 060 95%.
"Department of Defense of the United Siateg.” ” Thus, she fact that the ote
" Q-2 Lockheed reconnaissance piane.of the United Stetes, and Gefendant +:
Powers was a secret agent of the Central Intelligence agency ef tre oc
United States, has been quite definitely established during the court's
sitting: - Se PDR tak he Eka e igh ee ee Tay BN —

ee e one a tee at
Paneer ’ ace

mere ei we we ove won - :

Powers was the docile executor of the perfidious esigns of the US.°  *
Central Intelligence Agency, carried cut with the consent of the US... TL:
Governaént, -By ais own ‘admission Powers wes aware of the fact that, by ~
intruding ‘upon the Birspace of the USSR, he was infringing on th siete

sovereignty of the Soviet Unial end’ was flying over the latter's. 700 =
territory for ‘the’ purpose of espionage, the main aim of which was to7-"2 7
discover and record the location of rocket Jaunching siteso?- 0° - 00 w=:
eourt, Surin, Cherenisin, Chushakin, 22% 4.
the fall of an eirplane in the®

7

The witnesses "snuerrogsted by the
Asabin, said in Uestimony that they observed
area of the town of Sverdlovsk a

whom they detainod and disarmed, The men"¢
: EVM Sane Dive Ss

nd the’ moment ‘of landing of & parachutist "£7
ade

1 stained proved to be Powers. -

In examining the ¢asc against Power's,” the military collegium of. the USSR
Supreme Court has “remembered the fact, that the intrusion of the U.S .ctesrodr
“s criminal violation of the generally nest gae
1 jaw which establishes the exclusive. 2.7%
airspace extending above the territory ~.

aw Mind os See

admitted principle of internatioma
sovereignty of each state over the
-of that states Tt ce : ;

USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS) pY

~ BB 30 »
Aug. 22, 1960

d Thie principle, confirmed by the Paris convention on air navigation of
ee Oct, 13, 1919, and by several other, later international agrecwents, hes
beer proclaimed in the national legislation of various states, including

the USSR und the United States. rote wose

The violation of this sacred and immiable international principle -__
ereates, under current conditions a direct threst te universal peace, |
and the security of the peoplea, With the present day development of... !
military tecimiques, when certain states, having atomic and hydrogen
_weapons, at their disposal, have the opportunity to deliver thea rapidly
to the target, the flight of o military reconnaissance plane could heve .
directly preceeded a military attack, That danger was the more real in’.
a situntion in which the United States, as U.S. generels have stated, constantly
uaintaing patrolling airborne Sembers with hydrogen bembs on board, elways -
ready to drop a bomb on predetermined targets in the Soviet Union. —

imide! bean Gee:

. Under these conditions, the aggressive ect of the United States, ~~

. carried cut on May 1, 1960 by defendant Powers, was @ threat to ?
wniversal pesee.. The evidence at the disposal of the military cotlegium of
the Supreme Court does not leave any doubt that through the aggressive

+. ° 4ntrusion of the reconnaissance sirpleng into the sirspace of the Sovie+

Union, defendant Powers was carzying out far-reaching designs of the

reactionary ruling circles of the United States, aimed at increesing

s eve oe

internatiofial tension. eee Thee ee, ATS

After Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, the head of the Soviet Government,

at the sessica of the USSR Supreme Soviet of May 5, reported that 4 u.5.

aircraft hed, been shot down over USSR territory, the U.S. State

Department admitted that it was quite possible that a U.S. plane bed ‘
violated the USSR border, yet it tried to deceive world public opinion.

For this end the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration and ;
the Stete Department issued 6 wuddled sta tement about an accidentel -
departure of the U-2 plane, which hed elicgedly becn engaged in. en

research, from its coursés ea 7 Fenny Let ao. ee UE we.

et ee eesti she Vo Paces alt

tt

wee

. In his finel speech at the USSR Supreme, Soviet session of May re ;
Comrade Nikita Surgeyevich Khrustrehev,, wamasked the mesdaciouS.  os1. livc
nature of these claims.’. Then, US. leaders, President Eisenhower, ... +

ale. Viee President Nixon and State Seerctory Herter, admitted that. Sy Ae ee

ic espionage flights of U.S. aircraft over Soviet territory are part of

rte al
we

espicnage against them were. the official state policy of the Unased | sir.
States. aclie. eo To Lemos te mtn te : oisae Spe ee!

ae aae oo a
a oF tnt aout
Stier 1 h ‘
he beeen NS ib
sh
4
‘
it
3
“
a
4
.
‘
'
+
i
t

hb loge

é) ; O . RS

aaa ae - BB 3l- USSR INERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
a abe + Aug. 22, 1960

Subsequent evérts confirmed that the azgressive intrusion of the U-2
espionage plane fato USSR sirspave on May 1 was premeditatedly prepared _
py U.S. reactionary éiréles to wreck the Paris sumalt cooferesce, preveat,
a relaxation of international tension, and revive thé policy of cold wary |
batea by all pecpiess’ TT ee eee See

wee mie eee zane ees ens

The military Collegium of the USSR Supreme Court states that Powers®
fulfiliment of the espionage tasks he was set would have been Lopossible -,
without the use, by the United States and for aggressive ends, of military
bases and airfields on territories of states neighboring on the USSR,
including the territory of Turkey, tran, Pakistan, end Norvay- Powers? .-
flight has proved that the U.S. Governzent having bound Turkey, Iran,
Pakistan, Norwey, and other states by bilateral a@llitary agreements, 3-1,
hes set up military beses for dangerous provocatory actions oD their
territory and Tas turned these states into, accomplices in aggression ~.
against the USGR. : ae

: ; he

After examining the evidence of the case, paterial and other evidence and
the Conclusions of the experts, and hearing the statereats of the defendant
ang witnesses, the spceches made by the state prosecutor and counsel for
the defénse as well as the final statement of the defendant, the military
collezium of the USSR Supreme Court considers it established that |<
defendant Powers has, for a long time, een an active secret ageat of the
U.S, Central Intelligence Agency and has carried out espionage tasks
for that agency directed against the USSR; end thet on May 2, 2960, intruded,
vith the knowledge of the.U.S. Government and in & specially equipped
U.S. military U-@ espionage sirplane, into USSR airspace and, with the <:
help of special radio, technical, and photographic equipment gathered
information of strategic importance constituting ‘state and mijitery secre
of the Sovict state, thereby committing 6 serious crime as defined in
article 2 of the USSR law of criminal responsibility for crimes against ©
the state. =,

‘ho aH ; - bier reer eater er itearasd
At the same tine, having assessed a1] the circumstances of the case is
hand in accordance with their mutual relationship, and considering thers}
sincere admission of guilt aade by Powers and his sincere repentance.’ “-
over his actions, and proceeding from the principles of socialist humanism
and guided by articles 319 and 320 of the RSFSR criminal code,. the 7% 2
military collegium of the USSR Supreme Court hag sentenced Francis Gary Porers,
on the basis of article 2 of the USSR lav on criminal responsibility
for crimes against the state, to @eprivation of freedom for 10 years, .
with imprisonment during the first 3 years. ,

ts

dues

oat

”

a ee oer

Oe

Shey sitar p fo. Hoga tye “4. BB AS-' USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
a oe aoe . Aug- 22, 1960

fhe sentence takes account of the preliminary detention, and runs from
May 1, 1960. The material evidence will be kept on file (pri dels). The
money snd valuables taken from Powers are to be consicered state revenue.
In &ccordance with article ‘bof the fundamentals of criminal procedure
in the USSR and union republics,” the senteoce 4s final and not subject
to complaint or appeals =” Ne. aE ie? Se
Borisoglebskly, presiding Judge; Vorobeyev and Zakharov, assessors.

0.$, GOVERNMENT REACTION TO SENTENCE _.
wail, it’s White Housé Statempot Uncoaviocing :

Moscov, TASS, Radioteletype ip Russian to Europe, Aug. 19, 2960, 2830 GMT--L

_ (Text). Wash ington+-The White House hes published 8 special statement

concerning the seatence pessed by the military collezium of the USSR
Supreme Court on American Spy pilot Powers. > 8s

There ig not a word in this statewent esbout the responsibility of the U.5.
Government’ and the President personaily, with whose Knowledge and approval
such operations as the espionage flights of U-2 aircraft were carried out,
fcr Powers' fate. But there is no shortaze in the statenent of expressions
of rearct’ at the “severity” of the sentence passed on Povers, although, is
consideration of Lhe severity of the ¢crime committed by Powers, the =
sentence is being justly assessed everywhere as Very lenient. .

There is an unconvincing ring to the White House statement’s expressions
of sympathy for mexbers of Powers’ family since they cone from these
directly responsible for the lot that has befallen the American spy-

*

een as President Eisenhower Rypocritical

Moscow, Soviet Korth American Service in English, Aug. 20, 1960, .2300 CMP--L
(Anatoliy Gan Comment) * ae Pie

(text) White House Press Secretory Janes Hagerty gathered newsntd on Aug. 22
to read them a speciel statement by President Fisenhover on the spy trial
$n Moscow. The Fresident regretted the severe sentence and expressed his
symapthy. with the family of Francis Powers, the condemned spy pilot. :

 #*
Pay

. : >

ist <a
ofa te ee

Et
eas
?
2
;
!
dl
a
+
i
1
i
i
i
t
i
|
| s
} 7
¥:
i
s
~™

aetel loge dea naka ®.

Ors << 187

es en See ee = BB 33 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
oe ah ene -Aug. 22, 1960

Now, such monstrous bypocrisy is rare. The President koew about it when
Powers was sent on his unfortunate flight. The U.S. sutnorities furnished
his plane with’ ad explosive: device end the pilot binseif with a poison | —
pin, with orders, in chée his espionage wission failed, to destroy both ~

the plane and himself too. Where vere the President's regrets then? | Why
didn't he” syopathize ‘thes with Powers ‘add bis family? ” °° EP oe

' gi? grlfeseste at cred sobs fet 8 Te atet ere a,
Now when the U-2° flight has fallei’ through, the U.S, leaders have begua
to masquerade ashimanitaridns, shedding tears over the fate of the men”

‘ who carricd out their "sordid work for then Neither President Eisenhaver, .

however, nor anyone else can sling mud at the equity or the humaneness,
of Soviet: justice’: The rest-of the world éan‘sce if the sentence aeted
out to Powers is‘réeallyTmumane.  * "7 >" aed : PE ht

ritish member of parliament Xonni Zilliacus, who sttended the Moscow trial,

gold us that anyone under siaflar charges in the United States would Lave

been sentenced to-comparably more severe punishment. President Eisentover —

knows that though "hé sheds crocodile, tears over Powers, whose life isn't

vortii-8 cent either’ to’ the President or to Bayone else ie his administration.
eee gill of don aavmert yp Pree + te eee : ae

<e feet rv27 yg. Rulers Pinloried *, ”

ey re
eecc aio are
Moscow, Soviet Hone Service, Aug. 19, 1960-1930 GMT--D .

ci Por aT ee ee

foow, (an umrer. ts.

(Text) Président Eigenhower"éven put aside his: colf clubs ta order to .
wave his arms better’ and’¢ry out sbout the’ sentence of the Soviet Court.
The President of the United State's dia not”take it hard when he gave
the order for: the infamous intrusion across the Soviet border,” when ‘he ~~
sent his" spy pilot inte the peaceful ‘skiés of the Soviet land. Re had
no regrets in giving his provocative’ order end creating a threat to peace
and the lives of millions of people. a

Dia President Eisenhouer want regrets when he was caught red-han led while

" causing the failure of the conference of heads of governaent? He is

sorry about the severity of the’ sentence of the Soviet court. What hypocrisy!
Did the bigvigs in Washington think that the Soviet people would slap

che backs of those whe scoff at the” security of their homeland? ,A vain hope.
The Powers trial exposed the rviers of the United States 3s the enemies_.

of peace. These have been the days of their “shame. The White House 7 “+

sent Povers were not in the dock,

t* even’ in absentia they have beea

ct he.

i ities

ht

Boda

wey?

Ae ener co

ek

Pa
Pee
Tl lt

“alia

t. as,

evidence indicating the aggressive schenes of his masters«-,.

_(uncLassIFIED)

| Igy

OFFICIAL USE ONLY

see ~ BB 3A - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 22, 1960

’ Stete Department Forbids Comment
Moscoy, TASS, “Dictation in Russian to Provincial press, Aug. 19, 21960,

2118 GMI--L__ (UNCLASSIFIED) Dee age!

te Geese

(Text) Washington --After the clumsy attempt by the U.S. Air Force
command to once more Sistribute the masked version concealing the
true activity of the American 10-10 detachment in which Powers served,
official Washington bas decided to keep strictly silent stout Povers* *

UPI reports thet the U.S, State Department has forbidden officiels
ef 811 goveronent bodies snd departments to comment publicly on
Power's trial. — :
Tne organizers of the aggressive provocations ‘agaiost the Soviet
Union are obviously displeased at the fact that Powers did pot take

the poisou with which they provided hig. There may be some people,
significantly writes’ correspondent {Taylor?) of the Washington DAILY NEWS,

‘who would have liked it if Powers would have preferred oot to live apd

to have-takep his place in the Soviet court aod have told the whole.
world the story of the U-2 aircraft.

Pover's masters continue to assert the absurd fabricetion that Powers

was couditioned and that therefore his evidence ig pot valid. Io this

matter, they are not even deterred by the fact that President Eisenhower a,
has virtually refused to support this fabrication, UPI seys tbat certaio

ancnysous officials, though put out by the presideot's statenent,

nevertheless, go on saying that there qs slieged evidence to disprove

the view that ‘Powers was pot subjected Lo conditioning. Reads

OIMER COMMENT ON TRIAL AND SENTENCE. ; ee
ee kaa : Wes. Spy pavocates Legrn Nothing <a se

“3 ee .
* t

Moscow, Soviet Eur

opean Service in’ English, Auge 20,: 1960, 1315 Gwtt--L

Pr ee

(Boris Stolpovskty Conmentary)..*: nfs #

eagice iy Pes : sie y Re ae fe des ss BEE. RSS MES a ah ghise. ots gb gan” vet praie
{Text} The Povers trial in Moscow has ended. President Eiseuhower.. :/-
has alreedy had cause to regret {ts. ovtcone avd with reason too,”. *- 25
An unbiased court not only established the guilt of the spy pilot

Powers, who received the punishment he rightly deserved, but

documentary proof was provided cf the eriminal policy of the United
States, a policy of total espionage and aggression, of vbich Poweré

: was the toole

8A cae DAP

.
i
,
{
!
!
i

_. Rt will serve to remind everyone Tor # “long

_ reply to doy aggressive actions in the same ¥ : :
them. -

4 Me 97

CFFICLAL USE ONLY

~ BB 35 - . USSR DVTERNATIORNAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 22, 1960

Anothe r black page has been foscrived in the history of Americen policy.
i tine that aggressive actions

agsinst the Soviet Union end ic exbosure sod inevitable failure.) o>
eG ee are bette: ae hens we ee a ee ie ee.

Yet, despite this lesson, the U.5. advocates af esphorage and

@ggression seep to have’ lesred nothing. The Paris paper LIBERATION |
reported yesterday thet it was learoed from a% Aserican source that.

the Peotegon, with the, approval, of the White House, is preparivg bew
espionage plans. , These provide for the yesumption of the spy flights + -
over Soviet territory on @ ‘pew Lasis. “A special joiat group, which . -
includes the chief's of staff aod the leuders of the ictelligesce --_ +
services, has already been set up to handle the matters — das oS oe

gainst the USSR? It... L.

What is this new basis for criminal action a
seews to be as follows. In the future, agcording to the Pentagon's
plans, spy flights will be carried out from U.5, aircraft carriers
operating in veutrai waters. In adéition, the Pentagor and Allen 1.4.
companies which have | -.

Dulles’ agency have ‘a: aed certato civil eireraft ¢ }
permission to make ordinary flights to the USSR to take ou board special
equipseat for photographing certain objectives. The Fentagoc aod
Dulles’ agency have also considered the question of drawing ioto their. .
pegressive affeirs the governments of the United Stutes' allies ip the
various tilitery blocs. This is pot only for the purpose of giobal .
espionage, but also, eccording to the WALL SUREET JOURNAL, to force
these countries to share the, responsibility.’ 0 #2. oy

ey ee Ce ee ac oak ne se See Es aly a Ja et
The U.S. plans for spying, #5 you see, are very big, Sed both the +...
Peotagon and the Alles Dulles’ agency have lost all sense of reality.
They seen to have learoed nothing fron the failure of the Powers... tL
mission aod the RB-47 fizabt; or perhaps they. think thet if a spy oo. <..
plane takes off: froa ab aircraft carrier operating in peutral waters... *
the criminal will evade retaliation; or perhaps they harbor the -.. c+ ¢7 “"
42lusion that the civil camouflage will save, the eir pirates and: s.2.°
Vashington from exposure.7- ta: : Var? pode ou. ties ;

a a Pa
the USSR, camouflaged or uncamouf laged,
o that the USSR wifl.
ay as ig the, Powers:
aggressors ant put the rpotiseht, of

case. It wi

I
|
en

Mew ie

Lger

OFFICIAL USE ONLY

z - BB 36 « LUSSR INTERNATIONAL AFPatksS
Aug. 22, 1960

: fiashiogton Leaders Reckless
Moscow, Soviet Korth ‘American Service in Englieh, Avg. 26, 1960,
2300 GMD ee ee Lar ote *

(Nikolay Andreyey comentary oa the Powers Triel} |.
(Text) The three-day trial of airman Powers was ccoducted with
scrupulous clservance of the official procedure. Interpreters and
witnesses were warned that they were liable to prosecution under.
criminal lav for giving false witness. The interpreters translated
every Russian word about the responsibility they would bear for
pee rendering a false transiation fate the sccused's aother
ongue. go et Wie ae at Whe ah gee ee : : .

ence established more aad

As the cross-examination and expert evid
more of the circumstances of Francis Powere' crime, it becate increasingly
evident that the accused deserved the supreme punishrent. Tris impression
was shSred by #21 present in the hall. The opinion that Powers might be
condemned ta deuth for his acts of espionage +45 expressed in the United
Stetes itself, Mrs. Elearcr Roosevelt, for instance, io her newspaper
article of Aug: 18, recognized such 6 possibility. Hovever, even the |
prosecutor, taking into consideration Powers’ sincere regret, dia not
insist on applying the death penalty but asked that he shovld be
sentenced to 15 years' deprivation of liberty. The court, hovever,
from humanitarian considerations, sentenced the accused to only 16

yeors! deprivation of liberty. 7 0-7). ;
In my opinion, the fact that such’ a mild sentence was ‘gives bas largely
due to Powexs’ defending counsel, Mikhail Grinev. In his questions to
Powers and fin his persuasive speech for the defense, the advocate was
able to present facts to the advantage of the accused, Ten years’ ©
deprivation of liberty is merely the minioum sentencé leid dokn by -
the relevant clauses of the Soviet lew on crininal responsiblity for
crimes against the state. oe “ ak oa, x
Nevertheless,’ people veré to be found in the United States who had: |
the temerity to declare that the court had given Powers a very hersh
sentence, President Eisenhower wes One of them end Vice President -
Niaon another. President Elsenhover 8ccterea thet the United States

would do sll it could to secure a reduction of Francis Povers' sentence.

The U.S. President would seem to tekd this position oa huranitarian
fax from sincere.

grounds, but such hunaniterianism is very

f
24
i
a
- 8
} ,
{
7
|
|
!
|
{ "
sae :
j i
~
2 tre

ere RCR ee Ter

aww

“the Centrel, Intelligence Agency, Allen Dulles, with the knowledge -
*“gnd ‘approval’ of the U.S. Government. Is seading Powers o0 this flight
over the USSR, the higher autborities io Washington koew quite vell

"yoreover, I am “sbsolutely convinced that Powers?

.-‘the trial, io big speecti for the prosecution, in Pov

CEFICIAL USE ONLY 4

g ee Bee i+ S gp 37+ USSR INVERNATIONAL AFPAIRS
: "Avg. 22, 1960

It sas no other thao the President hinself who declared that espiovage
was U.S. nationsl policy. Tt was not Colonel Shelton, the notorious
commander of the 0-10 espionage’ detechment, hor even Sheltoo's |
{macdiate chief vho’sent_ Towers 00. bis flight over the VSR. qhe
flight was undertekes on the express fostructions of the gaief of °°

7

_ that they vere sending hin to possible death. Mevertheless, they sent
him, and they even provided bin with & pig with a deadly poison for |
his ovn ‘suicides (5 SUI LLL Ue Pear : 1 oe: Fh

ee a ke

chicfs nade the
assumption that io the event of a crash or of the plane being brought
down by @ Soviet rocket, both the plave aod the pilot would have
been destroyed without leaving 8 ‘trace. dust such # conviction that
there’ were no clues would explain the initial false eccounts of the
U-2 given by Washington tu which they said that the flight over
Sovitt territory vas, accidental and that the pilot had lost >
ecusciogussess. TT Bt ik oe ee Ue a 3

Cr a ed ce - Fi
pene ee . tar ok

Realizing the probability of 6 fatal outcome, they nevertheless
uuhesitetingly sent Powers on his espionage mission. 5o when they

- ere now publicly expressing their sorrow at the sad fate of poor,
Francis Powers this sorrow 1s mere hypocrisy. The Washingtoo “posses
would have experienced absolutely no sorrow Dut would have been

extresely plessed if the Soviet rocket had sent the plane end Powers
h more convenient

with it up in smoke. ” It would certaiply have beeu muc

for thens*
wl nel a3 bag cane -- fee
But ‘the fate’ of the eirnao ts, after ell, the fate of en individual 7"
human being, wheres his crime wes ‘ad act wbich affected not only *.
fiis ‘own fate. As the prosecutor, Romon Rudenko, pointed out até, L
er's ‘criminal "7.
acts, danger was involved for millions and milifons of people. Curing .
the cross examination, the prosecutor pointed out thet vheo Povers ..~
préssed the levers of the espionage instruments he might just-asv 4 ¢
easily have ‘pressed a lever relessing on atomic bomb over the USSR.
Yes, I wight, Povers ‘agreed, but he added, io an attempt to justify”

himself, Ahat “the ‘U-2 plane was’ now suitable for carrying aton tombs 5°

ee, ore ee: ‘

i. wee F

wee bd “ae wet re eerie:
eles ee a vy i.

ee cs we ome Pete et BS 7 -
Sale Teh ST Qiek fu Be ee vey

! youevér, ‘it is difficult to say vhat type of 8 pleve which is flying“...
at a height of 68,000 feet is and what-load it hes’ onboard. Consequently,
thé incursion “of a‘ war ‘pléne into our ‘sirspace might be token as.al! CY

‘ pilitary attack ‘ond the necessary teedng put into ection to deliver” (”

_a counterblow. That the USSR ‘possesses such means ne one in the world e
now doubts. The leaders of the United States were quite evere ia what? 7 |

1

". wanner the Sovict militery authorities might react to the incursion

of a U.S. plane into the, USSR. Still they seot Puvers with instructions ~
over ovr country fe the U-@+ o0. +. ae ar ie

wet ATU bina canetneanneitentie:

‘aaa 5.

. Fowers was & pawns Tt may be that be aid not think about the daugsrous

‘ “ opeIcLsL USE ONLY : 19a

- BB 30 = USSR INTER ATIONAL AFR As”
- Auge 22, 196¢

Tne leaders of the United States, in full tnowledge of what they were
going thus gambled with the lives of millions of people, thse millions
who vould be coudemned to death in the eveot of the catastrepbe of a wer
in the age ii which we live. They deliberapely plenned end carried out
Powers? flight ard brought the world to the’hrink of war, Cousequeatly, -
the present calla for bumanenes4 on the part of the Reshington authorities
ere hypocrisy from beginning to 'e24. . Humapitarfanisa decands rejection of
war aS a means of settling dfsputes,. 8 yefisal to carry oub aggressive *
acts against ‘other countries. VE tte aa aaiey re — o P

are tee eos oo eae ae i: Seas Bory oe :

consequences of his acts, but the recklessness of those people in
Wastington who. gent Powers on his espionage flight was of 8 monstrous oabot.
ray SEs Goris, te" Bee Treated Fairly ;

1830 GMP--L
(UNCLASSIFIED) - = eke, eee ae

Moscow, Soviet European Service in Norwegian, Auge 20, 1960,

{Summary} Editor Fino Gustavsen of the péper OR TENTERING attended the

Powers trial. In an intervie, he expressed surprise at the similarity

between Norvegian trials and the Russian one, He felt Powers hei been

feirly treated, Asked bis pinion about the fact that Powers had

instructions to land if pecessary on 4D airfield in Finland or Sweden ara

had intended to lanl at the sirfield in Bodoe, Gustavsen yeplied that ‘
this matter was very recent, ané he had ret really studied ite

Gustavsen said; "Whas’is pretty obyicus is that if he hed landed in.
Sweden or Finlapd he would not have teen met by representatives pf the

‘espionage section to which Povers belonged, Sweden and Finlend rup their

airfields complevely independently, pot like Norway, where unfortunately
the Americens ar2 allowed to have a certain control over the atrfields.
If he had landed in Sveden or Finland, it would have coe to light that

t and the whole

he had been over the Soviet Union on en espionage assignmen

world would have known about the uattere me
"It, on the other hand, he had Landed at Bodoe, ttis would bave teken .

place in the greatest secrecy. “The Americans would have met bin at the

Bodoe airfield. The aircraft would Lave been placed in a special- .. =
bangar:-as ves done in 1958 when Powers was at Bodoe Airfield--end the +
world end the Horwegian pecgle would not have known ‘anything abcut the

way in which the Anericans misuse the rights they have oo Norvegian eirfielés,

* _@he difference -betveen Morwsy's pos ition and thet of Sweden apd”. a fs
* Finland is, that Sweden and Picland decide about their eirfields and are

in full control of whet bappens there, while the Norwegian authorities,

as we have realized, sre aot in complete ‘control of their airfields. - -¢
xégrettable factel po .c. hat pal et tne aD

oe “-
ADT a. Get ‘ Px

oe

Vt
a

Sn ele

ee me mee A he a ee nme ae thine mee

193

i

Ey

t

i

t

ry

om
i

Faia

”

OFFICIAL USE ONLY
el oeee - BB 39 ~~ USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFALRS
Aug. 22, 1960

Gustavsen said he bas seen statements that Powers had bezo exposed to
rainvashing.” qhede’slatemtata bre bo ridiculous, he said, that he
could hardly answer thea) ~ He atidct that be hes not’ met a single person

here’ vho beliéves thés? titaterthte-cand that includes Americen newsmen. 7
gerade WAT SENATE, TL Tink et ogee ia cae
i ‘ Powers Trisi a Werning © 7
wee Pecan eer we ora Ae : ;

Moscow, PASS, Radioteletype “ia English to Buropey Aug. 20s 1960, ....

17hO GaT--L (UNCLASSLPIED}** “>, -*: ee
= ee ef ie Sig . 2

Beene Pane

“(fext) “Nosdéw-“Codméntiig on_the sentence passed on the American

spy pilot Powers, IZVESTIYA on Aug. 20, notes editorially that the

> "Verdict reflected Both the great fairness and true bumancoess of

Soviet justices "A Tabla’ criminal got what he deserved, and his bosses,

those who fdéstered this éspionage crossbreed--the war end death concerns,

Noscow, TASS,’ Radiote-etype PORE
0610 GMI--L-" (UNCLASSIFIED ae

the bloodthirsty militarists, and ovazen politicians--were put in

history's pillory. afewts - at ee

the Pokere triel fas ’sgain shown, IZVESTIYA says, who is to Dlane for
torpedoitig the Paris summit meeting, through whose fault the efforts
of the l0-ration Disarvament Committee have been foiled, who throws
wrencbos intd thé works of the ban-nuclear-tests conference, who is
striving to fetter the peoples of the East and Latin Amcrica, and who
continues té poison the intemational atmosphere. *_

Sete. Me Sst fet ig ee) eet aa te
Indeed, Washington gentlemen, 811 the above-said,
you maneuver it, is your own ®ealculatcd policy" to
chilly breath go on freczing our planct, to make our planct su
before from the arise’ réce. =" +" Peppa ei age. 4 oS Riedl

. bu: wea te Waa TT iso nee 3 oO oe
May Powers senterice, “T2VESTIYA ‘says, serve @ warning to all those whe
pursue an aggressive policy, who criminally vielete geticrally~ oe Magis
recognized standards cf intemational law and the sovercignty of
states, end who proclaim ‘the ‘cola var and espfonage their state policy.
May this sentence, firally, be a stern varning to all othersPowérs',; 6.
who might try, on ‘orders from their bosses, to undermine the cause of ne

peace, to encroach upen the honor, dignity, and integrity of the ‘great -

“no matter how hard
mane the cold war's
{fer as

Soviet Union. heen ae rr
Pe ey eg meeecaenge Ge cores an ee te Stet
a tas ‘\ossy tie grup gin dip boaeee. wl -) be BO Pate
SOVIET SPACE FEAP GETS. VORLD ATTENTION © Se ue one eee ee
vs BEA ee ye Guns eeas Ree) Ate ee a pee
sagem Se BSS 2+! Report on, CPR Reaction, a Be er od
mer quilts gtradiah oD LE aad wae te oe Sn ae

4 24, gee" edo occegtate me 0 TG
1g% Gee. te rt he he

CPA have been Listening

st
we

ame oe ene Rat
(Text) Foking--Millions of people in t?

“today, with tremendous’ joy for the Soviet people, to the special
“news bulletins ©

t the “central people's radio. oe of the republic
