UntitledD) re Statement of Viacheslav Ivanovich Toropovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115229, dated 5 November 1945.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115229).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a

- ¥Iacu :S3LaV me aL CIC VSRY Can Nh HARBIN

Vahase a LES wplian, be

eK = ey ad hedlo Wyre,
a) att Atte be 4-7-9 t-Bfle/ eect Manler/,

toe war cn Decemver €, 1¢41,

tem oee

Lh dhe
tack

ae,

tsfere tae start cfr
Ionad ne 2¢04atact wnatever witn any Japanese, att ,

dnen J reacas

e ase cf 16, I vegan 5 re asa ROMLUL
cerscnal assistant to ay 3

ecfataer, JANZS Hana} who €€¢: é¢V
was employed oy the Sritish gmbassy in 3hanzha working for FELCH
“the Ministry of Zconomic jarfare. ‘Air. Smart's 65 was CO survey -

ne ‘commercial activity cf agi Msiness firms in Coina, and 4g
also cr neutral firms wno ucted 43 surcnasinz azents for the

severnm SE UP terrany.a nese firds curcnased raw materials inchud
tye Par inst and sent it to termany via Russia (up to the start“,

omen
aot

cf the Scviset-terman Var). nen cr _ tee informaticn zathered —~—
game from t2iesrar3 3ent from nere to sermany and iussia, and I
crerated Peceaving staticn monitoring Shansnai-cerlin and
Sukden-terlin redic circuits. Mb) ToRED BY S@&iFcr's STERS ey
VL. TOROPOVSKY - KE SURTECT
Ata tre cutcoreak cfr” the War on Decemver 7, 1641, we DEAL
alesed up sy atation immediately, and transrcrted 211 tne could aif
yent to a vlace cf 3afety (tue Javanese never jot to anew cf gy p4e
retivity, abbaoutn trey. tad seme sussicions, ag I vas twice >
arrested sy the Jan tendarmerie and asked guesticus vaguely Zz.
related tc my wer. “owever, tue ca -anese nad no croecf, and :
couia gin HBCU oae 5 Sun Gees in seta instances 1 was released 5.
turcuca tae uelo cf “ovans and the Japanese laval attache's ia

cffice). * AWOLVED “WV RECRUITMENT.
BI As F Ora BY TapwAV-ATT CFA = Bt Dla t |

a Erie arrested sy ae Jendarner cn Deceaber
13, if4l., and gas celui veason to
ssiieve taat: ; : _ysether Er.
3eart <mew * ‘ god cf
January L:41, 2, (Ge See sent
residing in t wupplins Saou. fea noak) ame to 0 LM
gee Vr. 3aart AY eg VY Russian wno x seal ca tne ‘Cz,
cgavanese “avy wisted ne gee “nis regarding some work ne wanted ikea
mart to Je e.5 2 san wne wouls 4
Sar Cons secepted, I ar
, ad ..g This vcar-
: ad werk cor tuem on
his department in tae
os evacuated from

Jnoen Sgart asied lalanucvsxy who was ‘nis iussian he
ec to, lalancvsKky meres, 3216 “rould te surprised. Prem
satasred iaat 3mart aad scewn Jcvangs wefcre, cr, at least,
2 neard of aia. F ;
Savy oss AL / md
2er- AS

ae s Fa ene peepee rere cen secnemmentai atte cncayre prempmmgriti cts nnn sss

3 Na or. joove for ta yand nad remained in

er yy qesnangnal (ne WHS imerned 25 aren _2 ITISA) PLAN FoR USING
CHE MMA Chime we News ZL.
Sie Lye SVer, cao bint Peatecn C

> a
“nere ne aet Zovan , commander CHTANI (naval #3
Attache), and(uny TAusHii. ~ sistant.eThey wanted 3mart te
4nstall a receiving station fer them. Th atafion was required
to intercent_ news from the United States, and also to monitor

a — a el
vnlun

- mi Pt att) 5
Zkinz-S3an “#rancisco commercial telegrapn circui
a ag ne waa told, and ne and fT wersed tais gta+
“centas, until ne was repatriated 22 augue O4e.

, ee

for gix
3mart's

2
a330ciates and susericrs in tae - gv knew of this and had ne
colecticn (naturaliy, “e = a ¢Onsuited with them ore attemnpt-

ing te dc angtning;.

22
Fe R TAP-NAV-ATT-OFFO WESTERN -NAVACHALS
i SUBTEC TM ae TWIS AND OTHER
; when ne , ne to me tc "3 Wi tr 6 Na and 7)
sovans" and "keep my eyes and ears peeled". Jelteving that i Peeves
would continue werkinz on tne san Ling, we devised a means wneve-sav
ay Zaart eculd send sessazes tC ~< cver tue =ritish commercial 3
™isse neg327¢3 I was ts

nanazer of tne treat crtcern Telezrava tc., Zl Avekue MANE:
WIT, and mark them "FCR ste te EgigrarLey" is(xr) 3. 3.
408 Jastern SuncanS

.
Sos, eee Kars
Woy wees Cue SAMS CVALGi-w-

“Shancaai (ue wW

aay 318

rer]

to nis cirfice

and teid «6 tnat 20 24 sre rea was notuins 2 could de fcr
Shem, cut that tasy #cuid vey. + nine if any radic jot turned
—

\fter taat, “cvans weuld teienncne we now and tanen (on
the av o nce 3 } tines ne vould send se to repair
s radic 30% 3 his went on for almost 2 year
and 2 4 7 st 4n gsencol (wnat remained
Ci Ss 2 2 aie werksnoep at
nema, a wag caid frecuent
visits iv tne tsucavrsr: A io4e Io was ar-
regted and tne best cf Ay et aeiuding an. 2iucst
geaplste transmitter, * 2 1g accused me cr
guildinz: transmitters for Duuns : were compelied.tc
set me Svea anertly after my ott iled up Hovans and he-

ced + Fayal Attsene's oft ne wretecticn. I was

4 ae ae 2¢ 7 cade a “sclenn

ei oar “anti-e ayity". Later -cvans

told me tab two cen, Ved Econ 124 jiven the fencars-
eria infcrmaticn Loes 2 apicyed iy FaC3aT, “hans,
an AY CE 4 2d. c f salesman or Tur-
oa a3eat, ad lone oonsgideracle scusinesa vith
t: and is a 700d frieud cf ur. Sland.
2 cule cave learned cuite a lect abcut
cur tre-war activi 2abin 48 2 well ‘mown tendarmerie in-
former and needs uc Suction. lcta these wen Vere werain:
fer tne Cessfielc Aa. aarmeris.

saicé some mcre visits
re re aarece)

SQcesiys a Saeed:

During Secencer ifte, I was intreauced to Dr, PCKUEALS
sy “levans. FURURARa aad a radie taat was cut of order, and
: “ed me te wc cver and nave it repaired. This i did,,
Fuiunara assed se ardcut ail ay trcubles
nels nue jet cack my equiv-
4\t tne time I met Sukunar2,
oniecticn with evans,
a associate cr

3

?
wa

d se cver to his room in the

djnen Hovana aad calle
to #ukunara, ue told me the folicw-

tnay Hetsl tc send nse ever
3

Yvon and wr. 3aart were a ccuple of sunk vorkers!
wou Gian an tains te aels us. I set smart was spy-
inzt om us. adi wave ug durin; tae tiue you worked vas
a ict cf? premises and not air. cw we nave s san wane really
gets things dene. Tae aan is 4bs35Y.* why, just recently
& Se found out tuat a Zritish Jew by the name ee had a
radic transmitter in ais neuse, and was sendimg infcermaticn

cut cf 3hanvnai. Se save this information to me and I nad
TCH} Tut in Gridse Ecuse."

"TZUSHIMA ia very leased witn aAlessy, and Alessy 2as
‘seen jyiven a snecial >as3, i3 allcwed tc carr: a 3un, and
is issued jascline fcr als cars.” ; :

‘e435 ig woat vou could nave nad if you nad ztiven us
any infcgnaticn of cast sort."

ne.

277 ly
DS gcun ASessv 425 Acute du ccnsulat, apartoent 4a, Shenae oh
(3t. az AUSPEagntS)» anlecwn Li soUta america ag a |
“slackmailer. Jane te 3u0n*oes Edu and ias oeen
Rere most cr tne time. went to eniia in late iS41.
arrested there’ by 3. nutnorities and deoorted,.
went tc .anilla in 142, workins for vaps, have nc
: further particula By ch tnat mission. Op ee Se
Bhat wertrtiid. Fou fIeks ~. CUITNW 3 peg 7 -
ce vs ¥
I nad re treucle Presa 3 Téndarmérie until
asril 1545, waen ¢. 4gaLil came to ay 3 tuent, sealed up xzy
workxancen, cecufiscated acre equipment, and cck «me to tine Unicn
jack Club cranch cf tne Gendarmerie. Tnere taney accused me again
of building radic equipment for Ghunszking agents, and having a
short-wave set at home, but it was so built that it could be taken
apart in a few seconds, and fortunately it was dismantled at the
time when they made their searcn, and they did not find anything

suspicicus.
co;
3 wae loser iy

ise

ener gt EF AE EE ET NE ET EN

wee ays i: Pa wad a
Taey must .ave gussectss en
E

ee ux Weare. a
On 2@WS Lo Lae:

gince I of
rendarmeri

a

uw
2
S

AS $0cn 23 -: : acthner telephoned “ovans,
and ne azjain effected x7 “ows , i Vas pce allowed. tc
de any radio Work wats 2i ne: ny of the Naval Attacne
-an oglled se cver “cr ye tnen the. ‘excuse tnat
~ crag net allcweé te +e tever by the tendarmeris.

I ausnpected, and StLLS SUBUEOU, -2at all tae trouvole I

ad frea tne jendaraerie was races uy wile AaVy, 30 tnat I
veald rusn te them tne ainute they off ered me a joo, as there I

could zet some desree of ene eet lon. I aave no croor of tnis,
acwdever.

After tle of ~evans or any cr
tae Vlaval attac Sucy Were respensivdle
fer eli the tre: onditicn “was growing
werge, and 2c} ne radic cusiness.
2330, OUr as cue Freat wortherm
Telesras ste nad several ied
cress ie arose of financial aid.

aiessy, and-.after Listenins 2o 7

I sold Zovans ne Was 4 fake.
ttle nara in tne wav of ic

2 eiveé & teheguciwe call suprosedi;
2, ome re tue next day, as tnuey
Se Later found trat this cali was 4 yaue,
Zone it. The next fav i dronved in at tne
52 ané tolG Puluaara sac cevans avout it.
mm : fo) Ate Ucuse, aad wuat in case I was neid
a> there taey would tet xe oe ‘nen 7 arrived at Gridge House,
ne one there seemed to know bout the eall, and after questicning =¢
23 to ay Susiness tacre ane nae I nad acne, tney let me 30.

A few a Lever, ~ovess Seienacned 22 and said tnat trey
nad a san acing 3 heCiz. Penic ‘cPh, and tat 8 wad tcla them
Sost ag Could unccver Snunstin :-overated ragic 3taticaus in Shangaai
~itc some contraption se nas SULit. TALS wan tamned cut te ce

tag oil ie Maas aanding tae. Japs,
- es *

oped to dc Alessy a
ee liked alessy 38

Bice: fae) “ = ” a ot ee es t=
Sunart 244 2 (3G 40-25 ga Luternaticnai creos
an . a deem tut *

and aga trisa many;

nated. je were tudirectly
£3 tonuseguent jieport-

»egronsiols for ..4
aticn tusrefrom.

Mie next jaz Denice aciled ¢@ to ais orfice and told
se tnat I muat vers temetacer Whur aiessy, 2S vwney trusted me anc

mie “veri:

“sesie and uews @re7

to ycod

t.. tune Ja23 ge tnat ne
<?f jascilae, as ne seeded
ie: cit. I Hnow that ne
Oke anoti3Y Yrenchman oy
SLI+ tact wWita influential
fic

jnlsese ae of

on until Maren 1944, when

fais ,
q By avartment and told se

th. .
FOR

wad

Bal v1 4a group of foreisn

a _ 3 Yor ste te come as a

pay 2 t crint an assistant.

weg “ue k 2 me 50, Sut Hovans re-
pli t sed, 1 «oi the navy's protection"
waica cf ccurse mealit wore ane -crse treudle from the Gendarmerie.

I aid net near any more ascut tne proresed trip until
June, cut ia the ceantime....

Alessy came tc see uy cictaer ce day when I was out,
and teld ner-cf the murder cf a young Aussian which had cecurred
a few weeks defore, just cutside the tendarmerie at the Shanznai
american School on Avenue Fetain. He said that Hovans did it and
that the ycung man nad worked for Hovans before and had either
discbeyed or done something against him. He lightly hinted that

it eve oe ee Lo mse ef I 4isccered 4Ycovans. This was a story
ne cocked “27 3c that I would uct c2Puse te 3¢ te :anila, anda ai-
tacusn “new dit Was a cnéay scare stcry, AY cctnuer was Sener ee
soseat te gliicw :@ tc so. fe ee tan 23 eeer! reese £§  FEKOP OUT
ve Ab, a oo. Cee me
thes Bg; Seshstant arese, I imsed- »
rat zack, as ue Was tne only
ca ag i foresaw tnat any
el me and anyone I cculd as
ase? an sve cn we by the oapanese.
ts Beter 2h could wrvst
=, sini 3¢ Paindiy, at
: ee act Lu: v We were [01ns
Fo do in .aniaa, su.0 aituc Seeced _oaae ‘oF 1.15
ave¢ vill. say “frse wi 2 thet ‘was when I-
assed film-wc cone, sut-art st wee the Jans, 22
ceuld nct 72 u 1 B3y, ©: Jacs aigat
want us t : 2 vager there was ne 2
sa ores to enm ocean i SG: Cat 26 Laks
Si, Saas Ye oS uever reailised,

meet tll Nn. 7 Nepad, ,
- On June 7, 1044, a’Yap by ttre @ of
came to my apartment with a zendarmerie officer j

the seal from ny radio workshop. Ichijima worked : 2, fairs fay
attache's Off mye, thie removal o* seal was meant as a gest~

tre of "goodwill" /to me. T note here that this room had been
gealed since Aprifi, 1947, ané I wid aiven up tryine to get if _
open. he Courter wiry VT. ToReroy SKY ANP OTHER LEHNER
ar LC, ZS. IN SA gas f D IG cm
the sendarnerte Th Tr a 3s = te ;
Iechijima tnen aged me if I ras toing +o the Fhilippines with
them. I had heare of Hovans' departure 3 few days previous to
this, and I anewerea that I understood I was supposed to £0,

put no definite mention had been made me since the day I intro~
. oy §$R> duced Feter™{azak shima sometime in March. He asked me
Ril 4¢ Was prepared to zo the-next day, but I answered that I had

etl Ynot been told to make any prep ations and was by no means
a wel ready to zo. He then said that Pho deogpture could be put off
Clu" ¢111 June 10th, ant tole me to comberothe| Naval attache's office

eo RAD! on that 7ate. I notified Kazack, 2nd he ana Ll went to the
pen ay office on the next day to ask for some mont with which we bought
6 =z few things necessary for our trin. SHBIecr wired VE FoR opevsey

oe ee
WLS, COMA okie iN LLANICA >
nefore I go any further I wis o note an inveresting

; In the middle of Yay, 1044, my mother met an acquaint~
anee of her's who 35 quite elose to Uovans 28 her mother is an
actress who often acter with Hovans. Thie woman told my mother
that she had heard that lr. gmart had died in sngland, and that
ne had left ue 2ll hie money, ane that at nreeent a certain
lawyer (she Aafan't mention his name), acting through the Swiss
ned cross, was looking for us. This, of course, made wy mother
quite upset, but Tf tola her that it must te 4 lot of bull that
Yovans had cooked up.

incident:

On about Mav eOth, se received a Ictter from the red
sross to come and see Mr. ZaLE, the thairman. He told us that
he had received a telegram freém_ jeneva which read: "CaN YOU EXTEND
RELIEF FUNDS TO URS. 2. we. | ROFOVSKY." oa

this telegram must huve been arranged for by Mr. Smart,

ae ag by that time he knew that our finaneial situation was rather
critical. Mr. tale said that he was prepared to give us 4 eum
of money every month, snd that we cculd name the sum ourselves,
but shoulé te careful not to ask too much because the Japs did
not approve of the ved “ross hanéing out large sums of money to
its beneficiaries. Ee told us to come back a week later. My
mother went to see him after I left for ‘anila, and his attitude
nad undergone 2 complete crane. He sald that he could not let
us have any money =s there were no funes for us in geneva.

his wag a lis, I suppoce, because if there had not been any
funas, the telegram would not have been sent in tne first place.
Mow, more than ever, I am of the opinion that Novans or the

Jap Naval Attache's office had stopped tgle from giving us any
money. Proof of this is a ved 4ross letter which I have in my
voss#ssion, written by Mr. gmart, which reads:

"DEaR oLaVa, TaKE Cand OF YOUR MOTHER, GET GOCD
FRIEND TO GIVE YCU HONTHLY .LLOwaNCE, I SUPFORT
MY GUaRasTha BY MaGInG WILL IN MOTHER'S BENEFIT.
J IM. :

reached us in May 1944, Just when the rumor about Smart's ath
came out. we never received thia letter and did not know if its
existence until last month, when I read my name in the Pritish
Red cross list of addresses in the North thina naily News. It
is my opinion that Yovans, or the Jap Navy, had xnown of this
letterte existence, The word "will" seems to imply Jeath -

at least, that is now it struck me vhen I first read it. And
to anyone not too familiar with the ™ne@lish language, it might
have implied death all the more. I believe that this letter
was the orizin of the rumor of gnart's death, and that it was
withheld from us because we could have received money on ita
presentation at the treat Northern Telegraph ‘10.

This letter was dated March 1944, and would ae
e

I now understana that the favs did not want us to live
well, or to have any money of which they did not Know, as by
this method they could limit my activities. A man who’ has to
think of where he is going to get money to pay for tomorrow's
Aainner certuinly hus his hands tied, as far as doing any intelli-
gence work is concemed. :

ELI
Cn June 1Cth, Feter ant _J-eppeares at the Naval attache's
7 office, where we met Ichijima a Lojnikoff. It seems that Faul

had zissead-a. previous plane, und was soins with us. ye took off

from Nazang atyfield st noon that day. In our company there were:
’ Ichisima, PaukeLosnixof?, Feter Kazack, and mvsel?. Ye arrived

in Ta4nokl, Tormosa at Z.p.m. and were taken to the airport hotel, gi;

where we met some more of Hoyans' crowd: Dr. Flere“terni,. ct ie
. 4 Morihiko. pakami, Trancisco“Sarneiro, vrit eim, and 2 fellow ~|
Sek P by the y ele icy a AES at character is a
fellow ; : eritish fatrar, mu hers speaks

fs Td bee writ.
(ce 3222 rook

worked together, and ag they are both bums, they easily mingled

with the lower strata, and helped by Morriss' knowledge of the
sukien dialeet (Manila thinese speak Tukien dialect), and Tagallog,
hey made perfect stool-pidgeons. RE HS Ww, TAP

: : sey ~g 2 5 ‘ 48, AM SOAR 74
Ech Tranctacoarneiro an4 Paul ‘Lojnikoff wene_buddies4 é

always—Lived and workes together. I Khow nothing of Tameiro'e
activitiesinyshenghar, © I do know that 1
worked as @ purser on Pritish Vangtze Diver steamers. e
a wife and fon here In Shanehai. His wife fell in love with a
Tortucusse here ~ T believe he wag the Fortuzuese ‘tonsul in
shanghal, ghe divoreed carneiro ané was roing to leave Shanghai
yith this sonsul. As she wanted to take her son, the consul
ezlled carnetro and demanjed he sive up claim to his son. At
first warnetro refused, out later “inted that he would do so

for money. The consul, enraged at “~arneiro for being so cheap
and mereenary, flew =t him with his ‘ists. ‘arnelro pulled a
sun and fired, but missed. In the ensuing struagle, he was
Aisarmet and the colice were called in. Jarneiro was jailed for
attempted saurder, but I believe his sentence was light. I
understanc he has 2 further colic record, “ut I could not cub-

etantist> that. tb SM 2 ibedede fev Yepangsert 5. ais

MortnikolPpsc 04 45 an anerican-born and Amerfman=  /¢@L22.
aducated Japansse. His father is a-surzeon In neTaware
‘he prestfées In New vork City. He nas a brother who served in
the U, Ss. army curing the war. Takami is well built, stands
about 5'&", handsome, looks more Hawatian or Pilipino than
Japanese, is dark skinned, has a medium beard, and a squarish,
firm face. In 194%, ne married an Inéian Princess here in
Shanchai. “here was a swank y “éef=nony-warking the occasion
at the Fark Hotel. The marriaze was vlayed up 4t the time as a
sign of Info-Jan unity and friendship. The Little princess, I
unéerstand, is quit> 2 @al, and in Takami'’s abeence ran sround
the high spots with influential thinese, Jows, ste., object:
espionage, ghe had monev to ourn, and made no effort to hide
4t. In Manila, "akami cut°on the lone-wolf act. He worked —

alone and..waeanswerabl= only. to Ikushima and his superior,..—

sommanter sOYaMaA. sgovama waa a whiekxy-soaked, red-nosed playboy,
who Aidntt give 2 ¢ann ‘or the Javanese Yavy, and? Ikushima was
+h real cover tehin¢ the throne. after Yovans! tepserture from
vanila on Ausust ©, 1044, azxanti took over stool-vidszeons Fritz
and Morriss, and from then on they worked for him. They were
still working for him when we l=ft, on December 25th, 1944,

Chere gees Ddel Gyo Re wis WeRK WiTH TR te SY

O17: L8ER Lee? 2 vhaueabsli LGNP LA AME

aul’ Loinjkeff readed for tne
after xe afrived. 23 they aoved $2 the Avenue dctel (Rizal
ce all they had to do was go t9 the top floor, the "moyal
Roen", which was tne svankiest rlace in town at the time.
ee Lojnikof? “egan Beet naa 790-290 aves at girls, and one
made taenm “back was ate by the neme of Zspana de
Ge F. widal. She took a liking 69 Bs aul and from the very first
; neces we were in vtandle; she became hig steady flame. I doubt
La Taul knew woat 28 aS doing, out ne certaialy struck oil waen
} het tais jane. Ib_seems she Knew every man sorth knowing
/ tn the inilippine Islands. pall the way from Manuel -
hrougn e chie ; mila Constabulary, down through most
of the City mall over loré down to private business men such

j as Soriane (owaer af 3Sen/tiguel Brewery), Madrigal (owner of
-e La 2oma Lines), the AlLizelie DOYS, ang all the rest of
Insular s2eiety. ler @usoe 4 saened t2 b2 ac 2bstacl £0. her

\ in aer jaunts wits many 9f taese men
Sng uspassador verzas, and sne as
Lined mping sub greet young things ioe a ilats better families
-
u

. 0 and tatroduedag them to the "fata he country".
tr, Phe « AMANILA, PR,

This is what Log meade goe-goo eyes at, as he
sat at a table in the 2oye al foo. Eretty soon ae had Espanita
nanéins aim int “orpmation by/the rea. 3e was floeded wita
sheets typewritten in toe/bpest of Saglisnh. He didn't understand
half of xhat was ia teu but anyway ne passed them te Ikushinea.
No doubt the gaps were datisfied, beckuse Lojnikoff and Carneiro
were always full sf mogey, ip fact, t7€y flasaed around more
meney taan Hovans ever did. Zspanita » hin ta stay at aome
and seve nis strength (!) and that sae would 12 all the wark
for aim. Sune, of vourge, ia turn called on some other boy
j fo hers, ana gronensed nersell 29 say, ven rages
a

Saeeentee “ve e

troseaiss!7a $3 *Ea8
iy of Englisn ab @

= Jie
nat, 28 ae vas once Soaoae

tt Teas

ei t
LOE uni iversi Ley

‘aaats yauen for thic, <<

e Zhaly eapituleted on
ale) ¢ tut later “ss taken vut
cate PEs Sk informer for the Japs
‘ — - ’ camnemenmeienatatl areal a
on Ital ft z. > 39 not know of  e Ttalien in Changa2-,
saeciat OF penerrase, P27 és Spoken well 2f him. In the first
place, ae is 4 weakling, se tal nks only of ais own skin. Then,
ma is a qoward; © uen enile bevan $o 62 bombed in aarnest,
wee FRR AE LES (ott eee

ne aoved from nis r20m Acar
from the waterfront as possi
hoed of the city being bombe

nec
e.
2

sulavaré to a place as far
There sas very Little lixeli-

but na teek no chances. I1 can

say the same for Lojnikoff and Jarneire; they were living t90

well and could aot afford to die.
& grand shew, tie combiag of Mani

Kazack and I theught it was
la, and would be willing +9

go through it agaia ten times, just “sr the satisfactien of
Seeing nell licked »ut 2? the Jens. “we never saw the inside

of an air-raica iter in Manila
too interesting t+ aiss.

Ia Manila, Terni made ¢
be Italian, and severel otner people

- met went on in the sky wes

i
4

aes H ,
entact vito a DrMarseni, an
whose names I deAtt know, but

whem I could recoznise. Just what ne was after, I dan't know,
put I @e knaw that Dr. Varsoni ned traveled througa guerilla

territory in Bataagas one Semapines Morte provinces of Luzon,
and told me that he was in one town vnere there were at least

a hundred asericens and about 4 thousand Filipinos soldiers.

They had 2 radic installation Shere sith retary beam antennas,
ate., ind that se believed tais vas a contral statien for other
guerilla radio stations all over the islands. I de net Know
whether or not he passed this to the Jans, but there is more
possibility that did than otherwise. Terai and Nerseni tried

to find out if
ghort vave sets =
qigd, sac actually

acvavertars.
ste ve

New to set back te raia
know).s IT oould act fina vut a i

‘yarpe any reiio stores in Manila selling

Tasy agprvacned a ster2 woica
Ly 2 q7averter Trem them. I believe the

swoer of $ae sb7ra vas rut svay ia 75r4 tantiags, wanilats

aku (wetre still there, you

ying atcut tre ortwd at the

notel at the time, because they all esngregeted in one Troon and

sassed tue tine claying :eker. fete and I passed tne t

Beery

eal
talking and mekinge eves ab S12 notel cirls. ve werea't allowed
m 5

ri
Ww
sa)

sff the srounds, eitnqucs

Jap by

mi cad Worrisg went ta tewn and
42 cane offi®ubs, who was Ixusnice

rignt nand tan ia ere be, emer neaase cresucably aac left Shanznel
“ita Sovans and aad waited $4 Tataoku for tue rest of use ~ ‘ve
were to see much of Zud> later, tn wanila. Now and then one of

ena introduce aimselt. When

—- Tritz 4id sa, 46 a wewark thet there were "ten less ereeks
fn Shanghai”. “e + tered baat 2 714 net daubt it. Later, in
Vignile, 7 taut ta ig@ spoken t2 the Pormasan irive
af the tar went $2 syn, wile Takxani and Subo hed
2rocped ints 2 “Sat this iriver teld nin te Popes os
nated tae cars, o sia Gli Gael Post odd veare See: ees 12d
bean in Formosa, turer ‘sed cnoly brougat misfcortuaa gn the conman
» people. He said that the Fsrmosans aated their 2wn kind who
worked or the Japs, ans tret new and then tuese people were
mirdered by Parmesan patriats. He seemed ta trust Merriss when

/0

”
at

that ne had been ia

.

The next tay,
i, left for Manila, aac

1 but Laojnikeff, Ichijima, Kazack, and
fgllowed the day after that. Ne

sr
io bh

?

azriyad {4 lianile -a dune LEth, and were tazen t> 4 nause at
40€ .viles uur ses (Sn@ 22 ong & jnaangnei Eanx's campeund),
wiuere day in & nad Ais arters. This was the vesidence ef
iriraleAig AIDE, the J attacne in wzanila. He was under
iniralof., then eitre nGer, 32 vice-cammander, af the
Jap 3uthwest csaciZic Ve bad a fow wards with HIRaDE,

and we later learned thut he aad been the Jap Naval attache in
Rome. Later we were iatroduced +2 Commander seyama, Ikushima's
superier and running-dog f2r HIRAIDS. There we alse met Hovyans
and the crowd we nad mct in Taiheku. Takami dressed up in 4
sharkskin suit and headed for town. 5a did Lajnikeff and
Jarneiro, as taey nad slready arranged for accommodation at the
nVenue Fatel. They Lived tuere wit Hovans and ilsrriss. <A few
days later, lete and I were hustled aff to 4 house at the south
and of Daketa Street, where Fritz nad been installed. Living
ia the heuse as 4 sert af vatchman was fA, a petty efficer

working in the Menila Neval Px. I suppese he was & plant there,
fuat to keen an eve an us.

ea lived here “or tuo veers, isiag nothing and receiving
gaalary of 700 reses 4 aonta, “74i2h lasted absut twe weeks to pay
for aur teals. at shne end Wt suo weaks, we ware given @ bungalow
in waravillas © art, on zgark .venus, carner Ignecio Street, in
Tasay. Here we vane tnstelled with a cap by the name af Vash ide.
ie gat te like Yesnida, because ne seemed b> understand foreieners
ore than any of the .ther gars we knew, and always treated us
live a self appointed rapa. Se hated the guts sut af Tkushima.

Lf

Pas ‘as in cnarze of ta e Navy's listening pasts in
Manile “especially Shoee where «ser? oan- -born Javs were warking;
he was guardian .f Shess dans, as tney did act get aleng very ‘well.
_ with, and were alwavs sicxsd around by real dzed- ju-the weel =”
ipponese. Yeshidaa breugat in toree re ceive rs (Hellicrafters  _
Super Defiant and twe demmarlund “Super-rrs ts), und a dictaphene
set (never used it because it was aut of arder and we were ta2
lazy with the trogi cal scirit +f f2-it-tsmorrow te bother with
rerairs}, and 3 fuckeed ill ‘isx veoorcer, whieh we used mainly
for recsrding tae fit sercis.

Je told us t3 crey Cy treftfic fren VHM, « station in
Pert Darwin, australia, whica was used dy the U. o. Navy for

a

sending oréers ts all shins (NERK) in five-letter cade. Overy
night we cepied fer tvs hours (220C-0100 Item tin a) and then went
to bed. se weren't asked to 22 more, and we didn't try, either.
This statien sent for twe hours, stopped, ani started again later,
in the vee hours -f Shs noerning, but we never ©: othere1 to stav up

Mf

ne cme garner pie yg Tne ets agents EEE To

renner

tiat late. This went om vitasut jncident uctil sugust 15, when,
after a few visits ty straace daps, ‘Tashsts tald us that be es
very serry, but rnd Txusaica uad ordered us ta de meved ta 4
hsuse on Mabini Street, ater the corner of clense street, wiere
they nad a receivias statien run by ane 2% the pastardiest ef
Japs I have ever run oer ss ma syyed ta this place with aur
equipmeat, and there it was tad by 4 Jallicrafter Diversity
paceiver and a spiderwed oF antennas which were put up avidently

by Camewne Wes
turnsd 2ut

eieking

i
AIP I, as
us like ¢ag
up an sur feet,

end putt
writers

pad idsa,
Yashida,
t 41d ea

give us ¢€ Test

rauL oF

us wails

the crowd
left ilaniia on

sast).

‘anila by v. ss
pearing noise at

the garden, Loekd
aundred planes fr

{ons .

W as na ant ri

eeasbed ith @
ede back ie

ae?

evening gatt
a

25.

a5 thaucat he anaw
sy de sus bastard of 4

15 ar

hanghai man (Shinomure

les and saw

$3 oF si

after 2 We

ards.

W e antisze

aad 44 3s elves Ads
na ¢ 2 1 and

a

i sare St ais buastTul inoeeds
nd their activities. (
august ita, oersre
Then, 3

wae

owe
@

a

a

v

1. ae

aoe
i)
vs

oe

a Peed

ya » i?

cc
J ee ac
> bea i

a Lat abasut radie.
ound foo: tae first day
that we werked as lang as we ceuld stay
We played back ot them by staying up all night
ing @ll ths Teosivers fuil blast and nowniing en type-
erin that we werk

we nea important werk 63 G9 and kept it
Sie don't saliave their

then, didn't seen te mind.
sad, and nvw end taen he yeule

Wie We

r 20th 1944, cane tac first raid. an
nes. I was F
oqa noticed tnat

his sameene
Eby S=INOLURA. He began

A He and his assistant
watched

agise from Eangkek),

eenisss nights, Shimamura
maly te midnight

nerv2s ever
They began zing aut nigats and
Siet, we tarsught it aso 't &
zaid “te nell with werk.’

aculd set at least pie ceal 4

?
I f2rgs oa ta aention, tat Rael
»

aed by @ terrific
zete was Se bees
ran aut and saw slmest a0
So. and in Different. direcs-
fer en heur ar sa there
atipessed us trom ta2

“se went Up m the
b-ulevard and the bay.
sppins oembs fron

1 ed us that it “as
eakineg wued an ammunitien

yr faet. icmeke r3se

g a2:ntinued fsr ten

vag cart of the manceuv ;
Tian the eentancer sens

rushing in from a
tea oame inte ai

nad subsided,
rusned up and

-3
ug 69 listen in on ?
i

the snerzencr,
smuca an this 2
oy
2

©
a

with oall signs,

use a Gictiena
cersena lly
telapawmn?

he cuoket
a

Naw
while taey wer
pver Lacuna 42

in the af

or]

we
aoe

oO

ld us
is he din
eat

' 1. Takani
taia

rs
p, asking

cy ob lO

r

3

* we c3

ted then a 4475 ke, °.
uency. They iié nat talk

anc .izt-seaecd
rannel as it
only. Ve 32

io?)

aS
Hoe:

1 fut @ oe

Oo VHF, but we had ns
So waten 4478 ke &4 hours
76 ke very auch, and

ct be
by

roy)

ct

i}

.
ercht
peu

ct

is)
oma

enannel use
Ca tara Ai

an
wm iy t

)
i
xo
c
ct
XW yy ts
i]
eo
GS
'g
ke
Oo
wo
H
i]
hb
fs
fo]
ct
oO
ta
o
oO
=~
-
rs
a

i
oO
ea
o

abe
(You
a

Qa

t
awa nad t« write sut the nessages,
e
t

3

oS

”
ake!
a

o

H

m 69 .ur Jap “aperaters" whe had ta

har werd, and tuen these Japs, after

messages, weuld transmit then by

-ll tiis crece4ure taex up tine by

ayer cove these oo7° any ‘nfsrmatien

a tz be banbad, by the time tney
the vier was a rubble near.

tier 7 (by the Manila Hotel).

ry on

‘
&
exol
=
z
=

zr

ang then «2 ctld pick up signals from the planes
= still 15 minutes away, at tneir rendezvous peint
Zay, end we wauld tell the gaps that there was a
fins, Taey wault paone Hote, but H.C. would demané

ug ta tell them what the planes vere saying. ie weuld answer

that tue signa
aow the bell a
sy the tine 64

tbanbs vere fal

I realized hew

it w
the flames of

ls vere toa weak t> capy and taey would reply ‘well

9 yau knew they'rs veming, then" and -take-as action.
e nlenes cece clese ensuga +9 oe. read: 100%, the- :
ling. . This uappened sver aad over sgain. .Oaly then
stupid Japanese couli be.

sft Manila. On Ceteber
& lLandins semewhere

5 ve us end we almest

2 commander far thinking such "dangerous

ines taek place on Guluca the next cay,

shev said nething, and ~ 100 Leyte was invaded, they Said less.

ye
as fun t>

tnvasion

“Menila was t? be
‘Ne gat wird af

tnat they were gsing +
befere we actually laf
were told te cack an
24ta, we ware austled
quarters semewhere >
Nienols Field. at Nichals we vers ts hep an a truck which weuld
take us te Clerk Fisld. There was a let af squabbling ever whe
was geing te set aut first, army and navy men almest get inte 4
fight, until a Jap frem sur campany, UTSUNOMIYa, a scheel teacher
and a great breaker-up af sguubtles, ‘get ug en a Seap bex, made

a speech, and ta put it saort, we (Kuaack, myself, Ichijima,
Utsunemiya) get an the truck Zirst, and left the rest wf the buns
te scramble an us best they csuld. On the way to Clark, we

passed through several s.uu.ilil tewns, such as San Fernande, Angeles,
ete., aad Since we vere wearing Khaki clathes, all the Filipinos
airls alate the way threw us Kisses, thinking we were "americanes".
The Japs in the truck must have teen damned embarrassed, but they
Said nosthing.

take us back to Shanghe! absut twe days
: Sue nizht af December 23, we

s 2 seram. Un the merning af ths
nt? 4 car and taken te Air Cerps head-
r

We arrived at a small tovn on the sdge of Clark Field
and were given senething te eat there py seme Kind dap privates
and truck mechanics. Later in the eveiing we meved en ta Clark
Field and were given a placa t* sleep at Fart Statsenberg.
Slark Field was in ruins. The anly planes en it were jacked-up
dummies, Ral vlanes arrived after sundswn and teek aff before
sunrise. Thers were, however, 2 Sew fighters in revetuments under
the acacia trees, and seme fignter pilats were bunked in the same
bungelew with us. We nad ty claen on the flaer, under uesquite-
net tents, and our tnly bedclathes were a blanket apiece, our
cheice was ta fold the blanket and use it as a pillew, ani cen-
sequently freeze (it gets real c3ld in those hignlancs in Tecember)
or keep warm and Slisep sn a “seden flasr without a pillew - the
nth lagree of luxury, Nippenese style. Tas next morning tasre
yas na newe af a plane tar us s we just leafed cround. “Ve
esuldn't ge far becauss we vere -crnad thet very few Japs there
knew wae we were, and tuet of then Misnt nistake us for
American prissners.cnd ofat at abaut 10 a.m. the eir raid
Signal gun wentueff, end shettly after, tws calered a.4. puffs
revealed a flignt<of.5-24's end a whele degen ef F-58!s,..Bembs
We were t2ld-te get.inta a.faxhsle, but as ssen
as the Japs gst in theirs, we grt sut ts wateh the fracas A-
couple of seares vant up ana hustled round with a }-36, “Taey
eust ais Gown, tue plese coning cown in a fast pewer dive and an
explesien avout 200 yards from us. The F-3e's filet must Have
been bit wuen ne was up in the cuir. Tien, a ceunle af F-S56's sat
an the zerss' tail and ea
o

af about thirty Teet. «a
the fisld, they disappear
cut the Japs did avt.

ase
ter aswing tue grass and treetaps arsund
2d sver a low hill; the F-38's came up,

The sane act Was cut om the next day, gust after
Lajnikarf, Jarneirs and a sraup af Japs arrived. Lisjnikeff ond

oe

ry

a f3

cp TET

=

4)
ue}

fu cr ca
oo
Wy od

eh
Oo @

eo

Tetoo

Dw (FE ot
b
-
o
or

nba

#

drove ott

ya vere toile taet we were leaving sa2¢ aext
Bete WE WETC awakened, goat ine truck, anda
tne strip waere ur fp ane was parked. The * plane
tne

5-Q@ with all its seats, if
end altnsugn tier 5
Neto, UTSUAGKTT., and LYSSLE

and a pils t)

are it

iy epini or
- probably
quent ib

sala, as tae vaps are xnewn ts nave fTlewn larct
@ aetal wut of “gue Islands. »ls>, 2ur luggege

the steti:
were para,
Nerta cst,
with that,

people (fer the 1:
he styl?

3

Pp
ch oo be

of
rgoct

ss ue

' tuat teek Lo
: banned taz us
gasoline.

wailed BeN $

for es
fu be
cs

- & &
bs ct
 &

Had MH

ees

a shelter, and clanied
much xf ties but we
acre ofan, and wita
not knew the nanes +f
fanile, and I underst24d
na eawapany ves a jepanies?
sf Ikusaizats, whe was
sffics om Aviles street

eleven 3dd passengers (PETZ,
, plus a few Lew ranking »fficers
allowed ta taxe absard anly . nat we cerricd
g9, the plene acted 4s targa it had 4 1¢avy
wag running -2 duran fusl, but it is

carg? Sea was full of somebning very

1

ylatien, and fleering ripped
re were anly +
?

aerss soarertzent, but keot in the cabin

ei at Tavaa, 7-74988 in a Little aver 7eur
tier? was pretty vell canged up, and 2 naticec
agars that LoA net been nit.
te Takxad Tora yaireut, and at the parber
en a crowd that we fait like a sideshaw.
an on & sear=nex aad yell "“durry, hurry, hurryccc,
vad, Tne "police! vas in the torn of :
Lieutenant, © wae iispersed the orevd with
- & 228t ae Pantizs | eans. he then Soak us 63
yey o3Ker 1S hae ean questiens ef where
“wape our grendrarents and nad wa been %9 the
why 29b after taey aad gotten tareugn
s nev zeta us t2 give eur aninisn of the town-and tie
seal paper), and painted evenrelts up ia
fting reliticiens. z

Satel viere ve Bad 4 eped meal
a ciret tine 7 ate ts aur satis-
at nignt we zat 30 onared tie "Termsse
nours tea 69 tas 150 miles te Tainexu (she
¢ wf plants botween bis twe gities in srder
In Taiheku we were taken ts the rd airrpert
aye? ci tie way dawn, but the gendarmerie
eivisabie t9 uav" foreigners se near the
4 D2 Spies, 27 oe were moved ba tae rail-
city. fas ctef? thers: vere given tnstructiens
tae Duildine, out Later we recaived a pnons

cell from INUSHIIi4, wna was taiting fer us in Taineku, te

come over ta ais astel, just areund the corner, There ne

handed us a line abeut new grateful ne wes far sur werk, and

that fran cow on he weull te sur friend until he died (I wsnder
new long tuat will be). He caid we could have anything we wanted
when we we just nad ta ask hin (we enly had trs
days in whicn ta asic decause 1 Left Shangnai fer Tekye

the next day after sur arrival there. Vary smart, I say.)

The next -nerning we toek a plane ta Shanghei, and when
we arrived et the Uaval Eursau and phaned uy mether, I feund
she had nat sven been tald that we were due.

absut a week leter, Ladnikeff.end the rest arrived.
Tajnizef? speke af the horrible days at Clark Field, with all
the beubing. iete and I c2uld nave taken tvs more weeks af it,
because it was fun t 2 waten.

Lejnixeff immediately began tarewing perties and gather-
ing up all ais-girls. He brought 4a leac of industrial diamends
with hin from Manile, where ne bought then fer next te nethings.

We affered ta buy sone fear us, but the Japs wauld net give us acy
moaney.

week after our arrival in Thangual, reter and I feund
gursgely2s end our families in a worse Pinanecial state than we
were when we left. The Jars put us te werk et a raule verxshep
they ned om the tap flour of taeir builcing at 27, The Eundi.

My salary was 50,000 and azack's 50,000 at tae start. Wwe werked
there a aenth, waen suddenly Ikusnise came back frem Tskys for a
spell and installed us in a receiving statien, with ICHIJILMA as
yur superviser., “ICHI" later turned sut te be a swell fellew,
samething lize Yeshida sad been in Manila (I ferget te mentien
taat Yosrida was xilled in the first raid en Manila, at least,
waocare $914 59, Se may lave been removed, as he ves tee nice
ta us). :

Hare we worked straight, witasut any further incident,

until sugust ef this year, ‘hen Japan capitulated. We ned just

’

absut given up all eur henes, as we were farced to keer a 24 heur

a day waten, ang vie nad iiviced up cur time ts %4 hours sa0n, as

by tais methed we cvuld wrk 24 asurs, sleep le, and have l2 free.
Ih this free 12 teurs I varked as a sareaze aechanic, as 2ur salar-
jag wert pitifully evall in cammarisan tr the sver-growing prices.
It got se bad taat at tines tuere was nething to eat in the heuse,
ang my metaer nad to sell all ner-jewelry except for ner wedding
ting. Alsa, we wers warned Spoon t0TO (Jaen Faval Attaske's Office

wae wes ICTIIMA'l superior intafteirs dealing with us, that ve
were nat te attempt to ie eny business »f the buying and selling
variety, a3 that “culd “put us ¢

st
i3

's oantaat vith tae many peasple”".

/G ee

le es. tet»)

By July, taings cet <% bad, tnat after sansulting vith IcHI,
we asked YAMAMOTO te disaiss us. Iceni nad premised te get us
a jebd with better pay, as he knew many ef Shanghdits Jap
business men. ‘aea Yamanete heard this, he get very upset
and rather angry, whereupen I tald nim hew disgusted I wes.
with the whele waval attacne's effice, and hew I still remembered
the dirty treatment we received in Manila. Ts that he said
gemetning te sae ettect shat if ae hed knawn we were ef such

an epinien, he vauld net save "hired" us in the first place,

ana that further zeatien sf .wanila te nin wae unnecessary as

it was “gene and fergetten". I said that I was willing te

ferget but not fergive, and he almest burst aut crying, saying
that I sheuld net speak ef the xanila trip in such & manner, as
ne nad lest ais best friend (Subs, whe remained in Manila with
Takami, Fritz, and Merriss) en that trip. He said that he weuld
avrange 7o0r aur 2tsmissel immediately, but nething was done absut
4t ac far as I knew.

vinen Taran capitulated on August 12ta, we were teld
te burn all eur papers ang recerds (we tried te save sene ef then
#“sr an accasion Like this ene ere, but esuld nat because ICHIJILA
hat supervised the burning.

A beg

EN CL-/
