RTA


4 Le
Loe!


‘NSC BRIEFING . 5 January 1961


CUBA


I. Castro regime reacting defiantly to US break in relations,


A.


Castro calls US move "another step in aggressive preparations"
which are bringing world to brink of war.
— thal

1. , Cuban press unanimously echoing Castro, reaching new
heights of invective, .

ae CUBA Chose Crechoclovakia to hawdle ReEFAIRS (he U.S.

Bloc comment charges break is proof of US aggressive intent,

continues to warn that Cuba has powerful friends which"will

not andes her'', but no specific threats made.

1. On eve of break in relations, at Cuban embassy reception
in Moscow, Khrushchev said "US is pursuing an extremely
dangerous policy by trying to Suppress Cuban revolution",
but continued vague in pledging Soviet support, saying
only "Cuban people can always rely on aid of Soviet people,

News of US break treated as flash item by Latin American media,

but comment took no predominant line and officials generally

reluctant make statements,

1. In Peru, which broke relations 30 December, one paper
headlined: “Number one power in world follows Peru's
example," Prime Minister Beltran's paper also strongly
endorsed US action.

Chilean foreign minister told press that he saw no reason


for Chile to break with Castro under present circumstances,


Colombia, Venezuela, Uruguay, Honduras, which had been
considering breaking with Castro, may hesitate to follow
US action closely for fear of being labeled US lackey by
Opposition.

Leading Brazilian newspaper called US rupture with Cuba
worst crisis in Pan American history; urged other Latin
American nations to seek solution and not merely follow

US example, since they would then be "acting as a satellit


Our source reports that Panama will declare Cuban ambassad


there persona non grata within next day or so,


Mexican foreign minister told US Embassy 4 January that he

agreed US could not continue in Cuba with only ll-man

embassy. He added it now most difficult to influence

Cubans back into American family; said Cubans will need

Aasty Corr—LAc »

"a little bit of outside help" to solve thefr problem,
Latin American Communists and front groups urging increased
popular support for Castro,

1, Uruguayan Communist party on 3 January issued "ardent
appeal" urging Uruguayan people to "rise up in defense of
Cuban people,"

Argentine University students publicly warned 3 January

that "a second front will open up in the streets" if

aggression is perpetrated against Cuba, according to Cuban
press service,

Canadian government sources reported by press saying Canada's

relations with Cuba will continue uninterrupted.


-2.


Jean Paul Sartre, formerly a useful Castro apologist given
special treatment by Castro on recent visit to Cuba, reliably
reported to have told a friend recently that Castro has "gone
mad" and Cuban revolution has been betrayed.


Within Cuba itself, break in relations reported to have dampened


earre cad - ;
spirit of (opposition groups .\ hope. Lippe Gas Cor see
A. Intend to lie low next few days and see how Castro goes about
carrying out his threat of extreme repression,
Be See need henceforth much greater security and careful planning,
No evidence of imminent Cuban move against Guantanamo base but...
Cuban ambassador in Mexico said 3 January that Cuba will
present "petition" to UN "to have the base eliminated,"


Since 31 December reveal close


Cuban surveillance of base, identified


"Enterprise B", and Cubans apparently monitoring uncoded base


communications,
requests for
agreement for ambassadors from Bulgaria and North Korea to Cuba,
A. Four bloc embassies already in Havana~-Soviet, Chinese Communis
Czech, and Polish--have, with associated trade missions, more
than 100 people there,
1. This in addition to over 200 economic and military tech-
nicians.
Embassies of five more bloc countries recently recognized
by Cuba-~Hungary, Rumania, Albania, North Vietnam, and
Mongolia~-may be set up shortly. East Germany is only
bloc nation still not formally recognized,
pee


Soviet bloc military equipment Still arriving in Cuba,


with four shipments in last days of December and more


probably en route,
