Prospects for Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013618, dated 3 April 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013618).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Lu

NIE 93-65
12 May 1965

. oe

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the ~~
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf es

12 MAY 1965
Approved jor Release
Date wba 109 va
7

he i as of the Depart.

_ Director ‘of the Nonenal I Seurty Ageey.

eee b-

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 93-65

(Supersedes SNIE 93-64)

Prospects for Brazil

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE, PROBLEM) osscceheoen Ohad ee ok de FYE Dn Rad oe etek 1]
CONCLUSIONS.’ «26.4 nessnce atone ee bet ee OE Se ee eee ae. 1
DISCUSSION? \..csu tech tioteeeh anid toe plea Mare ledeaws (ltaek aod pated ated desea hiowart 3
ds INTRODUCTION: eee ichs cet so Saney teak be Re ep sek 3
II. THE POLITICAL SITUATION |... 00000. e ec ccc cena 3
Character of the Regime .......... 000. ccc cece eee e ener eea ee enees 3
Constitutional Aims 2.2.0.0. ee eee cent ecennns 4
Military DUPPOMC. a feidreahcaunt dcexat teste meebo d alte oe col cad 5
Political Problems 2.1... cece cee ee eecnveeaees 5
III]. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION ...... 0. ccc ccc eee eee ee nees 8
Goulart’s Legacy .........- Berd aces Sees See ee eet ee ere eee 8
Castello Branco’s Program. 2... c.iccu ved eues eden ee ees eee vee ot 8

IV THE OUTLOOR® © cct8 6s ead éhe Aaah eee coe eden Ses ta enhance Lee 10
Economic: Prospects: vo .c sick yaya GU due tae aaa sa wae Aiton ese dy 10
The Course of Political Developments ...........-0.6.2.000 000 -0e. .. Ii
The: Question of Bléchions: xisacicsauedoxevae he iad 13

PROSPECTS FOR BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To assess the character of the Castello Branco regime, and to esti-
mate Brazil's political and economic prospects over the next year
or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. The Castello Branco government has provided responsible and
effective leadership, reversing the movement toward chaos of the
Goulart period and making an impressive start toward reasonable
solutions of Brazil’s many problems. President Castello Branco com-
mands, largely on his own terms, the strong support of the military
establishment and the cooperation of Congress. This has enabled
him both to preserve the qualified constitutional system imposed by
the military after Goulart’s removal and to press ahead with his pro-
gram of major reforms. (Paras. 1-11)

B. So serious and basic are the economic problems inherited by
the Catello Branco government, however, that despite its determined
efforts improvements can come only slowly. While attempting to
bring Brazil's hyperinflation gradually under control, the administra-
tion is also trying to prepare the way for rapid economic growth and
meaningful social reform. Its accomplishments so far have fallen
short of its aims: it could not prevent a small decline in the economy
in 1964, and its goals of relative price stability and vigorous economic
expansion by 1966 are probably already beyond reach. Nevertheless,
it has achieved much in correcting the worst imbalances and has set
the stage for a significant reduction of inflation and a respectable
rate of economic growth. (Paras. 17-27)

C. Popular discontent is likely to increase over the next year, pri-
marily because all elements of the population are feeling the pinch

a 1

ea
Ay CAYENNE

BRITISH
®
URNCH

VENEZUELA
{ SURINAM Lote

Boaora}
COLOMBIA . S ~tae"
! — Vista

GUIANA

5) Ss : r
IRBORAIMAY

Ve
ake

_BOL I. Vv
Santa Cruz

nN,
sSuCRE :

\ Oo - Bien am,
i

A,
PACTFIO
OCEAN

i capital
¥ ‘ only)

ih

yauraveg

: teteene'
PARAGUAY

oe
\ sid

de e'gunt

mn

ee ¢

antot re
}
r

\

ne

Bae ¢

'

BRAZIL i
/

.
1 :
: “
Lagan 7 ,
~

2
far Chigarne

yy
ssn?

; © @srntiaco

51138 3-65

DistRit
FEDERACS

Gormiag

ve Teumaet sg : . fo}
Nn. arc:
Ot

“t “tos Prtos

‘
f
URUGUAY Sir
Sa
MONTEVIDEO
ae

Penedos de Séa Pedio e Sé0 Paulo
{0°S6'N, 29°22'W), @ possession
of Brozil, are not shown within

the limits of this map.

BU

i
Fortaleza i

oR

Fat
Hier Tesveery

ROCAS FERNANDO

x I
CEARA ARIO GRANDE DE
DO NORTE NORONKA

kee v a Bate
oe p aRai is 5 Ag odo Pessoa
Cy

- Cee
N4auBide Recite

\
MARANHAO © \
ae

atta 5

Paulistana

%

A nteg

Li,

ares mon,
ae -
poy CN als>

Puaporag
A

ent
Gi ¢ £7
| E A! S Y esPinito

@rorrnte- 4 ANTO j
Vitoria H

!

i

PauUuof{ Oe
ees:
Sis W/ PBE IANEIRG

i

t

;

sorurely |
1

i

19 ~Niteror
de 5 GUANABAR
A

BRAZIL

—=esem— [nternational boundary
~———~-— Estado or territ6ério boundary

National capital
Estado or territério capital

Paulo

riandpolis

Pp
Fie

400 600 Miles
600 Kilometers

WE:
of the regime’s austerity program. Because the regime’s integrity
and authority are widely respected, however, this discontent is not
likely to precipitate a major challenge to political stability. Over the
next year, leftist extremists will probably try to carry out sporadic
sabotage and terrorism, but their capabilities are limited and Brazil's
security forces will almost certainly be able to handle any threat they
may pose. The so-called hardline groups in the military are likely
to attempt to coerce the President occasionally, as in the past, but
such pressures will almost certainly not threaten his overthrow or

even force him to reverse his essentially moderate political policies.
(Paras. 12-16, 28-34)

D. There is, of course, a potential conflict between the regime's
determination to ensure the continuation of its program and its desire
to hold presidential elections as scheduled in November 1966. To
ensure continuation of its policies through an electoral victory, the
regime will probably seek to form a combination of political machines
at the state level that can “deliver” the vote. Castello Branco would
be the strongest pro-regime candidate. Although he has so far flatly
refused to run, there will be considerable pressure on him to change
his mind. In any case, we consider it likely that the election will be
held. (Paras. 36-39)

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

1. By the time of the overthrow of the Goulart regime in April 1964, Brazil
had been driven close to the edge of political and economic chaos. The con-
stitutional system had been rendered a shambles by President Goulart’s in-
competence and irresponsibility, by the growing power of leftist subversives,
and by corruption and factionalism nearly everywhere on the political scene.
Economic development had all but ceased; the country was threatened with
runaway inflation at home and collapse of its credit abroad; and political disarray
had intensified a multitude of social tensions.

2. In these circumstances, the military leaders of the coup against Goulart
defined their action as an authentic revolution and decided not to relinquish
power to civilian politicians until the foundations for national recovery had
been laid. But after some debate they concluded that a system of qualified
constitutional rule would prove more suitable for this purpose than an outright
military regime. They thereupon chose for the presidency General Humberto
Castello Branco, their most highly regarded colleague, and decreed an “Institu-
tional Act” to arm him with extraordinary powers vis-d-vis the rest of the political
system.’ Congress preserved form, first by electing Castello Branco to serve
out Goulart’s unexpired term (to January 1966), and then by amending the
constitution to extend this mandate until March 1967.

Il. THE POLITICAL SITUATION

Character of the Regime

3. As the executor of the 1964 revolution, Castello Branco’s regime is pledged
to set Brazil back on a course of national development and to prevent a return
to power of those politicians who had created a situation that the revolutionaries
found intolerable.” Within this general mandate, the military establishment has
granted Castello Branco a virtually free hand to forge an overall political strategy
and to work out specific measures. On matters of broad national policy, the
President has turned for counsel primarily to a group of senior military comrades

"The military’s Supreme Revolutionary Command, which exercised the real power of gov-
ernment immediately following Goulart’s removal, imposed the Institutional Act upon the
1946 constitution in the name of the revolution. The Act empowered the President for a
period of 60 days to cancel the mandates of elected officials and deprive individuals of their
political rights, and for a period of six months to remove members of the bureaucracy and
the armed forces without regard to tenure. It also gave the President special powers through
January 1966 to speed up and control the content of congressional legislation and constitu-
tional amendments.

*Many supporters of the revolution trace the responsibility for Brazil’s problems back to
the rule of Getulio Vargas (1930-1945, 1951-1954) and his political heirs, conspicuously
including President Juscelino Kubitschek (1956-1960) as well as Goulart.

Ss all 3

with whom he had discussed Brazil’s problems over many years. On problems

of economic strategy and policy implementation, he has sought principally the
assistance of civilian technicians.

4, During its first year in office, the new regime has made an impressive start
toward reasonable solutions of national problems. Castello Branco has con-
centrated his efforts on three priority goals: modernization of the political system,
making maximum use of constitutional processes; maintenance of strong military
support as the current bulwark of the revolution; prosecution of economic re-
covery and reform programs to forge a basis for broader popular support.

Constitutional Aims

5. As one means of bolstering constitutionalism, Castello Branco has empha-
sized the civilian aspects of his government. He has played down his military
status,? has appointed civilians to head all but one of his nonmilitary ministries,
and has generally prevented flagrant interference by military officers in political
affairs. He has pursued a moderate course with respect to the rest of the politi-
cal system, using with restraint the special powers granted him by the Institu-
tional Act. He has permitted Congress—following the purge of about 10 per-
cent of its former membership on charges of corruption and subversion—to
exercise considerable independence of action. The federal judiciary, at Castello
Branco’s personal insistence, was exempted from the purges and has slowly been
resuming its traditional primacy over military courts. Seven of Brazil’s 22
elected state governors have been removed from office since the revolution,
but those who have survived and have shown a general willingness to cooperate
with the regime have retained their usual prerogatives.

6. By deeds and words, Castello Branco has left no doubt that fully constitu-
tional government must be limited by the overriding need to achieve the goals
of the April revolution as embodied in the regime’s program.* On several oc-
casions—such as his insistence last February that his personal candidate be
elected President of the Chamber of Deputies—Castello Branco has not hesi-
tated to intervene directly or to exploit his considerable influence. His military
support and political skill have enabled him to avoid open confrontations between
the requirements of the revolution and those of constitutionalism on most occa-
sions. Even when there has been a showdown, he has achieved his immediate
objective without violating constitutional form, because the political groups repre-

* Although he chose to retire from active military service, he retains reserve status as a
marshal.

‘General Golbery do Couto e Silva, one of Castello Branco’s closest personal advisors, has
emphasized that there must be progress in the regime’s program in the economic, political,
and social areas before there can be a further reduction of military influence. Golbery feels
that military participants in past Brazilian crises got out too quickly without making necessary
changes in the political and economic structure, and that, as a result, further military inter-
ventions were required. He declares that the Castello Branco regime intends to return Brazil
to civilian normality—but only when the country’s political and economic affairs have been
put into reasonable order.

a i

sented in Congress understand that failure to support Castello Branco would risk
the imposition of an outright military regime.

Military Support

7. In the Brazilian military establishment Castello Branco is widely respected
for his integrity, courage, and intellect. Since taking office, he has frequently and
effectively presented the case for his policies to various military audiences. He
has also used promotions and transfers to move officers sympathetic to the
regime’s views into key posts and to remove potential oppositionists. In this
the President has had the firm backing of General Arthur da Costa e Silva,
the Minister of War, whose authority is respected throughout the armed forces.
Castello Branco has thereby commanded strong military support for his policies
largely on his own terms.

8. Pro-Goulart officers were for the most part forced into retirement under
the Institutional Act and have presented no challenge to Castello Branco.
Various participants in the revolution, on the other hand, have raised strenuous
objections to the regime’s moderate policy toward the old political order. Cer-
tain of these so-called hardline groups pose no appreciable threat; they exist
primarily to promote the political ambitions of congenital plotters, such as
Admiral (retired) Sylvio Heck and General Olympio Mourao Filho. Poten-
tially more troublesome to Castello Branco are certain loosely-knit groupings
of younger hardline officers (captains through colonels). These officers appear
to be motivated primarily by revolutionary zeal rather than by political or per-
sonal ambition. They have not directly challenged Castello Branco’s leader-
ship, but have sought to force the regime’s hand on certain policy issues.

9. To date Castello Branco has done well in containing these pressures, limit-
ing the political influence of hardliners for the most part to local security matters.
On occasion, however, they have been able to win over to their point of view
the bulk of the military establishment. Many influential officers, including Costa
e Silva, although loyal supporters of the President, are very sensitive to the
possible subversion of the revolution by oldline political forces. At times, these
officers have joined the hardliners in declaring an issue a crucial challenge to
the revolution. In some but not all of these cases, Castello Branco has given
in, at some cost to his prestige among civilian political forces. His primary
concern has been to avoid any major split in the military establishment and
the loss of its strong support for his overall policies. Such considerations were
probably paramount in his decisions to purge ex-President Kubitschek under
the Institutional Act and, after his purge power had expired, to oust Governor
Mauro Borges of Goias from office by means of the constitutional, but infre-
quently-used, device of federal intervention.

Political Problems

10. The relations of the Castello Branco administration with Congress so far
have produced benefits for both sides: the Executive has gained legal sanction
for nearly all of its far-reaching program; Congress has gained stature as a

.. 5

responsible, do-something body. During most of 1964, however, the administra-
tion enjoyed the formal political allegiance of only about one-third of the mem-
bers of Congress. In practice, therefore, Castello Branco has had to cut across
the entire political spectrum to seek majorities on an issue by issue basis. His
success stems primarily from his prestige, the lobbying skills of his chief legisla-
tive advisors, and the prudent use of the very considerable powers of the
executive.

ll. In February 1965, Castello Branco formed a congressional bloc, now
called the Parliamentary Renovation Bloc (BPR), to ensure more reliable
political support in the Chamber of Deputies.? He apparently had become
concerned that oldline political loyalties would revive as the impact of the
revolution faded and interest in the 1966 presidential election intensified,
endangering the passage of the remainder of the regime’s legislative program
and its ability to influence the outcome of the 1966 election. So far, 206 mem-
bers of the Chamber of Deputies have joined the BPR—a slim majority, but
sufficient to have secured control of nearly all key posts in that body.* The
President apparently is using his prestige and patronage to attract other Deputies
who have so far remained on the fence and to wean members of the Bloc
away from their old party loyalties.

12. The BPR is a congressional bloc, not a national party organization. As
state and national elections approach, the regime has an increasingly urgent
need to develop some form of electoral organization capable of getting out
the vote in support of favorably disposed candidates, all the more so in view
of the present unpopularity of many of its measures.

13. In contrast to initial enthusiasm for the overthrow of Goulart, dissatisfac-
tion now exists at all social levels. This results from the administration’s un-
precedented demands for economic austerity and discipline, and from its never-
theless slow progress toward the control of inflation and economic recovery.
The privileged classes (upper and middle income groups) are disappointed
in their expectation that the removal of Goulart would dispel their principal
problems and frustrations. That they find themselves called upon to bear
higher taxes, tighter credit controls, and closer regulation of business practices
is a continuing source of disenchantment with Castello Branco. The poor, for
their part, tend to feel that it is they who are called upon to bear the major
burden of the administration’s program and that relief for them is neglected by an

’ The formation of organized blocs of like-minded members from several political parties
is a longstanding Brazilian parliamentary practice.

“The National Democratic Union (UDN), formerly the leading anti-Goulart party and the
mainstay of the regime’s official support during 1964, has 93 members in the Chamber, 87
of whom joined the BPR. The Social Democratic Party (PSD), which had cooperated with
Goulart and has maintained a position of “independent cooperation” with regard to the
Castello Branco regime, has 119 members, 48 of whom have joined. Goulart’s Brazilian Labor
Party (PTB), which has taken a stance in opposition to the government but not to the revolu-
tion, has 113 members, 23 of whom have joined. Ten minor parties have 84 members, 48 of
whom have joined. A BPR has not been formed in the Senate, where Castello Branco has
had strong and consistent support.

6 wa

unsympathetic government. For the most part, however, this general discontent
has not developed beyond the grumbling stage and the regime retains con-
siderable respect for its integrity of purpose.

14. The administration has recognized that the alienation of the public could
upset its economic and political programs. Although Castello Branco at first
appeared to scorn suggestions that he try to “sell” these programs to the public,
of late he has been making an effort to explain them as necessary to correct
past abuses and achieve future benefits. It is difficult, however, to sell austerity
and discipline to the Brazilian people. The poor are unable to understand
complex economic calculations; the rich are too cynical to comply. In a politi-
cal showdown, the more progressive economic interests are likely to appreciate
that the administration’s programs are to their ultimate advantage, and that
there is no satisfactory political alternative. However, strong and _ positive
popular support for the regime is not likely to develop unless and until it
achieves some evident and substantial progress toward economic recovery
and social amelioration.

15. The government’s relations have been particularly strained with organized
labor, formerly one of Goulart’s strongholds. Traditionally the trade union
movement in Brazil has been controlled from the top through government sub-
ventions and patronage; under Goulart’s rule, Communists and other far leftists
gained a position of predominant influence in the labor union hierarchy. The
new regime moved quickly to purge extremist labor leaders and to name federal
interventors to take over control of some 400 unions. Its problem now is two-
fold. There is a dearth of pro-government labor leaders sufficiently capable to
control their unions without continued government intervention, and the rank-
and-file tend to believe that the regime’s policy of wage discipline is forcing
them to bear a disproportionate share of the burden of economic recovery. Be-
cause the government fears an immediate return of strong extremist influence
in the unions, it has been slow to withdraw its interventors and permit free
union elections.

16. The government’s relations are also strained with intellectuals generally
and with students in particular. In the immediate aftermath of the revolution,
many leftist extremists were purged from positions of influence in university
faculties, student organizations, the press, and other communications media.
Some left-leaning intellectuals innocent of subversive intentions were also
harassed, but mostly by local and state authorities bent on personal retaliation.
At present, the regime exercises no unusual restraints over the press or over the
personal liberties of intellectuals. It refuses, however, to permit student organi-
zations supported by government funds to participate in political activities.
The students are free to form their own action groups, but even many moderates
among them resent the fact that they can no longer enjoy their traditional sub-
sidies on their own terms.

qe: 7

Wee:

lil. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

Goulart’s Legacy

17. President Goulart inherited pressing economic and social problems when
he took office in 1961; through his demagogic policies and inept rule, he quickly
made them worse. During 1963, his last full year in office, the price level rose
by over 80 percent,” payments on foreign debts were increasingly in danger
of default, domestic and foreign investment declined, and economic growth
all but ceased. Gross national product (GNP), which had risen at an average
annual rate of six percent for over a decade, increased by less than two percent
during 1963, thereby falling behind the three percent population growth rate.
Thus, while Goulart’s political agitation raised the expectations of the down-
trodden majority of the population, his economic mismanagement depressed
their living conditions still further. Finally, during the first quarter of 1964,
the pace of economic deterioration quickened alarmingly. The price level shot
up at an annual rate of 140 percent and various forces were set in motion that

would probably have forced the rate higher as the year progressed.

Castello Branco’s Program

18. President Castello Branco placed his economic ministries in the hands of
men noted for their technical competence, chief among them Planning Minister
Roberto Campos, and charged them with devising a program to repair the
wreckage left behind by Goulart. The program they developed represents a
serious attempt to cope with Brazil’s problems; the President has given it top
priority and steadfast backing. Although it contains plans for recovery of
rapid growth rates and for structural and social reform, its major emphasis is
placed on the urgent task of bringing Brazil's hyperinflation under control. In
recognition of the limitations imposed by political and social considerations, it
provides for a gradual braking of inflation over a three year period. For 1964,
its goal was to hold the rise in prices below 80 percent.

19. To this end the regime launched a concerted drive to slow down the
three main engines of Brazilian inflation: budget deficits, bank credits, and
wage increases. It was able to reduce the 1964 budget deficit below that of
1963 by 25 percent in real terms.* Tax revenues were boosted substantially,
but budgetary expenditures remained at the 1963 level, largely because of the
government's unwillingness, for socio-political reasons, to discharge large num-
bers of unneeded employees, or to raise substantially the unrealistically low
rates charged by government-owned utilities. The government reduced the
volume of bank credits to the private sector in real terms, thus forcing business

* Data on price increases in this estimate are based on the cost of living index for Rio
de Janeiro.

§ The regime’s achievement may also be expressed in terms of the share of budgetary ex-
penditures covered by revenues: 73 percent in 1964, compared with 65 percent in 1963, and
only 53 percent during the first quarter of 1964.

8 wa:

firms to finance an increased share of their costs from their own resources. It
forced the elimination of patently inflationary features from wage contracts
in the private as well as the public sector, thereby causing a moderate decline
in workers’ average real wages. These achievements enabled the regime to hold
the rise in prices for the year to 87 percent, only slightly above target. The

average monthly rate of increase was reduced from over seven percent during
the first quarter to less than five percent during the final three quarters.

20. Important steps were also taken to prepare for renewed economic develop-
ment. An investment plan for 1965-1966 was adopted that is designed to bolster
the flow of funds to such bottleneck sectors as transportation and electric power.
The regime’s reversal of Goulart’s policy of deliberate harassment of foreign
companies improved the climate for foreign investment, although the actual flow
of new commitments continued sluggish throughout 1964. The establishment
of more realistic foreign exchange rates will help to promote a positive foreign
trade balance. A successful rescheduling of about $450 million of the payments
due to major foreign creditors temporarily relieves the danger of default or of
crippling import restrictions, though the level of repayments due over the next
few years will still constitute a formidable burden. Finally, successful negotia-
tions with the US and with other foreign countries and international organiza-
tions assure a substantial boost in foreign economic assistance for 1965.

21. In the area of structural reform, legislation was passed paving the way
for modernization of the banking and tax systems. Two major social reform
measures were also enacted. A broadly supported housing program promises
to make at least a start toward reducing Brazil’s enormous urban housing short-
age, and also to provide increased employment opportunities in urban areas.
An agrarian reform program, passed over stiff conservative opposition, is directed
toward increasing agricultural production as well as improving rural social con-
ditions. It provides for variable tax rates to discourage the retention of under-
utilized large holdings, and for expropriation with compensation in. bonds in the
case of unused holdings. An agrarian reform agency, with an assured source
of income, has been formed to administer the program of expropriation, resettle-
ment, and colonization. Overall, this represents a carefully constructed first
step in a complex long-term undertaking: an earnest of the regime’s concern
for the welfare of the depressed rural population.

22. The regime’s economic efforts during 1964, impressive though they were,
conveyed few direct benefits to the population at large. A combination of the
negative trends already in train under Goulart, the deflationary character of
many of the regime’s measures, and a severe drought that depressed industrial
as well as agricultural output led to a drop in GNP of 2 to 3 percent. Per
capita personal consumption declined by more than 5 percent. The pinch on
consumption was felt most acutely by low income groups and salaried employees.
The entrepreneurial classes, especially inefficient or overextended business inter-
ests, were caught in a cost-price squeeze made worse by tightened bank credits,

ie 9

IV, THE OUTLOOK

Economic Prospects

23. On balance, the economic outlook for Brazil over the next two years is
relatively encouraging. The regime will probably pursue essentially the same
responsible policies as in the past year, with at least modest progress to show
for its efforts. Most factors point to a resumption of economic growth during
1985, in spite of continued industrial sluggishness in the first quarter. Favorable
weather conditions already have assured a sizable increase in agricultural output,
while the emergence of some positive effects from the regime’s stabilization and
development measures is likely to stimulate industrial output as the year pro-
gresses. Moreover, massive foreign economic assistance will prime the pump.
Some $450 million is due in loans and grants from the US Government alone.
The International Monetary Fund has agreed upon a standby credit of $125 mil-
lion, and $200 million or so is likely to be forthcoming from other governments,
private banks, and foreign private investors.

24. The outlook for progress toward financial stability during 1965 is more
uncertain. Several factors would indicate a substantial reduction in the rate of
inflation. The regime’s performance in the areas of budgetary and credit con-
trols continues to be satisfactory. Also, the large food crops and ample supplies
of imported foodstuffs are likely to reduce the upward pressures on food prices,
a major component in the workers’ cost of living. Nonetheless, developments
during the first quarter were disquieting, with the price level rising by nearly
20 percent. In part this increase was due to recent price adjustments by the
government which were necessary to reduce the budgetary deficit (e.g., increases
in the rates charged by the railroads and other public utilities) and to large
increases in house rents. But it was apparently primarily the result of the in-
grained inflationary mentality of the population: businessmen continue automati-
cally to raise prices to cover actual and anticipated increases in production costs;
workers continue automatically to accept these increases and to demand wage
hikes to cover them.

25. The regime has recently launched a major campaign to brake this momen-
tum. It has set the standard for intensified wage stringency by raising the
minimum wage (the effective wage for most unskilled workers) by only 57 per-
cent, well below the 80 percent rise in the cost of living since the last adjustment.
It now is demanding that producers and merchants hold the line on prices and
is offering a variety of financial incentives for those who comply. So far the
response of the business community has been unenthusiastic; even cooperative
elements are somewhat cynical. We believe, therefore, that the regime’s goal,
to hold the increase in prices during 1965 to 25 percent, will not be achieved,
and that the increase will probably be in the range of 50 to 60 percent. Even
this will require a continued determined effort on the part of the regime and
would constitute a noteworthy achievement.

ic ae”

=:

26. We believe also that the regime’s goals for 1966—a growth in GNP of
seven percent, with a price increase of only 10 percent—are already beyond
reach, The regime’s ability to administer its many programs effectively and to
control the myriad of inflationary pressures is in doubt. On the other hand,
most of the factors underlying the promise of gradual improvement during
1965 will probably continue to operate during 1966. The regime probably will
be able to achieve a respectable growth rate of about five percent and to
hold the rise in prices to perhaps 20 to 30 percent.? These achievements would
be notable by the standards of economic performance during 1963-1964 and
would provide a reasonably sound foundation for further economic progress.

27. Whatever the extent of the regime’s success in promoting economic growth
and financial stability, the population will almost certainly continue to feel the
pinch of austerity throughout 1965. There probably will be some improvement
in living conditions during 1966 relative to 1984-1965, and the regime will obtain
a certain positive response as it moves forward gradually with its social reform
program over the next two years. The impact from housing and agrarian reform
or new opportunities for employment will not be felt widely in this short time
span, however, and appreciation of the difficult feats actually accomplished will
probably be limited to a relatively small sector of the politically active popu-
lation.

The Course of Political Developments

28. Because only a small part of the population will benefit from the regime’s
economic efforts, we believe that popular discontent will continue to grow and
will be expressed more openly over the next year or so. In particular, there
probably will be an increase in strikes by labor groups smarting under the
regime's policy of tightened wage restraints. There will probably also be a
rise in protests by student and intellectual groups against the regime's political
policies. We believe, however, that continued popular respect for the govern-
ment’s integrity and authority will keep these manifestations of discontent limited
for the most part. Even if major disturbances do occur, the federal and state
security forces will probably be able to control them.

29. Although leftist extremists will attempt to take advantage of popular dis-
enchantment with the regime, their capabilities—shattered by the government
crackdown that followed Goulart’s removal—are likely to continue to be limited.
The Brazilian Communist Party, still largely immersed in problems of reorgani-
zation, will probably concentrate on agitation and other “peaceful” activities.
The only sizable extremist group with any stomach for violent action will prob-
ably be that of Leonel Brizola, now led by him from exile in Uruguay. Brizola
will probably try to expand the present sporadic terrorist activities of his fol-
lowers within Brazil into a major insurgency campaign, but will probably lack
the resources to accomplish much, at least over the next two years. Brazilian

* We are assuming continued US and other foreign assistance at about the 1965 level and
at least normal agricultural weather.

bal ih

=e

security forces almost certainly will be able to handle effectively any attempt to
step-up the level of insurrectionary activity.

30. The most vociferous civilian critic of the administration has been Carlos
Lacerda, the fiery and erratic governor of Guanabara state (the city of Rio de
Janeiro). Lacerda has made a career of bitter opposition to successive presidents
from Vargas on. He was a daring opponent of Goulart and a leading civilian
supporter of the 1964 revolution. At that time he enjoyed widespread sympathy
and support among the military and probably expected the revolution to pave
his way to the presidency. The UDN, the chief political party supporting
Castello Branco, has technically nominated Lacerda as its presidential candidate.
However, his political future has become increasingly problematical as he has
chosen to deliver blistering attacks on the Castello Branco administration and its
program. He probably calculates that the program will fail, and that there is
political advantage to be gained by assuming the leadership of the dissatisfied
elements—not only wage earners and peasants, but also landlords, entrepreneurs,
and the hardline military.

31. The level of Lacerda’s agitation has fluctuated as he has repeatedly tried
and failed to win the military and the UDN away from support of Castello
Branco. He apparently vacillates between two mutually exclusive courses of
action: to seek once more the regime’s support for his presidential candidacy;
or to seek the leadership of all the dissatisfied elements. If Lacerda should
definitely commit himself to the anti-regime forces, he would almost certainly
forfeit the sympathy of the military and most of the UDN, and that would enable
the regime to deal summarily with him, if need be.

32. Governors Adhemar de Barros of Sao Paulo and Jose Magalhaes Pinto of
Minas Gerais—both staunch early supporters of the revolution, both presidential
aspirants with little chance of winning Castello Branco’s backing—are also
likely to seek political support from among those discontented with the regime,
but neither man is likely to attack the regime as boldly as Lacerda has. Castello
Branco’s political mobilization for the 1966 elections will probably force into
more systematic and aggressive opposition the political elements which remain
outside of his combination—e.g., elements of the PTB and PSD, and some minor
parties. These elements, deprived of their principal leaders by purges under
the Institutional Act, may seek alliance with one of the above governors, or even
with Lacerda.

33. In sum, most of the political problems the regime will have to contend
with during the next year or so will be somewhat more difficult versions of
problems it has so far handled effectively. There will probably be new occa-
sions requiring the exertion of strong, direct pressure on politicians or political
groups in or out of Congress; a few more plotters may appear among the
military. We believe, however, that Castello Branco will continue to provide
effective leadership and will not essentially change either the basic character
or the priority goals of his regime. The strong support he will continue to
command from the military establishment together with his strengthened posi-

‘3 wee

aes

tion in Congress will probably enable him to resolve within constitutional norms
whatever political crises arise. Hardliners are likely to attempt to coerce
the President on occasion, as in the past, but, while occasionally bowing to
their pressures, he probably will be able to keep their influence on national
policy slight.

34, We do not exclude the possibility that an authoritarian military govern-
ment might come to power in the next year or two, but we think it unlikely.
A major blow to the prestige of the Castello Branco regime—that is, the mani-
fest failure of its economic program; its inability to control some upsurge of
popular, political, or insurrectionary opposition; or its failure to provide a
reasonable solution to the problem of presidential succession—could touch
off a movement to unseat Castello Branco or to force him to reverse his moderate
policies. If such a major challenge were to develop, it would be less likely to
come from the “political generals” of Castello Branco’s own generation than
from the zealous younger officers who by their action would be repudiating the
“inadequate leadership” of their senior commanders.

35. In foreign relations, the Castello Branco regime will almost certainly
continue to pursue strongly pro-Western policies. In particular, it will seek to
keep intact Brazil's traditional close ties with the US, previously disrupted by
Goulart’s excessive nationalism and quasi-neutralist position.

The Question of Elections

36. Castello Branco faces a difficult question in determining how to ensure
that the program of the revolution will survive the presidential elections sched-
uled for November 1966. We believe that he and his close advisors desire
that these elections be held. They probably are aware that preservation of the
present extemporized political arrangement will prove more difficult and more
embarrassing as time passes. Yet they are doubtless equally aware that if elec-
tions were held and failed to return a candidate acceptable to the revolutionary
forces of 1964, strong—probably irresistible—pressures would arise for military
intervention, and that this would represent a major setback for constitutional
development.

37. The regime already is occupied with devising a political strategy for the
election, designed both to assure the continuity of revolutionary policies and to
open the way for a more normal constitutional system. We believe that the
regime will concentrate on developing a political combination that can “deliver”
the vote. Since Brazilian political parties are essentially federations of strong
state machines, it is likely to approach the issue on a state by state basis: in
some cases it will probably decide to enhance the power of an established
pro-regime party; in others it will probably attempt to weld various pro-regime
factions into multiparty blocs. This would be an arduous and complicated
process. Nonetheless, the regime starts off with considerable potential influ-
ence in state politics through various BPR congressmen and several strong and
friendly governors. Castello Branco will almost certainly use his control over

Re. 13

Ws,

federal appropriations and patronage to strengthen the regime’s chosen political
vehicle in each state, and will probably also use his control of Congress to
enact changes in party statutes and election procedures that would enhance
the regime’s electoral strength.1°

38. The regime has decided to hold direct gubernatorial elections in October
1965 in 11 states, including the key states of Guanabara and Minas Gerais. It
believes that it will be able to return friendly governors in nearly all contests,
strengthening its political position in some of the states in the process. Some
hardline military elements, who opposed the recent Sao Paulo municipal election
on the grounds that a candidate unacceptable to the revolution might win, will
probably raise similar objections to the holding of both the gubernatorial and the
presidential elections. But we believe that the momentum toward elections
will overcome this opposition, and that the presidential elections will be held.
on schedule.

39. The chief element of uncertainty about the 1966 election is whether
Castello Branco will consent to run for re-election. There is a strong consensus
among military and civilian supporters of the regime that he would be by far the
most effective candidate for their purposes. He has flatly refused to consider
running, but he is likely to be besieged on all sides over the next year with the
plea that only he can assure a victory for the revolution and thus forestall pres-
sures to cancel the election. This argument might persuade him to run. Such a
decision would remove all doubt about the holding of the election. If, on the
other hand, Castello Branco should persist in refusing to run, the race for the
regime’s nomination would probably be thrown open, considerable bickering
among the regime’s supporters would ensue, and appreciable doubts about the
holding of the election would probably persist well into 1966.

For example, if he desires it, a constitutional amendment making him eligible for re-
election,

T
CONTR DISSEM

T
CONTR ISSEM
