El Salvador: Rightist Arena Party Election Frontrunner - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049380, dated 2 February 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049380).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Central Intelligence Apengy

Wantengen 0 ATW

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
J
El Salvador?’ Rightist ARENA

Party Election Frontrunner

14 March 1989

ep

Approved for Release

Noy 1993

oun

«ential Wlcthipers ¢ Apenicy

+

ammo.
Ao .
{8 *
Washargan [ht Asars

DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE

14 March 1989

El Salvador: Pightist ARENA Party Election Frontrunner

Summary

Following a sweeping victory in legislative and
municipal elections a year ago, El Salvador ’s rightist
ARENA party--already in control of the National
Assembly--appears best positioned to win the
presidency, even if there is a last minute delay in the
election acheduled for 19 March. ARENA has
successfully exploited widespread popular disaffection
with the ruling Christian Democratic Party and worked
hard to promote a new, moderate image. Moreover,
ARENA’s campaign has been the best organized and
financed, and prenidential candidate Alfredo Cristiani

uppears to have wo e vital support of munt
businessmen.

We believe ARENA’s prospects have not been hurt by
the political bickering surrounding the guerrillas’
peace plan and various proposals to postpone the
election. ARENA, in our view, has adroitly defused
attempts by the Christian Democrats to portray it as an
obstacle to peace by reiterating its willingness to
initiate a dialogue with guerrillas once it wins the
election. We believe ARENA--which was in contact with

This type t was prepared >
Office of African atin Amer ‘

ution f

Analysis.

we

rebel leaders prior to the issuance of the peace
proposal--may even win additional votes because of its
flexible public position on dialogue. The party,
however, remains adamantly opposed to delaying the
election.

ARENA has given only vague hints of what policies
it would follow if Cristiani is elected. We doubt,
however, that it would move quickly toward a wholesale
undoing of President Duarte’s economic and social
reforms, although rollbacks in some areas are possible.
An ARENA government would probably take a tougher
position against the left, particularly if, as we
anticipate, hardliners like Roberto D’Aubuisson
dominate security policy. It may also be less inclined
than the current administration to investigate alleged
human rights abuses by government forces. At the same
time, however, we expect ARENA would try to bolster its
moderate credentials and avoid international criticism
by initiating talks with the guerrillas and promoting
market-oriented economic policies. ARENA, in our view,
probably would try to establish a good working
relationship with the United States, despite a strong
nationalist strain in the party. Po]

t * *

ARENA has run a well-funded and managed campaign in the
runup to the 19 March election. Once an instrument of El
Salvador's extreme right, the party has successfully projected a
more moderate image while exploiting widespread dissaffection
with the ruling Christian Democrats.
indicates the message has been wel] received by voters, who,

indicate, will give ARENA a victory either in the first or
second round-of balloting.

Election Issues

ARENA's reputation has been an important issue in the
campaign. In an effort to ease concern that hardliners control
ARENA, the party's extremiat founder--and president-for-life--
Roberto D'Aubuisson has allowed moderates, headed by presidential
candidate Alfredo Cristiani, to assume a wider public role. As a
result shows that party moderates have
attracted new support among moderate businessmen, many of whom
had backed the Christian Democrats in 1984.

ARENA has hit hard at the Christian Democrats’ poor handling
of the economy and alleged rampant corruption. The party's
emphasis on economic themes has been particularly effective in

iin

ga

rural areas, where many residents feel neglected by the
government and blame the Christian Democrats for the lack of jobs
and development assistance. Jn contrast, ARENA's Willingness to

use its own resources to bring goods and nervices to voters has
strengthened its image. ARENA's anti-corruption theme has struck
a responsive chord countrywide. Although we cannot fully assess
the pervasiveness of corruption under the Christian Democrats,
the ruling party's poor image and its failure to act on
allegations of official misdeeds have allowed ARENA to capitalize
on the issue.

We believe ARENA's hammering of the Christian Democrats for
the government's seeming inability to provide public security in
the face of growing leftist violence also has been a highly
successful theme. In contrast to the perceived failure of the
Christian Democrats to remedy the security situation, we judge
that the public believes ARENA would adopt a tougher posture
toward violent demonstrators and those suspected of terrorism and
sabotage. |

aneuvering on the Re eace opoga}

ARENA began the campaign by portraying itself as the party
that was willing to talk to the guerrillas and was most likely to
bring peace to war-weary Sa)vadorans, and it retained that image
even after the rebels introduced their "peace initiative" on
24 January. Despite attempts by the Christian Democrats to cast
ARENA as anti-peace because of its refysal to postpone the
election, we believe ARENA may have reaped the most benefits from
the recent flurry of proposals and counterproposals. ARENA, in
our view, largely has out-maneuvered other parties by maintaining
a firm stand against the guerrilla demand to delay the election,
which would have violated the constitution. In contrast to the
government's wavering on that issue and on whether to conduct a
dialogue with the guerrillas, ARENA appeared decisive by
presenting a counterproposal] on 3] January to meet with rebel
leaders. ARENA leaders, in fact, had met secretly with guerrilla
commanders before the proposal was announced. ARENA's repeated
calls for a dialogue, in our view, have helped polater the
party's peace credentials.

Who Controls ARENA?

We believe D'Aubuisson continyes to be the most important
policymaker in ARENA, although the jockeying between moderate and
conservative factions of the party will likely intensify if ARENA
comes to power. D‘Aubuisson's public deference to Cristiani is
largely cosmetic in our view, calculated to put a better face on
the party. that
D'Aubuisson remains in firm control and that Cristiani often
defers to him on party matters and decisions relating to the

i

campaign. We believe, however, that D' Aubuisson has grown more
politically astute since he lost to President Duarte in the
election of 1984 and almost certainly realizes that his party 5

past extremism is not appealing to an electorate weary «f war and
violence. aaa

D'Aubuisson's influence over the party would almost
certainly carry over to an ARENA govermnent, although the exact
role he would play is still unclear. D'Aubuisson is not likely
to hold a cabinet position, but he will have a direct impact on
policy through his seat in the Assembly and his role in the
party. D'Aubuisson will probably not be engaged equally on all
iesues. For example, we expect Cristiani--a prominent
businessman--and other moderates to have a relatively free hand
in formulating economic and social policies and in choosing a
cabinet. D'Aubuisson, on the other hand, probably will have
an impact on security issues and policies toward the left.

ARENA Looks Ahead

ARENA leaders probably will come under pressure from
business men--who have largely funded the party's campaign--to
roll back some social and economic reforms and reduce government
management of the economy. r inclined to
move quickly, however, and indicates that
there is no party consensus a c policies.
Cristiani and others have said publicly that ARENA will relax
state controls on marketing and bankirig, but party leaders are
not advocating immediate abolition of INCAFE, the government's
coffee marketing agency, or overnight privatization of the
banking system. In addition, their public statements suggest
ARENA leaders continue to view land reform as sacrosanct and are
advocating a reassessment, rather than a dismantling, of
inefficient government-run cooperatives. ARENA has hinted at
possible stractural changes, such as tax reforms and currency
devaluation, to address the fiecal deficit, but it probably will
move slowly to avoid straining relations with the private sector,
_" will remain vital for the new administration.

We believe ARENA in the near term will not take any drastic
steps to alter the conduct of the war or resort to violent
tactics to control the left. If gyustrated by the course of the
war, however, an ARENA government could seek dramatic

e insurgency by resurrecting death squads. geieeney
a. Aeon that most ARENA officials, includ

on, recognize the importance of U§ assistance--and its
linkage to an acceptable human rights record. In addition, most
ARENA officials probably realize that the military--which has
made significant progress on the human rights front--will not

Sanction any initiatives that Mt belreves could jeopardize US
military and economic Bupport. The armed forces, in our view,
will continue to resist Interference trom civilians, even

conservative ones, and will] have a je facto veto over major

changes in strategy--as well] as political concessions to the
guerrillas. ]

We expect an ARENA government to reintroduce legislation--
which lapsed in 1987--limiting civil liberties for suspected
guerrillas. Such a move would facilitate operations by military
and security services, which are increasingly frustrated by the
current gover ' c ce to deal espsively with the
insurgents. suggest that an
ARENA gover rrilla front
groups, particularly the rebel-controlled university in San
Salvador. Sensitive to international criticiam, however, ARENA

Probably will try to balance these actions with attempts to
initiate a dialogue with the insurgents. ca

The emergence of an ARENA government--regardless of its
security policy--is likely to encourage vigilante activity. For
example, right-wing extremists may view an ARENA victory as a
signal that death squad activity would be tolerated, even though
ARENA would officially disavow such connection. ARENA, however,

probably would be less inclined than the current government to
investigate i. political crimes by the right or to punish

offenders.

ARENA probably will seek a smooth’ working relationship with
the United States, although there will almost certainly be more
bilateral friction in their relationship than between Washington
and the Christian Democrat administration. We believe that an
ARENA government will be intent on retaining present levels of US
aid and will temper its language accordingly, even though
D'Aubuisson and others have in the past indulged in shrill anti-
American rhatoric. Some party officials, for example, already
have sounded out potential cabinet appointees with US officials
in an effort to assuage concerns that ARENA will move to diminish
US influence in El Salvador. =
