Economic Cooperation with U.s. Desired
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098728, dated 3 September 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098728).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Page: 1 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
FRO
Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 1

BRS Assigned Document Number: 000028439

Report Type: Daily Report AFS Number: 41050145
Report Number: FBIS-EAS-89-205-S Report Date: 25 Oct 89
Report Series: East Asia Start Page: 12

Report Division: JAPAN End Page: 17

Report Subdivision: United States AG File Flag:
Classification: UNCLASSIFIED Language : Japanese
Document Date: 01 Aug 89

Report Volume:
Dissemination: FOUO
City/Source of Document: Tokyo CHUO KORON
Report Name: SUPPLEMENT
Headline: * Economic Cooperation With U.S. Desired

Author(s) Kazuo Nukazawa, managing director, Federation of
Economic Organizations: ‘‘Things You Can Contain and
Things You Cannot’ ’]

Source Line: 41050145 Tokyo CHUO KORON in Japanese Aug 89 pp
278-287--FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Subslug: (Article by Kazuo Nukazawa, managing director, Federation
of Economic Organizations: ‘'Things You Can Contain and
Things You Cannot’ ’]

FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:

1. [Article by Kazuo Nukazawa, managing director, Federation of
Economic Organizations: ‘'Things You Can Contain and Things You
Cannot’’]

2. [Text] What an irony it would be if at a time when the free
economy has at long last proven its superiority over the Soviet-type
planned economy, the United States would try to contain the free
economy! -The-*‘containment of Japan’’ would-be synonymous with the
containment of a free economy.

3. Foreword
4. I met Mr Fallows only for about an hour when he visited Tokyo 3
years ago under a short-term leadership training program of the Japan

Society (in New York).

5. During a chat at that time, he touched on the question of the
U.S. burden of defending the free world and asked me in essence how I

Approved for Release

Date

FSO
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 2 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
_¥oue-

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 2

thought about the contention of some Americans that ‘‘Japan should
assume a certain share of the financial burden.’’ As I remember, my
off-hand response was: ‘‘Democracy in the United States is based on
the idea of ‘no tax without representation,’ and viewed from the
standpoint of this principle, unless Japan is given a say about the
U.S. defense policy, there would be no fairness.’’ In retrospect,
however, this would give Japan an opportunity to express its views
actively when it comes to settling a dispute by force, and Japan
would find itself in a rather awkward position under its
Constitution; so I think I should have added sotto voce,
‘“‘Nevertheless Japan would always abstain from expressing its views’'

6. In his paper, Fallows presumes that Japan will remain the most
valuable single partner of the United States in terms of (1)
Japanese-U.S. military arrangements, (2) financial cooperation, and
(3) business transaction. In the opinion of the average American,
what is most important in relations between countries is security
relations, and probably Fallows may view the importance of these
terms in the order given above. We have no objection to that.
However, we should also give a thought to cooperation in the question
of relieving countries with accumulated foreign debts in item (2),
namely, financial cooperation.

7. Throughout its history, the United States has alternated between
the fatherly image of being the preserver of the prevailing order and
the youthful image of the complainant protesting against the
prevailing order full of injustices. There have been conflicts
between these two images, and these conflicts have given the American
intellect stimuli and nourishment. The bright side of this reality is
the desire to realize justice, whereas the dark side is the
after-the-fact approval of rule by force.

8. In the Fallows paper, we first sense the temperament of the
United States as the preserver of the order, determined not to permit
Japan, the disturber of the order, from expanding.

9. We then see the face of the United States as the demurrer.
Formerly the United States saw Europe as the prevailing order full of
injustices. But it is now turning its eyes-on what appears to be
anachronistic in Japan. What a change. We see how strongly Fallows,
who is now a temporary resident of Japan, feels about protesting
against the irrational aspects of Japanese society, as well as the
boss-dominated aspects of its life which are underlying factors in
the rigidity of the market, at least from the standpoint of Japanese
consumers.

10. There is something common between these dual approaches. For
Fallows, preserving the existing order based on European-American
values and breaking up what is irrational in Japanese society are in

Fove-—
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 3 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
Bevo.

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 3

harmony with each other and even complementary to each other. We
sense a high moral tone of condemnation and even a sense of mission
for reformation, something in common with the erstwhile advocacy of
modernization, and there is no room for cultural relativism. On the
other hand, Fallows does not know first-hand the fact that once in
Japan, there was a generation which angrily felt that ‘‘it is high
time for Japan to lead Asia in protesting against the world order
centered around the West.’’

11. It is hard to put into practice the dictum ‘‘the righteous, be

strong,’’ the teaching of the mother of the late Toshio Doko, former
chairman of the Federation of Economic Organizations, but it is
harder still to practice the dictum ‘‘the strong, be righteous.’’ If

one regards force as a means for making one’s will prevail, he will
need self-restraint all the more to refrain from resorting to force,
especially when he is not confident whether or not his view is right.

12. In this sense, the present-day United States is on the verge of
crisis.

13. Trap of the New View on the Japanese

14. With respect to the conflicting views on the Japanese, Fallows’
sketch of the Japanese is correct on the whole. But probably because
of the limitations of his linguistic ability, his paper seems to be
overly dependent on the criticism of the Japanese by foreigners. As a
matter of fact, the originals on which his paper is based have many
errors in terms of facts and evaluations. But the Japanese, due to
negligence and linguistic limitations, have failed to point out these
errors in various forms, such as critical writings in influential
foreign journals.

15. It is customary in Europe that observations which have remained
unrebutted for a certain period of time are used as the bricks, so to
speak, to build the foundation upon which further inductions are
based. As a result, the house of cards is being built on the
assumption that Japan, ‘‘with an economy constitutionally predisposed
to cartels and devoid of free markets, is a xenophobic,
development-oriented state led by. the government (or marked by a cozy
relationship between industry and government)’’; a country which has
improved the international competitiveness of its industry and
practiced mercantilism by pursuing an aggressive targeting policy,
and which is the antipode of the United States (or the West) in every
aspect. Naturally, the recent Recruit scandal has sprinkled this
castle of cards with sequins in the form of a charge that ‘‘Japan is
dominated by corrupt money power.’’

16. Here, we will digress from the Fallows paper for a while to the
arguments used in current Japan bashing, which have the following

Feue~
UNCLASSTFIED

Page: 4 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
cFeue—

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 4
three features in common:

17. A. Pornographic Comparison (or single-factor analysis)
(preceding three words in English]

18. This refers to a lopsided exaggeration of partial truths. To be
sure, in the case of Japan, as is the case with other countries,
there is hidden in its private parts some truths. Nevertheless,
anyone who believes that the private parts contain everything that
stands for a woman has a level of intelligence even below that of the
adolescent. In a great country with a long history, there are many
multidirectional vectors. Accordingly, if one tries to explain
everything about it by only collecting single-directional vectors, he
can write only an article of ephemeral value. Moreover, one cannot
explain everything about a considerably efficient immense national
economy on the basis of an induction from the private parts alone,
for instance, from the different prices of its articles sold at home
and abroad.

19. When pornography directed toward women appears, men will
understand why women are mad at the current pornography which is
demeaning to them. Would it not be the height of happiness if one
were able to see only the most attractive things about foreign
countries rather than view their private parts with blinking eyes? We
suggest that foreigners make an attempt to practice seeing what
beautiful qualities there are in Japan. To be sure, Japan has many
such qualities. The Japanese for their part should correct the
shortcomings of the Japanese market, even little by little.
Admittedly, even well-educated Japanese privately use the word
‘“‘geto’’ or ‘‘ameko’’ when they refer to Westerners or Americans.
They say Japanese are xenophobes, but there are few countries in the
world where so many foreign talents appear in commercial messages on
TV as in Japan. We want foreigners to see that in a country smaller
than California, there are over 1,000 Kentucky Fried Chicken shops
and 600 McDonald's hamburger shops.

20. B. View of a Fly in the Toilet (or Jailbird’s Sociology)
(preceding two words in English]

21. This view is often found in writings by officials in charge of
trade negotiations. A fly in the toilet may believe that all human
beings stink, and a fly in the family Buddhist shrine may think that
human beings are always sobbing, and a fly in the noodle shop may
think that human beings are always making a sipping sound. But what
makes a man of intelligence different from a group of juvenile
adventurers is that he thinks there may be another aspect of the
truth outside the realm of his observation.

22. Negotiators with Japan are always troubled by excessive market

Foue"’
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 5 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
EQuE—

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 5

regulations and its meanness toward foreign firms. If the Japanese
side really made the kind of absurd refutations and explanations
which Mr Fallows cites, then Japan cannot help but being stigmatized
as a cunning temporizing race. But Japan's exports could not have
increased to the current level if the Japanese are so untrustworthy,
always cheating foreigners as they say. Moreover, if the
predilection to cartels is prevalent in Japan as they say, new
merchandize could not make its debut on the market, one after
another, and the wholesale price could not have dropped 10 percent
from the level prevailing 5 years ago.

23. C. Anecdotal Approach (or Anecdotal Economics) [preceding two
words in English]

24. It is regrettable that the Fallows paper is not shielded from
the effects of his reliance on the originals skewed toward such
views. This, in the final analysis, is related to another common
feature, namely, an anecdotal approach.

25. Many overseas best-seller type writings by foreign observers
follow the stereotype pattern of inflaming low passions in the
readers by citing such anecdotes of commercial value as the notorious
cases of metal baseball bats and the cumbersome standards for ski
equipment (one foolish Japanese blurted out that snow in Japan is not
like snow in Europe, and this episode spread throughout the world
overnight as a typical illustration of the closed nature of Japanese
society), rather than presenting economic and sociological proof
based on macroscopic observations. Anecdotes are meaningful in taking
the readers by surprise at the beginning of a straightforward
economic observation. One Japanese claimed that ‘'meat is not good
for the Japanese because they have longer intestines than Westerners;
accordingly, we are opposed to liberalization of meat imports.’’ This
episode may be an interesting subject for a light conversation at the
dinner table, but in reality, the beef import quotas as well as beef
consumption has increased, and the liberalization of beef imports is
in the works. Salad and cheese are served at the table and bread
consumption has been popularized. Would it not be a more mature view
if one makes the overall observation that the change in the Japanese
diet in this half-century has been radical-with no parallel in the
world?

26. Well, the Fallows paper says in one breath that MITI [Ministry
of International Trade and Industry] has now become a proponent of
free trade and in another that the trade policy administered by MITI
is totally in the nature of mercantilism. This represents a
self-contradiction resulting from his failure to make a macroscopic
observation.

27. We will first briefly test the validity of his claim that since

Foue-
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 6 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
-FOUO

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 6

the adjustment of the exchange rates in 1985, and since the
subsequent Maekawa Report of 1986, the constitutional makeup of the
Japanese economy has remained unchanged.

28. (1) The ratio of the current account balance to the GNP (this is
the only figure appearing in the Maekawa Report) had gradually
declined to 2.7 percent as of last year from 4.5 percent in 1985.
This ratio will continue to decline, even according to the latest
maximum upward modifications of Japan’s projected 1989-90 current
account surplus, including the IMF projection.

29. In addition, the contribution of international payments balance
to growth has been a minus in these 3 years. Incidentally, the ratio
of exports to the GNP has decreased to 9.3 percent from 13.2 percent
in the same period. The amount of exports has also dropped from 42
trillion yen to the 33-34 trillion yen level.

30. (2) The ratio of manufactured imports began to rise sharply from
about 30 percent in 1985, reaching 50 percent in 1988. The income
elasticity coefficient of manufactured imports is considerably high
at 2.5.

31. (3) The elasticity coefficients of Japanese exports and imports
have changed quite radically. For instance, according to the latest
monthly survey report of the Bank of Japan, the income elasticity
coefficient of the volume of U..S.-bound exports has dropped from 3.5
to 2.8, whereas the price elasticity coefficient has increased from
0.57 to 0.97.

32. According to this year’s white paper on trade, the income
elasticity coefficient of the volume of Japanese imports increased to
1.07 in 1988 from 0.77 before the realignment of the exchange rates.

33. Already in the 3-year period from 1985 to 1988, manufactured
imports increased sharply from $40 billion to $92 billion. Then, how
can the argument that the readjustment of the exchange rates has no
effect whatsoever on the Japanese square with this fact? There have
been some worrisome periods in the statistics of the past several
months .-But if-the United States should call. for containment of Japan
on the basis of these unfavorable months, then would it not
strengthen the impression of the United States as a sanction-happy
country just like a trigger-happy cowboy in westerns? In May there
was a report about a drastic shrinking of Japan’s trade surplus. The
ratio of U.S.-bound exports to Japan’s total exports dropped from
38.0 percent in 1986 to 33.9 percent in 1988. It is too much for
Japan to handle if the United States extrapolates the trade balance
on the basis of the longest postwar U.S. economic boom lasting
roughly for 80 months. We are currently testing whether or not these
dual factors, namely, the continuing boom in the United States and

FOUO-
UNCLASSTFIED

Page: 7 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED

_Foue-

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 7

the rapid increase in the export of capital goods accompanying the
sharp increase in Japan’s direct overseas investment, are sufficient
to explain the slow pace in narrowing the trade imbalance between the
two countries.

34. Moreover, if you like, I will use a somewhat anecdotal
expression. Japan’s annual imports from the United States are greater
than the combined total imports from the United States by the three
leading European countries (Germany, France, and Italy), this in
spite of the fact that both the combined GNP and population of these
three European countries are greater than those of Japan. We have,
time and time again, pointed out these facts to the American
ECONOMIST [as published], but it has made no response except to say
that ‘‘it is because Europe is farther from the United States than
Japan is.’

35. Things To Learn

36. However, in reality, it may be useless to point out these and
other facts.

37. Fallows knew a long time ago this much: macroeconomic factors
are responsible for the trade imbalance of both Japan and the United
States. In addition, Representative Gephardt and other influential
Americans are unanimous in pointing out that even if the Japanese
market is fully liberalized, the payments imbalance between the two
countries would improve only by $8 billion, that is, 15 percent of
the total imbalance.

38. To begin with, the trade balance in general and the balance of
bilateral trade in particular have no economic meaning, and an
exchange rate readjustment produces not much effect unless it is
accompanied by macroeconomic policy. West Germany’s trade surplus
also increased from $25.4 billion in 1985 to $72.8 billion in 1988
(Japan's trade surplus increased from $46.1 billion to $77.6 billion,
both on a customs clearance basis), and this accentuates the
necessity for a tighter fiscal policy on the part of the United
States and the continued expansion of domestic demand on the part of
Japan and- Germany. .--- - East Seen

39. I presume what Fallows really wanted to say is that in spite of
all this, unless Japan liberalizes its markets and thus becomes the
standard-bearer of free trade in the GATT, the United States and the
whole world would suffer, and that unless a big country like Japan
achieves a highly balanced economy, it would have an adverse impact
overseas.

40. To be sure, there are only national treatment and
most-favored-nation treatment as far as GATT rules are concerned, and

FOUO
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 8 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED

eee
Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 8

introduction of the kind of reciprocity concept as advocated by
Fallows--an idea that is valid only in bilateral relations--would
undermine the multilateral system. So, what about considering this
issue in the following manner of thinking? Suppose trade and
investment are completely liberalized between a highly regulated
economy (let it be the Japanese economy) and a sparsely regulated
economy (let it be the U.S. economy), American firms still would be
unable to enter the Japanese market because of the cost of adapting
itself to the Japanese regulations, even if it treated in the same
way domestic firms are.

41. Needless to say, Japan has not violated the GATT rules in this
regard, and Japan can insist that both sides should meet half way.
Nevertheless, it will be beneficial to both sides if they endeavor to
eliminate controls as much as possible. The gap in the intensity of
control produces friction by generating ‘'positional energy.’’ Where
there are controls, there necessarily will be the cost of
administering the controls and the cost of abiding by them (this cost
is several times more than the administering cost) and the controls,
themselves, would breed corruption and shady deals. The
administrative reform was intended not only to improve efficiency but
also to make society a better place to live through an enhanced sense
of responsibility on the part of each citizen, the self-cleansing
function of society, and a wider distribution of power and
information. Won’t we feel better if we suppress the feeling that we
loathe--or we feel shameful to be forced--to correct our shortcomings
under outside pressures, or rather if we think that the country that
cannot eliminate its fiscal deficit even under worldwide pressures
must be more shameful, and that the country that can rectify its
economic shortcomings under outside pressures is much better.

42. Is Japan Following Mercantilism?

43. Is mercantilism, that is, expansion of exports and curtailment
of imports, possible nowadays?

44. First, the type of mercantilism referred to by Fallows, that is,
the type by which ‘‘Spain and Portugal amassed gold,’’ is impossible
unless the value of gold is considerably stable. It is a known fact
that the value of gold has been fluctuating considerably, and the
ratio of gold stock to the foreign currency reserves in Japan is 1.5
percent, the lowest among the summit nations (the ratio in the United
States is 27.3 percent).

45. Although the value of the dollar has fluctuated violently, we
may safely say holdings in dollars have been a depreciating asset for
these several years except over the recent several months. The
foreign currency reserves of the Bank of Japan have markedly
depreciated. In brief, in the age of the depreciating key currency,

-Feu0
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 9 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED

oer
Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 9

ironically mercantilism may become an act of altruism. It may appear
that Japan is pursuing real estate buying, but that is not true
either. Janeway of THE WASHINGTON POST (on 28 May) said that ‘‘in
making investments in the United States (particularly investment in
stocks, bonds, and real estate) the Japanese have a persistent
tendency ‘to buy at a high price and sell at a lower price.'’’

46. Given a floating exchange rate system, mercantile measures
(export subsidies, import surtaxes, and a quota system) would be
neutralized by changes in the exchange rates. When we enforce an
import quota system in one sector, it would rebound to the exchange
rate, to the detriment of our own export industries. In addition, in
a world where capital moves freely, measures to curb imports will
result in a higher exchange rate, depriving export industries of
their competitive edges, and eventually transferring employment and
tax revenues to overseas. In brief, in the modern world mercantilism
contains a self-correcting mechanism.

47. If Japan tries to protect its agricultural products, the food
industries using farm products as raw materials will be forced out of
business and move their bases of operation overseas. As a
consequence, Japan will lose employment, tax revenues, and its bases
for the development of processing technologies, and the agricultural
sector will lose its markets. On the other hand, if subsidies are
paid to ships carrying export goods, foreign shipping agents will
hire transports at a lower cost than our own ships, dealing a blow to
our own shipping industry, which will also come to demand protection.
Thus protection would beget protection, and the cost of protection
would fall on the shoulders of the proficient industries. In my
opinion, the overwhelming role of Japan’s industrial policy in
quantitative terms has been the transfer of income from the
proficient economic sectors to the inefficient sectors (agriculture
among others). (This has been the case since the Meiji era, according
to various sources, including a study by Professor Teranishi of
Hitotsubashi University, and I wonder why foreigners refuse to learn
this lesson.) On the other hand, in my view, the most effective
industrial policy in qualitative terms has been the stimulation of
rationalization efforts on the part of enterprises through gradual
liberalization. - .--- 3 : on =

48. The model of a ‘‘developmental state’’ [preceding two words in
English] which underlies the Fallows paper, seems to neglect the
question of where the financial resources for protection and
fostering come from. This will be the first question to be
encountered when pursuing a targeting policy and related managing of
trade in the United States. If the financial resources for fostering
a high-tech industry are to be sought in the corporate income tax, a
greater portion of the actual tax revenues will come from proficient
and profitable industries, so this will end up transferring resources

_— F800
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 10 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED

nao

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 10

from the right pocket of the proficient industries to their left
pocket.

49. Most probably, the relatively more effective part of our
industrial policy has been that it has provided a pool of research
and development resources and information on overseas markets for
enterprises, has spurred the dismantling of equipment in
recession-affected industries, and has given enterprises the rational
for their investment decisions.

50. In his paper, Fallows points out that Japan has tried to become
No 1 in every field. But a comparative advantage means the ranking in
the domestic competition for productivity (as pointed out in the 1987
presidential economic message), and it should be noted that it does
not mean, as is generally misunderstood, that industry A in our
country is more efficient than industry A in the competitor nation.
Even if one country can produce more efficiently than its competitor
in every industry, national income will increase when it substitutes
imports for a certain group of industries.

S51. The Japanese economy will become more efficient when the market
rigidity of agriculture, distribution, and other heavily regulated
sectors is removed. As things stand now, there will be a manpower
shortage of 196,000 by 1993 in the information processing sector
alone (according to a projection by the financial department of the
Federation of Economic Organizations). Naturally, Japan cannot become
‘‘No 1 in everything’’ as Fallows claims it wants to, even in areas
deemed unimportant. To put it bluntly, if the United States stops
protecting the textile industry, at an annual cost of $20 billion to
consumers (according to the 1989 presidential economic message), its
national income will increase. Now is the best chance to do this,
with the unemployment rate at its lowest in 15 years, and in the
longest sustained postwar boom. Incidentally, the United States had
better do something about its agriculture, which will have more items
on the list of restricted imports than its Japanese counterpart in 3
years from now. Moreover, it is shameful that there is a price gap
between Japanese goods sold at home and abroad, but it is also odd
that the price of American wheat sold in Moscow is lower than that in
the United States. .-- ; side fee

52. Savings and Investment

53. Saving is delayed consumption. In this sense the dollars that
Japan has earned are bound to be spent for consumption. It is painful
to be criticized only because we have worked hard and saved prudently
in accordance with the teachings of Benjamin Franklin, but it is
politically desirable to direct our consumption both in its broader
and narrower senses toward the United States as much as possible.
Observed overall, the United States has advantages in land-intensive

_EOUO™
UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 11 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
FQuO

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 11

goods (farm products), in scale, in defense-related equipment for
which its government has put forth great efforts; therefore, it is
natural for consumption in the narrower sense of the word to be
directed toward American farm products, real estate, and arms. As far
as military hardware is concerned, it is outside the GATT
liberalization requirements. The reason some people in the United
States are apprehensive of Japanese investment in real estate and
plants in the United States is that such investment is, as the saying
goes, the goose that lays golden eggs. On the contrary, some others
are of the opinion that investment in real estate is more desirable
because stocks and bonds can be sold overnight but real estate cannot
be taken to Japan. The argument that Japan ‘‘should buy eggs, not the
goose’’ boils down to the demand that the Japanese save less. In this
metaphor, attention should be paid to the fact that the goose (real
estate and factories) will remain in the yard of the other party.
Moreover, if additional operational resources are created and more
eggs are laid as a result of Japanese participation and the quality
of the egg yolk improves, then it will be an additional merit of
Japanese investment.

54. Fallows says that Japanese firms operating overseas do not hire
non- Japanese for managerial posts. However, in view of the fact that
the annual income of section and department chiefs of large Japanese
firms has already surpassed that of their American counterparts
(except for managing directors or higher officers), there will be a
stepped up drive to hire more and more non-Japanese in order to save
personnel expenditure, including the cost of stationing Japanese
employees in the United States. Japanese firms operating in the
United States which fail to put outstanding American youths (who
choose not to enter the legal profession or Wall Street in favor of
Japanese firms) in key posts will most likely be defeated in the
whirlwinds of the American market.

55. Fallows also points out the lag in Japan’s efforts to foster
social overhead capital. But according to data on hand, the ratio of
overall public fixed capital formation to the GNP in the past 20
years has been at least 3 times that in the United States and twice
that in West Germany, which rose from the ashes like Japan. In the
overall-picture Japan-looks. like it is falling behind now, but it
should be remembered that Japan was a late starter.

56. It has only been 3 years since Japan became first in the world
in terms of per capita national income in the wake of the
readjustment of the exchange rates. Inasmuch as being rich is an idea
involving the stock of wealth rather than its flow, they should not
hastily complain that the Japanese living standard is not highest in
the world now. If Japan is left uncontained, it will improve this
also. Needless to say, land is the most important problem.

FOYO

‘UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 12 of 13
UNCLASSIFIED
FOUO

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports, 1989 Page 12
57. Possibility of Containment

58. The logic of economics, just like underground water, cannot be
contained by a fence or embankment. The water will burst out if we
try to contain it by force. There is a movie in which a white anda
black break out of prison handcuffed to each other. At first, they
curse each other, but they gradually come to cooperate each other
from necessity, and then when their handcuffs are removed, they
become inseparable. The relationship between Japan and the United
States is closer than MAD (mutual assured destruction) ties, and it
seems that their relationship is so close that if one side deals a
blow to the other, the blow will rebound to its own economy through
natural consequences on its financial and service markets as well as
the monetary and capital markets, even if the government of the other
side takes no retaliatory measures.

59. If the United States tries to shut out imports from Japan by
import restrictions, exports from Japanese production bases in Asia
and Europe will increase as long as there is a demand in the United
States, afid Japanese competitors will fill the void. The United
States will have to shut out these imports also and end up imposing a
worldwide quota system. When this reaches Wall Street, the market
will panic.

60. On the other hand, if Japan is so foolish as to act in such a
way as to hurt the U.S. economy, its direct investment in the United
States ceases to bring in earnings, and a further depreciation of the
dollar will deal a great blow to Japanese life and non-life insurance
companies and banks (including the Bank of Japan) with investments in
American securities. To begin with, investment is an act which
depends on a healthy condition of the economy of the other country
more than on trade with it.

61. It may be possible to stem the waves of Japan, but it is
impossible to contain the tides of NIC’s [newly industrialized
country] which will appear on the scene one after another. If they
are contained, one by one, then what is contained will not be Japan
alone but the world economy itself. What an irony it would be if ata
time when the free economy has at. long last.proved its superiority
over the Soviet-type planned economy, the United States should try to
contain the free economy!

62. If the United States is determined to contain Japan for the sake
of the world order, it should do so only after letting Japan
cooperate with it in correcting the present state of
affairs--compared with Japan, the United States consumes 2.5 times
more energy and emits 10 times more SO<inf>x<reset> (20 percent of
the global total), the cause of acid rain, and 15 times more
NO<inf>x<reset> (approximately 30 percent of the global total). Then

FOUO
UNCLASSIFIED

UNCLASSIFIED
FOUO

Document 1 of 1 FBIS Concatenated Daily Reports,

Japan would not haunt the United States.

FOQUO
UNCLASSIFIED

Page:

1989

13

of

Page

13

13
