Third World Reaction to Soviet Invasion of Czechoslovakia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126875, dated 2 August 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126875).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

an Deere © . v
vege LL an nee ee ots

LBJ LIBRARY

Mandetory Review
Case # NLLALNBG
Document #

Hoe Wwiel
AIG accéa
UW aq7- [secrre Biss
Ug aon- te) poy
Boog - fee VW 7

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE

Intelligence Memorandum

Third World Reaction to Soviet Invasion

of Czechoslovakia

APPROVER BOR RELEASE 17 September 1968
, ; No. 0622/68
-. D5

Week

“ument contains information affecting th cert
defense o ited States, within ning of Title
18, sections 793 an S Code, as amended.
Its transmissio Cclation o ents to or re-
ce Mm unauthorized person is prohibite

No=Porergr=Prssen

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
17 September 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

-Third World Reaction to Soviet Invasion of Czechoslovakia

summary

The Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia has pro-
duced largely predictable reactions among the "third-
world" nations of Africa and Asia. A great majority
of the governments making official statements have
voiced disapproval of the Soviet action, but in vary-
ing degrees of severity. In Asia, criticism of the
Soviets in :nonaligned countries was generally sub-
dued, while in Africa the reaction was almost unan-
imously hostile. (See Table) There is already some
evidence, however, that the unpopularity of the So-
viet action will be only temporary, and will have
little long-range impact on Soviet relations with
the nations of Africa and Asia.

Note: This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It
was-prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence and
coordinated with the Office of Nattonal Estimates.

25 - a

Reaction of Those African and Asian Governments Making Official Statements

APPROVAL DISAPPROVAL

Iraq Australia
Mali Afghanistan
North Korea Burma
North Vietnam Burundi
Southern Yemen Cameroon -
Syria Ceylon
Congo (K)
Dahomey
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
India
Indonesia
Israel
Ivory Coast
Jordan
Kenya
Lesotho
Libya .
Malagasy Republic
Malaysia
Mauritania
Nepal
Niger
Pakistan
Philippines
Senegal
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Uganda
Zambia

emOrekGrraDrSSliees

' Asia

1. Asian governments generally have been re-
strained in their official reactions to the events
in Czechoslovakia. Except for the anticipated con-
demnations by Australia, the Philippines, and Thai-
land, no Asian country expressed more than simple
disapproval of the Soviet action. The only explicit
endorsements of the Soviet intervention came from
North Korea and North Vietnam.

2. South Asia's two major powers, India and
Pakistan, officially reacted with caution--as evi-
denced by their abstention from the UN resolution
condemning Soviet intervention. India's reliance
on substantial Soviet military and economic aid
and its consequent unwillingness to jeopardize Indo-
Soviet relations diluted the government's censure
but did not prevent widespread public condemnation
and hostile parliamentary debate. The Pakistani
Government, by failing to issue any public statement
on the Czech crisis and instructing the press to
tone down its criticism of the invaders, demonstrated
a firm intention to avoid offending the USSR at a
time when Pak-Soviet relations are increasingly warm
and Soviet military aid may be forthcoming. The only
unequivocal statement in South Asia came from the
Government of Ceylon, which labeled the Soviet action
"a treacherous stab in the back."

3. In Southeast Asia, Malaysia and Burma merely
issued statements voicing adherence to the principles
of coexistence and noninterference in the internal
affairs of another country. Malaysia's position was
presumably influenced by large Soviet purchases of
rubber, as well as Moscow's support in the current
dispute with the Philippines over Sabah. The Indo-
nesian Government, although expressing shock and
criticism in private conversations, tempered its
official reaction because of the scheduled arrival
of a Soviet economic delegation on 29 August to dis-
cuss debt rescheduling and economic assistance.

a

( SEBRET

— ; ;

Africa

4. The African countries were nearly unanimous
in their disapproval and condemnation of the Soviet
intervention. Such an overwhelmingly unfavorable
reaction was made possible by the lack of substantial
dependence on the USSR for military and economic as-
sistance. In addition, African capitals are increas-
ingly hostile to any action by a "Great Power" which
hints of interference in the internal affairs of an-
other state, a reaction emphasized by the repeated
disapproval of the violation of the territorial in-

tegrity and national sovereignty of Czechoslovakia.

5. Only the radical state of Mali has officially
endorsed the Soviet action, and even here there are
indications that the Bamako regime took the action
only after strong Soviet pressures had been applied.
Although the Guinean regime has maintained a public
Silence on the event, regime leaders, including Presi-
dent Touré, are evidently disturbed by the Soviet
tactics and concerned at the divisions the invasion
has created in the socialist camp. Elsewhere in
West Africa, numerous official statements accused
the Soviets of flagrant violation of the sovereignty
of Czechoslovakia and demanded the immediate with-
drawal of all Soviet forces from the country. Ghana
labeled the Soviet invasion an act of “unjustified
aggression and blatant interference," while Gambia
suspended its limited cultural relations with the
USSR and its Warsaw Pact associates in the Czech
venture. Senegal's foreign minister privately
characterized the Soviet action as “open aggres-
sion" which destroyed the Soviet claim to be a
peace-loving nation. Although no public statement
was issued in Dakar, Senegal's representative at the
UN said his government "“regrets&:and condemns" the
intervention.

6. Strong Soviet support for Lagos' efforts
to maintain Nigerian unity probably was the most
important factor in Nigeria's refusal to comment of-
ficially on Soviet intervention in Czechoslovakia.
The Soviet's backing of federal military forces
fighting a civil war with secessionist Ibo tribesmen

< SEBRET C

Seeocenee

has included the sale of jet planes, patrol boats,
and other military equipment. Widespread public
outcry in Nigeria against the Soviet intervention
was dampened by Lagos, which put a stop to unfavor-
able press articles.

7. The reaction in Central Africa was severe.
Zambia's statement denounced the "Russian imperial-
ism in Czechoslovakia" as a "monstrous act of un-
called~for savagery." Congo (K) acted to withdraw
all its students from Warsaw Pact countries. Burundi
condemned the Soviet intervention, and students
scheduled to study in the USSR were denied permis-
Sion to leave the country.

8. Condemnation from the East African nations,
though generally more restrained, was nevertheless
widespread. Kenya called the Soviet intervention a
"naked and brutal manifestation of the worst form of
imperialism." Tanzania in unusually strong state-
ments condemned the Soviet "aggression" as a direct
violation of international law and of the UN charter.
Uganda stated that respect had been lost for the USSR
as a country assertedly opposing imperialism and
championing freedom and democracy. Haile Selassie
deplored the events in Eastern Europe as another ex-
ample of a small country being overrun, and urged
the withdrawal of Soviet forces as quickly as pos-
sible. Lesotho, in Southern Africa, condemned the "“un-
justified invasion" of Czechoslovakia by Soviet forces
in "the strongest possible terms."

Middle East

9. Although the USSR has tried to elicit Arab
support for the intervention by emphasizing Israeli
assistance to the "far-reaching imperialist plans"
for Czechoslovakia, most Arab countries have avoided
making an official statement on the issue. Support
for Moscow has come from Iraq, Syria, and Southern
Yemen, all left-wing regimes dependent on, or hopeful of,
military assistance from the USSR. Similarly, criti-
cism has come mainly from those states considered pro-
West: Jordan, Israel, and Libya. The UAR has taken
an equivocal line, which is interesting in view of
the large amounts of aid received from the Soviets.

So have Morocco and Sudan, which are more recent bene-
ficiaries of the USSR.

=

Ci sebger

10. The UAR's most authoritative commentary to
date makes little attempt to hide Cairo's distaste
for the Soviet action. Hasanayn Heykal, editor of
Cairo's major daily Al Ahram and a confidant. of
President Nasir, wrote on 30 August that the dangers
to Czechoslovak Communism were “not sufficient to
warrant military intervention." Because of “prin-
ciple," he said, he chose not to approve the inva-
sion, but because of “circumstance" he chose not to
condemn it. Nevertheless, he concluded that "mili-
tary intervention is wrong" and “what is wrong is
wrong."

11. There have been other signs of the UAR's
displeasure. Cairo's press spokesman, Al~Zayyat,
has missed both weekly news conferences ‘since the
invasion and, according to US sources there, has
privately repudiated the pro-Soviet line. Other
press comment points to Egypt's long-standing friend-
ship with CzechoSlovakia, especially Prague's assigt-
ance in helping to break the Western arms monopoly’
in 1955. Newspapers have also carried Western press
accounts of the event, which is not usual in Egypt,
along with numerous pictures of the occupation.

12. There are many reasons why Cairo--and
possibly other Arab states--might resent Moscow's
occupation of Czechoslovakia. As of late, the
Egyptians have appeared to be looking toward the
US and the USSR to arrange a political settlement
of the Middle East deadlock. Cairo surely views
the occupation as a serious blow to those hopes.
Now Egypt's only major ally--the USSR--is in de
facto military occupation of another nation and
Cairo can hardly support such an action while pro-
testing the occupation of its own territory. By
and large, however, the UAR is trying to lie low,
ana has issued no official statement thus far.

13. Of all the Middle Eastern states justify-
ing the Soviet action, Iraq has been the most forth-
right, calling the invasion a "defense of world-wide
freedom." The Soviet government has hitherto re-
served judgment on the new Iraqi regime, implying
that Moscow's approval is linked to Baghdad's future
performance. Iraq may believe that supporting the
intervention will increase its standing with the
Kremlin.

~5-
teWk . .

SESREL

( SEDRET C

edi uel OEOPGNeDLS:S Clee

Effects

14. The image the Soviet Union has sought to

create for itself in Africa and Asia as an enemy

of imperialism and champion of democracy has obvi-
ously been tarnished by recent events in Czechoslo-
vakia. Several African governments have canceled
cultural exchange programs with the USSR and pre-
viously existing suspicion in some governments of
Soviet propaganda efforts has probably been in-.
creased. Nevertheless, there is unlikely to be much
lasting or significant impact on Soviet relations
with these countries. -Many of them receive Soviet
military and economic assistance, and some have
strategic or internal political reasons for keeping»
their relations with Moscow on an even keel. In

most of the others, Moscow had little prestige to
lose.
