Pro-cominform Communist Party-vidali Speech on 27 January-vidali's
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014767, dated 5 February 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014767).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

INFORMATION REPORT |

te

‘

i

SECURITY INFORMATION

COUNTRY Free Territory of Trieste REPORT NO. C5-5265 *
SUBJECT Pre-foninfons Comuunist Party ~ DATE UISTR - 20 March 1993
Figali Soeoch on 27 Jam ~
. NO. OF PAGES . &4&
DATE OF INFO. 27 January 1953 : : REQUIREMENT NO. RD *
PLACE ACQUIRED’ (2 February 1953) REFERENCES

INE SOURCE EVALUATIONS IN: THIS’ FEPORT ARE DEFINITIVE.
THE APPRAISAL GF CONTENT IS TENTATIVE.
: (POR KEY SEE REVERSE)

source: From two feirly reliable individuals (C) with good contacts in pro-Coninfors
Communist Party circles in Trieste. Appraisal. of Content: 2.

i.
2.
3.
¥ h.

Vidali

ts Proposal for Solution of the Trieste Issue?

cn 27 Jawary 1953,Vittoric Vidali, Secretary o2 the vro-
Coninfom Commnist Party of Trieste, addressed 2 general
meeting of activists and card-carrying Barty menbers.t

‘His -reaarks concering the Iv Party Congress y2re reported .
‘an TL Lavoratere on 2) January 1953. A swrary of his
other remarks follows.

Ko action has beea teken on the Party's proposed solution ef the Trieste question.
prop q

tf the Party does not Fight with all its nicht ani if the Farty's proposal is not .

publicized, the Free Territory of Trieste (FIT) will be divided within a few
nenths according to the wishes of the Anglo-Anerican imperialists.

The vericus political parties which the Party eporoached for unity of action

against the barter

objective is to jsolate the Party to fight this arduous end ervcial problea

alons.

The Party mist not ve cowardly and it must not fear being eccused of wanting
frieste returnéa to Italy. At the present time, more than ever, & barter is
being prepared. The Caristian Denoorats have said that it would be worth more
to shou a newsreel iv southem Italy of a syrbolic catry of EBerseglieri into .
Trieste thar any election campaign because the people of ‘southern Italy do not
ynow the Party's problens and do not understand then. as

Reed for Revolutionary Vi gilance?

An article entitled rGestago in Trieste" was recently mvbliched in L'tnita. It

is true, another Gestapo js working in Trieste. The opposition is using ald
kinds of intinidatioss and means to split the Party. The Gestapo warks in the

—

& ?
.

Te ee

[s- ] 3x bm :

SMR Modleana By “Ry Feld Glactbwthen by Oe) : wr ARCHIE: Abceaht

as a
thegtan “anln gies

x She toutes
ferte m=

have not responded, nor will they. Jt is evident that their

we ar ae pickin Me le ged
ARO. Cog
PRT ae wre

- = dee ’ C3-5265

hy :
following mahner:. @ Party menber 4s called inte their police cffices. He is
asked to inform on the. Party, just a snail item, once a month will do, Then 4
group of Party menbers, jineduding the informer, Will be put in geil. The .
Soformer will be released imiediately. He 4s offered betiveer. 30,000 and 10,000
lire a month, His assigansat is to recruit other Perty maabers when he hears
then say sonething derogatory about the Party. He is told that he has nothing
to fear because, if the Americans win jn a future war, he will be a hero and,
if the Russians win, no ene will be the wiser, . .

.

S. Tse imperialists 8n Trieste corrupt ani make préstitates of the best Party menbers
in order to make then their servants and sleves. Exuvse the eospression, but
frankly, these jndividvals are... (oBscene). Eow ridiculeus the opposition's
chatter is: if the Russiens win, no one jAll be the wiser) Taney ought to know
that murder will out. Revolutionary vigilance cawnittees have been operating

' for 35 years ali over the world and soeasr or later traitors are winasked and

uae repudiated, Remenber the Slansky trial end the fenous e
the facts indicate that spies are uncovered every 50 often. It may take years,
bab the facis come to light. Therefore; all Party mewhers are urged to exercise

revolutionary vigilance.’ wane : S oy ;

Fo
2.
S
fag)
by
joy
c
5)
re
?
Fg
Op
fue
3
uw
wi
ee
a
+

Anorgmous Letterslt : 5

6, The imperialists try to frighten the Party by'sending letters si ened "Green

_ International", Mesbers of the Party's Central ‘Comnittee ami I have received
such letters. In the letters it is steted thet they are working aong us to
forn a Greea International. They do not Imow that the Perty has been plagued
ty these intrigues since its formation, They are afraid of the Party and are

trying to split it. : } .

. ‘ eas 7 }
7. These stapid letters, it zppears have bead sent by one of those in the exploy
of the reactioa's intelligence service which, in tura,is part of the imperial~ |
istic complex, This means that maocdmun revolutionary vigilance must be exercised
jn order to uncover the enemies in the Party's ranks. . ;

z

JI Socialist International? 7

i 5.

8, On l March 1993, delegates of the II Socialist Internationa will bs in Trieste
to get information, oh the spot, relative to the division o7 the FIT eid to
observe develeprents. This tntemational is paid, directed, and susported by
the enemies of the masses end therefore no faith should be placed in their
findings, These delegates are in agreement with the decisions of London and -
the governnents in the Atlantic Pact.

- Rosenberg Cased :

9, Sone Party members do not understend the rerty dine relative to the Rosenterg
case, They think it ia only the concem of the Anerican pesple because the
Rosenbergs are far avay O71 saother continent, But this is mo reason not to
fight for the lives of two innssent peopla. It is a sywsolic fight for the
respect of denocratle Viberty, [4 is necessary to ficht-aver in Enrope aad to
have a greater sense of homanity, dipiity and political morality.

Sindacath Yaieil

- 10, This year thers yas been a grast aecrease of mec ershty in the Sindasati Unicl
* (SU) axl other untono, Qae Party's onenies ere constantly. tryiag to crush tha
working class, and an, dmacdiste reaedy againat this activity must te Feund

nS

RR

”
. 5
os ‘

staat 4 it. is pealited that many factors: cater int the proble;, Many are con-
vinced by the-Anglo-Americans not to join a union. But there is ar undergrowid
movement which is trying by 211 means to crush the wiity of ‘the working class,
Tt is the Party's job to rectify this situction.

21, In order to strengthen the Trieste working class, nears must be recruited inte
the SU or into non-Party unions if they will not join ows because the Trieste
working cless is one of the least united in Europe, “This is tad tecanse if the
Party wants to ne the working classes in other friendly narties, it must first
unite its ow uorking class. Pee x -

Tialian Blee cn Lav ;

12, Next to nothing has been done to support the marvelous fight by the Ttalian
_people ageinst the fraudulent election law, Tais magnificent fight should be
supported betause if democratie liberties are token avay in Italy, they will be
taken away in Trieste, -There ere many martyrs langeishing in -Italian prisons _
for having fought agai cise this. lay. The party must also fight to assist the
prozressive forces in affirming theuselves so that it may enjoy the fruits of
Italien victories. If something concrete is not done, the Party shoul< be
ashamed of itselt. t :

Relations with the pcr8 : - :

13. here are too sany members in the Party who do not yet understand the importance
of a close liaison between the Party in Trieste and the Partito Comnmista I[tal-
ieno (FCI; Tialien Communist Perty). Although sone Farty meabers sey thatthe
" party is linked to the Italim people as mich as it would be to the Chinese if o:.
-the Lalter were in need, it is not true becanse the Chinsse are eae aldy ond the
Party cannot help then materi ally bat only norally.

Wh. The party should be interested above all in what is happening in Italy and Yugo-
slavia, and should support thase individuals who are fighting against a rebirth.
of fascism, -Italy is a bordering country of Trieste as i8 Yugoslavia’ and it is
our daty, as intsmationalist Communists, to svoport the people there, The FCI,
under the guidance of the beloved Togliatti, is always ready to come to the aid -
of the Party in Trieste. Therefore, the fight of the Italian proletariat -shovld
be followed closely and participated in actively, even by going on strike, and
concretely taking aétion.? : nq

Relations wi th the Tedependents and Resistence in Yugoslaviald

15, Recall that many party oe ee during the pre-ele etion period insisted cn the
necessity of uniting lists of cardidates with the independents, It would have
been a catastroche for the Party, and above all, it Would have been dishonest
and politically immoral if it had swallowed the bait. ~ : toe

16, It should never be forgott tenhow mich the pre-Coninforuists in Yugoslavia have
suffered. The magnificent heroes who, despite persecution and Titoist terror,
fought and are fighting for Narxist-Ieninist principles, cannot be betre .
If the Party had united with the independents, it would have teen a "rotten shan
and an unforgivably eaangarek et.

17. The party ‘should be ashened for not havir S se eively y supsorted the eiandestine.
struggle in Yagosl a it showld have been the duty of the Farty to joe an
organization to aid these unfortunate martyrs. Funds should be collected i:
order to givé concrete aid to these individuals suffering political perescition
in Yugoslavia. : :

- A - C5-5265

party pressti . : : a _
A : ‘ :

18. The crude truth ehout the Party press 4s that many sections have not yet sured
gn money from sales. Hundreds of thousands of lire heve not teen temed in or !
accounted for, In eidition to this, the party is in debt onc million lire. It :
is very difficult to keep the Party press alive, and you now vhere the prinay
favlt lies for these disastrous economic coaditions. The sections should take
care of these matters, or the perty will suffer. In order to report rre-congces=
sional news 11 Lavoratore Will again be issued in eight pages. A warm appeal is
made to all colleciers, distributors, croup leaders, wid cell committecs to do
their best tc increase the sale of Party press ne serial, ;

~

Washington Comments

. . 1, Vidali gave a ‘similar soeech on the same day... See CS-3537.4.

2. See cS-h$38 for recent information coaces ne. Vidali's provosal for solving
the Trieste issue. - f ahs “ ES hs fare td ee eae

3, See CS-3622, paragraph hh, CS-3537, paragraph 136, aod C5-3645 for information
on the Party's revolutionary vigilence canpaign. a Nt

oh. Possibly identical with the anonynous letters reported in 35-4878 and C3-37h0.

S. vWideli said approximately the same thing ‘in another speech on the saue day.
See CS-3537,-paragraph 5. : cen 4

. we 2 :
.

6. See €S-3636 for more information-on the Party's cény sign to seve the “Rosen- ‘
pergs. + fh «

i : - a = Wy

7. 08-3537, paragraph 13 reported that Vide steted that incteasing membership
in the Labor voious was to be an inmediate party objective. © 7-7 7

B, See CS-3537, paragraph 7, and CS-1301 for the Party*s relations with the PCT.

Field Comets ; : ae

9, An article written in a similar vein by Antonio Cettoner was published in
Tl Lavoratore on 31 Jenuary 1953 wider the headline: "La Nostra Partecipa-
Gicne Bille Lotie del Hovimento Democratico Tualiano."

Jo. An article written in a similar vein by Marie Rernstic was published in
* Jl Lavoratore on 32 January 1953 wader the healline "La Rostra Solidaricta
BL Popola della Jugosiavia". a : ;

VL. Washington Comment: See cs-lS58 for a report given to the Executive Connitvee

Of the Party by Mario Colli.and Stanc Bidovec oa the Party press.

ry
