EstimatedD Pub Date) Hanoi and the Pow/mia Issue DeletedD)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000095417, dated 2 August 1987.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000095417).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a

Facntat

AY.

ay

nesute, Director of
he ee Caatral ‘aaa
= ie i Intelligence

SHEL)

" SNIE 143-87
ce September, i 98

iNND 942012 “OS

7

7 oneithoss VEN)

KEY JUDGMENTS

Currently, a total of 2.418 American servicemen are unaccounted
for in Southeast Asia. The governments of Indochina assert that no
Americans are held captive. To date, the analysis of information
available to the US Government has not produced credible or convinc-
y ing evidence that any live American POW’s remain in Indochina.

However, until the governments of Indochina are more forthcoming
in resolving the POW issue, it will be difficult to conclude with
absolute certainty that Americans are not being held against their

will. BA{CNL)
There is a considerable body of evidence that the Vietnamese have

detailed information on the fates of several hundred personnel. We

estimate that the Vietnamese have already recovered and are warehous-

ing between 400 and 600 remains. Thus, Hanoi could account quickly

for several hundred US personnel by returning warehoused remains and

by providing material evidence that could aid in determining the fate of

other personnel. Wea)

Unfortunately, in the final analysis, because of such factors as the

ee circumstances of loss and the passage of time, many missing US
personnel will never be accounted for, regardless of the level of
cooperation by the Indochinese governments. SMWEYL)

We believe Hanoi desires a satisfactory resolution of the POW/
MIA issue in order to remove an impediment to eventual normalization
of relations with the United States. Although we doubt that Hanoi
harbors expectations of significant US aid following normalization, it
believes that improved relations with the United States will facilitate
Vietnamese access to the World Bank and other sources of Western aid.
Hanoi realizes, however, that achieving these objectives is unlikely so
long as the Cambodia issue fester: (i JIHENZ )

In fact, we cannot visualize any inducements, short of a change of
US policy regarding either Cambodia or conditions attached to normal-
ization of relations, that would draw Hanoi into a satisfactory early
resolution of the POW/MIA issue. For Hanoi, the POW/MIA matter,
though important, is clearly subordinate to its larger coals. 3#¢(EYD)

Although Hanoi sees a solution to the POW/MIA issue as being in
its long-term interest, it also sees tactical benefits in manipulating the
issue in the interim. For the short term, keeping the issue alive provides

3

a
(eee cenernepenmencensenesnesmmmememeeesne peer

iNND 942012 ~ GG

20 HRD tna gg a Soa

omic

a useful vehicle for contact with Washington on a variety of issues. At
the same time, however, Hauei does net want the issue to impede
progress toward a solution in Cambodia and the eventual normalization
of relations with Washington. We believe these competing impulses «will
continue to produce fits and starts in Hanoi’s cooperation on POW/MIA
questions over the near term, with the chances for sustained progress

improving if Hanoi senses that progress on a Cambodia settlement is

being made. ror.

Hanoi will not hesitate to use POW/MIA matters to pressure the
US Government directly on unrelated issues. In fact, we expect that
Vieliam, while continuing to hold out the prospect of crash site
excavations and the repatriation of remains, occasionally will resort to
suspending such cooperation to indicate displeasure with US actions, as

it did in April 1986 in response to the US bombing of Libya i

Vietnam is highly sensitized to the high governmental and public
interest in the POW/MIA issue in the United States and can be
expected to time cooperative gestures to coincide with US domestic
political conditions in hope of obtaining maximum concessions. Efforts
aimed at manipulating US public opinion are also likely to continue.
The record suggests, for example, that Vietnamese intelligence agencies
are behind many of the spurious reports of both “newly discovered”
remains and alleged sightings of live POWs in Vietnam.

Should Vietnam decide to give an early resolution a higher
priority, we believe significant obstacles to a full accounting would still
remain:

— We doubt that Vietnam has sufficient knowledge or the techni-
cal capability to account for the fate of the majority of
American MIAs.

— Even if they did, the Vietnamese would face a serious image
problem should they suddenly try to return substantial numbers
of remains.

— The most difficult problem of all for Hanoi would be the return
of POWs should any still be alive. Hanoi would certainly be
embarrassed by international reaction to its behavior and would
have to be convinced that its rationale for “discovering” live
POWs in Vietnam was sufficiently plausible and acceptable to
minimize any such US reaction.

Although evidence of Vietnam’s manipulation of Laos and Cambo-
dia in POW/MIA matters is lacking, the foreign relations of both

countries are closely aligned with Hanoi’s policies. Laos, like Vietnam,
has sought to gain maximum benefits for its cooperation but, unlike

4

FYEMNZ )

z(t) (2)

2Y(ENZ)

PSHLENL)

2. LED)

GB aE DTS I EAS SEL ETS TSE NE TES SDT NOD I ET I TI CITE SITU aE TIT *

Lamm Q47012 —-G)

ONSEN

euniatoman

Vielnam, there is ne evidence that the Lao have “warehoused”’ US
remains. In the case of Cambodia, the situation has beer complicated
by the absence of diplomatic contact between Washington and the
Phnom Penh regime, and by security conditions that inhibit access to

many parts of the country. i?

The Soviet Union, because of its importance as a source of aid and
assistance, is the one foreign power with significant influence in
Vietnam. Moscow probably sees advantages in a negotiated settlement
of the Cambodia problem. But, we do not believe the Soviets are
prepared to risk their influence in Vietnam by pressing Hanoi either to
make significant concessions to ASEAN or to be more forthcoming with
the United States on POW/MIA matters. Sy

While no radical changes in the Chinese-Vietnamese-Soviet rela-
tionships are likely in the near term, a significant shift in the current
relationships between any of these nations could dramatically aiter the
situation in Southeast Asia and, in turn, our assessment of the POW/

MIA equation. ae

renin 049019 7 (o y

SH/EN2)

PH ECHL)

PH(tHL )

2 l(tHtL)

Ree ree rere cece rerneeermmesenemnnenereseecnreememremneennanennene een

Stee Me cag

e. Vie

Narn *

3b)

o4{t{L)

34H)

PHBL

pena

FHG{L)

DISCUSSION

1. Currently, a total of 2.413 American servicemen
are unaccounted for in Southeast Asia. From the US
point of view, a resolution of the fates of these
individuals is a priority humanitarian issue. The Viet-
namese also publicly characterize such an accounting
as a humanitarian, nonpolitical issue, but it is, in fact,
closely tied to Hanoi’s politica! and economic agenda.

2. The US Intelligence Community continues to
emphasize the collection of information that might
Prove useful in determining if Americans are stil]
being held in Induchina. From 1975 through mid-
1987, 974 firsthand live sighting reports had been
received. In these reports, a source claims to have seen
one or more persons they believe to be Americanis)
under some degree of incarceration. While sighting
reports continue to be received and analyzed, none has
yet proved to be the sighting of an American stil] held
captive. The analysis of these reports has shown
consistently that:

—— 65 to 70 percent were sightings of Arnericans
who are accounted for (for example, returned
POWs, missionaries, civilian detainees, USMC
deserter Robert Garwood).

~-15 to 20 percent
fabrications.

were determined toa be

— 10 to 20 percent are, at any particular time, still
under analysis.

3. The governments of Indochina assert that no
Americans are held captive. To date, the analysis of
information available to the US Government has not
produced credible or concincing evidence that any
lioe American POWs remain in Indochina.’ However,
until the governments of Indochina are more forth-
coming in resolving the POW issue. it will be diffi-
cult to conclude with absolute certainty that Ameri-
cans are not being held against their will.

‘Information on live sightings and the locations of remains
usually is dated and reparted secondhand or thirdhand. Moreover,
the sources of these reports often have ulterior motives. For
example, many are refugees seeking resettlement, while others see
opportunities for financis! gain.

4. On the other hand, there is considerable evi-
dence that the Vietnamese have detailed information
on the fates of several hundred personnel. North
Vietnamese and Viet Cong forces had policies govern-
ing the handling of US remains that included remov-
ing identifying data, burying the remains, and sending
the identification and location of the gravesite to
Ilanoi. We estimate that the Vietnamese have already
recovered and are warehousing between 400 and 600
remains. Thus, Hanoi could account quickly for sever-
al hundred US personnel by returning warehoused
remains and by providing material evidence that
cuuid aid in determining the fate of other personnel.

BYOLL)

5. In mid-1985, the Vietnamese indicated their
intention to work toward resolving the POW/MIA
issue by the end of 1987. This message was conveyed
through Indonesian Foreign Minister Mochtar and was
welcomed by the United States. Although more
remains have since been returned—a total of 56—than
at any other period since the end of the war, progress
toward accomplishment of the so-called “two-year
work plan” has fallen victim to the same political
vicissitudes that marked earlier efforts at resolving the
issue.

6. There may be a minority in the Vietnamese
Government who believe that Vietnam should never
have treated POW/MIA matters as a “humanitarian”
issue, and who feel that Vietnam has given up negoti-
ating leverage with the United States in so doing. Most,
however, probably regard the humanitarian approach
as a usefu] fiction, one which permits both sides to
maintain a degree of contact without formal relations.
It permits Ilanoi to demonstrate that it is dealing with
a superpower on equal terms on a matter of “humani-
tarian™ concern. In this regard, Hanoi has on occasion
sought to portray its dealings with the United States on
POW/MIA matters as quasi-diplomatic negotiations
on a variety of regional issues

7. We have also seen that Hanoi is willing tc use
POW/MIA matters to pressure the US Government
directly on unrelated issues. In early 1987, Vietnamese
officials, for example, protested the US sale of artillery
counterbattery radars to China and the establishment
of US war reserve stockpiles in Thailand and indicated

Nn 047012 “LS

PYCLs )

FPHOXA )

that these actions could have an acverse efect on
continued cooperation in POW/MIA matters In fact,
we expect that Hanoi, while holding out the prospects
of crash site excavations and the repatriation of
remains, occasionally will continue to suspend such
cooperation—as it did after the April 1986 US bomb-
ing of Libya—to indicate displeasure with US actions.

(!) (ZZ

Vietnamese Manipulation of POW/MIA Issues

&. Publicity surrounding all aspects of the POW/
MIA issue certainly affects Hanoi’s decisionmaking,
and past revclations over reported manipulation of
human remains are no exception. Hanoi is highly

sensitized to the high governmental and public interest
win the POW SMIA issue in the United States

8. Notwithstanding Hanoi's position that POW/
MIA matters are nonpolitical, there is a long history of
Vietnamese manipulation of this issue. Vietnam can be
expected to time cooperative gestures to take advan-
tage of US domestic political conditions in the hope of
extracting greater concessions from the United States.
There is evidence that Vietnamese intelligence agen-
cies are behind many: of the spurious reports of both
“uewly discovered” remains and of alleged sightings of
live POWs in Vietnam. US interest groups who urgc
Washington to make concessions to Hanoi are the

primary targets of such manipulation.

The Historical Record: Two Steps Forward, One Step Back

In the 197s, the United States demanded 2 “complete”
eccounting of POW/MIAs as a precondition tc any normaliza-
tion of US-Vietnamese relatinns. Vietnain, in turn, demanded
US economic aid as a precondition. In the late 1970s, there was
still 2 belief in Hanoi that the United States could be 2 source
of direct assistance to Vietnam.#

When a US mission headed by Leonard Woodcock
visited Hanoi in March 1977, the Vietnamese insisted
that “normalzation” must include US economic aid,
and that normalization of diplomatic relations and the
provision of US aid were interrelated. The Vietnamese
were told, however, that the Paris Agreement was dead,
and that the POW/MIA issue must be solved on
humanitarian rather than political grounds. In Hanoi’'s
eye, the timing and composition of the delegation
reinforced its view that the United States ought to
expiate its past actions. The Vietnamese view of the
Commussion’s role was distorted, and it contributed to
Hanoi's shift from flexibility to a harder line regarding
reparations. The Vietnamese were counting on the
reccipt of aid cven to the point of including any monies
they might receive in their budget planning process.
The Vietnamese also misinterpreted the American pub-
lic’s mood during the period by underestimating conser-
vative backlash over the notion of aid and overestimat-
ing public desire to forgive and forget.

Progress toward normalization was dealt an addition-
al setback when Congress, in 1977, passed legislation
banning US aid to Vietnam—a direct repudiation of the
Nixon letter. Despite the diplomatic setbacks, however,
visits to Hanoi by groups or individuals perceived as
“friendly” were sometimes the occasion for the return
of small aumbers of remai

In the late 1970s, US-Vietnamese relations turned
sharply cooler as a result of Washington's continued
cultivation of China, Vietnam's rival, and subsequently
as a result of the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.

Hanoi’s 1978 invasion of Cambodia and the subsequent
Chinese “lesson” consumed Vietnamese energies and
reordered priorities for Hanoi’s policymakers. ‘he
Cambodian campaign and concomitant threat [rom
China forced Hanoi te double the size of its military
with the resultant diversion of attention from the
process of nation building. Massive Soviet aid took up
much of the balance but drove Hanoi even deeper into
the arms of Moscow. Hanoi failed to achieve ils imme-
diate goals in Cambodia and the war dragged on.
Western condemnation of Vietnam's occupation of
Cambodia brought deeper isolation. Between 1978 and
1960, there were no further returns of remains to US
authorities JB

- In September 1982, Vietnam agreed to a longstand-
ing US proposal! that technica! experts from both sides
meet on a regular basis to discuss POW/MIA matters.
The Vietnamese agreed to six technica] meetings per
year, the first of which was held in December 1982.
These meetings led to the return of the remains of nine
Americans in June 1983, but shortly thereafter Hanoi
failed to keep to the schedule. Since then, a pattern has
emerged in which, under prodding from US officials,
the Vietnamese reaffirm that the issue is strictly
humanitarian, release a small number of additional
temains, and agree to future meetings. However, the
process has frequently been interrupted by Vietuamese
Pique over US actions it considered arrogant or
unfriendly

“tn February 1973, « letter from President Nixon to Premier Pharn
Van Dong read. in pert, “As indicated ir Article 21 of The Agreement
on Ending the War and Restoring Peace in Vietnam signed in Paris on
January 27, 1973, the United States undertakes this participation in
sccordance with its traditional policies. These principle are as follows:
(1) The Government of the Linited States of America will contribute to
postwar reconstruction in North Vietnam without any political condi-
tlons. (2) Preiminary United States studies indicate thal the appropriate
Dragrams for the United States contribution to postwar reconstruction
will fall in the range of $3.25 billion of grant ald over five year. GR

wn RIANA =—a/N

PHCLt )

P.4/ONE

‘

ON pp Kinga

BH($H1)

10. There is a group of reports of approxitaulely
one Gozen sources that provide explicit evidence oi

Vietnamese manipulation.

— The. sources have been sponsored by one indi-
vidual. a Vietnamese emigre with US citizenship.

— The sources frequently have been surfaced by
this sponsor in a public forum—typically the
media and/or Congress—before the source can
be contacted by the US Government.

— The sources provide stories that initially are
plausible but, upon investigation, are demonstra-
bly fabrications.

— Several of the sources have either direct or
indirect links to Vietnamese intelligence and/or
securily services.

— Several of the sources have made public accusa-
tions that US intelligence representatives mis-
treated, browbeat, or threatened them for having

come forward with their reports. aay

Dog Tag Reports

Since 1979, when the first two were received, the US
Government has received over 2,000 “dog tag reports.”
In these reports, an individual, usually in Vietnam,
claims to have in his possession the remains of one or
more American personnel. As proof of his claim, the
individual provides the information found on military
identification tags—service number, blood type, reli-
cious preference. (v)

Analysis of the names shows that 80 percent of those
named in the reports served in Southeast Asia but
returned lu the United States alive and at no time were
unaccounted for. Another 12 percent of the subjects of
dog lag reports were killed in Southeast Asia but their
remains were recovered and identified, usualiy imme
diately after their death. Further evidence of the
spurious nature of this reporting is that many of the US
personnel named in the reports are “repeaters”"—that is,. °
their remains are reported to have been recovered
several times and/or at widely scattered locations. (uv)

The remaining & percent of US personnel named in
the dog tag reports are unaccounted for, raising the
possibility that their remains have been recovered by
civilians. However, most of these individuals were lost
under circumstances where it is likely that their re
mains were recovered by enemy troops. During the
war, Communist forces had strict instructions concern-
ing the disposition of US remains that came into their
possession. They were to remove identification media
and send details of the cravesite to central authorities.

~ Hutwis retaining POWs against their will se long after

9

F.4(E}2

ii. We cannot visualize any plausible motive for

the end of hostilities. In fact, retention of POW's would
work in contravention of present Vietnamese national
goals. Suggestions that Vietnam might still be “protec-
ting” US deserters, or that Hanoi retained a number of
POWs as a political hedge are speculative and unsub-

stantiated by any reliable evidence Sy w(t 2)

The View From Hanoi

12. Vietnain, of course, views the POW/MIA issue
and its overall relationship with the United States as
only one element of a much larger agenda of goals and
objectives. The results of the 6th Congress of the
Vietnamese Communist Party held in December 1956,
with its focus on Vietnam's economic shortcomings
and leadership changes, suggest that domestic priori-
ties will be very much center stage in Hanoi's thinking
over the next few years. As in the Soviet Union and
China, Hanoi is attempting to implement sweeping
internal economic and managerial reforms. Comple-
menting these internal efforts are attempts by leading

Thus, the Vietnamese Government probably has rudi-
mentary information on the fate of many of the
individuals cited in dog tag reports. (u)

In virtually every dog tag report. the individual
reporting the information is preparing to leave Vietnam
under the Orderly Departure Program or hasa relative -
abroad. Such individuals are approached by another
person shortly before they leave Vietnam, are given the
dog tag data, and are told to provide the information to
the US Government at the first opportunity. Vietnam-
ese living abroad frequently receive letters from family
members in Vietnam with dog tag information that has
been provided to the family by a third party with
instructions to get the information to the US Govern-
ment. Recent evidence indicates that the Vietnamese
Ministry of the Interior is directly controlling the dog
tag reporting using the Orderly Departure Program

ste)

‘The Vietnamese Government has been reluctant
either to expend its own resources in excavation of crash
sites or to permit US technicians the necessary access
The Vietnamese claim that searching for US remains
would not only be difficult and expensive, but they also
allege that such searches are not likely to be very
productive because crash sites are often plundered by
the local population. Dog tag reports may be intended
as “independent confirmation” that the Vietnamese
Government does face problems in attempting to recover

US remains. ; Z4H(1 Ht)

swan 049012 — TI

Sees

SOR He

see mG ds

sat Ys st

Hot aieiaay | eset y

enon: om

reforimists like Party leader Neuven Van Linh and
Vice Premier Neuven Co Thach to establish
broaden economic contacts with Japan and the West
that have been largely blocked because of Hanoi’s
Cambodia policy. Reformists are warning that failure
by: Vietnam to take advantage of scientific and techno-
logical advances in those countries wil] leave the
country even further behind in its development.

asicl

3)

Zaft)

13. Economic imperatives, therefore, are shaping
Hanoi's strategic ontlonk to a far greater extent than
before, moderating somewhat its earlier preoccupation
with security issues such as Cambodia and the China-
Vietnam border. We believe, for example, that Hanoi
has probably lowered its expectations in Cambodia
from insistence on outright control to some form of
compromise coalition—albeit one that meets its securi-
ty concerns—principally because continued rigidity
blocks the important goal of normalized politica! and
economic relations with the United States, China,

Japan, and the West. aD

14. Over the next few years, Vietnam hopes to
achieve satisfactory resolution of contentious issues
that block or impede access to Western: developmental
assistance. Vietnam's leaders will also desire diplo-
matic relations with the Unitcd States as a sign of
international respectability and as de facto recognition
of Hanoi’s political dominance in Indochina. Although
we doubt that Hanoi harbors expectations of signifi-
cant US aid following normalization, it probably
believes that improved relations with the United States
will facilitate Vietnamese access to the World Bank
and other sources of Western aid. However, Hanoi
apparently realizes that no breakthrough is likely so
long as the Cambodia issue festers.

15. In view of its other priorities, especially the
Cambodia problem, we cannot visualize any set of
rational inducements—if offered apart from conces-
sions on broader issues—that are likely to draw Hanoi
into a satisfactory separate resolution of Ue POW/
MIA issue. For Hanoi, the POW/MIA matter is clearly
subordinate to larger goals. Hanoi sees a solution to the
POW/MIA issue to be in its greater long-term interest,
but it also sees tactical benefits in manipulating it in
the interim. For the short term, keeping the issue alive
provides a useful vehicle for contact with Washington
on a variety of issues. At the same time, however,
Hanoi probably calculates that a Cambodia solution it
believes likely in the next few years will remove the
principal obstacle to normalization with Washington,
and we believe it will not want, what is the far less
important POW/MIA issue, to impede that process.

10

We believe these comneting impulses will continne to
produce ts and starts in Hanoi’s cooperation over the
near term, but chances for sustained cooperelion will
improve if Hanoi senses that progress on a Cambodia

settlement is being nade Ge PAGFHL)
On the Other Hand.... What If?

16. Vietnamese authorities to date have been much
less than forthcoming, even in regard to cases that are
susceptible of resolution. The most convincing evi-
dence that Hanoi desires to resolve the issue quickly
and separate from other objectives, would be far it to
repatriate all remains already reclaimed from crash
sites. Although unlikely in the absence of substantial
headway on broader issues such as Cambodia, there
are other steps as well that we believe Vietnamese
autnorities could take to demonstrate a more accom-
modating posture. These include:

— Adhering to the regularly scheduled technical
meetings.

— Providing written reports on alleged sightings of
live POWs, as we have requested.

— Proceeding on an agreed schedule of joint exca-

vations of crash sites. Gay FHENZ )

17. Even if Vietnam were to accord the highest
Priority to resolution of the POW/MIA issue, however,
significant obstacles would remain. First and perhaps
most important, we doubt whether Vietnam has suffi-
cient knowledge or the technical capability to account
for the fate of the majority of American MIAs. Of the
2.413 persons not accounted for, approximately one-
half are listed as killed in action/body not recovered
(KIA/BNR). The evidence at the time of their Joss led
to the conclusion by the United States that they had
been killed but their remains were not recoverable.
Unfortunately, in the final analysis, because of such
factors as the circumstances of loss and the passage of
time, many will never be accounted for, regardless of
the level of cooperation by the Indochinese govern-

ments ay PHfENL)

18. Hanoi would also face a serious image problem
should it suddenly try to return substantia] numbers of
remains. Hanoi could maintain that—in spite of its
needs to concentrate on its own problems—to show
their good faith and for humanitarian reasons, they
had intensified their search and located American
remains. Hanoi could also “discover” remains that had
been located by villagers earlier but had not been
brought to the attention of the authorities. Rernains
could be reburied and “discovered” by a joint US-
Vietnamese team through the cooperative efforts of

Samm 047012 —THX

Saigtheamis ea

Bib ores

SE ae te am

ls

LHQL)

euclieleames

Vietnamese villagers The Vietnamese probaly wonid
seek reaffirmation of US pledees that Washington.

would not challenge Vietnamese explanalicns.

19. A more difficult problem would be the return
of POW’ should any still be alive. There are still a
number of “discrepancy” cases, a lack of Vietnamese
response to inquiries concerning them, as well as
continued reports of live sightings. The greatest diffi-
culty for Hanoi in revealing the existence of POWs
would lie in providing adequate justification of its
behavior to deflect US public criticism and avoid
jeopardizing future relations.

20. Other factors mitigating against a sudden shift
in Hanoi’s POW/MIA policy include:

— An innate suspicion of US good faith.

— A general obsession for US “guarantees,” and a
quest for US concessions

— A strong reluctance to forfeit political leverage.
— Popular hostility to field investigations.

— A distorted view of US willingness to offer ever
greater concessions over the course of time.

SHA)

21. In the context of Vietnam's current political
priorities, it is highly unlikely Hanoi could overcome
all these obstacles—especially in the near term—in the
absence of a strong external push or domestic catastro-
phe. Externally, major shifts in bilateral relations—
Sino-Soviet, Sino-Vietnamese, or Vietnamese-Soviet—
could have a secondary or, more likeiy lesser, impact
on disposition of the POW/MIA issue. Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia is, by far, the overriding issue
for the Chinese and Vietnamese while preservation of
access to Cam Ranh is important to the Soviet Union.
Barring resolution of the Cambodia question, elimina-
tion of Chinese fears of Vietnamese regional hege-
mony, or a collapse in Vietnamese-Soviet relations,
Hanoi is unlikely to elevate the POW/MIA issue to a
priority sufficient to stimulate satisfactory progress.

Outside Influences

22. The Soviet Union is the one foreign power with
significant influence in Vietnam. To the best of our
knowledge, however, the Scviets have rarely at-
tempted to influence the specifics of Vietnamese
foreign policy. There are some signs that Moscow has
indicated to the Vietnamese that it would prefer a
more accommodating posture on Hanoi's part con-
cerning a negotiated solution in Cambodia, but it is

1}

—_———_-——_.

Combogia and taoos

Initial efforts to gain an accounting for Americans
missing ins Cambodia and Laos were complicated by the
fact that the United States considered Vietnam as
responsible for all American servicemen missing in
Indochina. In the case of Cambodia, the situation has
been further complicated by the absence of diplomatic
relations between Washington and the Phnom Penh
tegime and by the fighting since 1979, which has

inhibited access to many parts of the country. ie s4HtX)

In Cambodia, 82 US personnel are missing and
unaccounted for; for the most part in portions of eastern
Cambodia then—in 1979—under partial Vietnamese
control. Appeals to the Vietnamese Government have
not resulted in information concerning these persons.
Because of the remote locations involved, and hnecring
uncertainty as to which political authority might be
held responsible fer the individuals in question, reliable
information concerning MIAs in Cambodia will continue

to be dificult to obtain

In Laos, 552 US personnel are mussing and unac-
counted for. The situation with tegard to Laos is
superficially more promising, in that the existence of
diplomatic relations provides a communications chan-
nel. Moreover, in the past two years the Vientiane
government has professed a desire for improved rela-
tions with the United States and to this end hes
permitted the excavation of two crash sites, one in 1985
and anothcr in 1986. Since then, progress has been slow,
for reasons probably linked to Vietnam's larger diplo-
matic agenda. Laos has not yet agreed to an excavation
during the 1987 dry season, and has been increasingly
disposed to link cooperation in regard to POW/MIA
matiers to a resumption of US aid @

Although evidence is lacking of Vietnamese manipu-
lation of Laos and Cambodia in POW/MIA nuatters, the
forcign relations of both countries are closely aligned
with Hanoi'’s policies In August 1986, the Hanoi-
dominated Indochina foreign ministers, conference put
all three countries on record as prepared to cooperale
with the United States on POW/MIA matters Leos,
like Vietnam itself, has sought to gain maximum bene
fits for its cooperation, but there is no evidence that the
Lao have warehoused remains yy

unlikely that Moscow has taken a position on Viet-
nam's limited dealings with the United States on
MIA/POW matters. Because Vietnam represents such
an aid drain on the USSR—perhaps as much as $2
billion per year—we believe that the Soviets would
have no objection to increased contacts between Viet-
nam and the West, particularly if such contact might
result in a reduced requirement for Soviet aid. It is
possible that the USSR might be willing to play a

mnnn G49012 aa | 4

TH OML

VHOW)

IAAL)

COON pple “aueaaitinge ce:

+

ween:

positive roie in connection with the POW YMIA issue if

it did not invelve pressuring thei: 2lly ina was chee

would daimae Moscow § broader diterest in Vietnam. 7

3100)
Alternate, But Unlikely Scenarios

23. While no radical changes in the Chinese- Viet-
namese-Soviet relationships are likely in the near term,
a significant shift in the current relationships between
any of these nations could dramatically alter the
situation in Southeast Asia, and, in turn, the POW/
MIA equation. Several factors would benefit Vietnam
and allow that country to concentrate on its economy,
work to resolve the Cambodian situation, and pave the
way for better relations with the United States, other
Western nations and ASEAN:

—A rapprochement with Chine, which leads to
China’s drawdown of troops on the Sino-Viet-
namese border, cessation of aid to the Cambodi-

| mendes OHEZ)

12

an resistance, and pressure on Thailand not to
suppert or provide sanctuary to the resistance
forees, would facilitate Vietnam's resolving its
problems.

— A rapprochement between the USSR and China,
which did not compromise or exclude Vietnam's
interests, could promote a more stable Southeast
Asia, particularly if the Soviets and Chinese
provided economic encouragement combined
with the appropriate amount of pressure to
encourage Hannai to resolve the Cambodian issue.

— A warming of relations between Vietnam and
China and/or China and the USSR and a deter-
mined effort to extricate itself from Cambodia
would encourage a more favorable view of Hanoi
among ASEAN and the West and pave the way

for improved relations. Bas a4 SHELL)

sn O47012 ~ >f ae

ANNEX A

The Korea Connection

Vietnam is not the only Asian country trying to
exploit POW/MIA issues. Almost 8.200 Americans
were never accounted for after the Korean war. A
total of 389 servicemen, knuwn tu be alive in Commnu-
nist POW camps prior to the cease-fire, were not
repatriated after the 1953 armistice. Thirty-three
years later their fate is still voknown Qi

Various sources indicate numicrous grave sites are
located at 13 former POW camps and a POW hospi-
tal. In addition remains of UN soldiers are pzriadically
discovered during construction in forward areas near
the Demilitarized Zone. North Korean atternpts to
identify some recently exhumed remains, however,
have met with limited success. Lack of adequate
records, both of POW casualtics and exact grave
locations, has further hampered efforts by P'yongyang.

Since mid-1985, North Korea has tried to exploit the
Korean war dead as part of a continuing attempt to
create a forum for direct official contact with the
United States. P’yongyang has offered to return

IWENL)

remains of some of the over 2,500 missing and unac-
counted for UN POWs believed located in North
Korea. However, negotiations have stalemated over
the North's unwillingness to employ the multinaticnal
Military Armistice Commission, which includes South
Korean representatives, as a communications channel.

P24)

P’yongyane’s goal is to establish a bilateral dialogue
with Washington that will lead to the eventual with-
drawal of US forces from the peninsula. In addition
the North hopes to undermine the legitimacy of the
South by excluding the Republic of Korea from any

direct negctiations. (iy w4(4i)

Noting Hanoi’s attempts to exploit POW/MIA issues
and the growing interest of Korean war veteran's
groups, P’yongyang will continue to play its MIA
hand. North Korea may repatriate some remains
either to keep the issue alive or in an atlempt to
project an image of international responsibility. How-
ever, P’yongyang is unlikely to agree to joint recovery:

oe

efforts in North Korea with any US acency. aR IMENE,

ian BIIOt I 7S

|
|
|
|

wero

tte)

ANNEX 8

The French Experience

In more than three decades since the end of the first
Indochina war, the French Government has yet to
receive a full accounting for its missing servicemen. i}

By 9 September 1954, the deadline for release of al}
prisoners of war under the Geneva Agreements, the
Vietnamese Communists had returned about one-third
of the prisoners listed by the French. By May: 1955,
when the last French forces pulled out of North
Vietnam, the number of men from the French Expe-
ditionary Corps listed as “missing or failed to return
from captivity’’ totaled 8,746, of whom 2,995 were

French nationals yy

When accused of withholding prisoners, the Hanoi
government subsequently asserted that it had released
all POWs in accordance with the Geneva Agreemenits,
and that any missing personnel whom they had not

dlisted as having “rallied” to their side should be

considered as killed in action or dead from wounds. In
1955-56, under the supervision of the Internatianal
Contro] Commission (ICC), Hanoi released a total of
450 non-French soldiers of the Foreign Legion for
repatriation to Central and Eastern Europe. Reliable
Western observers in Vietnain during this period said
that hundreds more legionnaires were released via
China without the required notice to the ICC or the
French Command. Later, during the 1960 and early
1970s, the Hanoi government repatriated hundreds of
non-French personnel to their native countries as a
result of actions initiated by their embassies, without
informing the French authorities or the ICC. There
are indications that some of these persons: may not
have been in Vietnam on their own volition.

Most of those not repatriated prior to the September
1954 deadline were not French nationals from Metro-
politan France but were East Europeans, North Afri-
cans, and other nationalities who had served in the
French Expeditionary Corps. The only French nation-
als who are known to have been returned to French
authorities after 1954 were 40 enlisted men released in
1962 and flown to France with their Vietnamese
families Some if not all reportedly were tried as
deserters in France.

In June 1971, responding to a question in the
National Assembly, the French Foreign Minister
asserted that to the government's knowledge no

15S

French POWs were held in North Vietnam after the

execution of the Geneva Accords in 1954, and that no
members of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps
were being held against their will in 1971

The Remains Issue

While the French Government apparently is satis-
fed that all French prisoners were released at the end
of the Indochina war, it is clear that the Hanoi
government did not honor the terms of the Geneva
Agreement to account for all French troops who were
under Vietnamese control after the end of the va

The remains of over 22,000 French nationals and
legionnaires were initially buried in Vietnam. In Feb-
ruary 1955, the French High Command and the
People’s Army of Vietnam (PAVN) signed a graves
agreement to establish protocols for repatriation of the
remains of men who had fallen on both sides in the
conflict. They were to take “all necessary measures” to
complete the task by 1 July 1956—17 months after
signature of the agreement. In the following 21 years,
as of February 1976, the Vietnamese returned to
France fewer than 1,500 sets of remains. All of the
remains released by Hanci had been buried by the
French in military cemeteries in North Vietnam.
Hanoi has not returned the remains of any of the men
listed by the French as missing in action or as having
died in captivity. Despite the substantial political and
economic concessions the French have made to Hanoi
since 1954, France has never received a full account-
ing for its missing and dead.

In contrast, in South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia,
where the host governments cooperated with the
French, the French Graves Service was able to reinter
in the French cemetery at Tan Son Nhut, Saigon, the
remains of virtually all French military personnel who
had died in those countrics.

In August 1986 Paris and Hanoi reached an agree-
ment concerning the repatriation of the remains of an
estimated 25,000 French soldiers killed during the first
Indochina war. The operation is expected ta take two
years, with the costs, estimated at $2.5 million, being
borne by F rance. >

ey SLL? = 26

.

cached bad ns.

a a AT
