Memo from Richard Helms to Director, Central Intelligence Concerning Military T
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012313, dated 1 January 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012313).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ary

4.3(ay(4

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 235, D.C.

8 JAN 1962

MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intelligence

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: “Some Problems of Modern
Operations”, by Lieutenant-General
I. Tolkonyuk r

1. Enelosed is a verbatim translation of an article which

appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought" CFoyenaya Mysi") published by the.
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander.

2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of
any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

Enclosure

*

4.3(a)(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 3 0 un 1992

Original:

ccs

Director of Central Intelligence

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

National Indications Center

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

end
4.3(a)(4)
Ct

1.3(a)}(4;

4.3(0)\4)

COUNTRY :_ USSR

SUBJECT BB currany THOUGHT: “Some Problems of

Modern Operations", by Lieutenant~
General I, Tolkonyuk

DATE OF INFO: Early 1960

APPRAISAL OF
CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article
titled "Some Problems of Modern Operations", by
Lieutenant-General I. Tolkonyuk.

This article appeared in the 1960 ah Issue
of a special version of Voyennaya Mysl (Militar Thought)
which is classified TOP SECRET by the Soviets and is
issued irregularly. It is distributed only within the
Ministry of Defense down to the level of Army Commander.
The 1960 First Issue was the initial issue of this
publication.

4,3(a){4)

1.3(a)(4}

Some Problems of Modern Operations
by Lieutenant -General I. Tolkonyuk

{The problems of conducting military operations when both sides
use nuclear weapons have already been under study in our system of
operational training for several years.

A good deal is being written on these problems in our military
press. However, in practical operational preparation, in the pages of
the press and in military-scientific work, these questions are examined
very. timidly, which is out of keeping with the conditions of nuclear
warfare, The matter is not taken beyond the adaptation of old forms
and methods to new conditions, although the discussion should be
concerned with essentially new categories of military affairs.

It seems that the time has come to sacrifice poldly many of the .
theses from which the basic principles of operational art and tactics
have developed.

Military art is confronted with the fact that nuclear/missile
weapons bring strategic significance to the fire.strike (ognevoy udar).
There are many reasons for supposing that it will often be possible
to crush the enemy's will to resist only by the strikes of nuclear/
missile weapons. This phenomenon, which the nuclear age has brought
to mankind, confronts states and their armed forces with a series
of the gravest problems in the realm of military activity.

For this reason, our military thinking must work deeply on all
the problems connected with the preparation and conduct of modern
nuclear warfare. Once we havé fully resolved these problems we can
discuss forms and methods of conducting military operations. First
of all, our nuclear/missile strategy must be worked out most precisely,
since it is the strategic nuclear/missile weapon which will be decisive
in the achievement of victory. Then, on the basis of the strategic
requirements for the accomplishment of strategic tasks, and for the
exploitation of the results of the nuclear/missile strategic operations
peing conducted, it will be necessary to work out the methods and forms
of conducting combined operations with the types of armed forces, which
are the subject of examination in the field of operational art.

Along with the study of the problems of nuclear/missile operations

and the use of weapons ‘of mss destruction in zones of military
operation, it is necessary to make a radical reexamination of the

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

problems connected with the use of ground troops and naval forces,
whose utilization and operations must correspond to the conditions
created by the use of weapons of mass destruction.

The resolution of questions of operational art and of questions
on the preparation and conduct of modern operations is possible only
on the foundation of solutions to the problems indicated above.

The absence of even slight experience in nuclear/missile warfare
demands the ability to foresee and to analyze; it demands deep and
logical thinking. To glance unerringly into the future, mking |.
realistic allowance for the prospects of development of the means z
of armed combat - this, in our opinion, is the urgent task of our
military theory.

In this article it is our aim to raise only certain problems of
modern operations and to express our views on these problems briefly.

SII

Nuclear/Missile Operations. The important strategic missions,
which, in the previous wars of our times, were accomplished by the
conduct of a series of strategic offensive operations by ground, air,
and naval forces, and which usually lasted a month or more, can now
be accomplished in a very short period of time with the missed use
of nuclear/missile weapons. Such an objective as depriving a hostile
state or coalition of states of the capability to resist can be
achieved, it would seem, in the course of a few hours or, at the
outside, within a few days.

Of course, we do not consider that it is possible to capture the
enemy's territory with nuclear/missile weapons. For this we will
need mobile, well-trained ground troops with modern equipment, transport
aviation, airborne troops, and troops supporting their operations.

It is possible, however, to deprive the enemy of the means of
conducting war by nuclear /missile weapons alone if one has a sufficient
quantity of the latter and knows how to use them to the greatest
advantage.

The accumulation of a sufficient quantity of nuclear /missile

weapons permits the conduct of so-called nuclear/missile operations
for the performance of strategic tasks.

4.3(a){4)

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4)

What is meant by strategic nuciear/missile operations?

In our opinion, strategic nuclear/missile operations mean operations
conducted by the missile troops at the decision and plan of the Supreme
High Command, by the delivery of nuclear strikes aimed at depriving
the enemy of the most important means of conducting war, at disrupting
his civil and military administration and his national economy, and at
breaking his ability and will to offer further resistance.

The execution of such operations will probably be the most
important and the most crucial act of a future war. This is why the
questions of preparing, supporting, and executing such operations ,
must become «<----cr~ [remainder of sentence missing/.

To learn how to prepare and conduct such operations is clearly
the most vital task of our highest military echelons today; but this
is a fairly complicated matter, not tested by experience, and entailing
great responsibility. Here we have to deal with a very expensive means
of warfare, which is used up in a short period of time, and which my
not be available for repeating the operation in the event that the
first attempt was unsuccessful.

The preparation of 4 nuclear /missile strategic operation and the
attainment of its goals require first of all a good knowledge of the
enemy's territory and of the geographical distribution and points of
concentration of: modern means of warfare, primarily nuclear and
missile industry; the storage points for nuclear ammunition (boyepripas )
and missiles and the bases for their assembly and preparation; the
main branches of industry; the Jaunching sites of missile weapons and
their control systems; the system of antimissile defense; transportation
junctions; the most important points of concentration of manpower;
sources of electrical power; the communication centers of state and
military control, etc. On the basis of these data it is necessary
to select targets in the enemy's territory whose destruction by
nuclear strikes would paralyze the country and its military capabilities.
It would seem that it is sufficient to destroy the most important
points on the enemy's territory in order to place him ina situation
in which it is impossible or senseless for him to undertake any measures
whatsoever for continuing the war.

In planning such operations we should not scatter our resources,

even if we are forced to deal with a powerful coalition of enemy states.
It is necessary first of all to put out of commission the main partner

Fe
4.3(a)(4)
Ries et)

4.3(a)(4)

4.3(a)(4}

who represents the basic and directing force of the enemy camp;

having lost the combat capability of their main partner, the satellite
countries will be faced with the impossibility of starting ar continuing
a war.

To find the enemy's main links (zveno), whose destruction will
paralyze his power -- this is the most important task to be performed
by a nuclear/missile operation.

Thus, for the preparation and effective conduct of strategic
nuclear/missile operations, it is necessary:

- to know in detail and to evaluate correctly the capabilities
and the viability of the opposing side; .

- to select the most vulnerable targets for a strike; of these, to
take only the minimum necessary to accomplish the objective of the
operation; 7

- to determine the amount and yield of nuclear charges needed to
ensure the destruction of the targets selected;

- to determine the number of missile installations necessary for
the delivery of the nuclear charges to the targets selected, taking
into account accuracy (tochnost popadantya );

~ to choose the most suitable time for delivery of the strike;

- to organize control of the missile troops participating in the
operation.

In the preparation of the operation, a very important place is
occupied by the reconnaissance of the strike targets. An incorrect
picture of the enemy, of his vitally important centers, or ignorance
of the location of his most important means of warfare, can result in
the strike being delivered against secondary targets, which will not
achieve the objectives of the operation.

No less important t4s.the proper selection and preparation of the
missile launching sites to ensure the greatest effectiveness and
convenience in launching. The stockpiling of nuclear charges, their
delivery to the launching sites, and their mounting (stykovka ) on
the missiles represent a large volume of work of primary importance,

requiring the expenditure of mich time and effort.
4.3(a)(4)

4.3{a)(4)

4.3(a)(4}

Finally, there is the very complex question of organizing the
control of the missile troops and of the launching and guidance

systems of the missiles.

It is quite obvious that the preparations for 4 nuclear /missile
operation are very complicated and demand well-trained personnel, a
great deal of painstaking work, large numbers of qualified people,
and the expenditure of colossal material means. However, the
results that a successfully performed operation can pring are such
that no means or efforts should be spared to achieve them.

The actual execution of such an operation will take a very a
short time. It appears that it will take from a few hours to a few
days. In oe instance, tf sufficient means are applied, the strike
may last a few minutes and will take the form of the launch ofa
particular series of missiles, in the form of an immense volley
(zalp). In another instance, several series of missiles my be
launched in the course of a few hours or even a few days, and the .
situation may then take on the form of a sort of missile duel.

It is quite possible that during the course of the war it will
be possible to conduct only one strategic nuclear/missile operation
which should determine the outcome of the war. If the enemy is astrong
coalition, possessing powerful nuclear/missile weapons, we my land
in a situation in which it will be impossible to carry out a subsequent
nuclear /missile operation.

In any case, nuclear/missile operations must pe carried out
simultaneously in all, or at least in several, decisive theaters of

military operations.

In presenting this question, we do not think that strategic
nuclear/missile operations will have to be conducted with the aim of
destroying all the hostile states composing the enemy’ coalition. This
will be neither possible nor necessary. The operations must be directed
at the main link of the enemy coalition, at his backbone. Once the
enemy's back is broken he can be finished off by other means and

methods.

After a strategic nuclear/missile operation-has-been carried
out, it will be imperative to know the results of the strike
immediately, to know to what degree the mission has been accomplished
and how far the objective of the operation has been attained. Study

of the results of a strike and of the degree of mane to the

ee

1.3(a)(4)

1 32) (4)

enemy in a short time is an important job for the Supreme Command.
It is needed so that the methods of carrying out further actions to
exploit the results of the operation which has been performed may be
determined and final victory may be achieved. To achieve final
victory, it will be necessary to conduct offensive operations with
ground troops, using mobile large units, airborne troops, naval
forces and naval landing forces to crush the enemy troops who have
survived or who have retained their combat capability, and to
occupy the key positions in eneny territory. It follows, therefore,
that nuclear/missile strategic operations will probably be the min
link in the overall plan for waging a war. They mist be conducted
in close conjunction with the above-mentioned operations by ground
and airborne troops and naval forces, who, in carrying out their
tasks must take mximum advantage of the effect of nuclear/missile
strategic operatiors- :

Modern Offensive Opérations. “The conduct_of nuclear/missile
strategic operations---- several words missing/ scales of aggressive
operations by the ground troops. No matter what the effect of ® —
nuclear/missile strategic operation may be, final victory can only
be won by the occupation of the enemy's territory, or at least of
the key positions.

Consequently, in order to attain final victory it is necessary
for ground troops to carry out offensive operations. This is
explained, first of all, by the fact that far from all the important
targets and groupings of troops on the territory of the enemy will be
destroyed by the strikes of 4 nuclear/missile operation, since to
neutralize or to destroy everything with sufficient certainty would
be practically impossible, and not even desirable. Whole areas, even
very important ones, will remin untouched by strikes in these

_ operations.

Even in those areas or in those theaters of military operations
where the main targets and groupings of troops will be subjected to
overwhelming blows during a nuclear/missile strategic operation, not |
everything will be destroyed, and it is mainly here that operations
by ground troops are needed to exploit the results of the nuclear /
missile strategic operation and to achieve final victory over the
enemy.

In some theaters of military operations or in one section or

another of these theaters and in one or another of the strategic or
operational directions, nuclear/missile strategic operations will not

amum =O)

4.3{a)(4)

4.3(a)\4)

be carried out, because it will be either impossible or inexpedient.
In all such instances, it will be necessary for offensive operations
to be carried on by ground troops.

offensive operations by a group of
front ox by an arny, carried out either within the framework of front

operations or independently. In addition, combined operations may
ve carried out by missile and ground troops and by the navy.

Similar operations (without the use of nuclear/missile weapons )
were carried out during the Second World War. Now, however, they
will be of an entirely aifferent character.

In the first place, for the performance of the tasks with which
they are confronted in operations, ground troops now have at their
disposal, in their missile equipment, the means for the use of high-

yield nuclear weapons. _.This allows them, in the shortest possible

amount of time, to inflict overwhelming blows against the enemy's
weapons of mss destruction, against his basic groupings in the ;
entire depth of their deployment, which can lead to the disorganization
of the opponent's troops and deprive them of the ability, to put up

any serious resistance.

These blows can deprive the enemy of his missile installations,

of the aircraft at his airfields, destroy his supplies of nuclear

the airfields themselves out of commission,
annihilate the basic groupings of the enemy's ground troops, and
disrupt maneuver and control in a theater of military operations.

In addition, this weapon makes it possible not only to inflict losses
upon the troops of the eneny, but to destroy them completely, or at
least to subject them to such strikes that the

effectiveness completely.

In the second place, possessing weapons of mass destruction,
ground troops will be in a position to crush the enemy's resérves in
their mobilization deployment or buildup areas, preventing them from
approaching the pattlefield. This situation imposs entirely new
conditions for combat with the reserves, and poses the question of
the repulse of the counterstrikes and counterattacks of the enemy

in a new form.
It seems that in future pattles counterstrikes my be ruled out

entirely, if the. attacking force is able to organize the reconnaissance
and destruction of the enemy's reserves correctly. :

a  43tan

ae

4.3{a)(A)

4.3104

In the third place, the defensive maneuver of bringing up re-

placements and materiel to the field of battle can be prevented from
the very outset of combat operations.

In the fourth place, the first nuclear/missile strike can,
practically speaking, knock out of commission the basic elements in
the enemy's system of troop control, which makes the unified and firn

direction of the troops impossible.

In performing an offensive operation, a front mist, above all,
exploit to the maximum the results of a prev
nuclear/missile op

missile strikes.
must be the quick seizure of t

Thus, the goal of an offensive operation by a front
he key positions on the enemy territory
so that he has no opportunity to recover from the blow and to carry
out substantial counteraction. The most important task of the troops
of the front will be the annihilation of those groupings of troops
and weapons of mass destruction which have survived the nuclear/
missile strike or have retained their combat effectiveness.

The depth of front operations in the recent past was primrily

determined by the front's ability to suppress the enemy with a large ‘
the given depth, by the depth of the operational

by the permissible elongation of the rear areas
(rastyazhka tylov ), by the lag in the pasing of airfields, and by the
degree of effort and exhaustion which the troops were permitted to
sustain. For the successive execu
front was allotted definite boundaries for the inmediate and follow-
up missions. Within the framework of 4 front operation several
guecessive offensive operations by armies were carried out.

The most important form of operation was the encirclement of
the basic grouping of the enemy and his subsequent annihilation.
This was done in order not to give the enemy 4 chance to withdraw
his grouping to the rear area, put it in order, reinforce it with
reserves, and to organize further operations, 1.¢., to make it
impossible for him to escape destruction or annihilation. The most
important phase of the operation was breaking through the enemy's

defense.

How do these questions appear in modern operations? Since

modern weapons permit a cons
just suppression) of the group

jatent degree of annihilation (and not
ings of the enemy in the entire depth

as
am

4.3(a)(4)

4.3104

of his deployment, the offensive must encompass the entire depth at
once. For this purpose, the mobile groupings of the front must

follow the nuclear/missile strikes and proceed in the most advantageous
directions into the depth of the enemy's deployment to chosen
objectives or to selected areas. landings of airborne troops must

be made immediately to capture objectives located deep in the interior,
and in a coastal area amphibious Jandings must take place. Part of
the troops must be moved by air. In such a situation combat focal
points will form in the entire depth of the operational direction
along which the offensive operation is being carried out. Only in
thia case can the results of nuclear/missile strikes be exploited
effectively and in good time. ;

!
From this, it seems to us that the principles for planning a
front offensive operation which we accept at present are outdated
and no longer correspom-to modern demands. ,

The division of the overall task of a front into immediate
and follow-up territorial categories, to be carried out in sequence,
does not permit the fullest and most’effective exploitation of the
capabilities of todays new means of combat. In planning an operation,
it would appear to be more expedient to envisage two goals <- the
immediate and the final goal of the operation.

The immediate goal of a front offensive operation should be the
destruction by nuclear/missile weapons (and other weapons of mass
destruction) of the enemy's weapons of mass destruction, the annihilation
of the basic groupings of his troops, the destruction of his communication
lines and radiotechnical systems, disruption of his government and —
military controls, the liquidation of his supplies of mteriel, and
the disorganization of the population, i.e., the liquidation of the
enemy's ability for organized resistance.

The final goal of the operation must be the capture of key positions
or vitally important areas on the enemy's territory, i.e, the occupation
of his territory.

In order to reach these goals the main operational problems for
resolution by the commnder of the front must be; to define the ©
objectives whose destruction by nuclear/missile weapons should deprive
the enemy of the capability to resist or counterattack and to determine
the yield, types, means, timing, and method of these strikes. The
resolution of these problems will in fact also resolve the min strike
in the operation.

aD
—um (OO

-10-

434

4.3(a)(4)

After this, the commander of the troops of the front should
determine the areas or objectives which must be captured by ground
or airborne troops, or by troops carried by aircraft and helicopters,
or, in a coastal area, by amphibious landing forces, in order to
envelop the entire depth of the enemy's territory in the shortest
possible time. He must determine the initial (iskhodnyy) grouping
of the ground troops and the direction of movement of the mobile
groupings for the capture of selected areas or objectives, and for
the annihilation of surviving groupings of enemy troops, or of
those which retain their combat effectiveness. Further, he must
coordinate the timing and the tasks to be performed by all arms’ =-
of -troops, and resolve all the remaining questions connected with
the preparation, organization, and execution of the offensive operation.

In this connection we must bear in mind that there is no longer
any need to establish solid groupings of troops along a narrow front,
as was the case in the past, when a front was forced to do this in|
order to penetrate the enemy's defense, since it is unthinkable that
the enemy, under modern conditions, will establish any harmonious
(stroynyy) system of defense with the continuous front and boundary
lines typical of the last war. Supposing that such an attempt were
to be made, it would lead to the annihilation of the defenses by
nuclear weapons, and the entire front would in any case be destroyed.

On the whole, however, there will be no continuous fronts, and
consequently the penetration of the enemy's defenses on an operational
scale has already passed into history. It is possible that in isolated
cases there will be a penetration of the enemy's defenses, but this
can happen only ina tactical sense.

Proceeding from what has been said above, it is also necessary
to review the matter of army offensive operations. It seems to us
that there is no need for the combined-arms and tank armies operating
within the composition of a front to execute several army operations
in the framework of an offensive by the front. The tank army must
penetrate to the entire depth of the front operation, and occupy that
part of the opponent's territory which is farthest from the line of
departure. The combined-arms armies should be given the task of
operations throughout the depth of the front -operation, or .be.assigned
to occupy a specific portion of territory within the boundaries of
the front operation. Airborne and amphibious landing forces, as well
as troops being moved by air, mst also occupy specific centers or
areas in the interior of the enemy's territory.

amp 18

“11s

4.3(a)(4)

4.54)

The tempo of the operation is a different matter. Measuring the
tempo of a modern offensive operation by the daily advance of the
ground troops is senseless, in our opinion, because this will not be
in accordance with the decisive conduct of the operation, and will
not allow the timely and effective exploitation of the results of
the strikes of nuclear/missile weapons in the entire depth of the
operation . The duration and procedure of conducting the operation ~-
these are the main issues in the calculations, rather than the tempo,
in its former meaning. <A battle will split into separate focal
points of combat, dispersed over a large area, and therefore the
planned advance of a mass of ground troops as a continuous front
is unthinkable. .

The most important and perhaps the most complicated element of
modern offensive operations will be, it would seem, the preparation
of the operation. It will include an entire set of complicated measures,
large in scope, and labor-consuming, which will need a definite, and
probably lengthy, period of time. Therefore, in studying modern
operations, our operational art mst pay special. attention to the
problems of the detailed preparation of an operation, because its
successful execution and the results obtained will depend entirely
upon its preparation. Hence, in our view, a modern offensive operation
should consist of two phases; the preparatory phase and the phase of
execution of the operation. These periods must be determined by
the General Headquarters (Stavka) of the Supreme: High Commnd, in
close coordination with the strategic nuclear/missile operation
being prepared, in order to coordinate and unite the efforts of the
forces and means of those participating in the nuclear/missile
strategic operation, and of the ground troops operating in one or
another strategic direction. In addition, it appears that the nuclear /
missile means of fronts will often be detailed for participation in
and execution of a nuclear/missile strategic operation being carried
out by the General Headquarters with the forces of missile troops of
strategic designation. —

It is plain that the preparation of such an operation is a
complicated and crucial process which should start at the moment the
front receives an assignment to carry out an offensive operation
and end at the moment the signal is given to deliver the nuclear/
missile strike. This phase will probable take longer than the
actual phase of execution of the operation.

The phase of execution of the operation should begin at the moment
the signal is given to begin the nuclear /missile strike, and end at

4.3(a}(4)
ae

4.3{a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

the moment the final goal of the operation is reached. Now, when
nuclear/missile weapons have become the basic means of destruction of
the enemy and the decisive factor in achieving victory over him, it
would be incorrect, to say the least, to call the beginning of the
activities of the ground troops the beginning of the operation,
because the start of artillery preparation, or the shift to the
offensive of the ground groupings, does not represent the min

phase of the operation; these activities will be of a subordinate
nature in comparison with the operations of the missile troops by
whom the destructive missile strikes will be inflicted on the eneny.

The first operations in a future war will be of a decisive
nature, and the ultimate outcome of the war will probably depend_on
their successful execution. Therefore, the primry and urgent fone
or two words missing/--"of military thinking is the most thorough
elaboration and the theoretical solution of all the problems
connected with their preparation and execution.

The Materiel and Technical Support of Modern Offensive Operations.

The advance of ground troops in an operation will undoubtedly be carried
out under difficult circumstances. Supply bases, depots, communication
-lines, and other targets in the rear area my be subjected to heavy
nuclear strikes by the enemy; the operation of railroads my be
disrupted and delivery of materiel and technical supplies by air my
be impeded. Thus, one can not count upon being able to supply troops
with materiel according to plan during an operation which has already
started. In this connection, both missile troops andground groupings
mist have all the neceasary materiel supplies at their disposal. before
the start of combat operations. These supplies must be dispersed,

well concealed, and camouflaged, in areas which would be convenient,
and from which issue to the troops at any time can be ensured. As
much of this mterial should be stockpiled before the start of the
operation as would be needed to carry the entire operation through

to its ultimte goal. In addition, provision must be mde for a
specific reserve of these supplies, also concentrated in convenient
areas, from which they could be delivered to the troops by motor
transport and by helicopter. Fuel should be supplied mainly by
pipeline in order not to burden other, more vulnerable, means of
transport with its delivery.

4.3{a){4)

~ 4.3{a)(4)
