Probable Developments in Venezuela
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010486, dated 4 June 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010486).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

wy
x

eee
See oe

Pen asc

one
opr "

RUMAN ‘s
NT'S SECRETARY PILES

DISSEMINATION NOTICE.

1. This copy cf this publication is for the information and use of the rectpient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Fur-_
ther dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the in-
formation for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-
ment of State . : a.

bv. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of “he Army

¢. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department ot the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Cominission

g. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

kh, Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De-

partment or Agency’ : ie ;
2. ‘This copy may be either retained or destroyed by! burning in accordance with

applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar-
rangement with the Office.of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National Security Council
National Security, Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Atomie Energy Commission

Joint Chiefs of Staif

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Development Board
Munitions Board

1

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN VENEZUELA

The intelligence 1 izations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff
participated with the Central intelligence Agency in the
preparation of this estimate. All members of the Intelli-
gence Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on
24 July 1952.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN VENEZUELA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the current situation and probable future developments in Venezuela
With particular reference to factors affecting the availability of strategic materials.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Venezuela is ruled by a three-man
Junta which derives its principal support
from the armed forces. The Junta’s
strongest opponent is Accion Democrat-
ica, a leftist but non-Communist party
now outlawed and operating under-
ground. Accion Democratica actively
seeks to discredit the regime and, given
the opportunity, would not scruple to at-
tempt its overthrow by force. | Despite
this threat, however, the Junta is prob-
ably capable of maintaining itself in
power. _

2 The outlawed Communist Party does
not constitute by itself a threat to Ven-
ezuelan political stability and. has’ been
unable to form any firm alliance with the
non-Communist opposition.

3. The Junta wishes to create a legitimate
regime through elections and @ consti-
tuent assembly, but is determined that
its opponents shall not take over the gov-
ernment nor the armed forces lose their
rower to control Venezuela’s political
course. Hence it is unlikely that elec-
tions (if held) will be free, and the op-
position may boyectt them.

4. The economic condition of Venezuela

is good, and is likely to remain so, mainly .

pecause of high world demand for oil and

iron ore.

5. ‘The oil companies have developed and
maintained excellent relations with the
government. There is no evidence that
the present administration contemplates ©
nationalization of the ofl companies. No
foreseeable political change in Venezuela
would threaten the production and export
of.petroleum and iron ore.

‘6. The oil installations are vulnerable to

sabotage. Present security measures are
probably adequate to deal with sabotage
by local elements with limited resources.
Additional measures would be required to
cope with a large-scale, concerted pro~
gram of sabotage involving foreign as
‘well as local elements, such as might be
expected in the event of war.

1. Venezuela has generally supported US
policies ir: the UN and OAS and has
shown. willingness to cooperate in Hemi-
sphere defense. The Venezuelans con-
ceive their proper role to be limited to
defense of their own territory and strate-
gic industries. They desire to develop
military forces adequate for that purpose.
They would be unlikely to consent to the
stationing of foreign troops on Vene-
zuelan soil.

SEcha

DISCUSSION

Political

8. Venezuela is governed by a three-man
Junta’ which overthrew the regime of the
Accion Democratica (AD) in November 1948.
The Junta has supporters among conservative
and wealthy businessmen, industrialists, large
landowners, some government employees, and
professional men. In general the support of
these elements, which tend to place a higher
value on order than on civil liberties, reflects
satisfaction with a regime to which they have
@irect access. The Junta’s main support,
however, is furnished by the armed forces,
especially the Army.

9. Upon taking power the Junta outlawed the
Accion Democratica. The Junta has abro-
gated the 1947 constitution, censured political
groups for voicing “intemperate” criticism of
the Administration, arrested key political fig-
ures, and until very recently prevented or
impeded opposition political rallies. Its atti-
tude, however, has not been as arbitrary as
that of the Gomez dictatorship (1908-1935).
The Junta has begun preparations for elec-
tions to a constituent assembly, and has in-
sisted, against conservative opposition, on
universal suffrage. It has tried to persuade
voters that its policies are conceived in the
best interests of the nation. But the Junta
appears determined that ‘ts opponents shail
not take over the government nor the armed
forces lose their power to control Venezuela’s
political course.

10. The Junta has continued many of the
progressive social and economic policies of
preceding governments. These policies re-
flected the aspirations of the largely illiterate
lower classes, especially organized labor, and
of the small but expanding groups of business-
men, intellectuals, students, and professional
men. The successive administrations be-
tween 1935 and 1948 did much to satisfy these
groups. Accion Democratica in particular in-
stituted a vigorous pro-labor policy, with

irhe Junta ts at present composed of Dr. German
ssaarez Flamerich, Col. Marcos Pérez Jiménez,
and Col. Luis Felipe Llovera Paez.

numerous projects for improving health, sani-
tation, and education. It established direct
popular elections and in general showed a
respect for human rights unusual in Vene-
zuela’s history. .

11. The Junta is opposed by most of the social
groups which supported the immediately pre-
ceding regimes. Accion Democratica, despite
its outlawry in 1948 and the imprisonment or
exile of some of its most important leaders,
is the Junta’s most powerful adversary and
still the most widely supported political party
in the country. Led by an able group, whose
members operate from exile and from under-
ground, AD is seeking to create conditions
which will lead to the overthrow of the Junta.
It carries on an active propaganda campaign,
utilizing clandestine newspapers and radio
transmitters, and it seeks international politi-
cal and labor support.

12. The principal representative of interna-
tional Communism in Venezuela is the regular
Communist Party (PCV). Also active are a
small dissident Communist party, the PRP
{c)? which broke away from the PCV in 1944
in protest against PCV collaboration with
non-Comraunists, and various groups of resi-
dent foreign Communists of which the most
important is Spanish. Altogether the Com-
munists in Venezuela number less than 20,-
000. ‘Their capabilities are enhanced, how-
ever, by their influence in organized labor.
In 1950, among 40,000 petroleum workers,
some 6,000 belonged to Communisi-led unions
and in addition there were significant num-
bers of Communists in AD-led unions. At
present, among organized workers in general,
some 22 percent belong to Communist-led
unions, as compared with 50 percent in pro-
AD unions, 10 percent in minor opposition
party unions, and 10 percent in Junta-
approved unions.

18. In 1950 the Junta suppressed the PCV and
dissolved its affiliated labor unions. The
PRP(c), however, has enjoyed relative in-

*Partido Revolucionario del Proletarlado (comu-
nista).

SPCRE

munity. Ever, when, in Jwne 1952, the Junta
severed relations with the USSR and cracked
gown on Comnrunists and Communist-front
organizations, the PRP(c) was allowed to re-
tain its status as a legai political party. ~

14. Before the overthrow of Accion Demo-
eratica in 1948 its leaders were becoming in-
creasingly hostile to Communism, although
they tolerated Communist activity as a
counterbalance to that of right-wing, anti-AD
groups. The line of demarcation between AD
and Communist units in organized labor was
gradually becoming sharper. Since the AD
was suppressed local AD units have on occa-
sion collaborated with the PCV in student and
lapor agitation. The national leadership of
the AD, however, still realizes that Commu-
nist objectives differ from theirs and that
full cooperation with the Communists would
jeopardize the future of the AD. They differ
sharply with Communist leaders in their views
on national policy. For these reasons a
united front between AD and the PCV has
not developed and is unlikely to do so in the
foreseeable future. The AD leaders have
been able thus far to maintain a hold on their
rank-and-file despite Communist efforts to
win over AD adherents.

15. The principal remaining legal opposition
to the Junta is COPEI, a Christian socialist
type party which was the chief (though never
formidable) political opponent of the AD be-
fore 1948. COPEI has been outspoken in its
demand for a return to constitutional govern-
ment. It has some appeal to both organized
labor and conservative elements interested in
a restoration of civil liberties, and ite strength
is said to have grown since 1948. The only
other legal opposition party of consequence is
URD,' a secular leftist group which has en-
deavored, without apparent success, to win
over the popular followings of the two sup-
pressed parties, AD and PCV. COPEI and
URD are of potential importance, as legiti-
mate, non-Communist means of expressing

*Comité Organizacién Politica Electoral Inde-
pendiente.

“Unién Republicana Democratica,

opposition to the Junta, but they do not now
constitute an opposition strong enough to
cause the Junta serious concern.

16. Accion Democratica, though suppressed,
retains the largest political following in Vene-
zuela. Future political developments there-
fore depend to a great extent on its capa-
bilities and intentions, Through agitation,
and at times even terrorism, the AD will seek
te discredit the Junta or any Junta-created
regime, to undermine its stability, and to
bring it into conflict with other opposition
groups and with liberal opinion at home and
abroad. Given the opportunity, the AD
would not scruple to overthrow the Junta by
force, as it was itself overthrown. The AD,
however, now lacks the all-important support
of the military and without military support
is incapable cf organizing a successful revolu-
tion.

17. The Junta is capable of preventing an AD
revolution and of maintaining itself in power
so long as the Ar.ay remains united behind it.
But it desires to install a regime that will be
widely recognized as constitutional and will
at the same time protect the special interests
of the military and of their civilian allies. It
is under mounting pressures from political
and labor groups to hold elections. Restora-
tion of full constitutional government will be
@ complex process, which the Junta can speed
up or delay to suit its own political purposes.
The Junta may so greatly limit political activ-
ity as to cause opposition parties to boycott
the election. In such an event, the Junta
might fail to gain from an election the pres-
tige it desires at home and abroad.. But it is
also possible that the Junta might succeed in
registering’ a large favorable vote, since it is
the party in power and times are good.

18. The military will continue to be the key-
stone of government in Venezuela. There are
personal rivalries among influential officers of
the armed forces, and it is possible that these
conflicting ambitions might lead to disturb-
ance of the regime, with shifts of power be-
tween military groups and personages. We
believe, however, that the Junta will be able to
heal such rifts as develop within the armed

forces, especialiy if it convinces the military
that disunity offers AD new opportunities to
undermine the stability of government.

~ .
cconomic

19. Petroleum accounts for over 95 percent of
exports, 97 percent of foreign exchange re-
ceipts, and more than 65 percent of govern~
ment. revenue of Venezuela. At the begin-
ving of June output was at the rate of 680
miilion barrels per annum, which is near
maximum capacity without the development
of new concessions. The Junta, like the AD
before it, has not granted new cil concessions,
although recently it has encouraged oil com-
panies to bid for them. It has msintained
cordial relations with the companies, which
have experienced fewer operational difficul-
ties than at any time since the Gomez regime,
perhaps because many of the more serious
problems were adjusted during the AD admin-
istration. ;

20. There is no evidence that the present
administration is thinking of nationalizing
- the oil industry. Opposition parties have

proposed, from time to time, the eventual ©
nationalization. of the industry, presumably -.

after Venezuelans have been adequately
trained to take over. Nationalization remains
a potential possibility, but is not a present
problem. ‘The lack of outery for nationaliza-
tion is attributable to tie satisfactory
arrangements between the government and
the oil companies, and to the good public
relations established by the companies,

21. Known iron ore reserves in Venezuela are
estimated at 2 billion tons, assaying about 60
percent iron. Their development is now in
Sts early stages: exports began in 1951. Cur-
rent output is at the rate of approvimately
2,000,000 tons per annum and is expected to
rise to some 13,000,C00 tons by 1960. All ex-
ports of iron ore go to the United States.

22. Venezuela’s general industrial and agri-
cultural development has been slow. Partly
because of inadequate internal. communica-
tions, a large segment of the population. lives
at a subsistence level. Oil exports provide
ample foreign exchange to puy for imports

& 4

and until recently there has been litle incen-
tive to develop ‘ocal industries. Venezuelan
capitalists tend to invest only in domestic real
estate or in enterprises abroad. To redress
this situation AD adopted the policy of using
the government’s oil revenues to build up a
more diversified economy. The Junta has
maintained this policy: government funds
are being used to expand agricultural and
industrial production and for extensive public
works.

23. The present economic outlook for Vene-
zuela is bright. US demand for low gravity
oils, which, are in short supply and come
chiefly from Venezuela, continues to expand.
Venezuela’s competitive position has been
strengthened by developments which have
brought oil production costs in. the Middle
East more in line with those in Venezuela.
The country has virtually no foreign debt, a
very small. internal debt, no budgetary def-
icits, and = “old reserve of some $336 million.
The.export of iron ore promises well for the
future.

Military ..

24. Apart from their political role, tie mili-
tary forces of Venezuela have chiefly per-
formed the function of maintaining internal
order. The Army and the National Guard (&
professional security force) have been the
most politicaliy powerful elemei.ts in Vene-
zuela’s military establishment. There is little
evidence that either the Navy or the Air Force
will challenge their position in the near fu-
ture. The officer cadre of the Army comes
for the most part from the upper classes and
is generally conservative. The rank-and-file
are short-term conscripts, mostly from the
lower strata of society, and are therefore more
susceptible to propaganda directed against
the present regime. The officers, however,
can almost certainly control the rank-and-fite,

25. The Venezuelan Army, Navy, and Air
Force are small in comparison with those of
other South American nations. The com-
bined strength of the armed forces (including
4,000 security troops) totals roughly 18,000
officers and enlisted men. All branches are
deficient in logistics and equipment. None

has significant military capabilities, though
together they could probably defend Vene-
zuela from attacks by neighboring countries.

26. Venezuela is dependent upon foreign
sources for virtually all of its military equip-
ment and the nation’s favorable financial posi-
tion enables it to pay for its requirements.
Although a preference exists for US equip-
ment, particularly of the heavier varieties,

the military have bought material in Europe.

when supplies have been unobtainable in the
US. Destroyers and jet aircraft have been
ordered from the UK ard some jets have been
received. Semi-automatic rifles have been
procured from Belgium and antiaircraft guns
trom Sweden.

27. Venezuelan military leaders are irritated
because the US does not sell them latest
models of the best equizment. Nevertheless,
they have professed willingness to cooperate
jn Hemisphere defense arrangements. They
insist, however, that Venezuela’s role should
be limited to the strengthening of its own de-
fenses in order to assure the availability of
strategic materials. Military activity in de-
fense, therefore, would probably not extend
beyond protection of oil and iron ore installa-
tions, coastal defense, and anti-submarine pa-
trols.

Strategic Considerations

28. Venezuzlan cil is of prime strategic im-
portance to the Western Powers. Venezuela
is second only to the United States in petro-
leum production and is the world’s largest
single exporter. la present circrumstances
Venezuelan oil is in high demand in the
United States and Western Europe. In the
event of war its continued svailability would
be essential. The vulnerable location of Mid-
die Eastern oil resources and the relative
security of Venezuela serve to increase strate-
gie reliance on this resource.

22. Venezuelan oil exports (including re-ex-
ports of refined products from Aruba and
Curacao) normally go to Western countries.
In 1951 these exports amounted to 588 mil-
lion barrels, of which about 40 percent went
to the United States, 25 percent to Western

Europe, and most of the remainder to Latin
America. So far as is known, none was
shipped to Soviet Bloc countries.

30. The second strategic commodity supplied
by Venezuela is high-grade iron ore, all of
which goes to the United States. In 1951
the US received from Venezuela nearly 700,000
metric tons, roughly 6 percent of US ircn ore
imports. Total shipments are expected to
reach at least 2 million tons in 1952, 5 million
in 1955, and 13 million in 1960. Iron ore
transportation is hampered by the remote lo-
cation of deposits in the Guayana highlands
and by transshipment and dredging problems.
From the El Pao (Bethlehem Steel) deposits,
ore must be carried out by rail to water trans-
portation, and there is an additional transfer
from river to ocean-going bottoms. A rail
and water route from the Cerro Bolivar (US
Steel) deposits is still under development.

31. The oil industry in Venezuela has many
features vulnerable to sabotage. Output must
be channelled through a few major outlets
and processing points, The Lagunillas dike,
the narrow Maracaibo channel, and the Ma-
turin bar in the San Juan River all represent
points of vulnerability. Underwater opera-
tions, which are required for many wells in the
Maracaibo ayvea, and the submarine pipelines,
especially those which transport oi] and water
to the barren Paraguana Peninsula, present
special protection problems. The system of
power plants is of key significance from a
sabotage viewpoint. Pumping stations, re-
fineries, storage facilities, and overland pire-
lines would also be remunerative targets. The
effects of sabotage upon production would be
increased by the fact that nearly all eyuip-
ment must be imported. The danger of sab-
otage is increased by the presence of Commu-
nist workers in the oil fields and tanker feet.

$2. Measures to protect petro’eum installa-
tions have been taken both by the government
and by the companies. The former has sup-
plied armed protection (principally by securi-
ty troops), but the extent of the oil fields
causes such units to be widely dispersed.
Some assistance is also rendered by the Na-
tional Service of Investigation, though thi:

POL T

wert

Service is generally limited to surveillance of
subversive activities in the petroleum indus-
try. The companies, individually and collec-
tively, have taken such defensive measures
as establishing a photographic-badge identi-
fication system of eraployees, fencing proper-
ty, and providing lighting installations. Par-
ticular attention has been given to the pro-
tection of such facilities as power plants,
pumping stations, compression plants, and
pipeline terminals. The companies, in coop-
eration with the local authorities, also screen
the crews on the Lake tankers operating be-
tween Maracaibo, Aruba, and Curacao. The
effectiveness of these measures, however,
is to some extent reduced by the fact that
the petroleum workers, even those who are
non-Communist, are generally disaffected to-
ward the Junta regime and therefore tend to
regard with indifference or suspicion govern-
ment and company efforts to enforce securi-
ty measures.

33. Existing security measures in the petro-

Jeum industry, together with the assistance .

rendered by the armed forces, are probably
sufficient to control strikes and Iocal disturb-
ances and to deal with sabotage »y local ele-
ments with limited resources. Additional
measuxes would be required, however, to cope
with a large-scale, concerted program of sab-
otage involving foreign agents as well as local
elements, such as could be expected in the
event of war.

34. The nascent iron ore industry is less vul-
nerable than the petroleum incustry. Iron
ore is mined from open pits, and equipment
is well dispersed. However, transshipment
stations could be sabotaged rather easily and
the 170-mile, narrow channel being developed
in the Orinoco and Macareo Rivers could easily
be temporarily blocked.

imernational Relations

35. The majority of the Venezuelans are not
tivery interested in world affairs, and like

ther Latin Americans shy awa,
utitary involvement in areas remote

ctexm Hemisphere. Venezuelan-
US relations, ka which oil plays an important

role, have generally been friendly, but at times
delicate because of the nationalistic actitudys
of some members of the admizistration. Some
irritation has arisen over trade and tariff poli-
eies, the civil aviation agreement, and pur-
chase of military materiel.

36. Venezuela maintains friendly relations
with most Latin American states, but its rela-
tions with some have varied with the political
orientation of the Venezuelan Government.
When AD was in power it pursued a policy of
close cooperation with the more democratic
nations of the Hemisphere. The present gov-
ernment tends to be cool toward those gov-
ernments with which the AD regime was most
friendly, especially when such governments
continue to offer refuge to AD exiles. Guate-
mala is, however, the only Latin American
country which has never recognized the
Junta. ©

37. Relations \.ith the USSR, established in
1945, existed merely on a formal level. In
breaking off diplomatic relations with the
USSR and Czechoslovakia in June 1952, the
Junta was no doubt influenced by its long-
held view that the Soviet Embassy and Czech
Legation were centers for propaganda and
subversive activities. It also appears that
the Junta expected to reap some domestic
political advantage from the act, and possibly

also to win favor from the United States.

38. In the Organization of American States
and the United Nations Venezuela has gen-
erally supported US policies. It has ratified
the Rio Treaty and the Charter of the OAS
and has expressed willingness to cooperate in
Hemisphere defense, Venezuela voted with
the US on every important political question
at the sixth session of the UN General Assem-
bly. Venezuela has shown reluctance, how-
ever, tc implement certain UN resolutions for
which it has voted. Although it supported
the UN action in Korea and the Uniting for
Peace resolution, it has not offered military
aid to the UN in Korea or promised to set
aside armed forces for use by the UN in the
event of future aggressions.

39. ‘The Venezuelans conceive thelr proper
role in Hemisphere defense to be the protec-

tion of thelr own territory and strategic in- They would be unlikely to consent to the ata-
duetries. They desire to render their own tioning of any foreign troops on Venezuelan

armed forces capable of fulfilling tris mistion. sol
