Probable Developments in Vietnam to July 1956 - South Vietnam
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008010, dated 2 September 1955.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008010).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NYE G3. 1-3- 65.
11 October 1955

cr
aD ge

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 63.1-3-55

PITY VEL OP MELTS TH YT
rtd ake DEVELG PRES: i] Tt VT

TO JULY 12 86

Subniltted bu the

DIRECIOS. OF CHNPTRAL venta, AGENCE
The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparction of tits estimate: She Contrat foetelti Agyoucy
and the titelligence organizations of the Deourtiacnils of
State, the Army, the Nauy, the Air Fore nd Whe Joint Siaf.

Concurred in by the

INTELLIGENCE AUVIEORY COMMITTEES
on dt October 1955. Concurring were the Special Assistant,
Intelligence, Department of State; the Arststant Chlef of
Slat, G-2, Beja it of the Army; the Director of Nevel
Infalligence; tae etlor of Intelligence, USAF: and the
Hepaly Mirector for Intellipenre, The Joint Sug. Tne Atearic
Lneriy Com mission Representative to the JAC, and the Asals
ant Dircetor, Feu ! Ph, ton, dostuincd, the

subject being oniside of their jurigaieli

‘ =
Declassified by_OS¥3Z3_
aate,__4 NOY 375

:

nee thier aimed aa ected eee

Boe Oe

- aa Oy cout
BR Be Be? Phe eet yi do Sn peat ne wetted a

ae

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This eslimaly was disseminated by the Central Intcilivence Agency, This cops
is for the iriformaticn and ose of the recipient indicated on the font cover ang. of per-
sons under his jucisciction on a need to know basis, Additional essential dissemination
nay be authorized by the following officials within their respeclive departmenty:

&. Special Acsistant to the Scerctary for Intelligence, for the Department of
Stato

v. Assistant Chict of Stalf, G-2, for the Department of the 4 tray

¢. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Deparimcat of tae Navy

a. Diccetor of intelligence, USAF, for tne Departuient of the Ain Fores

e. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, far Oie Joint Staff

f, Dircetor ef Intellgence, AEC, for the Atomic Hucrey Co mmission

g. Assistant Director, PEM, for the Federal burcat of Lovestigation

h. Assistunt Director for Contral Reference, CLA, for any ober Department or
Agency

This copy iiecsy be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with eppli-

sae eceuril y reculstions, or retuened to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange.
mont with the Ofice of Central Heferenue, CLA.

» Viren on ealivaate is disscniinated overseas, the overseas rectplonts may retain
it jie boperiod nid je excess of one year. At fee of Raa the est inanbe ie
Githor be desheoved, retained to the forwarding eeency, or pormission should jer
guested of the forwarding ayency to retain il in sec aéee with TAC-D 69/2, oe
Sure JU53,

WATRHIN
1 contulng gM ormation aftcetings
bj of the United
the esplonace
"94, thie tans.

This inz
the Nationa
within the rece
Titla 38, UEC
mission of 5
fo on ubey

Lorized person is prohibited by Ie,

DISELTCUILION:

a ae House

il Beourity Counslt
inert af Sihate
rinien’ af Deferiga
eraviona Chorin:
Atonde bmorey Com
Pederel Bitesau of Zaye bigation

¢ Board

Listy

poe Dare ee eo ee ee

dite Shs 8. 08 Bal ASE SMM MN, HE EE NS

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN VIETNAM TO JULY 1956

THE PROBLEM

rate the prospects for the development of a Vietnamese government with

ee Helene itself heen internal Subversion oe ee and

1. Since

the first ful-

name se » Kor -rarmment.

ee cae bilily of the South
to develop an effective gov-
eh can survive during the
is SLID in doubt. (Peras.

ssuimine Dem survives ar) provided
o retcive wholchcarted US

eva he will prolkbly be
iy rit oe dissi-
vremain ha office dur-
estimmle. More-

or

we ue Laie GL

hee ge
“ye 6

support,
able be copy
dent ole
ing Une
over,
txercise Uk

thie 19th

his

prays ne

th Viet £17 an, Dien
further progress in
«a ere cflective government.

Yuet faries 48

Py SAS ae.
sure fram the

refumiis Gere $9 de

aah

direct consultations with the DRV con-
cerning elections, he would insist on con-
ditions which he felt certain the Comm
nists would he unable to accept. Aware
that such u pusition will probably cause
the Viet Mint: to increase their elioris to
destroy his government, Diem will prob-
ably seek to bind the US more specifically
to the defense of Vielnam. (Para. #2)

4. The Viel Minh, despite their relaiive
quiescence, present the preatest potontial
threat fo Diem. Should the Viel link
@iecl openly to invade the south with
regular forces, they are cupable of de-
fouling the VNA oo any French Forres
(if commilied) ix aS

Viebluain. iiarenre:

10,000 militery per:
nays, tne Viet Bin
to undertake local
actions, and all-scale bul widesprene
gucrrilia wari: VYhe Viel Minh can re-
infarce these forces by i
South Viele. The Viel Minh appar-

exerts

“ii by Ss
Aare an ete

sonnel in 1 South Viet.
h have the capalduty

sabotage and terrorist

3

cae we

a5e

re ge

ERR Tee

niicaiineg inie

ently mritical duflteece inp pean

Viet

H
tediore
(Paras.

wrecks Sf ab tnreushegl South

THA.

Ae OR IRR OR A RIN IONE! oot Slane pe EMA grONR RE cee aan

5. We believe that the Viet Minh, at jeast
until July 1956, will probably continue
to concentrate priinarily on a “political
struggle” designed on the one hand to
exert uressure for implementation of the
Geneva Agreemenis and on the other to
bring to power in the south political per-
sonalitics amenable to coalition govern-
ment with the Viet Minh. Their tactics
will probably be to maintain and in-
crease their influence in the villages,
hamper government administration, dis-
credit Diem and the government, to sub-
vert the command clements in the VNA,
and to infiltrate and incite dissident
groups — particularly elements of the
secis —- to oppose the government. (Para.
31)

6. However, the Communists probably
estimate that u ane: 23 they effectively chal-
on Pu oe Diem govern-

and slabiive if Socom: ne wen de-
cide, despite the presence of the Inter-
natioual Control Commission, to iniliate
smelbscale bul widespread guerrilla war-
fare in the south, provided such action
: over-all Bloc policies

x
was consistenk with

and provided they estimate that such ac-
tion would not provoke Manila Pact coun-
teractions. (Para. 30)

7. Should the Viet Minh initiate large-
scale guerrilla operations supported by
substantial infiltration from the north,
the South Vietnamese government would
be hard pressed to do more than maintain
control in the Saigon-Chclon area and in
a few other major urban centers. If the
operation were prolonged, the govern-
ment probably could not survive without
military assistance from outside. (Pura.
36)

8. While the French will continue to seek
to salvage as much as possible of French
commercial and cultural interests, we be-
lieve French interests and influence in
South Vietnam will progressively decline
during the period of this estimate. Ex-
cept for training personel, possible air
and naval bases, and perhaps some tolhen
forces, the French will have withdrawn
the bulk of the FEC by July 1056.
French forces remaining in South Viet-
nam will almost certainly not be com-
mitted against the Viel Minh, except in
self-defense or possibly as part of a rul-
tilateral We ae action. (Puras. #0, 510)

DISCUSSION

INTRODUCTION

- Wh fon Neo Dinh

Diem was eppointed Pre-
te Bao Daiin July 18s,
inlable and delecinra

Yea eva the sdimnin-
mingss povernmcal, Ube
riomilion was worewtary,
whificalion with the Nae-
vuio wes divided by re-
puters wednion. Their
fo belioy their gceamemnic

a gota 7%.
wo Uhedr nes CRE

sf peewee.

The most significant arliculate pol tical sent.
ment of the bulk of the popuh
antipathy for the Freneh corms th

personal repard for Ho Chi Minh as ihe syrn-
bol of Vietonuimese Nationale The
educated ata who were cometrmeg with

national ped

were primary power sonk-

Pg aac The existence
poll » Hee ES of gtitedtd
firwitizes ef pettiebst

aber ene Ne eT

.

PUP RT: Canp

ZF RD TIL NM DY
: 1

epee

vested interest in the economic and political
life of the country and the French govern-
ment feared that the establishment of an
effective anti-Communist government in the
south right involve French forces in renewed
fighting with the Vict Minh. The prospects
were made even darker by the ease with which
the Vict Minh appeared to be consolidating its
control of the north.

10. In this situation Diem was forced to move
slowly. Ajthough possessing considerable na-
tional prestige as a patriol, he was inexperi-
enced in administration and was confronted
at the outset by the intrigues of Bao Dai and
other self-interested individuals and groups,
who in many cascs benefited from French
support. Moreover, the loyally of the army
to the central government was in doubt and
General Binh, its Chief of Staff who also held
a ciinmission in the French Air Force, was
openly manenvering for political power. The
national police and security services were
commanded by Bay Vien, the leader of. the
Binh Muyen gauny who had bought thern from
2a0 Dai in April 185i and-who was hostile to
Diem. Finally, Diem was handicapped by 2
lack of trained ‘nan vbustrators al the Hational
and provincial levels.

1. In the difficult and confused situation
confronting the national government, Diern
concentrated on clminating or neutralizing
the most imipertant groups and individuals
chale nging, ue ow a at his goveramment.
ners] Vinh anid
Bag Dai i itie “al seen, won Une gup-
port of the ; une established the inde-
pendence ef his pevernment from French in-
flucnce. “hy sibery, persuasion, and finally
force, Dern virfucliy climinate! the Fanh
XMuyen ae the Ab eb elements cf
the Hoa Hac eect tale his euihority.
j sored? the Car Dai
aor inlo aM Uneasy
these succcsstygl fee

and Ronis

epee Tried

etig's “¢ eftag tz

Ebest ete anes tite ot

ment in South Vietnam is still in doubt.  Al- os

though Diem has established control over the
apparatus of government, he has dealt only in

part with such fundamental problems as: (a)~.
the development of an effective administra-

‘tion, particularly on provincial and local.

levels; (b) the institution of a popularly-
sanctioned constitutional basis for the re-—
gime; (c) the elimination of armed oppesi-:
tion and the extension of government authori--
ty throughout all areas of South Vietnam, (da)
the suppression of Viet Minh military and po-
litical capabilities remaining in South Viet--
nam; and (e) the restoration of the cconomy.

il, THE INTERNAL POLITICAL AND SECURITY
SITUATION

The Dier: Government

13. At present, Diem’s greatest assets are his ~
reputation for honesty and unsullicd nation-
wism, his contre! of the Victnamese National
Army, and the moral and financial support of
the US. In addition, Diem has gained con-
siderable popular following, csapecially in ure
ban centers and in recently paciited AFCES &
has the loyalty of the refagees from
Vietnam. However, should he lose arniy ‘é
US suppurt, his regime would prebabiy

lapse.

14. Diem also has the sympathy anc:
instances the active support of the rs
1,000,000 Cathalies in Howth Vietnam
clading about 500,060 Catholic refagccs
the north), who represmnl an antic
core with considerable politics!
However, in order to tercid agureye
relighsus isste, Dian, a ae ath

ain

‘careful nat te fiypear ta ck

olig cause.

35. Dien; is whi in thie ae mm
ging @ politcal miaehiw.

posed poitcarlly of eval t
polifirel stature.

and by fin i
regisnce

far chy conti:

sed Ge Det EI By se heh kai eatin wisi

. a

on his unpopular brothers for advice and en- — elections by the end of 1955 for a national as-
trusts them with positions of great responsi- sembly with limited powers. To what extent
bility. His tendency toward “one man rule,” this process will be carried through will de-
his dependence on his brothers for advice,and pend largely on Diem’s judgment as to his
his rejection of Vietnamese leaders whom he own appeal in the south and the extent of
does not trust, has denied his government Communist influence. The formation of a
many of the few trained administrators. representative body may be delayed into 1956.

16. Although Diem has established firm con-
trol over the army and security forces, he has
not established internal security. This fact, 19. The Cao Dai, the most powerful of the
coupicd with his failure to organize his gov- sects, aspires to polilical control of South
ernment effectiveiy, has been largely respon- Vietnam and is potentially Diem’s most inn-
sible for the delay in the implementation of | portant non-Communist opposition. It con-
promised reforms in government procedure trols a sizeable rural area and has a relatively
and agrarian policies. Projects for agricul- cohesive religious following of some 1,500,000
tural development and land reforia, under the Vietnamese, including a trained army of
guidance of US advisors, are still largely in about 15,000. While the Cao Dai spiritual
the planning stage. Even with US assistance leader, Pope Pharm Cong Tac, has coopcraied
and its own best efforts, the Diem govern- with other sect leaders opposing Diem, most
ment has completed only about 47,000 hous- Cao Dai military ieaders have supported
ing units accommodating approximately 40 Diem. General Phuong, the Commander-in-
percent of the 659.000 refugees from the Chief of Cao Dai forces and probably tie sect’s
north. Diem has mede some progress in in- most influential political leader, has entered
creasig the number of villages under the into an agrcement with the government to
administrative guidance of the central gov- integrate the bulk of his troops into the VA
ernmncnt. Civic action teams, cornposed of and to disband the remainder. Mowever,
represcniatives of the various ministries, Phuong has continued to imtrigne fo obtain
have boon trained and sent out to villages in beter terms and the agreeincatl still hag nut
aboul 1G provinces, been folly implemented.

Non-Communist Oppositio.-

17. Diwan bas made a considerable effort to 9 20, During Use spring and summer of 1955,
palvenive mess popular support behind his the Cao Dai sought to become the mies po-
pregiain. Inilialhy, he concentrated on ex-  Hliea! force in South Vietnam by attoniyling
plaiting popular antipathy for Rao Dai and to capture contrat of the Revululionary Com:
the Frenne: more yecentiv he hes sought foo omilite (RC). This committee was formed
Gevelop strong anti-Communist sentiment. during the spring of 1955 at tie thie oo the
Althossh thers have beer instances of un- Binh Kuyen crisis. It resulted from >
contraticd manife in of popular anger oo ger of follawers of Diemi’s beather Miu,
end segephobia, Divin has on lac whole suc- Dal generals The and Phoutong, ard Heo Poon
Lee gyi opular pissons within General Neo, ali of whom sourhi teouce the
force of netionalisnm: to serve Uneir oven
Hiilcal ereis, Ho is kely that mauech
extrem: nabionall
tee Chiring
Cue Dea offerte Us unile
the HO the politival

Theis sp pyscrigns

te

in gdvi-gys are currently pls
, F

foagram te obtain a t 3p.
(seine ware ovontunlly

-aescitbiy i Soulh

Pe)
res

“

refercriin for @

-hetweenm Peon and Bao es
SEES 258 2c

. Fruggs the perieh of

teyention af Cad Dai feces

probably conlinue. This process may be
marked by considerable political jockeying
‘and some loral armed flare-ups may occur.
. Because Phuong and other Cao Dai leaders
-lack popular support, we do not believe they
‘will elect to resist Diem by force. Should
‘they adopt such 4 course, we believe they
would not pose a major threat te the con-
: tinued existence of the government. How-

: ever, the effort to suppress their forces would
idisrupt army training and divert attention

:frora other critical tasks including the sup-
i pression of the Communists.

- 22, Although the Binh Xuyen and some ele-
“meonts of the Hoa Hao sect still retain the
. power to wage guerritla warfare in limited
‘areas, the government by force and bribery
has drastically reduced the potential of these
groups to chaliinee its authorily. The fol-
lowing is the disnosition of the four principal
- forces ef the Hoa Hao: Ba Cut’s unit is be-
Neved ta be reduced ta about 21,000, who are
scettered and in hiding after evading VNA en-
- Cirelement: Soul's ermein has been badly disor-
baniecd as a result of VNA- operations. aril
probobly docs not now totalmore than 1,500;
Neuven's force of some 2,509, though osten-
say ralied to the government, is in. fact
“neubral and News unit-of soni 3,900 is co-
uyerating with Une government. The Binh
Xoyen have probably ceased to be an efiec-
tive force falkevineg the recent VNA operation
avcsins) Ghebr swarip hideout However, the
retaining forecs of Bay Vien, Ba Cut, and
perhaps Soal wil probaly continue to oppose
the government durhis the period of this esti-
teate quand may be tompled to cooperate with
the Viel Minh.

24. Meat of the ather politica? eral ure
ep: seul to Dis noand are compoucd primariy
aad ee opportiunists,

folowing. While

tinue io panmuiver for

eure Perwer, we he-

nee Hay come bo

they Gercane convinced

reineved by political mu-

(eRe 9 ten Ah 9S 5 cn

ti eAineein cette cnn emt tiod Sead Sik Seta oS Hin

Communist Opposition

24. The Cormmunists pose the ultimate threat
to the independence of South Vietnam. The:
Communist regime in North Vietnam possess-
es afar stronger army, a more expericnced ad-
ministration, greater cohesion of Icadership,..
and greater drive than the government of.
South Victnam. However, we do not belicve -
there will be a direct test of military and:
political strengths during the period of this
estimate. Considerations of over-all bloc
strategy and apprehension concerning, possi-
ble US intervention will almost certainly pre-
vent an open Viet Minh attack. On the other
hand, Premier Diem wiil almust certainly not
agree tu a test of relative popular strengths in -
national elections.

25. The struggle, therefore, will be indirect.
On the Vict Minh side it wil) be carried out

by their accents now in South Vietnam, by the -

combined resources of Bloc diplornatic and
propaganda facilities, and possibly by frac 3s:
infillreted across the 17th Parallel.

a Since the cease-fire ara the nae
vacuation of most Viet Minh military units
to the north, the Communists in South ae i
nam nave cenceutrated on methods of “politi
cal struggle” designed on the one hand to
exert pressure for nationwide elections accord-
ing to the Geneva Agrcements, and on the
olher to infillrate and subvert Une jnstitutlons
af Free Vielnain with a view ta bringing ta
areer in the south police) personalities whe~
would bo ancuahle toa coalition cavcernisent
with the north. ,

27, We have little

a activities oT:

Vietnan via

South vb etree ee,

Viet MM: ae i

An wakyces

severe) Con

sea fates sa :
He Toni berations

tothe inenre on Viet MM it
pienligns ia
however,
al fran rea eed
nebition bd
fel ensives

irre dba gncin fone lene cams

: Sateaseetel dl Reb ee ita

tains of Central Annam, the Piaine des Joncs
area adjacent to Cambodia and the Laotian
borders, and in the Ca Mau region of Cochin-

China. These elements are probably engaged
in intelligence activity, organizational and
training functions, and in protecting local
headquarters and base areas. They are aiso
probably encouraging and perhaps assisting
those Binh Xuyen and Hoa Hao forces in con-
tinued opposition to the government. Avail-
able information indicates that the Viet Minh
in South Vietnam retain a continucd capabili-
ty for armed action and for a campaign of
mass intimidation, assassination, sabotage,
and terrorism.

28. The Vict Minh probably exercises effective
political control only in areas which are un-
derpopulated and in which the government
has made no attempt! to establish its own ad-
ministration. These include pockets in the
plateau and foothill areas of South-Central
Viethare, the Corsa peninsula in the extrerne
southern part of Victiam, and the Plaine des
Jones ie Cochin-China. The Viel Minh also
probably exerts influence in-rural areas where
povernrcnt administration is present but siiil
ineffective. in urban areas where national
government control is greatest; the Viet Minh
are working priracrily througn front organi-
gations, such as iubor unions, social service,
and Upones’ groups.

29, There appears to be little Camrmunist in-
fiMration jn the bicher scholons of the Viet-
names National vovernmentor the array, but
{here are indications of fairly extensive penc-
tration of lower units af the administration,
pessipiy ineludings revienal and. provincial
pevernments, noah certainly Une village
coumciis Wi sito the South Vietnam
te, resent information
STEER SUELESTS prowl Pera
av successful Cammunict efiorts ta
tie factions of Unese sects which re-
3 ‘armed append lan ta the

‘are confrontod wilh a
their ¢: en vr far pati.
ya Deatatay

aE ah 28% ste wy ota -

Homyer few

Se nena eee ee

be Mh tite AS

tively challenge the position of the Dicm gov-
ernment the latter will gradually strengthen
and stabilize its position. Morcover, they have
probably concluded that Diem will not agree.
to elections or unification schemes which
would favor the Communists. Under these.
circumstances the chances for a Communist
take-over of the south by means short ef open ~
force might decline. On the other hand, the. _
Communists also probably realize that the use
of foree against South Vietnam --- either
through open invasion or by infiltrating suffi-
cient troops across the 17th Parallel to insure
a successful “liberation” —- would jeopardize
current Bloc peace policics a: . risk provoking
US intervention. In addition, the Commu-
nists may not presently have sudlicient
Strength in South Victnarn quickly ta over-
throw the Diem government and may there-
fore estimate that to undertake widespread -
guerriNa warfare without substantial nifiltra-
tion from the north might lead not only ta
the weakening of their exposed orennivation
in the south but alse to a drastic loss of public
support.

31. We believe that unt) July 1956 the Corn=
mutists will folaw a caires of action wider
primarily political They did not scive ty
the crisis of lest spring fo initiate
warfare and their ee da pron
ments from Wanei an ta direct :
followers in the south, & intine their yx ait ;
“al actions. ‘Their ee appeirs toe the
preservation of their pose as the derend:
Vietnamese unity and independoncr
the supporters ef (he provisions of the
Accords. Jn tie south,
work mi both the villuces i
tovxploil local grievances, ta
vas

oe
ae

lane povern inert aitlysi:
to sudgvert Che comimiaid reais in ie VO
to disercdit Diet as a ab
age dissent groupes in

agains) the froverninesy:

fs
ole

fo oaea f betee

port for plou.ide iiss ae
wrifiention div bbe
bes ceye

corte fucrsulbs

ent Mecticiong «bed am satel Ge, eh Scat

hay 2 in a iE hick ie

oa

Nhe inthis i. Ba cae Site Seda,

ably hope by this tactic to force a
the government o
velop widesprea

change in
South Vietnam or to de-
antipathy toward Dicr.

32, However, the Coinmunists might. despite
the presence af the ICC, decide to initiate
srnall-scale but widespread guerrilla warfare
in the south, provided such action was con-
sistent with over-all loc policins and provided
they estimate that such action would not pro-
voke US counteraction. The Communists
presumably would be less fearful of US inter-
vention if they believed! that they could con-
duct sacecsivl pacriita operations with suffi-
cient support frorn the south to make unnec-
essary obvious and extensive support from the
north.

IN, VIETNAMESE MILITARY AND SECURITY
SERVICES

43. ‘The Vicinamcese National Army (VNA)
has an eslinated strength of 147,000, ¢xelu-
sive Of some BA0G-19,090 sect forces in the
SsOfintegraticn The VNA is composed
150 corsbat botichons, including 146 in-
faritre-ivps, . armored, and G artiery battal-
jor. As a oresull of recent reorganization
most of the Aura Ae have been regrouped
to form 4 fe a infentry divisions; 6 light
infantey div iG territorial regiments;
ard Soins hoantry repimenis. The
remainder xittahons are independent
The larger chetne ne stumerally arc still in the
formative stuge. amd are nat vel operational.
The Viel woo camernt hopes to increase
the cath of 200,000, whercnus
querer OS forne levels, Bias ao
and haved a call for a total strenpin oi
alert

pendeas

fe
af tbe

rey as haere
* ra ce #
PNA fa a stipe

EEMITOV CE

W grt

shy,

i Ncie¢ ae ne Lechens
Since Getever 7944,
B have bees pureed,
sforshays bn
"yey tyetates
Mitha ¢g Aer
desc

VN A Ath

Sec ce cn nc eae a ee

Shacsatla a as Bticl A oak ive inka Bai Maat SAD ite Ried white bebe adic

o

35. The moralc of the VNA has risen sharply
#5 a result of its operations against the Hoa
Hao and Binh Xuyen dissidents. ‘This factor,
together with the halt in demobilization and
the firm nationalist stand of the government
avainst the French, has piven the VNA a new
sense of independence and confidence.

36. Despite the VNA’s lack of experience and
training, it probably has the capability of
maintaining the government in powcr against
potential armed opposition now Jocatcd south
of the 17th Parallel, and of maintaining con-
trol of major urban centers and lines of com-
munication. Should the Vicl Minh initiate
a major gucrrilla operation supported by sub-
Slantial infiltration from the north during the
period of this estimate, the government would
be hard pressed to do more than roanintain
control of Saieon-Cholon and a few other
major urban centers. It the operation wes
prolonged, the South Victnamese vovernment
probably could not survive without Pees ry
assistance from oulside, Provided US assist-
ance is continucd, and conditions Neate tit pie
implementation of ylanned reorganivetion

and training programs, the VNA in another
two years should be able to maintain a larce
measure of internal seciriy even je Ue event
of considerate infiltration of guerrcitas from
tha north, Bboreover, arainst cxlorne!

sion, if shold) be able at Uist lime

side naval and air support. fo
dciay in withdvawbnyy ba the
af Ban Me Thuot- Dishut

tu comduct «defenses for sume
Saigon-Cn Jacques pres.

provide 2

famerid v2

ae get tek
VigtsThs bes

p Set.

has a sientlh giv

Geral personnel streueih of a)

O90 Shae al OEY Pitas
vrs trained olfeoor :

eluding GE eb eli tedd ¢
NO pilot trainees, arab 2

Otuer 2hiled pawl aercpakolol 3

aye = 44% ere tet
ey Gagan

4

% b Sica inci’ cek MNES We saat

ry Mae 2 oe

substantial increase in air. force capabilities
will depend primarily upon the training
and re-cquiprnent programs of the US spon-
sored Training Relations Instruction Mission
(TRIM) and MAAG.

38. The Vietnam Navy is under operational
control of the Chief of Staff of the VNA and
under the adrainistrative command of a sen-
jor naval officer. Its naval component cen-
sists of 1,618 men. with a Coast Guard of 82
men and a Murine Corps of 2,470 men. In
addition, 550 Victnamese serve with the
french Naval Trorces, Far Fast, on a con-
tractual basis. ‘The naval component pos-
sesses 2 submarine chaser (PC), 3 coastal
minesweepers (MISC (O)), 7 amphibious vees-
sels (1 LSSL, 2 LETL, 4 LCU), and 49 smater
amphibious anc patrotcraft. fhe Vietnamese
Navy has hinvited eiertiveness, bul is capuble
of eodertabing rivcy patrol, and minor coastal
and eee. operations. Both the navy
and mines aegene upon forcings logistic sup-
port, ari 3 will reguire consiierable additional
training before they can perform eficctively.

-

ae
1

SG. [Phe Vieten se National Police, under
i: mare fective lene tership,

JM omen, at least hall af

ies ¢, Fatal Pye:

Cormgats of ak

whom fre da ths » Seton “on area. Can-
sider nproevoent dn the morale, eguip-
ns of these forces is Ukely

ef this estieele A Civil
y bling Grgenived Chrough &
. provinelal gourds, focal
Ley! elements woder the cen-
the Minister of Interior.
with arm estirrated 65,000
‘ Ne aed necessary
25,000 will te trabnedt
“riynty perv dep inet fnatitaiee,
PEC)

> # Biter: “ih of gbowt 44.

4

Bitpee: yb ty sheer ¥ Cag pe

%

9 fog tise Muerte Ate

a ht Mi 28 1

mand the withdrawal of all French forces,
the French may continue to maintain some
token forces in South Vielnam. Jn particu-
lar, the French will probably seck to retain
naval and air bases in South Vietnam. The
principal missions of the FEC at the present
time are to protect the ICC in Vietnam and
French nationals and property. Only sare
token forces now remain in the vicinity of
the 17th Parallel. The FEC will alrnost cer-
tainly not be committed against the Viet
Minh, except to protect itself or as part of a
raultilateral Western action. The French will
continue to provide training factlities for VNA
personne! in France and will also probably
continue to participate, although reluctantly,
with the US in training the VNA in Vietnam.
In addition, the French will probably com-
plete the turnover of depots and instaliations
to the VIA

1¥. ECONOMIC

41, Vietnam's cconomic position bias not im
proved in the past year. PFormidalie budic
cconomic problems sill confront lhe go
ment. The country is dependent on hor
aid ta finance imports and the defense bud
Acreage vriler cullivalion ig sui far
prewar levels and the position of the ue
needs babe finpraved. There are ih us
rmediste problema. Despite a
duction of rice for denestte concur
distriimition and marketing differnt
forced # sieaamatic piece in Che poe af
torardiehity ig the jor

ge urlan cepters

a ‘ aye des wan besa Qogt €% rear
tiaployvrnesnt be pes: nom reap ot tha ebeod
it re an. san pt 7 ¢
Of the Prenuch cnierprincs preb tel
Ft 7 pt %
:
feupitic y
teeth fer qane
SRE See
Ts gine ! s
es “a
* fal =
FF ”

8 Nib itis a BA Rleaee sent sabe: Pt eee ee rer ee si jena

a ene puree ACEO RSI SUS NRIRNRETERS OR A RPE A A RRR A RENE ERE fe ONE RNA am NBER

i
?
x
:
:
i
é
i
4
}
&

000 to 200,000 metric tons. The dislocations
of war and the continued Jack of security in
many rural arcas have Icft one-third of the
prewar rice acreage uncultivated. Rice, rub-
ber, and other exports earn $94,000,000 a year,
which pays roughly for only one-third of
South Vietnatn’s itaports. US aid is now the
major source of foreign exchange for the area,

43. Local resources are expected to cover
about 30 percent of the estimated 1955 nation-
al budeet of $521,000,000. US military and
economic assistance is programmed at about
$325,000,000 which will cover most of the bal-
ance. The French now provide only about
$34,000,000 in forcign aid and this will prob-
abiy diminish as theis military forces are with-
drawn.

. France cinttinues to be the chief source of

He ports and French capital stil controls the
bulk of manufacturing and plantation agri-
culture. Howe vor, Franco-Vicinamese  tro-
nomic fies are weokoning because af mutual
mistrost and: us and thes shift to direct
US dollar sid, nim’s Forclen Exchange
QGifice has Hitted franc dipurts and has cur-
teller Dee Ger vmittaners ta France. ‘The
nee Vieinaricoe tarill schedule continuca the
traditional pretercitiel rates for France, but
ch shi arply rete hoyels. Under these cure
ho enlorpgises wi curtedl the
me eperatiois are general trade re-

“eon France and South Vieinam

ister (44 aie sek trade
oe ee s foyer

et ts gon

panies

oie mae ues rete tal i a

trace

46. Improvement in economic conditions in
South Vietnam will depend largely on the
success of government cflorts to deal with.
such proolems as unemployment, Jand tenure,
rural credit, currency reform, foreign comt---
mercial relations, and the reercation of a rice
surpius for export. The Diem government.
has recently established a new central bank,”
initiated independent control over foreign ex-"
change resources, and undertaken develop-

mental planning. The government probably.
will be sucecssful in perrnanently settling size-
able numbers of refugecs, in initiating effee-

tive import policies, and in regularizing its

trading relations with Cambodia and Laos.

However, institutional reforms and other pro-

trams designed to alleviate the cconomic sit--
uation will not pass beyond preliminary stages.
during, the period of this estirnate.

41. Despite economic stagnation in Vietnam,
the situntion is unlikely to become critical so
long as US wid continues, On the other hand,
there is Hiitle prospect of sofficient imyprove-
ment jn ceonoinic conditions to provide a
strong stimulus tu popular support for 1
foverninent.

V. EXTERNAL FACTORS

48. Recognizing that his regime is dependent
on US aid and suguort, Tem wil! Beas:
continue to follow a furclin pulley marked ly
touncralion with the US. At the same tin
Dients borelen ae te au bei ay Vee mark
#trome independ: nce
guentin lead hit fe :
fis thceat aities, Diem w iil ceriiisse t
the devehumnent a eestive dele

jomiz usndes the

saeeh treaty £

Lostia Pact

eek a,

Rinne ttc eR ith ee

*

°

;
|
|
|
:
|

Te ONERIR Set a Bee Re BE CELSO NES NORMA AARP eae I Fe

port. He clearly belicves that any recogni-
tion of the DRV as a “government” in the
narth woukl have adverse political conse-
quences. Consequently, although Diern will
attempt to modcrate the disfavor of the ICC
and the Geneva powers, he will probably con-
tinue to resist external pressures to hold con-
sultations. However, under pressure from the
Western Powers and Asian neutralists, Diem
might reluctantly agree to some form of indi-
rect consullations, but in such circumstances
he would vigorously press for conditions
which he felt certain the Communists would
be unable to accept. Aware that his position
Wi probably cause the Viel Minh to increase
their efforts to destroy his government, Diem
Will probably scck to bind the US more specif-
jenny to the defense of Vietnam.

50. Because he recoznizes that the continued
presence of the Jisicrnational Contro! Com-
mission im Vielmun exerts some deterrent
force On possible Communist designs, Diem
WH prebably continue a grudging and. re-
ee casperation with that: body. - How-
ever, die efiorts by the ICC to
ingoet restion. of elections in
Vie ae 1 EY sal should lead to the
dete of the I¢ ral es Viet,

51. ‘The Preneh heavy

agit ore Faris rary

iw
hie ae
ofy

e decided fa withdraw the
bulk of theiy forces from South Vietnam and
ie re ie e their fincocial contributions to the
Viet: 5 ae sie because of commit-
neni¢ in North ; a ann sentiment in
Branee, Viet pressures. While
the Fronch wil amlinue te aeck to salvage
feic eo! Drench commercial and
oes pas ee Freneh interests
ai) dolucnes in So Seinam will progres.
aivehy cc! pened of Usia esti
ig obebly conlinuc tg
pen tay the ee
a

cart

ea eee
ehh PERC

hittics

Stadt Behe

° Siena

52. India’s principal objectives toward Vicf--

nam will be dictated largely by its concern ta

prevent the outbreak of hostilities in tise area.

To effect this, India will attempt to imple.
ment the terms of the Geneva Agreements.

This policy ray lead India into conflicts with”
the Diem government and may lead India to»
propose the dissolution of the ICC in Victnara.

However, India’s policy toward South Vietnam

is likely to be moderated to the extent that

Dicm saceeeds in establishing a strong, and -
popular regime and replacing Ho Chi Minh as

the symboi of nationalisim in Vietnam.

53, Canada, though a member of the ICC
along with India and Poland, has consistently
supported US cfforts to establish a strong
anti-Communist government in the south and
may be expected to continue to follow a policy
generally paralicl to that of the US iu the arca,
even in the event of the break-up of the ICC.
The UK, on the other hand, has had pro-
found misuivings as to the strength of the
Diem governinent and the wisdom of Diem!'s:
policies. Because of its position as co-chair.
man of the Geneva Conference on Indochina
and berause of its deep fears of a renewal a
hosinities in 0.¢ Indochina arce, the UK ha
uried upon Dicrn a techni
compliance with the Geneva provisions. Th
UK will continue to press Diem to urge gen
ingly freo Glections in an effort to lake tie
iniliative away frorn Uhe THY and fore it toe
accept the anus of rejecting adequate election’
Buarantees. Indiestions are that if Diem
cantinues lo refuse even indirect comwudtae
tions, the UR will probably net join bn provid
ing Diem with external protection stand
south Vietnam be atlacked frowns the nocth,

. OUTLOOK

34. Assuming Dien 4
corliniics iG » receive

OF THE DIEVA GOVERNMENT

a Lee popes eels of fe
Sn Providied He
“es caer ee tee
pork. 3 probably

pene bis he operied of

abide Poor

wry fore

é

rr

|
|
|
i
I
}
|
|
|
i

i

a more effective government. His position
will probably be strengthened as a result of
increased popular support, the continued
loyalty of the VNA, and a deterioration in the
strength and concsiveness of his non-Com-
munist opposition. The national government
will probably increase the number of rural
commumnitics under its control, particularly in
areas now held by the sects. However, Diem
will probably have advanced little beyond the
preliminary stages in his social and economic
reform programs. Moreover, should Diem
for whatever reason be eliminated from the
scene, a period of extreme political instability

would almost certainly follow. Sueh  cir-
cumstances might produce a successor more
amenable to a rapprochement with the Vict
Minh.

59. Viet Minh clements in South Victnam will
continuc to control or influence remote areas -
and to hamper government action in the pro-
vinces. The Viet Minh capability to infil
trate personnel and arms into South Vietnam,
and to reinforce Communist and potential dis-
sident elements will remain the most serious
threat to the establishment of a viable and

stable national government in the south.
