Communist Capabilities and Intentions in Laos Over the Next Year- SNIE 58-1-68-
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011542, dated 3 January 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011542).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

~ Communist Capabilit

in Laos Over t

APPROVED FOR RELEASE ©
48 AUG 1988

weenie a eee

eon

es an

1c

Te rae

ee

M onda:
Ce «

Bruses.
?

d Intenti

i 1 :
Ce emt TE Ey rem og

1 Tm mm? pay ms rem 0

The following intelligence orgonizations participated in the preporation of
this estimate:

Tha Central tntelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Oepart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA. .

Concurring:
Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, the Deputy Director, Central Intelligence

Mr. Thomos L Hughes, the Director of Intelligence ond Research, Department
of Stote 5

Lt. Gea. Joseph F. Carroll, the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Ut. Gen Marsholl S. Corter,the Director, National Security Agency

Abstaining:

inate ae a Mat abel | neat hth dlad nk Laethn tn medion diate ed LL ee)

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistont General Manager, Atomic Energy Com--
mission ond Mr. William O. Cregor, for the Assatant Director, Federal - -~

Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their Jurisdiction.

within the moaning of the espionoge Wes
faission or revelation of which in any

me oF

Cyeste

COMMUNIST. CAPABILITIES AND :
INTENTIONS IN LAOS OVER THE
NEXT-YEAR

CONCLUSIONS

A. Over the past year the Communists have greatly strengthened... ___.
their combat forces in Laos. The combined Pathet Lao (PL)/North
Vietnamese Army (NVA) forces now number about 56,000 combat
troops; they could overwhelm the regular and guerritia forces of the
Royal Laotian Government (RLG) in the coming dry season. And.
we do not think that the RLG sould expand the size or capability of

its forces sufficiently in 6 or.12 months from domestic sources alone... _— ___—

to contain the Communists.
B. We do not believe that the Communists intend to conduct a -

major drive to the Mekong, lest such a move provoke US entry into
the Laotian corridor and perhaps upset any negotiations underway on

especially on guerrilla outposts, in order to strengthen their ultimate

bargaining yosition. They now demand that US bombing of Laos
be halte1 as a prerequisite to discussions of an interfal settlement

that must be based on “the realities of the current situation.”.. 0. =

C. Even if NVA resources were released from South Vietnam, we
doubt that this would in itself alter Hanoi’s intentions in Laos, since
the forces already there can launch an offensive without further reine= == =
forcement. Though developments in Vietnam could change Hanoi’s
calculations concerning Laos, in general we believe that the Commu- —-
nists hope to achieve their objectives without running great risks of
military counteraction.

DISCUSSION

~1. Hanoi has ambitions to control all of Laos, but has been unwilling to take

- actions there which would jeopardize higher priority goals in South Vietnam.

{n_ particular, Hanoi has limited the scope of its military actions in Laos, in
part, at least, out of concern for provoxing a large-scale US ground action
against the vital supply routes to South Vietnam which run through Laotian
territory.

_..2. Since the 1962 Ceneva settlement, the war in Laos has been characterized by

‘Royal Lao Government (RLG) offensives during the rainy season (May to

October) when the mobility of Pathet Lao (PI.) and North Vietnamese Army
(NVA) forces is restricted, and by Communist counteroffensives during the
dry season (November to April) to retake lost areas, often just in time to seize

the rice harvest. Thus an uneasy equilibrium has been established, with mili- -
‘tary factors operating on the RLG and political factors on the Communists

to restrain actions that might provoke a major reaction by the other side.
3. In the political ficld, both sides have continued to pay lip service to the

1962 Geneva Accords, which neutralized Laos, and until recently to the Zurich ~~

and Plaine des Jarres Agreements, which established a tripartite government—
rightists, neutralists, and the PL. This arrangement has persisted despite the

fact that the PL vacated their cabinet seats in April 1963. These are still kept -

open for them by Souvanna, the neutralist Prime Minister. Until this July
it scemed as though the PL objective, despite their denunciations of Souvanna,
was the restoration of the tripartite arrangements.

1. RECENT DEVELOPMENTS

... 4. Several recent events, however, suggest that the Coniniiinists are develop-
ing a new position. For the first time, they have made a bombing halt a
specific prerequisite to discussions of an internal political settlement. More-
over, while still reaffirming the 1962 international agreements, they have de-
manded that the internal settlement must take into account “the realities of
the current situation.”

5 eae PL and Soviet spokesmen have explained that such “realities”
mean a recognition of PL control over large areas of Laos (they claim two-
thirds of the territory and one-half the population). ~ In addition, they contend
that the US and its “puppets” have destroyed the tripartite structure, that
Souvanna no longer represents a neutralist faction, and that the present gov-
emment is, in elfect, illegal. Apparently, the PL are laying the ground work
to claim a larger role in a new government, and may demand that the neutralists
aligned with them in the so-called “National United Bloc” occupy the positions
now held by Souvanna’s neutralist faction.

2

: .
, emai - see +o é ay
9 tes ene OR Rr ge Ae a kde 1 ee ee he ek a Neca ae St Ne a A Smee meen meet a crenata a halt ne
Lo
: :
. °

we meee ot, ne meee

- deme im wh wg
1

6 While thus signaling their intention to reorder the old tripartite arrange-
ment, the Communists have reaffirmed their regard for the monarchy as a

“permanent feature” of Lao national hfe. Indeed, the whole point of the

rather odd visit of the North Vietnamese Ambassador in July after a four year

‘absence seemed to be to make a dramatic distinction between the King and

the present Lao government, and this line has been supported by the new
Soviet Ambassador and the Neo Lao Hak Xat (NLHX) spokesman in Vientiane.
The Communists have always peid deference to the King’s position and may
hope that the King’s desire to preserve the kingdom and establish a united
national community can be played upon to their advantage.

7. The Communists are taking other steps to improve their political position.
During the past rainy season, they have made more of an effort than ever before
to consolidate control over their territory. After unsuccessful attempts to
terrorize mountein people who have been assisting RLG guerrillas in the north,
the Communists are secking to win them over by cajolery. This is apparently
part of a wider effort to improve their hold over the mountainous and sparsely
populated reaches of Phong Saly, Luang Prabang, and Houa Phan (Sam Neua)
Provinces, where they have been stepping up their propaganda and political in-
doctrination programs.- Newly constructed roads give the Communists access to
hitherto isolated areas. In the south, PL troops have been busy trying to con-
solidate their hold over the rice-rich Sedone Valley, where the government carried
oa a development program from 1965 until July 1967. There are recent reports
that the PL civil administration is being reinforced by Lao political cadre who
have just completed political training in North Vietnam. One report indicates
that in Savannakhet Province North Vietnamese political cadre have been at-
tached to the Communist administration for the first time.

8. By the fall of 1967, the RLG had made considerable inroads on territory
that the Communists held in 19621 The Communists finally responded by
turning an RLC offensive in the Nam Bac area into a debacle for the government
in mid-January 1968. During the remainder. of the dry season, the Comma-
nists administered a serics of defeats to the RLG which added up to the worst

government setback since the precarious days of 1961 and 1962. The psycho.

logical impact was considerable. There was a good deal of apprehension in
Vientiane that the Communists would break out from the previous pattern of
military action and push on to the Mekong.

9. But this did not happen, and perhaps the most notable feature of the
rainy season now drawing to a close was the lack of significant new moves by
either side. The Communists did not press their advantage, but devoted then-
selves to a more intensive political consolidation of their territory than hereto-
fore. RLG forces, who for their part, usually regain considerable terrain in
the rainy season, had only some limited successes in the northeast and in the

* See centerspread maps.

area around Muong: Phalane. REG progress has been min the Sedone Valley
in the south, my Borkhane Province, and in other potentially significant regions,

“increase its logistic capabilities in Laos, strengthen its forces there, recover lost

In short, the Communists have developed a stronger military position while at
the same timesthey are preparing, if the situation in Vietnam warrants, to move
into a more active political phase in Laos.

12. PL and FAR troops are probably about evenly matched in terms of the
general effectiveness of individual troops or battalions, and man for man the
Meo guerrillas are probably better fighters than either. The NVA forces, how-
ever, are definitely better than the FAR, and the psychological impact on the
latter when attacked by the NVA is often sufficient to precipitate their defeat.
This qualitative inferiority is somewhat compensated for, however, b air sup-

rt pee ee OM : Wis Sa ae

eee. pane uc "SUCCESS. as the RLG has enjoyed
since 1962 is due largely to the combination of this air support with effective
use of friendly guerrilla forces.

13. For several years, Souvanna and other RLG leaders, includirg the mili-

tary, have felt that if it were not for the presence of NVA troops, RLG forces
could probably quickly dispose of the PL threat. In our view, this is probably
too optimistic, Although in- terms of present strengths on both sides. Roval

Lao combat forces would then outnumber those of the Pathet Lao by more
than two to one, we do not believe that this numerical advantage would be
decisive, in view of the many weaknesses and divisions that will continue to
hmit FAR effectiveness whatever enemy it confronts, We do believe that the
PL necd a considerable arnount of NVA support to mount a major attack, and
_. that without it, the RLG could almost certainly contain them. We also believe
that in northern Laos the Meo guerrillas could put considerable pressure on the
PL. But RLG forces could probably not reduce PL forces and territory very

rajidly—if at all—-without substantial outside logistical and air support.
14. We continue to estimate, however——as we did in March 1968 &—-that the

combined PL/NVA forces now in Laos have the military capability to reduce
cone ne. the RLG area of control to a few enclaves in fairly short order. They could

Ne Oh 6 le NIN as or: ah gether) apa

4

Le Oe eit ms}

do sé without diverting resources frorn South Vietnam or drawing significant
reinforcements from the North. And we do not think that RLG forces could
expand their size or capability sufficiently in 6 or 12 months from domestic
sources alone to contain the Communists.

A Ar en ee)
i

1. COMMUNIST INTENTIONS
paetat ge wan aT Geta 7 oe 15. There are several options open to the Communists over the next six
: months or so. There are various indications of preparations to resume military
: activity as the dry season commences, and it is possible that the Communists

~ have decided to exercise their military superionty and quickly overrun most of
> Laos. They might think this would be an effective means of putting the US
i under new pressures to reach a general settlement in Indochina. We believe
this is unlikely. The Communists would necessarily feel considerable uncer-
tainty over US countermoves in the Laotian corridor, especially at a time of |
changeover in American administrations. And, as long as the outcome in Viet-
nam js in doubt and under some sort of negotiation, we believe that Hanoi
would not run needless military risks in Laos before the chances of a new politi-
cal settlement there had been tested.

16. We do expect, however, that Communist forces will keep up substantial
military pressure on RLG forces in the coming dry season. In the northeast,
where General Vang Pao’s Meo guerrillas have long been a thorn in their
side, particularly in Houa Phan and Xieng Khouang Provinces, they will prob-
ably make a considerable effort to reduce a number of guerrilla sites and con-
solidate their claims. ‘Thev will probably also try to clear the guerrilla outposts
along the border of northeastern Khammouane Province with North Vietnam,
as well as in the northwest Provinces of Houa Khong and Luang Prabang. In

- the south, they will maintain the threat to the Mekong from Thakhek to
Champassak Province, They will attempt to disrupt US.sponsored aid and
development programs. “And. of course, they will protect their vital infiltration

Vietnam in the Laotian corridor.

and supply routes to South

ae ou

Pe ee ee

17. We anticipate more direct political pressures on Vientiane and the King,

which these military moves will serve to reinforce. At some point, depending

again on developments in South Vietnam, the Communists might offer to open
negotiations, providing the bombing in Laos ended. In any case, Hanoi would
believe its military pressures would improve the chances for eventual negotia-
tions on better terms.

18. Obviously, a major change in the situation: in - Vietnam could affect
Hanoi’s calculations. But we do not believe that the release of NVA assets
from South Vietnam would, in and of itself, be a decisive factor in changing
Hanoi's policy in Laos. In the event of a Vietnam settlement favorable to them,
the North Vietnamese would anticipate that political pressures would cause Laos
to fali into their hands fairly soon.—They. would therefore see no need for
ambitious moves in Laos that might risk upsetting any agreements reached on
South Vietnam, particularly respecting US military withdrawals. Should the
settlement be unfavorable to the Communists, we believe that military caution

~-in Laos would appear even more desirable to then: pera :

19. Eventually, if the Communists cannot achieve what they want in Laos
through a combination of pressures, they may resort to a vigorous military cam-
paiga. But for now, they appear to be moving slowly, calculating that the
outcome in Vietnam will be such that a new settlement in Laos can be reached
which would provide them an improved power position, from which they could
ultimately take control.

CHINA
PEsne shan

2 (36u-meo! cor one Gang
{Ve

LAO CAI

LAOS ; 7 Y Sica i
COMMUNIST CONTROLLED - ! saiese, YG n
AREAS, JUNE 1962° a J Thee Wf
Arva bald By Commuriat / orAnst PLATE. MY os
See eee et aes Hi oe eg ‘ ‘
a Ses ae: _ { GY; ip
C) — ald by Neuteatbst oe é
aca aoe mon U.S. el ae . A ,
STha wrvae shen, pecticaarly for teivery b a” mu, SS gem }
cepts li pepe Sorrento tag pl : Nes \ 3 H :
ld ae, i se

CAM BODILIA
+ Stas

‘
Ag Waray

j
4 x
?

Sub

wee

wo Ae abet fate hee Met 4

ON Ought

0"

C)
V2

fh

Muang tu

c

of Neing-chen
© Sey. Mea) j

t

Man Tt

on

5 / ; i \ Ee
( ! os

yy

YY,

/ VIENTIANE

THATLAN

COMMUNIST CONTROLLED
AREAS, OCTOBER 1968

Communat controled
aren

Contested ares
Cammonst-hekd locaton

Gover ament-Bald location

tee Mee

pormeiess

\ Seer Reap aiere ane envneea seranenetaran \

HINA.

Saas
Ee eu
>
4

meee Sitti

7 *
D- a wt came: Fa ae os

+
ott
fees ie ) ;

Pete! ‘

aren beeeres he pers and the carrenponding
ag Commusiet controed erwes mm SNIE 38 68 COMMUNIST
INIENTONS: IN IN LACS (28 Mach rota! reflect sare chonger
wn the ateacnn wece thet tome, bn forge port, however, they me:
persent @ more deceted end occerete presentanen of the m:brary
Btgees then press mons Mee atrempeed. For tha ap we
Reve ened the bMowng dehsirors: —

Can myalet Coated Arosa: The Cammucist have me
endfor edoiteiee prasance ond the RUG Ker dele of na pies:
ce. Althovgh RLG petrofe or reams may oxcesanely move
thegh a conduc cendaibse operotorn uA the arta, weed
clesher ann heaves, (Seale cotene ae srohed ol RG om
testted wewor shown mm aha)

Contested Asesa: Those ia which nether mde hes etheiane
mcktey endfor admiactrere prance ts eochede Me other, This
wclidles Senat whare both aden one sreset an gtresgeh ped clerk cae
facet, whew petrol of ether pile may be erbited and o-
where toxed by both aden, at wall ot othe: ovens whe-e both det
fer wt hvcer end do sot mehe muck effet 1 extede she other J F
oe, ina Stung Tera” aa

CAMBODIA

“«w

1 aH
ae y
Pe 8 ER ore g a8 6 ee mies 2 Ne weit FA INP ET RM ans ep eas ay RO DOVE nee ini ele eB, y+ Seni pwentiNl a AOR Rn 9 iP, «
* ‘ \ ; :

.

ANNEX

pe aa ae OR hte 6 em Ot Aree lla, Rar Me et

DT ee Oi a ie ee ee cee
