Here Are the Men and Formulas That Launched Sputnik
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124242, dated 18 March 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124242).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ee

CaS
18 tered 1958

PROCESSING COPY armyec-is5

N\

~ 3020554

a a
mw ¢
@ §
®
Bis
ee
‘Ou-
gaan
a0"

Approve
pais

cs0 DC 1610
\
Tht ARE THE wy L
fziatjon Mernaipe : 0. Sourine end J, Mareiin
te 2 r 1957, Parse

Pagee liad

Where there le eaoke there must be fire... Theoretically, the problen
of an ertioicial satellite was leng known te have been eolyed, It
was alee known that the iremendeus eaientifice progress of the last ten
yrore tad made this devrelepecrt teehnienl'y peezible, Macrous articles
have appeared in the last few wonths in the Soviet prees announcing the
firing ef eputnik, the first of ite nuns, ‘The aigazine Radio even
adviesd radio hana last Ame tht the eatallite's signals would be
breadeast on 20 and 40 Ma, In Auguet 1955, academloian L. Sedov wtated
nt the ietrenatie Cengrees of Ocpenhagen that the Pusaien eate! lite
“sould be launched within the next 2 yearase.”

And then, euddenly, in the night of 4 detoder, the Seriet radic anf
the arackling flashes en the teletypes of the newe apencies and newspapers
announmed the great news to the world, a world somewhat actoniehed to
learn that the first artifielal mscn war a Puesian reen! After the
first somert af dumbnees had peseed, a race vas on te get informtiocn end
umublished miterial end ene only needs to take another leok et the wor) d
preen output of the last three weekw to realize how many thousends of
linea do oepy were dewotad to thie eubjest. To be sure, it was thie
avalanche of eensations! informtion end revelations which led George
Sour (ne and mywelf to undertake this investigation. Ae a satter of fact,
{t wae eur common interest in Sevietrfrobleas which led us to make a yry
d-4alled eaarch of everything tht had Seen written on thie eubject. In
eo doing, ve diseovered that even very serious authora had written articles
that were replete with eertradictians end technical fay laurtti) ities,
Twerybody was able to notice that while the Ruesians remined ellent,
all great physieist, astroneute, actromadre, rocket epecialiete, admirala,
and gonerele of world renown enthmentionlly began making 211 eorte of
ci neational tut entirely contradictory etatencrits,

4% that poimt we decided 4. start cur investigation fren ecrateh
and, in erder to got it off our cleat, to enmine the "guilty pertics, *
in other werda, the Puselans themselves! Although the frecians de not
tele auch, they do write a let and it emlusively is threugh their writings
that we are able today te dieclese today a great member of unpubl ished
drtaile about eprinik and the men responsible fer its existense. Cesrges
Sourine, a great expert in the Russian lenguage and ite dialeete, was ef
walunble eseletanse for ine few éxys end nights we had te decipher
posurately an irmseing quantity ef beeks, dictionmtice, maguxines, and
Ruseian newspapers. ere is hew we did it,

ele

eee

i” Vie etternen wry tarsavetnenarene
My DOP AR OPS PNB ea Ie,
TD auee~s

ts, ite A :
A Te Se CP ta eet

i
PEE

BgnS og

SOC EO Al

>

Ney SCO St

Firat of all, we plunged back into the works ef Kenetentin Sdardevitoh
Talolievekiy, whon the Ruseians consider the epiritual feather of epirtnik
and whees writings have deen reported at length by in
Koa’ 162 and 185, There we found a prophetic phrase: he firet big
Gtep of lnmanity eensists ef crossing the at=mephere by creating an carth
eatellite" (eputnik enlya), ;

Undoubtedly, this was the first time that an artificial sateliite
had been mentioned in Soviet litercture, Let us recall that Silolkovekiy
died in 1935 and that ths US#.. colebrated the centenary of hia birth
(17 September 1857) with unteul glitter thie yeer. Bae As

Soanie sreeda 7

Rext we goneulted the Great Soviet Meydlopedia under ‘Interplanetary
Flights." There, we found « very interesting artiole by H. Ti!chenravev,
a specialist in recket actore (Yol 27, page 51, ff, edition of Ame
195h). In @ section entitled “Tedolimvakiy's Formile" Tikhonravev writes
(and we quote, leaving him the responsibility for hie statement):

“The final epeed of the rocket (Yk) — as shown in the accoupanying
chert — ie a fimetion of both the exhuust speed of the eonbustion pre~
duote (C) and the relation Mt , where Ht ie the mass of the fuel and MK

Nic
the mee of the emty recket efter combustion,

“when the foree of terrestrial attraction and the centrifuge) foree
are in equilibrium, then the orbit of the interplanetary ehip will seeune
the form ef a perimeter, The speed of this motion ia ealled efreular
apeed; it 1a expresaed by Yk e {er , where g represents the acceleration
of gravity at a digtance r fron the center of the plenet, If r equale
the radius of the earth and g = 9068 a per sesond per second, then Vk =
7,912 = per sesond. A dedy fired inte apace at that epeed cannet fall
back to earth. As the roaket leaves the earth, Yk diminishes birt the
launching into a circular erbit requires the use of sore energy than that
required to attain a speed of 7,912 m per second, ;

“Disregarding air reaistance, the neeessary speed to escape from
terrestrial attraction equals Yn {2 gr . The trajectory of the bedy
(reaket) will then be perabolie, end thie is the reason why Yn is called
the parabolic epeed. Por the earth thie speed Yn equale to 11, 20a
per eecem, on the average.

“The neceasary epeed for total liberation ef the interplanetary
ship from terrestrial attraction, exerted jeintly by earth and oun, can
be obtained by leunshing the veese] at a certain argle: it 10 16,662 = per
second. The maximus epeed of big liquid-fiel reekere 16 now mre than
QECCO_™ per tecort, the exhaust speed being 0 = 2,000 m per eceond and
wy ¢ 5s (Our chert ehows that for an exhaust speed of 4,000 m per second

the eirouler speed 1s reached when Mt « 7. For a beleeity ef 11, 20 n
Wc
per eecond ME must be 15. Fer a velocity of 16,00 m per eccent Mt = S04,
kc Wee :

“"9-4

wets a

"34 49 not rory probable thet [einglometagot/ rocketec answering
theese requtresnts oan be built. Several mane can bea considered to
ovarcome the diffieultice. The relative quritity of fuel necessary to
attain ooemia speed can ba diminished ty applying the prinsiple ef «
rocket in etagea. All the elements of such a roeicet would serve as
nsocleretors and datatdh theaselves after accompliehing their fimetion
with the exception of the last ome, which attains ecanie peed...

14 49 alow yuseible to utilise ecrtain perta of the reekct as fil,

The -extmers=- speed ean be increaged by increasing the exhsast epeed.
Atomic enargy oan be used to eshieve this. tut the creation of an atomic
resket requiran the solution ef a mmber ¢2 complicated technical pro-
bleng. In the firtura, the use of ateato energy will mice it poseible to
rodune the relative weight of the fucl (perhaps without hiving recourses
to the stage reeket), increase the payload, deersage the time required
for irterplenctary voyngee, and even to consider an ineoureion of apace
bayod the soler eystes, Tt will ateo mie the return te our own planet
eafor. . :

Thes» follows a paragraph on the works of Teander end Fordivat tuk,
as Woll as a ewenry of etudies tnfertaken cuteide the frontiers ef
the USSR by such well-teen echelars es Oberth, Soman, Semult-Pelteric,
Goddard, eta,

Now, ve mnve aren what the necosenry conditions ere te cecrpe
terrectrial attraction, Ye have aleo moted tint a anltiple-stage rocket
fe required to achieve (hic result. Thia, indeed, is the enlient point.
As extillery poneral, 4. Blagonravev, recently said in New York, “Sputnik
itee'f 1a nothings we could just as well have eent up « ehair!" The
impertant elemert of the euecees being the rocket iteelf, we looked
up this word in the Great Seviect Pneyelapedia. fnd here ie what we
have found over the signmture of HM. Tichonravey (again the seste one!)
and 8. lyapouncy (another roeket expert) in vol 55, page 605-666, edition
of duly 19551

“The taeio forms (Tetolkovaiciy's forma) of recket flight theory
4a es follows: Ye Clin where ¥ repreeete the apacd of the recket
oH
at the time T, 0 —= the exhaust speed ef the ecnbustion products, 1 --
the rocket pee at the time T, '2 -— the mse of tho fisel bernt before
tho time T, and 1 — the ange ef the reining feel, When the meter

me finished ite werk: K< 0 ard 11 © Mk, Trem teh 2:1. maz 2 Sie Ble =

Cin (1 « $2). This ferme is wild fer free apace there-Hiraie no

Ke ;
field of extraction ent atuepheris resistanse, 2¢ is suorrexioptely valid
for flisits wiser sot] sepiitions.

veintive thruct of the meter, ¢ = 9.01 1 per ecesni per ecsort, an tHe .
1a the initia! woight (mee) of the recht. In order to inereanse the
nnxdwum epeet (end the range), the prinsiple of a recket consisting of
stares ie weeds ‘ech elescet earrice a rocket ani dctaches ttevlf |
after ethanting ite feel meply. The last elesent contains the payload.

“rer mach a Teckel, 3 .
Yew 0 (in ein - on - fr} where Tk
yas ot Ta el frel = mm
ta the final epecd, Xl = MY ond 1 @ Gobi, where Oti fe tho weight of

Geo mA

the fuol turned by cach reckst elen=nt, Bett == the tan] wright of cach
elouom, and Ge the initial woight of the whole recket.

“then 71 @ ¥ wo have
Mme M1 (te ex) n= 1 end Tee in Tho teruimm’ speed of

— Aiea :

ef ste olenerte. be

It will be noticed, however, thet in the leng formils abewa, the
ehor of this study did not elsberats on the manning of the pares-ter
in and it is 2 pity he did not.

The te how epertnit: wns Inunched, Sheet were the properties of the
lamehing reeket? flow sary etuges did it hewt The Puceinre ere oxtrumsly

Tadie Hoasorws *Tt de thrown tint sur technolory peraite us to leunesh an
artiflein] enteliite with the help of a Smatage reetret,” without over
epccifying tht thie tes actunlly the runner in which syutni was leunehed.
Previa ef Oeteber 9 epcoifics (sic) ina len tulletin that the reclort
ted doen oxtrewly powerful ent bed bon cutdod with the) te id rie
eision ae ea to p gputeik inte the enlected orbit, that it tmé riecn
vwertiolly, only te deviate ‘a little later" fron that courecy oving to
an electronic brain eet before the firings thet et the esi ef ite sourse
14 ind reached a height of several lured kilencters and we traveling
primllel te the surthee ef the earth et en averare epoot 6f 6,000 m por
eoeent. Jt added thet after the lest etage had burned cut, the protect~
ing head was efeeted endl aputnik took: eff.

A queation eriacs here, the whole impertence ef whieh will be under=
stood: AL what altitude wae eputnik releaeedt

AlSdtude of Releage
Me

From the firet day on it vas announsed that eputnik revelved at .
an altitude of 900 lan and all newspapars imediately concluded tint it
tnd deen leumched preeisely at that altitude, Thie is utterly illegieal
and here ia the reaeon whys —

(1) Let ua Mret mte that the Rusefans have later epecified that
sputnik reached 900 loi (and, ecaording to even nearly 1,000
irs) at ite sree and thit ite perigee was “considerably emailer," it
follews, in effect, an allipttiont orbit. ire, igdia Mourncesova has
since revenled that this perigee anounted to OO ha. Thus, it de quite
unlikely that eputnik we leumohed at-a paébt sores (tut ing ita apozec.

(2) What do the laws of celestial mechanics any, in effect? A

body launched near the earth with a sredd of 6,000 m per second will

not return, In fact, at that speed the contrifian] foree and the force
of gravity cancel each other ot, ae we have seen above, The body will
thus de transformed inte a entellite moving in a ofrouler orbit like

all heavenly bedies. Thia orbit obvicusly approximtes a circle which,
for that mntter, 4a nothing Sut « epeotil form of ellipea, We saw that
a body launshed a a epesd of 11,900 m per acocnd esonpes the gravitational
attraction of the earth end btada for ease place in the solar syste.

If, then, we leunchethis bedy, for emmple an artifier] entellite, with
a spoed lying between the firat and eccond coamia apecd, 1, es, between
8,600 and 11,200 = per second, it will go off sufficiently far and will
thus riee te a higher altitude than that of ite launching. The greater
thia epeed, the further it will travel end the more elongated will bo

te orbit, The force of gravity wil) then compel it to return and to
pese fairly near to the earth, mre or lees at the point of ite reléaqn .
Tt will then begin tts second trip and eo on. For thie reaso: it is
not rash te eonclude that sputnik 1] wae releseed at an altitude of 300 -
400 laa, Lees, obviously, at &e perigee, This checks perfeetly well with
whet the Ruesiane have published and whnt we have reported abcvre,
manely, that the earrier reeket had reached a height of “several hundred
kilometers” and that the initia) launching apeed of eputnik excecded
6,000 m per second,

Rensons #7 the 03 Jax

dnrather question disturbing all western nations: why was the
United States beaten in the race to launch an artifiea!] satellite? Are
the Ruselans eo strong? Are the American technicians bliundering? let
us not get panicky. Inatead, let us try te reason thie owt in the light
of the contrevereies which develeped in the U8, after the Sovict miececs,
There oan be ne doubt that the asienticts ef free Amerienan are quite
as capable ae their Ruesien eolleagues ard that they have powerfil

aSa.

peent@ers permitting thea te comp icte euch x trasnicus prejoet. tht

lac fon “ooordismter,” ¢ lwenid fedove Cm dora rat here te be

a crent aofentint to underrtamt thet all branches of industry and estentifie
reoeatch rast worl: eloesly toprther in order 40 eehiovn on aovomp] iatrent '
of euch esopes. Thie inoludee ctyetion) prepulaion, awedynanice,

metrics of liquids and epeedal state, netheentictane, eleetranie brainn,

radio, etenie propuleton, checuetry, biclory, bnilicties, ates) It ta

new Teme that the Anerioan reeoarchere hare wertré atone parallel

lines, ecrtisma without corramiontine to «ach other th remilte of thir

werk eon a verre probicry, involtynd ne they wore in the riyniries betwacn

tavy, Amy, and Air Fores each of which me pulling ite weight to obtain

the hirheet elntione frei Conrcet, Thee are tho decpapentad

rensens why A-vedenne fmya tet yet been able to solve eompietely

arrinin Diem porsd by the carrier reo!zt, pertieulerly the eepatce

tien of &ifferent clematis, which tns to be acooup lighed with -
‘rent lace” 9 ag not to cha tin preefen caurwc loading the extol lite

inte itn orbit within a fow retere,

he teeeinne thermelvea tenn ty eomtralining all thodr regeareh
on Froject oprtnik by ersating « coord4imrcting eomsiseion wer th
Setrenaic Counall of the dendoy ef Colensce Uma, Leeid Sedov was
nppointed ite enimn, fo wore able to reconstruct thy orpuniention!

atrrt of this cenmmiscion ne fol lew:

Thondeey of faiomoce TER
Treeidents Alelenndr Toasoyorery

———_—_—9

Letpensria Cote]
\gadasy of “elenecs

oordimting Cerdesten under
the Aetronente Coumail (arto
of estnblishaet: April 19%) - i
Chniroant Learid Sedov i

ve chould xise sention the hatrenetis Seetion of the Centrnl Acro
CYub of the Tam Qeord Ve Po Sti nlov, vives ehniruen ie T, Warvarvy
with 4, Shternfeld as hie eaxistert, ;

‘part fron the achiowement itealt, of ht pesedble use ocn eputrik
hat Ua hove nelked Aloimertr leanwenev, president of the Aondeny
al Catena Tent te anesier thir queetion.
IPE IS TM UOT OF Tm EIet ~NTIPTGTAL SATTLLIOD
Tnumohed on the ocdnnion of the Intormtiem!] teephyoion! Year,
the firnt artiffedal Soviet earth entell Me wil) permit the atudy of
ncerots pheno of the ntrosphers. \

Ste: iepertant role sthich the ‘sneepheres plays tn a1) questions ef
cotertint plewles 4e onli Imom. Jt fe a mynterious taberatory whets 60
ary nhenovenn of the upper atoormphere ere horn,

Petentiete nead to collect c crest mmber of exerine»ntal drt to
niniein the neture ef molar partiole radintion an wll as of other
shenocem. In this regpect, ran stimmoted explontions of the role ef
ultreviolet tase end other anrlegec colnr ridé{ntion in tha formtion ef
ie tonomtheres, have remained hynotiwars.

“a alrendy Imer the rtrusture of the ntrwephere at high altitudes,
jin tespernture, premrure, and dennity, A inouledre of thease parantere
ta ionertemt not only for salertiots tut alco for engineers, for oxmmple

ae

49 caleulnting the neve-nt of planse Clyine at biph altitude,

in the light of the latest reeceroh, partiqulerly etudias conerned
wth rootlets, tim Inguffistemy af cur bnewledee of fonosphere physies
hen becese olnarly rpyftrent. Thie retcarch hae denenetreted the need to
Tind wera and senne to mtudy the umer lasers of the ntoombere frm
‘he nodinkt ef view of theory ne vell as of omerisemtation, ~

Intorertin: momponit tana and hynethsece heve Seen formulated a
ttn aririn of coszto mot Che avtorn barealia, and other phenemorn tatding
stnen tn the upper lege of the extmephere with the help of a new branch
of vhrretes, mapretayhcéynonios. Forever, there is es yot no theory
vhioh explnine tha ferretion of the loncsphere fn a mrmmer which 4a in
pornamem, with oxperinental data, The firing of reekote to hirh altitudes
creme wp nett possibilities in thie field beexuee they etmmble us to remains
diotly cortain parmsnters of tho rteonpheree

4th the help of these encime the elvotronis concentration of
tim donoonbere, prasaure, ahd deneity af tha atowmbhers, etc., wre
neaared In the Unen,

Thess ~eeummenorta breve glelded iheresting reauite. Thetr ~
principe! dofnct lies in the ty of the obecewetion tins, It haw
becom nesetaury te elnbornte golentifio reeearch mthods vhich weuld
part the sonducting of experinets in fhe teper Inyers of the atmoe
pimre during « prolenced period of tins, The ertificini omrth entellite

hee piven te this eppertunity,

tmong a maaber of etudies to be undertaken by means of the ertificie!
eatollite, research on primry comic radiation ranks first, Thies
nhenomenon 1a caused cesontially by hydrogen miclei (protone) and hel deer
muclet (alpha particles) and by n euch eemller member of heavy nuciel
(earbon, nitrogen, OxyEZeT, ets). One of the characteristics studied in
primmry comic redintion de the sinmilerity which exists between the curve
of clenert propagation in the universe and tho distribution curve of
vrimery comic redietion compornerte according to their charges. Such

va tee

olenorts an lithiua, beryllius, and boron are very rero in nature and
the question has not yet been theoretically resolved as to how many

of these nueled enter inte the eomppositien of primary cosmic rediation.
In thia respect, a etudy of the characteristics of thie redintion could
clarify questions on the duration of comic particle sireuletion in uni=
vorsnl space ee well as the origin of the oomtic rays themselves.

= It te fitting te inolude in thie series of questions aleo the etudy

of tho yarintione in the intensity of come rays at the different altitudes
and divere regions traversed by the ertifieiel earth entellite, The

stucy of these phenomena eseumnse eceantinl importance for the solution

of quewtion regarding the origin of cosmic rays end problese of astre~
physics, Purtiouler emmples include an exmilanation of the eormestion
hotweon solar eruptions and dieturbances at the magnetic pole of the
earth.

Anong the questions concerning, the etudy of the structure of the
fonospherio leyers egpaura alse the deteruination of ion ceneontration.
[4 tna been experimertally established that this censertration varice
with altitude, From this fact it can berseen that the reasipt of flirrther
information regarding the ionization of the atmosphere along the erbit
of the satellite will be of wmnieual {nterest.

While on the subject of ionospheric peasurenente, we should mention
‘those thet will be undertaken by spectrographio means in order to detor-
nino the ion composition of the fonoephare eo as to learn about art’ dette
its ehemioal structure.

i Be e

The fluctuations, or oscilletions, of the magretia pole ef the
earth je@ one of the mst agtonishing geophysical phenomena. Meats
morta undertaken partly on the eurfuce of the earth and partly with the
help of reckets Inve shew that the magnetic pole of the-eerth ia not
constant in tine but, rather mibject to po-called seculer and short ;
vrriations, The nature of the secular variations remins largely an cnign.
ds regards the veriatiens of shert duration, their origin ie at thie time
being related to the existence of systeus of electrical current of the
order of mpnitude of Inméreds of thousende of amperes in the upper

- 8<

It follows thet a study of the changes ef intensity of the menetic
pols at high altitudes should be of specie) interest. Je will provides

eoientiste with new data on the existence of stort variations of wvariouec
Szpes and on the resulting variations of atmeapheric currents.

\

this intereet will be increased by the fact thet magnetic veristione

are linked to other phyéical phenomena by virtuc of certain lewet eurere
borealis, propagation of radicelectric waves, coonic ray variations, ete.
The cormection is particularly strong between magnetic perturbetions

and auroras berealis, it is aemumed thet both phenomena are caused by
particle radiation from the sun. However, the nature and intensity

oe? thie patttéle rediation hae not yet been adequately studied. Kow,

the theory of eureras werenlis is based te a great extent on asausptions
regarding the nature of particles exitted by the sun. For this reason
the question of the nature and immensity of perticle redintion remins
extremely important and on 4te solution depend in large meaeure our ideas
asout the appearence of the auroras borealis and other phenomena taking
place in the wpper layers of the atncephere.

Heat wat tea

the studies made possible with the enlp ef the ertificial
earth antellite, the etudy of micrometeore and metecre takes up @n
important place. These eclid partieles, which move, for emmple, et a
speed of 50 to 70 lm per second in relation to the earth, are of greet
interest not only *o geophysicists end actromomers tit aleo to the
builders of rockets ami satellites. Ooupirtatiens show that even aml)
particles are able ts pierde the exterior skin ef the satellite. Tt
thug becomes necessary to learn the mmber and energy of micromsteors
over «2 given dietance and their energy. The procurement of speotrogreaphic
piotures of micrometeors and of meteors would allow us to draw preeiee
conslusione regarding the “natecritic danger,” an extremely dnportant
problea for future interplanbhtery eoranrn ications.

We have mentioned only a few of the experimenta which will be carried
out by Soviet sciernticts with the help of artificiel earth sete) lites.
But it ean be eeon that the vesulte whieh these engines will allow us to
obtain will add eonsiderably to the seientifie data ool leoted by other
means dering the course cf the Intermtienal Geephysioal Year.

s ates A, Keoameyency,.
Me ehall close this first detailed repert by enewering one lect

question: Vhet is the future Seviat pregrem far the firing of extellitest
Here is what we knew about it: : a oo

eB SS ee

(1) The firing of a greet maker ef entellites carrying verious
mencurenems instruments in the esurse ef the Ixternationgl Cregitjetoes.
Year} . Cw. a ee re : eae

: Lala BES oe Ss, SS ES ge BN ap ee Be gee oth a pet bt Fe

(2) within = short tise, the firing of a nonreceverablc enteliite

with dege as cooupente) . .
(3) The firing ote reseverable satellite with « ruminal ecoupants”

(4) The firing ef «000 extellite te inepect ste Sirtiemewe! odes =~

chin vhole program 4eained et one cingle geelt The firing of e
projectile te the meet Mes eG! wig ap TP ARE? Veh. TH

wee
wR

ne couing < tut y we ohel2 Learn about , the difterent Sevict projects a
for a landing on that planet. vet pane “2 egies
ine coming lente we shall study the biclegiea) studies by Pekrovekty
of conditiane of animal life at high altitudes, carried cut up < rev.
by means of reekete having reached altitudes of 100 ard 200 inte tot
sources! Exatias - sinoe 5 October) rst
Ransio.ss o Raketekh by Be Lispouncte 1995 Keacows aes
umust 1957) Beddns dupe 19571 and the eslleeted of XK, £. Tefolkevakiy.

. FIGURE CAPT IONS
[Preto page 11 of original

Appearance! Sputnik is a sphere composed of 2 hanispheres of
alist alleys (we emphasise the plural ef the Tussien werd). The
murfaes is highly pelished ei specially treated te facilitate
thermal exehanges. The eoler da yollewish, which undourtedly _
means that, eputnik is gilded, like the future Ameriesn satellite,

SG De.

t 4 z

toyees- Diameters S60 ma. Pitted weight: 65,600 kg.
Thie weight wus 90 eurprising that in the deginning it me thought
that the figure had been distorted through errere of traneniaeion.
Te this quection, the Russians anewereds "If eputnik is ec heavy,
44 de because We have: ineorperated a very heavy cheaical battery to
mopply the transmitters as leng ae peasibles furthermore, the greater
the masse the lees the initial apeed ic slowed down,"

Radic equipment? ‘Sputnik® eertets 2 trenenittere whieh =”
breadeest eontinseusly on wire frequeneics ef 20,005 end 40.002 Me,
correspending te wavelengths of ebeut 14 and 7.5m. The power of
she bean ie nearly ene watt. - The sigmie are telegraphic signe
lasting 0.3 seconde. They ete feillewed ty a peuce ef the same length,
The peuse of one tranemitter corresponds with the eending peried

-104:

2 ie A eC

of the ether. The 2 transmitters operate through 5 enters of
different length (2 ef 2.40 mend 2 of 2.90 nm). These estonmme
are mounted on exterier sockets poruitt ing their being folded beek
(as in the ofe of an vwnbrella) at the tine of the gecticr, frou

dhe lae® reekst stare.

ik Je filled with nitregen mfirred irrto eirewler setion
by an wmexplained process. Thie inert gre ie ueed for the therm?
repulntion of the interna] perta. The tranenitters, in fect, cit
heet and thie heating problem aut have bean ene of the met diffi@
ault to selve.

Se
orbit: The initial orbit ie an ellipse, one of wheee feei ie

- the center ef tha earthy the apoges, given as 000-ts1 on the firet
dny, aeverding to Prayda, ie “in the mmgnitude ef 1,000 kms ° the
potipen, seeerding to Mra. lydia Yournsescra, eoomie ray epeeial ist
nnd delegate te the Barcelona Cengresa, de 500 tm, The apogee ia
aituated ebove the southern henisphere of the aarth, the periges
above the natthern henlephere. The total initial trajeatery me
nbeut 4A,A00 ken lang and was covered in 1 hour 36 minstes 2 seconds,
The laet etage of the carrier rocket gave eputnik at the time eof
ite relecee an initial speed of “a little more than B,000 m per
second." An article signed by Ke Saveliey in of Oeteder 15,
stated that eputnik had been fired With a slightly higher

than necessary."
[Proto page 12 ef original/
Sm ARE XOU. LiDMaD sepovt

At laet wo smre micceseful in penetrating the escret of the
mysterious Hr. Sedov, who wes #0 adept at cluding the ind lecrete
questitns of the bend of journalists pursuing hin! Leonid Iwenevrich
cedoy waa born in 1907. A epecialist in mechanics, he we elected
corresponding member of the Acsdeny of Selencas USSR in 1946, be-

coming a member in 193%. He roosived the Stalin prise in 1952. Re
completed his studies at the Univereity of Moscow in 1971 and beoame
a profesece there in 1957. In 1951 he went to wrk «t TeAdI (dentrel
Inet itute Cor’ ‘Yydredynanice ) and in 1947 at TelAX (Central Inet <tute
for the Construction of Atrereft ingines). Al) hie ecientific
ettput wae deveted te mechariice probleas, In the field of ths
noctanise of liquide, ho established formes for the aerodynanic
foresees operating on nonstadilized wing movement, wepedially vibre=
tions. Te discovered a new method of ealoulating problems arising
fron profile eeredynanios. He applied thie method to the theery of
thin sings, later, he lergely adapted it for wre in the theory
waves, elastioity, «tv. In hie teek "The Preblens of Hytrodynanice
and Plan Aerodynamics, " Segrel Ty Section 21 “Slipping on the. .
furface of Heavy Liguid’) he states and completely ectvea the problen

@lie

cl wlivping., The reeulte of these iapora were incerperatea an nara.
genstruation and the eenstruetion of hydreplanes. Sedev alec

solved the problem of the immect of a tedy on miter, of ricochet,
ama

anc a garies of other probleaa cencerning the hy¢redynamics of

heavy liquide, Sedev ie supposed to have been the first discevrerer
ofa mathed permitting the study of the flow of guess arewnd a
mrate, He nleo refined the method permitting the study of potential
gaa eurrents, considerably enlarging the field ef eppiication of

tho method of eppreximmtions of &. Ae Ohapliguine, In the theory

of ainilarities, Sedov stated and solved the problens donstituting
the eelentifie daele of thie branch science, He slaboreted on the
theory of the nonetablilised motion of gases <-> in particular the
thecry of the propagation ef thiek waves — he obtained interesting
resulta in the theory of-surface waves, and established the law of
puleationg in dectopic turbulenmss. His wrk “The Propegation of
Strong Expleeive Waves" (1946) laid the foundations for sheek weve
theory, For thie accorpliahment, the Acadeny cf Scienses USER
awarded him the Chapliguine Prise, Sedov aleo studied several agtre=
phyraieal preblemm, He was awarded the Order of Lenin and received
many desoretiona, In April 1995 L. fedew wae named shairmin of the
Goordinating Jomaiseion under the Aetronomisces SOeuneil ef the Acadeny
of Seienses USSR — Projent Spirtinik.

Vhen Leon 2itrone of the French television system interviewed
L, Sedov, he aaked himt “De you delieve you are ahead of the Ameriennst®

ro

he was answered: “The facts speek for themselvos!*

(Gwtation from the Sy aca Yel 58, pages
=7O-3573, edition December 1955),

[Prete page 13 of origim)/

The preeerice of FP. Xapitea on the eecrdinmeting commiasion, of
which L, Sedov is ehairmn, is an entire program, Kepites is
sonaidered to be the father of the Tiussian A and Ho bombe. On
the other hand, 44 ia kmown that the fSoviete are working feverishly
to develop atoaio prepuleion intended for use in firture pace recketa.
The relationship between thie name and this work is evident.

Potr Leonidevich Kapitea was born in 1694 as the son of «
general in the former government. He completed Ms-etudles at the
Polytechnic Institute of Petrograd in 1916. fie firet works were
devoted to a study of the inertia ef eleetrons and the characteriatica
of radioactive radiations, He perfected an inetalletion which made
44 possible for mmn te work with very powerful magnetic fields,
Thie embled him te observe the fiselen ef spectral lines in field
of up to 320 idlogaues, discover the Sime increase of electric

A
=sétes in these fields, Te perfected a large-output hydrogen
liquefier and constructed an original instelietion for the industrial
liquefaction of helium, We should martion that Sevriet scurces
always fail to mention one important epiecde in the life of Kapites,
In 1921 he emigrated to Great Britain, Lord Rutherford, the ferous
Tnglieh physielet, welcomed hin in hie inetitute and, some years
later, made him ite direetor, Nevertheless, Yapitea did not eueceed
in ebtaining British citizenship, In 1934 he joined e greup of
solentieta invited to an internationn] congress in Moscow and 444
rot return, He even qucceeded in repurohasing hie leboratory and
in having it ehipped to the USSR. From 1935 to 1946 Fapiten me
direeter of the Institute of Physieal Bolenses of the Academy of
Foiences USSR, Ke perfected a new procese for the marufucture of
Jiquid adr by using a low-pressue cyole and a turbo-expander. With

the eame turboexpander methed he created an installatian Sy means
of whieh large quantities of liquid oxygen could be obtained through
reetificeation. For his thesis “A Trbeexpander to Obtain Lew ~
Temperatures and ite Applicstion in the Liquefretion of Air® (1999)
he received hie first Stalin Prize in 1941, He aleo studied the
properties of liquid helium and disesvered the phenomenon of sper
fluidity. In 194% he received hie second Stalin Prize for hie work,
the reeults of which were published in “Heat Transniseion and
eperfluidity of Helium II" (1941) and ‘Research on the Mechanian

of leat Transmiesion of Helium II" (1941),

Xapiten became a member of the Physics and Mathemtioe Section
of the Asadeny of Sciences in 1939, wae named Hero of Socialist
Labor in 194%, and received 2 mere Stalin prizes in 1945 and 1949.
Folder of 3 orders of Len he ales helde honorary doctor's degrees
frea various imiversities (4 British, 3 American, 2 French, 3 Ohineee,
eto). Other special distinations: University of Liege, medal (1954)
prire of honor of the Academy of Baiences (1957); Prenklin Hedal :
(1941)} Faraday Medal (1942),
Elgure top right page 12 of original? These two sketches, which
represent the eroit ef the sputnik, explain why the sbrellite travels
in northeasterly direction ever ene half of the earth and in
ecutheasterly direstion over the ether half,

flett MPigure page 12 of original) fe oxption, bee toxt,/

@e¢s

VACTINGTOR, De g,

2 COTM FLOOR
167& OOMNOCTICUT AVEay FM,

cron 7—kako

21S
