Political Trends in Western Germany
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008853, dated 4 June 1948.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008853).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FOR “THE ‘PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES

POLITICAL TRENDS
IN WESTERN GERMANY.

Jee ORE 52-48
z pai : Published 22 duly 1948

“== DECLASSIFIED"
~ BO. 652, Soe. 35) and hal
SSF nee mae

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State

b, Director of Intelligence, GS, USA, for the Department of the Army

e. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

a. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Frrce

e. Director of Security and Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Com:
moission

f. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, fer any other
Department or Agency

2, This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with:
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President

National] Security Council
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Department of Defense
Department of the Army’
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
State-Army-Navy Coordinating Committee
Joint Chiefs of Statk

Atomic Energy Commission

ORE 52.48

POLITICAL TRENDS IN WESTERN GERMANY
SUMMARY

The East-West tensions in Germany, resulting from the incompatibility of US
and Soviet policies in conjunction with certain basic internal factors, threaten to
destroy Western German adherence to moderate political groups and to stiffen resist-
ance to Western Allied policy. The US, stand against Communism. is being interpreted
as tacit permission for a revival of German nati alism, and the Germans are taking
advantage of the current US need for cooperation to demand greater privileges in
the economic and political spheres. The present polarization of Western German
thought toward political extre:nes is influenced by the following three basic indigenous
factors: (1) growing dissatisfaction with the occupation and with the weak German
covernmental administrations identified with it; (2) the probability of the future
disintegration of the moderate Social Democratic Party, the only strong non-Com-
munist labor force in Germany; and (3) the rightist trend of general German political
desires which has increased as a result of the large enfranchisement of ex-Nazis. In
the course of this polarization, the Social Democrats may lose political strength to both
the Right and the Left, while the alignment of the rightist parties will be affected by
the strong current of resurgent German nationalism. At present, there are several
rightist parties in Western Germany; of these, the National Democratic Party, although
under certain restrictions in the US Zone, appears: the most important vehicle for an.
expansion of German nationalism, The trend as a whole may result in the diminution
of the moderate parties, the development of @ small but aggressive Left, and the ex-
pansion of the Right with increasing Western German independence of Allied controls.

Note: The information in this report is as of 10 June 1948.
The intelligence-organizations of the Departments of State, Army, and the Navy have con-
curred in this report; the Air Intelligence Diyision, Air Intelligence Directorate, Department
of the Air Foree, had no comment.

POLITICAL TRENDS IN WESTERN GERMANY

‘Western German adherence to relatively moderate political groups, such as the
Social Democratic Party (SPD) and the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), apart
from certain basic internal factors, has been weakened by the East-West tensions in
Germany resulting from the policy conflicts of the US and the USSR. Many Germans
are interpreting the US stand against Communism as tacit permission for Germany to
exchange its present moderate political ideology for one of extreme nationalism involy-
ing the rehabilitation of elements in Germany formerly identified with the Nazi regime.
Results of recent elections have indicated at least the beginnings of a renascent Ger-
man political nationalism.

Should this trend from Left to Right develop to an appreciable degree, current
political alignments in Wester'. Germany will undergo considerable modification in
relative strength and influence. In order to retain contro! over their followers, German
political leaders will be compelled to adopt a more extreme stand on questions of
oceupation policy and Germany's international position. German politicians of all
parties, reacting to the current US need for German cooperation in the European re-
covery program and for German resistance to Sovieé overtures toward a unification of
Germany upon Communist terms, have already increased their demands for as much
freedom of action as is consistent with continued US protection against the USSR.
Unless satisfactory concessions are obtained, the Germans may feel that nothing further
is to be gained from democracy and may become more receptive to Soviet plans.

German dissatisfaction with the occupation and the weak German governmental
administrations is long-standing and has become increasingly vocal. In view of eur-
rent conditions in Germany, German political and industrial leaders have shown con-
siderable doubt as to the possibility of a successful implementation of the European
recovery program. These leaders are not eager for the establishment of a Western
German government by the Allies unless it be endowed with almost plenary powers,
and they would prefer an occupation statute clearly restricting and delineating the ex-
tent of Allied juristiction over German civil affairs. German leaders are hostile to the
continuance of the Joint Export-Import Agency, which they allege is stifling German
foreign trade by its bureaucratic methods. They are severely critical of the plans of
the Western Powers to internationalize the Ruhr, without corresponding internation-
alization of adjacent industrial areas and are opposed to further dismantlings of
heavy industry and the imposition of a fixed production level for German industry.
In general, Germans are apathetic toward political programs favored by the Western
Powers, and are resentful of Allied denazification policies and Western Power efforts
to democratize the populace and liberalize the old educational system.

The discrediting of occupational policies, as they are executed through either the
Bipartite Board or the Land and Bizonal administrations, is now an important means
by which German politicians appeal to the electorate. The effectiveness of such po-
litical appeals today is likely to be in direct ratio to the extent to which the Western

Allies or the German administrations identified with them are censured. The slowness
of economic recovery, the bad feod situation, and the failure to raise production levelg==
all these are advanced as political arguments, contributing to a popular belief that
Germany is being eliminated systematically as a potential economic competitor of the
Western Powers. Extremists on both the Left and Right are able to capitalize on the
resultant industrial unyest. Not even the moderate political parties belleve that
Allied interference in Germany is compatible with German economic recovery. Because
of this German emphasis upon Allied interference as a political issue, the degree of
Allied control in Germany may determine the future alignment of political forces in
that country.

The value of the Occupation in German eyes will be measured only by its ability
to rehabilitate the Western German economy while preventing Soviet expansion into —
Western Germany. German interest in economic aid, however, is no stronger than
German resentment against present foreign control. As long as any form of Occupa-
tion exists, German efforts to curtail or circumvent the jurisdiction of the Allied Military
Governments will continue. German governmental agencies will continue to evade
their responsibilities and attribute their ineptitude to an insufficient delegation of
authority by the Occupation Powers, upon which will be visited all the resentment of
the German population against the prolongation of their miseries.

The political development of most immediate importance is the retirement of Kurt
Schumacher, first chairman of the Social Democratic Party. His disappearance from
the scene may modify the present policy of the party and possibly its organization as
well.

With Schumacher in retirement, many South German party leaders, who in the
past were unable to revolt against his leadership, will probably attempt to reduce the
strict control exercised by party headquarters. The first step may be a demand that
a dual chairmanship be created, which would equalize the position of the Zend interests,
represented largely by the South German Federalists and the central party bureauc-
racy, represented largely by the North German Centralists, who have dominated the
party since 1945. Failing in this effort, Land party leaders may assume a more in-
dependent role in their respective areas. In addition, there is a potential source of
antagonism between the trade union wing of the party. and the political leadership of
the party.

Following Schumacher’s retirement, the various pro-Communist splinter groups
within the Social Democratic Party will probably remain in the party. Should the
party's policy remain firmly opposed either to the USSR or to Communism, these
groups may eventually break off and join the Communists.

If present US opposition to the socialization of German industry continues and
the Western German economy nevertheless attains some measure of prosperity, the
long-term result of Schumacher’s retirement will be a loss of party strength to both
the Right and the Left. Elements of the right wing of the Social Democratic Party,
particularly the younger members who joined-the party under Schumacher, may break
off and join rightist or more nationalistic political groupings. The Social Democratic

8 Som:

*
ie

Ee center, from, which Schumacher drew his support, may swing toward the Left to
retain its hold on the workers, particularly in the Ruhr. This will be reflected in in-
creased party emphasis on Socialist dogma, including demands for socialization and
participation in management and opposition to Allied economic policies in Western
Germany, but is unlikely to result in a working alliance between the Social Democrats
and the Communists in the near future. A working alliance between the SPD and the
Communist Party for common objectives might develop, however, if the USSR ceases
to menace Western Germany, and the SPD is prevented from fulfilling any of the major
points of its party program because of US opposition to socialization.

In general, however, the present political trend in Germany is to the Right, and
may develop into a strong current of resurgent nationalism. Recent local elections in
the US Zone indicate increasing rightist appeal to irredentist and dissatisfied elements
as well as to German nationalists.

A partial cause of this rightist trend has been the increased voting strength of
ex-Nazis, who have been re-enfranchised and are beginning to make their strength felt.
In addition, Germans expelled from foreign countries, such as the Volksdeutsche and
Sudeten Germans from the East, are supporting nationalist and irredentist movements.
The main cause of this trend, however, is the general attitude of the German people,
who tend to be extremists with only a slight understanding of the theory of govern-
ment by the center. Distrusting the Left for its connection with the USSR, the average
German will gravitate toward the extreme Right and a policy of direct action, rather
than adopt a parliamentary centrist attitude toward Communism and the USSR.

At present, there are several rightist parties in Western Germany; of these the
National Democratic Party in the DS Zone appears the ::.ost Hkely vehicle for an
expansion of German nationalism. Although still relatively weak, these parties may be
expected to grow rapidly, unless US Military Government intervenes. Several os-
tensibly nonpolitical organizations also have the personnel and the capability of ac-
tively supporting a resurgence of nationalism. At present, the largest of these as-
sociations is the Hilfswerk der Evangelischen Kirehen, an ecclesiastical welfare organ-
ization with an organizational structure covering all Germany, facilities for interna-
tional connections, and a very questionable executive personnel. In the future, this
and similar groups, supported by elements of the governmental and economic ad-
ministrations, can be expected to play an active role in promoting German nationalism.

The ultimate results of the widening split between the Right and the Left in Ger-
many will be: (1) the diminution of the Center; (2) the development of a minute but
aggressive Left; and (3) the expansion of the Right. Under present conditions, how-
ever, the fourth and most powerful element will be a dissatisfied but politically inert
mass, which will be unable to oppose actively present Allied policies and unwilling to
participate in the anti-Communist campaign. This political mass, however, will be a

a source of latent strength for the Right, and should the Germans receive political

3 freedom, this element would actively support a rightist program for a centralized and

unified German state, opposition to foreign intervention, and exploitation of the US-
USSR struggle for the benefit of German nationalism.

$
