Meeting no 38 - 5 October 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012418, dated 4 September 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012418).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tom,

MEETING NO. 38 - 2th OCTOBER, 1961.

G) Subject was met at RV Point Now 3, the Chaillot Palace, by G. and
led at a distance to the parked car driven by M. Roger again provided
surveillance cover, Subject arrived 15 minutes late and explained that
he was tied up with his delegation and could not get free to make the meeting

" exactly as acheduled, Upon review of the circumstances at the pick-up point
by G. and Roger on the next morning both parties who were present at the RV
point felt that several persons in the area were Observing everyone who
passed at a disoreet distance » but they certainly appeared to be members of
the French police in civilian clothes, Since an intensive curfew
regulation against Algerian Moslems is currently in effect and officially
begins at 2030 hours, this could be the logical reason for French detectives
to be actively patrolling, At any rate to play safe it was decided to abandon
RV No. 3 and to returm to RV Noe 1, the footbridge, which has always appeared
most suitable end had not been used for several meetings, only for the normal
security consideration to break a pattern,

S Upon arrival subject immediately began to describe everything that
‘took place with respect to his contacts with Sie This was a mst important
day in lining up whatever arrangements were possible for subject to exploit
in order to fulfil his missions for both the Committee and GRU on a
legitimate basis, Luckily it had been possible to obtain a report fron gg
on his meeting with subject via Al prior to subject's arrival at the meeting, -
The upshot of the report was, to quote Joe, that subject "hit like a cyclone"
with his demands and has even arranged a trip for his entire delegation
despite the fact that he was admonished against exerting pressure on HOOK,

G.) St Exouse ms for being late, I was held up by the delegation, Let
me tell you everything in proper order, This morning, just a few minutes
after 0800 hours, ONE calica me at my hotel, and made an appointment with
me at his office at 1100 hours, I went there and spoke to him for a rhole
hour, He received me very graciously and I also brought him some small gifts
of Caucasian wine, caviar and Cigarettes, I told him what I needed with ——

‘respect /

7

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
@ UMAR 1992

fe . #35
~2Q~

. respect to places that my delegation desires to visit in the PARIS area
and in other towns, I also told him about what brochures I needed and
about the places I want to visit out of tom next week, He wrote everything
down while we discussed this for a whole hour and we worked out a programme,
According to this Progranme, tomorrow at about 0830 we will be taken to the
Bourget area to visit a large electrical factory which manufactures electrical
equipment, WMBhas very kindly arranged for a representative of his to com -
to my hotel at 0800 hours, This man will be a guide and will go with m to
the hotel where our delegation are staying as tourists, I have arranged for
an interpreter to be there and have instructed the delegation chief to have
everyone up, fed and ready to leave at 0830 hours, G.: How many people will
this include ? & 3 There will be nine of them and myself will make ten,
I will go with them on this visit, Ge: What happenea to the other four 7?
S.: They are the metallurgists and they are already travelling through the |
country on their pre-arranged itinerary, Ge: What happened to your
Committee interpreter, LAPTEVA ? 8.3 She is also with them, SE 2120. got
three brochures on Nimonics and may even get me a sample. This will take — :
care of the delegation for the present and on Saturday evening they will leave 1
town to visit places in France and @$fprhas arranged another place for them |
to visit during this trip. TRANSTOUR will take them and he will arrange for
them to visit places on Monday and Tuesday, G.: Will you go with them on
this trip also? 8: No. I will just go tomorrow, and from there on they
Will go by themselves,

, S, S.: Now, for me and for tha representative of the Embasay, SOLOVYEV,

HOOK has arranged either for the 141th or the 12th October, a visit by SOLOVYEV
end me to the Eleotrio Mechanic Factory at Iz HAVRE. The Director ig
Mr. ROGSELL (phonetic), I will go there with SOLOVIEY and possibly QP
will have a guide go with us, This will take place on either the 11th or
12th October. In addition I will visit the firm "Jeumont" (phonetic) in ths
town of “sUMONT" (phonetic). This is about 250 kms, from PARIS, He said
that each place could be visited during the course of one day, This trip to
"JUMONT" should take place Monday or Tuesday, and the one to LE HAVRE on
Wednesday or Thursday, The dates may be re-arranged according to how Wi
is able to set them ups; he will tell me when the dates are set. The Director

of this plant in "JUMONT" is M, MOLIET. My only request to@iPwas that

ata 7

#3
-3-

all of these visits terminate by Thursday, This would make it possible
for me to work with you on Friday and Satuntays’ Therefore for these two
visits on my part I will be accompanied by SOLOVYEV and will ride ina
Soviet car. Qj is also seeing if it is possible for me to visit in
PARIS here, the Chemical firm of “PESHINET" (phonetic) (Pechiney Cie. de
Produits Chem. et Electro-Metallurg. 23 rue Balzac, PARIS 8e).

SS, S.: By the way the representative of the GVF (Civil Aviation) in
PARIS is a GRU officer whose name is Vladimir Ivanovich ZEMLYANSKIY (identified
in U.S, Embassy photo series No, 222), He is a Lt. Col. of Aviation, He :
is the stout one I referred to and he was also present at the operational
meeting, At that tims I could not remember his nam, but today since I
have already got my Air France ticket, I was able to mset him, We also saw
his photograph in the earlier pictures (British set),

Sez: Let ms get back to my arrangements with QM Therefore I will
have three trips, one with the delegation and two with SOLOVYEV, He also
showed me brochures, three of which were on Nimonics with new descriptions and
I asked him to save these for me until he has collected them all » before I
picked them up, and he agreed, MP will also drop in to see m at 0800
tomorrow at my hotel, just in order to tell me when I should get in touch
with him later in the day after I return from ny trip with the delegation in
order to find out from him how the other arrangements have been scheduled,

He was very nice to me and has invited me for lunch,which may be on one of
these days. After I met him today and made my requests, he already had
arranged everything for tomorrow and advised me thereof by a phone call

at 1700 hours, I told the delegation and they were most pleased that I was
able to arrange this, since they could get nothing like this out of DUDIN

of INTOURIST (KGB). Ge: Why are you involved tn arranging the trips for
the delegation ? So: Because this delegation has been sent here under

our Committee auspices and as a representative of our Committee here and

on visits of a technical nature it is up to me to make the arrangements even

though /

@& S.: Here is my Air France ticket; I am taking the 0800 flight on

#H3y
~h=

though you correctly said that they already have a general tourist-type
itinerary planned for them, This is an additional visit which is super—
imposed on their itinerary which has been completely laid out otherwise.

I try to fill in their free time that they have between tourist-type visits
with arrangements to visit places of technical interest to the Committee,
I am responsible for any of thae on this list of 89 who may be sent here,
thus far only these nine have come. No others will come, G.: What about
the cable that stated twenty others will cam ? &: That was changed;

; they will not com, Probably that is for reasons of economy, but in addition
the Exhibition has already closed. The other delegation members who are now
here had a chance to visit the Exhibition several times. (Subject described
HOOK's office and apparently was very much impressed by it).

@) 8.: I thank you all very mech for all your efforts, for arranging
all this with Q@MP and this will solve my mission problems for the Committee
Since they will return to MOSCOW four days before I will and will report on
this favourably. G.: And this will cover all of your Committee mission
requirements ? S.: Yes, fully. Ge: And the valuable documents will
help you fulfil your GRU missions and the less“valuable ones you will send
to the Committee, 5,: Yes, that is what I will do, I just want to mention
again that it would be clearly valuable for me to have something from the
Bagneux firm; I asked Q@§MMP about this too and he will try. Thatts all I

have to report in respect to aR

Sunday October 15 from Orly to PRAGUE and there I take a Soviet plane at

1155 hours and will be in MOSCOW at 1400 houra, That same night I can advise
you ty teléphone with three rings as before of my safe arrival. My only
request about the flight is that I must leave the hotel at 0600 hours to be
at the Airport in plenty of time to get my baggage through, therefore please
have WYNNE get up at 0500 hours and arrange for both him and myself to be
awakened then so we can meet this schedule, (Subject was assured that the

hotel /

x

“>

. hotel could wake them up on time and we would make sure that WYNNE would

be available on time), S,: When is WYNNE coming ? It would be well if he
could get here on Monday or Tuesday, He: He is just arriving in LONDON
today and he will probably not get here before Tuesday. S,: Maybe WYNNE
could go on one of the trips with m. Ge: Absolutely not. Keep WYNNE

as a source for one set of documents, and QW competely pecarats as Sous
other source. WYNNE mst not get mixed up with Qin any way; he has
already served his purpose as the contact man for you to met @fPand this
legend has in fact taken place and now #YNNE must be kept competely apart.
S.: Very wll, if you say it should not be done we won't do it. |

9e S.: I had lunch at the Embassy yesterday with GRIGORIYEV andwth
PROKHOROV and I found out that GRIGORIYEV has an acquaintance who is a chenist
and who has given him some samples of some steel corrosion preventative.

It is applied something like a paint, The man works in the Pechiney firn,
but I do not say that he is an agent, he may be only a good personal friend,
he did not give me his name, Everything is well at the Embassy and nobody
says anything whatsoever about the BERLIN situation. It ‘is entirely quiet,
but they ais careful about going around in town and are doing so more rarely,
Ge: You were at the Embassy for the past three days now, was there anything
new that you overheard of interest at all ? S,: I go to the Embassy every
day and sometimes I drop in several times, Yesterday I was at the Exhibition

watching how they were dismantling it.

Ga G.: That about this banquet that you mentioned would take place

on the 3rd after the closing 7 S,: That was a farce; they are s© stingy.
I arrived there late, about 2130 hours, there were hardly any people there
and in general few attended the Exhibition with the exception of Sundays.
In all about 850,000 visitors attended the Exhibition, but in MOSCOW over
two million visited the French Exhibition, I had to laugh, prior to the

”

closing of the Exhibition our specialists sold some fifty expensive cameras

to /

~6-

to the French, but they were brought back and refused as being inddequate,.
Instead of an elaborate banquet and the giving of awards both monetary and in
gifts to the people who worked so hard, all they received was an expression
of thanks and they were shom an Italian film, There were hardly any people
from the Embassy there. As a matter of fact some 500 French workers came to
begin the dismantling and made all kinds of noise while the film was going on,
so I left the place in disgust.
11. He: Did you call this French lady, Marie-Paulle (Marie-Paulle Lachaux) 7?
8: Yes, I did and I made an appointment with her to take her out tomorrow
night. I invited her to the Lido and I would like Michael to make reservations
for me in the name of Mr, ALEXANDER in the front row next to the stage. Ge:
Just go to the box office and ask for the tickets for Mr. AIZLAICI2 acd you
wall see that all has teen reserved for you; you do not need to tell the lady
what name you are using,

Cie.) G.: Now, about Sunday, it appears that that will be the day we
should meet in order to review the results of the trip @giy bas arranged ana
the plans he is setting up for you for the following week, That will be the

earliest day we can met since the next two evenings you will be mixed up with -
excuse the expression = "other diversions", S.: Fine. At what tim shall we
meet on Sunday ? G.: At 2000 hours. That is a very good time and we will
do this at the footbridge. S.: That's fine, That is an excellent place,
The other place, where I came today is very good too. then I was walking up
the stairs, there was nobody around (he thought). Next week we should meet
more often since we have many things to discuss and to refine and if there
are repetitions, what of it ? G.: We will see how things work out with
respect to your travel schedule and we can plan more exactly next Sunday.

C3) G.: You say you haven't heard one word about the BERLIN situation at
the Enbasay 7 S.: It seems that they are tired of speculating on it and I
get the impression that everyone is waiting, They are all listening to the
radio and reading French newspapers care fully, They mentioned in the French
paper ‘Figaro® that in a soccer mtch in the Caucasus an uncontrolled fight
began between a Georgian and an Armenian team and it became so uncontrolled

that / 7

#3y
-7-

that they had to stop the game. G,: Aren‘t there missions to report on
what the French attitude is towards the BERLIN crisis 7 S.: Itll be able
to tell you more about this later because I have a scheduled lunch with both
the Rezident and ANANYEV and if they have a few drinks at this time maybe I
can find somthing out, I'm glad that you asked me these things because it
will help me direct the Conversation, G.: Also it would be of interest to
know if there are any directives with respect to any action on the Algerian~
French difficulties, possibly such directives could involve what the French
Communists should do, Je: If by chance you should go to the Rezidentts
house should he invite you there, try to notice who else lives in that house,
on what floors and on what side of the house, §,: Very well I will certainly
remember this, but of course I do not know whether I will be invited there
or to the Torgpredstvo Dining Room

Cay) Get Now we have here for this eveningts programme additional questions
on our agenda and an album of photographs to look over; what shall we begin
with ? Hy: We may as well start with the questions, but I would like first
to ask him to Clerify two items which he has asked us to purchase for him,
We'd like to mow what those fifteen and thirty volt batteries he ordered were
for so that we can determine the size because they come in various sizes,
S.: They should be the very smallest sizes made but of the voltage I asked |
for. What they are for is this, LEVIN has a tiny tape-recorder md the
batteries to fit into it are cylindrical and smll, It is an agent-type
recorder set, it is a wire recorder, Three little batteries fit into it; |
the other types are the square shaped batteries of exactly the same type you
have given us before, Indidentally others always ask for amall batteries
for Japanese type transistor sets, The Japanese have brought in very many of
their type sets, Little transistors are a typical kind of Japanese gift
which they give to their contacts in trade dealings. There are also
Soviet transistors but they are low grade, G,: The other question is
about the battery operated razors, We're having trouble with this for the

very /

H3F

-8~

very good reason that many companies are discontinuing manufacturing them
Since the batteries become weak very rapidly. At first they work fine, but
very quickly the battery power drops, However, we have a way of solving this
problem by obtaining spring wound mechanical razors, All one needs to do is
to keep it wound tight and 4t will work wel} indefinitely. This spares the
necessity of always trying to replace worn out batteries, S.: I saw these
Once and I think that these would be very good, and as a matter of fact though
I have heard about them I was afraid to ask you because I thought that I
might be asking for 66 mich, G.: That is Just fine and ir anyons argues
with you you oan simply say "Look fool, this does not need batteries it is
more modern than the others and it can always be wound up". Se: Of course
that's fine and I will explain this except that I can't say "Look, you fool"
to the Minister of Defence, since he is going to be one of those to receive
it, as well as RUDNEV and SEROV. He: Thattg fine, George, let's go on to .
the questions, :

, Ge: In reference to rockets, when you consider the large ones such as
the R-2, which ihas a long range, of what use do the Soviets consider it

worthwhile to use conventional warheads on these “rockets since a great expense
is involved in the construction of these missiles and a small error off the
target would make their effect worthless, S.: I understand your question
perfectly. When you mention the R-2, first of all let me state that they have
produced a large quantity of thege rockets. It would be wasteful to sorap these
so that they are now held in reserve. In addition many conventional type
warheads have been already manufactured for these rockets. In addition they
still consider that within the allowable lateral and range deviations for these
rockets, the TNT equivalent conventional warhead would still effect a
considerable area of destruction, In addition to this, when you consider
that a war may break out in which nuclear weapons are not used, at least at
the outset, these available rockets would be very necessary, As I remember
from ny studies, the parameters of error within which these rockets operate

can /

wr eee oe:

oe
-9-
can still be effective, Of course, all types of rockets are equipped to
carry atomic warheads and these are the ones wane ranges are used to
determine how far an atom warhead can be delivered, Since the conventional
warheads consist of TNT which is poured in like a solid mass of honey and are
heavier, their corresponding ranges for each type of rocket’ ine greater than
if they carried an atomic charge. It is not feasible for technical reasons | -
to belence the load of the atomic warhead with additional heavy material | |
such as lead, therefore the ranges are ree
Gs Tell me how long has FEDEROV been in command of his missile

brigade at WEISSENFELS in the D.D.R? Se: FEDEROV was assigned there
last year in 1960, I would say in the late summer and he has been there
more than a year now, G,: Was this brigade there before he was assigned
to it 7 S.: Yes, it was, G.: How long did it exist tefore he came there ?

S.: Before he came there was a previous commander and he had trouble with :
the former deputy because the latter had aspired to be the Brigade Commander |
whereas FEDEROV simply came in from MOSCOW and was given the job. G.: How “i
long do you say the Brigade has been there before FEDEROV took over its
command ? S.: I would say this that all the four Brigades which are there
have been there for now two years. Of course one may have been deployed
there earlier and then the others followed so that the first one would have
been there two years and the last one say a year and a half,

Gi} Ge: What is the table of organisation renk for a commander of
such a brigade 2 S.: They can be Colonels or Major-Genereals. If a Colonel
does particularly well he can be promoted to a Major-General since that is
the Table of Organisations slot. Now there are two Colonels there and tw
Generals; PEDERGY is a Colonel and I have given you’ the nane of one Ma jor-
General who is a missile brigade commander, his name is Gen, Maior VINOGRADOV.
Since you mention FEDEROV, I want to stress to you that FEDEROV could be of
tremendous value to me if he were transferred back to MOSCOW. His wife is

. constantly /

+}

F388
~10-

constantly bombarding ny wife ‘. VARENTSOV and myself to get her husband
transferred to MOSCOW, She cannot go to the D.D.R, Since she was sent out
together with their abnormal son who got himself into trouble in the D.D.R,
and was declared persona non grata. All of FEDEROV's personal difficulties
there were in the line of personal transgressions but were not sufficient

to have him removed for official incompetence, VARENTSOV would always give
him a job because he was his former Adjutant and he is very fond of him even |
more so than BUZINOV, (Subject stresses that although he himself is one of
VARENTSOV's favourites due to long years of friendship, he still also likes
FEDEROV very much and FEDEROV would be a first-rate source of information for
subject since not only did they get along very well but FEDERCV is in subjectts
debt for past favours to a great degree, Subject goes on to explain how he
had a large party at his house Just before he came and to hich General
POZOVNYY came as well as BUZINOV and other Colonels from GRU. Much

classified information can come from such conversations and again subject
stressed that he could get anything out of FEDEROV ana BUZINOV, particularly
when either of those two are drinking with subject),
Ge: Have any long range aviation units been converted to or

replaced by missile units ? &: For a long time now in the Soviet Union ae
the number of long range aviation units has always been small. There never was
® programme to mke large numbers of long-range aircraft, but the units which
did exist were always retained, There were improvements made in the types,

and newer types replaced the old, but the numbers were always relatively

emall, This long-range aviation of course is capable of delivering atomic
bombs but it will require adequate air ages our fighters will not be able to
give it very long range protection because their own ranges will be limited,
The crew of these bombers is sizeable, it runs from twelve to fifteen men,

but it has considerable fire protection of its om with many multiple turrets
and also carries rockets. These rockets are air-to-air types, I heard about
all this from POZOVNYY, from whom I can easily get information since he is very
friendly to me and tells me everything, After all he was in the PVO and was

& deputy to BIRYUZOV. He attended all military conferences regarding PVO0,

19. He / 7

HSI

-14-

5.: He has all kinds of personal contacts even now with Generals,

such as Gen, Lieut, sat pi is an aviation General who also lives

near POZOVNYY in the soxorttt. PETUKHOV 4s still serving in PVO ana these
two met often, Another good friend of his is Gen, Lieut. MITEL'KOV,

He is the Commander of an Air Army near MOSCOW which is subordinate to PVO.

The Divisions which compose this Aruy are all an integral part of ti pyo ==
of the Land, (Subject related a long-winded story about the background =
of MITEL'KOV). He is a widower and his wife who was deaf died in 1958. . | |
Upon returning from Turkey I celebrated New Yearts Eve at POZOVNYYts on :
the year ending 1956 going on 1957. Four years later again on New Year's

Eve I was at POZOVNYY's, This time POZOVNYY did not invite MITEL'KOV, but

at three o'clock in the morning quite drunk, in came MITEL'KOV with a good

looking woman. This lady, whom he introduced as his fiancee, is the

Director of the Generalst store in MOSCOW which belongs to the Military

Council of the Ministry of Defence, Her name is Anya MARTYNOVA; she was

ny old girl-friend, I knew her years ago and, oh well, she was ny girl

friend, but I didntt marry her. I pretended not to know her although we are

good old friends ana she was loaded with dismonds, since anyone who is a

Director of a Generals’ store always steals, grafts and gets things others

do not, and she was no exception, After she was divorced from MARTYNOV,

and she has a grown son now attending the Baumann Institute » She married Hero

Of the Soviet Union SOBOLEV, who was killed while making a test flight in 3
the latest fighter craft when its canopy flew off. This happened in LENINGRAD a
but he was buried in MOSCOW in Novodevichiy cemetry, Now that she is a

dow, Genorel MITEL'KOV wants to marry her. Excuse me for deviating

from my thought, |
(@,) Ge: In other words you mean that the missile units did not replace

long range aviation units. 8: No. No. Under no circumstances, Although

the fleet and other civilian enterprises were cut dom in a budgetary sense

in favour of rockets and their increased producricn, the Ade Force.) was note

touched and though emal] it remained as “at was, that is ie tones range

aviation.

21. /
b

A325

-12—

(x) G.: Did VARENTSOV ever have arguments with the long range aviation

people or the Soviet Air Force 2? Se: Yes he did but this was all ona basis

of fighting for a greater budgetary appropriation, but this is also true of the

arguments he had with ROTMISTROV and the tank people; and in fact he still does

have arguments but it is all over money. MOSKALENKO also has commute with

them for the same reason. In fact Sergei Sergeievich told me that he often

argued with them in the presence of KHRUSHCHEV and the Central Committee on

hpudgetary matters and KOZLOV, BREZHNEV and also MIKOYAN were present.
VE

Ge: Do you know what is the exact nomenclature_ox title endwhe-dan

the chief of the
eee nl

ectorate, of _GRAU_which actually accepts the missiles from

—

the plants and serves as customer for the Defence industry ? S.: GRAU

nee some twelve or fotirteen directorates therein. ..GRAU has a Central Research _
conn pee CLA CET TT 8 cme ererp rere neperanenenerve eer eater teat COCCI Ponerinae er,

abe dh on .
group whic avolved with NIL OTK ees: All of the. Directorates _are numbered :
Peel nel SS ee cree at

but I ingeeseiee What the numbers | are. They also have a specific —
designation. One may be | concerned exclusively with optical instruments,
another exclusively with artillery bases. Still another may be concerned with
rocket material as such and under this they would have otdels. The exact title yt
of the Directorate that you refer to I do not know but there certainly is one :
just as you asked about. There is also a Directorate exclusively for warheads.
Frankly I know the internal organisation of GRAU very poorly; I need an
4nformant who is employed in that headquarters to get this information. I am
sure that BUZINOV and FEDEROV Imow, but I never chanced upon 4 conversation
a about GRAV with them,
V () Ge: In the Artilleriyskiy Sbornik there are BK ii and&A 61
missiles mentioned. Does this mean that the 8 K 11 missile and the 8 A 11
missile is with an atomic warhead 7? (After éoiisi acranle discussion and
re-questioning the eothers ne summation was machete Tee MM and Bisa
8 K 11 designations mean that they are atomic warheads, Designations such Oo:
ee EE 8 A 61 are deni gations: for yookets with. conyention&il warheads. ©

However it is possible that a rocket designated R-11 with the suffix changed

pe 1a:

‘ to R-i4 - A would mean an atomic warhead, Subject added that the

\ be oo
*

designation /

‘Comndttes ‘of E and to be more pig car eet eS
apne ee TTT ILI LOTTI eet I

#37
~13—

designation A or K made no difference with respect to their both being
atomic warheads, Their difference is their atomic yields 80 long as the

11 4e behind them in the designation).

2he Ge: Do you know the names of any other Central Committee Department
heads besides TYASKO for Light Industry, whom you mentioned before ? SS: The
last document that I photographed for you which involved the listing of
Government leaders beginning with KHRUSHCHEV, that was the very last

information on this subject. G.: You dontt remember any f from memory ?

‘Bet Nose You should refer to this directory.
Gy) Get_ Who in the Central Committee in the so-called Military Section

Wen mene ete ee ey

is the one that” sentisis “CRT F-Sy THESES BE ‘Weétion which controls
exclusively GRU. There is a military section (otdeir)--of the Central

beget

because ths Central Committee is squeamish about using that term, it is
officially called the Administrative Section. It is the same thing. There
is a group of officers therein who are concerned with the General Staff of
the Ministry of Defence and with the Ministry of Defence as a whole. I

named an officer there earlier who is concermed with GRAU, a Colonel whos:
name I gave you. There are two officers now who are concerned with GRU, and
I gave you their names, G.: Do they control GRU at all levels ? S.: Yes,
they have the kremlevka and they can simply call SEROV at any time. I just
remembered the name of one, Aviation Colonel CHIRKUNOV. This is the first
section ox the Military Section of the Central Committee of the CPSU and the
second section is the main political section of the CO of the CPSU. Thus the
Central Committee with these two powerful tentacles, controls the entire
armed forces in the U.S.S.R. |

26. Get Now, they sent out to all groups of’ forces and military
districts high ranking Generals who are members of the Military Council.
I remenber one such representative was a Lt. Gen. in the GSFG in Germany,
He is the representative of the Central Committee in Germany and he sits
right next to the Commander in Chief of the GSFG. S.: He is a member of

the /

P38

“1h=

the Military Council and reports to the Central Committee. G.: But certainly
hs cannot be with his rank subordinate to the Colonels you mentioned above ?
Sot: There is no subordination here whatsoever, A member of the Central
Committee is all-powerful. SEROV speaks to Colonel CHIRKUNOV of the Central
Committee by name and patronymic, After all CHIRKUNOV does not excess his
own personal views, he may be expressing the views or decisions of some
Secretariat of the Central Committee. G.: But these members of the Military
Council then mist all sit somewhere in the Central Committee and there must be
a pretty large number of them, S.: There certainly are but it mkes no
difference where they sit and rank is meaningless, they often go around in
civilian dress, After all my father-in-law, General-CAPANOVEGH~was_also-a-~
member of the Military Couneil, ‘There is a first member of the Military
Council and he is appointed by the Central Committee, He sends out the people
you just referred to to all of the military districts and to the groups of )
forces. These people are the soul of the political control over the Army ana
they report on everything that goes on in the Command they are assigned to
_ With respect to how the command is exercised, personal habits of the Commanding
Officer and his staff, ete. etc, They also report on the state of training of
the troops and on their morale and on their discipline. Many of these people
have no military background, but recently there are more and more who do have,
(A short pause was made. to change reels).
27s Ge: When did the first five-year olass graduate from the missile course
at the Dzerzhinskiy Academy 2? S.: First of all the course is actually 54
years by the time the stazhirovka is included and they hand one his diploma,
It is referred to of course as a Five Year Course. I would say that the first
class graduated in 1959, :
28, Ge: You mentioned a Military Academy of Sciences and a Civilian
Academy, Are these formal titles or just a = of referring to those with
military functions ? S.: These are two different academies of course with
different missions and with different Chiefs and Deputies. G.: But are those
titles correct ? 8S: Yes, they are. In recent years there hus bem a

changs, now there are a number of separate NIIs such as the one in GRAU,

which /

mo

3

-15=

which in the past have been all joined under the Academy of Military

Science. These NIIs now are subordinated to the respective combat arm

which they serve. Although the Academy exists it is not the all-inclusive
body 1t had been, Its functions have been considerably changed. G.: Surely
som of the “military” academies also have sone civilian work 7? Or does

the "military" academy include only military NIIs, laboratories and so forth ?
8: Their relationship is close-first of all the instructors have been taken |
from civilian academies . After all, all of the basic principles stem from |
chemistry, physics, electronics, etc. even though applied for military |
purposes they are actually from civilian sources, G.: Would the Military
Academies also have civilian one ? Se: Now It would be the other way
round, the civilian institutes would work for the military, The civilian
institutions are more numerous, more developed and better equipped than the
military, for example in the Academy of Sciences of the USSR there are five
GU’ ot@iivsyrcsr ari oer auectiguerd thaw glut ile a um too the Gometten. The
Acadeny of Sciences also has what we call a Top Secret Sector which
co-ordinates Top Secret matters which are concerned with every phase of
interest to the military. The point I went to stress is that there is a very
close co-ordination between the Academy of Sciences and military-scientific
institutes. |

290 Jet Is this sector listed in that Academy of Soiences directory

by that name or by a cover nam ? S.: No. That is Top Secret. For

example in the section of the directory under mathematical sciences you

know that there are some people who work for the Eighth Otdel with respect

to development of codes. I told you about this in detail last spring, but
the individual mathematician would not be listed under any such category.
Often specialists are called out of the Academy and requested to run some
project or other for the military, they may be even called before the

Supreme Military Council, “hen this happens they are given the people and
facilities to assist them and they simply do not exist in the Academy of

Sciences /

ae *.

ee a

-16-
Sciences during the period when their services are required by the military,
Get Therefore your military institutes would have many civilian specialists
as well as military Specialists ? §S,: Yes, they certainly do, Ge: Therefore
this Acadeny of Soiences directory would contain civilian and military
scientists, S.: Of course it does and Harold very correctly said that the
Kremlevka telephone directory shoula Ls Scrbaret with the Academy of Sciences
directory to determine who the top scientists and designers are in vital
Soviet scientific and militery programmes, At least that will cover everything
of importance in MOSCOW, but remember that there is a branch of the Acadeny
of Science even in Siberia, and these people also work for the Army. There
was a section in the Academy of Sciences directory which listed these people
_and gave the address of the Academy in NOVOSIBIRSK,

V Go: Remember you mentioned that there are missile polygons in the
Ukraine, specifically in NIKOLAYEV and | SEL YAUR, hwhich can fire into Poland
end Rumania, Is it possible that these are just testing sites for troop
training and not actual missile sites from where combat missiles would be
launched 7? §&: This is a good question, If you took NOVAYA ZEMLYA as an
example, where PYRSKIY has been conducting the tests and these should be
completed pretty soon since he must be back in MOSCOW in October, it is quite
possible that the sites from which rocket testing was conducted will not be
the sites from which rockets would be launched in case of war, But there at
NOVAYA ZEMLYA there are other excellent sites for storing nuclear warheads
and where missile sites in case of war are established, Similarly those two
locations in the Ukraine are sites from which rockets are aimed towards the
West in training exercises, but they may not be at all the actual combat sites
against the West in case of war, Right now they are suitable for covering
the targets, namely Poland and Rumania, in the event that it would be feoeaeaty:
to deliver via there, Whenever a huge site like these is developed it
obviously Seouiies all kinds of construction work including housing for

. personnel /

#37

-17-

personnel, adequate storage installations and all kinds of other auxiliary
construction, This would never be abandoned, not only because it can be used '
for continuous training but because since it is completely tied in geodetically
it can be used as a site for actual rocket firing against the enemy if the need
arose, Of course, when hostile intelligence has the place pinpointed, they may
displace equipment and personnel away from the immediate vicinity, but still
close enough to use it. Therefore we must consider that all these sites like
KAPUSTIN YaR, these two in the Ukraine and the ones in the north oan all be
used to launch actual combat missiles when necessary, Of course many missile :
sites which can be called firing positions are also being constructed and :
rocket troops would coms there to use these prepared sites for firing in case
of war. Much work must be done on these sites since launching pads require
ds of preparation.
Ge: Are there foreign observers at the current series of nuclear

ests, such as Chinese, Bulgarians or for that matter any satellites 7?
Se: No. No foreigners are permitted at our nuclear tests. I speak only —
about atomic tests because they do have representatives from the satellite
countries at rocket launching tests. Only Soviet military people and
scientists are at the atomic tests. The high officials of satellite countries
are told that the tests are going on but there is some degree of distrust
so that the representatives are not permitted to be there. At one time there
were officers from satellite countries at the Dzerzhinskiy Academy, at least

attending some of the faculties but now this has all been stopped. As I

remember the VAK there, there was a foreign faculty, but since that tims for :

the last two and a half years the Academy has become far more of a security :

type institution, |
Gey) Ge: Have you ever heard what the opinion of any senior officers is .

on the Chinese nuclear weapons programme and what is the opinion from any .

source as to when the Chinese will have such weapons ? S,.: I have had

interest in this matter and up to today all the Chinese have are various

installations for making fissionable materials and for testing them, The _

Chinese /

i hdatetinn titan tt eee

° Wy
_ =18-

Chinese ecientists are striving to develop the production of fissionable
materials and to produce them in more concentrated form but up to now they
do not have a nuclear bomb, I asked Sergei Sergeievich about this,
particularly after he had returned from Korea and China, He told me that
they do not have any bombs yet and if they need atomic weapons then we would
give it to them, The way I see it froma strategic viewpoint, if there is a
threat on that flank, I think that we would simply send our own units into
China to support them with nuclear weapons, However, up to now we have not
Given them any, G.: How soon do you think the Chinese will have their om
nuclear weapons ? S31 think that in two or three -ysars- they will ~bave
their own nuclear weapons, They are working very intensively on this; the
Chinese do not have large quantities of raw material » they do not have any
monazite sands, Czechoslovakia has more and we get this material from them,
Although the Chinese do not have any completed atomic weapons » they do have
many samples and quite a number of laboratories in which they are working on
this problem constantly. The Central Committee is concerned that the Chinese
will accomplish this in very short time. China has tumed off on its om
independent path with respect to many questions already, At the 12th
anniversary in China, no prominent Soviets went down. The only one who went
was PROKHOROV who is the Chairman of the Supreme Soviet of the RSFSR together
with a group of five insignificant officials. At the big party the Chinese
gare in WOSOOW, KEZUSHCEZT did not attend,

G3) Get Since you mention KHRUSHCHEV, have you heard anything about his
health rately ? Se: As a whole I would say his _State of health is not very
good, He tires easily and his heart is not too good, This was mentioned by
CHURAYEV during VARENTSOV's party, He is being closely watched by his doctors
and controlled medically. He goes for vacations to rest quite a few times
a year, They check his health every day and watch his diet and with this
kind of _care {t 42 quite possible he will survive another ten years.

Se Got Getting back to FEDEROV for a moment, when he speaks to you aboul

the /

7",
Vy

fi

pga

wee me
ae

See te

$

ae gh ee

H3

-19-

the rockets in his brigade, does he refer to them by "R" numbers ox by "A"
designations or in any other cover terms ? SS: When he speaks alone to me

he simply refers to rockets by the "R" numbers, BUZINOV does also because we
are all close personal friends. G.: How will he refer to them in VARENTSOV' s
office ? 8: To VARENTSOV personally he would still. speak .of.. the Rs, y-but

in strange offices he would speak of index minbers or cal}. a_ rooket an “Szdeliye’
; As I told you, at the Academy reference to !2°mmbers is forbidden,

| Incidentally although BUZINOV drinks a “lot when he visits with me he Satchee

his step regarding classified conversation when a person he does not know well

(ds present. I noticed this when I was invited to Colonel Peter GANICHEV who

a

ow a deputy to the Resident in India and for whom got an apartment in MOSCOW, |

; BUZINOV went with me and ZASORIN was also the re... ¥e-drenk,.a ot that night
ae 7 nae WERE i ahead :

end I had trouble getting BUZINOV hom, there were no taxis and I gave 20

roubles in _o ola. money to the driver oF a ‘garbage. truck+to~beke-BUBINOV-home ..-++ 98

Rss the next days a& Sunday at 44 stelodk was--when- your: man-caiied—ms-.on_the 2

"telephone, _ “t aa riot understand a dam thing.and-he.called at the wrong time i
tn te J

—_ 4

and I did realise the call vas from you, but I understood nothing that the man -
heeetente a poenennenanmenilll

rattled off. He said something about waiting.and then."bye-bye"s~~-z-wes-not. in

TR ee ae meee

_the best of shape myself but_I_was_not drunk because I never_drink.toa,meh,

. ao
ale ee haa

but I could not understend-a things...

356 Get In a combat operation what does the tem “osnovnyye napravlenie"
mean = what are these "napravlenii" in the European theatre, or do they vary
according to the situation ? S,: Ina theatre of military operations there
may be one “osnovnoye" direction or there may be several. This was particularly
true during World War II when our armies were still within the territories

of the USSR. On the basis of these several basic directions fronts were
orgenised, such as the First, Second, Third and Fourth Ukrainian Fronts, etc.
These are often described as compass directions such a8 , South East, North West

or Central. Many factors are tied in to determine these directions, such as

the meio metwork of bighvays and ret] Lises, the mit cercectrations cf
pans may
eneny /

HL
~20-

enemy forces, Now the main direction is considered to be the BERLIN

direction, It is really an operational-strategic concept, for example
beginning from the main base of the ten armies facing West Germany, the

main direction is called the BERLIN direction. In case of hostilities
additional directions may be designated along the flanks of the ‘min direction.
These. auxiliary directions may be temporary or fixed depending on the course.
of battle. G.: Would you consider the BERLIN direction as the main axis

of attack which actually extends westward beyond BERLIN. 8: Yes. It would
be both an operational as well as a strategic direction and BERLIN will in
effect be an intermediate point, not the ultimate objective and the direction
will extend all the way to the Channel.

36. G.: Do you know of any practical results of the Voyennaya Mysl.
articles, that is actions that have been taken following their having been
recommended in the sbornik ? 8.: Of course, when these articles get to the

_ Army commanders or even lower these are fundamental concepts on the basis of
which troops are trained. He: But you get a lot of disagreements; for ;
example ROTMISTROV says this and ZHADOV says that and then there are criticisms, ;
St: These discussions mst be considered as a step forward, First let us take
the Field Service regulations of 1959, Here the general principles are laid
down for various forms of combat under various conditions. In addition under
conditions where weapons of mass destruction are deployed, new circumstances
must be considered, However, there is no article in the sbornik which
contradicts the Field Service Regulations. The articles represent the
development of narrow or rigid concepts as expressed in the Field Service
Regulations into much broader concepts since the course of battle my find
circumstances of a special nature not possible to cover fully in the Field -
Service Regulations, Therefore these articles serve the Commanders as 7
supplementary material to assist them in their training progranmes,. The

Commander who gets these articles will take the appropriate reference to his

own specific training programme and on the basis of this information will

write up his own leotures and instructions for troop training. His

subordinates /

subordinates may not even know that he has used the material in. the

articles in the instructions which come from him and assum that it reflects
his own thinking, especially since they may not have acceas to these articles,
The articles are an expansion of the principles in the Field Service
Regulations which take into account specific conditions, Therefore the
articles mist be considered as one of the fundamental and up to date

i supplementary guides for all the armed forces in the USSR. New articles
continuously bring up to date the inclusion of new types of weapons and their
military application. It is not possible to publish a new set of Field
Service Regulations every year. Even when discussions from various view _
points are brought together and summarised the best points made in each

viewpoint are summarised and a common course of action is recommended which

is a step forward,

37 Gst-—Take-PLATONOV's article in the sbornik; he mentions ths

tes a ore!

Krylataya Raketa (cruise-type) under Naval control along the coasts, for

coastal defence. Do you know of such missile units - what missiles do '

they have and could it be that Naval officers at Dzerzhinskiy are training for : i
* these units ? 8: I have certainly heard of these. The Krylatka was “

taken from submarines and developed and improved for use with Ground Forces,

The Krylatka is also used in coastal defence and these units are under the

jurisdiction of the Navy. Ge: Is this the improved P-5, now called the n

SP-5 2? Set That is correct aie Naval officers do go to the |

Deerzhinskly Academy to study these missiles,

38. Get Have either Sergei Sergeievich or BUZINOV ever mentioned that 7

they are working closely with Naval, Air Force or PVO officers de missile

research, testing or troop problems ? S.: Yes, they. said so and they do ~

work together because all of these have the same basic equipment. The only ite

difference is that the missions designated for the rockets will suit the

service concerned, At the Supreme Military Council at which KHRUSHCHEV .

a

presides all representatives of the various combat arms are present,

39. /

i ae H3P

~22=

390 Ge: When Sergei Sergeievich spoke of failures in the strategic -
missile progremme, exactly what did he mean by failures ? S,: He meant
that there was insufficient trained personnel and that the electronic
equipment was not fully developed. Ge: You did mention this before, I
thought there might have been still another kind of failure he my have
referred to. |
hO. Ge: Sputniks are launched and strategic missiles are tested at a
—place 0ng,,thousand Icllome tren .¢ east, of . KAPUSTIN: -XeReg Have you ever heard
Sergei Sergeievich or BUZINOV mention the existence of this polygon, which
fires into the Pacific ? S.: I spoke to you about this, but I could not
give you its co-ordinated position since I could not find this out. There
is such a polygon and it is referred to as the one in Central Asia. There
4s even an impact area there to which they fire from KAPUSTIN YaR. G3: And
‘ao they fire into the Pacific from this base too 7? Se: Yes, they do.
te Get _n_the_NEDELIN | accident, what _were the exact words used by the
engineer to tell you that the first stage of the missile was propelled by
nuclear energy 7 Se: The way this was written up was that this rocket has been
filled with a new type of fuel, using fissionable material in its propulsion
mechanism, Get Could it be said that this was nuclear assisted, boosted
as it were ? Set He said that it was a two-stage rocket and that the first
stage when activated did not work properly and following the specific time
interval which had elapsed without the rocket having left the launching pad
and at which point no further movement should have taken place, all safety
valves should have automatical ly closed. At that time NEDELIN and his party
all cams out of their safety shelters and suddenly the second stage ignited
and exploded, Ge: Is it possible that the second stage could have been
atomic energy powered, or possibly both of the stages 2? Se: No. Only
one stage was 80 powered and it was the first stage. Both stages have fuel

but the first stage was the one with nuclear power, but the second stage ignited. ©

42. /

3

ae a : way

CP Ges When you say that the R-11, R-2 and R=1 are two-stage, what do

you man ? 8: I mean that Soviet science has taken the line that rockets

should have two stages including the Krylatka and the V-~75, In early tests

there were three-stage rockets, but it has been decided that two-stage rockets

are sufficient to accomplish the desired mission and they are easier to

guide than three-stage rockets, . : °
“SD G.: Why aren't there any sbornik articles on strategic missiles 7

Ses _Articles on strategic missiles are Placed ina special exclusive Top

Heese at ear ee 2

Secret Bulletin by MOSKALENKO and his officers, Of course thay’ aide get the ©
sbornik ‘themselves » but they do not write vavtteles 4 to. place in the sbornik. ~
I have not yet seen the third issue of the sbornik, but thus far I have seen

| n0 articles on strategic missiles, Gs: ‘hat would the reason for this be ?
Se: It is just an additional Top Secret security precaution and some of the
recipients of the sbornik would not be concemed with strategic missiles,
It would be none of their business.

* (4) Ge: Have there been missile exercises in the Caucasus this year 7?

Se: You mean in which rockets were used? Ge: Yes. S.: There were such

_ exercises this year and VARENTSOV was there, ~

A ee emma eet tite cee: ene weneee een

C5) Ge: Do you know how long a missile can be held after it is fuelled
before it must be launched ? S,: I understand and every rocket has its _
own particular maximum time limit, They ‘Rave deteloned 6 a type. of et
coating for the fuel chambers Wi8h permits the fuel to bs retained In the
rocket for a longer period of time, but to a certain extent no matter how
you try to bottle up the liquid fuel it manages to leak and vapourise to
some extent. This will vary for every type of rocket,
466 Ge: Are the 3R2, 3R3, and 35R7 being developed further ? 8: Yes,
they are constantly trying to perfect them, G.: Are their mounts amphibious ?
5S: Of course they are, I told you that they were mounted on the chassis
of the amphibious tank PI76. However, it is not reconmended that they make a

river crossing while the rocket is mounted on the chassis, ‘The rocket should

be /

bo HBT

-2he

be taken across by other means while the tank chassis crosses itself,

However there have been manoeuvres in which these carriers crossed a water
barrier carrying one rocket,

AT. Ge: Can the atomic cannon also have conventional shells as well as
nuclear 2 Sez Yes it can and why shouldntt it, since the barrel is rifled ?

It can fire either type of shell, G.: And are such cannons in the GSFC
already ? S.: Yes, they are. 7
@) Ge: Here is the last question. That would be the true unit
designation of FEDEROV's brigade ? Could it be called by a prefix number,
say 370, and then TRA brigade ? Se: That sounds very mech like it. It
could be called that, As a matter of fact since it is a secret designation

he did mention it to me once and: I couldn't quite remember it, but I do have

his military unit FPO number, which I gave you.

49. G.: These are all the questions which we are going to take up today.

¥e have more and we are going to work in still more for the next meetingse

S.: I am ready to keep working. G.: Don't worry, we have the photographs

for you to identify yet.

(J. showed subject a photo album of Soviet personalities in

PARIS from the U.S, Embassy and subject had the following remarks to make

about the persons he spotted as follows:-)

50. - Noe 5 This woman is from the Embassy and she worked at the —
Exhibition. I do not kmow what she does but she said
that she has been here for four years already and that

: she wants to go hom, (No. 5 was listed as Avianatta

ANISENKO). She was working at the "INTOURISI” stand ond

knows French well. She and her husband, whom I did not.

i . see, will go hom ina year. (He is listed as Mikhail

__ ANISENKD)

Sie No, 19 Here is a GRU officer, We have run across his photo

before. He was also st the operational meeting but I
do not remember his nare. (No. 19 listed as Aleksey ——~

CHEREMUCHKIN ) «

52. / 7

= ‘ ce . H-3 4

? “25

52. No. 21. Please look up his name. I have seen him, Ge: It is
Vladimir DACHKEVICH. S.: It should be DASHKEVICH. He
is a KGB officer. I have seen him in the KGB offices.
530 No, 32 Here is GRIGORIYEV and his wife. I told you that she had
been an instructor at the MDA and was older than he,
(Listed as Valentin and Maria GRIGORIYEV).
She No. 35 This officer is not here in PARIS now. He has just become 7
a Colonel and he is in the Air Force. He is a GRU officer
who had been the GVF representative here (Civil Aviation)
‘and now he works under ROGOV as I do and is with the GVF
in MOSCOW. (No. 35 not listed, probably because no longer ,
in PARIS).
556 No, 37. A GRU officer. Ge: That does he do? S,: He is a code
clerk or something like that, possibly with the rank of
Captain. He had been here in PARIS before. (No. 37 not
listed, probably for the same reason as above). .
56. No. 57 For some reason tie aminber: iis crossed out a oa he is here,
. : "(crossed out)
this is Colonel KUDRYAVISEV, Ivan Pavlovich. (No. 57 listed
as Anatoli KULAZHENKOV, whereas for No, 56 is listed Vladinir
Petrovich KUDRYAVTSEV, who is the other KUDRYAVISEV also in
PARIS, Therefore the No. 57 crossed out must obviously be
a different number, which is not listed).
| 5Te | Noe 56 This is ‘i KCB officer (the corrected number would refer to:
the listing).
58. No. 63 A GRU officer. (Listed as Nil LENSKIY). We saw him before,
590 No. 62 ‘This is a GRU officer who was at the operational meting
and we saw his face before. G.: That is LEBEDEV. 5.: That's

right, (Listed as Aleksei LEEEDEV).

60. «Noe 66 «This is a low ranking man, a GRU code clerk (No. 66 not

listed).

.

646 No. 93 Here is the Chief Book-keeper of the Embasey. I told you __

about him before. (Listed as Uikhail PETROV).

62. /

62.

656

66.

676

68.
696

JO.

The

126

136

Noe
No.
No.

No.

No.

Noe

No.
Noe
Noe
No.
No.

Noe

4129

1350

142

157

160
171

181

482

222

o™ ne

#3

~26-

A GRU officer. I dontt know why the number is struck

out, (No. 90 not listed). . .

Here is a GRU officer who is now in PARIS, (Listed as

Boris PANOV).

A GRU officer. G..: This is SVERLOV. 5S.: That" s right
(listed as Vladimir SVERLOV).

What is his name, 'G.: SVISTELNIKOV. S.: Yes. He isa :
KGB man but in the past he worked for GRU, then he went to
the neighbours. There are many officers like that.

‘(Listed as Paval SVISTELNIKOV).’ He graduated from our
Acadeny.

Here is the Ambassador. G.: That is right. (Listed as
Sergei VINOGRADOV).

Here is a number crossed out. He is our GRU officer. He

4s not in PARIS now. Ge: It looks mis-spelled here, it

is spelled ZAIKE. 8S: It should be either ZAIKA or
ZAIKIN., (Listed as Vladimir ZATKE). ,

AGRU officer. (Not listed).

Here is a KGB officer. He is now here. Get He must be an
Armenian, Se: That is the one. (Listed as Nikita
ENFANDZHIANTS)e ”

Here is the Rezident, isn't that right. Get Yes.
(Listed as Ivan CHEREDEYEV). |

Here is a KGB officer; I don't know his name. (Listed
as Grigoriy CHOPOREV).

Here is a GRU officer. His name is VOLKOV; he is not
here now. (Listed as getuaaiy VOLKOV) «

Here is ZEMLYANSKTY » about whom I told you earlier. A
GRU officer (Listed as Yevgeniy ZEMLYANSKIY). (Given
above as Lt, Col. Vladimir Ivanovich ZEMLYANSKIY, Aviation

Officer, now GVF representative, a GRU officer).

The /

™

o-

ee H#3F

-27= :

The A packet of loose photographs was shown to subject and amongst these
he identified one GRU officer, whose name is YEVLANPIVEV,
CC.) This finished the photography and subject was asked if he had spotted
where the code rooms were in the Embassy, S.: All the coding is done in that
second floor wing that I told you about. G.: Where do the code clerks sit ?
S.: They have their cabins in there but I haven't seen the rooms themselves. *,
I see them running around there. G.: Can you identify them by face ?
S.: Yes, I know them by face. Je: Does the KGB have their own code room
end the GRU their own ? Se: Yes, of course they have their om, each one.
Ge: How about the M.I.D. code room ? S.: They have their ow also, but I
don't know where it is, possibly it is in an extension of this second floor,
‘pesauns everything there is so thoroughly equipped for security. i
766 S.: You should prepare ny mission assignments before I leave and
review the old ones. Ge: . We have done most of this already and you may be ‘
sure that you will have a thorough review of this before you leave. S.: I ;
think that I will be able to get hold of this four section manual to photograph -
during the time of my vacation, because, as I told you I will spend half of -
it in KISLOVODSK and the other half in MOSCOW. -H.: How can you get hold of
it. S.: That I can do from BUZINOV. He will get them for himself and sign | , :
for them, I won't even go to the Academy. I will tell him that I need them
to write articles, FILIFPOVICH could even let me read them if I went to him
at the Academy. I cannot g0 to their secret section and ask for it as I can
‘in GRU. In GRU I would sign for it, but I cannot do so at the Academy since :
I am not registered there. Just like the case of the artillery journals,
I asked BUZINOV to get them for me because I needed to study up on the material
for some work that I am doing. :
T7e Se: These manuals are fairly large but I do have forty cassettes
left and that should be good for about 2000 frames. This should last m for
about three months, H.: Janet's husband has a re-supply. 5,: When WYNNE
comes of course he brings me bulky things, but cannot Janet hand ime a packet

of /

Mf

{ ~ #H3SF

-28-

t

i. of cigarettes ? H.: Yes. She can do this. 8S.: This solves the matter,
My cassettes are in good shape and both of my Minox operate well. I use
them both alternately. I almost always have a Minox in my pocket which is
buttoned, but I don't always take spare cassettes, but the camera is loaded,
There are certain targets of opportunity that I can take this way, for
example the background data on KLOCHKO. I actually work on something or
other every day, when I don't photograph I write up some terse notes at
home.
78. G.: How do you stand with having completed the personal purchases
you planned to make ? I ask this because it is going to be rough to throw
this all on WYNNE at the last minute if you still have a large number of
items to gete Se: Don't worry, I will do all this myself. I have already
got quite a number of things and I have visited all the places where I can get
what I still lack, I know where they are. WYNNE might take me to Versailles
4f it is not too far. I haven't been there yet. Neither have I seen
de GAULIZ's palace. He: That is pretty far away, but Versailles is near.
Se: I have seen most of the museums and I don't know how things will work
out with this French girl I will see tomorrow. Maybe she will get some
contacts for m and maybe I can go sightseeing in PARIS with her on Sunday.
796 (The matter of passing brochures by subject to his Embassy was
discussed and he was advised that it would be better to wait until he had
completed his trip with the delegation and possibly then receive som
material from HOOK before he took anything to the Embassy). Ge: In the
meantime all you need to do is to report to the Embassy that you have
established a good contact and certain things have been promised to you

and when you get them you will bring them in,

80./

JO

Lee een mens ete ee

-29-—

80. Regarding an acquaintance who subject could introduce to SOLOVYEV,
subject was advised that the only way this could be done in a straight-forward
fashion would be to meet the French people at the factory which subject and
SOLOVYEV together would visit on the itinerary set up by HOOK. But anyone
else would be inzecure, Subject agreed to this. Subject again enquired if
his information on the 230 re-deployed French planes was correct, but he | *
was told that we had not yet found out, but was advised that if the information
proved to be incorrect, it would not necessarily reflect on ZASORIN's
reliability as subject's source, but the information could nage been dndorsect
as reported by the French Goumniat sources |

Subject now brought up his plea for both a translation of a Westen
military article which he ‘could legend as having prepared himself ed in
addition a summary of a book which he would offer for consideration if
sufficiently of interest to the Soviet agency concerned for complete translation
and publication and for which subject would write a short preface in his own
way, guided by the summary prepared by us. He was show a recent issue of a
very technical book on fooksts and he saw how difficult it would be to
understand, let alone translate such a eesee: After much discussion and
repetition, subject stated that if within a year's time we could arrange to
have both these requests fulfilled, it would solve his problem He was told
that we would do the best we could to accomplish this,

Subject left the safe apartment at 21,00 hours and was delivered to
the eppoaste side of the footbridge at RV 1 without incident My Roger and Je
He walked a longer route home; this was more secure against chance

observation by other Soviets.

*y
