Security Conditions in Five Countries of the Western Pacific Area
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014087, dated 4 September 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014087).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ae
feru ff CCH

SNIE 40/50—66 7 )
CONTROLLED DISSEM 13 October 1966 }

LB] LIBRARY

=
Mandatory Revie; ae
Case # NLJ ea to fe > ies

Document #

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 40/50—66

SECURITY CONDITIONS IN FIVE COUNTRIES
OF THE WESTERN PACIFIC AREA

Submitted by

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the

UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

13 October 1966
DATE |

NOTE: This is the estimate.
No further version will be

b .
Authenticated: published

APPROVED FOR RELEASE CONTROLLED DISSEM
FEBRUARY 1994

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence
organizations of the Departments of State, Defense,
the NSA, and the FBI

Concurring:

Dr. R. Jd. Smith, Acting CIA Member of USIB

Mr. George C. Denney, Jr. for The Director of Intelligence
and Research, Department of State

Lieutenant General Joseph F. Carroll, Director, Defense
Intelligence Agency r

Lieutenant General Marshall S. Carter, Director, National
Security Agency

Mr. William C. Sullivan, Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation

Mr. Walter H. Young, for the Director, United States
Secret Service

Abstaining:

Mr. Howard C. Brown, Jr., Assistant General Manager
Atomic Energy Commission, the subject being outside
of his jurisdiction.

CLASSIFICATION OF TITLE IS OFFICIAL USE
ONLY WHEN USED SEPARATELY

WARNING

.. This material contains information affecting the National
Defense of the United States within the meaning of the
espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the
transmission or revelation of which in any manner to an
unauthorized person is prohibited.

nay gy
ate 4,
Nga, oY
a

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
13 October 1966

SUBJECT:  SNIE 40/50-66: SECURITY CONDITIONS IN FIVE COUNTRIES
OF THE WESTERN PACIFIC AREA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the likelihood of incidents which would endanger
President Johnson during his visits to Australia, New Zealand,

Thailand, Malaysia, and South Koreas.

THE ESTIMATE

1. Australia and New Zealend. The security situations in
Australia and New Zealand are roughly similar. Both countries
are in the final weeks of a national election campaign in which
Vietnam is one of the principal issues. In both countries,
students, intellectuals, leftists, and others have demonstrated

against participation in the war. Some of these demonstrations

GROUP 1
Excluded from automatic

SPREE downgrading and

declassification

have involved as many as 2,000 people, but they have been peaceful.
Both countries are likely to permit some demonstrations eat the

time of the President's visit.

2. The police and security agencies of both Australia and
New Zealand are well-trained and competent. In close cooperation
with US officials, they will take all possible precautions to con-
trol demonstrators and will probably be able to prevent any situa-
tion which might endanger President Johnson. Their problems will
be made more manageabile by the generally high regard for the US

which prevails among the people of both countries.

3. Thailand. The great majority of Thai people are loyal

' to their government, particularly the Crown, and favorably disposed

toward the US and its role in defense of South Vietnam. ‘The smlil-
scale Commnist tieundensiae in northeast Thailand and in the south
have had virtually no impact on the security situation in Bangkok.
The indigenous Thal Commmist Party is outlawed and, in any case,
probably has fewer than 500 members and would be incapable of
mounting any significant demonstration against the President. Even
among students and intellectuals, there is little overt anti-US
sentiment in Thailand. Any demonstration attempted by these or

other potentially dissident elements would probably not attract

more than a handful of participants and could be controlled easily

by Thet security forces.

4, Thai security forces in the Bangkok area are fairly well-
trained, their domestic intelligence capabilities are good, and
they would round up potential troublemakers if it seemed prudent.
There are close relationships between the Thai security forces
and US officials in Thailand and the Thai will cooperate to take
precautions to prevent any incident which might endanger the
President. The National Police (including its Central Investige-
tion Department and the Metropolitan Police) will have the primary
responsibility for security during the President's visit to
Bangkok. On any occasion in which the King participates, the well~
trained elite Royal Guard will share responsibility. If considered
necessary, the security forces would be augmented by major units
of the Thai Armed Forces stationed nearby. We believe that Thai
security forces will be able to prevent a situation in Bangkok

which would jeopardize the President's safety.

5. Security at US bases in northeast Thailand is the
responsibility of special Thai units, armed and supplied by the
US but under Thal command, and stationed on and around the bases.

These bases are close to the operational areas of some 600-1,000

pas

armed Thai Coumunist dissidents. The Thai security guards may

be infiltrated by Communist agents. Though none of the bases has
yet been attacked by the Thal insurgents, it is possible that
terrorists with advance information on the President's destination
would attempt sabotage or a minor armed action, e.g., a mortar

attack, on the base he visits.

6. Maleysia. Malaysia has a weak but vocal leftwing
opposition which strongly opposes US policy in Vietnam. Pro-
Commnist, ethnic Chinese youths from this opposition constitute
the principal security problem in Kuala ee Over the past
year, small groups of them have damaged US property and engaged
in noisy denonstrations against US officials. It is likely that
these same extremists will use the occasion of the President's
visit to attempt once more to show their hostility, and small-
scale sporadic demonstrations will probably occur.

7. Malaysian security officials sive Agta leftists
leaders and other extremists who might have access to Kuala Lumpur
during the President's visit. Security during the visit will be
the responsibility of the Royal Malaysian Police (RMP), a generally
efficient and experienced force with specialized paramilitary

units totaling several thousand men with intensive training in

riot control. Intelligence functions of the RMP -- concentrated

in its Special Branch -- are highly developed; there is an excelient
capability for swift response to fast-breaking situations. The

RMP will cooperate closely with US officials and we believe thet

it will be able to prevent any situation that will jeopardize

the President's safety. We pelieve, furthermore, that it will
prevent any large demonstrations and keep any small demonstrations

from getting out of hard.

8. South Korea. There is little overt opposition in South
Korea to US policy in Vietnam. Under the vigorously anti-Commmist

Pak government, of course, such opposition would be suppressed.

More important, it would probably be umpopular’s most South Koreans
clearly approve of US military intervention in defense of small
Asian nations. There 1s mich less certainty, however, that South , -
Koreans approve President Pak's heavy commitment of ROK combat
troops to the conflict. His leading political opponents charge

him with weakening the nation's defenses; more vehement critics
charge that he is bartering Korean bodies for US dollars in a
series of shady deals. Such charges have failed to spark signi?-

icant public opposition to the government; nor has the generally

favoreble Korean attitude toward the US been impaired. We believe

ney

therefore that President Johnson, when he visits Seoul, will receive

%
a friendly reception from most South Koreans.

9. It is possible, however, that Pak's political opponents
might stimlate small demonstrations in popiiieteen with President
Johnson's visit in order to cause the Pak government to lose face.
Such tactics are traditional in Korean politics; moreover, opposi-
tion leaders are currently engaged in a no-holds-barred preelection
campaign to discredit Pak. It is unlikely, however, that these
opposition leaders, most of whom seek US friendship and support,
would deliberately endanger President Johnson in the course of

their demonstrations or other antics.

10. In any case, we believe that South Korean security forces
available in the Seoul area would be capable of controlling any
hostile demonstration and preventing a situation which would
jeopardize the safety of President Johnson. The National Police,
who will have a major share of the responsibility for the visitors'
safety, are tough and experienced in erowd control. So are the
ROK Army contingents permanently assigned to internal security
duties in the Seoul area, Intelligence organizations -- the ROK
¥ "Tn the only previous comparable visit, the public reception of

President Eisenhower in 1960 was so enthusiastic that the
Presidential motorcade had to be rerouted to avoid the crowds.

Central Intelligence Agency and the ROK Army Counterintelligence
Corps -~ are efficient and cooperative with their US counterparts.
They will probably round up known troublemakers and issue stern
warnings in eoaronbiete political and student circles.

ll. While there have always been some North Korean agents in

the Seoul area, their missions have not involved deliberate violence

but rather intelligence collection and recruitment.

12. In the event of a Presidential visit to US military bases
north of Seoul, ROK forces would probably share security seaesne
sibilities with US mittee forces. In view of the generally
secure conditions prevailing in this area, we do not believe that

such a visit would involve any significant risk to the President.

13. General. In none of these Five countries can we exclude _

the possibility of an assassination attempt, for example by a

Communist or psychopath.
