Assessing the Judicial Process in el Salvador - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049254, dated 1 November 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049254).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1&8 December 1989

MEMORANDUM

SUBJECT: Assessing the Judicial Process in E] Salvador

1. The Salvadoran criminal justice system remains the
weakest and least developed of the country's democratic
institutions. In our judgment, the military, the civilian
elites, and the extreme left all routinely circumvent or
manipulate the formal judicial process. The government, for its
part, has failed to allocate adequate resources or to address the
systemic structural problems that impede the administration of
justice in El Salvador. As a result, we believe most Salvadorans
regard the formal judicial system as, at best, barely
functioning. They probably believe the alternative--in which
security and vigilante forces controlled by the military and
civilian elites dispense theiy own versions of justice on an ad
hoc basis--still predominates; Poor Salvadorans judge that the
judicial process, although enshrined in a new constitution, is
capricious and serves principally the interests of the rich and
powerful.

2. Despite improvements over the past five years, we judge
that the economically and politically powerful do control the
judiciary in El Salvador. The process of selecting judges
sustains a pattern of political cronyism. The ARENA dominated
National Assembly, for example, elects the 14-member Supreme
Court, which in turn appoints the 300 or so local judges.
Although the occasional competent and independent justice does
emerge, tha norm is a poorly-trained judiciary, highly
susceptible to manipulation by the party in power. In a recent
gathering of Intelligence Community and other analysts, there was
general agreement that ARENA leader Roberto D'Aubuisson had
successfully packed the Supreme Court with justices sympathetic
to his ideology and susceptible to his influence.

3. indicate that archaic
procedures, inadequate fac} (les, Intimidation of justices and

witnesses, and corruption continue to hinder the judicial
process. The historical record shows that a combination of these
factors has weighed heavily in the repeated failure of the
government~-despite pressure from the United.States--to conclude
a number of high-profile cases involving politically motivated
killings. For example, in the important “kidnapping for profit"
case--for which judicial] proceedings began in 1986--involving two

Approved for Release
NOY 1993

.

a.”

military officers ar defendants, a judqe was ensessinated efte:
announcing that he intended to press the case, his successor
dropped serious charges and transterred it| to another court, and
the new judge, hours before his term ended, released the
defendants. Pressure from the United States prompted then-

president-elect Cristiani--aware that this was a major test of
his intentions on human rights--to use his political influence to
have the release decision rescinded.

4. We believe the deficiencies in the judicial system could
have a similar impact on the case of the recent Jesuit killings,
especially if military personnel or right-wing groups were
involved. Even if the investigation leads to the arrest of
suspects, the judges and witnesses probably will come under
extreme pressure from those elements involved that do not want a
prosecution. Moreover, Salvadoran investigative bodies are
unlikely to be able to produce acceptable and sufficient physical
evidence to satisfy the procedural requirements of the courts.

We would expect the security services to give only grudging--and
incomplete--cooperation if military officers are involved.

5. The relationship between the judiciary and the military,
particularly in a human rights case, has always been difficult.
Historically, civilian judicial authority has not extended to the
officer corps--even President Duarte, when he assumed office in
1984, chose not to endanger his relations with the military by
seeking prosecutions for past crimes. Although lower ranking
military personnel are occasionally dismissed from the security
services or turned over to the civilian courts for criminal
activity--sometimes even for involvement in politically motivated
killings--it is customary for officers to steadfastly protect
their colleagues and for judges to be hesitant to bring charges.

otes that no officer has been convicted in recent
years, despite clear evidence of military involvement in several
human rights abuse cases. Officers accused in one incident are
now in custody.

6. In addition to manipulation by the military and the
political parties, the Salvadoran justice system also is
routinely targeted by the querrillas. The FMLN has announced
that it considers justices to be "military targets." Many judges
have resigned during the past year 1n response to direct threats.
The assassinations of the Attorney Generalgin April, and of the
former President of the Supreme Court in NBvember, were major
blows to the legal profession and present strong disincentives
for competent individuals to participate in the judicial system.
The insurgents have also been known to bribe and intimidate
judges and witnesses in cases involving FMLN supporters.

7. Although President Cristiani realizes that a more
credible system of criminal justice would enhance international

<A Cll

querrivllas SUCH pronouncements, however, are likely to Se ;
tolerated and even encouraged by the guerrillas because of their
Propaganda value.

Q: What is the state of the FMLN’s relations with the
civilian population and what is the movements overal] strategy?

A: The FMLN's waning popular support at home is its
principal vulnerability, in our view. Although the insurgency
maintains a following among a small, vocal segment af the urban
population and among peasants in areas with a large guerrilla
presence, most Salvadorans do not Jook to the FMLN as a solution
co their problems. Indeed, as the guerrillas' prospects for a
quick military victory have faded, the FMLN has resorted
increasingly to intimidation and outright terror to obtain food,
money, and other support from the civilian population.

indicates that in recent years the FMLN
has been responsible for the majority of human rights abuses in
El Salvador. Those who defy the guerrillas or who are considered
government collaborators--such as mayors, civilian bureaucrate,
and, at times, even registered voters--are subject to execution.
Between January and August 1988, for example, the insurgents
accounted for about two-thirds pf the 130 confirmed political
killings. That figure does not’ include civilian deaths--37
during the same period--from insurgent landmines and booby traps.
EMLN recruits, many of whom are women and children, often are
kidnapped or coerced into the movement, and civilians pay “war
taxes” to help defray FMLN expenses. Rural development projects
and lightly-a civil defense units are favored guerrilla

Strategic Objectives

The FMLN is pursuing a multidimensional ‘strategy--composed
of political, military, economic, and diplomatic elements--
intended to weaken and de-legitimize the government to the point
where it will fall before an insurgent-orchestrated mass
insurrection or, at a minimum, be forced into negotiations under
terms favorable to the guerrillas.

Political. The FMLN, using front groups and other
organizations sympathetic to its cause, seeks to discredit and
undermine the government by creating an atmosphere of popular
unrest. The guerrillas orchestrate anti-government
demonstrations which often turn violent, because pro-FMLN
marchers generally try to provoke security forces into
overreacting. The indiscriminate use of urban violence has
increased as the FMLN has expanded its opefatfons in San
Salvador. Bombings--including the use of car bombs--rocket
attacks on public buildings, and machinegun attacks on buses have
placed civilians at risk. The guerrillas have also stepped up
their attacks on US facilities and officials.

Toe quertidlas also operate ay etterctive cnberuat poral
propaganda machine, and thes worl to forma new andar ground cells
at supporters. Tae? FMUN, seein propaganda oppoctunit res ana
potential for expanding its Politica: organization has tacitly
Approved the Partiespabiyon ae ats political allyes in the Match
198° presidenrcial slectjan weverthelese nome qrerriids

conmanders remain, in principle, opposed to electrons.

Military. The FMLUN'& approximately 6,700-7,600 guerrillas
generally carry out low-risk, high-visibpility actions intended to
"bleed" the 57,000-man Salvedoran Army whiie keeping their own
forces intact. The insurgents rely mostly on hit-and-run attacks
on isolated outposts, ambushes, sabotage, and terrorism. On
occasion, the FMLN will attempt a well-planned and rehearsed
attack on 3 major military target in order to attract media
attention and demonstrate its military prowess.

Economic. The FMIN has intensified sabotage and attacks on
economic targets during the Past year in an effort to heighten
its military profile with minimal risk of sustaining casualties.
The insurgente also hope toa exacerbate the country's persistent
economic problems, thereby fueling popular discontent.

Diplomatic. The FMLN--generally operating through its
political ally, the FOR--pursuga contacts among sympathetic
groups in Western Europe and the United States. These groups
enhance the legitimacy of the insurgency as well an provide
financial support. Key guerrilla leaders currently are visiting
various Latin American and other foreign governments in a nighly-
publicized bid ta beost their own legitimacy and rally support
for negotiationa.
