Trends in South Africa's Nuclear Security Policies and Programs
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107420, dated 5 September 1984.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107420).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Director of
Central
Intelligence

gene

3 we
Teg:
:

t

es

* age! vor
<< sh, ay fe. "i Sena ‘
L2ck:
om Fete E
- “Ts
pres

ne anal, ae RELATE YT IM HS SY

Text not applicable

Text not applicable

Page {|

CONTENTS
Page
KEY JUDGMENTS ......ccecccccccccccccssscsecceesscessessseasesstsssseesessesetsecesseccecees 1
DISCUSSION oo. oecccccccccccesesccscessecccecsessaunssssasseasessesssssvactesseeeeececcece. 5
Introd uction......cccccsccccccsssseccsecessessscseasetessssesssasessisustecseesceceececsececess 5
The Search for Security....ccccccccccccscescescesssseeseseesecesceesseceecesceceeceecs 5
The Nuclear Option ......0...ccccccccssscssesssscsscstecssssecssssesesceecesesececceee 5
South Africa and Nonproliferation........cccccccscececccccsecececcesecececseeeeeee 7
South Africa’s Nuclear Explosives Capability .......c.ccccccccccccccceccecees 8
Genesis and Development.........c..ccccccscscsscesssessessesssesesscesesecseeevuce 8
Availability of Fissile Material... .ccccccccccccccsccccsscccsscesecsceesesees 11
Foreign Suppliers ......0....cccccccsceccessssscecsseccesssesssecesscsescececesecceceeeee 12
Pac ecccescccccessenssssseceeeessaucssaccussececcoscsuecasecssesssseane 13
Prospects for South Africa’s Nuclear Weapons Development...... 13
Size and Nature Over the Next Five Years ......c.cccccccccccccsceceeseees 13
Considerations Regarding Nuclear Testing .........cccccccccscececsecscseeeees 13
Nuclear Test Plans.....c.ccc.ccccccscceccscssecescssecssssstscsescssssessscassesecasseses 13
Political Considerations ......0..cccccccccscecsecceccesscseescesessescesessessesesseees 15
Technical Considerations .......00..ccccccccssccccesscsceesessessssessaceaseesseseces 16
Altermative Scenarios ........:ccccccccccsccescesssscecsserscessssssssaceasssscesevseces 16
Delivery System: Present Status and Future Prospects.............. 16

Implications of South African Nuclear Weapons Development... 17

Annex A: The Civil Nuclear Program .........ccccccccsccsssessescessacensereeeses 19
Annex B: Nuclear Test Capabilities 00... cccccccsceceseccecceeececeececeeseaes 23
Annex C: South African Delivery System Alternatives ........0.ccec0: 29

KEY JUDGMENTS

We believe that South Africa has the capability to produce nuclear
weapons on short notice. We believe
that South Africa has already stockpiled the components for several test
devices or first-generation nuclear weapons that use enriched uranium.

Given the size of its nuclear program, South Africa could stockpile
annually enough highly enriched uranium for two to four nuclear
explosives, depending on the design. {6-xr-nc-oc)

Since the furor that accompanied the discovery of the Kalahari test
site in 1977, South Africa has followed a policy of calculated ambiguity
with respect to its nuclear options by intimating thac it has the
capability to produce nuclear weapons while disavowing any interest in
doing so. Such a policy allows it to avoid the intensified pressures for
safeguards and the sanctions that would inevitably follow any revelation
of a weapons capability. At the present time, Pretoria appears satisfied
with that policy and is likely to adhere to it through the five-year time
frame of this Estimate. gig

There is no hard evidence about the degree to which South Africa
has incorporated nuclear strategy into its military planning. The South
African defense force’s clear-cut conventional military superiority in
the region makes a nuclear strike capability unnecessary. Nuclear
weaponry would have little effect against the principal military
threats—guerrillas operating from domestic or border-state rural bases
and insurrection in black urban areas. Moreover, the sense of urgency
that prevailed in the 1970s, largely because of the perceived Soviet
threat, appears to have diminished.

Much of the South African capability is based on work carried out

inthe id 1970: sy
QUEENS However, it is reasonable to assume that

research and development has continued, with the possibility that
emphasis may have shifted more toward fabrication and delivery
systems rather than continued stockpiling of uranium and components.
Although South Africa already has several types of aircraft capable of
delivering nuclear explosives, those aircraft are aging and are becoming

1

_lop-Secret

et

NOFORN/NOCONTRACT/ORCON/PROPIN/WNINFEL eee

increasingly vulnerable to the air eee systems being provided its
adversaries by the Soviet Union.

We believe that South Africa is not likely to test a nuclear explosive
device during the next five years. The increase in tensions on the
continent and with the West that would accrue from a test of a nuclear
device would be greater than the political/military gains to be derived.
However, growing tensions between the United States and the Soviet
Union, if accompanied by perceptions that the United States was losing

Bad Sersiind to Moscow in Africa, or was losing interest in Africa, might
provide incentive to test as a caution to the Soviets. Any attempted
intimidation by Moscow on behalf of its African clients might provoke
the South Africans to conduct a test as a warning that Pretoria will not

be bullied.e}——

There is still considerable disagreement within the Intelligence
Community as to whether the flash in the South Atlantic detected by a
Us Patti in September 1979 was a nuclear test, and if so, by
Sou rica. If the latter, the need for South Africa to test a device dur-
ing the time frame of this Estimate is significantly diminished.ts-np}~

Revelation that South Africa possessed nuclear weaponry would
immediately exacerbate the tensions that exist in southern Africa. Black
African states, supported by the Soviet Union, would seek stricter
sanctions against Pretoria and raise the specter of South African nuclear
blackmail to achieve regional domination. They might seek some form

ape ee ASC REALE ES MEME Py eet eee Bettas os ee

of protective guarantee from their patron. Although Moscow would
almost certainly not offer any explicit nuclear commitment, it might
provide more sophisticated air defense systems and step up arms and
advisory assistance. fe}—

Revelation would put the United States in an awkward position.
Black African states would hold the United States at least partially
responsible for Pretoria’s nuclear status and the United States would be
criticized for not restraining South Africa's nuclear progress. Converse- ;
ly, strong US denunciations of South Africa’s nuclear weapons capabili- :
ty would be perceived as evidence to Pretoria that the United States has r
taken an anti-South African position. We do not believe that a harsh US R.
reaction would provoke Pretoria to cut off important minerals exports ; :
to the United States, as some observers have contended. 4e)— FE

= ,

eee ee poe 8 mee ee eo et eee re

ate areata cet,”
oy amas

De aa ahs,

UL Aas —_——
Sr ee Bases

3

To Fet 7 =
“NOFORN/NOCONTRACT/ORCONTPROPINAWMIMTEL .
DISCUSSION

Introduction
The Search for Security

1. The rapid—and largely unforeseen—escalation
of conflict in southern Africa following Portugal’s
withdrawal in the mid-1970s had a traumatic impact
on South Africa. Until that time, the Portuguese
colonies of Angola and Mozambique were the furthest
extensions of the so-called “white redoubt” and, along
with the white minority regime in Rhodesia, constitut-
ed a buffer against those liberation groups seeking
black majority-rule in South Africa and Namibia. By
and large, South Africans felt secure within their
borders and confident of their ability to contain black

dissidence. fey”

2. South Africa's intervention in the Angolan civil
war of 1975-76 failed, however, to turn the tide in
favor of pro-Western liberation groups, and _ this
sparked a major reassessment of the country’s military
capabilities and policies. The intervention showed that
South Africa lacked the resources to wage a protracted
military campaign. In addition to having been over-
whelmed by the magnitude of the Soviet and Cuban
involvement in Angola, military officials also identi-
fied serious deficiencies in materiel, communications,
and logistics

3. Those deficiencies, set against the emergence in
Angola and Mozambique of Marxist-oriented, anti-
apartheid regimes heavily dependent on Soviet and
Cuban support, generated fears in Pretoria that those
former colonies would become staging areas for a
direct Soviet-backed invasion, perhaps involving Cu-
ban as well as black African forces. A subsequent rise
in guerrilla activity in both South Africa and Namibia
by guerrillas operating out of Angola and Mozambique
and an upsurge in racial demonstrations in South
Africa added to a sense of beleaguerment fey”

4, Thus, by the late 1970s, South Africa saw itself as
standing virtually alone against a “total onslaught”
being waged against it by black insurgents and radical
black African states supported by the Soviet Union and
its allies. In response, South African leaders adopted a
“total national strategy” aimed at creating a self-
sufficient, flexible defense force capable of deterring

a

conventional as well as guerrilla threats. In a crash
effort to redress the military imbalance, top priority
was given to building up the conventional! capabilities
of the armed forces and to developing an indigenous
arms industry capable of reducing—and eventually
eliminating—dependence on foreign sources of supply
(see inset on page 6).

5. The transfer of powe~ v. a black majority regime
in Rhodesia in 1980 came as another blow to South
Africa's sense of security. By then, however, the South
African military had adopted a “forward defense”
strategy based on increasingly aggressive conventional
and covert military operations against guerrilla bases
and local defense positions in neighboring states, par-
ticularly Angola and Mozambique. As a result, South
Africa has reasserted itself as the dominant military
power in southern Africa. It has forced Mozambique
to accept a mutual nonaggression pact and is exerting
pressure on Angola to send home the more than 30,000
Cuban troops stationed there. In addition, it has
convinced those governments to place restrictions on
guerrillas operating from their territories. fey

The Nuclear Option

, South Africa
constructed a nuclear test site in the Kalahari
Desert and appeared well on its way toward testing a

nuclear explosive device. {saixxcoc).

7. The international outcry that followed the dis-
covery of the Kalahari site persuaded Pretoria to
abandon any plans it may have had for a test and to.
impose tighter security over its nuclear explosives
programs. A mysterious flash in the South Atlantic
Ocean in 1979 raised fears in the international com-
munity that Pretoria finally had tested an explosive
device, although there is still strong disagreement
within the Intelligence Community as to whether a
test actually took place (see annex B). is}

——-- oo

wate

The Regional Military Balance

In relation to its neighbors South Africa is a super-
power, although it falls far short of that status by
Western or Soviet standards. The South African defense
force is made up of 76,500 active-duty personnel
including 28,000 regular forces. In all, South Africa
probably could muster a force of approximately
400,000 soldiers when ready reserves, home guard units,
and older males Hable for service in case of national
emergency are added in.

The government-controlled Armaments Corporation
of South Africa, with assets now estimated at $1.2
billion, currently meets the bulk of the military's
requirements for ground force equipment. It produces
small arms and ammunition, artillery and rockets,
armored vehicles, tactical communications equipment,
and landmines It also modifies and upgrades aging
equipment such as the British-supplied Centurion tank
of World War II vintage. Pretoria still faces serious
problems, however, replacing its aging fleet of fighters,
bombers, and reconnaissance aircraft. (cy~

In contrast, the black armies in the region are ill-
trained, inadequately supported, and poorly led. Mak-
ing the transition from bush fighter to conventional
soldier has been extremely difficult. Angola has some
30,000 to 35,000 men under arms, and Mozambique has
close to 22,000. The majority in both countries, howev-
er, are engaged in ccunterinsurgency operations, for
which they are inadequately prepared, or in local law
enforcement.

Zimbabwe's armed forces, once second in ability only
to those of South Africa, now number about 45,000 but
have been weakened since independence in 1980 by the
loss of white professionals, desertions, politica] interfer-
ence, and the inevitable frictions arising from tribalism
and the largely failec integration of rival guerrilla

elements. (7

While South Africa has an indigenous arms industry,
Angola and Mozambique must depend on Soviet-sup-
plied weaponry. Both countries have more battle tanks
than South Africa and together have more (and more
advanced) jet fighter aircraft. However, neither country
has the personne! trained to operate or maintain the
equipment, and the flow of spare parts is unreliable. (6

The only weaponry in the Angolan inventory that
limits South African operations within Angola are the
sophisticated SA-8 and SA-9 surface-to-air missiles pro-
vided by the Soviet Union in mid-1983. This modern air
defense system is manned by Soviet and/or Cuban
personnel at bases 150 to 200 miles north of the Angola-
Namibia border.

INF EL

8. The Soviet Union's projection of power into
southern Africa in the mid-1970s may well have been
the key factor in Pretoria’s decision to step up its
nuclear explosives research and development. South
Africa's leaders long have identified the Soviet Union
as their country’s major adversary. With Moscow
having once again (as it did elsewhere in Africa in the
1960s) brought the great-power rivalry to the conti-
nent—and with it the perceived threat of an invasion
of South Africa—the added protection of a credible
nuclear deterrent took on a new urgency.! f2zaceck

9. South Africa’s readiness to move ahead with both
conventional military buildup and nuclear explosives
development has also been motivated by the belief
that it cannot depend on the West. That belief—along
with the Soviet threat—will dominate South African
defense thinking through the 1980s and probably
beyond. (strr-tre-60}—

10. Prior to the 1970s, South Africa’s leaders ex-
tolled the idea that their country was of strategic
importance to the West given its location and mineral
resources. Because of that importance, they argued, it
was a major Soviet target. Thus, South Africa could
count on Wester assistance in the event of Soviet-
inspired aggression, Western criticism of apartheid
notwithstanding. In 1976, however, following the ill-
fated intervention in Angola, Defense Minister (now
Prime Minister) Botha, warned that realities had
changed and that South Africa no longer could count
on such assistance. That warning was based to a large
degree on the widespread belief among South African
military planners that their intervention in Angola
could have succeeded if the West had been willing to
support it

1]. Uneasiness over the West's reliability was rein-
forced by its outcry over the Kalahari test site and the
mandatory arms embargo against South Africa passed
by the United Nations. In addition to calling for an
embargo against conventional military assistance, the
embargo also called for a ban against UN member
states cooperating with South Africa in developing
nuclear weapons. The West's refusal to veto the
embargo deepened South African suspicions. Jay

' The present director of the National Intelligence Service, Dr.
Bernard, wrote extensively on the strategy of nuclear deterrence
while a university professor In the 1970«. He urged that South Africa
develop a nuclear weapons capability and demonstrate it to the
world. He justified his pasition by observing that Moscow would
have few reservations about using nuclear weapons against South

Africa. tf”

6
Top Sat

NOFORN/NOCONFRACT/ORCOAURROPINAMINITEL.

12. Since then, South Africa’s defense policy—
including nuclear policy—has been driven by a strong
desire for self-sufficiency and a fear of Western
interference. At the same time, it follows a policy of
calculated ambiguity by which it intimates that it has
a nuclear weapons capability while disavowing any
interest in testing a nuclear device. fey~

South Africa and Nonproliferation

13. South Africa, which has been a charter member
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
since 1957, has been reluctant to make major interna-
tional legal commitments that would restrict its free
dom to develop nuclear technology. It is probable that
its refusal] to adhere to the Non-Proliferation Treaty
(NPT) is in large part due to the fact that the treaty re-
quires signatories to place all fissile material under
IAEA safeguards.

14. Pretoria’s unwillingness to bend to outside pres-
sure from Western supplier states concerning safe-
guards requirements was perhaps best illustrated in
the early 1980s when the South Africans had to secure
nuclear fuel for the first of the two Koeberg power
reactors. Faced with a joint US-French strategy de-
signed to force them to accept comprehensive safe
guards in return for guaranteed fuel supply, the South
Africans canvassed the uranium market and succeeded
in obtaining a sufficient supply of low enriched urani-

um = a number of alternative sources, Saga
ma

15. Pretoria’s position concerning IAEA safeguards
on specific South African nuclear facilities has been
more flexible. It has acceded to requests from supplier
states for such controls involving imported nuclear
materials, equipment, and technology. For example,
the country’s only research reactor at the Pelindaba
nuclear research center has been under IAZA safe-
guards since 1965 because it utilizes US-origin en-
riched uranium. (US supplies were discontinued in the
mid-1970s.) Likewise, the two French-built Koeberg
power reactors are open to IAEA inspection. (a7

16. In January 1984 South Africa announced that it
would be willing to resume discussions with the IAEA
concerning safeguards for the indigenous semicom-
mercial uranium enrichment facility at Valindaba.
The motives behind this announcement are not clear.
This gesture was not the first time Pretoria has shown
a cooperative attitude. On a number of occasions
between 1973 and 1977, the South Africans demon-

qua 1

strated an interest in sharing knowledge about their
unique aerodynamic enrichment process with other
countries and a willingness to place the projected
commercial facility under JAEA safeguards. Howev-
et, persistent and successful efforts by the black
African states and India after 1977 to restrict South
Africa's ability to participate in JAEA activities rein-
forced a South African proclivity toward a siege
mentality. As a result, Pretoria saw no incentive to
cooperate on safeguards issues with an international
organization that appeared to have become captive of
South Africa’s enemies. fey

17. The controversy with regard to South Africa’s
status within the JAEA has become less intense in
recent years but the problem still remains. It is possible
that Pretoria’s strategy is to head off future attacks on
its IAEA membership. There have been several UN
resolutions introduced during the past year calling on
the LAEA to terminate al] contact with South Africa
until it accepts comprehensive safeguards. Several
Western nations, including the United States, have
urged that no action be taken in view of the resump-
tion in early August of South African-IJAEA discus-
sions concerning the possible application of IAEA
safeguards to the semicommercial enrichment facility
at Valindaba. (ey

18. Pretoria’s public commitment in the January
1984 announcement to request IAEA safeguards for all
of its own nuclear exports can be viewed as another
positive development justifying a more restrained
approach in dealing with the South African problem.?

AT

19. The actual technical difficulties in reaching a
safeguards arrangement for the enrichment facility
are considerable and will ensure that discussions will

‘In that announcement, Dr. J. W. L. DeVilliers stated that,
“South Africa will conduct and administer its nuclear affairs in a
manner which is in line with the spirit, principles, and goals of the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and the Nuclear Suppliers Group
Guidelines. ... This would specifically include: 1. South Africa will
not sell uranium to nonouclear weapons countries without Interna-
tlonal Atomic Energy Agency or Euratom safeguards, II. South
Africa will not make available sensitive technology to any other
country without Agency or Euratom safeguards; ITI. South Africa
will not sel] enriched uranium or nuclear equipment without
Agency or Euratom safeguards.” Dr. De Villiers concluded by stating
that any sales of such material or equipment must have guarantecs
that it will only be used for peaceful purposes. fet

et

be protracted.‘ The enrichment process utilized by the
South Africans has unique features that Pretoria will
wish to protect as a commercial secret. fe)”

20. The South Africans are acutely aware of the
time it will take to resolve the safeguards issue and
may well have calculated that their gesture was a
relatively costless way to buy time and more protec-
tion against further attacks on their IAEA membership
status. If the black African states and others continue
their effort to expel Pretoria from the IAEA, the South
Africans will have a legitimate rationale for breaking
off negotiations at any time. We doubt that there is
some other vested interest that would persuade Pre-
toria to remain at the negotiating table under such
circumstances.

South Africa’s Nuclear Explosives Capability

21. Evidence that South Africa has developed a
significant nuclear explosives capability is substantial

29. We are reasonably confident of the existence of
an active nuclear explosives program dating back to
the early 1970s. The program envisioned testing, and
efforts proceeded in that direction until the Kalahari
j Soviet Union j

site was

‘A serious proliferation concern is whether IAEA safequards
coverage can be extended in some manner to the pilot enrichment
facility at Valindabe.

Genesis and Development

24. According to open literature, South Africa could
have begun research on nuclear explosives devices as
early as 1968-69, when the Valindaba plant was being
designed and at least one South African scientist was in
the United States studying the application of peaceful

ey tae

re :
eile oH

a

Availability of Fissile Material

30. The Valindaba pilot scale uranium enrichment
plant was crucial to South Africa’s development of a
nuclear explosive device. The plant uses a unique
aerodynamic enrichment process developed from re-
search that began in 1961. Pretoria asserts that it is a
proprietary process and has refused to subject it to
international nuclear safeguards inspection for fear
that the design and operating data for it will be stolen.

ke ns-wo-09)
31.

beer}

uilding a semi-com-

mercial-scale enrichment plant for producing low

etw erg power react

The capacity of the semi-commer-

il] be about 30 percent higher than
the needs of the Koeberg reactors. This excess could be
used for export or making up for unscheduled plant
shutdowns. wea

| “UF

MOFORNZNOECONTRACT/ORCONZPROFIN AAANIINF EE

Heavy Water Technology and Plutonium Production

Foreign Suppliers

39. Foreign suppliers, predominantly West Europe-
an, have been important to South Africa’s nuclear
program from its incepiion. The development of South
Africa's nuclear explosives program would not have
been possibi& without foreign technical] assistance dur-

South Africa once had plans to develop natural
uranium power reactors. Those plans were abandoned
in the 1960s in favor of light water reactors, purpo

: G

that South Africa would have a less credible argument
for rejecting nuclear safeguards either on the heavy
water plant or on an indigenous plutonium production
reactor. These technologies do not have as much propri-
etary sensitivity and uniqueness as does the South
African enrichment process. (-3#-nc-oc)

Interest in heavy-water may portend yet another
technology—spent fuel reprocessing. The South Afri-
cans have shown interest in this technology for several
years, and every country of proliferation concern that
has added heavy-water-based natura] uranium reactor
technology to its program also has shown strong interest
in reprocessing. 6-we-o-oc}—

37

SRE TT ORT tasty
ce MEP ET TIL TG La, LEE wy

ets MRA be yt rete SET TESS * ue

Prospects for South Africa’s Nuclear
Weapons Development

retoria's apparent standdown regard-
recent years suggests that nuclear devel-
opment has met the country’s military requirements,

45. The South Africans have had little difficulty at Jeast to the extent warranted by current perceptions
acquiring materials and technology essential to their _ of the strategic threat and of the risks involved in overt
nuclear weapons development program. There are a actions such as testing. It also suggests that the diplo-
number of reasons for this. First, the program was matic and political benefits of being seen as having
very secret for most of its history, and nonproliferation once prepared for a nuclear test are considered to be
concerns were lower during the 1960: and early 1970s as great as if a test had been carried out.‘ 46am)
when many important acquisitions took place

Considerations Regarding Nuclear Testing
Nuclear Test Plans

aa dacait . é
minds of his enemies at rest by signing the Nuclear Non-Prolifera-

tion Treaty joy”

Io "a OulG

Page: LY

DENIED IN FULL

Exemptions: (+0 } & HGS

Political Considerations

56. Since 1977 South Africa has followed a policy of
calculated ambiguity with respect to the nuclear op-
tion by intimating that it has the capability to produce
nuclear weapons while disavowing any interest in

doing so. fay

57. Such a policy holds a number of benefits,
particularly for a pariah state such as South Africa. It
forces Pretoria’s adversaries to assume that South
Africa has a weapons capability and to factor that
assumption into their policy formulation. For example,
even though Moscow need have no fear of South
Africa’s ability to launch a nuclear strike against the
Soviet Union, it must take into consideration the
damage South Africa could inflict on the Soviet
Union's African clients, as well as on Soviet and Cuban

garrisons in Africa. (-0=xc-oo}-

58. Calculated ambiguity also allows South Africa
to avoid the intensified pressures for nuclear safe-

To

15

guards and sanctions that would inevitably follow any
open display of a weapons capability. Under present
policy it can proceed with research and development
fairly confident that the court of world opinion lacks
the evidence to bring a case against it. +E

59. The assumption on the part of its adversaries
that South Africa has a nuclear weapons capability also
gives Pretoria a deterrent credibility while allowing it
to avoid the stigma of: being the first to introduce
nuclear weapons on the African continent. That intro-
duction also might prompt neighboring black African
states to seek protection under the Soviet nuclear
umbrella or—though less likely—to allow deployment
on their territory of tactical nuclear weapons superior,

no doubt, to any South Africa might have. &«5)—
60.

+

61. The South African defense force's clear-cut
superiority in southern Africa and the success of its
operations against its adversaries make a nuclear strike
capability irrelevant at the present time. In addition,
the cost and effort involved in maintaining and up-
grading the conventional capabilities of the military
and of acquiring, if possible, new and advanced
weaponry, particularly aircraft and tanks, strongly
suggest that a nuclear weapon is far down on the
military's shopping list. +*}—

62. We believe that South Africa is not likely to test
a nuclear explosive device during the time frame of
this Estimate. At the present time, the sense of urgen-
cy associated with nuclear development in the 1970s
appears to have diminished. Moreover, the increase in
tensions on the continent and with the West that
would accrue from a test would be greater than the
political/military gains to be derived, particularly in
view of South Africa's military superiority in the
tegion and the conventional deterrent capability it

now enioys. ewewo-0c)_

63. There are circumstances which could induce
the South Africans to change their policy and test a
nuclear device. Internationa! considerations could lead
to a nuclear test far sooner than regional ones, at least
within the period of this Estimate. Growing tension
between the United States and the Soviet Union, if
accompanied by perceptions that the United States

et

NOEGRNANOCONER:

was losing ground to Moscow in Africa, or was losing
interest in Africa, might give added weight to advo-
cates of nuclear deterrence and trigger a test. one}

64. Stronger Soviet effcrts to defend its African
allies either with conventional weapons or intimations
of stronger retaliation could force South Africa to
counter with a test and with proclamations that it will
not be bullied. A private Soviet message last Novem-
ber condemning South Africa’s military policy toward
Angola, while not accompanied by threats of retalia-
tion, nonetheless was regarded by Pretoria as an
attempt at intimidation. fr}

Technical Considerations

65. Although we believe that the political consider-
ations governing whether South Africa conducts a
nuclear test are preeminent, there are, nevertheless,
significant technical considerations as well. These re-
late principally to reliability and performance of
nuclear explosives devices. ¢-nr}-

Fop-Secret

e that South Africa has leap-
frogged the testing phase and is concentrating on the
weaponizing and delivery of its nuclear explosives
device. Afrikaners are a contingency-minded people
and as such probably would prefer to have a deliver-
able nuclear weapon rather than be forced to develop
one hastily in the face of a worsening security situa-

tion. -we-ne-o6)

69. The head of South Africa's National Intelli-
gence Service, Dr. Bernard, voiced that point of view
in 1979 when he publicly stated that “by the time a
nuclear crisis really faces us, it will probably be too
late to make ourselves really prepared and to be able

to defend ourselves at that level." fey”

70. Another alternative scenario is that South Africa

is working on advanced design concepts such as

boosting or the thermonuclear device that was origi
nally in 1

Delivery System: Present Status
and Future Prospects

It 4s unquestionable that the Republic of
South Africa has the technological capacity to
manufacture nuclear arms as well as sophisti-
cated systems of delivery with the desired accu-
racy and penetration.

—(Commodore H. F. Nel, speech to the South
African Institute of Strategic Studies, 1980.) (c)

1
Joep siGet

Top-S

NOEO

72. Virtually all of South Africa’s combat aircraft
can carry a nuclear payload. These include the Mirage
F1AZ, the Mirage II] EZ, the Buccaneer § Mk 50, the
Impala, and the Canberra BUI)Mk 12. We do not
believe the Impala is a sound tactical choice, however,
because of its small size and inferior performance.
This issue is discussed in detail in annex C. »5}.

73. In 1976, the South African Air Force (SAAF)
publicly announced that Buccaneer bombers had been
used for practicing nuclear delivery techniques. Using
conventional bombs, five Buccaneer bombers de
stroyed a decommissioned 797-ton World War II
salvage ship off Cape Town. The bombers released
their bombs 3 to 5 miles away from the ship, then
pulled up sharply and veered away. The SAAF further
characterized the exercise as employing a “computer-
ized technique to deliver nuclear bombs and escape
the effect of the resulting explosions.” fey~

Implications of South African Nuclear
Weapons Development

76. For the past few years at least, South Africa's
nuclear program has not been a major source of
contention in Africa nor has it had adverse implica-
tions for the United States except in relation to the
international nonproliferation regime. With the excep-
tion of the discovery of the Kalahari test site in 1977
and the mysterious flash in the South Atlantic in 1979,
South Africa’s nuclear program has provoked little
condemnation. This is partly because of its low visibili-
ty and partly because Africans—who would be the
first to condemn—have been preoccupied with other
matters. The low level of open contention regarding

17

WNTEL

Pretoria’s nuclear development has provided the Unit-
ed States with room to maneuv

to attempt to bring
South African facilities under international nuclear

safeguards. +ne-ncoc)

77. Revelation that South Africa possessed nuclear
weaponry would immediately exacerbate the tensions
in southern Africa. Black African states, supported by
the Soviet Union, would renew their calls for UN and
other sanctions against Pretoria. Those calls would be
more intense than previous ones in view of South
Africa’s recent military operations in the region and
fears of South African nuclear blackmail to achieve
regional domination. Moscow's clients in southern
Africa might seek some form of protective guarantee
from their patron. While the Soviet Union almost
certainly would not offer any explicit nuclear commit-
ment, it might provide more sophisticated air defense
systems and step up arms and advisory assistance. In
addition, Moscow could be counted on to issue gener-
alized but ominous threats against South Africa and
those who were suspected of contributing to its nuclear

development. +e}-

78. Black African states would hold the United
States at least partly responsible for Pretoria’s nuclear
status, particularly if the United States did not join in
the denunciations. In African eyes, the United States
has done little to restrain South Africa’s military
operations in the region and the United States as a
nuclear superpower would be criticized for not re-
straining its nuclear progress as well, ¢-~F}—

is undependable or, at the very least, that the United
States expected South Africa to meet the threats
against it with one hand tied behind its back. Many
South African officials long have believed that accept-
ing the safeguards demanded by the West puts smaller
nuclear countries at a distinct disadvantage. We doubt
that a harsh US reaction would provoke Pretoria to cut

Ipp-betrer

ROFORNINGEONFTR:

off important minerals exports to the United States, as
some observers have contended, since economic reality
probably would prevail over South African pique. A
cutoff could become more possible, however, should
the United States actively seek to interrupt the flow of
nuclear-related equipment and technology to South
Africa. 4-n¥)

81. South African testing of a nuclear device would
weaken the international nonproliferation regime and

18

INTEL

encourage the acquisition of nuclear weapons by other
counties by demonstrating that indigenous develop-
ment of a nuclear weapons capability can be success-
fully accomplished. Several states (such as Pakistan,
Argentina, Brazil, and Israel) might feel fewer inhibi-
tions about developing nuclear weapons or openly
publicizing their nuclear weapons capabilities if South
Africa suffered no serious international repercussions

or technological setbacks. 6-xe}-

~&

Top Secret

NOFORNINGCOMTRAETIOREON/PROFIN AW NINTEL—

ANNEX A
THE CIVIL NUCLEAR PROGRAM

1. Although South Africa has vast coal reserves and
exports significant amounts of coal, it saw a need for
nuclear power as early as the 1960s. This need arises
because South Africa has built its electrical power
plants where its coal is located. A number of the
developed regions in South Africa, most notably the
western Cape, are not near coal deposits, however, and
transporting coal by rail or transmitting power over
electrical lines, at distances sometimes up to 1,500
kilometers, is inefficient and prohibitively expensive.

2. Pretoria chose therefore to construct nuclear
power plants on the coast to ensure adequate cooling
water from the ocean. In fact, the recent drought in
South Africa has heightened South African interest in
additional nuclear plants since some conventional
power plants located inland have been forced to shut
down because of inadequate cooling water supply.

3. South Africa's entry into the realm of civil
nuclear power began in 1976 when it signed an
agreement with a French-led consortium to s\ oly
two 922-megawatt (electrical) light water reactor pow-
er plants for the Koeberg nuclear station near Cape
Town. The first of these reactors started up for initial
testing on 19 March 1984. When both reactors are
operating, they will contribute about 8 to 10 percent of
the country’s electrical power needs fey~

4. The problems encountered in obtaining foreign
enriched uranium fuel have pushed Pretoria into a
program for self-sufficiency in nuclear fuel supply. It
is developing and/or constructing commercial-scale
facilities for uranium processing, enrichment, and
reactor fuel fabrication. These facilities, shown in
figure 4, should be available by the time current
foreign supply contracts are completed. fwe-e-00}-

T. In the 1960s a South African effort to develop a
heavy-water-based power reactor was abandoned. A
competing effort on a process for uranium enrich-
ment, which would support a light-water-based nucle-
ar fuel cycle succeeded, however, and development of
the process began. f¢-nr}-

‘ENC-OCy

10. At the present time, however, there is a large
worldwide oversupply of enric

uranium, and an
export market does not exist.

1 I ——ae

Page: Zo
DENIED IN FULL

Exemptions: eC) +4 Cs)

TAO eee a,

liad, Vat ee rea

GO tet Nee.
BATT Ne ns
BESTE ANE AE DAY
tg Ne TOR ETON
CO ty orem EOE

ters

ee ts ete

woo th ge Fe

Top Satie

ANNEX B
NUCLEAR TEST CAPABILITIES

The Kalahari Nuclear Test Site

Background

9. The Kalahari nuclear test site is located about 80
kilometers north of Upington in the Kalahari Desert.
The site's existence was discovered and publicly made
known by the Soviets in August 1977.

At the time of its discov-
ery, early preparations appeared to be under way for
an underground nuclear test. Subsequent to the inter-
national uproar created by the Soviets’ announcement,
the site wes mothballed, although not decommis-
sioned. A low level of activity has been observed by
satellite imagery since that time. (cxm-no-oc-ay},

Site Description

10. The general! area around the Kalahari facility is
well-suited to underground nuclear testing. The isola-
tion from important centers of activity, the relatively
low intrinsic value of the land, and the hard-rock
geology are all typical features sought in selecting a
nuclear test site. (s-neon}.

ll. The site itself is large, comprising a perimeter of
20 by 23 kilometers (or an area of about 450 square
kilometers). The facility consists of an operational area
and a support base. The support base generally is
upwind of the operational (test) areas as one would
expect at a test site. 6-1e-vereh

We estimate that by 1979 Pretoria
could have produced enough of that fissile material for
a first nuclear device. 46-ne-ncogaaax)}

The Event
17

The Search for Other Technical Evidence

18. A massive Intelligence Community effort was
launched to corroborate the occurrence of a nuclear
detonation through means other than satellite observa-

tions.

The 22 September 1979 Event

The Context

16. While faced with the possibility that South
Africa conducted a nuclear test in 1979, we should
consider the following context." In 1963, South Africa
acceded to the Limited Test Ban T which
prohibits atmospheric nuclear

candidate for such « test icy

Page: DC

DENIED IN FULL

Exemptions: CG & UNG

Page: 2]

DENIED IN FULL

Exemptions: C&G ) & Xs)

Page: y) Y

DENIED IN FULL

Exemptions: can) G ) 4 CG)

oh

ANNEX C
SOUTH AFRICAN DELIVERY SYSTEM ALTERNATIVES '°

Aircraft

l. The aircraft in the current South African Air
Force (SAAF) inventory most likely to be selected for
the nuclear weapons delivery role are fighter-bombers
and light bombers. The fighter-bomber and light
bomber aircraft in the SAAF are the Mirage FIAZ, the
Mirage II] EZ, the Buccaneer § Mk 50, the Impala,
and the Canberra BKI)Mk 12. We do not believe the
Impala is a realistic alternative because of its small size
and inferior performance. Thus, our analysis of the
SAAF’s nuclear-capable aircraft focused on the Mirage
Fl, Mirage Il], Buccaneer, and Canberra. @-r}

2. Based on all performance aspects, we believe
that the best nuclear strike aircraft in the SAAF is the

.-- Buccaneer. The Canberra has a greater combat radius

but was designed for clear-weather operations. The
Buccaneer is capable of unrestricted operations at
night and in adverse weather. Furthermore, the low-
altitude penetration speed of the Buccaneer is higher,
and the Buccaneer’s superior avionics should enable it
to penetrate at a lower altitude."' Although no infor-
mation was available on the electronic countermeas-
ures (ECM) of either aircraft, the Buccaneer ECM is
almost certainly superior to that of the Canberra. All
of these factors—the higher speed, lower penetration
altitude, and superior ECM—tend to make the Bucca-
neer more survivable than the Canberra. The Canber-
ra probably would not be selected in preference to the
Buccaneer unless:

— The weight and/or size of the nuclear weapon
exceeds the Buccaneer bomb bay weight or
dimension limits.

— The selection criteria are such that the Canber-
ra's 200-nautical-mile combat radius advantage
over the Buccaneer is a critical factor. ~z)-

UCCECeT 13 €Q) a

fire-control redar, and a bead-up display radar. Canberra has nove
of these.

3. The survivability of the Mirage Fl and Mirage
TI probably is comparable to thet of the Buccaneer.
However, the inferior combat radius of the two Mi-
rage aircraft limits their employment to targets at
relatively short range. Even against short-range tar-
gets, the superior range of the Buccaneer would allow
it to follow a more circuitous route to the target. Such
flexibility permits an aircraft to bypass concentrations
of air defense weapons, to use terrain-masking to make
tracking and interception more difficult, or to ap-
proach the target from the most advantageous direc
tion. Thus, we would not expect either Mirage aircraft
to be selected over the Buccaneer unless the selection
criteria are such that:

— The markedly superior combat radius of the
Buccaneer is not a critical factor.

— The SAAF believes that the superior over-target
speed of the Mirage aircraft will significantly
improve the mission's chances of success. ene}

Weapons Delivery

4. All four aircraft are capable of performing the
standard nuclear weapons delivery techniques. High-
altitude bombing, for example, with a freefall or
parachute-retarded nuclear weapon should present no
problems, since all four aircraft have service ceilings in
excess of 10,000 meters. However, this delivery profile
may not be used in a high-threat environment since
low-level delivery makes the attacking aircraft less
vulnerable to air defenses. The four aircraft should be
capable of low-level bombing techniques—loft bomb-
ing (free-fall or parachute-retarded weapon) and level
laydown (parachute-retarded weapon}—with no un-
usual] restrictions.

Cruise Missile or Glide Bomb

coc

6. The South Africa Navy has Gabriel cruise mis-
siles on its Reshef patrol boats from Israel The Gabriel
missile conventional warhead weighs 180 kilograms
and is about 0.3 meter in diameter. While the environ-
mental considerations for a cruise missile (tempera-
ture, acceleration, altitude) are similar to those for
aircraft delivery,

7. Lf the South Africans were to develop indigenous-
ly a cruise missile of sufficient size to carry the
postulated design, then the weaponization require
ments would not be significantly more difficult to
master than for an air-delivered free-fall bomb. The
same conclusions apply whether the missile is surface
launched or air launched, or whether it is a glide
bomb. We believe the South Africans would have little
trouble in adapting their aircraft delivered design to a
cruise missile if no major weight and size reductions

are necessary. (s-nE}

Ballistic Missiles

NOG ROY
Artillery

9. Nuclear artillery projectile design is very differ-
ent from that of aircraft or missile delivered nuclear

“

”

Top -See,

et a
a. we

weapons. Artillery delivery requires that very high
acceleration be imparted directly to the projectile case
and presents formidable challenges to weapon design-
ers. Both interior and exterior ballistics considerations
must be included in the design. Center of gravity,
moment of inertia, size, weight, volume, and safety are
critical to provide the reliability and accuracy re

quired for battlefield operaiions. ewe}

10. The South Africans manufacture their own 155-
mm field artillery guns and sophisticated extended-
range ammunjtion for them. This has led to specula-
tion that they may also be working on nuclear rounds
for these guns. Given the present known scope of their
program, however, we believe they would stand no
chance of succeeding in such an effort. 4-4)

1}

30

—

Top-Sécret

DA NINTEL—
