Meeting no 7, Birmingham, England, 27 April 1961REGARDING Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012397, dated 4 March 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012397).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

worked tognihes for 85 houre in 41. as I heve calowleted. Thin is a
—@urlng which we have set and not ale ’

myself in such trustworthy hands. This is very pleasant, sui it enenireges
"end inepives me.

Meoting Mucber J, Birmingham, England, 27 April. 196

G: We have been vest to met an important men. New,
Sail Ga whew pou youralle have ta Glial Seekuss 45 chdsia puch a perscn 4a 0S
problen for us. However, you know yourrelf that promiment people who give
comenis do not all welerstemt secrecy as we do. ee
emi nothing will be sald. Of course, such a man would not know enything
pervonally about you, as one might eay. But you umlerstand -~- {¢ may seem
like a small matter but the fewer people who know kbovt you the more secure
things are. But we can do it, nevertheless. 39: I will try to explain to

you end do your best to fulfill wy Fequest) Jom very gled to contize thet we
Inte me Officers are work! of our Free World -- ignoring
the fact t. we are meeting Soley far the eovouthe uiae or tet mow

Chat we are on the seme wave length. I herve aleo prepared an snever for your’
question. I heve expected your question. I am glad thet I can think about it.
agnin and gled thet ym so deeply examine and understand me, end that I find

© 8: I heve prepered a amall offielal declaration which I want te pees .
to you. This will be ot the sime tine a reply to your question. A week hes
passed in whieh we have worked direetly and in whieh we have had the good

heey to oe for the oe of grent aryl ch Seat matters. Ltonsidar

woldier ach aslAder in the direct sense ani in any other, ns you like. I did
BOS Bene ota te fo Little Shines. If I hed not hed sufficient elantestine

capabilities, in sp hetred sad eonteapt Yor corrupted Leninies, perhaps
“{, os au-Intelligence Offlec® onl ab ond with y hichor oie ion oot Woe hee :

dared to presume: to grasp nt such questions, or come with such requests ant such
Gefinite demonis -- believe me. I consider that I heve suchunusunl ani speetal.
capabilities ani sccensibilities for agent work, thet I shall de able to prove
int wena en President - aa a line soldier. You mz:
wrlerstend m correctly -- I heve talked ebout this several times -- I

om capoble af grent things. I want to prove this "es soon as possible”. —
Fras] ; ;

APPROVED FOR.RFLEASE

$y aK doe Cease pocshe Gat Mulged wo SGrere < eal gos, ws Get ng Go
emi touching m...Your frequent promgting is invaluable to me.

&) %: After syery eeeting with you now, my brains begin to work freah
and to contrive mew things, Z ax new on Laventer withia the frenedork of the
possibilities epen tum. With respect te ny desires —- you have nothing to
aay. Tom Sege-to-. face with you ani you ean decipher this for yourvelves ~
bse igloo gtr Aetna arp Gl begged opel oh pig tsa Wins @o I wesstt
te try mm ok on

‘mattery, 9 ey teak wate’ 0 within my eqabtLttied to woscepLish veig ay —
edvestion, wy tr (end everyticing elee echich I represent and whieh I hove
we vkly we poorible. (Here

yerheps gomeboty ¥
into uy eyes Like you, will say, “Perkops ke copies el)
out of Previa", or something Like that that. %, you must exury me tub you mst
Se ee ee Z as metore, oe ee
Be ee ee ce Joni ae younssr, Chat fe ag
2 perbepe in exyeriens they exe oda than we «+ Y comet toy. 31 Guanke you.

(5) Br Wheat elee fo X want to say? dine de I eveluste the altuntion!

Xf 238 governments waleh I now serve ~~ the high eocmends whieh I serve anid
Mie Be a i ee ee ee

A everything.
eppreech thie Oe ta alee nk Ug ta ee rust correct me in a
ecmrede—Lile wry eat X at oan eee

2

aa)
for erts

LS

7 3

tel el
sitlite et a ube alan
ae eitt lle open ala
 dusetabesd ee it Hite MED

A Se

©

vt

Bus you weterntanl, sy rebellious reture. a ee eee ae
Sively, Euenwle Gereta. I feel that you ere #tiil texting my mensure, #¢111
m, For me, this ie a sonevhet drs out moment. Perhaps there is
sone eontrediobion me in your eyens If so, tell re. Perhepe I cen clear
a an eo ee ee
veo ct ua rate oy ee ea ee od ent of

tcanwren wteh Ge 5 you will heve evalueted me. gig you Will. sey,
"You know what? Everything with you fs medium. You do not need to concern

af shout such grent matters because others are thinking for you". When
X decided to come to you, I aid not think elk tads ovbh lightly, I ask you to
oe ee ee to believe in me, ard te give me ae
neg Pe possible a severe mission go thet ¥ den fulfill it.

fierieae gs Glee, X want you to vee we only for big things.
ait ey Aaeata cA gecuine che bata Ge.

& 8: Wor I will cheek throogh the thoughts whieh I herve prepared +.
ond verted «. I think f heve endd owwrything., Then I will mo on to eco
gay eligi arom bag eh aed harap fearechelg ag cer Is
Oe ee ee eee ety ere ee (@ trys to brenk tn.) 8: Just

Y will finteh shortly. For me, ths Sikora cr sees bchicam writ be
the wey in which the goverment Rasscoes’ thove two (inerisens), WINRE, smi

the work thet you eve mrt fsbo om colluteration, for the goed of the common

enuse, wlll be ateensed. Let us hope thet nll will be well.

ip eenblgaey fortum, well-being, You wterrtend thet I only wert to work on
arge prinetples, aerLoun prinetples evi let them be dongereue ones. oA

pe ree oe if anything should heppen to se, you would not

 Soogert my eT ny mether, aad my wife. You know my engmeetions shout

this ent you would contrive somthing, ant you would ach lesve then in «
materiel 1

he haw mak eared Bren a minteter vio recsives 18 to 18,000 xbles
saved something and Af they get someting on kim end be te Grliven

4

#7

ee ee et as ee a

elne -. after this he just drags hie life ot wt
wage of Eoolalion is now eatehlished ani weet sort of woge is it? Tt ie really
a gray ant lemery life ~ believe me. I live in Ccmmnuortt
ered

|

there had been a more clever Teer, there neve no
8S: Iishen,< ean tell. yousll kimis of things. With us in the 7th bese
ment the KGB site, there ere chabers where Russians ~- pronleent

people
trom the point of view of Putrlotim:, wise people ~~ were exposed to rats. I

:
i
Ey
u

I wee with or anything”, they qo a valve whieh relersen « single rat.
The xext, who bas aot exten for several days, begins to ron shout and to bite the

13, ws KURUGWHRY cam see thet Uf in addition to thie grey, belt-sterving
SS ee ee oe mein 2 me tt
wea in SDALIN's time -~ of eovotee, STALIN bed support 211 arcuml -- then the
people might ewally omy “the Rell with 382° this is why ha in mking Little

3

eT

intueemyats., For inetenes ha made a general eemesty for those who were
chewed up by rats, or. shot. To thety fumiiities, he gave porustone, They get
~« wob very lerge -- but they get something. Or he rehabilitated

81 I could tell you about som people fron the Orv perhops you
nnn, of then. We enn talk about # Some other ting, I vanted to
canatly Weel Bag poe ne wal ena ge are Wont with
exagtly a wiek. rf you <4 z only ye 2
ma, "You know, (Subjects tone news), everyitl not &
reaching fox. Th'a sort of medionrs ant ve really don't want to vse you

&
*

g ry
What kind of bg things? So fev, I heve offered (my Hens) to you. Tf you
‘onsite this oll waitebie - and aw Lt should te ~ then I ant you $0

(the plan) ant gtve we mi sercrity eo I camomeute £%. Tell et,
¢ Will serive on: ti ond om the sth you have to blow up the Koa". At
Lis o'elock in tht norning on the 15th, the IOS will esase to exist. Just give

Tar the mens to do this ani there will te no Mm! Now I'm fintahed with whet

Gs On ths thing: you heave sid - on corte

me, this is ell very ohjective, Thers exe no personal considerations of qualities
whieh would be of help in matters ef ow wae tere

Gs Now WWE had ongentred a Ati, After sitting excel a tit,
nen myonlf met seta thet ¥ tel ta eall ~« the Enbaray. Sheretg a Line
+ the Yelerraph offten, Then I went for a walk; I left scewone to teke my place =

6

Biren 7

-

#7

« professor. I told him to write up his reports. Yesterday they were lootcing
at the entixe laboratory. Today they wore looking at the Walter ALIN. After
this, I will not eall you. When I eo bnek I will go to sleep. Breakfast

is ot 8:15. We get up at 7100. Ther feed wa well, We ave all delighted

WEEN. Who doen oll these things? You're mot altting there. WYNNE io the one.

the big thing we ave all doing. G: We ere awere of oll this, bob while he 7
rumiing Wack ext forth between you and the representatives it's impossible.to
tear him awny, in any sense of the word =~ even for 2 or 3 hours. When he cones
to Londou, everything will be teken enre of properly.

pod

want 1003,0r wrthing ~. or kill me, €: How about 105%7 Cleay. Chey. st Please
wexlerstem mw cormetly, because ve don't heve much time. We hove to make
feeistoun, or do you heave some question? ——

19. 8: Good! Mow, whit IX weuxtedt to tell you -- after all t een't say 50
woria st once ineteed of one wort, or 50 thoughts. I geve you a List of 60
canext Le future

There in e long table opposite ~ about where Mr. Joseph ta sitting -~- ani there
sits General SHOLIECV. Next to hit is your reletive, KHLOPOY, and bere «11 the

—

7

fT

Chiefs of the Direetorates. Here, the eeniidate ee here.
Preryone is writing thinre sbout him -- whet color eyes, whet height, his
eppeeranee ~~ does he look Like a ‘how, for inten, or en Arrenten or ant
(OSRTTH) or Like a Fit Wo ome geye a words they write amtetly. ‘Then they
Ceclde ~ IVANCY {9 necepted. I told you before 150 peraens applied - 90
Were sifted out ant GO were accepted. There vere various reasons for this ~-
I won't go inte nl) that sow.

20. 8: When all the students are secepted, by orier of the Chief of.
to

begins.
Yor instance, some blond chareeter night be dagired ty both the Firmtieh and
the Huropesn (group). He fs entered, in this case, in Yoth groups. There are
mury onges ifke this. Then they bergainy the decision is based on seniority
aml usuolly is a just one.

21. G: Does 4t work on the 2/o system? For instance, a large Directorate
but no slots openj there are go mony slota seeording to 1/07 &: But we are not
prepering them for a Directorate. We ate prepésring them for overseas duty.
Those thet are left over will. fini « apot toporertly even {f it's not according
to their destontion (PROFEUUY). Por inetenee, I was atwiying Ji “"

when To wae in the Acedany, neturlly I hod nothing to do with Japon. T
krev everything show: it, ineluding the Pugearere Depression and ite depth
eee ee): Bo, they divide up the poeple. ‘wy have © sort of plan ~

perspective -- in monbers., ‘The Chief of the First Dirdetorste gets sece
people ~ in execss aimost of a1) the other directorates «- thet's BEKRENRY.
te got 18 people, enong thes your eequsintense ~ BHCHERBAROY, whe will be
trained’ for two yeors.

22. 8: SHCMFADAKCY loxnes two lenguages very well ont hee experiences
in agent work. He used to be an Tiers. Viet's the purpose in training hin

#
53 He doeon’t need anymore; that's whet MESROMNY gaid. If i¢'s meeeosary, he
oun Sinieh in ove ent a held years - in other words, half a course - ani be!2.
be givens digtom. ~ mxt « “pip” (Roem). I've got two og then. G1 Aceteny of
Mba the Soviet A 8: No. The one fren tha Acadony of Prouse ecys “Aendeny of
een Freee” just thet; the other cme has VASA (YOYEHNATA AKADRHIYA SOVES'GKOY
vee APMIIT). Actunlly {t ie the VDA (VOYRNNAYA DIPLOMAPICHESKAYA J.

8

Anywey, aT Ge eee ec Why? Becanpe there ie stress
on This Tete igenes wo ae + Be took the best te. Who were
these 18 pa 1 QI you will give ip: Mindi I heve not mcked
At before), I cen tell you who is he fixet end who is in the

tat group
arcom. ee acniee yn his first list but 444 not

23. 8: Bor who is pieked for TLlegal. Intelligence wirk. They murs

be young esl, of 2 rule, unmerried. There ore 6 weerried people in this
course, O: Wheat does young man -- 28, 27 old? 6: Unier 3. X said,
young eni prefercbly uneerried, Cal The the first requirements,
G: Why unmerriedt S: Because 16 ion't always permitted to take your wite
along. As you know, according to ox lows of sociplias it doean't do te
breek wp 2 ferdly. Of evursa there ave merried Dlegnlay they go ebroed
with their wives,

2). 61 Now, let's go through these quickly. I've forgobten- weny of
them alremty! You kmow what I did not mck down before tn the list whiten
I gave the Acerten frienis «~ wy “lerkroctors -~ interpreters ~~ that Liss
was not siphebetical, here I wrote the last time ant the inttinley I dia
“aie

tein wtutty "M0,
better let him shaty Baglighy be won't mae 4t in Tustieh”. Do you have the
first Lists G: It's im Lonion. 6: In Losion? Let's de it in London then,
#o thet we'll weve them both together that way. If you waxt we can go through
fost. G: Ho. It ie better to be more aceurnte ont thorough. ee a

you, thas sre €1L WERE 's pemple. fe seye “2'21 efther
send him to this countey, or te thet one". ‘That's why. 4: RSXRPREY ead
this? "i: BEXREREY. Me said, "He ta auiteble for this one or for that
country.” I'L) be“thistiking shout it. I alremty know (wince © heard this)
#0 I yart bin dows for both ~~ so that he's between two, Beemwe he might a
nob be named for om commtry and then suddenly be sent to sous other Se
country Latest!

9

#7

26. 6: Now, whet I must say before I forget about it -- out of these
18 people, the ones to pase all the tests, cheeks, and meet ell the
comtitions, dod willing, there may be 5 ~~ out of all those 18. ‘this is
the proportion, ani the relationship of the chaff and the wheat. The chef’
will go and work for some other direetorates. This is impertent to remember.
Well, we've deeided to work on this over there later becanse the list is
there exi we will do it completely,

2{. 6: When you were asking me yesterday about our group in the
Committee, I forgot to give the neme of the Captain. It is Captain MUTILIN,
Boris. Me was getting ready to go to Spein, as an Illegel. I wes wnfused -
he does not work now at the Institute of Foreign Langueges, but is working
in the Foretgn nt of VOYENIZDAT. We have a YOYENIZIMT -- Military
Publishing (louse) of the General Staff -- and there we have a erent deer
of material in foreign lenguages. There are meny instrustors there from our
Acadany, and others. This 1s sort of a secowlary echelon -- they let

16

#7

. 30. 8: Remexther the red-head? I hed « certein connection with LEBXIEY
when I wae on the aren desk. Remember I told you about the agent who gave
information on the CHET-RESHAYUSRCHIYE USTROYSTVAN (computing devices)
from Pakisten - these meterials wows! wo in his hents. He had two specialists
thera -. they were decoding experts. He asked me to auk the agent vith
what speed the dises turned, the frequency of nusber repetition, ete. 1
eontaeted the REZIDERT -- end the REZIDEMP, through the ceperetional officer,
asked the agent (whom we are going to hang soon -- but only efter I come out).
(Joke) thus, this LEMEDEV, Colonel, has « section -- not a sut-peetion. Be

on y

B: Direetly to General of the Army, SERCY. Directly. But he eooriinates
hie eetivities with your sequaintance -- the Colonel who ie with our Radio
Intelligeme -- RIABOY. Their immediate supervisor ie Lieutenant Generel
(GENERAL~LEYYVNANT) . Thies nem is familier to your 6: I know him.
He was in Germany, the eltef. 8; That's tight, that's TRUSOY.

Ga.) 8: 1 wont t0 ase you people ~ ny next point - to strive ee}

help Iey to point ont te me -~ ant what you direct will be my order +
the Listing ai the priority sequence of all ay sasigunents. <Zere is
my iden of whet I's to do whea FE te Mossow. First - the work!

few ineecureciers. At
be doing it thoroughly. ft aftition to the basle aren orientation, I will
give thelogtesl pleases, most suftabie, which I think of for placing a large
ERT equivalent, for the purpope of blowing wo the targets when it is.
necessary to do so. This is the first thing whieh I should completely work out
Aw long as I am talking so such about such big things I must, fron my end of 1%
give you sort of a documentary plas, ‘Then F will take 16 upon myself
“VSUY MOSKYU VYPOLNTT” to put the entire thing into action. If you say that
this ig too mich for you to do, plesre give me another order.

S¢ Mey I centinwet Seeowily ~~ I'll be working now » ani since

with you I unferstand it even better ~~ to collect all availeble
materials in Illegal Intelligence pai ar veximning with the theory
the lecturesy speetfic situations (cases). ‘The SOV-SEXRETNO (Top secret)
will go uniler « special entegory. Perhaps in this theoretical pert we will
find nome keys in order for us to apply prophylactic measures. This is how I

-

TT

serutiny. 5: Yes, scrutiny es to who + whatt I knov, for instance, about
SUCHERBAKOY; I know exactly. He's o big (or healthy) ene. I know this will

end trained before. They need a wan like thet ~- he is prepared in all

a very inportent avi big port of the work, beesuse the basic threat to
us comes from the @ivection of the Diegnls.

33J/ 58: I alao want to thet there fa one task which confronts
Réce the gels especially, ent ell of wi, inoluting myself. Generally,
ial 8

ot te Intelligence pal
fete. af Command (KCMANDOVANIYE), tie Central Committee ent the Presidium
SEE W hour >of he a gtart of @ Yre

: BOOUG A ROE Fare OF AA ft
slistipe ‘Pata os tg desie mission ~~ to warn of the beginning of 5
j ; war, wren “e Yew mimotes beforchent. For this purpose trenendiows
Intlsf ewer resources are being developed. This contimes to stress the importance of the \.
es point I was making when I told you the meaning of Radio Intelligences. Tt is
esrried on tere, in the U.8., enti everywhere. This is their bread, beemwe the
ACRNTURA tu sparse «- there are not anny valueble agents. Of eourss, there ore
nome here (in Radic Intelligenta)) however, it's very conerete ~~ sttually
whatever ig ploked up cen be recoried Just as it is. For this reason methods
herve been developed so thet with the help of these stations, duplieste radio
intercept stations, the rest of the radio rtations which are normal-working,
eeble transmitting atetions. Siganls enn be gent to RPs, xince they are
cloner -- the RAZVED-PUMNTY ere olso equipped with refio. There is gach on
alam el already worked cut --~ os soon as thie sign) is received,
Ruvelop #1 (SONVEERT HOMER ODIN) in epened. There ts one at the AP for the

2)

22 operating unter some kind of cover bub not unter the APPARAT of the
Military Attache, ‘Tixis last I strese and titlerline again. All these ©
things ean be consideret ag supporting mul developmental data..

mga BS: Yow, thirdly, I went to umlerteke -~ since I consider tt very
mt for you to know -~ all the mrthode weed to
(Officer in hic work. I will collect all their 1

12

a te re

#7
on Operations. Tnmtical matters, beemue there ere trp Stems persis gri

All
for you «alse, Yow, Tohnien). Intelligence «= with whieh I em eomected

how to grow vegetebles not in the grmmd; but in arhificial soll Like sant
ext chenlonia, [t's ame sort of discovery, The requirement is to determine
vhat the components ace, Tent see, even these aseteneenta ove

Inbelligense » oni we think thet wi aun divorce Politics for Intelligeees!
Row cen we do thie? We ean't!

Be Tk, mal I repeat thin beceow: thie question may come vp again,
why Z oll thee copies of the 150 requirenants gent to all the other
aepitaligtie ecuntriew! Reeanes there is emch of the Britich eet Anertean
peo) ae re cen oe ee ee Tf you can't get inte the U.S.
aml you con't get inte eee ee
thet's alli ‘thet fe the fourth point.

if GQ. he fifth -- an I seid on the whole ami generelly speaking «<
4s

i" Sr it Loe Ores, ne he oe comb
deette or toes ~ #9 ¥ een worn (you). #: Ae fer os counter-mesures
econ eal the

Access . @ G1: T would like to add something ~ this in aside from the ACEITURA
OTamndiy a Aexnteny, Ware you reeeived training on rockets, ‘Thet’s 211 well
Giacaccnig find good, tit when you heve your ECMANDIRGKIYE UN (Militery Command tredning)

13

Pe

DIVA) w~ the Mechanived Rifle Diviaton. 4
&

the exny is being developed aml trained. 8: The exny is being prepared.
G: Now, I dant know whether you ave eenre of this or mt - I hol heard
that you exe doteg awey completely with the Corps structure within the
exmy. 8: KOXPUENAYA SISTEMA? se wight. The Divialons ore

directly under Armies. 5: That ox they wll be
of the Reserve = RVK. (CHO wuntts) Hovever, rome oomy corps still extiat}!
they are doing mmey with it but mony heve been alrenty « : ae

That ia correct.

38. G: Secomily, the Rifle Division so longer existe os goths it ie now
called the Metorizet Dixiston. 6: You ara already behinds 36 is onlled
Hechenteed "= not Hoterized. It ie enlied HOD STRELXOVAYA

ant there Is not a 2
distance on foot. are ov... mto-battalion, vaich is
employed per noverwart ples. ‘They load then on trosks, ent owe enbo-bebtalion F
follows snother, «te,

%, as I gave you alvesty, there
which fires atunic shells.
about rockets; that is, the

Sime to tabter of Regulations, this
this the Munber 1 wlaston, bet it is high on the pricrity List
of things which are of interest to us, expecially, since all this is evelleble
to you, Sr Absolutely. ‘Tile fe how I hare alresily written thie. Bere,

VY

#7 -
I'LL show you thin place egein « lectures on Intelligence, on Operstionsl-
Snotiesl metterd, ete. G1 You've written £4 dow G: Tea. < woes writing j
this da my roan = cperational~teetieal matters «« just ss you sata. \
a (lirting a gles) Well, heve's to your health! it Ghank you: TI
quite of eeth

Will wot tink of you, even for e mosh ~ not only vhen you receive the meteriol
from mt, but enytine. tf: Of course, certainly.

Ge x hi, G2 Here's wheb I've propered. G1 Thet's quite a list! i: Yes, |
Gusti it'n quite a Mat, beb I think....e eam bring out all these other subjects
later on, emi refine it. Gt yy BL this is fim os p besiss we

|

ing | apecific. Gr T wore’ to ask you vhet you might vert to aid something more to
. thews. Ci We'll aid sons more. Br Ox, porkops you'll say, "(subject's trus
none), this Teehnfent Intelligence wren though I have it towa an point  ~
let £t obey thet eny' Hut the lestures on Querational-Thetien] matters, you
hed better pub over here”.
©. Gi We will to fast thet, Wew, here le 2 suell question. Wet is ;
the eotusl period when you were at te Rocket Acateny. fe Hilitery Fagineering
Acadamy, Hane of Doxr ive ere celled YAK -- VYSSHIYE |

pppeteeiesios eames

y the Military Ariiiiery
ay, iis of DARCRERSKTY. the courses were given by order of

story

Selenes Tsusryoo). ALL this wes canceled for m. beemne I had two
| diplenes. I only stutied the technics! eyulpnent course, rocket firing. There
waa no politionl work for me, ebrolately, Bxt the vest, they hed the full
eyele. Gr So you sebunlly geadtemted in darnmry? ie Bo, I aryl
vecelved ihe diploma «= the sertifiexte (SVIuRwEL'aTv0) ~--or 3 Apel

eve of 1 Hay. I have 9 copy of om attestation (AMBESTATSIYA) for this period
inatenting with whet rok I entered, how ny stulies wert, eraiustion and
essesement. iL have a copys IF will sent {t to you.

1s

ye Ty mre ee

bra dé,
Chan throut

Canara fe.
——

F?

43. Gr So, all the time that you were in Reserves, you were still going
to mchool? 6: I attended a bit, tut I was relieved of all the Liberal
Artes (GUMANTTARNYKS KAUK) ent was only the equiruent enf rocket
conerately, my stufiles ars froma 1 Geptexber 1955 through 30
1 1959. 01 That's better. This is wiat was confusing me, now 1t's

reserves at the Acedeny and getting ready for India ~ everything at once,
St I told you ebout the Reserves. XI vas still studying anid working, but .1t

Beginning with June, I was sitting for 6 months ~~ up to the New Year.
I came in 1958, studied until 1959 end at the end of 1959 I mreeted the
New Year. On the Sth of Jenunry (1960) I was called in te SHUMDXIY - 2 months
in Reserves -- then on the 29th of Februmry I became chief officer for those
three countries which I heve mentioned ~~ until June. Then the exenining
committee (MARNATNYA KUMISSIYA) began screening candidates. This brings us
into 1960.

® f: I was thrown out as the Chief of the sourse (MACHAL'NIK KURGA) ~~
speek

to + Ani 15 November 1940, I waa in the Committee. Didn't 1

' roughly
_ tell you before? I started (sehool) there in 1958, and I wee going to echool

April 19 I went 2. » oni was

_through 30 Aprt every |
_ Politieal Offieer (STARSHINA PARTORGARA). G: We had figured out that all

this was e yeer later. 8: No, no, no. I was sitting on the aren desk ant
tcok part in the examining committee. 1 may have aceldently mentioned one
yeor instead of the other. I beg your pardon. Gt Now {¢ ts clesr.

hS. 8: I repost agein ~« 1 Septenber 1958, the orfer wan already issued
sbout my enrollment in the course ani school started in September. Aa fer
as dates go, I exved myself 2-2) months. Oh! ~- another thing -- they
also gove a little preperation in languages. That language which (the
stwient) had studied before -- but very little, perhaps once a week for
an hour, sometimes two, but this very seldom. I was relieved froa this
elso even though I don't kuow English very well, int it is at least 100 times
vettexr than the rest who were going to sehool there.

my

ds) G: Shall we finish your notes now? 8: We'll fintsh right away. I

e by LY AGEHTUR rr shit , io = of mot « under
no circumstances, OS: There is seme good material there thet eould be used,
but better you don't. @: Of couree.

16

¥T

h7/ 8: Now (reading notes), in regerd to the photographing - to leave

it or ° pillar Mi ay reveling they
quiet: 1s. On cutabivte of tek tom where e-ae—

the right of the highway. Then further on there are airports. I've read

one of then is for the efvyilisn Air Poree of Great Britain. Then there is
ona «~~ { don't aay it is, but I understand that it is for Ameriean Fighters.
I don't nay I know. Yhen there is one more airport, all on the right side

1¢ coming fron there.

hs.) 9: fov, yesterdny morning I stopped in one of their (delegates)
roons => no, it wes dey before yestertey at Leeds! His wintows locked out
on the rallroni -- the train station at leeds. There is nothing there but
roofs, but you ¢en see the tracks and observe the feet that it is a Railway
Station, a terminal. Thet's about all. Sea I asked mysilf -- shall I leave
then or mot? ‘They leave their ceneras in theiy rooms -- perhaps I should

h9. 9: We'll tele ehowt this scse more. ‘There are still scee questions
ask in regeml to ny Intelligence Assignment. Do you think you can
help me? 6: Yes, yes. @: A little bit ~ an@ also we have to decide about the
mon ...0am work out a legemt ~~ where I met him. I cen introduce hin anit
lexve him - the devil take hin. It doesn't matter to me whet goes on after the
introduction, that's all. thet eomerns mm. Now here is whet I request.
Tomorrow I meet with the RECIDEW?, in Lomion. I have to report to him the
remults of the trip, whet I saw, ete., whether there were eny prevocstions,
offers, ate, I wanted to confer with you on this matter. My task is to pess
ayy information of the st interest, whieh I may obtain through
ecquaintances, or gee myself, or steal, or stick in my poeket or ny brief-case.
This must be sent through the REZIDENY, addressed to the name of ny Colonel,
the Chief of the Seetion, ROWOV. 4G: rv Colonel? 6: Tes, the Colonel. ALL
this will go on to AFARASIEV. G: De yeu heve the name earl potronynie of the
Colonel? One een go crazy with all the ROGOYS. You've got twe of then.
8: Vesiliy Mekeimovich. 61: This is Vasiity Makeimorich. 5: ‘66, the envelop
must be addressed as follows ~~ this would go via diplomatic mail - ROcOY,
V.M. -~ you see, I wrote it down ROGOVEATY, This I must give to the REZIDEW?.
If f heve nothing for hin, then I have not fulfilled my Informational
Assignment. So, I eck you to give me a Little something which will not be

1f

FT
detrimental to aur enuee. G: You will

3
F
5
:
,
g
F

Ry thet tine we will reeetve some metertels. You will look st bia ent
you will be able to sey to hin with confidence that you heve obtained such and
such inforsstion on ~ aml rerlly know about it - ond not be spesking about

"? confirm that both FERRANTI ext FUISSY visite ore avaiiedle". Ts ia not
necessary (to gee) beth of then -- either one or the other, amd show them just a
little bit -- (in English) a few. Don't make « big deal out of it. Don't make

aay. They all know him and are afreté of him. Se 1
to scawone again, they will say st once, “Mere fa the plant again". lat
work in the postition of a thirt man -- but they know hin. Bais Le what I
wented to tell you. :

i

18

51. 8: I vwonter way there wos a confusion over the dates. I thought I
gave £¢ right but you hed it a year later. 6; I suspected as much; thie was
juet for the purpose of matting 1t more exeatly. 8: I think thet you heve put
everything down correctly. YY told you everything as it wes. The courses ere
PERBREOINYYS from year to year. They always start on the let of Septesber --
the basic ani the supplementary ome as well. ‘The courses sow held unier a
directive of the General Steff, the announcement regarding them is mete the
hee spimvasvccliare Loypisetiong Adaya hie epi pag X etuck my nose in there
too, beesuse I had heard thet the situntion wae such thab thie wuld be helpful
tom. I alrenty het small plans for the future -- more comerete, bat amali --
and £ went to echool 4h months in 1958, ant up to May 1959.

52. Gt Tint in clear now. There iv a weal) question. As you see, we don't
‘have too much work right row. ol escinaapa opener erect teh ard
Pix Sta we have sont moxe photographs ..-you probebly recognize these. (Subject
ae lodciug et photogranis:) Br Tes, By Yes, Xvi ane on 86, thin fe nob en Ped Soave -
P a is the MANEZH; thie is the Kremlin: this is the University; this is the
V75 MANEZH, This right here ies the V-75, and this ie the seme thing. There were i
r 5 or 6 rows of these -- and b columns to a row. Wo, this is the Bol'shoy Theatre «. *
4 RO, mH, Lee's the MAIZE. G: dines we ere on the seventy fives, there are more
phy here. ‘There will be some move Like this, I'm sure. Con thee be
net adapted © use when necessary? &: Ho, these are only for Anti«Alreraft
hack. «fm use. Why wee atomte weapons ageinst adrereft? This I heve never heart of ani
heave ons

igs 53. 8: (looking at secout ) Here is the second stags. prot

AS, seve i wn ty foek ant Fare 19 the AbaalE ~— bec 18 es alios ee eee
. ‘OG: Tank's olaer. How, how is it guifed after the control

os, eaten Li eal cers 8: Piret, 1% goes up the armed. I acre 2 for

Aufpofin a lethal redius of destruction of the terget. Gr At whet distance is this - is -
 . | thie eoxtrolled by a ratio inpulee or what? S: ‘The distance is the

peice cn ecee eecnmerennenns

| Reo

Vleale
why

—

[ened

La35 J

ineltent with powers

[uJ |

A

forces ub thie then there are oly eestticin tines Cee

56. 8: Yor exauple when I was duty officer anf on the ist of May 1960, this
took aren,

57. 81 Insofar as the PYO of the lent 4a eonseract, cash

commander places
vhahever rocket uxtte are given fo hin in the best Setennive post:
the vital + ‘econ to the fullest degree enti. mere
Suen Site sa cus Wanciiee eee oo Mecca at eee ce
t thing se ome , a of d c i
soe WGA Le Una Bae ee ae ee ere OE Setnaive fren

r

#7

ae by rocket emnying fighter planes of the type T told yon shout Since the MIts
ph tne fixe four to five kilometers above themselves with these rockets, you my
; consider that they can defend up to en altitute of 25 kiloawters.

WIS 59. G: Stil on this roeket - bere in a theoreticsl quéstion. Suppose
: Plones ere attacked from different directions. How dees the ucemender of the
te, gob battalion dncide which target ¢o engage? 8: That is « 4iffMeult question.
Todey the PYO expects attacks sgeinet major objectives such e8 Koscow and
Gehafrk Leningrad to come from what we onl) "star formations” or plenes attacking from
severnl directions #t one time. To defend against this, rocket fires are .

because we do nob have thet extent of

60. ee ear ac eee
bie a edit ga Matis be special radar vortrol wuntte specifieally designed to service
ie the Y-75 battalion, You did net give any detalia on the specific radar wdt.
bes St In the orgmnisation of She of the Loot there ere all kinds of early
Sy verning end reiex stations which are Integrated with each other anf are used to

Gey help for tha rocket battalion. ALL I eve you in my degertption was the specific
WS | elegtr fe controls ek euite tnftspunsble to eid eat fize the Tooke. To hnve
C this comp! ted with the PYO xedteor evates 18 Viet Se eee
fvo weeking on. Thia is one of our grectect deficiencies, partt where

pertioulerly
eleatronies axe concerned. That is why such greet emphesia now is being placed
on the deve lopment of electronics.

eee 61. 93 In afaition to this there is another great defietemy -~ thet te
Sheed § detiet of persommeal. X mentioned that ve heve aided the 5th of
prfontsl elsctroaten $O Ene Fo cr Forkst sendemy end wren thoogh 2,500 students

— | aenleny, we soy thet 1¢ will still teke two to three years in orter to have
ea pin ties el abrir meds, ete, 60 I egy KIUGENEY meets ob leash two

< : , ; ae
: * : : :

the relax el that’s <e were atven only the of tite tn

techeit en!
egipasnt agperh of tt + In tte possibilities ani construction. I still think
thet in theese courses, there were more professional tethnictans ~
and of course there were somt line offieers. This is

top pert con be teben off, and there are seme aseerbled without this cover. a: I
bist nen, thin little basket. 61: Tt fon't a basket really. t's on thie rotating avivel
(VERTLIOG) end 24 wetunlly holds this reemet. I think during the first parade
APo.| wo of these were shows . let's ee, two, four, ais of then.

- Gh. 8: Thts te nob the R-2. G1 Hob the R-27 8: Not the R-2. We a4a .
nob atody thie reeket cperationslly (ARTTyNc). Wait a bt ~ ne « this was a rj

Hn. very poo photograph. This in not a guided rocket; thie is a free sooket, dry '
ele. ae pte That's cw This ee ae

Lenn oe Se the 3R- 4 dean's a gut rodket. Tits, ‘the wey, tJ base "

EF set-up wileh t wee deeoribing to » the leunching ineballetion (PUGXOVAYA

G: f761 St That's right, %76,

H ote te ee Ce ee et 8s Ss 28
ar ob 1. Tie ia why thay ave consd: #0 Smeniésle. turrets axe
hilg | “remaveds the frame ts made over to noke a lemehing ramp, Yes, thts te en
oun tenk, They art eonsldered to te dn the middle entegory in regert
.,,,2}| $0 thely traceability (pRoKHODINOST), ete, ‘Thies is a free reeket. I eoulin't
(ovis | make dt out at iret; couldn't ean the head because the ghadow of the jacket was
v4e | dn the way. There are no more of thee. Let mt tell you scemething - they put

obs, | on this cov a9 @ wed herring CEEM' MA PLETEN’ NAVESTI) so |
thet unler thees covers (025 ont be able to see the leestions
end types of oma, wntons mv all the other eqripsent. They dan't

have tiie one any moe ani we did mot ebuly thie aesesbly.

-- Stnaneneeen ee atill memmememmennene erent

xtt :
~ the ssupiibtous tenk (PLAVAUYEHORTY Tam).

£7 4
is 62. G1 There ian't much deseription of the (FELENDATOR) Retest, viich
: services and belongs to these, be V-75. It anys % Is comected to
« Br Yes}.
|

22

eee Ce eee ee eee

c
|

a7

oS 66. G: (Looking at _phote $3) Hore ~ these two things « this is the R-2.
t G: This ie the euided rocket? 8: Yea, yos. This ie the carrier which transports
old tt from the storege station to the assembly point when 1% is slresdy on the
: technical postition. Zhe earriers heve « mpecial Lifting mechanian, emi by this
Ro | the rocket 4s Litted to the leumeking pad. Now to go further, it te attached
iL in two places ~~ Z wrote shout it - there ore bronze bushings ) wien
hold the quying ropes wirtil the meeent of releasa when the rocket is given free
flight (SYORODNYY EuoD). ‘This eteft xhows here 4s, exeuse the
concerm’d. Their

ii aang ee This is the olf B-2.

hoa 67. Gs (tecking further at ptetoe) Bere was the Anertenn tebesey - then
pelibe Se ee These over oot a2 Pree yoekets awit herve is tis

eet | 1~Airoratt PONTEKA). Hex were the femoue ( in racks).
(27- Xt desertbed them before -- free it~» te rows of then. thot Kini of

2 al poree is this? esis lratlper lve Ma ehg Tris we heve | ~ here

olde (KAT usHi)
RI a 6&8. 9: Whst's R-1t rn posording ee fasion) BOP this whonthten 4 be ifke

69. 4: (i English) x i/o. go on hte tag, of Sinem quntone
yb oun other ons st. Gy Yea, you mtioned thet there are
: ctheys.. 3: Nob 2, 3, ~ I vweote in one wrte... G: Ie there en

RO? Hs BO, T and 57 Gr the ‘da tere, 8S: I emphesived the and
Re because thay are identienl in construction m4 all ere lerge 4a alas (2LINA)
7 emi in renege. Bub the RT and RO rockets are not et in oorial » .
Y

ere being suede bet not on a ayoteom, tut but of course machine ; it
We mt teehnieal equimment ean be mete Tn areet quucities ¥ithous e comeyer = tot :
masa . All the rockets ore identies! onl have big renge...T mentioned
thes they exist bot we aia not atuiy them. But with the 25, YX sew it
and opened the cover (CHAKHOL) east looked tnto the exvities. tt is formifeble.
OG: But 14 te not in serial production. 8: Be. G: How about the Reliy 9; X
only referred to tho R-lA tut 14 ts notin serial production, ‘They mentioned 1b,

| (pe) Tie Pange 1s greater han 1000 - the B-ih. \

| Rasen: 23 2
|

|

RRECFION |

aN

70. (G explains in English) Well, now what are they working
ns what are the difficulties? One can enlarge & rocket our of
proportion (RAKETU RAZDUT! NE PO MERKE), as chev say -- In length
- and in width -- but then it !s necessary to tie In PRIVYAZAT') and
to develop the corresponding electronic apparatus so that this
(ex4 rocket, can be brought through the active phase with the necessary
Oo iea speedtai rection. Recaiculations begin and these lead to the founda-
E eebicnats tion of new electronic techni ques. This fs where the blockage «eve
It fs necessary to assemble the casing (NAKLEPAT! KO7HUKH); to
arrange all the spaces with all these feeding devices, turbo connec~
tions and so on. S$ {es no difficulty. The technical recalculatio
to make a larger combustion chamber is no problem -- the development
of combustion chambers has progressed well, the deficiency !s that
pee the metal does not yet meet our requirements, They are working on
high- eats resistant steels. They have developed some that do not

correspond sufficiently to the demands made of them. G: And the
even numbers which are not completed -- what were these? Experi-
mental? The R-6& or the R-687 S: Yes, experimental. They receive

these numbers. They all existed. They go In order. They work -~
perhaps there is some modification or addition and perhaps there |
will be an R-8 or R-10. If there !s an R-1h, there is an R-13. }
| Ht There Ys already? S$: But they have not mentioned the R-13 to

} Me, therefore, I did not mention It because 1 did not hear cf ft by /

| ~- ear, not once, and 1 did not see it. ta

- Gi) G: When KHRUSHCHEV said that there are already rockets

with a range of 2 to 4,000 kilometers and that they are even produc-
ing larger ones witha collosal range, was he right or not? Or have
there been experiments In which they were fired accurately at a
target? St In such large questions of strategic rockets and
attacks. with strategic weapons, he lies and puts out what he wants
as if It were true, belfeve me. You can check this as you like
through other channels and you will hear the same. There are rockets
like those which launched the Sputnik; there are intercontinental
rockets with which one can fire from one continent to the other --
warhead and Its carrier. On_accuracy, he lies like a gray stallion.
Ace I swear to you that these were the ost ‘exact data which I “could”

U7 collect on the vertical, the later deviating over-a trajectory and

on the deviations of accuracy (RASSEIVANIYE) of free rockets. And

the position is very difficult because electronic technique is
unreliable -- sometimes they do have successful experiments, but [t
{s still not firm enough for adoption_on a massive scale. He can
fire a rocket at South America -+ but to say it will fall on Cuba

in Support of our forces who are supporting Castro -- he lies like)
a gray stallion. ©
Seas ht :

2b

#7

72. J: Excuse mey how do you know this? Is this your

25> opinion? (In English) S: No, it {8 the opinion of rshal
VARENTSOV ~- opinion {s nok efiough Cin English). You know you
“are putting questions of an engineering nature to me. Even when I

Va
ie was on the course, I did not thoroughly understand because I have
st ond Basts for this, and Tdld tr . I bBilndly accepted what was

written down, what 1 heard, what was_in my notebook, what was in the
summary, what was In the manuals (NASTAVLENIYE). There were five
manuals covering the whole course POTOK)<(SYLLABUS) and » as pe

pate leader, took one whenever I needed {t. The data were absolutely Pe

‘5 accurate for “tha me, <ihere are now working to decrease the . (Cc?

comprar -lateral deviation and range deviation to attain greater accuracy.

oes But I never did hear that there had been an progress made,

OG

VARENTSOV says, "There 18 not a damned thing, only talk." New
models are made, tests are being run. In somé particular aspects
there are successes andtelsewhere there are complete failures. But
tests are going on everywhere; new parts are being designed, bullt,
and_ tested. Cadres are being trained quickly and in large numbers, |
but there is stilfa@ mass of shortcomings. And when Mr. Efsenhower
and Mr. Nixon «+ especlally Mr. Nixon -- said that, "We know that
you have been unsuccessful in developing this and that", s;.of course
they were absolutely correct -- and {t would have been funny !f he
~~ had been asked, "How did NEDELIN die?".

@) St One small incidental point «- say you had gotton
togethef and sald, "Look, you (KHRUSHCHEV) seriously want to come to
terms with us about coexistance, disarmament, etc., but how can you
be believed, when in your own name and in that of the Central
Committee of the Praesidiun, you falsely stated to us and to the
world about how NEDELIN died. What difference does it make how he
‘died? It is a Pity that headed, let us say fn general, but how

can we belfeve you when you lie about such a great man?". What
would he say to you fn reply? You could really expose him by con-
fronting him with this fact. Gr He would probably beat on the table
with his:shoe,

B 7h. J: Ask him about the 3 at the beginning of the series.
ZR Gt: What Is the significance of the number which Begins the series?
; Si Free rockets have the index 3, as the index 8 -ts-used“for #11
oe guided rockets about which I mentioned earlter. Even the heater,
“| where the hot alr fs pocketed, begins with the number 8, since it fs
rings used for guided rGchets: Thus it begins with an 8. But for free
Be rockets this index {fs 3.

= 75. G: And your V-757 S: No, the V-75 has several varia-
hus tions, as I wrote. They also use 750, Why do they do this, while
vi f others in the Garrisons of the OKRUG say V-752  BIRYUZOV and his

25

V6

gute 8

Ri
Cowl he

Syue wl

#7

staff say 75. But for study purposes they say 750. How did these
contradictions arise? V-750 came originally from the DZERZHINSRIY
Academy; the director there is ODINTSEV. They could tell your
relative in the academy, "refer to this as V<75". I'm Just giving
you this as an example. Whenever camouflage designations are used,
I'll ee you both since I know what they are. G: Has it heen tn
serial production for long? S$: I estimate like this «- as I
understood all the Instructors -- that this rocket was already
(developed) in 1956 -- the V-75. G1 Probably there were improve-
ments? Sr Stril again, I will repeat my thoughts, though I am
not your professor. Every year they perfeet it and they will
continue to perfect It. But there will not be any significant
changes from the basic model whichtthey have. G: This answers the
question, .

76. S: Now I will ask you «= on engineering subjects -- do
not put big questions to me. I1 said this from the very beginning.
To present the material tn the form I did was my idea -- I thought -

- it best. “ wanted to put everything about a rocket on one page --

length, construction -- all details, but I thought this must be
known. I thought perhaps ee would give "my" scientists ~~
yours 1 mean, erican and English -- a heiping hand. Perhaps they
think that the Russfans are care this Incorrectly, or perhaps it
is progress, For that reason I did it altogether and possibly I
made a mix-up. This {8 a proper question you asked, to the point ..
that the data on the pole golcance syotm ts very pennret- i have
not had them yet, perhaps I shail be abie to get’ them In detali.
Well, there Is not much new. J: When he copied these documents,
was it a complete copy or did he extract what he considered
significant? S: J will tell you. The information on the R11]
rocket, I copied completely, but some of the sections on the other
rockets I copied fully and others I copied as tt seemed to ma "the
main \dea™ (in English). 1 wrote so much that I got a corn as big
as this, on my finger .... then I copied !t out. J had the Idea

of typings but I would still be typing. And then I wrote It out
twice, since you would never have deciphered my abbreviations.

iv/ S$: When SHUMSKIY summoned me about the unpleasantness
about my father, about which I had worrled eo much -- then I was
quite gladsessee 1 was quite glad when they put me fn an ops section
because {t showed that they trusted me. They gave me agent contacts
pects onan code, a seal, the red book <« everything. Well, during
this period 1 deciphered all the material and copfed It out. I
already had a feeling of mistrust towards them, my intultion which
has not deceived me. Sometime after November I went to the selec-
tion commission for the MDA course and after that in 1960 1 went to
the GNTK, and I tried to give you this material as quickly as

26 | a

a
Lalite

faw
er

V6
Hadtiyn
Th?

elnad|

as
#7

possible, It had been with me for eight months -- I am thinking

of 12 August when I had my first encoy te ith fore! gners, lready
two mont Seen

hs before thfs everything was typed and ready.

73. St Once again I tel! you that there {s nothing additional

that is particularly new on these rockets, Everything additional,
as it becomes known t

a tmnt teen

se ome, I Will get to you In detatl. That is what
1 Wanted to say to you on thls subject. Sa

7h. Gt How quickly can the V-75 be combat ready? $: Al}
rockets are normally kept “dry’, as It {8 called <= you know the
expression -- a "dry rocket". The fueling equipment and machines,
booster, of course, the charges (SHASHKI) or "KONFERTY" (candies) as
they are called .... There sre small KONFERTY and large ones for
the R rockets. These are all stored tn hermetically-stored containers
I wrote down the sizes of the wooden crates fort the rockets, and for
dry fuel. There are large metal ones, air-tight. The fueling equip-
ment {8 not badly worked out. Under pressure, the fuel fs loaded
quickly {nto the rocket compartments «- how many seconds {t takes, 1
do not want to guess. All this already exists. The V-75 interests
you, doesn't It =~- just for preparation to fire? |

75. Gt How quickly can a second one be sent up after the first
half has been fired? 8: A rocket which fs already charged and on
its launching position .... AS soon as the command #1 "prepare to
fire” ts given, the crew begins to prepare the second rocket, They
bring up the necessary equipment and begin. The rocket fs brought wp
on its carrier to the launching pad. The sequence of command {s like
this. As scon as the commander has given the alarm, already from a
distance of 3-00 kilometers, the radars transmit from one distance
(GLUBINA) to another point closer to the rosition showing that the
hostile target is approaching, The command js “IDET TSEL”. They are

| already starting to prepare rockets. I wrote all about this prepara~

tion,

7&6. Gt And do you think China ts getting rockets? S$: They
are giving rockets to China. G: Already? Which type? S: They
Sre_in production, They are
ever cket ulded rockets. Mac Tse Tung had
very outspoken tatks about progress on this subject in Peking. He
wanted us to follow his road. That's what It came to. That is what

77. Gt Do rocket forces have special Insignia? S: None at

all. Only the artillery uniform With black (Ins gnia) PETLITSY,

cannons on the PETLITSY; If an overcoat is worn, the national
emblem, stars, black Piping on the cap. No special ins! nia. They
have taken away the symbol which the-ant{-tan roops had, a cross.

27

#7

There was no need for it. One can still tell parachute troops.
They have a parachute designation and a metal tag to show how many
Jumps a man has made -=- ten, twelve, one, three, a hundred.ees

heal 78. Gt: Do rocket men not_wear special insignia even in |
Moscow? St Of course not. I saw a photograph of a man who has
fe been made a Hero of Soviet Labor four times -- a rocket constructor.
po. | os and there have been many people who have been a Hero of Soviet
oe Labor three times in radio or electronic equipment. They give them
pt money and so forth secretly, but this is not published In the news-
‘A papers. Awards are constantly being given in secret and-now
KHRUSHCHEV says «eee. Under Stalin, awards were given to excess.
No, there is eo-Gistingulshing Insignia -- in order to camouflage
them and not to distinguish them differently tn the Army. You could
photograph the rocket people quite easily -~ those who live In the
dormitory bulldings, Count them up and note into which entrance of
ours they go. The others live on the Academy premises. But there Is
no special uniform.

f 79. Gt The soldiers ~< the signal troops, the engineers, etc.,
wth ~~ do they use thelr own service Insf{gnia? S: They are considered
pos? auxiltary troops -- the signals, chenical engingering troops gre

bes presently considered important branches of thelr respective services,
= G: Have they taken away their inaignia? (2ZNACHKI). S: They have
o™ | . left them their emblems (EMBLEMI)3; there is no change. There is
unit nothing new about the uniforms as regards the insignia. There {s one

: sort of uniform which has been developed for officers -- and {s now
being issued -- a Jacket, with a split in the back. Both the parade
and the dally uniforms are khaki, The parade uniform is worn with
gold shoulderboards, and cap with gold braid andeall that Junk, and
the rest Is khaki. I know uniforms “exactly”.

G: And the RB-l7?7 How did you hear about that? Who was
the source? St 1 heard exactly that our patrel forces and our
radar detachments, which were in that sector, detected an aircraft
and located it, and put up cur aircraft, one of which came close to
it, and shot !t down over neutral waters. We know this very well.
But we could not admit to KHRUSHCHEV, "I am sorry. Excuse me, I am
to blame -- estroye a @ wrong place,..He hadn!t crossed
the frontier, but I bagged him’. -= SVCLOCH. I was*told this by
Sergey SERGEYEVICH and by Viadimir FEDCROV who has now been in
Germany for two years.

Peg :

Pa these same rocket forces? St Yes, of course.

28

#7

because (Subject's own name) told us ~- two brigades equipped to
: : ? Force a German to
locate them for you. There are storage areas under ground. 1 was

not been yet done

83. Gr You also told us that there were earlier cases in
which people lfke NEDELIN «ses. Was this known definitely? Ss:

juaht Definitely. Mr. NIXON could have spat in KHRUSHCHEV's face when h
ipa Ht) asked whether there had been cases of unsuccessful launchings and
ao ee KHRUSHCHEV said, "No, there were none. You are a clever chap, you
have figured everything out". There are disastrous cases to'this
oe day. I give you my word of honor. At first they didn't send up a
nV ce man but living matter, plants, biological specimens,etc. Then they

sent up # robot which began to work In 10-15 minutes, with the help
of signal impulses sent from the earth and which was the model of a
man -- an automatic man. There are many volunteers who are keen to

ae 8h. S: Do you know about the sputnik which was lost? well
helt you know that they Isunched it at cosmic speed -- you understand
“ cosmic speed; there Is no need to talk ebout 1t7 It fs generally
apr Known. Well, it was launched and then they lost control of {t.
pre G: Did VARENTSOV tell you that? S: No, they say this quite
openly In general discussion and 1 repeat thiseas rumors strung
an together. Everyone knows about them -» FEDOROV, BUZIN, VARENTSOV,

See Hoe

several other generals, I will give you a list if you Likessseess

85. Gt: Are the Moscow defenses arourid the town all completed?
Pro ~~ the anti-aircraft guns, the rockets, etc.? S- 1 will tell you.
We, the General Staff, believe that you see Moscow as target #1 on
deflinee a list of 5 targets tn order of significance -- Moscow, Leningrad,
beet and all the of] districts like Baku, which i# a special zone. The
a PV has a center there. I mention this to you so you will know in
general of the number of such defenses. These are excellently
defended. There is emphasis on'the Urals, where heavy Industry Is

29 =!

V> Cur Gy-—

becditur
Vevers el

Gav

Gibansy

- that you heard of? (G translates). S: I know of five such fillghts

married with two grown-up sons. POZOVNIY went to work In the PVO~

#7

y

defended. There are defenses in front of the Urals and behind the |
Urals. Y-75s have been sent there because your alrecraft have often
bean detected there. 1 give you my word of honor that when your
first T1ilght came over in the direction of Kiev-Kharkov -- there

was one flight there that we knew about, where the Soviet air space
was violated but there was nothing to shoot with. Now that the new
rockets have appeared, KHRUSHCHEV has given the order to fire. “So
they shot at PCWERS on the ist of May. There were (defenses) before
but not in quantity and they were not able to go into action as
quickly as they can now. They existed, but not In the right direc-
tioneseecee BIRYUZCV was reprimanded because he had not correctly
estimated the probable direction of the flights from the potnt-of-
view of importance of the targets. That fs to say -- they would have
fired when this aircraft from Turkey flew over Kiev, but there was
nothing to°fire with -- the aircraft escaped. POWERS would have

oereree if he had flown 1 or i$ kilometers toithe right of his flight
pat ry ; on

86. J: To your knowledge, how many such U-2 fl! chts were there

~~ I know exactly because I wat told by someone who would not mislead
me. J would work with him "In the dark” (unwittingly). He fs *
Major General Andrey Romanovich PCZCVNIY, head of the Political
Directorate of BIRYUZOV's PVO, the former deputy to VARENTSOV Jn the
Political Section on the Ist tkrainian Front. VARENTSOV had him
promoted to Major General, ae

87. St Immediately after the war, VARENTSOV began on a series
of jobs which I will try to explain, He Gommanded (the Artillery)

——_______)

of the Central Group of Forces, the artillery in Lvov in the
Transcarpathian Military District, then the Artillery in the Trans-
caucasian Military District, Tbilis!, and then, when YAKOVLEV was
Jailed, and the late NEDELIN +-- who was the commander of the
artillery after VORONQY <~ called him from Tbilisi and put him In
charge of GAU, while ZHDANOV was a Colonel General. VARENTSOV
immediately modified the gun which needed a cooling device, for
which YAKOVLEV, a Colonel General, was jalled. PCZOVNIY lost touch
with VARENTSOV at that time -+ they respect each others go to each
other's homes.

—

¢
Se cee a

88. $: POZCVNIY Iives near SOKOL. He has a flat and is

with Marshal BIRYUZOV ~- In political work. Then he quarreled with
BIRYUZCV and it !@ interesting hew a big chief can bite a lesser

. one, BIRYUZOV Is a Hero of the Soviet Unfon. In Lyubertay, we have

a sort of engineering base, in the hands of BIRYUZOV. He ordered
them to make him ten duplicate Hero of the Soviet Union medals, The

\

30

#7

Original is in gold with a mnber but these were etenped out of brass in
the sam desion ant dimensions, He planed to war then
in order to protect the ren). gold one. Theat is what he
cee to Lyubertay to inapect the garri
Is this some sort of Mint? The Mint ia in the Krenlin ext in Loatugrad. What
are you dotnet” Shey sait it was fer Merghal BINVZOT. POACTINIY vent too far,
He reacted in such a wry that they sald, "Youare making yourself look foolish,
De pore subordinate will wear theses stars? Or will pase himaelr
off sa ® Baro} will get some sort of vewardt” This is tot allowed -- forgery

| either of the national ewhlem or of medals ant

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

th
BIRTWZAOV ani was kieked out to be Deputy to the Commander of the PVD sore in

f
i
a

|¥ ave Working on thes but I do net know anything eonerste about any modcls, che

One which was developed frou the subemrine rockets, the P-5, hes been istued to
, the len forces alreaty. . ;

ten ntereept: tan missile on its trajectory. Lg
this trajectory from the mest of ite Leaching to determine ite ¢ 2 and to
i bring = saver’ st a cortain point, an Bee 8 With TS fetid aircraft.
t There 8 nothing services? 3 Hothing. here 8 seme ne on Peper
ZL wut they ore vorking on £t. = eee ee

. Gt What about enttmiestle migetlen? 5: They ere working on then
| too. This is the type whtoh it ti

91, Bs Now something ele they are working on -- once again I draw
your ettention to it. Ih is the development of a fuel of She higher’ posstble
ealortfi

| fuels |] calorific value by means of atonte Sisinteration in the rocket and to lavoch
: i the rocket with this fuel. If they do this, 1% will be "“gemething terrible",

Atr Fores aff its bases. ‘Thora ta no ronson to give theady forces V-75's
tally. The PYO hes thes, ae well ag the aviation.

31

i
|
|
|
i
|
i
j
\

Rocks fre (c
t Work ING |

)

: »: be, nA hte

B

.

ee

eee

93. @: On the B-3, dons it need «6 leunciring platform or a fountationt
ba te auveatioa it en

transpired
anvil in which he het
aseenbled

the voeket
TU Is 4 level megnetic plete. ‘the ar
the roeket in order te level 14; £¢ ts portiqularly weed te level

32

@ megnetic plate fs pt in

penbly tebee place. S: Ho, X told

reported MOOKALENKO's heedquartern to Be.)

ro t - . ‘ ee ;
> o
‘ d ;

#7

96. G: Has he e big headquerters there? Appronimately? 6: It is
bac lefurds w dig hesdquerters mewrically, but how meny reane are there? About 600-500,

_

: 3
Yor each section ((TIEL), there are 4-3 row ff it fs a emall om, oni 3-4

(Further dtecieston of exactloeention of Ferkunhkevo. Locking xt map.) 6: I
ee remember I abways tock the electric train from the SYSLORUGSZIY . re

ere houses there. Ib way formerly a extete. This was
tre, sivays the center where the POLITsocTKy $ieal pereommel) carried out ite

or by ear, or straight hy cer from Moesow. 6: If I gald there exe 1,500 on the
atefft 6: Probebly, bot I will not guess. YF will find oot excetly, because this
é ia a beste heniquarters. I will tell you the exset saber of kiloseters |
ak emi will tiq it in to there other tows. I will consider thie essentiel and
Cit Genk. Previously, ay driver took me emi be knew the rod.

cree nue

the dey before yerteriay? dive we = email recorder, 26 thet I con pot the
questions whieh we need ensvered onl record conversations with VARENTOY ant
with chher friends. Sow there da » Bol queetion te thinks ebout. Sheuld you
give me a pietol in the neer futuce? I beve no gun at the moment, nothing.

I weed to hove 8 very good Cermen officer's plete! but they tock it suny from
me. One iv mob elloved to have ers, I hed a Sevan one with a red marking,
a WALTER. Wow ¥ beve nothing. Xs there anything te prevent mo fron heving
fromething like their 6: There ie wrthing te prevent you, tet don't 1t dangerous
for 7 Why should you beve {47 6: Bs. I willi have e Minow or.....7 sek
you ¢o think sbouk f6. XI think £ ehenlé tell you whet T om thinking ebevt.

kpeeace™ 98. Gt Can you sive ue any deielis about this naval rosket -- the P-52
ps S1_ Wo, Fvevytiing thet they told me wes reported. G: Do yeu know bow St 18
a {aunched) vertically or at axengie? 3: Dlén't I write thet it can

teacbart lant troops, G: Rut one ean laumiemderveter rockets either at on angie or
eae vertically, %1 Absolutely right, on evbenrines - how is ‘this tons, whet cre
RENE A

33

v7

ps (Gn ghet for em inclined launch the lewwhing installation (USTAROVEA) must be
Gelvel | eS timers longer thant the reoket. In other vorda, {2 a rocket 1s 8-10 meters,
fof the leuichey mist Be NO.50 meters. tne eould construct this, But 4% would
Peares: require huge supgerta to keep everything rigtt. He ana, "(Subject's true
| ; neem), they Have polvet this question technteslly”. Bat how 16 wes solved
(avech| Ne aia not say. Oy Oe : No, for lend forces. 1 @o not know
hew thoy do tt on submarines.

er oe

99. Gs Wher ke told you about this how did he tell yout Did he

Ades ary “inet , there fe such 6 thing”, or how? 8; 1% esow ebout lier.
thin. Hie wife sel4, “(fubject’s true name), I om writing a ectentific paper.
Pe dele I em doing secretarial work for a eentifate payer of Vi

olodyn PARKEMENNO, BY
husbend. Se is the heed of the Staff”. I asked, “What is the subject?"
She acta “Rocket forces”, Well, whet te dot Me was a pentor instructor

fre dae lye

net hin en te seid, "We are begimeing te instruct the new studanta in thers

solved". “hatte all ho sed*. &: What are bis fovenenea? Vlodimir Ivanovich
nleo Fedorer. ts Visdinby rvanovieh the mat who wie in Cermany, the former
Aide -tq-Comp?

SSN 100. dy DMA this PARKROMEKO tell you that there eve about 10
(1) edbmarines -- cx wus it ct o lecturer 6: I beard, in general, thet there ere
submarines with thig roaket, but they did not tell ud about Tt or iastrest us
in it. I heard thle fron others in tte General Steff. PARKHOMERKD never worked
Foun’ | in the General Start. ae |

10L. 8: Cue detetl about hin whiel: you can check ~~ after be hed finished
ly Academy, he married a girl called Ella. She has two

fate stepfather wes ecllet SXLIMABOY, a Colom) in the Kon

Germany. Thorn, he hed an effntr with the daughter of a Lt.

Ri

|
|
|
|
|
\

_
c

102, i: So PARKICUNERD merited Ella and gob te haow
SELIMANGY. Ve tun use this Infertostion one of these deys.
rengaiber SSLIMANOY*s forwneme. | + he
in Germany on KOR Wesiness, You oon
hegpene’, Th wie the yenr when I hed a few operation. I hed « conmusaton
Fe ae ee pene en Onl, $5 you Gen wee, they put ia geld britgrvark,
It was the when ft on thet
seid, “(subject's true mes), senething uafortimate hes happens,

bie

Whe

Laos “rug d

SSN.

Srv pote
Gewi Sh L

f ‘ho hae
q

rey oa

~~

|

7

103, 8: This is Mia's stepfether (feLDemy). 6: An interesting 00
person? 8: A good frient of the pllote CHARALOY evi TISREY. ie wat os close |
fo SHR ua J em to VANENTOOY. OG: Waore 424 he flee? The West? 3: To the
Ves; se was notified that he wee avreated. There was, however, mo offielal
notloe reeeived.

106, 8: ‘tw (Olga Petronas) worteed for the 078 at Lovina, as 8
Jantor Lt.3 ste vore a welferm, She wort for 19 yeores she lncked on year
to get o penton. He owt pencione efter GO years. How ahe hes a sell job

whe was repriaanied along the Party ites for her short~

beenuse signtedvens,
Becwse her kuchent happened te be on caeny of the Soviet Union end because

the d18 wrt Giaaever enk report hin wrelisbility. The verted to emiute

her froa the Porty. Her bie tuemed grey. Stes 1s very petriatin -- «
menber of the Party -~ a Cormnexiat, averything. They left hes fn the Perty but
gave her a strong reprima. Kot another word was uttered about SRLDIAGOT.

107. 68: There ta one favberenting Gebel ~- PARKIN ts in elose
eontae’ with me anf as I wee pleming to Lecve to com to Englent, be ealled anil
neta, "Dear Oleg Vindintrevieh, let's go Losk at spertieente". He proposed to
rent 2 J-reos mporinent ext cecupy two yoors «.. to slure the epartuent. Tt is
hart to get eportuents there, you koow. But this ie beaide ths paint. Im fe
& close frivnd of mines te wouldn't lie ta me. /T hod hoot ebout’ the exietense of
the P.5 rogket in the Nevy, tut I ofa ret knov deatatla about 1%, Be geve me the

Lert etree

dQateiis thet T just geve you; they ere hie detalle,

108, Gs DIA the Aawtructor tell you about the wertal, produttion of up to

10 mibescines? £8: I was wrrer fold this vy ineteectors, To here friends in the

Generel Buatt. RL ot aghe heir cen ice Paes to iG Ge ee, It is
cent thing to clarity the amet source. () You me, if this vas

dail soon Bremen cas, it wala he alright, bet Of it wes enid msch eerlier..

G:; I kissv, tuo yours age... thet te even wore important. 31 CHRECHERIN told

me ebout thia. By wee mibordiinete to 2 when T wee there 31 SECON tela

Attach: in Duvkey, He wan eestgned to the stett of W783 I told you. Be fa a

fool, in hin sbtlity, develageent, etc. Tet’s see, whe eles told me? Another
high yanking superrivor, I een't remerber who it was now ant I don't went to
geese, G: Don's. 8: I don't neve the right ta. G: Ghay, don't. This is such
an iepertent eridele that it wae nenewanry te nak. &: I welerstent.

3S

~ nl
* > .
.
red! ct * 2 Bee Pa -

WLLL tell you about the north. 6G: Wait a mincte. You don't remenber if he

told you where he was Loeated? 8: I heve tt written some place. G: If I told

you about the of peed gal ely Sar oO 8: Ho, I have forgotten

ema XY don't went guesa. please don't steer me away from whet I know)
acs Gas aa haw oe, Gt Fin.

110. vag get i Jia Dmg ns pipet igee ening
for « year I wes uot adeounted fort G: Probably
beenune Aaring our firwt novting you teid us everything oo feat that {8 ws
motertals fox over a year. G: Well
now 1% 40 1961 elrendy, sore then a year. 8: That fe whet I seid, FT tried to
contact you, but 414 not get an answer. When I tried to contact you, I tnd
all, thie in the trunz. 6: Okay, all this is now cleer.

Hather ie) LLL. “OG: Mow « question thet interests us -. this region of Rorthern _
ere Leningrad iemobt connected with the boatst 8: Mowanak Oblast? G: Yes,
a. Hormansk Oblast, but not connected with the hoats? 8: Ho, eheolutely not. It
UC (prenele is ta ceearetak with the 0 eT eae pois, mie frou reinforeed concrete, with
Sits. rots ee re anh simed at Wigland, nob ab Frense. OG: Fine. What
Q5.1,9 ee een tone Et 3 Ly, RS, R-7, RJ. G: They are
peers Oe G,000 EN resoet CS RE ae Te eeicine ths Alston is go much,

ee Mes. They are of this series of rockets. The gommamier of these rockets is clearly

f
:
Nie
£407
;
5

tet be pp Gurkey, ida toler bad pti lame’ in Lebanon--vhen
Mee eonmemier... this was dons for pomp as well. as *
ah At this time VARENISOY was was these ali the time. bop p Beamaad

‘the
Leben th Trane Camasian MLLEt ory Diet District, ea toomeniny of the Artillery. &: VARENTSOV
uttuy | Was Tn thet eres all » in because

RRUHHOHEY orddxearverytiting to ve in battle readiness.

S:YARIRIECY ven thre cleo wk the tiom of the protert, to Pukisten
| Ur POMER's Flight. Shey expected encvher flight and would
protests me Wot With in atomic wmirteel. they wurted to hove mother
ae seue af penetration of (Boviet atx apace). They wonted to say, "Look here,

3T

Crrtctons
#7
/ enother penetration!" wrt than he we afvald te staxvt a wer. But
they were rendy, ‘These battle positions extah, lawwhing folly
ae ee xe stenting ¢ everything
elise is reety, All this te nearby, waters (in )
ei all camouflaged. Yattle readineng tmyltes nesetsary the (rocket)
J ern be eet up and Lonieds there i wi resdiness
ent ready to fire. Mnybe the/eeldd-Sued/(ntestion) ere to be fired -./ 4)
x hove been told that is seme places Ve heve = ee. Yor exompile, —:,
E ng ‘Bat Liquid Fal udasties are not Fenly for firing, x (S:iic)
tela you Tiguia eveporetes, how the fuel ete.

of the tventy students that were teking the qourse with you is Moscow end
who went to HOSKALEINO? S: Yea, I ean &o thiw,

i 113. 6: I have a goof » Coleone) LP,
dusts | utes af Sue Ferakans YACA : .

IX) | 14, G1 Wien you write your reporte to wa, ean you give ws the nemes

not wecepted, VAREWNSOY wrote a Letter

; Directorates unt the
{ Yerioua Aras af Grount Yorses «+ they rre ell suberitaste tothe General stett
ami then to the Minister. G: Y walerston’. fs fae, ee ee ree

| Rocket reaps of the Ground Yorees and to ; |
Mi | Of Stett, SMavoy -— Formerly ZATDOY +» end thet ie the chain of comnnt.

goes
wa the Chie? of start, wie Deputy, unl the Hinteter of Defanse, ete. VARENESOY te
tahagyy thet he hee Gowkle subordiontion. ie te renpetuible to the Chief of
Clase the Gener. Stat, his Deyoty, oni the Commenter quay. Gr Both wayst

‘ : :
» 5 a

<=

Grout Yorees : 5: Yea. G: VAREWERSOY wld
wot wene't give it to hin beeang wien mm the highest wititary
Soviet mrt with your friend XHRUSMEY (laude). He is such 2 mean wretch,
& thig perdon whe veived power right ork fron uler the nose of ‘
AACN Ay Wag upheld by the Seeretaries af thy once. wae Minteter of Agriovlture
| de rites Ei eord, » Where wee this
_ || military Soviet to decide when to appoint (to neplaent RETELIN). the tiret
(| Nedidn || comiidate weutioned was VARENTSOY. ‘They to 3 - Be
ass has weny Chenies. He ie @ Very severs yory fair, & very honeet end. -
food men, He pity nis eoul inte his work. But. VAREEPIOY does uot heave encugh

ay ‘tubolag (aatusy
LLY. St Thte srerat’ de + ated tiowmugh all possible meens, ant x

VARRETSOV wes naned os a ceiitdate,
Former Comunvier-in-Chie? ROR, —

+ Shan they left, they became 411 --.
Bat VARENESOY 41d oot get support here

Frout where VAREMUSOY was Coumenter of the Artillery. L have & photorraph
ex & kespecke emt shows Nikita Serpeyerieh, SCRILCVSKIY, YACUFIN ant

_ 39>

gt
Vs 318. 8: Ie wrote a latter ta EY ecaying thet there ves a mene
late, (SARDAK) in the mommgement of the Aneel Yorees - certain Foekets were neld
kn K » Suda Were Ket given, maport was wet given, eta.
a perkes of material iu a lethex te XEAUGHCHEV. He wrote 2¢ Deeause
4% is inponeible get on appointments to see KISTUSHOREY. on

KaRUSRCERY
letter went to BUSLOY, wevber of the PRISTDIUH,and the Sxcretary of the
Central Cogittas. SUSLoV read letters 4t afd not ment anything to Bim.
He enlled in MALINOVOKTY and told hin, “Yate Commenter of Rogkat Troops

constantly.
MEVELIN died, VARENZSOY wes not ¢ epyolated to his tion, On Artillery Bay,
NVETVOUS EXp of Chief Marshal of Art ;
ae VORCHUY, bith he did act receive 4, They were holding everything tack fron
him, Latta wee whist on the Set of Sepberber. Will they give his the
‘ Onier of LENT ay not. (Nete: YARerIScY's mow title of Chief Mershal of
Avtiilery wae exnemeet in PMAYIM fn Mey 1961).

120. 6; PRIRVTKO -. ymt eee how X rentelber names, and you esy I start
nizing everything tw at midnight. G: Ie ke & general? 81 Ne, PETRENKO fa 8
Colonel, ste only one. The reet are generals, Thove they plan nai eveste

Besides thie, three is the Sefemtifie Sovies of the GAU -- it te calind Military
Selentifie Soviet of the Nein Artillery Directorate (Yoennty Ushonty Boyet pri
Gleynos Artiliertyekea Uprevientys). ‘The moin artillery etminietration and the
hesd, Colonel General EHMAHOY, as I told you befors, has concentrated In his
hands oll eqripsent prednetion, sll. the mmalittary plonts of the country thas
work for the axny, fr leo hae a fotentifie Construction Directorate, very
lorge end parerfel, where all the theoretiedans sft. 000”

ko

#7
b 121. 8: Then there is a second center, the Rocket Academy. I Gia
Gicat not start with the Aenfeny withowt reneen -- for for there they consern thesselves
a directly only vith one item ~- rockets, At GAY they bere directorates --
Zz Cleetronie equipsent) Verious other equigaent, on fuels, explosives, ete.
“ 122. 8: The third, in the henvis of VARZITSOV, ami now,alse in the hanis
Uf of MODKALENKD «~ there are the NII, Salentifie Research Institutes. There is
Pane » more than one. " fen Of te inattoctan 1s Seated om the presises of the
ae (V7 Best in the nome of Deerzhinskty, it has a separate hend and earries out
post pinepeit, resesrah only. They get vhat is invented at GAU anf transfer 1% to

goes
nil t The second wt HIT tu-wt | SOKOLEIKI, not not. far frou the Ameriesn, now
err British etuce: It ie beyond the SCKOLNIRE Park, about 8 kilometers from

Jd he SOKOLKIKI Wtre Station. 0; Who direets this oni vhich sre subordtcate to

oe

Tikes Bx fe * NOW. The “heademyis m longer esvbord
. be ete ee to i Nee Oh te GhU Tere “There the scientific research
__L idens are being “Gaveloped very actively ond and concretely.
Eng. ~ 12h, @: Further, there ere mony Engineering-Artillery schools were the
lower _renking offleers are prepared-Lientenmts; they study up to five yeers.

a This is because the Artillery sehoold are now also engineering schoole where
Ant’ they have Selentifie Research departments. In other words, the ccmean’ pushes el)

hy tSlaat endres, no meatier where vork or stuily, to think, invent, and create as long
i an they are in thie field (rockytry). ‘Then all these (ideas and thinking)
feta funnel into tha Aca » to GAU ani to the NITs. A proposal from the

Artiliery-Techndesl Bane ‘In Rostev-on-the-Don would go along thereat chamela.

I don't remeber if I told you that there is such a school there anit slso in

Peat Odessa end . Shen they analyze what has been produced -- ean saything else
—) be dem, or 1 Perhaps you go into a mew field. With this unified effort by

all the secientiate fren all sources, everything is collected oni sereencd.

| Valuable ideas are developed, ari tested, first on paper ani then on metal. This
ie the structure of the Selentific Research works there ie no eclentifie
research in one place.

Fhe t

Gas 125.61 ' Who evordinates all this? 81 GAY. ‘his-is the highest 5 eoordivetion,
Gnduci, vat GAU also get this frou the Nile end the schools. 0: I uvlerstamd. 8: And
; @ lose to Moncew ere the towns with the Germans that I told yo about ~~ special
¢ teetmictans. “They test % things end ‘sonetines “get somethin something from then. This is
ASW. md

hl

x

May. :
fp coordinated by the Setentific Researeh Directorate. 1% is Like the highest
| ” Soviet, whieh incorporates all the selentizts frou all the scientific research
: | tutes, aesfenies ani schools. 1% is the ecordineting organ.
iS 106, 0: What wes the resection whos {0 wae snnounce!d in the UOSR
| pene ltrs

’

40
I (us nteder- .
a

| wnt? ar
te
ip Any 7

fayal

hey Military Intelligence. gure you dfan"s present or sell thea there
Faas tf are filme on Corporal miseiies «= how they are fireds the servicing
aoe personnel, I vemexber thetpexr$ of the wear giasees. iris wes all

Fads! ve
&

lx por

oy
eat

rere nei eG a pene ctrl. {Seep eats ev ema a

Vyvcteip Meviate Commisaion by the way. G: He was fn the old Bureeu of New Technology,
ZHUROY wos theres VIPTORETY wes there; OSOTIN wae there. ff: OSONIN was the
military attache te thet negry BEC at Addf{w Ababa. Be got fired. G: And

the Directorate of the Oat a. oh. (

Rexvodetet nave Upravientye, en), Min job is te ubliias new
teennical » Se leetured to us ani tolé we about tate recket that fires
fron platfones ani is sorakle +» Wonestly, be bet so many diagrams

|

iby
~j

BR Mee,

130. 3: X heve « question for you. 6: Yes. OG: When ean we plan to have
a meting xt weich I eon teks ell the meteriele, look then over, and give you
afaditional seementet G6: For next tine, let's prepare the following
of teportumes. Then you can present your efditional coments ent elarifiestions.
8; I eam recall. meny things when I sce the materiel.

Gd: Whnt tie ie best for you? §: I don't know when VYHHE will drive ve over.
You see I sit sext to Witt; he fe « wonderfal driver. You have to give bbe
evedit for drftving me aroun carefully and taking good esre

traffic. @: Yes. &: Ant I hear pos don't want to give hin anything. 1 Ouite
the opposite, we yrouised to take exre of thie. 8: If you

that I heave ne Insignificant, then there fs ne need to make such ecerifices.
@; Definitely not. 6: Then tell mw eo I will wrlerstend

light. G: this will «13 be fom correctly.

§
E
|
i
:
i
;
:

aii
132. 8: Another question must be eeasiderred in view
1% 4g necewenry thet I be gives a telephone momber, in ease
ium borry. I caee X herve sume unplessenturea -~ 8 threat or something eles.
Anything eould happen. I ask that you give we a telephone (member); I don't
eere which one. J: Be will give you thie. 6: Fine, so this is definite. This
worries me. (The muber) should contein « Bor 11; but don't cive me a
Maeber 13. (Levghs) G: Hine.

a)

133. How, wa heve to finish with the photes. G: This 1a plemeds
we heva a vhole sohedule worked out. 8: Fine. G: Tomorrow plan to came at
G100 hours. If you ere late, we will weit for you.

3s. Bs tat oe een - (Locking at hin ecbedule) whet do you think we
should dor What fa the progren? Dmorrow we visit two firms. Go: It is not

afternoon? S: WENGE ent I ean do thin either wy; we con do this first. a: I
dove not ele any differs whieh vay you Ao 9. 8: How long does it take to
drive to Lorton from here? All: 24-3 .

Ry Alright, we will count on three houres Tt 4on't ellov his to go fest. IT have
to becareful. Of It is about 120 kilometare. ©: Thet's a lot! 6: Kileasters!
@: Ch! Kilometers. { thought it wae miles, Here, a Colonel BACKAY gave me &
rite at 110 m.p.h, to Neatpool. Tatts sey nine o'clock tomorrow. Fine,
let's decide on mine. ft: Today I could heve cone ever st eight thirty end set
waiting until nine. G: Theat fe usfortmete. &: fT sxb ani waited. “"  F
HM: Tonorroy this won't heppen. You here te go to tio pleces tomorrow szst,

in addition, drive te Lonfon.

135. O:(2n English) How ebout rooming arrangements? Shoald 1 4411 hin
thet? Hs: Yes. Gi Here is a svell tut important matter. It has been arranged
thet you will ell be staying on the Sth floor. Gt I, alco? 6: Yes.

SB: Ye it eomventent for m te go dewstelrst O: Yes, very convenient.
2: L won't haere to walk slong the eorridert 6: Ho. 8; X will te in the sat
wing ag you? 67; Yes, very closes. 5, Tilt ie very Layortent. H: That's right.

eavefal. TP he telka too much or beecnes genred, & danger will be erented
for yo.

hh

#7

bin,

|

e af il

bh a fi

: 4] Hee pir

epi “ Hi Bre

2 ist ee 2 ats

bh a se Ce
Hepat ui Ea ny

Least ef hed Ta Hii Hae,

a i He ain Hee

ay Fart + shi ait fata

iiycelt bel ee ii ss

ayn iH eaaat Seka: il : Ht * 5 <

Hea all need jad UY Ht

: tse +P ‘i hg err iss

a Si rl Panik

iu i i Hee
“ an " S z otf "
iF &° + i | abe

its nl

BE a ‘

Tn

121, Or Wht dota KAPALZIN do mow? 8: ‘She Generel te vetived, ie does
good-looking

nothing — drinky Vodim anf eeris. The tall gue +- 6

Gerget (fertoche) weed te work fn the Couneli of Hinisters. here wes «

aro before, i BULCANIN's time, eat be worked

matters whlek of Goverment « Te wae sot the chief
of « sections the ehtef of the section wes on Intelifgoncs Offiesr, « Oenrrel,
ani he works in b mites Ste + Chie?

‘Ue, G: BERSEINY 8: Mo, not SERULTW, Os BAREDIN wes Chief of «
Direction. &: fers he waa go were other Generals, : The devil take then!
They change them wo often. 8: Be only beemse General resentiys be was 2
Colonel. YY took on exasiuction weler hiv,

143. Os YASTL'2¥t Bt Bo, we'll Leave 2% for a while -- mybe the new
will ccs to mt. KAPALKIN, then, worked in BULGANIN's grows. Then they |
Liquifiated WILGANEN sev diagersed the grou sil KAPALKIN was throw out,

eo"
4 tt

i
|
t
;

®
.

alveys walking exmovl vith a potty fone; visite the restaurants daily, Bets
really living 1% up.

O45) 1 Med you heart thet BOXOLOVSKY's som bine been senbensed to 25
years? Ui: Ne! 8: A get of thege sons end daughters of the Marebels got

together ;
& veeation from Lentngred to Moscow. Sw in the niece of norm Hintater. ©
don't xemenker either the Mintetry ar the nese wow. When eh wos trying to

revolver ent fived « tlenk = beemusr he was dromk. Revertheless, the car vas

vorked hie time, Then he went to the thitvernity in the lenin Hills.
Altogether, he wae fuprisoned shout three yrars., Thon he developed wleers asl
was quickly set free. ‘This son of KORY 4a in the wemer type of creel.

T4G. 8: Mow be ds working in the: Bimetorate of Infermetion, He corks
in the Ameriesn Sextt ty the woy, ent knvve Poglish very wll. That's
Gelis «— telly Yvanwvrich. Its fathers, the Merehal, wes the Comenter-in-ciier
of the First Urrainion Front. After the war vee over, Be left Geliy's mother

7

(nis fires wife who bad borne him deliy end a daughter Irene). tie daughter,
Trone, is now married end has ehildren. Anywexy, be left thea end morried the
nonegeress/dimetress of the cafeteria (STOLOYATA) of the Military Council of
the First Usrainien Front. fle ig atill Livizg with her anf now has a little
ehila fren this momerress/direetreos of the STULOVAYA.

G: Be you renenber s VASILE at the Acatimyt 8: Cur Acatenyt
a: Yes, Vasiliy Wikoleyevieh VASIL'EV, a Colonel. Beis teald. ie alias

after om o'clock. St Alright. ‘Tsnorrow we meet et 9 ofelock, right?
(Subjeet reviews « list of purchases he fa 4¢ mke for kis wife.) 8: A between~
geegon cont, red with white buttons. Try take advantage of me. She likes to
Avess wall ent, of course, I apotl her, I'm going to euch & “wealthy” eountry -
what om I eying to do, wring hav a Little bleweet I'm going to have te rveurry
around and look. My progres is here, I've given you all tie a. Right?

work gore pore.
on 20 April 1941.)

4S

]
|
|
:
:
