Detention of Three U.s. Prisoners of War in Dam Doi District, an Xuyen P Rovinc
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022796, dated 3 July 1971.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022796).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

co Ca ne AOA yee a es ee ee babe

ees wy <OEETEs cS Me eee sew
: « Sig a* ae oe ES cuties 7 ‘7 BP re
. zi % Vow fi os a \S = - oe
1] August 197)
MEMORANDUM =

SUBIECT: Detention of Three U.S. Prisoners of War in Dam Doi
District, An Xuyen Province, South Vietnam

ee

SOURCE: BS : oe .

1. From 1964 until Tuly 1970 the 4-8 Prisoner of War detention
camp, subordinate to the Viet Cong {VC} Propagance and Training Section
of the VC Military Region 3 (MR-3), was loceted on the banks of the Cz}

EXCED GDS

a Ge eee a ee ERE Amr semen etiree tie

~

eee ee

a

ee

Ngai river (WQ 1573) in Dam Doi district, An Xuyen province, Sout i
Vietnam (SVN}. In mid-July 1970 orders were received to move the
prison to the COSVN base camp area.* From at least Janvary 1970
until 19 July 1970, the camp held three U.S. Army personnel as

prisoners.

2. All three of the U.S. prisoners wer? captured in Tan Pku
and Tan Loc villages, An Xuyen province, SVN, bui the date of capture
is unknown. One of the men was known as First Lieutenant Brown he
was 1,69 meters tall, weighed 65 kilograms, had blond short hair and
a receding forehead. His eyes were hazel, and his cornplexion was fair.
He had a slim build and no visible scars, tattoos or birthmarks. His
prominent facial features were 4 rounded chin and a straight, flat nose.
Wis estimated age was 35 years, The second man was an Army sergeant
who was arcund 1.60 meters tall, weighed 60 kilograms, had blond short
hair and very Hight hazel eyes. He was slender and appeared approximately
40 years old. His nose and chin were pointed and straight. The sergeant
had no visible scars, tattoos or birthmarks. His complexion was very
pale. The third man was an Army captain whose height was around 1.70
. meters, weighing over 70 kilograms, with blond hair, hazel eyes anda
; light, ruddy complexion. He }ud no distinguishing birthmarks, scars oT
tattoos, except for flesh wounds on his right arm, the right side of his.
waist, and his right leg which he received during his capture. He had
a heavy build and appeared approximately 33 years old. F*

3. Each man was jailed separately in a wooden hut raised off the
ruddy ground by stilts, Each hut was approximately 3.5 meters wide,
4 meters long and 3.5 meters high. The huts had no windows and only
one door which could be locked with a metal hasp lock. "Monkey bridges"
{large logs raised above the ground by stilts) afforded the only access to
the cells and other buildings of the camp. The celis were approximately
: 50 meters apart in order to isolate the prisoners, while an interrogation

¢ probable that the
did not know the

ees Comment: eee stated that it v
camp moved out of the area by the end of July 197C
new location of the camp.

Gormment: Photographs of all U.S, personnel missing or suspected
of being captured in An Xuyen province were obtained “ror the Joint
Personnel Recovery Center (IPRC), Saigon, and shown to |
He was unable to make a positive identification from these p

Pe cere, iad ae aae
aT MT FO Ee TR RY SRSA 9 TE BE Ora en en EL a me te

a FS a er ey ee
ee

cet ey oe Phe are RG LT TE
E oe
*

we hE AFC 92 pinathy TAG TAS A nites ae

Pr OR EP FE EI Te LT IEE Saar

room similar in construction to the cells was some 90 meters from the
cells. Approximately 80 meters from the prisoners’ huts were quarters
for the guard platoon which housed approximately 35 personnel. In
addition, there were separate huts for the camp director's office and
kitchen. The surrounding topography was flat, muddy and impossible

to travel by land. The only way out of the camp was by Bampan. There
was a small pier with a guardhouse located some distance from the camp.

4. With the exception of the Army captain, the prisoners were

- treated leniently and allowed liberal privileges. They were permitted to

move about in their huts and could leave to eat in the kitchen or go to the

‘Jatrine provided they notified the guards. They were not escorted,

but were watched by the guard on duty. The only restriction placed on

‘the men was that they could not talk or congregate among themselves.

The two p-isoneré with liberal privileges were given soap, washcloths,
toothpaste and toothbrush, two pairs of pajamas and eating utensils, end
they were allowed to keep these items in their cells. A bamboo mat and

a mosquito net were given to each man, but there was no other furniture.
prisoners, the Army

In strong contrast to the treatment given to these two
length of his cell.

captain was chained to a metal bar which traversed the
A metal ring was attached to both the bar and his foot. He could stand.
up and move back and forth within his cell, but only with great difficulty.
The guards brought him food, and two guards escorted him outside to the
latrine. Although he had a mosquito net and mat, he was not allowed
to keep any other items and was given soap, toothbrush and eating utenstis
just before bathing or eating, The captain was treated in this manner
because he nad attempted to esc. pe from the carmp on two ocexsions.
When he was captured the second time, one of the guards, Tu £1ic, beat
him on the head with the blunt end of an axe. Because of his escape
attempts and his adamant refusal to cooperate with his cap-ors, the

guards were very harsh with him, and some of the methods of tre ment

were directly contrary to the camp director's orders. After cac escape

told the staff that the caj tain

attempt, the camp director, Muoi Hong,
1 e
lost

was not to be beaten or mistreated, but the guards felt that they *ad
face because of the incidents and took it out on the prisoner, Afie. Be
beating, the captain still refused to cooperate with the captors, | «
chained to the bar in his hat, and his food ration was cut in half,

5, The prisoners were fed twice a cay, at approximately 090% and
1600 hours each day. They were given fish and vegetable soup, dried *
shrimp, crabmeat, cuttle fish and rice, although not all at each meal.

: i a

K 24

Sa REPRE PERLE EE FE WE Fe ba ee

A

ENN HN,

os

‘of in stallations, but

i
They received about half a kilogram of this fare per day plus all the
rice they could eat. The Army captain, however, received half this
ration. The lieutenant and sergeant were allowed to ZO into the kitchen
and eaf'with the guards and after dinner they smoked cigarettes and
attempted to converse with the guards. The Meutenant ate first and
then returned Eo his cell before the sergeant was allowed to eat. Two
guards brought the captain's food to his cell. The prisoners were in
pood health ana did not look undernourished. The captain, although
receiving half rations, appeared stocky and strong both physically and H
psychologically. A medical technician from the F-20 medical unit of :
MR-3 came once to examine the prisoners but did not administer any
medication or treat them. No vitamins were given to the men. On one
occasion the sergeant, who claimed to be a medical technician, examined
one of the staff members for a bad tooth. The Sergeant was not allowed
to administer to his fellow prisoners. *

ak at em Sie Gmmere simbalastried: bet om

6. The prisoners occasionally were taken inta an interrogation
room set apart from the cells. Between 11 and 19 Jwy 1970, for example,
the captain was interrogated twice and the other two prisoners once each.
Each session lasted about two hours. There were twe North Vietnamese
interrogators, Hai nd Hai Phong, and one interpreter, Ba Sanh,
South Vietnamese Ba Sanh that the captain was the only
one who refused to cooperate;

he would not even give his name or serial

number. Attempts at indoctrination were as futile as physical threats.
A team of photegraphers from the Propaganda and Training Section of
MR-3 headquarters came into the carp and tried to take pictuzes of the
captain, but he refused and turned his heae away from the camera. The
other two prisoners cooperated and identified the captain to the
inferropators, *

tated that the lieutenant also had provided drawings
aid not know which ones, ©

|

ae the English reports were sent out from
the camp by messenper once a week to MR-3 headquarters. He did not

“know the number of reports

the two interrogators were very friendly to the
prisoners, “but they had difficulties with the Army captain, They attempted
to indectrinete the officer many times, but to no avail did not know what '
success the interrogators had with the other {vo prisoners. The interpreter
also was friendly and occasionally would converse with the prisoners

about their personal health and welfare. As a g:neral rule, the support

staff and interrogators, with the exception of the guards, were friendly ~

and humane toward the prisoners,

9. The security of the camp was maintained by the 35 guards
housed in the camp area and there were no other units in the immediate
area to provide back-up security in case of attack by U.S. forces. There
was a perimeter guard assigned to prevent personnel from entering the
camp via the river. One security guard was postec near the cells and
performed a roving check of the three cells continususly. The guards
possessed Ki and KZ sub-machine guns, MI] carbines, AK-47's and one
ULS.-made automatic weapon. The interro ators carried K-54 and
B-38 pistols on their person at all times there was no

radio transmitter but that he had seen a Philips radio receiver, made

in Holland, anda tape recorder. The only way to get word outside the
camp was by messenger and then only at night Pec euee of the dangers of
being detecten by the enemy. Personnel were allowed to leave only ,
when on duty. While off duty, the guards and staff were restricted to

one of the reports from the

: if SAS Se
lieutenant concerned an outpost in An Xuyen province, ed spelled
Lich 5u, and that a diagram wes atta ched to the re eport 25 tested

at thes : : :
written and qd oral, and it was determined that hs wis not ee e of under-

standing any more than the rudiments of written English and could speak
approximately 150 word 8 of Pee :

eta EA

Ais

a

ee

ity

3

NE ESSENSE Ay:

Py

‘at

eee
Bi tee

a ed

™

Me pons

read, played cards or-slept. On 19 July
: the entire camp was moving io the COSVN

Fthe assistant director of the camp that all the personnel and the
prisoners would be kept at COSVN, *

coment: As stated in paragraph 1-C of CS 211/02642-71} the
preliminary report on these U.S, Prisoners of War was sbown to the Joint
Prisoner Recovery Center (JPRC), which advised that the physical descrip-
tions of two of these POW's matched those of Lieutenant Bowers and
Sergeant Baez, who were missing in action together on 24 March 1969.
They added that cne of the physical descriptions also matched that of
Sergeant First Class Parrish, who was missing in action on 16 January
1968. The abeve report has also been shown to JPRC for their comments,
and they have nothing additional to add on First Lieutenant Brown (thought
to be Bowers) or Sergeant Parrish. With regard to the recalcitrant
captain, the JPRC advised that the physical description is similar to

that of a U.S, Marine Corps Captain Donald Cook, who was captured

near Tay Ninh (MR-3) on 31 December 1964. He was reputed to be very
uncooperative with his captors. This was learned trem SP4 Charles
Craits, who was in the same camp with Cook from January 1965 to

_February 1967, and later repatriated. Crafts reported that Gook had

been determined to escape. JPRC added that there is no record of a
captain fitting Cook's description captured or missing in action in MR-4.
However, they state that a captain currently carried as missing in action
{Captain Welshah) has black hair, brown eyes, a swarthy complexion
and was downed in that area.

*

‘ Ds atsadiiat inital
Rr Ee ORR AE RTE yeti ng Se ce pr aan eg i re OF BO ae ere pe

1
i
i
:
t
t
t
!
}
‘
