Nasser's Policy and Prospects in Black Africa
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008134, dated 4 January 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008134).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

9 January 1964

SANITIZER COPY
y base
cael
: a “ S GS
Special Memorandurn
NASSER?’S POLICY AND PROSPECTS
IN BLACK AFRICA.

Office of National Estimates

peep ee "Sh D
So een OSERTS. eer were ee

£ aa!
ig Sy

zte
. # .
7 e+ =

| CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE Os NATIOUAL ESTIMATES "

9 Jexuary 196%

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO, 1-Gh

SUBJECT: Nasser's Folicy and Prospects in Black Africa
_ SUMMARY

ae Gamal ‘Naseer is seeking to expand his influeace in Flack Africa.

ht the Aldis Ababa Conference Nesser recognized that he carricd
ecaparatively Little weight with his confreres, and he set about
expending ond strengthening his African relationships. Hy playing
host to numerous visiting Africars he has. sought to improve his
diplomatic sm] political tica. Fe hss also played up bis brand of
enticolonialism; striving thus to _schieve a larger role in the
"grecdon fight” against the Portuguese and the South African govern-
rents. However, Kasser regards his African policies es a means not
merely to gain prestige for bin cn the continent but also to enhance
his role on the world scene, particularly snong the nonaligned states,
_ {he chances ere slin, however, that Nasser will achieve the stature
avd political maneuversbility he desires in Black Africa, particularly
sf strains between the Ared and the African worlds grow.

H.-S RUE

%. PACKGRCED
A. asser's Continental Airs

J, Wasser, himself a fervent revolutionary, wants to prod

the African continent into a sharp break with its colonial past.

aa :
~~
“ of

oe i 4)

LYNDON JAINES JOHNSON |

Spicer ee

He regards his own revolution 8s & suitedle model for all Africa.
Stressing Egypt's historical end geogrephic relationship ‘to the
_Sontinent, Masser holds that Egypt is a technically advenced state
capable of offering guidance to the nascent nations of Africa, *
_end a natural leeder in the struggle against inperialisn and -

- colonialism. ...

2, In addition, Nasser is consclous of what he regards as
‘gn Isracli “threat” to the VAR on the African continent. To his
consternation, and to that of much of the Areb World, Isreel has
established an effective diplomatic presence throughout 8 major
part of newly independent Black Africa. In response, Caira hes
developed its own extensive program of cultural, technical, and
military. assistance. If there were no other motive, Nasser would
probably continue his activities in Africa simply out of competi-

tion with Israel. -

3. By and large, however, bis primary interest on the
African scene is probably more generale He regards his African
policies us a means rot only to gain prestige for bim on the
continent, but also to enhance his role on the world scene,

particularly among the nonaligned states. Hasser’s pursuit of

COPY: -

LYNDON 2AINES JOHNSON I.

pew eee ioc TERIA ATR,

these broed objectives is essentially uxplonned, end largely.
consists of reaction to situations or opportunities that present

* themselves from time to tine.
_ B. The WAR's Africa "Establistment” and its Assets

he

5» ne readily dvaileble asset for the UAR is the heterogeneous
collection of Africen exiles end dissidents who have sought refuge

in Cairo. Currently, there are more than a dozen African territories

he zt on eee aR AA
wes QPy-
CO ae

LYNDON SAINES JOHNSON |

represented in a goveranent-controlled but loosely knit: organization
known es the Africa Association, In return for a reasonably ‘generous
gubatay, thess expatriates provide the UAR with counenutery and
 @eteicten ebout the preblema in their hoemelends. They also efford

a point of contact with the African nationalist movements through-

out the continert.

? 6. Eeyot's Moslem ties also provide valuable openings in
gub:Betlaven Africa. There is an annual Icflux of students to
. Al-Azhar University, and Egyptian religtous teachers are found in
ell parts of Africa's Moslem belt.--These provide means of influence

Nasser has sought to expsrd and control.

7. ‘The VAR's African establishzent also has at its disposal

sone useful econcmic end propaganda tools, Cairo's powerful-radio,.-- - - --

The Voice of Africe, end its clendestine counterpart, The Voice of
Free Africa, flood the continent with a continuous stream of ©
vituperative enticolonialist propegends. ‘rhé Presidential Council,
hich establishes policy for Calro's entire broadcasting system,
has allotted seven hours per day for African broadcasts. Material
for these broadcasts is frequently garnered from the subsidized

refugees and exDles residing in Cairo.

~COPY- -

LYNDON 2AINES JOHNSON L

5.

C. Cairo's Fest Maneuvering in Africe —

9. thus far, Nasser's efforts to gain influence in Africa
have proved to be fallures. Nasser weade on artful debut before
the Afro-Asian World at Bandung 7n 1955, end followed this by
hosting a successful first uceting of the ifro-Asian Peoples

COPY

LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON |

ee

Solidarity Grganizetion (AAPEO) in Deeember 1957. Subsequently,
however, the efforts af both Nescow and Pelping to dcsinate the

orgmization left little roca for Cairo.

0. The UAR was aloo dceply involved in the intrigues which

- FoNowed Luesmba's downfall jn the Convo in 1960.

Jl. The UAR's maneuvering in the Congo was also elesely related
to the esteblishnent of the Casablanca Group in January 1961. . Cairo
“provided mich of the initiative for the formation of this organt-
gation, bub a pro-Iammba Africen nationalist policy was the conmon
Mink between the unlikely political allies included in it. However,
the Casablanca Grovp never_beceme the significant African voice its
Jeaters hoped At vould become, ond in the long con VAR affiliation _

with it probably proved more of a lisbility than ao asset.

sn a CE A COI AOI A
« t % es y x *
, s COP =
, *

LYNDON 2AINES JOHNSON |

a
.

I. CURRENT SITUATION

.
8

A. he Addis Ababa Conference of African Heads of State, June 1965

22. At the outset, the Addis Conference convened to
esteblish an all-Africen political organization, flatly rejected
the Egyptian suggestion to use Arabic as one of the asserbly's
official, lenguages. Although sone prominent Black Africen leaders
personally urged Nasser to attend the Conference in support of
"african Unity,” this setback served as a timely reminder to Nasser
of the division between the Arab and Africen worlds. Thereafter,
he conducted himself quietly and circumspectly and succeeded in
making a generally favorable impression on his fellow chief
" executives. Eevartheless, he commented privately that he was
disappointed with the meeting; in rart because the eonference -
failed to take strong ection against recaining coloniel territories.
Whatever the overall jspression Nasser gained from close association
vith fellow chief executives at Addis, he returned determined to
revitalize his African relations. He summoned his African envoys

to Cairo and exhorted then to pursue a rore vigorous African policy.

ee o¢ .

COPY.

LYNDON 2AINES JOHNSON |

kk meee

B. Revived African Endeavors

23.
\ The
firet response to Nasser's new loox in things African, was & surge
of Africen visitors to Cairo. In the nonth of July alone, Nasser
played host to four Africen hess of state, plus two important
parlienentary delegations. — Houphouet-Bolgay, probably the most
notable visitor of the month, was given royal treatment. The
Presidents of Niger and Mauritania, both states of strong Moslen
persuasion, were also wermly weleczed, This esme trent continued,
~ at a slightly slover pace, euccagh the ewer and fall. Cairo,
with its syb rosa coffers, hes always deen & yopular stop for

travelling Africens, but even for Cairo this was heavy traffic. -

rs. Nasser's principal ain in extending Znvitations to these
Africen lesders was to encourage the establishment of diplomatic
ties. Currently, the UAR has ambassadors in caly iz of the 30
Rieck African states, and only seven of these states have re eipros

cated by sending their eniesaries to Cairo. She attention Nasser

has pala to the UA" states also suggests: that he hopes to establish

¥ iT - The African and Nalegasy Union ie the association of the

. foxrcer Freach Territories of mcderate or conservative persuasion
yhich have in the past revealed little interest in closer ties
with the "redically” oriented UAR. __ :

a: Bc

COPY:

LYNDON 2AINES JOHNSON I

NE EEO DEAE ALOE ALI

.

bridgeheads in the so-called "neocolontalist™ foruer French :

territories. His efforts to influence the course of events in

tae UAM region will be pragaatic.

matic relations with those states

Ye will conduct normal diplo-

which respond to hia overtures

‘but he will, also employ clandestine measures against those states ‘

which remain vary of the UAR.

15. -Nesser's deep interest gn the newly established

Organization for African Unity (AR) 1s ancther manifestation of

his interest in enhancing his Zufluence in Africa. At the Addis

" Conference, the Fayptisn delegation maneuvered its way on to the

tyvo main bodies within the fledgling OA -- the Secretariat and the

Berican Liberation Comittee (ALC

). Significuntly Mohamad Falq

wea selected as Egypt's representative to the ALG, and the WAR

mate a f 100,000 donation to finance the Comaittce'e activittes.

Although this sizeable contribut

Zon may mean nothing more than ~~

that Feypt is following the OAU ‘suggested guidelines for contri-

butions, 1.e., one yercent of each state's national incene, this

still represents roughly one-fifth of-the total that the AL has

thus far collected. Moreover, insefar as it is sble, the UAR has

moved to expand its influence in the functioning of these organiza~

tious and to steer their policies
by Cairo.

into line with these backed

COPY: -

LYNDON 3AINES JOHNSON |

1G. Eleewhere in Africa, the UAR hss EESeAY, taken other
nev initiutives. In o step calculated to deprove the UAR's **
posture mong most African states, Cairo reluctantly granted
> gormal. recognition to Holden Roberto's Angolen governzent~in-exsle.
Scualia, where Nasser haa long sought to cbtain a position of
Snfluence, was given four Yaapire jets end was prooised additional
military and technical sssistence. Nasser ie one of the few African
Jeaders to take sides in the split of the Southern Rhodesian
‘pationalist movement. Fublicly, vie Redio Free Africa, ond privately
vith finenciol support, Cairo bas throm its weight belind the
freat-ruoning faction of Joshua Nkexo. Elsevhere, Fgypt seems to
have responded to the imitiatives of Zonzibar Prine Minister,

mea Shemte. Unkeppy with the prospects of limited UK develop: _
nent esaletence, Zenzibar sent a delegation to Cairo where 3% vaa aa
warmly recelvel and given assurances of economic ald, trede egree-
ments, and technical essistance. Such assistance would give the

VAR an excelleut opening in a state which is considered African

bat is rvlea by on Arad ndnority. ——. —.-— —

Ge Kew Cpportunities for the UAR ates

Me African enixosity toward the Portugues? and the southern
Africen territories provides Fgypt with a tailor-xade opportunity

- 10-

“COPY: .
, | 00% NINES JOHNSON |

Ne

to gain new credit in Tropical Africa. In accordance with the |
Adis Conference resoluticn, Fgypt moved quickly to procleina
pudlicly a total boycott of both South Africa and Portugal. Con-
corrently, the UAR delegation to the June ILO Conference in Geneve
~~ ook the lead in a violent attack on South Africa, and helped
. gulae the ‘African caucus which attempted unsuccessfully to expel
; South Africa from the ILO. Subsequently, Cairo hosted a conference
of African Labor Mivisters to plan a new effort to achieve this
end. Ja another move against Portugal, in October Caire’s rabble
eating Yaice of Africa begen a 45-minute daily broadcest beaned

in Portuguese “to our brothers in Angola end Mozambique."

XIX. PROSPECTS

18, In ite efforts to achieve greater influence on the
African scene, the VAR 411 almost certainly continue the array of
an ae : approaches discussed above. Recent
Fayptian activities have given considerable emphasis to diplomatic -
yelationships, In recent months there has been some reduction in
the anti-Israeli, Line, thus allowieg African visitors with well
esteblished Israeli tics to be welcomed cordlally in Cairo. thus "
from tine to time there are likely to be cherges in nuances or

epproaches in the UAR's African policy. |

-l-

Fi ss AZ
a ‘
ee’ ri
3 %
or) 7 ~~
« s :@

NYNNON BAINES JOHNSON |

19. Feyptian policy will strive to appear more Atricen than
the Africans thanselves; more zealous, nore militently nationalist,
end more outi-imperialist. By these neens Calro hopes to obtain e
Reading role in the inner councils of Africen liberation movements,
and eventually on the continent as a whole. From time to tire,
euch a policy could place Fgynt at odds with the US preference for

peaceful end more gradual chenge.
A. Continuing Irpediments

20. At the ssme time, several factors will work to impede

Fosser's efforts to enhance his position in Africa. In general,

Arabs remain somewhat suspect in the eyes of Bleck Africans 2 who
still remerber thea as the slave treders of past generations. In
the case of the UAR, that fear 1s incressed even more because of

en awareness that Esypt ie secking to extend its_political in-
fluence in Africa, -In these circumstances, Israel often appears

; to be a safer source of old end technical assistance to many African
_etates, This, in tum; heo in the past tended to counteract
Fayptian propaganda ebout Israeli Juperlalist designs. Moreover,
Calro's Moslem ties are currently a-liebility-in parte of Kast Africa
where considerable wnfavoreble attention has been given to the

persecution of the Christien minority by Sudanese Moslems. In many

oe ¢

Sain - cr et PTET ETE TOOL
+ iy a 2 / : eo
« Me a 7” «

LYNDON 2AINES JOHNSON |

West Afxicen states, too, a major division exists between the-
Moslem populetion in the northern sectors and the Christian and
pogen elements in the south. Hence, mejor segments of the popula-

tion continue to be wory of the UAR's Mosien influences.

ah. - jeuenete own interests will, ab times, conflict with the
pursuit of his Africen policy. Cemmituents to Algeriup Prime
}iinister Ben Bella receatly necessitated Feyptien involvement in
the Algerlan/Moroccen border dispute. Heavyhanded Egyptian
~ petivities on behalf of the Algerians in this exisis provoked much
unfavorable ccument in Black Africa. Finally, Nasser has fre-
quently rade wowise choices in those 3ndividuals he has backe’d to
achieve external political objectives even in the Middle Feat.
In the shifting political tides ef Black Africa, thera are few

femiliar guideposts.
B ‘&ah Dividends Likely

22. Nasser hes equated the problem of- the whites in South
Africa with that which the Arsh world faces in Israel. Me considers ~
both groups elfen intruders vith no rights to the lend they occupy.
Such 6 rAlitent line ig a populer one in Africa, and the UAR will

trumet this line in hopes of exalting its leadership role there.

-13-

3

~EOPY--

LYNDON GAINES JOHNSON |

Nasser may begin to back wp his vords with deeds by shipping eral.
guantit ties of arms to the natioualist movenents in southern Africa.
Training for rebel. forces, which is already occurring on a minor
scale, wih probably increase Dut is unlikely to reach the propor
tions of, ESY, Pen Fella's or Nkcureh's efforts. Most guerrilla
training will fall under the tacit sponsorship of the ALC, but
Nasser will almost certainly sponsor seme of his own chosen

nationalists.

23. a6 4s difficult to judge whether or not Nasser's many

* -wentures in Africa emount to much. For example, it is virtually
Smpossible to measure the Simpact of the Voice of Free Africa or

the lesting effect of the Fayptien religious teachers ebroed, To
the extent that Nasser continues to subsidize these activities, at
least he is apparently convinced of their effectiveness. Ca: 4,
balence, we believe thet Nasser is unlikely to achieve a high degree .
of political dafieenes in Black Africas Indeed, should strains
betveen the Areb and African worlds grow over the next few years,

puch Jofluence es Fasser now has in Tropicel Africa would also wane,

FOR {HE BOARD OF RATLONAL ESTIMATES: :
SHERMAN KENT
Chairman
wow jhe

“COPY: -

SS asks tot hfs in de ahaa a ua’ aaa .
