General Concept of Discussions with DeletedD) Prepairing Him for Forthcoming Ca
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135824, dated 6 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135824).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

23 Jan, 1954

Subjects GENERAL COMEPT OF DISCUSSIONS WITH é ) REPARING

HIM FOR FORTHCOMING CALIGERIS MEETING

I. This memo is prepared for approval C/P PBSUCCESS prior to
subject conference, && being the general baxt« ef planning now
peing conducted within the rrefect in the ( )steld. It is

slanted toward setting ( in en advantageous position inso
fac es his forthcoming meting with CALLIGERIS is conderned and
Will be foklowed up in { )_CALLIGERIS meeting and Calligeris- |

( ) discussions te follow.
IL FACTORS DETERMINING THE CORSIDERED PLAN OF ACTION:

aA Former @XLLIGERIS planning has been considered carefully, and
with the following exceptions the main context of PBSUCCESS thinking
adheres as neavly as possible to CALLIGERIS's prior concept!

a 1. It 4s considered that extreme care mst be taken to svoit
putting all our assets into any situation, the compromise of which

along main communication routes. Compartmentation of unite is sought, also.
2. For the same reason, ths approsch to Puerto Barrios is
being considered Jand-approach to prevent the obvious containment
and easy destruction of Calligeris forces in the event recent
notification of "3s aks" to the opposition are mre compaste than
redlised (an entirely possible situatibn).
3. With a realization that to allow this movement to become
a prolonged civil war would present major complications in addition
to allowing opposition to strengthen its tactical situation while
ours bogged down, it is considered that each possible strongpoint
of the opposition should be accounted for simltansously rather than
piecemeal,
h. Utility of bombing tactics to neutralize any strongpoint has
been eliminated, even 56 2 psychological factor, in view of the fact
that the very concept of the movement is that of release of persons
ffom oppression and all actions mst allow this discontented element
to participate in the overthrow of opression or a least aid by sympathy.
Our tactics mst vere away from terrorism of this faction and vere towards

inviting participation.

ee @ &

5. Techniques of partisan warfare will be applied in the tested and
manner to best support more conventional military tactics, This
technique of combining the two types of tactics has proven itself in
reducing the number of personnel and the. magnitude of support neccessary
to overwhelm superior forces many times in history.

6. Techniques in logistics are being applied to elixinate the massive
logistical problem mi its Uimitations to mobility and actions of normal
military tactics.

7. Communications has been brought to a maximum of dependability.

8, Utilization of all potential personnel, some of which though
now unknown, will through organization becoms "the thousand bee-stings
which Kill the tiger" which Mao Tae Tung so successfully utilized to

overthrow superior forces.

proven

B, Realization that there can be no failure, both fron( )ucatti-
GERIS! standpoint and ours, and that gside from known opposition tactics
sod precautionary measures the third factor of being up sgainst trained
Commnist tacticiams in the field of security, staybehind, subversion,
intrigue, ete., all of us involved mst overplan, ove are, and be
prepared to “drive the tack with the sledgehammer" in the event the
tack turns out to be a railroad spike.

JI. FRAMEWORK OF GENERAL PLANNING:

4 4. the key targets under consideration, those felt neccessarily. to
be controled to completely insure total success are! 4
Guatauala garrisons, air facilities, comm, (Guatemala City)
Puerto Barrios port, air facilities, comm, and garrisonk
Jutiapa GarrisonE, comm, and air facilities
Zacapa garrison , comm, mnt. fie FBP es :
Magatenago, “uesaltenango and Quiche garrisons, commo and air facilities
Coban aif facilities, commo and garrison
San Jose garrison and port facilities and commo

B, The ideal would be simltaneous containment and siezure of control.
of each key target using known and physically directed shock troops with
supporting partisans in each instance.

C, In all actuality, once the entire assets of Calligeris are brought
to the surface and evaluated and assigned missions, the approach to esch
target will be different but will follow one of the following patterns?

1. “trike the feasible targets with shock troops and inner organi-
gation, while having pre-devaloped the others to a point of Self-siezure
and eventual pre-planned assenbly with shock troops and resulting recruits
from ‘ther targets.

2. Strike the feasible targets as above, and BASSE develop the
feasible targets to a point of self siezure, and block the remaining targets
through spotting of sabateur teams along routes of egresx from the remaingng
targets, and through organization of block areas in which small equipped and
directed units harrasse md retard any desired military movement until
effective consolidation can be attained at our strong points.

@ & g @

3, In all eventuzlities target sab teams at comm at each target,
existing military air facilities, and at any possible trengportation
tie-up situation. In all eventualities utilise all pertisan units
possible to be formed st any point in Guatamla uhere a singls Calligeris
man can be located.

nt. [ «BASIS OF PLANNINGE;

A, The key to the country's survival is Guatamle City. Thelifelins
(so long as Hondures, £1 Salvador, and Mexico remain reluctant to support
the present Guatemalan regims) is the port at Puerto Barrios. Jutiapa,
Zacapa, ami Coban should be cdntrolled before penetration beyond then to
prevent reorganization behind car moverent and eventual entrapment.
SanJose Should be controlled es s possible substitute for PuertoBarrios,
an encirclement of Guatamala City, and as e port of entry for our novensnt
4n eventual emloymnt of prolonged hostilities, Maratenango, Quesaltenango,
add Quiche pose distance and logistical problers plus a personnel drain,
plus a remotensss which calls for possibilities of the block manner of
containasnt, that causes us to search for self-siersure and block proceedures
which will control the situation until consolidation of other gains is
comilsted,

C, Roughly. pending receipt of intelligence expected ss 8 result of
U LLIGERIS matings (it should be brought ovt constantly
that all planning at this stage is based on rumor end that total/ ( _ known
assets, the reliability of whidh is unknown, consists of eleven trainees for

)olnus four trainees for ( Jit is felt that inner organization

Of the Guatemala complex will be the main source for immdiste, physical
eeisure of control. It is estimated that sufficient shocktroops could not
be assetbled outside the country to accomplish the job. I¢ diseussion with
Calligeris proves that the immer aszets in the Guatemala City area are
sufficient to attempt (with high percentage of success chance) striking
at Guatemala Gity instantaneously and in concurrence with sieaure of
Puerto Barrios, Zacapa, Jutiapa and San Jose, the major portion off available
forces vill be directed at Gustemla City, utilizing the orgénization of
4nner assets and surrounding areas at tha other sites to obtain control,
(control here mans physical control, without assurance of which, Guatemla
City should jut on « secopds 4s chronologically. speaking and
nen re ae See Ae our planning to insure this physical control).

D. Preliminary reports on our assets plus distance and elamentsofe
suprise factors may well dictate a course which calls for satting up
Guatemala Gity inner organization to the point where if a move is made by
the Guatemala Cantral Commnd to move & partial force towarda Zacapas
Jutiapa, Puerto Barrios, or Coban or San dose, the inner organization
would make its bid while partisan organization arouhd Guatemala City
retarded, harassed and generally set uo the partial force for anhialation
by the Zacapa, Jutiapa, PuertoEarrios, Coban, and San Jose Forces.

SLMEGE peated SP ohana bE re EG Uebs ated fas
ae Sate St Mee Sin, See ET seh Serra a yas

@ @ eo ©

The Idea of being capable of taking over if Quatemla City forces are
depleted can be promoted to the point where the Guatemala City Command
will be detained, at least partially. Seb action against air facilities
and como Will be executed ERUIESE similtancous with D-day, with possible
Ktesm action at the same time against key figures. All other assets
within the inner oggenization would remain covert, their plan eslling

for action on depletion of Central Comsand forces designed to take control.
or recall the comitted troops, or for action couse Callegeris' Zacapa,
Jutiapa, Coban, and Puerto Barrios and San Jose forces were consolidated,

E, It is contemplated thst the terrain and distance situation slong
with professed Cahklegeris assets and reported opposition OB, would allow
shock troops to be app&fed against Sutiapa, Zacapa, and Puerto Barrios.
These shock troops would travel in small compact unite utilising beck
treils and prohibitive terrain to mintain non-detection insomich 8s
possible, and relying on mobility and concealment to disguise location
if datection unavoidable. On Day these three forces would be in *
respective positions, the exact nature of which to be determined following
more extensive terrain and intelligence studies, Present figures available,
unevaluated, peport the following situation, personnel-wise, some of which
will be cleared up following a disevssion with Callegeris:
Zecepase.eeopposition consists of 6 officers, 9 enlisted Guardia
38 officers, 601 " Military
323 Callegeris assets 200 within Zacapa (no indica~
tion military stetus)
/ SOO various localities approx
Jutdapa..oppesition consists of LU: officers, 199enlisted Guardia

Callegeris assets 300 within Jutiape
300 warious localities approx
Fuerto Earrios sppesition
28 Officers, 283 enlisted Military
Callegeris assets 59 overall vicinity
Cobanss Opposition (not extracting @a¥Regeris assets repertedly
strong) |) Officers 6) enlisted
Guardia,
23 Officers, 295 man Military
Callegeris assets 2000 reported combination
military and surrounding pop~-
ulace
San Jose..Opposition 2 Officers 28 enlisted Guardia
15 Cfficers, 208 anlisted, Mil.
Ca legeris assets 2000 (reported by ( jin
preliminary discussions)

@ ® @ @

F. While the above does not in any way constitute ea reliable estimate
of the situation it does give us a basis for planning ay confirmation
or rejection of portions af the knowledge should be possible following
the forthcoming metings. Tentatively, the basis of thinking allows for
Zacapa shock troops to sieze gantrol and move out to approx U,°S3" Long
90° lat. to form assembly with Coban forces moving down parallel to

the Coban-Salama-Morasan highway. It is tentatively planned to alene
control of Coban through reported Callegeris'assets within the Garrison
and sugemsnt that farce with pledged populace (reported ) moving through
Salama on the journey to the assembly. On assembly, and in ling with the
existing situation a movement towards Suatemla by this force could

be commenced.

Joutiapa seisurs would be affected in the same manner from a comartmented
staging base just across the “alvador border, Upen completion of this
seigure 4t would turn parsllel to the mair highway to a point soms five miles
east of Laguna de Amatitlan to join with forces from San Jose and turn towards
Guatemala City, The seisure of San Jose would be dependent on the facts
learned from the coming Calligaris meeting as to the true idsantity of the
2,000 reported personnel in the area.

G, Due to distance, logistical problems ani reed to utilise personnel at
the foregoing projects the ideal will be to organize Mazaltenango, Quizal-
tenanco and Quicha to the point of self-seizure. A study of personnel of
those garrisons my disclose gimmicks wita which we can force key military
figures to employ a ~2tin-type retardation, insuring that thesa forces do

not enter into the tactical picture in tims to alter it. Tne probable situs-
tion will be a series of retardation events set up by organization of the
area between these three sites and Guatemala City defigned to delay reinforce-
ment from these three sites until consolidation of the other targets as corm
pleted, :

RB, Contingency viens she.id eccount for 1, employment of Guatemala forces
to the aid of our initial turgets(wnich contingenc has been generally cone
sidered in the above perazrephs); 2. retirement of “cetemalang forces to
Quezaltenango as has been reported to be the Guatemalan plan, in tuis letter
event it is nov being considered most feasible to compic te tne cavitation oF
Gistemala City set wp egainst returred activities from the ~uesaltenange

area and explete solid reorgenisation before turning t the Quezalterange
croblem, After solid ergenivation it would be considered within our capa~
pilities to té6 the forces st Wuezeltenanzo cy straimni ottack. 3, Huskinotner
fermi contingency would be for Guatemala City to prepere for 2 state of
siege in whicn casé reorganization following seizure of inc liiiel targets
could be carried ent wille insuring isolation ef Gertevela vite from re-supviy
cr reinforcement.

A. Communications men now comaencing training vill prodgice two types of
radio operators. One types is to te ealied resident &/Ua and will be placed
in the vicinity of target sites,eas yet unselected points, for the purpose oF
reperting last mimte changes in 0B, Once ths tactical situation opens ups

ee @ ¢€

we will revert to tactical R/Os who have previously been married to specific

shock troop units, Until the tactical situation opens up Commo will be processed

through outside (Zink LINC). It ie expected agent-to—Calligeris service will
be a 6-hour progess, Once the tactical situation opens up arrangements have
been made for unit-to—Celligeris-to-unit-info LINC service, The messages will
be sent in code due to the dependability of the RS-l set to be used on this
oparation, Resident R/Os will have their radios delivered to them once they
are in position, Tactical R/Os are expected to be paired end will carry RS-ls

in packs.
¥. LOGISTICS:

A. The logistical sipport has been broken down into three categories?
1. Westher-proofed kits of approximately 50 lbs. weight, the con -
tents of which are grouped to service partisans, sabdeurs and R/Os,
Approximately 12 March the total of these iits will arrive by plane
at fields near the staging areas for distribution as needed. The
sun total of equipment to ba packaged is outlined .

. Ne
7 if
