NSC BRIEFING 28 September 1960


CUBA


I. Castro regime has become virtually a member of Soviet bloc.


iY
CA.


\


During 25 September private talk with Castro in New York, ee

ae --: the strong feeling that Castro is “neither

independent nor neutral, but is already committed to the Soviet

bloc."

First tajor bloc arms shipment arrived 8 September.

1. Included ten tanks, 100 antiaircraft guns, machineguns, large
quantities of ammo and électronic equipment.

2. More ships en route.

ee augnes of Cubans have been undergoing training.in Czecho-


Slovakia for some months, possibly for jet aircraft.


II, Provocative anti-US acts continue.


A.


Ambassador Bonsal noted that 19 September demonstrators protest-
ing alleged indignities suffered by Castro in New York were
unusually determined and could easily have been incited to
violence had government so desired.

An embassy officer recently informed by a friend in ee
foreign ministry that Cuba preparing break diplomatic relations
with US,


1. New Cuban chargé in Washington may provoke US request for


his recall as pretext for ouster of US Ambassador.


2m 1


SECRET


Castro regime has apparently decided to launch campaign de-

Signed to cause US to evacuate Guantanamo naval base.

1. Campaign would probably be- launched at a new "Assembly of
Cuban People" called at time regime feels it needs a new


dramatic appeal for popular support.


Likely to be in form of strong propaganda campaign aimed


at subjecting US to worldwide pressure on issue, and could
be accompanied by provocative acts designed to force US
counteraction that could be exploited in propaganda,

Might also involve appeal to UN Security Council or General
Assembly. (On leaving New York 28 Sept, Castro said he
‘would return in week or ten days.)

Such a campaign would be consistent with Cuban Communist
party program adopted at August congress.

Trends toward tighter dictatorship and increased Communist control

continue.

A. Last independent TV-radio network seized 12 September.

B. Last vestiges of an independent judiciary fast disappearing under
pressure government campaign to “revolutionize" judicial branch.
“United front" groups being formed in municipalities i#hm an evident
Communist effort to build Communist-dominated political machine at
grass roots.

Communists have now virtually completed capture of powerful Con-
federation of Cuban Workers (CTC), which takes leading role in
organizing Castro's mass rallies. ‘


ay


IV. Goveroment facing growing unrest.


A. Guerrilla activity continues in Escambray mountains and govern-
meot apparently having trouble in efforts to destroy the esti-
mated several hundred guerrillas.

1. An American engineer who had been working in area said 16
September that situation becoming too dangerous to continue;
prolonged gunfire heard nightly and travel on roads hazardous
even in daytime.

2. He added that one guerrilla band composed of about 200 well-
armed and well—trained ex-Castro soldiers.

3. Other sources report guerrillas getting stronger with new
recruits and supplies coming in from opposition groups in
Havana, other cities. However, guerrilla bands still apparent-
ly divided into mutually antagonistic groups.

B. Spontaneous clashes between pro-—Castro and anti-Communist groups
in a town in Matanzas province led to anti-government demonstra-
tions suppressed only after police and militia fired into
demonstrators. Resentment high.

C. Workers on Havana's waterfront grumbling at Communist seizure
of unions and over their own declining income.


S


l. They also complain at exacting requirements of Soviet ships


loading sugar.
Vv. Economy showing signs of serious weakness.
A. Cost of living rising steadily and consumer goods getting scarce.
B. Nationalized oil refineries forced to cut back because of short-


ages in catalysts used in refining process.


23%


\ A.


_SECRET™


Al high sulfur Cowen of Soviet oil causing corrosion
so,


in refineries, which are having trouble getting needed spare
: ’


parts.


Heavy lubricants also in short supply and government attempt-


ing to force private companies in US to front for govern~


ment purchases,


VI. In Castro speech last night, two notable points.


Stated again that would recover Guantanamo through


“international Law",


Called for formation of local “vigilante commét tees "——apnears
to be Communist "block Systen” of informers.
