1. Good Performance of Soyuzzoloto During the 1970'S 2. Origin and Development
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000102949, dated 6 August 1984.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000102949).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DOMESTIC COLLECTION DIVISION

FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE INFORMATION REPORT

WARNING NOTICE—-INTELLIGENCE SOURCES OR METHODS INVOLVED

STATE DIA NSA OCR DDI/SAG 10 COMMERCE
FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT TO CONTROLS $s

STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT PAGE lo
THIS 1S AN INFORMATION REPORT, NOT FINALLY EVALUATED INTELLIGENCE

COUNTRY: USSR DATE DISTR. 29 SEPTEMBER 1984
SUBJ: 1. Good Performance of Soyuzzoloto During the 1970's

2. Origin and Development of Artels in the Soviet Gold Mining

Industry
DOI: 1940-1955 and 1974-1981 :

SUMMARY: During the 1970's, the All-Union Industrial Association for Gold
Mining (Soyuzzoloto) almost always filled its plan, which in 1978 called for
production of 308 metric tons of gold at .999 percent purity. In 1981, the
plan increased to 318 at. The artel systez played a major role in the
successes of the Soviet gold mining industry during the 1970's, producing 35

Approved for Release,
Date. g: yee es >

. a“ WARNING NOTICE
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES OR METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT

PACE 2 of S

percent of the country's gold in 1978. The first artel in the industry was
founded in 1951 or 1952 in the Chelbanya Gold Field near Susuman. It
consisted of only six people. Still earlier, the mines of the 1940's were
worked almost exclusively by prisoners. The largest construction project in
the Magadan area during the early 1940's was a 600 kilometer road to supply
gold fields and prison camps. About 400,000 prisoners worked on the road.
U.S. envoy Sumner Wells visited a gold mine on it in 1944 during an evaluation
of Soviet capacity to repay Lend-Lease equipment.

TEXT: 1. From 1974-1979, the All-Union Industrial Arsociation for Gold
(Soyuzzoloto), which was subordinate to the Ministry of Nom-Ferrous Metallurgy
(Mintsvetmet), was headquartered on Prospekt Kalinina in Moscow. In 1979, the
Chief of Soyuzzoloto was Petr Trofimovich ((Zhmurko)) and total employees of
Soyuzzoloto at its headquarters location numbered approximately 150. Within
Mintsvetmet, Soyuzzoloto had the status of a main administration (glavk).

~ 2s Mintevetmet established five-year and annual All-Union plans for
gold mining, and Soyuzzolote was responsible for meeting them.-In1978,>the -.~

“““anaual All-Union plan called for the mining of 308 metric, tons-(mt) of gold*at -=<7 =
999 percent purity. In that year s in-almost all others during the 1970's,-
Soyuzzoloto fulfilled its plan. gagememmomment: Source could not recall a os
year in which Soyuzzoloto failed ulfill its plan, but he was not
sufficiently certain to assert that at no time during the 1970's did it fall
short.) According to a person who continued to be employed in Soyuzzoloto
through 1981, the plan for 1981 was 318 mt. (QM Comment: The increase in
plan from 1978 was probably realistic because Soyuzzoloto had a good record of
meeting its plans. In addition, for subsequent years, additional increases
should be possible because of the new find on Novaya Zemlya, which employees
of Soyuzzoloto said is extremely rich. Moreover, Mintsvetmet was allowing the
Artel System to expand at the expense of the state-operated mines of the State
Mining System, and the former was historically much more efficient than the

latter.)

3. Throughout the period 1974-1979, the Artel System (Staratel'skaya
Sistema Dobychi) grew steadily at the expense of the State Mining System
(Gosudarstvennaya Sistema Dobychi). The State System typically worked a gold
field which was divided into at least three sections (uchastki) with 600

roximately 100 were administrators or

“depending “Wpoa “senjority :and

WARNING NOTICE
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES OR METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT

PAGE 3 ofS

the latter earned between 200 and 300 new rubles per month. Unlike the 1940's
and 1950's, almost all of these employees were free laborers (vol'no-nayeanyye
rabochiye) rather than prisoners. On average during the 1970's, one gram of
gold cost from 16 to 18 rubles to produce under the State Mining System. ‘The
typical artel, on the other hand, had about 500 workers, of whom only 10 were
administrators. It bought and maintained its own equipment, unlike the field
of the State Mining System, and che artels as a whole were noted for the speed
with which they repaired their equipment and for its generally good

condition. In 1978, artels were selling gold to Soyuzzoloto for only five to
six rubles per gram and were paying their workers an average of more than 1000
rubles per month. The total share of gold produced by artels reached 35
percent in 1978 (up from zero in 1953), and senior officials of Soyuzzoloto
expected that the artel share would reach 50 percent by 1984.

: 4 Despite their glaringly superior productivity, artels were opposed
by some officials of Mintevetmet and Soyuzzoloto on the grounds that they were.
a capitalist system of production.. Comment: This was obviously |. ore
true.) “Another source of constant irritation was that the most p-oficient
workers of the State Mining System quit, whenever they could, to switch to
artels in order to quadruple or quintuple their wages. Within Mintsvetmet,
the official whose support of artels turned out to be crucial to their :
growth during the 1970's was Vladimir Ivanovich ((Lezhkov)), who acted as Premier

Aleksey HN. Kosygin's referent for gold mining.

5. The very first artel in the Soviet gold mining industry was created
in 1951 or 1952 at the Chelbanya Gold Field (Priisk), located approximately 12
kilomatars (km) to the west of Susuman in Siberia. While a totally new
organizational form, this artel did have an antecedent at Chelbanya itself:
free labor (vol'no-nayemnyye rabochiye) as opposed to prisoner labor. During
the period 1950-1953, the Chelbanya Gold Field was subdivided into four
geographical sections: Section 1 (l-yy), Section 2, Section 3 and the
Zhelaniye Section, which was named after a stream which flowed through it. At
each of the first three sections, Chelbanya employed approximately 2000
prisoners, while at the Zhelaniye Section, it employed only about 1000 free
workers; despite the disparity, the output of Zhelaniye was approximately the
same as the output at each of the first three sections because the free labor
force was much more efficient. The free workers of the Zhelaniye sector were
former prisoners who had completed their prison sentences, but were still 24,5.

rnal or ;several ‘yea ‘Six of 3

“subject to interna Texile*f these workers. ‘vere s
& oe : Poe:

x

3 : ARP Say 8
2 oe, ht Wea ATS

WARNING NOTICE
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES OR METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT

PAGE 49fS

organized as an artel on the following three basic conditions: they would pay
their own salaries; they would buy and maintain their own equipment; and they
would sell gold to the state at 4 ptice of one-third that of the rest of the
Chelbanya Gold Field. :

6. By way of comparison, gold mined by the prisoners in Sections 1, 2
and 3 of Chelbanya from 1950-1953 cost about eight old rubles per gram to
produce, and gold produced by the free workers of the Zhelaniye Section cost
about six old rubles per gram. The prisoners were unpaid, while the free
workers of the Zhelaniye Section earned between 1000 and 2000 old rubles per
month. All mining was from shallow drafts, none of which was deeper than 50
meters (m). Mining operations occurred only during the four summer months; it
vas too cold during the remainder of the year. The purity was «820 to .880,
and costs were calculated per gram at that purity. However, Chelbanya's
annual plan, which was three and one-half mt of gold during the years
1950-1953, was stated in gold of a purity of .999. Chelbanya's production was. --,...

picked up twice each week and trucked, under guard, to Magadan. From there, aS.
: a refinery in ‘Novosibirsk. «. Offic.als of ithe ‘Chelbenya “field

wich .999 ‘purity gold they had mined each week Until the wr re
‘Novosibirsk refinery notified thea. La a Ee eer a ee ee ee

7. Another Siberian field, the Perspektivayy Gold Field, mined about
two and one-half ut of gold per year during the period 1953-1955. Located
about five km south fo Susuman, it employed about 1500 prisoners and 1500 free
workers. It mined by surface drag lines and washed its ore with high pressure
hoses.

8. During the late 1930's and early 1940's, supply of the very large
number of gold fields in the Magadan area was greatly hampered by the poor
road network. Accordingly, the single largest construction project in the
area from 1940-1947 was a 600 km road linking Susuman and Khandyga. The
project was handled by a Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) aduinistration
called UDORLAG (Upravientye Dorogami Lageryey, i.e-, Administration of Roads
for Camps). UDORLAG's headquarters was located at Adigkhalakh, which was
located about halfway between Susuman and the village of Myakit on the toad.
All labor used on the project consisted of prisoners; about 400,000 prisoners
As the project developed, 4 prison camp was

d, and its prisoners were responsible
Sra other caap ee See

WARNING NOTICE
INTELLIGENCE SOURCES OR METHODS INVOLVED

FURTHER DISSEMINATION AND USE OF THIS INFORMATION SUBJECT
TO CONTROLS STATED AT BEGINNING AND END OF REPORT

PAGE 5 gf >

9. Actual supply of the camps and the gold mines during the 1940's in
the Magadan area was handled by an MVD administration called KOLYMSNAB (Kolyma
Snabzheniye, i.e., Kolyma Supply). The goods which KOLYMSNAB procured were
transported for it to the various mines and camps by another MVD
administration called TRANSLAG (Transport Lageryey, 1.e., Transport for
Camps). The headquarters of TRANSLAG was in the village of Myakit between
Susuman and Khandyga. . . er:

10. In 1944, the U.S. envoy Sumner ((Wells)) visited TRANSLAG's
headquarters in Myakit on an inspection of the gold fields with the aim of
ascertaining whether gold production would be sufficient to repay U.S.
Lend-Lease. His visit was coordinated by Colonel (FNU) ((Markov)), Chief of
Translag. Markov ordered very extensive preparations in advance of Wells'
visit. All prison camps within sight of the roads on which Wells would travel
were dismantled, including all fences and guard facilities. Oo the actual day
Wells arrived, all prisoners were marched deep into the taiga, out of sight.
Because Wells was to visit the Komsomol'sk Gold Field, the director of that... .—:
field was ordered to allow several days’ worth of ‘panned gold to accumulate’ ‘ia’
his screens, and he was to inform Wells that the total amount visible in the
screens had been produced on the day of the visit. Also on that day, all
prisoner workers at the field were dressed in civilian clothes. Most nae
important to Markov, all evidence tiat the prisoner-miners were receiving U.S.
rations was obliterated, because the rations were supposed to be. destined only
for military units. In fact, during much of 1944 the gold niner-prisoners
were being fed Lipton tea, white bread from U.S. flour and U.S. canned meat
and vegetables. (@@S@QMB Comment: This attests to the extreme importance
which Soviet authorities placed on gold mining.) Wells expressed satisfaction
with his visit to Colonel Markov. Shortly after Wells left, Markov was
promoted to the position of Secretary of the Oblast' Party Committee in

Chukhotsk.
