The Political Situation in Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119173, dated 3 April 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119173).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

S ET SNIE 93-64
CONTR@LLED DISSEM 27 May 1964
4-b
_

LB] LIBRARY

Mandatory vie

Case # NLJ 35

Document #
SPECIAL

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
| NUMBER 93-64

The Political Situation in Brazil

Submitted by the
"DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD
_ As indicated overleaf
27 MAY 1964

APPROVED FOR RELEASH |
sep 11997 He ne 2
| CONTR@LLED DISSEM °

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate: ee
The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and NSA. 7-7 wets BES ely

Concurring: , aS :
Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State :
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency , oe

Director of the National Security Agency on ol a “a my 7

Abstaining: -
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the Assistant Di-
rector, Federal Bureau. of Investigation, the subject being outside of their

jurisdiction.

This material contains information affegting the National Defense of the United States.
within the meaning of the espion aws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of whichggwany manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

3 seg

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 93-64

The Political Situation in Brazil

Bee

THE POLITICAL
SITUATION § IN
BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To assess the stability of the Castello Branco regime and the
outlook in Brazil during his stated term in office.

CONCLUSIONS

A. President Castello Branco, whose term runs through Jan-
uary 1966, probably will provide reasonably effective political
leadership along moderate reformist lines.’ It is unlikely that
the supporters of deposed President Goulart will be able to mount
a serious challenge to the stability of the new regime, although
some leftist extremists may attempt demonstrative acts of vio-
lence to discredit it. The principal danger to the stability of
the new regime is the possibility of a falling out between Castello
Branco and some groups within the military who want a more
thorough purge of the old political order. We believe that, with
some concessions to expediency, he will succeed in maintainmg
general control of the situation. (Paras. 2-15)

B. Brazil’s economic and social problems—worsened but not
caused by Goulart’s disruptive rule—are not amenable to quick

1The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State, feels that
the thrust of this estimate is overly optimistic in several respects. He believes
that it does not adequately take into account the enormous gravity and many-
sided challenge of the politica] situation; the persisting confrontation of power-
ful forces on both the right and the left which will hamstring necessary reformist
action; the political inexperience of the President and most of his Cabinet and the
absence of enough qualified second- and third-level technical personnel; and the
prospective destabilizing role of some of the revolution’s military leaders who
would emphasize continuing repressive action at the expense of meaningful social
reforms. For these reasons, the Director believes that there is an even chance
that the regime will slip into increasing authoritarianism, thus precipitating
another constitutional crisis within the period of the estimate.

gt 1

al

or painless solutions. The new regime is likely to take construc-
tive steps on several fronts, but over the next year or so it probably
will be unable to do much more than to lay a basis for future
progress. It probably will enact a number of social reforms as
an earnest of its concern for Brazil’s depressed classes, but will
concentrate initially on combatting inflation and on other meas-
ures needed to get the economy rolling again. For political rea-
sons, however, it probably will stop short of stringent austerity
measures. It will need considerable foreign economic assistance
to reschedule Brazil’s huge short-term debt and to help cushion
the shock of the economic stabilization measures it does under-
take. (Paras. 16-21)

sett

DISCUSSION

1. Many of Brazil’s recent difficulties stem from deeply rooted eco-
nomic and social problems common to countries undergoing moderniza-
tion. They also spring, however, from the easygoing economic policies
of a succession of post-war governments (notably those of Vargas,
Kubitschek, and Goulart), political instability, and in particular the
demagogic and self-serving policies of President Goulart. Brazil’s prob-
lems will not be amenable to quick or painless solutions, but the April
revolution has provided an opportunity for a new and more sensible
approach and the Castello Branco regime gives promise of making a
constructive effort.

The New Regime

2. President Humberto Castello Branco, one of the chief architects of
Goulart’s overthrow, was chosen by the military leaders of the revoiu-
tion with the acquiescence of the political leaders involved and was
subsequently elected by Congress to hold office until the end of Janu-
ary 1966.2 A 63-year-old career Army officer, he has had no previous
political experience, but is noted for his intellect, integrity, and courage.
His cabinet is composed primarily of technicians without personal politi-
cal strength, but with a generally high level of professional competence.
Moreover, he has the advantage of the extraordinary powers conferred
upon him by the “Institutional Act,” which the military considered
necessary to implement the aims of the revolution? On the whole,
we believe that Castello Branco will provide the responsible and effec-
tive leadership that was sorely lacking during the presidency of Goulart.

3. Castello Branco came to office at a time when the country was
ready for a drastic change in national leadership. While few Brazilians
expected to see the military take a strong hand in structuring the new

* Castello Branco’s mandate covers the unexpired term of Janio Quadros, whose
resignation in 1961 led to the succession of Vice President Goulart. On 2 April
the President of the Senate declared that Goulart had vacated his office, where-
upon the President of the Chamber of Deputies became acting President pend-
ing the election of a new President by Congress. During that interval, however,
the real power of government was exercised by the military Supreme Revolu-
tionary Command.

>This “Institutional Act,” decreed by the Supreme Revolutionary Command on
the basis of its revolutionary authority, supersedes the Constitution in certain
particulars, confirming it in other respects. It not only provided for the im-
mediate election of a President (the Constitution required a 30-day delay), but
authorized him to cancel the mandates of elected federal, state, and local officials,
to remove political appointees and civil servants, and to deprive individuals of
their political rights for ten years. Legislation proposed by him will become
law unless acted on by Congress within 30 days; the procedure for amending
the Constitution has been simplified.

spgffer 3

of

government, they were relieved to see a moderate military figure take
office. Some believed Castello Branco would have a better chance
than a civilian of introducing honest and effective government, in-
cluding a progressive economic program. Others thought that a mili-
tary man was needed to root out Communist influence in the govern-
ment and the political process.

4. The post-revolutionary situation still is too fluid for a definitive
assessment of the political lineup for and against the new regime.
For one thing, the Castello Branco administration is just beginning
to define its policies on the numerous problems which confront Brazil.
To begin with, it had the general approval of those who supported or
at least welcomed the revolution: nearly all military officers, most fed-
eral and state political leaders, and much of the population at large—
probably a substantial majority of the literate half. Already, however,
misgivings are being expressed about the extent of the purge of office
holders and the possibility of military-conservative domination of the
government.

5. The administration is not formally associated with any political
party. On the whole, it is centrist and moderately reformist in political
orientation and is likely to find general support for its policies in
Congress, where a large majority of the members are of similar orienta-
tion. This Congressional majority is normally fragmented by commit-
ments to particular parties, states, and special interest groups, but the
administration, armed with the extraordinary powers conferred by the
Institutional Act, should have no difficulty in obtaining desired legis-
lation.

6. The administration is attempting to formalize its political support
by organizing a pro-government coalition to which the National Demo-
cratic Union (led by Carlos Lacerda), the Social Progressive Party (led
by Adhemar de Barros), and several minor parties will probably adhere.
The Social Democratic Party of Juscelino Kubitschek will probably
support the administration without joining the coalition, so long as it
can hope thereby to avert repressive action against itself as a party
in the Vargas tradition. The surviving, moderate elements of Goulart’s
Brazilian Labor Party have declared themselves to be in “intelligent
opposition” to the new administration, which presumably means that
they will avoid provoking it.

7. Some political opposition will almost certainly develop as the
administration’s actual programs become more clearly defined and as
the time for the next presidential election (due to be held in October
1965) approaches. Regardless of party affiliation, the representatives of
vested interests adversely affected by administration programs will seek
to obstruct or alter them, covertly if not openly. On the other hand, if
these programs do not seriously affect such interests, then even moderate

, a

spf

reformists will criticize them as inadequate and deceptive. In anticipa-
tion of the election, all parties will be seeking vote-getting issues, at the
expense of the incumbent administration unless they have reason to
expect its favor. There are already pressures on Castello Branco to
alter radically the existing party structure, to postpone the election,
or to modify drastically the electoral procedure. Administration action
along these lines would be likely to precipitate a political crisis.

Political Stability

8. We foresee no serious challenge to the stability of the Castello
Branco regime from leftist extremists—unless it becomes generally dis-
credited or loses its strong military support. Goulart and his supporters
were evidently surprised by the military coup and unprepared to resist
it; most of the elements thought friendly to Goulart accepted his over-
throw with apparent indifference or resignation. The leftist extremists
who gave militant support to Goulart’s aborted drive for increased power
were a small minority to begin with and now are in considerable dis-
array, with many leaders in exile, in hiding, or in jail. Moreover, the
expulsion of extremists from the official positions in the bureaucracy,
labor organizations, and universities which they had gained under
Goulart probably has deprived them of much of their influence over
left-leaning sectors of the population. Almost certainly they will be
unable to muster sufficient strength for a successful counter-coup during
the period of this estimate.

9. Some leftist extremists may eventually attempt demonstrative acts
of violence to discredit the new regime. The most likely sources of these
efforts are the Castroist groups—including those dominated by Leonel
Brizola, Goulart’s brother-in-law; the Peasant Leagues of the ‘North-
east; and the small dissident Communist Party. The Moscow-line
Brazilian Communist Party is likely to refrain from provocative acts,
hoping eventually to regain freedom of action under a civilian President
such as Kubitschek. The extremists probably do not now command
enough trained and willing activists to launch insurgency on an im-
pressive scale. However, they probably could engage in hit-and-run
guerrilla raids in remote areas and occasional urban violence. Govern-

ment security forces probably would be able to quash or at least contain: -

such operations as the extremists do undertake. There may also de-
velop extremist-inspired or spontaneous protest demonstrations by left-
ist student and worker groups, especially in Rio de Janeiro, a stronghold
of these groups. Government security forces probably would be able to
control these demonstrations as well.

‘The Communists counted on a continuation of Goulart’s rule and urged him

not to act rashly, fearing that he might bring on his own downfall—as indeed
he did. /

yf ; 5

sper

10. The principal danger to the stability of the new regime is the
possibility of conflict among the military and political leaders of the
April revolution. The politicians are already calculating their chances
in the presidential election due to be held in October 1965 and are
jockeying for position. For many of the military, however, the April
revolution was a repudiation, not only of Goulart and his extremist
allies, but also of the entire Vargas tradition in Brazilian politics.’
While they have the opportunity, these officers want to accomplish a
thorough purge of the politicians whose corrupt and inefficient prac-
tices, they charge, have perverted Brazil’s national development. In
particular, they (and many politicians) want to ensure against Kubit-
schek’s possible election in October 1965.

11. This issue is present in the purge which began before Castello
Branco took office and is still going on. The initial drive, “Operation
Cleanup,” resulted in the arrest of several thousand persons. It was
represented to be an emergency measure required to frustrate an im-
minent Goulart-Communist plot to subvert the constitutional regime
and was approved by most of the general public. Many of those ar-
rested have now been investigated and released; a substantial number,
however, are being held for trial. The continuing purge, which is
being carried on under the terms of the Institutional Act, involves
forced retirements and dismissals from public office and/or the depriva-
tion of political rights for ten years. In addition to many lesser elected
officials, over 40 Congressmen and four state Governors have fallen
under this ban. Other Governors are still threatened. Not all of those
purged or threatened are extremists; some are vulnerable to charges
of corruption. Considerable political reprisal and maneuvering also
appears to be involved.

12. President Castello Branco is himself disdainful of the dema-
goguery and deviousness, the cronyism and outright corruption that
have characterized Brazilian politics. He has long been noted, how-
ever, as a “legalist’”’ who believed that the political role of the military
should be limited. He probably desires to restore national unity and
tranquility by following a conciliatory course. He has given repeated
assurances that he intends to control the present proscriptions and he
appears to be exerting & moderating influence. Nevertheless, the purge
continues and his ability to control it remains open to question.

13. The attitudes of two key military leaders complicate Castello
Branco’s problem and may limit his freedom of action. General Costa e
Silva, the Minister of War, is the spokesman of the hard-line element

among the military. Having exercised power as head of the Supreme

*Getulio Vargas ruled Brazil 1930-1945 and again 1951-1954. He founded both
the Social Democratic Party of Kubitschek and the Brazilian Labor Party of
Goulart. Those parties in coalition have ruled Brazil since 1945, except for
the brief Quadros interlude in 1961.

6 al

syfer

Revolutionary Command, he is probably reluctant to “return to the
barracks.” General Amaury Kruel, commander of the powerful Second
Army, has presidential ambitions and has long been a personal enemy
of Castello Branco.

14. It may be that under the coercion of circumstances Castello
Branco will be compelled to pursue a harder line than he would himself
have chosen, or that he will eventually be displaced by an out-and-out
military dictatorship. At present, however, no other military leader
can match Castello Branco’s personal prestige and broad support among
senior military officers. Moreover, his “legalist” views are probably sup-
ported by a large majority of all military officers. We believe, there-
fore, that with some concessions to expediency he will succeed in main-
taining general control of the situation.

15. We are less confident that Castello Branco will carry out his per-
sonal pledge to conduct a free presidential election in October 1965.
As that date approaches he may have to choose between carrying out
that pledge and ensuring the continuation of his moderate policies.
He may come to support either a one-year postponement of the election
or a revision of the electoral procedures designed to prevent the elec-
tion of Kubitschek.°

Economic and Social Problems

16. Most of Brazil’s underlying economic and social tensions were
inherited by Goulart when he took office in 1961. Economic expansion
in the 1950’s, although generally impressive, did not benefit some sectors
and geographical regions, was achieved at the cost of inflation and
mounting foreign exchange difficulties, and did relatively little to relieve
the plight of the majority of the population. Goulart exacerbated most
problems with his demagogic policies and his disruptive style of rule.
During his last 12 months in office the pace of economic deterioration
quickened noticeably: the price level nearly doubled; domestic and for-
eign capital investment stagnated; economic growth was sharply re-
duced and per capita real income fell. In these circumstances the
economic condition of the salaried classes, including the military, de-
teriorated substantially, while that of the poor remained unimproved,
in spite of Goulart’s professed concern to better their lot.

17. In formulating its economic and social program, the Castello
Branco regime must do battle on several and at times competing fronts.
Economic and financial reforms are needed to contain inflation, improve
productive efficiency, and straighten out Brazil’s external accounts;
social reforms are needed to reduce tensions among the poorest classes.

‘We plan to treat the problem of the presidential succession and other longer
range problems in an NIE early in 1965.

sagt 7

ee

At the same time, the regime cannot pursue policies so restrictive that
they will sharply reduce real income or inhibit investment and economic
growth. The regime will probably concentrate first on controlling in-
flation, bolstering business confidence, and attracting foreign and do-
mestic capital. It will also seek foreign assistance, including PL 480
foodstuffs to hold down the cost of living. The reversal or modification
of Goulart’s disruptive policies (e.g., his encouragement of political
strikes and harassment of foreign investors) will have a favorable im-
pact on the economy, as will the prospect for greater political stability
which his removal opens up.

18. The establishment of a foundation for economic expansion will
require substantial progress in cutting back the rate of inflation. The
regime will probably concentrate on reducing the federal deficit, the
principal factor in Brazilian inflation. There probably will be tax and
administrative reforms designed to increase revenues and to reduce
waste and corruption. Some costly government subsidies have been
reduced and “nonessential” expenditures will be delayed to the extent
possible. The regime will be disinclined to cater to labor elements and
business interests formerly associated with the Goulart government.
For political reasons, however, the regime is likely to avoid a sharp
cutback in real wages and will be wary of choking off growth by too
great a curtailment of bank credits to the business community. These
inhibitions probably will result in continued substantial rises in prices
for some time. Nonetheless, if the monthly rate of increase can be
brought down over the next year, some of the worst dislocations caused
by the recent very high rate probably will begin to recede.

19. The Castello Branco government will probably sponsor a program
of social reform because of its own reformist convictions, its fear of an
eventual upsurge of radicalism if the conditions of the poorest classes
are ignored, and, finally, its interest in promoting the election of a presi-
dential candidate in 1965 likely to continue its general policies. In
the short run, however, social reform almost certainly will have to take
second place to economic recovery. We would expect, therefore, pro-
grams of an impact nature that cost relatively little rather than ones
involving a large-scale redistribution of resources. These programs
probably will include benefits for rural areas (a modest agrarian re-
form; increased credits and technological assistance) as well as urban
areas (expansion of social-welfare benefits, including low-cost housing
and foods; investment projects to provide employment opportunities for
the unskilled).

20. The economic and social programs of the new regime are unlikely
to produce dramatic results over the next year or So. The regime will
probably be unable to do much more than to lay a basis for future
progress.

8 al

sug
Foreign Policy

21. The Castello Branco regime is generally disposed to maintain
close relations with the US. Moreover, it will be considerably dependent
on foreign economic assistance for progress on the economic and social
fronts. Brazil’s huge short-term debt maturities (about US$1.5 billion
in principal, interest, and arrears is due over the next 20 months) must
be rescheduled with annual payments more in line with its ability to
pay. The government will also need economic assistance to help cush-
ion the shock of whatever economic stabilization measures it does under-
take. For these reasons, although it is unlikely to reverse sharply the
Brazilian trend toward economic nationalism, it is seeking to revise
Goulart’s stringent policy on remittance of profits and probably will
adopt other measures designed to encourage foreign investment.

92. The new regime has broken diplomatic relations with Cuba and
adopted a cool posture toward the USSR and other Bloc countries with
which it now has relations. Although it will maintain a basically “in-
dependent” foreign policy and seek to avoid the appearance of subser-
vience to the US, it will probably align itself with Western nations on
most issues and act more responsibly in the international field than did
preceding governments.

1. This document was disseminated by, the Central Intelligence ‘Agency.
is for the information and use of the recipient | and of persons under his jurisdiction ona. - _
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may ‘be’ ‘authorized by the”
following officials within their respective departments: * a

mPa on

. Director of Intelligence and Research, “for the Department of ‘State ans)
. Director, Defense Intelligence’ Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of.

. Assistant Chief of Staff for. _Intelligence, Department of. the Army, for. * 7

“This copy _

Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff nr

t-

the Department of the Army So Ry is

. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intligence), for the Department of

-the Navy Stee wal * os ’ —_ _—

. Assistant Chief of Staff, nteligence, USAF, for the ‘Deparment of the Air

Force
Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic ‘Energy. Commission rr ae
Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Lots Mane . wo.
Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency -. . ; . Te .
Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or fee

Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by

arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with.
|AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. -

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

sified: FO

2s ppsisantl ONLY

DISTRIBUTION: Ee
White House wee
National Security Council

Department of State

Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission

Federal Bureau of Investigation
