OPEC Tri-ministerial Conference: Focus on Strategy
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000117898, dated 4 August 1980.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000117898).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

OPEC Tri-Ministerial
Conference: Focus on Strategy

The oil, foreign, and finance ministers from the
OPEC nations are scheduled to meet in Vienna

on 15 and 16 September to review the wide-ranging
oil, aid, and political recommendations of the OPEC
Long-Term Strategy Committee (LTSC). Al-
though broad agreement already has been reached
on many issues, including the establishment of an
automatic price adjustment mechanism, a discor-
dant note may be injected into the proceedings

by disputes over short-term price and production
policies. Some OPEC officials expect that the meet-
ing will turn into a confrontation between Saudi
Arabia and the more militant OPEC nations,
particularly Iran. Iran, Libya, Algeria, and Nigeria
have scheduled a meeting just prior to the Tri-
Ministerial Conference to coordinate their produc-
tion and price positions. Confrontations over current
policies could spill over into the discussions of the
‘LTSC report, possibly even preventing agreement
on aspects of the long-term pricing adjustment for-
mula.

Any unresolved issues among the LTSC recommen-
dations will be dealt with by the committee over
the next severa! months. Questions of implementa-
tion are unlikely to be settled quickly. A final review
of the report is planned for a second Tri-Ministerial
Conference scheduled for early November. The en-
tire report will then be subn.itted to the summit

_ Meeting of sovereigns and heads of state of OPEC
member countries in Baghdad on 4 and 5 Novem-
ber. >

Current Price and Production Issues

Contrary to press reports, Saudi Arabia has not

yet decided to cut production from the current level |
_ of 9.5 million b/d.

23

The Saudis recognize that maintaining production

‘at 9.5 million b /d contributes to market pressures

on other OPEC suppliers. On the other hand, the
current market could absorb a | million b/d Saudi
production cut without generating significant price
Pressures. Riyadh will have to raise prices by $4

per barrel if it is to realign its oil prices with those °
of other OPEC members. While the timing of Saudi
actions remains uncertain, we believe Riyadh in-
tends to use a production cut as an inducement

to gain agreement on a reunified crade price struc-
ture sometime during the course of the series of 7
OPEC meetings beginning in mid-September gi -

Background on LTSC

The OPEC Long-Term Strategy Committee was
established during the May 1978 OPEC consulta-
tive meeting in Taif, Saudi Arabia. It isa -
ministerial-level committee composed of the oil
ministers from the five founding members of
OPEC—Sandi Arabia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, and
Venezuela—and Algeria, representing the African
OPEC members. The committee was established
at the urging of Yamani, who maintained that
OPEC ministerial conferences spend an inordinate
amount of time discussing current Price issues and
not enough time considering long-run issues. >

she
! September 1980

eur Asiecs

— AUG J9S7_

tp

LTSC Recommendations :

After working for two vears on its report. the LTSC
presented its recommendaticns at an extraordinary
ministerial conference in Taif in early May 1980.

Price. The committee's main recommendation was
for the adoption of an automatic quarterly price
adjuscment mechanism. The system would establish
a floor price for crude oil that. in the long term,
would approach the approximate level of the cost
of alternative fuels. To guarantee movement toward
this goal, the price floor would be adjusted upward
in line with a three-point formula incorporating:

* An index reflecting the impact of inflation on

" international trade. The index would be based
on an OECD export price index to reflect com-
modity inflation and an OECD domestic con-
sumer price index (CPI) to reflect inflation in
the price of services. The export price index would
have twice the weight of the CPI.

An exchange rate adjustment mechanism. The
currency basket being considered is the Original
11 currency Geneva II basket ' modified to in-
clude the US dollar and weighted according to
OPEC imports from the countries whose curren-
cies are included. : ;

A provision for increasing the floor price in real
lerms proportionately to the growth in real GNP
of the OECD countries.

The.concept of automatic price increases was ac-

cepted by all of the OPEC members at the Taif

conference. Iran, Libya, and Algeria, however,

voiced reservations over the formula and insisted

that price increases be based instead on:

+ An index representing OPEC inflation rather than
OECD inflation. ,

¢ GNP growth in the OPEC countries rather than
the OECD countries.

‘ Australian dollar, Belgian franc, British pound sterling. Canadian
dollar. French franc, Italian lira, Japanese yen, Netherlands guilder,
Swedish krona. Swiss franc, and West German deutsche mark.

et
I September 1980

The majority of OPEC members rejected this ap-
proach. reportedly on the grounds that OPEC ir, Ja-
tion—historically higher than the OECD raie—
often includes factors for which the consuming na-
tions cannot be held responsible and that use of
OPEC GNP growth could lead toa spiral of oil
Price rises generating GNP growth which in turn
would push up oil prices. ;
Although several compromises on price formulas
were suggested at the Taif meeting, no agreement -
was reached and modifications were left to be devel-
oped by the LTSC. Over the last month or So,
several reports have indicated that most of the dif-
ferences among OPEC members were resolved. We
have not been able to verify if or how the original
formula may have been modified. >

The LTSC report stresses that the pricing formula
only establishes a minimum floor Price, and that
as the market swings from surplus to shortage
OPEC's pricing strategy must be flexible enough
to allow prices to rise above the minimum. The
LTSC presented alternative courses of action to
be considered when prices rise above this level:
* Prices may be frozen in real terms until the floor
catches up with the higher market determined
price level. ;

-* A new price floor could be established at the
higher level. . :

Prevailing market conditions and the political cli-
mate would play a large part in determining which
alternative is chesen. If OPEC were to be unable
to reach agreement on which path to follow, the
effectiveness of the price mechanism would be im- .

paired. Gp

Although many details remain to be worked out, —
it seems clear that the Tri-Ministerial Conference
will recommend to the OPEC Baghdad summit
that an automatic quarterly price adjustment
mechanism be adopted. Strong Saudi support for’
regular price increases is evidenced by a public
statement made earlier this year by Yamani.

s

As @ result of the freeze imposed by Saudi Ara-
bia. oil prices have more than doubled since the
end of 1978. Uf the Western countrizs kod been
realistic and had accepted regular annucl in- ~
creases in the price of oii, there we t have
been such a sharp and sudden increu. in prices,
with the ensuing impact on their econumies. |
wish we had not frozen the price of vs. in the
past.

Riyadh undoubtedly also recognizes that an auto-
matic price adjustment mechanism would free them
from some of the political pressures that they face
on the price issuc. >

If the proposed price adjustment mechanism had
_ been in effect since 1973, the OPEC staff calculates
that prices would have risen an average of more
than I+ percent per year. By 1978—prior to the
Iranian revolution—prices would have risen to
$17.82 per barrel, compared with the actual average
official sales price of $12.93. The formula would
have called fora 1980 price level of $24.26 per
barrel. but prices would have risen above this level
because of the oil market disruptions associated
with the Iranian revolution.

Although we believe that the #.« <;foposals cur- .
rently under discussion have a better chance oO;
being realized than similar ones in the past—the
LTSC under the direction of Yamani already has
been charged with developing a plan of action—
OPEC agreement in Principle may not translate
into speedy implementation. Many operational de-
tails need te be resolved before any of the commit-
tee’s recommendations can be put into operation. .
For example, while the OPEC price structure over
the last several years has been based on the price
for a benchmark crude, Saudi Arab Light (34°),
the LTSC report recommends thai Arab Light be
dropped as the benchmark on the questionable - ~
grounds that it is no longer the “swing crude™ in
the world market place, that is, that there is no
longer sufficient excess capacity to produce Arab
Light to cover short-term swings in demand. The
’ LTSC also cited changing supply/demand pat-
terns—with demand tending toward lighter prod-

to major markers

~7ts while supply is becoming increasingly 2
heavier—as justification for abandoning Arab Light _
as the marker crude. Riyadh undoubtedly would

also prefer to distance its price decisions from those
of OPEC by getting agreement on an alternate’

benchmark crude. gD

OPEC is considering several other options for a

marker crude or crudes: ; aa

° Use of more than one benchmark—one for the
Persian Gulf and one for the African region.

* A theoretical benchmark more representative of

.. demand patterns.

« A theoretical benchmark reflecting the weighted
average OPEC export barrel.

The problem of determining price differentials ?
among the various OPEC crudes will continue te
exist. OPEC has never been able to adequat uty

deal with this problem and the LTSC report side-
Steps the issue by stating that, witha continuously
Moving price base, the problems should be less than
experienced in the past. Other operational problems
being worked on by OPEC include the periodicity
and time lag in each of the components of the

floor price and the associated question of changing

price on the.basis of projections or ex post facto
adjustments. ft

Production. The LTSC report recommends that
during periods of surplus supply “appropriate meas-
ures must be taken by all member countries to
restrict production.” The report, however, does not
advocate a formal production programing scheme. _
Iraq has long been the leading advocate of produc-
tion programing. More recently, Iran has become
vocal in its demands for the institution of some
OPEC-wide mechanism to prorate production cuts.

Saudi Arabia is adamantly opposed to any formal
scheme for production programing, maintaining
that each country should control its own production
? Differentials are the margins by which prices of various crudes

differ from tbe price of the OPEC benchmark crude. Crude prices
vary widely because of differences in crude quality and proximity

t

: 7 September 1980

as a matter of national sovereignty. The Saudis.
however, have made clear to their fellow OPEC
members that after the current price structure is
reunified, they will be more than willing to absorb
their share of any necessary decline in output. Given ©
the strength of Saudi opposition to programing,

we believe it highly unlikely that a formal pro-
rationing agreement would be included in the rec-
ommendations passed on to the Baghdad summit

meeting. _

The LTSC report recommends that underutilized
productive capacity be brought on line to hold prices
down during periods of shortage. It also suggests
comrmnsatory financing be made available to rev-
en *-rt OPEC members during periods of falling

dens 1.
:

Relations With Developing Countries

The LTSC recommendations on future relations
between OPEC and other developing countries were
upproved by all members attending the May 1980
Taif meeting. The OPEC finance ministers can -

be expected to pay particular attention to the specif-
ics for implementing these proposals. According to
the report, OPEC assistance to developing countries
should include:

* Assurances about security of oil supplies, with
the developing nations having priority over sup-
plics to industrialized countries.

* A series of Joans and grants to help developing

"countries meet the cost of their oil imports. Loans
to the poorest LDCs would be on concessional
lerms graduated according to degree of need,
whereas loans to developing nations with stronger
economies would be on commercial terms.

¢ Development aid, including aid for development
of their indigenous energy resources.

* Balance-of-payments aid. >
The report also recommends that OPEC “aid to

developing countries not be given unilaterally with-
out a Commensurate commitment from the indus-

a Spat
“TI September 1980

’ bloc. Most OPEC members see this as 2 way to

Pr

trialized countries.” It points to the Iraqi proposal
for a joint fund for energy and development as

an ideal vehicle for achieving these objectives. Aid
from developed nations would be expected to in-
crease in real terms to offset import inflation. | a

oo |

Relations With Industrialized Countries|

The LTSC report recommends that since recent 3
developments in pricing and long-term supply seem -y
to make some form of dialogue between OPEC : 2s
and the industrialized countries inevitable, OPEC =
countries should be prepared to participate as a my

prevent the déveloped countries from isolating the
members from one another. Qj

In negotiations with the developed countries, the me

report suggests OPEC seek- . Fee

* Free access to the markets of developed countries - 8
for refined products and petrochemicals. ~Y

* Access to advanced technology needed by OPEC
countries for development.

* Increased involvement of industrialized countries

in exploration activitics in OPEC countries. -
* Participation in joint research activities. _
* Location of energy-intensive industries in natural mm A

gas producing areas within OPEC countries.
Removal of economic sanctions against OPEC i
countries and the lifting of trade barriers on non- boy
oil-producing countries. ,

Guaranteed access to financial and investment

markets in industrialized countries for OPEC

funds on “at least parity of terms and conditions”: : *
with those applied among industrialized countries. :

The report also recommends that because of the ‘3
poor experience with previous producer-consumer —
mectings—specifically the Conference on Interna- - iz
tional Economic Cooperation during 1975-77— ° - 3
participation should be limited to OPEC and OECD =
members. OPEC undoubtedly hopes that by exclud- =.
ing other developing countries from these meetings ; “3
it will be able to limit criticism from these nations. ; 3
The Tri-Ministerial Conference will consider how oS
to proceed on these issues.

bay ‘4

26
