Prospects for West German Foreign Policy
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012251, dated 4 March 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012251).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ss bin pn ME 22.65
Hak Ghat AS gatas tee e

Marea a : CONTROLED DISSEM 42 April 1965
oe ty ck
2 # Pek a K 2
hy f ; 2
Ne nee nd f ( ,

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 23-65

- Prospects for West German
iy Foreign Policy

oy Tine ts
ge ve oy mo

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
JULY 1994

><

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and tha intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defanse, AEC, and NSA.

ae Concurring:

Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
ah The Atomic Energy Conraissian Reprusentative to the USIB

cag Birector of the Mur oi Socwity Ayency

dos dining:

The Assistant ta the lacecior, Federal Buraau of Investigation, the subject boi.
outside of his jurisciciion.

tie WARNING

This material contains Information affecting the National Defense of the United States
___ within the ‘meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
foe ission:orjravelation a which : in any manner to an 1 unauthorized: patean " proneliees

GROUP |
Excluded fram autamatle
» downgrading and

-*' declassificatian

: ‘ 1
2 ae bates bh ata hdd snared 8

incl vids tab ale

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 23-65

Prospects for West German
Foreign Policy

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM

CONCLUSIONS

DISCUSSION

I. GENERAL

Implications of the 1965 Election

HW. THE OUTLOOK FOR FOREIGN POLICY
General Considerations
Relations with the Major Western Allies
Defense and Nuclear Policies
Relations with the Comniunist World

Policy Toward Other Areas

HL LONGER RANGE POSSIBILITIES

+ ,
Page

Pat

PROSPECTS FOR WEST
GERMAN FOREIGN POLICY

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the principal trends in West German foreign policy
during the next two years or so.

CONCLUSIONS

A, West German leaders are hecoming increasingly impatient to
adopt a more self-reliant, distinctively German, foreign policy, Con-
scious of their country’s growing economic and military strength,
they are eager to attain a more influential position within the West-
ern Alliance and a greater share in the formulation of Western defense
and nuclear policies. At the same time, they are anxious to impart
momentum, if necessary an their own, toward the reunification of
their country. Whatever the outcome of the national election this
fall, we believe that during the next two vears or so these tendencies
will be reflected in a more assertive stvle and some differences of
emphasis in foreign policy. Nevertheless, barring important external
developments, the West German government will probably be con-
strained by practical considerations—notably the rigidity of the power
relationship in Europe—from making anv major changes in the basic
lines of policy. (Paras, I-11)

B. Specifically, we believe that West Germany will retain its
present commitments in Europe and the Western Alliance for the
period of this estimate, and will continue to depend on US nuclear
power to protect the integrity of its borders and those of West Berlin.
Though we expect sympathy to grow for de Gaulle’s idea of “Europe
for the Europeans,” with some accompanying interest in a European
nuclear force, West Germany's strong defense ties with the US will
almost certainly prevent a significant shift away from present clefense
policv during the next two vears or so. (Paras. 12-19)

Pa

Ps

C. In policy toward the Communist world the new West German
administration will be likely to make more vigorous attempts than
its predecessor to take the initiative. This will almost certainly in-
clude further efforts to expand the West German position in Eastern
Europe. It may also he reflected in moves to resolve the German
question by direct discussions with the Soviet leaders and additional
steps to “normalize” relations with East Germany. Yet substantial
progress in any of these spheres is unlikely unless an important shift
occurs in Soviet policy toward Germany; a marked acceleration in
the trend toward independence or internal “liberalization” in Eastern
Europe could also open Up new opportunities for West Germany in
the area. (Paras. 20-23)

D. Beyond the period of this estimate, we believe the potentiality
for important changes in West German foreign policy will increase.
In the event of rapid or fundamental changes outside Germanv—e.g,,
in the Communist world or the Western Alliance—West German
leaders may find themselves in a position to act independently in a
wav which would importantly tes the interests of their allies,
favorably or adversely, For example, if the Soviets eventually are
forced by events to reassess their position in Europe, this might open
the way for a West German-Soviet agreement to resolve the German
question at the expense of the East German regime and perhaps of
Bonn's Western allies. Or future West German leaders might be
tempted to seek to exploit popular frustration aver the absence of
visible movement toward reunification and might thus tend to revive
German chauvinism and the appeal of a boisterous and intolerant
extremism.’ (Paras. 26-28)

* The Director of Intelligence and Research. Department of State, feels that this Conclusion
does nat adequately en either the negative or positive possibilities over the longer
term. In particular, it fails to note such powsihle favorable developments as a post-de Gaulle

softening of French opposition taward European integration, significant progress toward
reunification consistent with US interests in a changed international context, continuing eco-
namic prosperity, and especially the attraction of a strong palitical-military tie ta the US,
Moreover, the Conclusion omity such critically impartant adverse possibilities (mentioned
in Para. 27) as major disturbances in Allance relations, which could cause Bonn to reapen
fundamental questiona of defense policy.

Sui

DISCUSSION
|, GENERAL

1. West Germany is in a period of growing restiveness over foreign policy,
Increasingly, West Germans are finding that the assumptions and goals of the
Adenauer ern are na longer Apprapriate to changing world conditions, and
they are raising searching questions about the future. In the days of Adenauer

ak the principal objectives. af foreign policy were to contain Communist expan-
} sionism and ta cooperate with the Western powers in the rebuilding of Western

Europe and the creation of an integrated defensive alliance. Partly because
some af Adenauer's objectives were attained and partly hecause the nature of
German problems has changed. foreign policy objectives under Erhard are
| much more difficult to define. The Germans themselves. government and
people alike, have nat succeeded in defining them. This is a period of search
for new definitions and new formulas.

2. West Germany has long since passed the phase of postwar reconstruction.
It is now a major economic power and a major partner in the Western Alliance.
Its econamy ix thriving and growing at a rapid rate.’ It makes a larger con-
tribution to the conventional defensive forces af the Western Alliance than any
ather European power, Conscious of this growing strength, West Germans
desire more and more to exercise appropriately greater influence within the
Alliance. Members of a new generation are heginning to acquire pasitions of
influence: increasingly these people. and especially the vounger generation after
them. are coming ta resent heing identified with the Nazi regime, and feel that
naw, same 20 vears after World War II, they should he entitled to look to the
future instead of being incessantly embroiled in the past,

3. At the same time, West Germans are becoming increasingly aware that
in changing world circumstances the interests of their country and those of
their major allies do not alwavs coincide, There is growing impatience over
What is regarded as excessive dependence on others in foreign policy, especially
in areas not of major importance ta West Germany. Indeed, what is happen-
ing is a burgeoning of nationalist feeling, not in the sense associated with the
Nazi or even earlier periods, hut in the sense that West Germans now desire
that their government should follow a more self-reliant, distinctively German,
policy. In this they are influenced hy the example of de Gaulle.

4. As the Germans look eastward, the Communist warld no longer presents
so menacing an image as it did in the Adenauer era. There is less sense of
immediate threat, and more awareness of opportunities developing from the
rifts and ferment within the Communist world. The Bonn government has

“In 1964 the economy achieved a real GNP yrowth rate of seven percent, which doubled
that of the previous year. Full emplovment is being maintained, and Bonn expects a growth
rato this year almost as high as last. West Germans have never enjoyed such prosperity,

oe

EL RT ee eS eke age pe nese meppuryen 2 EE em py EU TEE ree et Yr HORT

4

position in Eastern Enrope. in the form. of
es will he a wedge for greater influence. Mean-
the division of the country. which hus heen present
from the beginning, has become more evident and increased in intensity. ever
since the erection of the Berlin Wall in 196d. Though most Germans realize
that the likelihood of reunification is remote, thev still wish to he assured that
progress toward the comman goal is not being shirked. Many West Germans
have since concluded that in a situation of nuclear stalemate they could nat
rely an their allies to make the desired progress far them. but would have to
take steps on their own, Largely in response to the initiatives of Willy Brandt.
a number of “small steps” have heen taken by the Bonn government to improve
contacts with East Germans. In general, West Germans are convinced of the
necessity to maintain movement in eastern policy. lest they give the Impression

that they accept the statuy qua and are no longer particularly interested in the
reunification of their country,

taken steps to establish a modest
trade missions. which it hop
While. German concern over

5. Nevertheless, there are
main independent initiatives,
the West Germans remain ru
eastern border. Their desire
German soil for protection. is

still very strong fuctars which restrict West Ger-
Despite the diminished sense of immediate threat.
reatly concerned aver the vulnerability of their
to have strang US military forces. stationed on
as firm as ever; indeed. there is great sensitivity
ta any suggestion that the US might withdraw even small units of its forces,
There is naw a close and comples relationship hetween the armed forces of
West Germany and the US which would inhibit rapid or radical changes in
detense policy and planning. Another limitation upan independent action is
the growing practical invalvement of West Germany in the Common Market
and other West Eurepeun coapenitive endeavors, Other factors which inhibit
change in foreign policy or divert attention from it are domestic prosperity.
growing social and economic integration in German society, and the consensus

of responsible leaders in hath majar political parties on the main outlines of
West German foreign policy,

Implications of the 1965 Election

8. West Germany is now pre
19 September 1963, the oute
style and emphasis of fore
likely outcome, we believe,

paring for a national election to be held on
ame of which could have a significant effect on the
ign policy during the next year or two.) The most
is that the German electorate will return to power
an administration led hy the Christian Demacratie Union (CDU) and its
Bavarian affiliate, the Christian Social Union (CSU), which. as now, is likely
to depend for its majority on conlition with the Free Demaocrutic Pyrty (FDP),
In any case. the Adenauer-Stranss wing af the CDU/CSU will probably renew
its pressure for a more “European” orientation in policy, A substantially re-
duced plurality would probably be interpreted by the party leaders as calling
for a mare assertive leadership. Fighting for survival. the small FDP has al-
ready chosen ta press for a more radical policy. especially toward the east. as

the main plank of its electoral platform,

4 Sat

See

© However. for the first time in its history the Sacial Democratic Party (SPD)
has a chance of gaining a plurality. which would entitle it to try to form a
government. TE it sneceeded. it would he equally inclined to seek to revitalize
West Germany's policies. The SPID leaders probably would interpret an clee-
tion victory as a mandate for a more energetic paliey toward the Communist
world. Especially toward East Germany. an SPD administration prebably
would feel relatively nnencumbered hy previous practices and principles such as
the Hallstein Doctrine. It probaly would develop closer ties with the East
Germans and in time possibly oven with the Commumist regime, Miany of the
present: problems would remain in relations with West Germany's Eurapean
lies. ulthongh the SPD leaders have. close connections with fellaw Socialists.
especially in the Scandinavian countries,

S. It is possible. though much less likely. that a “grand coalition” will be
tormed between the CDU/CSU and the SPD utter the election, In such an
event, the administration will possess an averwhelming parliamentary majority,
so that there will he a greater surface appearance of stability in foreign policy.
Nevertheless, even such a government wanld be subjected to increased pressure
tor a new. mare independent stvle in poliey, Competition and maneuver be-
tween and within the two particy would continue. If the FDP were excluded
tram effective influence over national poliev. it could became a focus for dis-
contented radicals and nationals, Such an apposition would probably try
to cally support by exhuming and reviving German grievances which have
accumulated since World War H—e.g.. alleged unpunished Allied “war crimes.”
and the division of Germany at Allied hands. This kind of appeal would he
likely ta evake some papular response. but we do not think it would have an
important effect on foreign policy for the next few years.

ll. THE OUTLOOK FOR FOREIGN POLICY

General Considerations

4. We believe that the outcome of the election, whatever it may be, is un-
likely to bring about fundamental change in West German foreign policy during
the next few years. West German leaders will try to adapt at least the appear-
ance af a mare independent line, so that changes in style and emphasis can be
expected, But for some vears the Federal Republic will be constrained by
practical considerations—natably the rigidity of the pawer relationship in
Evrope—from making radical changes in the substance of its policy, Only in
the event of important developments outside Germany would an important shift
in West German foreign policy be likely to occur diving the period of this
estimate,

10, Popular sentiment in West Germany does not now actively favor funda-
mental changes in policy. Quite the contrary. most West Germans are pre-
accupied with the enjoyment of their imprecedented prosperity; their principal

The Hallstein’ Doctrine calls for the severuner af relations with any uation, other than
the USSR. which recountzes East Germany,

Prd

concern is to protect it, Foreign policy does not figure importantly as an elec-
tion issue, To he sure, there is widespread popular disapproval of Erhard’s
“bumbling,” in contrast ta Adenauer's Arm and decisive leadership. but. for the
most part, there is general approval of the present orientation of foreign policy.
No organized clement now exists in German society with the disruptive influ-
ence which characterized the militarist and hig business blocs of Weimar days.
Foreign policy in West Germany new is principally the concern of politicians
and “opinion moulders,” wha know which issues are likely to evoke popular
response in support of particular policy lines,

IL, Reunification is of special significance, Additional interest in this. issue
las heen stimulated recently in connection with the election campaign. Each
of the political parties tries to manipulate it to its own advantage. Willy Brandt
has used his position as Governing Mayar of West Berlin to exploit it on behalf
of his party. The FDP leaders have staked their political future on a play for
4 more active policy toward reunification. The Erhard administration feels
compelled to appear to he trying to make ogress taward the goal. Though
there is currently no Widespread popular ierund for an immediate solution,
reunification nevertheless remains the kev national issue in Germany. Active
interest could he greatly intensified if it appeared ta Germans on hoth sides of
the border that there were impraved practical possibilities for achieving it.

Relations with the Major Western Allies

12, We believe that West Germany will remain committed to an “Atlantic”
orientation for the period of this estimate. will maintain close ties with the US
and with its other NATO allies. and will continue ta press for increasingly close
economic and political ties among the Common Market countries. At a mini-
mum. the continued need and desire for US protection af West Germany and
West Berlin will prevent any significant shift in the next few vears.

13. At the same time, West German leaders are confronted with a dilemma
arising from the fact that close ties with France are also essential to Germany's
goals in Europe and to further progress toward European integration. We he-
lieve that there will be growing sympathy among West German leaders for
de Gaulle’s iden of “Europe for the Europeans,” This tendency will he espe-
cially significant if, as a result of the 1985 election. the “Gaullist” wing of the
CDU/CSU acquires greater influence within the government. But we helieve
that any Bonn government will seek to avoid situations which require a choice
between the US and France. In the event of an administration led hy the CDU.
de Gaulle will continue to exert a strong influence over German policy since he
can create serious difficulties for West German policymakers, especially in inter-
allied relations, and can deepen divisions within the CDU/CSU itself, An
administration dominated by the SPD would probably be less sympathetic to
de Gaulle but still it could not avoid heing preacenpied with his actions.
Relations with France will therefore probably he troubled. regardless af which
party holds power after the clection.

r Set

pt

14. Relations with the UK will prohably continue to be hampered by basic
differences on key issues, though intermittent atmospheric improvement may be
expected, since bath governments have an interest in bettering their relationship.
Various differences between the two countries will surface from time to time.
the most profound of which will concern Germany's role in Europe and in the
Western Alliance. West German leaders believe that Britain does not support
their national interests (e.g. on reunifcation) and is lukewarm toward German
aspirations for a larger rele in NATO councils. In the event that the West
German election should bring an SPD administration into power, relations with
the Labour Government prahably will improve somewhat. since there are some
close personal ties hetween individuals in the two parties. Improvement would
also result from progress toward a mutually satisfactory version of the Atlantic
Nuclear Force (ANF) proposed hy the British, or a suitable alternative.

Defense and Nuclear Policies

15. We believe that West Germany's heavy reliance on US protection will
remain the heart of its defense and nuclear policies. The West Germans will
continue to urge, however, that the present US strategy of “flexible response”
he interpreted to allow almost immediate use of nuclear weapons for the pro-
tection of West German territory. West German leaders will also press for a
larger voice in the determination of NATO defensive strategy and in the control
of the West's nuclear deterrent.

16. This continuing concern was un important factor in the discussion of the
proposal for a Multilateral Nuclear Force (MLF); it continues to operate in
the discussion of nuclear defense arrangements which naw centers upon the
Atlantic Nuclear Force (ANF). The outlook for agreement on such a force is
not bright, partly because of British-German differences, hut particularly be-
cause the Germans and others are anxious ta avoid a confrontation with
de Gaulle over the question. If there is no progress on current proposals,
German policymakers will probably look for other sharing arrangements; failure
to achieve any form of sharing may lead them eventually ta consider alternative
nuclear policies,

17, Some leading West German politicians—e.g., Adenauer, Strauss, and
Krone—have expressed themselves as favoring the development of a European
nuclear force. Such individuals sympathize with de Gaulle’s stated view that
the US cannot be relied upon indefinitely to come to Europe's defense in a
crisis. They advance the argument that the credibility of the Western nuclear
deterrent would be enhanced by the presence in Western Europe of a nuclear
force under European control, incorporating the French force ce frappe. If as a
result of the West German election the “Gaullist” wing of the CDU/CSU should
obtain a more influential position, the government may come under some
pressure to explore the possibilities of this scheme. We believe, however, that
the West German leadership in the main does not regard the creation of such a
force as a realistic objective. Perhaps more important, most German leaders

~”

par

><

would continue to consider essential the intimate involvement of the US in any
nuclear arrangement.

18, A bilateral French-German arrangement for nuclear defense is highly
unlikely during the period of this estimate. The Germans will nat want to
jeopardize their close relationship with the US hy such an arrangement. and
in any case, we believe that de Gaulle will not permit the Germans a mean-
ingful share in a joint nuclear program, Considerable cooperation already
exists between the twa countries in various military fields (though far less than
that between West Germany and the US), but we have no evidence of any
collaboration relating to nuclear weapons. It is possible that the Germans. in
return for some important advantage, would agree to a French request for
financial support for the force de frappe. We doubt this, hecause we see no
adequate advantage which the West Germans wauld he likely to receive from
the French at present that would compensate for the risk of undermining Ger-
many's relations with the US,

19, We believe that there is little disposition in West Germany at present
to acquire a national nuclear weapons capability. Over the next several vears,
to the extent that their desires for a greater role appear to the Germans to be
frustrated, sentiment for an independent nuclear capability will probably in-
crease to some extent, But all responsible West German leaders at present
reject such a course, and there continue to he strong political factors, including
the Bonn government's treaty commitments, which deter West Germans from
a national nuclear weapons program. We believe it highly unlikely that they
will begin to develop such a program during the period of this estimate.

Relations with the Communist World

20. Whatever the outcome of the 1065 election, we believe that the new
administration in Bonn will try ta develop initiatives in eastern policy, if neces-
sary independently of its Western allies. It will continue to urge its allies to
press the Soviets to abandon their rigid opposition to reunification, If the
allies prove unresponsive to this pressure, or if their effarts are blocked by the
Soviets, West German leaders will intensify their exploration of alternative
approaches to the prohlem. This might result in direct talks with the Soviets,
further moves to improve the German position in Eastern Europe, or additional
moves to normalize West German relations with East Germany; or it could
result in all three together. There will probably be a continuing tendency to
look for practical accommodations of policy regardless of political restrictions—
such as agreements for greater movement of Germans in both directions across
the zonal border. An SPD administration would probably accelerate imple-
mentation of such a policy, especially if its coalition partner were the activist
FDP.

21, But Bonn’s eastern policy operates under severe constraints, and unless
important external developments should accur, we believe that progress will
not be spectacular. A fundamental change in Soviet policy toward Germany

s:

8 pat

Sa

would at any time be likely to find positive response in Bonn, but we see no

prospect of such 4 change during the period of this estimate. West German
progress toward rapprochement with East Germany probably will be limited,
ut least to the extent that the Soviets regard it as likely to endanger the stability
at the Communist regime, We expect further West German steps to improve
relations, despite repeated demonstration of the Communist intention to use
these steps to enhance the status of the East German regime at Bonn’s expense,

22. In Eastern Europe, it is conceivable that sudden developments—for
cxample, a marked acceleration of the trend toward independence ar toward
internal liberalization—could Open up new opportunities for enhancing West
German influence in the area. which any West German administration would
he quick to exploit. But in the absence af such developments, we believe
that the West German government will continue to improve its relations with
these countries at a gradual pace. Jssues such as the Oder-Neisse question
continue to present serious obstacles to the normalization of Bonn’s relations
with Eastern Europe. The impression continues to prevail in the countries of
this area that the West Germans still have designs on their former eastern
territories,

23. Policy toward China is another area where Bonn will probably attempt a
more assertive line than in the past. The Bonn government, under whatever
leadership, probably will be less deterred by US susceptibilities than its prede-
cessor in establishing trade relations with Peiping. Bonn's principal interest
in such a tie is that it may be able to obtain a trade agreement with China
including a Berlin clause, which Bonn could use in its maneuvering against
the Ulbricht regime.’ Trade considerations are secondary, but not unimportant.
To some extent Bonn will be influenced by the example of de Gaulle. How-
ever, the West Germans seem to believe that such actions will not be construed

by the US as a major break in Western solidarity.

Policy Toward Other Areas

24, West Germany's national interests are less directly involved in other areas
af the world, and Bonn’s foreign policy is less actively engaged in these areas,
But the government and West German business interests are greatly interested
in trade with the underdeveloped world, and the West Germans have developed
a fairly extensive economic aid program. Bonn's major concern with respect to
these areas is to maintain its position as the sale spokesman for the German
people, and to sustain the diplomatic isolation of the Ulbricht regime. How-
ever, this policy, which is epitomized by the Hallstein Doctrine, has become
increasingly difficult to maintain as more and more nations, many of them newly
independent, have been subjected to Communist pressure and influence. Recent
troubles with Indonesia, Tanzania, and the UAR have caused West German

‘The Berlin clause refers to the inclusion of West Berlin in the area covered by the trade
Agreement. The East German regime maintains that West Berlin hos no legitimate tie to the
Federal Republic.

Pn

Pet be phice this poliey ponciple under searching examination. Thev are
Poet docorshether to retain it, abandon it. or modify it.

‘iota policy toward the Middle East. an area of mare than ardi-

fer Cerra aberest has heen greatly complicated hy Bonn’s invalvement in
he Mah Laach conflict largely as a result of its peculiar relationship with
Feel falas handling of all the problems arising out of the Ulbricht visit

bette cil Honn’s halting of military aid ta Israel was widely criticized hy
Hho Wet Gornan public as extremely inept diplamacy. and he eventually
mopeciled to pressure fora harder line against the Arabs. It is widely believed
ee Set Corian That ane of the basic causes of its troubles in the Middle East
the Vlenader practice af follawing US policy guidance, natably in the
soto ageeement with Israel; West German policv in the Middle East is
mee hitch to reflect specifically German political and econamic interests to a
vroitor degree than before, Bann is no longer likely to apply a uniform policy
be the Vth countries. and the complexities of the prahlem may result in at least
mpe thochiieation of the Hallstein Doctrine, More broadly, recent events will
vobobh uerease West German wariness toward political commitments. or
Tie ade in disputes. in regions o€ tension outside the area of NATO,

Wl LONGER RANGE POSSIBILITIES *

Though we have estimated that no important changes in West German
veo poliey aie dikely during the next two years or so, we believe that de-

lepuuetits i the world situation will considerably increase the potentiality for
Chacee ater that, For many vears Bonn's foreign policy was relatively quiescent
cud hargely dependent on. the foreign policies of others, but in recent years
ota. bepon ta move, and in vears to come we expect if ta gather momentum,
(in the other hand, habits of constitutional government. which have found
cmbover dhe past 20 years, should tend to im pede sudden shifts in foreign
poliey without careful governmental reflection and considerable national debate.
her factors inhibiting sudden change are West Germany's deep-seated fear
ofthe Soviet Union and its intense drive for reconciliation with Western Europe,

‘Putin the event of rapid or fundamental change outside Germany—e.g.,
i the USSR, in Sino-Soviet ar US-Soviet relations, Eastern Europe, the EEC,
uu NA'TO--West German leaders may find themselves in a position to take
mdependent action ina way which would have an important effect on the
witerests Of their allies, either favorable or adverse, If the Soviets are eventually
hoaced by events to reassess their position in Europe, this might open the way
haa West German-Soviet agreement to resolve the German question at the
copense of the East German vegime and perhaps of Bonn's Western allies. A

the Director of Intelligence qnd Research, Department of State. feels that this section
‘loos not adequately represent: the positive possibilities aver the Jonyer term. In particular,
aU obals ta nate such possible favarable developments as postede Gaulle sottening of French
vyiosition toward European integration, significant prauress toward reunification consistent
val US interests ian a changed International contest, continuing cconamic prosperity, and
copeemlh the attraction af a strong political-militury tie to the US.

major disruption of the Western Alliance—for example, through a French deci-
sion to leave NATO——could cause the West Germans to reassess their entire
position on defense policy. Evidence that the US intended to bring about a
substantial reduction of its commitments in Europe would certainly cause such
A Feassessment, and strang domestic pressure might then arise for the adoption
of a national nuclear Weapons program.

28, External developments could alse affect opinion inside West Germany in
a way which would not be to the advantage of the US or Bonn’s other allies,
Future West German leaders might he tempted to seek to exploit popular
frustration over the absence of visible movement toward reunification and might
thus tend to revive German chauvinism and the appeal of a boisterous and
intolerant extremism. It is also possible that external events could cause
neutralist feeling in West Germany to grow, In time. and especially if the
sense of direct Soviet threat to Western Europe continues to diminish, the West
Germans’ conviction that NATO is essential for their security could weaken,
Conceivably even the necessity for the continued presence of American forces
on German soil might eventually he put in question.

THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This capy
Is for the Information and use of the recipient and of persons under his Jurisdiction on a
need to know basis, Additional essential disseminatian may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff

c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Dapartment of the Army

d. Astistont Chlef of Naval Oparations (Intelligence), for the Derortrnent of the
Phe

e, Aasistar Chiet of Stefi. | «higenee, USAF, for the Departanar of the Ate

a Forca

fy f, Director of Intelligence, AEC, far the Atomic Energy Comaissicn

» Assistant Diractor, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Invastigation

Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

+ Asslitant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or

oe - Agency

- ae

2. This document may be retained, or. destroyed by burning In accordance. with
applicable security regulations, a: returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document Is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain It for q period nat in excess of ane year, At the end of this period, the
‘document should either be destroyed, returned to the farwarding agency, or per-—
‘mission should be requested of the forwarding ‘agency to retain It In
pj ACD~69/2/'22-June 195,

Popes ¥ ee E ¢
. egne : rope

ae ede, he‘title’ of this dacument when us

National Security: Council ”.
' "4: Department. of States
ay Department. of. Defense.

Atomic Energy Commission
«Federal Bureau: of Investigation

seehe gh Lt

Tete eect t
