South African Uranium Enrichment Program DeletedD)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126892, dated 1 July 1977.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126892).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ate ley SD bye! ateiee ce cere eevee nt
EE parte TSE! SE cbes es ee Se Ea

South African Uranium
- Enrichment Program 3

Appreved for Keiease

Date AiG 1997.

were

August 1977

South African Uranium Enrichment Program

S| 77-10058

sts Pate

|
t
}
{
t
i
4
!
:

eee ee

‘= 3. aw Beg een gt ee st ae NE
* yas ~ Ort. : < a 4s Pete Del Se A Pa PEO ge

ple {Sign f
GES Re

SOUTH AFRICAN URANIUM ENRICHMENT PROGRAM

August 1977

bE
E. :
: j S! 77-10058

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DIRECTORATE OF INTELLIGENCE
OFFICE OF SCIENTIFIC INTELLIGENCE

rok oe Mele ts --
A ee a AS See a eS he
zs He TS ae eS

wiitbe aia gPk 3 Ae 4) Cabs
ON, te a St

PREFACE

in 1970 South Africa announced that it had developed a new process for enriching
uranium in the fissile isotope U-235 and that it was constructing a pilot plant to
demonstrate this process. The announced goal of the program was to convert natural
uranium, mined from South Africa's extensive deposits, to a more valuable product for
export. Since then there has been much interest in determining South Africa's
capability to produce weapon-grade enriched uranium and in predicting the role of
this new enrichment process in the international uranium enrichment market.

Only one scientific
report describing the pilot uranium enrichment plant has been released by South
Africa. That report was presented to the European Nuclear Conference in Paris in
April 1975 by Dr. A. J. A. Roux, head uf the South African nuclear program.

ag Seale get Gee aud
ae OR EOE

og ate,
..% ” a:

sabes... -¥ epee
SPER ee ont ater

¢

eae er rg ee RT ee oe ae

OY ee a SEE gh FO ee EERE EY Re es ene ne ee an oe

=
J
e- 3

SEC
NOPORN

TECHNICAL FOREWORD i

Uranium as found in nature Is primarily a mixture of two varieties, or isotopes:
uranium-235, the isotope that sustains nuclear reactions, and the fairly inert uranium-
238. Nuclear weapons and most nuclear reactors require a greater concentration of
U-235 than is found in natural uranium. Consequently, uranium is entiched from the
natural state (0.7 percent U-295) to about 3 percent U-235 for power reactor fuel or to
about 90 percent U-235 for use in nuclear weapons.

Uranium can be enriched by any of several isotope separation techniques, although
only a few methods (e.g., gaseous diffusion, gas centrifuge, and aerodynamic processes
such as the Becker nozzle process} are feasible for large-scale application. In each
technique uranium is passed through a machine, or stage, which separates the feed
material into an enriched portion and a depleted portion. The fraction of uranium
that is split off to become the enriched portion is called the cut.

The degree of enrichment achieved by a stage depends on the stage separation
factor or enrichment factor. In general, decreasing the cut of a stage increases the
enrichment factor of the stage, but the flow of enriched material from the stage also
decreases. Although a large enrichment factor is desirable, very few isotope separation
techniques allow more than a very small degree of enrichment at each stage. To reach
a useful U-235 concentration, therefore, uranium must be passed through a succession
of stages called a cascade. For example, a cascade based on gaseous diffusion, which
exhibits an enrichment factor of about 0.004, is made up of more than 1,000
individual stages.

To perform useful enrichment, natural uranium is fed into a stege somewhere in the
lower portion of a cascade. The cascade splits that uranium into depleted uranium,
which is withdrawn from the low end, or bottom, and enriched uranium, which is
withdrawn from the top of the cascade.

The flow of uranium varies from stage to stage In an ideal cascade. The flow is
greatest at the stage where natural urinium is fed into the system. On either side of
this pcint the flow gradually decreases and reaches a minimum at the ends of the
cascade where product and depleted uranium are withdrawn. Inan ideal cascade each
stage would be sized according to its place in the cascade, but the associazed cost of
building each stage a different size would be unacceptably high. Instead, only 2 few
sizes of equipment are manufactured and Installed, with a small resultant loss of
efficiency.

In dividing uranium into enriched ci.: Jepleted portions, a ect" in amount of
separatice work is performed. Enrichment tasks --c evaluated ty the amount of
separative work involved; stages and enrich. .t plants are classified by their
capacities to perform separative work.

Tm we.

:

Page(s) Vil

are denied in its/their entirety.

Exemption(s): (S) 0) (y) G)

IV ARER ae

rs

SOUTH AFRICAN URANIUM. ENRICHMENT PROGRAM

The aerodynamic uranium enrichment process

developed by South Africa is intended to increase the -

value of exported uraniuim and to make the domestic
nuclear power prograin independent of foreign fuel
suppliers, As with othe: aerodynamic enrichment
Processes, such as the Becks: nozzle process, the South

African process could be us: . ro enrich uranium to 90.

percent U-235, suitable for nuclear weapons
production. a

Details of the specific isotos:~ ~snaration technique
used in the South 4fican enncament process have

_Riveughtly held. Other characteristics of the Process ,
have been reported, however, such as the working
fluid “(a mixture of uranium ‘:-tafluoride and ;

hydrogen) and a fairly high enrichm: ~ factor (0.03).

a . "SUMMARY

A small enfichment plant, the Valindabs pilot plant

‘near Pretoria, has been built t

African enrichment processk

monstrate the South

South Africa hopes to capture 10 percent of the
world-wide uranium enrichment business in the mid-
1980s with a commercial enrichment capacity of 5,000
tonnes of separative work per year.

DISCUSSION

THE ENRICHMENT PROCESS

Suspicions that South Atrica s ennchment process
was a modification of a West German process, the
Becker nozzle process, were only partially con-
firmed in 1975 when Dr. A. J. A. Roux described an
aerodynamic process which used a “‘stationary-walled
centrifuge’ as the separating element. The operating
pressure given for the process gas, a mixture of
uranium hexafluoride (UFe) and hydrogen, was too
high. to suggest a simple modification of the Becker
process. Whereas the Becker process has always
operated below atmaspheric pressure, Roux stated that
all process pressures in the South African plant were
above atmospheric and indicated a maximum pressure
of up to 6 atmospheres.' The two processes, therefore,
cannot be equated.

The separation factor for tne South African
separation element was stated to be “1.025 - 1.030
depending on economic considerations.” This factor
was etplained by Roux in 1973 to be the degree of
enzichment achieved by a South African separation
element.? The fact that Roux described the South
African separation factor as depending on economic
considerations rather than engineering constraints
implies that this separation can be achieved not only
in the laboratory but also in an enrichment plant.’

In the gaseous diffusion process the separation
element is a porous membrane; in the Becker process it
consists of a curved wall and a knife edge. Except for
the vague description given by Dr. Roux, the
separation element in the South African process
remains unknown.

According to Roux’s presentation, the South African
process involves a small cut;® that is, the amount of
enriched uraninm Icaving each stage in an enrichment
plant is a smail portion of the uranium fed into the
stage. Figure | shows, for example, flow diagrams of
two stages that have a cut of 1/4. The enriched stream
of Stage 1 has 1/4 the flow of the feed stream; the
depleted stream has the remaining 3/4. This is the
usual kind of stage; with a cut of 1/4, the effect of
isotope separation is threv times greater for the
enriched stream than for the depleted stream. The use

*The value uf the cut is discused in Appendix A.

Enriched Stream

\ Depleted Stream

Stage . Enriched Stream

Part of Depicted Stream
to be Recycled

? $77 -
er

Figure 1. Uranium Flow Through Two Types of Stages

of a small cut creates a higher enrichment factor than .
would be achieved by the sare equipment operating
with a cut of 1/2, but it complicates the
interconnection of stages in a plant. Figure 2 shows
how stages like this may be arranged in a cascade to
produce useful levels of enrichment (and to deplete
the remaining waste to low U-235 concentration). The
appropriate arrangement for stages like Stage 1 of

Roux claimed, in his presentation at the European
Nuclear Conference, that the small cut associated with
the South African process led to the development of a
novel cascade arrangement “based on the principle
that an aaial flow compressor can simultaneously

figure 1 is seen to be a complicated cascade with three
enriched streams. If the cut were smaller there would
be an even greater number of enriched streams.

sransmit several streams of differing U-295 concentra-
tions without there being significant mixing between

thm.” He called his cascade technique the “helikon
technique.” It was developed iater than the pilot plant
technolagy and hence is not used at Valindaba.

entering each section tends to follow a fairly discrete
path along the compressor and teemerges with Jitile
mixing, compressed and ready to be fed into the next
Stage. The actual mizing that will occur in the
compressor is nut krown.,

A module consusts of “one set of compressors’
(interpreted to mean one compressor carrying several

which are
mixed within
the Stage

Cascade 1~ made up of stages like Stage 2.
Stage 1 cannot be used in this errangement if the
Cul is less than ‘5.

$730$1 577

bh ____

Cascade 2~ made up of stages like Stage 1
operating with a cut of *.. The number of steges |
in a row would be greater with asmallercut ° ”

Figura 2. Two Cascade Techniques

streams) “and one set of separation elements’ (which
implies that the South African separation unit will also
be capable of handling several streams of different

U-235 concentration without mixing). Furthermore, .

according to Roux, a module is not limited to one
separation factor of enrichment; a module “can
produce various degrees of enrichment up to a
maximum of several times the separation factor over
the element.””?

Consideration of this information has resulted in a
concept of a South African module, shown in figure 4.
The axial compressor and separation unit are built into
an integrated unit, perhaps including the heat
exchanger that is needed to remove the heat generated
by compvession of the process gas. The eniire module
‘is divided into segments, with physical barriess
between the segments wherever possible to limit
mixing. For the purpose of illustratinn, six segments
are shown.* Each compressor segraent has a high-
pressu.2 inlet and a low-pressure inlet. because
acenrding to Roux,' feed streams aie separated into
enriched streams that are at 2/3 the original pressure

* Reports received while this paper wes being processed indicated
that the modules consist of 19 segments, or stages, and that each
operates with a cut of 1/20. This does not significantly alter the
assessments made in this paper.

o.. Sypaden a ea Baie

ae he Ee EES,

a

oe oe Ss

_ and depleted streams that are at 9/10 the original
pressure.

There are certain advantages in such a module. The
module could be installed as one group of six stages
operating with a cut of 1/7. This system would
ameliorate the complicated cascade arrangement
required by individual stages operating with cut of
1/7, consistent with Roux’s remark that the helikon
technique was developed because of the small cut
associated with the South African process. Also, a
module could be further segmented and operated as
several siaaller groups of six steges. One size of
equipment could then be used throughout the
cascade, using multiple groups of small segments
where the flow requirements are small and using one
group of large segments where the flow requirements
are greatest. This would reduce the capital costs
involved in building a plant.

THE YALINDABA ENRICHMENT PLANT

r

ec ee en ese genmmme ee ee ene Ee ee ee ie ee ee oe , rer ar "
wo ek " “ r , i. .¥

Page(s) 5 a

are denied in its/their entirety.

Exemption(s) : tp) Q) () 3) .

Enrichment Capability

The equation which oredicts the maximum
enrichment that normally will be achieved by a fixed
number of stages arranged in a simple series is the
{ulluwing:

y/(l-y) = (x/(l-x}) eve ee)
fhe sanables y and x are the U-235 concentrations of -
the product and waste material, respectively. The
yuaatities « and N sre the ennchment factor® and
number of stages, respectively. The maximum
eanchmert level, therefore, is related to the L-235
eoecentration in the waste material and is a functicn
of the enrichment iactor and number of stages. Table
L shows the maximum enrichment levels associated

—

*The eanchment factor and separation factor differ by 1

wi TT Ugo aR: tap ans Re, Se

Page(s) 7 ! 4

are denied in its/their entirety.

Exemption(s) : (END. ) (3)

with a variety of U-235 waste concentrations and
enrichment factor values, for normal operations.

however, for uranium enriched to leve tween 4 and
90 percent U-235.

Plant Capacity

Several studies of the Valindaba pilot plant
conducted in recent years form the basis for
calculating the plant capacity, ag discussed below.

y
|

G

.
eee IE RSE AR EEE YD Me me ap OO RIED RY I RD ORS

Page(s) Uf 2 pases 2 preter)

are denied in its/their entirety.

Exemption(s): ( b) M) 2

Vo (°9* (v

nee

Koeberg nuclear power station near Cape Town will
consist of two 925-MWe pressurized-water reactors,

* Based on West Cerman experience with the Becker aerodynamic
isotope separation process.

Peonraeren tebe ible sitar asta

é

each requiring 24 tonnes of 3.25-percent-enriched
uranium annually,

Operational Status

There is little evidence and much debate concerning
the operational status of the Valindaba enrichment
plant. In the absence of physical evidence, one must
choose among conflicting reports to assess plant
operations,

In his April 1975 presentation, Dr. Roux confirmed
that “part of the pilot plant together with its
associated hydrogen separators and all other ancillary
‘equipment has been successfully brought into
operation.”

© TYTN Aereemerengs cemetery Mera <r SEO, tN EE = oe PEON DR! OP me pet ie ne
7

Page(s) (t, 15 |

are denied in its/their entirety.

Exemption(s) : (A) b)Z

[Vo PG /6

APPENDIX A

Estimate of Cut and UF; Cone: ~tration at Valindaba

The cut is defined as the ratio of the enriched flo
to the feed flow or, in this estimate. (1 percent of the
enriched stream flow rate) /(sum of the enriched and
depleted stream flow rates multiplied by the feed
concentration of UFs),

17
SECRET

LW 2.2

ts/their entirety.

Exemption(s)* tb) Ne)

Page(s)

are denied in i
