Sage


o 5


Sonestier
. TS# 1he205 Le
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY


OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES


27 January 1961


DRAFT
INTERNAL O/NE ONLY


MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR


SUBJECT: Probable International Reactions to Certain
Possible US Courses of Action against the Castro


Regime


“ Introduction


1. The purpose of this memorandum is to assess the inter-— ks,
national risks involved in various types of action the US might .
take to weaken or overthrow the Castro government -- especially “,

the nature and magnitude of possible Bloc countermoves and the |
possibility of serious adverse reactions on the part of Latin


American countries or others in the Free World. We must empha


size that actual international reactions might be ereathy. in- oe
fluenced by circumstantial factors which cannot be accurately | |
foreseen —- by the precise nature of the US action, by the manner, -
speed, and success with which it was carried out, by new develop-


ments in the situation which might affect international opinion


Cersirter


~


regarding hens justification of the US action or (in the case
of the Bloc) the possibilities for countering it without undue
risk. Nevertheless, we telieve some valid generalizations can
be made, on the basis of the situation as it has devexepea so
far, regarding certain broad lines of action open to the US.
Various steps have already been taken by the US against the
Castro regime: the sugar quota has been eliminated; virtually _ 7
all other US Sconcata trade with Cuba has been sfisced under
embargo; political aad diplomatic moves have been taken to
{eolste cand ‘condenn Gaba nthe: Anaya Gan conmmnundtys cand cadet
recently, diplomatic relations have been broken. Thus » for
purposes of this memorandum, we consider that any US effort to
greatly increase the pressures on Castro would probably involve |
moves, unilaterally or with the support of other Latin. American
countries, to (a) establish “i eae and air blockade of Cuba;
‘(b) provide active support, of varying degrees of magnitude and
overtness, to an attempt by Cuban opposition elements, internal |
and in exile, to overthrow Castro; or (c) undertake an overt


military invasion of Cuba,


TOR seen


Sino-Soviet Bloc Reactions


2. Bloc interests and prestige are by now ueeply involved
in Cuba. Bloc leaders from the start have recognized the Value
of a revolutionary, pro-Commmist Cuba as a source of irritation
and embarrassment to the US, as an example for revolutionary
movements elsewhere in the hemisphere, and as a center for
Communist as well as Cuban agitation and propaganda throughout
Latin America. Indeed, the Cuban example has assumed increasing
prominence in Soviet and (even more so) Chinese Communist
assessments of the world sitdations Cuba is being depicted as a
prime example of the Communist thesis that colonial regimes are
inevitably toppling under the impact of revolutionary national-
ism, and that Bloc strength can prevent the Sapestavists from
re-intervening to reverse this process. Further, in the Bloc's”
. view the Castro regime is farther olcng toward the next stage -~


the advent of Communist power -~ than any other Free World


country, The Bloc has provided Castro with extensive political, —


eccrenic, and military support, including tanks. and artillery as
well as extensive quantities of small arms. While carefully
avoiding firm commitments, Khrushchev has further involved Bloc
prestige in several statements designed to create the impression
that the Cuban revolution is under the protection of Soviet

~ missiles.


ae


OL SEB


<er"SECKET


3. For these reasons, the Bloc would regard Castro's
downfall as a substantial political defeat and would respond
vigorously to any major US move -- event or covert and whether
or not supported by ethers -- to bring it about. Such
reaction might include the dispatch of additional military supplies
to Castro, if need be by submarine or aircraft. In the event of
an unresolved military struggle between Castro and US-backed oppe-
sition forces, it is conceivable, eho we believe unlikely, ‘that
the Bloc might even seek to introduce a few "volunteers" to handle
specialized equipment. In. any event, the Bloc would’ probably |
issue jase warnings of the posses, o wider hostilities,
perhaps - lgceblnpahted by naval. redeployments ‘end other pes, .


demonstrations.


4. However, we believe that such Bloc military moves as
were undertaken would be primarily political. acts desi gned to
heighten the crisis so as to play on worldwide feats of" general


war and that the Bloc would carefully avoid a direct military ”
confrontation with US forces. The Communist leaders almost

- certainly recognize that Cuba's geographical location sharply
limits their ability to counter US military moves there and that


US sensitivity regarding Cuba would make the risks of general
oe ee


GOST


war particularly great. Thus Bloc efforts would probably be
primarily directed at heading off the American threat to Cuba
by political means, exploiting in the process all opportunities
to exploit political reactions against the US. Its campaign
would probably stress emergency action by the UN to curb and
censure the us. Given certain circumstances, it might seek to


establish some sort of international control mechanism for Cuba.


5. If the US succeeded in bringing Castro down, the Bloc
leaders, and particularly the Chinese Communists, would feel
thenselves under pressure to offset this defeat (and impress the
Us with their dtsnisasiis) by initiatives elsewhere, At least |
| ‘the Soviet leaders, however, probably believe: ‘that they could

prevent: Castro! s downfall from becoming a dead loss by exploiting
| it as an example of imperialist repression of Cuban nationalism.
Moreover, the US action might impel] Bloc leaders to revise their
assessment of US willingness to take military risks. In, any
event, >a Soviet or Chinese decision to make trouble elsewhere
would depend on the extent to which local circumstances were
favorable. We Imow of no such local situation which is not


‘already being exploited by the Bloc.


Latin American and other Free World Reactions
tn rr nae ee WOFIG NheactLons


6. Castro's stature in Latin America has markedly .
declined over the last year. His dictatorial methods, his
political meddling in other countries, and his close collabora~
tion with world communism have progressively alienated moderates
who initially felt that Castro, with all his crudeness, was
bringing a long needed social revolution to Cuba. Official
opinion, at least privately. has generally crystallized against
Castro, and the earlier tendency of many to secretly applaud his
Yankee-baiting has subsided. The majority of Latin American :
goverments apparently felt that the US economic embargo was
justified and virtually ail have at least privately sympathized
with the US decision to break diplomatic relations. Peru and five
lesser countries have also broken or suspended diplomatic ties


with Cuba, and six others have withdrawn their Ambassadors from


Havana,


Te Nevertheless » most Latin imecicak Jeaders remain
reluctant te stir up the vociferous and sometimes strategically |
- placed minority of pro-Commnists erdother leftists who Look to
Castro as a symbol of revolution, and these leaders themselves


continue to be influenced by traditional fears of US domination


eee es


ee


pect


of the hemisphere. We see little likelihood as matters now
stand that the OAS can be induced to participate in or officially
sanction anti~Castro measures of the drastic nature considefed in


this memorandum.


8. Despite the likelihood of outeries from the far left,
unobtrusive US support for an opposition move against Castro
which promised to win broad popular support would probably be
_at least privately supported by most Latin American governmentse
Some » indeed, | would probably be willing to provide covert
assistance of their own for such a move, particularly if ney felt
that the us would oe support moves to overthrow the Trujillo


sae s 7


di ctetonen in ‘the Dominican Ropar ites


9. Especially if they had been consulted by the US in
advance, the other Latin American governments might be willing
to acquiesce ina neni sizable amount of r uispknorlodged 0 US


support for such an operation, However, | : i


would be enaakig weakened if US ictGc patton pee such pro-
portions as to suggest that the US was imposing a new regime
-rather than assisting the Cubans themselves to settle their owm
destinies. Except possibly on invitation from a new regime
which was widely considered to represent the true feelings of the


Cuban people, direct participation of US combat forces in action


ey ae


ss set


against Castro within Cuba itself would probably cause a violent
and bitter reaction throughout the hemisphere, reflected in
strong opposition in the OAS and UN. These reactions would’be
especially deep and lasting if it appeared that the US was
attempting to install another reactionary Batista-type regime in
Cuba. | |


10. The Latin American reaction would probably also be
adverse, though less intense than in the case of US combat
operations within Cuba, if the US esteblished a blockade of Cuba
in. international | eee At least in the absence of de and
persuasive Cuban: provocations » most Latin Ancrican countries would
find it difficult to oppose efforts to condemn such action: in the
UN end would probably feel impelled to take similar action in the


OAS.


ll, Other Free World nations are for the most part not
deeply involved with the Cuban issue, regarding: At 8s one for
Cuba and the US to work out. Thus their reactions to sicang us
actions would depend mainly on the extent to which these actions
‘appeared to threaten their own national interests, to materially
increase the risks of global war, or to represent (particularly


for the Afro-Asian Bloc) great power disregard for the rights of


TOP SHereT


smaller nations. Actual US military intervention in Cuba would
almost certainly evoke widespread and vehement opposition and,
even if carried out so rapidly as to present the world with a
fait accompli, would probably create a lasting bad impression
throughout the Afro-Asian world as well as in 4atin America.
Imposition of a US blockade would probably stimulate widespread
UN opposition, particularly since Canada and a number of nations
otherwise not particularly sympathetic with Castro etill maintain
trading relations with Castro, Unobtrusive US support for an
“gppuedtion attempt against Castro would produce a good deal of
cynicism throughout the world about the extent of the US role
but if quickly successful little other lasting reaction. How-
ever, an operation in which US participation was marked, or one
which resulted in prolonged and inconclusive fighting, would
probably generate widespread pressure for moves to internationalize
| and control the situation. Unilateral US military intervention
against Cuban territory would probably confront the US with a
situetion in many respects comparable to that of the British and
French at the time of Suez, with even many of our NATO allies


- likely to take the position the US did at that time.
