Prospects for the Castro Regime
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132661, dated 4 November 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132661).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tien sent NIE «8 5 -3-60-<--
8 December 1960

se Ce eT ne bee Feat da a Ree pte a

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated. in the ke
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence - organizations ‘of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, The Joint Stef,
and the Pepe of Besense: Sey
rh ke SAS fact aie wk
: Saearred ‘in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on & December 1960. Concurring were The Director of Intelli-
gence and Research, Department of State; the Assistant Chief
of Staff for pekdass phase pei elaslabbad of ule Army; the Assist-
at e) 5 ss Depariment, of, 3

5 ; f te USA
the Director Wa Tniellisence” - a Ae ecstont “to
the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations; and the Di-
cu»  rectomofthe Natignal'Securitysagency:The Atomic Energy;
Commission sat npecnaeipey fo the USIB, "and the Assistant ;

Pocsinpomarsty

eS at tee: vomee

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE tae 28

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments.

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State :

i b. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army... ,

, c. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), for the ‘Department of {
_the Navy ues

a *DIiFector sof Intelligentey

e. Director for Intelligence,“Join “The {Ota oe ee

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

+ mineen seecenanepnene

Fi

|

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation: . &
h. Assistant to the Secretary of Defense, Special Operations, for the Department 4
of Defense oe :
i. Director of NSA for the National Security Agency :
j.. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other De yartment or i
” “Agency ae Sih Bees ae
2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable :
security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrangement with 2
the Office of Central Reference, CIA. :
3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain i
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate :
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should
be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2, :
22 June 1953. ee ae 4
4. The title of this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified: t
I FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY .
| WARNING 2 ce :
i This material contains information affecting *
the National Defense of the United. States i
within the meaning of the espionage laws, 3
Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794cthe stra 3
SE mission or revelation of which inyanys 3
: to an unauthorized person is prohipt ed g
:
DISTRIBUTION: .
White House
National Security Council i
. .. Department of State £
cs : Department of Defense 3
Operations Coordinating Board e
Atomic Energy Commission 2 ageige tit >
Ai. -E-. Federal Bureau of Investigations Seas
i te Sgt tue fneate rages ibe» a 5 eats cee fords cant bes Bo i

PROSPECTS FOR THE CASTRO REGIME

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects for the Fidel Castro regime over the next six months
or So, assuming that the US continues political and economic actions against the re-
gime at roughly present levels of severity, and that Castro is not removed from the

scene.

THE ESTIMATE

THE POLITICAL SITUATION

1. Prime Minister Fidel Castro remains firmly
in control of Cuba. His overall popular sup-
port has declined since its high water mark of
early 1959, but as a symbol of revolutionary
change he retains widespread support among
the poorer classes, particularly in the country-
side. No other figure has emerged with the
Stature to challenge him, and his associates
have not achieved comparable popular sup-
port.

2. In less than two years the Castro regime
has consolidated its hold over Cuban society.
New institutions have been created, and others,
which have resisted the regime’s domination,
have been eliminated or revamped. The Na-
tional Institute of Agrarian Reform, which
controls most agricultural lands, the state
farms, “people’s stores,” and many industrial
enterprises, is the major vehicle of authori-
tarian statism. All political parties except
the Popular Socialist Party (PSP—Cuban
Communist Party) have been destroyed and
their leadership silenced or forced to flee. For
Some time the regime has dominated all mass
communications media—newspapers, radio,
and television. Pro-Castro elements are in
control of all important labor unions, student
groups, and professional organizations. The
regime’s seizure of most major industrial units
as well as the property of all urban landlords
and its establishment of a network of urban
block wardens have further extended its con-
trol over daily life in the cities. Censure of
the administration by the Catholic Church

has resulted in a government-inspired -propa-
ganda effort to discredit the Church by identi-
fying it with the Batista regime, the upper
class, and foreign imperialism. These meas-
ures are closely parallel to the traditional pat-
tern of Communist takeover.

The Security Forces

3. To tighten the dictatorship and provide
strong defense against its external enemies,
the Castro regime, with Bloc assistance, is
rapidly building up its military and security
capabilities.’ Primary stress has been placed
on building up the militia, a growing force
presently estimated at some 200,000, which
has now taken over many of the internal se-
curity functions previously carried out by the
regular armed forces. Drawn primarily from
lower income peasants and urban workers, the
militia represents an attempt by the regime
to provide itself with a large security force and
to regiment a large number of youth and give
them a sense of participation and identifica-
tion with the regime. Thus far, the militia’s

‘Bloc assistance to date totals some 10,000-12,000
tons of military equipment, including large
amounts of small arms and ammunition and a
few helicopters and probably some tanks, artillery
(also antiaircraft), and other relatively heavy
equipment. Thus far Cuba has received no com-
bat jet aircraft, though some Czech trainers have
already arrived and some jet fighters may be
en route. In addition, the Bloc has Provided up
to perhaps 200 military technicians and instruc-
tors and has taken a like number of Cuban pilots
and other specialists for overseas training.

aE 1

MERRION EES SRROT IY COTM SO SOIR 10 2 oc pe emer cee

me es ae.

SET 2

overall combat efficiency is low; many units
are still on a part-time training basis. How-
ever, there appears to be emerging a nucleus
of well organized, well equipped, and well
trained units loyal to Castro and Strongly
Communist-infiuenced > We believe that within
the next 12 months or so these units will de-
velop into a reasonably effective security force.

4. The regular armed forces are still largely
disrupted as a result of Successive purges and
the employment of substantial army and navy
detachments in construction and other public
works. At present, the combat effectiveness
of the air force is virtually nil, that of the
navy is poor, and that of the army islow. The
army now numbers about 32,000. Increased
emphasis is being placed on training, and Bloc
military equipment and advisors have begun
to make their appearance. Hence the army’s
combat capability can be expected to improve.

The Role of the Communist Party

5. It is impossible to distinguish between the
policies and actions of the Castro regime and
the program presently advocated by the local
Communists. The PSP is playing an increas-
ingly important role in the Castro regime. It
is providing guidance to Castro through his
chief aids. PSP members fill key administra-
tive, Managerial, and military positions. The
party’s propaganda apparatus is of inesti-
mable value to Castro. The party line laid
down at the PSP congress last summer called
for continued Strong support of Castro, who
was characterized as carrying out the essen-
tial first steps of a “revolution of national
liberation.” pgp spokesmen indicated that
the regime would eventually evolve into a
Communist state. Virtually all institutions
of Cuban life are being remolded in the like-
ness of a typical Communist society. In
Short, for most practical purposes, the present
Cuban Government can be regarded as Com-
munist.

The Opposition

6. Internal resistance to the Castro regime has
risen in the last six months but is stil] gen-
erally ineffective. The Catholic Church, the
only major institution not brought to its knees

by the regime, has taken an increasingly firm
Stand against ‘Castro, but because the Cuban
Church has never enjoyed the influence of the
Church in, Say, Colombia, it serves as little
more than a rallying point for opposition.
Castro has alienated most of the middle and
professional classes, but many have now fled,
and the remainder are disorganized and leader-
less. Some campesinos are disgruntled, no-
tably over the regime’s failure to redistribute
large landholdings as it has promised, and ur-
ban labor discontent is increasing with lower
take-home pay and consumer goods scarcities,
A number of anti-Castro guerrilla groups are
Operating in the Sierra Escambray area and
in Oriente Province, but the regime has re-
acted vigorously and has thus far been able to
contain these bands. Within the armed
forces, there probably remains a measure of
dissidence and probably considerable resent-
ment at the regime's decided preference for
the civilian militia, but this may decline as
more Bloc equipment is made available to
them. Moreover, Castro is almost certain to
continue to remove dissatisfied elements.
Abroad, Cuban exile groups are making some
progress toward joining forces, but as yet none
appears to have the Capability for decisive ac-
tion against Castro. Hence, while the re-
gime’s enemies are growing in numbers, no
one group or combination of them Seems well
enough organized or sufficiently strong to of-
fer a serious threat to Castro’s authority.

Castro's Standing in the Free World

7. The Castro regime enjoys a considerable
measure of sympathy among the general fiub-
lic in Latin America because it appears to
stand for social progress and for emancipation
from US economic dominance. Its revolu-
tionary character is not regarded as a defect
by those who are out of power. Therefore,
there would be no wide basis of popular sup-
port for an inter-American move against
Castro; indeed most governments would be ex-
tremely cautious about committing them-
Selves tosuch a move. At the Same time most
governments and ruling groups are alarmed
by the revolutionary aspects of the Castro
movement. Latin American governments are

RT”

ORNATE st EEN NOE QR Tr Bp,

Tata +

a

generally unsympathetic to Castro, and are
becoming increasingly worried over the pres-
ence of the Bloc in Cuba, the pro-Castro
troublemaking minorities in their countries,
and Castro’s attempts to export revolution.
Nevertheless, Castro is benefiting from the
unwillingness of most Latin American gov-
ernments to act against him except when he
or his supporters are caught interfering in
their internal affairs.

8. Most Latin American officials probably do
not share the extreme concern of the US over
the Communist danger in Cuba, and in any
event, their concern in this respect is condi-
tioned by the disinclination of any Latin
American country, except where its own inter-
ests are directly involved, to take a position
in open opposition to another Latin American
state. Also contributing to the apparent
stalemate on Castro is a tendency throughout
the area to view the Cuba problem as one be-
tween that country and the US and to be criti-
cal of US economic sanctions.

9. Only Guatemala, which sometime ago broke
relations with Castro, and possibly Argentina
and Nicaragua, would favor strong OAS action
on the Cuba problem. Presidents Betancourt
of Venezuela and Lleras Camargo of Colombia
are firmly anti-Castro, but neither is prepared
to move on Cuba, the former, in particular,
because he believes that the US let him down
in his efforts to do away with Dominican dic-
tator Trujillo. The other Latin American
States will be reluctant to support anti-Castro
action in the OAS, with Mexico among the
most uncompromising. °

10. Outside Latin America, there is little
strong feeling against Castro. There was al-
most certainly a widespread belief that
Cuba’s extreme economic dependence on the
US would sooner or later provoke a reaction,
and though many countries may regret the
violence of Cuba’s breakaway, most of them
regard this as primarily a US problem. Many
of the underdeveloped and neutralist nations
of Asia and Africa are inclined to sympathize
with Castro in his struggle against the US,
while others probably wish to avoid trouble
with the USSR on the Cuban issue.

THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

11. The Cuban economy as a whole continues
to deteriorate, but is rot yet close to the point
where the stability of the Castro regime is
jeopardized. In the last two years, the econ-
omy has suffered from the unsettling effects
of violent revolution, drastic and haphazard
reforms, and the setbacks attending govern-
ment seizure of virtually all private enter-
prises. In the past six months, the regime’s
economic problems have been compounded by
the cutoff in US imports of Cuban sugar and
by the embargo of all US exports to Cuba
except medical supplies and nonsubsidized
foodstuffs. These actions by Cuba’s major
trading partner have had a considerable im-
pact on the already sagging Cuban economy,
and have aggravated the seasonal decline in
Cuba's foreign exchange reserves, which will
stand at about $75 million at the end of De-
cember 1960, having been about $200 million
in mid-1960.?7_ At the same time, shortages of
industrial goods, including spare parts for
US-made machinery, are increasing. Infla-
tionary pressure, springing mainly from large
currency issues and government deficit fi-
nancing, has thus far been kept in check by
tightening price, wage, and exchange con-
trols.

12. The regime’s performance in economic
affairs has been spotty. Inadequate planning
and mismanagement have resulted in wasted
resources and some production losses, notably
in rice and beans, although agricultural pro-
duction generally appears to have increased.
Industrial production, especially of consumer
goods, was initially spurred by increased mass
purchasing power and import restrictions, but
now may be beginning to feel the pinch of raw
materials and spare parts shortages.

13. Meanwhile, Bloc economic assistance has
reduced the impact of US sanctions. The
Bloc was quick to exploit the US-Cuba con-
flict by signing agreements for large-scale
trade and for financial and technical assist-

? The value of US-Cuban trade totaled $900 million
in 1959. The US has traditionally supplied 70-80
percent of Cuba’s import needs and taken 60~70
percent of Cuba’s exports.

we SECRET

RERELIT TSR

RPE EIS ETRDNT CT

Ra ss Ze tha

e
s
*
“

Se

SARI *

ance The USSR purchased the 700,000 tons
of sugar cut from the US quota in June. It
moved quickly to help Cuba meet the serious
problems posed by the withdrawal of Ameri-
can oil companies from Cuba in mid-summer
and the resulting loss of traditional sources
of crude. Even though Soviet grades of oil
are imperfectly suited for Cuban refineries,
this difficulty is being surmounted and in
general Cuba’s POL needs are being met.
Castro’s search for substitute suppliers of
goods denied him by the US export controls
imposed in mid-October has been hampered
in some degree by shortages of foreign ex-
change. However, no other countries, in
Latin America or elsewhere, have imposed
economic sanctions against Cuba. Hence
Cuba has been able to look for supplies not
only in Bloc but in non-Bloc markets.

*The USSR is committed to purchase one million
tons of Cuban sugar annually for the next five
years, and to provide a $100 million line of credit
to cover the costs of capital equipment imports
and technical assistance for new industrial plans
to be undertaken during a five-year period be-
ginning in 1961. The agreement with the USSR
calls for 20 percent of the USSR’s purchases of
sugar during 1961-1964 to be paid for in US dollars
and the remainder in shipments of Soviet goods.
A trade and payments agreement with Commu-
nist China provides for Peiping’s purchase of
500,000 tons of Cuban sugar annually for a five-
year period; China has agreed to take one million
tons of sugar in 1961 and has now extended Cuba
a credit of about $60 million. A one-year trade
agreement concluded with East Germany calls
initially for the barter of 60,000 tons of sugar for
German machinery and small industrial plants.
A one-year agreement with Poland provides the
framework for delivery of Polish industrial goods
for Cuban sugar, minerals, metals, and other
raw materials. Czechoslovakia recently increased
its credit to Cuba for industrial equipment to
$40 million; also a technical assistance agree-
ment and a five-year trade pact have been signed.
Hungary has signed an agreement with Cuba on
commercial relations, payment, and credits and
granted Cuba a credit of $8 million to buy ma-
chinery, especially for hydroelectric projects.
Cuba has a commercial agreement with Bulgaria
providing for the purchase of at least 20,000 tons
of Cuban sugar annually for the next five years.
Rumania and North Korea have recently signed
trade and technical cooperation agreements with
Cuba.

PROSPECTS

14. We believe that during the period of this
estimate Castro’s control of Cuba will be fur-
ther consolidated. Organized opposition ap-
pears to lack the strength and coherence to
pose a major threat to the regime, and we
foresee no development in the internal eco-
nomic or political situation which would be
likely to bring about a critical shift of popu-
lar opinion away from Castro. Any further
erosion of Castro's base of popular support is
likely to be offset by the growing effective-
ness of the state’s instrumentalities of con-
trol. The regime’s capabilities for dealing
with internal disturbances and foreign-based
incursions are almost certain to improve.
Effective governmental control over the in-
stitutions and daily life of the Cuban people
is also likely to increase, making effective op-
position more difficult and risky.

15. The efficiency of Cuba’s plantations and
indusiries is likely to continue to decline, but
the Communist Bloc will almost certainly
take whatever steps are necessary to sustain
the Cuban economy. Economic dislocations
will occur but will not lead to the collapse or
significant weakening of the Castro regime.
Internal controls will facilitate any further
belt-tightening required.

16. The prospects for effective international
action against Cuba remain poor. Despite
the growing concern about Castro and Cas-
troism among many responsible Latin Ameri-
can leaders, inhibitions about taking strong
OAS action against Cuba will probably ré&
main strong. Most of the rest of the Free
World will probably continue to regard the
Cuban problem as one for the US to handle,
with many of the Afro-Asian states inclined
to sympathize with Cuba.

17. We do not believe that Cuba will make a
direct military assault on the Guantanamo
base. However, the Castro regime will con-
tinue its efforts to undermine the position of
the US and to spread the Castro revolution
to other countries in Latin America. Given
the serious social and economic pressures
building up in most countries of Latin Amer-

RE a oe as a

TREE ETAO TPA AERIS IAS SAE YE TREAT

+ TARGA Ee -

yet

LRAT CREA SRR NE

‘
3
é
:

PRRDIAN Vth

RES

Slike 5

ica and the weakness of many of the pres-
ent governments, the chances of the estab-
lishment of one or more Castro-like regimes
over the next year to 18 months are appre-
ciable.

18. For the Communist powers, Cuba rep-
resents an opportunity of incalculable value.
Within Cuba, the institutions on which an
avowed Communist regime could be based
are being created, with the PSP gaining val-
uable experience in the process. More im-
portantly, the advent of Castro has provided
the Communists with a friendly base for
propaganda and agitation throughout the
rest of Latin America and with a highly eXx-
ploitable example of revolutionary achieve-
ment and successful defiance of the US. The
fact that Castro can be depicted as a na-
tionalist reformer rather than as an avowed
Communist is, at this stage, a net asset.

19. The Soviet Bloc can and will provide the
assistance necessary to prevent serious de-
terioration in the Cuban economy in the short
run and to permit an expansion of economic
capabilities over the longer term. The Soviet
Union will continue to support the military
buildup in Cuba and will unstintingly exert

its influence—short of risking general war—
to sustain the present regime.

20, We believe the Soviet leaders wish to
avoid becoming overextended in Cuba.
Given Cuba’s remoteness from Bloc centers
of power and the extreme sensitivity of the
US on the Cuban situation, the Soviet lead-
ers will probably stop short of actions which
might provoke strong US counteraction, and
especially those which might also alarm the
other Latin American nations. They are un-

likely to encourage a PSP attempt to seize |

power from Castro. Instead, they will seek
to have the local Cuban Communists expand
their influence and in other ways prepare
the ground for an eventual Communist take-
over. The USSR is unlikely to seek military
bases in Cuba or to enter formal defense ar-
rangements with Cuba. Moreover, the USSR
will probably urge Castro to exercise some
caution in pursuing his anti-US policy lest
he provoke an undesired showdown. Though
Communist China advocates a more active
Communist role, and though Chinese Com-
munist influence in Cuba will probably in-
crease, we believe that the Soviet hand will
remain dominant in Cuba for at least the
period of this estimate.

NS AACOS A AON Ay a. DE TF APE NEE LY) LPAI HON AIPLIAS ANTAL OWS T Kangen Reet mane ee meer

SNE te

CALNE INERTIA PEG! Dy iS a A”

CORTES pe ere

1 AAAOR GD 1 TES

a en
