The Federation of Malaya NIE 64-58
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008013, dated 2 January 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008013).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Caey i ge F S uteta eed, “ Se ae ae se Ree aa Thee aoe wet wey ek ty ee
SOMERS SEER CC ROC TD E XU UR CREY STers Ree Cen OnE Tn poe TL eR er eee ese Mle MC FRE SM Ra et Laan

ie

23

3 | , NIE. 64~58°
. oo 14 January 1958

be | NG 288.

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 64-58

(Supersedes NIE 64-56)

TEE a PLDERATION OF is

Submitied by the
DIRECTOR. OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following inteliigence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff. .

Concurred in by the
INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITLEE

on 14 January 1958. Concurring were fhe Director of Inielii-
gence and Research, Department of Stale; the Assistant Chief
of Staff, Intelligence, Departinent of tie Army; the Director
of Naval Intelligence; the Assistant eo of Staff, Iniciti«
gence, USAF: and the Deputy Director for Intelligence, The
Joint Stag: The Atomic Energy Commission Representative
to the IAC and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of
Investigation, ubstuined, the subject veing outside of their
jurisdiction,

Declassified by 6883 TS ies
dete 1c Bevemben-—t225——~

‘
f ‘Salad diay,
\A a

*

a
Pe ea ee cee ete Bec t te CL ee re et ee

RRND g NAN GV IR Om OF Tet IE rors

Beate.
ln sand meth italian tence ny thy ¢ om pate wi, deta i eile a A Mie ds inhi rani ld endian

See en ne

1 ; : on

ili AC 2S CA ANd Pa TE CAT Nae BLATT WON wk ars wan bss “WiteDavwah'h yatyeadhs

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

sO DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This estirnate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy i
is for the Zuformation and use of the recipient indicated on the front cover and of per-
sons urider his jurisdiction on a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination
may be authorized by the following officials within their respective departments:

a. Director of intelligence and Research, for the Department of State

b. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, for the Department of the Army

c. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Na

a. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

e. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

f. Dircctor of Intelligence, AC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

h. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

f

2. This copy may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with appli-
cable sccurity regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrange-
ment with the Office of Central Reference, CLA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated oversees, the overscas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission shovld be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-1D-69/2, 22
June 1953.

4, The title of this estimate, when used separately from the text, should be classified:

LOR adi 4G ONLY
WARNING ;
his material contains informatj fing

nited States
the espionage inws,
ani 794, the trans-
in any manner
ited by Inw.

om wnauthorized person is

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Depsriunent of State
Department of Defense
Operations Coordinating Board
Atémic Energy Cominission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

etal at 1 eee eee

rR 1 Mam 8 oma BS bos ooo a : Wai sey ea gees

CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM .

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS. . ... .
THE OUTLOOK . or.28

A. POLITICAL STABILITY

B. INTERNAL SECURITY .....

C, FEDERATION-SINGAPORE RELATIONS .
D. ECONOMIC STABILITY AND PROGRESS

iB. INTERNATIONAL ORIENTATION . .

ANNEX A: THE POLITICAL SITUATION
A. The Communa) Problem
B. The Constitution .
C. The Government... .....
D. Political Parties

ANNEX B: THE SECURITY SITUATION
A. Communist Activities .
B. The Federation Security Forces
C. The Anglo-Malayan Defense Agreement .

ANNEX C: THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

ANNEX D: THE SITUATION IN SINGAPORE

oo enw VS aah kh NW

Page

Pe eee ee ee
3S §& &@e ee

THE FEDERATION OF MALAYA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects for the political stability, economic viability, and in-

ternal security of the Federation of Malaya, and its probable international orienta-
tion over the next few years, and to estimate probable trends in Federation-Singapore

relations.

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

1. The Federation of Malaya, unlike most
other former colonial states in Southeast
Asia, began independence with little ill-

feeling for its former ruler and with a

generally capable government. The lead-
ers of the new nation are faced, however,
with the task of welding the indigenous
Malays and the alien and unassimilated
Chinese and Indians into a unified na-
tional community. Meanwhile, antag-
onism and rivalries between the Malay
and Chinese groups, almost equal in size,
will be increasingly difficult to hold in
check,

2. Despite growing difficulties, the Alli-
ance ' parties will probably continue their
coalition through the aational elections,
now scheduled for August 1959. Under
the guidance of Prime Minister Rahman,
the Alliance will probably be returned to

‘The Alliance is a conlition of the three main

racial parties, the United Malay National Or-
ganization, the Malayan Chinese Association,
and the Malayan Indian Congress.

office but with a considerably reduced
majority. Over the longer run, increas-
ing communal tensions are likely to lead
to the disintegration of the present racial
coalition and to political turmoil.

3. The Federation will probably continue
its policy of curtailing its ties with Singa-
pore, despite certain consequent economic
sacrifices, and there is little prospect for
a Federation-Singapore merger in the
foreseeable future.

4. Barring a major break in the interna-
tional rubber and tin markets upon which
the Federation’s economic well-being de-
pends, the outlook is for general economic
stability and for some progress under the
government's financial reform and eco-
nomic development programs. However,
the. high rate of population growth and
popular expectations of higher living
standards under an independent govern-
ment will place heavy demands on the
economy and aggravate any economic
setback.

Serer 1

EY TI > RABAT TYTN REIN! BARE FTN PMR RRO, RNAI PPT TIME ILE EAE ETON TE a

oe aR RLS EEO TEV PESTO

fee aires ie nanee

t=
47

eRe

:
:
!
|

61°C DERRY: Lepr RIE a aaa it cates chs clam onlaas 4 gsal Pomc daddhate! ae endacstadh abe dssiiea; Gaidtah oo LATO EN Le A$ I Oe CINE PS oT US RA 3 P “ AE ART NR PPS HP PS
EI NI IE AAO NEO PENNANT. me

5. The Communist guerrillas are no
longer a serious military threat to in-
ternal security. Although we do not be-
lieve the government will accept terms
which would permit the Communists to
operate as a legal party, some basis may
be found to negotiate an end to the Com-
munist armed resistance before the 1959
elections. The Malayan Communist
Party will probably continue to shift em-
phasis away from armed insurrection and
toward building a united front, and will
probably be able to capitalize on Malay-
Chinese tensions and to operate with in-
creasing effectiveness among youth
groups and organized labor.

6. The Federation’s still evolving foreign
policy is at present oriented toward the
Free World. It is a member of the Brit-
ish Commonwealth and the sterling area -
and retains close economic and security
ties with the UK. This orientation will

‘probably continue over. the next few

years, but the presently discernible neu-
tralist trend will probably increase. It is
unlikely that the Federation will join
SEATO or recognize either Communist
China or Nationalist China. However,
an end to the Communist armed insur-
rection would probably increase domestic
pressures for neutralism and for a closer
relationship with Communist China.

THE OUTLOOK

%. The Federation of Malaya? began inde-
pendence with a moderately conservative, pro-
Western government and a relatively sound
economy. Beneath the appearance of internal
stability, however, Malaya’s population of 6.4
million is sharply divided into Malay ® (49 per-
cent), Chinese (39 percent), and Indian (11
percent) racial communities, separated by dif-
ferences in culture, religion, and language.
The size and economic power of the unassimi-
lated Chinese community accentuates the
long-standing conflict of political and eco-

‘nomic interests between the Chinese and the

indigenous Malays and complicates the new
nation’s task of attempting to weld the racial
groups into a unified national community.

*The Federation of Malaya includes-the Malay
states of Johore,; Kedah, Kelantan, Negri Sem-
bilan, Pahang, Perak, Perlis, Selangor, and
Trengganu, and the former Straits Settlements
of Penang and Malacea, Singapore, which re-
mains a Crown Colony, is discussed in Annex D.

*'vThe word Malay refers throughout this paper

to the ethnic group. The word Malayan in-
eludes all permanent residents of Malaya,
whether Chinese, Indian, or Malay.

*See Annex A for 9 fuller discussion of the cur-
rent. political situation.

A. POLITICAL STABILITY *

8. Stimulated by a common desire for inde-
pendence, the three main racial parties, the
United Malay National Organization, the Ma-
layan Chinese Association, and the Malayan
Indian Congress, in 1951 formed a coalition
known as the Alliance. Under the astute
leadership of Tengku Abdul Rahman, the
present Prime Minister, the leaders of these
parties reached a compromise regarding the
Federation's constitution, which provides spe-
cial privileges and a favored political position
for the Malays, but which, at the same time,
protects the Chinese and Indians from arbi-
trary discrimination. The three Alliance —
parties have continued to work together si:.>2
independence, but with increasing difficulties.

9. The United Malay National Organization,
led by Rahman, is the largest and best organ-
ized political party in the Alliance and dom-
inates the government. It has supported
Rahman’s approach cf moderation and of
compromise toward the Chinese and Indian
communities becarse it realized that British:
willingness to grant independence depended
in part on a demonstration that the racial
groups could work together. Party members

abel bleed atle.

have been willing to acquiesce in concessions
to other racial groups so long as the dominant
political position of the Malays in the Fed-
eration was preserved. Since independence,
however, some groups have emerged, particu-
larly among the youth, which represent a
more extreme “Malaya for the Malays” point
of view and oppose concessions to the Chinese
and Indian communities as a betrayal of the
national heritage and birthright of the Ma-
lays. These ultra-nationalist trends place an
increasing pressure upon the party leaders
for strong support of Malay privileges and
may lead to some splintering and to an in-
erease in the strength of the now small Malay
opposition parties.

10. The Malayan Chinese Association is led
by a group of Chinese businessmen who have
a large economic stake in the country and.
have an interest in the development of a
Malayan nation. They have been willing to
cooperate with the United Malay National
Organization largely because they hoped to
preserve their economic position and prevent
excessive discrimination against the Chinese.
As the major source of Alliance funds, they
have been able to cxercise considerable influ-
ence over Alliance decisions. The willingness
of the Asscciation’s leaders to cooperate with
the Malays could not be effectively challenged
because there has been no other organized
national Chinese political group (except the
outlawed Malayan Communist Party, esti-
mated to be 95 percent Chinese). Neverthe-
less, because of the Association’s close rela-
tionship with the United Malay National Or-
ganization, and its acquiescence in a second-
ary political role for the Chinese, it does not
have a broad base of support within the Chi-
nese community. In particular, Chinese
youth have not been attracted to the Associ-
ation. Young Chinese, like most of their eld-
ers, are opposed to assimilation and to any
effort to break down their cultural integrity
or feeling of kinship with mainland China.
These circumstances are conducive to the cre-
ation of a Chinese political opposition.

11. The Maleyan Indian Congress has little
influence over political developments in the
Federation. It will probably remain politi-

cally weak and unimportant because of the
relatively small number of Indians in Malaya
and its lack of financial resources.

12. The trends toward political disunity in
Malaya have not yet gained sufficient momen-
tum to endanger tne Alliance. In the first
national elections scheduled for August 1959,
most of the Malays, who represent a substan-
tial majority of the electorate, will probably
continue to support the United Malay Na-
tional Organization. Under Rahinan’s lead-
exship, it will almost certainly retain a domi-
nent position in the Alliance and the govern-
ment. Barring a serious economic crisis, we
believe the Alliance will win the 1959 elec-
tions, although its present overwhelming par-
liamentary majority will almost certainly be
reduced. The more important opposition
forees will probably be generally leftist in
orientation and adopt extremist Malay and
Chinese positions on communal issues.

13. Despite the success of the Alliance in
reaching an accommodation between the Ma-
lays and Chinese, the underlying tensicns will
continue to be a basic source of political in-
Stability. These tensions, arising out of the
suspicions which have developed among racial
groups through years of community and cul-
tura] exclusiveness, now center on the ques-
tion of which group will ultimately dominate
the Federation. In an effort to reduce these

_ tensions, the government has continued a

British-initiated program intended to encour-
age the re-direction of Chinese loyalties
towards Malaya and create @ comunon sense
of national loyalty. This program includes
increased Chinese participation in political af-
fairs and in the civil service. Implementa-
tion of this program has run up against
strong Chinese resistance to assimilation and
requires continual adjustments among the
racial communities in such mattors as land
use, commercial privileges, and civil rights.
The most sensitive aspect of the prograrn is
the government’s effort to bring the separate
Chinese schools under Federation supervision.
This effort has already caused Alliance losses
in local government clections in urban arcas
and has precipitated a few riots and demon-
Strations.

Sine

FN SERA PRP SAR YOO 8 RR MENDON TAN MN ATT ERR TR PRY TE

Ha > TERIA ar mE TT

neat nan peenednememeaemaememmeenanienmmmastiiiatal

ae en er te om A ra EPA Png NR ra ert pete

}

14. Over the longer run, present political
trends point toward a future of political tur-
moil in the Federation. The mutual suspi-
cions and conflicts of interest between the
Malay and Chinese communities will proba-
bly force the United Malay National Organi-
zation and the Malayan Chinese Association
to adopt increasingly extreme positions in de-
fense of the interests of their own racial
groups. A strong left-wing Chinese opposi-
tion party will probably develop, and Chinese
discontent with their political position will in-
crease the susceptibility of the Chinese com-
munity to Communist activity. The United
Malay National Organization will probably
lose strength to ultranationalist Malay parties
and, in time, this organization may split into
several competing parties. This could lead to
an end of the Alliance as an effective political
coalition, and provide a Chinese party the
opportunity to wield the balance of power in
a weak coalition government,

B. INTERNAL SECURITY °

15. Primarily as the result of a major, British
effort over the past five years, the Communist
guerrillas have been reduced to about 1,700
and are now mostly located in remote jungle
areas. Although they retain a capability for
raids and terrorism, they do not pose a serious
military threat in view of the combined
strength of the Federation security forces and
of the Commonwealth troops available under
the terms of the pe aoa Defense
Agreement.

16. We estinate that the illegal Malayan
Communist Party numbers about 5,000. Party
leaders have been unwilling to accept the Fed-
eration government’s terms of surrender and
are endeavoring to conserve their armed
strength in hopes that they can negotiate
terms in the future which will permit them
to engage in united front activities and politi-
cal subversion. There are pressures on both
sides to reach a settlement. From the Com-
munist point of view, the morale of the guer-
rilla forces is deteriorating, and continuation

‘See Annex B for a fuller discussion of the in-
ternal security situation and of the Anglo-Ma-
layan Defense Agreement.

of the jungle war offers little hope of gaining
its objective and prolongs the presence of
Commonwealth troops in Malaya. On the —
other hand, the Federation government is un-
dey pressure. to end the restrictive regulations
imposed to further the war effort and to con- .
centrate on communal problems and eco-
nomic development. The Federation govern-
ment will probably progressively reduce these
restrictive regulations. Although we do not
believe the..government will accept terms
which would permit the Communists to oper-
ate as a legal party, some basis may be found
for negotiating an end to the Communist
armed resistance before the 1859 elections.

17. Whether or not there is an agreement
with the Malayan Communist Party to end
the jungle war, the Federation government
will have to cope with increasing Communist
subversion, particularly in the labor move-
ment and in the Chinese middle schools. In
addition, the Communists will be able to ex-
ploit continuing racial tension in the Federa-
tion and the growing prestige of Communist
China among many Malayan Chinese. A
growth of Communist strength in Singapore
would further increase the Federation’s prob-
lems with subversion. These factors, in con-
junction with a growth in Malay ultra-nation-
alistic sentiments and in Chinese dissatisfac-
tion with the Malayan Chinese Association,
could lead to the formation of new Chinese
political groups with stronger pro-Communist
leanings. However, we believe the Federa-
tion, supported by the British, will probably
be able over the next few years to prevent the
Communists from endangering the position of
the government.

C. FEDERATION-SINGAPORE RELATIONS °

18, Federation leaders are opposed to a
merger with Singapore and are in fact seek-
ing to reduce ties with the Colony. The Ma-
lays oppose a merger because the addition of
Singapore’s Chinese population to that of the
Federation would make the Chinese a numeri-
cal majorily. Moreover, they believe that the
outlook for internal security and for substan-

"See Annex D for a discussion of the situation
in Singapore.

“SPT ne ANU ARERR PE A PUNT AA Ar ty YR NN 2 RNR A UPR IARI

FE HS RO

Sinilindin.s..” jab RURUMEEONMAn Tce OA EN

1 MALT RRR EBIE AMA PTIE NRC My TOLD TERA ED ATM We! C8 iB ML TIT RRR CO ETE RINT

. SPOR, 5

tially reducing Communist activity and sub-
version in Singapore is poor, and therefore
believe that merger would greatly increase
their own problems. Given these conditions,
it is almost certain that merger will not take
place so long as a Malay-dominated govern-
ment is in power in the Federation.

D. ECONOMIC STABILITY AND PROGRESS *

19. The Federation began its independence
under favorable economic conditions. How-
ever, its prosperity depends almost entirely
upon prevailing world prices of its two basic
resources, rubber and tin. At present, its
economy is healthy and growing; its trade
position is favorable, and its currency is sound.
The Federation will probably remain within
the sterling area and continue to be a major
contributor to the area’s dollar pool. The
economy can probably withstand short term
declines in rubber and tin prices, but a major
and prolonged decline of these prices would
create severe economic problems.

20. Consistent with their attitude toward the
proposed merger with Singapore, Federation
leaders have adopted a policy of curtailing
economic ties with the Colony. ‘This involves
the establishment by the Federation of a sepa-
rate currency and central bank, and the crea-
tion of its own commercial, financial, and port
facilities. While designed to develop institu-
tions more responsive to ti:2 needs of the Fed-
eration’s economy, the government’s policy
also will entail some financial risks, reduce the
efficiency of commercial transactions, and re-
quire the expenditure of private and public
funds to build new facilities. It will place
heavy demands on the Federation's limited
number of trained administrators, a problem
which can be reduced to the extent the Federa-
tion is willing to enlist expert assistance from
Western countries.

21. The high rate of population growth, now
slightly over three percent per year, places
severe demands on the economy for corre-
sponding expansion. In addition, the Pedera-
tion will probably face the problem, common

?See Annex C for a fuller discussion of the eco-
‘ nomic situation.

in most newly independent nations, of unreal-
istic public expectations for improved living
conditions. To meet these problems, as well
as to cushion the Federation’s dependence on
tin and rubber, the government has adopted
a comprehensive and realistic plan for eco-
nomic development and diversification. The
plan calls for the expenditure of US $444 mil-
lion from 1956 through 1960. The Federa-
tion's economy will probably make some prog-
ress over the next few years, but will be hard
put to keep economic expansion ahead of pop-
ulation growth.

E. INTERNATIONAL ORIENTATION

22. The Federation has retained close links
with the UK by remaining within the Com-
monwealth and the sterling area, by the
Anglo-Malayan Defense Agreement *, by trade,
and by financial agreements which provide
for substantial amounts of British economic
aid. British nationals occupy about one-third
of the principal governmental posts, and
most of the Federation’s future foreign service
officers are now being trained by the Austral-
ians and the British. The government’s for-
eign policy, although still in process of formu-

lation, is oriented generally toward the Free

World. This orientation will probably con-
tinue, at least until the 1959 parliamentary
elections. However, opposition to continuing
close ties with the West is represented both
by Malay groups favoring a closer relationship
with the Afro-Asian countries and by Chinese
groups supporting closer ties with the Sino-
Soviet Bloc. These groups will exercise i:-
creasing pressure upon the government’s for-
eign policy.

23. The Federation, admitted to the UN im-
mediately after independence, has extended
recognition to practically ali UN members
with the major exception of Nationalist China.
It has withheld recognition of Communist

_ States not in the UN, including Communist

China, The Federation government probably
will not recognize Nationalist China or Com-
munist China within the next few years be-
cause such recognition would create addition-

*See paragraph 13 of Annex B for details of this
this agreement. L

SENN ee IRE EES RM EY bahar inthe Sees

links
Com-
r the
trade,
ovide
romic
‘third

and
srvice
stral-
s for-
rniu-
Free

con-
ntary
nuing
both
nship
linese
Sino-
se fi
8 for-

N im-
ended
mbers
shina.
1unist
1unist
ybably

Com-
rs be-
lition-

of this

ATER

= _ . a? a

a) difficulties for the Federation government
among the Malayan Chinese. However, rec-
ognizing that the large Chinese community
looks to the mainland as its cultural home,

the Federation leaders will become increas-

ingly concerned over growing internal pres-
sures for the recognition of Communist China.
In addition, the Federation’s heavy depend-
ence on rubber exports offers an opportunity
for Sino-Soviet Bloc economic penetration.

24, The Federation’s policies toward neigh-
boring countries are not yet fully defined.
The Malays and the Indonesians are of the
same racial, linguistic, cultural, and religious
background. There is a great deal of per-
sonal rapport between the Malays and the
peoples of Sumatra. Although Malaya and
Indonesia have remained on generally friendly
terms, Federation leaders have displayed in-
creasing concern over the political situation
in Indonesia because they fear that continued
Communist advances could result in serious
political and economic repercussions in Ma-
laya. With Thailand, the problem of closing
the Thai border to the Malayan Communist

Party guerrillas has caused some difficulty, .

but relations have remained generally friend- -

ly. There are important economic ties be-

tween the two countries, and Thailand sup-
plies avout 20 percent of the Federation's an- *

nual rice requirements.

25. There is among some elements of the Fed-  -
eration a tendency to follow a policy of neu-
tralism such as espoused by India and Burma.
These elements believe that the Federation
should rely on the UN rather than the Anglo-
Malayan Defense Agreement for protection,
should ally itself with the Afro-Asian coun-
tries, and thereby avoid being drawn into the
cold war. In particular, there is considerable -
opposition in the local press and among poli-
ticians of ai! parties to joining SEATO. The
Federation leaders probably feei that they |
have secured all the practical advantages of
SEATO membership by means of the Angio-
Malayan Defense Agreement and will prob- .
ably take no action on SEATO membership in —
the foreseeable future. Tendencies toward
neutralism are not yet prevalent, but they will
probably increase in the future.

A. The Communal Problem

1. The Federation of Malaya has a population
of about 6.4 million, divided approximately
into 3 million Malays, 2% million Chinese, and

700 thousand Indians. These three ethnic

groups maintain their separate cultural, re-
ligious, and linguistic identities, and the Chi-
nese and Indian communities have strongly
resisted assimilation. The existence of these
three racial groups, each with its own pre-
rogatives and economic interests built up dur-
ing the colonia! administration, tends to dom-
inate the political life of tne Federation. This
communal problem is a basic factor in the
Federation's constitution, its government, its
economy, and its political party system.

2. The Malays generally lack the skills and
ambitions of the other racial groups. Most
of them are Moslems, living in rural areas and
occupied with farming and fishing. Many
have small rubber holdings. Under British
rule, the Malays were protected against the
more energetic Chinese. They were given a
preferred status in government service, in civil
and political rights, and in land ownership.
Their schools were supported by the govern-
ment, and, ‘> « ‘tizens, they had certain rights
denied to otners. Educated and ambitious
Malays have generally entered government
service or politics rather than attempt to com-
pete with the Chinese and British in the eco-

nomic sphere.

3. The Chinese in the Federation have tended
to avoid political activity and have been con-
tent to concentrate on commercial activities.
As in other Southeast Asian countries, the
Malayan Chinese nave gravitated to the urban
centers and have come to dominate important
segments of the Federation economy, particu-
larly commerce, foreign trade, tin mining, and

ANNEX A

THE POLITICAL SITUATION

rubber processing. With the less numerous
Indians, the Chinese provide most of the Fed-
eration’s skilled and semi-skilled labor. Prob-
ably half the Malayan Chinese were born in
China and most of the others attended Chi-
nese schools in Malaya. They are generally
oriented toward the Chinese mainland and
have maintained separateness by clinging to
their Chinese culture and their closed society.
Prior to independence, only a small number
of Chinese eligible for citizenship took ad-
vantage of that rizht. Most were satisfied to
forego political rights so long as the British
were present to protect them against economic
discrimination.

4, The Indian community, like the Chinese,
was attracted to Malaya by economic oppor-
tunities afforded by the British development
of the country and by the protection of the
British colonial administration. Most of them
are low-caste Tamils. They make up a large
portion of the manual labor force of the Fed-
eration and have been especiatly active in
trade union activities, where a few individual
Indians have achieved some political signifi-
cance. However, because of their fewer num-
bers, the Indians as a community have not
been a major economic or political force and
exercise little influence over developments in
the Federation.

5. There have been few serious race riots in
Malaya, and, generally speaking, the mem-
bers of the three communities get on well to-
gether as individuals in their day-to-day re-
lationships. The frictions and tensions exist
primarily on a group level and grow out of eco-
nomic competition and envy, and the desire
of each group to maintain its prerogatives.
Since independence ended the British role as
buffer and arbiter among the racial groups,

r

Sera. . 7

OER LEICA IO BIS MY HEP PRN ESATO NTR AMT REALONE MD MEE YAR RSNT NRTA ATT A ME ANS REARING ENA

ee er AARON a PIO Ric AS OREN ERT RETR AE tmuninee nme note

oe

their mutual suspicion and sense of insecurity
have increased. The leaders of the Chinese
community realize they must increase their
political strength in order to protect their
economic position and their separate culture
from the Malay-controlled government. The
Malays, on the other hand, are determined
to maintain their dominant political position
and to play a larger role in the nation’s econ-
omy.

6. During the last years before independence,
the British inaugurated a program designed
to encourage the re-direction of Chinesc loy-

alties towards Malaya and create a common —

sense of national loyalty. This program is
now a major aspect of the Federation govern-
ment’s domestic policy. It includes efforts
to bring the Chinese community schools under
government control, to establish Malay as the
national language in schools and the govern-
ment, and to encourage the Chinese to par-
ticipate, fo some extent, in government serv-
ice. To date, the program has made little

headway. However, present indications are —

that an increasing number of Chinese may
take advantage of the relaxed citizenship re-
quirements under the new constitution.

B. The Constitution

I, Alliance leaders, demonstrating a high de-

gree of statesmanship ard ability to compro-
mise, worked effectively with a special Com-
monwealth commission organized to prepare
a constitution for the Federation, and their
ideas were generally incorporated into the
final document, The constitution is designed
to preserve the basic Malay character of the
country, but it also provides protection for the
interests of the non-Malay communities. It
calls for a parliamentary democracy with a
strong centra] government, and incorporates
most of the features of the British system.
It contains a standard bill of rights, including
the right to vote for all citizens over 21 years
of age.

8. Executive power is centered in a responsible
cabinet headed by a Prime Minister. To pro-
vide political stability during the immediate
post-independence period, the constitution
specifies that the present Legislative Council,

elected in 1955, will remain in office until 1959,
when the first general elections will be held
and. a two-house parliament formed. The
upper house will consist of two elected repre-
sentatives from each state and 16 appointed
from professional and cultural groups. The
lower house of 100 members will be elected
from the country as a whole. The Prime
Minister must. be a member of the lower house.

9. The Sultans, hereditary rulers of the nine
Malay states, retain their positions. Collec-
tively, they form a Conference of Rulers which
elects from its membership the Head of State
(Paramount Ruler) who serves for a five year
term. The Paramount Ruler has the usual
prerogatives of a constitutional monarch and
@ special responsibility to protect certain Ma-
lay privileges pertaining to land ownership,
government service, and business licenses. On
behalf of the Conference of Rulers, he can veto
laws affecting religious matters and the priv-

‘Hepes of the Sultans themselves. In turn, the

constitution calls for the adoption of a parlia-
mentary democracy in each of the nine Maiay
states and the two former Straits Settlements,
Penang and Malacea, with an clected uni-
camerai legislature, a responsible head of gov-
ernment, and a constitutional ruler (the Sul-
tans in the nine Malay states and governors
appointed by the Paramount Ruler in Penang
and Malacca). The state governments have
autonomy in matters of Moslem law, land
tenure, agriculture and forestry, and local gov-
ernment services.

10. The constitution establishes Malay as the
national language but provides for the use of
English as an official language for 10 years.
Islam is designated as the state religion, but
religious freedom is guaranteed. The con-
Stitution provides that all Malays are auto-
matically citizens, that all citizens prior to in-
dependence retain that status, and that ail
persons born in the Federation after independ-
ence hecome citizens. Non-Malays residing
in the Federation can qualify fer citizenship
if they are of good character, have an cle-
mentary knowledge of Malay, and meet cer-

‘tain residence requirements. During the first

year of independence, the language require-
ment is waived for all applicants born in the

Serer: 8

IT PERT NM A LEN: SRP

. “ ; prey
teen NN asta | el shame eharneeeatememanemaabaameimnenbeennemneneneni mame arsine nae abentta cart cmsear anaes renieentans er adananaianan antes nome tunedeumatemmnaearematmle etataaaeauettuatiate nt aneaatenase alice :
Pere

|
:
|
:
|
|

A mtg om OEE REI Pw”

Federation and all those over 45 years of age.
The constitution can be amended legally only
by a 2/3 vote of Parliament, thereby insuring,
at least for the foreseeable future, the domi-
nant position cf the Malays.

C. The Government

(1) LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL

11. The present 98-seat Legislative Council
took office in August 1955. Forty-six of its
members were appointed by the High Commis-
sioner and 52 were elected. Fifty-one of the
elective seats were won by the three communal
parties which make up the governing Alliance
party... The Alliance party members elected
include 34 Malays, 15 Chinese, and 2 Indians.
Of the 46 appointed members, five were sclect-
ed after consultation with the United Malay
National Organization as the major party,
five were designated British officials, and 36
were selected from commercial, labor, racial
and jocal interests. This Legislative Council,
with a few changes due to vacancies, will gov-
ern the Federation until the first general elec-
tions scheduled for August 1959 and the or-
ganization of a regular parliament.

(2) THE CABINET

12. The dominant political figure in the gov-
ernment, and wnicispu.ted national leader, is
Prime Minister Tengku Abdul Rahman. He
is 54 years of age, Cambridge educated, and
the son of the Sultan of Kedah and a Thai
princess. Despite nis royal backgrouad, Rah-
man has the corimon touch which enables
him to associate easily and effectively with
the Malayan people. As Chief Minister, he
directed the independence negotiations with
the British and now enjoys nationwide pres-
tige as the “father of Malayan independence.”
Rahman is anti-Communist, generally pro-
West, and represents the moderate, rational
approach to the Federation’s racial problems.
His political astuteness and ability to com-

1In the Ipoh by-election of 27 November 1957 a
Ceylonese defeated the Alliance Chinese candi-
date in a predominantly Chinese district lower-
ing to 50 the number of sents held by the Al-
liarice.

promise have enabled him to hold together

_the racially diverse Alliance without losing

the support of the Malay community. His
ability, moderation, and relatively secure posi-
tion as the national leader of the Federation
were important factors in the British decision
+9 grant independence when they did.

13. Prime Minister Rahman, who also holds
the foreitn affairs portfolio, has been careful
to retain the appearance of multi-racial com-
promise in forming his cabinet. However, the
Malays clearly exercise the strongest influence.
Second to Rahman in importance is Abdul

Razak bin Dato Hussein, Deputy Prime Minis- |

ter and Minister of Defense. Although more
reserved in his dealings with the Chinese than
Rahman, Razak has followed Rahman’s ap-
proach towards reconciling communal  dif-
ferences, and as former Minister of Education
he played a key role in drafting a compromise
Alliance plan for bringing Chinese schools
within the national educational system. Other
important Malay leaders hold the Ministries
of Justice, Agriculture, Education, and Com-
munications in the cabinet. Leaders of the
Chinese community head the Ministries of
Labor, Commerce and Industry, and Finance.
The principal leader of the Indian community
is Minister of Health. Although Rahman was
guided largely by political considerations in

forming his cabinet, he has assembled a gen- —

erally competent group of men who, with the
aid of experienced British advisers, provide
an efficient administration.

D. Political Parties

14. The Alliance, an association of the three
major communal parties, the United Malay
National Organization, the Malayan Chinese
Association, and ‘he Malayan Indian Con-
gress, was formed in 1951 as a united front to
work for nationzl elections and Malayan in-
dependence. Tne United Malay National Or-
ganization has a preponderant hold on the
Malay community and is the strongest of the
Alliance parvies. Under Rahman, who has
been party wresident since 1951, it has built
up a strong and fairly well-disciplined nation-
al organization with a large and active youth
section. Much of the Organization’s strength

_ <0 ilinlnas 9

a , ‘
“EF re 5 RREUSRRNDE URRY FEY HMR ene mer tm mR A ato: Clr a ee i a i alec Rl ik a he Oa ae ea Mane eae oe oe ee i Ce a aed

EX A

rether
losing
. His
e posi-
ration
>cision

holds
careful
1 com-
er, the
uence.
Abdul
Minis-
, more
e than
VS ap-
21 dif-
cation
romise
chools
Other
istries
Com-
of the
‘ics of
nance.
munity
131 WAS
ms in
A gen-
th the
rovide

three
Malay
hinese
. Con-
ont to
an in-
1a) Or-
on the
of the
io has
s built
ation-
youth
roneth

es)

errr oe

is derived from its leadership in the independ-
ence movement. This position in turn en-
abled the party to keep a hold upon Malay
nationalistic sentiment and to reconcile with-
in its organization diverse elements in the
Malay community, ranging from conservative,
orthodox Moslems to radical, nationalistic
youth groups.

15. The Malayan Chinese Association, the sec-
ond ijargest of the Alliance parties, has been
controlled by a smal) group of wealthy and
conservative Chinese and has never succeeded
in building a wide base of support among the
Chinese. It has been hampered by the polit-

ica) apathy of the Chinese prior to independ-
ence and by the opposition of many Chinese >

to the dominant role of the Malays in the
Alliance. Furthermore, the party has not at-
tracted Chinese youth, particularly in the Chi-
nese middle schools. Despite its defects and
the factional struggles among its leaders and
branches, the Malayan Chinese Association is
important to the Alliance as a major source
of funds and as the only source of Chinese
support and participation in the government.

16. The Malayan Indian Congress has little
or no influence on Alliance decisions, The
party’s impotence reflects both the numerical

and economic weakness of the Indian com-

munity and its lack of leadership and party
discipline. Its importance to the Alliance is
primarily the justification for claiming sup-
port from all three racial communities, rather
than its electoral strength.

17. Political opposition to the Alliance is weak
and poorly organized. Dato Onn, formerly
one of the leading Malay politicians and the
founder of the United Malay National Organi-
zation in 1946, has lost most of his following
and influence. In 1952 he founded the Party
Negara (National Party) and has led it to an
increasingly extremist Malay position, attack-
ing the constitution, the United Malay Na-
tional Organization, and the Alliance as de-
structive of the Malay position. The Pan-
Malayan Islamic Association, originally a con-

ANNEX A

servative religious party dedicated to creation
of an Islamic state, is led by Dr. Burhanuddin
Al-Helmy, one of the most extreme Malay na-
tionalists. It was the only non-Alliance party
to win a seat in 1955 Legislative Council elec-
tions. Neither of these parties has as yet
achieved national strength, and their future
will depend upon the growth of ultranation-
alistic sentiment among the Malays. The Peo-
ple’s Progressive Party, which holds the sec-
ond non-Alliance seat in the Legislative Coun-
cil, at present is a local organization. It is
led by D. R. Seenivasagam, an aggressive left-
wing Ceylonese who may be able to build it
into a national opposition party. ws

18. The Labor Party of Malaya, made up of
Indian and Chinese workers, is led primarily
by Indians. It has joined with the Party Ra’-
ayat, a leftist Malay group, to form a National
Socialist Front as a left-wing, non-Communist
oppcsition. The weakness of this coalition .
results from the lack of appeal of socialist doc-
trine among the Malays and the present polit-
ical impotency of labor. Most of the Indians
and Chinese, who make up the majority of
the labor force, either did not meet citizenship
qualifications or were uninterested in becom-
ing citizens before independence. Moreover,
existing law prohibits trade unions from en-
gaging in political activity.

19. There is no legal political party outside
of the Alliance for the expression of purely
Chinese communal interests. However, recent
successes of the Labor Party in loca) by-elec-
tions indicate that it may be able to attract
increasing support from Chinese and Indian
groups who will make wp a larger share of the
electorate than previously with the imple-
mentation of the new constitution. The Ma-
Jayan Communist Party, the membership of
which is about 95 percent Chinese, has been
outlawed since 1948 when it began its armed
uprising. During debate of the constitution,
the Chinese Federation of Guilds and Associa-
tions and the Chinese Chambers of Commerce
were spokesmen for the Chinese opposition
view.

SuiGhieliatow 10

t
ADEN Cpe epg

ES A RO eS ae
re SRE RR Pr a eR PRET “eR rr eng ae e RE SSE AP HUE STS TEF SDE CESTAPSRR SON CREEPS TY ye

ANNEX B

THE SECURITY SITUATION

A. Communist Activities

1. During 1957 Communist guerrilla activi-
ties dropped to the lowest point since the be-
ginning of the armed uprising in 1948. The
Emergency regulations, promulgated by the
British early in the Communist uprising for
furthering the war effort, remain in force.
Commonwealth forces continue to assist in
anti-guerrilla operations and the Federation
government hopes to be able to lift the Emer-
gency by mid-1958,

2. Communist Strength and Capabilities: The
Malayan Communist Party is estimated to
have a strength of about 5,000, about $5 per-
cent of whom are Chinese. Its armed element,
the Malayan Races Liberation Army, is esti-
mated to number about 1,760, now in small
groups scatioxed through remote jungle areas.
The largest concentrations are in the states of
Johore, Perak, and Kedah, the latter two pos-
ing the most difficult problem becanse they
are adjacent to the Thai border. Reportedly,
about 25 percent of the Communists’ armed
forces, and their headquarters, are near or in
Thai territory. Comparatively little is known
about the Afin Yuen (People’s Organization),
which supplies the Communist guerrillas with
food, medicine, and intelligence, but it is con-
siderably larger than the Malayan Com:nu-
nist Party. Though weakened and isolated,
the Communist armed forces retain a capa-
bility for terrorism and raids. So long as the
party chooses to maintain armed units, it can
pin down substantial numbers of Common-
wealth and Malayan troops and impose a
burden on the Federation’s budget.

3. Communist Policy: According to a new
Manifesto dated 1 September 1957 the Ma-
layan Communist Party is endeavoring to de-
velop a “united front’ in labor organizations,

political partics, and schools, and to exert
pressure on the Federation government to end
the Emergency on terms favorable to the Com-
munists. These terms include acceptance of
the Malayan Communist Party as a legal
political party, and the restoration of the
privileges of full citizenship to the outlaw
leaders. As early as 1954, the Malayan Com-
munist Party acknowledged its inability to
overthrow the government by force and began
efforts to promote a united front organiza-
tion. However, it has been unable to nego-
tiate an agreement with the government
which would enable it to retain the hard core
of its leadership. In December 1855, party
secretary general, Chen Ping, emerged irom
the jungle for a series of talks with Federa-
tion government leaders, The latter refused
at that time and again in December 1957 to
grant: legal recognition to the party or to bar-
gain for the fate of the guerrillas as the price
for ending the Communists’ armed resistance.
With their numbers reduced, their area of
operations restricted, a growing morale prob-
lem within their ranks, and little hope of im-

proving their position in the jungle war, the :

Communist leaders are clearly anxious to
reach an agreement to end the war and to
shift to political competition and subversion.

4, Communist Subversive Tactics: Since 1948,
the Malayan Communists have devoted the
major part of their energies to armed insur-
rection, leaving their subversion and political
infiltration efforts with a minimum of leader-
Ship and support. The central theme of its
propaganda is the building of a united front
against the “colonialists." While independ-
ence has reduced the effectiveness of this
theme considerably, Malayan Communist
propaganda continues to charge the govern-
ment with “selling out lo the British.’ At

Sudeledidaiiiae 11

ye,
istaa aac nein tre cht Cate ut ated Ditch tascam eae Pt Gosamet tated inate ceed cee Lee A peat uta toe ieee Later tater tnd ite ate eRe

RR I perm

pomncemannabatinnn ine | sm x ninmasewmann ¢

the same time, the Communists claim full
credit for obtaining independence for the Fed-
eration on the basis that its activities forced
the British to relinquish control. They are
also secking to increase pressures for elim-
ination of Commonwealth armed forces and
strategic bomber bases in the Federation.

5. Students of the Chinese middle schools are
a major target of Communist propaganda and
subversion. These students are subjeci to the
full play of the communal problem; their
opportunities ta secure higher education or
to obtain work commensurate with their
training are limited; they are susceptible to
the appeal of Communist China’s accomplish-
ments; their teachers are subject to Coramu-
nist influence; their schools have been undis-
cipline’, and school facilities often inade-
quate. A number of Chinese students go to
the mainiand for higher education. However,
there was a 40 percent drop from 1955 to 1956
in the number of school age Chinese going
from Malaya and Singapore to mainland
China. This may result, in part, from Pei-
ping’s increasingly selective policy in choos-
ing overseas students, and in part from Ma-
Jayan Commninist policy of encouraging its
most promising prospects to stay and con-
tinue the struggle in Malaya. However, local
authorities in Malaya cite disenchantment
with conditions and opportunities on ‘the
mainiand as the major factor in the decline.

6. Present Communist subversion of labor in
the Federation is limited by its Joss of contact
during the eight-year armed struggle and by
the lack of a large, well-organized, labor move-
ment. In mid-1957, Federation statistics
listed nearly 300 separate unions, either reg-
istered or awaiting registration, with a
claimed membership of about 250,000. Dur-
ing 1956 there was some increase in labor un-
rest which, however, has not been a serious
problem for the Federation since 1947 when
the Communists, who had at that time a
strong grip on the labor movement, were at-
tempting to seize the country. Aithough most
of this increased agitation was probably
caused by union organizing efferts, part of it
can be ascribed to some increase in Commu-
nist activity in the labor movement.

; te il

stone meena techaaeetinmn temaeala cinema teehee tel atmenet nit edeemeaem naar itee tate pet a EU an RE a

ANNEX B

7 Communist subversive efforts in’ Malaya
nave also received limited support from main-
Jand China. The Chinese Communist Bank
of China with branches at Singapore, Kuala
Lumpur, and Penang, has apparently had
some success in winning the favor of Chinese
businessmen by its willingness to make virtu-
ally unsecured loans. Radio Peiping pro-
vides the great bulk of information for Com-
munist propaganda in Malaya. Chinese Com-
munist trade overtures toward the Federation
have been initiated although not on the same
scale as elsewhere in Southeast Asia.

B. The Federation Security Forces

8. The Federation army consists of approxi-
mately 11,500 officers and men. It is organ-
ized into two operational brigade headquar-
ters and includes eight infantry battalions,
two armored car squadrons, an artillery cadre,
and the nucleus for technical and logistical
support. A major problem is the acute short-
age of indigenous officer personnel. At pres-
ent, more than half the officer corps ac
British detailed to the Federation. They hold
all but one of the major staff positions and
command all but two of the combat and tech-
nical service units. Troop mocale and relia-
bility is high. The army is trained, experi-
enced, and efficient in small unit, anti-guer-
rilla, jungie warfare. In addition there are
about 22,000 regular police, 24,000 special con-
stables, and 110,000 in the Home Guard.

9. Present plans are to increase the Federa-..,
tion army by 2,090 to 5,000 men over the next
two years and, during 1958, to reduce to 42,000
the size of the Home Guard. By means of in-
tensive training of regular troops and the de-
velopment of an indigenous officer corps; by
periodic exercises for the local volunteer units,
and by improved pay, equipment, and train-
ing for the Home Guard, current plans en-
visage a Malayan defense organization which
will be capable, within the next few years, of
dealing with internal security problems and
able to handle small-scale border violations.
Plans for containing the Communist guer-
rilias are based on the continuing availability
of UK troops to supplement.and aid the Fed-
eration defense organization. As the Malayan

a 12

’

Marg
Rpm mmte ne coke SEE NE ROMPRES OA BES TITE RE NNT OAT | It TURRET: OEE BOD HAND, Pm PES OR OF LTR PROM ED NERY Erp RET EMM ppy) me DMEM ae, wee

ra cence nan aerate, Ee

Was Ray Ai a dd

we tee an et

a ane tener mr ane eer

forces are strengthened and trained, the Brit-
ish forces will phase out of the internal secu-
rity picture over the next five years.

10. Under the financial arrangements made at
the time of independence, the British agreed
to provide a substantial portion of the cost of
fighting the jungle war and of the expansion
of the Federation armed forces. For the cur-
rent hostilities, the British will provide annual
grants of about US $8.3 million for three years
and, subject to review, up to $30.7 million over
the two subsequent years. In addition, the
UK will provide approximately US $45 to $50
million for expanding and equipping Federa-
tion armed forces.

11. The Royal Malayan Navy at present con-
sists of approximately 650 officers and men
and nine small patrol craft. An officer on
loan from the Royal Navy is in command.
The navy was raised by Singapore legislation
and, until Federation independence, was
wholly financed and administered by the
Singapore government. However, it is now
in process of being transfcrred to the Feder-
ation to form the nucleus of its new navy and
plans are being made to develop a Federation
navy base on the wast coast, probably at
Lumut, near Port Swettenham.

12. There is a Malayan auxiliary air force,
formed in 1950, made up of volunteer reserv-

ists and ten small aircraft. There are plans.

Jor developing an effective indigenous air
force, but such a force is not foreseen in the
near future.

C. The Anglo-Malayan Defense
Agreement

13. The special relationship between the Fed-
eration and the UK in matters of internal
security and external defense is embodied in
an Anglo-Malayan External Defense Mutual
Assistance Agreement concluded at the time
of independence. The apreement provides:
(a) that the UK will assisi the Federation in
maintaining internal security as long as the
latter considers such assistance necessary;
(b) the UK will assist in the training and
equipping of the Malayan defense forces over

FOr oa aesaneenennioniechandialiatteneaneasieminbaebnemmaiatean ena adebeesdnndan ream aan nc oeaee ana cnpam canon conunanieaatearagtiommiontetemendnn nttuinea uianhblusatem oamingmmmntindanionininaacoachemdtatnauobabadbdaiitencak i aisued tet cata

ANNEX B

a five year period; and (c) the British will
retain a responsibility for the Federation's ex-
ternal defense. In exchange for these com-
mitments, the British are granted the right
to maintain armed forces, including a Com-
monwealth Strategic Reserve, in the Federa-
tion. The agreement provides army, navy,
and air base rights, including a strategic
bomber base near Penang, necessary for the
UK to fulfill its obligations for the defense of
Malaya as well as for Commonwealth and re-
gional security. The agreement also provides
that the two governments will cooperate in
taking action in case of an armed aitack upon
Malaya or upon British Far East passessions,
and that they will consult on necessary meas-
ures in the event of a threat to the peace in
the Far East. There is no time limit on the
agreement and either party may propose re-
view at any time.

14. The foliowing Commonwealth forces are
available i the federation and Singapore to
assist in maintaining internal security and to
fulfill local and regional commitments under
the Anglo-Malayan Defense Agreement:

a. Approximately 25,000 ground forces com-
prising 13 infantry battalions (5 British, 6
Gurkha, 1 Australian, and 1 New Zealand); 1
armored car regiment; 1 airborne regiment;
and 1 artillery regiment, organized under 4
brigade headquarters.

b. Approximately 7,500 air force personne),
including ahout 330 pilots and 150 bombardier
navigators. There are about 100 aircraft, in-
cluding 46 jets, based in Singapore; 90 air-
craft, including 18 jets, are based in the Fed-
eration. The Federation itself has 19 air-
fields, 14 of which are limited to C-47’s or
smaller aircraft. The other five are capable
of supporting jet fighter or jet light bomber
operations.

ec. Approximately 3,750 naval personnel,
and 1 light cruiser, 1 anti-aircraft cruiser, 4
destroyers, and 3 escort vessels are based in
Singapore and the Federation. In an emer-
gency, of course, the entire Commonwealth
naval strength in the Far East could be made
available,

S.Ebaedeahes. 13

t id ke aah eR a Td Th hi Be fines ON a ic AUR on ed ck Cee Sa el

Pere ragga nae

rs ot ceed MAIL Onin, les ph NAPA eRPMRL ttt in anepenARDNNa! Abe OA atime ante A AAI aN MNAtEh RN ShiT ETI Ihre AI Yo alain AOR RU Deh ay ans as mmevidomath Piiteted UMASS Erie ad aha ramen is
es ,

|
|

ED aaa RLS een

we

' ‘weCRTT™

\

ANNEX C

THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

1. The Federation had a per capita GNP of
approximately US $260 in 1956, well in excess
of other independent countries in Southeast
Asia. It has over 6,000 miles of maintained
highways, 1,000 miles of efficiently admin-
istered railways, and 238,000 kilowatts of in-
stalled electric generating capacity. Although
the Federation began independence with a
generally favorable economic situation, there
are basic economic problems which will re-
main and possibly become more acute in the
future. Its resource base is narrow gnd un-
stable and the state of its economy depends
on the world prices of rubber and tin.” As a
result of the loss of many experienced British
professionals, the Federation has a shortage
of technical and admiinistrative personnel.

This situation will challenge the resourceful- —

ness and competence of the newly independ-
ent government, at a time when the demands
of economic development and financial reform
are increasing. The Yederation also has a
high rate of population growth, estimated at
slightly over three percent annually, which
wil) require at Jeast correspondingly rapid in-
creases in investment, production and social
services to maintain living standards.

2. Rubber and tin are the essential bases of
the Federation’s economy, accounting for
approximately two-thirds of the value of all
exports, rubber alone comprising over one-
half. Over one-quarter of all gainfully em-
ployed persons are directly engaged in these
two indusfries and a large paft of the popu-
lation depends on them directly or indirectly.
The Federation produces about one-third of
the world’s natural rubber, and slightly over
one-third of the Free World's ‘supply of tin.
It is a major supplier of the YS in botii prod-

‘3. The Federation’s economy

anda tin to the US, the Federation is the major
net contributor to the sterling area dollar
pool.

is oriented
toward international markets. Per capita
foreign trade amounted in 1956 to $205, ex-
ceeded in the Far East only by Singapore and
Hong Kong and much higher than Japan’s
$63 per capita. Along with the predominance
of the rubber and tin industries, there is 4
serious deficiency in food production, and
manufacturing is not well developed. The

Federation, consequently, relies heavily on_

imports for essential consumption require-
ments. The concentration of economic activ-
ity on production for export and the corre-
sponding reliance on rubber and tin earnings
for imports places the Federation’s economy
virtually at the mercy of intcrnational market
conditions. Despite this high degree of spe-
cialization and resulting vulnerability to ex-
ternal influences, conservative administration
has, in the past, enabled the Federation con-
sistently to maintain a favorable trade bal-
ance, ranging from $500 million at the height
of the Korean War rubber boom, to $50
million in 1953, one of the lean years.

4. Malayan rubber and tin face serious com-
petition and measures are being taken to im-
prove their position in international markets.
The tin industry claims that proven tin re-
sources are declining; there has been HNttle
exploration since 1930. However, the adop-
tion of more modern mining methods has
tended to counterbalance this threat over the
short run and to maintain production volume.
Added incentive for state rulers to make land
more readily available for prospecting and

mining may develop from a provision in the —

ucts. Because of its heavy export of rubber — new constituiion which provides that ten per-
rill “14
2 eral tea eke ee PENCE NNE, 7 MONSON ARE TNG  MOUE TOLCTN RUMUN IS ERAS SAARI MORAY Mog BEM LRA AHMET 8a:

aaage

sgn

NS Emi Cm sore

cent of the export tax revenue on tin will be
turned over to the state in which the mineral
was mined. In the absence of more attrac-
tive alternatives and in anticipation of a long-
term increase in the use of rubber, the Fed-
eration has embarked on a vigorous improve-
ment program aimed at cutting rubber pro-
duction costs and increasing output. Under
this program the annual rate of new planting
and replanting has reached four percent of
total rubber acreage. The Federation hopes
that such measures, reinforced with intensive
research, will help its natural rubber to com-
pete successfully with synthetics.

5. Under the British, the Federation and
Singapore formed a single economic unit. The
Feceration’s primary production and Singa-
pore’s outstanding facilities as a trade and
financial center were developed in concert and
on a basis of mutual dependence. Approxi-
mately 40 percent of the Federation’s trade
passed through Singapore, constituting a sub-
stantial portion of the latter’s critical entrepdt
trade. Much of the Federation’s direct trade
and its domestic transactions were handled
through the banking, insurance, shipping and
trading facilities of Singapore. The separate
political evolution of the Federation into ain
independent nation weakened the close eco-
nomic ties between the two areas. Moreover,
the Federation government, largely for politi-
cal reasons, has adopted a deliberate policy of
severing as many economic ties with Singa-
pore as possible, to the economic detriment of
both.

6. The communal problem has a variety of
econoniic implications. Because of the great-
er economic initiative of the forcign elements,
mainly British and Chinese, the government
has provided special protection to the less
enterprising Malays. Communal problems
msy increase as conflicts of interest cevelop
between the large foreign-owned estates and
the Malay small holders and between Chinese
businessmen and the Malay peasants. The
unequal distribution of income, with a larger
part accruing to alien interests, may cause
serious friction in the future. The non-fulfill-
ment of the exagyerated benefils expected
from independence may serve to concentrate

ANNEX C

criticism on the control held by non-Mailays
over much of the country’s productive plant
and on the outflow of profits.

7. Basic factors in the economic outlook are
the Federation’s planned financial reforms
and its economic development plan. The
financial reforms are designed to bring the
currency under national authority and to de-
velop a domestic money market to serve the
Federation’s capital needs. The government
plans to withdraw from the British-controlled
currency board, which at present adininisters
in a combincd operation the currencies of the
Federation, Singapore, and British Borneo,
and to establish its own central bank. This
will enable the government to reduce the 100
to 110 percent sterling cover of the Federa-
tion’s currency and to invest part of it in
Malayan securities. Complementary plans
are to encourage the development of financial
institutions and to enlarge official credit facil-
ities for rural and industrial enterprises. A
rural bank and an industrial development
bank haye already been established. In addi-
tion, the government has assured existing for-
eign interests of continucd equitable treat-
ment and proposes 1o encourage further pri-
vate foreign capital investment. Federation
leaders emphasize that their financial reforms
do not imply withdrawal from the sterling
area and that the Federation’s dollar will con-
tinue to ke pegged to the pound; however, un-
less managed with high competence, these
measures may weaken confidence in the cur-
rency.

8. The Federation of Malaya has adopted a
comprehensive economic development plan
calling for capital outlays totalling US $444
million from 1956 through 1980. The United
Kingdom has agreed to contribute $50 million

‘for projects under the plan. The Federation’s

intention to raise the remainder by drawing
on surplus and by borrowing appears feasible
without risking undue deterioration in finan-
cial stability, provided the rate of progress is
adjusted, as proposed, to the level of export
earnings and to the availability of technical
and administrative personnel.

9. Under the pian, the government has limited
ils sphere of action to the expansion of public

sree: 15

a

"ag ash 5S i 3 4g oh EAS ty a, payed wae aD
Di hie dee a laden ake) itt a AR LTS ald ae eas dee ite a lai St oat eda MLL oa doce E sede LE ee he alsa sgh no ea bd) ¢ siete aR eae

Pad hi rele! Arteta set Slam ata shard inl ea alah eh ti, ASC UM Ali aed SA nic ala Me aN ca A aa cn han oa cas ne nimraadaun ie

Pre Mop yaa |

:
|

Mies shall Teall ou take deel ated Lonastahaer tain x ta the hs inamuadanemate ettetee ae hereteau ence axdatamaa ta ndsatiincte dais ep tctaLtatt diketiommsinn nats tices tect ok henner na ee Dee ae hee aie ee ac Scenes

-

a Seep

works and to the provision of financial facil-_

ities to producers. Actual prcduction, except
in such fields as electric power and similar
public services, is left to private enterprise. Al-
though proposed expenditures in several cate-
gories are designed to assist local manufactur-
ing and to promote the production of food-
stuffls, a major portion ($52 million) of the

a "\

ANNEX C

proposed investment is to be devoted to the
strengthening of the rubber industry, pri-
marily by replanting with better yielding vari-
eties. Electric power development is allotted
$26 million, and the remainder in the eco-
nomic sector, about $80 million, is to be de-
voted almost entirely to transportation and
communications.

Sale lke 16

lai Tel eld: Mae

one tas gh ehh DA AAR DE AAA RAAT TAO Mca SE Nei NeeA ge ie Sag ER DG On

pen Na ene tna Sane AP lin IANO Male AO lato PE SEERA A She ENA thd CA I Se Resor TNE SA Sl Antes pts
fC fe

oA Ae iA th eel Mat FOR Ahead OAL ID SS RR bee th te WA andl oath

t

20

ANNEX D

THE SITUATION IN SINGAPORE

1. Internal security and general political sta-
bility in Singapore have improved under Chief
Minister Lim Yew Hock. Lim, who succeeded
the impctuous David Marshall in 1956, has
taken an increasingly strong anti-Commu-
nist position, making liberal use of his powers
and the full backing of the British authorities
to arrest Communist and pro-Communist
leaders of the People’s Action Party and Com-
munist activists in the Chinese middle schools
and the trade unions. Although the Commu-
nist movement has been kept off balance by
the government’s aggressive anti-Communist
program, the basic factors contributing to
Communist strength remain. Communist in-
fluence, especially in the Chinese schools and
the labor movement, is still strong; political
problems susceptible to Communist exploita-
tion persist; and economic problems are in-
creasing,

2, Singapore’s rapidly increasing population
of 1,495,000 is about 77 percent Chinese, Sixty
percent of these Chinese are under 21 years
of age and raany are susceptible to Chinese
Communist propaganda and pressures. Most
Singapore Chinese are impressed by the rise
of Communist China and continue their emo-
tional attachment to the mainland. The
younger Chinese tend to feel their opportu-
nitics for higher education and for economic
advancement in Singapore are limited. These
feelings are intensified by the fact that Singa-
pore’s entrepdt trade is declining and by Sing-
apore’s uncertain economic outlook, resulting
in part from Federation independence and the
lessening of economic ties between the two
areas.

3. Singapore has not achieved the degree of
internal political stability of the Federation.
The British had originally hoped that both
parts of the peninsula would progress toward

self-government and independence together,
but have had to postpone independence for
Singapore for the foresecable future. In

April 1957, however, a Singapore government

delegation headed by Chief Minister Lim Yew
Hock signed an agreement with the UK which
provides for the establishment of internal self-
government during the latter part of 1958.
Under this arrangement, the British will re-
main responsible for external defense and for-
eign relations, and the Singapore government
will exercise internal self-government except
for security matters. Responsibility for inter-
nal security was assigned to an Internal Secu-
rity Council of three members from Singapore,
three from the UK, and one from the Fcdera-
tion. The Federation authoiities agreed to
this arrangement with considerable reluctance
because of their desire to avoid any entangle-
ment in Singapore's security problerns. The
British retained the right to withdraw the

Singapore constitution if the internal situa-_

tion should deteriorate sufficiently to threaten
the ability of the council to carry out its
obligations,

4. The Singapore government, led by the
moderate socialist Labor Front since 1955,
has 25 elective and seven appointive seats
in the Legislative Assembly. Six of its nine
cabinet posts are appointed on the recom-
mendation of the majority Jeader of the As-
sembly. Singapore remains a Crown Colony
with uitimate authority in the hands of a
British-appointed governor. He has a veto
power over legislation and the right to ap-
point the ministers who hold the cabinet posts
for defense and internal sccurity, finance, and
justice.

5. During the past year, the People’s Action

Party, the major opposition, fell under in- |

creased pro-Communist control. Although

aT 17

SERRE RII MII SPRINT RR TLD EMT STEN eS On Ce OR MECN RENEE HAN LUDO MIPNENEE Re RL: Om Kt EPO Be

he ek tT ee) tect io cca eo os

he GAB A nora MM aA Nh Rw ear ale Tobi 1 SIN hi PE la Pe fa he, ieee oR

9 ip annmatptee titi aBhe

» BRON & anette
2

Se he de AIA ag gol AA lll lM Dia ARCO te a i i a lan et Det nate 3 a
«

2

ee AS SER i ese Oe ee A A aE ean Nee A HNN ae ee ee eS RY ee

»

Lim has managed to create some confusion in
the party’s ranks by political manipulation
and by his arrest of 30 of its top leftist lead-
ers, the People’s Action Party still remains
the strongest and best organized political or-
ganization in Singapore. In November 1957,
ex-Chief Minister David Marshall inaugurated
an opposition Worker’s Party. The party
pledges parliamentary democracy, socialism,
and independence for Singapore, and it has
adopted an “anti-colonial’ line. In his or-
ganization campaign, Marshall, who visited
Communist China shortly after his ouster as
Chicf Minister, made special efforts to attract
Chinese support and attacked the govern-
ment’s security program.

6. Lim Yew Hock's anti-Communist leadership
has provided an opportunity to salvage the
deteriorating political situation in Singapore.
However, Lim has not succeeded in building
@ Strong, non-Communist political organiza-
tion, and his government rests on a weak
coalition which maintains power only because
of the seven appointed members of the Legis-
lative Council. The weak foundation of his
government and the widespread Communist
activity among Singapore’s Chinese, especial-
ly in the schools and labor unions, emphasize
the difference between the political situation
in Singapore and in the 'cederation.

7. In local elections 'cld on 21 December 1957,
the People’s Action Party won a plurality of
Singapore's 32-seat City Council. The party
carried 13 out of 14 districts which it con-

tested. Lim Yew Hock’s Labor Front won only .

four out of 16 seats sought. Although the two
parties did not run candidates in direct com-
petition, the outcome represented a severe loss
of preslige for the Labor Front; Further evi-
dence of a leftward trend was disclosed by the
Success of former Chief Minister David Mar-
shall’s new Worker’s Party in winning four out
af five seats it contested, whereas the conserv-
ative Liberal Socialists gaincd only seven out
of 32 seats. The election results pointed up the
failure of Lim Yew Hock’s efforts to consoli-
date non-Communist political forces or to iso-
late left-wing forces.

8. The chances appear somewhat less than
even thal Lim Yew Hock will be able to

tae eothaake eer trae geil sharin ae nicedlaaartehchteahtmaiaentatntntat ninteiadd iddarmntminwma cig aiamtaniaerainanaionsmumticnionamr nin On)

4\
ANNEX D

maintain his anti-Communist government in
power after the 1958 general elections. If
the economic situation deteriorates to any sig-
nificant extent, a left-wing government dom-
inated by the People’s Action Party will prob-.
ably come into power. Over the long run,
the prospects are that leftist and Communist
strength will increase.

9. Available for the preservation of internal
security in Singapore, in addition to the UK
units,’ are approximatcly 4,500 police, includ-
ing reserves, and the Special Constabulary of
1,300 active and 1,100 voluntecr reserve mem-
bers. The Malays outnumber the Chinese
about four to one in the police, but the Chi-
nese predominate in the higher ranks. The
probiem of replacing top British officers is dif-
ficult, because indigenous officers are not ex-
perienced, Singapore’s government in March
1957 began to recruit a volunteer batialion of
800 men with the intent of enlisting about 75
percent Chinese. The local internal security
forces probably could not maintain Jaw and
order in the event of large-scale riots or dem-
onstrations in Singapore without the assist-
ance of the regular British troop units sta-
tioned in Singapore.

10. Singapore continues to be the main Brit-
ish military base in the Far East, with im-
portant functions in British Commonwealth
and regional defense. In addition, it is still
an important commercial center. For these
reasons, and because of the basic political in-
stability of the colony, the British are unlikely
to consider independence for Singapore in the
near future. Furthermore, the British, who
we believe have adequate forces in the area to
maintain internal security, will probably sus-
pend the Singapore constituiion and assume
direct rule in the event of either a threatened
loss of control of the situation by the elected
government or a Communist take-over.

11. Merger of Singapore with the Federation
is the ultimate goal of Singapore authorities
and of many Eritish officials. These latter
feel that merger might reduce the threat to
British strategic interests posed by political
instability and Communist subversion in

‘See Annex B, paragraph 14, for the strength of
these units, ;

See 18

APPEND DEP ANE E YEA REINA) Larne Fa Sag PNY TE 20 8 SRR NE Ey ERIN I RN NOMEN FOUR IEA Esa Ang om Be

. re
f 2

inionsaiaoabl " sit src il AON Rat id NAP nah ra ariel Nal Satan ide wdiecaaabetahadla eae Kaho mab Ahab mets ri I RT nN sive Fu eh mle Wed

eA NS OR CR FF Ne UN ah el TR ONT et EE ee NE NON tN ee ee Lem Res te Haaren dere fhe aH en peel

had

Singapore. Lim Yew Hock and other Singa-
pore leaders are aware of the emerging eco-
nomic and political problems which result
from the dwindling economic ties with the
Federation. Commercial shipping and bank-
ing in Singapore generally favor merger in
order to perpetuate Singapore’s present posi-
tion as the principal entrepdt for the Malay
peninsula.

Vv

ANNEX D

12. The Communists believe that merger
would increase their ability to subvert the
Federation. For this same reason, the Fed-
eration opposes merger. To Rahman and the
Alliance government, Singapore is a hothed
of Communism which must be isolated from
the Federation. Furthermore, the Federa-
tion's ieadership know that merger would
give the Chinese a numerical majority.

i

j
‘

'

i

i

i
1

Hl

i

i

;

x

$

" ~

i

3 >
7

4

7

4

i

;

4

4

j

4

4

;

i ad

5

i SP ~ 19
H ‘
‘

en ay omy teen wee! Oe RRR TPE gpa eyeeRea ore PUSAN NEO ORD. BAIL TBSP RON AAU BR TEAS SORE ARERR CROP END AIRE Lee AS UMM Re IR Fe
