Studies in Intelligence Vol 18 no 4 Winter 1974 - General de Gaulle in a Ction
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000047315, dated 2 January 1974.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000047315).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Sluts 0k

' oy tte iMgene e

— -—-

Ancther recottes ton uf the
20 Sumrut Conference

CENERAL de CAULLE IN ACTION

Lieut. Cen. Vernon A. Walters

On 14 May 1960 Deft the United States with President Exenhower to attend
the Four Powers Meeting in Paris between the USSR, France, Creat Britain and
the United States This conference had been sbedoled for some tbme, but its con-
vening had been in deadt Following the crash of the U2 an the Soviet Une andl
the captuze of its pilot, Cary Powers. Altar a porno of doubt, Cencrat de Caulle
had announced that the conference would be held ass: fashehed and the other
Chiefs of Government had sucec suvely announced that they wonk! attend When
Khrushchey announced he would attend, a worldwide sigh of relef went up

Shortly after arriving in Paris on 15 May, Paccempaned President Encnhower
on his call on President de Gaulle. As always, the mating betwcen the tao was
most cordial almost affectionate. DE have accompanied a numler of American
dignitaries to see General de Gaulle, the two he did nut really talk down to were
General Eisenhower and Governor Harriman, But only to Evsenhower did he show
real warmth,

De Gaulle said Khrushchev had been to see him and was highly excited about
the U-2 overflights, He had read to De Caulle a long statement denouncing the
everflights and demanding an apology from President Essenhower De Caulle, who
had with hitn only his superb Enchsh and Russian interpreter Constantin Androni-
kof, added,“ Obviously you cannot apologize but you must decide how you wish
tu handle this I will do everything [can te be helpful without being openly par-
tisan.”

He said he had asked Khrushchew whether under these ciroumstances they
should go ahead with the Conference. He had had bis Ambassador in Moscow put
this question to Khrushchev before he feft Moscow, and Khrushchev had said that
cy should. He had repeated the question to Khnishchew after his arrivaf in Paris
and again he had said that they should go ahead De Gaulle had indscated to
Khrushchev that he could not seriously expect that the US. President woukd
apologize to him. This sort of thing was not done among serious Chiefs of Covern:
ment. But Khrushchev had hoon adamant that Esenhoser must apologize for the
U-2 Might. De Caulle felt that Khrushchev’s readiness to fo ahead with the con-
ference after he had told him that Eisenhower could not be expected to apologize
was a hopeful sign, but he added, “We shall sce” :

The US delegation was clearly embarrassed by the shoot-down amd Powers’
confession, but it was determined that Khrushchey woull not be allowed to
use this for public humiliation of the United States. Prosilent Eisenhower clearly
felt that in the discharge of his responsibilities to the Coited States he must
aicurtain the measure of the threat against it, and wath a closed socuty such as
the Soviet one we faced, there was no other way than by such imaginative

Approved for Release

"$1 MAR 1989 ”

Ce Gaulle

methods as the U-2 Alter ali, Sosict satellites had already everflgwn the Usted
States and the Soviets bad publshed pictures Gahan by cancers ahead sinh
satellites.

The confercace was held in the Elyse Palace, the traditional residence of
the Presidents of France. Ie was held in a Jorge high-cesinged rocrn on the
second floor of the Elysce, only a few rooms removed from Coneral de Caulle’s
office. The windows looked ont to the south and west over the gardens of the
Elysce. In the center of the room was a large table in the form of a syuare General
de Caulle and the French delegation sat on the east side, nearst to De Gantic’s
office. Opposite him sat the US. delegation (1 was seated at the far mcht of
the US. delegation, closest to the Sovicts). On the right of the US were the
Soviets, and facing them were the British.

As L entered the room with President Eisenhower and Coneral de Gantle,
who had met him at the top of the stairs, the Russtans v +> already there,
standing around lalhing together. Exsenhower greeted the otf. Fremh delegates
and the British, but the Russians kept talking among themwhyes, and so Eisen:
hower walked around to his own side of the table and set duwn with the Scure-
tary of State beside him. After a few minutes Genecal de Canfle called the
meeting to order, and all who were still standing sat duwn

Ceneral de Gaulle then greeted the Chicfs of Delegation, thanked them
for coming, and expressed the hope that the mecting which was abcut te bem
would be fruitful and contnbute to world peace. He then sand that maura h
as President Eisenhower was the only other Chief of Dek gatuin wha was abo
a Chicf of State, he would give him the floor first. Khrushchev, obvicusty aga
tated, stood up and said that he had asked to speak fist gad that as Cte fs
of Delegation they were all equal) He demanded the right to read a prepared
statemont first. De Gaulle, when this cuthurst was transtited, raised his eye
brows and looked questioningly at General Eisenhower, who nxhled De Canth
then gave the floor to Khrushchev. Khrushchev stood up and began te read
from a prepared statement in a very loud voice This “as clearly the pane state
ment he had read to De Gaulle previously De Ganlle assumed a pated bet
patient expression as Khrushchev rumbled on From tine fo tine he would
pause for transtation and take a drink of water.

] had been strongly enjoined by the State Departincnt not fo wear my une
form as this was a “peace conference” Notwithstanding this, Savict Ds fense
Minister Marshal Rodion Malinovsky was there glowering in fall unrform As
Khrushchev thundered on, f fell to counting the mbbons on Mabnovshy’s chest
There were 54, including, as I noted with some interest, the US Legion of
Merit. At one paint as Khrushchev zead (and f noticed that his bands tre mibted
as he held the piece of paper he was reading—whether from agitatern, asiety
or anger, Edo net know), he raised his voice even louder, De G ville datermpted
turned to the Sovict interpreter, rather than his own, and sand, “Phe acuustics an
this room are excellent’ We can all hear the Chairman ‘There is no nod for
him te raise his voice.” The Russian interpreter blanc hed, turned to KRhowfa hev
with a faltering, voiee and transfated Khrushchev paused, looked over the tap
of his glasses and cast a furious ghince at General de Gautte and then oontenned
reading in a semew hat bess Joud soice

eared

De Gauffa

AS Shashehey read, he wos clearly Peleg breath ante an avon ate ate
to. Fat he Cemorned the OOS oserticdity, be perutob at te aabag as

nits 2¢ JS were averted at Chat morse ot UD Coyatle ote rrerptedd fer san that
oO hebban overflusn “By your Ameran ales” ached AberePe hes No”
sar Com ral de Crauftle, “by yer Yesterday that sate Mite yes Vararae frock yrestt te bore
you deft Misscow to irapress as overflow the shy of Frome 2S teres withered my
pommssios. How do DT know you do not have carts abeand whack are tabling
pictures ef any creastry?” De Gaulle crossedd bis arms and kadedd at Adueseh bow
questoniagh khrohohes’s paw dropped) Fhen an abrant daathhe cspressien
came over his face. He pared beth hands above bis head and sand qlearh. “Bog
menya welet, Moi suki Glivte (Cod seas me My bared are aban) You doen't
thunk Tye’ do a thiig ike hace? oWell” sand Censral de Cautle, “how afd
you tuke those pictures of the fae side of the moon which yeu showed us with
such justifiable pride?” “Ab,” sank Aheohebev, "mm that ene To had) carn cas”
“Ah,” sand General de Gaulle, “in that one you had carieras. Pras. continue”

This exchange had upset Khrusiahev, and bis Bands tainted csen mare
as he continued reading bis long statement Wile ke was talking, State De:
partincnut Counselor and former Ambassador to Mosnow Chip Bebhin bept
grumbling, “We can't sit: stl! for this, We've got to anna” Enenhewer sat
silcotly Istening to the origural and ats translation Hle doodlab impaticitly with
append jf still have the doodle, as E pwked at up when be deft the table ) ibs
face and neck were flushed, however, and f couhl tell he was eatrermely angry
Bhad worked for Geocral Eisenhower for a number of years closely, and [had
never seen an outburst of temper, but long capenence bad taught me the sages
of anger on his part, and they were all present hare Once er tasce he locked
at De Gaulle, who was sitting there with a sliybty bond eipeessain He had
already heard all of this from Khrushchev, The Botsh Pome Minister was un-
casy as be looked at the angry Khrushchev, the flushed Encohuwes, amd ihe
bored De Gaulle.

At one point Khrushchev exclaimed, “What devil made the Americans doe
this?” De Gaulle observed that there were devils everys here, on both sides, that
this was a matter of espionage such as went on all the time and was not worthy
of the consideration of Chiefs of Covernment to whom the peoples of the work
were logking for hopes of pcace. Khrushchev shook his head hhe a bull and weet
on reading. He finally ended his Jong diatube by announcing that unicss Pros:
dent Eisenhower apologized he would not attend the conference

President Eisenhower then made a molhfying stateguut containing many
of the justifications used publicly for the U-2 flights and said that US. aircraft
would not overfly the USSR again. Khrushchev angrily repeated that he would
not attend any further meetings of the conference if Eisenhower did not apologize.

De Gaulle said, “Chairman Khrushchev, you have imposed conditions that
are obviously impossible for Gencral Eisenhower to accept, Before you kit Mus:
cow and after the U-2 was shot down, f sent my Ambassarlor ta see you to ask
whether this meeting should be held or shoukd be postpones You knew every-
thing thea that you know now. You told my Ambassador that tins confcrence
should be held and that it would be fruitful Erepeated this question to you when
I saw you alone before this meeting, and once again you sant it should be held
Now, by imposing conditions that cannet be met by the American Presidlent,

“41

De Goulle

you make at imposible to go further You bave brought Mr MacMillan fare
from London, General Eisenhower frou the Cnoted States and) fave put mae
to serious inconvenience to attend a mecting: which your intramagence wohl
make impossible. We should all seflect on this and on the hopes that the people
of the world have placed ja this meeting and mect again bore tomorrow at the
same time.”

Khrushchev jumped to his fect and said that unless Eisenhower apologized
he would not come, De Gaulle looked at hint as one would book at a naughty
child and announced that the conference would mert + following day
Khrushchev, accompanied by his whole delegation, strod- at the room and
down the stairs. The other delegations looked al one an‘erer. De Gaulle said
that he would stay in touch with the Russians. All then rose and started eut of
the room. De Gaulle came over to Eisenhower and took him by the arm Fhe
took me also by the elbow ard, taking us a fitde apart, he said to Esenhower,
“Edy not know what Khrushchev is going to du, nor what is going to happen,
but whatever he does, | want you to know that 1am with you to the end” I
was astounded at this statement and Eiscnhowes was clearly mov ed by hes an
expected expression of unconditional support. Only the three of us beard at, but
it remains vivid in my mind to this day 15 years liter Enenhewer thanked
De Caulle who walked down the stairs with him to his car. As we entered the
car, Eenhower, stil upset by the whole episode, looked at me an? sand of
De Gaulle, “He's quite a guy.” We drove the short distance to the US Embassy
Residence, then on Avenze dIéna, where the US. delegation went into a met:
ing to decide what to do neat,

i was not privy to this discussion and do not know what was docdid, but
President Exenhowor's mollifyfag stufement and promise that the U-2's woul
not overfly the Soviet Union bad evidently not done the job of bringing Kho
shchev back to the conference table, and Esenhower's pending invitation to visit
the USSR was obviously withdrawn. ;

in the meantime Khrushchev had been holding a stormy and farious press
conference making veiled threats and inveighing against the treacherous mature
of the US. Next day at the time appointed De Ganlle, Muc Millan and Emanhower
met in the same room in the Elysée where the meeting had taken place the
previous day. The three delegations sat looking slightly sheepishly at one another
and General de Gaulle said that he had had no word from Khrusht hes, bent
he was out “kissing babies on the street and generally electioncering, for the
French Communist Party.” Marshal Mahnovsky was out near Verdun where
Maltinovsky had been a sergeant in the two Russian disisions fighting in France
in WW I, and “where he bad attempted to subvert the Russian troop» from
fighting with the Allies.” Alter some wait, General de Gaulle gue an order
to contact Khrushchev and ask him whether or not he would attend the met
ing After a further delay, an assistant came into the room to say that Khrushehes
had sent word he would net attend the meeting untess Proudent Esenhower
appolugized De Gaulle locked furious, MacMillan, crushed by the news, an
Eisenhower, tom between embarrassment and anger. De Caudle tutned ta
the assistant and sad that Khrushcbey had) been inv ited in writing, the ce fore
he should reply in writing, A fow msinites tater the aide came back ia to gy
that Khrushches had answered that he would not amwer in writing De Cauth

Ag

peeP og REF

rah? Fo

De Goulle

sand to the aid, Fell Jamotis dhe aage bitween asiheed mubons Foompty bo
wathes comoranications by wartters quinn ats 7 Dhe aebe ok geted to
near a few asmates fates te announce Chat Rbrushe iw work anyawcr ia waiting
but woukd mat comme.

De Caulle, who appear pleased to have wan this avon peri, adjoins q
the confereme To my surpose nedher De Cautle, who did mt seem unduly
shaken, nur MacMillian, who was chouasty staggered by the wehbe faeiness, over
sugdested, even indirectly, that Eseshower should apelyace

Adeniner, who was sti in Paris, appeared reheved that at beast Germany
woukl not pay the cost of a fuur power agreement

Preawent Essenhower then left for Portugal where he was geen a mest
warm welcome by President Tomas and Prime Mista Salszar

It secmed to me that the Sovicts had gambled on a capstclation by Enen-
hower and were dporiented when it was not forthvenune They bad cect |
on both De Caulle and SfacMillon to pressure Enonhowes for sie forn of
apology, aad this had not happened

L hase often been wntated and antagonized by sosne of the things Cancral
de Gaulle bas said publicly where be sometimes appeared fo eqjnate the USSR
and the US, as threats to the grandcur and independence of Frame Bat I have
not forgotten the statement he made at this crucial bree—"V hatever happens
or whatever he does, we will be with you to the end”

Seven years later I peturned to Paris as the US. Military Attaché, shortly after
Cencral de Gaulle had taken France out of the inte grated mifitary stractare
of NATO and had requested the US to remove its mubtary presence from
France. I could not help but wonder what had led us from the fist statement
ef uncombtional support to the second situation During the years between
J967 and my departure from France in 1972, { tried as a matter of personal
curiosity as well as of national interest to ascertain what had hed Cencral de Gaulle
to underga such a change. I never asked General de Gantle point black, bot
did talk ta him about his philowphy of the defense of France. [ tatked to
many of his closest military and naval aides, some of whem bE had kmrwn for
more than 20 years, and 1 came to the following conclusian, based not just on
what they tuld me but also on what T remembered of the discusuans bitwecn
Ceneral de Caulle and Ceneral Eisenhower on nuclear weapons and their use

In 1962 when President Kennedy had sent Dean Acheson and Shorman Kent
to see General de Gaulle and to show him the photographs pf the Soviet nus lear-
tipped rockets in Cuba,* General de Caulle, unlthe many of the Europa an dead rs,
had accepted that it might be necessary for the US. to take pre-emptive nubtary
action agcinst Cuba. He was a man who understood the us of power, and
he watched carefully to sce what we would do. When he saw that instead of
taking such action, we appeared to him to have made an agrecment with
Khrushchev by which we took our missiles out of Greece and Turkey in tin
for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, he felt that we had not really
won the Cuban missile confrontation. Ove of his closest ardes said to me that

ee el on
"See “The Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962. Presenting the Phot.grapha Evahnoe About,”
Studies XVI/2, pp. 29-36.

43

“*

Le Goulle

De Gaulle had told his entourage, “HE the Americans will not fight fi Cubes
90 miles from the US, they wall not fight for Europe 3,500 niles away fount
draw the conclusions fram this that affect France's independknee and «hb femme”
I cannot prove this, but nearly afl my contacts close te De Gaulle mile ted
something very bike this.

I remembered sitting before the fire at Rambouitlet Castle in 1959 betucer
Cencral Eisenhower and Cencral de Caulle in bathrobes after dioner ant
De Caulle saying, “You, Essenhower, would go to nuclear war for Europe because
you know what its loss would mean and you are bound to us by special bes
As the Soviet Union develops the capability to strike with nuclear rockets the
cities of North America, one of your unknown successors will devide to ga to
nuclear war only sf there is a nuclear strike against North America When that
day comes, I or my unknown successor must have in hand the nuclear means
to turn what the Soviets may want to be a conventional war into 2 ni lear war
I do not seck to compete with SAC or the Long Range Air Anny, but Paph
France to have the means of some tactical and strategie strike agamnst the Soviet
Union. The addition of another center of nuclear decision will multiply the
uncertainties of the Soviet planners. You Americans could survise—fur a shet
time—the loss of Western Europe. We Europeans could not.”

dd

.. ts Pte
