Outlook in Mainland Southeast Asia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008866, dated 2 February 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008866).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ia tn toe

tye

ayers

qe

AOE

one

a NRT CTE BEI I IW

.

be tt

2 ety tee Tee

7

ae RTE NE at,

EO

vy

eA REO a EH,

NIE 50-61

28 March 1961

“ESTIMATE

TELLIGENCE.

IN

MAING

LOC

OUT

AND
A.

I

ST:

Beas

“

A

[IE

i Sutealited dy the.

CTOR OF CENTRAL

aa

DIRE

“4

acy
Lof >
t Staff.

ents

icipated in the

Central Intel
of
the

ce Ager
tm.

en
The Join

tell
‘the Depar
ind

‘organizations part

he
izations
din by

ag
2

»

ence
s estimate: T
be. Organ
Concurre

‘intell
a:
ligene

ing
tion of th

‘and. the inte
State, the Army,

The ‘followi
prepara

ED STATE

CE BOARD.

aN

UNIT

nm. 28 March

>

LIGE

$ INTE

Fri

Cone.

ntelli-

ZI

f
tant Chie}

ar. ©

‘The Direct

é€

mg wer
Deportment of §

a4

1961:
d Research,

oO

Sts

rmy; the As

the As
ent of the A
ions Untellig

tate

sist
tof
the: °
the ..

tmen

Depar

2

en

.
’

ence)

Steff, Intellig

e, d
Operat
tant. Ch

Depart

ence

lig
yal

f Staf for Intel
ant Chlejf of Na
the Assis

tor ‘for, Intell

gence an

N

ef

i

Ps

ce, USAF

of

Agee Aes

bfect ~

10 :
and the. Director

tons;
e Atom
“and

Energy Com-"
d, the su

the Assistant Di-’

Assistant
adstaine

isdlction,

ion,
qur

Th

ney.
the USIB,:
eir

Special Operat
ty Ag
0)

et
ureau of Investigal

gence, Joint Staff; the

Curt
¢

v

Secretary of Defense,
of the National Se

outside of th

roy

ntat

r, Federal B

i

ing

*
ar

be

jon Represe

recto

a
2

tree
3

Pore iy gee
ohne

ie

a

ee Ma,

‘

Pirin Jars
em ne Og

wnat

wee

Ft.

a TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM... 20. es 6 BE ax wee
a GONGLUSIONS 4.6 ng vd Seis a SO EERE oo 1
4 DISCUSSION 4 4 2.4 422M ee ee oS Gaede es ae
‘|. AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE . 0 6 0 0 ee ee ee 8
= Ii. TRENDS IN THE ARGA © ook et ake ae Ge he ee 4

A. Conditions and Trends Affecting Internal Development. . . 4
B. Conditions and Trends Affecting International Orientation . 5

Ill. MAJOR PROBLEMS AND OUTLOOK IN THE SOUTHEAST
ASIA COUNTRIES . 2. 1 6 ee ee ee ee ea se ee

> ;

BUNS: go rds te. Se Ae: DY ee Tee Ate ge tah ey tes en Acta Se OS
The Military and Political Situations . . 6... ee ee 6
Oullook . 1. 2s. SE eee EW ee AS - 6
. South Vietnam... .. So die oar cia Meteen ning ee WPveeten bata ae? UE
O PhaiANG . 6G Gvg oS toes WOAOR We Pe eae a a a ee
. Cambodia . 2... eee oo Bice Be we Whe! ae a AS
. Malaya ..... Bh foie: AE ee Satie wae eRe at eat ee AS

mist Ot
yy
=
S
»

& IV. PROBABLE EFFECTS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA OF MAJOR COM-
7. MUNIST GAINS IN LAOS OR SOUTH VIETNAM... . - 14

: inks we at
4S Ree Ot oh

OUTLOOK IN MAINLAND SOUTHEAST ASIA

THE PROBLEM

a. To analyze the basic political and sre conditions and trends in mainland
Southeast Asia;*

b. To icentify potential political-military crisis situations and to estimate prob-
able developments over the next year or so in domestic stability and international
orientation of the countries of the area; and

2 c. To estimate the probable effects on the peoples and governments of these
oa ‘countries in the event there were significant Communist gains in Laos or South
~ Vietnam.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Most Southeast Asian countries are This would increase the likelihood of the
either now experiencing or willencounter disintegration of the Laotian Army and
in the next year or two serious political _ the subsequent collapse of the non-Com-
crises arising out of foreign iatervention, munist position. The Laotian crisis has
domestic strains, or a complex of factors become a matter of contention among the
attributable to their basically unstable major powers and its resolution rests pri-
and unhealthy political, social, and eco- marily in non-Laotian hands. (Paras.
nomic structure. Byfarthemostserious 28-30)
s problems ae Ee Sele iorating sihuaviow 3. In South Vietnam, the situation of the
x in Laos and the mounting Communist pion government seems likely to become
threat and precarious governmental situ- increasingly difficult, not only because of
ation in South Vietnam. (Paras. 22-68) rising Communist guerrilla strength and |

"| 2. The Pathet Lao probably havea greater declining internal security but also be-
= - military capability than they have yet cause of widening dissatisfaction with
fyi 6 chosen to exercise. They could sharply .. Diem’s government. Since the coup at-

~ - step up the action at any time and prob- tempt of November 1960, Diem has re-
ably achieve a series of local victories. asserted his control of the government
on and made some cautious moves toward

‘Laos, South Viclnam, Cambodia, Thailand, Bur- :
yn, and Malaya. - government reform; he has taken action

Copy
A gi RTE am Be aes nase Lac Naar Nas iT Rab

Sees
Son iiabis, ints

won Bae

Pek actac st el arona de decade: Roe racer bel bas

GECRET=a 2

to improve the antiguerrilla capabilities
of the army and stepped up military ac-
tivities against the Viet Cong. Nonethe-
less, the factors which gave rise to the
November 1960 coup attempt still exist,
and we believe that the odds favor another
coup atternpt by non-Communist ele-
ments in the next year or so. The Com-
munists would attempt to expleit any new
efforts to unseat the povernment. We
are not confident that the army would ke
able to keep the situation from getting
out of hand. (Paras. 36-38)

4. There is deep awareness among the
countries of Southeast Asia that develop-
ments in the Laotian crisis, and its out-
come, have a profound impact on their
. future. The governments of the area
_ tend to regard the Laotian crisis as a
symbolic test of intentions, wills, and
strengths between the major powers of
the West and the Communist Bloc.
(Para. 69)

5. Those countries which are in close
alignment with the US favor stronger
measures to assure at least a non-Com-
_-munist and preferably an anti-Commu-
nist, western-oriented regime in Laos;
neutralist Burma and Cambodia, as
well as Malaya, favor a neutralist but
not Communist-dominated government.
‘These latter governments favor some
form of international political agreement
to end the crisis: They would be alarmed
if Laos were lost under conditions which
indicated to them that the US position
in the area had gravely weakened. (Para.
70)

6. The loss of Laos to the Communists,
or perhaps even the division of the coun-
try, would alrnost certainly incline the
Thai toward accommodation to Commu-

nist power in Southeast Asia. A pre-
dominantly Communist-controlled Laos
would vitally threaten South Vietnam's
independence: it would greatly extend the
Communist frontiers with South Viet-
nam; it would bring substantially greater
Communist military power to bear on the
crucial Saigon defense complex; and it
would greatly facilitate Communist in-
filtration and subversion. The close
proximity of a Comrnunist state would
make more difficult Western efforts to
starch up local resistance. In short, the
loss of Laos would severely darmage the US
position and its influence in Thailand and
South Vietnam. (Para. 72)

7 The future course of all of the countries
of Southeast Asia would be strongly in-
fluenced by the actuai circumstances in
which the loss or division of Laos had oc-
curred as well as the local appraisal of
the attitude and actions of the US in re-
sponse to the situation. The extent to
which these countries would go in resist-
ing Bloc pressures or in withstanding
local Communist threats would depend in
great degree on whether they still assessed
that the US could stem further Commu-
nist expansion in the area. They would
feel more keenly than before a strong
temptation to take a neutral position
between the two power blocs, even though
they recognized that the US is the only
country with sufficient power to op-
pose the Communist Bloc in the area.
Although they probably would be deeply
disillusioned regarding US resolution
after the loss or division of Laos, they
would nonetheless welcome demonstra- _
tions of US firmness and might in re-
sponse modify their appraisal of their
own future in due course. (Para. 73)

od aisha “ps “2d

copy
ero oe Dlnaerdebneoue Ts Tabi2 2!

SECKET’ 3

8. Although the Communist threat to
South Vietnam has reached serious pro-
portions, the chances of a Communist
takeover in the next year or so are con-
siderably less than they are in Laos.
Nevertheless, Peiping and Hanoi alrnost
certainly attach greater importance to
thei: efforts in South Vietnam than they
do to their efforts in Laos. US prestige
and policy are particularly deeply en-
gaged in South Vietnam. Diern’s policy
of close alignment with the US is on trial
in the current crisis. All countries of the

area would attach great importance to
a failure of ‘the South Vietnam Govern-
ment to cope successfully with the rising
tempo of Communist subversion and
armed insurrection. If South Vietnam
were to fall to the Communists or be
forced to swing toward neutralism, the
irnpact upon the countries of Southeast
Asia would be similar in kind but con-
siderably more severe than that resulting
from the loss or division of Laos. (Para.
74)

DISCUSSION

I. AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE

§. Throughout their histories the countries
and- peoples of Southeast Asia have been
caught in the crossfire. of outside influences.
_ In early times they lived in the shadows of
__the great civilizations of India and China fron.
_ which they derived many characteristics of
their diverse cultures and social orders. Later,
_ during. the period of colonial domination,
Western civilization left its stamp on cultural,
_ social, and political institutions of the area.
More recently, Southeast Asia has been caught
up in the competition between the two great
modern political and ideological movements—
Communist totalitarianism and representa-
tive democracy.

10. Since 1940 the peoples of Southeast Asia
have been involved in a revolutionary experi-
ence which has few parallels in history for
diversity, scope, and speed. During this pe-
riod, Southeast Asia has experienced major
- war, the military defeat in World War II of
the Western colonial powers by an Asian
~ power, a disillusioning occupation by Japan,
a preat upsurge of nationalism, the defeat of
France in Indochina, and the rapid growth of
Communist pressures end influence. Since
the end of the Second World War, a wave of
independence has swept mainland Southeast

Asia, leaving in its wake a number of new
sovereign states. Traditional social and cul-
tural patterns and values have been under-
going change. Economic and political prob-
lems have multiplied in number and increased
in complexity. Every state in Southeast Asia,
except Thailand, has experienced Communist
insurrection or invasion. Their immediate
neighbor---Communist China—has emerged
as a new and threatening Asian power, and
the US, partly in response, has greatly in-
creased its activitics and presence in their
‘area, Thus, regardless of the wishes of the
peoples and goverrments of the area, the
issues of the global cold war between two
preat world power blocs have focused sharply
in Southeast Asia, Historically, the peoples
and leaders of Southeast Asia, when caught
between overwhelming outside forces or in-
fluences, have taken the line of least resistance
and have accommodated to superior power.

11. There is great political, cultural, ethnic,
and historical diversity among the countries
and peoples of Southeast Asia. There is
among them no sense of regional unity, Most
of the peoples of the area identify themselves
with their ethnic groups. More recently, and
thus far only within limited circles, they have
bepun to identify themselves with their na-

&SEGRST

“LES ; ae yy

So ere ree EE TOE oN qomerrerrarenet or patna sr aon
5 ek ae ihe a eg :

i

COPY

ae = acs t
Ne? a Pes +. i ee ee a ~ teed

ison Te. ay

She ier eS ,
Peerage 7 Pi ee

SHEET 4

tions. Despite their great diversity the
peoples and leaders of the arca face in com-
mon a nurnber of basic problems concerning
economic developmeni, political stability,
ethnic antagonisms, Communist pressures,
and national security. They also share, al-
though to varying degrees, an emotional na-
tionalisin compounded of anticolonialism,
racism, and a growing demand for equality,
respect, and prestige among nations.

ll. TRENDS IN THE AREA

A. Conditions and Trends Affecting Internal
Development

12. No strong sense of national unity has yet

..developed arnong the diverse peoples within

the countries of Southeast Asia. They all
contain sizable unassimilated ethnic minori-
ties. In Malaya, for example, the population
is split chiefly between the indigenous Malays
and the Overseas Chinese. The ethnic Lao
constitute only about half the population of
Laos; the remainder are made up of a num-
ber of ethnic and tribal groups, several of
which overlap into the adjoining countries
of Burma, China, and North Vietnam. Even
in Cambodia and Thailand, which have the
advantage of considerable linguistic, cultural,
and ethnic homogeneity, there are large unas-
similated Chinese and Vietnamese communi-
ties which wield economic influence dispro-
porticnate to their size. The historic suspi-
cions and antagonisms among the various
ethnic groups continue, and there are very
few instances of a trend toward mutual ac-
commodation or assimilation,

13. None of the nations cf Southeast Asia
has yet firmly established’ institutions and
traditions necessary for peaceful and orderly
political change. British tutelage has made
a promising impact on the political life of

Malaya and Burma, but this is largely offset

in the former case by the potential for insta-
bility which exists in the communal nature
of Malaya’s society. Throughout the area
there exists an unwillingness among the
moderate and conservative national leaders

to submerge their individual or group ambi-

‘tions and rivalries for the sake of national

welfare. We can discern no trend toward in-
creasing’ cohesion among the moderate and
conservative leadership groups.

14. Despite postwar efforts ta establish parlia-
mentary democracy, the present trend is for
political authority to become increasingly con-
centrated in very small groups. In most in-
stances, political power also means economic
power and personal gain, and in many in-
siances political power is regarded as the
means and economic power the end. The
proups in power are but a small part of the
educated elite in each country. Although the
elite groups are at least superficially attracted
to Western political concepts, the political and
social realities in their countries retard, and
in some cases preclude, the development of
concepts of a loyal opposition and an orderly
transfer of governmental authority.

15. There is a vast intellectual, economic, and
social gulf between the leadership elites and
governing circles on the one hand and the
mass of the population on the other. In all
the countries of the area 75 to &5 percent of
the population are peasants or village dwell-
ers. For the most part they are illiterate,
suspicious of central authority, and out of
touch with national and international de-
velopments. Many of therm live outside the
national moncy economy. Although most of
the peasants tend to be politically apathetic,
they are often resentful of local and provincial
officials, and they are gradually becoming
aware of the vast difference between their
Jot and that of the leadership elites. A simi-
Jar pap exists between the elites and the bulk
of the people who live in the urban centers,
where the dissatisfaction prowing out of the
situation is more acute. The smali govern-
ing groups are under increasing pressurcs
from the educated elites and, to some extent,
even from the masses whose political aspira-
tions and economic expectations are on the
rise. Consequer:tly, governments in the area
are finding it increasingly difficult to evoke
positive public support.

16. The military has generally come to play
an increasingly important political role in the
area except in the cases of Cambodia and
Malaya. Thailand has been ruled almost con-

= epee £0 PEeperommer Meter

mya
. tia aa
= _

|

mt ted nee ot
i

6 ea ACH PNR AB RIP RARHM LON Ao ay

PrCRET 5

tinually since 1932 by a military junta. Mih-
tary leaders throughout the area account for
a significant part of the educated elite, and
they are becoming increasingly conscious of
their potential political power and increasingly
dissatisfied with the perforrnance of their
civilian governments. Their grievances in-
clude governmental inefficiency and corrup-
tion, and dissatisfaction with the govern-
ment’s means of dealing with internal promo-
tions within the military. As a result, the
governing groups cannot count so heavily as
they once did on military backing in a time
of political crisis. For their part, military
leaders in the Southeast Asia couniries are
prone to factionalism. In general, the more
they become involved in political and eco-
nomic affairs, the wider spreads the circle of
corruption among their ranKs and the more
acute their factional rivalries tend to become.

17, No matter how well motivated, the military
leaders have at tirmnes shown themselves to be

: _..__ politically inept and incapable of sustained

united political action. Moreover, they have

__not. been_able to overcome the historical

tendency of the peoples of the area to regard
the military with suspicion and hostility. On
the other hand, despite their shortcomings as
political instruments, the armies of the South-
east Asian nations have been important stabi-
lizing forces on the national scene and major
factors in inhibiting Communist advances.
They constitute the largest and best organized
single element in the society of these nations.

B. Conditions and Trends Affecting
International Orientation

18. Most of the peoples of Southeast Asia are

only vaguely aware of developments outside

their local communities. Among the edu-
cated and semieducated groups in the urban
areas, however, there has developed an active
interest in international affairs. In general,
these groups are highly nationalistic and
acutely sensitive to real or imagined slights to
their nation’s sovereignty. Many of the edu-
~ cated, particularly those dissatisfied with their
economic or political lot, are attracted to

Marxist and Socialist economic theories with-
out in many instances understanding thern.
Anticolonial and antiwhite sentiments are
likely to be strong and vocal among these
urban groups.

19, The peoples of Southeast Asia are pre-
occupied with their own problems and aspira-
tions. They have no desire to see their coun-
tries as a battlefield in the cold war aid resent
being treated as pawns by the major powers.
There is a growing tendency arnong them to
view the Communist Bloc as on the rise and
the West as on the wane in the rhythm of
history. They have no real enthusiasm for
aligninent with either the Communist Bloc or
the West, and among them there is a growing
tendency to believe that neutralism provides
preater security and freedom of action at
less risk than close relations with the West.

20. To the educated elites and the small gov-
erning groups alike, the proximity of Com-
munist China, with its vast population and
growing military power, is an omnipresent
fact of life. The foreign policy question con-
stantly before the Southeast Asia governments
is how best to deal with the looming threat of
China--whether to depend upon Western
policy and strength, or to make some degree
of accommodation with Communist China.
In either case, the intent is the same—to pre-
serve national integrity and independence—
and the methed is similar-—to avoid complete
commitment and to maintain the maximum
flexibility. .

21, In sum, while the Southeast Asians are
in no hurry to place themselves at the Bloc’s
mercy, they are in general becoming more
reluctant to assume a strong stand in opposi-
tion to China in the absence of certain guaran-
tees of swift, successful, and painless Western
protection. This is caused principally by re-
luctance to offend an increasingly powerful
China; prowing concern over involvement in
modern war; uncertainty, fed by recent events
in Laos, as to US consistency and promises of
support; a belief that they can survive and
successfully play off East and West through
neutralist tactics; and concern that growing
Sino-Soviet power may deter the US from effec-

_ COPY -

f
COUT te teeta Lethon po toenl te

{
t
f
i
t
ia
t

tive action to prevent an eventual Chinese
Communist hegemony in Southeast Asia.

til, MAJOR PROBLEMS AND OUTLOOK IN
THE SOUTHEAST ASIA COUNTRIES

22. The following serics of brief country esti-
mates concentrates on the two or three situa-
tions in each country which have reached
crisis proportions or are likely to do so in the
near future. Except for the situations in Laos
and South Vietnam, the most pressing prob-
lems are the result of particular interns! cir-
curnstances rather than Cornmunist activity.

93. The Communist threat in Laos is critical
and has reached serious proportions in South
Vietnam. Elsewhere in mainland Southeast
Asia the immediate security situation is
reasonably good. The protracted Communist
insurrection in Malaya is virtually liquidated
and the major Comraunist effort there has
shifted fromm arrmed “national liberation” to
the establishment of a base for future political
activities. in Thailand, Communist assets
are still quite limited. Local Communist ac-
tivity within Burma and Cambodia appears to
be proceeding in a low key.

A. Loos?
The Military and Political Situations

24, Laos is a country divided by two contend-
ing factions. The pro-Communist forces con-
trol Xieng Khouang, Sam Neua, Phong Saly,
and large parts of Luang Frabang provinces.
They are consolidating their political and ad-
ministrative authority in these areas without
_effective resistance. The Pathet Lao and the
Bloc capitals still claim Souvanna Phouma to
be the legal Prime Minister. A government
rivaling that at Vientiane has been installed
at Xieng Khouang, with Khamsouk Keola act-
ing as Premier while Souvanna remains out
of the country, The Fathet Lao have begun

See also, SNIE 63-60, “The Situation and Short-
ees Outlook In Laos,” dated 6 December 1560;
SNIE 63-2-60, “probable Communist Intentions in
Laos,” dated 29 Deceniber 1960; and SNIE 55-61,
“Probable Communist Reactions to Certain US
Courses of Action With Respect to Laos,” dated 21
February 1961.

ha) aoe Fs ‘i P co P PY
Seah bce PR SRL FF THT, Retr, Oe So ei hg tae lt Da oe ah betas APR aE
* : a oe 7 ek a 4 : ne eae as moet :

SEC ET 6

to organize the territory under their control
along Communist lines.

25. The Laotian Government of Prince Boun
Oum and General Phoumi is ineffective and
has become increasingly corrupt. It is not
a broadly representative government and its
efforts to generate non-Communist support
have been largely inept and unsuccessful.
‘The National Assembly delegates are for the
most part apathetic, neither opposing the gov-
ernment nor providing it strong support.
Badly needed social and political reforra pro-
grams have been pushed into the background
by. the exigencies of the military situation.

26. The military situation in Taos has de-
generated into sporadic civil war. Military
action has been characterized by repeated
Pathet Lao probing actions, Laotian Army
withdrawsls, and subsequent regroupings.
Since the Communist Pathet Lao-Kong Le
forces seized the Plaine des Jarres in January
they have concentrated rnuch of their strength
in that area and appear to have initiated a
major training effort. The logistic buildup has
reached substantial proportions. The Soviet
airlift into Laos, especially into Xieng
Khouang province, continues at a high and
sustained rate. Additional supplies are being
brought in by truck from North Vietnam.
Some North Vietnamese artillery crews are
working with the Fathct Lao forces. In addi-
tion North Vietnam is providing training as-
sistance and tactical guidance.

37. The Lactian Government forces are supe-
rior in number to the Pathet Lao and have a
greater amount of equipment available to
them. However, problems of internal security
and transportation prevent them from con-
centrating their strength. The Laotian Army
is poorly led and in general Jacks a will to
fight. It has been very slow to initiate any
effective military operations and will be un-
able to retake the Plaine des Jarres and Xieng
Khouang in the near future.

Outlook

28. Present Pathet Lao tactics appear to be
to consolidate, politically and militarily, their
positions in the north. However, the Paihet

a, * RON sn

Fe ge,
des EP ong cy

grr ee SNE eS TERY ENERO IH OE A A RTA CE I TOIT PCO, A ET LOR ome

A

5
OR RAREST
are

SEGRE: v

Lao has a greater military capability in both
the Plaines des Jarres and Plateau des
Bolovens areas than they have thus far chosen
to exercise. They could sharply step up their
military activities at any time and could em-
ploy a variety of tactics. They could expand
their attack on such government concentra-
tions as Lueng Prabang with sizable forces or
they could launch widespread guerrilla activ-
ity throughout Laos. Southern Laos is par-
ticularly vulnerable at this time to such guer-
rilla activity.

29. A dramatic, though limited, victory by the
Pathet Lao, or a series of local victories, could
occur at any {ime. In turn, such a develop-
ment could cause a collapse of the non-Com-
munist position, lead to a general disintegra-
tion of the Laotian Army, and to the establish-
ment of a pro-Communist “neutralist” regime
in Vientiane.

30. Assurning that the Laotian Army does not

- Gissolve under military pressure or lose all its

will to resist, it is possible that, in time, some

_basis for negotiated settlement may be de-

vised. However, a “solution” to the Laotian
crisis has become a matter of contention
among the major powers. Any agreement
which would end the armed struggle in Laos
and resolve the political impasse in that coun-
try rests primarily in non-Laotian hands.

B. South Vietnam 3

31. An extremely critical period for President
Ngo Dinh Diem and the Republic of Vietnam
lies immediately ahead. During the past six
months the internal security situation has

_ continued to deteriorate and has now reached

_Serigus proportions.

Communist North Viet-
nam has stepped up its covert direction and

_ support of the Viet Cong, its paramilitary arm

in South Vietnam, and intensified its political
and propaganda pressures on South Vietnam.
During this same period, non-Communist po-
litical opposition toe Diem and his regime has

- developed mnarkedly, and there are increasing

signs of dissatisfaction within the Vietnamese
military establishment, Both factors were in-

‘Supplements SNIE 63.1-60, “Short-Term Trends
ir, South Vietnam,” dated 23 August 1960.

volved in the abortive coup d’etat of last No-
vember.

32. The Internal Security Problem. Tne mili-
tary phase of the North Vietnamese drive for
“reunification” has been proceeding at a rising
level since late 1959. Since that time, the size
of Viel Cong guerrilla-terrorist apparatus in
South Vietnam has increased greatly and now
numbers approximately 8,000-10,000, as a
result of infiltration and increased Jocal re-
cruitment. Local recruits and sympathetic
or intimidated villagers have enhanced Viet
Cong control and influence over increasing
areas of the countryside. For example, more
than one-half of the entire rural region south
and southwest of Saigon, as well as some areas
to the north, are under considerable Com-
munist control. Some of these areas are in
effect denied te all governinent authority not
immediately backed by substantial armed
force. The Viet Cong's strength encircles
Saigon and has recently begun to move closer
in on the city. There has been an increase in
guerrilla activity in the central highlands,
notably in regions directly bordering on Laos.
The guerrillas have increased their terrorist
attacks on villagers and local officials. Oper-
ating often in sizable groups of 30 to 80 or
more, they have moved with growing boldness
against the Vietnamese Army itself, Over
2,600 civilians, mostly governrnent officials and
sympathizers, were assassinated or kidnapped
by the Viet Cong in 1960. Despite growing
Vietnainese Army aggressiveness and substan-
tial casualties inflicted by the army, the Viet
Cong guerrillas continue to retain the initia-
tive in the field.

33. Political Problems, The deterioration in
the position of the Diern government reached
a new extreme in November when army para-
troop officers joined forces with a number of
civilian oppositionists in a narrowly defeated
attempt to overthrow Diem. On the surface,
Diern’s position appears to have improved
somewhat since then. He has reasserted his
control of the government, made some
cautious moves toward government reform,
and proceeded with plans for the presidential
election to be held in April. He has taken
action to improve the antiguerrilla capabilities

we send 2S APRS aa hoes rakcerem en She SITE ee TAREE AE SRA a ene ma ee) men oat mn eh een eee onsen enon nee ON

eal adele

t

SHER 8B

of the army and stepped up military activities
against the Viel Cong. However, the factors
which gave rise to the coup attempt have not
been seriously dealt with and still exist. Dis-
content with the Diem government continues
to be prevalent among intellectual circles and,
to a lesser degree, among labor and business
groups. There has been an increasing dispo-
siticn within official circles and the army to
question Diem’s ability to lead in this period.
Many feel that he is unable to rally the people
in the fight against the Cormmunists because
of his reliance on virtual one-man rule, his
toleration of corruption extending even to his
immediate entourage, and his refusal to relax
a rigid system of public controls. Moreover,
the people in the countryside are becoming
increasingly. disillusioned regarding the gov-
ernment’s ability to protect them from depre-
dations and taxation by the Viet Cong.

34. The Novernber coup attempt encouraged
the North Vietnamese to strengthen their po-
litical and propaganda drive against Diem.
New efforts are being made by the Communists
to stimulate “united front” action by individ-
uals and groups in South Vietnam which are
known to oppose Diem. The objective is to
intensify and exploit anti-Diem sentiment,
and to supplement their guerrilla activities
with a political campaign against the regime.

35. The Vietnamese Army has also been af-
fected by the present political situation. A
significant part of the November coup group
came from hitherto trusted army units. In
view of this and the apparent hesitancy of
some top military leaders to act quickly in
his support, Diem is now more suspicious of
the army as a potentially serious source of
antigovernment activity. The coup attempt
has probably opened the eyes of many army
officers to their political potential.

Outlook
36. The key issue facing the }iiem govern-

rnent over the next six months arises from.

the Communist internal threat. If the army
is able to make substantial progress toward

- subduing the Viet Cong guerrillas, the politi-

cal position of the government will be substan-
tially improved. However, if there is no dis-

cernible improvement in the internal security
situation and Diem continues to be arbitrary
in dealing with the military and government
leaders, their support for Diern will become
increasingly uncertain. There would be grow-
ing likelihood of a-definite split in the army
and government leadership between those
backing Diem and those opposed to him,
Such a situation would substantially add to
the regime’s instability and increase the pros-
pect for another coup attempt.

37. Given Diem's precarious political situa-
tion and the strength of Cornrnunist guerrilla
and subversive pressures, we believe that the
odds favor a second coup atternpt sometime in
the next year or so. The Communists would
like to initiate and control a coup against
Diem, and their armed and subversive opera-
tions including “united front” efforts are di-
rected toward this purpose. It is more likely,
however, that any coup atternpt which occurs
over the next year or so will originate arnong
non-Communist elements, perhaps a combina-
tion of disgruntled civilian officials and opposi-
tionists and army elements, broader than
those involved in the November attempt, If
such a coup appeared to have good prospects
of succeeding, various groups such as the
sects and labor unions probably would join
in. We believe that if this were to happen
such a coup attempt would have a better than
even chance of succeeding.

38. Any coup group not primarily sponsored
and supported by the Communists would be
likely to maintain South Vietnam’s pro-US
orientation and to seek US help in resisting
Viet Cong attempts to capitalize on the coup.
The leaders of any anti-Diem coup originating
within the present government or the army
would probably maintain Vietnam's pro-US
orientation. Nevertheless, Hanoi would seek
to exploit the confusion attending a revolu-
tionary change of government in South Viet-
nam and it is uncertain that the army would
be able to keep the situation from getting
out of hand.

\
39. Diem’s removal from office would probably
result in a scramble for power. Under such
circumstances, Vice President Nguyen Ngoc
Tho would seem to have a slightly better than
COPY

™~

lyndon Bainss Johnson Tibrar

a ee a a A mc a A Ba

Reaeeeert |

SbCRET 9

even chance of succeeding Diem. Tho is the
constitutional suceessor. He is generally re-
spected within the government and considered
to be one of its most influential members.
Moreover he has sore support within the
army and he has been on good terms with
two of Diem's brothers, Ngo Dinh Luyen and
Roman Catholic Archbishop Ngo Dinh Thuc.
However, Tho or any other successor would
probably exercise less personal power than
Diem, and would have to control or accommo-
date to the power of the army which will al-
most certainly play a major role in any new
governinent.

40. The presidential election now scheduled
for early April provides a potential occasion
for explosive developments on the political
scene. The Viet Cong almost certainly will
attempt to exploit the confusion that normally
-attends election campaigns in South Vietnam,
and they may seek to force the governrnent to
postpone the elections. They may attempt
to activate their announced National Front
for Liberatiow, publicly establishing it in Viet
Cong-held territory in South Vietnam and
offering support to all anti-Dierm nationalist
elements. On the government side, members
of Diem’s regime will probably tamper with
_ the elections and as a result his victory may
be an overwhelming one. If these efforts are
blatant, major demonstrations and riots may
occur in Saigon.

c. Thailand

41. Prime Minister Sarit Thanarat came to
power in 1957 through a military coup d’ctat
and is the undisputed leader of the present
-- ruling group. Throughout the course of his
~yule, Sarit has kept Thailand closely aligned
with the US and the West, The US in turn
has been instrumental in building up the Thai
~- military establishment (a major source of
Sarit’s political strength) and in helping de-
velop the ‘Chai economy. There is some dis-
content with the existing political order, es-
pecially among urban and educated groups.
However, the majority of the Thai people, es-
pecially those in the countryside, feel little
concern with the political activitics in

SECRET

a SB a eee

Bangkok, and tend to focus their loyalty on
the King.

42. Political. The immediate course of po-
litical events within Thailand hangs prirnarily
upon Prirne Minister Sarit’s uncertain health.
If Sarit should depart from the political scene
because of incapacity or death, it is probable
that General Thanorn Kittikachorn, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister of Defense, would
succeed to the Premiership. Thanom, who
served as Prime Minister for 10 months in
1958, has been named by Sarit as the heir ap-
parent. He appears at this time to have the
support of the powerful and ambitious Min-
ister of Interior, General Praphat Charusa-
thien.

43. Members of the middle grade officer eche-
lon are dissatished with their present status
and their share of the graft available to mem-
bers of the regime. Another weakening of
Sarit’s physical condition conceivably could
encourage an attempt to grab power by some
of these officers.

44. Sarit’s death or incapacity would almost
certainly be followed by increasing tensions
within the ruling military group. Latent dif-
ferences between Generals Thanom and Pra-
phat could develop into a scrious schism, In
the event of a serious power struggle within
the ruling group, prospects would be for a
relatively brief period of government insta-
bility, followed by the eventual assumption of
power by one of the contending factions and
the continuation of military control of the
government essentially along present and past

_ lines,

45, Foreign Policy. Thai foreign policy is
highly sensitive to the Thai assessment of
developments in the Far East, particularly
those involving Laos, and of US reaction to
these developments. Neither the present
leadership nor any successor military ruling
group is likely to divest itself of its close ties
with the US and the West as long as it con-
siders that these connections provide adequate
assurance of Thailand’s survival as a free and
independent nation. On the other hand, if
Thai leaders should reach the conclusion that
the US is either unwilling or unable to guaran-
Corr

‘
4
{
. Iyndon Baines Johnson Library:

i)

SHELLL, 10

tee the security of the kingdom, they would coming active, At a time of unprecedented
probably seek an accommodation with the Burmese rapprochement with Communist
Communist Bloc. Thai society in general is China, US relations with Burma have become
not sympathetic to communism; Thailand’s inflamed over the issue of the Chinese Na-
traditional enemy is China, Communist or  tionalist irregulars in Burma.
non-Comrmunist. Nonetheless, Thailand’s for-
eion policy is pragmatically based, and the
Thai would react to a real or apparent swing
of the balance of power in favor of the Corn-
munists in the Far East,

48. Political. The 1960 elections were a great
personal triumph for U Nu who returned to
head a government with a two-thirds majority
in the Chamber of Deputies, U Nu’s personal
, prestige throughout Burma rernains high
46. Although US-Thai relations rernain close, despite growing factional dissension within
developments since the August 1960 Kong Le — his own Union Party and despite accuraulating
coup in Laos have at times strained the rela- | unresolved political problems, many of them
tionship. ‘he Thai leaders not only consider involving the ethnic minorities. The most im-
aneutralist and Communist-influenced Laosa = mediate threat to the stability of Nu’s govern-
threat to Thai security, but also view US ment lies in the increasing factionalism within
actions in J.aos as a test of US intentions and the Union Party, and the scramble among
strength in Southeast Asia. They have almost competing groups for control of party ma-
certainly undertaken a private reassessment chinery and organization. U Nu will probably
of their unequivocal alignment with the US beable to avert an open break in the party, but
and the West, and they have made gestures _ internal disputes will probably continue. The
toward the USSR which were probably in- unsettled condition of the Union Farty will
tended as a warning to the US. Although continue to detract from the government’s
they have apparently concluded that the time _ ability to act decisively.
has not arrived for any significant policy shift, :
there is a clear hardening of attitude toward
the US among a number of top Thai leaders,
including Sarit, who believe that their co-
operation with the US has not been fully
recornpensed. A perennial source of irrita-
tion to the Thai is the US policy of dispensing
cornparatively large amounts of aid to neu-
- vals, particularly to neighboring Cambodia.
Ffiorts to convince Sarit and most other gov-
ernment leaders that US assistance to neu-
trals, even Cambodia, benefits the Free World,
including -‘Thailand,. have met with little
success,

49. Probably the most difficult problem con-
fronting U Nu arises from his election cam-
paign promise to make Buddhism the state re-
ligion. This has caused growing unrest
among many Christian and non-Buddhist
tribal groups in Burma, particularly the Ka-
chins in the north. There has been a con-
siderable resurgence of political activity by
Communist and left-wing elernents since U Nu
returned to power and dropped the army-im-
posed measures directed against them. The
Burmese political scene will probably be
marked by increasing turbulence and insta-
bility over the next year. However, U Nu will
probably continue to head the government at
D. Burma least for the next year.

47. Over the past year, since control of the 50. The Army. During late 1960 considerable
government was returned to Prime Minister pressure built up within the army for new
Nu and the politicians by General Ne Win and political action to reinstitute army control.
the Burmese military, economic and social ‘This pressure was leading to a serious con-
conditions in Burma have generally declined. frontation between General Ne Win and a
Frice levels have begun to rise again, local number of army political activists. Ne Win
crime rates are up, and the security of the wanted no change in the political situation,
countryside has worsened. The ruling Union at least until the China-Burma border de-
Party is showing signs of coming apart at the marcation now underway was completed,

Seams, and local Communists are again be- while the other army group bsligved that a |
Tyndon Baines Johnson Library
RE-ORISS. .

so ncaa ON here at a a Adie ae lg: Dat Cte eat oe eee pe Beale alk

SECRET 11

new rove against the government was needed
immediately. The matter apparently was
settied in February 1961 when General Ne Win
summarily directed the resignation or reas-
signraent of a substantial number of the
army's most senior officers. An atternpt by
these officers to counter Ne Win’s action prob-
ably would not succeed.

51, We believe that Ne Win will continue to
dominate army policy and that he will not
for the time being choose to involve the army
directly in national political affairs. Nis at-
titude could change if U Nu’s party frag-
mented and serious political instability ap-
peared to be threatening the country. If that
happened Ne Win would probably move to
shore up U Nu’s position and effect some work-
ing arrangement with him which would in-
crease army participation in government and
administration.

52. Foreign policy. The Nu government has
raade no major changes in Burina’s traditional
foreign policy of nonalignment in the cold war
and of general cooperation with the neu-
tralist Asian countries. However, owing
partly to the personal initiative of U Nu—
- who strongly desired to reaffirm “peaceful co-
existence” as the cornerstoné of Burmese neu-
tralism and to complete the settlement of the
Sino-Burmese border question initiated by
General Ne Win—Burma has established con-
siderably more friendly diplomatic relations
and closer economic ties with Communist
China than have existed heretofore. In Janu-
ary 1961, Burma signed an agreement on
economic and technical cooperation providing
for a Chinese Communist long-term interest-

free loan of about $84 million to finance Chi-
~ nese equipment and technical advice for Bur-
mese economic development projects. This
loan agreement, the largest Communist China
has offered to any non-Communist country,
is to come into force in October 1961, with
repayment over a 10-year period beginning in
1971.

$3. Utilization of Communist China’s prof-
fered assistance in Burma’s Four-Year Plan
tay give Feiping substantial influence over
the general orientatioa of Burma's economic
planning efforts. Closer Sino-Burmese trade

relations will probably develop if, as expected,
Burma concludes trade arrangements for in-
creased rice exports to China during the next
months. However, in keeping with Burma’s
avowed policy of accepting aid from both
Blocs, the Nu government will probably con-
tinue to draw on existing US grant and loan
aid. Burma will probably also seek economic,
and perhaps military, assistance from the So-
viet Union sometime in the near future.

54, US-Burimese relations have recently de-
teriorated sharply as a result of developments
involving the Chinese Nationalist irregulars
in northeast Burma. Acting under a secret
agreement providing for joint action to pro-
tect the teams engaged in demarcating the
Sino-Burmese border, the Chinese Commu-
nists launched an attack into Burra against
the Nationalist units in December 1960. The
Burmese Army later joined in. By February
1961, the forces of the two countries had suc-
ceeded in capturing the major Nationalist
bases and driving most of the irregulars across
the Mekong into Laos and Thailand, although
this was apparently done at the cost of severe
casualties to the Burmese Army, Substan-
tial quantities of Nationalist arms and equip-
ment, much of it US made, were captured by
the Burmese, As news of the fighting and the
capture of US-manufactured arms in the
hands of the Nationalist irregulars became
known, an army-inspired press campaign
bepan to grow, aimed in part at the Taiwan
regime but chiefly at the US as the country
primarily responsible. The fact that Chinese
Communist troops helped the Burmese Army
in the attack on the irregulars has been kept
from the Burmese public and U Nu has pub-
licly and emphatically denied the presence of
any Chinese Communist troops on Burmese
soil.

55. In February, the Burmese Government
brought to the attention of the UN the matter
of the Nationalist irregulars and their con-
tinning support from Taiwan. Whipped up
by the press campaign, student and labor
groups have led anti-US riots in Rangoon and
Mandalay. A number of the US advisers to
the Burmese Army have been requested to
leave prior to the expiration of th@Pifours in

Iynmdon Baines John3on Tbr,

SECRET

tty

ampere toa ee TL y

gErernrT 12

April. US relations with the Burmese mili-
tary, which once were quite close, have suf-
fered a sharp decline. Although U Nu prob-
ably wishes to avoid serious damage to US-
Burmese relations, he probably will seek to
exploit public and army feeling over the sup-
posed US role in supporting the Chinese Na-
tionalist irregulars in order to force the liqui-
dation of the problem posed by the irregulars.
To this end the Burmese Government will
probably continue a generally anti-US line
over the next several months.

E. Carnbodia

56. Cambodia is dorninated by Prince Noro-
dorn Sihanouk, the 39-year old ruler who has
been variously King, Prime Minister, and Chief

_of State of his country. Whatever his posi-

tion at any given time, Sihanouk is in fact
the center of power within Cambodia. More-
over, he fully controls Cambodian foreign
policy. As his views of the world scene have

changed, Cambodia's relations with the East

and West have changed. His dominance has
been responsible for the many sharp swings,
right and left, of Cambodia’s foreign policy
in the past. The one constant throughout
Sihanouk’s rule has been his conviction that
the key to Carnbodia’s domestic stability and
international security lies in following a policy
of neutrality.

57. Although Sihancuk professes neutrality,
several factors have combined at times to
make him incline toward the Soviet Bloc.
These factors include Cambodia’s proximity
to Cornraunist China; Sihancuk’s apparent
feeling that communism and Communist
China represent the ‘wave of the future,” par-
ticularly in Asia; his fear of Communist
strength and ruthlessness, particularly that

-of China; and Cambodia’s traditional enmity

with Thailand and Vietnam, accentuated in
modern days by their differing foreign policies.

__ At the same time, Sihanouk takes great care
| to assure the Soviet Bloc that his acceptance

of US or French military assistance does not
modify his basic policy of neutrality.

~~ §8. In domestic policy, Sihanouk attempts to

keep left-wing and Communist influences in

‘check. From time to time he has suppressed

domestic Comrnunist activity and Communist-
oriented newspapers. Sihanouk’s fear of in-
ternal subversion, both Communist and West-
ern, causes him to rnaintain a high state of
internal vigilance. This fear, and that of
losing Western econoric and military aid,
have probably been the main reasons for his
continued refusal to accept military aid from
the Soviet Bloc.

59. Although Sihanouk has been careful to
watch out for subversion in its militant forms,
he has been lenient in other fields where the
danger is less immediate. Thus Communist
propaganda, despite occasional suppression, is
widespread and is having a serious impact on
the increasing number of literate end edu-
cated Cambodians, Bloc economic aid is well
publicized and contributes to an effective pro-
Cornmunist impact. Sihanouk himself, by his
public tirades against the West at times of
tension with Thailand and South Vietnam, has
also contributed to this impact. His desire
to enlist the support of leftist-oriented edu-
cated youth leads him to overlook the po-
tential danger they pose to his neutralist
policy abroad and nationalist policy at home.
While Sihanouk may be justifiably confident
at this time of his ability to control or direct
public opinion, he or his successor may in
time have to be responsive to a public opinion
increasingly faverable to the Communist Bloc,
an opinion which he helped to create and
permitted to develop.

60. Sihanouk will continue to dominate the
political scene in Cambodia for the foreseeable
future. Economie considerations are not
likely to provoke significant internal political
pressures. Sihanouk will continue to steer
Cambodia along a middle course, committed to
neither major power group and seeking aid
and assistance from ke“ Within the limits
of his neutralist policy, oiianouk will turn his
smiles or tirades toward the West or the Bloc
and back apain, according to his {ccling for
the situation. The balance between East and
West in Southeast Asia is a most important
determinant for Sihanouk, and this could be
affected greatly by developments ing§jpyLao-
tian crisis.

Lyndon Raines Johnson Liz

egress ce

ser nme mere
Eras a 4

eh se REET REL OORT TT ’
‘ F ‘ thes

ARE MIR mI REA RE Ht SE SOM a OHH GED PIERO ** 7 BE
f ‘ '
a ‘

ears

-a strong majority in Parliament.

LAL Ee Spe

Lo ARE ER OT i DS Be Bh ee Pibelsaea eer Sh pintcsa eins 6 peed ae ie ‘safaeS Macs prim, oe maltaee at aot Pan ea

me rere oe net ee oe ad
pee ile wore es

&&-6-R-EP 13

61. Although Sihanouk would probably adjust
quite readily to almost any resolution of the
Laotian crisis, the solution he would almost
certainly prefer would be a neutral belt com-
posed of Laos and Cambodia, guaranteed by
the great powers. He would not like to see
Laos under Comraunist domination, but his
sympathies clearly He with the neutralist
course Souvanna Phourna has advocated for
Taos. Sihanouk probably places Boun Oum
and Phoumi in the satne general category as
Diern and Sarit, his major antagonists in the
Southeast Asia area. Sihanouk’s propasal for
a 14-nation conference to negotiate a solution
to the Laotian crisis was @ serious effort on
his part to seck an end to a situation which
he regards as a serious one for Cambodia.

F, Malaya
62. Malaya is one of the most prosperous na-

tions in Asia and has a stable and conservative
government. Under Prime Minister Tunku
Abdul Rahman, the ruling Alliance Party has
Rahman
has shown considerable ability since Malaya
gained independence in 1957 in managing the
government in a competent and efficient
manner. AS a Inember of the British Com-
monwealth, Malaya has generally pursucd a
pro-Western foreign policy and has shown
little sympathy for Communist causes. It is
further tied to the West by the Anglo-Ma-
layan Defense Agreement, concluded at the
time of andependente, which specified that the
UK wiil provide assistance for Malaya’s armed

- forces and for its external defense. Although

Prime Minister Rahman has recently advo-
cated the admission of Communist China to
the UN along with an independent Formosa,
Malaya has refused to establish diplomatic
relations with tnembers of the Communist
Bloc.”

63. The 12-year long state of emergency re-
sulting from the armed Communist insurrec-

~~ tion was officially ended by the government

on 31 July 1960. The rebel force has now
been reduced to a few hundred individuals
confined largely to the Malaya-Thailand
border region, and Communist tactics have
Shifted from armed iasurrection to clandestine

political organization and the penetration of
labor and student groups. The Communists
hope thereby to build a base for political and
national front activities.

b4. Political linplications of Communal Ri-
valry. The racial cornposition of Malaya is
its most. important political determinant.
Only 50 percent of the Federation’s popula-
tion is Malay; 36 percent is Chinese, and 11
percent Indian and Pakistani, Although the
Chinese and Malays have lived in relative
harmony siacs fadependence, racial antagon-
isms are nonetheless deep-seated. The ener-
getic Chinese, who control much of the na-
tion’s economic life, tend to look down on the
Malays as indclent, inefficient, and culturally
inferior, Many still regard mainland China
as their mnotherland, an attitude which has
been enhanced by China’s growing interna-
tional importance. The predominantly Mus-
lim Malays in turn regard the Chinese as
pork-eating foreigners, atheists, and economic
exploiters. -

65. The economic and cultural differences are
further complicated by the fact that, by con-
stitutional mandate, the Malays are assured
of control over the civil and security services
and are given special consideration in land
development as well. The constitution estab-
lishes Malay as the national language but
provides for the use of English as an official
language for 10 years (i.e., until 1967). It
requires for citizenship that non-Malays have
a knowledge of Malay and meet certain resi-
dence requirements. These conditions tend
to discriminate against the Chinese. . There is
a clear tendency among the younger elements
of both racial proups toward radicalism—the
Malays attracted to extremist nationalistic
movements and the Chinese youth attracted
to left-wing causes and groups, The older,
more moderate Chinese and Malay leaders,
who now dominate the government and the
major political parties, appear to be unable
to halt the trend toward political polarization.
Any serious infringement of Chinese economic

status would sharply increase Chinese resent-

ment of Malay domination and thus accelerate
this trend. Although friction CtWeen the

Malays and the ChijuatoniBodmtiaudahng onl bra

~

|

SECRs-F | id

probably spark occasional outbursts of vio-
lence, a major communal showdown is not
likely for several years. Over the next year,
Malaya’s prosperity will probably continue to
submerge the nation’s racial differences.

66. Relations with Singapore. Singapore,
which became a serniautonomous state within
the British Commonwealth in 1959, wants to
merge with Malaya, but its advances are not
welcomed by the Federation’s Malays who fear
‘Chinese dornination. The Chinese, who are
jin an overwhelming majority in Singapore,
would constitute 44 percent of the population
in a combined unit while Lhe Malays would be
reduced to about 43 percent of the total.
Initial Malay suspicion of the left-wing
People’s Action Party government formed in
Singapore in 1959 has added to the difficulties
between the twoareas. Asa result, the Feder-
ation has sought to eliminate its historic de-
pendence upon Singapore's financial and part
_ facilities by setting up its own. Singapore's
economic and political prospects, without ac-
_cess to the Malayan “hinterland,” would be
extremely poor over the long run.

67. At present, there is a trend among top
officials of the Federation toward a more
“sympathetic approach to Singapore’s prob-
lems, largely as a result of their growing
_Tealization of the threat which instability in
Singapore would pose for the Federation.
Representatives of the two governments have
been mecting from time to time to explore the
prospects for a limited common market.
There are, in addition, some indications that
the Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Min-
ister of the Federation have been exploring
the possibility of a limiled merger, but one
““ which would preserve Malay hegemony. Al-
though no striking developments are likely
during the coming year, there will probably
be closer cooperation between the two areas

~~ than in the recent past. Over the long run

there raay be a significant move toward a

confederation of Malaya and Singapore that

would also include Brunei, Sarawak, and
British Borneo.

68. Economic Vulnerabilities. Although the

-- Federation of Malaya is the most prosperous
nation in Southeast Asia, the economy is

t

heavily dependent on rubber and tin, which
account for 75 percent of the nation’s exports
and finance the import of essential foodstuffs.
About 60 to 70 percent of the total population
is dependent on rubber for a livelihood. The
prices which Malaya receives for its rubber are

largely deterrnined ty non-Malayans. Since’

rubber trees take at least six years to mature,
production cannot be shifted quickly in the
event of a price collapse. Malaya is still pros-
perous, but hard times for the rubber industry,
as a consequence of competition from syn-
thetic rubber, for example, could result in a
generally depressed economic situation. This
in turn could bring to the surface many of the
Federation’s now dorrnant political and social
problems. However, the demand for natural
rubber is expected to remain high during the
coming year. Consequently, no serious de-
cline in the Federation’s economy is envisaged
during this period.

IV. PROBABLE EFFECTS IN SOUTHEAST ASIA
OF MAJOR COMMUNIST GAINS iN LAOS
OR SOUTH VIETNAM

69. There is decp awareness among the coun-
tries of Southeast Asia that developments in
the Laotian crisis, and its outcorne, will have
a profound impact on their future. The gov-
ernments of the area tend to regard the Lao-
tian crisis as a symbolic test of intentions,
wills, and strengths between the major powers
of the West and the Communist Bloc. They
fear the possibility that the hostilities, by mis-
calculation or design, may spread to their own
territory. In one way or another they all
regard the US as responsible in large degree
for the present state of affairs in Laos, The
governments of South Vietnam and Thailand,
for example, are convinced that if the US had
given the anti-Communist elements bold and
prompt support, the Laotian crisis would not
have reached serious proportions and would
long ago have been resolved. However, Diern
and Sarit both reserve their most severe criti-
cism for the attitudes of France and the UK.
They believe that the two European powers
have restrained the US and made decisive ac-
tion by SEATO unlikely if not impossible.
The governments of Cambodia, Budeey and

Lyndon Baines Johnson Lis

SSHGRET

BE Tag ijucns Wa BE eo ig Fat oh Te TS Sy AM TERI CRO EE ETON, H
. ‘

Se cine a Cen lier za Unt eel dd oak
' Cran Vi a be) fie
‘

a ate aE LE SR EIT EMTS I POE ES ORE RED) Se

erEGRET 18

Malaya favor a political scttlement and a
neutralist Laos.

70. In short, the general attitudes of the gov-
ernments of mainland Southeast Asia are split
along the lines of their general foreign policy
orientation: those in close alignment with the
US favor stronger measures to assure at least
a non-Cormmunist and preferably an anti-

Communist, western-orientated regime in

Laos; and the neutralist governments, as well
as Malaya, favor a neutralist but not Com-
runist-dominated government. The neu-
tralist governments, recognizing that the
course of events in Laos will be determined

- by the major powers instead of the opposing

Laotian factions, favor some form of interna-
tional political agreement to end the crisis,

_guch as_UN intervention, a new conference

among the powers which negotiated the
Geneva agreements, or a broader international
conference such as that proposed by Sihanouk.
Thajland and South Vietnam would welcome
some form of UN representation in Laos, but
with a limited function, ie., to stop Bloc aid
to the Pathet Lao-Kong Le forces.

71, Cambodia and Burma would view with
satisfaction an international political settle-
ment of the Laotian crisis which provided for
& neutral Laos and reduced the ‘possibilities
that the armed conflict would spread. How-
ever, both countries realize that a continuing
strong US posture and influence in the area
is necessary to keep in check Chinese Com-
munist expansionist aspirations and to enable
Cambodia and Burma to maintain flexibility
in their neutralist policies. Consequently,
they would be alarmed if Laos were to be Jost
to the Communists under conditions which

would seem to indicate that the US position in -

the area had been seriously weakened.

72. The loss of Laos to the Communists or per-
haps even the division of the country, would

almost certainly incline the Thai toward ac-

cornmodation to Communist power in South-

__.east Asia. Depending upon where the line

Inight be drawn, a divided Laos would pose
almost as many difliculties for the Thai as
would a completely Communist Laos, particu-
larly if Thailand shared a common border
With the. Communist-controlled portion of

Laos. A predominantly Comrounist-con-
troied Laos would vitally threaten South Vict-
narn's independence: it would greatly extend
the Communist frontiers with South Vietnam;
it would bring significantly greater Commu-
nist military power to bear on the crucial Sai-
gon defense complex; and it wou!d greatly
facilitate Cornrnunist infiltration and subver-
sion. The close proximity of a Cormmunist
state would xeake more difficult Western
efforts to starch up local resistance. In short,
either a divided Laos or a predominantly Com-
munist Laos would severely damage the US
position and its influence in Thailand and
South Vietnain.

73. The future course of all of the countries
of Southeast Asia would be strongly influenced
by the actual circumstances in which the loss

or division of Laos had occurred as well as the ©

local appraisal of the attitude and actions of
the US in response to the situation. The ex-
tent to which these countries would go in re-
sisting Bloc pressures or in withstanding local
Communist threats would depend in great de-
gree on whether they still assessed that the

US could stem further Communist expansion -

in the area, They would feel more keenly
than before a strong temptation to take a neu-
tral position between the two power blocs,
even though they recognized that the US is
the only country with sufficient power to
oppose the Communist Bloc in the area. Al-
though they probably would be deeply dis-
illusioned regarding US resolution after the
loss or division af Laos, they would nonetheless
welcome demonstrations of US firmness and
might in .response modify their appraisal of
their own future in due course.

94. Although the Communist threat to South

Vietnam has reached serious proportions, the
chances of a Communist takeover in the next
year or so are considerably less than they are
in Laos. Nevertheless, Peiping and Hanoi
almost certainly attach greater importance to
their efforts in South Vietnam than they do
to their efforts in Laos. US prestige and policy
are particularly deeply engaged in South Viet-
nam. Diem’s policy of close alignment with
the US is on trial in_the, current OF All
.  Tynd

SECREL.

i

ERG lhe elk i ing a Sapien RR At ammeter nine NTI NY Ba ORD Mi EibonwEe te ET ESI RO RGR SP SRLS IN ore

7 RET er ere

oe ee

ae

on Baines Johnson Idt:

, Sg ci A Om Re, eo

SSE T 16

countries of the area would attach great irn- to fali to the Communists or be forced to swing
portance to a failure of the South Vietnam — toward neutralism, the impact upon the coun-
Government to cope successfully with the tries of Southeast Asia would be similar in
_ sising tempo of Communist subversion and kind but considerably more severe than that
“armed insurrection. If South Vietnam were resulting from the loss or division of Laos.

COPY
Iyndon Baines Johnson Ia’.

BROREE i.
