Assassinations and Kidnappings of Local Officials - TruthH Commission I) DocC U
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049393, dated 2 January 1991.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049393).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This report was prepared by the U.S. Government. It provides
data on alleged human rights violations by the FMLN. Previous
reports provided to the Ad Hoc and Truth Commissions dealt with
alleged human rights violations by the Salvadoran Government.
While this document is based on the best information available to
the U.8. Government, the U.S. Government cannot provide any
guarantee of the accuracy of the report.

I. ASSASSINATIONS AND KIDNAPPINGS OF LOCAL OFFICIALS

The U.S. Embassy Human Rights report on E] Salvador for 1989
noted that “during much of 1989 the FMLN pursued a public policy
of attempting to make the country ‘ungovernable! through
increased urban bombings and assassinations against conservative
intellectuals, newspaper columnists, civilian employees of the
military, former FMLN members, mayors, and government ministers
and their families." The attacks on mayors and other local
officials began in the early 1980s and intensified as the civil
strife worsened. In 1985 the FMLN began a systematic campaign to
eliminate governsental authority in areas the guerrillas claimed
to control. .

April 3, 1983. Eleazar ¢ruz, Mayor of San Cayetano Istepeque,
San Vicente Department, was killed by 15 heavily armed FMLN
guerrillas from the FDR faction who attacked and briefly
occupied the town. The assailants also destroyed the mayor's
files. Three other municipalities--Guadalupe, Verapaz, and
San Lorenzo--were also attacked on the same da 17 persons
were reported] illed in the four tow

July 10, 19863. FMLN guerrillas seized the town of Nueva
Granada, Usulutan Department, and killed the Christian

Democratic mayor, Roberto Rendon,-who they charged supported

January, 1984. Maria Ovidia Amaya, the ARENA mayor of
Yamabal, Morazan Department, was forced from her home and
shot. est

January, 1984. An ARENA deputy from Usulutan, Ricardo Arnoldo
Pohl, was assassinated. roa

January, 1985. The FMLN killed the mayor of San Jorge, San
Miguel Department, during an attempted kidnapping. ea

May 2, 1985. The newly appointed Christian Democratic mayor
of San Jorge, Edgar Mauricio Valenzuela, was taken from his
home and slain because he had disregarded guerrilla orders and
accepted the

Approved for Release
a

NOV 1993

May 16, 1985. FMLN guerrillas assassinated Dr. Jose Rodolfo
Araujo, a magistrate on the Military First Instance Court in
the capital; the FMLN claimed responsibility for the attack in
a subsequent Radio Venceremos broadcast.

August 16, 1985. Baydelio Aviles, the former ARENA mayor of
El Paisnal, San Salvador Department, was killed and his wife
and sister wounded during an FMLN attack on his home.

1985. The FMLN also kidnapped 28 mayors in 1985 and used them
as part of a ransom package for the release of captured or
imprisoned FMLN leaders and combatants. Some of the mayors
were held for over six months. On September 2, 4 reporter
from the Salvadoran newspaper La Prensa Grafica observed a
Radio Venceremos broadcast from Perquin, Morazan Department.
Participants included ERP chief Joaquin Villalobos, PCS chief
Shafik Handal, and nine of the kidnapped mayors. In October,
all 28 mayors were ransomed by the government; they promptly
resigned from their posts. a

1986. At least eight mayors and one former mayor were
assassinated by the FMLN. At least 95 of El Salvador's 262
mayors were unable to carry out their duties in their own
towns and sought refuge in departmental capitals; most had
been ment death for cooperating with the
government.

January, 1987. The FMLN kidnapped three additional mayors as
part of a campaign called “Heroic January--Farabundo Marti
Lives." In Radio Venceremos broadcasts the guerrillas
threatened all mayors and demanded their resignations. The
FMLN kidnapped at least six additional mayors during the year
and, beginning with the slaying of the mayor of Sensembra in
September, initiated an intensive assassination campaign
against mayors and ot local officials.

September 28, 1987. In the early morning hours, FMLN
guerrillas murdered Jsidra Andrade, the Christian Democratic
mayor of Sensembra, Morazan Department. The 48-year-old
Andrade was forced from her house and shot and killed on her
patio in the presence of her young daughter. The Salvadoran
daily El Mundo noted that the murder may have been motivated
by both persona) and political reasons. Mayor Andrade's

brother Felix, an FMLN squad leader at_ the time, was believed
to have been behind the assault.

.

2
a

March 17, 1988. Guerrillas attacked the town of Azacualpa in
southeastern Chalatenango Department and kidnapped Mayor
Serqio Romero, a member of the Nationa] Conciliation Party.

On the same day, the FMLN's “Radia Venceremos"” first announced
that the mayor had been killed in combat. The Salvadoran
military, however, stated that Mr. Romero was killed as part
of the FMLN's campaign against the upcoming elections. The
ttributed Mr. Romero's death to the FMLN,
reporting that he was beaten to death and his face mutilate

April 14, 1988. During the night, guerrillas who identified
themselves as members of the "Chico Sanchez" Eastern Front of

the FMLN, took Pedro Ventura from his home and shot him to
death in front of his wife and children. The victim, a member
of the ARENA part was ma ~elect o idro orazan.

On April 16, 1988 Radio Venceremos claimed responsibility
for Ventura's execution and stated that it was carried out
because the mayor had’ failed to heed an FMLN warning not to
participate e elections or to continue his work as

May 11, 1988. During the night, Terencio Rodrigues, the 38-
year-old ARENA mayor of Perquin, Morazan Department, was

assassinated by an unidentif oup of FMLN guerrillas on
the anes _ his house.

August 21, 1988. Guerrillas identifying themselves as members
of thd FMLN kidnapped and killed Dolores Molina, mayor of the
small municipality of Lolotiquillo, Morazan Department. A
member of the Christian Democratic Party, Molina was severely
beaten before his e o Mor eputy

A communique issued by the FMLN on August 22 announced that
Molina had been executed for participating
government! fe) ions.

October 25, 1988. Mayor Lucio Salvador Perla of Sociedad,
Morazan Department was taken from his house by FMLN guerrillas
who accused the ARENA member of assisting the government's

vil de j

Pal

On October 27, Radio Venceremos claimed responsibility for
the execution. On November 6, Gregorio Rosa Chavez,
Auxiliary Bishop of San Salvador, condemned the FMLN for
the assassinatio three mayors, includi

Oc¥ober 30, 1988. fe) erto Lo , the Christian
Democratic mayor of Guatajiagua, Morazan Department, was

.kidnapped'-from his home. by guerrillas believed to be elements

of the FMLN. Lopez's body was found in aurural area the next
morning. On November 6, Gregorio,Rosa Chavez;‘Auxildary -
Biship of San Salvador, condemned the FMLN for the
assassination of three mayors, including Lopez.

October 31, 1988. ARENA member Jose Ulises Hernandez, Mayor
of Nueva Granada, Usulutan Department, was taken from his home
at 7:00 PM by two guerrillas. According to local press
reports the assailants, members &f tha) FPL, shot. the mayor
shortly thereafter. Eyewjtnesses stated that Hernandez'

family attempted to drive’ h to San Mique fe) e
died pase

Du€ing a“ homi: , “Mag? Grdgorio Rosa Chavez, .the Auxiliary
Bishop of San Salvador, condemned such’ "barbaric actions
against civilian officials chosen by the people" and
asserted, "We express our vigorous rejection of these acts
despite the reasons the guerrillas allege to justify the

November 25, 1988. ARENA member

, the Mayor of Sesori, San Miguel Department, was
abducted and killed by three members of the ERP from the
Northern San Miguel subzone. One of the three used the
pseudonym "Arnolfo." "Lucio," ERP Chief of Masas in the
Northern San Miguel Subzone, gave the order to kill
Villafuerte. In'a Radio Venceremos broadcast the next day,
the FMLN took credit for the assassination and reminded all
local mayors and officials that "we will not allow them to
operate in disputed areas under guerrilla control as instru-
ments of counterinsurgency war plans. We urge mayors and

“oftiogals -to refrain fromyparticipating in such activities and

to resign. Otherwise, they will continue to be targets of our
units for participating in the dictatorship's
counterinsurgenc "

January 27, 1989. -Erneuto Flores, the 40-year-old Governor of
Usulutan, was aSSassinated hy a unit of the FMLN. Flores was
the PDC secretary general in the department. The governor's
secretary reported that the attackers appeared at Flores!
residence in Villa El Triunfo in the morning, shot the victim,
and left a poster at the site that stated: "For not keeping
your promise and for collaborating with the Yankees", On
January 29, Archbishop Rivera y Damas strongly condemned the
governor's murder and the bombing of the hame of the defense
minister's mother.

II. ASSASSINATIONS OF PROMINENT CIVILIANS

June 27, 1983. Rene Barrios Amaya, former labor leader, first
secretary of the Constituent Assembly, and ARENA deputy, was
assassinated by several unidentified individuals on the
southern outskirts of the capital. In a communique issued
several hours er, the j esponsibility for the

January 27, 1984. FMLN guerrillas killed ARENA assembly

deputy Ricardo Arnaldo Poh} as he drove his daughter to school
in San Salvador. The Clara Eliza t e FPL
ed responsibility.

February 25, 1984. Roberto Ismael Ayala, 4 PAISA deputy from
Cabanas department, was shot to death in San Salvador by two
young men. Although no terrorist group claimed responsibility
for the slaying, the -strongly suspected the Clara
Elizabeth Ramirez Front of the FPL.

March 14, 1984. Hector Tulio Flores, a PCN deputy, was shot
dead by unidentified assailants. The Clara Elizabeth Ramirez
Front_o PL claimed responsibility.

March 31, 1984. Dr Rafael Hasbun, a leading ARENA ideologue
and well-known conservative writer and newspaper correspon
dent, was assassinated by urban commandos. The PRTC claimed
responsibility for the slaying in a communique released on
April 2, describing the killing as "revolutionary action:

death to political harborers of the death squads".

December 7, 1984.  Etrain Altistides Figueroa, the dtrector of
the San Salvador Light Company, was shot to death in downtown
Gan Salvador. The Clara Elizabeth Ramirez Front of the FPL
claimed responsibility.

October 26, 1987. Herbert Ernesto Anaya Sanabria, President
of the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission (CDHES), was

assassinated in San Salvador. The victim was in the parking
lot of his residential complex, waiting to take his wife and
their five children to school, when two men shot him with
small caliber weapons.

Anaya, a member of the ERP, had been imprisoned from May
1986 until February 1987, when he was one of 57 insurgents

released from prison in exchange for the FMLN's release of
; mine Air Force colonel.

Shortly after the assassination of Anaya the FMLN issued a

communique charging the Salvadoran Army and Duarte

government with the crime. The insurgents also suspended

the dialogue with the government and declared a three-day

national transportatibt stoppage in early November "to show

the people's rejection of the repressive esc lation
the Duarte ernment. ..- .-"

On December 23, the National Police arrested ERP member
Jorge Alberto Miranda Arevalo, alias "Erick" and "Jacinto,"
in the San Salvador neighborhood of Zacamil. During
interrogation, Miranda admitted to having taken part in
Anaya's assassination. According to Miranda, the ERP had
ordered Anaya's death because he had been passing
information to the armed forces and was no longer effective
as* president of the CDHES. During the assault Miranda
provided security for the gunman who killed Amaya, another
cell member known only as "Carlos." A third insurgent,
Romualdo Alberto Zelaya, alias "Jose," drove the escape
vehicle. Miranda was sentenced to a 30-year prison term
for the murder of Anaya.

December 6, 1968. Francisco Ismael] Diaz, the press and
propaganda secretary of the 22,000-member Salvadoran Peasant
Central (CCS) and former mayor of Lolotique, San Miguel
Department, was slain by guerrillas after he was kidnapped
near Lolotique. His younger brother, who was present during
Diaz' abduction, identified the kidnappers as members of the
FMLN. Diaz! corpse was discovered the next day in the
vicinity of Sesori, about 15 kilometers north of Lolotique.
He had been shat at least once in the head. Diaz, leader of
the CCS agricultural cooperative of Lolotique, had refused to

6

cooperate with the FMLN, despite having received two
threatening letters. ERP member Andres Perez allegedly
articipated in the assassination of Diaz.

An FMLN communique issued after the slaying stated that
Diaz had been killed because he had helped the Army's
counterinsurgency campaign. i

March 15, 1989. An armed man assassinated Francisco L.
Peccorini, an American citizen and one of the leaders of the
Committee for the Rescue of the National University. The
victim was shot when his car stopped at a traffic light on
Avenida Olimpica, near the Flor Blanca Stadium in San
Salvador. No group claimed responsibility for the slaying. A
former Jesuit, retired professor, and conservative political
commentator, Peccorini had returned to El Salvador from the
United States in 1987. He spoke against the FMLN and its use
of the National University for subversive activities.

Two other attacks on members of the Committee had occurred
earlier. On November 25, 1988 three grenades were thrown
at the son and daughter-in-law of Rafael Antonio Mendez,
head of the Committee; the daughter-in-law was injured.
Mendez publicly blamed ‘University Unity, a political group
at the National University, for the attack. On March 10,
1989 armed men shot at Mendez's vehicle, lightly wounding
him as well ag his bodyguard and Gladis Larromana, a
secretary recently released from the University.

The QM commented that university students operating
out of the campus as FMLN urban commandos probably
assassinated Peccorini and suggested the slaying was an
indication that the Rescue Committee's efforts were
perceived by t control of the

U ity.

On July 25, 1989 former U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador
Robert White described a
meeting he had recently attended In Mexico w erman
Cienfuegos and other FMLN officials. White stated that
during the meeting the FMLN had acknowledged its
responsibliity for recent acts of terrorism including the
killing of Peccorini and the bombing of Vice-President
Merino's house--but not the killings of Minister Rodriguez
Porth and Edgar Chacon. The FMLN admitted, however, that
the killings had worked against FMLN interests. Cienfuegos
stated that the FMLN was debating a change in policy
regarding assassinations, under which the high command
would decide who would be killed by name and acknowledge
responsibility for all such acts. Cienfuegos indicated
that part of the reason for the change was a lack of

nase in the orders passed to urban commando cells.

On February 2, 1992 ERP leader Joaquin Villalobos and his

deputy Ana Guadalupe Martinez discuss! Qa
"mistakes" made in urban terror tac 5. One
was the Wave of civilian killings launched by the FMLN high

command in the late 1980s. Among the victims of that
campaign listed by the guerrilla leader was Francisco
Peccorini.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, alias "Roberto," was charged with
the murder of Edgar Chacon, as well as numerous others
including Peccorini.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo or "Roberto" was jdentified as a
former FAL political commander who was arrested by Treasury
Salvador on December 30 1989.

February 16, 1989. Napoleon Romero Garcia, alias "
Castellanos," a 42-year-old former guerrilla commander who had
defected from the FMLN, was machine-qunned to death as he left
his office in northern San Salvador by car. For several years
Castellanos had been a leader of the FPL, but in 1985 he had
renounced violence and, along with other former guerrillas,
formed the Center for the Study of the National Reality, with
the goal of promoting democracy. Radio Venceremos announced
the death of "traitor" Castellanos immediately after the
attack, but never formally claimed responsibility for the
slaying. The FPL's clandestine radio also announced the
"execution" and characterized it as a victory of the peo le
anda

In mid-February, 1989 a leader in the FPL urban structure
in San Salvador, alias "Daniel", boasted that he and
several other unidentified individuals had participated in
bringing Castellanos to justice. i

On October 24, 1989 President Cristiani revealed in a press
conference that, according to ballistic experts, the
weapons used to kill Castellanos were the same as those
used to assassinate Rodriguez Porth.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, alias "Roberto," was charged with

pe pass of memeveegal as well as numerous others.

Pablo Salvador Carcame or "Roberto" has been identified as
a former FAL political commander who was arrested by

—_— Police in San Salvador on December 30, 1989.

April 9, 1989. Jose Roberto Garcia Alvarado, the Attorney
General of El Salvador, was killed in his armored car. As the

vehicle was stopped at a traffic light, an unidentified
assailant jumped from a truck, placed a cone-shaped device on
top of the passenger Side--directly above Garcia-~and escaped
on foot. The powerful blast killed the attorney general
instantly, but his driver and bodyguard survived. iim

Immediately after the attack, an obscure urban commando
group calling itself the "Gerardo Barrios Civic Force"
telephoned a San Salvador radio station and claimed
responsibility for the slaying. The January 10, 1990
edition of Processo, a weekly publication of the Jesuit-run
Central American University, stated in an editorial that
the Armed Forces of Liberation (FAL) had claimed

onsibilit oy Garcia's assassination.

On February 2, 1992, ERP leader Joaquin Villalobos and his
deputy Ana Guadalupe discussed aa
"mistakes" made in urban terror tactics, including the wave
of civilian killings launched by the FMLN high command in

the late 1980s. Among the victims of that campaign listed
by the guerri eader was Atto al Garcia.

June 9, 1989. Jose Antonio Rodriquez Porth, having served as
Minister of the Presidency for eight days, was assassinated in
front of his home in San Salvador. Three to four men using
automatic rifles killed Rodriguez, his driver, and his
orderly. @R

The FMLN was accused of the crime, but did not respond for
several] days; when it did, the organization pledged an
investigation to determine if any of its combatants had
been involved. In a radio communique on June 15, 1989, the
FMLN General Command denied responsibility for the slaying
and claimed that it had no reason to commit such an act.

Elements of the PRTC Mardoqueo Cruz Urban Commandos unit
were responsible for the slaying, which was approved in
advance by PRTC leader Francisco Jovel Urquilla, alias
“Roberto Roca." He ordered the unit not to claim
responsibility for the assassination, because it had not
been authorized by the FMLN high command. FMLN leaders,

9

however, were intormed ob the frees invelvement after the
fact. The unit responsible for the slaylng worked under
Alvarado Osarlio, a1las “Jose

the direction af Miguel Ange}
Juan Obregon" and Gerardo Jacinto Melgar, alias "Wilbur
Mendoza," both members of the PRTC central] committee.

During a press conference on October 24, 1989 President
Cristiani stated. that according to ballistic experts, the
weapons used to kill Roadruguez Porth were the same as those
use j "Miquel Castellanas."

alias "Roberto" was charged with
ous others

Pablo Salvador Carcamo,
the murder of Edgar Chacon,
including Rodriguez Porth.

or "Roberto," was a former FAL
rested by Treasur Police in

1989.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo,
political commander who was ar

San Salvador On December 30,

On February 2, 1992 ERP: leader Joaquin Villalobos and his

deputy Ana Guadalupe Martinez discussed
"mistakes" smade in urban terror tactics. One
wale wave of civilian killings launched by the FMLN high
command in the late 1980s. Among the victims listed by the
verrilla leaders was Jose Antonio Rodriguez Porth.

July 19, 1989. Guillermo Payes Interiane, rightwing political

analyst and member of Edgar Chacon's conservative think-tank,

the International Relations Institute, was shot in the back,

arm, and neck as he entered a business establishment in San

Salvador; he died on August 21, 1989. Payes Was president of
t

the Association of Salvadoran professionals and

The FMLN publicly denied responsibility for the murder of

Payes, blaming it, along with the deaths of Chacon and
Rodriguez, on a power struggle within the ARENA party. | |

During a meeting vith aa 3 February 2,
1992 ERP leader Joaquin alobos listed Guillermo Payes

as one of the victims of the campaign of civilian killings
launched by the FMLN command in 1989.

During a press conference on December 9, 1989 President
Cristiani implicated "Jaime," an FPL urban commando
operating from the University of El Salvador in Chacon's
murder. Cristiani stated that according to ballistic

10

tests, a .45 caliber pistol used by Wlagme" to sheot
Francisco Guerrero sa be seg to murder Chacon and
Payes.

On July 23, 1989 Salvadoran police arrested suspected FMLN
member Adolfo Aquilar and charged him with the murders of
Gabriel Payes and Edgar Chacon. As of January 1992, his
case was under consideration by the 6th Criminal Court of
San Salvador. Qype,

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, alias "Roberto," was charged with
the murder of Payes, among tte others. eimnanenatbit as

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, or "Roberto," was identified as a
former FAL political commander who was arrested by Treasury
Police in S$ vador on December 30

June 30, 1989. Edgar Chacon, rightwing intellectual, politi-
cal analyst, and President of the conservative International
Relations Institute, was slain by gunfire while his auto was
stopped in traffic at a San Salvador intersection. The same
day the FMLN issued a communique denying responsibility for
the attack, claiming that Chacon died as the result of a "war"
among rightist groups "with the participation of the CIA."

But President Alfredo Cristiani blamed the FMLN guerrillas for
the murder.

On July 25, 1989 during a meeting in Mexico between FARN
leader Ferman Cienfuegos and former U.S. Ambassador to
El Salvador Robert White, Cienfuegos admitted FMLN
responsibility for a number of- killings of prominent
civilians but jed that the FMLN had killed Chacon.

During a discussion with as
eau = February 21, 1990, Hec , @ leader of
e le

st Popular Social Movement (MPSC) stated that
there were increasing indications that the FMLN--
specifically urban units of the PCES--had killed "Chachi"

Guerrero and most likel a killed Ro Porth and
coe Chacon.

On February 2, 1992 ERP leader Joaquin Villalobos and his
deputy Ana Guadalupe Martinez discussed with
cee ca made in urban terror tactics,

ng the wave of civilian killings launched by the

FMLN high command in the late 1980s. Among the victims of
the campaign listed by the guerrilla leaders was Edgar

11

During a press conference on December 4, 1989 President
Cristiani implicated "Jaime," an FPL urban commando
operating from the University of El Salvador in Chacon's
murder. Cristiani stated that according to ballistic
tests, a .45 caliber pistol used by "Jaime" to shoot
Francisco Guerrero also had been used to murder Chacon and
Payes.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, alias "Roberta," was charged with

the murder of Chacon, as well as numerous others, including
Miguel Castellanos, Peccorini, Payes Rodrigue orth
and "Chachi" Guerrero.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo or "Roberto" was identified as a
former FAL political commander who was arrested by Treasury
Police in San Salvador on December 30, 1989.

On July 23, 1989 Salvadoran police arrested suspected FMLN
member Adolfo Aguilar ’and charged him with the murders of
Gabriel Payes and Edgar Chacon. As of January 1992,
Aguilar's case was under consideration by the 6th Criminal
Court of San Salvador.

November 28, 1989. Francisco Jose "Chachi" Guerrero, a former
foreign minister and former President of the Salvadoran
Supreme Court, was machine-gunned in his car by FMLN urban
commandos in a yellow Volkswagen at a San Salvador
intersection; he died later that day. Guerrero's security men
killed one of the two assailants and wounded and captured the
other. The government communique issued on the same day
accused the FMLN of the crime. An FMLN spokesman in Costa
Rica, rejected the accusation on November 28 and announced
that the leaderahip of the FMLN was preparing an official
communique on Guerrero's death. The wounded assailant, Cesar
Ernesto Erazo Cruz, a member of the FPL, confess

participating in Guerrero's sla

Cesar Erazo was brought to trial in the 6th Criminal Court
of San Salvador where, on July 21, 1992, he was acquitted
of the murder of Guerrero. £Erazo still faces a charge in

connection with his escape from prison was yeleased on
aes on August 13, 1992.

itiemaca

During a <2iscussion with
on February 21, 1 ; Or Silva, a leader c:
the leftist Popular Socia] Movement stated that there were

increasing indications that the FMLN--specitically urban
units of the PCES--had killed Guerrero.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, alias "Roberto," was charged with
the murder of Guerrero, as well as several others.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, or "Roberto," was identified as a
former FAL politica] commander who was arrested by Treasury
Police in San Salvador on December 30, 1989.

On February 2, 1992, ERP leader Joaquin Villalobos and his

deputy Ana Guadalupe Martinez discussed QE
meee "mistakes" made in urban terror tactics,
ncluding the wave of civilian killings launched by the

FMLN high command in the late 1980s. Among the victims of
the campaign listed by the guerrilla leade was Francisco
Jose Guerre

III. OTHER CIVILIAN VICTIMS OF FMLN VIOLENCE
July, 1984. Miquel Portillo was reportedly killed in

Quetzaltepeque, La Libertad Department, by the Clara Elizabeth
Ramirez _ of the FPL. ee

October 26, 1984. Three men claiming to be members of the FPL
shot Raul Melendez Aquino, the 62-year-old supervisor of
securfty guards at the U.S. Embassy as he walked near the

San Salvador Maternit ospital.

November 17, 1984. Santiago Carcamo Seqovia, the supervisor
of the mobile vehicle patrol for the US Embassy, was shot to
death. The Clara Elizabeth Ramirez Front of the FPL claimed
responsibility.

November, 1984. Marco A. Navarro, a guard at the Ministry of
Justice in San Salvador, was shot to death by the Clara
Elizabeth Ramirez Front of the FPL.

Q j , a driver

November 12, 1987. ic
for the US Defense Attache's office, was abducted while

retueling an Embassy vehicle In San salvador. He was kiliec
by five bullets fired into his head and back. The FMLN
claimed responsibility.

December 12, 1987, FMLN guerrillas trapped seven Usulutan
coffee workers, including women and children, in a storage
building and raked the doors with machine-gun fire while

wom the o ~ aon ea them alive.

May 22, 1989. FMLN guerrillas ambushed a civilian van
carrying 15 people on the Santa Ana highway near Tacachico.
The guerrillas exploded two mines on the road and then
machine~-gunned the vehicle, killing eight persons, including
two children. In a broadcast on Radio Venceremos the FMLN
admitted responsibility and deplored the loss of civilian

October 17, 1989. Maria Isabe] Casanova Porras, the 23-year-
old daughter of retired Colonel Edgardo Casanova Vejar, was
machine-gunned to death mear her home in Santa Tecla. The
university student was driving unaccompanied to a local gym
when urban commandos using AK-47s attacked her car. An
official government communique issued on the same day blamed
the FMLN for the assassination. Initially, the FMLN Modesto
Ramirez Urban Commandos claimed responsibility in a telephone
call to a local radio station, but three hours later the FMLN
General Command denied responsibility, noting that "it is not
ae policy of the FMLN to kill the relatives of military
chiefs".

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, alias-—"Roberto" was charged with
thé murder of Casanova, as well as several others.

Pablo Salvador Carcamo, or "Roberto," was identified as a
former FAL political commander who was arrested by Treasury
Police in §& ecember 30 989.

January 25, 1990. An FMLN urban commando squad attacked the
San Salvador residence of president sor Saul Suster
eres two of his ee

March 23, 1990. Otto Valdemar sorte, the son-in-law of Air
Force Commander General Rafael Villamariona, was shot and
seriously wounded as he left his home. The 25-year-old Serto

died of the wou 9, 1990. The
responsibility.

Eas]

June 18, 1990. Berta Flores Beltran and Maria Elena Romero
were killed when alleged FMLN extremists opened fire with
AK-47s on a house in Mejicanos.

IV. KIDNAPPING OF THE PRESIDENT'S DAUGHTER

September 10, 1985. Ines Guadalupe Duarte Duran, the eldest
daughter of then President Jose Napoleon Duarte and a 35-year-old
mother of three, was abducted by a heavily armed group of men as
she arrived for classes at the University of New El Salvador.

Her companion, 23-year-old Ana Cecilia Villeda Sosa was also
kidnapped. The operation left Duarte's driver dead and her
security guard seriously injured.

Three days after the abduction, Duarte's kidnappers contacted
government officials and began probing their willingness to
exchange captured FMLN leadf@rs for Duarte. With a motive for the
abduction established, suspicions were immediately cast on the
FAL faction. Government security forces had recently captured
the second highest ranking FAL leader, deputy secretary general
Americo Mauro Araujo Ramirez, alias "Comandante Hugo" and FAL
commander Hector Antonio Acevedo Moreno, alias "Octavio
Martinez." Fearing that ongoing negotiations with the government
might be imperiled by the abduction, the FMLN did not publicly
claim responsibility. Nevertheless, several weeks after the
kidnapping, the FMLN informed key Latin_American and European
leaders that it had kidnapped Duarte. a

On October 24, 1985 after 44 days of captivity, Duarte and
Villeda were released in exchange for "Comandante Hugo," "Octavio
Martinez," PRTC leader alias "Nidia Diaz," 22 other insurgents
held in prison, and a promise of safe conduct for 101 injured

Duarte's recollection of events confirmed the involvement of the
FAL in the abduction. Based on information provided by Duarte
after her release, it appeared that she had been held in Cerro
Los Lirios, a FAL stronghold on the southern slopes of the
Guazapa Volcano. A 35- to 40-member FMLN unit commanded by
Lieutenant alias "Junior," second in command of a FAL special
forces detachment known as U-24, served as Duarte's jailers.

was reportedly killed in a firefight on April 23, 1986.

15
SECRET

According to Duarte, her captors also spoke of "Lucio" as one of
their leaders. Dagoberto Sosa, alias "Lucio Martinez" was FAL
chief of staff. When Duarte and Villeda were released on
October 24, he was present on behalf of the FMLN.

V. INDISCRIMINATE USE OF IMPROVISED WEAPONS

The FMLN developed three types of improvised indirect fire
weapons to launch explosive charges at targets several hundred
meters away. The first, commonly known as mortero, was fashioned
from steel pipes and launched a 2-kilogram charge. The mortars
were sometimes launched from an abandoned vehicle rigged with
explosives that would detonate after the mortars had been fired.
A second weapon, the rampa, was a catapult-type system that
launched a 6-kilogram charge. The third and most destructive

device, the tepezcuintle, was manufactured fro ropane gas
mouse and scianes a anal i

Because these improvised devices were inaccurate or
indiscriminate, they often missed their military targets and
exploded in civilian areas.

January 16 and February 21, 1989. FMLN guerrillas attacked
the headquarters of Military Detachment-Engineers in

San Salvador, employing yampas in both attacks. Neither of
these attacks caused civilian casualties, but eight homes were
destroyed and 13 others seriously damaged. In Radio

Venceremos claimed responsibilit
attacks.

for both

February 16, 1989. FMLN guerrillas launched five rampa
charges at the 6th Brigade Headquarters in Usulutan
Department. Three of the five charges exploded outside the
compound, seriously wounding three civilians--including a
small girl, destroying one civilian house, and damaging
several others; there was no damage to or injury in the

Venceremos broadcast.

March 15, 1989. FMLN forces attacked Military Detachment-1
installations in Chalatenango city, using rampas and small
arms. Several charges missed their targets and fell on
civilian homes around the installation, wounding one child and
damaging five houses. In a Radio Venceremos broadcast the
FMLN Modesto Ramirez Central Front claimed responsibility for
the attack.

October 30, 1989. FMLN urban commandos attacked the Joint
General Staff headquarters in San Salvador with homemade
mortars, killing one civilian and wounding four others. All
of the rounds missed the military compound and fell among
civilians in a heavily travelled area of the capita... One
round exploded in a Texaco gas station, damaging two cars and
the station. Two rounds landed on a Chevron gas station,
killing the attendant and wounding one child. Six other
rounds damaged a restaurant, a military recreation center, and
a barber shop. There were no military casualties. In a Radio
Venceremos broadcast the FMLN's Modesto Ramirez Central Front
took credit for the assault.

November 11, 1989. FMLN urban commandos fired homemade
mortars at the National Guard General Headquarters. Three
soldiers weré wounded when one round fell inside the
installation. Five other rounds exploded outside the
garrison, one killing two children in their home. Security

forces subsequently disman
rounds ked ne j

tled a car bomb with six mortar
: tion.

October 17, 1990, FMLN guerrillas attacked the Salvadoran Air
Force base at Illopango, using at least 18 tepezcuintles and
damaging a number of aircraft and facilities, as well as a
foster home for young girls. Ina "war bulletin" broadcast
over Radio Venceremos, the Modesto Ramirez Central Front

October 23, 1990. FMLN guerrillas fired two tepezcuintlesat
the Salvadoran Joint General Staff Headquarters in San
Salvador. Both projectiles missed their target: one landed in
a parking lot, and the other hit a private home, killing an

eight-year-old and a ]7-year-old boy, and wounding three
adults.

March 11, 1986. Two car bombs exploded in the commercial
district of Zona Rosa in the capital, injuring two civilians,
destroying three cars and damaging eight others, and breaking
windows in commercial buildings. Two days later, in a Radio
Venceremos broadcast FLMN urban commandos were congratulated
for the assault. bombs.

October 18, 1988. Two car bombs were detonated simultaneously
in the Escalon subdivision of San Salvador, injuring 11
civilians, damaging 21 commercial establishments, and
destroying three vehicles. Two additional car bombs were

17

discovered and deactivated hy security frorces that evening.
In a communique issued on October 14, a guerrilla group called

_ “Jose Manuel Arce Commandos" took credit for the attack.

November 1, 1988. The FMLN conducted a rampa attack against
the National Guard Headquarters in the capital, killing four
soldiers, wounding 50 others, and causing considerable damage
to the installation. In addition one round fell on a house,
and several houses in the neighborhood were damaged when the
vehicles carrying the rampas exploded. Four civilians were
killed, including one child. The FMLN Modesto Ramirez Central
Front, through a Radio Venceremos broadcast, claimed
responsibility.

December 23, 1988. The FMLN attacked the Ministry of Defense
compound and the Joint General Staff Headquarters in San
Salvador with three rampasg, killing one civilian employee and
wounding one Salvadoran Army officer and four other civilian
employees and causing considerable structural damage inside
the compound. Two secondary explosions occurred as a result
of bombs set in two pickup trucks that held the rampas,
killing two civilians and wounding 45 others, mostly women and
children. One truck was parked next to a government health
station, which was destroyed by the explosion. The FMLN
General Command, through Radio Venceremos "war reports,"

the attack to its urban commandos.

January 20, 1989. FMLN guerrillas launched two rampas from
pickup trucks at the Treasury Police garrison in the capital.
Both charges exploded inside the compound, killing one
policeman and wounding two others. The two trucks then
exploded, killing one civilian and wounding a dozen others.
At least 20 civilian homes and other buildings also were

damaged. The FMLN claimed responsib or the attack ina
Radio Venceremos broadcast.

February 21, 1989. FMLN guerrillas fired rampas at the lst
Brigade Headquarters, killing two civilians and wounding four
others when the projectiles fell short and exploded in
civilian areas around the military installation. The two
trucks transporting the rampagsthen exploded, damaging or
destroying at least 15 civilian houses. The FMLN claimed

responsibility on Radio Venceremos. eee

April §, 1989. FMLN guerrillas launched three explosives from
a truck into the Artillery Brigade garrison at San Juan Opico,
La Libertad Department. There was little damage to the

military installation, but one civilian was injured when the

May 22, 1991. FMLN querrillas attacked ]st Brigade
Headquarters in San Salvador with rampas. The explosives
landed in a civilian area, killing two women and injuring a
young girl. The military installation suffered no damage or
casualties.

minate Use of Landmines and Booby Traps. Yd
Country Reports on Human Rights noted that e
1

as' use of unmarked landmines and booby traps was a major

cause of peasant deaths and maimings. Planted along farm roads
and paths, around electric poles downed by the guerrillas, under
railroad tracks, near water sources, in farmlands, and on coffee
plantations, these mines killed 52 civilians in 1988, 36 in the

VI. THE FMLN'S WAR AGAINST THE SALVADORAN ECONOMY (1979-1990)

The 12-year-long Salvadoran conflict caused more than $2 billion
in losses,

The losses included direct and indirect costs (lost
production and sales), damage to agriculture, industry, and
commerce, and material damage to infrastructure, mass transport,
and residential property. The report also estimates the
resources of business firms and the government that were diverted
to provide security against FMLN attacks. (U)

The Embassy noted that the estimate was conservative, since it
did not attempt to quantify such factors as capital flight,
foregone foreign and domestic investment, replacement cost of
lost equipment, and revenue losses caused by the disruption of
public sector untility services. w

Infrastructure. A key component of FMLN strategy was a cam-
paign against the country's basic infrastructure. In March
1990, however, the FMLN pledged to halt attacks against
civilian economic targets. Disruptions of the communications
network declined significantly, from $4.2 million in 1989 to
$0.5 million in 1990, though FMLN sabotage teams continued
occasionally to attack telephone boxes and local and district
offices of the talephone company. Direct damage to other
state-owned infrastructure, such as the water system, ports,
bridges, and railroads also declined, from $1.4 million in
1989 to $0.2 million in 1990. But FMLN forbearance did not

extend to the electric puwer system. In luso the qguerrilias
executed more than 1,000 bombing attacks on the electric power
grid, causing $6 million in damage and keeping most primary
transmission lines operating at 15-20 percent below capacity.
The frequent power outages caused serious interruptions to
potable water services in large areas of the country.

Agriculture. The war was waged primarily in the countryside,
and the FMLN harrassed agriculture enterprises unceasingly.
Early in the war FMLN assaults resulted in massive destruction
of physical plant and equipment (mills, storage silos, etc.)
and crops of farms owned by the elite. Cotton production was
particularly hard hit owing to the ease with which harvested
cotton can be burned and the industry's concentration in the
eastern--and most conflictive--third of the country. The

estimated direct damage to E] Salvador's principal
export crops in the 1990 crop year at $6 million. As the
government's agrarian reform program moved into high gear in
the 1980s, FMLN incursions spread to small, medium, and
cooperative farms. In these attacks the FMLN indiscriminately
burned crops, destroyed farm equipment, mined fields, and
gunned down livestock, particularly cattle.

Farmers also faced indirgct losses as combat halted
harvesting, FMLN roadblotks prevented farmers from getting
their produce to market, and sabotage of the power grid
hampered production in cotton gins and coffee and sugar mills.
The war forced thousands of farm families to flee in search of
security. Many small landowners (campesinos) fled to San
Salvador; unable to find jobs, this migrant underclass put
further strains on the city's limited services.

DAMAGE TO THE SALVADORAN ECONOMY: 1979-1990
(millions of US dollars)

1989 1990 1979-90
Infrastructure? 19.0 9.8 213
Industry & Commerce? 73.5 51.0 308
Agroindustry® 40.0 42.0 744
Public Transport? 4.6 1.0 28
Residential Housing 8.5 1.5 42
& Personal Property®

Security Costsf 46.0 20.0 748

191.6 125.3 2083

wee

a. Se ost imate of direct property damage derived from data
Supplied by El Salvador’s National Electric Company (CEL),

National Telephone co. (ANTEL), Port Authority (CEPA),
Ministry of Planning, and National Water Utility (ANDA).

b. Includes Qi estimate of foregone production and sales
losses due to war-related business closures, electric system
sabotage, as well as direct material damage. Some data
derived from estimates of private sector associations and from

C. QM estimates include the value ef lost agricultural
production, as well as physical destruction of crops and
property. Some data derived from National Coffee Council
(CSC) and National cotton Cooperative (COPAL).

d. a= estimate based on Salvadoran govern, and National
Association of Bus Owners data, and qi

e. a. estimate using Ministry of Planning and Chamber of
Construction approximations ond
f. Estimate based on PY survey conducted in 1991.

Commerce and Industry. Direct dumage to this sector amounted
to about $18 miilion In 1989 and $9 million in 1990.
Businesses were damaged more heavily by indirect losses, such
aS Sanotage-induced slowdowns In activity and power outages.
The estimated indirect Josses at $46 million in 1989
and 342 million in J990. =

Public Transport. Despite the FMLN's decade-long attempt to
Cripple the economy by shutting down the mass transport system
uSing such tactics as Massive bus burnings, the system did not
collapse. In March 19909 the guerrillas announced that they
would no longer attack commuter buses. Guerrillas burned
several dozen buses in 1990, causing damage estimated at $0.5
million, much less than previous years. GR

Residential and personal Property: The FMLN's inability or
unwillingness to hold urban areas and rural townships mini-
mized destruction of homes and other personal property. The
urban offensive in November 1989, however, wrought unprece-
dented damage to residential areas; 6,200 housing units were
damaged or destroyed at a cost of $9 million. In 1990, combat
damage to homes returned to the normal level of about $1
Million. Destruction of personal vehicles in firefights,
terrorist ambushes, and bombings grew sharply at the end of
the decade; in 1989 an estimated 175 autos were damaged or
destroyed at a cost of $875,000. And in 1990 225 utos were
damaged or destroyed at cost of about $500,000. g

Indirect Private and Public Security Costs. The need to take
security measures to Protect against FMLN attacks on public
and private property was a significant cost to business and
the government. such expenses included the maintenance of
guard personnel, acquiring weapons, security-related
construction, and terrorist insurance payments. —
estimated that security related expenditures dropped from $46
million in 1989 to $20 million in 1990.
