Gary Powers TextT on Indictment-soviet Gov't Ordered U-2 Shot Down)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022361, dated 3 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022361).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

-Rarposes, and te this end canipped for aerial phowngee

BE 41 - USSR IWPEANATIOUAL AFFAIRS

fie ae ora
fag. 19, 130

T POWERS

mst Francig¢ G.

doe
PASTE.

ESF /ER Ty
througnout
compiiation of

eae foe tee

The

ay Soviet

Savies

Piane's sou! indugty dk Uaho sta
oh jeotives he Soviet taion. Throughout the encire Tlighs, tae

7

aitivade at which
te left ac doubt
Tea

the Usher

plane rempinad at an altitude of 20,00 meters, an
no Thights are made. oy any civilian planes. The Ga
that this was a deliberate incursion into the
with hostile aims.

In View of this, the Soviet Government ordered the plane shoz down.

In fulfillmest of tais order, 2 soviet antiais defense unit hrougit

the plane down with a rocket on the very first shot. chis vas at

Q855 hours, Moscow time, wha“the plane was at an altimade oF 20,000

meters in the area of Gverdlavsk; that is, over 2,000 kilomecers from

at which tt crossed the frontier of she Sovieh Union. The

pilot of the plane baLied quteand was desaimea. The first interrogation

encehlished that he was Francis, Gary Fowers, 4 citisen of the.
; ee ohe 2, po. 29-85: VoL. @, pe t: Vol. 7, B-

Oey

MES lm AIRG

Lith ts at great siivinudes.,

equi Apr,

reconnaissance fram preat neiviats. Found among the wr aie Ware

undeveloped filma of fovier airflelas and other dmorbtant military
and industr. Ss in the Seviet Union. Moreuver,
tape wae fond with a erling of the stamals of certain
stations. (Vol. 1, pp. 49-5@, 1RA-L46, 227, 228, 242-253) ;

Approved for Release
Date L2.SEP_ 1095 ome

. ji | | ae

SL APFARRY

~ OB uD .

Wr de
Aa EE

camrude Nw. Korushthey, chaimman ef the 4
Mockeed this gangstor fiiget in hia renart te tne
VSSE Supreme Soviet on May oy

Lapartent eaduitied that same
WSSR by ao Awericen plane was le

stig o3
in

4

been anc cal Q urproameditar
Bne, Ob MA;
@ upper Lay ort
tier, und surayed off course because of a failure

2id further that the pilot haa probebiy lost congelous-
toe plans anntinued on augtemetde pilot ard ascddenieliy

# -

3 air

Space of tne Soviet Union, This version was

eontirnei on
Acroniutios z
tue place and which, according to the statement, had veen uc
svudy vind gusts and atmospherin conditions at high altitude

lly controlled

aq ta

8, Accord-
ing to NAGA, a search for the missing U-2 plane had been charted in

the area of Lake Yan in Turkey.

ioe Administration, which alles

The sate version was givea in uhe note of the U,3. RBebassy in Mosecw
Seilvered to the USSR Ministry of Foreign Atfalrs on way 6.

Mm May 7, address

ing the US rleb, tne head of the
Oa . a:

SEU ET hy fulstay af this version and
BLE, Gonoreze ects which proved beyond a doubt the
perfidious, and ganasterlike natura of the violatioc

ky The LT ond ales the iotellivence parnosas
t dole with the

: elementary requirements
Phat el eterns cea el nope) ops SS ust week Soares) ances :

Atuas unes, toe Ebate wepiab, anrusrel oy the facts etbad by
Comrade N.S, Korushehv, had to aimlt in e new statement on May 7
the intelligence nature of tho fligh«e, toting, however, that “ineoTar
as the Washingteor sawthorities are Seared, Chere was no sutheardia-
tion ter any such flights as deserlsed by My Eheashen re

pee

- ce | ie a) ere pera ‘ .

Te

TIT BALAT TON b

Ae. LG, 2

Li degt upen the quedtion of the U.5. 6

5 ove iam

Ji shis steiesent st
dire. samplication in ths tracsen oot of ue the Bova
Waid . Gcubth ot this scare were Glepeiiad by vhe Stgvedsht mote

ty UVB. Boersvery of State Herter on Moy } an the name oF

GOvGgrts

: OLE.

a2 ter cn his ototamsnt, rede ls
fy) ered Ge ‘ wuat the National 5
a ae ident Risenhowe oe nod ante effect since ce ang. vt
hb. som ation dirvetives to carry suv duvelitgence Ew Ste O88
agains’ Sovier Unieou. Uncer a direetives, @8 avtea by Herter,
progyams bed been developed 2 eud pot lave tg for the
ine. aaa by Amerioga recon: ésauce girs Sha airspece oi She
USS! ‘
Marter'é gtntesent wos cunftmmed on May 2h o, Pres.dens Biswohiwer

an var tao ¢

bimsvit, wne 818y panies that £1 ERGs by Auerican plo
Soviet Union had ceen snd remained the “ea Leulated paliey of t

Suate*. oe
r

h @he some thang We sa.d by tue U.S. Guvertmnen
Soviet Government un May Le.

2

on by V

Espyec. ily Praten one ahnaae igas
the eyyieai St

Hixen ov Moy 25, in which he not
bhag American Fights over tke *

@nd vicleting standards of inter rations) law--but wo at

Hixon dve.ared thot tae United Staies ned
eaplonaie, and sought ty justify the obvious lie iu the Mey 5
wi the State pou rtnedl aboot. the "neteorslagivcl resdcre a
ML

coniuetud vy tha U-f plane. Ta uther words, he was upkols:
rue.

U.S, “right to espicnige.

a
These gta ae Oy the seyarmiary o

whe 3 Xa
Fruside uf e United. Srous ware paler
acti. ies conducted by the United Gtatea with regares to the
Union over @ dumcer wT years, and eupresded Im repuGtec iseurs

oieopes. vl the (sak tor atts Lalgaiay

Amar.lens ,ibtes 4nuG uf

Tus, The Govermgent ot ta. United Suites fh01Gkay pres e oe
time o ,olduy Whch c2u omay be Sublowed wnad counvrles ora a4
During Eiseunower'a tenure 45 pres. dant of the United States,

beginning in January 1953, tee Soviet Yaiva mide Seavert] proce

nelewioued U.S, policy--statene ate ynde sores at Herter aad His
even further.

the United

mote te tbe

igg #8c8 buetis

ehoOMen

Su-det Untied were

enhewer ,

imag yied
he ESTs de
Soviet

iuns by

BET PUSS S|

ve eT

cnat is,
5iB to whe
is

Government of the United States agginst incursions of Amerjaan phones

within the boundaries of the UBSaR.

2 -

ee ey

. cs ed ee
~ Ee ah TEEN THOERHATIONAL ArRATNS
auce LO, 1ot2

2 + “ se - hs 5 4 7
In assesniag these violations, the Soviet Government pointed cut thet
' a 2 st 7 -oasd 7 a 3 A . tr ef .
tkese Violations of the frontiers of the Bovieb Union py American
ee

Protesting resolutely egainst.puch acts, the Government of the WAGE

strnsoed renestedly in its notes to the U.3. Gevermmens than these
tong "are a groas violation of the elementary standards of internztione

lew" (note of Sept. &, LOS4--TAIS), and consti

by certain 5. circles aimed at aggraratin,

Soviet Union and the United States.” (Nota of July 10, 1953~-TASS) «

ute "neencditated actions

ieations between the

4
ara
©.

In reply to all these notes, the U.0. Government Limite. itself te
formal answers. The repeated intrusions by American planes vithin the
ses of the Seviet Unien are a flazsrant violation of the univergaliy

contines
reengnised principle of international Lew establishing fula and exclusive
sogsreionty of every state over the airspace above its territery. This.

principle was recognized in the nuitiparcite Paris convention on the
remvation of aie navigation, Got. Li, LoL, noted din the Eevane sonvenvicn
of 1$24 concluded by a number of American atetes, and veaffirmed in

Ayt. 1 of the convention on international civil aviation, concluded in

Ghise;o on Dec. 7, 19b4.

The save principle also found expression in the netionsi Legislation of
various countries, including the Soviet Union and the United States (She
air commerce act of 1905 and the civil aeronautics act of 1935--TASS).

Art. l of the air code of the USSR, of 1935, also establishes that "the
USSR exercises full and exclusive aovereignty over the airspace of the
USSR. This principle of sovereignty is sacred and dmiutable in
international relations. ta!

Under these conditions the stabenents of President Eisenhower, Vice

act Bs .
ape ued

President MWixon, and Secretary Uerter, attempting to Justity viclations
£ USSR savereignty by American aivcrait and elevating such violations
to a principle of state policy, cannot be regarded as other than an open

declaration of “ne vefasal of bhe U.0. Goverment to ccuply with
fundanental uaiversally recognised gomderds of international lav,
without the obsecvance of which normal relations bewucen atetes are

impagsible,

The repeated intrusions of American aircraft into the airspace of the
USSR, specifically the May 1 U-2 Flight, constitute a gross violation
of the sovereignty of the USSR and an act of aggression which tranples
upon standards of international lew end the high principies of the U.N.
Chester, Wiich also bears the signature of the Unitad Gtates.

7 TOE oe hs
“ae Pat ee : t ia a o °
ee ham 3 as. :

PaaniveR ie aa dst

remo ere oF gS ¥ a oa

ters

ser ai

YOCe wh
Sitaey alreratt

Am

peace 2508 Sins

Ase ay

represent: an setia

when -sricin at
7 = aa ot
x ™. =

arm hey a Me
RSA SO aaa vey

ake + f,
Su UAET

pet owe Jags
TOL G STE

‘y> tha Uaated Btebes on hay

the mosh grave conrequences

lesdens O20

allege ; y
iies, rove the feisivy

ee 17 rE er a “ Pram omy

Bo. AY tREScus, taken Pram

Defense Derarhuant ant ty
"

heea Gladys. 4&9 =)
wes caries the inst
intion “Deparkient

(Yoo. L, Be G3 Vol. t,

Sates ot fuerion.

Povers wepiies

rn eal

was aiploved ss 2 U.S. ty

Shar I cerved in tie US, Air Fores as 2 eiviliss.'
“4

Asked furbhcr ber the orgaciestion for wirteh be womsed should be

"mes ig ¢ kisd of

vemorpdedq-miibtary or sivil--Fewers andds Cn

tectiusbicn cf cividian amt ott sary Servite; whi this is
soled by nate “Dotochoent LGR"? (VoR., @, pe 2}
Shek agp 4050 Bhe chief of waail of
= vigite’ the Incirlivn auchese

Ta ”
« DALES
yeas oy YT? OG a 3

aayLils base, Pouens s7ia tho dung
weg visited owies by General 2y LOSE y

acdelix bec
of U.Gs air forces im Eurcpe, and by olney Amovloan geuercis.

rol. by pp. 24-214) Tb bas thus teen establiched teas she U-£

1.6, Air Fores.

) : Bos

- BB YS + USSR CWEREUATIONSL SPRATSS
kar. 1a, 1960
“+, 1, 1460

othe #Lenenis

ws py

2
a Peer REIgte one
3.

5 foe
By cane

23 8 BOSitiy.s
Ley:

Psonulates

epeante yt

Soeroeaee af Suave John

i

ct
as
froee
r

ca

netecvent policy, amd 4

ag Lave as dely 1935 Vice t
wrsiveu tne brink of war 59
ane cl the supreme priccizl

4en Ountries
Agersssive aoe and
che cane 7
aver 3ovis ee Ua O.greesiy
may 2.

ne ULE. Government have brought ebout the breakdewn
dn py and complicated the invern ational
gitvation. The U.2. Government. hes drawn into the realization cf its

angressive policy & nuwber of states bordering of the Soviet Union,

wnieh have allowed their territories to te used for Américen aictary
ive actions ageinst

bases and consequently are accomplices in aggress
UBor« ,

he recktiess acticns
2? the sumnit a

Tt bac teen esbabliuhs. oy the investigation taat the U-2 intrishon could
ra taken place without toe use of ailitary airbases in stazes ner
speciric. Saly in Turkey, pakisten, and Horvey, since
prevented it from aperaviag Prom

Scivet Union,
the maim fangs of the LechkHecd Y-2

eztaolished that the reconnealesenc cetackment 20-10, in which
wl, waco bagel ab whe dmeciean~Pursieh Tnedriik vee Hits
wnat of Colones Shelton, of the U.5. Ad > Forae.

Plows Prev fneirilk $¢ the Peshavar military cee @ in, Pakisten,
mo yiolation of th:

4% thew to the Saview Unien. Tiida involves |

Lh
scven yo of Afybanistan, over which the U-@ plane Tlev unlenouliy,
‘without the knowledse of Afghen antherities.

se OO as

aka

~ BE YT + USCR IEREATIGUAL aFOAIRG
Aug. 16, 20

ct y

hod weet recerve airfield
“Ag pegerve &

ky atwolishead that accordims to lie sosigament, fo
after ending ‘is flight, was to land at the Bodos military airbase in
Norway, whieh ned bee eady used by the LO-LG intelligence detackuent
on vrevious oceasions. These

testimony given by Fevers, hi ,aidip, and other evidence. (Vol. 2,
m. 9, 28, 130, 196-196, 304; Vol. 6. fe 2S}

Wyong circumstances were established from the

to Fowere envisaged the
: er gcGned a5 well, Gn this
Lege ‘nh ease of too Little tuel to- fly to Murmansk as blamed,
T could turn Left before reaching Kendsigesha and fly vie Finland to
Bodoe," (Vol. 2, p. abl)

Wt =

The instrucsions given tc Fowars envisaged the poessibllisy of land
vy, Sb atr“ields in Pinlasd or Sweden. Fowers said on this
D

as ry, S
mecter: "Phe word 'Sodenkyla' written along the green 1i
flight map meens that J could lend at Sodunkyla airfiels in Flolead.
Bowever, Colonel Shelton worned me that this girtield is bad and that

T should use i+ oly in an emergency, but that it was better shea Landing
somewliere on Soviet territory. He alee said that Tt was best to land

in Swsden or Borway, vith the lavier being more desirable.” “Vole By

Pp. 271} Powers! testimony is confirmed by the marks Found on his

flight map. {Vol. 4, o. 25}

Thus, the investigation of the present case again eonfizaed that

American military beses in certain forelyn states are a danger te
B ; z ft

peace and to the security of nations.

aalisation of thedx aggressive policy of espionage egairst the’

For 2

Soviet Union, the U.S. Govermacat and the U,8, military command for

a tucber of yadrs fave togn oileating aod training the necessary person
nel. Ts was Zoe this purnose that the defendent in this cade, Prane ia
Geary Fowers, waa reoruniec.

Doring tne investigation Fowars testifiad that in 2950 be volunteersa
for tho U.S, Ais Perce, trained at en air foree school in Greoanvilie,
Mississippi, end leter at an airbase outside Fneenix, Arizona. Arter
graduation he served as a pilot at various U.S. milisary aiehbases wits
the rank of first lisutenent. (Vol. 3, pp. 109-213; Vol. 4, 3p. apehs)

apts ey

Wectae 2 Lk

LO, LEED

Te AtcL 1956, Dovere was rearuites
; oy apecind % Feu clones etwea Lens]

adraract. Vos 2, TR.

—?
recruited, tis tesks axph Bao)
1 Taowarg testificd: "They asié thet mv main nee Would be
a1oay USSR borders to piek up any info: ion T cenlda about
relia stations, aad any other infos on that could r+
piesed up. Lacy also said that there wight be other aucles im tae
future if erneyihide vent well." (Vol. 4,

Acter thet ng etmed 4 secret contract with CTA he
ard tine to agen onis cogparniion &

Riedie. wis pledges and divulging
tne aotds the american Litelligence service
criminal pPresecution and iamri sonmens for LO years or a “o, O00-dpliar
fing, or both. (Vol. @, pr. 92, 103 «1th }

Lvwers Was

rs

at Lor aneauh

be

stan AP on ee and Censoranip” of the an.
whieh stipulates auch punisrnent foe

afienses

powers testified that for the ft ulfilimens of espionage assi
of the American intelligence a Me received 2,500 deliars
although when he pashan’ in the U.S, Air Fores, he was paid 709
a mouth. (Vol. 2, pp- 2, 91)

After being anlicted by the Americas antelligence service he was sent
for special training to a desert A airfield in Nevada. At this fleld,
which also is part of an atomia tasting ground, be atudied ror two
a a ens elas ane ee ie leeinee oa U-2 plane and received
desigasd to inhercept raed

avg made hide

23 citude, een training fT lights over Culivomia, Taxae, and on

Lea

northern United Stetes.

eo? seoreey the apy pilots vn underwent temining ah

‘ BuVered unagr Fietitiaus ne Powers binmsalt
2 re sre under the neme a Palmer. @, pee DeteLie;y
Vol. 3, BR. ay Vol. 45) Pre 47-52

After special treining Powers was sent tothe AmericanrTurkisn
Incirlik military airbase near Adana, where the recomiaissance unit
ynown under the code namé of the 1O-10 detachment was tthatlone:

This detnehment--agsigned to conduct Intelligence vwark 18.
USSR oy sending syy planes inte Sov.eh alivapace te outlive s

on military. inaustr , and otaes risnt ims
sake of camcuttage waa offislall: Ainaved wo

yp. L3G, @L7; ¥ol. 4) pp. 52-50, 64,

a

ye:

fee:

says that

issued to me
The cartitiesie

v Lane aLons os

(Vol. 2, po. 5, ity “te,

Fowers stubed aboarh these MWe would tene off from IncirLit
aivfield and fly sastweri as far as the town of Van on th: sheres of
habe Van. Then we would proceed to Deheran, the capital of Trad
and eastvard to the south of the Caspian fea, Arter t au
Ylew to the wi, crosged the rranie an

G@ fartrer Papas frontier ss: ae 5
Hog far trom the eastern froutler of Fekisten ve jurne a
by the seme route to the Devt airfield. Later, we Feean

mehing a tuen carlier, efter penetrating Afghan te

Bac miles." (Vol. 3, a a)
that during bis
se as asides os:

Eovers! flight plan over the territory of the Soviet Uniin on
Mey 1, 1980, was carefully prepared in efvance. This is indicated
by the fect that this flight was antrusted preclaely to Powers, who
had femilarised himsel? with Bodea airport in Norway in 1955,

4s established by tbe investigation, oa Apts 27, 1960, Powers was
taken by U.S. Aiz Foreea tracsgert plane from the Ineirlik air force
basa to Peshawar alrport in Pakistan. Colonel Shelter and a party

of 20 maintenance men from the LO-10 detachnent arrived simultenecusly
qu Peshawar baer to pregare this.fiigin. The speclaily Sitted-out
Lockheed U-2 plane was elown there from Turkey by anotar. pilots

of the 10-10 aeeackinent. YWole &, Phe LTP: 197-195, Muh: Vola 3,

ea

Dre fT; Voks 4, poe Feet Cop 7

Sa tae night of May 1, 2960, Be and s half hours nefore taxc
Soyers was oréered by Shelton bo fly over the wereitery a2 the USES

from seuth to norsh at an altitude of 20,000 meters along the
following route: Fesnawur, the Arai Sea, Sverdlevsk, Kinov,
fechengel, and Murmansk, and to Land at Bodoe airport in Norway.

TOKAL APPTADSS

TRS

: - BE x - USSR IURHCTEOMAL APPATRS

Aug. iC, 1960

ws he ceceived Bevers, woen

ry, Was to éviveh on the special
wed Tor : ohography and re
» stations of aut anviairorats
vs Pover: We sugcbL ahwent son
vse Bnd te twa f je-et one of which & ut
a supposed oo be Lotated amd ar the ovher, € Mv
instellsacion.

Locitheed

9 oorataity comp! led these inazructiong. In nis
W-2 plane Powacs took off f

20,000 meters, flev over the terr
airspace oc the Govies Uni
ek not clpo_ pad The ray

dntouded into

tory cf Agghanietan, 3
for wore then @,O00 kilometers

ani the special aque

ert

eot Bowers fele normal and plotted w

In the mres of Sverdlovsk
05 5 (Vou. 2, apts Fs
SE-271, 272-874; You. 3,
25)
Asked abowt the tireumatances under which the Plane he tad aileted WAS
shet down, Povars testified: ".,,(gliipsis as transmit ted)? saite

4
unerpectediy T heard a kind of hollow explosion and saw an avunge flash.
The plane suddenly pitehed down, and I think its wings and tall svarted
falling off. Perhaps the plane wae nov hiv directiy aod

plece near the plane and it was bit by the burst and fragments. - -(ellipsis

ag transmittol) TI think it occurred at an altitude of some GC, 000
fees...(Bllinsis es transmitted) T was shot down acme 20-30 niles south
or qoutheast of Sverdlovek, t~that moment I was maintaining the ruute
indicated on my chart rather accusately...(e@llipsis ss transmitted) When
the plane began to fall I was Rresced +o the control ¢

mas Che eatapuat. To ouened the canons, wivastenad the
ext of the tlene through the top.” The parachute opens

pp.

(vel. 2, p. IG: Fol. 4,

giraps, end got

a autometicelly."

i)
wa
t
ie)
AA
-1

and expert conclusions

ee

@ nastinony of the accused, maverial avidence,
eave sheim Lbet the plane piloted oy Powers was equipped with & special
pLosive device permitting the pilet te blo it wp in case of a forced
landing in Soviet tereisery. Moreover, there was en explosive device
in ube tage recorder designed to teriater the signais of Soviet reder
grations. (Vol. i, p- 226; Vol. 2, pp. 22-210; Voi. 8, pp. 30, 05-92)

ome my
i‘ A . ve * a i .

+ 1
rou Pudhaver airport, climbed to an altitude of
i

the acplosion nook

enel and eculd nev

ry

0a Wo started wateming where ne would land Some th

UAL AFRAG

=,
4

tu

1

a ppyviasd w.ih
group, This nawdic

rota! Yes, yale an
an nna We ws Goreurad.,

qeSe-TASS; whieh,
ton Wh be |

ap ugse of 4

GLEMEnT WwW
34 AL.
mp. @hbe ah,

sin, @ worker, L. A. Chngbaksr.
atnore. who whlinessed how
the area af Sverdloves aad +

r he ; apeanuesd inva testified ta the To.lowlng:

tehy 2% ilu. aeurs local tine;

ALArtet, J hetrd o sharp nuise reseiselang
Guctkwheilier. Tels wot oe augperestea aad fT
 T Was wp. gia ft hemrd an expausl

i) 8 2ubtan ;
Sted 5
ho by syed, and when it

Ve. BP. Sart
Waen T wus
Tach whoa jee
ran imte she

Sita! SB"

D Wea tens,

parachutist.

“When a2k this wis papeening drivar Leonad Choanasin, whos ft
; "TG Wh bt Gas aov. ss (rita peis ag ‘bran

rere

Bev LE, Gara SA
later wy Saw

my Wk, gua
Woot ne get out of the inr T pained to

thet le wae landang...(ailigsia as troumaitted) on the Gnome ot
rivalet oear the high-voltage line. Chushakin in-aitod
ang we 4reve te tha piace where the paraahusis. sandot.
frwm toere, Chushakin ne the sar and Wa ran wt the
perachwi.st came down,"

rc
1

Wal. 4, pe. Ub Sa}

unas

Fea. Asabin, "ph
being dragged on
him te sw the

rou havin

landing. To prevent him from

Taeld bin and &

Tam ecquainte
Meanwhile, my

icin, ancl V1 adinir

ie)

ast
FS

be th ae ba L :
he hped evan remove at hearemisin, Chushakin, and Surin
removed the halen wlth the 2

“when toa helmet with the «a Be

aomeuhing ina langusge we t panty
fe WES ane what happened, ae he gave no ecu and woly shook bis herd.
We understood thet: he was a Toreigner ani decided to detain nic.”

{Yol. 4, pe. 369, 35c)

AP. Cheremisin; “Supporting the detained parachutist by the az,
savin and TF led him to the passenger car standing close ty in whica
Chuzhakin and pias had arrived. While putting aim into the oar,
Asasin saw that the parachutist had a hunting Enite and toak 26 away.
(vo. 4; ps 367)

tte

—=
The inspection of the remnants of tle dowmed plane
parts and the instruwentation of the plane wets 22
when the pisne was nin in the air and when ib oxaa i
Parts of the plane were’ scattered over an erea of about 20

Kiloweters. (Vol. 1, po. 47-95, 227)

perandant Powers, wh

au shown toe parts of the |
veut plane Lh was, B Wwackr
Aamaged condttis e ox was tae y which fe
over tag territory of the fevleh Uo on Kay 1, Laud, Powers replies:
"To my aan this io the same plane which I pileted on way 1, TWyos.

In orders to tell more exactly I must see the pilot's aechpit, if is
scLli wees ." {ellipsis ag transmitte.}

nuese

ay

AZber that defendant Pevers was shown the salvaged part of tue pllon's
gabin. When asked: "Are you familiar with this part of thy p!

He replied: “wes, it 4g familiar to me, in is a campy of tne Betee is
sockpit. Tam sure this is tha canopy Mw the + tik omy f
{sllivais es transwitce)) (vol. 3, pr. Labbe}

Fae Ate

wis

- ED S53 = OR TESTESITA TIONAL ArPaTrs
Lo, 1 ae]

p wRo inspacted th: rammants of

Pats) & Bue ones OS aaveY: recoona:

L x ime of
thargs containing 1.4 kilograms of exp ceaneeraen
and parts of the plane carry trade m &meriean firms
in particular the turbojet engine wa evtehoitiney

rharhers and electric bee
1, Ganasal
imere cee ae thas: ; S gseperky of tae
far

ckarsd Company

ors shoving that

dsence on the plant of nesionsl idacbificceticn marks and t
pretence of a sey of special apparatus for pheto and radioteck
reconnaissance, as well ac the lasting device for destroying
plane clearly reveal its imbelligence mission, (vo2. 1, DR

. ‘ = zn
B48.953; Vol. 5, ope G4-O1, LLI-119, 195-158, 174-185)

The expert tachnical exemination has established that 12 plane
carried « eae aerial cound recorded conuected with the radicwave
detetor, with 2 roll of texremammetic tape for aight hours cf
nontinuongs operation, The soygd recorder has the el LLP,

{hone service gives MoR.+-Ed.) 12,570 and serial amber. 769, i

Tt hes a da, bape-feed-actuatling mechinism made by os American

Globe Industries, Ine., in Payton, Ontc.

4

é Gecocing of the impulse simals recordad on the ferrowagnetd
pe bos shown thece of ls te belong to the greund peder stavic a5
the radar metvork of ae a defenses of the Sowlet Union.
These veeomlings can serve Leake rine the ae: we OF wavelanghhs
. the reccnmoitered re dar stations operate, the frequency of

pepatition, the time of coverage of the plana py & vader
and the area of ite dislocation, ths Hagen acd operating
far stabions in service. (Vol. 5, pp. 20-36)

prrenerranie sit rd ane)

: : : uid | * 373.

PORUAE TONAL APRAIRG

ring activity o7 the To
ry of the ;

4
i
H

epee ae

The invests
ring nis Plight over the terri?

erapee the locelity of industriel, miii

Buch oF the film
var doveloned.

aati

Lowa.

2 re nt
lm are a
6 eS well as uboreant inde

trial

d the rest of
“abtained during the flighty of
piloted oy Powers represent a wide range of inte
faguswrial and milivary establishments within ‘the bho tenet area,
apphicable Qoth Por reconnat ispance purposes and Tor conpiiing

i togegrephic mapa and also for determining the coordinncea of 5 tembeagic
: military establishments . (Vol. 5; Ph. LP A255 )

The intelLLigence~gathering aotivity of the Leckheed U-2 plane hes
1sq been confirmed by Powers! testimony during the Pp
sae stigation and by his own wr ithan statement. .

a.
Questioned on the substance gf the charge treferrad against hin,
Powers pleaded # nd testified ag Followa; “I pleaded guilty
to the ‘fact that L eave flo over the Soviet warritory mui aver the
voints indicated on the chart and turned or and off tha necessary
sontrels of the special equinment mounted anoc ara my phan. ee
“ belleve, uaa done wit thevain of ecllecting : ath:
about the Soviet Union.”

8

And further og; “In accordance with the comerach which was simed
ny me with the U.S. CTA, Iwasa a pliet af is spacial U.5. als
dactacknent dealing with tne eollesticon oF ih Wormation abous operational

_ redio stations and radar on the territory ef the Soviet Union and, 65
L suppose, avout locations of vookete." (Vol. 2, pp. 276, LIT}

Powers’ Liability to tae charge Se agaiost nin la cont Lene’ oy
factual anu written evidence, experts findings, and the testimony of
the witnesses

- BB 55 - USSR INZERLATIONAL AFFAIRS
hug. LO, 1960

Ou the tasia of the foregoing:

f. 13
o

1g Gary Powers,, born dn 1629, abject of the Unitec. Gtates,
noof Bourdyne, Kentucky, & hiph-seneol graduate, ond pilot ©
ecdigh 1LO-10 intelilgence getmehmens of the U.S. CTA, is heresy
A oof having, after being recruited wy the U.S, Ch) in Las6 concuctes
anse espionage activity against tae Soviet Union, which 2
astoreasion cf the aggressive policy persued by the Government of the
United states.

ct a
at

3
Sree

ar

ny

on May 1, 1960, he, Powers, invaded the a-rspace of the USSR in s
specially equipped intelligence plane, a Leckheed U-#, with the
Knowledge of the U.8. Gevernment and under instructions fram the
American inteLiigence service, which is implementing th2 alcremention
aggressive poliey, for the purpose of gatherlag strategie invelligence
on the jocetion of missile bases, airfields, radar facilities, and
other impor:iant USSR defense wed industrial establishments --that is,
informacion which represents gtate sod military secrets or tne

Soviet Jnion~-and, having Tlown sore khan 2,000 kilometars into the
soviet Jnion, photographed with suecial equipment 8 nurber ‘of

the above-mentioned installations, sape recorded the signals of radar
stations, and collected other ioforweation of an espionage ch racter.

ad

oe

Tie serine committed by the accused Francis Gary Fovers falis within
the scope of Art. 2 of the law of the Soviet Union “Ona Criminal
Responsibility for State Crines.”

The indictment was drawe up in the city of Moscow on July 7, 2950.

Signed: 4. Shelepin, cheinnen of Committea for State Security under
the USER Council of Ministers.

PROSECUTOR GENERAL APERCVES INBICTMAIM
Moacew. Soviet Heme Service; Aug. @, 1960, 1655 Guit--I. (UNCLASSIFIED )

(Text) The prosecunst general of the OO5R, Rudenke, 03 July 9, 1260,
approved the act af indietmeut in the case of Praneds Gary Powers
drawn zp in accerdatce with Art. (of the USSR criminal eode?)
dealing with responsibility for erimes against vu. utabe by the
Committee of State Security under the USER Couneli of Minigters .

TTOMAL

Yt is stated that the (concluding?) (word indist
nee aimitted to veing guilty of the forimes?} in e ind
Power's guilt im the erime of which tm is indieted tz also coutirn
By materas” ovidence, ‘findings by experts, and tegtimuny of witnes
An the end of the act of indictmens (it is stated that}, having
peer anlistat in 1986 the U.G. CTA, Pover!s eendusted artive
aspiongs2 work agabiast tas Sovies Union wich nas an ex giog of
aggressive policy pursued by the ad
earlier, the open session of she 1 USSr
Suprene Cours for the trial of Powers has been fixed for Aug. 17.

tr pt”

Moat
