Warsaw Pact Concepts and Capabilities for Going to War in Europe: Implications
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000046685, dated 3 June 1978.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000046685).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

pet: Director of

aed

3
et

re Ceatril
cea) Inielligeace

Approved for Release
Date ies)?

BEST COPY
AYATLABLE

a

NATION S¢ SSCURIT

Y INFORMATION

o Crimian! Sanctions

NIE 4-17-73

WIARSAV PACT CONCEPTS AND
CAPASIITIES FOR GOING TO

OW Aeaaess Eu ee weed oO PA 3 Ge Se ;
Ve ise { ° : : on 35

wei vb

FO? MATO WARNING OF WAR

THIS ESTIMATE 15 ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CEINTRA
INTELLIC ENCE.

THE M ATIO® TAL FORCION INTELLIGENCE SOARD CONCURS
‘

'

%

EXCEPT AS TED tr

The fol} TOW ITH 3 intelligencs Larne yack "295 a rHelacst rad in the procarator of the
vy we Z ft ‘a
Estimate

The Control Intetigen gerie ne dateligance cvasnizetions of the Denartrassts of
Sinlz , La uty.
ASstolainea
thet et i favs ee
Ths Specicl Acsistent to th2 Socretery for Notioncl Security, Depurtment of the Treesur y

a
Tre Assistant Chicf of Stuff for Inteligence, Decortment ef the Army
r

Tre Director ef Mave! intel!

y

ence, Depariment of the Nevy

The Assistent Chizt of Stati

©

a
cay
)
wy
Q
oO
if)

cpurtmest of the Air Force ©

Ao

CONTENTS

Likelibo-d of a NATO-Warsaw Pact War oo ccc ccececcceccecceeeceeeseeese cusees
Military Obfectives in a War With NATO. 0 oo cece ccceeecceeceeeesee

Doctrine and Readiness 000 oc leeeeeeees

How the Pact Would Go ta War

Warning ef Wer

Pact Opuiens for lasistine Wor in Europe--Warning

Tinpli cations ...
Option ---The Stee tho Gert Atiack

Option U—Atlach With Pao Proits

Cntion Wi--Atheck With Three Fronts

Wic. Five Fronts

Grecdianl Buildup

fey)

Likelhood of a NATO—Wersaw Pact Wer

1. Under presert ciurcumstances, it is highly unlikely that the
Warsaw Pact nations, or the Soviets alone, would deliberate! ly Gacide to
attack reember countries of the North Atlantic Treat y Organization,
The weight of evidence indicates that the Soviets view the risks involved
in a war with NATO as extremely high. The Soviets recerd the
possibiity that such a war el become nuclear with unpredictel)e
consequences, perhaps including escalation to massive nuclear st a 23
against the Soviet Unica, as a major threat to the existence of the USSR.
The Suvists are XB awn ta take a conservative view of NATO cap ae
and und estan! | matic suf NATO defense inight prevent a cuich Sie
victory, eleavine Ae 4 io bring into play the greater menooer end
industiial resery no West. Cunearn that its East European oles

1 cr Tul
1

gna eleetively probeh

1 fucther comstroins
Masco-w's planning for azcrecsive wear. Moreuver, the Soviets eppear to
’
L

tat: more Lighly than we cdo th: danger of China's taking advan ape of
ie tee ta eae the USSre

2. For these reasons, we holieve that war in Europe would become
likel, culy as a resule of ¢ Doane chance in the present politica!,
misters, or economic situation end would be preecded by a period of
extvec:e temsion in a crisis of unprecedented severity.

3. Lf over a period of many months or several years, lation:
between the Western and Warsaw Pact nations deteriorated be idly the
political, economic, and military posture of both alliances cor 1 lye

expece? to change. Uf this weie to occur, the judgments iu thés
L
t

Estiresto—draven against U-e present political, economic, and milters
mnt—might no lonser be valid.

Militery Objectives in a Wor With NATO

4. If the Soviets decided to go to war with NATO, for whatever
reason, it is highly likely that their principal military objective would be
the rapid defeat of all NATO forces in Central Europe. On the basis af
our analysis of Warsaw Pact doctrire and the design of Pact forces, th
pte Wie prea hGkis Mas waly thou lice Peay: ily Cape eave
campaign could the USSR hepe to interrupt or prevent NATO from
developing equal or, possibly in the longer run, greater combat potential
in Europe. Soviet doctriae and training focus heavily on operation:
designed to achieve such a rapid, total victory over NATO Forces

1
beret”

acne

5. We judge it to be eatremely unlikely that the Soviets micht
deliberately attack with limited force to achieve limited objectives,
either as a first step in going to war with NATO or to obtain the upper
hand in a crisis while attempting to avoid war. Asa first step in a larger
campaign, the limited-objective attack would have liitle or no miliary
value in destroying or interrupting NATO OECG development. It would,
in fact, completely sacrifice strategic surpriz: and ensure that NATO
mobiliz.tion would not Jag far behind tbat of the Pact.

6. As a Ee to secure an important politics) chiective (for
one control of West Kerlin or Hamburg! a limited-obiective attack
probably would heave serious flaws in the Soviet view. First, Soviet
leaders could not be confident that a dimited-cbiective atteck could
suceced quickly cnoough to avoid an undesired broadening of the
conflict. Secondly, the gvave consequences of NATO response with
nuclear weapons, however slight the chances, would seem to cutweizh
by fer any potential eaira. Even ia the litre 2 of war, such an ace
would «: eee the end of the era of “peaceful cacsis nes! end would

inevitu! a throw NATO into serious prepaietions fa sarin kurcope
Given their own comsersitive views of NATO’s rocid micbiivetion
aay a in the shortorme. and the proscect of uclivtins NATO's
much greater industrial, manpower, and eciciomic ae in the
lowes rp, the Soviets con’? nerecive an incre) fusdy a = balance of

. See 1h & wey Me 4 V . 7 2 ede 7 is
forces in Hurove as NATO wore te tre tosh of confronting cae wold be

einige * . eens Vey ert sae Seay Kroar lip ole : Sane
roa an Oxtronisiy Serpags Soviet tare: at. AC OVCILS Y, We Judas?
rtually no chance that the Soviets would iniuiate an attach to oe

te
2 ee Vineatice sin the nrn 4 soltical BOP te
firated cifectives in tae mresent milita FY, pourcal. and COM ATIC

7. The Sovicts evidentty plan for military operations against I, }
NATO in three separete theaters: in the northwestern USS! and ave
Scandinavia, in central! and western Europes, and in southern Europe.

Althevch a erisis leading to war could develon es easily on one of cater f WATE
NATO flanks as in the center, the Soviets would ex Con central Evurone un 2th

tu be the decisive theater of a large-scale NATO-Warsaw Pact con! cies ue Y itr
o~ ah atrmnrth
Doctrine and Reaciness ( sl tren de

8. Soviet doctrine emphasizes a need for heavy suceriority in the ee? hes
main battle areas, with strong reserves to ensure the miomentuin of the seadt fa é i
attack. Doctrine also stresses achieving surprise and, in eel the 2 ade prams AO
Soviets will strive to achieve pe surprise and suneriority. If forced to a so
choose Letween thern, the Soviets S are te keh: to opt for force superiozity: s/AT Pe mere

mst gare in. forers fs. a a aired
cst Las fe
MAD Aber ¢

surprise is a less tangible advantage and always runs some risk of
oy

Fords efentiiaes that are corlain

compromise. In any event, Soviet strategy for sar in Europe centers on
seizing and holding the stratesic initiative through prornpt offensive wml analy

action by all forces. piel MAE
i

9. Another tenet of Soviet doctrine is joint action by all
components of the military forces, each of which is considered tu have
“Tole—if only a continzent one—in any maior operation. Related to Uhis
is the longstanding Sovict insistence on te importance of the econoriy,
morale, and political stability of the nation in tirse of war. Because of
these factors—espocially in view of aw risk of nuclear war-—prepira-
tions throushout the Pact countries and armed forces can be expected us
a prelude to any military venture.

10. a Soviets apparently believe that a period of inereasod
tension will ! pre cedeany maior use of military forces. The ¢ me vis’ heavy
reliance on the waruing that they believe such a reriod would provide i
reflected in the neacetiz.e read: e 3 status of Pact forces,
which rejuire quai cieiee through mobilization before cunin
to cambit. They also evidently receanize the chanee that an enesny
might dr isc

alis shorten this period of tension. Each Pact nation hes en

a

alert and extup system: which provides both for the nichilization of il-
naticr:! ministration ond economy and for the readines ess, aloctiny,
and m ; of ings armed forces. Under this system, which i
stariln fe © Ue Pact, there ere tive ee tf readiness,
above the normal, peacetiois cuuditiom: dereased rendiness and fal
Teadivess.

Eow the Pact Woae'd Go to Wo
. ; : :
li. We have t ty lo monitor, on a timely esis the patiorn
of Soviel and East Burove.n civilian and military activity in poacetirce.

For 23 reason we are cuntideat that we could sense Pact preparetivns

ryat

nificant early changes would ebmost certainly be
initigte-c in a wide ranse of civilian and military activities.

1 . Bae yt os
NIN Sfeus

j2. The ae indicators that the Soviet Uninn was ta
which -could enable it io initiate war in Eurspe would be pst teatiedly

o> 2 at se 1
availetos us the Soviets end their Pact allies were making the deoision bo
¥ . Pia aad
undertake them. Given dhe present structure of Soviet political anc

military leadership, tt : decision to prepare for or initiate war with
NATO would necessaztily be made by the full Politburo and abrmaust
certainly with the recommendation of the Defense Council. Unless the
reason far going to war sere cbvious to the principal Politburo
members, maxing the decision would be a contentious and probally
pyolie ctedl process. Security surrounding such delfoerations would be
ae

eybo Vas yt tls TTA ERS won aleneast eertain|y inyobve Sey ee

Pein. ‘el veh tical aaa riktary olficers. We cainot judge to vhst
eastent the counsel of Fast Enzopean leaders would be sought in the
initia! decisionmaking process, but svoner or later the comnutment of
principal! Fas European political and military Jeaders would almost

3
Secret

certainly be required because their sur pport would be eritical in the
execution of a war with NATO.

13. Unusual activilics on the part of the Pact leadership would
raise US and N ae awareness of possible imrainent Pact activity of
some kind and incresse th. likelihood that indications of actus]
preparations would i. interpreted quickly. Strong signals be
reported to one of the NATO int lizence services directly from one of
the Pact puneinals or staff members involved in the decision process.
Nonetheless, such reporting prohaty! y would be difficult to evalunte: a
there were no cor rohernt 12 evidence and would not, in itself, sup: port a
firm jucdsimeat that ihe Pact was taking steps which would enable it to
go to war in the near future.

li. A major concern of the Soviet leadership would be to
guarantee the sunpoit acd stability of the population and public
institutions in both the Ssvist Union and Is stern ae Representa-
tions to the region:! }-: Seip of the Communist Perty of the Gavia
Unio: (CPSU) would ; -

woatdy be made, aod a lureescale meron gid
as one seen eee }
Prosar LOMO eh Tt wal y uf

he Ce “CESE CHT Gu: tra to

war would be planne? cr ir itistad. The more critical problem, in cic
Soviet view, weld Lo tho oSeltation of sunr: ft and mai tenance of

Poy RE ee 2s eee ieee ial oe Holltwions of the
nunc al Past Euvon. oc oles. Eliciting anc eae: the sunvort of

the Soviet and East Eurorean population for a maior attack on NATO
canki not be accemoplished ine low-key manner. There would likely |

aT indications ef steps by the Pact leadershin to ensure the political
of the Wars. Pact nations.

15. In preparing to initiete hostilities with N NATO, the Soviets
: be certain w hethe ver the prospective war would be short or
Ser Or nonnucieuy, aa asa matter of prudence would heve to
oe civil and economie preparations from the start. The

iting industrial, aericuliural, and civil defense sysloms ora
full wes ue sue. whether besun before or after a war st tarted, would he
ois disruptive and visible and wonld take weeks or MONS Lo won
out, even with wholly adequate plauning.

16. Soviet doctrine anticipates that a critical step in preparing the
eee and national economy for war is the declaration of a siate af
increased readiness. The declartion, even if not published, would he
widely disseminated throuchout the Soviet Enon aud would, in itsel!,
be firm iiacativg thal the Sovicis were prot, hig for the caigihiges cs,
of war. Similacly, declaration of a state of fall readiness, even if not
published, would be widely disseminated and would, in itself, clearly
sigual the serious Soviet (ar Pact) intent to pr epare for war. The

declaration and associated measures would be impossible to mask.

4
SEL Reda

orertt

17. The way in which the Pact would modify: jts military: bosture
during a crisis would depend largely on the speed, Urgency, and
intensity with which the cTIsis developed.

— Ina slow: developing Crisis, the Pact countries might move ty a
Stale of increased rendiuess, Diacing units on alert. Ty such a
condition, a Wide Variety of Direpuratory measures Might be
undertaken, but these would fall far short of placing the Pact oy
a full war fosting. The Process need not he continuous; rather,
there probably: Would he periods of holding at interim levels

— Once the Soviets hae! determined that the likelihood of Wur was
high, the Pact’s final Preparations would be initixted by a

decision to £0 to fy} readiness, ordering Complete mObNization
and MOVInE toa fy} War footing.

ness would be 4 Vey:

1S. Decluration of 2 State of increased readi
7 4 *y-
HE URS presess of Brepazing military forces for Une

Step in beginn

Contin cenoy: of War. tics ‘ors of Preparatory Measures HECEssary ty
1: 1 .

aCnieve this level of Toudineass ieclede:

> Aji wot opay tte he ee nhet peste.
— Por sshegted a+ Oe ME Gary UnELS ines eased combat redness.

—~ Readyicr of "OE y ation machinery and Selected caliup,
hits

— Unisys Hlgpehes ol COUUTand aclvitios or MOovemonts,

. . r. “y-
— Activation of Richleve] Military: command posts and Opera-
tional COMancs,

— Increesed acthits jy military: bosts, railroad yards, moto;
transport units end depots.

ot — Evidence of Imoreacad Weather reconnaissance and forecastige:
en teat tess foo. Fly: itityol aghiasu.. Tanison? a
— Aacuvetion of evcitiige! Nibitary Organizations
— Increased Tevonnaiseanop activity of al] types.
— Abnorm] deploy eats of submarines, surface Ships, or

Merchant ships.

19. As the Pact noved from a Posture of increased to full
i

readiness, x much More visible set of activities would eecur, including:

— Declaration, Cither publicly or secretly, of a state of full corahat
Foul gs

— Initiation of large-scale or general mobilization,

— Establishment of active wartime cominand posts at frong,
theater, and nAuional levels.

5
dberer™

— Extensive and ebnormal efforts to restrict, deceive, or interfere
with US and Allied intelligence collection.

— Extraordinary levels of intelivence collection against tt iw United
States and the Allies.

— Activation of, or preparctions to activate, sabotece andor
special warfere/uncenventional warfare teonis outside the
Warsaw Pact countries.

}

— Deployment of some aircraft to alternate cirficlds.

— Extraordinary lovels of air defense preparedness of <l) types,
both activ. and nissive.

: ? : . 5 eae at i i“
—Penid and widesore.d deployment or dispersal of have

members of submarines, pavel ships, and merchant ships.

1

—Moavement of tactical miclear weanans to forward storas
Nities aud operctional forces.

— Destovinents cf

: : Z
eee apis soy ee
Rostern lferene feorn

sound const tits und supno:t forces in
Sield resltiess sad the

seca Saihlisk. Bee aeeeGs AE, eee
meamGasbe NADA POO TEES,

cy %

— Assecably cf treriicci for Une movement of Soviet ral Neary units
(particularty ths in the western border districts!, their
mow caf iat poe SS Us re : 6, Gr dina civ af ee hi
units inta Pesterrn Drsope.

— Unusual patterns cf radar activity indicative of derles ments or

a7 7

prerarations to depiay tectical units on a wide pe

protein: and. expansion -of omiktiry mech

oyment chee ee to employ clectrenic connter-

essures (ECAM csainst US and NATO forces.

Tv ‘ s Se fea a Se py g PS PRE PY ates :
For the purpose: of this Estimeste we define warning rs en
fog feral : Ee rae ee
intelligence judgement rly conveyod ta metonal daveoinrianres

wri 8D
ao

that ihe Warsaw Pact is tediag eee to enchile it tou bo tower in tre
near fiture and that He course of events fics increased the ! Is pelea
of wer in Europe. This cesece of warning, although it Gaus sist
incorporate all cf the cloniebts of ideal warning, could be provided io
national

decisionmakers relatively rapidly and would provide an
adequitc basis for decisions cotceraiay approvriete ecm: arprep ara:
tions aii Glaer courses ui aciion. Woure ankikeiy ioe auld be glues
ne than this in our initizl warning and foretell when the enciny
will attack, where be will attack, er whether he will attick at all The
perceived pattern of activity oa which the initial warning would be

é

aoe

Elsments of Ideal Warning

Ideally, intelligence warring of imminent hostilities would
have all of the followins: characteristics:

— Describe preparations Unat a potentiel enemy was taking
and state that these steps, if continued, would enable it t
go to war afier a specific time in the near future “hours,
days, weeks, months).

aby
act
Hi

— Kelste these preparations to the course of crisic-related
events and conelids that the likelihood of war in the nour
future had ior reed

— Cive specific Cetuils concerning the potential enemy’s plan
for the time, plsec, ninnner, and strereth of the initial
attack

— Convey the ifccrration convincinaly to national decisica-

mukers in a char, Geely and’ vert eutmenited form.

based is Hkely to he oconctistent with Soviet intentions, other than a
picid suede MUL suehas: pe surplinas to dele wtohe a st for
Stanidl, cr ochicve a blir baceidsiag posiiiun da the crisis: or to take
action in a diQverout tester. (Se+ dmset above.)

St. The Warsaw Pact nations, and particulerly the Soviets, have
the cerabllity end the experience to employ me ny ‘techniques cf

sco... concen ment, ced Ceceptioa that conhl effect our ability to
detect or correctly interorel same indicaturs of eit preperations for
would expect the Pact to employ such measures as restricting
to aminimurn nuaber of people, tetal me lia control, j
betelbeence and portion coatral, denial of travel in areas of

C

cclivity, cammouflas, communications security, and candnct e

1

rool rocveinents aral co! }. er ebserveble preparations at nicht. The:

¢
would giterngt te misles! NATO by deception, propacarda, end
misinformation; by mobilizing some forces coverth, delaviny firal
deployments, and using feluts to divert attention from riain ath bh

Ning their operations under cover of an

exercise. However, we judze that Pact security, concealment, an:!
decention would not signiticaut!y degrade our ability to intecnre:
quickly the sur ae “identified aciivities as preparations for var.

22. Once the Pact had made a decision that war is inevitable, it
wonll sanction at least selective interference with our intellige: ce

collection. While such interference would degrad= Western int Nissen “Le,
it would, in itself, constiaute «a strong warning indicator.

7
Seana

seerrT

23. We are, in any case, confident of the ability of Western
intelligence to deiect and interpret correctly 2 great number of
indicators which would be given were the Pact to prepace for a lerge-
scale war with NATO. In general this confidence is bas: “do om our
continuing ability, through technical means, to provide timnely:
intellizence on a broad array of Pact inilitary, petiical, and economic
targets; extensive access to Pact countries in peecetime by attaches 3,
militury Haison missions, and travelers; our ability to moniter Sovict
naval movem ents; and our abilit y during a crisis to auziaent inte
capabilities and j no: re handling lime. We are confident thet we ell
inform decisisumakers that the Soviet Union—with or v, ‘ithout its Pact
allies—was taking stens which would encble it to vo to war in the near
future within one day of the be ginning of activity associated with the
move to full readiness.

oo :

Pact Cptlons for Initictea War in Europe—Wierning Imotcations

24. As Soviet Joacers: rere Peon Tecan: the eels tion of Warsaw
Pact forces for var vith > ATO, they world he faced sith deci

Bs . . ce q . . . 1
Sle. Of tres initial attach.

SA bites, Wee te mf + ue phot a ee eee
Gealios, thats, ari Arsaio dilernauia facies

the Sovict lasbers woo li fe ine coerce toowhich they world eace to

fecdiewt Pacheesant eset eal ll cubase potential called fer in their
eats Se ead aah oC GaP Gen gue dea ocean M2 Qk hes
ieee a by a ee Leo are Guichty ccicted altack desicnc] ty
prcetpt the eatablsbinent cf an organized defense by NATO. I: =
ev“ niof the risks, beeefits, and warning meee aus of ie

Say, ad Warsase Pact os tions for the initial sttac k, we have doljn: =

ys Pact opuots. The first, the standine-start atlack, is not

ian - a if cote a . e ted “ -f
bo ee wet doctrine hut is iuchided to present a more complete
-f Pact capabilities, The other three of these: options are selected

eres ae ‘
eatsis Gs inte

. . cr +
‘ evidence au Pact concepts tor conducting aa
Sve in’ Central

Ope
oe certain of the lis is, We refer to Warsaw Pact

ca te d freaty. (See inset on opposite pace.) Jn

discussi:.g th xe number of fronts for war in Europe, we refer only to
those that would be availeble in Central Europe. Warses Pact
continzency plans for war ia Europe envision the establishment of a
first echelon of three froits in the Central Region, with additionc!
fronts moved forward from the western USSR to feria a secand
echelon. (See foldout inap, appended.) If the USSR should decide oa
war in Furen- ft nrebably cba vorld besin to activate tha un:

structure of fronts throsgnout the USSR. The folluwing ap ae Sis is
confined to military factors and does not attempt to anticipate the
political considerations thet would likely influence a Soviet decision on
whether or when to atiack NATO.

8
omelet

ereReT"

we
A Froat in the Warsaw Pact

In the Pact concept, a fron! would be a eonbincd-arms force
usually consisting of three to five field armies—-each numberiag
three to five tank or motorized rifle “i isions; an air army of samc
E30 taetical aircraft; and those resal clerments neccessary to

at

. ravi.
accamplion the mifssion of Use frone, The eround forces of the front
4e mummers separate combet and combat-suppart
af

art femse malts. A

Vory, missile, and air d:

large sorviee-suppert coimeat nonibering about TOO080 men
would provide the fien! with transport, inuintonance, ougiseering,
supoly, and raecical sunport, as well as resuaply of ftems renediue
froin aiminuniticn lo hen end missiles. The froat thse! would tata]
about 2° 0,000 men aficr full mobilization. Arh sueh not divecth

Weston oreanizetion, the front i yak! be

t - ee - ’ many
‘froup in size, he al of comunaad, and

OCpiicn b-Tas Seocdou Start Attack
25. Phore ds ne av ban ect es Soviets coanbeaalite an
Mmingrerecd suandiole fluc: a peacetings fore
pesiare “Fhe S aviett, hoowvove gr, do heeve the ° copabil ty to attack MATO
unis ccipa greand oral cir cenmibat forces garrisoned near tha Pater:
Cocnwe bodon As muny cs 1 to 1S Soviet divisions and perkus-
i Uso tars could roach initial cormbat points aac

.
'

Hh etpatack in the Central Region in somewhat Jes
“dint of surprise and lucal force supericrily, Savic
eel nught gel—some early ground and air

5
t

Shase inital sveceses would Jikely he the only advantace

arhoan atiack, however. The considersHon:

Vauiaz a war from a staadins stut ere
ve, end we judge that there is virtually no chance thist the
Soviets would initiate a war ugalnst NATO with an atte:
standin: start. The Soviets wa cole | have to capect that the st wo
attach wauhkd cause N ATG | fu indinte mocsive and rapid mobilization
almc-t simultaneously wit: the Pact, and the local force superiority
which weold sacerne® in sich en idttack poobebly could pot he medntaned

ONE O toices reacted cOectively. The Soviets, consiccrimes tier
conservative view of NATO's rapid mobilization carabilidies, mizht
well concluds that the stewkirs: force could face on adverse situation
before reinforcements could be coinitted. he attack would iitially
have to rely on incornplete lines of communication. The Soviets would

9

SheRPT

not have time to establish a front-level comraand and control structure
or to prepare the Soviet or East European populace or national
economies fer war—both basic requirements posed in Soviet military
literature. Finally, the standing-start attack would leave other Pact
Strategic and general purpose forces—as well as the national
economy—unprepared for expanded hostilities. In particular, the
Soviets would be concerned about the threat of NATO escalation to
nuclear war.

28. A stauding-start attack from a peacetime posture would he
designed to provide as little warning as possible, and the Soviets would
probably forgo political preparations and the move to increased
readiness to avoid alerting NATO. Nonetheless, the Soviets would have
to prepare the initial assault farce hy calling most of the groups of Savi=t
forces iri Europe to a state of full combat readiness. In addition, they
would not risk initiating a war without first bringing their stratesic
nuctear forces to a status of full combat readiness. The increase in
activity associated with the movement to full cambat readiness would
be massive, and micht he the first indicator leading to warning. The
forward movement of en attack force of 10 to 15 divisions would
provide muny atkins! indicators to Western intellizerce, which
niitary activity in Fast Germany.

routinely monitors

29. Accordinsly, i the extremely unlikely case of an unprovoked
Ce ai aE OPE O™ RATS ce oe ee See Saat Geriab Abo at
integicence could sense oe wonld pak the massive moverent «ad

unusual activity within bours of the beginning of preparation. S - 4

activity would provide sufficient intelivence for Alied comminn ors
and cecisionmakers to take precautionary steps. Given the extremely
unlikely nature of such en event, however, interpretation of this activity

Ww ay he oe and a final judament that an attack was imminent
yt
3h

be reached before hostilities occurred.

Oostion H—Attack With Two Fronts

3). Extensive analysis of Pact doctrine leads us to conclude that
the smallest force the Pact would use to start theater cffensive
operations would cousist cf iwe fronts. This force would be compuse:!
essentially of all Soviet ground and tactical air force units in East
Germany, Poland, and Czechoslovakia together with most of the East
Gerinan and Czechoslovak units which are active in pe: « total
of scme 40 ground divisions, plus support and tactical air units.

31. Extensive study of evidence on Pact concepts for war with
TATO. alone with anulysis of the Pact’s theoretical capability. to
organize, deploy, and prepare forces for war in Europe indicates that in
the most urgent circurnastances, the Pact would need about four days to
prepare a two-front force. While initiation of an attack with slightly less
than four full days of preparation is possible, the complexity and

10
SECRET

erent

magnitude of the operation and the risks attending insufficient
Preparation would be likely lo cause the Soviets to take more than four
days to prepare this two-fron! force. These preparations word be made
using a compressed pandep procedure which woald exacerbate the
confusion and disruptions inhereat in a transition to a war foati nz and,
at least initially, would sseld combat units—and especially combat
support units—with Jess than full capabilities to undertake or susted
combat operations. Preparativas which, in a less demandinz operation,
would Le undertaken in a phased or secuential putiern would have to
occur siinultaneously.

32. By waiting to establish a iwodrane attaching feree, the Pact
would diminish many cf the critical deficiencies of the slandina-start
attack. 1: would gain same raohilization advantuge, set up at least
minimal lozistic system: for reinforcement and resupply of attacking
forces, undertake mints) povies and economic re sparations, and
hedge acainst rapid NATO escalation to 2 massive navlear exchanue by

bringi:. Pact land-l cal stratevic forecs to full readiness and deploying

: = ie Ee piers see err DS ees ee epi din CN ERE - .
them: ts support the isl offensive. Nava! caruulities would be

subsiantially improved, 2. ee sadobral essentiak of the cunrucnd and
Contvo: system could be fonctoutre,

33. Still, irétiati:  ¢., after one these minimum prepara-
tees otra ee et a - pM Rte a Pe ae oe age curled

extrencly waukody oot in the panst treent Cirauinstinces. The
attecsing force itsetf woull dick some front-level os dents and woak
have to cover (he bread ssctar from the Baltic to Austria. Commie nd
ties, particularly at Vie theater aa would remain

‘ne would pot have proceeded far enough to
ensur- immediate followup forces and supplies for Uae attack in Central

Eurcpe and effective perticipation in the war by major forces in other

a

S4. We believe that it is extremely unlikely that the Pact would
initie+ os ar frora Chis twe-frant posture in ather thea an extraordinarily
urcet clreumstance. On this point there are two views. One halds
only circumstance which would caus: the Pact to initiate
digiges ide offensive operations against NATO from this posture ae
only four days cf preparation would be the Soviet perce ption of the
threat of imminent NATO attack. Althonzh NATO mobilization would
be viewed as a serious threat and would almest certainly cause the Pact
to make counterpreparations, the Soviets would be particularly averse to
initiating an attuck with a force net fully prenared against NATO forces
whici euieyed some vdvantages of prior preparation or muliliza-
tion—ualess threat of imminent NATO attuck was clear.

pe
D
rs
er
1

35. The other view holds that the Soviets mizht choose to attack
with the two-front force in a variety of urgent contingencies. For

1
SeeReT™

obi

example, during a serious East-West political dispute, the NATO
countries (particularly the United Stetes and West Germany) night
undertake a degree of mobilization and other military preparations to
improve their defensive postures and to demonstrate wil! in support of
the diplomatic bargaining. The Soviets, of course, might sce this as
weakening their awn barzaining position, in particular by threatening to
upset the political advantuge afforded them by superiority in forces-in-
being ix Central Europe. In such a continzency, and if they perceived
truly vital interests at risk, the Soviels might set in motion the rapid
buildup and early attack option. Their efforts would be intended to
preempt NATO defeusive and diplomatic preparations, not an
immediate threat of NATO attack.

35. Preparation of a two-front attack from the normal Pact
Reacetime posture would aliaost certainly require declaration of ful!
readiness. Even if the atert were accomplished covertly, 2 host of
indicators that a full reaciuess posture was being taken would be
available anc would alsost certainly be correctly interpreted and
conveyed to deeisinnnst rs within one day. Accardingl,. US and
NATO cecisienmekers wold alawst certainly have three days or more
of warning in the case of a rapid Pact attack with two fronts.

Option [il—-Atiosk Von Three Froats

87. The third and fonrts options are ones in which Soviet planners,
under a less urgent need te defend er attack, would elect to bring the
Pact to full readiness via a more efficient, phased buildup procedure
and to attack when the f-rce available for initial operations totaled
three fronts (Cpticn Jl) or five frants (Option IV). We estimate that, in
these circumstances, the Pact would require, at a minimum, abont eight
days to achieve a three-front force.

88. The Pact preference for a Jarger-than-two-front attack is well
supported hy evidence. The phased buildup to three fronfts—a total of
sume 50 to GO divisions plas support and tactical air units—would offer
a reasonable expectation of an orderly and efficient transition to an
attack posture affording force superiovity, sustainability, and precau-
tions against the risks of a wider war. Jn addition, this option_weould
provide opportunity for significantly more naval forces to deploy.
Accordingly, we judge that except in extraordinarily urgent circum-
stances (as described above) the Pact would prefer to prepare at least a
three-front force before initiaticy hostilities. Although these prepara-
tions could proceex! inca phased, organized inanuner, they would be
massive and would almost certainly be initiated by an alert to full
readiness. US and NATO decisionmakers would almost certainly have
seven days or more of warning in the event of a Pact attack with three

fronts.

12
Secret

oo

SeCPTT”

Option IV-—Atteck With Five Fronts

39. The Pact miah! elect to build up even greater forces in Ezstern
Europe prio: to initiating hostilities agaiust NATO, dependinz on its
assessmeut of the political and military situation at the time A ie
front posture—about SO ground divisions plus support and tactical a
units and with additional naval units at sea—would fulfill act
covservative coctrinal preferences to the extent possible in’ practic:!
lerms and would take about two weeks to achieve.

40. The pattern of activity involved in developing a full five-front
attack force in Europe weld be similar to that of the Etech on t force,
although the peace might be reduced somewhat We judze that about
two weeks would be required to prepare for combat and move from the
USSR the tro additional fronts. Western intelicence would almest
certainly be able to sense the change in overall prsture even if the first
alert to increased readiness were not directly and imme ‘diately detected.

Therefore, we judge t!.u in the case of a five-front attack ovlion,
) * is " 7 r

intelligence could provid « werning that the Pact was tline sions which

would enable if to go te var in the near fatuce, pa ctbly within hours,

but certainly withia a — er two of the initio! order to go to increased
readiness. Accordingty, i: the case of a full five-froa! attack, US and

NATO deciviearahers © cold have 12 dass or so of warrirs time.

Summary Judgmants and Pelotive Likelihood
w

41. The following elements are unanimous within the US
Intelligence Comunity.

— The Pact would bein to organize at least five fronts for use ia
Central Europe from the time of the decision to go to ful!

readiness.

— There is virtua'ly no chance that the Soviets would attack from
a standing start.

— The smallest force the Pact would use to begir a theater
offensive would consist of two fronts, requiring about four days
of preparation; except in an extraordinarily time-urcent
circumstance, it is extremely unlikely the Pact would initiate
war from this posture.

— The Pact would prefer, before attacking, to prepare at least a
three-front force, which would require, at a minimum, about
eight days of preparation.

— Circumstances permitting, the Pact would build up even greater
forces in Eastern Europe before initiating hostilities against
NATO.

13
erereT™

GEERT

42. For cach of the four options previously discussed, we have
estimated approximate minimum preparation times which would he
required before the Pact could lanach a colerent attack with a force of
a given size. OF course, any Soviet decision an when to attack would be
influenced by a set of sometinies contradictory military factors,
including the USSA’s own level of preparations and its perception of the
status of NATO preparations and deployments, the desire to achieve
surprise, and the urge to develop fully, in advance, as large a force as
possible. We are agreed that the ultimate decision to attack almost
certainly would not rest on purely military factors, but rather on a
cornbination of those and political imperatives, the state of diplomatic
negotiations. or other considerations.

43. Even though Uie varions analysts within the Communit, have
used the same basic data, differeit conclusions have been reached
concerning the most lixe’y timing of a Pact attack. This is due to
differing interpretations ¢f data and judem-nats aboot the weighting of
the various railitery ang uclitical factors and considerations. One view
interprets the cata an? druses conclusions as Follows:

— According towh-t eek

now of Pact trainins. the Pact narmoly
pructices two to ree fronts—which are the forces that tie Pact
woud have avaias'- in the forward aiea in the four-to-eight-

day perie 2

— The Pact has the most faverable force ratio in this sarne period

after becinning preparations for war.
— These factors emphasize the importance of surprise.

— Therefore, the four-to-eight-day period is the most likely thine
for the Pact to attack.

44. All others believe that it is more likely the Pact would take at
least eight days of preparation (assembling three to five frenty) before
initiating hostilines. In their view: .

— The Pact preference for an attack invelving more thio tio

fronts is well suvperted by the evidence and by analysis.

— There is no agreed system of calculating force ratios, and several
methods other than that used to forrn the preceding view show
that greater force ratios occur after eight days of prepar.tion. In
any case, force ratios would be only one of the considerations in
timing the attack.

—~Sovict doctrine calls for force superiority, availability of
resupply and reinforcements, full preparation for joint action hy
all components of the military forces, stability of the rear, aud
fully effective command and control, and each of these is
enhanced with eight days or more of preparation.

14
SeertT

aberntt*

— Although the Pact would attempt to achieve both surprise and
force superiority, if forced to chuose between them the Pact
would likely opt for force superiority.

— Soviet military plannins is conservative, and the risks the Soviets
would associate with potentially inadequate prevaration would

be high.

45. As a modification to any of the options previously discussed
the Soviets and possibly their Pact allies eculd make graduo
preparations for war over a longer period. Steps which incresse
combat readiness of any elements of their military forces could de taken
sclectively over an interval of weeks or months. For exariple, such steps
as the rocbilization of rear service support elements in the forwacd area
or the estublishment of front and army command and cortry! networks,
which woold normally be accomplished during a period of fill
readiness, coul! be ace nantished incrementatl during a period of no

alert. Such steps, hows cr, woul! probaly he noted hy Western
. . on 1 ¢ ’ . . not. .
intcHigence within dass afer their imolecktion ard would be
. a: sole 1 . . . _ . . « » . L
interpreted as modifying the Pact peacetime military posture. Such

actions mix! itt ro setions of a sinclar mature by NATO members
and would certetaly bic etern date sony Meaty Tire Cisse

| cays r Pann 4 ler g Ree uz teyp pee foyee tt
Pact sters might somes hatroduc: the tirce necessary lo achieve the fall

combat readiness of the forces discussed in Gpticns Jl, TL, ane TV, they

would be taken at the evpencse uf likely greater NATO preporedness and
vigilance.

46. Other measures which the USSR alone ar ia concert with its
Pact allies might ucdertake to carry out graduclly could include more
time-consuming, but relstively unpzovecative, civil and rnilitary
preparedsiess steps. These measures woald net involve any stens
normally associated with the alert to full readiness and would jevrove

the efficiency of the natinn to support a war and the sustainakilty of
the forces but not necessarily the initial combat capability cf the

engaging forces. They would not greatly improve the Saviet and Pact

capability to move quick!» to a posture of ful! readiness because the
large-scale and most time-sensitive actions that are required in each of
the previous options, and which would still be very visible, would
remain to be done.

47. Gradual Pact preparations for hostilities, either as a deliberate
policy in preparatioa for some “surprise” sethan inclinding attuck erin a
period of political crisis, would presert more analytic problems for
Western intellizence than would the sudden and widespread implemen-
tation of war preparations. Although a gradual implementation would

provide us more opportunities to detect some of the preparations and

15
ene

beROT
more lime to validate our information, the early preparations would

probably be ambizuons and might be difficult to distinguish from
“routine” foree improvements or exercises.

48. Because of the high risks and costs involved, the Pact would
defer general mobilizetion, major deployrcents of combat forces, am!
other highly visible end provocative measures until the final rove to
full readivess. We therefore believe that even after some months of
preparation, when a final or contingent decision to attack was mad-.
there would still be a discernible difference ia the nature, scope, and
race of preparedness measures. This would alert us and enable us to
provide warning Uiat the Pact was initiating the final steps that world
enzble it to go te war in the neur future. Accerdingly, even after a
gradual buildup, we believe we would detect within a day the fina
moves to full readiness to attack.

49. A period of gradu: preparations would improve Pect combat
effectiveness and civ!) preparedness under any of the postulated
buildu: options. Deperins om the number and nature of the mensures
alveaely taken and the pohitedl circurssianess, the thie required to
prepare the attack cont! Yoose duy
or more. We would, however, already have issued warsiags, probably
repeatedly, of a grate. danger of hostilities.

? 1 . é es i
wot be reduced, perhaps by as ini

16

operations Pras bly wouls consist of two
Pair units. In the most urgent circumstances,
tawctd mead about four days to pr oo Attack with slightly less than four days is patsitle,
cer pleniry of the oparstion anc the risks cttcading insufficient preparation would linciy couse the
to the more than four days to prepare this farce.

Establisnman: of a five-front posture—some BO to 29

ground divisioas—before initiating an offensive against NATO

p av ets b> OY would fulfil! Sovi-e canservative dactrinal preferences to the
extant possidia in practical terms and would take about twa

wees to achiuve.

RR RN EER ee the On rE ner Oe Te RnRey tee See aoe RR Anca ee ASR LA ine te “ANE REARS t sie we

FO ete oo eT ARE eT ORGAN. AAERTMRMEE AE SEE PoP cam ame tes

ae ecm ce

set

we iersan

Czechoslovas'a

denict.d in Pact doctrine anc! exercises, this

ry

Tne Warsaw Past envisions o besi¢ force cf tke

ae frets as the first echelon of 29 track on MATO. As
-2OCt force inctudes 60 to €O ground civistons plus support

and toctical air units. About eight days sould te necdéed to pre;iara this force.

Qo Democmitic
av?
<
y F si HT
(2 OL oud
of Se ° or
Ngale ce
Lee
Germany

Austria

Hungary

“ge Vearsaw

we Becepest

Romania

17

1

I SACLE LAL IE LO CLOT AAR A ANP OE nt mare ap
. 1
| {
i
 -
t

ll BE ete a otal TO ee eT

ae oe

8g ome roome gs,

bal tad
