El Salvador: Controlling Rightwing Terrorism
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000046974, dated 5 January 1985.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000046974).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ou Ovrectocete of
Intellig:<ce
O77,

El Salvador: —
Controlling Rightwing Terrorism &

Aan Lotelfigence Assessment

Approved for Rel
Date or Release

Key Jud gments

E] Salvador:
Controlling Rightwing Terrorism |

Rightwing violence in El Salvador has declined significantly since the
beginning of 1984. Figures supplied by Gi Since put the total for
confirmed political killings by bot the left and the right throughout the
year at 757—less than half the total for 1983 and only a fraction of the fig-
ure for the peak years 1980 and 1981. While statistics differ among
observers, virtually all—incloding rebel supporters—confirm the sharply
downward trend.

The decline occurred despite partisan maneuvering during the spring 1984

presidential campaiga and balloting, the coming to power of the moderate

Christian Democrats led by President Duarte, and guerrilla planning for a

major offensive. In our opinion, the reasons for the reduction include:

¢ Warnings from Washington, highlighted by-the visit in December 1983
of Vice President Busb.

+ Disciplinary méasures by the military high command—such as transfers
and discharges of enlisted men and officers involved in human rights
abuses—to discourage such activities within the armed forces.

¢ Actions by the Duarte administration to reform the judicial system and
to find legal means to make extremists more accountable for their
activities. :

« Self-imposed constraints by rightists themselves as they perceived the

tactical and political trends undermining support for the insurgents.

by means of judicial reform have been modest, and he may be approaching
the limits of his ability to coatrol extremist elements. For example, rightist
political factions last summer eaxrged from legislative infighting to
dominate judicial and legal appointments, complicating Duarte’s efforts to
pursue legal solutioas. Further, the rightist-dominated Assembly passed a
budget measure in December 1984 that would strip Dvarte’s judicial
reform commission of all funding, as well as possibly frustrate his efforts to
create a “criminofogical institute” to investigate rightwing terrorist acts.

Faced with these and other reactions from the extreme right, Duarte has
utilized ad hoc measures, such as personnel shifts in the armed forces, to
prompt changes in the military's behavior, but be bas probably come close
to breaching the military's tolerance for some of his moves. The most
notable example of this was in January 1985 when the President backed
off—in the face of coup rumblings—from efforts to promote to general
officer rank the moderate Vice Minister of Defense Lopez Nuila, a
noncombat officer viewed by so mmanders as too sympathetic to
Christian Democratic politics

We believe, moreover, that there will be growing incentives for some
extremists to intensify violence soon. Of paramount interest to the right
are:

The legislative and municipal elections scheduled for March 1985, which
will determine the balance of power between the far right and the
moderates for the next fhree years.

¢ The Duarte government's handling of dialogue with the insurgents.

¢ The guerrillas’ increasing use of urban terrorism, which invites sinilar
tactics by the right. @ ‘

We believe that these issues, together with continuing political and
economic problems, are likely to generate increased terrorism by military
and civilian extremists during 1985. In recent months, alleged plots to
assassinate members ofS she chistes eb asvaalaaed esovernest and US

Despite official efforts to discourage extremist activities, both the vehicles
for tod the retionales bebind sighowing terror remain largely intact. A

a pee indicates that ultrarightist standard bearer
Roberto D'Aubuisson and members of his Nationalist Republican Alliance
(ARENA) cooperate with and direct some terrorist groups. Although we
perceive ARENA's internal terrorist network to be one component of the
- much broader phenomenon of rightist violence in El Salvador, the party's
attitudes and goals probably influence extremist perspectives in general
and, by extension, help determine the prospects for resurgeat violence by
less organized ad hoc groupings of both civilians and the mili

eae

Although we judge that resurgent rightist violence probably would not
exceed and may aot reach the levels of 1983, a potential rise in the politicat
death rate would work against US policy interests in El Salvador. An
increase in violeace—reversing the highly publicized downward trend of
1984—would be used by leftists in El Salvador and their propagandists
abroad to discredit the Duarte government and generate public and official
pressure in the United States to reduce its assistance to the country. In our
view, just as was the case during Duarte’s provisional 1980-82 term,
opponents would use any rise in violence to discredit the Presideat’s
political initiatives, making it more difficult for bim to carry out such
activities as the dialogue with the guerrillas

Moreover, in our judgment, the extremists’ frustrations over their inability
to undercut US support for moderate transition in E] Salvador pose a
growing threat to US officials in the country. This is especially true in light
of Washington's support for President Duarte's peace initiative. Extremists
bave publicly £barged US agencies and the Embassy with imposing a
harmful reform process and with rigging Duarte’s election victory in May
1984. We believe, therefore, that some rightwing fanatics may sow be
more willing to try to intimidate Washington directly by attacks against
US personnel in order to weaken Christian Democratic policies Raeaen

c
6
8
x
o
«
Qa
<
te
S
z

E) Salvador:

Comtrolling Rightwing Terrorism z

Introductica

Politically motivaned civilian killings in El Salvador
fell sharply in [9B as the government took aclion oa
a variety of fronts so rein in death squads. That
reduction, in coagamction with significant political and
military derelopaments, bas aided democracy and the
promise of an ewomtual resolution of the civil war.
Recent death threats against Presideat Duarte and

other government officials over the issue of dialogue z
with the insurgeme left, however, have underscored the

This assessment as a descriptive and analytic overview
of the strocture aund goals of the Salvadoran extreme
‘right and its termarist capebilities It reviews those

factors that bs ve contributed to a reduction in rightist
terrorism, examinees prospects for resurgent violence,
and outlines the ‘zenplications for US policy. RE

Legacy of Viclesune

Violence is partaaf the cultural history of El Salvador,

just as it is in mutggh boring countries. Salvadorans are
‘at once intenselle: mationslistic and community orient-
ed, while also bating fierce champions of persona! gain.
Highly ingrainestl in the national psyche are the -—
interlocking valuaes of ownership of property, loyalty

to family and friwends, and pride of the individual. The

historical record! shows that retribution can be swift
against those wiiao challenge such principles, and the
practice of violenat vendetta traditionally bas beea

common amongrmll socioeconomic classes and aloag

the third leading cause of death in country @

pubic sdmixsions made by rede! spokremea.

the entire political spectrum. Even during the comper-
atively peaceful and prosperous years of the late
1960s and early 1970s, the relative level of common
domestic violence—resulting from property feuds,
spontaneous duels, and crimes of passion—was among
the highest in the world, according to international
statistical references. By the mid-1970s, bomicide was

death squads.’ We agree that a targe but anknowable
perceatage of the political violence in receat years bas
been carried out by rightwing civilian and military
extremists.

there sve bece jest over 10,000 kilkags confirmed
authorities and the local sedis since Jnssary 1961. Masy
mods Kore ENED, were kided during 1990, before records

past fre years scveral (horsad
toes) Geerrilla targets have i

ee on oe 7

Evolurion of the Extreme Right

Rightwing political violence had its genesis in El
Salvador's late-19th-century conversion from mer-
cantilism to capitalism. Al that time the government
confiscated peasant farmers’ subsistence holdings and
turned them over to large coffee growers in order to
develop en agricultural export system. A semifeudal,
social-Darwinian system soon evolved cround land-
less wage-earning laborers, a tiny managerial aristoc-
and a constabulary army to maintain order.

By December 1931, however, the world depression
had gutted the economy, end a newly elected civilian
government was threatened by growing unrest. The
Army stoged a coup and established a military
dictatorship. A moash later, impoverished Indian
laborers seeking return of their lands launched a
small uprising in the western provinces. According to
a variety of academic sources, the rebellion was
fomenied in part by Communist Party militants who
were attempting to integrate rural workers with the

- fledgling socialist trade union movement in the capl-
tal. Fearing a widespread conspiracy, the Army and
the civilian elites reacted by massocring a3 many as

30,000 peasants in a few weeks.

The resulting endemic national paranoia over the
Commuaist threat reinforced authoritarian rule by
the armed forces and its afftuent civilian beckers for
the next half century. The chain of military regimes
provided order and stability, and largely gave the
plantation owners and monopolist businessmen a free
hand over the economy. Combining with favorable
international economic trends and foreign aid, this
system of rule resulted in substoatial material prog
ress for the upper and middle classes, and develop-
ment of a strong physical and lastitutlonal economic

base. Given these historical roots, order and stability .

also became closely identified with institutionalized
violence against dissident leftist elements, as well as
intimidatio the rural peasant and urban labor
classes. ,

Control over society was handled by the military
government and civilian elites largely through pare-
military constabulary forces, regular Army units,
and numerous official aad private vigilante organiza-
tions. The historical record shows that, given the
inherent weaknesses of the formal judicial process,
these security bodies would often function at the local
level as Judge. Jury. ond executioner of individuals
perceived to be criminals or subversives.

The Sandinista victory in Nicaragua in July 1979
shocked Satvedoran military leaders and provided

the catalyst fora reformist coup in October, as

CER aR ee Bain JUS ae eee Re Con-
vinced that dramatic political, social, and economic
changes were needed to deter @ popular lasurrection
among the urban end rural poor during a period of
economic downturn and leftist unrest, the new armed
Sorces leadership formed a ctvil-military funta with
the moderate Christian Democrats that was commil-
ted to democratic elections re-
perhaps 20 percent of the entire officer corps was
subsequently purged, which, in part, had the fect of
acutralizing many corrupt senior officers and their
subordinates who had long ago been co-opted by
rightist civilian elites. With the Army backing re-
form. the political and economic power of the oligar-
chy was quickly reduced, with many of its key
members liquidating assets and opting for self-im-
posed exile in Guatemala and the United States.

i ee

P> na el

Stricture and Operadioas of the Extreme Right The Public View of Righrwiag Terrorism

In our view, the viokent attitudes aod ectons of the
extreme right represent much more than just the The phenomenon of rightist violence, while publicly

conservative political spectrum. We believe that the denounced by the leaders af virtually all sectors of
extreme right is distinguishable from the mainstream Salvadoran society, evokes mixed feelings among

right wing by two basic characteristics: average citizens in private discussion. While some
© Absolute intoleramce of any element that bas coo- —-fa/k about “death squads” only in hushed tones.
tributed to change in the pre-1979 sates quo. others express detachment and even gallows humor

© Willingness to comfront that change with active over the dlsappearance or assassination of individ-
subversion of the constitutional system and with uals. Occasionally, some will claim to have close
violeat terrorism. Sriends on the right who allegedly engage in violence
In our view, the extreme right does not predominate or who have personal knowledge of specific terrorist
in any one social, economic, or political sector. Rath- activities. Comrersely, others choose to believe that
er, it sa fanatic Gcimge drawn from all elements of rightwing terrorist groups do not exist Gee

— . These contrasting attitudes are evident throughout
Indeed, despite a seiative neutralization of the old society and reflect a great ambivalence about the
order by the 1979 coup, we jodge that El Salvador national role played by rightwing terrorists. Many
remains a decidedly conservative society, with rightist Sehadorans, af all economic classes, believe that,
political teadencis running deep in the military, the however repugnant the methods used by rightist
private sector, anal the general public. This wat vigilantes, their Lnpoct on Marxist subversion has
iDustrated in the € Wfay 1924 presidential election, been largely positive. Such people applaud gover
which gare only a sparrow margin of victory to ment dforts to professionalize the armed forces and
Napolece Duarte. Nearty half of the vote—in the crock down on Cfficta! corruption aad abuses. Al the
largest and moat Benacst election in the astion’s histo- seme time, however, cy denounce the US “obses-
ry—weat to the exactreme rightist candidate, Roberto sion” with hamnan rights end rationalize the need to
D'Aubuisson. Daugpite repeated public allegations of Aght leftwing terrorism with “whatever means are
his terrocist Haba, EY Aubcissoa won 10 of 14 depart- necessary.” Qfien clied in such arguments bs the
ments aod ¢ mageerity of the reral vote over the Oficial treatmcat meted out during the 1970s to the
progressive Dusceae Qigereeneeeri ema Tupemaros tx Uruguay, the Moatoncros ix Argentina,
suggests (hat mommy Selvadorans perceived D’Aubais- ead the Miristes la Chile, as examples of extroordi-
$00 as representingg 8 no-soascnse conservatism that nary measures sometimes needed to save a society
would lend Itseif™an reestablishing law aad order and = Srom choos iene

: Against this beckdrop, local criminals probably can
Furthermore, ix titixe abscace of aa effective criminal continue fo operate as mercenarles for hire to settle
justice system amaid, watil recently, an Army capable of personal scores or fill the ranks of ad hoc death
containing the imumurgeacy, the extreme right bas been squods for fanatic rightists. Such an exvircoment,
fighting what i cammsidcrs a legitimate clandestine war moreover, will continue to make it difficult for Sen
sre ‘ i Salvador to levestigate, prosecute, and comvict local
sts b security force personnel who may still feel compelled
ers as nations! seescmrity threats equal to those posed by to act on thelr‘own against suspected insurgents and
the guerrilla mosmexnent. Heoce, rightwing violence their sympathizers
as cefected in ovenerall levels of civilian political <n EEE
deaths—has genmmerally increased as insargent opera-
tions have escalesazed, whea the bettlefeld performance
of the armed foceaces has diminished, or when political
and economic izsmases hare been intensely debated in

os ee

neg

The rigbreing extremist minorities of the various
social sectors often wield enough power to influence
events in Bays disproportionate to their numbers.
Importan: members of large agricultural. industrial,
and commercial org anizations are well-known right-
wing zeaku. a pete an indicate, for exam-
ple, that a oumber of wealthy Salvadoran expatriates
living in Miami bave lent both overt and covert
financial and organizational support to paramilitary
groups associated with coffee exporter Orlando De-
Sols and whers. Money and personal connections in
E] Salvador permit such individuals to aid or even
participate in illegal! activities in that country with
relative freedom from prosecution because of their
ability to bribe and intimidate Salvadoran Govern-
meat and military officials. Accountability for ex-
tremist activities is constrained further because msi
of the Salvadoran media are privately owned by
archconservatives, whose editorial policies include
fierce craism of evea moderate government pro-
nas asd praise for tbe hardline positions of

Paes

moreover, because of the PaaS
they wield through control of death squads.

groupings
(ARENA) Founded in 1981 by Roberto D’Aubcis-
son—e former Army intelligence officer who was.

cashicred by the military following the 1979 coup—

ARENA has evolved into the second-largest political Court judge
pe en

after the ruling Christian Democrats
election results show that it commands enthusiastic
multifaceted organization with important contacts
among foreign governments and groups, it bas belped
legitimize extremist calls for retrenchment oa reforms
and eradication of the insurgent left through more °
radical ese of force. : ‘

s legitimate exterior lies a ter-
rocist sctwork led by D'Aubsisson beachmen and
funded by wealthy Salvadoran expatriates residing in
Guatemals and the United States Seas th

Secret

the far.

ARENA party leader Roberto D
then wh Yolanda Mungis for ube 1982

labor advisers.
Guard triggermen end reports by cyewitnesses have
connected various civilian and military associates of
D’Asbeisson to the crime. A pro-ARENA Supreme
hes been successful in using legs! mance-
vers and personal influence to free Army Capt.

Eduardo Avils from prosecution for the

emacs bat D'Acbuissoa persooally arranged
for lower courts to drop charges egainst Lt. Isidro
Lopez Sibriaa, another junior officer implicated in tbe
murders.

In 1983, D'Aubuisson confided ;
by security force personnel to eliminate
leftists. He claimed thet safeguarding bumas rights

we.

was impossible in eh insurgent war and advocated ae Sona
“extraofficial” operations to combat the enemy: Since epee one olen fu wor in dah ade
es cme have indicated that a, x

ARENA's terrorist components—directly managed
by some of D'Aubulsson's closest advisers—remaia cammissiooed trigg
intact and are preparing for future operations against the Popular Democratic Unity (UPD), « large labor
be 1 eres cae ene coalition that has joined the Christian Democratic

; ernment to administer agrarian reform programs.

ARENA has cast its net wide inn tdentifyoag the threat
from the “left.” Following Premaent Duarte's election
in May 1984 Qaeae a Gi i
mm dicated that the sparty's security appara:
tus also was targeting members of the Canstian
Democratic Party for assassimxiion. Former Nat
Police personnel : nee :

ional

rea"

resistance against the Duane governmest. The group

and other extrer mae decided oa this
course because they fear
tion might launch investigates against suspected

terrorists and tbus interrupt tiscir domestic activities.

ec ee? =

assassination attempts oe
other Christian Democratic teaders: ee

These and other operations ase often planed and
implemented by individeals working ost of safebouses
belonging to known rightist corilian of

PA y wealthy ‘ARENA party

operations to store weapors 20d smmnenition The

and blasting caps also is buddca.

che Duarte administra-/

Rura! Vigilantes
Violence linked to ARENA is only one manifestation
of rightwing terrorism in El Salvador. To eliminate

challenges to its power, the extreme right traditionally
has used civilian vigilante organizations, elements of
the armed forces, and death squads led by ideologues
and mercenans§ Pace BEE BEL Tonge 5

In the 1960s and 1970s, a surge of political activity
among left-of-center opposition parties, peasants, ar-
ban workers, and student groups inspired the creation
of several ofScial and clandestine rightwing organiza-
tions, both ad boc and permaneat. The National
Democratic Organization (ORDEN), for example,
was & government-sponsored civic group formed in
1966 and comprising tens of thousands of conservative

peasants, maay of them former Army ealisted person

—

‘nel who were pert of the nation’s inactive reserve

that such gorerament-directed groups 5
ive for several years, vigilante vi i
clining‘ >

ORDEN

8 srocture =
with many of its former members having joined the
Territorial Service and Civil Defense Forces—Army-
run militias that provide local security in outlying

villages and tactical intelligence to the military. We
believe these militias too often function without off-

= cial authorization as peasant vigilantes. The abdec-

too in late 1983 of nine agrarian reform workers from
the town of San Pedro Masabuat in La Paz Depart
ment, and their subsequent torture and murder in the
Zaregoza bamict Libertad Department, was

Defense personne! $0, too was the 1982 massacre of

More recenuy in San Salvador Department, in Ube
town of Nejapa, Civil Defense personnel bave bees
engaging in abuses against peasant farmers affiliated
f the larger democratic labor unions:

squad. Qe that the local commander
was being assisted by elements within the regular
armed forces and is responsible for the deaths of 11
people in the immediate area, including two chikdrea
Labor officials have delivered a protest pote to the
military high command in San Salvador, GSS
BSI In addition, the government's
Rights Commission is investigating a case involving
the murders of some 30 loca! peasants near the town
of Armenia in Sonsonate Department. During 1981
and 198 3 A Civil Defense
personnel {rin ction abducted™
neighbors suspected of subversion and, efter bretally

ser

killing them, threw their bodies into a deep well. Four

vigilantes have beea arrested in this case, and one bas
confessed to the crimes Siar ass

Rural vigilantism is sugmeated in the towns and cities
by civilian mercenaries and fanatics albed with specif
ic individuals or groups who routinely bare waged

inst suspected sabrersives and

unspecified opera tons. Rightist terrorist cells abo use
both active-duty and retired

Armed Forces Death Squads

In addition to ARENA and rural vigilantes, the
military has also beea responsible for a share of
rightwing violence is El Salvador. Despite the sow
relatively moderate charactes of the military high
command, the armed forces’ staff and Seid commands
are largely controlled by a younger geoeration of
ambitious ofScers who have proved themselves to be
among the best trained and motivated ia a taleat-
deficieat officer corpeQig Soe

QEBMER Unfortunately for the Duarte administration,
many of these officers are former academy classmates
and military colleagues of D'Aubuissoa who share his
ultrarightist views. Although tbey generally bave
abided by the moderate doctrine of their superior in
San Salvador, several Gea ass

are alleged to have associa-

tions with rightwing terrorist organizations and, is

some cases, to have been leaders of death squads
within the Army and the security forces Q5zaammey

SURE *

£7

squads in ft Peces operate out of both arban

military headquarters and rural outposts. They are led
by senior enlisted personne! and junior officers, and
they may function with or without the knowledge of
immediate superiors. Ln 1983, for example, at least 20
and perhaps as many as 75 members of an Indian
agrarian reform cooperative in the Las Hojas hamlet
of Soasoaate Department were abducted and Ister

The November murder of a Lutheran minister in Sas
Migse! Departmcat Mustrates that some actions are
committed by regular military personnel withost su-
pervision. Spokesmen for the armed forces have an-
nounced publicly that two Army enlisted mea from
the 3rd Brigade confessed to killing the minister on 8
whim, appereatly assuming be bad finks to insargeats
in the area

Rightwing terrorists have been accustomed to operat-
ing with wide latitude, and it ts almost certain that
some Army and security force personne! continec to

Teo powuag girls become ne
tums af 4 Salvadoran mn hrmng
death squad. Thev alleged df:
Senses and the name of the
group that killed them are
probably inscribed on the preces
oA paper aitached to thes mre
bound thumbs

Mag WEEE we aie corti od “hc broad panes Bs
ard, rightwing terrorism by ARENA, rural vigilantes, and
and Treasury Police bave all hare elements of the military, the precise scope and opers-
bored terrorist elements within their ranks. In add> tions of terrorist grocps is more difficult to assess. The
tion to the 6th Detachment in Sonsonate, other methods used by the extreme right-——cuch as interro
: gating or killing victims far from where they were
” abducted—cuggest a c2tionwide capability within at
squad ac least some of the clandestine organizations. Compart-
Signa! Corps, the Air Force, and the Ist Brigade, all mentation, 2 rigid code of secrecy, and the shifting
three located in San Salvador; the Cavalry Regimeat whims of extremist leaders make estimating the num-
in San Andres; the Artillery Brigade in San Juas bers of terrorist organizations end their members
Opico; the Engineers Center in Zacatecoluca; the Sifbealt Te geesagte Wain cod (eet aoe
former 4th Infantry Detachment in Usulutan; and the i
2nd Brigade in Santa Ana. That several of these are
key units with strong political sway within the mil
tary institution underscores the difficulty facing the
high command is its efforts to improve the humas
rights record of the armed forces.

period of time. It is our judgment that most are
nameless and largely ad boc groups, keyed to specific
missions in local areas. Some appear more permancat-
ly organized, however, and wider ranging. Perhaps the
most notorious of these is the Maximilisno Hernandez
Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade, named for the
military dictator who carried out the 1932 peasant
massacre. This group bas operated for several years,
frequently publicizing its abductions and executioas
of leftist student and Labor kaders with notes attached
to bodies, newspaper advertisements, and radiobroad-

casts.

om indicates that such
groups occasionally dif heir activities with the
security forces, and in some cases specific missions
and personne! probably overlap different organiza-
tions. Perhaps the most outrageous instance of this
occurred in November 1980, when masked gugmen
abducted leftist political leaders during a news confer-
ence held in a Jesuit school near the US Enjbassy.
Security for the affair was provided by a large
number of uniformed National Police personnel, yet
the abduction of six top leftists occurred in broad
daylight without any interfereace from the authori-
tes. The victims’ mutilated bodies were found the

overeat ea ree cae

common leadership whose ultimate loyalties are to
D'Aubuisson and bis financial beckers in Miami.

Constralats oa Rightwing Violence ;

Although the various rightwing térrorist groups re-
main active and appear organizationally intact, they
are being utilized with far less frequency than in past
years. Indeed, the level of rightist terrorism in 1984
was surprisingly low, given the stakes involved in the
presidential elections, expectations of summer and fall

guerrilla offensives, and rule by the moderate Chris-

tian Democrats. New polices by the government and
the military high command designed to present terror-
ists with a less bospitable climate have probably given
pause to some extreme rightst elements

Rindicated that the high comma
Be US demands—sech as transferring cer-
tain unsavory officers out of Uke country—because the
armed forces badly needed US aid. Several Army and
security force agp oa have siace beet Sent overseas to

aiica ania by Dias to manage securi-
ty at the Legislative Assembty—that if they remained
in E] Salvador they would be investigated for their

oes of invotremcat with rightwing death
squads. The callers threatesed them with prosecution
if they did not leave the coustry. The Nationa! Police
at that time also arrested Army Capt. Eduardo Avila,
implicated ia the 1981 murder of two US labor
advisers. Legal maneuvers by extreme rightist sup-

Ministry be! d
in the officer corps to investigate extremist cements.

oO

The caSiag card af the Mano
Blan-a white bead) right
death mpuad appeast on ihe
doors af a whoolhouse where
asiasnesied members Se Id’
wing teacher 5 wALOA were CRY
glo

4

Notices were placed in the local media announciag 8
campaign by the armed forces against the “death
squads,” and calling for belp from the pcblic and the
justice system in identifica tion and prosecution of the
squads’ members. One such notice was signed by most
of the armed forces’ staff and Geld commanders. fa :
addition, the Ministry set up an ad boc military meat with the death squads and a reiteration of strict
commission at the beginning of 1984 to investigate guidelines for armed forces condect are likely to
reports of criminal activities and kuman rights abuses coctinve. In our fodgment, the close relationship
withsa the armed forces Wiis a between key military officers and extreme rightist
civilian politicians—es indicated by :

Throughout 1984, moreover,
under orders from President

Revamping the Justice System

undergone a major persoanel reorganization that Despite their preoccupation with establishing the
transferred or discharged some 110 officers and ea- credibility of the political process while escalating the
listed men from its ntorious intelligence and invest, war effort, both the provisional coalition government
gations section. Colonel Lopez Nuila—staunchly crit- of President Magana and the successor Duarte ad-
ical of rightist violence—was appointed Vice Minister ministration pushed through judicial measures aimed
of Defense in charge of public secarity. This pew at controlling the terrorist element. Early in 1984, a
position was created to better coordinate aod control Seaete

the activities of the two police organizations aod the sie

Nationa! Guard. @& : : :

=

Cm :

Rightwiag Terrorist Organizations

Salvadoran Aati-Commuaist Command (CAS)
Created in late 1983. Largely engaged in propaganda.
Publicly denounced Defense Ministry for imposing
Auman rights doctrine on the security forces.

Ga the group may only be front for
othe? clandestine organizarions. (imam

Death Squedroa (EM)

May not be an organized group but rather a generic
label used loosely by ad hoc hit squads probably
operating out of military posts. Trademark since at
least 1979 has been initials EM carved into bodies of
victl

Secret Aati-Commaunist Army (ESA)

One of the most active groups in recent years. Be~
lieved by some o have been formed ta
mid-1980 by elements that since have been integrated
into ARENA’: poramilitary structure. aS
White Haad (MB)

Like the Ed and other nameless groups, @ frobable
ad hoc name for terrorists working out of the Army
and security forces. Trademark traditionally was @
handprint In white paint left on the property of
victims or near their bod

Maximiliene Hersander Martizet Asti-Commaaist
Brigade (MBN)

Responsible for many kigh-prafile killings over the
past five years. Victims often found clutching leaflets
with the group's message on them. MHM has used
newspapers, radio, and ever television to make an-
nouncements of acts committed end operations
planned:

from lo

Salvation Movement of 28 March (MS-28)

Group first appeared on the scene in late 1983. Its
propoganda aad name—28 March 1980 was the last
day of Phase I government expropriation of large
ploarations—suggest the group represents the inter-
ests of a tiny group of fanatic coffee barons, many of
whom probably reside in Mion

Orgenization for Liberation From Communism

(OLC)

A group that appeared on the scene at about the time

of the October 1979 coup; its current status is

unknown. May have been absorbed by one or another

Ca the above groups. possibly the ESA, which some

: SM believe comprises personnel
JoPMer terrorist organizations such as the White

Warriors Union and the Salvadoran Anti-Communist

Brigade

White Farrier: Unioa (UGB)

Formed in May 1977 following the leftwing kidnap-
ing and murder of Foreign Minister Mauricio Bor-
gonove. De ee Oe

Bike Ba a. The UGB appears to
have been disbanded soon after the October 1979
coup end D’Aubulsson's release from active duty.

special saves sas sell waited with US finas-
cial and technical aid to belp the government analyze
terrorist activities and bring to justice perpetrators of
rightwing violence. The much-publicized case against
five National Guard enlisted men charged ‘with tor-

turing and killing four US churchwomen in late 1980
was Snally resolved. All five were convicted in May

by a civilian jury and sentenced to 30 years in prisoa.

il

Although an initial coverup of the affair probably was
orchestrated by midlevel National Guard officers,

there has never been any credible evidence that the —
killings of the churchwomen were ordered by higher

authority. Fi.

Judicial proceedings against Civilian and military
personnel arrested for past terrorist acts also continue:
to progress, albeit uncrenly. One setback in this effort’
was the Supreme Court's review of the case of Lt
Lopez Sibrian, which = November 1984 resulted is
his acquittal of all charges stemming from the 1981
murders of two US labor advisers. As suggested by

Neer seen er, US pressure recent-
ly belped Duarte in December to convince a refoctaat
military bigh command to have the licutenast
dropped from the list of active-duty officers. More-
over, Duarte's govermmeat in November warned local
media owners of fines and other legs! sanctions if they
continued to publish or broadcast declarations from
self-proclaimed rightwing terrorist organizations. Af-
ter a two-month hiates, however, extremist communi-
ques and death threats are once again being pub
ished. GS» -

pte Sod A)

The administration is sow struggling with the right-
ist-dominated Legistatrve Assembly to create 8 jodi-
cia] commission to oversee broad reforms proposed by
Duarte for the civil asd criminal justice system.
“yaaa eX STEM, a recent Assembly bill
would cut off funding to this aod other presidential
commissions, proba bly forcing Duarte to veto ths
legislation. These obstactes could also affect plans by
the President to activate a “criminological institute”
to investigate specific rightwing terrorist acts GP
eS en hat its first priorities would

include an investigation of the March 1980 assassina-
tion of Archbishop Komero, said by other

o have been authored by D’Aubuissoa and
his backers. QP

Self-Lmposed Constraints

In addition to changes io the military and judiczal
systems, last year's reduction in rightist violence s
also attributable, in our opinion, to a variety of seif-
imposed constraints. Some extreme rightists probably
concluded that, in the wake of the visit by Vice
President Bush in 1983, at least a temporary stand-
down in terrorist activities would be required to direct
the attention of the US administration sway from the
issue of human rights. Almost certainly, in our view,
the US Congressional! focus on political violence ia El
Salvador and the need for continued US military and
economic aid provided extreme rightists additional

-{ncentives to curtail terrorist operations.

The right wing probably also has been encouraged by
the upturn in government fortunes on the battieBeld
since January 1984 and a commensurate oes im
political support for the rebel alliance. The far right
may believe that favorable trends in the military
Situation bave tempoverily reduced the need for rvil-
lan terrorist operations against insurgent elements.

The election campaign last year ironically also played
a role in reducing rightwing terrorism. It is oar
judgment that many rightist leaders genuinely be-
lieved that D'Aubuissoa and his ARENA party could

lence. Following the electoral defeat of ARENA,
fess cobesive!

- et .

3-l

Sense Promineé
1980-84

st Cases of Righrwing Terrorism,

Salvadoran Cases

+ In December 1980, National Guardsmen killed
cight members af a rural cooperative in San Vicente
efter they were denounced as subversives by the
local Civil Defense. Disposition: The Guard com-
mander who ordered the killings was transferred to
another department. The military promised finan-
cial remuneration to families of the victims.

In March 1980, Archbishop Oscar Romero was
assassinated while performing Mass ina San Sal-
vador chapel, presumably by right wing. Disposi-
tion: No government investigation or arrests.

During 1981, atrocities ocewred in two working-
class neighborhoods of the capital. Some 40 sus-
pected leftists were summarily executed py ele-
ments of the Ist Infantry Brigade and Treasury
Police. Disposition: No investigations or arrests.

During 1981-82, some 30 peasants from Sonsonate
Department were abducted ond killed by local Civil
Defense forces and their bodies thrown into @ well
in the town of Armenia. Disposition: Government
investigation recently begun, three suspects
arrested.

In November 1982, Army troops stationed in Usu-
lutan abducted at least 15 youths from nearby
Sante Flena and murdered them. Disposition: No
investigation or arrests. ;

The fame month, Army end Civil Defense personnel
tortured end killed at least seven members af La

Floride farm cooperative in Santa Ana Department.
Dispositioa: No Invest

_

In February 1983, berween 20 and 75 Indian farm-
workers from Las Hofas furisdiction of Sonsonate
Department were abducted and killed by Army and
Civil Defense troops commanded by Captain Figue-
roa Morales of the 6th Detachment. Disposition:
Figueroa wes transferred, and three Civil Defense
suspects detained last May. No further

igatio or arrests, @2REEEM gated by the government eae

« In November 1983, Civil Defense forces tortured

and murdered nine peasant men and women in
Zaragoza hamie: in La Libertad Department.
miatEsn EGR eee E a Army Ls. Col.
Denis Moran—reputed death squad leader—or-
dered the killings. Dispesition. No investigation
and no arrests. Licutenam Colonel Moran recently
transferred to the Inter-American Defense School
in Washington, D.C.

In February 1984, seven Civil Defense members
Seas re on trial ia Santa Ana for murders
committed over a four-year period. Dispositioa: No

information on the outcome.

eet:

The April 1984 trial of mtorious ex-Army Maj.
Guillermo Roeder—arrested in 1982 Sor crimes
ranging from embezzlement to murder—wes COR
sidered a key test of the Salvadoran Justice system.
Disposition: Roeder was acquitted af all charges.

In November 1984, a Satvedoran Lutheran minister
was murdered by two Army personnel in San
Miguel. Disposition: The perpetrators confessed
and were remanded to ctvil authorities

Cases of US Citizens

© The murder of four US ckurchwomen in December
1980 was resolved in May 1984, when five National
Guardsmen were convicted by a civilian Jury end
sentenced to 30 years In jail.

© The case of Jokn Sullivan—a freelance journalist
abducted ond killed by presumed rightists in De-
cember 1980—is unlikely to ever be fully investi-

: Zoe investiga-

tions have yielded no sotid leads.

© The case af two US labor advisers assassinated in
January 1981 remains texuous. Two National
Guard triggermen confessed in 1982, but two offi-

_cacarwahg-ordered the killings and wealthy civilian
conspirators have escaped prosecution in civilian
courts. One of the officers was released from active
duty in December under orders from President

> information.

The relative lack of political confrontation between
Duarte and the right wing 1n 1984 probably also lent
itself to reducing violence. Until the beginning of this
year, Assembly debate had been low-key, as Most of
the cartier reform issues were resolved before the
elections, thus removing opportunities for volatile
political crusades by the extreme right opposition.
Duarte. moreover, avoided public confrontations with
extreme rightists and skillfully undercut them by
assuaging military leaders on important decisions—
including initial plans for dialogue with the insur-
gents. In addition, his trips abroad greatly boosted tbe
country's international image, resulting in increased
foreign aid and raising potential commercial opportu-
nities for Salvadoran businessmen. ($ NF)

Potential for Renewed Violeace

In our judgment, the level of rightist violence is likely
to rise in 1985S. Present political and military trends,
suggest the possibility for increased rightist violence /
in the near-to-middle term, despite the disinceatives ‘i
that brought the rate down in 1984. We believe the
basic philosophy of the extreme rightists remains
unchanged; they apparently continue to view the
democratic transition as anathema to their interests
and violent terrorism as an effective policy tool. At
the time of Vice President Bush's visit in December
1983, a press communique by the extreme right
clearly stated this basic philosophy when it announced
the formation of a new political front, the National
Liberation Party (PLN). The group's party doctrine
called for “clandestine armed struggle as the only
solution to the Central American crisis,” and urged
the Salvadoran citizenry to join in the right’s clandes-
tine war against the Communist forces. We believe
the views of the extreme right remain unchanged ia

1985.

Rightist Attitudes and Goals

One factor that may induce rightwing extremists to
escalate violence is their probable concern over re-
cently increased guerrilla activities and their likely
reaction to planned changes in guerrilla tactics. Al-
though weakened on the battlefield, the guerrillas’
continuing capabilities were underscored by a major
Army defeat in December 1984 near the village of EJ
Salto in La Paz Department. The insurgents have also

ans ober isis 2

tions of local poli

en
Figure 2?

El Salvador, Civilian Political Deaths and
Guerrilla Offensive Operations, 1981-84

.
idl

— Guermila operauioas®

wees Civilian deaths

ie

o 1981 82 1) “

* Terougt July 19% ealy.

stepped up their sabotage of the economy country-
wide—including attacks on agricultural targets in the
heretofore quiet western departments—and appear to
bave begun a new campaign of urban terrorism. The
various insurgent factions bave been planning re-
newed political agitation and violence in the capital

oracrea te target San Salvador’s transportation, elec-
trical, and telecommunications systems. Lefust unica
strikes bave effectively shut down much of the coun-
try’s external communications system, and guerrilla
sabotage of the power grid since early January has
forced government rationing of electricity in the
api The insurgents are also intensifying their war
of at

trition against the government's urban security
personnel, as well as planning additional assassina-
tical leaders and foreigners Siam

14

me morecs27, suggests tat
the geer7 a groups will soon be lan.7g greater ag.ar-
tage of 2 more open political eny.coomentin E,

Salade: cp challenge central authoccy further ane
damage irr geonomy Although ir c.7 view, the
govern 27. has shown great restra.c. in not respenc:

ing tothe: cuual rise in leftust-sponsered activity at
yearend. :te probable continuation of, or increase in.
leftist-insz cod public and pmvate iador strikes anc
street deresstrations will only sere to incite exireme
righust ements.

Politica'!y. potential exists for more ditter clast ss
between Duarte and the mgbt wing as the March
legislative and municipal elections approach and as
the Chnst:as Democrats bring their political agenda
to the forefront later in the year. Already, a confroc-
tation in the Assembly, precipitated in December
1984 by a presidential veto of a mgbust- -sponsored
clectora! law, has pitted the moderate administration
against the conservative opposition in what could have
become a constitutional battle in the Supreme Coun.
This and otber policy moves by the Presidegt likely
have reinforced rightist fears about his political inten-
tions. Duarte's perceived bid for extralegal powers,
combined with recent rumblings of coup plotting
within military circles, wil] likely encourage a raion-
alization among at least some extreme ngbtists (bat
they must move violeatly against the Duarte adminis-
tration

Another volatile issue that could precipitate a right-
wing backlash is the dialogue between the government
and the insurgents. Strong anti-Communist senti-
ments and mberent distrust of Duarte make the right
wing parucularly nervous about the President's ability
to carry on a peace initiative witbout eo ground to
the rebels! Lost

though m instreatn conservauves appear willing to
Support the principle of continued peace talks,

Ww ndicale that D’Aubuisson and other ultra-
rigbtist leaders are increasingly restive about what
they perceive as an eventual sellout to the guerrillas

by President Dun

Reflecting their distaste for the negotiation process,
ultrarigbtist leaders in the Assembly are already

maneuvering to block an administration proposal for
broad amnesty for the insurgents,

15

US Ambassodor Robert White stands over the shallow prove ta
which fow US churckwomen were busted following thay torture
aad murder by members of the National Guard ia Ls Paz

Department, ? December 1960 qa,

ws, comme believe that any
ampesty acpi bie to the nghbt wing would have to
exclude top guerrilla leaders and include pardons for
Rigbiist crimiaals involved in death squad activities

POM says that ARENA will
plan proposed by Duarte with a
counterproposal that would pardon all rightwing ter-
rorists on an equal footing witb leftist rebels. We
suspect that such a proposa! would include pardons
for the five Nationa] Guardsmen already serving
prison sentences for the killings of the American
churchwomen, as well as those being investigated for
the murdess-of other US citizens §

In our judgment, Duarte is likely to re-ect such a
counterproposal, although some of bis cwn advisers
might be inclined to accept a reciproca| compromise
as necessary for reaching an accord on an amnesty.
Should Duarte remain firm, however, mg sust extrem-
ists may seek to supplant legitimate pc. ical debate
with terrorist activities to scuttle the amnesty initia-
tive altogether. Rightists may already be targeting
government officials who are aabhaed sachin a ‘cued
eslene eine =e ra

plotting to assassinate Julio Rey Prendes, Duarte’s
Sincical troublesbooter and a key figure in the
government's current peace initiative. A nightwing
radio communique already bas announced the “sen-
tencing” of Duarte to death for bis October meeting
in La Palma witb insurgeat representa ives SE

The extreme right also is concerned that it bas host
influence over domestic issues and bas publicly lag
ba 's ois) Se economic policies <p =e

community porares of Duarte's economic policies
because it views them as having done nothing to
alleviate socioeconomic decline while actually damag-
ing the nation's potential for recovery. Duarte’s per-
ceived antagonism toward the private sectot continues
to undermine investor confidence in the government's
willingness and ability to support business initiatives
that would help regencrate economic growth

peated Bema As dissatisfaction grows within
the business community, small groups of extremists
may target labor leaders and Christian Democratic
officiats involved in the reform process or other.
economic planning as a way to demonstrate their
displeasure and to intimidate the Duarte administra-
tion into adopting policies more ii to large-
scale private enterp t a

Ramifications of [Increased Violence

We judge that an increase in extreme rightist violence
would complicate efforts by the Duarte administra-
tion to strengthen the country's moderate elements
and its weak democratic institutions. While the level
of violence probably would not exceed the levels of
1983—an average of 140 confirmed political killings
per month—any rise in the rate of political deaths
would reverse the significant downward tread in 1984
and make the government a more vulnerable target
for criticism at home and abroad:

An upsurge in rightist violence would sorely test a
judicial system that generally bas failed to function
even during the best of times. Despite the efforts by
President Duarte to introduce legislation aimed at
streamlining the judicial process and making it more
effective, both the Attorney General's office and the
Supreme Court remain overwhelmingly rightist in
orientation. Moreover, unless the Christian Demo-
crats can capture a majority of the Assembly seats in
tbe March 1985 election or forge a working coalition
with moderate rightists, the prospects for enacting
any of Duarte’s judicial reforms are poor.

Increased rightwing violence and Duarte’s inability to
control it could cost the government some of its
important political support from urban labor and
peasant organizations, the church, and other moder-
ate interest groups. Some Christian Democratic Party
members might react to increased violence by drop-
ping-out of public service or political activity altogetb-
er, thus leaving the field more open to the conserva-
sive opposition Sai Pa

The adverse international! impact of resurgent politi-
cal violence probably would offset some of Duarte's
initia! accomplishments overseas, which have included
garnering broad political and financial support from
governments and private groups. Significant new po-
litical and financial support from a variety of West
seiapen and Latin American countries to E] Salva-

sons that be will creck Gown'on those respontible for
political violence. Foreign adversaries of the govern-
ment, as well as the insurgents’ overseas propaganda
network, would benefit from a Duarte presidency

tarnished by rightwing vicleo: Sm

Duarte's ability to counter resurgent rightwing terror-
ism may be severely limited, in oor opinion. Apart
from the fact that judicial mechanisms are not yet in
place to investigate and prosecute extremist groups,
we Soubt that military leaders—whether or not they
are sympathetic to the goals of the ultraright—would
allow a comprehensive purge of extremists from the
ranks. Indeed, any move by Duarte to investigate and

a at eee

16

Political violence was @ centre!
isswe during the 1982 Coasttty-
eat Assembly elections The
tcverameni created this poster
which reads This us the scene
tha: ee ds not like to see How
sod’ Thousands of lives exum
guished by hare and violence
Your vote can make the der
ence El Salvador deserves
your vole |

| Esta es la escena que no nos gusta ver j Que triste I’:
Miles de vidas cegadas por el odio y la violencia

~

—

i :
il

ij

"et a
\f Je
f; &
] rf

. ee Te er
: ve -

& an wees . Meret s pS
#55 conise]0 CENTRAL DE BL EODOMES. Ty gerartis oo Siecores Loves
iin Lhe le Sve =. +. hag Coot Se IYER Mee ee

- . =» 7 . . we
a 2 ahh OE ba ee I

¢

te

prosecute members of the officer corps for political ImpUcations for the United States

abuses or human rights violations would be stroogly

resisted by military leaders, probably compelling even We believe a resurgence of rightist violence would
moderate officers to side with their conservative col- affect US policy, by:

leagues against the civilian government. Such an

institutional crisis would almost certainly result in « Giving the insurgents a highly exploitable propagan-

renewed coup plotting among selected senior staff and di igsve that they would use to discredit tbe dia-

combat commanders, pressured from below by 8 logue with the government and to justify tbeir

substantial portion of the junior officer corps. ae continuing refusal to participate in the democratic
process.

17

« Creating i $s tuarct conducive to mounting put::¢
ard offic i press.*e in the United States fora
revecticn 2° cute? of assistance to El Salvador

© Comphca cg ary sTorts by Washington to gener-
ate inter=...:0ona! Z-ancial and diplomatic support

for the Cewznte coenmen Gi

Beyond these policy considerations, it is our judgment
that the fruszratiog of the extreme right over its past
inability tc undercut US support for moderate transi-
tion in El Si'vador poses a growing threat to US

Wie believe that threats from the right agains: US
personnel are especially serious in light of Washing-
ton’s support for President Duarte’s peace initiative.
As the dialogue with the guernilas progresses, the
armed forces and the private sector may increasingly
fear that Duarte risks being politically outflanked by
the rebels in future peace talks or, worse, roilitanly
strapped by an unfavorable cease-fire arrangement.
Some rightwing fanatics may now be more willing to
try to intimidate Washington directly by attacks
against US personnel in order to weaken Christian

Democratic policies

officisls in zountry Extremists publicly charge the
US Agency for International Development with bav-
ing imposez 2n allegedly harmful reform process on
the countrs the US Congress with financial and
political comstraints on the Salvadoran war effort, and
the US Erm:.sessy with rigging the May 1984 presiden-
tial electioms in favor of the Christian Democrats.

surveillance and indicated that an attack against the
Ambassader was being planned possibly as part of a
larger conspiracy by ARENA to target a aumbez of

nt? an unidentified hit man was =

P& argeting US Embassy at em
ers were aware of this and other plots |
against US officials, and concurred in the financing.
arming, ame sheltering of the terrorisu@

=__ ~~ 18

a a el
