Probable Developments in the Union of South Africa
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119703, dated 1 September 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119703).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

i .
hobo ge qo.

copy no. 77

FOR THE CHIEF,
ACQUISITION & DISTRIBUTION DIVISION

DEPT.OF STATE

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE, ESTIMATE

nn

| pom Vibpete cy
PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE UNION
_ OF SOUTH AFRICA |

Published 20 October 1952

The following member organizations of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intelli-
gence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The
intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the-Joint Staff.

All members of the Intelligence Advisory Committee
concurred in this estimate on 16 October 1952.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

P 1997
oo, | -=21) SECRET

~«

‘mn

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipie
ae on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipi
office W.

formation for the ormance of official duties may be authoriz

a. Special Assist:
ment of State

. Assistant Chief of S
. Director of Naval Intelligenc€Sfor-the Department of the Navy
Director of Intelligence, U: , forthe Department of the Air Force
Deputy Director for InteHfgence, Joint S Stas for the Joint Staff

. Director of Intelligefice, AEC, for the Atomic En Commission
Investigation

rat S APS

ble security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
gement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA. oa

WARNING.
ic material contains information aflecéin®
the Natfonal_ Defense of the Daitéd States
within the medning o eé esplonage laws,

Title 18, USC, “7193 ~end_ 794, the trans-
missio velation of which ifrany_manner
unauthorized person ts prohibited by-iaz

DISTRIBUTION:

White House —

National Security Council
Department of State

Department of Defense

National Security Resources Board
Mutual Security Agency
Psychological Strategy Board
Atomic Energy Commission ~
Federal Bureau of Investigation

October 22, 1:52

Kren AnDUY

Tor The setisn.: Secretary

Transmitted nereniti for your
informati:n is a cony of IRRK72: Prouable
Developments in in the Union of Scuth Africa.

#. Pars arcgtrong, dr.

Copies to: G — Lr. imttrows
Cm or. delilen
S/2 =r. itze
S/i ~ aAsb. Jessup
FUR ~ Lr. Perkins
izA ~ A}. Byroade
E — i. Thorp
GNA - Ur, Hickerson
S/isa - Yr. Nartin
IAD - Mr. Luckett

IR via OIR Mt ag

London
Pretoria

RilMetzger 10/22/52

rE 2 co

-2)3

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

THE PROBLEM

To assess the strategic importance of the Union of South Africa; analyze the
political and racial situation in the Union; and estimate future developments which

may affect US interests.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The strategic importance of the Union
of South Africa arises chiefly from its sub-
stantial production of chromite, manga-
nese, and amosite asbestos; from its
potential production of uranium; and
from the fact that in event of general war
the Union’s bases and port facilities
would be valuable, especially if the Suez
Canal were closed.

2. We believe that under present condi-
tions the Union will probably remain for
at least four years unable to meet its com-
mitment to provide a full armored divi-
sion for Middle East defense within three
months after the outbreak of war. If
war should break out now, South Africa
could not provide the division in less than
one year, even with prompt, substantial,
outside material aid.

3. The chief immediate problem in South
Africa is the extreme political tension
between the Nationalists and the Opposi-
tion. Nationalist and Opposition leaders
will endeavor to avert civil war, but be-
cause they intend to press their positions
to the limit, short of such a conflict, and
because they may miscalculate their abil-

ity to control their followers in inflamma- ,,

ble situations, the possibility of civil war /{

cannot be excluded.

4. Over the long run the repressive racial
policy of the whites will almost certainly
lead to rebellion of the non-white popula-
tion. Communist influence, presently
small, will probably play an increasing
part in stimulating unrest.

5. The tensions in South Africa are un-
likely for the next several years to inter-
fere seriously with the export of strategic
materials, but they may limit the Union’s
ability to dispatch forces outside the
country in event of war. In the longer
run, when rising racial tensions erupt
into widespread disorders, the outflow of
strategic materials will be hampered or
even halted.

6. Racial tensions in South Africa will
almost certainly have an increasingly ad-
verse effect on race relations elsewhere in
Africa and on the relations of India and!
the rest of Asia with the West. Ifthe UN
intensifies its criticisms of the Union’s
racial policy, the Union may carry out its
threat to withdraw from the UN.

Crone. 1

—21¢

|

1

DISCUSSION

The Strategic Importance of South Africa

7. Economic. The strategic economic impor-
tance of the Union of South Africa arises pri-
marily from its large-scale production of chro-
mite, manganese, and asbestos. ‘From the
Union come about one-quarter of the West’s
supply of chromite (including practically all
chemical-grade chromite ore), one-quarter
of total Western manganese supply, and.the
entire Western supply of the strategic grades
of amosite asbestos.! South African produc-
tion of corundum, antimony, and industrial
diamonds is also important. The Union is
also a potential source of other strategic ma-
terials. Under US contracts, the production
of uranium, as a by-product of gold mining, is
just beginning. This development promises
to make the Union of South Africa a substan-
tial source of uranium. In addition, the
Union’s gold production is important to
the financial stability of the UK and the
Sterling Area.

8. Military. South Africa’s armed forces are
at present undermanned, poorly trained,
and inadequately equipped. Their regular
strength totals less than 6,600 and their re-
serves less than 28,000 men. One fighter-
bomber squadron, with US equipment, is serv-
ing in Korea. The Nationalist Government is
apathetic regarding military matters. Al-
though the current military budget has in-
creased some 35 percent over the previous fis-
cal year, and stands at 12.9 percent of the total
national budget, it constitutes only about 2
percent of the Union’s national income. More-
over, the Government’s administration of
the military establishment has been inept and
its appointments and promotions in the
three services have been largely based on po-
litical rather than professional qualifications.
Morale in the services is low, retirement of able
officers has accelerated, and few inducements
exist to attract recruits. Union armed forces

*The US stockpile of chromite and manganese {is
great enough to offset for three or four years a
total loss of the South African source of supply.
The US stockpile of the strategic grades of amo-
site asbestos is very small.

“SfCURET™

are almost completely dependent upon exter-
nal sources for armaments.

9. Despite its present military weakness,
South Africa has considerable military poten-
tial. In World War II the South Africans
demonstrated excellent fighting qualities and
technical adaptability. By mid-1943 about
225,000 were serving.*. Given time and equip-
ment, substantial ground and air forces could
again be made available for Middle East oper-
ations, and naval and air forces for operations
in the South Atlantic and Indian Oceans.

10. South Africa has made a commitment
to the UK to contribute one armored division
for the defense of the Middle East: within
three months after the outbreak of gen-
eral war. The Government has, however,
made little preparation to meet this commit-
ment. We estimate that at least one year
would be required for such a division to be or-
ganized, trained, and transported to the Mid-
dle East, even if the equipment were made
available promptly from outside sources.

11. The Union’s naval, air, and port facilities
would also be of considerable value in event of
general war, as in World War U, especially
if the Suez Canal were denied the West.
These facilities, including the British con-
trolled naval base at Simonstown, would be
useful for ship and aircraft maintenance
work, air and sea operations against subma-
rines, convoy organization and protection,
storage and resupply operations, and troop
Staging operations.

The Population

12. The two chief problems confronting South
Africa —the present extreme tension be-
tween Government and Opposition and the
Steady deterioration of race relations — arise
primarily from the conflicting aspirations and
outlook of the Union’s heterogeneous popula-
tion elements. There is a basic division be-
tween the dominant white minority of 2.6 mil-

*The Union did not and will not permit non-
whites to serve in combatant status, though it
uses them in auxiliary services.

7
—2) 5

lion and the ten million Natives, Coloreds, and
Asiatics. In addition, the whites themselves
are divided into two hostile political
groups, the Nationalists, predominantly
Dutch-descent Afrikaners, and the Opposition,
mainly of British descent.

13. The Whites. The Union’s white, or “Euro-
pean,” minority totally controls the political
and economic life of South Africa. About 60
percent are Afrikaners. These speak a sim-
plified version of Dutch called Afrikaans; and
most belong to the intensely conservative
Dutch Reformed Churches. The Afrikaners
have been predominantly rural, but an in-
creasing number are entering business and the
professions.

14. The remaining 40 percent of the white
population is largely of British descent. This
group is mainly urban and commercial, and is
economically the more powerful. While an-
tagonism between Afrikaners and British an-
tedates the Boer War, the two groups have a
common interest in the perpetuation of white
supremacy and in the economic development
of South Africa.

15. The Non-Whites. The non-European pop-
ulation includes 8.5 million Natives (Bantu
negroes), 1.1 million Coloreds (mixed breeds),
and 365,000 Asiatics (mostly Indians). These
three groups have little in common except dis-
like of the whites. The large Native majority
is divided into several major linguistic groups
and hundreds of tribes speaking many dia-
lects. It is largely illiterate. Only a few
thousand Natives have had a secondary edu-
cation and there are few college graduates
and professional people. About 40 percent of
the natives are engaged in primitive agricul-
tural pursuits in the native reserves, about
one-third live in or near white urban areas,
mostly in slums, and the remainder work on
white farms. The Natives do most of the
unskilled manual labor.

16. The Coloreds and Asiatics are better edu-
cated and culturally more advanced than the
Natives. The Coloreds, 90 percent of whom
live in Cape Province, regard themselves as an
adjunct of white society. They work for the
whites as waiters, factory workers, artisans,
and farmhands. The Asiatics, of whom 82

SrCRrE Tt

BREE 3)

percent live in Natal Province, are mostly In-
dians. They maintain close cultural relation-
ships with India, and many are graduates of
Indian or British universities. Although a
small number are wealthy businessmen, most
are small traders, truck gardeners, waiters,
and workers in light industry.

The Nationalist-Opposition Controversy
and the Prospects of Civil War

17. Character and Policies of the Nationalist
Government. The Nationalist Party of Prime
Minister Malan came to power in May 1948
with a slim majority of five Assembly seats,
although it received only 42 percent of the
popular vote. It has since increased its ma-
jority to thirteen seats by winning one’by-elec-
tion and sweeping the South West Africa’
election in 1950. The Malan Government
represents an extreme, anti-British, Afrikaner
nationalism. The Cabinet is wholly Afri-
kaner, and the Nationalist Party and its sup-
porters almost entirely so. The Party finds
its main inspiration in the ideals of the early
Boers: racial purity (free even from British
admixture), white supremacy, republicanism,
and a patriarchal society founded on the
teachings of their church. The Party’s im-
plicit authoritarianism is evident in the Gov-
ernment’s encroachments on civil liberties and
in its moves to insure for the Afrikaners a
permanent grip on political power in the
Union.

18. A fundamental element of the Nationalist
Party program is its policy of apartheid,
meaning strict racial segregation, designed to
insure continued white supremacy. Segrega-
tion has been practiced by the whites for gen-
erations, but influential Nationalists believe
white superiority divinely ordained and they
carry the policy to extremes. The Govern-
ment has deprived non-Europeans of scanty
privileges they had previously enjoyed, has in-

*The former German colony of South West Africa
was mandated to the Union by the League of Na-
tions in 1920. In 1949 the Union passed a law
granting South West Africa representation in the
Union Legislature, and the first election based on
that law was held in 1950.

~Ub

tensified segregation regulations, and has
launched a program involving the physical
transfer of long-established non-European
communities. The Nationalists allege that
more thorough segregation will facilitate the
economic and social development of the non-
Europeans and minimize inter-racial friction.

19. The Parliamentary Opposition. The
large United Party of the late Field Marshal
Smuts leads the Opposition. In 1948 it won
49 percent of the popular vote, seven percent
more than the Nationalists, but — due to ger-
rymandering and over-representation of rural
areas — only 43 percent of the Assembly seats.
The Party’s supporters are mainly of British
descent, but include a substantial minority of
moderate Afrikaners. The party leader has
invariably been an Afrikaner. Because of a
membership varying widely from liberal to
conservative, the relative disinterest in politics
of much of the English-speaking community,
and the current unimpressive leadership, the
United Party has virtually no positive pro-
gram of its own and has confined itself largely
to criticism of Nationalist programs. There
is also a small Labor Party, composed mostly
of intellectuals and English-speaking workers,
which cooperates generally with the United
Party.

20. The Torch Commando. Two years ago
certain United Party leaders created the Torch
Commando as a device to arouse and exploit
popular alarm over the Nationalist threat to
constitutional. democracy. It is primarily an
urban organization, well financed and ener-
getic, with a membership of about 250,000.
Its membership is mostly English-speaking,
but includes an important minority of anti-
Nationalist Afrikaners. Many thousand war
veterans constitute the hard core of the Com-
mando. A number of distinguished retired
soldiers and civilians are members, and a ma-
jority of the permanent and reserve forces are
members or sympathizers. With organized
branches in many towns, the Commando has
concentrated on expanding its membership,
holding rallies and protest meetings, generat-
ing anti-Nationalist sentiment, and getting its
voters registered. Although its membership
overlaps that of the United and Labor Parties

“STCRE

- Pes

and its leaders work closely with the United
Party, many Commando members are dissat-
isfied with the cautious conservatism of the
United Party.leadership.

21. Issues Between the Parties. There is a
large area of agreement between the Nation-
alists and the white Opposition over national
policies. Foreign policy is not an issue, ex-
cept that the Opposition firmly supports the
Commonwealth tie. Both groups favor terri-
torial expansion and resent foreign criticism
of the Union. Both are strongly anti-Com-
munist. Both stand for white domination
and a large measure of racial segregation, but
the Opposition criticizes Nationalist racial
policy as needlessly provocative and economi-
cally impracticable. It is also -strongly
aroused against the Nationalists’ grants to
administrators of sweeping powers over civil
liberties and the press without allowing ap-
peal to the courts.

22. The issue which above all has inflamed
relations between the Nationalists and Op-
position has arisen over the Government's re-
cent efforts to override legal and constitu-
tional checks in order to perpetuate itself in
power. Last year the Government passed, as
part of its segregation program, an act which
transferred Colored voters from the common
electoral rolls. Since the Coloreds regularly
vote United Party, the effect of this act would
be to insure Nationalist victories in a number
of marginal constituencies. The act, how-
ever, was declared invalid by the Supreme
Court, on the grounds that such a change in
the “entrenched clauses” of the South Africa
Act of 1909 (the Union “constitution”) re-
quired a two-thirds majority of both houses
of Parliament sitting together. The Nation-
alists then passed a second act which estab-
lishes Parliament itself as the highest ‘“‘judi-
cial” body empowered to pass on the validity
of its own acts. This attempt to circumvent
constitutional checks has resulted in antag-
onism greater than at any time since the Boer
War.

23. The Supreme Court will almost certainly
rule in the near future that the second act is
also invalid on the same grounds. We be-
lieve that the Government will probably defy

this ruling and proceed to transfer the Col-

ae)

Si e-h--

ored voters, unless it is convinced that such
a course would provoke civil war. Defiance
of the Supreme Court will raise tension to ex-
tremes, for the Opposition has declared its in-
tention to “defend the Constitution” against
Nationalist “dictatorship” and to “meet force
with counterforce,” while the Nationalists,
with equal passion, are determined to place
the supremacy of Parliament beyond consti-
tutional checks and to carry out their pro-
gram. '

24. The next general election is expected in
May or June 1953, although it may be called
as early as February. The election campaign
will be even more heated than’ usual. The
Nationalists, solidly supported in the rural
areas and bolstered by such devices as a redis-
tricting of constituencies and the prospective
transfer of the Coloreds, will probably win an-
other 5-year term. If the aged Malan retires
or dies, his successor as Prime Minister will
probably be the able and emotional extremist,
Strydom, perhaps after a short interregnum
under the moderate Havenga. Strydom, even
more than Malan, would carry forward pres-
ent Nationalist policies.

25. Prospects for Civil War. All whites desire
to avoid an armed conflict primarily for fear
of jeopardizing white control over the large
non-white majority. In addition the Nation-
alists, although determined to carry out their
program by one means or another, will prob-
ably take care not to provoke an armed con-
flict in which they would be opposed by half
of the white population, including most vet-
erans and most of the regular military estab-
lishment. Although some hot-heads in the
Torch Commando already advocate armed re-
sistance to what they regard as in effect a
Nationalist coup d’etat, we believe that the
conservative leadership of the Opposition can
and will restrain them, at least until the next
general election has been held. If the Na-
tionalists should win that election, and if they
should then take steps further to entrench
themselves in power, the danger of armed
reaction by the Torch Commando would be

great. Even in that case, however, given the
; general fear of the consequences of civil war
on white supremacy, we believe that the lead-

6H6RET

a

ers of both parties and influential business
interests would exert themselves to avert such
a conflict. However, because leaders of both
parties wish. to press their positions to the
limit, short of civil war, and because they
may miscalculate their ability to control their
followers in inflammable situations, the possi-
bility of civil war cannot be excluded.

26. Should civil war occur, we believe that it
would be prolonged and disorder would be
widespread. The Nationalist Government
could count on the loyal support of the rough-
ly 20,000 South African police, whose key offi-
Cials are Nationalists. The police serve as
both local police and national gendarmerie;
their morale, training, and efficiency are ex-
cellent. The government could also rely on
most of the Skiet Commando units, about 500
of which are organized throughout the coun-
try, with a membership totaling about 85,000,
almost entirely Afrikaners. Their mission is
mainly to insure internal security in their
local areas. Though equipped with rifles,
these units are untrained and have little mili-
tary effectiveness. A minority of the armed
forces would also remain loyal to the Govern-
ment. The Opposition forces would include
most of the war veterans and younger mem-
bers of the Torch Commando, as well as the
majority of regular, reserve, and retired mili-
tary personnel. Though virtually unarmed
at present, the Torch Commando could rap-
idly become a formidable force. It could al-
most certainly acquire plenty of arms through
its numerous supporters in the services. It
is already organized on military lines and cen-
trally directed. Neither side would arm non-
Europeans.

27. We believe that, if civil war should occur,
the Opposition would have a better than even
chance of overthrowing the Government; we
cannot, however, estimate subsequent develop-
ments in the Union.

The Race Relations Problem

28. A longer range threat to South African
Stability is the growing hostility of the non-
white population toward the dominant white
minority. This hostility had been increasing

for years before the Nationalists came to

<2

power. Since 1948 the severe repressions by
the Nationalists have sharply stimulated the
ominous trend in relations between the races.
The desire to overthrow white domination is
latent throughout the non-European com-
munity, and certain advances have been made
in the past few years toward organizing for
this purpose. Influenced by the equalitarian
tenets of western liberalism, by the political
advances of non-Europeans elsewhere, and to
a limited extent by Communists, the kaders
of urban non-European groups have demon-
strated some capacity to organize united ac-
tions. The current series of deliberate viola-
tions of racial regulations is a joint project
of Indian and Native organizations. These
organizations have also cooperated with Col-
ored bodies in resisting the Government’s at-
tack on the Colored franchise. This passive
resistance campaign is almost certainly an
early step in a program to overturn white
supremacy.

29. Generally, however, the non-Europeans
are disunited and as yet appear to be poorly
organized. While existing intelligence on
this subject is scanty, they appear to have no
widely recognized central leadership. Except
among the small, educated elite, cultural dif-
ferences are great between Colored, Native,
and Indian; and even within each group sus-
picions and enmities hamper the growth of
non-white unity. Native organization is rudi-
mentary. Local or tribal leaders have their
few hundreds or thousands of followers, but
the masses are politically apathetic and large-
ly absorbed in day-to-day problems of mere
existence. The attitudes of the few educated
native leaders are not typical of those of the
majority of natives, and there is no evidence
that they are effectively converting or even
contacting most of those whom they claim to
lead.

30. For some years the non-Europeans’ lead-
ers will be too few and too inexperienced, their
economic and arms resources too meager, and
their unity and organization too weak for an
effective nation-wide revolt. The knowledge
that the Government would react harshly is
another deterrent. Local urban disorders
may come earlier, but they will almost cer-
tainly be ruthlessly quelled. Even if the Na-

treet rer

tionalists and Opposition were to fight an
early civll war, the non-Europeans would al-
most certainly be unable to exploit the situ-
ation effectively.

31. Nevertheless, we believe that race rela-
tions will continue to deteriorate, and will
eventually produce a serious challenge to
white domination. The prospective continua-
tion of the harsh race policy will stimulate
the non-white resistance movement, so that
major disorders and widespread rebellion ap-
pear almost certain in the long run. More
moderate treatment would not alter non-
white aspirations for equality, although such
benefits as better housing and economic op-
portunity and more freedom of movement
would slow the pace toward rebellion.

32. Communist Influence. The small South
African Communist Party publicly dissolved
itself in June 1950, shortly before the Parlia-
ment voted to outlaw it. Its membership was
only about 2,000, with a hard core of some 400
active workers. A fourth of the membership
was white, and the bulk of the remainder were
Indians, though Communism was spreading
among the Coloreds. It made very slight
progress among the Natives, although they
had long been a major target. Forced under-
ground, the Party’s influence remains small.
White workers will not tolerate Communist
opposition to the color bar. Among non-
European groups, the spread of Communism
is hampered by the internal dissensions over
tactics, lack of organizers, and the ignorance,
conservatism, and distrust of the masses.
Moreover, civil officials are alert to suppress
its influence.

33. However, the Communist Party's longer
Tun prospects among urban non-Europeans
appear good. As non-European grievances
multiply under repressive Nationalist policies,
increasing racial tension and sporadic violence
should expand the opportunities for Commu-
nist exploitation. A number of the top non-
European leaders are Communists. The
Nationalist actions against the Coloreds will
probably turn more of them to the Party, cre-
ating a reservoir of educated party workers.

_ Though Communist progress will not be swift

24

among the mass of the Natives, the Commu-
nists may have greater success in acquiring
positions of leadership among the Native
organizations.

External Effects of Prospective
Developments

34. Repression of the non-Europeans in the
Union is inevitably deepening the suspicions
and dislike of whites by non-whites elsewhere
in Africa, particularly in British Central and
East Africa, and thus contributing to insta-
bility there. The continuation of Nationalist
racial policies will confirm the belief of the
non-European intelligentsia in the British col-
onies that similar measures would be likely in
their own areas if the British Colonial Office
relinquished control. The Nationalists’ racial
measures, well-advertised in those areas, are
helping to undermine Britain’s efforts to find
a basis for racial partnership in its colonies.

35. Prospective developments in the Union
will almost certainly further isolate the Union
from a majority of UN members. Moreover,
failure of the US and UK to take a firm stand
in the UN against South Africa would expose
them to charges of race prejudice and support
for colonialism, and would probably create
another divisive issue between the Western
and Asian powers. If the US and UK took a
stand against the Union, it would cost them
a significant measure of South African coop-
eration.

36. The internal tensions in the Union proba-
bly will not in the short run have any greatly
adverse effects on the flow of strategic ma-
terials to the US and UK. All white South
Africans are interested in the maintenance
and expansion of commerce. However, the
internal political situation will probably di-
vert attention and energies from existing pro-
duction and transport problems, and deliv-
eries of the materials will probably fall short
of US and UK expectations. In the longer
run, when rising racial tensions erupt into
widespread disorders, the outflow of strategic
materials will be hampered or even halted.

CEORET
REE EEE OL Ee

Probable Foreign Policies

37. Though many in the Nationalist Party are
disposed toward isolationism, South Africa’s
desire for US-UK markets and capital, its need
for allies, and its fear of Communism will lead
the government to continue to cooperate with
the Western Powers.

38. The Nationalist Government currently re-
gards Commonwealth membership as tem-
porarily useful. However, the old Afrikaner
aim of an independent republic, the diametric
difference between Britain’s racial policy in
Africa and that of the Union, Britain’s proba-
ble opposition to the Union’s expansionist
aspirations, and South African irritations
with India will probably lead in time to re-
placement of the Commonwealth tie by a bi-
lateral relationship with the UK. As an in-
terim step the Union may declare itself a re-
public (like India) while remaining in the
Commonwealth.

39. The Nationalists denounce the UN as
futile and meddlesome; they may carry out
their threat to withdraw if the UN intensifies
its criticisms of the Union’s racial policy.

40. South Africans have long aimed to extend
the Union’s rule and influence in Africa. The
present Government has urged the UK to

_ cede the British protectorates of Basutoland,

Bechuanaland, and Swaziland. Almost cer-
tainly, however, this aspiration will be frus-
trated for the foreseeable future by Britain’s
firm opposition. The Nationalists also have
cultivated relations with the white settlers in
Central and East Africa and may have deliber-
ately encouraged Afrikaner emigration into
Southern Rhodesia. They hope within per-
haps a generation to absorb the Rhodesias.

41. Since virtually all whites are anti-Soviet
and since both major parties would almost
certainly desire to help defend Africa, the
Union Government would make a strong
effort to send forces to the Middle East as
soon as possible in event of general war. On
the other hand, the Nationalist Government
Will probably not in peacetime improve sub-
stantially the effectiveness of its armed forces.
We therefore believe that under present con-
ditions the Union will probably remain for at

= AQE

least four years unable to provide a full ar-
mored division for Middle East defense within
three months after the outbreak of war. If
war should break out now, South Africa could
not provide the division in less than one year,
even with prompt, substantial, outside ma-
terial aid. Moreover, rising racial tension will
increase manpower and equipment require-
ments to insure internal security; and, if war
should break out while the controversy be-
tween the white groups remains intense, re-
cruitment for foreign service would probably

be handicapped by the preference of men to
remain at home and support the interests of
their group.

42. As an ally in the event of war, South
Africa would be available to the West as a
base. As a non-belligerent — an unlikely
Status in event of war on a scale sufficient
to make its facilities important to the West
— the Union could probably be persuaded to
cooperate by economic inducements or pres-
sures on the part of the UK and US.

-22l

UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

BELGIAN
LEGEND

CONGO
international or intercolonial

TANGANYIKA
boundary

(TL TOA WU KS
—-—-— Internal administrative boundary

mmueaess Study area boundary

aco

Statute ides

ANGOLA

aa
'
:
1ORT
SOUTMERRN
RROOESIA
uw Cray
ray
c
a
= BECHUANALAND
WALVIS i < wea
wane | $m
Tw
=
3
¥
¥ n” |
mn
2
- 2
o
Yy :
* ipa

ATLANTIC

SOUTH A

RACIAL POPULATIONS
BY PROVINCE

UNION OF SOUTH aFitCA

CAPE OF GOOD HOTE

Provence Wiete Matra = Cotored Tout
Care uf Good Hops 44s Lalit wees Malt
Merl. 2. 274.608 (SOIT INGO F Leary

Orenes Free Sense tyne TNR ist totager

Trenernal ABSA ATLA 78S 2 4A

Prue ¢ the minors coated af rhe Unemn of Smead Alben a »
whe Cavs Tome a the inguleree cama! Tore (1900 cereal eek ia? SIS ME LICL MASSe Le ITT
47es? 1082
