EstimatedD Pub Date) a Study of Assassination
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135832, dated 5 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135832).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

+ he P9-O10LSR
: THIS DOCUMKNT MAS BREN

SO a cnet ime | a APPROVED FOR RELKASR BY _
Te - CSE PRG OM [2 DuY.45

5S re tater to met, 0 osld to have, isndoaeel

= < te induce motivation his followers “to etery ‘out |

tical end other mises, eoualty, at the coat of ‘their Lives.

*

Te fi here used to Weeceibe the planned killing of @ person who -

fa rot wader the legal fariediction of the killer, who As not phyatcaliy”
ia the hands of the killer, wo has been selected by « restetance

_ Ofgent ration for daath, end whose death provides positive atventages to :

Re that orrent zation, a ~ : Sy
- a . . .

. 4 epee’ we assumed that Atvedi1 ~nerer te ortared or, :
ark TO
Qo am thori sed w any U. ¢ . Headquarterr, “though the latter msy in’ rere

imatences agree to ite execution by members of an asocci med: ¢ foresee

the victin nd tnovledge-virich wxson anay Se Taryn resistence rgani.eation

SLY eennreg pis:
6f-dhval gos. Assesaination of pereons » for atrocities or 1 EG
repeieals may be reyerded es fast puntabmaat Aslling apetitien lester (“as
wnone burgeoning carver isa clear end prowent danger to the case of a tips
freedoa may be held necessary. . .

But asseasination con seaeldom be employed with a clear conscience. ‘.
ry ‘ /.

Persons whe are morally scquissish should not atteapt it.
CLESSIFICATIONS
The techni ques erplayed will vary accetdin: to whether the subject
pe enevere ef his danger, eware but urncsarded, or guarie!. They will also
be affected by whether or not the assassin in to be killed with the subject
hereafter, asesasinations in which Ure subject on. sware will be teraed |
“etple*; those were the subject: te ware: but ancuarded will be termed
“@aase"s thooe where the victim is guarded «ili be termed "guarded." ar
If the easeasin 10 to die with the eubject, the ect €il) be called :
"lect .* Lf the anseacin ie to escape,’ the adjective All be “safe. * i
onenld be acted that no compromise ahonl4 axiat here. The oseassin macy”
nat fall alive into enesy haze. oO OS
A further type divicion 1s coused by the nosh te cancel the fact . :
that the subject wee actually the victin of secesrinetion, rather that

 cociéent or natural eonces. ‘If ouch concodinent 10 denireite the ,

Following these definitions, tHe aasescination of Julius Caeear

was safe, single, and terroriatic, wile that of Ruey ode was lost,
er Fe gaanied ami oper. _Coviously, successful secret esueasinations are not
- > recorded. ns assascinaticn’at all: Gena of Thailand’ and’ “fuguetus |

Teesar may have been the victiae of s safe, ue and secret assassination.
ii “ a ES. fe a

wae

hase assassinations use*? My involve wndestine ee anita’ er rerbers of

{ . e ®

3

erininal oryani zations.
THe aS8aceyN

In safe acsaarinalion’, the ascassin needs the uaial qualities of @

Cantestine arent. fe ahaclt he determine’, couraveour, intelligent,

rencureefal, and sevsloalcy active. 1 specisi equipment i- ta te used,
“euch as firearac ce 4rscr, it da clear that he must Live cotatancing skill)
with guch ea a , : i
| Except ie. @uaccaes terreristic assuasinatior, if is desirable
© ES 7 = > US Z 5 =: “5
that the Assaasin he a transient fh the ures. He should haya m absolute

minimax of contact with the rest of the orzentration, and his inetructions
should be given orally by. one person, only. His safe evacuation after ‘the
act is suse lately eesent ic), tat here again contact should he as Linited
as possible. Te is prefarehle that the person iesuing instruct ions ee ,
< conduct ay i Urdrawel cr covering action wich’ ‘may de neceseary.
¥ in lost sssansination, the aececsin mist be 2 fanatic of some sort.
Palitice, religion, esl Tevetye ere ebout the only feasible motives. van , :
a fanatic is inetahie psychologically, be must be handled with. extreme care, a
Se must. not know oe identities of the other nenbers of bas  orgentaatier,

for elthough it is intemted that he die in ithe act rometning band ions rote
+ significant eed oe ae

ay

a.

hen the decision to assarsinete has bom reache’, the tactics of

tee operation mst be planned, based upon an cetimate of the eitustion -

stati that used in militery operations. The preliminary estinate

ll reveal gaps in information snd. possibly indicate a need for special
oquipacat “which mist be procered 6r constructed .: hen ell necessary data

has been * colledted, an effective tactical plana can be prepare. qn

planning must be uontal; no papers should ever contain evidence of the ©

epération. : °

~
In resistance zituationz, essassination nay be used as a counter-

reprisal. Sinec thie rewirer adve-tising io be effective, the resistance.

erpanizstion mat be ina position te warn high cff4cials pobliicly that

. . >
their lives will be the price of reprisal actins wrirst dniocent people. “és
ay

Such a threat is of no value unless it can be carrlei out, so it aay =
feecessary to plan the assaseinstion.s® virhous retronuitie officers of ay
qt.

the oppressive racime exd held such plans i: readinerms to be used orly ae
4f provoked by excessive brutalitr. Such plans most he “aod ified. 7
frequmtly to meet changes {n the tactical situatior. ae a

\

The eseontial point of assassination is the death of the mubject. A

mone being may be killed in many ways tit rureness is often overlooked
wy those who may be emtionally wenstrung by the sericasness of thie ect

thay intend to commit. The specific techniqee emplayet will depend wpon

ed

& large number of verisdlese, but should be constant im one point: Death —
smst be absolutely certain. The atteapt on Ritler‘e life failed beemise
the conepiracg did not give this matter proper sttention.

Techniques ~~ be considered os ‘follows: Shoes

It is possible to to kill a men with the bere bande,

ct very faw are sksiifal enoagh to do it well. fven

a highly trained Judo expert will hesitate to risk

willing vy hand unless he has abeolutely no , alternative.

newever, tbe eiaplest 1ocel toold are often wach th
most efficient means of ‘gnsaseinatior. 4 hawer, axe;
wrench, scree driver, fire poker, kitenen knife, lap .

atan’, or atything hard,- weary and aeoty wD wmffice. ‘

A Length of rope or wire or & melt vill do if the assassin :

fe strong and agilr. “p21 wach iaprovised weapons have ‘the

-4mortant advantage of availability wd apparent innocence.

The oevic sh Lethal machine c2n eeijet te KG 4]) trots
¥ :

were an iter of ap crting K00Us w_ccaeda’ -

in sii safe canes daeere Be acaagcin way De subject |
ES

to search, either before cr after the act, speci alized

weapons should not be urad. Sven $n tee lost casee, Une

aaaxin nay accidentally be aaarched hefure the ect and

ghould mot carm incriminating device if any sort of

ote

lethal weapon can he fey revised ut or near the site. If

op

aietie

the assessif normally carries weapons becauge of the nature

fa

of his jot, it mor til] ve desirable to improvise oes’

ogg RM

implement st the scene to gtoid disclosure of hia identity.

yw

t
YaSeateb

yi SN edic hv

~

2. accidents. ws

For secret aaseorination, pees simple oc cheer,
the contrived eccident is the most effective technique.
Ven successfully executed, it causes little excitement
at in only casaally investiceted. . >
The most efficient accident, in simple assassinstion,
is a fall of 75 feet or more onto & hard surface. Wlevator
shafts, stair walis, unscreened windows ad bridges will :
serve. ridge fails into water tre not reliatle. Im
simple caxes a private wecting with the wuciect may be
rranged at a proecray-carec location. The act may be
executed by <uddee, vgoroes of the ankles, tiprim
the ritiact over the edifice. if the assassin irmetiately sete
up an outcry, pliayirme the “norvified witnesnc”, no alidi or

euvrertitious wi theta i if necessery. :

In chase cases it +il) asually be necessaty to stun oe
drag the subject before dropping hin, Care ic reyuired to
Me / TS A
dn@ire thet no wound or comitien not attributedlie to the
fall ie discemanle after death.
Falls into the sea or swiftly flowing rivere may auffice
if the subject cannot swir. It will be acre reliavle if the

mean een i

of the subject's death ani at the same time seem eee

ART

If the eudject's personel hatite ushe it.

feasible, elookol say be used eany-Bnucesetabhy te ee
prepsre kin for a contrived accident of any Kimi. _
Felis before trains er subwey cars are usally |
effective, tut require exact tixing ed can saldom
be free from unexpected obdsarvatioc.
Autesotile accidents are a less satisfactory means of,
assacsinatior. bs the subject 4s deliberately run dows, ‘
very exact timing is secassery aed investization is likely
to te thorwerh. If the subject's car is tampered with,
raliatility is very low. The eubsect may be stunned or
drugged avi then placed in the car, tat this ie only
reiiatle | wren the car can be run of © a high e1iff or into

dean water without opeervation. -

Arson can canes accidental death if the subject is
drugged and left in a wraing building. Reliatility ie
not satisfectory valese the brilding is iaclated and

highly combustible.

In all types of aseaesination except terroristic, a
druge cm be very effective. If the eseeesin is treined
ae a doctor or rarse end the subject is wader medical

care, this is an easy amd mre method. Am overdoee of

“qorptine atminietered on ¢ sedative will cause death — -

without disturbance and is difficult to detect. Tae cise

of the dove will depen wpe wether the subject bas Cowt. ae

Seen

aE Tt

er eae at cies at

cise of death will often be held to te eaute slocbelion. a
Specific poteons, each ea arsenic or strychine, ere

effective but their possession or procurenent 1s |

ineriminsting, 2nd accurate dosage is problematical. ~ °
Poiscrt was used unsuccessfully in the escsaceinations of, : 2
Rasputin and Kolohea, though the latter case is more oe

accurately described es a mirder.

deg
‘

is : tny Lacey obtained Sige devien mr be evomefety spared.
A certain miniawn of enatenical knowledge is needed for reliebility. a :

pet akee aga tre eee
the heart is reached. The heart is protected by the rib cage and is —

aot always easy to locate.

Au ; me d 1] wounds were once nearly always oe bat wodera aos
enaccal treatment me mide this no longer tree. ; mo Been oe - oo:
Absolute reliability is obtained by severing the espinal cond 99-2

in tha cervical regia. This can be done with the point of « imife or
a light blow ef an are or hatchet. ™ as ee
Another reliaula mathod fa the severing of both jugrlar and “f
carotid * Llood weesals on beth aiaee of the windpige.
if the subject has teen rendered wicca ticua by other wounds

or druis, either «ff the auove aetiodg. can be used to insure deatt.

| a
S. Blunt weapons “Ae

Aas with adve weapon, ‘lune veapons require some anatomical -
knowledve for effective use. Their me advantage is their universal
aveilatility. so &« oe my be nities up almest anywhere in the world.
Sagedall and cri Wt bate are very widely distributed. Sven a rock
or & heavy stick will do, and nothing resembling s weapsn heed be
procures, carried or echoequently disposed of .

Blows should be directed to the temple, the area just below
and behind the ear, and the lower, rear portioa of the skull. Of
course, if the blow is very “heavy, aay portion of the uper skull] will

dc. The lower froatal portion of the Mead, froa the eyes to the throat, ee ee

can withatand enormous blows witteut fatal conaequencee, 9 /<
a : & as:

wt taseees Se. SEG i Mey eten Tae eg Sate Seas ier a + Deh AER ne TE Te . od “ :

Aneffectively. The aesassin wmually bas insufficient technical _
knowledge of the limitations of weapons, spd aoects sore tances
_sccuracy and killing power than cen be provided with reliability.
Since certainty of death iz the sajor requirement, firearse should be
used which can pioeide destructive power at least 1008 in excees of
thet thought to be necessery, and rengee should te half that con-

_eidered practical for the weapon.

Piresrra heve other drawbeckr. Their pousesaion is often
incriminating. Ther my be diffiewlt to obtair. They require a
degree of exeertnes: from the user. They are nuicr. Their on
lath Jt iy consistently over-rated.

4

However, ‘cere are: many caras in which Cirenre are probebly

wore efficient than any other auane., These cares comualily iawolve

distance between the ea Da thérsubject, OT Carparative physiesl
Bs < in ok -
ee a

weaknera cof the agrzancin, as with a worms.

{a} The precision rifle. Ina quarded ansansination, @
good bunting or sarget rifle should alweys be considered ae
a poseibility. Absolute relisbility can nearly always be ,
achieved et a distance of one hundred yards. In ideal
Circumstances, the range may be dxtended to 250 yard.
The rifle should be a well made bolt or falling block my
action type, handling a powerful long-range cartridge. The ©
4300 F.AP. Magmm is ere the best cartridge readily
eveilable. Other excellent calibers ere .375 H.&%.. Magma,

_ 270 Winchester, .30 - (06 5.°., 8 160 Mt Magnes, 9.3 x

ST ARAN Tm eo ae

62 ve and othere of this type. | These are preferable te

ordinary military calibers, giace asmmition available tae
then is usually of the epending bullet type, vheress
most ansrition for military rifles is full jacketed and
hence not sufficiently lethal. Military emanition should
not be altered by filing or drilling bullets, as this will
adversely affect sccuracr. |

The rifle-say be of the “bull gun” variety, with extra

heavy barre] and set REEeats wut in any case should de *

capalile of maxim precision. Ideally, the weapon should be

at-le to crom tr one inch at one hundred yerde, out 2as
grows nie adequate. The sight ahould be einai, not
only for accurecy, cut pecsuse auch a eight is much better
in dim Light or newer darkneazr. Ag lorg as the hare outline
cf the target is discernable, a peg sight will wort,
even if the rifle and'shoo ter are aa total da rhanes ft.

An expanding, hunting dullet of such calibers as
deseribed above will produce extravagant laceration and
shock at short or mide veneers Tf e man iz struck just cace
in the body oevity, bis death is slaost entirely certain.

Public figures or guarded officials may be killed wits
great relishility and scm safety if « firing point can be
established prior to an official occasion. ~The propegands

walue of this eyeten ay be very high.
m()) The packine cus.

eee

ihe eaneraled'G6 @ GbE eb ea cents ;
igual tebiibecaelaanan
dispose of a loyal gum crew without commotion and take
over the gun at the critical tine. | wary
The area fire capacity of the sachine cm should at de
“weed to ecarch out a concealed subject. This was tried with
piedietaure leck of success on Trotsky. The automatic .
feature of the machine gun shold rether be used to increane
reliability .y alacine « 5 second burst on the subject.  =wen
with full jacket amamitior, thie will be absolutely lethe)
“tf the burst pattern is no larger than a eer. This can be
MuecueDieled zt about 150 yardr. In idmal circuses: tances, a
properly tedded and isieetea machine gin: can de it at aso yart.
'@ major difficity is piecing the firet tarst exactly on the
target, as aost. me = ee ate treined to spot their os
on target by observation of strike. This will not do in
asseeaination as the aubject will not wai‘.
(ce) The Submachine dun. a | 3
Tris weapon, known as the “machine-pintol™ by the
Ruseiane and Jermans and “machine-carvine* by the British,

is occasionally useful in assassination. Unlike the rifle and

machine gun, this 19 e@ short retgs: espon and eince it firee Sa J
pistol ammunition, mich lose povernat. To be reliable, it

should deliver at least S row rounds into the acbject!s chest,
“though the AS saliner 1.3. ‘wf tare 6 me anger mares
of Willing effietncy than the 9 mu Reopen arm

blank. While acourate single rowds can be delivered
vy edbywechine guenefe at SO yards or mre, this is

not certain mowh for easasaination. Under ordinsry :

| circemtances, the SIO should be used asa fully

- . automatic weepor. In the nands of a capeble gunner, & a

high cyclic rate is «@ distinct advantage, as ewed of *

. execution ir spst desirable, particularly in the case’. °

of miltiple subjects. He
The wutsmchine gun 1s especially adapted to ‘{adoor « ”

work when more than one subject is to be assarsinatec.

An effective technioue hac been devised for the ure of

a pair of sub feachine gunnerr, by which «a room cantaining

are many as 2 dozen sutjects can be “puri fLeo” in about

twenty seconde with little or ne rink t+ the guoner’.

Tt ia illuetreted belo...
ie ae Sly
teat
“s Figr .

an .

While the ™.S. sut-machine ¢uns fire the most lethal

cartridge, the higher cyclic rate of some foreign _-

weapons enable the gunner to cover a target quicker with

acceptedle pattera density. . The Bergman Model 1934 is 2
particularly good in this way. ~ The Danish Medean SUC *
has @ moderately cood. cyclic yete end ie eduiredly eoupect ,
and conces lable. The Iussion S0's bave goed cyclic
rata, Wet are biaticepped by 4 omall, Light protective 7 3
hich requires muife bite for eqeivalems Killing Cffeet: | eB

A large vere chetgun is a.

Killing iastriment as long ee the range is kept wider ten .

f

yards. It should sormally be used only on single farce as Og
it cannot sustain fire successfully. The dberrel aay vee t:—~t—“‘ =
Soawed-off* for conveniance, but this is not a aignificant FE
factor in ite killing performance. Its optisun renge is 4
just out of reach of the wubject. 00 buckshot is concidered , 3
the best shot sise for a twelve gage tum, out anything from a
single balls to bird shot will @ if the renge is right. =
The arsassin should aim for the solar plexus as tha shot a
pattern ie seall aclese renge and can caeily mss the head. .
{ce} The fietol Fr
While the handvun is quite inefficient as 4 =
weapon of assarsinatior, it da often asec, sartl, because *
At 1s reedily availacle 2 and can ve conver ed on tie *perton,
and partly becaiwe teagan’ gre not wicely soprectated,
While many well known afcarrinat! one have beer carried mut
with platols (Lincolr, Heading , Ghandi}, suet aitespts fail
as often as they succeed (Truman, foosevelt, Churchill). ;
_ if a pietol is used, {t should be as powerful a6 ,
possible and fired from just peyoad reach. The pisto] and 3
the ehotgun are used in similer tadtical situations, axrcept 2
that the shoteun is mich mre lethal and the pistol is 5
ech sore easily conces Led. A \ 4
In the hands of aa expert, © a poerfed. piotol te qusce” i
deacly, but ouch caarte ere rare ani not sevally available , a
a "Sia ta Spectaly ASS: my, A5 eT. (eis Seetee) a

Be

AW awe!

| garteidges auch as the "520 and . The stonld be avoided.

"senate con outticn bot are 2ete RLUAIC. “Ste-power

In all cases, the sibject ewld opt « solidly at
least three tines for complete reliability.
(f) Silent Firearne )
The sound of the explosica of the propruant in
a firearm can be effectively silenced by appropriate
attechmentr. However, the sound of the projective passing

threugh the air camet, since this sou is cecerated <

_outside the weapor. In cases where the velocity of the

pallet greatly exceeds thet of sound, tha noise #0 conerated

Ls woct. lowder than that of the explosior. Since all
powerful rifles have surziea velocitias of over 2000 feet |
per secon’, they camet be silence’.

Pistol panetet s 2 the other mane, ufually trevel
slower than sound aad “the Sowed® of ‘their Might {a neg ligidle.
Therefore, pistolr, suutachine guns and any-eort of improvised
carbine or rifle which will take a low velocity cartridge can
_ be silenced. The wer showld pot forget that the sound of
the operation of a repeating ection is considerable, and
that the sound of vellet strike, particularly in bone, 189
quite lea. - y |

Sileat firearms are o&ly occasionally weeful to the
escaseirF, though they wave dees widely publicised in this

coanett ica. ‘pecawee permissible velocity is low, effective.

precieien range 14 bald to abovt 100 yunds with rifle o

Fa

ab

peesosia, bet mire poseescion of 4 silent  eirearn is

likely to create enough haserd to ‘cownter the edvastage
of its silence. The silent pistal combines the deedvantages
ef any pistel with the added one of its obviously clandestine

purpore. L on

A&A alevworicelly eighted, closed-action cartine shooting
a low velocity bullet of greet weight, and Milt for eccuracy,
could be very’ useful to an assassin in certain situations.
At: the time of writing, no such weapon is known to exist.

a Explorivee.
Bort.s and demolition charges of various sorts have

been used frequently in’ asnacsinatior. Such devices, in t. reoristic
and open arcassination, can provide agkely aad. overcome guard barriers,
but it is curious that bosbs have oftan been the ixp lemon t of lost
acsassinaticor. ~ , .

The mjor factor whtet effects reliability ie the use of explosives
for aesaseination. The charge met be very large and tha detonation
must be controlled exactly as to time by the assasgin who’can observe
the subject. A saall or moderate explosive chaige fa highly mreliable
as a cause of death, and time delay or booby-trep devicee are out renety
prone to kill the wrong mar. In aati tion to the worel aepects of
indiscriminate killing, the death of cesuel bystanders can often
produce public reactions unfavoredle to the cause for which the
assassination ie carried out. .

“het . tne
Boabe or grenades « should oan be throws ate @uhject. “hile this

18

NS ‘

ah Oe Serial eats Sc cine ca a (Q) reacting” ee
hie atteok position, (2) placing the charge close @ictgh to the 13
target and (3) firing the charge at the right time.

Placing the cherge surreptitiowly ia e¢maccs permits « change
of proper size to be employed, but requires accurate prediction of
the swhject's reeds,

Ten pounds és high explosive should normlly be ragarded as ¢@
winiais. and this is ox lusive of fragmentation materia). The latter
can oonsist of any hard, to ¢ mterial as lor a@ the frazgamts are
large encugt . Metal or rock fragments ehoul4 be walmrt-sire rether
thai pee-siee. If solid Plates are used, to d« ruptured by the
exploeioa, cast iron, 1* thick, gives excellent fragmentation:

Militery or commercial high re Oenes are Piece for wie in
assaseination. - Homeemde or infiirieed peices should be avoided.
Waile possibly powerful, they tend ‘to be dangerous and unreliable.
Anti-pereonnel explosive miseiles are excellent, provided the assassin
bas sufficient technical insuisdce to fuse thes properly. M or 82 am
werter shells, or the 120 sm mortar shell, are particularly good.

ti-perwoemel shelle fer &, 88, 9, 100 and 105 om geas end howitrers
ere beth Lares enough to be completely reliable and emll eaugh to
we carried dy one man. rae > Fs

The charge chould be se placed that the subject 1s ast ever six
fest from it at the macat of ates

A large, ret Saree at the come filled with irea ftaguente
(oueh as 1* aute end bolts) an fire a RigAly Lethal stengue- type

ftrepnente Pregeeate should 4 poostrete at least 1° of soasoned pine

or equivalent for winima reliability.

«
.

Any firing device my be used which oermits exact control by the \
assarsin. An ordinary cormerctal or military exp loder is efficieat,
. J

as lont as it is rigged for instantansous action with no time fuse in

the syster.

€

The wire scronn electric target can serve as the trizzering device

. : co ae .
ami provide exact timiay froa ian far away as the assassin can reliably

hit the tarzet. This will avoid the disa iwantages of stringing wire

* sleeaa the cropesed poritiens of the assassin and the sxifect, and
alsy permit the aniansin ta fire the charge from a variety of porsible
nosi tions

The radio. switch can ve sagt “LO fre a acharre, though its

reliability isa somewhet lower end 4ts procuranent may “not be eary.
a

eaaiere 5 *

. Co
tf ere my be presented ‘brief outlines, with critical evaluations

Se the following assassinations and attempts:

Yaret Hedrich
Lincola - Hitler

Ra rdi ng Roosevelt
Grand Juke Ser coi —— Truman
Pirhvie Monsolini -
archduke Francis Ferdinand Beres
Rasputin Aung Sang

-~ 18 -

~

eat

[akeameaneee

oe on . Conlerence Room Pechhy gv€

O Eaters Room Queerty Bat Qurer ly
(2) Srands in Doorway

a

(Dfnisheg Burst. Commends “Sri tte’ reps’

Béct Thro Boy. loee§ Magazine,
COVEKS Cove tdo r Replaces Empty 13

Ow Commend Shi tr% Opens five on Oppocit
Sime of Terger Swings gate Gover ferns GrorP

07 OS

Q) heres Roem. Commanas “Go7
Ceorees Rear vivk nearly ful!
Haqotine ,

(DO Command “Go. Leads

withdrawal Covering Front
Oth full magariae

QDopens five on first Se by ccd re
Peace .dwmgs Across group Toward
center of Mass. Times Burst rofmpry

MaAgALine At ent of Gane .
(Deevers Group to Prevent JwowjinvAl

Danseroes Reacrions, /E gecesvary,

Fires diidval Buowts of Zrovrds

oO @

2 2
“QO O
—6©@ ‘SM
Ofinicres Buaer, Com mate he fr. Props

Bek Taru Loon
« Rephce® Magazine «
Covers Cone wor P 4

4) On Command, "Sha te® Re-enters room.
Cavers grove 2 kits SevviverS wiek Teor
Revad Rersrs, Leaves Propag Dada.
