Snie-repercussions of a Unilateral Declaration of Independence by South- Ern Rh
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000036519, dated 3 September 1965.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000036519).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ri SPECIAL NA Ti On: AL INT TELL GENCE STE L MATE

sore eS!

ee

IB CISIOS OFA UNILATERAL

Tee

=. Seer os Sl eiceetier

ee
$08SE

Sa ee ee

for. Release” - gn

JUVE

mo
Th

ae Bets SS ad tn by th
UNITED 3 "STATES. JNTELUGENCE BOARD

ee

HOTE «+e we ee eo

CORCLUSIONS . Lt * o e .

DISCUSSION «+ « © se @ «8
I. BACEGROUND « «

um. TH SITUATION AND PROSPECTS TH RHODESIA « « «

il.
Iv.

¥. PROBABLE REACTIONS BY PORTUGAL AND SOUTH AFRICA
VI. THE UE'S POSITION
VII, THB COOWNIST STATES .
VIL, THE UNITED NATIONS. ,
1X, "BB OUTLOOK
x. IMPLICATIONS POR THE 0S

te ae eee WRN eg Rene ee

ee ee ee em te ct tee a

ods Bie Saha sacle) ae 14
a wha ee eae 15
a a a ear 15
bene esate 17

7

wey

cn ete oe ee

CENTRAL IHTELLIGENCE AGENCY

13 October 1965

REPERCUSSIONS OF A UNTLATERAL DECLARATION OF
INDEPENDENCE BY SOUTHERN RHODESIA

his estimate is primarily directed to the few months following a
unilaternl declaration of independence by Southern Rhodesia, though some

longer range estimates are made.

CONCLUSIONS

A. We believe that for the next several years at least, political
and economiz sanctions would not dislodge white rale in Southern Rhodesia
and that effective military intervention from any quarter is highly
unlikely. Rhodesia'’s white minority government would probably be able
to maintain internal security following independence; it would be unlikely
to undertak® serious economic measures against neighboring African states

wiless severely provoked. (Paras. 22, 20, 16, 6-7)

een eee TE TE SES TPT

leat Seria ar ac a Lentcient haat aA Me et
} hs :

ee atten hte ane lge

wege or wae?

ET OTT Py | Vo EPR OP ara a emer meres EY EE — ee —

ay ahcias a
ond sips Fae wa

wre

P
WN “Sa Termes seo 7a momen es
hos bis Se cater

B. African frustrations over Rhodesia's ability to sustain itself

yould cause recurrent difficulties for the West in the UN and African

measures against Rhodesia. (Paras. 9-10, 15-19, 21, 24)

C, The situation might lead to severe strains between Britain
and the African states in the Commonwealth and a few of the latter might

withdray. (Para. 18) ¢

D, The probvebijity that the West will be unable to resolve the
Rhodesia issne to the satisfaction of the Africans will provide opportunities
for Communist propaganda. While Western influence will suffer 4 ton-
siderable setback, the West will, bowever, retain an important presence
in Africa, and Africans will continue to look to the West for the bulk

of their economic, technical, and other assistance. (Paras. 20, 22)

DISCUSSION

I, BACEGROUND

2. <A decision by the government of Southern Rhodesia to cast
aside ite remaining colonial ties and declare independence would provoke

an intense emotional response throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, end create
@ new and troubling issue for the West on the vorld scene. Although

ae Sat eT aee e > im *,
* aby D aoe . > fee epee Te TM
er 7 . ge hE ee gE Fg TS BG ee

SS Oe ee a a a a TET TTY
TPT aRE «

Roodesia hes been virtually autonomous since 1923, the UK has withheld

full independence because the 220,000 Rhodesian whites have been unwilling
to provide fronclad guarantees of political advyancenent and eveotual

ority mile for the territory's four million black Africans. The whites’

oe)
exasperation with Britain for maintaining Rhodesian colonial status has

{increased sharply as most of Africa bas become independent. At the same
time, black Africans in Rhodesia end elsewhere regard UK and Westero
attitudes towards Rhodesian 4ndependence under a white minority as a test

of Western intentions toward Africans generelly.

II. TSE STYUATION AND PROSFECTS Hi REDDESIA

2, Prime Minister Ian Smith's Rhodesian Front (RF) Party won a

crushing victory in the May 1965 perliementary elections by campaigning

for the coctimation of political domination by the whites. The whites,

of course, constituted the overwhelming majority of those who voted.
Although the Front’s leadership 1s drawn largely from its most conservative

the party reflects the determined mood of the great tulk of the

wing,
incapable of

white community, which is convinced that the Africans are
airs, and that the Africans’ own welfare, as well
under white rule,

administering their aff
as the interests of the whites, cen be secured only

They are confident that the West ill soon acknowledge the justice of

their argument that Plack African governments are inherently unstable

end rapidly coming under Comminist influence.

3, The black Rhodesian nationalists are badly éivided and constantly

wer among themselves over personal and political aifferences. ‘The

Josbus, Nhono's Zimbabwe African People's

bic
pejor black nationalist movement,
pnion (ZAPU), and the rival Zimbabwe Africen Rationel Union (ZANU) are

poorly organized end ineffective, with most of their leaders either in
Activities by ZAPU and othe> pationalists in exile

detention or in exile.
iguous

pave been ineffective, only partly because they jac bases in cont

areas. The pationalist movement in general has thus fer faLied to attract

the firm support of African urban workers. Moreover,
tem, plus its banning of African parties and
rs to remote arees in the territory, have

the government's .

effective security sys

banishing nationalist Reade

Jimited nationalist activities to minor uncoordinated acts of violence

and sabotage.

k, he whites’ desire for independence is belsterea by their con-

tats economy and their beltef that independence ywould
erritory bas

fidence in Rhodes
pssure an inflow of investment and white immigraticn. The t
cultural and mining econbay, and a rapidly growing
ertainty has limited the flow

a well-developed agri
industrial sector. Although political unc
of investment capitel, Rhodesia hed a balanced Dpodget and favorable trade

balance last year. Tobacco js the most important cash crop and the chief

It earned over $110 militon in foreign exchange last year, with

export.
than half the cvop. Although net a purchaser of

the UE buying more

Bhodesian tobacco, Zambia is an equally important customer; each takes over

a quarter of Rhodesia’s exports.

NE

etter Wy ; ie F “ :
a nN Pe ee MM ae ce

5, Indeed, Rhogesia's importance to the economies of neighboring

plack African states is likely to be a crucial element in their reactions
to Rhodesian independence. Salisbury has a hold on Zambia, whose economy,
dent on Rhodesian

In 1964,

particularly the copper industry, is heavily dere

electr
sent of Zambia's electric power (most of which is used in tre
ty thermal

fe power, coal, and transportation facilities (see maps).

93 pe
pining industry) wes generated in Rhodesia at Karibe Dam or

plants in Zembia using Rhodesian coal. While some alternate sources of

a period of time, loss of Rhodesian
4s

coal and pover could be developed over

supplies would seriowsly curtail Zambia's copper production. Atso,

1004, over 98 percent of Zambia's overseas trade was carried by the

Rhodesian railwey system. The Kariba pover complex and the railroads

ave jointly owned by Zambia and Rhodesia. But Salisbury has physical

control over the power generating equipment and, of course, control over

the railroed through its territory. Rhodesia provides employnexs for

some 270,000 foreign African workers, including some 50,000 from Zambia,

150,000 from Malewi, and 70,000 from Mozambique. The loss
fects in their home countries,

ef the earnings

of these workers would heave serious ¢

particularly in poverty-strikea Malawi; even the repatriation of some

might have a disturbing effect.

“ eRe oi — Tp aE la SE ye Se ee teat aerate . rath
ined gop, Ba gt 8 ip were? . na - i ees a at Pe Arena arres hae sage ee iors
rai E wilt ok

soimtie! c@acacitewerte. ter gale Pe mare pret A
~ Be ee a a ae

Rhodesian Policy after Independence

' 6, We belteve that Salisbury would prefer not to exercise its
jererage over Zenbin, and would rather have it a3 @ threat to guarantee
the latter's good bebavior. Once 4ndependence bas been declared, the
Rhodesian Government would try to minimize frict.ons with its African
peighbors to the extent competible with ite ow stability and economic
well-being. It would seek to maintain 6 “risiness as usual” atmosphere.

Rhodesian whites are concerned for their country's status on the inter-

national wcene; after independence they vould be even more anxious to

attract capital, immigrants, and new perkets {

me Bhodesians realize that once they had played

as the capability to eripple-Zembia's cash econony --

their trump card
as well as eliminated

they would have seriously damaged their own economy

one of the mjor factors inducing caution in their adversaries. Never~-
minor economic harass-

theless, Rhodesia may engage? 4n occasional acts of
that it has the ability

ment toward Zambia and perhaps Malawi, just to show

to inflict serious injury on these African hostages.

Cede es apt olen at Wari SEER sy ate 2° Seer no ee tas.
ig ee. - s ee ma wo ee ee
. eee eee

7. The Rhodesian Government would be able ta act tolerently in

“gpese potters,
gecarlty problem for some considerable time to come. The whites' decision

in part beceanse it is unlikely to face 8 serious internal

to seize {independence would not in itself persuade the black nationalists
qo resolve their differences, although their African sympathizers would
{nerease their efforta to beal the rift. We look for some increase tn
pstionalist infiltration and acts of violence and sebotage. Even if the
ptionalists prove able to form some kind of goverrment in exile with
Organization of African Unity (OAD) encourager.wot, we foresee no early
evergence of 8 threat*that could not be handled by Rhodesia's efficient
§,100-man police force supported, if necessary, by the armed forces.*
Salisbury would be unlikely to apply drastic economic retaliatory measures
against neighboring African states unless it was threatened by a serious

{nsurgency based in and supported by those countries.

ele : : i : : ao

¥ The Rhodesian Police Force has a Field Reserve of 13,000, about hal?
of vhom are whites, plus a Special Reserve of about 12,500 vhich has
Little training. Tbe army has an actual strength of 2,500 regulars
{all officers are vhite as are about 4O percent of the enlisted
personnel). There are in addition 7,200 white Territorials who have
some training, The air force has 1,200 men and six operational
aquatrons;-five of which ere suited for en internal security role.

VY. FROBABLE REACTIONS BY PORTUGAL AND SOUTH AFRICA

12, Portugel does not welcome s crisis over Rhodesian independence
and the uncertainties 1t brings, particularly because it inevitably
focuses attention on Mozambique and Angola. Liston's inclination is to
remin faconspicuous. However, Portugal would probably be willing to
allow part of Zambian traffic which normally transits Rhodesia and

Mozambique to use the route through the Congo (Leopolévilie) and Angole.

13. Nevertheless, Portugal identifies its basic interests with
those of the white-dominated regime in Salisbury, and it cooperates in
security and intelligence operations with Southera Rhodesia and South
Africa. Portogal would not support UZ or UN economte sanctions; indeed,
Portugal vould quietly facilitate Salistury’s efforts to evade then by
providing access to international mirkets and giving some financial

assistance,

th, Like Salazar, Prime Minister Verwoerd vould be epyrebhensive over
the consequences of Rhodesian independence. He has done what be could to
dampen Rhodesian expectations of South African scpport, and there is

-~10-

virtually no ckence of @ merger with Rhocesia. However, South Africa
would prefer to see a white-ruled buffer state in Rhodesia for es long as
possible. South Africa would not join in UK or UH economic senctions
against Fhodesia; on the contrary, it would provide an elterrate means
of access to the sterling area and might help merzet Rhogesien exports
in the event of a boycott. Should Salisbury become pressed, Pretcria

would elcrost certainly extend lcans and credits and, if required, arzs

and military equiprent.
YI, THE UK's POSITION

15. The UE faces an extraordinarily cruel dilemm in determining
its resperse to Rhodesian seizure of independence. London recognizes that
African erotions run high on this issue, and that British, ard to & degree
Cormouveeth, prestige in Africa is involved. On the other bend, the
British economic stake in Rhodesia is large, rany vhite Rhedesiers stiil
have close family or personal ties in the UE, and any British governrent
would be reluctant to employ extreze meescres against their "covsins.”

he UE bas both publicly and privately ruled out military action ecainst
the white regire. London would therefore geek to devise measures short

of military action but sufficiently harsh tq -

Mi -ove an independent Rhocesia towards guaranteeing a greater

political role to the Africans,

ree ET ADL OZTE FO Z| a? beans q
ORE? [ROOD OE YU | ee ec ee ach ce THA | aa

t

16. It will be very difficult end perhaps impossible for Britain to
devise a cembination of political and economic measures which would have the
desired effects. Prime Minister Wilson has slready said thet unileteral
fndependence is Ptreasonable," and if it takes place, the British plan to

dismiss the Salisbury cabinet and to ceil on atl other countries to deny

eid and diplomatic recognition

o she British would also eesors to economic sanctions. A munber of

punitive measures, €.g-, removal of Coccorwealth preferences, freezing 7
any recaining sterling belances, and exclueion from the sterling bloc,
could be taken without adverse effects for the hard-pressed Er tish

economy. ‘The tougher sanctions, @.§., @ tan on Rhodesian totacco or

a general ~race extareo, would be costly to both sides.

the UK decides to do, however, ve estirate that neither Portugal nor
South Africa would support London aceirst Salisbury end, in these cir
cunstances, the economic consequences for Rhodesia would be significent but
not decisive, The next Rhodesian tobacco crop will not be rarketed until
mid-1966; therefore, a tobacco boycott could not have a significant effect

before that time.

"ae ae
Se a ee

18, Veamvbile,.the UK will attempt to head off c=
reaction by taking the initiative in the UN. If Rhodesien independence
4s declared, Britain will propose resolutions calting for UN economic
sanctions along lines parallel to those which Britain is reacy to impose
unilaterally, But i+ will be very diffieult for the British to ret

the initiative at the UN, for few Africans would be satisfied with

AEA STERN 1 AS T/A VENTE A AN re a bs SIRES LMA ENT rey

Daa ea ee ey RT © Pes Wh oe

i)

wba

+ am

SNR TIGR LS 6? PS, eet ft”

19, The UK would press the rajor trading netions (perticularly
France, West Gerrany, Jepan, The Netherlands, and the US) to cooperete in
economic sanctions. While such governrents would find it difficult to
reject gach eppeals, particularly if embodied in a strong UN resolution,
the ability of most countries to control their smporvers end expervers
4s seriously limited, as the UK kncvs from its own enbergo experience.
Therefore, while other Western countries would joia in interrational
indicnation acainst Salisbury, end seek offictaly to be helpful, they

would probably not prevent @ccess to supplies and markets.

VII. THE COMMUNIST STATES

20, The sitvation would provide Moscow end Peiping with attractive
opportunities for political meddling at Little risk or cost. The Comminist
powers would engage in propagenda in end out of the UN, would best the anti-
colonialist drum, and vould urge the Africens to right their grievances,
mney vould offer support and encouragerent to Rhocesian exile grotps, end
would show themselves willing to supply some arms and treining for sub-
versive and insurgent operations. The Chinese, in particular, would see
in the situation an evportunity to advence their hopes to infiltrate
southern Africa. As the frustrations of Rhodesian black netiorslists
and their activist supporters grev with the resistance of the Rhodesian
Government to pressures, they would protubly accept, if rot welcoze,
Chinese and other Communist support. Nevertheless, the Commmist powers

-ik-

nee oe ee
en

wrnpeeqe oe

.- tateby

ee eee OSE

a ee vee

ar -get

VORTPUT UD

wee

co pyrrerge pert

ower

eget

en

are unlikely to play a decisive role, partly because the wealmesses of
the Rhodesian nationalists, e.g., the lack of militery forces and coatiguous

pase areas, would make it difficult for the Commnists to bring these

essets to bear.
VOI, Tse UnIcED RATIONS

@l, The Rhodesian questioa will quickly be brought before the UN,
probably by the UE. Even if the British are able to retain the initiative
at the UN for a time, they will from the very beginning come under strong
and repested pressures for stronger meesures. The Africen states then-
selves cen take few practical steps other then to increase their eid to
Rhodesian exile nationalist groups. The African countries, however,
will use OAU and Afro-Asian meetings to prod the UN to enact mere severe
resolutions and to keep the issue active. Over the short-run the Africans,
nevertheless, will probably moderate their criticism of tke British as any
UK ana CH sanctions are applied. However, their patience would scon be

exhausted if, as appears likely, these sanctions prove dneffective.

They would then call more urgently for international military intervention.

IX, THE OUTLOOK

pe, It seers highly unlikely that African demands for military
4nteryention would receive effective support frou the cajcr powers. For
the next several years, at least, the white regine in Salisbury is not

215 =

- Ya Wye

remap?

or eet ay Oe Cio. te oo P ae one

ee AE ae

likely to te dislodged except by militery 4nterveotion. Thus it eppears
tet the Rhedesien issue would tate its place as an unresolved, if recurrent,
{tem on the UN acencs. Despite strongiy-held anti-colonialist attitudes,
the Africars would be forced to live with Rhodesia, es they hate in similar
situations which are beyond their power to change at presest, €.g., Angols
and South Africa. This situation migat endure until the Rhodesien nations-
ist movenert could secure power throngh its own efforts, oF enti there
were a general shift of power to the Africans in southern Africa. if
this proves to be the case, Western influence in Africa will suffer 4
considerable setae: Toe West will continue, however, to maintein en
important preserce in Africa, even in those countries most deeply concerned

in the status of Rhodesia, and Africans will continue to look to the West

for the bulk of their economic, technical, and other assistence.

re TL eae

a

oe pee

xX,  IMPLICATICNS FOR THE US

a

to be a decisive influence on the Rhodesian question, though it eould assist

the UK rorelly and patertally, The US could, of course, deny diploratic
recognition to an independent Rhodesia. The US could also join UK and UN
economic measures aceinst Salisbury, but we have estimated that they ere
unlikely to te effective. US tra¢e with Rhodesia 4s only one-sixth that

of the UE, and US direct anvestuent there amourts to only $56 mitlion.

In any event, the US would share in

the onprotriun directed at the West by Africans. The Rhodes‘ans a7¢
concerned about US public opinion, though not so much as to give UD

newly won independence or to yield political pover to the black rajor-ty-

ch, The US lacks sufficient political jeverage on the parties concerned

< 7 r- 7.
7 se" F
¢ MIGERLS ; af
z fants, CAMEROON t ;
: ao pane 1 ie
ae "= _» Stanlepulle
: ne ate
_ ~ GABON fe DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC” has
' RWANDA ‘
Arg Saisie
tFe
| aUJUMBURA ;
i ous as “Mo base
i “y Momoata
oTange
_ezenbar
i
t
I
'
H
! Pono ampoimey'* gece ; e 2 ‘ \= Sena eae
i Gavela %, Ae TS i nF QA PE Roe a
fvae
a me ; 4 Vile Capea

:
i
’
t KANDABWE
: COSLFIELDY »
+
:
‘ r BECHUANALAND Bilongze
= 4 W.K.) Aad a a
:
4 |
g
, i ke ah Sirs df
j : ' i " C41 LOURENGO wakQues
j Lugertz » “ 3 noe ;
: } os SOUTHERN AFRICA
. cee MAJOR RAILROADS ;
: .
: a Railroad (3/6 gauge.
| eee : : i . a] : gacept ag indicated)
: bd Ly e Brice oF comme chee *

370 soc Ho

we WOO 4gC asgeeres
esse eevee
wey areresstar serrate hed
82276 10-65 —

a ES A en ee

1. eee

at J + = = ‘ : oo

ae

f cena J c > . .
fs ENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC . = at
SUDAN .
+ CAMEROON ° aaneuit gem Lae 4 ETHIOPIA
[St grout SS A Neg wan P aa _
MH ba dane *, ., te
a . & \ — yore ‘ par Nee Ae
FERNABDO PO “7 i f \ an Las .
Tae ra H 4 * Rusuit (
at aa bese “;UGANDA } aye :
mo @., 7 ; a : aioen \ ed ey , somaLL,
1 omen » wad eae { tf’ o “ni ff me
Gp erevuce Ss Z 7 MMPALA ’ KENYA ;
~ I Loker oe ‘i
Euwarc Feeturia 7» =, aiid
=i

/ GABON ; °

“, Let

« © / * DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC. ere ee ee \.
\ eo eae oO ‘a a ar) @agu ) te =
NN Lage : a JT. i e,

}
A <, azz OF THE CONGO J wan
BRAZZAVILLE f BURUNDI gy
Ars! t Ao =

\ oe Reaws si
WAND ww eg es eer ON TANZANIA a
Pani cation” Sia Ketto, f. A . ~.. 7
Malanie ) bat S-
i 4 2 awe Miware —.
nnn eh eee
\- Cooper = nnelreDA { 3 phe
Lomo, it S14 ogi : Jf" ;
Ee Colle | rsl |
: ase 7 fa: .
ANGOLA eS : L
(Port.} ‘4 z —— Pomerete
os * Vila i Eee ; a 1
Mogdmeoes. : Seroe Pinto LUSAKA ae Cum
zi [ fl . (9 m ZOMBA eee, WOE
i i ANS cue : 4 a:
mee os en eee * aa
SOUTH-WEST AFRICA mS Ne -
{Mandsce~ Rep. of §. Af.) fy
gett 9 Bfoattontern +
:
_.g BECHUANALAND |
(U.K) q Pa
WALVIS BA : r. bd :
than A “watws Bay ed i MUZAMES E ;
CHAN ES :

SO0TH SOUTHERN AFRICA
St FLOW OF
ATLANTIC . MAJOR COMMODITIES
EAN Commodities shown are in

addition to general height

ms am igteresimia beeretary

Qo eareces 6 cen casts

Q ad bad Bt] OO Pray,

9 G0) 200 00 Mourvometey

er a INDIAN CERN

fr ee

mete meerEartanee 8
Or APEC RSs LT oy Pemerre toed

ee

B2277 190-65
