Meeting no 14 - 04 May 1961REGARDING Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012402, dated 4 April 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012402).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

7+ 8 tet ma report te you. The demtby to the KOS REIN? in.
+ Ye in the Firat Geer - FT eoulé only stey here a
Little longer XY enld provebly dig owt « Lithte more, aml probably sosrthing
abot the ezent net here. 6: You know, nov that you hart been ao yell
reccomeniod 6% the enbassy, the less you go there for ummeesinry reanons, the
better, 8: They wrote up thet the doleamtion here worked very well, thet
wt did not annoy tha csbasey or make ony demmmia on ther, et thet we did
everything sseroding to plan. i foot out from converestions with GAERALOY
thet the deputy ROALD of the X08 is RAPPTKOY. hz

8: In my opinion, ninte you have already expoced KM persons here,
Lt wool be 2 good iden to push thts forther, But don't bother the crv,
Yeu: will knew el). shewk them even more Oa the foture, bub don"t toned then,
Of eourse, you mist take protective meesuren, This is go thet no repereucetons
Will fall beck on wr through ony ackion, But prwes agatnet the te ast
fo tosh that the REZToeN? will be renord, Thie will upest their tivities
eonsitiere amt befors new people ean Beets here end becom ortented, they
WiLL lose © greet dent. G: I uerstemt, ant the ONY shonld semetn tn a”
Favorable porition. 5: Thetts right, int of course keap then harelecs.

G) 1 By the wy, T have @ requent of you. GENERALOY told me thet
et the airport the Beitieh weigh our beerees art thet we ek pey perionmelly
for ell exuess weight over twenty kilograms. We @on'y heve emp money. O: Rov
ean this be 4 thin te a Soviet pleret Hi Te AMMOPLOT do nob heve thedy ova
tepresentehives here oni th: lucene te wetehet by BRA. If there Le exces
Ingenge weteht, they will eherme efves they ewe to de this asecrding to their
xitles, We wih eee vhat we end de, ;

guh

ie 3 .
you trendiate this for met iret, be reverts very much thet he canst eee
you personally. He aqked me to reley this meemen te you. x hove been shown
the cath of allngtones whteh you hers mate fer the covernmente of Great Britein
emi the United Htntes. If sm fliled with otmivation for the great extent thet
you here wein, ani we ave min it) of the rieke thet you ars running, I heve
elso had reported tome the information which you have pacned-on to ua. I
rea a a aca be of the highest value ant importance to the
Free Vorld, : :

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 AMAR 1992

‘fertene pergomliy by the Quran.

z
my fevotion, unt ry readiness to fight uniter your the ent of
wy life, Dering the course of the part tus weeks I have het tha gool

vk bare
gentlesen preeent in this roce. These matters were of a military-stratezte,
avd politienl nature. I vish to state to you Boldly end Ieently tet I.
still here guffielent mtrength and henlth cet outfictent training of both «&
theoretical awl prestienl neiere in order to give meeating to my new missions nov
and to exeewbe then ia the best maurr possible for our Bees World.

was pod 1 T wish to newure thi Lowel and yourselt thet very Little tine

very well. ig manner, very eormct ant selenbifieslly, about & grew

axprens the great derive whieh I heve cerried in my acul ent whitch I entry now ~
f even thenght shout this in Hossow « end thet is to eveer my fealty to ny
treen Kiteebeth TF end to the President of the United States, Hr. RERARHY, whost
I om serving es thety doldter.. Although wetertunstely due to elreunstancer,
thie te nob possible mv. I boge that in the firture ZX will bo blessed by this

WHT: ‘Yes, well, I would ithe to reply to that. First, now thet
Col. (Suoject's troe name) te going bese to Reapia, I beg that Ra proeved with
esution in view of the greet risk, Wt IT went tim to huow thet should the tine
coum When he must leave Russia and sobe bie bee tn the Western world, thes the
obligetions that we umioudtedly heve tevards hin will be firnly end eleerly

: Intt aetially
goloml in her Hejesty's merriee, Furthermore (please oxy thet) I will serve
exnebly as tnrtrwered ext thet I'm in very ecnpetent Ronis. WHITE: Of thet f
feel mre. To mewt you has bren delightful. (Hote: Wine te served for « toast.)

hy

WHITE: You heve had meny meny houwre together to make this possible.
for

WHITE: You unferstent my Pnglish a little, do yout &: I know English, but as
one says, "fifty-fifty", or less. You know I ves in Turkey and I wan assistant
attache. (To G:) How do you assy "aeting intelligence chief?" After this I hed
no oppertunity to improve my English, T ata not have practice. tut I promise
else in future I improve. (Rote: ALL the preceding is said in Fngtioh by
Subject.) WHITH: Now that you're a colonel in the United States Army, I think
that this will be necessary. 8: You will aleo beve to learn Amertean.

& 83 T would like the lord and Six WHITH end eleo my controlling
care 0 cers who are concerned about me and who will be receiving materials
frou me in the future - I wish all of you to know that I will serve to the very
emi in an honest, faithful manner and will be resolute to the end. Thet is my
character aml I am confident of my power to do #0. WRITE: ‘Tht is the impression
that we heve, smi we are strongly enavineed of this, 8: Thank you, I will
attempt to justify your faith. warren: I think that you have conveyed your
Geelres very clearly to us and I think thet wa taderstend thie clearly ent
entirely. 8: It ie very plessast for me to hear these words and as a soldier
I receive them willingly. WHITE: How then, 1f you will exeuas me, I think I
will leave you to your work. The very best of luck to you in the accomplishment

of your missions. My very beet regaris to you gentlemen, (Note: fir waite
was excorted out by #.)

everything
honestly ant briefly. 4; Thet wes good si I feel sure that Lord MOUNTRATIEN
Will tell her Majesty about you. &: This obligntes me even more to work hard.

mother Russfen? Hi He came from the Greek Royal Rouse, but they were inter-
married with the Rugsien Royal femily anit the Queen's graminother was a
Car

ae 7 me .
« ,
: » . i
ae 2 , - . i
ra : ~ ‘ ‘

fur

heel «@ St Well, shell we get down to work? G: Fre. X heave seme.
questi here which you may or msy not know the enewers to. Firet of all, do

Vel s yom happen to know of the militery mmber system for Soviet mtlitery vehiolest

bea*® 8: First of all, ell military vehieles with the exception of commant vehteles

ad are all painted a kheki color. All military vehicles have a letter designation

hens Whtieh ta keyed to elites, or garrisons if they are not in a city. This 1s to

ces permit the Chief Directorate of Highway Control, namely the militia, to

en ascertain ate glance to what military unit the vehicle belongs. I do not know

what the mpecifies mre for eneh wmilt, On the right hend side of the ced,

from the driver, in a red ater aleo signifying that this is a military vehicle.

18. 8: Ths mumbers within a gerrison are iasved in sequence ond traffic
eontrol offiesre whose business it is to know can tell et once by the mamber
which specifie unit the vehicle belongs to. With respect to elvilian vehicles
used for Intelligence purposes, I heve already told you how the mubers run.
G: Whet would the letter "U" designete? 8: Theat is an alphabetical letter only
for & rumeriesl sequence. Int others Like "H" would be for Moecev, "2" for
Tila, ete. HOB ani MVD vehicles heve a sero somewhere in the mmerien) sequence, -

| either before of after. SEROVY bes tyo zeros, and then two more digits. However,
or operational ears would be entirely » Theee are only for KdB, MYD
ani GRU offialal purposes. The PYO also have thelr own mumerteal sequences.

VE i ; G: Do VARERTSOV, MOGKALENKO, an’ ZHDAMOV have thedr own private
a
\

plicit § Niameeeccr ac dmeds
nar \ ances assigned to then 7 8: Yes, they do. VARENTCOV aleo hen his ovn
ee reilrosd ear. ‘two eontuetore services it ant sometimes he tekes the wife and
PR far ( femily in omer to seve cerfare. 6; Whet kint of plenes are they seslened?
| Ba They get ILalis, and KARUBETHEV has en I-18 equipped with an office, (: Where
— aye they stationed uselly? §: Either et the airport off the Leningradakiy Shosse
or the Viukowe Airport. They are not at the Sharabetevo Airport, although near
\ Sharebetevo, five kilometern eway there is a civilian airport for internal trevel.
a G: Who services there sircreft? 6: Tt is unter the command of the ehief of
Pope ' aviation and specifically umier his deprty for technical maintenance services.

' This te of comes under the overeli control of the Soviet Air Fores. Yor the
sireraft given to eivilien chiefs of the Preestdium there ia a General Mayor
who fe in chergs, A full colonel is the personal pilot for KHAUSSCHEY. He has
: . e million flying hours. (Jokingly) Be has = great number of hours. We eall
| ——- then millionsizes, .

stl 20, G: Did you ever hear of an orgentzntion called the Interdepartmentel

: Wee Committee for Interplanetary Communientions? §: There is nothing by. thet name,
ae \y and Z haven't heart of it. 4: Possibly this hes something to do with your

fe ;

L 7 ,

a

eis

6 %

| | | a

[Ci wi stersrve_
SrednNe2eFo-

MASH NOES TOVeENIYA

SAe nore ama a pternenentnet tetas EA RS ee eT ao
4
‘¢ me a ee ce
a A ert St aerate a

ties Re Ete ee en EE a =
af
es

Bie ee noL
weg = os
-

“a ‘ i
. =f -
2 : - : ; - : :
. i : : x By ra

gus

Seba, | Commonauts. 61 This would concern MBDELIN and MOSKALENNO. ‘There is seme
« training school. vhere space fliers are + subjected to all kinds of

a ~ a

rained antl
4“, | tests. At Honitio there 1s aa alr Pores training bese. It {a m= eoemen’ school.
v/ \ Te ie in the direction of Raglinsk. Tse academy has been greatly reduced in
: “size, The engineering oviation sehool im. Ziwkovskoge is still on |
Leningradaiiy Shosse, G: Bo all of these experimental flights such as the one
Soe, by GAGARIN ave eeally under militery Juriedietion and heve a mi Liters purpoes,
2p (fp 2 | St OF course they do, primarily for photography, It would be absurd to say
cn ¢! [ that GAGARIN was not given eautomatie photography to control.

f
|
MerSreitrage, 21. Gt How about the Ministry of Middle Mochine/Construetion? 8: That

; is exactly what it fe - Q: Dees 1t not have « eomection with rocket
i A sonstruction? §: Yea, it does. This is its cover name for civilien purposes

( / | end international purposes. But setually they are building rockets, 1: Who No

ee is in charge of thts committee? St This is unter the Couneil of Ministers of —— |

the USSR. G1 Wivere in 1% located? 8: Tt is in one of the wudidings on the Guictit
| Ritayskiy Pereulok going towant the Deershinaskly Academy am& their polyelinte 2. (2,
~~

iS

Cw pide

emcees

Fraalnse quite often, a young officer who ones had e minor fire at an artillery dun?
“e 8: Yea, thet wes Captain SXLYAROY ~ near Moxhayek. 61 Is thia about 120

% //* | geormous ertillery base there, His neme is Yevgenty Mikheylovich. G1 Is
ae it closer then Borodine? §: Ho, it's further from Moscow. G: Somewhere south -
of the highway, not fer from Borodine there Le a buge military installation,
Do you know what it ist Or could it possibly be this artillery basei 8: The
artillery base in enormous ant it is called a Clases One base. There is even a

‘railrosd thet erviess it. ‘Thin Captain is stationed there wow. ke ts a
Gav transportation officer; he is a terk officer. 1: We belfeve it has been there |
‘= wince 1955. 8: It is an ola base whieh han been expanted, It is unter GAU,
Cae . 23. G: By chence are you ever in a postion to obtain first orter

: ; Survey data? S: Thet te a very specialized service. Although it is larse
Cif. end also has certein efvilion components, the material is very closely held.
oh In ay stalies of roeketry, ebstract figures were used. All baste trian ulation
she data is tightly held. They ere partially unier the Ministry of Ceclogy ant
~ | Protection of Resources of the USSR. This ministry is loeated on Bolaheye

Ne. Gruzinskeya Street aerons from the Zoo0logteal Gariens. Tary olsc have 4
Ge thy | topographical working section. @: With reapect to this work who is responsible

7

Be re
Suey”
lund

bene te.

Nfowacen £, goes
Sate one

Le Yer

fnChta + i

oS 2

nde aby

i

ec

{
Wy |
fat 2

for data needed by MOSKALENKO? Bs MOSKALENKO hes his own unit for this, but
thia ministry esoperates with them. ‘They provide HOSKALEIN withroch baste
date, even he has his own unit. They also provide weather eherts and
Safarant ica gas ecu’ venseast ha foo alll Was Geta rece Les
the USSR.

24, G: In February 1960 Marshal KONEY while speaking to the Vernaw
Feet Defense Ministers in Moscow salé thet though the ICEM hes deen a ’
the first country to develop an enti-balligtie missile will enjoy a great
Strategie ntvantage. Have you ever heard any discussion of this thene in .
VOYENNAYA MYSL or any other military cireles? S: In the first place whatever
KOHEY said cenld only be at the direction of KHRUSECHEY. Even when MALINOVSNTY
seys anything it in at KERUSHCHEV's direction. Wo mepehal cen express bis own
Yiewn. On ocesstlon, when necessary, © militery person cen make a strictly
tecinitesl eteterent. It Lf one wort of polities te involved then his statement
will have beemvritten out for him word for word. (9 prtaery) a

25, 3; Unve you ever heart of DOROXHOV who is in eherne of this progran?
St Yes, I have heard the name, ant I think thet he Is the one who received a
decoration Of Hero of Socialist Labor four tines. I will sleek on this, Tt seene

26. G: DIA you ever heard ef a place eT ee meee Tele

Belkhach whieh te engaged in atomle work? 6: 1 44a wtih sting of
“Baryy-Shagan but I have heard thet at Lake Balkhash they are

fissionsble atomic materials. Hoge quentities of water are needed for > this.
There in quite en Insteliation there. 61: From when Ald you hear thist 8: I
heerd this from many sourees, even on ocension in leetures which referred to
this pleee, It's hart for me to pinpoint a specific source, net ere
GAPANOVICH told me about this aines he hed served in the yer Past. Be saatd
that there ere oreas in the Por' Beet and Central Asta which are remarkably
suited for sith work end that they ere very easily conresled. there. Ther |
_ *places ere hard to destroy milesa one knows their exct location.

G1 What 418 KARUSHCHSY infer vhen he sald in erly 1960 that nev
-srneantce wenpons hea been devel Which mee more dangerous than the ICBH7
S: We bad in mind thet he given instructions to develop a new Ok
tat oy ee ee eee aon, They ere working on
thin now, tht in addition to the atonte energy for ney ere aiso working to
develop an extremely hich calorific fiwl. OF thoes. I have already given you,
you vill notice that Boron ip one of the ingrediente. eet grey ae

intensively with huge monetary: allocations to develop an atomte energy fuel.
8

fir

Gr fabs calle barca, RA aoe ,
net there sre highly yee Meare Bei tinh or Consdien 23 agente? &
taly thet 8 Of the Soviet Strategie Tntaligenee oak
met they heve American, English, French enl Gernen egents. I know this like TF
know tvo ent tve is four. It ie anvther mstter to estinnte the value. For
exemple, in Turkey even though som egent casiidates hel very little operational
capabilities, etill the order was for thes to he recruited. Me one

a top-renking gomere) to be reeruited. G: Thie is all ORU? 6: Yee. @: Bow
about the KOR? 6&1: Of emurse they have (then), Not only em I sure, bub 2 will

pat my head on this Decause the 08 borrowed money from me fron my ops fonds

to psy their agente. The tliegels alec heave thely ow network. They don't

use the people native to that comtry neceserily but alec wee people brought
in from third countries.

LL, 21 tery, 20m I vill dive you s complete List of operating agents
pertiotlttrly in Cayton. 6; Ke ere not aoing to touch them. 8: Suppone
I don't meme over to you fer two years? G: Tf texing action against then would
in any woy evfenger your semurity during thie period of two years, then I would
any we wrald not take ection until you ces: ent. §: I uevlervtend. After I an
out you can roll them all. wo. + Ani you cen help us. 8: Tf youeould isolate
one egent ent under the proper legend piek Nim up, even though hie records will
show coum tiebeck to me, IX could st11) get by with this, But if two or more
were pleked up then I would really have bet it. 61: In general, vhenever we
Secite to vet we would only do no efter conmiltation with you, sd you can

give us the proper guidance.

noted ont murveilied. wy sre all being seid. They receive perlodle

instruction ant they heve equipsent such as redio gets. Prom tim to tine

thelr radiow are checked technically. In Pakisten the agent net is

insigqnificert. But there is one sagenh who hee been giving information sbout

calculating mechines, Ceylon, however, tw an eetive avea. It shovwld be shut

re GO: As I anid before, we vill teke no netion witht prior cee tetan
‘yor, ;

3. St Let me give you a quick reeuw. Bo not toweh anyone in Inte
now. ‘They ere not achive. They exe on commervertion. ‘They should simply be
31. it: In thin eomection XT vould Like to mike a valid point #0 he wilt
unierstemd, Earlier he mentioned thet someon: wae. given twenty-five years for
espionage. I want to enphestve with him thet we have known about this exer for
e long time, Wit aif not take action deliberstely becanse we wented te protect
soneone, It wae only after it was mo longer necessary toproeteet scmeune thet
we took aotion aginst that spy. 61 Thatts en exellent point. I will explain
that to him. 8: OFNHRALOV teld me about thie case. He also sald thet it wes

9

S14

difficult to work in London eni that there is no demmatrative type of

» that there is very good covert surveillance, They particularly
vateh the man who is meating with our people and then they try te double
him back ageinst us.

32, 8: Iwt me finkeh regarding Ceylon. The agent produces American
manuals on military data. He ia a corporal. Fromote the corporal, would
be ny suggestion, buat transfer hin to another job. Let him heave a higher

official position emi more money aw if this is en acknowledzement of his good

‘work, but at the same time eut off his esceusibility to important materials. .

This verietion could work as 2 form of tsolation. Nr This would presuppose
that we could deal directly with the goverment of Ceylon in order to effect
this end this we would not do. 8: However, valuable Amertean teformation is
leaking out. G: Neverthelens we exrmot truct the Ceylon goverment in a matter
of this kiwi. There are too manyuncelisble elesenta there. 8: Yes, there ere
quite a few leftists there. But at least you van stop sending valueble Anertean
publientions anf data to Ceylon. et him sit there. To hell with him, but
fion't give him eny new data. %

. 33. Gt Leb me ask yom something shout coder and ciphers. Possibly
‘you mey not know the angvers to theay quertions. First of «ll, who prepares
and is in charne of the codes, that ia, fron the viewpoint of ecment
responsibility ent distritetion? 8: First of all, codex are prepered by

cryptographic unite witieh are Top Seeret. Highly trained eelentists, that
is, methemtietens ait there, ¢: fo whoa fe this subortinate? 8: This te
suboriinate to the Acsdemy of Setenees. First of all the Academy of fcelences
has the meet intensive intelligence research, but in addition to this they

have a spacial service consisting of mathematicians who wee electronie machines.

Thia in dome to ayold any possible reprtition of eyeles of munbers.

3h. S: With veapect to military wage, those codés are uler the direet
tontrol of the Mintetry of Defense emi the General Stary, A specific deputy
of the General Staff is personelly responsible for thie, He is concerned with
this selentific seetion as well as with all codme and he is the iemediate chief
of the Eighth Directorate of the General Stare. He ie a generel leytenant.
G: This teat the Mintstry of Defense level? 8: Yes, 1t te. This eonglomwration
has unfer it. the mxthemtical scetion of the Keateny of Setences. They algo have
Under then the training of code elerks en apperatus of all kints, ant under it

40

lds

Kea
Ai

ba €r-6&

CH She

uh

35. 6: They even have short-eut codex for our ow eryptes. For exemple,
my nome CLENIZY, and nemes like KARPOY, KARLOV, can all be coted in five nunbers.
Incidentally, I just remembered that RUEENKO's erypto is ENVER.

35. G1 Who does this for the Kom7 S: The KUB also has ae eryptegraphic
saryice ond they aleo get the basic material from this brain trust of
mathesatielons in the Aendemy of Sciences. Of course, they ean take this
material and work 1t over to suit their own cryptographic purposes. ¢: Who

special KGB untts such as the OMSDON. No one can enter theiy aren at the Academy,
In the pest they were even pold for doing seerst work bub new all poy for
geered work hae been eliminated. i

37- 2 Bo you know anything about the methods of principles of
how they prapere ciphers? 5: No, I don't. ty Of emurse they alec heve codes
es well as ciphers. 8: That's right. SEROV hes his own code ant directorate
chiefs heve their ow coden. Incidentally, the M08 also hee on Eighth Section.
Thet tumber is the indteator for all. este am cipher work, ~

38. 1 Where 1a your ORU ratio etetion located? Ie it on the prenives
where the offices are? 6: It's like tits. We heve our own CHU stetlows Just
outside of Moseow, ‘hese are the OSHAZY. Sane are fieeds there are bulidings
of a permenent mature, ete. We also have mobile stations with the equipment
mounted ce tricks. A reguler tourter service gore to GRY headquarters from.
these stations. ;

39. 8: The station that hawiles traffise fro Allegals on « continuing
basis, however, {a Loested right on the f1fth floer of the CRU headquarters.
This room in lowated juet neer where SOKITOV has his office. I even renenber
sewing the redio station when Io was the duty offieer, The duty officer
vavelly cheeks sofes in open areas to be sure they are locked antl eleo cheeks
senled doors which are supposed to be locked,

AQ. 1 Who ts in charge of normal conwamieations Between your CRU
headquarters ant your REZIDENTURAS ebrond? 6: These commmiestions are
hantled by the OSHAZY which cre exelusively subordinated to GRU. These are all
out of town. G: How shout, the KGB? §: Ty heve their own OSHAZY, also out

of town, but they may also have a speetal station atthe Drershinskaya Ploshehad'
es we do for iliegels. .

Bhs

hl. Gt Who handles the nechantes for tranenitting a messeget For
exaxple, suppor a ypricrity message errived at your OSNAZ for BEKRENEY.

Lephore
Eighth Sevtion. Of course this line canned be intercepted, that is, monttore.

direetly to the Highth Section by teletype mchines. Then Eighth Section
personnel decode the cable ant deliver 14. Low-level information type eobles
are deexted at the resetring OSNAZ station. Remenber there is no seb pattern
emi these are diupliente methods of trenesiesion. Roth methods are considered
to be wertine seeurity types of comemiertions. The Geeodel cable ab GRU,
in handearried say, to SEROY.

h2. : The HOW premumebly operates in aimiler feshiont 8: Of course
it does, 9: Does the KGB ales engrost in radio comamications intelli gene
wotivity? 8: Yea, they do, just 28 we do. G: Do you know where this
headquerters is? d: Mo, Ido not. Bub they operate on the sane prineiple that
we do ami there ia an interchange of informmtion. oe:

43, Ot Do you here ony other extensive radic station network
the USSR sinen distences are considershle? 6: Yes. Every RP has ite redio
station, tut of course their equipment te nowhere near the capeeity of the
CRU OSNAY, station: sear Meseov. Citen they act as relay stationa ant when they
get on incoming mesmmge say fromthe direction of Tran, the entire coded message
ia trommitted to Moscow. They do nob derofe it at the RP. Of course if the
mesnage 16 directed locally, say te the elie? of a military district, tt wuld
rennin there, This ecementer of intelLiigense operations in a military district
is responsible for contucting inteliigenee ageinet the eourtry te which the
district ts adjerent. S: De they alrendy heve high speed radio trananitters?
8: Yes, they heve enl they aleo use teletype. :

Nh. Gt With respect to your tecimienl develogments for egent r-
radios avi tradeeratt items such as commealmeart devices ant SY, does the GRU
fo all this themdeves or is there a central teetnical isboratory witeh may
also service the KUBT 68: No, the GfU has ite own shop ent the KGB aleo hes
its ow, but they do heave an interchanges of deta Detween them. The better
it. Of gers operstional details are not given as to who used whet in what
area. G: Is thie arrangement impose! by order or heve they tone this

volunterilyy 8: Ne, It has been dome voluntarily. The coordination has been
effected as the result of agreements by high-renking offictals.

12

4S. Gs Where ie the KOS leboretory? Sr ft belteve thet they heve
their laboratory where they have their VAK, off the y Shoese.
G: Do they heve enything in Kuchino? §: Yea, they heve, but exestly whet they
have there I don't know, They also have their higher school nem the
Bolorusskly Vokzal.. G: Do you have any idea of the type of activity they have
at Kuthina? 6: fits is a technical radio center. Of course they are uniler
different cover.

fs

h6. G1 Do you have any very advanced scientific technology witeh is
electronic ant which meamures certain imilees all over the world? 8: In
electronies ow greatest development hes heen in eonputers uch as the STRELA.
Row I believe: they heve already developed the OTRELA 4. ‘The eorlier models
were intermediate developmental models. We algo have developed devices whieh
operate as vibrating mebrases sani can reflect soul immises even from glass.
The KOB uses this for their interception work. ‘The GRU dees uot. We here
not uel then ourselves but we have been told about thea. We lucre eleo been
told that such deviees are possessed by both the Amerieens antl the British.

WT. Gt Meve you ever heert that in other countries, say in England,
en electronte device in a bor hed been concesled sonewhere? This device
receives some rort of impulses and continuwesly tranentits them beck to you.
S: Yes, there ave auch devices. Yhey work mrtomatierliy. I don’t knew the
principles, but I have heard thes referred to as beaeons (HAYAXT).

(48) J) Ras be ever heard of exy techolenl devices thet may here been
used against foreign exbassies in Moseow! 61 Hot only hove I heart of then,
but I heya seen them. Many of the tyyew lurve been copled from your ~
equipment. They heave thin menbranes sbowt a half centimeter thiek which eet
23 = microphone ant whieh can be plastered inte « will, Wires lest out to some
tranmitter whith 4a monttored. In general, these are eopies of instriments
which you heve installed that heve been diseorered. G1 But they hove wires,
How about thone wither wires? ©: I hevenot amen any Like thet and I don’t
know shout them, although they are probebly working on euch things. 6: However,
they definitely plant these devices in foreton enbosstes in Moneow? 6: Yes,
absolutely, in every exbessy where « potential enemy ia located ~ ary waleh
we can penetrate,

() 8: This bringe tonint a point which I want te emphasice. of the
macros Soviet enployees at the American, English sust-Canedian ecibasaies, all —

of them report to the KGB. Yor exemple, my own aunt, Yelena Yakovleyna SHTVISOVA
hed worked for « long time in the Afghen Esbesay and ehe was on inforzent of

13

rigey |
the 1033. She ie the sister ef my mother ant hes recently been pensloned

for a long time, nmi later sho wes transferred to the Italien entasay. She
was always terrified exit confided in my mother. Ke were very concerned because
ony rishep she might have with the KOB would ceflect on is, We were very
pleesed when she wes pensioned two yeors ago.

4

|

i

|

|

|

| OR, In Takey we never used local tetinieiens or eleaning personnel,

| only But here in Hoscow you have lerge nonbers of servant ;

Every one hoa a KGB mission to fulfill and mest eonstently report. Why con't —

ne you mnt out these people ant heve your oun elearing wonen do the work? It is

no disgrace te eleen up flours for your own people to protect eeeurity. But no,
you always heve to tering in so meny personnel and everyone is seeking @ exumb
of information fox whieh they are peld. Unfortussbely, Soviet people need

| every ruble they ¢en get. There ave shsclutely no exeeptions. Often your
kindnesges to certein intividuals serves a very bad purpose. How sure cern IT

| be ebout this when I tell you my ows cunt was formed to work for the Kus in

| a foreian enberty?

|

|

|

|

Wapet dude

obtaining urmtium ore. When
hours while ve were drinking AA anata, tive
el not to interfere. Bven Soviet deators were polied out of the Congo, ani later
the enbassy was ¢loeed. ;

52, S: By the wy, are your convinge® about whet I told you regemding
Soviet enployess in your exbasstes? 6: Of course ve are. fi: All you red to do
is compere the mmbber of Soviet eqployees in. enbansies ant the muuber
of your people in Seviet embassies, a: We report all thie eni ‘hey our
governments wlll act ie thedy business. §: E have told you foots of lite.
Tnotdentelly, sy euit's meme hed been RICHTER at first since her first hushert
wom an Ospotion whores nem was Boris RICHTER. ‘The neme is German. He divorced

lb

: | | =

Us

my aunt, rewarried, aml is now living in Rostov. Hy cousin, Igor, vas his
hon ani be died after his iliness tn 1955. When she eane to Moscow and ws
ee Oe Beet ee ee ee a,
on Vorovekoge Street. She was good-looking at thet time. She worked there
for twelve years ent she was the girlfrient of YUNNTS, an Afghon official
; from the Afghanistan court. Later she married SHIVESOV, a prominent piysictien.
| ae
Ne; aie 53, G: Renenber you mentioned that possibly you eculd get urentum from
uae China? What is the Chinese reaction to this? &: I know thet at ff first ve head
ay. “given then all Kinis of basie e | Tor atomte Fpweecohy Yerioae seee Seeree es
XA me Fesetuly Wey &2 Sey US with Gomes tirandua ore, I don't knew, but
a moy herve” been thay watt to keep all thta for themnelves. In addition, rede
pa epere Oe It would not be stonemienl to hel low-greje ore such _
‘A great distence, Gur best supplies ate in Czechoslovakia ani in the Dit.

ete ee

he Ae Sh. Gr To you know where in Moseow tlw Central Artillery Design

fe Buresu Le looted? &: Yes, Ide. It is on Khoroshovskoye Shosre, a

vy, “the Hippodrom: and the Votkinalays Hcapitel, There is ea triengle there
thie offices was previously VAREMRCT's. Now it is uniler MOSKALEIEND. Be

ce Chief 19 Geverel Hayor BEREZIN, but he, of course, is not an tuo nn

pote. foe | Sytelligence offieer. A Colonel SARAMmAnHOY (phonetic) ia abtet of personnel.
i _there, BEREZIN {¢ nleted to be retired shortly. There ert ea mamber of mew
ae “bulldings there qhien are fenced in. Let me show you this on the Moscow map.

G: Let me moxk thie ae number 25 on the mep end then we een record it.

+) l 55. G: With wespectto field poet mutbers, some of the madbers,
noticed, have four digits. 8: I don"t know what “know what they are or wast tiny euy.

Ke 7 tt Rare eS as wheel, end told
26. Ged jJournallits ha viatte’ o re 250 xroukehs came off the assembly line
fens, | 2 Ome yea. fo you know which pastosy this wes? 8: If these rockets were of
8 LOWA or MARS, then it is ouethie, bt! tite would ape be See for
aidad wiasilés. Toosibly only hulis were produced, bat thie could never
2 completed quided wisstlen.

dates,
lee 57, 0: You mentioned thet with NEURLIN's death there wes mourning
Lerprepg lene 7 an the elty of Dnempetrovak., 8:1 Thie is quite « of _Eroninent
i selentistes oni a lot _of the persomel of the testing crews hed com from
as eprom otek When the seeident oowirred anil these people were Killed that di¢ |

is 4 iniividuales fron Deepropetrovsk who hed perished in the exepleston. a: thts
wee

vi
ae | 15

vould tnttente thet there must be sons mort off fngtalletion for mumfeeturing
rockets in Dnepropetrorak,

roe

Cae 50. G1: With respect to ratl. on of rockrts, you sald thet
ea this hag all been worked out. | How is Rg sakes tot tee ot hee ea 7
ie frelod ceeas wie oe ae een It eon be + Mes iy oe is

iu tnaee Loemeportet les aalch F gure Fons ae ; ae

Tae 59. Os tow test of alusiles ere

sre t in orter te,
aesess o mientlc'’s meeuracy? 8: a rooiors Le prepared for testing and is

ficvgS | ‘aetunlly fired, the data ts taken dow ent ia the besia for esteblishing its
; £ table, All deviations in the tngeet aren ave registered. Say Stee
a reds of sockets are fired ant they fell within sllowsble devixtions, ere

L the firing tshles exectly established. L ennnet say how meaty feet rockets are
requixed, but dovens end derens are fired before a rocket is secepted for
proiuetion. This is aleo dome under varying conditions, pertleularly et different

tures. Tha min thing ie thet firing tebles ore extrbdlished only on
the basis of setunl firing, not on theoretical data.

_ 60. G3 Why wea REDELDT selected for the post of rocket commanler rather:
Nedct.;”) thes VAROIIGOY? 6: I heave alpedily told you thet this was beemwe VARENTSCY
carte aa pula Cet eietinns with the Minister (of Defense),
the chief of the Generul Bteff, sn with the chief of Grew Forces. RERTSOV
eee oe) meet eee Uae Pe ces ret bere eee es one on): te 28
military. This wos aleo «a consiferetion. VARENTSOY 19 a Littie hot. .
| Be wrote this letver to KHRUSHOERY cowl it got inte the hows of the Mintater -
- Of Defense, Therefore he mete a lot of ensmies.

ZHOANOY now atte, re ae ceneinten Tin te eater a ne net
of ertillery of (ground forces of) the Soviet Army viich 1s now VARENTOOY's

were jelled. YAROVLEV's vite became insmne, Wis son, a Licutenmt, wis

16.

Fuh
diemiseed from the army. tater YARWLEY wis rehabilitated and Ms oon wes
the commenter of the Higher Artillery Sehool at Yoronsth. WEIELIN then ae

VARERTSOV ehief of GAU anil nomed himself os the ehtef of ths Soviet Arsy
ee es As Peet anand nnd SAENIGOY wos aula the tle’

% Fech
subordinate OAU to hinself. But thet is inpossible. “Othervise two GAUs
- wold heve to be formed. ~

—_ 62, St The death of NMIMEIN should be exploited hy you in confronking
[icaeken KERUSHCHEY pertiqeulaxly &t 0 tine cf polities! expetieny because he stresses

alrerefs.

wake? Ve ane monty 46 see a REBUY 38 Oe Oop li win cl

the seme of the goverment and the Preesidius, lie to the world es well as

loge es te eee you cea expose the Peoples! Frieniship University
‘ tears is YERZIN whom you know 69 be e prominent
Yona poe ga Ae (a | cases Onn Werte aio tok Goee in batts ent tn, hakey

assigned ae the Provector of this university?

Tilae peas” | 63. Gr Bere you ever benrt of a Gen. Pol, Voi. ‘TOLUPKOT 8: Ithinke =
| the meme fa eerbled, t kone ell army generals end all colonel gererals, but nob
si all Meutensnt generals,

one Gh, Gs To you Enow Maj. Gem. GAYIRKOV? BS: GAYOUROV? Yes, Ifo. O: How
a

abort VASIEMHKO? 61 Of course T know him. Gt What mre they doing now?

_ 8: I don't iow what CAYDUNOV is doing tut VASILENKO fa ao frien’ of mine»
omit is the ohfef of n faulty ot the mershinakly Artillery Acadeny, We wes
OTMWy. 2xt%,

Front. Se a He is there now
end I heve hie phone meter. It is 401. Write down the eendeny meer. ‘The
iviex io K 68, antl then hts extension {¢ 401, Ineldentelly, I just remeeberet
thet a relebtye of your frient Gen. MANSUMCY, a major-generel, is the ehtef of
the Reavy ferviees Depertment of tht Deershinakty Artillevy Aeedeny ani he is
® Here of the Soviet Unies. —

PLecitg
Fu,

tsa, [bedus.

LT

|

—_
“

wu

Gerbrenew ° 7 65. @: By the wry, do you know en engineer colonel by the vem of
cen te ee ee in KRAGHAYA Z¥EZpAt $: I
-" haerd the neme, teb that ds 011.

paces: 66. G1 De you krenw a Generel HAZAROV? I geve a ecementary deseribing
“Oy | wegtewtes oct the 1960 Novesber perede, 51 cf eteucd saw ee. Mayor
NAZARCY, ie Lives in my house unter me, in mober 36. Ie has been retired
amt he lives in a DACHA where be hea # cow, He has three roses in his spertmert,
whereas I have only tw. i

Gr X woul Like to whow hin the (3 7 photograph| egein to vee 1
that f Cee ee ceemaly in nin tut FAAS Geek te dat thet theb is

the one we think it in. (Mote: Se Sa ry on
angie prc ee sage all pd a

Eis ie o‘eaio tie secot, UB, fret tow tin main of LOTT
go thet a phevy detailed Rietars wee not pusetbie. (3 eh photosreph 73)
ee ee eS ( , to both photosraph ell wogevtar

type white haw never oe we, eran Al At ae nn ie
experimental type, viieh hes Sey This is the MARS, a free rocket. G to H:
Would you Like te shew him your pletures o should we contime with ours?
@: T'2L being cure tomrrev.

68. 8: Let me aee..I hove wlrendy told you ebout the RESIDENT in
Japen who is there wiler a feloe nem. For the tine being I wouldn't touch bin.
LT heve just apcken to him. G: Dom's worry, we won't.

ON K-47" 69. Gritew is your nev ONIX orgeniantion tied in with the COSrLAM
as | ‘Shronsh your i

that ie, whet aover t2 unid to perntt finia whlch pers
weed for the sovert purposes intewted? nite pariinaine coven (sweets.
mw committer is unter the Council of Minieters. Our chief is a damity to

‘The :
of the eomstttes. oe yery Lueatdel. in inthe pleming of intivliunl nintstries.
We _earve oa h cooriinsting boty. te GOGPTAN Le the heert of the whole
overnLi. Batter. i) In other words, you would recommend whet is necessary for.
the cuuntry, say in metalloergties) developaent? 6: Yea, of course. G: And

48

gs — kiloten equivalent whoa | eharge.

| ‘ : n : a F it a

pis .
you recemmynd what is needed for ullitary purposes as well ex elyiiien

purposes? 8: OF courses, aince clyliien factorlés must execute oll military
requirendnts. :

70. G: Dia you hear from any more how the development of etoule
nergy fron fiesioneble meterinls 1s progressing? 9:1 1 wlerrboant whet you
an: emi they are peepering such materials. 9: ‘there heve been runors thet
there ere great defielencies in the progren ent thet it is falling fur Dehin’
whet hes been plereed. §: I believe those rucors ere absolutely correct.
T eemot give you epeeific ineteneen but thare ad rumors thet there beve been

= many mish mishaps 3 sal best fedlures.

Tl. Gt Gen you give eeanekeats of the reeled ae wvale
energy reseereh thet is going for wer purpores ea contrasted to elyilian
purposes? Ge Atemie energy reseerch for sclextific moposes te of on
cout porwwntegt, There ere « few eivilien efforts woch an the.
ppc kira Tanin, ani certain reactora thet have been produced, but almost

- everything is going for war purposes.

Lm Gt T have one Inet akties Tris devises with the alye of starle

Weapons,

sige of Rieger remina + he sie bat « different pre worhend is fastensd _
on. G3 To whet degree hae thin been tevelaped? For ekaxple, whet is the
Largest charge? Sy I know thet we hove been ftring rockets with @ 25 |

r heawe Catt G1 How about atente Glontiog carried hy atrereft? ive on

Levee they can ba? of: Yee, T have heart. Let my see «~ on the
lower seale there ore five ant ten kiloten chermes wp to tuusty- five kbloten
meee. by prkillery, thas te voekete. An aireraft hae at uilinited size bord.
It oon carry whetever La L. X teve heerd of a fifty kLiotos
atrersft bows Wet thts is the megulay A-honb,

.

mot the | bon,
ee eS a a Wheat I

khicten.
aquivalent wen be fired ant thet a 80} t beets ix used by

Rhioten ent &
eiversft. Hf: Get a osc tees Gor enh ce yl) tas le See

Th. ss cay Sea Gena une gelen aman ie sae GEN Gate
Yefiie «~ the groups of five mebern. Of: Tt ia sinple, tut in omier not to
get comfuced, welll write it this wy -- two dots -- then go like this. See?
There te nothing to tt. the seme thing with the next groupe =~ like this --

3

7 oy : : ae :
| ate se SEY ah, i £ he

a : 7 . : :
4 :

#15

five grovps. Fenell in the group, then go shesd -- along the entire peper.
It wilZ be on for five mimtes, so if you make five -- five -~ five -~ blocks
of groups per line, 4% will be easier for you. 8s I know, f know (with «
deep sigh). When are we going to work tomorrow?

75. Gto th Well, we heve the option of hearing more questions here;
let m finish this sleet. I heve covered all the asterinked ones in the
first batehy the only ones I haven't covered ere theones thet are not
anteriaked in the firet batch. There were quite a mmber of thea, tut they
were the lenat important. mm: Let's fintsh these uw. G: Yes, we vill.

GS: Yeu, led’s ao.

| nei 76) G: Do you heve eny idea of whet methods they use to festen the
ce atomic Wirheed on the rockets? 6: This is called the proces of STYZOVAT
bef (locking-In) wertesds to the rocket. This process hee various methods for

different rockets, One of the methods ia to sarew 16 in alienhtly, bet eet
ahechs* all the wry around. (: Interrupted sexew. 8: then, eleo, it eon be attechsd
| _ by bolts -— (bolted) the bolts pees through the body of the easing (120
| HUBASHKT). Then when the entire procsas cf GIYKOVKE ta finiahed, the entire
i Seoul io nae 6 ee this in to prevent eny trbulence
TAVIKURENTYS) -- to have a smooth eurfaer. Then it 1s eorered epediel
oll paints. iret 16 fe given o prime (grout) cont (GRUNMUYRTSIA). Tris
is all dome very quickly. This is a very dapeniable qelid method.
heve bean no ences where the werleat would fly off. Thie ie STYROVKA -- the
warhead is brovakt wp on a carrier, « holuting mechantem reiees Lt, and the
Joining 1s done (SYYeDYUT).
|

Teepe @) G: Avra there eny Limitations as to tenprrature due to locality
bsbus Lats| GESSINCHE’)7 Suppose something hes to be xanenbled in the fer Herth, are there
| | fewtore weteh Lintt thie wekr 8: Abooluiwly. ‘Teme rvetare ie » big faztor.
ws\\qe4) Plus kO «+ mime bO .~ this da a selentifie eategory which hrs been

i— cealevinted yery exertly. There ere elimetic eoniitions when ports must be

| EM: heated 7 G: Are theve such climatig confititons where it ia inpossitile to heat
Ae ee 4
ye

|

}

s up in the fre North here it is either very difficult or impossible to henile.
a Liguid-Tuel rodbety. ‘There, thay hive to wwe solid fiel.x You can't hent the
+ §eed hack. pte there -- em't heat thes through «= end if you wee gunpewder it will
a ‘

Cntr Pee rea live.
Uh iy Wrils teed me (verdoye foplive |

S. ytrerc AG, Says 2 poreichovoy.

|| : a : MAS

{uh
bora |
a a Ge es ees aetinte eo take place of theme rockets with
ef atonte ao they heve « definite nl, inspection «~ any one, two,
tSpee Kulns tires “Gapeetions of thia, inspection of hurt, wte.? Do thoy then

ng spperetus.
Sec | ae Gt Gia fa cece ile fon eter Sy There ie a cerions of rockets thet

|

|

| Limpeet

often? 8: I have deseribed all. the teelesiael Inepections xt all the positions.
| Siete.

|

gi | Gt Bi often are the etente werhots inopeetea? 8: Share vas this mon who knows

guehatiy £4 dees wah encase tw sate level, Taiecss (a ewe ocseets the
ae morm, Lt Lereportet.

ae G1 How ome they trenoperbed ~~ fs epeeial Be They mow
ball. —) teperetely; I heve erhagicd told si thete ALL warhead

tates : perte oe soperubaly in special, eerniers. Thay have their omen
— | recpiletions. £6: Super ~ eneetal! for cbeeth the relationship, mmerieally
rhe speekineg, the power of the wehbe ext ita weight? ‘Tet ia, such 6

cape es weight will be § kilotons, much a weight whl. de LO kilotens, ete, 8: there
a is such o teble. 2 have given you the ranges, cagneitios. For each type of
eb it werlwad thera in a teble «~ ob L000 iedleewters with varieus typts ef —

| a warheads, ae

this reletionsitp, I tiink 146 hea not beentore. You oct, there ore linkts ant
this aleo Lintte the songe. G: You nee, wink Tosm getting xt ~~ maybe 20's «
grometeteal reloblonskip. For inetonee, 5 kLictome: my weigh 1000 kilogressy
ten xfloten rey weigh 3000. 8: Ch! 6 they d24 mb give ws. G: See wit
Imenn! Not doubling 14, But tripling 1b. 68: Ho, thaylid not give us thia.

| 89, G: How about in relation te theweteht? Sy Ye heye sot been given
ig

7, 1 Germerelly, how esny ctondes explorion teats (OFYIOY) wore

2 ” there toil vias was tbe roportion of suncévece and fallurest 8; This is a
i good ibation: You aid net detect all thy testa. The emaller explosions.
- Sek ica You iy luc’ picked them ip es an Indiextica
cefecten i. mL

sy
.
Ey

Mon Puy

ay, ‘| Of 8 slight earthwake, but theses verenct velente menifestations. You must

cee be made evere thet there were may teste (CrYry), but with very aml)
equivalent wharges. After these teste, we would whet would appear in
the press ~ MSS, for instaree ~ servi, very Tew exceptions, there was no

LY mention of then, the selentific-« work here ins shooting forth Like

he Ge¥eun & geyser. ALL this is done in the central pert of the Serict nesrer

, ' to the Southert en. All this shouts stopping the micless tests is just

trey © G2. -G: Sho we show him some pletares ~~ dy Just a ron-throwgh
to see if there exe avy who be can reconjure. o: Yes, there's a whole mess of
them. 2 Anyway, here ie what EF wort you to now --many of the questions

83. 8S: Ie this the AFANASTZY vio ie altting in the Englieh seetort
O: No, thin ona had gaeething to do with Feonale Intelligence. He's beer
fired. att tts thw aeme meme, APANASIEV. 81 Oh! Here 1a my frt om
My. CHIZHOV, 2 Colonel. (V7) 6: Whet doen he do? 8: He's the Deputy to the
Chiet of the tet Direetorete, revler General Majov BORTLOY. He gave me my
orlentetion when Iowee soning here. Me te the one who will hen! in ry
FAVOIKA (Report on Subject) ao thet in the Pell I will go for treintzy te so
overseas (PONsOTOVED).

Be. Be Vy the way, whet do you adviees Sheld I ecek being cent
shynet or should I eoutimme te work like thie? Because setuelly Lt tokes a
while, Firnt, there ie the PADOOIOVKA; then the matter of the Visa ~ you ent
toke qutte along wille befowe you lem me a View. If I come for tue years,
to Fuglend ~~ to Amerion «= to Canela — G1 You'll be welcomed! 8: Tere wilt
be no benefit to ow work. 61: Of ecurse there will be benefits. 6: I cen give
you cofes only. X21 bring you the eoden ant for an hour got will here 10

ae

fib

decide on thins, thes they will give me seme kind ef “cover”. I'LL be dlechorged
fron the amey notlomlly. I'LL probebly not com ag military but will cone as an
advisor, But you titink this wlll be good ff Io eome? G1 OF course! FB: that
would, De very well. 8: Of courne I can pet you the coles, -- the whole book
eon you ean rend el) the cables. .

85. OG: Where do you think they will semi yout &: Either Rnglen,
Ameries, oz Cenmic but only there. O: You'll be able to tell us whe does
whet at the pleer you sre stationed, 6: Vell, of course, but maybe thet is not
enough. I tiink that I here some good poerliblilties im Moscow. 1: It you
will te in touch with Hoscow all. the tine ant will. be able to tell us who 1a
coming antl going avi also you will heve your conmerviers’ dxyz. 8: Vell, then
you heve no objection if they send me shrond ~ if trusted by the Ferty anit
Goverment, Y enn 4o qiite a bit during my training period ~- ani really,

I would Like to get mvay frase “there”. ‘They aen only semi me to Faclovt,
Amerion, or Cenoday Io finished as regert the For East.

86. 8: thie te a very frenlline person. (V-3) Let ib stay here « bit.
Re is « Styaterle Inteliicence officer.

87. 81 Now this one, even thouwh he pot on glseses, thin ia OSOKIN,
(7-9) Gt CROKINY ‘the one vho is in the Puree of New Teeheiology? 6; He has
bee Leid off. Be locks Like COOKIN very much bit please make a oleck. £
wouldn't wart you to say that I (cibjeeh's teve nee) heve a bed meery end
only ku how to vislt ulgktelvbs awl etter «ll, photos are nometines
migiesding, ©: Tw says he looks like OSOKTH. J: This in ¥-9. (Photo choked
onb to be feber occrr. } is

83. 8: Tere is om officer of Stretegie Intelligences. You've got then
lined up in a rew today. (Y¥-11)

89. 8: Gh! this one gratucted from the Academy in 1952. Now he is a
Coloml, e Military Attache in Austria. (Y-15) oO: You are thinking of SHAHOY.
This looks Like SHAMOY very much, byt it dem't. 8: No, no, it does's Just
Look like hit. Th de SHANOV. Of I'LL tell you where you mide a misteke.
BSHAMOV Tintehed the Aendeny earlier. 1 Either 1951 or 1952. G1 1951 or
1950, bet not in 1952. ‘Yheh's frporetble. o1 Bub it does lock Like him very
woh, dowen't it. I world have identified iin as BHAMOY, ‘How I om remmibering,
evi I think T‘lL challenge you on thet. Bb did fintah the Aesdewy in 1952,

I finished in 1953, et he in 1952, 1 don't even want to thine shout the name
aml patronyate. + I think hie neme ts devril Patlipevieh SHAMOY, Bi I dom't
know that: t cen't rember. dr (tidking qietly) B: plays PROFERANS a little,

33

i ee
7S

/ neme on the thing. G: I'LL tell you something, this man rekendles SRAMOV 80

i 4e a very importent steck, When I come in fresh tomorrow, X will lock at them

fis

drinks. 81 Yes, yes, I know it ie he. G: You're right about one thing. He
did go reeently to Austria s Militery Attecta. J: I don't know; there's no

much thet we ean sey thet it is SHAMOV!

90. 81 Do you know DUTOV? He's ensther frien’ of SHAMOY. 8: The
nene is femilier, but I don’t remeber now.

9. 8: Bere is ao men who works for KM. He has only recently arrived
heres I shock his hent todey. (V-24) te ds in Englaml now. G: BRAGIN, Lev
BRAGIN. 8: Absolutely right -- not too bed with the English Langusgs, pote
on aire somewhet, very ective worker. ORHERALOV was complaining to me about
him todey. BRAGIN has coos to join thie Technien] (THXHNICHESKUTU GRUPU)
Group emi he ian't doing enything.

92. 8: Ch, hello! KAPALIXIN. (v-33) He graduated fron the Acedeny.
ghia ie the one whe wes the Chief of the Direetioss he's the one who is
working now et the Militery-Diplomnmbic Acetemy at the BESKIN fehool for Tilegalis --
Viktor Veaiifevich. He was the Chief of the Direction, was canned and now
works at the Aertemy -- a ledies’ mean.

93. 8: Thte in the Chief of » Directorate -- General Kajor MEIXISHEV.
(¥-37) G: This cnet G1 He locks so young. Will you check tt plesse? Is
it MRINISHEY? Ot He's Chief of « Directorate? 8: The hth Directorate. He was
formerly the Deputy there. ;

9h. 8: (Looking at photoes) Oh, Ch, here ia Colonel LEVIN, the RUB
HEIDEN? in the GRIK Beate Comittes of Belence end Technology. (¥-53)
G: With you? 6: Yes, here's his neme ent pebronymie-- Yevgenty Ul'yich. He's
y to OVISHIANI. Na wes in Austria, or in Germany. I thine in dermeany.
te thie list Germany? I'l) ask you to show me this stack tomorrow when I have
a frech mind. ‘There are so many fanilier faces ~~ seems to be elwost a block
of Intelligence Officers. Here is enother very femiliar one. Flease put it
over there. ioe

95. St Now, thie one is definitely an Officer of Strategic Intelligence!
(v-55) @: You don't remember who he ie? St It's been a long tim: since I saw
him at the Information Directorate. Perhaps be has gone somewhere.

95. f: Oh, here's GVISHIAME, Zhermen Mikhatlorich. He's married to
KOSYCIN’s daughter, my chief. (¥-56) This steck I must lock at ageiny this

thing.

ah

——t 7, *

ub

O7. 8: Here's SCHIARTY. (V-92) He knows English well. Me will
be here visiting you on May 9th, with « Kolating Equipment (POD'EMNOYES |
OBORUDOVANTYE) Delegation of 7 people. G: GNTKY S: Yes, ONTK (State Committee
of Selence ami Tecimology). I'm a bit tired now. Let the photos welt e while. |
I'll go through them all tomorrow.

G1 You knov what -- you are tired now. Why don't you lesve now ani
tomorrow’we'll make # fresh start. 8: 80 we heve tomorrow, the 4th eni then
the 5th. On the 6th, I leave here. I won't be going to the Pebassy. We are
leaving at 11 o'clock. I'11 come to say goodbye to you ebout 10 AM. G: We'll
see how things work ont, Perhaps we wor't be here either. We'll decide this
on Friday. Tomorrow we will start about 9 o'clock. 8: Can we stort earlier?
G: Yes, then we won't work as late. &: Why? We have quite ea bit. ia must do
gone things more thoroughly, some less, but we should go through the entire
plan. 4: You won't heve any mix-up vith your delegation tomorrey night, will
yout 8: No, no, they're just like my little Inmates (KROLIEI). I got them acme
cigerettes (5 cartons) at the Exbessy yesterday. They were so happy they alsont
kissed me. I got them for 11 shillings eseh! They are afratd of me.
know that if I write a ded report of any of them, they'll get it when they go
beck. I em not worrted about seeurity in front of thems they don't mean a thing
to me. at Won \oeseow ine Ee sin cl ae. Flesee instruct
him, eceoriing to my request, how he shovld eet. The day after tenorrew,

I wild teke hin to mint GENFRALOY) I'll ieatroduce him. He is not to show any
notive interest. GNMERALOV will cell him hineelf ami will invite hin. For
tomorrow, I ask you to bring the nietures of all thoee in Englent, If will

ahow you OENERALOY, end all those. ‘There are many more familiar feces. I'LL
find then. At least 1'11 be able to may whether they are in Englant or net.

Gt Well, it's up te you. What tine do you want? Yor us it's fine -- 7 or

8 o'slock or 9. 8: I was thinking ebout 6. G: «- G-- okay, Right after dinner.
8: Let me think about tits. Con Lendl yout G: Well, yott know yoursel? we

all must gather and « set time ia better. Tf you havea any possible difficulties,

on

you'l) heve dimer ent you might. eft dow to talk to someon. I don't know
how things mre organized with you. S: Let me think a bit. G: If you ceca at
8 o'clock, we heve 4& hours for working, even 5 hours if necessary. 6: Certainly.
G: Etght o'clock 4m a good time. You will have time to dine ent do things
smoothly. 8: Alright, we all meet theny you will set up all

G: Of course, we will prepare ani wrep everything for you to teke with you.

We wlll eheek everything. This whole operation will take 2 hours, then a few
questions -~ another one half to one hour, ‘Then right away we wil) shew you
the photos -~ the Mnglish ones en the others. Many of them ere notinportant.
You can shuffle through then in about one helf hour. 61 Of course, 1t depenis
what's im the set, ‘Toley's set hee held me wp because there were many “frienis”

25

_ ta say gostbye -~ In ease you've forgotten sosething. We'll ghake hands.

Fah

of mine there, 6: Then on Freifey, we can take it easy ~~ say our farewells -«
have a few drinks »» joke «. and clean up odd@ ani emis. &: Then on floor
Saturday morning I don't need to stop in to see you. @: You ean, of course -~

You will only be able to stay about 15 mimrtes. Ss Well, of course,

probably no more than 10 or 15 mimites. Okay, now guppose I go to sleep.
I'm a ditt tired. T hed a session with GUNSRAIOV. Alright, goodnight.

All: Geotnight! B: I G44 not hoes presence of mimi in front of him, af4 It

I told him everything that wma immernost, tut tell me as frienis for ny owt
future reference ~~ 414 I do eliright? Hr Om my word of honor «- I speke to him
afterwante «- on my word ef honor! 8: As regerée the form «= the eetual
precentation of everything «~ wea it correct? G: Most correct. H: Very
proper, well done. J: The important thing is thet it came from the heart.

S: Well, goodnight! We'll meet tomorrow et 5 o'clock. Gs You éfan't

forget anything ~ the pen? 6: Mo. (Subject left at 0005 hours on 4 Mey 1961.)
