Headquarters Handbook: Files Management Dated 28 January 1983
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000044998, dated 5 January 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000044998).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

INSTRUCTION SHEET

This handbook contains guidance for Agency personnel to effect uniform procedures in carrying
out the files maintenance and use program.

DISTRIBUTION: Qe 28 January 1983

Approved.for Release
Date aay

HHB 2s

FILES MANAGEMENT

DISTRIBUTION: 4g

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB Saar
: FOREWOR

FOREWORD

This handbook prescribes the procedures for implementing the Agency files maintenance and use
program. Much of the information it contains was gathered from National Archives and Records
Service (NARS) publications on case and subject files management and a previous Agency publication
on subject filing. Where applicable, certain portions appear as a verbatim extract while others have
been tailored to meet the Agency’s current requirement for a files management system.

Harry E. Fitzwater
Deputy Director
for
Administration

DISTRIBUTION: gi

28 January 1983

tnere is no page ii

we ae

‘INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
: ; CONTENTS |

CONTENTS |

Paragraph Page

CHAPTER I: GENERAL

Ly INTRODUCTION cutee cnet tutes ies desea cen teeta cette ua need 6 sede 1 |
2, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY ccecccssssssscccscssssscssssssescecsseccssssccsssvecssseccsuscesssasescssnssssccessssasees 1
Ber - RESPONSTB Mt 1k Sie foe we areola elute ta eee hw Ot l |

CHAPTER II: FILING SYSTEMS
4. “PILES =-GENERAL vss io sssctoetsassaptet Seoueauinsd daviuchastesloanideheusinant see hse lene deena

By DE PES OB BYES ves. scsicsactassessy <cateaesohecassaecrstyetuneatteteadegstonibedsea Svacdsd ob dducmtrearansa ves cea hast
a, SUBJECT. RIRES wic.sieds ce ahs cateel scented iaitesassval tected esvis se, tabled asseavesTee AT en eae aes
|CMag P4S) SS a sh pe reg errr re vn rev eTE ape ores er OR ET coe tee Un DETER RTT ern ot

Be - SUBIC TIEN 2 sctiscst es setesced azet vactrv cpa sapeventen eves can attosmensee cals caueanae soviet tetera
a: ‘OBJECTIV Eis ivtacco nannies eush adn diculs haion tenia as
b; SUBJECT FILE CLASSIFICATION. cages isntsaiesdil ls ieiatihied nce nets ean ncleieedaesecccas
c. FUNCTIONAL: GROUPINGS ois sicciicsieisesictasadececebetesuseheatedh sbtsedhacdcastiaeeseraacerenereee
Gi PRE GA TIONG cicccos sass cuoha ise iiserecetoc vans a ccae couse alia cus puesta asennad Acyliaty
e. NUMBER OF SUBJECT FILE CATEGORIES .....ecscssscssssssssessosssaesssscscssscssesssesessenne
By STE COD oak acosets he calsenoa coreg scan esta iar vl wee eased aerate sta i acre Decuria

-I
Q
>
wn
|
"
ss
zZ
oO

oo O OO OO naar F&F Rh FF OO WHO Ww

. REFERENCE AND CHARGEOUT PROCEDUREG......ccsssssscreesssesessesesesssesssssseenees 11
+ DISPOSITION: TECHNIQUES: ievszccescctasvesiecsfasciesssdivseostbehensatanscangussasneevasssaeseatessecetpbey il

eR mo mM Oo oO BP
re
>
ies]
ia]
t
om
Zz
oO)
(e)
es |
re |
et
rt
res
hy
oO
cr
0
ri
og
fn
z
Zz
oO
a)
(se)
Zz
|
=
Zz
tl
pos]
in
—
fo)

CHAPTER III: FILING EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
9. FILING EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES MANAGEMENT........cccccsssssssssssstssssssssesees 18
ae DEFINITION) :.c2ssissccsistatani chain the id a sitnaeete divcdies dodteteaeaavtaie ea ratelreiiees 18
Be GEEINE RA Esse Seats tu svasuetsh caste son dedi cana ah ols re ocala and cta cara Ramee ag lo fee eee oad revenay 13

28 January 1983 ifi

_ HHEW
; CONTE? < .
Paragraph Page
BRI MINA BESTE PG a! pcse teat ctinedessretcataustatmanpeiaiatsind stant leno 13
d. STANDARD FILE EQUIPMENT ccccccccccsccsesssssssssssseresvsssse i uieiGud restates 13
e. NONSTANDARD FILE EQUIPMENT..ccccccscsscssssscssssssssnsssssseseseccessnensessesansssesenssen 13 |
ES SURPEUS PILE EOULP MEN Toi decor cexticccaclave uhunielioeddedhavinan Audaeealeetcuesseania Dee 14
BO STANDARD FILING SUPPITES isc ccc msSudlou Shs teudsinnrececnectain aloenivad 14
h. NONSTANDARD FILING SUPPLIES AND HEAVY-DUTY FILE FOLDERS... 14
CHAPTER IV: MICROGRAPHICS
10. MICROGRAPHICS MANAGEMENT eccccccsssccscccsesssssssssnssssessssessssecssscssssssssesesesesesnsec is
Bh GE NIA Coxe ert on Si al ete ot MS acetate ete ie area Sgn Sach 15
b. RESPONSIBILITIES AND OBJECTIVES. vcccccssssessssssssssnssssssssessssssssssssssessessosesse 15
c. MICROGRAPHICS APPLICATION PROPOSALS .ccsscccscsssscssssssessecesscssseccsssseeensee 15
d. MICROGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT PROCUREMENT wccccsccsssscssesscscsssssssssessssssesnsee 15
e. CONVERSION OF PAPER RECORDS .cccccscscscscssssssssssesssesssssssessessssssssssssssssacesssee 15
Ee MIGROFORM RECORDS i est coli hat nsec Sw 0 aalechacnageSoeereleatonss 16
g. MICROGRAPHIC SYSTEM AUDIT vcccccscsscssccssssscssssssssssssssssssssssesssesearcessssesessvssssen 16
h. MICROGRAPHIC TRAINING. cscccsssscccsccccssccsssssssesssssssssssnsseseencevnssssseesisteessssnsese 16
Figure No. Page
1. SAMPLE MEMORANDUM FORMAT vvvsssscscsccecsescscssssesssssssseccceessssssssussasssssssansesnses 17
2, FORM@@P- REQUISITION FOR MATERIEL AND/OR SERVICES vssssssssecsssesccscsee 18
8. FORM REQUISITION OR TURN-IN FOR ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPLIES
AND ROUTE MENT s6ieace tented corn tiatr sn seues ceciaren seas mcatatnt tiene oe 19

A GLOSSARY OF FILE MANAGEMENT TERMG.......ccssssssssssscssesecssssscsssssesssesssessssssssessass 21
B SUBJECT FILE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM .......ccssssssssssssscssssssssscsussesssesssesssscsssssseessees 29
Cc FILE EQUIPMENT AND: SUPPLIES «.cxscsvcsteicsscusoscssatscsoseesecatascsseesdiubsaiontoobveppicondieiabecse 41
D GLOSSARY OF COMMON MICROGRAPHIC TERMSG......csccsscssessssessesssessseerseerscesssesses 43
E ELEMENTS OF A MICROGRAPHIC SYSTEM ANALYSIS.......cccscscsssesssesssecsssesseesseeees 45
EINE Sees eat caelv as cnc ibaa agspceceasc Ae pated nsec pa tenape lS oc eu waaabestuseaiacutsGe aces tanta masiede shale neste 47

28 January 1983

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

L.

a.

e

a

aa

p

c

28 January 1983

CHAPTER I: GENERAL

INTRODUCTION

The objectives of a files management program are to organize agency files so that needed
information can be found quickly, to ensure complete records, to facilitate the selection and
retention of records having permanent value. and to dispose of temporary records promptly (see
Appendix A for a glossary of files management terms).

This handbook offers guidelines. procedures, and rules which, in conjunction with other records
management programs, will contribute toward meeting these objectives. The handbook is not a
primer on files, filing, or filing systems but it does contain information that should enable employees
responsible for managing files to do so efficiently and economically.

Appendix B is a model subject file classification system for administrative records developed by
National Archives and Records Service (NARS), General Services Administration (GSA), for use by all
Federal agencies. The model has been tailored for Agency use. It replaces the subject-numeric
system previously recommended as the Agency standard. While the model is not presented as a
standard, it should be used as much as possible by Agency components when changing existing file
systems or when creating new subject file systems.

A new feature emphasized in this handbook is the use of the records control schedule to assist in the
maintenance of component file systems. The records control schedule is a ready reference for
identifying permanent and temporary records and for applying disposition techniques in file system
mInanagement. Component file managers should become thoroughly familiar with this document.

PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY

Chapter 31 of 44 U.S.C. requires each Federal agency “to make and preserve records containing
adequate and proper documentation of the organization, functions, policies, decisions. procedures,
and essential transactions of the agency designed to furnish the information necessary to protect the
legal and financial rights of the Government and of persons directly affected by the agency's
activities." The law also requires each Federal agency to “establish and maintain an active
continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the records of the agency.”
This program will provide for “effective controls over the creation, maintenance, and use of records
in the conduct of current business.”

This handbook on files management is part of the Agency’s records management program created to
satisfy the requirements of Chapter 31 of 44 U.S.C. and improve the management of Agency
information.

RESPONSIBILITIES

The Chief, Qh ppieeiediimpenmeseGities Office of Information Services (OIS), Directorate

of Administration, serves as the Agency Records Management Officer and provides staff guidance
and assistance on records management to each directorate and independent office, develops and
publishes detailed regulations and procedures for implementing the records management program,
and is responsible for Agency liaison with NARS.

The R/OIS, develops, coordinates, and monitors the Agency
records management program.

Component Records Management Officers (RMO’s) are responsible for administering the Agency
records management program within their areas of jurisdiction.

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT ~

HHB
3d

d. The Agency Archives and Records Center (AARC) is the temporary archival staging area for the
storage of the Agency's permanent records until they can be declassified and transferred to NARS or
other Federal agencies. It is not an extension of NARS. AARC provides for the storage, control.
security, servicing, and processing of both permanent and temporary records which are not active
enough to justify being retained in more expensive office equipment or space.

.

28 January 1983

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB ae

CHAPTER II: FILING SYSTEMS

4, FILES—GENERAL

a. A file is a collection of records arranged in some systematic order. Federal Property Management

Regulation (FPMR) 101-11.101-3 defines the term “records” to include “‘all books. papers, maps,
photographs, or other documentary materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics made or
received by any agency of the United States Government in pursuance of Federal law or in
connection with the transaction of public business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by
that agency or its legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions, policies, decisions,
procedures, operations, or other activities of the Government or because of the informational value
of data contained therein.” Excluded from this definition are “Library and museum material made
or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes, extra copies of documents
preserved only for convenience of reference, and stocks of publications and of processed docu-
ments....”

The information in this handbook primarily covers the traditional types of files, mainly paper.
Microforms are discussed in Chapter IV, and the basic tenets of filing are applicable to computer
files.

5. TYPES OF FILES

A file is a collection of records arranged in some systematic order. A filing system is a plan for
organizing files into related categories. Generally, there are only two types of files: subject and case.

a. SUBJECT FILES

c

28 January 1983

Subject files document the organization, policies, programs, and functions of an agency. These files
consist mainly of general correspondence but also may include forms, reports, and other material
relating to programs and functions but not to specific cases, projects. or transactions. Records are
selected for filing in a subject file based on their informational content. It is important to understand
the difference between a subject file, which contains information of general planning and
operations, and a case file, which contains information concerning a specific action, event, person,
organization, place, or project (see Appendix B).

CASE FILES

Case files document a specific action, transaction, event, place, project, or other topic. A case file
may include one or several subjects relating to the specific topic. It is estimated by NARS that 85
percent of all Federal records which are maintained in folders are handled by the case file method.
Some examples are:

(1) The Official Personnel Folder, which is the most commonly known type of case file used
throughout the Federal Government.

(2) Project files, which contain records relating to an assigned task or problem.

(3) Transaction files (such as a contract file), which document the conducting of negotiations,
business matters, and the like, to a particular conclusion or settlement.

OTHER TYPES OF FILES
Subject and case files account for 95 percent of all Federal records. Other types of files include:
(1) Transitory files, which contain records that lose their value within a short period of time.

(2) Working paper files, which contain records such as rough drafts, calculations, or notes assembled
or created for use in the preparation or analysis of other documents. These files generally are
disposed of when the task is complete and the finished document prepared.

—

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

aa 22
Hye

6.

a.

c

(3) Technical reference files. which contain copies of reports, studies. compilations of data,
drawings, etc., that are needed only for ready reference and are not made part of the official case
file. These nonrecord materials usually are disposed of when no longer needed for reference.

SUBJECT FILING
OBJECTIVE

An objective of the files management program is to achieve uniformity and ease in maintaining and
using Agency records. As a step towards meeting this objective, Appendix B is recommended for
filing administrative records throughout the Agency. This system is not meant to be all-inclusive, and
it can be modified to meet individual office filing needs. Many offices will be able to use the system
for all of their administrative records while others will require the creation of different subject
categories not found in the system. The remainder of this chapter provides background and
instructions on creating subject files under a subject file classification system.

SUBJECT FILE CLASSIFICATION

Subject file classification is the dividing of records into broad groups of interrelated subjects called
primary categories. These primary categories are then subdivided by successive levels of subordinate
topics; i.e., primary (Records Management), secondary (Files Management), and tertiary (Subject File
Classification System). This process is referred to as a hierarchical order and may be organized by
concrete, abstract, or functional words. In order to work well in subject files, this process must be:
(1) Representative of Information Needs
The subject file classification should conform to the recordkeeping needs of the office. The terms
selected should pattern the way information is requested from the files.
(2) Complete
There should be suitable subject file categories for all existing and anticipated information needs.
(3) Flexible
Provision should be made for contracting or expanding the classification outline to allow subjects
to be dropped or added as information needs change.
(4) Logica]
File subjects should be grouped in such a way that the reason for such arrangement will be
obvious.
(5) Restrictive
Each subject title should be phrased to be exclusive of others. Select only one term to denote a
subject.
(6) Precise

Each subject title should be precise in describing the file category. This will encourage filing at
the lowest possible rung on the hierarchical ladder at which there is a sufficient volume of related
records.

The principal advantage to a hierarchical file arrangement is that it facilitates document retrieval by
limiting the area of search.

FUNCTIONAL GROUPINGS

Hierarchical order may be arranged by concrete, abstract, or functional words. The Agency subject
file classification system is arranged using functional groupings because records are the result of the
performance of functions and they are used in relation to the functions. The subject categories
selected as filing guides therefore reflect an organization's purpose, missions, programs, projects, or
activities. The scope of the functions for which a file is organized determines the breadth of the

28 January 1983

a

»

; 6d

subject categories. An advantage to the use of functional groupings is that it provides a common
language for recordkeepers and record users. Another advantage is that it is relatively easy to add.
delete. or modify functional groupings without changing the remainder of the files.

d. PRECAUTIONS

Care should be taken that excessive primary subjects and subdivisions are not created merely
because these functions appear on an organization chart or are contained in a mission and functions
statement. Excessive subject categories lead to overlapping files and make it difficult to classify
documents which vary only slightly. When subject categories become too highly specialized. there
are always documents for which there is no appropriate filing place. Conversely, when the subject
categories are too broad, too many subdivisions are created and they become meaningless catchalls,

e. NUMBER OF SUBJECT FILE CATEGORIES

(1) Using too many subdivisions complicates the file structure and slows down the filing and
retrieving of information, but using too few subdivisions turns the files into irretrievable storage
bins. Three basic factors to consider when determining the appropriate number of categories and
subdivisions to be used in a file arrangement are:

(a)

(b)

(c)

28 January 1983

Volume of Records Covered

Establishing subject categories presupposes a certain volume of records for each primary
subject. If the quantity of records is comparatively small, the subject categories should be
broad and few. As the quantity of records increases. so does the need for more numerous and
precise categories. (There are two important exceptions to the general rule that the volume of
records determines the number and breadth of categories. First, regardless of the volume. a
separate primary category must be established for unique records that cannot be
subordinated to any other subject. Second, providing for familiar terms (or subjects) used in
an organization may require the adoption of more primary categories than volume would
support.)

Organizational Level Served

In standardizing a subject file classification system for use throughout an organization. it is
unnecessary to provide precise subordinate categories. Indeed, to ensure the usefulness that
comes from flexibility, it may be better to let each file station subdivide primary subject
categories to meet its own volume requirements. The number of subject categories in any file
arrangement depends in part on the organizational levels served and their information needs.
It can be expected that the full range of functions expressed in the fewest and broadest
subjects will represent the files at the top of the organization, and the more precise functions
will be represented by the numerous subjects at the lowest levels of the organization.

Precision of Terms Selected as Subject Captions

Adjectives and adverbs can be used freely in conversation, public speaking, and even in
nontechnical writing. However, extreme care must be used when selecting modifiers for
subject category file captions. The misapplication of a modifier can narrow the scope of a
caption so drastically as to restrict its application to only a fraction of the records it should
cover. On the other hand, the absence of a modifier may result in an omnibus caption which
overlaps and engulfs subjects that should be covered by other captions, The selection of
captions for use as subject titles—either primary, secondary, or tertiary-——should be guided
by the ways in which records are requested (titles used), the breadth of the file content, or the
need for detail as governed by the volume of records. The question to be answered in
meeting these requirements is whether to choose captions which denote processes, classes, or
items:

(1) Processes are actions taken; e.g., procurement, transportation, and use.

(2) Classes are groups of items; e.g., building materials and office equipment.

or

Re Pe -

.  HHB ae. INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
of

.

(3) Items are specific things making up the broader class; e.g., bricks and lumber or chairs
and desks.

(2) Deciding the degree technical terms will be used as captions will depend on how the information
is requested. While there are advantages to converting technical/scientific terms to lay terms for
ease of filing, these advantages will have to be weighed against the possible disadvantages of
cross-indexing the technical/lay terms.

(3) Captions must be understandable to everyone using the files. Two words may give the caption
broader coverage, and long captions (more than four words) make it difficult to recognize quickly
the types of records fitting a caption.

f. FILE CODES
While most Agency components will not need special file codes for their subject files, some
components may find it necessary to devise such codes. The following paragraphs are offered to assist
in the creation of filing codes if necessary.
(1) Noncoded File Arrangements
The simplest subject file is arranged in straight alphabetical sequence by words or subiect titles
without file codes. Arrangements like this are often called “‘subject-alphabetic” or “subject-title”
files. For example:
ACCOUNTING
ANNUAL LEAVE
BUDGETING
COMMUNICATIONS
MAIL
PERSONNEL
RECRUITMENT AND PLACEMENT
SICK LEAVE
SUPPLIES
TRAINING
WORKSHOPS
(2) Secondary Subject Topics
The primary subject topics are classified in straight alphabetical order with secondary topics
retained at each classification level as follows:
PERSONNEL
LEAVE

ANNUAL
SICK

RECRUITMENT AND PLACEMENT
SUPPLIES
TRAINING

WORKSHOPS
This arrangement may be satisfactory as long as the file remains small, but as the file grows it
will become more difficult to keep related subjects together and maintain an alphabetical order.
Also, the subject titles tend to lengthen as the files grow and become more complicated.

(8) Basic Coded File System

To avoid writing out lengthy file titles on the file copies of correspondence, some components
assign a consecutive number to each subject category. When a new subject category is created the
next consecutive number would be assigned. A basic code file system might look like:

28 January 1983

—_

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

PERSONNEL
FINANCE |
SUPPLIES |
REPORTS
LOANS
SECURITY

Anat kone

(4) Duplex-Numeric Code System
A more elaborate coding scheme is the ‘“duplex-numeric” system and would look something like
this:
8 SUPPLIES
3-1 Factory
8-1-1 Oil
3-1-2 Wire
3-2 Office
3-2-1 Furniture
8-2-2 Pencils

(5) Alpha-Numeric Code System

Letters can be substituted for the primary subject which would make the filing scheme an
“alpha-numeric” code:
A SUPPLIES
A-l Factory
A-1l-1 Oil
A-1-2 Wire
(6) Subject-Numeric Code System
The “subject-numeric” coding scheme is one of the more popular file systems. This scheme
permits the arrangement of primary subjects in alphabetic sequence while retaining a simple
numeric order for subdividing the primary subject category. The abbreviations selected to
designate a primary subject offer a mnemonic feature to the users of the files. One example of
the “subject-numeric” file scheme is illustrated in Appendix B. Some components have
developed a file system utilizing the as the file outline. A
typical file system using this approach might look like:
ORGANIZATION
Agency
Directorate
SECURITY
Physical
Personnel
PERSONNEL
Recruitment
Professional
Clerical
TRAVEL
Foreign
Domestic
LOGISTICS

~1

HHB ge . INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

(7) Advantages and Disadvantages of File Codes

The advantages of file codes are that they are easy to memorize, they use short coding symbols,
cross-referencing is simplified. sorting is made easier, filing can be accomplished faster, and filing
errors generally are reduced. However, file codes are not without disadvantages, Often file codes
become complex and highly specialized. the product of one individual. File codes also have a
tendency not to be updated at periodic intervals and may become outdated quickly.

(8) Hints for Designing File Codes
File codes should be:
(a) Short—Each symbol should be limited to a few characters.
(b) Simple—The file pattern should be obvious by glancing at the file classification outline.
(c) Meaningful—The symbols for the primary subjects should be meaningful and not abstract.

(d) Segmented—Components of symbols should be in segments, as opposed to one group of
letters or numbers; e.g., RM 1-2 rather than RM12.

(e) Flexible—The coding scheme must be flexible to allow additional subjects without changing
the existing symbols.

7. CASE FILING

Case files document a specific action, transaction, event, place. project, or other topic. Like subject files,
case files may consist of books, papers, audiovisual, machine readable, cartographic, and other types of
records. The distinction between the two types of files is that case files consist of records relating to one
specific action. For example, a subject file titled “Contracts” would contain general information
telating to contracts, such as procedures, sample formats. and regulations; but a case file would contain
only records pertaining to a specific contract, such as a copy of the contract, amendments. and
correspondence relating to the contract. The case file title would contain information identifying the
contract either by name or by contract number. Like subject files, case files contain records that have
administrative, legal, or fiscal values. In addition to these primary values, case file records also might
have evidential or informational value not normally found in subject file records.

a. CASE FILE ARRANGEMENT

(1) Case files are best arranged by the filing feature most frequently requested in retrieving the file.
This may be by name, number, project title, subject title, or geographic location. A case file may
include one or several subjects that relate to a specific topic and may consist of one or several file
folders, depending on the scope of the project or program. Regardless of the number of file
folders, all records pertaining to the specific topic are referred to as the case file. For example,
the case file on the construction of building XYZ might include a separate file on blueprints,
plumbing specifications, electrical diagrams, heating and air conditioning, contracts, etc. All the
files associated with the construction of the XYZ building would be considered the case file for
Building XYZ.

(2) Case files may be arranged either alphabetically or numerically. The most suitable arrangement
is the one that best serves the needs of the user. The single most important general rule to
remember when setting up a case file system is to be consistent. Once an arrangement is selected,
be consistent in that arrangement for the entire case file. The following are a few of the basic
rules that apply to case files:

(a) Names of Individuals

Arrange alphabetically by surname, given name, and middle name initial. Small collections
may be able to use initials for given and middle names. Large collections might have to use
the complete middle name rather than just the initial. Files on individuals also might be
arranged numerically by using the employee number, Social Security number, or some other

28 January 1983

— — 5

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB ,

b.

-_

38 January 1983

8

numerical designation: however. this kind of file arrangement will require a cross-
referencing index.

.

(b) Names of Companies. Organizations. or Associations
Arrange alphabetically by the predominant word in the name or title.
(c) Geographic Arrangement

Arrange alphabetically by country, province. state, county, city, or other appropriate
subdivision. Large collections of geographic files may require subdividing, such as by regions.

(d

—

Project Files

Arrange project case files alphabetically by key words assigned as the file titles. The file title
or the assigned project title should be the feature most often used to retrieve the file. Project
case files assigned a number should be arranged in numerical sequence.

(e) Numeric Arrangement

A numeric file arrangement is not self-indexing and it is often referred to as an indirect file
system, as opposed to a subject file arrangement which is self-indexing and is referred to as a
direct file system. Numeric arrangement is a quick and easy way to file large quantities of
records. To minimize errors. numbers should be hyphenated or spaced on the file folders
(e.g., 12345678 should appear as 123-45-678 or 12 84 56 78 on a file folder label). Number or
number-letter prefixes or suffixes can be used for geographic locations. types of files, or kinds
of contracts. For example, in the number 31-12345. 51] might represent a geographic location
or a particular kind of contract and 12845 might represent the consecutive number of that
case file series. A prefix or suffix such as 81 might represent the calendar or fiscal year as part
of the case file number.

SPECIAL FILE ARRANGEMENT

Special file arrangement schemes are common throughout the Agency. These systems should be
reviewed to ensure that the needs of the user continue to be met. Commercial vendors offer a wide
variety of case filing systems; however, these systems generally require the use of the vendor's filing
supplies. The component RMO should be consulted prior to contacting any vendor regarding file
arrangement systems.

FILES MAINTENANCE

. DEFINITION

Once a filing system has been selected. files maintenance becomes critical to the continued
usefulness of the information contained in that filing system. A well-designed file system quickly can
become an office liability if not properly maintained. The term files maintenance includes the
following operations:

(1) Prefile sorting of the records.

(2) Filing operations.

(3) Labeling of file folders and containers.

(4) Indexing.

(5) Reference and chargeout procedures.

(6) Disposition techniques.

The extra time taken to perform all these operations will prove to be well spent when needed
information is quickly retrieved and unnecessary filing is avoided.

PREFILE SORTING OF THE RECORDS

This first step in the files maintenance process is very important because it is the point where
temporary and permanent records are identified. The component records control schedule is a

a a

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

.

valuable tool which should be used to accomplish this task. The records control schedule describes
the records of the component and provides disposition instructions. As a general rule. permanent : ~
records as identified in the records control schedule should not be interfiled with temporary records.
If there are records to be filed which cannot be identified to an item in the records control schedule.
the component RMO should be notified immediately. The separation of temporary and permanent
records at this stage will facilitate disposition of the records and reduce the need for extensive and
costly reviews. The records to be filed then should be arranged to conform with the file system
arrangement. Duplicate copies, valueless attachments. unneeded envelopes, routing slips, and cover
sheets that do not contain record information should be removed. Rubber bands, pins, and paper
clips also should be removed from the records before filing. The prefile sorting of records should
help reduce indiscriminate filing and prevent the creation of files which are not covered by
approved records control schedules. Records control schedules are discussed in more detail in
HHB Records Disposition Handbook. and later in this handbook. The following hints also
should help reduce the amount of material to be filed:

(1) File fewer publications, periodicals, circulars, and other printed items received for general
information.

(2) File fewer ‘Information Only” copies of correspondence. Only those items which are likely to be

referred to should be filed.

(3) File fewer directives. Unless the file station is responsible for maintaining the complete set of
regulations, information copies should not be filed.

(4) Restrict the number of extra copies of correspondence or documents being reproduced and limit
the distribution to only what is necessary.

(5) Share files of common interest with other components, if possible.
(6) If unsure whether something should be filed, ASK FIRST before filing.
FILING OPERATIONS

Filing of records should be done at least daily or more often depending on the volume of the records.
Unless the file system arrangement indicates otherwise, records should be filed chronologically with
the latest date on top. Loose filing requires less filing time, costs less initially, and allows easy
removal of individual records for reference. Loose filing generally is appropriate for case files that
are small, have a low reference rate, are scheduled for short-term retention, or rarely leave the office
or file room. However, loose filing has two inherent disadvantages: (1) papers may be lost or mis-
placed easily, and (2) the lack of uniform arrangement of the folder contents makes it more difficult
to find a particular document. Fastened filing usually is preferred for large case files and subject files
that receive extensive use, have long retention periods, and are likely to be charged out for extended
periods of time. The decision on whether to use loose or fastened filing is an individual component
option. Another approach available is to delay fastening papers until more than 10 or 20 documents
accumulate or until the file folder is about to be charged out. The standard file folder has scores or
creases on the bottom to allow expansion to accommodate various quantities of paper. When a folder
reaches full capacity, use one or more additional folders to avoid overcrowding. Be sure to revise or
update file tabs or labels on each folder to show volume figures, dates, contents, and disposition
instructions.

d. LABELING OF FILE FOLDERS AND CONTAINERS

(1) File folder labels should reflect accurately the contents of the file, inclusive dates, disposition
instructions, and applicable item in the component's records control schedule. For example:

c.

REM 12 RECORDS MAINTENANCE FILES MANAGEMENT HANDBOOK 1980
WORKING PAPERS, DRAFTS, ETC. Item xx (2) a.
TEMP.

10 28 January 1983

HH
<8e |

(2) The file label on the left of the folder indicates the primary subject file classification category.
The center label indicates the secondary level and describes the contents of the file. The label on
the right provides information on when the material was collected, the records control schedule
item that applies, and the fact that the file is considered temporary. The disposition instructions
for item xx (2) a. also might be placed on the label if space allows; i.e., TEMP. Dest. Jan82.

(8) File folder labels may be positioned to accommodate the file system arrangement or the type of
file storage container used. The use of classified file titles should be avoided if possible. If the file
title must be classified, it must be marked to show the classification level, and file indexes and
label also must be marked as appropriate. Whenever possible, file storage containers should be
labeled to indicate their contents.

e. INDEXING

Indexing usually is required only when a numeric file arrangement is employed. Subject files and
case files utilizing a subject topic file arrangement are self-indexing. For those components requiring
an index, consult with the component RMO or OY OIs.

f. REFERENCE AND CHARGEOUT PROCEDURES

Component files should be made available only to authorized employees. Whenever a file is removed
from the file station, a chargeout card should be completed so that the file may be located and
retrieved. Specific time limits should be imposed on how long the file may be charged out. Files .
containing Top Secret and Sensitive Compartmented Information material are subject to separate
control procedures.

g. DISPOSITION TECHNIQUES

Planning ahead is essential to facilitate the ultimate disposition or preservation of Agency records. It
also ensures records are not kept in office space longer than necessary. The component records
control schedule provides information concerning particular types of records. A typical disposition
technique is by file break or cutoff.

(1) A common method of segregating files for disposition is the file break or cutoff. Using this
method, a file series is terminated at regular periodic intervals to facilitate continuous disposal or
transfer of unneeded records to the AARC. The selected period should if practical be annual,
biennial, or some other convenient cycle. File series which are assigned numbers that have a
calendar or fiscal year prefix or suffix are easily organized by annual groups. Current (open) files
arranged by number continue to be filed by that number over a period of years or until they
become inactive (closed). As files are closed throughout the year, the folders are physically
removed from the active files and placed in an inactive or closed file area. When the authorized
disposition period is reached, there will not be a need to screen the active files. Thus, two file
categories are always in being, an active (open) and an inactive (closed). This technique can be
successful where all or most of the files are closed within a three- to five-year period and when
few references and rare interfiling of new records are needed. If the volume of records is small or
quick reference is required, the inactive storage can take place in the office. However, most
inactive storage will take place at the AARC where it is more economical to store and service
inactive records.

(2) Many case file series cannot be cutoff or broken periodically and generally should be broken only
when the file is closed by final action. The controlling factor to be considered when establishing
file breaks is the usage of the file after the file is closed. If reference service or filing activity
remains high in a closed file, the file should remain in office space until such activity diminishes.
Files stored at the AARC can be retrieved quickly, and the need for valuable office storage space
should be considered in establishing file breaks.

(3) Records control schedules provide instructions on file breaks and cutoffs for specific file series. If
these instructions are inappropriate, contact the component RMO and explain the particular
circumstances. These instructions can and should be modified to accommodate changing
conditions.

28 January 1983 ese he ie a re

=

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT 7 HH eae
9

CHAPTER ITI: FILING EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES

9. FILING EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES MANAGFMENT

a. DEFINITION

This chapter sets forth procedures to be followed when ordering filing equipment and supplies. It
also provides information about the different types of filing equipment and supplies used within the
Agency. The chapter outlines the preliminary steps that are to be taken before ordering this type of
equipment and supplies.

b. GENERAL

(1) The Chief, jas the Agency RMO, is responsible for the management of filing equipment
and filing supplies used within the Agency. All requests for filing equipment and nonstandard
filing supplies must be approved by the Chief, Fin advance of any procurement action taken
by a requesting component. The Office of Logistics (OL) will not process procurement actions for
nonstandard file equipment and supplies without the approval of the Chief,

(2) The Chief, gg will not approve requests for file equipment or nonstandard filing supplies
without the concurrence of the component RMO and the directorate RMO.

c. PRELIMINARY STEPS

Before any filing equipment is ordered, the component RMO should confirm the need and ensure
the following actions are performed prior to determining the amount and type of additional file
equipment:

(1) Remove office supplies, unclassified forms, nonclassified publications, and other material from
file storage equipment.

(2) Destroy those records no longer needed as authorized by the records control schedule. Paragraphs
1] and 12 of HHB provide specific guidance and instruction on the Agency's records
destruction policy.

(8) Transfer inactive records identified in the records control schedule to the AARC. Further
guidance on the transfer of records is contained in paragraph 13 of HH

(4) If the increase in file storage is a result of new records creation, ensure that these records can be
associated with current disposition instructions contained in the records control schedule; if not,
initiate action to have the records scheduled and the records control schedule updated.

(5) Determine if it is feasible to consider converting the file medium; i.e., from paper to microfilm
or to digital data.

d. STANDARD FILE EQUIPMENT

The Agency standard item of file equipment is the two- or four-drawer safe. This equipment is
funded by OL. Requests for this type equipment must include a certification statement by the
component RMO that the preliminary steps as outlined above have been completed, and a statement
of justification (see Figure 1, sample memorandum format). A completed For Requisition for
Materiel and/or Services (Figure 2), must accompany the request. The requesting memorandum
must be approved by the directorate RMO and reviewed by a senior official at the directorate level.
OL will not process requests for file equipment unless approved by the Chief, SS

e. NONSTANDARD FILE EQUIPMENT

Nonstandard file equipment is anything other than the two- or four-drawer safe. Components
requesting nonstandard file equipment must follow the procedures outlined in paragraph d and also

28 January 1983 13

HHB ap INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
Of

.

include the component's funding citation on the Form ] The requesting component will be
required to pay for all items received except those items available from surplus stock.

f. SURPLUS FILE EQUIPMENT

Components having surplus file equipment should prepare Form ae Requisition or Turn-In for
Administrative Supplies and Equipment (Figure 3), and forward it through the directorate RMO to
OL. Directorate RMO’s should attempt to satisfy their file equipment needs by utilizing surplus file
eaioment. should be informed of surplus file equipment.

g. STANDARD FILING SUPPLIES

(1) The 11-point kraft paper file folder is the Agency standard file folder. It is available in legal and
letter size with or without fasteners. The Agency standard file guide is of pressboard construction
with metal tab. These folders, guides. and paper inserts for guide tabs are available in building
supply rooms.

(2) Components requesting large quantities of these items should submit a Form Qo the building
supply room.

h. NONSTANDARD FILING SUPPLIES AND HEAVY-DUTY FILE FOLDERS

(1} Requests for nonstandard filing supplies and heavy-duty file folders must be justified by
memorandum and be accompanied by a completed Form Requests for heavy-duty file
folders may be approved by the directorate RMO as the technical officer on the Form. Special
requests; e.g., a request for an unusually large quantity of heavy-duty folders, may be submitted
to the Chief, QM. for approval at the discretion of the directorate RMO. Requests for other
types of nonstandard filing supplies must be approved by the Chief 3p

(2) Reorders of previously approved filing supplies may be approved by the directorate RMO as the
technical officer on Form

(3) Appendix C provides additional information on the types of file equipment and filing supplies.

14 , 28 January 1983

x

CHAPTER IV: MICROGRAPHICS

10. MICROGRAPHICS MANAGEMENT

a.

a.

CQ

e&

GENERAL

(1) Micrographics refers to the technology that reduces a unit of information such as a page of text or
a drawing to a form which cannot be read without the aid of magnification. This unit of
information is referred to as a microimage when reduced. A microform is a form containing
microimages, such as a microfiche or reel microfilm. A micrographics system is a configuration
of equipment and procedures for the production, reproduction. maintenance, storage, retrieval,
display, or use of microforms. A system may involve one or more, but not necessarily all, of these
functions. (See Appendix D for a more detailed glossary of common micrographic terms.)

(2) The use of micrographics technology is but one alternative available to records managers in
developing solutions to files and records management problems. It will not be the purpose of this
chapter to promote the use of micrographics as the cure-all to these problems but rather to
provide information, guidance, and procedures on the uses of micrographies within the Agency.
Subpart 11.5 of Chapter 101 FPMR, Title 41 CFR, is the authority for the standards, regulation,
and guidelines for using micrographics technology in the creation, use, storage, retrieval,
preservation, and disposition of Federal Government records.

RESPONSIBILITIES AND OBJECTIVES

Micrographics management is a part of the Agency's records management program administered by
OIS. The : / OIS, is designated the responsible component
for the management of micrographic activities within the Agency. The primary objectives of the
micrographies function are to support the Agency records management program, establish a focal
point for the coordination of all Agency micrographic activities, and develop standards and
guidelines regarding the production and use of microforms and micrographic equipment.

MICROGRAPHICS APPLICATION PROPOSALS

Proposals for new micrographics applications must be submitted on Form @a@® Microfilming
Proposal for Evaluation (see Figure 4). The proposal requires the approval of both the component
and directorate RMO’s. If approved, the directorate RMO should submit the completed Form
to the focal point for passage to Ee will conduct a feasibility study to determine if the
proposed application meets the requirements of FPMR 101-11.5 (see Appendix E). If the results of
the study are favorable, & will concur in the proposal and make recommendations on the system
configuration.

MICROGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT PROCUREMENT

Requests for purchase or lease of micrographic equipment will be submitted on a Form Sd
approved by the component and directorate RMO’s, and forwarded to ee. for concurrence and
passage to,OL. Requests for purchase or lease of micrographic equipment will not be approved
unless ae has approved the micrographics application associated with the equipment.
maintains an inventory of micrographic equipment used within the Agency. Components turning in
surplus or excess micrographic equipment should forward a completed Form 4 through@gy> to
OL.

CONVERSION OF PAPER RECORDS

(1) The best available paper copy of records should be maintained in files identified for microform
conversion. The integrity of the file system must be maintained throughout the microfilming
process. The records should be arranged, identified. and indexed so that any individual

28 January 1983 lates : 15

a)

=

16

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

.

document or segment of the file series can be located quickly. The use of leaders. flash cards.
and classification headings is recommended. particularly for manual retrieval micrographic
‘systems.

(2) The paper records must be maintained in good order until after the processed microform is
verified as an acceptable substitute in accordance with prescribed standards. Components should
ensure the microform is verified as soon as possible after microfilming is completed. Disposition
of paper records after verification will be accomplished in accordance with instructions
contained in the component's approved records control schedule. The component RMO is
responsible for ensuring this process is accomplished in accordance with the established system
specifications.

MICROFORM RECORDS

The maintenance, use, and disposition of microform records should be planned and coordinated with
the records user by the component RMO and PD during the micrographics system’s configuration
phase. These procedures should be specific in terms of the type of microform being used: archival
requirements and vital records, if any; disposition of paper records: and file system employed as well
as disposition of the microform records. This information will be necessary when the records control
schedule is changed. (The value of the information contained in records does not change just because
the storage media changes. Records series valued as temporary in their paper form will not increase
in value to permanent just because the information is now contained on microfilm. Changes in the
retention times for microfilm records must be fully justified. The requirement for silver original
microforms will be detailed in the specifications for the system by @

MICROGRAPHIC SYSTEM AUDIT

A micrographic system audit is an examination and verification of an existing application to
determine whether the objectives of the system are being achieved and whether standards are being
followed. @ji will conduct periodic audits of existing micrographic applications, either at the
request of the responsible component or on the basis of age, format, or substance. All audits are
conducted in cooperation with component and directorate RMO’s. will prepare an audit report
detailing findings and making recommendations for system improvements.

MICROGRAPHIC TRAINING

Orientation seminars for the purpose of providing basic information on micrographics technology
and its application to Agency information handling are conducted bye Special presentations and
the development of other training courses in micrographics are provided upon request.

28 January 1983

ae

PA

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB oF. Fig. 1

(Classification)

Chief, Rene a
Office or Information Services, DDA

Component Records Management Officer
Directorate Records Management Officer

Originating Component

SUBJECT: Request for Filing Equipment and/or Nonstandard
Filing Supplies

REFERENCE: He

1. Forwarded herewith for approval is Form for filing equipment
Tequired to (specify the justification; estimated savings, if any; or
anticipated efficiencies, if any, resulting from the requested equipment).

2. File equipment to be turned in upon receipt of this equipment
is listed on the attached Form

3. The provisions of paragraph 9c of reference handbook have
been complied with by the component Records Management Officer.

/s/ Component Head

Attachments:
A. Form
B. Form

HSirectorate Records Management Urficer

REVIEWED:

mior Official at lrectorate Level

(Classification)

Figure 1

28 January 1983 eg ae a

7

HHB | Fig. 2 INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

CAUTION: Blank form requires
secure storage in held

arrests ae eR PSS
NAME OF CONTACT OFFICER TELEPHONE. SIGNATURE OF APPROVING OFFICER SIGNATURE OF TECHNICAL OFFICER |

TEMARKS "BUDGET CERTIFICATION. | CERTIFY THAT ®RA ANO/OR
| FUNDS ARE AVAILAGLE, CHARGE FAN INDICATED IN BLOCK
\ ASTERISKED (°) GELOW
;

!
* SIGMATURE OF AUTHORIZING OFFICER 1 GATE

REQUISITION FOR MATERIEL |*ta™. cate. cocumEeNT ConTRoL NUMBER PROCUAEMENT INSTRUMERT NO
AND/OR SERVICES ees i

MATERIEL PROC. ALLOT. NO. , REQUIRED DATE AT DESTINATION DATE PROC STEMS 6} DATE STOCK STEMS + TYPE It FPA!
' REQUIRED IN + REQUIRED IN ———$—— ew
oeror ; TRANSPORTATION ’ OTHER,
ee
* FINANCIAL ANALYSIS NUMBER ] ACCOUNTASILITY TO af ASSUMED BY
» STATION
4

TENSIGNEE ” REFERENCE

RECOMMENDED METHOD OF SHIPMENT SCCOMMENDED CHANNCL FOR SMIPWEAT
[CIRUCK. RAIL, SHIP, PLANE, OR POSTAL) ©. (COMMERCIAL, MILITARY OTHER

WARRING INSTRUCTIONS , PACKING INSTRUCTIONS

SOURCE EDIT ICS INPUT eenaans

ot

PROG. | STOCK (INITIAL | CATE | INITIAL | OaTE : 5
Hemao STOCX NO, MOMERCLATURE f : PRICING AKO EDITING DATA
QUANTITY UNIT. UNIT PRICE EXTENSION

1

ACTION A Stee LOCATION
UME + Umit PRICE EXTENSION

LOCATION
J i ~
QUANTITY | UNIT > UMEE PRICE EXTENSION

RELEASED | ACTION ase LOCATION
- QUANTITY 1 UNIT Suni prick 1

es

RELEASED

EXTENSION

} ACTION Sete LOCATION
; 7
{

| QUANTITY | UNIT $ UNIT PRICE UTENSION

QUARTITY | unar EXTLNSION

LOCATION

t
!
|

RELEASED | ACTION a LOCATION

RELEASED. | ACTION See
| vel UNIt  f UNIT PRICE | EXTENSION
| RELEASED | ACTION pw | LOCATION
!

1 QUANTITY | UMIT | UNIT PRICE EXTENSION

RELEASED | ACTION Set | LOCATION

USE PREVIOUS EDITIONS

18 aoe ; 28 January 1983

+

—_
aoe

<
v

- INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB ae Fig. 3

ATQUISITION ng,

DELIVER TO EXTENS ton | aaow me. | OUILS ING COST CENTER NO.

PERsonm TQ Contact CXTEWatoOn | 200M. NE. GUILO ing SEVISIOM sNO BRANCH
i

APPROVES SY (Siqnetere) ATE

a a gC OENNIRIGNPUON fe en

I CERTIFY thac the quantities of items listed below have been received except as
otherwise noted. If the items are curn-ins of file cabinets, desks, tables or
similar type items, I CERTIFY they have been checkad to ensure that no classified
material has been left therein.

7 i
SUAMS! Uns TiuNIT PRE Awount
free [unt ; ae

COMPLETE ONLY tf ABOVE (TEMS ARE TURN- INS

PICKUP FROM (Parson to contact ) QUILSING

Caeerere recvroeus
terriens

Figure 3

28 January 1983 19

-

HHB ep. Fig. 4 INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

tLaceirieacign

MICROFILMING PROPOSAL FOR EVALUATION

CUSTODIAN COMPONENT roc NO. fea watt?

S3IIORD OESCRIPTION

FELE 1QENTUFICATION (inecdude titia. descriapeion, inclusive dateas AND COMPOSITION (Jetter decumencs. tegai decuments.
cards, ete.)

1S FILE ON RECOROS SCMEOULE NO. RETENTION PER!OO OF FILE }LOCATION OF FILE

Brees SE one aie ene,
StZ€ OF FILE TO BE FILMED EST. NO. OF GOCUMENTS/ NNUAL GROWTH fe FILE ARRANGEMENT
(lin ft) CAROS/ETC IN FILE € Clan ft)
| favemaeeric NUMERIC
tof !  } OTHER Csmecrty?

FILE CLASSIFICATION ANNO COMMENT
Sensitivity j

FILE uSeo ar (give tecacren} NUMBER OF USERS
1S FILE ACTIVE

COMee NT

INDICATE OROER OF IMPORTANCE BY 1, 2. 3, ETC.

rain ? : Y
FASTER RETRIEVAL fuaintath © 1LE INTEGaty OISPOSITION OF MARO COP

_ _APTER FILMING
Tvivay secoros

PRESERVE OETERFORATING BECOROS OTMER (Specs fy?)
ACTAIR DESTROY
(MULTIPLE COPY OTSTRISUTION i

REVIEWS ANO CONCURRENCES
COMPONENT RMO CONTROL NUMBER
(Cite nunber en form 70)
ey OE Cee aE

CLASSIFICATION
OaseLart recvieus
toiriens

Figure 4

= ' . 28 January 1983

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHe a
APPENDIX A

APPENDIX A: GLOSSARY OF FILES MANAGEMENT TERMS

ACTIVE RECORDS. See CURRENT RECORDS.
ADMINISTRATIVE RECORDS. See HOUSEKEEPING RECORDS.

ALPHABETIC INDEX (OR RELATIVE INDEX). A filing and finding aid for subject files that
alphabetically lists each of the topics included in a subject outline and usually contains many
additional subjects under which papers might be located. Each entry shows the file designation for
papers on that subject.

ALPHABETIC NAME INDEX. A finding aid that permits documents filed by subject to be located by
the name of an individual or organization mentioned in the documents. Usually consists of extra
copies of outgoing correspondence, cross-reference forms. or combinations of both.

ALPHABETIC-SUBJECT FILING SYSTEM. A subject file classification system in which subjects are
arranged in alphabetic order regardless of their relationship to one another. For example, the
subjects ‘adobe houses” and “adrenalin” might immediately follow “administration.”

ALPHA-NUMERIC FILING SYSTEM. A classification system in which letters are assigned to main
divisions and numbers to subdivisions. For example, “A” might stand for the main subject
“administration” and ““A3” for the subdivision “personnel.”

APPRAISAL. The process of determining the value and thus the disposition of records based upon their
administrative and other uses, their evidential and informational or research value, their
arrangement. and their relationship to other records.

ARCHIVES. (1) The noncurrent records of an organization or institution preserved because of their
permanent value: also referred to, in this sense, as archival materials or archival holdings. See also
PERMANENT RECORDS. (2) The agency responsible for selecting, preserving, and making
available archival materials; also referred to as an archival agency. (8) The building or part of a
building in which such materials are located: also referred to as an archival repository or depository.

ARRANGEMENT. (1) The order in which documents are filed. (2) A logical plan for organizing
records, such as numerically or alphabetically by name of subject.

BREAKDOWN. (1) The separation of files into such basic types as general correspondence (subject)
files, transitory correspondence, case files, case working papers, technical reference materials,
convenience copies, and the like. (2) The internal arrangement of basic file types by such filing
features as names, places, numbers, dates, or subject categories. (3) The division or subdivision of
subject categories into successively more specific classes.

CASE FILE. A folder or other file unit containing material relating to a specific action, transaction,
event, person, place, project, or other subject. A case fle may cover one or many subjects that
relate to the case. For example, a contract file contains records on a specific contract, such as the
application, correspondence, addenda, reports, and processing documents. Other types of case files
include official personnel folders, surveys, studies, and the like. See also PROJECT FILE,
TRANSACTION FILE.

CENTRAL FILES. The files of several offices or organizational units physically and/or functionally
centralized and supervised in one location.

CHARGEOUT. The action of recording the removal and loan of papers from a file or the loan of an
entire file to indicate its whereabouts, usually done on a specifically designed card.

CHRONOLOGICAL FILE. See READING FILE.

28 January 1983 31

HHB a INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENTS
APPENDIX A -

.

CLASSIFICATION. The process of determining the file designation and necessary index references to
records to be filed, normally connected with subject files (NOT TO BE CONFUSED WITH
NATIONAL SECURITY MARKINGS).

CLASSIFICATION SYSTEMS. See SUBJECT FILE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM.
CODES. See FILE CODES.

CODING. The process of implementing the file designation decision made during the classification
process; the process of putting file designations on the records themselves. Normally used only for
subject file classification systems. :

COMPREHENSIVE RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document describing all records of an
agency or component, specifying records to be preserved as having archival value, and authorizing
on a continuing basis the disposition of specified recurring series of records.

COPY. A reproduction of the contents of an original document, prepared simultaneously or separately.
usually identified by function or by method of creation. Copies identified by function may include
action copy, comeback copy, file or record copy, information or reference copy, official copy, and
suspense copy. Copies identified by method or creation include carbon copy, mimeograph copy,
ribbon copy, and electrostatic copy.

CORRESPONDENCE FILE. See SUBJECT FILES.

CROSS-REFERENCE. A finding aid that directs the user from one place in the file to another when a
particular document may be requested by more than one name, number, or subject.
CURRENT RECORDS. Records necessary for conducting the current business of an office and

therefore generally maintained in office space and equipment. See also NONCURRENT
RECORDS, SEMICURRENT RECORDS.

CUTOFF. See FILE BREAK.

DECENTRALIZED FILES. Files of an agency or agency component that are maintained at several
locations. Physically decentralized files can be made subject to centralized intellectual and
administrative controls.

DECIMAL FILING SYSTEM. A system for classifying records by subject, developed in units of 10 and
coded for arrangement in numerical order. Each of the 10 main subjects (000-900) may be divided
into as many as 9 secondary subjects (10-90), which in turn may be divided into 9 tertiary subjects
(1-9). The use of decimal points can accommodate further breakdown by 9’s.

DIRECTIVE. Any issuance of an organization that guides, instructs, and informs employees in their
work. Included are formalized statements of policy and procedures. Directives are issued under
many names, such as notices, orders, procedures, bulletins, manuals, handbooks, regulations.
circulars, guides.

DISPOSAL. Physical destruction of records. See also DISPOSITION.

DISPOSAL AUTHORITY. The legal authorization for the disposal of records obtained from the
Archivist of the United States and, for certain series, from the Comptroller General. Initiated by
agencies on Standard Form 115, Request for Records Disposition Authority, or granted in the
General Records Schedules.

DISPOSAL LIST. A document providing one-time authorization for the legal destruction of specified
nonrecurring series of records.

DISPOSAL PERIOD. See RETENTION STANDARD.

DISPOSITION. The actions taken with regard to noncurrent records following their ate The
actions include transfer to a records center for temporary storage. transfer to an archival agency,
donation to an eligible depository, reproduction on microfilm. and destruction.

99 28 January 1983

29 —

i

—

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT | HH |
APPENDIX A

.

DISPOSITION PROGRAM. A management system resulting in the efficient and economical
disposition of records by developing and implementing standards, procedures. and techniques,
Includes scheduling records for disposition and administering their storage, documenting agency
benefits accruing from the program. and undertaking surveys and audits of disposition operations.

DISPOSITION SCHEDULE. A document governing, on a continuing basis, the mandatory disposition
of recurring records series of an organization or agency. Also known as a records schedule. records
control schedule, retention schedule, or records retention schedule. See also COMPREHENSIVE
RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE, GENERAL RECORDS SCHEDULE.

DISPOSITION STANDARD. The time period for the cutoff, transfer to a records center, destruction,
or offer to the National Archives and Records Service (NARS) of a records series.

DOCUMENTATION. (1) The recording of an agency's legal mission, functions, organization, Policies,
decisions, procedures, essential transactions, and accomplishments. (2) The body of records that
results from such recording.

DUPLEX-NUMERIC FILING. The Process of arranging records by adding assigned numbers
associated with subordinate headings to those associated with main headings; eg, 2
Communications, 2-1 Mail, and 2-1-] Postage.

FACILITATIVE RECORDS. See HOUSEKEEPING RECORDS.

FILE. (1) An accumulation of records maintained in a predetermined physical arrangement. (2) Storage
equipment, such as a filing cabinet. See also SERIES.

FILE AUDIT. A systematic evaluation of files operations, including such matters as subject file
classification, coding, cross-referencing, retrieval time, accuracy of filing, use of cutoffs, and
layout. Also called file inspection.

FILE BREAK. Termination of a file at regular periodic intervals to facilitate continuous disposal or
transfer of the file series. Also called cutoff. ;

FILE CODES. Numbers or symbols used to abbreviate lengthy file designations that would otherwise
be expressed as words. Most filing systems take their name from the file code system used: for
example, alpha-numeric, decimal, numeric-alphabetic, and subject-numeric.

FILE COPY. The official or record document that is so marked or recognized, complete with
enclosures or related papers. Also known as record copy. See OFFICIAL FILES.

FILE CUSTODIAN. A person given official responsibility for the control of records at a file station.

FILE DESIGNATION. A distinguishing symbol, subject, name, number, or date controlling the
placement of a document in a filing system. See also CODING.

FILE GROUP. A collection of papers that have similar characteristics and that need to be kept apart
from other groups of records at a file location. Also called file type. See also SERIES.

FILE STATION. Any location in the organization at which documents are maintained for current use.
A file station may be small with only one or two file cabinets serving a single branch or section.

FILES. A collective term usually applied to all records of an office or agency.

FILES OPERATIONS. The practical application of filing principles; the performance of the practical
work of arranging current records in systematic order for purposes of preservation and reference.

FILES PLAN. A plan designating the physical location(s) at which an agency's files are to be
maintained, the specific types of files to be maintained there, and the organizational element(s)
having custodial responsibilities. Also known as a files placement plan.

FILING. The act of putting documents into their place in accordance with an established syste.

28 January 1983 23

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

HH, ae

APPENDIX A

FILING FEATURE. The characteristic by which a document is filed and found such as a number.
date, title, name, or subject.

FILING MANUAL. A guide to control and facilitate filing, which prescribes and explains a particular
system.

FILING SYSTEM. A plan for organizing and identifying records so that they can be found quickly
when needed. Most filing systems are based on either an alphabetic or a numeric arrangement.

FOLLOWUP FILE. A file used as a means of checking on borrowed records and effecting their retain
to the files.

FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION. Successively dividing records into classes and subclasses to
conform to the programs, activities, and transactions carried out by the organization accumulating
the records.

GENERAL CORRESPONDENCE FILE. A file consisting of correspondence on a number of subjects.
as distinguished from a case file that contains correspondence about specific transactions or
projects.

GENERAL RECORDS SCHEDULE. A schedule. issued by NARS, governing the disposition of
specified recurring series common to several or all agencies. Use of the General Records Schedule is
MANDATORY.

HOLDING AREA. Agency space assigned for the temporary storage of current or semicurrent records
and for records with relatively short retention periods. Also known as staging area.

HOUSEKEEPING RECORDS. Records of an organization that relate to budget, accounting,
personnel, supply, and similar administrative or facilitative operations normally common to most
agencies, as distinguished from program or substantive records that relate to an agency's primary
functions. See also PROGRAM RECORDS.

INACTIVE RECORDS. See NONCURRENT RECORDS.

INDEX. A separate collection of cards, extra copies, cross-reference sheets, or other forms arranged in a
different sequence from that of the related main file. An index provides a way of finding a
document other than by its file designation. For example, a contract file that is arranged
numerically might have an index arranged alphabetically by the name of the contract.

INFORMATION COPY. An extra copy other than the official file copy. May be sent to offices with an
interest in the subject discussed.

INVENTORY. A survey of files prior to the development or revision of disposition schedules. Generally
included are such data as series title, inclusive dates, use, volume, arrangement, duplication, and
other pertinent information. Use of such forms as GSA Form 138, Records Inventory Worksheet,
facilitates the completion of inventories.

LOOSE FILING. Placing papers in folders without attaching them to the folders or to backing sheets.

MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS. All operations incidental to the upkeep of an organized filing
system. Includes classifying, indexing, sorting, filing, and reference service.

MICROGRAPHICS TECHNOLOGY. A process which reduces a unit of information, such as a page of
text or a drawing, to a form which cannot be read without magnification.

MNEMONIC FILING SYSTE®. A classification system in which records are coded by symbols that
remind the user of the subject; e.g., COM for communications and TEL for telephone. These
symbols are usually arranged in alphabetic order.

NONCURRENT RECORDS. Records that are no longer required in the conduct of current business
and therefore can be accessioned by an archival depository or destroyed. See also CURRENT
RECORDS, SEMICURRENT RECORDS.

24 b Basie : 28 January 1983

—

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

HHe ge

APPENDIX A

NONRECORDS MATERIAL. Material excluded from the definition of records, such as unofficial
copies of documents that are kept only for convenience or reference. stocks of publications and
processed documents. and library or museum material intended solely for reference or exhibition,
See also RECORDS.

NUMERIC-ALPHABETIC FILING SYSTEM. A classification system in which numbers are assigned
to main divisions and letters and numbers to succeeding subdivisions. For example. 1 might stand
for “administration,” 1-C for the subdivision “personnel,” and 1-C-4 for the further subdivision
“retirement.”

NUMERIC FILING SYSTEM. Any classification system in which records are arranged by numbers.
May require an alphabetic index to facilitate its use. ;

OFFICE OF RECORD. An office designated as the official custodian of records for specified

programs, activities, or transactions of an organization.

OFFICE OF SUBJECT OUTLINE. An outline that js normally based on the topics included in a
prescribed agency subject outline and that lists each folder caption or subject heading needed for
the records arranged by subject at a particular file station. See also SUBJECT OUTLINE.

OFFICIAL FILES. An accumulation of official records documenting an action or providing valuable
information. The official files include the originals of incoming correspondence and the initialed
copies of the outgoing and interoffice correspondence; the original or action copies of reports;
completed forms, maps, photographs, and other documents.

PAPERS. See RECORDS.

PERMANENT RECORDS. In U.S. Government usage, records appraised by NARS as having enduring
value because they document the organization and functions of the agency that created or received
them and/or because they contain significant information on persons, things, problems, and
conditions with which the agency dealt. See also ARCHIVES.

PROGRAM RECORDS. Records created or received and maintained by an agency in the conduct of
the substantive functions for which it is responsible. The term is used in contrast with housekeeping
or facilitative records.

PROJECT FILE. A type of case file that contains records relating to an assigned task or problem. See
also CASE FILE. ihe Ryeyisy ees

PUBLIC RECORDS. (1) In general usage, records accumulated by Government agencies. (2) Records
open to public inspection by Jaw or custom.

READING FILE. A file containing copies of documents arranged in chronological order. Sometimes
known as a chronological file.

RECORD COPY. See FILE COPY, RECORDS.

RECORD SET. Official record copies of published materials, as distinguished from extra copies kept in
stock.

RECORDS. All books, papers, maps, photographs, machine-readable materials, or other documentary
materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received by an agency of the U.S.
Government under Federal law or in connection with the transaction of public business and
preserved or appropriate for preservation by that agency or its legitimate successor as evidence of
the organization, functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities of the
Government, or because of the informational value of data in them. Library and museum material
made or acquired and preserved solely for reference or exhibition purposes, and extra copies of
documents preserved only for convenience of reference. Stocks of publications and of processed
documents are not included.

28 January 1983

Ww

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

HH ae
APPENDIX A

.

RECORDS CENTER. A facility for the economical storage and servicing of records pending their
ultimate disposition.

RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. See DISPOSITION SCHEDULE.
RECORDS DISPOSITION. See DISPOSITION.

RECORDS MANAGEMENT. That area of general administrative management concerned with
achieving economy and efficiency in the creation. use and maintenance, and disposition of records.
Included are fulfilling archival requirements and ensuring effective documentations.

RECORDS MANAGER, The person responsible for or engaged in records management program
activities. Sometimes known as a records officer or records administrator.

RECORDS RETENTION SCHEDULE. See DISPOSITION SCHEDULE.
RECORDS RETIREMENT. See RETIREMENT, DISPOSITION.
RECORDS SCHEDULE. See DISPOSITION SCHEDULE.

RETENTION PERIOD. See DISPOSITION SCHEDULE.

RETENTION STANDARD. The time period for particular records (normally a series) to be kept. Also
called retention period or disposal period. See also DISPOSITION STANDARD.

RETIREMENT. Transfer of semicurrent and noncurrent records to a records center or some other
authorized depository for storage.

SCREENING. The examination of records to determine the presence of documents eligible for
destruction and the removal of such documents from the files. Also called weeding.

SELF-INDEXING FILES. A collection of records in which requested information can normally be
searched for and found without resource to a separate index.

SEMICURRENT RECORDS. Records required so infrequently in the conduct of current business that
they should be moved to a holding area or directly to a records center. See also CURRENT
RECORDS, NONCURRENT RECORDS.

SERIES. File units or documents arranged in accordance with a filing system or maintained as a unit
because they relate to a particular subject or function, result from the same activity, have a
particular form, or because of some other relationship arising out of their creation, receipt, or use.
Sometimes known as a records series.

SORTING. The process of separating Papers into groups for filing according to a classification system. A
second and third sorting of individual groups may be required to achieve the necessary final
breakdown.

STAGING AREA. See HOLDING AREA.
SUBJECT CORRESPONDENCE FILES. See SUBJECT FILES.

SUBJECT FILE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM. Various plans used for identifying and coding
documents by topic to provide an orderly and accurate way of filing and finding. Examples of such
systems include the subject-numeric, alphabetic-subject, alpha-numeric, duplex-numeric, and
mnemonic. See also FILING SYSTEM, SUBJECT FILES.

SUBJECT FILES. Records arranged and filed according to their general informational content. Consist
mainly of general correspondence but may also include forms, reports, and other materials that
relate to programs and functions and not to a specific case or a particular person or organization.
The purpose of establishing subject files is to bring together all papers on the same topic to
facilitate information retrieval. Also known as correspondence files, general correspondence files,
or central files,

96 28 January 1983

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB ,
APPENDIX A

SUBJECT-NUMERIC FILING SYSTEM. A subject file classification system in which the main topics
are arranged in alphabetic order and the subdivisions are coded for numeric arrangment. For
example, “PERSONNEL 10” might stand for “hours of duty.” This system may be modified by
combining it with the mnemonic filing system so that. for example, “PERSONNEL 10” would
become “PER 10,”

SUBJECT OUTLINE. A written list of topics arranged in hierarchical manner (i.e., primary,
secondary, tertiary) and serving as the source for selecting file designations (folder label captions)
for arranging or classifying the documents of a subject file. File codes are normally included with
the subject outline.

SUSPENSE FILE. See FOLLOWUP FILE.

TECHNICAL REFERENCE MATERIAL. Copies of reports, studies, compilations of data, drawings,
periodicals, clippings, etc., that are needed for reference and information but are not made a part
of the official files. Such nonrecord material js to be kept only as long as needed and may be
periodically replaced with more current material.

TICKLER FILE. See FOLLOWUP FILE.

TRANSACTION FILE. <A type of case file that documents the conducting of negotiations. business
matters, and the like to a particular conclusion or settlement. See also CASE FILE.

TRANSITORY RECORDS. A general term for records that lose their value within a short period of
time and that should be separated during filing from records requiring longer retention.

UNSCHEDULED RECORDS. Records for which no ultimate disposition has been determined.

VITAL RECORDS. Records essential for maintaining the continuity of Federal Government activities
during a national emergency. Consist of two categories: (1) emergency operating records which
outline the essential functions of the Government for the duration of emergency conditions and (2)
rights and interests records which are required for the preservation of the rights and interests of
individual citizens and the Government.

WEEDING. See SCREENING.

WORKING PAPERS. Documents such as rough notes, calculations, or drafts assembled or created and
used in the preparation or analysis of other documents.

28 January 1983 ce 27-28

HHB Si

APPENDIX B

APPENDIX B: SUBJECT FILE CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM

1. INTRODUCTION

a. The model subject files classification system provides a uniform method of organizing administrative
records that are not part of a case or project file arrangement. The purpose of this system is to
provide a model arrangement for administrative correspondence which will be useful to components
currently using an inadequate or unsatisfactory system.

b. The system includes 16 primary subject titles representing administrative functions common to most
Agency components with related subordinate subjects grouped in outline form as subdivisions of the
Primary subject. These subdivisions are referred to as secondary and tertiary subjects. Primary
subjects are assigned a three-letter code; secondary and tertiary subjects contain the same three-letter
code and a simple numerical identification. The following illustrates the subject-numeric coding
system:

(1) Primary subject: PER Personnel
(2) Secondary subject: PER 10 Pay Administration
(3) Tertiary subject: PER 10-2 Deductions
By expanding the primary subjects as necessary to include different program areas, a component can
develop a comprehensive filing system for all correspondence filed by subject.
Z. PRIMARY SUBJECTS
ADP Automated Data Processing

ADS Administrative Services
AUD Audits and Investigations
BUD Budget

CMC Committees, Meetings, and Conferences
EEO Equal Employment Opportunity

FIN Financial Management

LEG Legal and Legislative

OPM Organization, Planning, and Management
PER Personnel

PRC Procurement and Contracting

PUB Public Relations

REM Records Management and Information Processing
SEC Security Services

TAE Training and Education

TRV Travel and Transportation

a. AUTOMATED DATA PROCESSING (ADP)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to automated
and electronic data processing equipment, systems, management, and operations. Do NOT use this
outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing in specific case files.

Code Title
ADP AUTOMATED DATA PROCESSING—Use for ADP planning and management in
general.

ADP 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys of ADP
within Agency, progress reports, and significant accomplishment reports,

28 January 1983 yj. . : i oT 29

HHB

APPENDIX B

Code
ADP 2

ADP 8

ADP 4
ADP 4-1
ADP 4-2
ADP 4-3
ADP 4-4
ADP 5
ADP 5-1
ADP 5-2
ADP 6

ADP 7

ADP 8

. . Paes
: ed
— -

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

.

Title

LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations. and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

AUTOMATED SYSTEMS—Use for general material regarding systems initiation.

* development, documentation, operation, and maintenance. Subdivide by name of
system. Includes information and statistics, systems, and computer simulation
systems. -

DATA PROCESSING FACILITIES

Accessories-Auxiliary Equipment

Word Processing

Machine Utilization

Maintenance and Repair

EQUIPMENT SELECTION

Requirements, Specifications, and Standards

Equipment Studies

FEASIBILITY STUDIES—Use for general correspondence relating to feasibility
studies. For specific study projects, create a separate case file.

LIAISON AND INFORMATION EXCHANGE—Use for general material regarding
liaison with computer facilities and programs of other internal Agency components
and other Federal agencies.

STANDARDIZATION—Use for general correspondence regarding data processing
standards and standards development.

b. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES (ADS)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to office
service functions, including buildings and grounds, mail facilities and services, office equipment and
supplies (less file equipment and supplies), printing, property management, and telecommunications.
Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing in specific case files.

30

Code
ADS

ADS I
ADS 2

ADS 3
ADS 3-1

ADS 8-2

ADS 3-3
ADS 3-4
ADS 4

ADS 4-1
ADS 4-2
ADS 4-3
ADS 5

ADS 5-1
ADS 5-2
ADS 5-3

Title

ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY—Use for information pertaining to general policies and
procedures that cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.

REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports,

LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

BUILDING AND GROUNDS

Acquisitions—Use for general material on acquisition of buildings and grounds lease,
lease amendments, renewals, floor plans, etc.; acquisition of real property.

Facilities and Maintenance—Includes cleaning, heating and air conditioning, utilities,
moving, alterations, and repairs.

Space Management

Parking

MAIL FACILITIES AND SERVICES

Mailing Lists

Courier Services

Postage and Fees

OFFICE EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES (EXCEPT FILES EQUIPMENT AND
SUPPLIES)—Use for general material on procurement, distribution, and control.

Maintenance and Repair

Purchase

Surplus Property (Except Files Equipment)

28 January 1983

fee INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

HHB aia

' APPENDIX B
Code Title

ADS 6 PERSONAL PROPERTY ACCOUNTABILITY—Use for general material on control,
identification, inventory, loss or damage, and transfers.

ADS 7 PRINTING AND REPRODUCTION

ADS 7-1 Graphic Services—Includes artwork. design, drafting, etc.

ADS 7-2 Copying Services—Includes internal copier control. 7

ADS 7-3 Printing and Binding

ADS 7-4 Requisition and Authorizations—Use for general papers not regarding a specific
requisition.

ADS 8 TELECOMMUNICATIONS

ADS 8-1 Telegraph, Teletype, and Facsimile Service

ADS 8-2 Telephone Service

ADS 8-3 Telephone Directories

c. AUDITS AND INVESTIGATIONS (AUD)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to audits and
Inspector General (IG) investigations. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is
appropriate for filing in specific audit or IG investigation case files.

Code
AUD

AUD 1
AUD 2
AUD 3

AUD 3-1
AUD 3-2
AUD 3-8
AUD 4
AUD 4-1
AUD 4-2
AUD 4-3
AUD 5
AUD 6
AUD7

AUD 8
AUD 8-1
AUD 8-2
AUD 9
AUD 10
AUD ll

Title

AUDITS AND IG INVESTIGATIONS—Use for general policy not identified by a
specific subject listed below.

REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES—Use for procedures for conducting, reporting,
and reviewing audits and IG investigations.

Plans and Preparations

Development of Findings

Closure-Resolution

INTERNAL AUDITS

Administrative and Program Operations

Fiscal Administration

Exceptions

CONTRACT AUDITS

AUDIT TRAINING

COORDINATIONS WITH FEDERAL AGENCIES—Use for listing Federal agencies
cooperating with IG program activities. Subdivide if necessary.

IG INVESTIGATIONS

Conflict of Interest

Fraud and Embezzlement

IG INVESTIGATIVE REFERRALS

QUALITY CONTROL

LIAISON ORGANIZATIONS—Use for listing non-Federal organizations involved
with IG program activities,

d. BUDGET (BUD)
Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to the

preparation,

review, and submission of Agency budget data, including budget estimates,

justifications, policies, procedures, and financial plans. Do NOT use these subjects for documentation
which is appropriately filed in a specific case file. See the F INANCIAL MANAGEMENT outline for
records of accounting and management of appropriated and other funds.

28 January 1983

31

wv

H

at
-; id —<
a 5

HB _ INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX B
Code Title
BUD BUDGET—Use for information pertaining to general policies and procedures that

e.

cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.

BUD 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports. studies. surveys, progress
reports. and significant accomplishment reports.

BUD2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations. and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

BUD 3 BUDGET PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION

BUD 3-1 Budget Estimates—Includes preliminary estimates.

BUD 3-2 Submissions and Justifications—Use for materials concerning submission of budget
estimates to the Director, Office of Management and Budget and Congress.
Subdivide by review organization if appropriate.

BUD 4 BUDGET EXECUTION

BUD 4-1 Allotments and Authorizations

BUD 4-2 Apportionment and Allocations

BUD 4-3 Transfer of Funds

BUD 5 FINANCIAL PLANS—Use for overall plans for expenditure of funds. Includes
requests, consolidations, review work plans. approvals. etc.

BUD 6 FUND AVAILABILITY—Appropriated funds, earned reimbursements. refunds,
allocations received, transfer appropriations, etc.

COMMITTEES, MEETINGS, AND CONFERENCES (CMC)

Use this subject category for material regarding committees, meetings, conferences, task forces, etc.,
ONLY when the subject matter is too broad or general to be filed by specific subject. Establish
individual files by name of committee, conference, etc., and arrange in alphabetical order, omitting
a numeric code. See ORGANIZATION, PLANNING, AND MANAGEMENT (OPM) for committee

management.
Code Title

CMC COMMITTEES, MEETINGS, AND CONFERENCES—Use for subject matter that is
too broad or general to be filed by specific subject. For example:

CMC AUTOMATION TASK FORCE

CMC CAREER DEVELOPMENT PLANNING CONFERENCE

CMC CONTRACT REVIEW BOARD—FY 83

CMC DESIGN AND EVALUATION COMMITTEE—1982

CMC ENGINEERING WORKING GROUP

CMC PROJECT REVIEW BOARD—Jan - Jun 1982

CMC PROJECT REVIEW BOARD—Jul - Dec 1982

CMC SECURITY WORKING GROUP

« EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY (EEO)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and similar papers related to equal
employment opportunity. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing
in specific discrimination case files.

Code Title

EEO EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY—Use for general information not related
to a specific subject listed below.

EEO 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

EEO 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

EEO 8 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLANNING

28 January 1983

_— egy

an INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB Sa
APPENDIX B

Code Title
EEO 4 COMPLAINTS
EEO 4-1 Formal—Including EEO Advisory Committee
EEO 4-2 Informal
EEO 5 DISCRIMINATION—Use for materials that relate to discrimination in equal
opportunity matters. a
EEO 5-1 Age
EEO 5-2 Ethnic Origin
EEO 5-3 Handicapped Persons

EEO 5-4 Race
EEO 5-5 Color
EEO 5-6 Sex

EEO 5-7 ‘Religion
EEO 6 FEDERAL WOMEN—Use for information concerning programs designed for
Federal women.

g. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT (FIN)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to
disbursement and collection activities and the maintenance, control, and accountability of Agency a
finances. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing in specific case

files. See the BUDGET section of the subject classification system for materials relating to
preparation, submission, and execution of the Agency budget. See TRAVEL AND
TRANSPORTATION for subject outline for general correspondence on policies and procedures
regarding the travel of individuals and movement of household goods, etc.

Code Title

FIN FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT—Use for information pertaining to general policies
and procedures that cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.

FIN 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

FIN 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations. and revisions S
thereto relating to Agency programs.

FIN 3 AUTHORIZATIONS AND DESIGNATIONS—Use for designations of personnel to
perform paying, collecting, timekeeping, and similar functions.

FIN 4 BONDING OF EMPLOYEES

FIN 5 ACCOUNTING SYSTEMS

FIN 5-1 Accounting Codes and Symbols

FIN 5-2 Automated Accounting Systems

FIN 6 COLLECTIONS/RECEIPTS

FIN 6-1 Accounts Receivable

FIN 6-2 Adjustments

FIN 6-3. Checks, Money Orders, Currency—Except payroll and travel.

FIN 7 DISBURSEMENTS—Except payroll and travel.

FIN 7-1 Accounts Payable

FIN 7-2 Adjustments

FIN 7-3. Imprest Fund

FIN 7-4 Letters of Credit

FIN 7-5 Voucher Examination and Certification

FIN 8 GENERAL LEDGER—Includes correspondence concerning general ledger account-
ing, including journal vouchers, subsidiary ledgers, trial balances, balance sheets,
etc.

FIN 9 CONTRACTOR ACCOUNTING

28 January 1983 33

OL EOL,

; HEB.

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX B :

Code Title
FIN 10 OBLIGATION FUND CONTROL AND F LOW
FIN 11 PAYROLL ACCOUNTING
FIN 11-1 Deductions
FIN 11-2 Paychecks
FIN 11-8 Salary Changes
FIN 12 TRAVEL ACCOUNTING -
FIN 12-1 Advances
FIN 12-2 Per Diem
FIN 12-3 Transportation

h. LEGAL AND LEGISLATIVE (LEG)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and similar Papers pertaining to the
Agency's legislative programs, relations with Congress. and legal matters that are so general in nature
that they cannot be filed under more specific subjects. Do NOT use this outline for documentation
which is appropriate for filing in specific legal and legislative case files.

Code Title ;
LEG LEGAL AND LEGISLATIVE—Use for information pertaining to general policies

and procedures that cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.
LEG 1 COPYRIGHTS—PATENTS

LEG 2 FEDERAL REGISTER

LEG 2-1 Published Items

LEG 2-2 Proposed Items

LEG 3 LEGAL LIBRARY

LEG 4 LEGISLATION

LEG 4-1 Proposed

LEG 4-2 Enacted

LEG 5 LITIGATION AND APPEALS
LEG 5-1 Civil Actions

LEG 5-1-1 Freedom of Information Act
LEG 5-1-2 Privacy Act

LEG 5-2 Criminal Actions

LEG 6 OPINIONS AND DECISIONS
LEG 6-1 Administrative

LEG 6-2 —_ Judicial

i. ORGANIZATION, PLANNING, AND MANAGEMENT (OPM)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related Papers pertaining to the
establishment, organization, reorganization, and termination of organizational units; the assignment
and reassignment of functions; operational planning, management analysis, and surveys; manpower
requirements and utilization; and emergency planning. Do NOT use this outline for documentation
which is appropriate for filing in specific case files.

Code Title

OPM ORGANIZATION, PLANNING, AND MANAGEMENT—Use for information
Pertaining to general policies and procedures that cannot be put under specific
subjects of this outline.

OPM 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

OPM 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for Proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

OPM 3 COMMITTEE MANAGEMENT—General correspondence regarding the manage-
ment and administration of Agency committees. Do NOT use for papers on a
committee meeting which should be filed under the specific subject category or
category CMC (Committees, Meetings, and Conferences).

34 28 January 1983

ay
a

=

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHE

Code

OPM 4
OPM 5

OPM 6

OPM 7
OPM 8

OPM 9

OPM 9-1
OPM 9-2
OPM 9-3
OPM 9-4
OPM 10

OPM 1]

APPENDIX B

Title

DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY

ADMINISTRATIVE SURVEYS—Includes administrative and operational surveys of a
general nature. :

MANAGEMENT ANALYSIS AND IMPROVEMENT (See also RECORDS MAN-
AGEMENT AND INFORMATION PROCESSING)—Includes managenient
improvement, evaluation, and cost-reduction activities other than inspections,
audits, and surveys. :

EMERGENCY PLANNING (See also RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND INFOR-
MATION PROCESSING under VITAL RECORDS.)—Use for material relating to
continuation of operations in an emergency.

ORGANIZATION AND REORGANIZATION—Includes organization charts, state-
ments of functions, organization and reorganization plans, history and background
of elements, and the establishment and jurisdiction of regional offices.

STAFF CONTROL AND UTILIZATION

Staff Requirements

Work Distribution

Work Simplification

Work Measurement

PROGRAM PLANNING AND EVALUATION—Use for general material on the
overall planning, direction, coordination, supervision, review, and evaluation of
Program goals.

PROJECTS MANAGEMENT—Use for general correspondence relating to the man-
agement and administration of Agency projects.

j. PERSONNEL (PER)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related Papers pertaining to personnel.
Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing in specific case files. See

Code
PER

PER 1
PER 2
PER 3

PER 4
PER 4-1

PER 4-2
PER 4-3
PER 4-4
PER 5

PER 5-1
PER 5-2

28 January 1983

Title

PERSONNEL~—Use for information pertaining to general policies and procedures
that cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.

REPORTS AND STATISTICS—-Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE—Includes annual, sick, military leave, leave without
pay, holidays, and absence for jury duty. Subdivide by type as volume warrants.

EMPLOYEE RELATIONS AND SERVICES

Appeals and Grievances—Use for general material on the appeals system, policies
and procedures for handling appeals, complaints, and grievances.

Campaigns and Programs—Includes Combined Federal Campaign, Savings Bonds
Campaign, and blood donation program.

Conduct of Employees—Use for general materials relating to regulations and
Procedures governing conflicts of interest, political activities, acceptance of
gratuities, etc. Subdivide as necessary.

Disciplinary and Adverse Actions

EMPLOYMENT

Former Employees

Job Retention and Restoration

HHeSa

APPENDIX B

36

Code

PER 5-3
PER 6

PER 7
PER 8
PER 8-1
PER 8-2
PER 8-3
PER 8-4
PER 9
PER 10
PER 10-1
PER 10-2
PER 10-3
PER 11
PER il-1
PER 11-2
PER 11-3
PER 12
PER 13
PER 13-1
PER 13-2
PER 13-3
PER 13-4
PER 14

PER 14-1
PER 14-2
PER 15
PER 15-1
PER 16
PER 16-1

PER 16-2
PER 16-3
PER 16-4
PER 16-5
PER 16-6
PER 17

PER 17-1
PER 17-2
PER 17-3
PER 17-4
PER 17-5
PER 18

PER 18-1
PER 18-2
PER 19

. Pay
ct Daa F a i <=
ens

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT

Title

Special Categories—Includes students. handicapped veterans. consultants. etc.

HEALTH AND MEDICAL CARE—Includes injuries. alcoholism. physical
examinations, etc. Subdivide as necessary. :

HOURS OF DUTY

INSURANCE AND ANNUITIES 5

Life Insurance

Health Insurance

Retirement

Unemployment Compensation

LABOR MANAGEMENT RELATIONS

PAY ADMINISTRATION

Allowances and Differentials

Deductions

Name and Record Changes

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

Documentation and Processing

Ratings and Appraisals

Performance Standards

PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT—lIncludes program inspections and surveys.

POSITION CLASSIFICATION

Appeals

Job Descriptions

Series and Standards

Surveys and Evaluations

POSITION MANAGEMENT-—Use for requests for, establishment of, and control
over numerical authorization of staffing levels of personnel ceilings.

Personnel Ceilings

Staffing Patterns

PROMOTION AND INTERNAL PLACEMENT

Assignments and Demotions

RECRUITMENT, SELECTION, AND APPOINTMENT

Advertising and Publicity—Includes general material relating to vacancy
announcements.

Application for Employment

Appointment—Subdivide by type of appointment if volume warrants.

Examination and Testing

Qualifications

Requirements

SEPARATION AND DISPLACEMENT

Death

Reduction-in-Force

Resignation

Separation for Cause

Transfer

CAREER DEVELOPMENT

Career Planning and Counseling

Orientation

AWARDS AND COMMENDATIONS—Subdivide by type of award if volume
warrants.

28 January 1983

=e

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB- Se

APPENDIX B

k. PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING (PRC)
Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to
procurement of Agency supplies, equipment. and services; contracting for supplies and services: and
interagency agreements. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing
in a specific contract or procurement case file.
PRC PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING—Use this subject for general policies that
cannot be placed under a more specific category. .
PRC 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.
PRC 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.
PRC 3 AUTHORIZATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS—Includes contracting officers and
purchase limitations.
PRC 4 PROCUREMENT METHODS—Includes formal advertising, negotiations, small pur-
chases, and blanket purchase agreements.
PRC5 SUPPLIERS AND CONTRACTORS
PRC 5-1 _ Bidder Lists
PRC 5-2 Ineligible Bidders
PRC 5-3 Small Business and Minority Businesses
PRC 5-4 Catalogs, Price Lists, and Schedules
PRC 6 PURCHASE ORDERS AND REQUISITIONS—lIncludes policies and procedures for
submission and requisition.
PRC 7 CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS—Includes general material on clauses, forms,
etc. Subdivide by type of contract such as lease, rental, interagency agreement, etc.
PRC 8 SOLICITATIONS, BIDS, AND AWARDS
PRC 8-1 Issuance for Invitation for Bids/Request for Proposals
PRC 8-2 Evaluation of Bids and Proposals
PRC 8-3 Negotiation
PRC 8-4 Award
PRC 9 CONTRACT ADMINISTRATION
PRC 9-1 Contract Monitoring
PRC 9-2 Changes and Modifications
PRC 9-3 Cost and Billing Rates
PRC 9-4 Closeout and Termination
I. Not used.
- PUBLIC RELATIONS (PUB)

28 January 1983

Use this subject outline for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to public affairs
functions, the preparation of publications containing program information, the clearance of
publications and audiovisual materials for issuance and distribution, and the promotion of program
activities. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing in specific case
files, nor for information requested under Freedom of Information Act (F OJA) and Privacy Act (PA).
See ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES for subject headings relating to printing and reproduction,
including graphic services. See RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND INFORMATION PROCESSING
for subject headings concerning FOIA and PA requests for information.

Code Title

PUB PUBLIC RELATIONS—Use for information pertaining to general policies and
procedures that cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.

PUB 1 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

37

~—

HH 3B m.. ; INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX B

Code
PUB 2

PUB 3

PUB 4
PUB 5
PUB 6
PUB7
PUB 7-1
PUB 7-2
PUB 7-8
PUB 7-4
PUB 7-5
PUB 7-6
PUB 8
PUB 8-1
PUB 8-2
PUB 8-2-1
PUB 8-2-2
PUB 9
PUB 10

PUB 11
PUB 12

Title

REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

AUDIOVISUAL—Includes Promotional aids and publication materials. Subdivide
by type if volume warrants: maps, charts, posters, motion pictures, recordings,
photographs, and slides.

BRIEFING MATERIALS :

EXHIBITS, CEREMONIES. COMMUNITY PROJECTS

INVITATIONS—ENGAGEMENTS

PUBLICATIONS

Annual Reports

Articles

Biographies

Newsletters and House Organs

Press Releases

Public Service Announcements

PUBLIC OPINION

Congratulations, Commendations. Appreciation

Criticisms, Critiques

Favorable

Unfavorable

PRESS RELATIONS

RADIO, TELEVISION, AND MOTION PICTURE—Use for Agency relations with
these groups.

SPEECHES

VISITORS, REPRESENTATIVES, GUESTS

n. RECORDS MANAGEMENT AND INFORMATION PROCESSING (REM)

Use this subject outline for general correspondence relating to such records management functions as
records maintenance and disposition, document security, and the management of correspondence,
forms, directives, and reports. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for
filing in a specific case file.

38

Code
REM

REM 1
REM 2
REM 3
REM 4

REM 5

REM 6

REM 7

Title

RECORDS MANAGEMENT—Use for information pertaining to general policies
and procedures that cannot be put under specific subjects of this outline.

REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports,

LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs,

CORRESPONDENCE MANAGEMENT—Includes procedures and instructions.

DIRECTIVES MANAGEMENT—Use for correspondence on systems for issuing
policy and procedures for giving guidance to Agency personnel and outsiders, Do
NOT use for copies of directives.

DOCUMENT AND INFORMATION SECURITY—Use for systems and procedures
regarding the handling and control of information and documents. Includes
material on technical. administrative, and physical safeguards to ensure the
confidentiality of records containing national security information.

FORMS MANAGEMENT—Use for general correspondence on forms clearance and
control, design and development, analysis, storage, and distribution.

FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT—Use for requirements involving inquiries
specifically identified as Freedom of Information Act requests. Do NOT use for
case files.

28 January 1983

ae

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT | HHS. es
oh APPENDIX B

Code Title

REM 8 MICROFORM MANAGEMENT-—Use for correspondence regarding the manage-
ment of microfilm. microfiche, and other microforms.

REM 9 PRIVACY ACT—Use for requirements involving inquiries specifically identified as
Privacy Act requests, Do NOT use for case files,

REM 10 RECORDS DISPOSITION—General correspondence on policy and procedures to be
followed in administering and operating the Agency's records disposition program
as a whole.

REM 10-1 Disposition Schedules—General correspondence about scheduling records.

REM 10-2 Records Retirement

REM 10-3 Statistical Reports of Records Holdings

REM 11 RECORDS EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES

REM 12 RECORDS MAINTENANCE—Includes filing systems.

REM 13 REPORTS MANAGEMENT—General matters regarding the preparation, submis-
sion, control, and cost of reports.

REM 14 VITAL RECORDS—General correspondence on policy and procedures to be
followed in handling records essential to the Agency’s operations in an emergency
situation.

o. SECURITY SERVICES (SEC)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to Office of
Security service functions, including physical security, personnel security, clearances, accountability
and handling of classified material, and related subjects. Do NOT use this outline for documentation
which is appropriate for filing in specific case files.

Code ’ Title
SEC SECURITY SERVICES—Use for information pertaining to general policies and

procedures that cannot be put under specific subjects.

SEC 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

SEC 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for Proposed laws, regulations, and revisions és
thereto relating to Agency programs.

SEC 3 PHYSICAL SECURITY

SEC 4 PERSONNEL SECURITY

SEC 4-1 Special Clearances

SEC 4-2 Liaison Clearances

SEC 5 ACCOUNTABILITY AND HANDLING OF CLASSIFIED MATERIAL

SEC 6 SAFETY PROGRAM

p. TRAINING AND EDUCATION (TAE)

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related papers pertaining to Office of
Training and Education. Do NOT use this outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing
in specific case files,
Code Title
TAE TRAINING AND EDUCATION—Use for general material which cannot be filed
under a more specific subject of this nature.
TAE 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.
TAE 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for Proposed laws, regulations, and revisions -
thereto relating to Agency programs.
TAE 3 INTERNAL TRAINING—Use for general material relating to various internal
training courses. : ae
TAE 4 EXTERNAL TRAINING

28 January 1983 . ; : 39

Pony
at

HHB - INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT
APPENDIX B :
q. TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION (TRV)

40

Use these subject categories for general correspondence and related Papers pertaining to the travel of
individuals and the movement of household goods: the shipment of equipment. supplies. and
materials; and the acquisition, maintenance, use, and disposition of motor vehicles. Do NOT use this
outline for documentation which is appropriate for filing in a specific case file. See FINANCIAL
MANAGEMENT for accounting matters.

Code Title 7

TRV TRAVEL AND TRANSPORTATION—Use for general material which cannot be
filed under a more specific subject of this outline.

TRV 1 REPORTS AND STATISTICS—Use for general reports, studies, surveys, progress
reports, and significant accomplishment reports.

TRV 2 LAWS AND REGULATIONS—Use for proposed laws, regulations, and revisions
thereto relating to Agency programs.

TRV 3 GOVERNMENT VEHICLES—Use for general material on acquisition, assignment
and use, credit cards, operator permits, maintenance and repairs, and motor vehicle
reporting. Includes General Services Administration (GSA) interagency motor pool
vehicles and Agency vehicles.

TRV 4 ITINERARIES AND RESERVATIONS

TRV 5 TRANSPORTATION OF PERSONAL AND HOUSEHOLD EFFECTS

TRV 6 TRAVEL ALLOWANCES—iIncludes per diem and mileage rates, travel advances,
etc.

TRV 7 TRAVEL ORDERS/ AUTHORIZATIONS—Use for general material of a regulatory
or procedural nature. Includes transportation requests.

TRV 8 TRAVEL VOUCHERS—Use for Procedures regarding preparation and submission.
(See FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT for accounting matters.)

MatennianmQNNMNeMMma, T1980

—

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT -_ HH Ba
APPENDIX C

APPENDIX C: FILE EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES

CORRESPONDENCE TYPE FILE EQUIPMENT

The two-, four-, or five-drawer safe is the most common type of filing equipment used by the
Agency.

1. STANDARD FILE EQUIPMENT
a. Two-Drawer Safe

The two-drawer desk safe occupies no additional office floor space when used as a pedestal for a
desk. It should be used only when there is a legitimate need for secure storage at the desk location.
This safe is the most expensive in terms of cost per cubic feet of storage.

b. Four-Drawer Safe

The four-drawer safe occupies the same amount of office floor space as a freestanding two-drawer
safe. It provides twice the storage volume at less than twice the cost of a two-drawer safe.

2. NONSTANDARD FILE EQUIPMENT
a. Five-Drawer Safe

The five-drawer safe increases filing capacity by 20 percent without increasing office floor space
requirements. When office floor space is critical, this type safe should be considered, despite its
additional cost.

b. Card Filing Cabinet

This equipment is available with a combination lock and is suitable for storing 3x5 and 5x8 inch
cards or 4x6 inch microfiche. Storage of classified material in this equipment is restricted to Office
of Security-approved vaulted areas. (See HR io: guidance on the storage of classified
information or material.)

ce. Oversized Items

Cabinets for storing maps, charts, and other oversized items are available with or without
combination locks.

d. Lateral and Shelf File Equipment

Lateral and shelf files store records in lateral fashion with the sides of the file folders facing forward
rather than their front surface. The shelves may be fixed or on roll-out drawers. This equipment
utilizes floor space more efficiently, speeds filing and retrieval, and costs less than the standard safe-
type storage equipment. The equipment can be constructed to store cards, magnetic tapes, and
various microforms. Storage of classified material in this equipment is restricted to Office of
Security-approved vaulted areas. The component RMO should be consulted early in the planning
phase when lateral or shelf filing equipment is being considered. A description of other types of file
equipment and filing supplies may be found in the General Services Administration (GSA) Supply
Catalog, FSC Group 75.

28 January 1988 41-42

ru

wv
—

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HH Ba.
APPENDIX D

APPENDIX D: GLOSSARY OF COMMON MICROGRAPHIC TERMS

ARCHIVAL MICROFILM. Silver halide microfilm meeting the requirements of Federal Standard No.
125D, Film, Photographic and F ilm, Photographic, Processed (for permanent records use); Ameri-
can National Standards Institute (ANSI) Standard PH1.25-1976, etc. (See FPMR 101-11.502 (a).)
For Agency purposes, archival microfilm is defined as a silver gelatin type film that is controlled
through all phases of processing in accordance with the provisions of FPMR 101-11.5. The :
Office of Logistics, provides centralized micrographic services available
to all Agency components. Those components using this central facility can be assured thar
processed film meets the technical specifications established by NARS for the production Af
archival quality microfilm. Agency components performing independent micrographic operatidns
(not processed by the central facility) are obligated to follow the same standards and specifications

COMPUTER OUTPUT MICROFILM (COM). Microfilm containing data produced by a recorder
from computer-generated signals,

FACILITY. An area set aside for equipment and operations required in the production or reproduction
of microforms either for internal use or for the use of other organizational elements of the Federal
Government.

MICROFILM. (1) Raw (unexposed and unprocessed) film with characteristics that make it suitable for
use in micrographics. (2) The process of recording microimages on film. (3) A fine-grain, high-
resolution photographic film containing an image greatly reduced in size from the original.

MICROFORM. A term used for any form containing microimages,

MICROGRAPHICS. The science and technology of document and information microfilming and
associated microform systems,

MICROIMAGE. A unit of information, such as a page of text or a drawing, that has been made too
small to be read without the aid of magnification.

PERMANENT RECORD. Any record (see 44 U.S.C, 3301) that has been determined by the Archivist
of the United States to have sufficient historical or other value to warrant its continued
Preservation by the Government.

SYSTEM, MICROGRAPHIC. A configuration of equipment and procedures for the production,
reproduction, maintenance, storage, retrieval, display, or use of microforms. A micrographic
system may involve one or more, but not necessarily all, of the functions listed above.

28 January 1983 43-44

e

oc
—

INFORMATION AND RECORDS MANAGEMENT HHB er
APPENDIX E

APPENDIX E: ELEMENTS OF A MICROGRAPHIC SYSTEM ANALYSIS
(Items applicable for Agency use have been extracted from FPMR 101-11.505.)

(1) A system analysis including a cost/benefit analysis shall be conducted prior to the decision to
establish a micrographic system. The cost/benefit analysis shall include a comparative cost
analysis in accordance with Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-76-if it meets
the guidelines described therein.

(b) The system analysis will contain the following items:

(1) An examination of the current operating system to evaluate the need for the documents or
information and the use to which they are put.

(2) A consideration of the alternatives to micrographics including such measures as:

(i) Revising records control schedules to provide for the disposition of paper records by
disposal, or transfer of inactive records to the AARC.

(ii) Improving current retrieval and distribution procedures using paper records.

(3) A consideration of all feasible alternative methods of creating the microform records, such as:
(i) Purchase, lease, or lease-purchase of equipment.
(ii) Sharing micrographic production equipment already in the Agency.

(4) An analysis of the workload and staffing requirements to ensure sufficient trained personne! to
operate and maintain the micrographic system.

(5) An examination of the information needs of the user when determining reduction ratio, format,
quality control procedures, viewing equipment, and user training.

(6) A review to ensure compatibility of microforms used within the Agency and those used to
transmit information to other agencies and the public.

(7) A determination of the availability and cost of specialized space requirements: ie. temperature,
humidity control, etc.

(c) The chosen alternative will be the most cost effective and efficient system unless overriding
intangible benefits necessitate an alternate decision.

28 January 1988 ee Oe eee 45-46
