Studies in Intelligence Sint)-volL 6 no 1 Winter 1962-TARGET: Cia-(pages 29-55
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000007485, dated 6 November 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000007485).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ee ae

Features Of (0 recent Sous

TARGET: CHA

It is part of the job of opposing antesigenve servires to Bak
each other, and one means of carrying on this minrnre tb tie
is arranging publicity lo discredit the adversary in. J Un
country, among its allies and neutrals, and at hime Loa
grating the opposing service at nome serves te entior be
people's vigilance against the enemy and ther suppourt for
the defending service (and more broadly as a consenient out
let for the instinct to portray the encmy as evi}, expo
arnong tts ales and meufrats will mane its bal om andits
eratiens abroad mere @iMirait, an ie. credauny BOW Es Cen
s to undercut its freeto mo cf wis

v
nepactare OF ef car

eee rere
Shteheisa ire 2 r

poopie at home, the aber.ry’s ec:

roy te aware Of pity breashon eas sp ant

It is nob surpriuing, therefore, (hat &
cther poyWar cperatiers long suse foci cn US
as one of them preferred targets Tre mam features OF the

uzaboa they wish to make its puble image hase been ¢e-
senbed in an eartier article?) Durna the paw teoocr three
years, however, and especially since the capture Gf U-2 pilet
Powers and the failure of the Cuban invasion, the Scy,et cam
paign has been intensified, has been focused mire marrcary Cn
CIA and a personal symbol of US intelhgencve, Alen Priites,
and has scored some tating bluws. It has had the advantage
ef being able to use the Western press while the Bow press
remains impervious to Western infuence. The major Bio

‘Leste D. Welr’s “Soviet Publlcists Tack about US Intellgente™
In Studies V3. p AID TT

vad fer Peis?

nly PE BER UII m= 9g

ive, iu mle
. itun

=

*
2 30 SEC Pipheaeiome
i :
SOT ST LE Pt Sela oT anlar Aas nm i Rd ae the os
- “ ia ne ; * .
a .
aft - . Ny : 7 ees - . i + + a : < '

Rost Targe?: CIA

satyes have come in six openly published books er articles and
three series of covert mailings since 1539

The six publications include, in addition to three “white”
propaganda productions issued in East Beriin and MMosccw,
three from ostensibly non-Ccmmunist sources-—ore by Brit-
ish member of parhiament Bcb Edwards and Kenneth Dunne,
A Study of a Master Spy (Aben Duites) ore pubtished in
New York, Robert E. Light and Cari B. Marzani’s Cube ts the
CIA, and Fred J. Cook’s The CIA, published as a special Bate
of The Nafton* What distinguishes these Iatter three from
the recent weiter of more or less honest and spontaneous
scapegzating of the CIA and marks them as dei:terate ecm-
ponents of the Soviet psywar campaign is the sumtarity ¢f
thelr arguments to those of the Bax bocks and in parthutar
their coerd.nation in building up a distorted strutture ups t.
certain document fragments that could have been furnihed,
directly or indirectly, only by the Soviets.

The He rentohe Pepers

Back in 1943 the Soviet Unformatvn Bureau pobncred a
booklet entitted Falafers of Hitory portray ng te UfsR cs
aks

Mi

the hergic vangupter er fascism, and the Wesstn ai.

i
eonning enly to Cairn Hitler aracst the Fact Atel?
many ouatuyle. af thb Wevterm Gay. ty it cred (doin ts

captar di by the Soviet Torys at the tame of the dete at of Hot
ler Germany which .. . teH of régotiatns whica tein pace
relwern representatives of lie Guvernn aufthe USA and
Germany in Switze

erland in February 1943"

'Eejeestes Printers Lid, Church Gate, Leicester. Ergiacd Pubished
by Housmans Pubuishers & Bockseflers and the Chemical Waortker®
Union: § Caledentan Read, Hings Cress, NI Intredu dates
January 1901

*"Marcant and Mursell, 1951 Marvant is the enty one of the five
authars known to be a Communist

‘Vol 192, No. 25, 24 June 1961.

ae ar ars
.

oa .
i ie

Target: CIA

ee ee

who acted as Htler’s representative under tho autsd rime
of "Pauls The disument containig & $umiracy Of these mig.
ations belonged to the Gerimin Serurty Service eS D1.

10 is evident from th.s document, the consersat.n (6 shed on
important questions relating lo Austria Crechealoy-bkia Poland
Rumania, and Hungary and, enh Wo esperary ep riani, to
the conclusion of peace with Germany

In the course of the conversation A. Dutes (Ben: states that

“In the fulure. a situation will never aga.n be permite? to
arise where nations Lke the German would be compe led bo reart
to desperate experiments and heroin aS B Fescit ef arfostice
and want The German state must corntince lo ex.st as @ factor
of order and rehabiraticn The partition of Germany or the
separation of Austria is out of the question”

Concerning Potand, Duttes ub stated

“by extending Poland to the East and preserny.ng Eom ata
and a strong Hungary the establishment of @ eitocm s4an.tacce

against Betshewom aad Pan S.at.sm must be sup pest Pe

The record of the ecmver ation further sags that

Meo Ball micre cr lew anrecs f) the pe ltoul ar four ca ttea
Orapvaticn ef Bone an the bass af tn terete a7 to
Biaue en that a fe lctated Greatte Gore 3 KPise om eh
U S At, ech the at oot Panenan Cont ea ee
tote tio bet waaranthee si aren and Lae kere Pete, Meee eee are
Faster, For pe

Dette atate atea stated that be (ily peccocic tae cae?

wore

German Nebitrp to Uae jeatng mie dr Ear ce

ry te ben
tge cr cc orton per ay

ft tre

it mot be meted that to sour
and Arorecans Both at ine kit
the Soviet Unes. aed that muherg was ec ar a
Soviet Government conccinng the resclh co i geen by ely cr
post factum unftcmanen

This might warrant the ascumpticn that the Gisernven's cf
the U S A and Great Briia.n Bad in thos instance mrii* an
attemps to indugnrate neges: ne woth Bitier fora separate peace

Clearly, such behaviour cn the part of the Gcreriments of
Britain and the U S A can only be rgarged as an arts.73e-
ment of Une mast elementary dutes and etigaters cf ales

These documents, fragments of the supposed He hicniche re-

: port to the Sicherheitsdienst, are the seed which Bb Ed-
: wards, Carl Marzani, and Fred Cock will cooperate in bring:

SEGRE” 31

cSPeRERX

‘ Target CHA

ing to fuk fower in 1931. The Western wr.ters wil als} Te-
produce the reasons adduced by Fafsifers e] Histo, for the
US. Governent’s and Allen Dulles’ soticitude about the fu-
ture of Gerinany:

The poe played by the Amenran morcpeles, heazed by the
du Port, Meurgan, Rockefener, Lamunt and other imfustriae baron.at
famites. an financing Grrman heavy industry and establishing Ss
the clasest tres between Amezican and German Industry {s #e) ;
known. ... The Schroeder Fark ..- furnishes @ typ. chexamyce ae
of the ciose Interlocking of American and German, as #¢t] as : id
British, cap.tal. Atien Dulles, d.recter of the 3. Henry Schrce ser i : ee
Bank rg Corporation in Kew York, which represented the Srbree
der unterests im London, Ceolvene. and Homturg. prayed a leat.re *
rote in ihe affairs of th.s bank An existatading role an the hee
York trench of the Schroeder bark was played ty the Ina Em /
of Slibvan and Cromyeih teated by John Forter Dates . act : 7
and ci‘sel, connected wath the Roickefeter world ot trast Stand.
ard Git. ag well as with ihe Chace National, the bE.gges: Fark in
Amernca ahh made e1orm ued investments in German wl Saticy

But first the Fast German and Soviet propayand.-ts Test
and nurture ihe story
forth new shots, in a chapte

guage Hatcrcadl study “Byone font Hears Trew
Uonal paricita’ ss In the Dis Heer s.
beth tims He docs mut rms the ether S.cherbes -
acents, bat says that Me Wulls had a fate rdipate Bare
Robert Tascer (caver bame Afr Robertal, am @apert E- | Se
Pan eeOnenivs, who also deat with the Nazi ;

He says furitier that the Hoheniehe rep uts were aes
by a cover settler Over the sipmatuc: of S35 Hauptr’
Ahrens [erearding them frm ene S.cherhiitsed

another.

Hodiz weaves into his account reserences to the Schroeder '
bank, 1G. Fa-ben, Vereinigten Stahtwerke, ete, as Links oc-
©. representative and the Nazis. He says that

tween the US.
Mr. Dutles toid Hehenlohe it was errors in Nazi foresgn plus

‘Die Hintesgruende des Muenchkaer AbKov mens CC% isif, eure
9 uf a seres Said to be preparcd by a “Commission of H.cterans ef
Fast Gormary and Crechosiovakia™ Edited by Drs Karl Gtermant
of Berka ard Josef Polsensty of Prague. pubushed by Ruetten and
Leenine Bera Hodic's con‘r.butien 15 heated (Die Foricctrute der

Pottrk +oa Muenchen durch die Westmaecchte im zaeden Weithreg *

32 7 SEGRE

we

| Target: CIA ee RT
{
i

that had ferced Great Ercitain and the UnHed Stutes to enter
the war, and he continues with a new interpreie account:

The basis from sahich Dulles began the negotiation wos that
the next war would be conducted betweon the USA and ber aces
on one s.de and the Seviet Union on the other The entire xt:
waar order of Eurcpe should be subordinated to th.s ccmtepiion
of the development of the world Fram this pition Dates critt-
clied fasctst Germany's Internal and external poetics of recent
times .. Becacce of a psychotog.cal error— whch was mentored
many limes--the German government caused the AngioSaxtn
pewers to enter a state of preparedness for war, caused Great
Britain to intrcduce general conscription, and caused Rhe U S&S to
turn away from her isclationist potiches .. .

From the beginn'ng Rocsevelt’s spectal representative recognized
the histerical signifeance of AAME Hoter Dittes detiared
that in principte he a. mot reject maticnal sox atm and fs pasts
y@eas and actons For example, he indicated that the fact
Goebbets speech was a masterpiece and that te had read Mt with
great satifatiion 2... The gaidieg prncple fur Ge new order
tn Eurcpe after the ®ar must be the realcatin that the pest

gar wlll be beteecn the USA ard the UPR Geir any shou
ret come eut ef the ear weukered oir shaw po ple baw Ge
Germans te forced to dvioperate mejor i OO Gaert me

andomtry Bf oroovor, Gie German State moat cone
nea fahe efar, patd rerivrab. td Taere ace i to ate Ge wee
wnwortheasap

dg ree neta Hl,

seceded sinane Bluld be erectenl 5
woes and Tayler arcribed onty a fimited Guyw rience fo tie
Crechositvak.an questo Both of them visualised that some day
ascluten to tha question witha she frames cre cP the Hern
woul lbe acceptable 2...
Duties... Informed himsctf exhau tively on the question ef
ahether there ex sted among the German bourges 4 and Germea
Burkers anarchistie or other nihilistic tendencies Shieh wuuld sty
for 4 sovietizatiun of Germany. ... Fer Dulles Uiere was no
thought which was more unacceptatie than that the Geimmans
i might enter discussions of any sort with the Scwet Uncn after
the military catirtrophe of 1843. Nathing disturbed Rim more
than the pess:t.bty of the postwar expansica of the Intacnce
ef the USSR in Euronue or in the M:ddle East Max Htheniche
emphasived that Mr Datles, untike the trish, d.d not want under
any conditions to see the Russians reach the Darcareves or the
ofl arcas of Rumanis and the Middle Fast

Dales and Taylor agver mit.¢. an op, criemsty te en ypharce
that the d.scuss.en ath Herr Hohemche and the qiher mig sl ahr>
®aS a pleasuce, fur they had heard encogh trom the offs Boras cpt

pelicans, imoigrants, and prejud.ied Jens

This elaboration, buried in the midst of other ponderous
historical “scholarship.” cannot be counted a macur satv3 in
the anti-ClA campaign. Bat also is 1959 there was pubushed
in East Beriin a cheap, sensational papez-tack with a ferrate
spy on its cover entite d Alien’s Gangsters in Actiot, Ly Jubus

fader, “and containing, among other demigratracs of the CEA,
a further distorted version of the Henentohe epicoce mo eri-
bellshed by Hodic. Mader prints a facsio.ve of the punwried
cover fetter signed by SS. Hauptstumr uehrer Abreas for-
warding the Hohenlohe report to Sicherhetchenrt c™ct
WI DD?

Mader changes the identity of Mr Dunes’ “suterainate” and
caries the solution of “the Crrchasitsakian problem” fo ts

fozical eonluticn:

Beth oof the Amencun gontiomen sat the ecrircrce with ibe
putyo aim adt.tan fo Donets eas prevent Mr Moco Yap 7
Bed amzoroef the US Steet Corp. ~ c

t

velthotcnme dus an iffs

arseplate Tro German sale om ctr
yer a tgere yf JM must rer en gt a factors. :
teraton there ca.lf te mo quet..on of a dace of Gerrans
era separatiine! Assis.
Mader treats the in idicus influence cf back.ng and tig
business, especially ol as folcas:

After 1626 we find bom (Anen Duties! a partner In the law «Tle
ol Sutlvan and Cromactt established by bes brother im to1! %F
ts situated In Wall Street, Mea York, and wh.ch, 3.g0.07)

‘Jutins Mader, Alea Gangster in Akfion, Beriin, Konores Verlag,
1323

Tho Mader and Hod.c versions had artaaly been anticipated woh
Journalistic premptness, by the Czech party Cauy, Rude Praca, &
in Qotober 1958 cared a similar account, Mustrated with @ facs
of the Ahrens letter and a photeraph of none ines of Hotes
Tepark UWxt

34 SERRE Rzne

TR ag = ly ee BE a ate Ne ce net a Vm te

a eg

eee ree ie
so oa *

re * i
.
ws

a il * cet - om: +

‘ed . = - i + F

Target: CIA RPGRETS..

reprexnts the intvrcets of the Suretert O12 Compary. amor
Others, cn a centractual bays Than fa. ac b ycars daring wrt
he exercised the following furwaicns  d.restcr of the Arvrican
Bunk Note Co, member of ine board ef d.rcrters and ef the re
search sect.n of "Council on Forgan Fels “tn Bow Werk
Torether with his brother Juha Foster, fae yoars los sencr, Aven
Dities hasty smatcied up several millon Gare an wire. cp
belonged to tne top draner” of “better” American sacety Thre
baus for his milhons was sweat, bul net his can

The neat year, 196), saw the pubicatiun of an cven more
élaberate version of the Hoheniohe stery in the New Toes
of Moscow” This eight-page articie repeats acl the main
themes of the earher versions and is the mast ccmptete cf
all, including a facsimile of the Ahrens lester and a photo
graph of five lines sad to be from a Heheniohe ncpot? Bat
there remniined tne task of winning credence Sor Uns ma.
teria! in the West by arranging fer ils pollication from an
ostensitvy men -Cammunist source

The Brithh Ww Po Bob Pawards and bit cyauth © Renreth
Dine mit Uns regugernent In January Vol Faure
Wwri'e>

Wey bet ucanvocwe the fawoc.wrot tar ort that t A roe un
weod) For ih.s ps Teer Ciba ater eG poate o
ac hentor ad ecemen's © Tp cer art
hoy at Mast be Warm the teerw ar aT. eo AES

"on Hoheniove ard De oor.

were were

ment VIbAG

Eiwards doa, mot tel how he came in. pert ef te
“threa authewie dosuments.” ner dacs be pail any taco
les But his account Is cetated, spanning cat all Ue mason
themes of the preceding versions and hee «hem tasting in-
vestigate conversations that may have taken place between
Mr, Dutles and German sources incluhing Huheniote inte of-
ficial negotiations with Nazi “emissaies "

“Documents, on ANen Danes'’s Secret Be fens with Pe Nar:
in WD" Nee Tones, pubiched by Tred Moicos, No 27, Ja"y Mert

repared for the press ky L Becymenctky and A Lecn.icy

*Promad:ferent page than the n.ne broes mproticeds ky Rute Provo

ARES. 35

IS IE EI EL EN RE EL ET I I Ea A a eR ES
fi . oF ‘“ ‘ ot ~ . Dies ~

Ya

Mr Dulles’ represesviat.on of bis bustness Interes's, how-
ever, 18 handled wath gtiater restraint for the Brith aul
ence

He tad Ltte dotecusty ta ob asrcg a poss in the highly re
spectublie I-gat Arm of Sall.van acd Oromeac? This fea woth
ahich od Juhn Foster sult had deatings, woe one oF the largest
in Wall Strect Aoce the wm gtty coniecns to #a.ch it g3ve legs
advice were the Rockefellers themselves Ets ties #.th the Morgans
were no tess firmly estabiohed.

But Edwards is careful to mention the matter of ot Bes: tes
repeating Uhe passage from the earher accounts ta ahich Me
Dulles “on no arcount wished bo sce the Ratsuass at Une Dar-
danelies or in Uh on areas of Ruarcaria or Awa Mince,” he
points out that

be bad teen placed in eharse cl Noa Fast atart
atthe State Deparimest Ti 4 was ad enicgceiy Posy peor fer
In the taent.cs the Sear East was mgarie 2 Bm Cove tere

yerest by the United States Tr Near batho myariiad

The Erctieh bee nls es esbee ater fee sae foe Pe

PAD Capa s PoP ane af) ap dfbandhs Uoted States Is
Gabe Vs $4.60 | ae ch . eae etek tL. aly

A ES tet fer tee of Parl rent Mfr Boer i taar how et

ye Bae Ee a Te EE Oe GR ee Te bien tg >t *

. can torda vee. a a a i ee | :

Wee tu obhat Fevriare 2 #3

Note thotthe dbecumen'’s ate na Sd ti be ce cm poten ted
nied that Holeniehe. who geaerir s te ths Aus mn. baccum.*
was Siche rhe he 33 THT noe loathe r
SS odicnil fowucoanm af how Bb obarts agua
his My oeTma.d OUT en!

Iaght Marzan. acvote Tao puccs bo que‘ats na and sum-

marics from Euwacds, stressnac the theme cf bts Dunev ant
Semutism intredueed in Hohe’s reference ta “prea ed doa”
ami making the now funuiar mferenies to ber Wares and
ou interests

Dales _betame head of the Doasiscn fot Neue Fut af
fairs. . Near Fatt means el and dieire tos gen fate bye

betackn Amicecan and Britt ob comping ¢ tem glace 8th
Pockefetter Gnuty echung 23 per cectoet toe sieves of Trag Pe
trove Co. Melicn’s ercup of the Gf GEC up raten Ceeurg
prionty myhts en the Bahron Tvarcds

36 ww SRR

Oa “take, Pet El “ea icin hl eats Tat Part. ome Miele ne herp So tana

Target: CIA TOC RETR

In $625 Dae. rene d feoci the State DP parted Por a peut
In the poaeciaul legal frm cf f.taan and Cronae who had
Ges ant dealogs with FPockefeNcr ang Miuorgan amos etre
Asencan eorpratens Dates krcwictg. ef ob shear Ram in
g xd stead asesilonced quik.y by the ata onthe weal dg "Barco
Cuncessicon” In the acd Felis of Celomt a fehl) Oe dan
Pres deat De Miguel Atoda Mordor dencurcet The Morgan.
Mellon group ¢ioo¢ two experts cu the art cf pottery pressure,
both former State Department oMciats Alen Doles and Francis
Locims

The culmination in this transformaticn frcm a 3643 tad-
pole hatched by the Soviet Infermat on Buresu to a 160] ball-
froz croaking in a suppesedty American pool appears in
Fred J Cock’s The Cid Except for a few chances in em-
phasis for the benefit of Armcrican readers, (ek friows the
Evdiwards text, even to the chapice beatings almost fo the
pointoef plagiarism Asampe of his treater ent

The Moar Fast then asin « was a senctwe area and fer much
theawme mac «2 Eetuhirtereate bo ibata bam i ak o4
Wench prooorses af the entire Pf Scart an Bs a trod
feat to Free eet An

the pear after Do oy
Yorn iam famoat fo.

Jo.

woe

mas Gist t fie Evite Lepartrert, Der
maselortcd Pres arte Oot. He
Sate Rae Barty @. 0 e209 vw.
Amencat ob Barocts tarred matytay uo tteor beeab Erctns
Gre sach britn was Prost B Latta a forms Grate Gopariment
e™meal, ancther A 8 Dates

Doeites and bis eiivr brother, donna Fe ster, were Periners
in the Genet Sl. and Crome. thes reprecented tre rave
chests and the same interes uy Lob gertant act my Ghee
sarned Interests ard clum.rce amare stare cf Poor attent.cn,
were sore of Germain, s ptcatest iniectiat. a3) carte "+ cut
side Gerr any the Scheeuee Brarncabenmy re streticed iirg and
poaecrful tentacics In Fretacd at bat J Wb Senrocrer bid. tn
the Uarted States, the iehrecder Trest Comypary ard the do Henry
Sehtocuer Corporations Alben Dales siten the & asare..eut.
of buth ..

- epele : ea us ie meeeuts to ae
Sennen XE Ne ATT in dS Tacs a RT Se Nh a ae at ha Di hl alti eT hn Ses Ral Ait reed: in eee Sate ie I a me

£5 GRET Targe®, CIA

The Allen Duttes of 1555, cf 3432 45, of 1247.49, seers the same
man. with the ame string ac.asces G2 top level Werwacs regara.s
of thes baeGicgy

Cook mates a final important contribution to the develop
ment of the Hoheniohe febcsicatien Whereas Edwards keops
very quiet about how he chtained his avcumemts, Cock sayS
he got them “fram atsclutely reusable sources in Benn’
Moreover, he attributes this claim to Edwards (He says that
Edwards atquired a sumter of d-curents, nelading the three
dealin: with Mr. Dutes and the $3, whereas Edwards claims a
total of three) The whole composite structure thus estensi-
ty rests now on an authentic Western origit.al source ¥

Now that the Cock piece has appeared In The Nat on, the
Communist propagandists are atl set for then regular West to
Fast replay." Fhe Binstay weekiy Bitz, WHloze ELer Sper
clalizes In attacks on the United States and CWA, printed the
followsng In its 15 July 199] sue

[Mitr readers bave Feard of (ie cccck and docvger cf te CTA.
therctonovt Amercanarven safe. mace Sees Ee Sea oe
gon Nila he, acl re. at tern Iar ses :
gecret azincy and Ma unter: aby Biretd © 8 BO

Pegi Gia

?

ON, TEATS 20a hems tart Amercir pie wt rS
@atng the ia tub. @ > cars

And the pest day. 10 July. fooc fot eacrs
J 4 bea ted cae ;
“Deparinant

Impe ang Pupytt Regenes Dllars Are

ard Preovocateurs’ wish ecm Jia
phrases {rura the Ck artiste
Portrait of a Branster

In tracing the development cf the Hoherniche legen te e3-
tattish the direct line of descent that mrs from the Soviet
Information Bureau to Edwards, Marcvant, and Cock, we have

"On the cover of Efwards' bek (he ttle is supesmpcied upon the
trace of a UH) French int.gence report Wit inclades the plcace
Sovece Brive Source Gocd). If presied. Cok Moyht argue tat
he mistock Bone for Bonn

"For examp'es of this standard procedure ee Alma Frpxel.s ° Pasbar
by Forgery” in Steaies V1, p 25 0

:

i a Kihei ae a al mx ah ane

or act cat Rint oR Ack ob stn Db, lan ates

Target: CIA

seen Mbosstratcd +.
patgn of cefaniat. 9
Allen Dou
Semitlse
pricale cotimery
ing business
Musient to the

at

gence, ike other cee aes furct

mon in the Blot pri
of Gomuli.a’s cou eal

Allen Dulles had a special reascn for being u.terc tea in Po

land. in private tife
group,”

her

Ras

what wf
Polish indepentenve ”

Similany, i rev. 8.n

The Und Prot

Aor, 17 Moy 150:

On 29 May 1993 the
major target beta.
On suffered its grea
ing that CIA nec

;

Wicteryorn Ge.te7 8 Tre Does be ch ors are perc gas ch are }

Rel dees ge Shake oe ae ER Ce ase Se ey ee Poe '

OF Rk Bets

Buta bee ths Goenwounl tare Ly crer sb to be cr ete :

'

Cray wes oment ant ery tat Waban et Ayaan t

4

porertodivthe ¢ rere. PU S boon ‘
Th Cceraris te a RD Ae a Ey BOO ee a sae

fam.’y. the Raw ofl cp imc Pho for ray fa tear cement

Feeanrn thes. FS ooat Des bag the nw geet. heb vp ate ons |

On the ecurtrary be ops trp. in es ry Waa tT 5 mowers H
Msn) Seat. HPO ESE BS deere mar fo ee oe he ee
Brefics cut cf the armaments rece orTne fon cl Pefernatece cd

mae Of the Uhemesg wee

Nes is pro Ge:
He o1¢s prriary alepaiwe foonok

tits belween beg Gascness ard

sich at cne time cerned €x
and bndusteal enterprises im Upper Si:
ind the

ace “this happened ta be ahere Stand
tank Ie

= ~ > : 7 . pelde, ike aes eae, eet : .
ee i ee ee ee : er ee ee soe : .
eg ae ee ae ae Se foe R Ts yo a TRAE

eye = * ‘ "a" a OS ait Se , “ eo.
Po : are at Pr ere Pe ae ee gt re ee te we

I nias amet nd dent Caines. enh

ESE

t

a team
ATLA Ze

fect, aud enir
ed ponerfm
ieteresf{s, aud bes ClA ou the serpanf ef

En (he resen

moot
err rt 4

ageiont CLA Cre

nm, fJretdiy fo

wy ®
ore

US intel:
ions gre cf couese corm

and rad? commentaric At the t'm
im Pon for example, if was sard that

3

the “Harroman
AL reicuré

he had becn a Lear for
as nally

wa J! ys indicate
ane? do anxiety of the tes Dates for
(Neues Dewtschlond, 23 Gvtctir 1966)
“The Fras cf Arerncan Peps nye’.

iat]
™

CO ery Cree Tore rae "te US

hl

Peking NCNA named Cir sae CIA's fet
rd
nd charg
T3o to ceerthaa

a eo
ar ees

soe from ress
wed shoawk forces mm 19

Iranian Premicn Mocsadegh, it suggested Ue racer “note

that the Angiodra:.an Oil Company, BION Dole Was £o0-
i couring, was a cient of Sullivan and Croc." |
” - =

—SREaSL:: 39 |
* Re EE ee ne Tg RE ale ai tall FE GN
. ‘ 7 ee
en Ge ee ee ee Si i ee tn Man eS en Na Sot a tt Ae wth Somer cee ee
a aoe fs
‘ - y * vw : va

- rl ru +. . f

. ; on ae _ P ow

“a a” i - * Hx

a ee Mamie tea aa ae Laat pa Tatas teas Alia ipnigica tt Spero, Cer a i sich fk Saree
; ~ ym BS wey * 2 Fe a es :
a . 7 So +? 1 mee ; r. » =. EB: : 2 .
.* . fe : eee . ey . " 2 FF Fam be . eee
Seis cs ee OR ; ‘ se = ’ a” . ied ,
ae eee tty Fa a Pea ee . sche eae : eH ae
ad) . + # . _. * woe eS rs . rit! a “ae .
bee tet -osas nn 2 Rae ee ee ee * ee ge _ Bo og eke
earns ee Ra SETS Ie SS IO gee NP ROL CEI at es eee ae ee
gtoen % .
sect” Target CIA
TASS reperte d thes th al Sasaet secstonm ef the Hoben-
jote story ond) August bk
= Vo Chemie has conteted te the Noe Tati) magance an
oe ariivie descn2.ng ceriag serrets oF the oc le Besled ky Aen
aye Bali op Ne pants cut that the Ceres [ote gence ae ee
. 2 av ueses remit the wil of the Avanro2b and po foite ck rilere
7 ofthe United States now represents the @ recht ritie Arena
. : 4 , Mercpeles in ther wiclent @iloct Ba fer wird f.vanation :
eve elt, And on 25 August 190) Mewes Dentschisnd mefitre Pty eee
eee, ee
Seater . Be CTA, the ecp:rnage organtrat.on of Allen Dates the man ahs
eee ee Re : represents the interests of the bg Arcez.: “ly attr, .
ee ; the Rocaeleiier trust *
‘e Py soo es
3 nae A frightening conecluscn often drasn or wferret from
awe cat these charges forms another theme of the campaign, aniin- “
bitte deeditsdiminart note. Histhat :

The US. wilermngence sergive pO
Pesce ‘bus theme can be mus 2 i other einterts by
somewhat paratel quotatiins from Frei Cex ani fro the
third majcr white pre gear ome e
eased Canghhoan fhe Act chee GUS tS Bore te oan
Shticran tn Ayre Me USS

esa crest riccsce tapers

Prem Coughlin ihe Al?

Tre a. Be ere ee pe Ha
the const fae iG ey es ee ee See) es a rn red
to tec: eal peas

Tis qi te ebac us
s.ate truvriare ata l.
Do a Spy plate into Peet aparece op hat len etiate TOTS
ari athreat to peace ar ladcurce cfanteriatir a we on

Tre unmitairg and stcprrg of the US Inte’ on rcve ct ore.td
enninal prov ations atanct the peace tose poopie ie BOP!
cond.tien for guarantee. g dura’ic po1-e

Frem Coot:

Destevetive as such Incidents are ty America’s iv ove. they ¢o
mot menace the peace ef the wirdiee i.e mite grant oy Cis
endoavers that ied dumithy to the ences cf Quer lp ar 3 MLN 3

The Barnmcce crs that ab bat furnes frend a> he tre re
current cries on Qoemoy ant Matis spd y auctsate Poe ees
In ahich the secret and mitant acta te7 of CIA tieate For bt a

“Published by the Soviet Informat.cn Bureag, Moura

Cre Haris tee hee ce te Bet
‘

Wloome Bm alt fever or wm oo ae

‘
ateaninillsilit Meant
Ps
°o
-_
wy
"h
iQ .
Fo eS Sp EEL NY GOERS: A 8 tere Si

: eae : 13 4 5
3 1
ash Py Re al 0 ake, Mae A ath ath a3 Ea Mn MB aha Ee a ot in Rea ht Snel aS noch ton om te Dah
a s
f ’ ie
- “ a e

‘
'
'
‘
t

Target: CIA VEEP

ferelgn pebcy all their oan They Hiastrate Ehe way the CPA
tall wags the Arcer.caon Gz and Roa son Barge. ny Can g2.e
easly plunge the whole anbrat—and af Ris brethren -imto toe
mast hormbie of hittury § ars

Our pecpte do not un derstand that, even as ur Pres.den's speak
the actions of CIA freqcently invest thee worts wiih exery ap
pearance of the most arract hypoctsy The Prez.deats spaak
peate, but the CIA overthro vs reg.c.e8, pits interhal subolare an3
revolution, [o.51$ op.um groaers Gi. B fnencty nanan, @.reccs mui:
tary invasions, backs mght sing mc.tarists Thece are mot the
actions of a denveraie, peace fou.ng mathin derciet to the kirh
ideals we profess These are the acicns of ihe Cecisvem ta
right-wing robes

The la:t two quotations from Cock lead us into the first of
some other thematic characteristits with which the Soviet
psywar artists clothe their bogey-man There are four of
them:

CIA interferes with and even creates Stale Dopariment end
US. foreign pobey. It tres aneatercily and storelly to onvr-
thro legal governments

CIA rs perfidions aud unprne:pisd Wb sjicren Arierss
frend: ai-celias its fors.

Cla doninetes and manypuiates Sappoce Ry mdere
organvanons, governmental es aver prnate Morice:
@iigre Groupe andtarns (leminio ory nevis

Deepiie the fact that at cots tce US tesyps, 7 fant:
sums, CLA is incompelont

Ve shall loox at each cf these in turn

sofort

»

Clocked Policy Meker

The theme that CIA warps nati powcy OF Manes
its own polwy is Hlustrated in the fa wy paxazes from
Moc propaganda, inciuding the major vebicies crad in the
foregoing.

The job of the OM ce cf National Estirates ts to be the greece "t
falsifier In the world, so that US pency can be warpec fAnens
Goup.fers*

Allon Dulles's separate poucy ... departs In macy ime pectact
detil!s from oficial American pelcy Sysverctitary the Deere
Sopvice delivers intompmlete or even falveanfcry at in to the gover

ment, only to expio.t the a.tual lag of the US by relewng ta the
pubtic... reports. . desirned to furthers hes woporct.coms for
power. (Budapest Pesti fap, 12 April 1-034

SEGRE 4]

fee P

1 om mee ey oe

RES Torget: CIA

This highiy powerful organization headed by AMen Dctle- is the
most influential of all American e:-pionsge organizations talay
vis is no trifurg matter in view of the fact that by naw vartcus
Intetigence organlzatio;s have all but assumed fopleve: pomtical
eentrol, (Budapest Magyar Nemvet, 2 June 1920)

In our minds Mr Allen Dulles has always been associated wit
Mr. John Foster Dulles, and net only Eecause they have Lived Uretr
fascinating lives almost side by side Our anxtety is bared on the
fact that such a combination of two simutarly minded prsiners In
two such pests (Intell.gence and dipismacy) aulomatieatly places
& question mark against Mr Allen Dulies’s nsite intention ef having
nothing to do with pe''y and supnivciig ¢ bard facts .. . Sem
People assert that Atlen Deles not on’y worked In cltoe contact
with John Foster but eventua"y began to conduct his ex foretyen
policy On January 28, 1960, the Frening Star stated that the
CLA. was “beginning to make policies at home and abrcz4." acd
on June 6 the Defrond Times remarked that to wm certain extent
the CIA was conducting ‘its own foreign peticy 4B Awards’
Dunn)

The world has evidence that the decisicn te send the Amertian
Sixth Fleet Into Lebanon waters and land US marines or. Letarca
ternitery aiso came from Mr Dalles It has teen descsttea Kos
in the ear.y hours of the mirrung of July 14, 1$53. he rally git
€évoryone out of bed and fersed them to authirsze the intesvent. 1
(rbd

We cannot see that the CTA‘s "c
America a iat of gsod
upkiy brother John’
his can pecuhar way Even today, fer an
Drew Pearson claims that America has tas Secretaries cf Stat
One is knean as Alen Dues Pearsca adds that the CIA Tat
harmed US foreign potcy on pcre thar cre occastin We lhink
Pearsen ts right (mid)

On June 29, 1859, the Ne: York Times printed... a report of
the repies given by retired o@cers of the Foreign Sereize to a
Foreign Relations Committee Ingu.ry on American fereien pul.cy
One tigh-rarking diplodu:et wrote. ‘Every senior cticer of the
Fareten Service has heard something of CIA's subversive effirts
In forctgm countries and probably mest cf them have sone azthen-
tic Informatlon about CIA operations cf this mature in s-me
particwtar ease. Unfortunately, most of these activities appear to
have been blundering affairs and mest, if nou all of them. seem to
have resuited to the disadvantage cf the United States an4t scme-
times in terrible failure." The truth of these remacxs os nox

obvious not only to former Foreign Service efficials kak to the
Whole world The West fs a laughing stock In the eyes of the
East. (ited)

.

eee

Targel: CIA

it ls our profeand convigtion that im the rext fen years great
pe tacal strupa.cs Bill take piace ee Cur ecuniry ta tke Amencant
foregn petcy uit of the hands of the CLA, the Pentag om, the arma.
mmen{s corporations and the een Gehands . Deop.te Danes
pruicstauons to ine contrary, the CIA unier Ris dwerti.n het
consistently edged into fore.in a cy and has acted agan art
again as if Ho were a government Timp td en a goverment
(Light Marzanis

It Is characteristic that the Senate Gub Committee fon Nativnal
Policy Machinery) qualified the US secret service as an instrumert . a
of national pelcy, emphasizing thereby that the task cf the secret Fas he
semice Bas mot erty to collect intel.gernce Bat alo to tke a

at

direct hand in the conduct of stale peur (Cesghtt an tke Act = . a.
It js significant that as the Cia became tre he Sant aia ef qe 6
- United States espionage ard subversion, it acquired great po Sarnce uw 7
7 In shaping United States feretgn poucy urcer [he Essen hiwer
Administration ... Thus, the weilinfarmed West German jour-
rainst Jcachim Jocsten, in his bock about the CIA’... wrt Uhat ° :
the United States Central Intesugence Agency Fas in the pat
Cccatelefta pecutar imprnton the entice Aces car foreigs p= ued
The Central Intelugence Agony, MS ams ard : ret presfiom.
rate ih Walters tetay ever aibouther omlres Bc lip os ae bro te .
facts oo ertide
‘Troe Une! States intel ecre evlatlabm
erreur Purdy pe wecle Wilh gre al p Ae f
ect e 2 bey BRB eon ewetis cet on
state polcw cf the United Stes ir ‘
In a baur senat, CIA male foe geo ce aT EUs see the
New Eepatc, tor esaryple. wis the matureter 2 rer aS ofa rt ee
of power BAN & OK a ee ¢. hake Geese fe ie op.
: a 5S 3ear anherene ba thr Ste Ler iin
2 end eneliher be oF eney iene. eee a & Bf] feceue
- death ef Foster Duties this usaryatt.c: Ras grocer ances we
ne os wis.tie, and Cuba turned ms searnng spect leht os Uc prem Ten
- ofa Rovers: nt which has come lo hase. ine
: a partments Perhaps the most amportart evn?
; ure of the Cutan invasion Is that fer the fir t tire the At: oat
a ; . perple have hud a gumpoe of the ss.ter ir. oe ef the CIA in
rie Bias - foreten pehey  *Iight Afarzars
rs Tince and again, CIA has mecdied actively in the internal atars
4 of foreign 22 c Antot isan Uhs feld that eica cfs
. : mOst VaUunied successes raise grave Guestiors ato it the rit ari
ah intent of gur foreign potscy. . 0. Has cerfanty quest. rate a: ough
2 a . to have American foreign policy tugged and hau d all cver the map
a ae it by the super secret activites of CEA elotk ard dscver thas, C,4rat-
Ing free of any cMective pestrarterectire: iC was
* Reviewed in Siid:ies I 4. p 82%
«
fe i ae ayy s
ere ht aa were Se ee ee

Forget: CIA

The Hungartan Revelt of 1956 The CLA’s rote in promet.cg and
encouraging this abortive and tragic unprici.g., ahh we mere not
proparet to suppurt after we had instigated Ut, remains shure cited
In top level, cleak and dogger secrecy. It seems well established,
hewever, that arms were smupggied inte both Poland’ and Hungary,
e:ther by the CIA or tts Gehien eniaborators 2... More isepurtint
than the unresolved Issue of arms wrogg-ing ... Is sthi anciher
umresoived matter—the responsibilty of CIA in whipo.ne up the
Hungarian rebels to fanathe sefesocrifice in a hopeless cause
(rbd)

One of the three series of covert mailings supporting the
anti-CIA campaign was also devoted to this theme. It was a
forgery based on a Senate Foreign Relations Committee pam-
phiet which made public the views of selected retired Fore:gn
Service officers about U.S. foreign policy, views which Ed-
wards Dunne quote from the New York Times in ene cf the
passages reproduced above. The pertinent section of the orig-
inal pamphiet read as follows:

Tt is recommended that members of the Comm.ttee on Fore:g.
Relations read Harry Howe Rarcom, Cettral Iatecjpence ed Ae
tional Securify, Warvard Univer sty Press. 12230 Tr..3 as 28 25
thertatiwe a buk on the CIA asus avaecatie Fhe aot 6 oak ar
enthusastie supporter of CIA batan spite of hich he pre eros 2
frghtcing pature clan crganwation fa.ce at beg agin i
mantel State spending triacs s&umeunter hie crm
sosten ard he quesuers Ws compatit..ty Ban
crate system He specks of “anldercoter pe
“packttace pollical action” and stutes (hat bite re atle uniocr a
tier, exists as fo the extent to atuch CEA has a:ved fore.gnm rele:
iets Its true that there ts littie accurate informiat.in ava .a' €.
bul every senior ofieer of the Department of State and ever
senior officer of the Foreign Service has heard something ci Ct4’s
subversive eM%urts in foreign courtmes and protat’y mcorst of thom
have some authentic infermaten abcut CIA cpiraticns «2 ths
nalure in scme particular case Unforlucateiy, mot ef fnew ac
Usities seem to have resulted to the disadvantage of the Dr.ted
States and sometimes Im termbie failure.

Ransem says" “Per eptive students of pudblie afers viene ¢r
ROTKINE overseas oftin get the fmpressicn that C14 agents ars
the intelligence overatives of other Government ageniis, ate cp
erating In uncoordinated fashicn In every dark alley, behind every
bush, and often in each others hair.” Most dipicr.atic ava con
Sular oMicers abroad can vouch for the accuracy of thts state Tit ct
The situation 9s exacerbated by the fact that in o.sst @.p': tie

“Reviewed in Studics 11 4, p 73 ff.

44 EGRIEI

ree

ar estabtismnents atrcaa esp
are statzoned nranquerading #5 diplomat? ah

Ransom Says again: “.- - certaimy the atv
is to & large extent seit determined - - - certa.my tr
no voice 25 to how and where CIA is to functian. other than Fro
pibiting Ho te engece nm domestic selcurnhy activities = - The
existence of a mostve inathieuen possessed of serret pnferm ain
and operatecge imsibty at home and arroad is 2 focus Of PO REE
unchecked by the normal pracesees of demacrant givernment”
ja) That if the sebvecst¥e activities of CiA
tinued at at they te carried ent

ie is recommended:
in foreign countmes are to be con

very. very rare‘y. be subfected to greater eontral than pt presezt

and be carried out more secretiy aed skiifeny tan at precesst

ttes of CIA te mo iehees rarsied out

wates Ard

(bi That the espionage activ:
from the protection of embassies, legations ani conse
te) That Congress exerc comirol over the activ h75 of

reise greater
CIA.”
Beginning o7 12 September 1969, the fotleaing TOrgery in-
opies to

spired by this document was mailed in therm 2fax tcp

varius farcign embassies in Waching's4 and to «=;

cf the Departracnt et State and newsy4

cs of the Department as
gover the fede ty OF an

ake over fore:gn POF | Creer

and consul
4 consul

es

mer COreesy st

Honest Korke are and Fo reat
are deeply carcerr ed e put ci the
rates Tenet acer ty bot ae
Stat? Depareert

Our Departre: 4 aty test to ch & great geal

has aires
fluenee and cot US. foreies oF
5 burrec

The CIA has
State Department

ced int? an corp amt att
spenainke gremend 23!

gar estab ish?

supervision.
In mast of cur dipfomatic and const.
hundreds of espicnage agents of the CHA are statones moaspecrad-
atic OF consular omcers.
te EnfaTmmass + - 2 r

Itie accert
every: the Department of Hrate and every.
of the Foreign Service has heard somethin ot

effurts in forc:en co

authentic information about CIA oFtt eB 8
: ates seem Lo

case Unfortunats?
blundenfe affairs a®
sulted to the @yradvant

terrible foliure.
—_—_——
» sendy of
Foreign Set
Lions, United

d for the Comm. nee Fl.
the GPO GA 15 June bee?.

United States Foret
ce Of-cers. prepare
States Senate, printed by

of #5

surg over
team tere av btm 3% the

ren abraza

in fo" purticu!
have been

n Policy Sertrey of Viens! Reticel
veg om Rea

45

J
1
. ' “|
oN
; Dstt
ra
- oat *
|
°
: t
‘
i

Ta-geft. CIA

‘chis Is what we propose:

fat That the espionage activities... be mo loteer carried ont
from the protection of US embasstes, legattons ard consutates

(by That lf the subversive activ tfes of CIA tn feretgn eccuntetes
are to be continued at all, they be carried out very, very rare’>. be
sub ected to greater centro! than at present, and be earricd out
more skillfully aid secretiy than et present.

fe) That Congress exercise greater control over the aclivittes
of CIA.
FOREIGN SERVICE EMFLOYEES AND OTHER AMERICANS

UNITED FOR SEPARATION OF FOREIGN PoOLicy
AND ESPIONAGE

About two-thirds of the letter was copied verbatim from
the Senate document, but note the characteristic Commru-
nist phrase "Honest workers’ in the Part not copied Note
also the striking similarity in mame between the estensit?
Sponsor and the genuine organization “Protestants and Other
Americans United for the Separation of Church and State.
a kind of plagiarism the Bioc PFyWar operators often use in
crealing a phantom organization. There are othe
tions of the origun of the decument—-that ancther recent Else
forgery was similarly based upen Imatenals reread oy the
Scnate Foreign Relations Committee,” that art is a standard
Communist tactic to surface forgeries through miti.gs to pri-
vate individuals and newspaper correspondents, that at is fre-
quent Bloc practice to use photocopies or thermofex in créer
to hamper technical analysis, and that the State Department
statione-y, complete with seal, here used was used also in a
later series of mailings, as we shall see. Morecver, the erve-
lopes used were made of low-grade paper normally exported
from the United States, and the typewriter that mile Lhe
master copy of the letter and addressed all the emvelspes 15
a Remington Rand containing a style of type ceticned Sor
Estonian writing and is probabiy the same mcichine that

“See pages 23 and 42 of Hearing before the Subcommittee to In-
reshigaie Bhe Adiinisfration of the internal Secunty Act and Oider
Internal Security Laws of the Cemriutsee on the Judretary Tecimieny
of Richard Hetms, Assistant Director, Centrat inteligence Agency, June
2, 1961, JS, Government Printing Ofice, Washington, DC.

mie

Target: CIA gr eet

typed a diplomatic note sent to Mr Herter during his tenure
as Secretary of State by the diplomatic representatives of
Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania in Wastingt-a

A subtheme of the portrayal of CIA as undercover policy
maker, one prominent in the Foreign Service Employees for-
gery, is that CIA metdtes in foreign efairs by sechimg clan-
destine,y to overthrow legal governmen.s. This facet is given
particular attention in the following p.:sages fram the psywar
salvos:

In early 1959, the Carmbdedian goverment forestalied a coup
deta! headed by the traiters Sam San ard Dap Chit.can ... The
records of the prot triat published In the Reaute Cant yresre on
October 1, 1959, disclosed that the Americans had a direct part in
the matter" ¢Casghf in the Ach

CIA agents played a big rove Im the averthrc® ef the Mosagern
government in Iran... Shortly before the everthvow, the centre
was visited by Alen Duties, aNegetiy om bis wataticn ‘
ing to the American priss, the CIA spert sore rivelesa milic
dotiars to brite the o™Mrers who were to perpetrate the pick | Gta)

Titan secrel Sorvire

The records convincingly proved that the An
in eollabiraten asth the Baghdad Pact meters Bat pre, ae. k
apel anan-t the Spr.a3 Repwtoe The gircperat re SOR ta

: mg vemrest a dG. pat cammas

Im poaweran Une evatdry oerbode
Of tate the US Entelhrence has becn tecreecels tre. g fo

reervrave ard sateen ge. ara ter tat try.

pot. ta cverthrim the (aal.cy @. ea weer et ee
these courtner andrepiate then woth cea ate] Pte won
the USA inbsda

It has been published and never dented Goat the Cra has su
verted Gavermmeont Uler gyernmert, fot 8 pS atthe ue cf
military force The CLA rote in cverthrcatrg the BME sauegh Ev:
ernment in Iran and U.e Arbenz government on Goater. aa has
been undert.ned in innumerable pubicat 13s A Siturizy Bren
Post articie over four years ago Ceciand that CLA ascents had
worked with Naguib and Nasser in the overttiri% of K.rg Farce.
In 1952 asd the responsible British New Stafetesit iMay) 12,1320)
flatly asserted that the CIA “dispa-ed of Patrice Lu im ta “ There
are persistent reports In France that CIA agents were inveived In
the generais’ abortive revolt in Algeria There are strorg great
for believing the CLA suprerted Chiang Fabsrck’s defeated troops
which retreated to Burma and set up bares these fat bit-ard-ren

"This “proof” was itseifa forgery. See Tessicien, of @chard Heirs,
op. ci., p. 18.

a
.

ea be

pey

43

_ SOGRET Target: CIA

raiéseon Chica This led to sericas friction between the US ind
Burma tLight Marzani

Corsider the case of Chiang’s Burmese opium gravers In 1351,
felloaing the covapse of Chiang’s regit.e on the ma: niand, several
thou'acds of his foticaers Bed across the Wornnan Eescer inte
Nerthermm Burma American pollsy makers decited to arm and
equip these Nationalist troop, for a reievasion of Yurran Previn:
From Formosa, ClA alleged.y masterminded the operation Arms,
munitions, suppiies were alrisftied Into Burma, bat despite Lhuis
support, there is itttie evidence that Chiang’s galant watricrs ever
wreaked much damage on the Chintse Reds Instead, the Na-
tlonalsts disccvered they coutd achieve the firer ive mare east oy
by growing cp.um. and a great number of ie settied dian in
sNerthem Burma and proceesed to do Just th

The Burmese, a most unreascnabie peaple. Were not happy wth
this Kleal, CJA created sttuaticn For seme fmexplicatie reason.
they seemed to resent the presence of this foreign army on their
tout, and when Chiarg’s fighters showing 1o regard for Burnes
sovereignty, practically tock over the state of Kerngtung art 4 estab-
hsted thelr car. government, the Burmese actually fled a wigaice
protest ah ihe United States As Charies Econ ton wrote
in The Neaficn aNiv 71957), the Amefican Amwrav: ao am Batra
hadnt besa fetancn the secret of ahat the CiA art £the Cr :

: 's were up fe The Ambviatr. W.lan £ =
pedyve cerned i per fect poacd fath Uhat Arisa had any
homes guecetas in anes Bora

Retterardke ane cian et rer.
em reis ae

orate &

pretest Fe A a hes
Cut Saat phen Ge
i

When, henten the heels of Cuba. the Freccoh gorerats 7 AC:
trad to ceerthris Chates de Gaulle, Be were 2 olar”
Baute™ctat chres in the Frerch press Ghat CIA ence m
Lonthe milvarits MM Scuctely, at a foninelnan Wa'
s last Peces rer Tis face tc hase tas nefdcng a0 earnestp
CIA Deraty Durecier Bacthard Bissell, Jr. ce te
de Gaulle’s program in Algera cy ae tea ory £6 2 sroan. iA
is said to have bein impressed, General Chale, who ied the rey
{5 sid fo have had several meeur Bih ClA aee wis. hes ee
to hove been given the am presncca that he wold have te supe crt
of the United States God)

The rumor Light Marzani and Cook cite of the CIA ir sti-
gation or backing of the Chale revolt was itecif smsiituted
and spread by Bios propagandists ™ as part of this campaign

"See Testimony of Richard Helms, pp. 2-5

+

Peet ae ee
: : Ae

au Fi
+
7 -, . se
gee ee
Fa, wee ose =
an . t t :
“
_. i ~ -
. PY te .
+ ot
‘ 7 .*&
- +
tas ai

ve 7 . by ae ist ed ~ - ct
. ' be > = 14 dd ” a ie * .-
. ’ * a . ws, * o Be, te
; ae . ‘s =
- so} 3 sii
* a vo 7 . 2 : - ¥ :
ota . er ren eee 3
ean a cue Siw ade Mitesh En 5 ee AB a i a a EAD Bale lh

Target: CIA

to picture CIA as seeking to overthrow legal governments
through chindestine operations and more broadly as making
US. pelcy instead of serving 1. Cock atso treats at some
length and in similar free-wheeling style the Guatemalan
coup and the overthrow of Mossadegh, and then concludes as

fotlows:

The answer seems clear and unaquivacal to anyone hoe will stusy
the record It has been given in & fomter of praces-in Fact
Germary. in Poland. in Hucgary, in the} (alte East Behind mary

of the eruptions that In recent years have shaken the peace of an ‘J a .ot bes
uncertain world, elese examination wit reveal the foe, shemirg : Pie ee
hand of CIA. And It will reveal, too, that CIA time ard again has = aa
stirred up the brush fires without any regard for the lorg race .
consequences : ee

Treacherous Ally
The propaganda portrayal of CIA as perfidizus and unprin-

fre or

cipted, spying on friend and foe alike, is stem in the folowing
passages:

*

ra

The pudicg priceip’e of any cout. a isan beocorablTe atu
tocre’s ales parhcuary in face Gi tie qnenTy Bir Goglies al
borselt te siaute this paatp
ur2cssterndabie, Awe Pate -

minsin o$ and Incerprehenstce

ft
‘

te btithin gigari ta Baa, 5 rte

Free oen,

rE Starts fo. 003

ace nt eae
CU thas

nate; everya here Encer €47
fore the secret services of ctp.tr
tain coordination: against the Seta Se Cam. RIK
torizily against each other. ros as Inthe past lAven's Ganzsteran

The Walt Strect journal wrote in as. etteral on February @, 1997:
"And Wo we are kecpirg @ Beater eye cut Gey CM csunirics 5
we dort like, Be are extremely nate We had better watch ato ie bes

those who don’t Lke us new and thse who may mot Lice us to-

morrow.” (Ceught in the Act)

Active cooperation and Joint action with fts partners in esporage
activites directed against the soc:aist countres by na means pre-
vent the CIA from carrying on aclve Intetgence Wirk ith regard
to its own alties too. One Is amazed by the eyrican with which

the Amertean secret service makes we of the eppertunives and F

channe's furnished by Its abies for work against the Govet Unica,

: ey eo Pare . sight praise oe .
nek. ‘pea hina ite antler hPa en ite Aas that EE tn Ht

i

oa
eo
ae

wm
fiat

Se TT ey we.

Target. CIA

-

It is, of course, up te the US at ses theeeiven bo dec. te BOL re
or met to wierate Bac Bn Culrsete oS fact, fer insta ..¢, a2 tee
deciphemra of thet state ecorresjendence By the Amerncast z
any rate, accord.cz bo the aulhiriieuse Geslenc yg cf ie Lever
employers of Ine NS AD Mitchel and W bartn. ine fact men ens
that the Americans cecopres the telegracs of micre Than 42 Cau.
unes, ther alies Turacy, ay and France Inrivie!l makrd Oe
for this purpose of esevirerica, Ue. €W.) paeni da the cgner oc
partments of U.etr aiues, and be ave of Atecian cipher pactuscs
fo the fatter. tide

In Britain alone Lhere are 4000 American oMctata, Comumanten
of American bases must otvicusy practive & certa.n account of
counteresp.onage to protect ther oxen security Bit who can £-2°
entce Ht Le only counter¢spiorage? In RanemTs Casa! Wolk
tn American Intecgence the CEA ts War.ed for incl sae re the
influe; ce of General ce Gaute’s adverh to peer O% Frarce a ou
Hon In NATO The Icetcal conceit that the CEA csemp.cied
to colfect certain kints ef trformalen in Bhecotices of the West
em aoe We diugbt areiher this counicy (Orest Iervialn] is an
execptien 1Edcswards Donnes

Bat this pertrayal has ato bern reanfarced bs anclier
eres ef maisr.te Eos Bove ef aut nie teceae PU det t-
rents tu Western “weacpamrs On
Pespo rep ried Ghat Geer MUS arete Surtet OS me
tut¥ attaebas Abpea d Gea mda baste Swed real, fee Wee
Pie otteaais for the poarin os pt gett te et SE a tee

tee tb ita cet earl ee

a”
te pn
r

»!

‘

4

"
et

~

‘

~

—

i.

“:

fe tems, ebaerT nt tee Pee
Gecmentars pie Dtbat Eas aac ve dea la do et th
bope ser baa c wuihents were Poa dbo te Av. Fs ce
Pars ctlice, io the Dondon Picg Baprete, er fee §
in Hamburg They were a forped ene pate were ar wad
on omicsal stationery headed 7 Derartment of state in sirius
trom 132 Ny CA 974 June 1. P40) Suteect Ee fscier Pro
plum ameng & siet and Sonet Crt OM stats mm andagpen:
tune bul suojers -d Departmert of the Amry dwurent dated
3 December $936 and headed “Department ef the Army De-
fectar and Returnee Bxpiuutation Prosram acd Reésted As:
trities” They were accompanied Gy p coer fetter s.cred
ows. who claimed to be al S ctiven unabie to "st ity EY
shite response Amcncan Geils enpige ei sach coop abe
an] dangerous plans of subver..on “

Starting on 22 Aprit TSél. WS sent from Paris a rew cover
Jecter and tao new photocopy enciseures, both classed and

50 eee ad

x

ae Taare
a 7
Nec er ‘

= . ae
ae ad .
: ' . :

Pa < .
“ 4 -

.

Se eee Sn et eee A or 5 le ee Ir

.
4

. ve “8

«

By cas +

‘4

«

Pa

4
‘
;

To-gel, CIA

witlentic, CO m wider ranve of measpamrs  Addute mal re-
Cipeemts were tha Com nhann Dogens Nyheter, Use Mine
thester Goaridion, the Stesateoim Sienshe Daybistes, avd Ue
Islurnbel Combarset WS captained that he wos Machen
the chasfitd materi to nesspapers bevaue he was aspernd
by the esinunace comductad by “oue nbebei nee services
ozuinst our allns and (rendiy counts These activtins are
not only uncliival and dishonorable, bat they undermine re-
spect and confluence in Amerwa and endanger the sctidar ity
of the free world” The enclosures were echppings frum a
USATE Datly Intelligence Report and a Department of the
Ammy Headquarters Dasty Intetirerce Buthtin ‘Fre phate
frapis of all four @ocurents Rad boon enlaryed to precoely
the size of the focatly- purchascd envelunes wed for the mail
ings. a technique Unat Rad characterized some cater Soviet
forgery campaign.

Sturting on June 16451, WS matted the Apid entices
frome Heme fo roost of tie anual recments and ton ether
Popes at Tbs. Bran. Tram Laban sand Bsplan'! On'y
Cae Pecetan Maly Bape Bad res porte 3 fhe Jancaty Markee
fe pede ry ot dr fe Gf te pace re bat i ee Pe

the Aprilsere ss Boat ow the ale we a ay Beer tgrate Liat
story sterh the Jane mosheste nw the boa. OM ery
Slate Starts Uo toca fore a te the ath peo acts
Bed Sar a eter a nob coat. poe. afoun
Aes and bide. Gta Doce ale perth 2th) wa, be ee
mentor anate fo weit, OPA rat BG teeta fora AT ra
farced Ce mamun.t Chew en ie Jane batanm hes ge oe. ty
WM Geneva a copy at the WS story am Comtor ef th wt sare

aa

Mate mo Lonarnaly avaratie (here Before the miata aor
he spent that afemoen und een: ealung Bota the ate
Gen ch Western poirhal ts,
Matipiatur Of Pupoets

The Eline campatia shoas CLA dominatirg or mancalsatng
suppened.y Indeoondent pasate groups and povernmcnt agen
cls Cong han fle Act pictures sts Band in prop agarwa op.
eravions

OM ual “mR hite” peopicae a conducted ty the PUSS Pieficra

isn Agency in direct co Lact actin ictebicence baties Mary USIA
ROS OT ROBT art eal ore pre

Hoaterat, Whether fig. > Gres ts

Aisaehs* 5]

% xt em
e: ae. . 7
as .
mi : 7 = = -
, aed +, af a eee
a Se ae ee ee Se a ae a
ta
f ’
é
7

ee me lie ee ee te ope

Eee

SEGREF Target. CiA

pared from catertals prosiled by the CIA) Hur dre ti of ClA cm
poogees are moray aorcad under the ecser cf VSIA ATO.
The CLA regulariy provides the RFE wubb broadrasting material It

is the scle supper of perscorel ta the RFE ar dothes such es'a>-

lahiments Of the RFE s 2iTlemp opees there tent are who ks not
conmected in ese way oF another with Ameiva ini. gence

In May 1961 TASS charged that CIA was using the Peace

Corps for cover Another facet of the man polation theme

is the charge that CiA abuses the emigration by foreng

refuzees lo bo spies’

Finaty, the CIA sees a source ch indspensatie 2 tir. (he ergantsa-

lions ard secret sxetesofemigrants Bharti them intorsss

fot the surpe st ofetpccage ard stationed Mie bn many eouniees

See tAlien’s Gargilers)
It is this charge that was supported by the third series cf

coverL mailings. The Amecrvan Committee for Lreration om
ployed one Alexander Mevbardis im Munich from eariy Wie

fiom Pholacones of wcohing and alain trate parers he
tabhanwh bovan best woup in the mae
A sleabomete. typeaniten am Bios .oh

Pappas ort wos tto the 1G Bat on Balt an

Frarhfuart ec Mam oo [form

wor

=
£
‘
-
:

C8 f thew wep Bre Tule fat aes ee ee RS
pish to Patter cur 4.0 Our pot tee
HTL pb tar ati nts aro pra aor ri uar root

The characterstic teshrwgue Gf eniarung the puto cra 4
he a
ay

materials to exactiy Une right size fey the eno. p45 We
aiso un this maining The enclosures we.
reeeipts for AmCamLid payments, a summary reps rt by Biel
barihs of refucce gosup abeut pe si.tle Stviet agents, and the
trike.

In June 1969 other Melbardis papers were rained to a niim-

tarts letters,

thee

ot ber of Rusian émigeés in Germany and France, togethes
| with a fetter signed Zemieaki (Fellow Ceunteoyren™y which
- #

“See Testiricny of Rechotd Helris, p 42

52 HERE

I OR bbe fede Meiers tei $1

7 a . £ « oe ge . .
fe . 1oae ets s * oe "7
m 7

7 . 2 7 *
s * Son, * 2 a i : . - nige ,' Ser ~ = - ‘
Daa lA tiate Bee, Gat neh ett as aaah Bk al ee i es ae a i et rt he aR I A I Si AE an aoe

Target: CIA pexatr

desounced American intelligence and the tefuzees who serse
it Rater matings of Meiardis papers @interad to g3 te
these and o.her émigré recipicrts, to Gute there hase been
twelve such manings

Costly Blunderer

The psychotogical warfare experts cf the Soviet Bio: have
shown a touching concern on the quesua ef CIA's compe:
tence, a concern manifested in English-language materia’s
Gesignet to convince the US Givernment and public that
CIA's exorbitant costimess is Matched only by its appalling

reo
tundering:

In {ts efforts to eohect ecpicmage ie form ation atect the Savtet
Unicon, the American Intelligence by mecting with one facure after
another ... In the Urntted States Mreth bite valce in piten the
results of the Clas actusstes 2, The poo “a cierow.7 if nut
lhe complete fasca of the US Intel genre Servite with respect to
the Soviet Ur.cn can ke prosed ty the fact thatat fareg ie tre ta
rion the Arerioun goserement cf the Sovpiswient is ard tech.
rical ache termens im packs
fomstivaly moanioims the putlotar.
fo the rest situation mn the £4.
Pounifiew G1 PP BE. at ob male,
ing wo. sttort the Acts

We are a’e uci steotosl abon

Battngi South, the Brot. expert co tena,
picteyrapny (EJaards Dornnes

How did the Aressan Irtellierce senmice Jace In thos goed
shok.rg event? The reierd irdcaves tao cane @ arc
facts) (a? The CLA fated to curply Arveinca eth authe
Information on the fehirg cagocty cf dat Eocean Commoctit
forces UL Was taken unawarcs, for example, ty the presence cf
MIG-15 alresaftia, tb) The CLA fated *) gare warring Gf Bet
China's entry into the war fo} “Orn Gitoter D3 vice Pres 4a nt
Truman recerds In his menmcies, “We CLA delivcreta
dum Come which said that they had reper's thit ihe ¢
Mmusists would move in fac encuth lo safeziandg the fa.5.9 etwerci:
punt and other instaflabions aling the Yalta Rover woth provi fed
them with power” Actually the Chinese had bepon ercuing the
Yaiu four days earlier ibid

But if we reacy want to find examptes of CIA blir fers, weomest
take a lock at Is estimates regartirg the Sovet Unwin 2. Fhe
list begins with the appalung qiistake in estimating the time re-

SER hy -~ 53

. .

/ -

Target. CIA

Goret to make a Sevtet atom bore ander fsin esnn ste conta
BCT ceer the Susct gagkets ott fa
In theiriervals he (Mr Dues! afcris Ble how thew
Peeasure He sends gut agetie Bne efter dards bh :
nite in Muwioe, Pragse and Ez Me teaciucey Cor gress
tren ard Secretaries Dy belimg them not to lees) bd Se rtet claims

hich in next to ro time become .rrefatatie cenuty He despatches
aircraft, to the East as gifts te Communist pripacanta And

malty. ke forced a weak wied President to encc. ce that
cessful espicrage is purtof the omircal ocl.cy cf the great a: ran
demoracy. ths creating cainfasin Ue ughout the Western world

We have naturally a’aays been tolerartef Giperan But decpty
convinced that even the Amectiacs ave mit cher cig’ cr ge eer
ful enough t alicw themselves the ftuwccy cf keer:
In such a resporst'e pilbany icrger He bay f.-e hie cuty we
shubnctargee how wed Ard nie he gost dec telp ga cr alta?
us may perish in an atesuc Ivferr > oehits

Dues his.eif bos sah lo oO Vta base ta ls
direc
havent git tomeire whoacan te tut
youd Ketter throa Rom ct avd get some cre ee”

This iliac andacier tor, baer ots Cif a
{50 (het AL ee: GRC EEE ORs OPES bp aia ee Ce
ClIA oalihe st

Betas muti. deeper iris the stot cre se Cla Beare

ar ie tre mr: voe eye ie pas ee Lamers 4S tetle

ee eee
wom Tyee
oboe

: Tre Me TF até
ardspees whos the CLA ts gucpiied #2 hase alc
Big the, misiead Wasthun gion? ob oa

Tre bad fulgemertim pict im cricneg (he 6 7) f 2 at such
a dencae time, be polcculvas CIA “clser story Cait Plascs wa
gathering weather cata the sclemn prim ulrat tes talry tale
acd the switt satheequent exposure af the Ure’ Stites hefcre the
word as am arrant Jiar—all of this wrecvkeg the fom tt, firced
the United States to atanicn the U-2Beernalg-ocram ar fant. te?
engmrcus Biridalte damage cn Amercan pre tie Me.

Tiiete itiab tous furs cf Pmtell cefce in the Korean War were
mations OF reise Lite momertecm pares & the frat
tn the mobof lst? Lteraly cout the dea aftoo Tp oP Amerncan
ess)... FE US frees presedcn arty Nieth Kocea would th
ee Communists... enter the wart?

Target: CIA

General Dougtas MacArthur was confdert that they would not
A'lb of our intelligence forces agreed in exerce enthis forecast. .
gence for which we pay Ntervaly Ooms of dears was
abysmaly wrong ... In the Korean War, as tn the cate of Cora,

aes

there were many clear and expiccil warmitgs Chat a bind tmieit.
gence refused to heed. ardufb

Mere Scapegoct

In mid-196], however, taking account of the prospect of 2
reorganization and change of leadership for CIA, the Bioc
propagandists began to pul} their ateiences back from the
dangerous assumption that removal of the CEA cancer would
leave US. poticy clean and wholesome. CIA, ineNective and
immoral as it is, now Lecomes the mere instrument of US
foreign policy and a scapegoat for its fabures, it Is the policy
itself that must be changed:

According to the US press the CIA bs tearg recrgan.ced on
resident Kenacdy stmetcscteons The ClhA has Berome mciricus
threghout the werid fer its sharmefa: aci.im: “En.s arcncy ar-
ranced the U-3 spy fMlehts over Siwer tem.t7p aleve a Uz
Plane BIS slot Coan te ch ins pnctiutionm prey aed
the armed mercenary nh agar we (ylan ectirie Tris

are: Patienes
af the, + -crsedin Ch.
a ae eae a

; Bsa fal are
rez and defeats for the US Goer.cent Afer atercig ot
Shams ful defeats, arecifcaly an Cuta Fro tent Mence ly crced
A recrpanizativn Gf ihe accasities cf the tp ¥ cectee

Now a@ readtustiment is gong ea Toe port.cs respouncihie are
being sough! Bat atis potls kniaietre thako in (hos cove bh
CIA as .he scapegoat. for Uns spy center was merely ¢btry rg
out instructions from higher e%.cil becies and ape g US
fore.gn poiey In its way

And so the clams py the Yackee prss thal when the Cia fs
reorsanized there wil Ge moo mere fa lures ere winds antenccd
for smpletens Tre thomeful fatures ta foreseen peiocy and the
$tns of ant) North.Amemecanism are mor must ihe recuits cf CTA
aches, But primary of the averestiwe@ de periaiet fore on petey
of the United States To ave.d such (a0ures wiat is meters
is not a readjustment of the CIA, but 2 radical chance In US
policy and renunciation Of iterent mh an Ger Coan ieeee Gla’
aflairs. (Radio Mastow to Soutn Amerca. 3 July 2705)

A ee
