The Theory of Scientific Socialism Should Be Developed in Practice
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000042349, dated 1 August 1988.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000042349).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SPRS-CAR-88-056
“29 September 1988
if these conditions are not fully met and the gove
at the provincial or higher level deems it 2 2
‘40 cate a township, and have officially approved it,
: can be listed as an urban residential arca.

ie

Door

‘to'B rough estimate based on these crfteria,

the urbe population of China in 1984 and 1995 was
Es 529.8 and }4 percent of the total population respottively.
os 25 7; - These figutes are tower than the respective 31.9 dnd 36.6
® iy 0 Percent Lighves OT the Siate Statistical Burcau/and take
re # _ . dato account\adminisirative criteria, demograbhic crite-
zg ‘ie - im, economid criteria, and geographic crit thereby
& “gz -'. ‘Betler refecting the real differences bet urban and
ao 3.  #ural areas. hee - i
é a oe es ales
o ‘= *_ No matter what the criteria are, if they afe to be used, it
& ? “fds necessary for us to understand the ca peting interests

of various internal departments of administrative bodies
in vur government ver the issue ofAhe definition of
wrban and rural land\ The strongest gpposition to stan-
dardizing the criteria By which urbar/and rural! areas are
defined are the statistids departm themselves. They
are strongly in favor of\a definitign by administrative
units, so that the definitjon will Be consistent with the
current system of compiling stftistics. The statistics
departments fecl that the ratifnality of the criteria
themselves is of secondary \mpériance. What is impor-
tani to them is who will defige/the criteria and once the
Criteria are defined, who will\be responsible for compil-
ing the statistics. They wofld find it impossible to
assume the heavy burden q
basis of both administratife regions and standardized
classifications. The State/ Planing Commission also
frowned on major changeg which ould bring difficulties
for a comprehensive balgnce in laBor and wages, Credit,
and taxaticn. The Tax Bureau caliects 7 percent,” 5
percent, and 3 percenf town-building tax from Cities,
towns, and villages refpectively, and is, therefore, not
interested in two different types of datistics on urban
population. The Migistry of Finance Would like to see
more rigorous stanfards applied to the definition of
wrban and rural becaise the mbre than 9,100
townships now enjoying treatment as urban entity
will be a heavy bufden. The public securit . commercial,
education, publi health, and grain departments all have
different definitfons and measures for urban and rural
arcas, and it would be hard to enforce a y arbitrary
standardizatiog. Whatever form the new criteria may
take docs not/seem to matter much. ortticians try
€ven harder — arrive at standardized criterid and com-
parability anfi welcome a standard definition\of demar-
cation. In tye face of the many competing interests and
desired criferia, the State Council should dopt the
following measures in addition to Stressing thr necd to
Jook at this issue from a nationwide perspettive: qd)
increase the funds, personnel, and power of thd statisti-
cal depadments so that they can play their role more
effectively as economic chiefs of staff. (2) Not ch gc the
tules of Special departments. (3) Work out carefu ly and
resolutgly the criteria that will meet the requirements of

tp eB, Set vats
aT

cempiling statistic on the,

. POLITICAL

i nt so that they will
tational yardstic: i es an

jo
This is alse an underlying requi
tion. | #

‘Wang Reoshei on Truth Criterion,
__ Wang : Theory

_ 40050370 Beijing WEI RENDAO ZHUYI BIANHU
in Chinese 1986 pp 1-22

{Chapter from book “fa Defence of Humanism" by

ang Ruoshui; Sanlian Shudian, 279 pages; transcrip-

'~ tion of a speech delivered at a forum held in Shanghai on
45 Aug 1979] : /

TText)}

Treth Criterion and Theory Research

The Theory of Scientific Socialism Should Be
Developed in Practice

First, I'd like to talk about the issue of truth criterior.
Bringing up this issue at the present is of not only domestic
but also international significance. Marxism has been
tested in practice for over a century since it was intro-
duced. How do we look at it now? In the beginning of the
20th Century, the October revolution won a great victory.
in the middle of the 20th Century, the Chinese revolution
also won a great victory. These great events brilliantly
proved the correctness of Marxism and exerted a far-
reaching influence in the world. In the 1950's, the reputa-
tion of the imperialist camp was notorious while the
_ influence of the socialist camp was growing among the
“people of the world who placed hope in the Soviet Union
and China. However, in the past 20 ycars or so, things have
changed. First, the Soviet Union had problems. Immedi-
ately afier that, the socialist camp split. There followed 10
years of turmoil in China. Contrary to what happened on
this side, capitalism had over 20 years of a “golden age.”
What does this explain? I think perhaps during these years
Marxist theory has failed to develop along with the devel-
opment of practice: therefore, it is probably already behind
the international reality.

Marxist theory has three parts, and the most detailed onc
is political economy. “Das Kapital” was in line with the
Peality at its time. Later in the imperialist period, things
were different. In the early 20th Century, Lenin wrote
“Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism” and
thereby solved the problems of that period. Now half a
century has passed since then, the situation has changed
rastically, and many sew situations and phenomena
have appeared in capitalist. development. However,
many of our comrades still try to understand capitalism
only by reading books. Of course, we need to read Marx's
“Das Kapital" and Lenin's “Imperialism, the Highest
Stage of Capitatism.” but what these bouks depicted

Sie rd aS een Sac

Approved for Release
Date AUG Boi

tee

ae

Maal le: ta ca

A Sl te 0 AE Wee

i

tet

+ ¥
_Te . cy). we did not understand the outside world. Due to the
“}aggolation and lack of study, we knew very little about the

JIPRS-CAR-88-056
19 Septeraber 1983

cs

sgwere situations in the last century or the carly part of this
century and many changes have occurred since then.
Although essential and basic contradictions remain the
same, many situations have indecd changed. Due to

oggaany years of isolation (resulting first from an impcti-

Bist blockade and then from our own closed-door pol-

gpiteations of capitalist countries. Even if we knew a little,
‘ee were tno afraid to talk about it. Now that our door is

" Sibpen, we find that things are different from books,

have raised many questions, and the theoretical

—Bircle also fecls the need to think about many issues. We

¥ aced a book—not one book but many books—that

“ahaalyzes, from all angles, new phenomena which have

“mppeared in capitalist countries during the past few

“@ecades since the introduction of “Imperialism, the
“Highest Stage of Capitalism” and gives Marxist answers
to new questions and on new situations. Of course, we do
not have another Lenin; nor did Chairman Mao write
such a book. Then what shall we do? I think, instead of
waiting for some talent to show up, we should rely on
collective power—the collective power of theoretical
workers—to explore and study and gain new knowledge
from years of research and discussion, which is also
developing Marxist political economy.

Lenin said imperialism was moribund capitalism. He
even then predicted that the capitalist system was dying.
Of course, several dacades could also be considered a
dying period in history. It takes not just one or two
decades for a system to dic; it could take several decades
or even a century. This is understandable. But the
question is since Lenin's book “Imperialism, the Highest
Stage of Capitalism.” especially since World War I], the
capitalist economy, in general, has had many crises as
well as rapid developments, resulting in higher ‘living

standards for workers and a so-called “golden age.“ How ©

come a dying system has a “golden age?" In addition,
some new capitalist countries have emerged in some
arcas and they are developing very rapidly. For instance,
Singapore and South Korea are making rapid economic
progress. This explains that Chairman Mao's thesis in
“The Theory of New Democracy” that there could not
be another Kemal is proved incorrect in practice. Then,
és it justified 10 describe the present capitalist world with
such adjectives as rapidly declining and moribound?
There are two cstimaics and based on them we can
develop two kinds of forcign strategic principles. If we
think the capitalist system is dying, we should hurry up
and get prepared for the world revolution, Didn't we use
fo say during the “cultural revolution™ that “now is the
time for imperialism to head to a compicte collapse and
for socialism to head to a world-wide victory?” Lin Biao
also thought that way. He belicved that cities were
surrounded by rural areas all over the world and he
wanted to overthrow U.S. impcrialis. Soviet revision-
- ism, and everything clsc. He was anc ...cme “Leftist.”
Another estimate is that in spite of crises, capitalism stilt
has some life in it. | have been abroad only a few times.
Last year | went to the United States and saw there were

10 . POLITICAL

indeed many contradictions including economic prob-
’ tems. inflation, and an energy crisis, which gave them

great headaches. but they are far from dying or rapidly

declining. When a system is dying, it should be farrly
easy to detect. Even if you are there only for 20 days or
a month, you should be able to find traces of decline in
gocial conditions and the psychological conditions of the
people. Like Comrade Ba Jin said in his novel “Home:~
dam denouncing a dying system: that system is indeed
“@ying for feudal things are withering one aficr another.
. Swdged from the current situation, the force of life is still
Ugrowing in the framwork of capitalist production rela-
tions. Therefore, | wonder if the life of capitalism is
Jonger than what Lenin predicted or if it was probably
400 carly for Lenin to say that capitalism was at a dying
Stage. We should be able to study these questions. At that
dime, it was impossible for Lenin to make accurate
predictions on certain things. I think Lenin probably
could not imagine or predict the rapid developments in
the science, technology, and productive forces of today’s
capitalist world. Take polarization for instance. Marx
said in “Das Kapital” that as capitalism develops, there
will be an increasingly large number of poor proletarians
on the one side and millionaires on the other. In other
words, the entire society will be polarized into the shape
of a gourd—big on one end, small on the other, and very
skinny in the middle—and the middle class and petty
bourgeoisie will be drawn to both ends. What is the
current situation of capitalist society? There are large
aumbers of middie-class people. Under this circum-
stance, we should forget about books, proceed strictly
from reality, and test theory with practice. If a theory
-contradicts reality, we should revise it. We should never
distort facts to accommodate theories by saying that the
peoples of capitalist countries are impoverished, that
they will rebel any minute, that they are just sitting on a
powder magazine that will explode any time, and that

* they will be doomed as soon as it explodes. Because, it

would be unrealistic. American workers strike, too, but
they are not opposing the capitalist system. They want
higher wages. We visited the United Auto Workers
union in Detroit. A union official told us that they were
willing to cooperate with capitalists, but capitalists
refused to couperate, so they had to fight. He believed
that everything could be solved through icgal struggic
and he had no intention of overthrowing the capitalsst
system. We -annot just say you American workers havi
such a jow level of class consciousness, you are cor-
rupted, and cic. | think we should do more than make
critical remarks on this issuc, for it reflects the objective
existence of a siluation, whereas the task of Marxism ts
to recognize facts as they are in an objective manner and
fo answer such questions through Marxist analysis. We
should not be afraid of such things. Now that our foreign
yelations have been established and more and more
people have come in and out of our country, our youth
begin to have problems, thinking that capitalism is
superior. In the past these young people did not under-
stand and thought capitalism was a complete mess. Now

bre ag

mR i

JPRS-CAR-88-056
19 September 1988

they understand a little about the surface of capitalism,

but not enough, so they think that capitalism is superior ©

and that our socialism, in comparison. has failed.

What is socialism exactly? 11 was impossible to have a

“*Scomplete theory of socialism during Marx’ time because

y HE

Van
‘

ss,

ee ed
a)

x

an

“suit China's national conditions and develop productive
“* forces as soon as possible. This includes absorbing the
good experiences of other countries.

This involves the question of how to uphold socialism.
First, we should understand what is real and what is fake
socialism. Only by thoroughly criticizing the fake social-
ésm of the “Gang of Four” can we uphoid real socialism.
Second, socialism has more than one modcl. As long as
the general principle is the same, socialism could be
carried out in a hundred different ways. Before we only
knew how to copy the Soviet Union. We did it because
the Soviet Union was the only socialist country at the
time. Later we criticized the Soviet Union but we were
still thinking in the same way. We thought there was only
one way to achieve socialism, no alternatives. Only by
comparing can one distinguish and recognize. Only after
comparing our methods with those of other countries
such as Yugoslavia and Romania did we find out that
there could be different methods. Therefore, to uphold
socialism, we should have a clear understanding of these
issues. This also explains that we cannot uphold social-

ism unless we emancipate our thinking. Upholding *

socialism does not mean maintaining the status quo and
copying everything indiscriminately. We should not
copy the 10 years of the “cultural revolution”: nor
should we copy the 17 years before the “cultural revolu-
tion.” Of course, certain things should still be done in
accordance with the methods used during that 17 years,
but they are not sufficient. We must create new methods
to solve new probiems. Failing to solve these problems
will make upholding socialism impossibic. Because of
this, we should not advocate emancipating our thinking
snder the prerequisite of the four uphods. | disagree
with this view. We should reverse it—only by persisting
in emancipating thinking can we uphold socialism. You
say we need to uphold socialism, but what kind of
socialism? There is no fixed model for socialism, then
what is the method most suited to China's conditions?
We should let the public discuss these questions. How
can they discuss anything if their thinking is nol eman-
Cipaicd? Some crroncous and popular views of the past
are mistaken for the only way to socialism. For instance.
socialism docs not allow recruits so everybody must be
assigned under socialism; otherwise. if workers are

A 7 hag Heats, ath"
Stk Ne kes

Tal t38 Cpe ‘uk ay Lares Seen lene is
ieee amt Ee PULSES eT 58

POLITICAL

secruited, it would not be socialism. What is this non-
aense? For another instance, the planned cconomy,
which is also waiting to be studied, may be practiced in
diffe ways. Only by so doing can we develop the
theory of socialism. How can we develop the theory of
igocialism if we do not emancipate our thinking? Many
practices cannot be continued. Since Stalin's problems
ropped up, the Soviet Union realized that they could

'” got succeed by copying all of Stalin’ methods and that

‘they had to make some changes. Chairman Mao also

“ wealized this fact and tried to create some new methods.

- As a result, when Chairman Mao criticized dogmatism
‘before the year 1957, he urged us to think before copying
the Soviet Union so that we could learn from their
positive experiences and draw lessons from their nega-

" tive ones. The Soviet Union also changed. They attached

- dmportance to material incentive or material reward—!
cannot find much difference between the meanings of
these two phrases afier consulting with many dictionar-
ies. The Soviet Union has indeed taken this road. In
1958 we put politics in command. Later we engaged in
class struggic, using it to determine everything, as the key
link, and to promote production. After all these years, if
we look back and use practice to test the several theories
which guided us through these ycars, we would find
out—we need not to be evasive—that the 10 years of
turmoil has pushed the national economy to the brink of
collapse. How can you afford not to review this theory?
How can you refuse to recognize such a practice?

Many people at home and abroad say that we have
turned into “revisionists” and that our line has changed.
it is true that our line has changed. It was the ultra-Icfi
. guiding ideology that occupied a dominant position
during the “cultural revolution.” How can we afford not
to change it? But, changing the line is not the same as
revisionism. In fact. the “revisionist line’ is not an
appropriate term. Why? Revisionism initially was
referred to the theory of Bernstein and his like. It was a
theorctical issuc. If a theory contradicts the basic tencts
of Marxism, it is called revisionism. As for the issue of
line, it is cither Left or Right opportunist linc; there is no
revisionist line. The basic tencts of Marxism are univer-
sal truth which is a criterion for the whole wide world.
“Revising” such a criterion is the same as opposing
Marxism and thus should be objected. We cannot say a
basic tenet was good yesterday but is no good today
because it covers a very Jong period of time. As for the
line itself, it should change as situations change. We had
one line for the period of democratic revolution and
another for the period of socialist revolution. We even
had different lincs for different stages of the socialist
period. Therefore, the term, the revisionist line, gives
peopte an illusion as if there ought to be a permanent line
that will stay the same forever like “doing everything
according to existing principles” which was advocated .
by the “Gang of Four.” You have to do everything
according to existing principles and lines: otherwise, you
afe revisionists—this is the cxact logic Liang Xiao [2743
2400] used in his article carried by the “GUANGMING
RIBAQ.” I says: After Marx died, Engels waged a

Sea. |
rs iid Deke ee

ro

gar pT alg

 Ragtage ee Che ar eae:

we 9 NCR, PE RY pepe mp MOE

2PRS-CAR-88-056 on
19 September 1988 *

Struggle against opportunism according to existing prin-
ciples, after Engels died, Lenin followed Marx’ and

_ Engels’ existing principles; later Stalin followed Lenin's

"n)_SCopaiting principles, and Chairman Mao too followed

te cseaisting principles. As a result, our curreat principles are

i: 18 Marx’ principles. This is absolutcly absurd mcta-
PRC physics,

ep ~ Fe Te. of 28 tee

cree +

re.

_ .*e, ABLE anean is that socialism still needs to be shaped and
1 2, #8 ghee is a vast world where much can be accomplished by
“i- our theoretical and other workers in this field. To do so,

a we emancipate our thinking. Therefore, I say there
"$8 we scientific basis for the argument that Chairman

- Sao had a complete set-of theories on socialist revolu-
. _ don. How can there be a complete theory of socialism
defore socialist construction is completed? I is of course
possible for theory to precede practice, but theory could
not be completed before practice is completed. Do we
have a complicte understanding of capitalism? No, we do
nol. After “Das Kapital” we had to study “Imperialism,
the Highest Stage of Capitalism.” After “Imperialism,
the Highest Stage of Capitalism” we had to study other
aspects of capitalism. When will we be able to complete
our understanJing of capitalism? After the death of
capitalism. Only then can we study the whole process of
birth, development, and death and thereby complete our
understanding of capitalism. We cannot even complete
our understanding of capitalism not to mention social-
ism. Therefore, we must emancipate our thinking to
develop Marxism. People used to think in the past that
theoretical issue was only a leader's responsibility. This
idea came from the Soviet Union and Chinese tradition.
Each dynasty had a sage such as Yao, Shun, Yu, Tang,
Wen, Wu, Zhougong. Confucius, and Mencius. Only
their words can be used for criterion or the ‘so-called
“Confucian Orthodoxy” and other people’s words are
worthicss. A theory should be developed by the collective
including the masses of people and theoretical workers,
and everybody can make a contribution and help
develop it. We are all fools, but even a fool can occasion-
ally hit on a good idea. By adding such ideas together, we
would be able to improve our theory. For many ycars we
were not used to thinking for ourselves, we used to wait
for the central government and Chairman Mao to say
something and then we would do whatever Chairman
Mao.told us to do. Now we cannot rely on them
aaymorc. We need to study many teachings of Chairman
Mao, but there are no ready-made answers to many new
questions. This forces us to think for ourselves, thus
Bringing life and hope back to our theoretical work.
There still may be great development in China's theoret-
ical undertaking.

Marxism and Mao Zedong Thought Permit Inquiries
and Criticisms

I'd like to address another issuc: how to treat Marxism
and Mao Zedong Thought. Whea we bring up the issuc
of the four upholds, we should not sct it against the

2 POLITICAL

liberation of our thinking because we need to emancipate
our thinking to uphold Marxism and Mao Zedong
Thought; otherwise, we cannot uphold Marxism and
Mao Zedong Thought.

{think that after years of practice, Chairman Mao's 1957
y handling contradictions among the

=: <gpecch on
4 - people has been proved basically correct. Restoring some

_ ‘of the theses in this speech which have been forgoticn
and abandoned is exactly what we need to do now. For
.dmstance, the phrase that the class struggle has been
“> Basically completed is a long-forgotien sentence and we
pave started to mention it again. There are also some
problems. During the same socialist period, first he said
that the class struggle was basically completed and later
he said that it should be discussed yearly, monthly, and
daily. These two sentences contradict. If one of them is
the truth, the other would not be. So it is impossible for
sentence to be the truth; neither is it possible for us
to follow every instruction. Since the tenets of a com-
plete system usually are consistent, the inconsistency of
its tenets explains that our understanding of socialist
construction and revolution has not been completed.
Chairman Mao urjed us in 1962 to understand the realm
of necessity—the socialist construction of China and we
have not been able to accomplish it. When did we
complete our understanding of democratic revolution?
As far as the theoretical system was concerned, we did
not set forth the general line for the new democratic
revolution—namely, a revolution led by the proletariat
and the masses of people to oppose imperialism, feudal-
ism, and bureaucratic capitalism—until 1948 right
before the victory of the democratic revolution. Later in
the article “On the People’s Democratic Dictatorship,”
he was still reviewing this experience, but by that tithe
the theory was complete because the practice of demo-
cratic revolution was completed and the theory was
tested to be correct. Now we have this probiem: Some
instructions contradict others and we cannot follow
every onc of them. What do we do? There is only once
thing we can do—we resolutely follow those instructions
which have been proved correct in practice in accor-
dance with the criterion of practice. So, quoting a
sentence from Chairman Mao's 1957 specch—the large-
scale, violent mass class struggle has been basically
completed—at the 3rd Plenary Session of the [1th Party
Central Commitice does not mean that we stick to cach
and every instruction. Instead, it means that this instruc-
lion has been proved correct after over 20 years of
practice. Why did we not quote other words? We did not
quote other words because they have not been tested in
practice. These questions not only concern our attitude
toward our leaders and political stand but also concern
athe sucecss and failure and the life and death of socialism
én our country. Some people still cannot get over the
lingcring fear. They say, you are probably right now, Mut
what happens if there is another “cultural revolution.” |
say. if there is another “cultural revolution,” whether or
not you will be criticized would not constitute an issuc
because the issuc would be whether or not the nation and
the party will survive.

5

IPRS-CAR-B8-056
19 September 1988

That Marxism permits criticism was originally an idea
advanced by Chairman Mago in his 1957 Yeport on
contradictions among the pcopic. Chairman Mao said:
Marxism has been considered as a guiding idcology in
our country, then can we criticize it? Of course. Marxism
would be useless if it were afraid te be criticized. Instead
_ of being afraid of criticism, Marxism iavites it in order
‘40 develop dering the struggle. In fact, the petty bour-
_geoisie, bourgeoisie, and other people are criticizing
jz, Marxism every day, aren't they? They criticize it every
« Gay. Some are fair criticisms and others are not. Can you
~~ Sop them frém criticizing? No, it is impossible. — .
es 3 ’ ¥ we. a

We have to distinguish between opposing socialism and

es
‘§* opposing Maraism and between doubting socialism and

.

}.; @pposing socialism in action. In China, socialism is our
b basic system and the overwhelming majority of peopic
3, SUPPO it. So you cannot oppose it. Nowadays, some
a. young people are confused. They doubt socialism and

* do not understand what socialism is. They thought the
iron rice bow! and cating from the same big pot [2
months a year means socialism. What docs that have
anything to do with socialism? They do not know and
we cannot blame them. We should blame ourselves, for
we did not do a good job. If you oppose socialism in
action, like instigating a group of people, founding
some kind of an organization, or calling on the people
to overthrow socialism, then, sorry, you would be
violating the criminal law. It is of course allowed to
have some doubts about socialism. It is also allowed to
have some doubts about Marxism. Why can’t we have
doubts about it since Chairman Mao said it was Okay
to criticize it? We should distinguish between party and
non-party members. If a party member says I don’t
believe in Marxism or Mao Zedong Thought at all, we
should ask: Why did you join the party? It is not strange
for the masses outside the party to have different kinds
of thinking. We should use a proletarian world outlook

to educate and reform them, which is a long-term task. *

All non-proictarian thinkings including the anti-
Marxist thinking will exist for a long time to come. We
should educate or criticize people with such thoughts
but we cannot prohibit such thoughts, according to
Chairman Mao. What can we do about the anti-Marxist
thinking? If our enemies have such thoughts, it will be
easy—just forbid their talking. What happens if it is one
of our people? We can only let him talk first and then
educate and criticize him by reasoning with and talking
to him.

. Therefore, first, we should not be afraid of criticism:
second, we cannot possibly stop them from criticizing:
and (third we should permit criticism. Is criticism good or
bad to Marxism? It is good. Many people are scared to
death as if allowing criticism could damage our stand
and Mao Zedong Thought. | say Chairman Mao himself
thought differently. He said: Marxism develops during
the process of a struggic and it stops when peopic stop
triticizing. To prevent Marxism from turning into dog-
matism, an important measure is to allow a hundred
schools to contend.

13. POLITICAL

I can tell you something cise. In April 1957, 1 met
Chairman Mao and heard him say face to face that
Marxism, including the basic tencts of Marxism, permits
Criticism. He said it did not sound good to say it is Okay
0 criticize the igdividual theories of Marxism but not
the basic of Marxism. So, when he wrote his
apecch, he just said in a gencral term that Marxism can

“te criticized ieee 7 ie

aa @ > ae Baa s 2

> Bat, we did not follow his instruction. Later at a propa-
ganda work conference, someone said that a hundred

' _ schools referred to only two schools—capitalist and

proictarian, thus confusing the issue of allowing a hun-
__Sdred schools to contend. All thinkings were categorized
dato either bourgeois or proictarian. In other words, if
were not bourgeois. you must be profctarian. What
to the bourgeoisie? Everything that was wrong.

ifthe proletarian ideology was so pure that it could not
have any mistake at all whereas the bourgeoisie had all
the mistakes. As a result. every ideology was labeled.
This practice may be traced further back to “The Theory
of Practice” where there was a sentence saying that all
ideologies were stamped with the brand of a class. Of
course many ideologies were stamped with the brand of
aclass, but docs every ideology have a class nature? Later
during the “Great Cultural Revolution,” this sentence
became the basis for the theory of blood relationship.
You were branded with a class as soon as you were born.
The brands of certain classes were especially deep, such
asthe “son of a bitch” class and the four black categories.
The several red categories were also branded with a class
which was born red. These brands of classes could never
be erased. Can we categorize all ideologies into either
bourgeois or proletarian? Many ideologies have a class
nature but many don't. What kind of a class nature docs
the thinking of natural science such as Einstcin's theory
of relativity have? What class does social science such as
Morgan's ancient sociology belong to? Another question
is: Are there only two classes? Can landlords be consid-
ered 2 class? Can farmers and small producers be con-
sidered a class? How about the petty bourgeoisie in
urban areas? How come we only singled out the bour-
gcoisic? Since only two classes were noticed, somconc
later put forward the slogan of eliminating bourgcois
idcology and fostering proletarian idcology as if on the
ideological front all we had to fight was only one bour-
gcois ideology. When did we criticize the influence of
feudalism and petty production over all these years?
Never. In fact, we saw that feudal influence was much
greater and worse than bourgeois influence. What we did
was ict slip by the thinkings of the 1..-«lord class and
feudalism. As a result, feudal thinking werged during
the criticism of the bourgeoisie. For instance, during the
“Great Cultural Revolution,” women were not allowed
to wear skirts or braids. | also saw a big-character poster
Opposing men and women swimming together and say-
ing that women's swimsuits Jooked ridiculous in the
pool. I think in the past 20 years we have failed to raise
anti-feudalism to a proper level on our ideological front.
The fact that the governnient work report at this people's
congress mentioned the issuc of anti-feudalism indicates

APRS-CAR-88-056
19 September 1988
great progress. As I mentioned before, someone at a
propaganda work conference said that a hundred schools
referred to only two schools, which was however changed
in the “May 16 Circular.” Originally we were told that
various erroncous thinkings among the people should be
b wag. not
24

i
ree

“Gang of Four.”

The movement of ccanbating and preventing revision-
ism originally was to oppose changing the basic tenets of
Marxism. Later, it tured into a movement to establish
absolute authority for a leader and ensuring that China
will never change its political color also became a means
to establish a leader's absolute authority. Every word this
authority said was absolutely correct and did not need to
be tested through practice. Whoever criticized or vio-
lated some of his words before or after he died would be
likened to Khruschev, accused of opposing Mao Zedong
Thought, and considered a bad guy to be punished by the
whole party and nation. As a result, in the process of
combating and preventing revisionism, a personality cult
gained ground. In 1956, we drew lessons from Soviet
experiences and wrote an article, “On the Historical

Experience of Proletarian Dictatorship,” to criticize Sfa- -

lin’s personality cult, which was the right thing to do. In
the report to the Eighth National People's Congress on
the amendment of the Party Constitution, Comrade
Deng Xiaoping said there was a reflection of a personal-
ity cult inside our party. Later, this view was changed.
On the issue of Stalin, the second criticism of the “Nine
Criticisms,” which was adapted from the speech of a
certain “adviser,” never even mentioned the mistakes of
his personality cult. Instead, it said criticizing personal-
ity cult was completely wrong for it violated Lenin's
theorics on the masses, class, political parties, and lead-
ers, thus paving the way for the development of a
personality cult and resulting in serious and disastrous
consequences. These views all violated the criterion of
truth. Lenin’s teachings on the masses, class, political
parties, and icaders is that the masses are of different
classes, the party represents classes, and leaders repre-
sent the party. 1t is true that leaders represent the party,
classes, and the masses, but we cannot say that every-
thing a leader does must represent the masses, that
belicving in leaders means believing in the masses, and
that the personality cult docs not exist. Leaders can also
depart from the people; therefore, not every word and

14 POLITICAL

decd of icaders absolutely, undoubtedly conform to the
people's interests. Leaders sometimes can make mis-
fakes. Chairman Mao himself once said: “No party or
person can g¥oid making mistakes.” Lin Biao advocatcd
that “everything Chairman Mao said is the truth.” I'd
tke to ask him: isn’t this remark of Chairman Mao also
gee truth? Chairman Mao said no one, including himself

“of course, can avoid commiting mistakes. This remark
must also be the truth if whatever Chairman Mao said is
athe truth as Lin Biao advocated. However, if this remark
is the truth, “whatever he said is the truth” would
become impossible. Due to many years of propaganda,
this view has been ingrained: therefore, trying to set

“things right, solving these problems, and emancipating
our thinking has become a very arduous task. This
requires a certain process. Of course, we should also
realize and notice thal some people our efforts to
set things right because they are on the side of the “Gang
of Four.” But a large number of masses have no bad
intention. They are against the “Gang of Four,” but
since they have had too much of this propaganda and
have not paid much attentiot. to their political study,
they resent what we are irying to do now. Our RENMIN
RIBAO has received many letters, especially from PLA
soldiers, protesting: Don't attack people here and there
by innuendo and stop doing such things. These comrades
are good comrades. They do not necessarily think that
Chairman Mao had made no mistakes. It is just that they
can not accept this psychologically. We need to carry out
propaganda steadily. Propaganda needs discipline, but
what kind? It is very hard to say. [1 is a process. We
cannot say certain things during a certain period; but
after a while, it will be all right. Maybe we cannot say this
today, but we will be able to say it after a certain period.
Therefore, we need to advance steadily and help some
people by working with them to change their thinking,
but never hurt their feelings.

We should advance steadily not only in propaganda but
also in all fields including democratic and reform issues.
Old bad practices die hard. We now have so many
problems which are forming not a piic but a mountain.
So, when we sort out these problems, we can only work ai
a steady pace. We should not vaciliate. Vacillation is no
good. Don't vacillate, advance steadily. This is why we
cannot discuss certain things now but we will be able to
afier a whilc. Take the issuc of sham Icflist and rcal
rightist, for example. Some peopic say that this still has
not been corrected, and 1 agree. When an articic on this
issue was first published, it was risky to talk about an
issue which was considered a forbidden zone. Chairman
Mao said himself that Lin Biao was an extreme rightist.
The only way to indicate sham leftist, real rightist was by
placing quotation marks around the word “leftist.” You
now say he was an extreme ieflist, so now an unquoted
feftist has come to mean sham, and a quoted “leftist”
means real. Later after the situation developed, it was all
right to talk about the extreme leftist linc. Therefore.
things arc developing and idcological liberation requires
a process. Eliminating the forbidden zone also requires a
process. For instance, the Liu Shaoqi forbidden zone has

ty

Se ae

“2 tee

rgb

Aa 3 ROR CaS

JIPRS-CAR-88-056
49 September 1988

ae

40 be eliminated sooner or later and it will involve even

more areas. Many people have already had too much of

this. They say: We redress mishandled cases everyday.
Why are there so many cases to be redressed? A ia

of the masses think the same way. What do you thik

their thinking? In a certain sense, their thinking is

Mili under the pernicious influence of the ultradefiist

= afhinking of the “Gang of Four.” tn another sense, their

inking is lagging behind the situation. The situation

- “<3 Shas Seveloped and the focus has been shifted, but they

La

Mill stay in the past talking about things like taking the

“glass struggic or this and that as the key link. So based on
‘this a their thinking is conservative. There arc

wo common definitions for “teftists” and right-

‘“-aets as Chairman Mao pointed out. One definition is:

{One Who emphasizes struggle, excessive Struggic, is a

ba _deftist; ane who lacks the spirit of struggle is a rightist.

“Another definition is: One who does things which should

be done in the future, going too far, is called a “teftis:™,
one who refuses to do things which should have been
done and stays in the past is called a “rightist.” Although
practice has changed, many people with ossified thinking
have failed to change their thinking along with the
change of practice, so in this sense they are considered as
conservatives who have fallen behind.

The Issue of Socialist Democracy Should Be Resolved

Many socialist countries have not yet resolved this issuc.
Failure to resolve this issue has caused many problems
for the Soviet Union. What about us? We have not
resolved it cither. We always thought democracy was an
issue of work style. For many years we advertised:
Democracy is to iet the people speak, refrain from
bludgeoning and putting labels on people, and heed the
Opinions of the masses. We thought this was what
democracy was all about. It is of course democracy but
the major meaning of democracy should not be limited
to this area. This formulation is to urge leaders to heed
the opinions of the masses, let the people speak, and
allow them to express their opinions. According to this
formulation which is based on the viewpoint of the
leaders’, democracy is possible even in a feudal society.
Due to the deep influence of feudal ideology, our discus-
sion of democracy has been limited to how leaders
should understand the people. An upright feudal official
and a good empcror could be democratic if they accepied
others’ advice. Of course we hope that leaders are like
this, but the question is what do we do if they aren't.
Nothing. Now we have to correct this misunderstanding.
First, democracy is the system of a country under which
the people have the right not only to criticize but also to
supervise, vote, recall, and etc. I attended the people's
congress and felt that some progress has been made. Al
the congress, representatives criticized state leaders by
mame and those criticisms were sharp and unprece-
dented. Many representatives responded to the issue of
personal privileges, which is a good phenomenon. How-
ever, all this is just preliminary. The important question
is the principle of the Paris Communc. Before when we
discussed the principle and experience of the Paris

45 —* POLITICAL

. Commune, people like Yao Wenyuan and Chen Boda
always wrote articies to blame the failure on the lack of
suppressjon on the enemy. Today when we discuss the
principle of the Paris Commune, we concentrate on how
$0 prevent Seaders from changing from the people's
public servants into the peopic’s masters. The Paris

“Xommune had two methods: one is general election and
‘the other, the low-wage system. The low-wage system.
stander which leaders are paid the same amount of wage as

“workers, is mol feasible today, but at ieast personal

privileges should be eliminated.

{gAVe cannot expect “upright officials” to do all this for us.

We have to rely on ourselves and fight. Whether it is
economic reform, political democracy, or ideological
Kiberation, there is always a fight and ‘many things
demand of us to get up and fight. This is a very
important experience and lesson. If there were more
comrades like Zhang Zhixin {1728 1807 2450] in the
past, many things would not have been in such a mess.
Zhang Zhixin was a hero of the socialist period and we
need such an exampic. In the old days, things were
simple. Whoever opposed the Kucmintang became a
here, of course, and whoever got shot became a martyr
who will be remembered by the people. Under the new
conditions, whoever has differing views becomes a revi-
sionist who will go down in history as a byword of
infamy and whoever opposes Mao Zedong Thought
becomes a disgraced element of the three evils who
cannot even gain the understanding of the people. It is
nol very casy to take this kind of mental pressure. None
of us is mentally prepared for such a struggic in the
socialist period. In the past, when we fought the Kuo-
" mintang and Japanese, we could easily tell right from
wrong and we felt superior to our enemies if we died and
became heroes. However, in the sozialsit period, since
the party and leaders have high prestige, we always feel

” like we are wrong, wondering if we lack ideological

consciousness, if we are wrong after all, and if we will go
down in history labelicd as a byword of infamy and
humiliation. This indeed poses a mental pressure. So |
said Comrade Zhang Zhixin was wonderful. She noticed
the problems very early. She was also alone because at
the time everybody else, not knowing the problems, was
still talking about the “three bests” and the “red sun.”
Comrade Zhang Zhixin's criticism on Chairman Mio
came from love and respect not vicious attacks. | heard

that comrades of Liaoning Province decided to rchabil- *

itate Comrade Zhang Zhixin after they read the docu-
* ments of the ideological work conference and found that
ahere were criticisms on Chairman Mao because Com-
fade Zhang Zhixin's criticism was not as serious as those
at the ideological work conference. She was great because
she was alonc and many good comrades and people
around her did not understand and opposed her. 1 wits
fol casy for her to persist under such a ciecumstance
Zhang Zhixin was the vanguard of idcological liberation

idcological liberation ts to free us from various kinds of
ideologies such as idealism, old dogmatism, SUpPCEM-
tions, and prejudice that prevent us from understanding

wire

Tek sit. afte

caballo: Vi egy tows are

espn a) pa

-g~acens. If

Me
ee.

IPRS-CAR-88-056
19 September 1988 os

she truth 0 that we can seek and understand the truth .

freely gad independenily. The purpose of ideological
Hberation is to understand the truth and the criterion of
truth is practice. As long as we recognize this rule, we

: 4twould abt have to worry about the problem of overdoing

ee

in ideological iberation. Today, we still need to liberate

or

comrades asked me how to explain democracy as &
democracy is a means, 90 is dictatorship. We
we no reason to belittle the importance of

“Just because we think it as a means. Is dictatorship a

ee 2 apeans? Yes, it is also a means. As Marx said, dictator-

ae

_ B-ship is a medium to ultimately eliminate classes. If we
1p £aN Stress the means of dictatorship, why can’t we stress
dhe means of democracy? This is the first question. The

ra

second question is that a means and an end are relative
and can be transformed. For instance, when we were
opposing the Kuomintang, we fought for democracy
which was our end; after we won democracy, we used it
to build socialism and democracy became a means. Al
the present, democracy, I think, is both a means and an
end because we still need to develop socialist democracy
90 we can use it to arouse the people's enthusiasm for the
cause of the four modernizations.

On the Issue ef Chairman Mac's Philosophical
Thinking

How do we look at Chairman Mao's philosophical think-
ing? What are his contributions and shortcomings? I can
only talk about it briefly because I am not prepared and
don't have any reference materials. I can only say a few
things based on my memory.

While discussing these issues, including Chairman Mao's

theories on epistemology and contradictions, we should ..

go far back to the philosophical difference between
Chairman Mao and Stalin. Lenin wrote “Materialism

‘and Empirio-Criticism” which was the first Marxist

classic to discuss mainly epistemology. No book was
devoted to the discussion of epistemology before then.
However, this book is to resolve the issue of materialism
and criticize idealism. It also talks about the dialectics of
epistemology, but not much. It mainly answers questions
such as what is primary and what is secondary. Later he
began to write “Notes on Philosophy” and learned
Hegel's science of logic. He finished writing outlines and
introduced many thinkings. It looked like he was ready
40 write another book on philosophy, but he did not have
enough time to do so. In his “Notes on Philosophy.”
Lenin had two Ideas: one is 10 summarize the gist of
dialectics into the unity of opposites, thus getting to the
heart of the issuc, which however should be explained
and expanded on: the other is to apply dialectics to the
theory of reficction. In addition, he also said that the
road to knowledge is from vivid perception to abstract
thinking and then from thinking to practice. For a long
time in the Soviet Union, Ideas ke this failed to attract
Stalin's attention. Since Stalin looked down on Hegel

16 - POLITICAL.

and dialectics, for a long time the Soviet Union attached
much importance to “Materialism and Empirio-Criti-
cism” Jui did not give duc attention to “Notes on
Pailosophy.” Under Soviet influence, China also
attached importance to “Materialism and Empirio-Crit-
 $cism™ and ignored “Notes on Philosophy.” “Notes on
Philosophy” 6 only aotes not a book but 1 contains the

_ embryos of many valuable ideas. However, Chairman
developed

Mao inherited and

these ideas first by
“texpanding on Lenin's remark on the unity of the oppo-
sites into an article, entitled “The Theory of Contradic-
gions” and, second, by expanding Lenin's idea on the
process of cognition into an article, entitled “The Theory
of Practice.” Chairman Mao's articles were written in
9937, and “The Short History of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union” was published in 1938. Stalin wrote
one of the chapters, entitled “Dialectical and Historical
“Materialism” which exerted great influence and played a
great part. This article expounds on the general guide-
fines of the tenets of Marxist philosophy in simple and
clear language and carrics a certain amount of weight.
However, it also has several mistakes which | will not
discuss at length today. One of the mistakes is, as
everybody knows, that when he discussed the four char-
acteristics of dialectics, he only mentioned that the
struggle of opposites in contradictions pushes things to
move forward. Lenin's original remarks were two sen-
tences: one was “development is the identity of oppo-
sites” and the other was “development is the struggle of
opposites.” Stalin used only the second sentence and
dropped the first one. Another thins about his article is
that it did not give enough coverage to the issue of
epistemology. As if epistemology is merely an issuc of

" the knowability and unknowability of the world, he said

that the materialism thinks the world is knowable and
idealism thinks the world is unknowabic. And that is all
he said about the issue of epistemology. Earlicr in 1937,
Chairman Mao already claborated on this issuc; so it 1s
in these areas that Chairman Mao inherited and devel-
oped Lenin's thinking and these are also Chairman
Mao's contributions.

Lenin’s original remarks on the process from vivid percep-
tion to abstract thinking and then from abstract thinking to
practice later aroused some questions. For example, how
many stages are there in the process of cognition? Onc
group says there are two: one is perceptual and the other,
gational. They say according to “The Theory of Practice,”
knowledge is perceptual in the iower stage and rational in
the higher stage; so there are two stages. Another group

_ says there are three stages, contending that rational knowl-

edge is not the end of the process and that there should be
another stage for the testing of practice, which is also what
Chairman Mao said. Rational knowledge, which is only
the half point in the process of cognition, needs to go back
$o the stage of practice. This is the continuous develop-
avent of knowledge.

What is our answer to this question? Chairman Mao
elzborated on this issuc in his work “Where Docs Man's
Correct Thinking Come From" where he said that one

;
3

as

es ‘Stages between practice and knowledge: one is perceptual

SPRS-CAR-88-056
19 September 1988

we

‘stage is from practice to knowledge and another stage is
from to practice. In this sense, the process of
“Sognition has two stages—one from the beginning of
‘practice to knowledge and the other, the return of

. But didn't i reflect any

et ae ranean ieee Ena cence ee mee wee

17 - POLITICAL

appearance while rational knowledge reflects essence.

"This formulation is questionable. Does it mean that

there is #0 Concep! or judgement in the stage of percep-
tual knowledge? Let me give you an cxample. | say this
cup is white. Is this perceptual or rational knowledge? By
saying that this cup is white. 1 reflected the appearance.
concept or judgement? The cup is

"a concept znd so is the color white. That the cup is white
$3 t jedgement but this judgement docs not reflect the

2-essence of the cup. So { think there is conception and

_Jadgement in the stage of perceptual knowledge and we
#on't automatically understand the essence of things as

Process _ s00n as we gain concepts. Let's look at one of Chairman

a

go mY take the road of subjectivism leading to ideal
worm Of materialism. Therefore, we should say that the

begins from practice and that there are two

and the other, rational . This is my view.

should of course return to practice to be
tested, but there are only two forms of knowledge:
perceptual and rational. Are there any other forms? I say
ao. How can knowledge return to practice to be tested? It
is simple. First we gain perceptual knowledge in practice
and then elevate it to rational knowledge. Practice itself
does not equal knowledge. For instance, the 10-year
“Great Cultural Revolution” was a test for our basic line,
© the theory of continuous revolution, and the theory of
sharpening the class struggle. This 10-year period was
used to test this theory. How? Like I said before, first we
discovered through perceptual knowledge many wronged
eases, economic problems, and lower living standards
and then we elevated and combined many different
kinds of perceptual knowledge, turned them into rational
knowledge, and then concluded that the theory of sharp-
ening the class struggle is wrong. When we review our

experiences, we also use practice as the criterion for

judgement which is formulated on the basis of percep-
tual and rational knowledge: therefore, as far as the form
of knowledge is concerned, there are only two stages. In
sum, we should affirm Chairman Mao's philosophical
development and achievements. It is not right to ignore
“The Theory of Practice” and stress only “Materialism
and Empirio-Criticism.” .

Then, is Chairman Mao's philosophical thinking per-
fect? Of course not. For instance, | think “The Theory of
Practice™ also has insufficient arcas or shoricomings.
Here 1 will discuss only one question: what is perceptual
and rational knowledge? According 10 “The Theory of
Practice.” perceptual knowledge reflects the appcarance

_ of things and is a stage of sense perceptions and impres-

sions, afier this stage repeats for several times, a sudden
change will take place and form conception, judgement,
inference, or rational knowledge, which reflects the
essence of things. So perceptual knowledge is different
¥rom rational knowledge. One difference is that rational

is conception and judgement while percep-
tual knowledge is impression and sense perception.
Another difference is that perceptual knowledge reflects

ae:
RY

> 3 ry PR eer te
FL 7 nT Le
ree gee Vt ra cae

Mao's own example: The first pert of pa hae?
‘people's struggle against imperialism was stage o
‘perceptual knowledge and so was the long-term sponta-

\_meous struggle of the working class against capitalism.

“Were there any concept or judgement during that stage?
Of course there were, but those cuncepts and judgements
only reflected the appearance of things. We ofien usc
concepts and judgements in our daily life. but many of
such concepts and judgements reficct only the appear-
ance not the essence of things. So we cannot say that the
formation of a concept automatically leads to the essence
of things. Not necessarily. The difference between a
concept and a sense perception is that the former masters
the common characteristics and appearances of things
and summarizes the common characteristics of things.
Of course, essence can be reflected only by concepts, but
this does not mean that all concepts reflect the essence of
things. We now have many concepts. For instance, th:
concept of capitalism existed before Marxism, but then it
did not reflect the essence of capitalism. The concept of
the noun commodity existed long time ago, but it took
economists several thousand years to study, from classi-
cal economics to Marx, before they finaliy understood
the essence of commodity. Therefore, after a concept is
formed, we usually have to go through a fairly long
‘development stage before we can master the essence of
things. For another instance. since the 1940's, there have
been people reporting that they saw lying objects which
did not look like airplanes or anything else. More and
more people saw them but nobody knew what they were.
So afler failing to find their name after much research,
we named them “flying saucers” which foreigners called
om ely unidentified Aying objects. Is this 2
concept?) “Flying — saucers*-—unidentified fiying
objecis—is a concept. Bul what exactly is this unident:-
fied fying object or “flying saucer?’ Is it sent by the
people of another planct or an illusion? We don't know.
We need to conduct research and prolonged studies and
collect data before we can finally juilge what caactly isa
“flying saucer and understand its essence. For still
another instance, when did we learn the essence of ment
Marx did, He said men’s essence is the combination of
social relations, so he grasped the essence of men. But.
didn't the concept of men exist before then? Aristotle
said men are rational animals and others said men are
there were many concepts. Franklin said men are
tool-making animals, which was: affirmed by Mars.
Therefore, the process of learning the essence of things is

ey ‘
Po la “wee *

esa

13 POLITICAL

. After the beginning of the reform and the adoption o
2 open poficy in China, peopic are more concerned wi
; onomic activities which have a direct bearing on
cil] development, and have the fecling that philosgphy
Sebsiract and far removed from the realities of ily

_ and so 8 ot y
aclaied 10 ; {realities of social life. Philosoph will then

cd, “he able 10 i its proper place in the presen society.
< i, The so-called crisis in Marxist is essentigily a type of
political crisis, 0 a conflict between the realities of social
: conditions, and tile old ideology. We must ¢ ¢ this
. Graduate Seminar Discusses Crisis Pollcepty fom are we can remove the e of crisis in
10050341h Shanghai WEN HUI BAO in Chiftese e411
7 Jungs p 4
eevee COOS0St2 Shonehal JIACANG RIBRO in Chines
AN BAO in Chinese
{Text} Question of Crisis in ist Philosophy 8 Jun 88 96
udan Univazsity’ tt te student ial-
tins in phils ye irostaeod Mafcist philosophy in a (Article by Deng Weizhi (4772 )251 1807}: “Raise the
recent seminary Most of them agfeed that in the devel- _ Coefficient of Political ty for Theorists”)
opment of theokes in China, 9/so-called crisis actually

4 to the cause of this crisis
however, the participants

exists in Marxist Ahilosophy.
and the way to overcome i
had many different'opiniog’s.

1. Some were of the o

3% Marxist philosophy of She present age is caused by the -~ The position of theorists jn Ching, as shown in a social
ry current publication of textbooks on this subject. The cross-section, is not by pecans low. Some theorists did
} system of Marxist philoshphy according to these text- occupy eminent positions at certaif\ times. Vertically and
_ books is mostly bas¢d on the old 18th-century material- individually, however, Ahey had their ups and downs.
x ism. The same traditional theory of knowledge is still Their positions were gven more precarious when “class
& used to explain spime basic calegories of Marxist philos- struggle is taken as ti key link.” situation, though
4 ophy, and the sytem used is baged on a Sovict model of — much improved in { years, is }till by no means
the 1930's. refore, the use\of these textbooks in tranquil. Norma! gcademic debates inay suddenly be
: . -- education obsfructs further explofgtions in Marxist phi- charged as indicatjons of political dissidence and a good
x a , Sosophy, ang causes a stagnation iA\the study of Marx- — book just published may become the piimary target of
: 2. ism, The ghly way to overcome this crisis is to get scrutiny. Becausé of the changes in the pQitical climate, _
= <"_ tompletely’ owt of the entanglement With old material. — suspension of publication and sales, desftuction of the
4 &, “* Sam, m/to search for a new starting\point. In other printing plate{ replacement of pages and\so forth arc
z a . words, ye must study Marxism afresh in Srder to under- common sigh/s. In a certain year, for exampiec, a theorist
é = | stand arx and his philosophy. was invited fo deliver a lecture. The script was examincd
3 pho in advancé, the delivery of the leclure was warmly
3 eS 2 so-called crisis in Marxist philosopky of the applauded, and, people cordially shook hand with the
‘ & cs : age can also be attributed to this cause: Marxism —secturer. f & news report on this event, ver, this
¢ ‘ er enjoys its supreme position as a em of heo was of “opposing the Central

flues "and faith in people's minds. To overco: this
we should combine our national cultural tradhi

ith the tatest ideological Irend of Western philoso} y

ae ay

é oe,
E a2
a a

le ae

Wane

and sci wp a new system of values aad faith that
aceded by Chinese people in order to eliminate the
of an impending crisis.

f .
3

ision that the so-called crisis in-

tical work is not rich or
periant causes may be the
rity for the theorists.

[Text] If we say that our
vivid enough, one of the i
low coefficient of political

Comrfittee. Again, when a certain theorist in Shanghai

joined the “mass criticism” according to a unificy pian,

a oid with powerful backing accused him of co}umit-

ting the same mistakes which he himself criticized, The
weorist and some others did not know whether Whey
ould laugh or cry.
