Moscow Industrial and Agricultural Exhibit/models of Sputniks/electronics Equipment
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000124335, dated 2 September 1958.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000124335).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

t

Se :
| ‘Ruseer Inieetrial end Agrioulterel Exhinit/

tam arene mewn eee ee He

“INFORMATION REPOR a ee ee

ooantag of Os topteerqs Lown Tite if UEC
Coen, PP cad PHA he Oumemeninn a toreieten
J of which in ery mamew te er somethertend pas
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY oom te proband

reacts 3
2 2 Septeater 1948
ac crests co eres

'

Reiale ef Syuteike/Electroaics Eguiparant

or erwewm whtak, erent of aneditinns domed in

It te eaid that in 1956 nearly six aillian people visited the Moscow Industrial
and Agricultural Brhibition fram ali over the Soviet Unico, including about

25 thousand fureigers cf many naticalitics. We ware preeent at the 19593
opening ty Khrushchev and hed tims for coly @ burried view through some of the
buildings. ‘The exhibition ocewpias atout S00 acres with 21 parilions housing
sone 6O thousand exhibits, many being shown for the first tiae, in a fine setting
of Clowers and trees vith miny Iewaly foumtaines. It is @ striking picture of
Soviet industrial progr“ss and deanostrates tbs tremecdcus efferts that are being
mds in every fiald of Soviet endeavor. In pasetig cor my mention the exhibits
oa the peaceful uses of atonic eargy, on mechaniration and automation, on dere).
opments in the chenical and electrical indistrieas, on new agricultural mchinery,
trucks and coaches, and not least the US style motar cars. All of these are
effectively preeented, and vben added to t+ eprctacular Sputnik display in the
Science Pavilion make up an fapressirs abv. Pull ecale models of Sputnik 4,
end III with aide-exhibits of specialised and sresuring apparatus, are show and
explained. Sputnik III is an tapressive piece of work. It weighs about 2,K0
lds and onrries over @ ton of scientific equipmat. It te pearly 13 ft long and
about firw feet diamater at the base, and cculd have contained a mun, bted
this vill come; searvhile, instruments provide more information, Among the
instruments carried are devices for determiniazy *he foic mxsent of the ateoe-
phere, and the ciectric charge of th Sputnik itself; for srasuring the earth's
magnetic fteld ard for etudying corpuscular radiation from ths eun. Provision
fa also =x‘ to record the mmber of calliaions of the Sputnik with aicro-
netecrites. The satellite is fitted with solar powered batterins and redio
eqiipoent. The transaitting entanoas, consisting of steal faldad Gipoles,can be
seen cy te opposite eidea of the nose, vhtle tha four recelring antennas profect
backwards from the baseplate. It ta aatd that instrumatation is provided for
nine sir casecua observations which are tranexitted down to earth. Qne of the
intrig:::., Tretures of the design of Sputmix LII ie the memns for waintaining
temper re equilibrium in ite passage through space by exntomtically ootrolling
beat red'ation by moans of adhistable vans surrcumding the lower portion of the
coos. ‘Th: generat mechanical conception points to an advanced degree of
technological development.

In the Pavilion of “Machine-bullding", which is the largest of the exhibition,
the exzineering Lodistries ary represen ted including electronics end commnica-
ticns, options, cinema, etc. The Asdio Section presented « particularly fine
range of all kinds of tubes, treasistore and components, including examples ef
10° deflection cathode ray tubes, image arthicons, vidieens, photomitinliers,
Locnoscopes and iamce iccnoscopes, « large variety of receiring tubas both
miniatcre end eub-minfature typaa, low and high power trenemitting tubes and
magoetrons, e-wi-conductor devices vith many different types of diodes ang

Approved for Release
Date__/ 1H? 1996_

4,

Se

end Wariun titemates, resisters, condrasers, eto. Ys one of the show cases
there wae alse a emill treneisterised redio brosdeset reesiver in the form
ef a book. Many wrosdcast receivers end talevision ests, os well at
Television end ether professional equipment, enmlag end digital commuters,
end tect usneuring apparetus were on show.

 qme sany poople who have visited the USAR Pavilion at the Brusecls tori Pair

must have wondered vbethar the exhibite that they sav there were perhaps

wade to impress the ortalée world. Waving visited the Gruseals
Pavilion before going to Moscow, I wuld cay that thare should be ac ouch
Lilssions. the Moscow exhibition is many, many times more impressive end
ineludes, with several additions] exemples, precti te
ye coer in Brussels. =

Althengh most ef the exhibition is érveted to the achievements of heavy indus ’
there ig mach evidence of greater activity in the consmer product field with
improvesentes im clothing mterials and furnishings, foods end home eypliancss.

in Moscow end Leningred good looking electric veorm cleaners ood at 425
rubles ($42.50) end electric floor polishers at 285 rubles ($23.9).

:

Whether all the goods displayed at the Exhibition are evetlable in the eh oe

ia qgeite another question. Certainly ase & es not see any of the larger aev

gutamotiles on the streets of Mosocy. On tha other band, the new emaller

YOLOA model is out in fair mumbers and even being used es tarts. Rylon mteriel

is pot eveiladle, but there is « scmeviat sintlar German tyye of material called |

*Pericn”. The price of goods in the stores seams to follow no clear pattern,
peceuse the Government cootrale everything and can therefore decide

what goods to subsidive end eel) cheaply. TY seta run from about 1,250 - 2,00

rubles end radios about balf those prices. Thare are many etoree selling

identical serchentiss, tut, of course, thare is no campetition.

Ga Pile in CIA Library ie @ nina page extract in Bngliah from the USSR indistrial
and Agrimilterel Erhibition Guide Booklet - Moscow 1957 - dsecribing the axhibite

in the following Slields:
@. %aéio Mngineering Infistry and Commmications.
». Toxtrument Making end Means of Antamtion.
e. Optics.
@. Cinema Industry.
e. Mrtrology, Standards en4 Precision Measuring.
On Pile Material is UecLasarrren. 7

aS: San te OY

Poe

Extract froma U.S.S.R. Industriel & Agricultural Exhibition
Guide Booklet ~ Moscoyn 1957

The Exhibition aims to promote technical provyress in
the Soviet Union. It seeks to point out the reserves lying
latent in different branches of industry and to show workers,
technicians and heade of industrial enterprises possibilities
Tor increasing output while allowing for a steady, planned
reduction of costs. New machines, tebhnological processes, and
the latest achievements in automation and in remote and electronio
control are demonstrated at the Exhibition.

Thousands of Soviet industrial workers and technicians
come to this school of advanced experience to exchange information
on their achievements and to borrow the most progressive methods =
of isbor.

PAVILION OF MACHINE-SUILDING

This is the biggest pavilion of the Exhibition. The
display, whibh occupies a fioor space of nearly 20,000 square
metrea and ta divided into 15 sections, shows the leading branches
of industry in the Soviet Union.

The open desonstration grounds adjoining the pavilion
on the north and east exhibit lurse-size eguipzment, lorries and
special-purpose autoroviles, high-voltage apparatuses, agricultural
machines, ani fire-fighting equiosent.

RADIO-ENGINESURING INDUSTRY ANU COMMUNICATIONS
eee eee ee ten eA LoS

This section occupies Halls Nios. 20 and 21, in which are
displayed samples of piezoelectric articlea, radio parts and units
ot radio apparatuses, electric vacuuc epparatuses (sources of light,
radio velves, electronm-rey end Eoentgen tudes), sext-conductor end
redio-messuring instrucerntsu, wireless sets and redio-gremophones,
broadcasting and receiving TY apperatuses, radio-reley and re-
broudcesting atations acd radio-.cicy cormunicetion apparatuses,
electric vacuum and seri-concuctor instrurerte,

There are new types of nidget receivirg-erplifying vulves,
which ere puch superior to einilar vaives put out previously.

The 6ALII triode-heptode that is exhibited has extra-

rdinarily fine operetionel quaiities. Its prime use is for con-
verging frequencies in superheterodyne receivers. The triode and
he; :oce parta of thia vaive xe; be used independently.

The cidget 6IT15TI outlet pentode ig likerice superior to
he formerly procuced 6239 pentode. One of its advanteges is that
* can opercte uncer & reduced a:ode tension of up to L7C-1&C voitea.
Cn view there are new tyres of siaget traneconcucting long-wearing
heating velvea for reiic cpypurutuees, racio-reisy end long-dlatence
corunicstion lines; a wice rence ef penerator valves for vericus

ln the long, seuiun and short wave bande, the
senaitivity of the 6-watt Rossiya eet is-.not below 50 microvolts,
and dn the ultra~short wave band - not telow 8 microvolts. The
hoealya mas knobs for regulating tone on low and high frequencies
separately, ap automatio amplification regulator, and a keyboard
bund changer. The eooustioc eysten coneiate of 5 dynamio loudspeakers

a

which ensure high fidelity.

; Table radio-gramophones of the same clase ara repre-
sented by the Lux and Brurhba. All the detaile and unite - ultre-
aliort wave blocks, variable capacity condenser blocks, intermediate
frecuenoy filters, selenium reotifiers, keyboard band changera, and
ao forth ~ are uniform in the Rossiya, Lux and Druzhba.

The 6-watt Kontsert is representative of firet-olase
radio-gremophones. Built on the basis of a unified cheaseis and
details of a first-clesa wireless set, the Konteert coneints of a
Tevalve combined all-wave superheterodyne first-class wireless set,

a universal eleotrio record player, and a built-in revolving magnetic
aerial. The eet has knobea for regulating tone on low and high fre-
quenoies sejarately, tone-compenesation regulation of sound, smooth
regulation in the intermediate frequency AM band, and automatic
anplification control. In the long, medium and short wave bands

the aet's sensitivity is not below 200 mtcruvolts, in the ultra-ahort
wave bend ~- not below 20 microvolts. The acoustic system consists

of four dyfamic loudspeckerea. Wave bands are changed by means Of a

Keyboard.

Second-clees wireless sets end radio-gremophones are
repreaented by the l-watt Eaikal radio-grarophone, a 6-valve super—
heterodyna which receives AX broadcasting etationes operating in the
long, medium and short waves, and FM broadcasting etat‘ons operating
in the ultra-short wave banc. The set has an electric record player.
Ite sensitivity on long, medium and short waves 1s not below 200
microvolte, and on ultra-short waves - not below 20 microvolts. It
hae ao Ultra-short wave dipole and a keyboard band changer.

The acoustic system consiets of two 1TYE5 loudepeaxers.

Also on view there are stall O.l-watt portable wireless
eetea (Nov, Turist, Novost) and automobile radio sets. The Kov is a
third-clase 4-valve superheterodyne with feed from dry or storege
batteries. It ensures reception in the long and medium waves with a
weneitivity of not below 400 microvoDts. Energy consurption from
batteries ~ 1.3 volta. The set is aseembled by the printed circuit

method.

Radio communication and broadcasting. In this section the exhibite
include a Strela-M radio-relay comzunication-line apparatus for
multi-canal radio-relay comcunication lines extending over distances

of up to 25,000 kilometres. In joint operation with a K-24 compression
apparatus, the Strela-k ensures communication in 24 telephone canals.
It also ensures a separate canal for service communication with

selective calls.

Visitore will see a TIPS all-wave receiving apparatus
fer sound telegraph (sustained and tonal) and telephone recerticn

from an open aerial in the 172~-25,000 megacycle wave band. The
receiver's sensitivity te not below 6 gicrovoltse. [It hae pro+

vision for semi-duplex reception.

The new Sirena automobile radio station ie for comrunti-
cation on ultra-short waves. It ie designed for emergency communi-
ontion with ambulances. Unfailing communication ia guaranteed over
a distance of up to 39 kilometres. The radio station ie fed from a

6-volt automobile power circuit.
\

N

Television apparatuses. All the TY sets exhibited in this section
basically differ from the rodels put out formerly. They have new
cathode-ray tubes with a rectangular screen, elliptic loudspenkers,
new sypea of radio valves, uniform units and detaila. io has
mude 1¢ possitle to design compact sets and achieve higher quality
inages and sound accompaniment. The TV sets - Mir, Yaptar, Rubin,
cnamya, Soyuz and Stert # exhibited in this eeation rgeteive five
TY programa.

The Stert is aesserbled by the printed/nethod on three
preseed fo@tings. /

TV sets with 4X26 tubes have a 255 by 340 rm acreen.
They are represented by three mocele - Znanyn, Rpdin and Temp-3.
The Temp-} receives ic television pro,rame and three ultra-short
wave FM programa. TV sets with 5 yk tubes are represented by two
mocela - Mir and Yantar - with 315 by 420 mom. fcreens. Cn view
there 1a a Noacva projection TV set with a 900 x 1,200 mm. screen,

Visitors can acquaint themselves with a TrCO-20 re-
broadcasting station which ensures recpetion at points located more
than 150-200 milometres from a TV station, and a model of a radio
maat that can be lengthened to a height of up to 500 metres.

Interest ia attracted by the IITY-0O, IITY-1 and IITy-2
industrial television installations for rerote television control of
vurious operations and technological processes. There are numerous
otrer radio-broadcasting and corrunication exhibits.

ST-MAKING AND IEANS OF AUTOMATION

UNS

Halls Nos. 22 and 23 show the progrese made by Soviet
andustry in the output of technological con:rol instruments, means
of automatizing various production processes, special watches and
clecrworks, weights, dynanometers, and material-teasting machines.

Visitors will see methane, hydrogen, oxygen and
hydrogen sulphide gas analyzera for the automatic control of the
composition of various gases}

automatic electronic potentiometers, hygrometera, and
other instruzentsy

new metal-teating machines: MYIA-5000 fatigue-testing
machine, YN-5 universal teating machine, TK-2 cone durometer, pro-
longed heat-reaistance and creep testers, and the Tx automatic
durcreter,

The attention of apecitaliasts will be attracted by
inatruzente and regulatorea for the automatic regulation of various
technological processes; operating mock-ups which denonatrate the
sutomatio feed of a catalyzer on a catalytic cracking instaliation,
the regulation of combuetion in a boiler with a chain grate,

Other exhibitea in this section inolude:

. the main parts and units of an automatic regulation
hycraulio system that 1e being wicely ue 4 for automatizing power,
metallurgical, marine and other aegsrega’ x (ouilt on a block
principle, these hydraulic regulatore ore sicply designed, reliable
in operation and easy to adjust) 3

- *

numerous electronic inetruments of normal and mall
sizes for controlling operating regimes in one or rany points with
electric and pneumatio regulation devices;

nulti-point inetrunents with devices that flash signals when
temperatures reach a danger level;

secondary instruments equipped with electric and tele-
metering devices that transmit the readings of reasuring inetrumente

(transzittera}

sarples of new high-clase precision logoneters deaianed
for work in conditions where explosions zay occur; manometric therno-
ceterg; regulators for autoratizing ailmconditioning inatallations
(all these instruments are shown in operations);

a scheme for the complex automation of thermal power
atatione {central stand);

a mock-up of a steam boiler diegram showing the points
os control and organs of reguletion (a device which signals deviationa
from fixed limits 1a shorn in operation on this mock-up);

preseure and texperature tranazitters, various regulating
blocks anc secondary instruzents (the operetion of pneumatic eystem
regulators ia dencnstrated by the regulation of terperature ina
mock-u; of a therzal furnace).

In recent years, technological processes have been con-
trolled and regulated by new methods based on the ecployrent of radio
active radiation and ultra-short and supereonic waves. There is a
ereat future for these rethods as they allow taking high-precision
heusurerents without disturbing the plant process. ‘The radioactive
instrunents displayed in the centrw of the hall include a level seter,
a Curometer end a vacuum gauge. In addition, there i3 an ultrasound

“low meter and an ultra-short wave level meter.

“here are some extrenely interesting computing
-cehtrness general- and special-purpose continuous action eieotro
cocele; supplementary apparatuses that extend the possibilities of
alectromodele} registering inetruzents end indicators and iafra-
low band frequency inetrumes‘s that ehow the frequency and transient
dynemie characteristics of systers of automatic regulation and con-
trol and of their seperate appliances. These instrunerts aleo allow
tanking various measurements in the range of frenuenci+s between zero
end the lower lisit of the sound range (from 0.01 to 50 C.p.8).

Continuous-action electronic mechines are designed for
the solution of common linear differential equations of up to the
ath and 16th order with correspondingly constan*: and variable co-
efficientea. These equations help to describe the dynazics of various
mechanical and electrical procesees as a result of which with these
rachines it 48 possible to re,roduce real processes in laboratory
conditions and aubject therm to detailed experimental research. One
of the special eleatromodels, the autonatic ATF-1, 1a designed to
solve differential equations of motion.

On the central stand in Holl lio.24 there are eaxnples
of optical glass workpieces for articles of various sizes - from
tiny object glasses to huge blocks tor aetronomical mirrors and
tenoes;: samples of ordinury and colored opticul gless, quartz
glasa and aynt}etic crystals, Exhibite deacribe the technology of
producing optical glass and the properties and features of this glass.

In thie section visitors will see:

mocern microscopes used for researoh (one of these is
the EV-4 electronic microscvpe, an instrument with high magnetic
optical properties that gives strongly magnified images in passing
electronio raya and allows seeing particles measuring as little ase

0,02 micron)}

an icveresting universal bioiogical microscope with an
WSI-6 set of uppiaaunces for medical and biological research (in
addition to ite ordinary functions, it allows photographing objects
on a film or lute, magnifying them up to 1,425 tines);

Mineralogical and mstallographic microscopes and
microscopes used by nuclear physicists;

optical econ:rol and measuring instruments widely used
in machine-building for extra-precise measurexents of length, thicx-
ness and angles, and for controlling surface finishes}

new instruzents for non-contact control (the OB%-1
non-contact optical micrometer con+rols the cachining of details
with an accuracy of t0.01 ma. without stopping the lathe):

m

jy apr
th ay

i

ao

i

ideskaatad

an [A}K-40M microscope whith measures the pitch and
ceun diameter of a detail with an accuracy of 2 0.002 mm. and half
» anele of an internal threed profile with an accuracy of 2 10

minavegs

numerous speotral laboratory inatruments and apparatuses
for etidying emission spectra, absorption, dispersion and luminescence

of suostances;

instrunen:s that comprise a‘modern laboratory eet for
enisaion spectral analyels;

CzC-1 photoelectric steelometer (exhibited for the
e) for express quantitative analyses of low-alloy steels

firat tim

und other alloys (in metallurgy, wiere speed and accureoy are needed,
the Dil-l taxes only two or three sinutes to determine the content

of an element with an accuracy of 1-22);

the new Cfl-l1l ateeloscope for rapid vioual qualitative
and quantitative spectrul analyses of tne moat frequently used ateels

and non-ferro1is alioya.

A number of other uew exhibits: an O@2K-56 photocolori-
seter for deterzining t:¢ cuncentration of fluid solutions by their
lizht-absorption :a the visible and ultra-violet regione of the

a,ectrum; an 24-58 universal phocronezar for photometric operations,

for measuring tne abiltty of transpurent cediums to pares light, the
brightness coefficient of diffused surfaces, anc brilliunce, whitenesa,
eto; the ring-type increased accuracy C-36 polarimeter for measuring
the angle of rotation of the plane of polarization within a range

of O-3609 with optical-active transparent solutions and homogeneous
Sludda witn an accuracy of 7 19;

a reveivin, eizctric lishthouse, which emits 2,000,000-.
cundle-jover yericdic beuss thet can be seen from a distance of up to
40 pilougtres (lishthouses of this kind ara being built in all
Soviet waters);

projecting instrusenta (Hall No.23a)! diasoopes,’
epidiascopes anc a microprojector;

instrusents used for defectoscopy in rachine-building
e industry os w2il ss for diugnosing certain diseases
¢ the viability of seeda of agricultural crops,

Anong the various astronomical, opticsl and geodetic
inotrunents and cameras in Hall No.25 there ure:

an :TiTSechniecal level for deterzinine land elevation

avove sea level (the cass proeaucticn of tots instrument was otarted
recently);

an improved-deaign HA-2 hign-uccuracy level for deter-
mining elevations with an accuracy of 0.05 aon. froma distance of
75 metres (thie allows it to be used in construction and erection
fobs where hich accuracy fa ecpecially isyortant);

a en

a new TI-5 theodolite-tachometer for measuring
rortzontsl and vertical angles with an accuracy of 30", for
meanuring magnetic azimuths and determining distances by means of°

a thrend distance Gauge and a vertical rod or renge-findin,; capi

; a new A3T-7 mirromlene telescope designed by Dd.

Mak sutOV, corresponding member of the J.S.S.R. Acadexy of Sciences

‘4s enlarges objects 100-570 times and is used for visual observations
end for photographing and taking soectrographia and photometrio
mensurements of heavenly bodies. This system has won worldwide

recognition)}

_

more than 20 cameras for amateur and technical and
epecial photography, new high-speed lenses for movie caneres and
tolevision apparatuses, highly sensitive exposure meters, magnifiere,

Moinuya flashismps, eto.
CINLMA INDUSTRY

In Hall No.25 the display conaists of movie cameras
nd tlluminution apparatuses, machines for developing bisck-and-
ite negative and positive films und for printing copies of color
s, fils-projection and sound-recurding apparatuses, control
measuring inetruments, and eazpies of fiina and paper. Disgrans,
charts and photographs ghow technolosical processes for the production
of materials for sotion pictures, sotion pictures, rovie cameras and
esuiprent, and the growth of te einemo und “qin-dioetribution networks

tn this country.

sere aret

rad

Among the exhibits

; interesting movie cereras — excc for studio work with
simultaneous sound recording (the distinguishing features of this
cumern are thet it uses & mirror shutter and a short-focus optical
yena), Rodina (model 3KCX) camera for newarecis ang sciontific cilxs}
onvas-Avtozat portable cacera for newsreels, and an avateur lécm
curera for color und blec«x-and-white filza;

a projector for screening microfiims with the necessary

an WO-il ecartoon-filming cauere (also exhibited by the
Odessa cinap “ores)4
verious Kinds of {llunination apparatuses for fils
adios and outdoor work;

a
at

a 4$QO2T-2 laboratory deveioping and drying machine for

black-and-white negative and positive tilzs (the outstunding feature
of this machine 43 thus £4 does not need &@ dar« roon. Its pro-
oes 49 regalsted by a variator nithin the range of 52-320 metres
per hour ]$

a stationary f2i.. prejector,
wide-sereen gteraopnonic fiite, w codernic
Yor color ane block-uncewiite Tidng, 2 Cyccane
trnatilintion, tape recorJers and o%.er &,

METROLOGY, STANDARDS AND PRECISION MEASURING

The work of the State Service of Scales and i
Yeasuring Inetruments ia shown in Hall No.5. Visitors will }
gee a chart of standard measures and of the network of organs of H
the State Service of Soales and Measuring Inetruzentes which ensure :
the correct reproduction of standari units of meaguremen’t on
working measures and instruments.

\
In this section visitors can wcquaint themselves with
the system of ensuring unified measures}

instruments and inetallations for measuring mass,
pressure, nerdnees, angular velooity, light and other radiation,
and for recording temperature, time and frequency for linear,
angular, radio-engineering, electrical, magnetic and other measure- =

mean*s}
a travelling laboratory for checking measurea, pressure

re B and maes measuring {natruments, linear and electrical measuring and
Fel otner apparatuses oD the spot where they are used.

In addition to the natural exhibits, there are posters,
drawings and explanatory diagrazs covering all epherea of preoision

measuring.

capacitiss, photocelle and photoelectronte multipliers, gas-filled
triodes, Jenitrona, current and voltege stabilizers, alpha, beta

aod gamma counters, operating mockupe of ea kiystron and a magnetron,
end a new rectangular cathode-reay valve(kineecope) measuring 35, 43

and 53 cm. along the diegonal.

In the national economy increasing importance ia being
attached to seni-conductor apparatuses. Samples of the semi-conductor
tnatruments and apparatuses produced by the radio-engineering industry
can be seen in this section. A big group of exhibits consists of
peint rectifying gerganium diodea that are ueed in measuring apparatuses,
TY sete and wireless receivers. Theee diodes do not react to mechanical
influences, work reliably in conditions of high humidity and retain
their operational properties durirg etorage or prolonged service. They
last for more than 10,000 hours.

Other exhibits include silicic mixing diodes for con-
verting frequencies in superheterodyne radio receivers with l-em. end
1C-em. bands; silicic rectifying diodes which are used as detectors
for receiving devices in receivers that directly amplify the 10-on.
bond; planar and point germanium triodes used chiefly to amplify

electric signals}

semi-conductor photoresistances and thermoresistances
used in various types of radio apparatuses (the sensitivity of the
COK-1 sexni-conductor photoresistance ig 12 times higher than that of

the CLUB photocell)

a wide selection of readio-apparatues details and unite
(the moat diverse kinds of condeneers, piezo-eleotrio articles, relays.
new types of loudepeekeras, resistances and macy other exhibdite);

verious kinds of light sources put out by the radio-~
engineering industry;

dozens of electric incandescent lamps for the most
diverse purposes, luminescent and special larpe and other illumination

arppliences. ;

Relaying apperatuees. SITY-2 portable apparatus for relaying speech
and music from theatres, conoert halle, stediures, eto.

. K3Y-15 command-bdroadoasting inetellation, hich ia «
radio+felaying unit for sea and river vessels. It is used for ralasying
radio broadcasts and shipboard corrande.

Radio sete end Radio-sgremophones. All the new redio sete and radio-
6recophones displayed at the Exhibition fall into one of five classes
superior, first, eecond, third and fourth. The most characteriatio
supérion-clese radio-grazophone is the Rossaiya console model. This

is an all-wave ll-valve corbined superhetsrodyne equipped with a
universal electric record player. It ensures reoeption in the long,
medium anc short weves and ray de tured ir on ultra—ahort wave FY
broadceating stations operating in the 64.5-7} megacyole band. The
built-in revolving eeriel icproves the quality of the reception.
