Refutation of Communist Charges in Connection with the Rosenberg Case
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000014713, dated 5 January 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000014713).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ae

.

ae tog ace ares ehal f

---) J is . ; “ : .
; ae f 4 : ( 50 January 1953 /

Ree AML rOR: CHIETS, ALL AMEAS AND DIVISTCHS

4 “ J
SIP 7CTs Pefotattion of Cevreaint Charees in coandetion with
= the Reaovoerg cease,

* ‘
‘
‘

i Atteched hereto is Saige material suileble for use by field

etetions {n arces where it is necessary to counter yro-Rosenberg propa-
ganfga. It constitutes a conesse end factual revicw of the Rosenberg
eese fren its teginning up to the time of appeal for executive elenency.

?. The material ig divided ‘into eeyen sections.

i
ea. Government's caec. :
b. Defendente! case.
ce, Government's Mevuttal.
@. Cenduct of the Trial, : :
. ’ re %
e, Verdict. '

g. The Rosenterg Case and the Cosmunist Porty.

*

coch es Ccouvnist-inepired agitstion in regard to the

3. Inascre
Rosenbere3 will doubtless contimme over e long perio? of time regerd-
lesa of t=. cutcore oF their epptel for clemency, it is believed that
this rateriel will prove of continuing value to the field staticns.

ne

Come ca hp

oe Ngpemngp,§

tre}

Distribution:

security Informatien

‘ a ; . 3
e : - x age ; ; a
é ‘ ef . Fi *

” ‘
. 7 . 7
“~ * 7 a a

* =" a 4

ote
‘3 ‘ C d . !
; .

* *

TAGAT, LISTORY

ee ae =, .
ry

Julius and FEthel Rosenberg were indicted Jonuary 31, 1952,
charged with conspiring betwoen 1944 and 1950 to commit espionnice,.
With then the Crané Jury indicted David Gréengiass, Anatoli Yakovicv
&@ Viee-Consul in the Soviet Consulate at New York, and Morton Sobel]

Creenglass pleaded guilty before the trial started, Yakovlev
Yled the country in 1946 but is still under indictment, Should he
return to Ancrica, he would have“ to stand trial, @

Tne trial of the two Rosenbergs and Sobell began on March 6,
1951. .They were conviated on March 29, 1951. ‘They were sentensnd
on Azril 5, 1951, the Resonbergs to ‘death by execution, Sotell to
30 yenrs in jail. a:

from April 5 to date, the verdict and the sentence have been
aled several times te the Cirevit Court of A-ceals and to the
ene Court.. Oa February 25, 1952, the US Court of A»peals con-
firzed the lower court's decision and sentence, The Suoreme
Court of the United States refused to review the Court of Avneals!
Gecision, The Rosenbergs and Sobell then moved in the District
Court to set aside.the jury's verdict, Tris motion’was denied,
ane Rosenbergs and Sobell have appealed this denial, and this ap-
peal. is to te ereued again in the Circuit Court of Av:peals in 4°
srecial session Dec._28, This decision can also be appealed to
: the Suprere Court of the United States, Tne Kosentergs end Sotell
* efter that will be able to ask the District Court for a reduction
_ OF sentence. No apreal is possidle from the decision on that re-
usst, end their final recourse will be an application to the
rresident for executive Clemencye ae
= . a -
After the Rosenbergs and Sobell were convicted and sentenced,
Greengless was sentenced to serve 15 years in jail. Ti-o-persons ;
were nered in the original indictment as co-conspirators, but not
defendants. They were Harry Gold, who pleaded guilty to a ‘separate
charsze of espionage in Philadelphia end was sentenced to 30 years
in prison, and Ruth Greengiass, the wife of Devid, ;

~~

et

moe - ORT tee Cane mee ON cy omen RE eee ee ene we we Te oe em a ee oe ee ow
s . i Pa fs

Seti wee By,

sigh POE pO  , 1 gt

. phos C. Ph: Past a ee nN ing 5 CASE

Te. ne first government witness vas Max litcher, a
graduato electrical cngineer, Elitcher testified that he
a‘renber of the Communist party in Washington, thet he head
joined through the efforts of Sobe]l and that as chairmon of
Blitcher's Communist party Group, Scobe)] instructed members bo
support cecntinuaily the cause of Soviet Nucsias Flitehcr aso
testified that in 1944 Ros SENVEYE | asked him to procure classificd
information about wilitary cguipssent from the Navy's bureau, of
Ordnance where Elitcher worked. Elitcher said Rosenberg toid
him Sobell was anong those who were giving De military inforna-

tion for transmission to Russia, Blitoher 4 stifsed that toth
Sobell and Resenberg repeatedly asked hin fur the names of cn-
Bincers "who Were progrcssive, who La be mare To mepecach on

this question of espionage, oY gciting rateriel."

&. The second gevernnment witness vas David Gre sengless, en

“army machinist, who worked on the atomie borb development ab: Ozk

Ridge, Tcanessee, and Los Alomosy New Mcxico, @uring the war.

Greenglass Pestified he first learned that what he was working on

was part of the atomic bomb project when his wife visited pee in

November 1944, and tola him that Rosenberg had said Greengle

was working on the bomb, During this visit from his wife, re
&lass tes bifica she told hin Rosenberg wanted him to procure and

felis jer to hima list of scientists working en ctenle resenrehy,

descriptions of cxpérironts conducted in .tho atonit latera tory, ‘
ketches of materials that etomic scientists aslci him to ccns-

truct. , Greenglacs testified his wife said Rosenberg also wented

"the “general lay-out of the Los Alosos atomic project, the tuild-

ings, cancuflage, number of people,” Grocnsless Lostaticd ke J. :

gave his wife ‘the information for which R SEnvens ae OS Oi igiac Pe ee,

*

Ir tam nuary 194>, Greenglass came to New York on leave, He

testified Rosenberg cane to him one morning and asked for infor-
mation, "specifically anything of value on the atogwic bomb", and

said he would return later that night. In-answer to this request
Greenglass testified he gave’Rosenberg sketches and descriptions P

of high-explosive lens molds, and how they were used in etonic
experiments, plus a list of "sore possible recruits for Soviet
espionase",

A icv days later Greenglass testified he went to Roscnberg's
home for dinner and was introduced py Rosenberg to a Woman named
Ann Sidorovich. Greenglass testified Rosenberg asxed him to re-
ember her face because "Julius said this is the woman who he ©
thinks wpuld oome out to sse us at Albuquerque - (where Mrs, Green-
glass lived, near Los Alamos) to receive information from myself
on the atomic bomb," Greenglass testified Rosenberg that night -
also eStadlished an alternate means of: identification between
Greonglass and ges hee representative in case Ann Sidorovich
was unable to travel’, This“alternate mcans of identification, —....... -
Grcenglass testified, consisted of.tne side of a box of Jello, a :
preparod dessert made of gelatine powder.  Grcenglass testified -
that Rosenberg cut a V-shaped section out of the side of this
Jello box, gave onc side to Ruth Greenglass and kept one side for
hinself, : _ -

-

A few ‘nights later, Greenglass testified, Rosenberg arove him
to a plece on ist Avenuc to a rendezvous with @ "Russian" who .
asked about high cxplosive lcnses; the formula of the curve on '
the lens, the high-explosive uscd, and the means of detonation,

Phe Reyer LP

Sr att aera

NARI

Tet COVEENE 2NE!S CASE

~~ oe

re.

In func of 1945, back in Los Alanns, Crcenglass tostiried,
Se received a visit from a man who pald to hin- "Julius sent Le"
and then produccd one part of the Jello box which Greenglass had

“Jast secon in Rosenberg's possession, .Greenglass testificd that
Jbe_Jearncd ecubcoqucntly this man was Harry Gold, who has pleaded

coilty to cspionage. Greenglass tos tified he gave Gold skctchcs
of now Jens molds, how they wore wscd in experiments and descript~
jons of these cxperinents,. Creengluss tostificd Gold gavo him

,o00 in return. .

Sogtombor 1045, @rcenglass again went to Nev York on fur-

Vnueh. Cn thi: Reo To) Grconglass testificd he wsve to Ror nborg
Wa pretty socd deseription of the atom tomb". Gare oN ass testi
- icd he wes able to produce this dcscription beysuce, in the couse

f his work at Los Alamos "JT came in contact with various people
ere worked on different parts of ie project, and also’ I! worked
a@irecsly on curtain apparatus that vont in to ths bomb, and J ane
yoople who talked of the bombs ana how they worked", Greenglas
testificd that his description involved the principles, not pres
ne asurerents, except for the specific lens melds and other parts
nich he hisself manufactured, Grcengless testified he gave Rosen-."
be sye.o12 psess of written material, including the sketch of the bomb
ena a Coser iption of the sketch. Greenslass testified Resenterg .
Eeve him 200 on this occesion. On this scice night, Greengless
testified, Roscnbcrg told nim thet he bed “stolen the proximity Tuse

when he wes working at 4mcrcson Kedio ". Senor said that Mra,

ces

2

“te
Pe

ee typed up his original notcs at this meeting, and these
hotes were then "taken and burned in the frying ran and then flushed

dovm eke drain" by Rosenberg. Boe

Creenglass testified he was honorably discharged from the
Arry at Los Alanos February'1946, and returned to New York. Soon
age Peete ers Seat re Or teres "to have the Russians:

A fcow days efter Dr. Klaus Fuchs was arrested in England,
Greenglass testificd, Rosenberg cane to Greengtass end told his
that Fuchs was elso a contact of harry Gold. Greenglass said
Hosenberg told him Geld would soon be arrested, and Gold's érrcst

might implicate Greenglass. Rosenberg» als6t saad he was known to

Elizabeth Bentley by name, and he was fearful she might implicate

hin, Grecnglass testified. Rosenberg then _said Greengless would
have to leave the country and gave Greenglass $1000 with instruct=.
ions to contact the secretery of the Ambassador of the Soviet Union
in texicd City under the alias "I, Jackson". These instructions
also entailed contacting the secretaries of the Ambassador.of the
Soviet Union in Stockholm ~--undor—the-statue-of-Lincus, Greenglass
testified - and the Aubaseddor of ‘the Sovict Union in Czechoslovakia
Greengless testified he had passport picturcs made and gave five *
sets to Rosenbergs Greenglass said Rosenberg then gave them on ad-.
a@iticnal $4000, wrappcd in heavy brown paper. He said he. gave this
pockeeer to his brother- ~in-law,, Louis Abel.

"a Wiliva (Eee nic eh ae Reema eka he LIn tenn’ & Wactt o

ee ne a
i f

he Jesrmed subsequently - this man was Harry Gold, vho has plesded
geilly to cspionane. Grecnglass testificd he gave Gold skctchcs
of nc lens molds, how they wore wsecd in experiments and des cript-
jons of these cxperiments. Greenglass testificd Gold gave hin

S500 in return. .

Tr Bote 1945, Greongelass again went to tsv Tork on Ture |
Jnuch.e: Ca this aoe, Greanglas 3S teatified he 370 " Nore nburg

*"q pretty sosd Geserdipiion of the atom bend" Gnome Wss tecti-

ficd he wes able to Lae this a@cserinpiion bent se. in ‘the CULO

of his work at Los Alamos "TI came in contact “with various people

who worked on different parts of the project, end also: I worked
_ Gircesly. on certain appa rats that wont in to ths bomb, and T met

people who talked of the bombs and how they. workca"s Grcenglass

testificd that his description involved the principles, not precise . :
reasurenents, except for the specific lens melds end other parts . .
yvnich he himself manufactured, nee testified he gave Rosen-.—" : ;
berg 12 passs of written material, including the sketch of the bomb
end a ¢eseription of the skctch. Greenslass testified Rocenterg .
geve him F200 on this occasion. On this seme night, Greenglass .
testified, Roscnberg told nin thet he hed ‘stolen the proximity fuse
when he wes working at 4mcrson Redio ". ec said that Mra,
Rosenbsrg typed up his original notes «et this mseting, and these
fotes were then "Vaken and burned in the feeiae ran and then flushed ;
dovm the drain" by Rosenberge——---—-- Be ae oy

a ae

ib ae

Creenglass testified he was honorably discharged from the
Arry at Los Alenos February’1946, and noe ees to New York. Soon
efter, Greenglass testificd,’ Rosenberg offered “to have the Russians:
pey for pert of ny schooling, that I should go to Collese far the -
purpose of cultivating the friendships of people I had known at Los
Alanos and also to acquire new friendships with people who were j
the fiela of research, like physics ena nuclear energy." .

oc

¥

wae py eter gh :

I A few deys after Dr. Klaus Fuchs was arrestee in Englend, p
' Greenglass testificd, Rosenberg cane to Greenglass and told him
that Fuchs was also a contact of Harry Gold.. Greenglass said
Hope here told him Geld would soon be arrested, and Gold's arrest
ht implicate Greenglass,.. Rosenberg als6-said-he was known to.
“Elizabeth Bentley by namc,.and he was fearful she might implicate
hin, Grecnglass testified, Rosenberg then said Greenglass would
have to leava the country end gave Greenglass $1000 with instruct-—-..—-—]...-
ions to contact the seordtery of the ‘Ambassador of the Soviet Union
in Hexicod City undcr the alias "I, Jackson".: These instructions
also entailed contacting the secretaries of the Ambassador of the
Soviet Union in Stockholm} under the Statue of Lincus, Greenglass ~~
testified ~ and the Ambassador of ‘the Sovict Union in Cceehoslovakia,
Greengless testified he had passport: picturcs made and gave five - 1.
sets to Rosenbergs Greenglass said Rosenberg then gave them on ad--.--—-~ |—---
ditional $4000, wrappcd in heavy brown paper. Ee said he. gave this
package to his brother-in-law, Lovis Abel.

3, The third government witness wes Dr, Walter S. Koski, a |. --
professor of physical chemistry at John Hopkins University and a '
consultant in the Brookhaven Netional Laboratories specializing in.
nuclear chemistry, Di. Hooke testified that he wes engaged in ~

ee fe en - Oe en me ee re Ne

a eee es — an * = * -
Z Z c wei a
A che eg ce ne RE oe eS ( -
'

a ot 1 7 «
. WT CUVTENIGTENS O°3E
|
'
i
{
é
|
;

A

erie NR ge cys se ; Recta «
; on jae

3 ae aa Saye eee + . *

atomic seul ‘at Los Alenos during tho war, that he specializcd
in *inmlosion research" using high explosive lenses. , He said he
adcsigncd molds for these lenses and tock them to the machine shop,
where Greergelass worked, to be hanufactureds ” Dr. Koski testified
that Greenglasst sketeh w Peprenonting a copy of whet Grecnglass
said he gave to his wife for Nusenberg and later Lo Rosenberg Hin-
sclf - wus."a reasonably accurate replica® of his‘own design, He
~~  * ““fdentificd enother Greeng).ass sketch "as a sk cetch, a rovegh sketch
of our cxperimcntal set-up for studying cylinérical inplosion",
Dr, Keski testificd thet cylhi card cal feolosion VAS an cntirely new
ficld of rcctarch. \

The . information jnvolyed in this Greenelesss sketeh wag decla
. sified by the Atomic Encrgy Committee cspecially for sthe . iial,. as
and re-classified immcdiately after the trial. e
4, ‘the rourth governmecnt witness was Ruth Greenglass. Sve r

testificd that Julius Resenberg had told hee thet nis "friends

P had told him David was working on the atomic torb in Los Alanos,

= and "thet he felt the information should be shared with Rissia,

that he wanted me to tell David to give inforration to him to be

passed on to the Russians", Tins. Greenglass testified Nocenberg

, asked for a phySical description of the “Los Alecos POsC ery the i

nocber of people employed, tne nakes of sore cf the scientists |

there, whether the plece vas ewsourleged, what the security rcas~

urés were, and the Gistance of the project to Albucucrane and |

Senta Fe. She testificd Foscnberg give ker YlbO for travel ex- ;

penses to seo her husband. She testified she gave her husband ,

Rosenberg's message, and'seig her husband gave her infornstion

Rosenberg had-‘requested. She said she returned to New York in :

Decerbder 1944, wrote down the information her husband had given

her, end gave this information to Rosenberg. - |
|
!
'
|

2 “rs. Greenglass testified that her husband returned to New
=e York in Jenuary 1945, when Rosenberg cane to their house and re-
. ecived written information from her husband, . She’ testified that
a few nights later they went to the Rosenbergs and met Ann
Sidorovich. She testified ebout the Jello box and said that
Rosenberg gave her one of the two portions

Ta February 1945, Ivs. Greenslass testificd, Rosenberg cane
to see her one night when her sister, Dorothy Avel, was present.
She testified that aftcr a few mimates of conversation, Rosenberg
asked Dorothy Abcl "to take a book and go into the bathroom because
he had something private to discuss,"

In June 1945, in Albuqueroue, she testificd Harry Gold cane to
’ their apartment nad identified fina by producing his-helf of
—.. ....the Jello box-side, She testificd Gold asked her husband for the:
--.. .»* 4nformation end that this information was given to Gold later in
the afterndon, She tcstificd Gold gavo her husband 7500.

Cha bnetiPind ints eK Gantambar 1046. thay ro tornca ta Now

a A St ER ee ep a ml a

“e
=

QE SGML MUSUD LUE UW ALERO YO GM YUU Wd EY rb anawan a aane evreane peg
where G.cerg ass wore? lo be manufactured.’ Br. Koski testified
that G@roenslass' sketch - representing a copy of what Greenclass
said ke guva to his wife for Nesenterg and letcr to Rosenberg Ain-
self - was."a reasonably accurate replica" of his‘own design, He
identificd enother Greenglass sketch Yas a sketch, a rough skctch
of our ¢xperinmental set-up for studying eylinarical implosion",
Dr, Neski testificd that cylind rical feploustonr vas an cntirely new
rictd of rectaren. c

sformation involved in this Geeonglass
s Atomic Tncergy Committee cspcecially for ;the .trial,
ifica imncdiately after the trial, i, :
4, ‘the fourth government witness was Ruth Greenglass. She
testificd that TJulins Rescnberg had told her thet nis “WPrjiends®
hed told him David was working on the atomic borb in Los Alaris,
and “that he felt the information should be shared with Russia,
that he vanted me to tell David to give information to hin to be
passed on t6 the Rassians", fies, Greenglass testificd Rosenberg
asked for a physical description of the Los &lcrcos pe scely the
nusber of people employed, the names of sore of the scientists
there, whether the plece was exmouflezgcd, what the security lmcas-
urss were, and the aisteance of he prejcet to Albucuergque and
Santa Fe. Shre testificd Posenberg geve her $1b0 for travel ex-
penses to seo her husband. She testificd she geve her hu sband
Rosenberg's message, end’ seid her husband gave her information
Rosenberg had-requested. She said she returned to New York in
Decerber 1944, wrote down the information her husbend had given
her, end gave this information to Rosenbderg.

‘Mrs. Greenglass testified that ber husband returned to. New
York in Jenuary 1945, when Rosenberg came to their house and re- —
ecived written information from her husband, She testified that
a fev nichts later they went to the Rosenbergs and met Ann
Sidorovich. Ske testified about the Jcllo box and said that:
Rosenberg gave her one of the two portions.——

fa February 1945, Iivs. Greenslass testificd, Rosenberg came
to see her one night when her sister, Dorothy Abel, was present.
She testified that eftcor a few minutes of conversation, Rosenberg
asked Dorothy Abel "to_take_a book and go into the bathroom becauso
he had something private to discuss,"

In June 1945, in Albuqueraoue, she testificd Harry Gold cance to
their apartment and identified himself by producing his-helf of
the Jello box side, She testified Gold esked ker husband for the’
information end that this information was giveh to Gola ater in

the afternbdon. She tcstificd Gold gavo her husband 1500. be eee

She ‘tostifica that: in September 1945, they returned to Now
York, and that her husband eave Rosenberg Hore infornation in tho
Rosenberg apartment, —9 9.

Aftcr her husbena's: discharge fron, tho ‘Arty, sho. tcstitica,

Bey wag dcclas-

they visited the Roscnborg3s apartmcnt from tine to tinc.~ “In that -
apartment, sho said, me Roscnodcrgs:- showed hor a mahogany consolo

a pO aan ANRC gtr te

80 Ceo 5 AO LPR Mf) EO

Vik GOVERNESS CASE

a a a eee

hn +

table which Roscnborg said was "a very nice gift from his friend,
-a. special kind of table holloved ont, for a lamp to fit underncath
it co that the table could bo uscd for photograph purposcs." She
testificd Ros enberg told hex "he took picturcs on microfilm of
een novess™ . P
Irs. Greenslass testificd that in Mey 1950 Rosenberg told
her and her husband that they would have to lcave the country,
thet they should f° to the Sovict Union. She testificda Rosmibereg
eave her Jaeband (1000, Sic testificd they hed recspoet pietores
taten end that they Give copies to Rocanherg’s Fe peas ae a ee a
v6 her husbend {000 dn Jura TahO, phe saiid ee told
her he elso inte ted to lnuve the countey and would pict the.
Groeinglasecs in Nexicoe j ‘
«. “The Firth cea nnent witness was Dorothy Abel, the sister
Lh Se .Sre testified that Julius and Ethel Ruscabterg
ld her that ey thought. Rus sia was the idcal form of govern-
rent” end that she had similar conversations with thes whenever
they met. Dorothy Abel corroborated the testimeny of Ruth Green-
glacs when she testified that in carly 1945 Julius Rosenberg once
esred her "to take a book and leave the roon, becunse he wanted
to speuk to Ruth Greenslcss privately",

He teste

6, The sixth governacnt witness was Louis Avel,
; aekoge in beown

ificd that Dav fae Greenglass éid give hin a wien p

Po

paper for sefekce come USe

ra
2

The seventh governzent witness was Harry Gold, who test=

vars
fied that he hed pleeade ead guilty in July, 1950, in Philedelphia
her

chergse of espionage, and had been sentenced to 30 years in

. Gold testified he knew Anatoli Yakovlev in connection
Wits “sy espionage work for the Soviet Union"... He testified he
had teen engaged in this work from 1935 until the time of his
arrest. Gold testified he met regularly with Dr. Klaus Fuchs, .
wrote reports of his conversations with Fuchs an@ turned these
reports over to Yekovlev, Gold testified his espionaze duties
were "to odtain information from a number of sources in Ancrica
end te transfer this information Po Yakovlev." Hse testificd he
met with bis source of information after making contact by neans
of set recognition signals which always involved a code phrase,
plus two parts of sone object or picce of paper. He testified
he paid some of the people he contacted regular ty with money
given to him by Yakovlev.

tS oct bs
$3 ° .
by ta $b

Da ch fre
QO

_ Wsen Fuchs was stationcd at Los Alanos, Gold testificd,
Yakovicv told him to go to Albuquerquc.——He- said Yakovlev-also
gave him a shcct of paper on which was typed the word "Greenglass",
then a number "High Street", then "Albuquerque, Naw Mexico” and -
then "Recognition signal, I come fron Julius", Gold testified

Wyekovlev gave ns @ piece of carbvard which appeared to have been
cut from a package of food of sone sort. It was cut in an oda
shape and Yekovlev told me that the man Greenglass, would have the
natching piece of cardboard, Yakovlev told me. just in case tho

aes a Roe eS Se ee a Re oa Soe BM Wes cee

THE COV IIVELINS CAS

See

Gold testificd he went to Albuquerque, contacted Greeng lass,
produced his fart of the Jello box side, end matched it with tho °
one Grceensliss hed, Ho said Greenglass told hin’to return later
in the affesnecna. Uren he did relurn, Cold said, Creenglass gave’
hin "(se gestivtal on the atenm berb" and he gave Gicenglass the’
civelepe contatsing $500 whieh Yakovlev hud giver hin, Gold teste
ificd he alco received documents from Fechs on this visit and
returned to New York’with tvo envelopes, one merked "Doctor" and
one, from Grcensless, marked "Other". Ho testified he gave both
envelopes to Yihoevicv back In Niw Yerk. Yuo oe

ea

¥
nt

fr » « ‘
5 aber y LC ren
t
«

L » Ee
IPicd,, “Sohoy les Sold He ie atest elias Aen Died git a
SESE AMO VES TE wus Na Tee: SO. Ta er ey pe Ce ot:
Uaton". Fe said that the Gufouoition which T aiecaived from Grceen-
gless was "cxtrenely excellent @:d very valuable," Gold testified |
Fachs subscenchily gave hin information atout the first atofic ex-
plosion at Alomczorie, Nai Mexico, and Gold said he gave this

information to Yexuvlev.

ig: » George Bernherdt,
cat in May 1°50, Rosenberg esked hin what injections
E0 to Mexico. :

Fe testifi

8, th
ié
were meeded +

9, Tho ninth government witness wes William Danziger... He
testificd he visited the home of Goocll in June 1950, Ee ‘said
that Sobell naé told hin he was going to Mexico City, and that he
sew suitensass piled into Sobell's car. He testified he received
mail frou Soteii in Fexico under these aliases esking hin
to give his adézess to various reople in New York. :

nth governfent witness was Candler Cobb, the
ctive Service in New York City. He. identified
re

‘Sotell's signature on various Sclective Scrvice docunents

of all resserch, ano

le. -Tho twelfth government witness wes John A. Doiry, &@
member of the Atenic Exergy Cecvidsesion, who during the war served
as tho Liaison Officer betveen the Les Alznos atomic energy labo-
ratories «in Now Mexico and ‘eneral Groves, who was in-charge of
ell U.S. ctouic research, in Washin jton.

; During Derrr's testinony, at the suggestion of lawyers ror
the Rosenbergs, #ll spectators were cleared fron the courtroone

{he stenographic record of Derry's testicony which dealt with the

atomic bonb, was sealed and impounded by the Court.
Derry vas read Greengless' testinony concerning the sketch

he pede of the atonic bonb and wes soown a ‘copy of this sketch.
ate ee we lm kek Ot Oe hth Ot fmernnwiavnel tactinanyv Aaerinngke

~ Puehs subsces

in the offecneos, Wren he did return, Gola said, Grcenglass gave
hin Vise geleetal on the atem bomb" and he gave Gicenglass the-
cavelepe contistsing 8500 which Yakovlev had give hin. Gold tost-
ificd he alco received docuncnts from Fachs on thia visit and
returned to New York'with tvo envelopes, one nerked "Doctor" and
ore, from Greensless, marked "Other". Ho tesiificd he gave both
envelopes to Yitioviuev back in Niw YourR. vo vecks Inter, he ft: ot
iticed, “Sehoytley bold ge tise aes yoeabden whe D2 ped es for ita
EEO Vier S Veevious Wel Powe Soak ee Oley Lorie fale
Union", Me sata that the dufercitdon which I rcocived from Ceeen-

Blass was "extrenely escellent ard very valuebdle," Gold testified |

wently seve hing information avout the first atotic ex-
plosion at Alovigerfo, Nui Mexico, and Gold said he gave this
information to Yexovlev.e oo

8, The eighth governrent witness wes Dr. George Bernhardt.
He testified that in May 1950, Rosenberg esked hin what injections
were needcd to £0 to Mexico, ,

9, Whe ninth government witness wes Willian Danzicer.. He
testificd hs visitcd the home of Gobocll in dune 1950, He ‘said
that Sobell ned told him he was going to lcxico City, and that he
sew suitensss pilsd into Sobell's car. He testified he received
rail frou Sote:l in Mexico under three aliases eéesking hia
to give his addiess to varicus people in New Yorke :

The tenth governfent witness was Candler Cobb, the
ctor of Selective Service in New York City. He. identified
ignature on various Sclective Sersice documents

ll. The eleventh governnent Witness was John Lansdale jre,.
who Guring the wer was responsible for all phases of the security
of the atom bont project under General Groves, Ec explained
security procedures at Los Alanos and testified to the secrécy.
of all research. : .

12. .Tho twelfth governnent- witness wes John A. Doiry, &

nember of the Atccic Energy _Coviussion, who during the war served

as the Liaison Officer betveen the Les Alamos atomic energy labo~
ratories in New Mcxico and eneral Groves, who was in-charge of
ell U.S. ctouic research, in Vashin ;ton. —

; Dvring Derrv's testinony, ‘at the suggestion of lawyers ror
the Rosenbergs, @ll spectators were cleared fron the courtroone |
The stenographic record of Derry's—testinony which dealt with the

atonic bond, was sealed ang impounded by the Courts

Derry vas read Greengless' testinony concerning the sketch-
he made of the atonic borib and wes shown a copy of this sketch.
Derry testified that the sketch and Greenzlass' testinony denons-
trated "substantially and with substantial aocuracy the principle
Snvolved in the operation of the 1945 atonic bond".

; : ;

Derry testified that from the sketch end fron Greenglass*

testimony a scientist covld “perceive toa substantial degree
what the actual construction ef the bord was".

+

ned

sient Mula

t

in a NBR ROSE A: AMON eg

Cover VeNE'S

C58

ros)
tee
Volt
7)

amen,

6 :

. * «

Derry Was asxed "Nocs' this information that hes been read
to you, together with the sketch, concern & type of atonic pond
whieh vias actually used by the United Statcs of America?” Derry
yeplied Lt dors zt is the bob we dropped at Nognsakl, sjnilar
vo. 2,

13. Tho thirteenth governnent witness wes Manuel Giner de
Los Rios, Who testified through an interpreter that he net Sobell
in Levico City in July, 1949+ . jie grid “Soball asked hin how at
nasibte bo lave the ecuntry without having popers Jn pone
te seid Suball told hin he wes ofsrid to wien Lo the
fticd States boosuse he thonght pilitary politics vere looking Cor
hin end he ~suld have to go into the Acuye Pics testified that
thure ceré a tins when Sobell left Mexico City to 69 fo Vora Cruz.

re

Je ew OD

Seis Ee
a

14. Tre fourteenth government witness WSs Minerva Bravo
Espinosa, an exployce of a Mexico City oculist. She testified -.

through an-.interpreter that Sobell purchased a pair of glasses
under the alias, Sande. ea

ase Broccado
-4 the hotel regis-
ttorney stipvleted

15,° The Pirtces
rell, a vera Uru
€

m4
rs
a)

.

normed Sand, and Sobell

16, ‘the sixtcenth governucnt wihncss was pora Bautista.
She testified that in July, 1950, Scdvell registered in her hotel,

under the. alias, Salt.

17. The seventeenvh governnent witness was Glenn Dennis,
a Vexican airline officials. He testified Sobell flew in his
company's plane fron Vera Criz to Tanpico, and from Tappico to
Yexico City, under the alias Solt.

18, ‘The eighteenth governnent witness Ves Lan Adonian,
forner employee of the Antorg Trading Corporation, the Soviet
pned purchasing conpany .in New York» He identified Yekoviev
es a Viee-Consul in the Soviet Consulate in hev York from 1944
until 19466 bot

Governrent end acfense attorneys stipulated that Ra Be.
Valklett, en officiel of the Unitea States Lines, had.in his pos-
session docursnts which proved .that Yakovlev, his wife, and two’

_ ehildren, sailed fron the United States for Frence, Detenter 27,
49460 °° °¢=—CO Se oe

---79, The nineteenth governnent witness wes Elizabeth Bentley,

_en admitted former Connunist courier. Sho testified that fron her
-experienca aS B neover, the Connunist perty in Averica "only.

ra

serve the interests of Moscow, whether propaganda, espionage Or .
TVG ee on, enetdifeind that while she was working as 4 Conaunist

Lek ee aA ek ‘anticd

eine, eh an RE LC

|
:
|
7
|

vu yusey wer ttt
whieh was actually used by the United StLAtcs Ul Anwr sees ees
yeplied “1b docs. TH is the bomb wa dropped at Nosgnasaki, sinilar
10 it." ; _
|

/13. Tho thirteenth government witness Wes Manuel Giner Ge
Los Rios, Wno testified through an interpreter that he net Sobdell
jn Meriea Gity in duly, 1SL0, .He srid GobedL anked hin how it
mp ungeible to Voge the eciiay W et aes Te? In goo
pedeny Meet SoselL told din he we3 afesid to vetuin bo the
eeaop he thonght oilitacy polices yers looking Por
wave Lo go into the Avuye fics tustiricd that
when Sobell Jert Mexico City to Go to Vora Cruz.

hio end he

ee eee 14, Tre fourteenth governnent witness was Minerva Bravo
-Espinose, an Ghployee of a Mexico City oculist. She testified .
through an.interpceter that Sebell purchased a pair of glasses
under the elias, Sande , 7°
15,° The fiftecnth governncny Vo Tose Broccado
endrell, a Vera Cru2 hotel ovner. H t,
vation card of a men norea Sand, and Sobell
hat this was Sobell's signature, |
i
j
4
|

16, The sixtcenth govermicnt wihncss was pora Bautista.
She testified that in Jul 1950, Sobel] ré istercd in her hotel,
: > 2. )
under the.alias, Selt. ; :

17. The seventeenrh government witness was Glenn Dennis,
a Mexican airline officials He testified Sovell flew in his
company's plene fron Vera Criz to Tampico, end from Tanpico to
Yexico City, under the alias Solte——.. Pc ee

18. The eighteenth governnent witness was Tan Adopian,
forner enployee of the Antorg Trading Corporation, the Soviet
owned purchasing conpany in New York. He Fdantiricd Yekovlev Be PN
es a Vice-Consul in tne Soviet Consulate in hew York from 1944
until 19466 pee

Governrent end acfense attorneys stipulated that Re Be.

}

Walklett, en official of the United States Lines, had.in his pos- |
|

|

session docurnents which proved that Yakovlev, his wife, and two’)
children, sailed fron the United- States for France, Deésnbver ety
1946.6 aT :

19, The nineteenth governnont witness Wes Elizabeth Bentley,
_en adnitted Porner Gonnunist courier. Sho testified that fron her- stats
experienca as a nenber, the Conmunist party_in“Anerdca Yonly 2

serve the intercsts of Moscow, whether propaganda, espionage or.
sabotage", — She testified. that whilo she was yorking as & Connunist
courier in 1945 she received telephone calls fron a person callcd
Julius who, she later Jearned, lived in Knickerbocker Village, |

where, in fact, Rosenberg aid jive. However, in hér testinony she
could not identify Rosenberg positively as the "Julius" sho talked ~~~

tO

20, The twentieth governnent witness was Janos 8, Huggins,

~~, : 1

: F F :
* pro | aati eee ne wae ey edie wee fee meme 2 ene me ee - te ge rt ties wk ee woe
* fess @ aC ‘ . \
< ~~ et ‘ : i
*
. sv ‘ °
. ; ( ‘
eed $0 tn

PUN CGOPMIISTPIS CASS
es eee eS ee : was

o!
en jnnigration inspector from tho Innigration and Naturalization:
Services ‘He tdstified that Sobol] was dcportsd by the Eexican
Becurity Police in August, 1950

Shee hn ity ae
.

ety PAS a+

PN I

Saws enero et

ye eg

é

Sy A RIN CEPI OH SEE Se

Fa a rr as tone re oer me tee eee
' fe ‘ .

WHE PEPENDANTS © CASE

l, The first defense witness wes Julius Poscnbergs ‘te
Cenied cetegorically every statencnt by ony povernnent
witness who tied him to espionage, He specifically denicd
that he planned to flee the country and had passport
yhotosrayh.s taken of himself, his wife end his childrens
lo speed fic: ally denied that tue Ro sstans ave hin the

sacih: onny Con sole table deBeribed by Ruth Groce nf lass ond

seid thet he had purchased this table from Macy's departe

Ment stores ‘ie testified that he knew Ann SidorOvich ‘but |

cenied he hed ever presented her to the Srcenglass!' as

a Cone t SONG He téstafied that Ruth Eyrunglas

Lola htm th. her Imabead Piytd S)o 6g an ddea to yche aene
7 } ¥

Piuiey a an peet? thie ls Paqna tke Arty" ae RB ey
he told hee “warn David not ta do cay Ling Toolishs
Rosenberg testified that "Lhe artily approve the systen
of justice as performed in this country, AneYo-Saxon
jurispudcess “Ce am in favor, heartily in favcr of our .
Constitution ‘and Byi1 of Rignts and T owe allegience to
my country at all tines," a

ba
fy
u

. Under crosszexaninatic on, Rosenberg repeated every: “denials
When he ves eshed if he were a meareer of the Communist party, -
clatred hes Bonstiputional “spivilese against self--inerinl-

nation and vcfused to ansve re

2_ The sevond, dcferse witness. was Jotn Gibbons, an

enployce of the New York Herald T,itune who was subposneed

by the Rocenbers 33, Gibbons was on the stand less than cise
minute, sicply pro ducing for Rosenberg's lawyer a picture °*
of -Harry Gola which éppeared ‘in the Herald. Tribune: in- Nay,
1950. Rosenberg’s attomey. then. offered the photograph in’
evidence end asked the jury to compare. that’ photograph with
one 2iready introduced.in evidence “by “the government»

3, The third defense witvess wes. Thomas V,- Kelly): én
employee of Hacy s department. store, who was, also: subpoenaed

“by the defense, He testified he had been’ unable to locate

ény record of: e sale to the Rosenberés of a | mahogany console
table, Since company. records for the ycars~ involved had been
destroyed,

has The fourth and lest defense witness wes Ethel Rosen-
berg: She corroborated ner “husband's: testimony) repeating
nis categoric.denial of'every covernment. witness who linked ©
the defendants’ to espionage.s, 5he also’ refused to answer .
questions about Communist party effiliation:on the. grounds:
- that. her answer might ten@ to incriminate her,

a

woe

I ECU EDI

Saye ne een ate

es AAD MER SER HY PONT PR Ee. SASS,
’

tee e <3 he Aa eR. Ee ee SR Se ee re ee eae ee Se See a Soe res eee Se

.

* 7 a *
‘ 7 +m,
, *
' «
(= RR COVERS HET 'S, BRAMITAL

*

1, The firse government rebuttal witness, and the

twenty-first governzent witness, was Mrsve"9lyn Cox. She

testified that she worked pert-tine es a maid for the

Rosenbergs in kh end 1945. She testifica Brso Rosenberg

told her thet. they hed recoiyved the. ahocany console
teble asa pitt fron a “friend” of Foscuburge

; 2. The second government rebuttal. witness, and the
twenty-second government witness, wos Holen Papono, a
secretary in the-law firm of the attcimey woo gasoee onbed
Mogid pein nds, She tesla 12. & in ly sa VOLO, sivas
ALel browht a peckoye of renuy Woapyo ata hoavy wre sa
peper to the lawyer's of fice. ,

2:
¢

Bes Pm re
twenty-third
potograupher cializing in passport and identificetion
phetcsraphse He testified that Julius and Ethel Rosenberg
znd their two children visited his studios in the spring
of 1950 and ordered three dozen passport-sized photographs.
Schneider testified Rosenberg told him that hits wife hed
teen left some property ond thet they were going Lo Prence
to teke care of it» :

Lo : - too
ast povernment rcebutcal witness, ond: the
. a a

evernment witness, was Pen Schneider, a
pe

}
S
Ss
H

aa nee -eegimaersnienerergnte tne Somme mime aA RE TL

CR aR OnE RTA SH

zs

oo

fag og SREY EC NE NR A, SI

yrs CMe OL Pas THTAL
= ee ee emt ee Pee Tem arene

oe ne ee ee ah
rend Ut : :
te eee

In Avcrica, a Federal judge is GSI
Within any individual federal court systen, the chief
charged by Jaw to assign cases to judges. As a general

pote, dudges rotnte from ene covrh to another, toying erining?)
eons noe santh, olvi]l cases another ponth, presiding in VMolicns

Roeph anobsep mouth, sitting on eqriralty caccs the next month,
cote, Enns, in normal ecireunstences @ cere is

ang whichever: juése is presiding in that court tries the c1se

Where A long teint is enitedmadted, fren rs die
ine elief judge co a pate of preetilua acstgas
pc ee » whig is haw Judge voug fran, one
ict. Snips Sy. tase coed ed Lo tey the Fisonhergse
é
(iret bore
Yn the Federal district of southern New York, where the
Rosenbergs were tricd, a pancl -of jurors is selectcd.from the
list of voters in thab areca. They are selected from theses lists
by chence. Voting lists arc pleced in a pile and a pin is in-
seried through this pile’ in scveral aitfercnt places. Any juror
ca iny list who has a pin-poins threvga his none is autouatically
seleeted as a potential APO Re oie ek, ee ;

g@ ence _tvo cays were zcoulired before a jury

Zz Yt ae
wes selec i tisfied the defcnéents, the governncnt and
+. Sxy3A eS As r
thG Judes AX r
rs

£
satis?
COVED
believe in capital punishnent wore €x-
clatives in any law enforcenent divi-~
sion were cxeused. The jury panel was exhaustively questioned
ebcut vast military service by thesselves or by their relatives...

fay juror whose connection with militery service might have
prevented hia reeching an unbiased verdict was excused,

TT) Anrerican lew, in.cases which carry the death penalty, the
a€cferse end the governnent are alloved to-challenge twenty jurors
eech, without giving eny reason. However, in this case, Judge
Keurftcen allowed the defense thirty challenges, The governnsent
was atill ellcvwed only twenty, At any tine cither side pay chel-
lense a juror for cause end Such a challenge is not deducted from
tho nundver of challenges allowed. In the Rosenberg case, defense
attorneys announced that they were satisficd with the jury aftcr
they ha& used only 29 challenges. They could have objected at
leest once more to the jury, if they thenselves had not been satis-
fied.

"Y want to say

agpoinksd by the Prosident |

assigned to the court

.
.
1!
ern nN See AR EE NNN meer s eR ERNE WAET A RET eee ener “as i sree
: e a aie
i .

re

i

ng RAEI TBE RI toe

stage aRO rE PACE RERE

GEE CONDUCT OF THS TRIAL ND THE DEFENSE.

on questions of law, we feel that the trial has been conducted

HN POG, BW avuvesse weer tf
for Jire, Within any sndividual federal court systen, tne cher
Sitges is charged by Jaw to asstgn eases to judges. As & general

af s .
pote, dodges robots from ene coort to another, teying erininal

hows one serth, ebvil coscs aYyotrer ponth, presiding in Voticns
Aor enobaer fonth, sitting on eqraralty caccs the next month,
te. *fhous, in nornal cireunstences a eare is assinncd to the couet

CGU&ae >
end whichover judge is presiding jn that court tries the onsets
Poe tty 1h COs. tis a Long tao. 13 pyiiciuated, aio 95 the
Bho heyy PRS Gee Sig Dep Aig aa eg iat Genes ee aeodenas
gS lia ase aR bag His TS et ace 2 Li fran, one
or 16 mgurice 1 mies, Retis) aaavailiy wed Lo lcy the Pesenver Ese

z

{
eee SUEY

of southern uw York, where the
<1Gl-of jurors is celectcd.from the
2 cy are selected fron these lists
bs are plece”d in a pile end a pin is in-
aifferent places. Any juror
reopen his ncne is autunatically

St
ry chances Voting 1
4 tary

'
c
i

ws
ch

"ye

In the Poserizrg ense, two Guys were pegvired berore & jury
yes sclectcd which satisfied the déefcenéunts, the Governmncnt and
the duése. All government employcoos were excuecd by the judgee--
41 persons wao cid not believe in capital ponishacnt were Gx
“cused. ALL parsans with relatives in any lew enforcenent divi-’
sion were cxeused. Tre jury panel was exhaustively questioned
ebcut vest military service by thenselves or by their relatives, ———-
ny juror whose connection with militery service might have
prevented hin yeeching an unbiased verdict was excused,

ta Anerican lew, in-cases which carry the death penalty, the
rse end the governnent are allowed to‘challenge twenty jurors

acte
eech, without giving eny reasons Kowever, in this case, wudge
Koutexcen allowed the defense thirty challenges, -The governoent

was atill allewed only twenty, Ab any tine either side may chal-
lense a Juror for cause end such a challenge is not deducted from
the nuober of challenges allowed, Inthe Rosenberg case, defense
attorneys announced that they were satisficd with the jury aftcr
they had used only 29 challengcs. ‘They could have objected at
Jeest ones nore to the jury; {f they thenselves had not been satis-
fied.

—S Sa

: The Resenbergs' own lavyer said this at the ena of the trial:
iy west to say this for the Court, ana { for once, and I think all.
ny co-counsel fcel, that you have been cxtrepely. courteous to us’
ané you have affort:4 us. lewyers every privilege that a lawyer
should expect in a criminal case." ~ ‘ .

Later in his arguments to the jury, the sane lawyer said: "I
would like to say to the Court on behalf of all defcnse counsel
that we feel that you have treated us with the utpost courtesy,
that-you have extended to us the privileges-that we expect as law-
-yers, end despite eny disagreenents wo nay have had with the Court

%

a es ee

rer

ME ARM POM Bede

1 oe

Hm mar tga

Bea teat ease a “;
VTS CORLL OF We WAT AT.

OW,

ow

bet
and wa hope we heave contributed, our share , with ise dignity and
thet decorain that befits and Anczican trial.” The canoe ltwyer,
ire Es Ha Bloch, &)so told: the ncnbers of- the trosechtion, "Ve
ére mopreeiative of the courtesies extended tons",

Unicr Arerican Levy UP a defcrtant esanot atford to poy Pore
court ae ear for witness feos’) Tux subpacnes, Cles,y ho my
Pile @ peuper’s oath, ond the geverscent will pay for these cx-.
penses, the Fos scnbergs Tiled paupcrs cath, and the governnont
eee Heoa with all records at no eecst, Subsequently, Qa chne

Lee Pied Ponds, £9d€ has aroured the burd.a of * ir nngiiys tha

ae 2g} Be keidstdirg (NES eda pe
e712 O48 ihe Baits Paw “ES 8 *

oid
iy

thee *

~ ad . de = : ; : te . .
Judse Kaurzren took 12,000 words to fnets ict the: jury on
the law involved, no ee

‘he jurors were told net the Rosenbergs end Sobel were

presuncd to be innecenit throvugnout the trial, ‘he jurors were
told that they were the sole judge o? the fects, that if their
recollection differca from the progsento v'9 or fron the judge's
that it was their roco2lection Which W238 “‘pindinag. fia jurors

were told thet af thes did not bBelicve the tesstinony of Vex
Sliicehcr 2s it per icd to Sobsii, thas they rust acgnit Solell.
The ; speck ly told to consider ecrerelly the testinceny
or angles ith Greenglass and Naryy Gold, and act upon
it en, 2 ey are accused of being accu. Licese:

er how ce regula
ssibility th
oression pice is
ns Seon eit reference” to the guilt or innocence
Gents, or thet he tainks thet some particular phese
is more important than another; cr that sone partic-
S is nore credible than another, or vhat a certain
inference oF fact should not be mede and so on. If you have ©
seta eny such invression vou nust put it out-of your rind end
utterly disregard it. Nothing - -Iheve said auring the trial HOP.

warned the jury "No mett
oa. it, _there is ee the po
=p

bang

of the _case
55

Peach
in these instructions vas intended to give any such inpression.'
Judge Faurfoen also told the jurors “not to determine the guilt
or innoctcace of a defendant on whether or not ke is a Cconnunist “.

on £Ur Prats:

Tre jury reached its verdict in Abril. 1851. For twenty
months since that date the case hes been appcalcd. It every
cease ApDpelate sovrts have upheld the convicticn of the Roscnberes
end Sobell.-In dis opinion, Jnudge:Jerone Frank of the United
Stetes ourt of Anpcals, one of the best known civil libertarians

-~din-the Unitea States, has said "Vo have scrutinized the records -
with extraorcinary care to see it-it contained ‘any errors"se. |
La

this court is obligated to essune thet the. jury believes the |
evidence wnravorcble to the defendents. On that assunvtion the

Se caemiaetehanaemnneseaatenarteatebonnand

SUS OR ER RRR YO Rh UNF DN  ie FAR Te PU OA Bah to a ak ww

are nopreeiative of the courtesics extendca tous",

Under arericen lew, ifa defer tant eunhot afford to poy Poe
court records, for witne sg foos, Tuy subpouurs, Glesa, ho may
Tile @ pRuper's oath, ond the geverscwent will pay for these ex-.

ae)

poten ache tian santa MA en ese
. sa

penses. The senbergs Tiled paupsrs oath, and the governnont
vrovided Shou with alt records at no cest, Subsequently, a chn-
eibtece@ eelued Pands, £94 hes arcnred is burda of Viranedvs tha
Pe coy a ee eer ee Re oak

Judes Kaurgren teok 12,000 words to inet. ist the: jury on

urors were told that the Rosenbergs end Sobeld were
oO bas innecenit throvghout the t rial. “ithe jurors were
thre sole judge of? the facts, that if their
t}

be}

re

i to1
Ch Cute

ty
)
<
aot
a
hg

i
he jutget s

2

ins

MWicetion whieh ves bindina, Tha juvoess

: i
1G Reps ony of Vex I.
|

NoHo

ey from the prosscenter'’s or fron

ty by bei

oop

fare

2
Dh
7 oO Tra

.

3 d@id rot nelicve
‘

Opty

tney fst asgnit SotaGll.
Gr CGz craig the 7
Yarry Sold, and act upon .
boing Meee aCe tSe-

3

fate ded

OW th or oe rn Oo

mY ch er
a
A
Ief e
err
+

ray
*

Py

MeO RU row hy choy
ehh ir Oo Irom oO

J
e at
Pt be bt oO:
m4) bly Jaa chock

they are necuc a o

~!

‘en warned the jury “No retiter how cereful a

p ipragrene
judges ray de to aveid it, there is elcys the possibility that
tke jury or soze pertioular guror rey_ Bet. @n impression that the
gudso Les somes opinion vith reference to the guilt or innocence
of the Cercncants, or thet he thinks thet sons particular phase
of the case is more inportant than enother; cr that sone partic-————}—~—
wler witres

s
Ss is nore credible than- another, or vnat a certain.

inference or Tact should not be mede end so on. I? you have

formed eny such invression vou aust put it -eut-of your rind ena

utterly disregord it. Nothing. I heve said during the trial nor i

in these instructions vas intended to give any such inpression," |

duage Eaufaen also tola the jurors “not to deteraine the guilt

or inaocenec of a defenéant en_whether or not he is a Cenounist ".-. --.

Tic jury rcacked its verdict in Asril- 1951. ° For twenty . -

months since that @ete@ the case hes béen eppealed. In cvery
case Appelate courts have upheld the -convicticn of the Roscnbergs -—--
end Sobell. - In his opinion, Judge-Jorone Frank of the United

tetes Covrt of ope als, one of the best Known civil libertarians
in the United States, has said "Vic have scrutinized the records:
with extraordinary care to see if it contained ‘any errors" sas ;
this court is obligated.to_assure the ab bbe -jury. believes the
evidence unfavoreble to the: defendants, 3 that co ee the
evidence to musth in the verdict is_ r:ore. enon: enple,

Since Judge Frenk's decision, the case went to the Siprero
Court, That Cuurt ruled that Since no question of law was in-.
...yolved they would not consider the case and-denied certiorari, _
Scunsel for the Rosenbergs and Sobell could and | did: start over ~

= |

i
i
|

Ts CO

egain in tha Dis teiat Conrt and asked that the jury's verdict
be s
Gietion of Telce Ke DNS: he coe ayifica Rhee fron gonlding oa

the rotten, AS mobfon wes aveued before Twas Selye ester Ryan
ard vatentcsd by hints Coline for t: .c Roscnberg S a: a Sebel could
eed did appeal dudge Ryants deniel to the Circnit Court of As-
Ppoals. @Ais Court will hear that appeal in a week, starting Rec
£28, Th spactal scssten sinesa the Court has addonvrcd for the
Oetshidsa helde 4S e {
t

reo ats ed ASA aC Pe Coe a aS
Wi eae owen he, teh to Tho SwgpenoeGaliet,, 4F pthat appeal
S devised, courcel for the Ruse atergs and-Spbel) can Start over,
neaia gn Nisiesct Court with a notion to reduce the sgaton 1CCe sg

# Since this pups vas weition, the Civ weit Court of fyr-2la urheld dndg
Lele: incy ae “a. asd Ly Sedge

tQ Frocit Refcasa Counsel 1
ey. Detensre Counea] hag filcd tha
G& 31% 48 still perding.

Rysats dental sd en apj,al for 7
Esufzsn who d2d grant a stay _of
to file a psa Por Paccutive c
petition for Erecutive eclonincy a

is

et aside. Although this case would normally cone ck. yo dura ox
i
\"
|

Pa EARN ea

THE VieU Lo

*

The geverniceut evidence has alrcady bean ontlineds

It will be noted that the testinony of David Grecnglass
es correborated first by his wife, then eae Harry Gold, by
x Pit cher, by the poceeert u ee rayher Sohneider, by’
oe Koe ki, Ly nee mado by Teoncdate, Th ea etd only

J the Piecaaes.

The testdseny of Ruth Croenbl ess | wes correboreted by
Povid Gromnelass, Harry Gold, Max Bliteher, Derethy Aol,
Lee He peks edt and Evelyn Coxe Th wea cvefat. tf waly by he
Bae ee Se, ae) ee ee Coe Oe teat Pala yay oA mhorgted
Pe Ns GA eg: EPR ah tee a a ee A Ia a ia Td
CORP ORS HOt Ineo. ,

Spenburg wes correl arated only’

ius
ife's testimony was corroborated only

‘Ss wile, and his wi

The testimony of the Greengless' about the Rosenbderg's
cchoseny console table wis

ore supported by Evelyn Cox. The
Kosunbere versicon of the che gany treble wee not ee soe led,
even by the defence witness Tres Meliy.

The rebuttal Costineny of the NOELLE Ff Pobors 60her
Schneider wes net itself oF ead

id not testify, nor did ha protocea anv
4 "

The expert testimgony of Dr. Koski énd ais
rebutted. The defense calicd no expert witne

ze
&

0 sere erent rman HN Tener nt ennreenermairaaretnenpaamnaeirarsuntr metus ASSES

gfe espa ae ages Tem tm iy Dy

mabe

0 AAAS MAAN EBLE HC PA TE Ree MY |

~ In Ameriden law mxinun ond minis’ penoltics are
dcternined by Congress; the decision as to what eentence
shall be inposed within’ the maximum and minimum, is a_
matter for. the judge alone to dctermines.

The raxirvn puntshivint for couvictfon of concpiring.
LO Gesnit comtowepe is executions. TH: Gsi) ceafenee pro-
yided for by Jiav is "not more than 30 years", Iife
teprisenment is not allowed by law, Judge Kauffman sen-.
tonecd Sebeoll to serve 30 years in jail. He sentenétcd

t sy “ . + +
Lhe ore err Lo: Cera Uy ier an eee

eer

+ -. ‘3 $F a) 2 hae Pas
Tn Sache “eee? 3 Daye. beri pda oT Pe oe ed wry

meveramen, Por a reeeiandshaion, wh

mae aeh i
ali crintnal cases. "Phe venponsibility Sis

$ t IT believe the Court alcne should exsune vit",
the judge said. Addressing hinself to the general charge

of espionage Judge Kauffran said “citizens of this country
who betray their fellow countrymen can be under none of

the delusions about the benighity of Soviet power that

they might have been prior to Tvorid Var IL. Tre nature of
ian terroris. is new self evident. Idcalicm es a
rationale dinsolvecve.:eothe competitive edyrentaya lield by
he United States in suncr-venpens ig witting a preoitom Ons
he services of a new school of spies, the hove-giesn variety
thet places allegiance to ea fureign pewer before loyalty to
the United States, The punichrent to be meted in this cas
ust therefore cerve the messin
tion of our society epainst these traitors in our midst. °
"It is ironic thet the very country which these defendants
betrayed and sought to destroy placed every safeguard around
them for obtaining a fair and impartial trial, a trial which
consuxed three weeks in this court, I recall the defendant ~
Julius Rosenberg testifying thet our Anerican system of
jurisprudence met with his aporeval and wes preferred over
Russian justices Ever the defendants rezlize, = by this,
éecdnission, -- that this type of trial weuld not heve been
afforded to then in Russiae Certainly, .to-a Russian national
accused of a conspirécy to destroy Russia not ons day would
have been consuned in s triak> It is to Ancrica's credit that
it took the pains and exerted the effort which it did in the
trial of these defendants. Yet, they made a choice of devo--
ting themselves to the Ryssian ideology-of denial of God, -

denial of the sanctity of the individual and aggression against

Sree men everywhere instead of serving the cause of. liberty
and freedon, & ox

"I.consider your crime worse than nurder. Plain deliherate
contemplated murder is dwarfed in nagnitude by comparison
with the crime you have committed. In committing the ect of
rurder, the criminal kills only his victim, The inncdiate
family is brought to grief and-when gustace is meted out the
chapter is closed. But. in your case, I believe your conduct
in putting into the hands of the Ryssians the 4-bonb years
before our best scientists predicted Russia would perfect

“the borb has alrzady causcd, in ny opinion, the Coznmunist
, aggression in Korea,-with the resultant casveltics exceeding

i .

+

eH aR amet

RPE SE Ep EEE ae

panko

af

a ‘* te
i
: ater’
BO oe ig Eee a lew silliens nore Of Inrocent — «
poeple gy say the price af your Ue a4 & Tivdeody by your
betreal you undoubtedly buve attered the course of history
to Ue disadvantage of our country."

"Tho defendents Jnlius and Eghel Rosenberg placed their

2 :
eva Pep thoi eanse da tage

Geyotion to thetr eeuce above their om persenal safety en
Vee ecusefous that they were ceerificing their con children,
’ 4 :

ee :
edo anedr Jives - 20 4 6 oven

poote rg than thear Jeve fer their children,

" In the disht of the circunstences PT fcel thet DT rast
ae

POU SE ey oh a ae oe is Sy Pe de a taser)
i Ea Aas. ea eit a A aks Paes ae tae cae yy VaTew vy
. BOG Ne Ue eae? Bier aa, Da ee ual regdn ak, a Saat ea 4
“ rf ro Bev lita } i" Pe sale ha froth’ wee pe C8 ViLUR, oe ee
preldted by slavish Javeitun to a Puorgign ideolory sor by a
(wore Tor Neaibery aos: past eeege™, Pca 3
a e
Tn ientencing Sobel, Judge Kauffren said! “I do not for
Qien at doubt that you were enzaged in espignase fictivitics;
hoveyrr, the evidence in the case did not point to wny acti-
ity on your part in cenmnection with the atom bomb projects
pate otivated by a desire to do

eunnet be moved by hysteria or m

oot be
ee

A aes DT otek, do sueitew dcuasnee Lo the Gytiesce
: est te fetes? Sig hagee “GER meaQat: Taw eat Bde Ye are

i i Oa Visi Cleo So uie: your gas) ty ub L

ee ehiee the Josser degree of your implication in this

it Dim ebout to shew you some ,

cor mean that I condcne’ your acts or that
Tomininize them in eny respects They were loathsome: they
were contemptible. T must, however, recegnize the help :iven
by you in epprehending and bringing to justice the arch
cririnels in this nefarious schene,. Julius Resenberg and
his wife Eynel Rosenterz. You heave at lcast not edded to your
Sins DY committing ths additional cringe of perjury. You
confessed and toid a complete story in this case and it has
been of great assistance to the government. I realize the
courese thet was required for you to give your testinony.”

In the opinion of the Circuit Court of Appetls, the sentence
was upheld with the verdict. Judge Fpank did comment at sore

length ebout the death sentence «nd the defense contention «
that it consisted of "cruel and unusual" punishnent,; shocking -
the "common conscience” since the death sentence has never
before been itposed by a civilian court. Judge Frank said ° _
"cases are conceivable where there would be littie doubt of a
gceneréi public antipathy to a death sentence. But this is not
such a case. We gust consider the case as one ‘in which death
sentences heve buen inposed on Anericans who conspired to pass
important secret information to Russia, not. only during 1944-..
1945, vut also during the 'cold war', tt is‘impossible to say
that the com unity is shocked and outraged by such sentences
resting on such fects," ,

oe eee cneceieteennctn MP caenaeneeemeneres

woabtioa acd Lectovia, ene of thease questions, and tnoix
prefers fare PE A te Lay,

4 7

deo Why wess

ee er ee

Vader feortnan daw, a hurler cemnct beer pyolyed to

ie La ty arte a, Shs wEte, tad Tsp Teg oa Lboodota Lag ya
Gh Ee Ge He ee haa ed Ga NEN a Ei. AER Sear ite ae ae
foapta tah at ae OE OR AS OR BS Ga ORL GAPE Sk 1,
feeiG Mae Fai. PoeAmda deavu a 2) doio wEify, Jithneng thi
: Greonglass te: Jocony, the supposbing testineny of Gold,
ELitct idar, Koski, Derry. the Abels, Lonsdale”
And oO ant witnesses weoulé prebvably not have
boon Lo earvict the Resenberes and Sobvell of

renit treason, Greenglasd was willing to
himself but not ageinst nis wife *

kaow anything

bh Ruth Greenpless Indietved?: |
|

i

'

a2 phony

7 ie os

> It ; class

A transnits os crghaud-

z ticn of A ; Pian one

: con Was eh by osnerts as a ueboriiae draving, ijl-
ustrating t neinles of the atosie bow) that was droppe

on Nagasaki did transmit precise, detailed information

: about caver 2t he himself constructed for research cer-

F ried on in tion with the atcmic bomb, He gave Rosentsrg

: a devailed” & or the high explosive lenSwhich he hirseif

$ hed moleeds Jens wes used in en exceriment, one of rainy

3 experiments ccaducted before the atomic bonb was perfected, =

o Greengless foind out as mich @s he could about the materials

5 other rachinists were manufacturing for other experiments. He

. searched for tris information Yavidly",. It is the government

4 contention thet the secret of the atonie bomb coula be deter

rined by a Incvledge of the principles, of the experiments
being conducted a d of the materials being menufactured for...
the conduct of those experiments,

nberg as Valuable and important

3. ‘las the information transsitted by Greenglass and Rose=
as claimed by the governmént?

a
5
°

The Rosenbergs! own attorney, P.-He Bloch, thought the
information wes so valuable and important. that._cn three occa-
sions he hirself privately esked the judge to clear the court-
room of spectators and impsund the stenographic record of ‘a
Grenglass! testimony, Block told Judge Kaufman that he was ~
Mot at all sare in my own mind, and_I-en_telking privately,
-whether or not, even at this late date, this information -~-
(he wes referring to the "pretty gooi description of the —..
atcmic benb" Greenglass said.he gave Kesénberg --- may not be
used to the advantage of a fcreicn powerse:I am perfectly
satisfied that this be kept secret." Bloch also asked Judge ©
Kaufman to impound the sketch Greengless made of the bomb.

The nuclear chenist Dr. Koski testified Greenglass made an
accurate sketch of his experiments with implosion research, He
said. no sinilar experiments were being conducted, And his*
testincny was nover rebutted or answered by the Rosenbergs,

"RRL NYE er ER yet! amReONENIMO TIS ot

r
‘
:
-

The Abr ife Pnerey Commission raprerc neue , Dervyy teste
ified that Greengless produced for Ror
exetch of the atecie bomb actually dropped on Flopasakie Ags
in the case of Dr, Kotkti, Derfy!s testinery “was neyer rebuticd

or ingaeeed by the Roscnberese

Nosonlarg on accurile

the abenic aefcatints

4a rr rs af bar

Lins
Vist of povern rat

30 de

: P
2 pores, There 1S no.

Saha av site Teo ties Peay haa dT .
ee eee ee ek ee ee
hae de a es dete
‘oe trial a list of @11 witness¢s
cssibdle call. ‘his rule :
a of whese testinceny ‘tle
Tn the Réstnberg case, tv}
n 1
; r

& SS
al list
zg yhnzent + as a witness every Firs
srnmens tells the @efense night be called as a
any tine during the trlal, the écfense coulg ha
Qntea) ots, Urer, Giese OF fee else as thei
Wirgbe iv te celuged on the goeeranent List
Behe cae : iy Cine SAS Bare as
@liher ¢ A lanl eee
the Root: at ueli toon
Derry es x 5 2
witnesses ows icr os
the test sk ebutted and vnan-
swered, 7% ver sen penheimer, Groves
or Ureye :
The government Gid call cnc Witness whese name was not
on the list furnished the dcfense. This we the passport -
a overn=

shotegrepher Ben Schneider. His rene w
ment list, because the government did not

é
the dey before the trial closed, Under Ame
government does ncy have to give three days

S S
s not on the &€
z e

-Gefense on rebduttel witnestes.

De Diéntt enti-semitism play an indirect role in the
Rosenbergé case, ard especially in the sentence?
HOSEN DET Lasts S= PECLer ty 2n- benvence ’ '

Here, the cormunist and others use both the! presence
of Jews among the government (judge and prosecutor, and
an alleged absence of Jews anong the jury to charge that
the’ Rosenbergs were vietins of anti-semitise.

In the first place it is impessible to determine
whether any of the jurors were members of ‘the Jewish faith.
‘Their:nemes‘were Lebonitte; Booth, Becker, ‘Gibbons, Christie,
Axley, Dean, Willer, Damas,.Doda, Mitchell, Tessitore. They’
yiere never esked by the judge, by the ‘prosecution, ‘or by the
Rosenbergs! lavyers to what religion they belonged. The
religion of the jurors did not becone an issue until after.
+L, Dracsne trinis. The religion of the jurors has never -

De Se ae ne eee ee

wee

+

ee la a ae as a

MER Widths Vues pea ~~ ©

rata, See ui, Seve das
oP ungweved hy the Heucnbergse

he Vhy dieat) tie peveeniat call the
ee, 4k: - a et ee Same eerie ar ee eT
ee Se ad Groves hs

“Siva V8 the de Ferse on 2

Rags = + M Y 7 . 4 ela moe
tee eae a a ae ae ar ae ae ee
A . . tae ‘ : +
H eg ae) bi 7 “ta Sige ta peu tEUeg ee
. ’ e : ’ ; te. a 25 Fee Sah Me pad
+ ; ren who gybies. ad: a Ae ee ek ae Te “Cel fendinbs at

i
8

é

“ Le ee ee 3 he 2

us Lforve trial a list of all witnesses Wnon
a

Pe aS
oye rare Goht pessidle call. his rate was mide to
ive G@eruneents &: e testincniy they might have
oO pebnt and enews?, In the Rostaberg case, the Government
eatiniti~cd a list of 102 pares, Where is no law yhich requircs
the government to call as a witness every forson the gov-
srnmenst te he @efcnse:nigat be called as a witness, " At
ta the UE i forse eculéd have callcd
deo
by. 4 an
either }
the Roc:
Derry es
WLtnheseée
the test
Suered,-
or Urey.
The governzent aid call cne a
on the list furnished the dcfense. This was he passport
photogrevher Ben Schneider. His mame was not on the govern=
ment ~+ Gid not éiscover him until

ravher
st, because the government 4
ore the trial closed. Under American lew, the
€ é@

or
ey
Ww
36
te jo
e
MH

-dGefense on rebuttel witnestes, sce o,

5. Didn't anti-semitism pley aa indirest role in the

Rosenbers case, era espzcielly in the sentence?

Here, the conmunist and_others use both the‘presence
of Jews among the government (Judge and prosecutor), and
an alleged absence of Jevs_anong the jury to cuarge that
the Rosenbergs were vietins of anti-semitisr.

In the first place it is impossible te determine.
whether any of the surors were menbers of the Jewish faith,

.

Their-nenes‘were Lebonitte; Booth, Becker, ‘Gibbons, Christie,
Axley, Dean, Hiller, Daras,. Duda, Mitchell, Tessitore. They -
vere never asked by the judge, by the ‘prosecution, “or by the
Rosenbergs! lawyers to what-religion they belonged, The
religion of the jurors 41d not becone an issue untii after ..
the Prague trials. The religion of the jurors has néver -
veen determined, | — Saeco

It is difficult to see hew anti-semitism-can be .
attributed to a Jewish judge and @ Jewish prosecutor.
