Problems of Political Development in South Vietnam Over the Next Year or So
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008007, dated 4 November 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008007).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

rae

abet aaa DATS AR. WGN, athe

o
bre
o
Pi]
us
a

18 Decem

NCE ESTIMATE

TELLIGE
MA

%2_ 8
x4
ae

“Ye!

bh
NJ
N
2
Can
ay
:
soy?

tt
4

WAL
2

iN

NATIO

to)
gee rae ene eee ee TT RT EERE ES, Ri ETE A apt mete Urn ari terme OS RELI, MET Om NIE SY

¥

te ye

A Noy 1975

- : : He
Bs ys

-_
Declassified by_ OF ¥373_.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated’ overeat
18 December 1954

Submitied by
dn oor che .

DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

ofed:

c

Avthent

Si Rel AA as ae at a a a Ta A ce a nS Ld a a Ol laa ene ae a a er ee

tee Sons ee nrengen os,

Tete

rp

NR Om FR ah POLE EOD Ee ya

A ye te eee on

Te NS ane le

Sr nee eee ARO a Oe a mar eae ae ete am al ee any Seman maanget pace ecenenaiinne fee pom reetde F Bee Re ee a ae twee

. : 7 _ : - z

+ th elooe doe nln cP Mania les me ee dite PS sete saree lh cent

ey iy at

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence orgenizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Dr. R. J. Smith, for the Deputy Director of Central Intelligence

Mr. George C. Denney, Jr., for The Director of Intelligence and Research, Do epart-
ment of State

lt, Gen. Joseph F. Carroll, the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

lt. Gen. Marshati $. Carter, the Director, Nationcl Security Agency

weaken

Abstaining:

Mr. Chartas A. Sommer, for the Assistant General Manager, Atomic Energy Com-
mission and Mr. William O. Cragar, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau
of Investigation, the subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

re ores Cet eer en ee ee

WARNING

Nem ak tee No i ae de tt neat nea

This moteriel contains informa Bn eee) | ofense of ine United Stotes
within the antiee of th. LA o4 ie ane

e 3 3 re) re KE I ty
Raper Bite 2
ne eT . Ce pee
Cree

Phich in any manner to an unauthorized

ee ara FS Amare Anna Leathe Mette etl sty « Miartech Ratt hn Bd Mewtatnledind mdretetghnns fu anne aia

_exobnainm or Dice WA sca trisha pian so hittin el coe scien beg end tiers On i ac we Sa tae ce FE so alg eo Sag Sarah a Sched aca DO

i
sett macnn
oe

on

CONTENTS.

q ; Page
{ BONCLUSIONS iatiiev cial ousted meats cote atacand eee 1
4 DISCUSSION Sasa aac celts Gatien ane eee ee out ae 3
| i INTRODUCTION 2..4. 50 eicsisesecsn ete Loiewieeadeesdn dense 3
IJ. MAJOR SOURCES OF WEAKNESS ........--- sete ateceheeetiae ee 3
i It, MAJOR SOURCES OF STRENGTH .........-0.-0082e0eeeeeeeeeeees 6
IV. CURRENT SITUATION 00.02. ..0.0.ccceceeeeeeceseeeeeee tenses 7
| VY. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OVER THE NEXT YEAR OR SO ..... 9

Pa

wh

°

Ce taaele bee elas uta aled inthe Seats cht reel Mitel willbe 1 tnalaline ib alah QaALt faladeht a! 4 tm ceeeiiadbe le amano 5

: q
NORTH.
WIETNAM
2 Ny a f
4 . x
oe Ss QEMARCATION UNE

~

i < GUANG |,

‘QUANs” ea Wa >
rey ae CORPS

NC eins KOEN
f QUANG. TIN, “25

Ubon :
Rate! hathani_, . BY :
Dad a tof. . , \

iy

} Quang @ar gt
£ QUANG?) \
i NGAI 1

; “ 1 & 2
bi : vn % : f Kortum
j OY | Plats?
i te Xi PLemu
d
4.
Fi
;
7} y
i:
4.
ie, co
} A. : ne SUYEN >
40 a Skomoonp Cham "ENS oa take Gays RAN
E rr Komoone Cham
7 @einn D
4 B + * LONG
4 PHNOM PENH.” ts. LAM DONG
4 I\;
$ s Khieme SAU N
, 4 ; NGS Kenta
{ i eM
1. \ sere” C58 SOUTH VIETNAM
Nabe age EE SY Cae OS POPULATION AND
gre cts ghana ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Perties get square mde
oe 30 30a 1000
o ae rs] Be
Pertana gee aquace hiomeior
Shon DPopeletion dots bead on estimator by distvicts fas 1960 ond Jonnsey 1063
: LE OF 7 ca i . a2 International boundary
aman Prownce boundary
a4 Autonomuus muncpakty Duundary
« @® National capital
- a ‘ ¥ Prownce capitol
wy ea suase lS .- : oO Pi) sy fy ea Mees i

7 WO sincters |

bouyn sey sessanestanay <9
oe NAL ANNE ae renter ae

49.391 12-66

a ah te co a ts Bo a nn adil wae gash cn sb aetna

PROBLEMS OF POLITICAL DEVEL-
OPMENT IN SOUTH VIETNAM
OVER THE NEXT YEAR OR SO

CONCLUSIONS

A. Over the last 18 months, there have been a number of favor-
able developments in the South Vietnamese political scene: the Ky-
Thieu regime has successfully ridden out a series of crises; it has
shown an ability to fashion reasonably acceptable compromises of
troublesome issues; a Constituent Assembly has been elected; the mili-
tary and civilian leaders have demonstrated an increasing willingness
to work together. The longer the process continues, the more diffi-
cult it may become to reverse it by a single sudden move. Finally,
the US presence has contributed significantly to stability, and the im-
proved military situation adds generally to a better political climate.

B. Nevertheless, South Vietnam is still plaguéd by important po-
litical weaknesses: divisive regional animosities, religious enmities,
civilian-military rivalries, and factionalism within the military. Over
the next year, crises are bound to occur, particularly as the process of
developing a constitution and moving toward a more permanent form
of government unfolds. No assurance can be given that some crisis
might not undo the political progress made to date.

C. On balance, we believe that the Constituent Assembly will suc-
ceed in drafting a constitution. If so, political maneuvering for new
national elections may actually exacerbate the basic factors which
threaten political stability. Nonetheless, we believe the chances are
better than even that nationa! elections will be conducted successfully
during the period of this estimate.

D. If presidential elections are held, the military would probably
find it easier to maintain unity bchind a military candidate (or a mili-
tary man who resigned in order to run). It is not clear, however,

eReT 4

4
|
i
i
i
:
i
i
a
i
1
1
1
|.

SEGRE

whether the military considers it essential that a military leader occupy
the presidential seat or whether a civilian would be acceptable. Much
would depend on which civilian. The election of a candidate who was
opposed by the military leadership would raise the chances of a mili-
tary coup attempt. Whether or not such an attempt succeeded, po-
litical development would have received a serious setback.

E. Even if a relatively smooth transition to an elected government -
can be achieved, continuing political stability cannot be maintained
without military unity and support. The military is probably more
cohesive and certainly commands greater resources than any other
group in the country. Thus for some time to come, any regime in
South Vietnam will be dependent on military support and almost cer-
tainly under strong military influence.

DISCUSSION

1. INTRODUCTION

1. When South Vietnam achieved independence in 1954, it was already bur-
dened with certain basic liabilities. Despite a deep sense of Victnamesc identity,
there was no corresponding commitment to a concept of national government.
Virtually no preparation for self government had been made during the decades
of French rule. Not only was the country partitioned at the 17th parallel,
but South Vietnam itself was also divided by ethnic, religious, regional, and other
conflicts. Under the Diem regime, though some political stability was for a
time achieved, little progress was made in resolving these basic problems. More-
over, a new threat emerged as it became apparent that Hanoi was detennined
to wage a revolutionary war against the South. Thus, when the Diem regime
was toppled in late 1963, its various successors found no adequate base en which
to build a stable government and faced a rapidly detcriorating military situation.
Onc regime after another rose, quickly floundered, and fell.

2. By early 1965, the South Vietnamese Government—beset by military defeats,
deprived of control of large sections of the countryside, incapable of effective
bureaucratic performance, and ruling over a population in varying degrees in-
different, resentful, and deeply divided—seemed in danger of imminent collapse.

_ The vastly expanded US presence in South Vietnam, civilian as well as military,

has retrieved this situation. In particular, the buildup of US combat forces was
viewed by South Vietnamese as evidence of US determination to sce the war
through and to prevent a Communist victory. Thus bolstered, the Ky regime
which assumed power in June 1965 has had more room to maneuver and has
retained control far longer than any other regime since the fall of Dicin.

3. These circumstances have given the government new strengths, although
it remains subject to most of the same stresses and weaknesses as its predecessors.
Like them, it must operate within the limits of a domestic political situation
established as the result of Diem’s downfall. On the one hand, the military
leadership assumed the reins of power while lacking the cohesiveness and single-
mindedness that had enabled the Diem regime to establish its tightly-knit, cen-
trally-controlled power structure. On the other hand, Diem's overthrow also
unleashed still other political forces—the religious sects (principality the Bud-
dhists), the students, Jabor, and a varicty of politicians and inteD<ctuals. Since
Diem’s overthrow, political developments have focused on two hasic issues: the
relative roles and power positions of these forces in the new body politic, and
the pace and nature of the transition to a more broadly-based constitutional
government. In varying degrees, these issues precipitated or underlay each of
the political crises since 1963.

i. MAJOR SOURCES OF WEAKNESS

4. Regionalism. South Vietnam has long been plagued by regional animosities.
Native Southerners (Cochinchinese) generally regard those of Northern (Ton-

3

kinese) origin as “carpetbaggers,” who wield power within the government and
the military establishment far out of proportion to their numbers, In addition,
those native to Central Vietnam (Annamites) are viewed with suspicion by both
Northerncrs and Southemers. These regional antipathies hamper efforts to forge
truly national Sonth Vietnamese institutions. In one way or another, regional
biases intrude into most of South Vietnam’s problems aud touch all groups, in-
cluding the military, where factionalism is often on regional Jines. In short,
regionalism remains a basic weakness of Vietnamese politics and shaws no in-
dication of becoming less divisive in the near future.

5. Religion. Political developments during the Diem period and particularly
since 1963 have created deep suspicions between South Vietnam’s badly split
Buddhist majority and its active but less factionalized Catholic minority. The
Buddhists and the Catholics mistrust each other’s influence in government and
each fears the emergence of a government dominated by the other. This rivalry
is of less immediate importance, however, than the political role of the militant
wing of the Buddhist movement led by Thich Tri Quang, an adept and wily ns
political tactician.!' Although the militant Buddhists were weakened by their 4
failure to topple Ky last spring and by their unsuccessful boycott of the Con-
stituent Assembly elections, they remain a likely source of trouble. They still
seem to constitute the largest body within organized Buddhism and may in time
be able to reunite the Buddhists under their control. In any event, they still
possess a substantial political base in the northern provinces of South Vietnam,
from which they could reenter the political arena if they wished. In the shorter
run, there remains a possibility of a new round of militant Buddhist demonstra-
tions, given their assets among the students and the remnants of last spring’s ~~
“struggle movement.” ,

6. Civilian-Military Rivalry. The relationship between the military and civilian
elements is fragile; neither group particularly respects the intentions or compe-
tence of the other. As the ultimate arbiter of power, the military is sometimes
prone to ignore civilian interests. For their part, the civilian politicians tend
to overreact to real or imagined provocations and thereby run the risk of needlessly
precipitating reaction by the military. Frictions between the military and various
civilian groups are unavoidable. There will almost certainly be occasional events
which will threaten to burgeon into a serious civilian-military confrontation.

7. Military Factionalism. Factionalism has been chronic among Vietnamese
military leaders, and plots and counterplots, personal rivalries, and jealousies
have been common. This lack of cohesiveness among the military leaders has
presented nonmilitary opponents of the government tempting opportunities to
strike alliances with discontented commanders. The command structure itself :

*Tri Quang’s base of power is in Central Vietnam, particularly around Hue. ‘The more
flexible wing of the Buddhist Institute, led by Thich Tam Chau, is strangest in the Saigon
area; much of its strength is based on Buddhists originally from North Vietnam. In addition,
there are many Buddhists, including most of those from the southern provinces, who do not
participate in the Buddhist Institute. :

4 , SSR

|
|
|
|
|
|
i
1
j
|
|

anal

is conducive to factionalism, since it has allowed the Corps Commanders to run
their arcas as personal satrapies. ;

8. Lack of National Awareness. As a result of the factionalism and paro-
chialism which characterizes politics in Vietnam, there is little awareness of
broad national issues. There is nothing approaching a- national political party.
Most politicians think primarly in terms of advancing their own or their group's
interests. Moreover, activity by the multiplicity of political groups is generally
restricted to urban areas, with the rank-and-Ale support seldom extending beyond
personal and group loyalties. The rural peasantry, which constitutes the bulk
of the population, has been largely unconcerned and unaffected by the political
developments in Saigon. :

9. Inflation. Among the many economic problems, inflation presents the
greatest threat to governmental security. For over a year, South Victnam has
been gripped by severe inflation, caused in part by the large war-related budget
deficit and in part by heavy US spending also caused by the war. Since January
1985, the cost of living has increased by over 125 percent. Despite the salutary
effects of the regime’s recent currency devaluation, the cost of living during 1957
will jump by at least another 20 percent, and probably by-much more. Although
the effects of inflation fall most heavily on the urban population, the rural areas
also suffer difficulties which are often compounded by disruptions in the supply
and distribution system. In genera), inflation has increased dissatisfaction with
the government and ha: provided the Viet Cong and other opponents with an
exploitable popular issue.

10. Bureaucratic Inadequacies. South Victnam has failed to develop an
effective bureaucracy and administrative apparatus. There has been a separa-
tion of authority from responsibility; military officers: administer most programs
at the province and district levels, and the ministries have little control over
them. Government procedures tend to be both rigid and cumbersome. - More-
over, many trained individuals have been reluctant to work with the government,
preferring instead to remain uninvolved. The succession of regimes and coups
has resulted in frequent reorganizations, many of them inspired by political con- °
Siderations rather than concern with increased efficiency, and has made many
competent administrators politically unacceptable. It has also made them hesi-
tant to commit themselves to a regime, out of fear that its tenure and their own
were likely to be of short duration. In addition, corruption is rampant through-
out the system, and its corrosive effect not only impedes government activities
but adversely affects attitudes toward the government. ,

11. The War. ' These various problems would obstruct political development
even in peacetime. The war, however, exacerbates every problem, magnifies
every weakness, and makcs even the simplest tasks of governing exceedingly
difficult. Vict Cong control of large parts. of the country, and varying degrees
of insecurity elsewhere, greatly restrict the ability of the government to carry
forward programs of social and economic development. Finally, the refugees
who have fied from the countryside to the cities, and who may number a million

eaeeRa | 5

" in Saigon alone, add to the administrative burdens of the regime and may pro-
vide an object for exploitation by its enemies, including of course the Viet Cong.

Ii. MAJOR SOURCES OF STRENGTH

12. Consensus on the Wer. A significant and often overlooked source of
strength ir. South Vietnam is the consistently anti-Communist attitude of the
country’s politically active elements. Despite concern over various GVN policies
toward war and peace and over the impact of the large US involvement in
Victnamese affairs, none has called for an end to the fighting or a withdrawal
of US forces. The many governmental shakeups that have taken place have
not been over basic policy concerning the continuation of the war or ever the
CVN’s steadfast refusal to deal with the Communists. Thus the Communists
have been denied the opportunity of gaining power through the back door in
league with other South Victnamese groups. Anticommunism is strongest among
the Catholics and military, many of whom fied from communism in North
Vietnam in 1954.

13. Continuity of Government. The Ky regime has now survived for 18
months, This remarkable longevity, reversing what appeared to be a persistent
trend toward ever-changing, short-lived governments, has had positive psycho-
logical effects at home and abroad which have been reinforced by the impact
of US military operations. The government has at least had time to begin
implementing a number of major programs which heretofore had progressed
little beyond the planning stage. Progress has been limited, and much of the
emphasis and initiative has come from the US and US prodding. Nevertheless,
Ky and his advisors have demonstrated greater insight into the issues facing
them and have shown greater flexibility in adopting remedial measures.

14. Political Continuity. Politically, the regime has also profited from its ability
to maintain itself in power, especially from its success in facing down both
militant Buddhist opposition and military plotting. Most politically active Viet-
namese viewed the September elections for the Constituent Assembly as an
earnest of the regime's willingness to sanction a larger civilian role in the gov-
ernment; about 80 percent of those registered and over 50 percent of the total
adult population of South Vietnam vated, despite the opposition of both the
militant Buddhists and the Viet Cong. The cabinet crisis in October demon-
strated the persistence of regional rivalries, but the regime managed to dilute
the impact of this episode. In any event, increasing numbers of politicians are
probably coming to feel that there is political advantage in coexisting with the
Ky regime as long as they see reasonable prospects for 2 transition to elected
government.

15. Political Development. For the first time since Diem’s downfall, political
activity is manifested more in legal channels than in demonstrations and coup
plotting. This political activity, while creating a raft of new frictions and prob-
lems, is essential and healthy in terms of political development. Moreover, the
military leadership, which will remain the final arbiter of power in any case,

é

Wa

3s actively taking part in this political evolution. Borrowing from the experience
of the South Korean military, the Ky regime is secking to find political means
to insure the military’s participation in any future government. With this in-
surance, they appear to be prepared to accept an elected government with a
constitutional mandate; such a development would be a promising step toward
the creation of a government with a popular national base.

1€. US Support. Obviously crucial in the military and economic fields, the
greatly increased US presence has injected a new element of major importance
into the South Vietnamese body politic. “The US role carries great weight among
the Vietnamese, so much so in fact that even inaction by the US is a form of
involvement or, at the very least, has the same impact by being seen as such.
For example, several previous regimes became vulnerable when their opponents
suspected that US support was weakening. Ky’s regime is strengthened by the
fact that most Vietnamese consider the US to be solidly behind it. The expand-
ing US presence has obviously increased the disruptive effect of the war on the
Vietnamese economy, and there are some latent anti-American sentiments. These
negative factors are likely to be aggravated by the infusion of larger numbers of
US troops into the more heavily populated arcas of the country. Nevertheless,
the overall effect of the US presence has thus far been ‘to contribute significantly
to stability.

iV. CURRENT SITUATION

17. The Directorate. During the past year, the Directorate strengthened its
position within the military establishment, enhanccd its standing in the country,
and preserved a considerable degree of cohesiveness. The successful removal
of two decply entrenched Corps Commanders, Generals Thi and Quang, added
to the stature of both Ky and Thieu. The precise relationship between these
two leaders is not clear, but Ky certainly has the leading public role. He also
draws sireagth from the aura of US support, from the air force which he still
commands, and from a group of younger officers called the Baby ‘Turks. This
jatter group includes Genera) Loan, Director of Police and Chief of Military -
Security and a close confidant of Ky’s, and General Khang,- Commander of IIT
Corps and the Capital Military Zone. This combination has provided physical
security for the Ky regime.

18. Theze are persistent rumors of friction between Thieu and Ky, though
we see no evidence that such friction is now of serious proportions. But the
future cohesiveness of the Directorate depends to a great extent on the coopera-
tion, or at Jeast continuing mutual tolerance, of these two officers.

19. The Constituent Assembly. Except for the Buddhist Institute, all the
traditional political, regional, and religious groups are reflected in the 117-member
Constituent Assembly. The Assembly includes professional politicians, repre-
sentatives of the Dai Viet and VNQDD partics (badly split themselves), re-
gionalists (such as the militant Movement for the Renaissance of the South),
and a large number of young and inexperienced delegates. Four political “blocs”

Sasa 7

g
i
4
3
a
j
2
a |
q
y
7
}
}
i
|
!
!
i
I
3
}
4
u
i
3
2
a
i
i
4
i
i
a
4
.}
2
}
4
:
i
4
3
5
a
3
2
2
2
a
?
4
|
%
4
3
i
i
i
i
‘
|
i
i

’

{

cl Lin ahah td Artie ch hal Sansa land ad cae a M408 nieag be. by ge ead HV nw sa ia idea akin! Ee 7 A nein nd een inst Mima Sit a a alt alg dad babel? vale atch nds Delos date On haan! wa ett sand dh acaba A be capt rh alias Ry eat,
: : = Da Ae Bos oe é Ses aera - .

—

were formed for the election of Assembly officers and committees, but each is a
conglomerate of differing interests, and their membership and the lines between
them continue to shift. ;

20. For the next few months at least, the Assembly will be the source of the
issucs on which the civilian politicians and the regime will confront onc another.
The Directorate has net yet shown its hand, but its military members would
almost certainly resist any move which would deprive them of a constitutional
role in a new government. The precise goals of the civilians are not clear. In
general, however, they distrest the Directorate and appear to belicve that the
time is ripe for the creation of a constitutional government with a much larger

role for the civilian.elements. -The September elections whetted their political

appetites, and since the military gave up some political power then, the civilians

are pressing for more. Their motives range from parochial self-interest to ~

genuine concern for a legitimate government. ‘The many divisions and rivalries
within the Assembly will impair its ability to present 2 solid front against the
Directorate.

21. There are a number of potential problems that could lead to an open

break, cither by design or by accident, between the Assembly and the Direc-
torate. The Assembly will continue to interpret its mandate for constitution-
drafting broadly, while the Directorate will be suspicious of incursions into its
domain of power. There is considerable resentment in the Assembly over the
power of the Directorate to change items in the draft constitution, reversible

only by a two-thirds vote of the Assembly. The regime, for its part, is reluctant
to relinquish this power until it has a fairly good idea of what will be in the -

constitution. “The desire of some Assembly members to retain the Assembly in
being until the convocation of an elected legislature may also cause friction
with the Directorate. g ;

22. There are, however, factors that could lead toward compromise. The
majority of the Assembly members probably are not interested in pursuing a
collision course with the government, in Jarge part because they realize that
if the Assembly fails, they are unlikely for sonie tiie to have another chance of
sharing power. Moreover, there may be many who wil! advocate caution in
the expectation thatthe very establishment of a constitutional system, even if it
is not fully in accord with their desires, will provide new opportunities for change.
The Directorate also has reason to try to avoid a showdown. It probably be-
lieves that the real iest is not so much the question of a constitution but that
of power afterwards, and it is aware of the US concern that there be a constitu-
tion. Within limits, the regime will probably try to be forthcoming on this
matter. On balance, we believe that an open break between the Directorate
and the Assembly will be avoided and that a constitution will be produced.

23. Although we consider it unlikely that the Ky regime will be overthrown
during the near future, its downfall could seriously endanger the promulgation

of a constitution as well as the political progress made to date. Much would

depend on how Ky was overthrown and what sort of regime succeeded him.

8 “SEQREEE: |

&

i

°
.

SEGRE

Progress would not necessarily he wholly lost, for example, if Ky were over-
thrown by an internal palace coup with a minimum of violence and disruption,
or if the new regime were no less disposed to work toward constitutional Eov-
ernment. Should the coup be violent, however, or should there be a scries of
coups and countercoups, the whole structure created by past political develop-
ment wauld almost certainly disintegrate.

.Y

cy

V. PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS OVER THE NEXT YEAR OR SO

24. Judgments concerning the course of political development in South Vietnam
must be highly tentative. The country is in the throes of political evolution, the
course of which will be disputed even after a constitution is adopted. In a very
real sense, political development in South Victnam will be a day-to-day, month-
te-month phenomenon for some time to come, and periodic upheavais and crises
will threaten the entire process, Indecd, as the pace of political events quickens,
the factors that work agains: <¢bility may actually be exacerbated. Regionalism
in particular is likely to be a politically volatile factor. The Southern elements
are resentful of the Northern/Central coloration of Ky's regime and fear that Ky
and Loan are conniving to perpetuate it at Southern expense. No assurance can

be given that some crisis might not prove to be the ultimate undoing of the
government. :

25. A falling out among the military leaders could have serious consequences.
As political activity increases, the possibility of frictions between Ky aud Thieu
also increases. Ky has thus far been skillful and fortunate in his efforts to con-
tain the political power of individual Corps Commanders; on a future occasion,
he might be less successful. The question of how much political power is to
be shared with the civilian elements might become a cause of contention within
the military, particularly since the Baby Turks appear to be less inclined to com-
promise with the civilians than is the Dizeetorate. ;

;
%
3
r
4
3
4
2
£
Fi
1%
a
4
=
j
4
5
»
Es
a
j
?.
4
:
3
‘s
?
%
3
<7
a
a
a
3
a)
i
j
i
q
3
a
3
a
J
4
H
4
}
4

26. The prospect of negotiations could introduce unsettling influences into
the political situation over the next year or.so. .At present, no significant Vietna-
mese group publicly advocates negotiations and the military leaders are quite
opposed to them except on terms that amount to Communist capitulation.

' Hence, any Zovernment that, in the near term, agreed to negotiations would
increase its vulnerability to attack by its political enemies. On the other hand,
the large US presence may encourage the Vietnamese to believe that the US
will agree to no settlement that does not effectively insure the survival of a
non-Communist SVN. The degree to which this confidence would remain as
a counterweight to disruptive effects would depend heavily on the circumstances
in which negotiations seemed an imminent possibility.

s

Kerha anda PAR 0 nies Slat yet ide She iva cham aah vUies ce,

Mayo

27. Nevertheless, there are developments which tend to make us cautiously
optimistic about the prospects for a more stable political situation. ‘These in-
clude the continuity of the Ky regime, its success in riding cut a series of crises
and potertial crises, and its ability to fashion reasonably acceptable compromises
without resorting to outright repression. In addition, the election of a Con-

‘ Be. reer oo deat eat
6b mislead agli mer lends Aaatie fr mri bodat _

CORRS 9

ie tt bate kpc me

fag ggeny teks atacpis 22 “ Ms Soe Rua Dict aT aes ‘ fat wahiiteg Oe pts ee MEHR A ak oa eT ge ee ot wah fis way a oe dt ie weer. An
ait hi en OG eb NSE a that is bade betas tnak ensint Baie bint dost did avant indiat Sts Rew ha Sand 2 Shiai ane sal dal nn ih ed Mi ne inland itd aaah Ub Ala Asia patel ens Lb Lesa ncaa ciciniee

]
4
|
q
j
j
}
3
q

4

Se Andad kiran tah ty dash Suh arbh bottom in ebdesSate-accn alec smal PI ERI SRT TIT no,

stituent Assembly, and the willingness of both the military leadership and civilian
elements to attempt to work together augur well for coutinued political progress.
The longer the process continues and is reflected in the development of new
institutions and working relations, the more difficult it may become to reverse
it by some single sudden move. Finally, the improved military situation con-
tributes generally to a better political climate.

28. During the next year or so, the successful holding of national elections
would be an important indication of growing political stability. Actually, events
are moving in this direction; a constitution will almost certainly call for presi-

dential elections, and probably legislative oncs as well. Political maneuvering |

among the various civilian clements is already underway in anticipation of clec-
tions and will grow more intense. New political alliances will eventually emerge,
although it is too early to determine what they are likely to be. The Direc-
torate’s final decision concerning elections will depend on its assessment of the
situation at the time; if the military felt that clections seriously threatened their
basic interests, they might move to postpone them. But we believe the chances
are better than even that national elections will be conducted successfully during
the period of this estimate.

29. If presidential elections are held, there will probably be a military candi-
date (or a military man who has resigned in order to run), perhaps Ky or Thieu,
as well as civilian candidates. It isnot clear whether the military considers it

essential that a military leader occupy the presidential seat or whether 2 civilian -

would be acceptable. Much of course would depend on the civilian. The
military would probably find it easier to maintain unity behind a military candi-
eate. The election of a candidate who was opposed by the military leadership
would raise the chances of a military coup attempt. Whether or not such an
attempt succceded, political development would have received a serious setback.

30. Even assuming a relatively smooth transition to an elected government,
continuing political stability cannot be maintained without military unity and
support. There is little evidence of any significant growth of a sense of national
commitment that would submerge special interests. Civilian-military and other
rivalries wil] persist and will manifest themselves in recurring conflicts over the
distribution of power within the government. Any government, particularly a
civilian one, will almost certainly be subject to debilitating bickering and jockey-
ing for influence, and vulnerable to plots from within and without. As long as
the military leadership remains relatively united, it will have the upper hand
over others. It is probably more cohesive and certainly commands greater re-
sources than any other group in the country. Thus for some time to come, any
regime in South Victnam will be dependent on military support and almost cer-
tainly under strong military influence.

10 . ae

Sires Serre Ne ECaeS

neta can ted eed Daren van ba etal tn Se ht a pags CAE a ee»

2a anita OO

1 arm ede Male

t

Se petite nega hata,

oN OR Oey tad

fn teh oe

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENC ¥

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This decumerd was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential disseminction may be auihorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

c. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Depaziment of State
b. Director, Defense intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
» Assisiant Chief of Staif for Intelligence, Depariment of the Army, for the
Depastment of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), for the Deporiment of the
Navy
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Depariment of the Air
Force
f. Director of Inielligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
g. Assistant Director, FBI, fer the Federal Bureau of Investigation
h.
i,

ie)

Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency
2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accardance with
opplicable security pose? or returned to the Cenival IntelEgence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this documeni is dissaminated overseas, the overseas recipient: may
rotuin it for a period noi in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
cocument should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to reiain it ia accordance with
IAC-D-~69/2, 22 June 1953.

sified: FOR OFFICIAL "USE ONLY
¢ .
DISTRIBUTION:

White House

Naiione! Security Council
Department of Sicte
Dapariment of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Burcau of Investigation

4, ame fitle of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-
