El Salvador: Challenges Facing the Arena Government - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049383, dated 2 July 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049383).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Part |

feature acticle

EI Salvador:
Challenges Facing the
ARENA Government

Although the nghtwing ARENA parly won a sizable
mandate in the presidential election in March—-
besting the Christian Democrats $4 to 36 percent —
and now controls all three branches of the govern-
ment, President Alfredo Cristiani realizes he must
build a political consensus with opposition parties to
govern effectively and to prevent the radical left fram
exploiting political divisions.

The moderate Cristiani appears to be in control of
the party, but the party's extremist faction, headed
by party founder Roberto D'Aubuisson, will chal-
lenge him. D'Aubuisson probably will keep a low
profile on mast policy decisions; nevertheless, we.’
expect him to weigh in heavily on securty matyers.
: )
Cristiani may have difficulty reconciling demands by
conservative businessmen for market-onented re-
forms, and a reduced role in the écanomy with his
populist campaign promises to create new jobs and
improve housing and education. Failure to meet
expectations from an impoverished and war-weary
populace could quickly undermine Cristiani’s man-
date and strengthen the hand of party hardliners

Cristiani—whom mast of the officer corps sup
ports—has stressed his commitment to human rights,
but acts of vigilantism by rightwing extremists could
increase. The new administration is not likely to alter
Significantly the strategy of the 10-year-old war
against the Marxist insurgents, but plans to reinstate
legislation restricting some civil liberties for suspect-
ed terrorists.

For thetr part, the 6,000 to 7,000 guernilas, who have
suffered serous military setbacks since the failure of .
their preelection offensive, are increasing urban terrar-
ism and assassinations of elected officials The guerril-
las hope these tactics will provoke a backlash that
would discredit Cristiani's administranan and force

the government into negotiations on ther terms wi

Approved for Reiease

NOV 1993

Guatemala

SAN SALVADOR,
{

4 El
Salvador

North
Paci Ocean

_ So
Geunsery eeprwevetatien ts 2)
Aan Seeaar thy pete erie

O0137O (407017) 6-08

New Political Dynamics

By improving its image and exploiting puolic disaffec-
tion with the performance of the Christian Democrats,
ARENA has come to control all three branches of
government. This total control, along with the absence
of strong oppasition parties, should allow ARENA to
implement its conservative agenda and has increased
fears that it will roll back populist programs. The
centrist Christian Democrats, badly divided and lack-
ing strong leaders and clear direction, now have only
six of 60 seats in the Assembly and are unlikely to be
eflective rivals ilo ARENA. The coalition of three
leftist parties, the Democratic Convergence, is also in
disarray after winning less than 4 percent of the vote,

and does not pose a
significant political challenge. Although some politcal
leaders hape to form a broad opposition to ARENA,
prospects for a united front appear poor in the near
term.

Despite the lack of a strong opposition, ARENA
leaders apparently realize that, given political polar-
ization in El Salvadar over the war and economic

=~ LT ca. Tea, SAI <P ase SNS SSSA

President Alfredo Cristian consults with part
leaders

issues, they cannot govern effectively without the
cooperation of other political parties and interest
groups. Cristiani has adopted a consensus style of
problem salving that so far appears to be effective. :
For example, the new government is asking democrat- /
ic labor leaders—who supported the Christian Demo-
crats in the past two elections—io work with ARENA
on solving economic and social problems

Who Controls ARENA?

One of Cristiani's early goals is to destroy the impres-
sion—especially among international critics —that he
is a mere front man for such ARENA hardliners as
Roberto D'Aubuisson. The new president almost cer-
tainly will try to keep,D’Aubuisson in the party—-he
admits the charismatic D’Aubuisson remains a key
factor in the party's ability to retain Popular sup-
port-—while at the same time pushing him and other
hardliners to the sidelines on key government appoint:
ments and policy issues. Cristiani already has shown a

significant degree of | ndence, especially in the
selection of his cabinet.

indicates that, although Crnistiani's
appointments are largely party loyalists, they are also
professional technocrats representative of the party's
moderate outlook. In our view, the stock of party
moderates has increased with the party's electoral
successes and probably can be consolidated further as
long as factional rivalnes are minimized y

The selection process was not entirely smooth, howev-
er, and maneuvenng for some key posts highlighted
Intraparty tensions and underscored the difficulty
Cristiani may have marginalizing the hardliners. At-
tempts by D’Aubussson and other party hardliners to
name Air Force chief Gen. Rafael Bustillo as Defense
Minister rather than Army Chief of Staff Col. Emilio
Ponce-—Cristiam’s choice —almost caused 8 crisis
when the Air Force refused for several days to fly
missions in suppan of Army operations. Cristiani’s
consensus style came to the fore when he named
Army General and former Vice Defense Minister
Larios as a compromise, but Jockeying for pasition by
different factions in the miliary and ARENA is

likely to increase if, as expected, Larios steps down in
three to six months ]

Although Cristiani will have a relatively free hand
rinning the government, D’Aubuisson remains a pow-
erful player, especially on security matters. We be-
lieve D"Aubuisson's public deference to Cristiani is
largely cosmetic, calculated to put the best face on
ARENA, and that he will not hesitate to use his seat
in the Assembly to influence the legislative agenda.
D'Aubuisson, however, fears that the guerrillas would
exploit any perceived divisions and thus wants to
maintain party uaity. He will probably avoid public
confrontations that could precipitate a crisis in the
party.

First Moves on the Economic Front

Cristiani’s first policy priority is 10 improve an econo-
my devastated by war-related destruction, capital
Right, mismanagement, and natural disasters. Al-
though El Salvador is expected to register a seventh
consecutive year of modest GDP growth—1.5 percent
in 1988---economic advances are not likely to keep
pace with the rapad population growth (currently at
2.6 percent annually). Even these modest growth rates
remain highly dependent on revenue (rom external
transfers Salvadoran remittances from the United
States totaled $300-400 million last year, and US

ARENA founder and Prevdent
for tile. Raberta QO dubuisson

economic aid—$395 million for FY 1989—is equiva-
lent to about 50 percent of El Salvador's budget,
much of which is used to offset the direct and indirect
damage done by the war.

Given serious revenue shortages, Cristian will have
difficulty meeting both voter expectations for new
jobs and improvements in housing, health, aad educa-
tion and business expectations for privatization of the
economy and implementation of market-oriented re-
forms. Wary of the political risks in undoing past
populist programs, Cristiani has said his government
will not abolish agrarian reform or institute structural
changes that would hurt the workers—almost 50
percent of whom are underemployed. Although
ARENA is likely to enjoy a shart honeymoon period,
public perception that the new government favors the
business class and landowners at the expense of
unemployed workers—a common theme of govern-
ment opponents—could play into the hands of the
rebels who are trying to foment civil unrest through
their political and labor front gtoups.

Trying To Improve the Human Rights Record

Cristiani realizes that, because of clase international
scrutiny and ARENA’s poor human rights record ih
the past, his government must work hard to prevent a
reversal of El Salvador’s progress in this area. The
President and other party officials have affirmed their
commitment to human rights during numerous (rips

vlante
plan to speed up Feta ent and corrupt

judicial} system, which remains an impediment to
additional improvements in human rights. Crstiani is
also seeking a consensus with other parties for approv-
al of a tightening up of exssting Jaws to control urban
violence,

Despite widespread charges—-mostly from proguer-
rilla groups—that rightwing death squads have been
resurrected, we cannot confirm the formation of such
groups.

@ indicates that military leaders would not tolerate
killings that could implicate the security forces in
human rights abuses, jeopardize continued US assis-
lance, and undermine the legitimacy of the new
government. Afier the assassinations of the Attorney
General and Cristiani’s Chief of Staff, as well as
attacks on other ARENA officials, Cristiani publicly
vowed nol to retaliate with violence, and thus far the

government has kept its word <i
aa By calling for dialogue with the

rebels even as they continue their campaign of terror-
ism in the capital, Cristiani probably hopes to main-
tain the moral high ground and undercut internation-
al sympathy for the guerrillas. Nonetheless, some
government and military officials—many of whom
continue to receive guerrilla death threats—are in-
creasingly angry over the government's inability to

prevent such attacks and may take matters into their
own ns

Status of the War

The 6,000 to 7,000 insurgents have gone on the
political offensive to marshal opposition to the new
government. Although they balked at Cristiani’s for-
mation of a multiparty commission to initiate a
dialogue, we expect the insurgents will soon put
forward propasals of their own. The guerrillas may
offer cosmetic concessions, bu

indicate they have no intention of adhering to any

Secret

agreement with the government and see dialogue
largely as a means to gain domestic and international
sympathy

On the military front, the insurgents are concentral-
ing on assassinations, urban lerrarism, economic sabo-
tage, and harassment of military targets, to provoke a
violent extrajudicial backlash by the military and, at
the same time, erode the government's public standing
and force it to enter into negotiations on terms
favorable to the guerrillas. Although their attacks
have little chance of altering the strategic balance of
the war, the guerrillas hope to project an image of
strength through highly visible actions in the capital
Moreover, rebel attacks on the economic infrastruc-
ture--which have resulted in about $2 billion worth of
damage since 1979—-continue to hinder the govern-
ment’s efforts to attract new foreign investment.

The Armed Forces retain the strategic upper hand
of battle

and hay blows to the
rebels. indicates the
milita. flensive in guer-
rilla strongholds in the northern and eastern areas of
the country. We believe the guerrillas’ recent switch
to East Bloc weapons for their front-line operatives
reflects the rebels’ increasing difficulty in Capturing
US-made arms from the Salvadoran military and
their confidence in continued Cuban and Nicaraguan
support. Nevertheless, introduction of these weapons
is unlikely to affect the balance of the war. The
seizure in May of a large guerrilla cache of new East
Bloc weapons and explosives—the largest store of
insurgent arms found to date—will possibly cause a

~ reduction in guerrilla urban operations.

Meanwhile, personnel changes in the Armed Farces
bode well for Cristiani and the course of the war.
Most newly promoted officers are members of the
military class of 1966, known as the Tandona, which
has generally supported E] Salvador’s transitron to
democracy and has been a driving force behind the
current Counterinsurgency strategy of avoiding indis-
criminate bloodshed and improving human rights.
Chief of Staff Ponce, who heads the Tandona and is

—_
—.

i Se . ' aa - 6

paree guerrilla cache of East Bloc weapons
Joaptuced by the oe Armed Forces

WO May 1989

hikely to be named Defense Minister in three to six
months, espouses moderate political views and ap-
pears to be Cristiani’s chief ally in the military. Ponce

GERD is planning to give local commanders more

responsibility in order to prosecute the war more
cece.

Key Indicators To Watch

Most Likely Scenario: Cristiani is able to consolidate
his control over the party and the government; his
gradual approach to policy implementation bolsters
the new government's international legitimacy and
dampens charges that he will roll back past reforms
and unleash a bloody crackdown on the left; Cristiani
also wins points for his peace initiatives, while the
guerrillas continue to lose domestic and international
sympathy, US and other vital foreign assistance
continues,

* D’Aubuisson conunues to maintain a low profile; no
serious party divisions occur

* Cristiant moves slowly .o implement conservative
economic policies and private sector contidence
increases, these moves buy time for ARENA to
bring about modest economic improvements No
serious, uncontrollable, economic-related civil disor
der erupts

* Although no meaningful government/insurgent dia-
logue takes place, Cristiani keeps the peace initia-
tive alive. No significant rise occurs in the number
of suspicious killings, and the civilian government
retains the support of the military

« The rebels’ terrorist acts cast them domestic and
international support.

Alternative Scenario: A major political crisis oc-
curs—Chrisnani's announcement of an extremely un-
popular economic policy or even his assassination by

?
,

Reverse Blank

the guerniias  precipilating 4 power struggle that

puts ARENA hardliners tn control, economic condi:

trons deteriorate and the government fails to contral
resultant domesue violence, the cauntry becomes al-
mos! ungovernable

* Coffee earnings fall even faster than they have in
recent months, a foreign exchange shortage forces
the President to reduce imports, which causes the
business sector 10 slow investments.

« Guernila terrorism increases, guerrillas successfully
mobilize their front groups ta foment violent domes-
lic protests, sparking a backlash by extremists in the
military and ARENA

° A resurgence of rightwing death squad activity in-
creases support for the insurgents and undermines the
legitimacy of the government, which leads ultimately
to a suspension in US and other foreign assistance.

* Opposition parties overcome divisions and form a
united front.
