Prospects for Indonesia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012246, dated 3 June 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012246).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

eae 2,

see ve —
-NIE. 55-64: '

“g.3(a)14 22 July 1964

: - CINE A ay . Be wre |

ARETE EB OK areas 1ST 2 Nass

er ee
HEE. sade 2. . Leocumens a rope

tah
‘sijt

fare 8:

or: Indonesian
intel

i A de us ns

Mh, DIRECTOR‘ O ra TReLLIGENC ER
(¥ He t ‘ee a pakory ath fe tty es (aly vai

2 ae bs F + a een hid
: “UNITED: STATES: INTEL

yce Paste? i Ode areas a

Meets leat. oe wi
ry ‘ 1 ota
: oh ine
aD

Ch coe Fa tee & oe

ee

fe | — a4) a

re a re at Ohl Tecprengie sees

io

the Central es pane ‘and the ialgance sgn ol of the Depart

a op
oe
oat
oe
a |
ee

oe:

anil at if Bete

Aa

cue — wee

SL te ee acento a ah eae Anne BY Seater ae ce tot Be

ge bytes

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 55-64

Prospects for Indonesia

r

a

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
THE PROBLEN qacusarsel cause seeeG nici fa lat aster erences 1
CONCLUSIONS: Sales heca’.dvcadical ela bitidencdedeaamerieten ting l
DISCUSSION yeivroitis = whe ce nauiuacaes inane toeuenie Rune anne 3
I. INTRODUCTION 000000. occ cccccccceeceeesseeneectet etree: 3
I]. THE POLITICAL SITUATION .....00000 cc cccccceeecceee tees 3
Il], THE ECONOMIC SITUATION ..... oes 7
IV. FOREIGN POLICY ee, Be oc neti aeuntcee ul
{
|
;

L

eS 2

PROSPECTS FOR
INDONESIA

THE PROBLEM

To examine the major trends in Indonesia and to estimate probable
developments, taking into account implications of the campaign against
Malaysia.’

CONCLUSIONS

A. President Sukarno remains virtually all-powerful in Indonesia
and there is almost no chance that his rule or his policies will be
effectively challenged by any group, movement, or individual during
his lifetime. Neither increased economic stringency nor dissidence
in the outer islands is likely to threaten Sukarno’s position seriously.
(Para. 3)

B. Over the past year Sukarno has tended to reinforce the position
of the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) and reduce the political
influence of the military. Although PKI influence in the govern-
ment remains relatively limited, it is likely to continue growing as
long as Sukarno remains in power. Sukarno does not seek to establish
PKI dominance but, over the long term, to fuse it with other radical
and nationalist elements that he has slowly drawn into supporting
his objectives. The PKI, well aware of his tactic, will probably con-
tinue ostensibly to support Sukarno, in the belief that in the long run
the Communist cause will be the chief beneficiary of the economic,
social, and political disarray he will bequeath to Indonesia. ( Paras.
2-14)

‘See also NIE 55-63, “Indonesia's International Orientation,” dated 10 April 1963; and
NIE 54/55-63, “The Malavsian-Indonesian Conflict," dated 30 October 1943. The judgments
in both estimates remain essentially valid.

Cc )

Eo

C. Sukaro’s campaign to disrupt Malaysia—“confrontation’”—has
helped accelerate the drift toward the radical left and will do so further
if, as seems likely, the campaign continues. Sukarno will probably
continue to seek to avoid open hostilities with British Commonwealth
forces, because of the uncertainty of victory. aA decisive trend in the
struggle in South Vietnam, either way, would have some effect upon
political forces in Indonesia and upon the pitch of the anti-Malaysia
campaign. But, in any case, the mainsprings of Sukarno’s foreign
policy actions will continue to be found primarily in purely Indonesian
considerations. (Paras. 1, 33, 36)

D. Confrontation has speeded the deterioration of the Indonesian
economy. The most serious short-term problems are growing short-
ages of foodstuffs and other consumer necessities, and a heavy balance
of payments deficit; prospects for improvement are not bright. The
political impact has thus far been slight, but if food shortages persist,
the problem of maintaining public order in urban areas could hecome
serious. (Paras. 17-32)

E. These developments will probably not lead to any marked
changes in Indonesian foreign policy over the next few years. Indo-
nesia's growing cordiality with Communist China will probably con-
tinue, based on a near identity of short-term interests in the Afro-
Asian world. The USSR, clearly disappointed by its failure to achieve
predominant influence in Indonesia, even in the PKI, possesses only
limited influence with Sukarno despite its vast military assistance to
confrontation. (Paras, 34-35)

F. The road ahead for Indonesia is a troubled one of domestic
deterioration, external aggression, and overall Communist profit. This
prospect will not brighten until and unless Indonesia’s energies are
turned from foreign ambitions, which probably include Portuguese
Timor and, in due course, the rest of New Guinea, and are devoted
to the development of this potentially rich country. It is unlikely
that such a shift will occur so long as Sukarno dominates Indonesia.
(Para, 37)

-

L A

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

1. President Sukarno’s campaign against Malaysia—“confrontation"—con-
tinues to dominate Indonesian foreign policy. Confrontation has come to
encompass the use of all means short of overt hostilities to detach the territories
of northern Borneo from Malaysia and drive the British from Southeast Asia.
Confrontation also serves to balster Sukarno’s claim to be a leader of the “new
emerging forces” of the underdeveloped world and provides him with justifica-
tion for his buildup of Indonesian military power. Like the West New Guinea
campaign which it followed, confrontation has worsened the relations of Indo:
nesia with the Western powers and increased its inclination toward the “socialist
camp” upon which it now depends almost exclusively for military equipment
and political support. Yet despite this dependence and an almost complete
identity of positions on mast cold war issues, Sukarno has managed to remain
politically independent of the Communist world and to retain most of his links
with the West.

2, Within Indonesia, Sukarno has also sought to maintain a balance between
Communist and non-Communist forcds, in this case the Indonesian Communist
Party (PKI) and the Indonesian military, the only significant contenders for
political power, There has been, however, a steady accretion of Communist
influence with Sukarno’s acquiescence, especially aver the past year. To some
extent, this drift to the left is attributable to Sukarno’s need to protect his
personal position against Communist attempts to exploit growing economic dis-
content. There is, however, a high degree of volition to Sukarno’s support
of the PKI, stemming mainly from his basic philosophic commitment to au-
thoritarian and socialist forms of government, and from an obsessive anti-
colonialism that has found its most powerful allies among Communists. These
factors have induced Sukarno to increase Communist participation in the gov-
ernment and further to intimidate political moderates and potential dissenters.
In the context of confrontation, which is strongly supported by bath the PKI
and the military, Sukarno is able ta take such actions in the name of national
unity.

Il. THE POLITICAL SITUATION

3. Sukarno. Sukarno remains the unchallenged leader of Indonesia. Al-
though his personal popularity has heen on the wane for several years, he
retains two key assets in maintaining his controlling position: a mystique among
Indonesians stemming from his role as the leader and symbol of the Indonesian
revolution; and a consummate skill in the manipulation of individuals, groups,
institutions, and issues, Neither the PKI nor the military is prepared to challenge
his political pre-eminence, and Sukarno continues to be successful in balancing
them against each other while retaining for himself the controlling power

L _

eS

position. Nor does the nation’s economic distress vet constitute an immediate
danger to him. Faced with the police controls of a “guided democracy” and
hemused by the nationalistic uproar against Malaysia, most Indonesians appear
to have passively accepted economic stringency. The recent increase in armed
dissidence in the Celebes poses no real threat to Sukarno’s position. The Army
is moving vigorously to suppress the rebels and will probably succeed shortly in
confining them to the hilly interior. There are very minor problems of armed
dissidence in Ceram and potential trouble spots in Sumatra and West Irian,
but none appears likely to develop into a serious security problem.

4. The Armed Forces. The Indonesian military leadership is basically a
conservative force; in foreign affairs it is ultranationalist and in domestic affairs
it is interested primarily in maintaining the considerable economic and political
position it has won over the past decade, While overwhelmingly non-Commu-
nist, its opposition to the PKI is hased more on its desire to safeguard this
position than on ideology. Though the military leaders retain considerable
power, they have lost many of their political prerogatives and government posi-
tions over the past year or so, mainly because Sukarno views them as a greater
potential threat to his achievement of absolute power than the PKI and has
accordingly acted to erade their position.

5. Until recently, the Defense Minister -and Chief of Staff of the Armed
Forces, General Nasution, as the most profninent spokesman for the military,
has been a major force in Indonesian politics, He is basically loyal to Sukarno
whom he sees as the irreplaceable leader of the nation, but he has always been
opposed to any encroachment on Army interests, especially Sukarno’s efforts
to enlarge the PKI’s role in national life. A series of cabinet reshuffles follow-
ing the death of First Minister Djuanda in late 1863 moved Nasution from the
inner circle of top palicymakers to a position below that of three Vice Prime
Ministers, who, with Sukarno, now comprise the Cabinet Presidium. The re-
alignment also introduced pro-Communist elements into the Cabinet and reduced
the number and status of portfolios held by the military.

6, Perhaps Sukarno's most important step in reducing Nasution’s influence
has been to raise the status of the more pliable Army Chief of Staff, General
Yani, a former Nasution protege. Since early 1962, Yani, whose professional
ability is highly respected, has had the direct control of the Army once held
by Nasution; he has been given a leading role in the Malaysian confrontation;
and, most important, he is “in” with Sukarno. Yani, although reputed to be
anti-Communist, has acquiesced, apparently for opportunistic reasons, in the
removal of certain militantly anti-Communist regional commanders, and has
shown a tendency to accommodate to the leftists. Nasution’s passive acceptance
of these actions and Yani’s personal ambition have weakened the military as
a force capable of arresting the apparent slide toward the left

mi
4 [ |

1.3(a)(4)(5)

es

7. The military leadership still exerts a prominent and influential administra-
tive role. Of{cers accupy many positions in central government organs and
participate fully in local government. In certain regions outside Java, regional
commumnders continue to exercise predominant political power and in manv cases
have moved to check the PKI. PKI penetration of the armed forces is prob-
ably minor amang officers; perhaps a fe hundred are under Communist influ-
ence. We lack information from which to estimate Communist influence within
the lower ranks, The greater danger to the pasition of the military, however, is
that it will continue ta accept Sukarno’s whittling away of its political influ-
ence to the point where it cannat or will not oppose any of his policies.

8. The Indonesian Communist Party. The PKI is the largest and best or-
ganized political party in Indonesia. It has a young and vigorous leadership
and now claims 3,000,000 members. The total membership of its principal
front organizations—SOBSI (labor), BTI (pensants), Pemuda Rakjat (youth), and
Gerwani (women)—is even greater. The PKI also controls, dominates, or has
heavily infiltrated other leftist political parties, including some small ones close
to Sukamo, and such quasi-political groups as Baperki, comprised of ethnic
Chinese. Above all, over the past decade, the PKT has exploited nationalistic
issues and Sukarno’s benevolence to gain a respectability scarcely approached
by a Communist party in any other non-Communist country.

9. Although the PKI did not achieve its long sought goal of overt cabinet
membership in the reshuffle of late "1963, pra-Cammunists gained the pasts of
Minister of Justice, Minister of the Central Bank, and Minister assigned to the
Cabinet Presidium. Under the new Justice Minister, the judicial system (which
has been nothing more than an arm of the executive in recent years) is being
systematically opened to Communist manipulations, particularly in connection
with plans for administering the complex and poorly conceived land reform
law. Sukarno has urged the Justice Minister “to retool (i.e., replace) all legal
personnel who fail to understand the elements of the revolution and especially
those who oppose it.” The third mentioned pro-Communist minister, an ethnic
Chinese. has access to inner Cabinet proceedings. Sukarno has also replaced
certain anti-Communist governors and canfirmed the PKI as the dominant policy
voice in the management of Antara, Indonesia’s government (and only) news
agency. PKI influence has also become stronger in the secretariat of the Na-
tional Front, the quasi-official federation of all political parties and mass organ-
izations in Indonesia.

10. While ostensibly backing Sukarno on most issues, the PKI has taken a
more aggressive course in the past year. It has renewed its campaign for rep-
resentation in the cabinet and greater participation at all levels of government
and has attacked the government's economic policies, focusing on shortages of
food and consumer goods, inflation, and neglect of the peasantry. These pres-
sure tactics and the patriotic cover offered by its shrill advocacy of confronta-
tion. have facilitated PKI infiltration into various elements of Indonesian society.
Under the guise of achieving national goals, the party has also taken the lead

Ew

PHILIPPUNES'
lrg

REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA

Se e “I PACEFTL ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
oe Se disc JUNE 1964
7 , ” os : IRCA, ok! Fi po Biel od acenadete
or GEN ie les 4 ae ae:
A aed PuLaY ee
- NARABLLONG
araien} Ct 4 ft HE > stpuvauan 7 ae rename international haundary @ National capital
NF \ , vant aN ~~" =" Bravincs Baundary Pal Province capita
x si Bs i, wanotal ~~ \ 4
~ : Porubay ratute Miles
cacy anne, f er : Kilomatere
Pa; Po ee Z Hung | ie
. Man kampungberu, a Ae ei: . i # a
Repeated Aarwre  HEONE 4] Ternate, aa Ta MANERA
= UT aes

Se Ty vrs mana cael

+ ees Pos Ee ee E
as ae ee ee ef age oe ee PMA AI ee ne et
. sl LAWES x { on ba
eK \ { . sag, ln t on iy

ae y res AUW- : rary
. . ie age LS - * ‘ 7
s 4 baa, ome mt mua yatanS aie *,Kiemane oe \ \, | *
PAN 4 ob ee of ‘ re. ade ays rysay Uri meres
cE se ne ae Sa ae . a - i a4
SE 5 Oe I rey re
a ‘ ’ : { WEPULAWAN SULA 4 " :
se ct ee
BPaiapa | “y Na wea ° : Shope Se
ee ae nigh ae, cada
ELAP R : nna MORAG if oe wy He: ng Ly:
‘Nos. 744i asia 7 eis
: oWglampane | ™
Dg I A ait eset
S Baubau’ . “o |
~ Bantnain ~ . IE Nas |
: ALAN gry SEA *eauaniee i ;
a rn Dah
y poe
te aii
SE =" mt. ; | qgpupauan
fot, SUNDO ISLANDS \ wae rua ee
: : ‘ fs :
NF): Pai coed SMe ely ‘a ne
PTR, 2 rchppyhenya we thbeuriere om" OS add Sagres
‘ MATS EXNGUARA ‘
“™ ‘ —_A) TEM ‘i ; J eine cal roman
venangeiaxu? ~ Hongapy ya ~ IFen.t ,ROVED A A

SS et Sa ha Seg Ate re Ah

le Bang “. _ "surely /
: #6 _ : /

A US TLR ACL I

wg Mada Aten

; ” \
ie! OE Se Pou ¢

zoe
hee
IERBELIONS QT .

Alor Star® s

“Gone Konak NE 4
ie ae rare eae § oe : LP eR ae So
wT taH MALA a1A a
ee — ith.
~ wna, ‘hee .
? Aematann- Fendjung ms oo oe / ¢
: tanter", Lan : NATUNA
~ — Kalehepens'y es Tang . vi \
wtih Ngee peiene
: ca a ee ee \ Rte ¢ | Sunes: N=
eh e a . ig »
= ae 2 \. hes Be ce ea
oo 3 coo |
2. wrens ¥e- 2 sf cag fitfaarone i, Suciand® TIMUR
Pura . eG 2p, ro NOPULAUAN may Pamanghele
mag sha Jane hate / a roe t Tandungnineng ey,
Nanas Fe 2 Bak a REA \,
ee OPS Se Ga ty See 3 viet 4
Aaa twuiatg = Se ee a ee, ations aaa? jangapinon ~ \ a Bamavn
- Paraman & eHthumbun Re He 41° Auan all IMANTA Q hoa Tenggarang amaunds
PADANGS * Miderd po hee "ASRAT \ poe)
- ~Yy ‘ Tel sinatibe ! Ye
muy TAPER A SOL ioe as eanday (™ SeuKPaan
") ni
’ AbAuy "ARAT "We oe ~~ Fmeinyy as ; , «fanangrogot
ae OIAMAT “Mung a ohne
A au t Ww, . o Panghaipinang Suberape, ( KALIMANT, oi
ee \ “fern? > : Nanos 7" _ anuipoencen Se ” 4 SEL. ArAS =
* Ww, jangga ~
<— ee tubuktingge be HEMRANG Den dong aii: SAND URMAgIN >
‘Sthatan i tao miusitan
Peraburiubh, SUMAT E  PutaY peut
Sangkuiue we < L . i AN
v7 XX A
“ “Wartapur GR E A T E R | S L A
ace : tEAM PUNY IQA N
oT ae OS BEE ti he tse. dinnene 2: ed area : OM test nee? : tr. NI ae Ae te
x ss Araat } ang oe
hb patie Frage : main fe
I A\dnunan e JAKARTA xe SEAW A TOMER
* ‘ — PULAU Kanazan
-_oaoR 1 ity 7 sama aa ae
. MANQLIN LDIAw ATA % .
ate, eae sunapanra oe RURAL
+ ‘te
Twetap :

ye ea Oshawa

"> CHNETMaS inten
(Aneorotiad

ES

in discrediting the Western political position in Indonesia and in agitatine
against Western economic investment.

11. Despite its considerable gains, the PKI can still exert only limited influ-
ence on formulation of national policy and contral of government machinery.
Communist membership in policymaking bodies is small and usually only ad-
visory in nature, Sukarno has been slow to give the PKI increased representa-
tion in government and wil] probably continue to be so. On the other hand,
even limited participation in the §overnment associates the party with govern-
ment policies, blunts jts ability to open full-scale attacks on the government's
ross mishandling of the economy, and tends to reduce the revolutionary zeal
of party members. Nevertheless, the party continues to view the policy of co-
operation with Sukarna as in its best short-term interest,

PKI and, for that matter, of Sukarno, on the necessity for militant support for
“national liberation” movements accard well with those of Peiping. This con-
gruence of views, more than any other single factor, accounts for Sukarno’s cur-
rent flirtation with Peiping, his benevolence foward the PKI, and the growing
coolness in Djakarta toward Moscow.

13, Prospects. These trends are unlikely to change significantly over the next
year or so. Sukarno will remain the prime mover, with nearly absolute power
of decision in both domestic and foreign affairs. He will continue to seek the
eradication of Western influence in Indonesia and its environs, and the expan-
sion of Indonesia's and his own prestige and influence. For these purposes, he

gradually been drawn into supporting his objectives. At the same time, he will
need the military to maintain public order, implement his expansionist policies,
and provide insurance Against a PKI bid for power.

14, The PKI will Probably continue to move essentially in tandem with
Sukarno. To be sure, the party will seek to add ta its popular appeal by criti-
cizing government econamic policies and portraying itself as the spokesman of
the deprived. It will force the pace of the nationalization of Western assets,
-As long as Sukarno remains in active control of Indonesia, however, the PKI will
almost certainly maintain a basically nonviolent course, Tt does not have the
organization, training, or broad geographic base ta seize power, and any attempt
ta do so would probably fail because of the Superior force of the Army and
Sukarno’s substantial Popularity. Even if successful in seizing power in its Java-

al

4.3(a)(4)(5)

—

nese stronghold, the party would face the certainty of rebellion in the rich outer
islands and the possible fragmentation of the Indonesian state. The PKI leaders
apparently hope that somehow, while the party is still under Sukarno’s protec-
tion, it will became so deeply entrenched in the government that, when Sukarno
leaves the scene, the military will have no choice but to acquiesce in a continua-
tion of the PKT’s role. Any sudden shift in party tactics before Sukarno’s death
would probably be in response to provocation, e.g., an Army crackdown.

15, The Succession. In the event of Sukarno’s death, incapacity, or—as seems
highly unlikely-—his removal from office within the next few years, the most
likely successor government would be a non-Communist military and civilian
group. The military would probably exercise much greater authority than at
present because its support would he essential to the maintenance of public
order. The PKI, restrained hy its limited potential for insurgency and its desire
to avoid provoking the Army into a complete takeover, would announce support
for a speedy civilian succession. A period of political ferment would be likely,
during which competing forces, including political groups now in eclipse or out-
lawed, would jackey for position. The PKI would seek to strengthen its alli-
ances with non-Communist opportunists, like Suhandrio, with whom it has
already developed mutually profitable relationships. The resultant political in-
terplav would provide opportunities: for a realignment of domestic political
forces. The outcome cannot he estimated.

16. It is unlikely that Indonesian domestic or foreign policies would change
in any major way, at least initially. The drive toward socialization might
slacken, but the aggressively nationalistic doctrines of the Sukarno era, the
broad commitment to regional hegemony, and the desire to remain on good
terms with its chief military supplier, the USSR, would persist and hinder any
shift toward pro-Western positions in foreign policy, The new leaders would
probably continue to focus on appeals to nationalist emations rather than on
efforts to solve practical problems, and would probably persist in the confronta-
tion campaign aven if only in low key. Lacking Sukarno’s unequaled gifts for
sloganeering and expansionist campaigns, they might he unable to contain the
economic discontent and the regional separatist pressures that he has kept under
control.

Ill. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

17. Trends. Confrontation has greatly aggravated Indonesia’s chronic prob-
lems of economic mismanagement, inflation, declining industrial production and
falling raw material exports, foreign exchange shortages, and the growing bur-
den of repayment obligations. The heaviest economic burdens of the campaign
against Malaysia have heen the cessation of legal trade with the Singapore entre-

pot,
_

Gass ae

4,(a)(4)(6)

E.

18. The immediate economic impact on confrontation fell most severely on
exports of smallholder rubber from northern Sumatra and Borneo which had
formerly been taken to Singapore for processing and sale, Initial trade losses
were very heavy, but Indonesia has managed to move much of the rubber di-
rectly to overseas markets and smuggling has further reduced stocks on hand;
the loss in earnings may no longer be very great. Estate rubber exports, usually
shipped directly to consumers, were not affected, but production has been re-
duced by the seizures of some British plantations. Tin output has declined
severely and ‘tin earnings even more because of the increased costs incurred
in shipping ores to the Netherlands for smelting rather than to nearby Penang.
Foreign exchange earnings have also suffered because of inadequate shipping
facilities to replace those once supplied by Singapore traders to move Indonesian
cargoes.

19. These short-term effects of confrontation have intensified more funda-
mental problems in the economic sphere. Foreign trade in 1963 dropped 18
percent below 1962: exports dropped 5 percent, and imports, including much
needed machinery, spare parts, and industrial raw materials, dropped 30 per-
cent. A commodity trade surplus of $189 million was not sufficient to offset
transport costs, remittances hy foreign enterprises, and other services, plus a
substantial capital outflow in debt repayments. The result was a heavy deficit
in balance of payments which was met through foreign aid and drawing on gold
and other foreign exchange reserves. Total eserves at the end of 1963 were
only 996 million, less than one-fourth of the Agure in 1960 just before the West
New Guinea crisis. Reserves may now be close to the vanishing point.

20. With declining exparts, a debt repayment burden estimated at $180 mil-
lion per year,” and a rice import requirement of at least $100 million, the avenues
open to Indonesia in balancing its international payments are limited: imports
could be cut even further; it could demand further rescheduling of payments;
or it could default on its debts. Least likely of all, it could abandon the trucu-
lent posture toward Malaysia which has cast it Western financial assistance.

21, As is the case with other underdeveloped countries the revenues of the
Indonesian Government depend heavily on foreign trade. Declining trade has
meant increased budget deficits to be met by borrowing from the Central
Bank—i.e., the printing press—and inflation is rampant. In the six months
following the September 1943 announcement of confrontation, the money sup-
ply increased 50 percent and the cast of living 120 percent.

22, To the average Indonesian, the problem of rising prices and commodity
shortages focuses on food, Production of foodstuffs in Indonesia, always highly
inefficient, has not kept pace with population growth, and per capita consump-
tion is steadily declining; the point may have been reached at which severe
food shortages in certain Jess-favored agricultural areas of Java could become a
regular occurrence between the October and April harvests. There was some

* Indonesia's total foreign debt js $1.0 billion. $900 million is owed to Communist countries,
mainly for military equipment, and 8188 million to the US.

8 a 7

LJ

starvarien in eastern and central Java and on Bali earlier this vear. Deficiencies
in cood production are aggravated by increased demand and a poor distribution
system, Military activities in Borneo and the inclusion of West Irian and the
islands of the Riau Archipelago (off Singapore) in the government distribution
area Curing the past year compaund the prablem. The government is trying
tu suxplement the domestic rice harvest by importing about one million tons
anmuaiv at a cost of 8100 million or one-fifth of total import expenditures.
There is little prospect of procuring additional rice and other foodstuffs under
long-term credit arrangements or of allocating much more of the scarce foreign
exchange to foodstuffs. Thus far, however, the food shortage has apparently
had little political impact.

23. The decline in the economy almost certainly cannot be halted without
extensive foreign assistance, especially to finance imports of food, consumer
goods, and industrial raw materials. Prospects in this regard are poar. Com-
munist China cannot and the USSR probably will not make the required heavy
and continuing expenditure, although Peiping has agreed to deliver 30,000 tons
of rice in 1064 under a commercial arrangement involving na cash payment
and the USSR will almost certainly provide some assistance, such as liberalized
credit for Indonesian purchases. Confrontation has removed the once-bright
prasyect of a coordinated Western program of Anancial satan

A reeent effort to secure this type of aid in Western Europé alone has
vam failed. ,
.

24. Foreign Aid and Investment. Economic aid from the Bloc is now almost
entirely confined to specific development projects, though local currency short-
ages have caused many of these to be postponed. The Communist countries
have rescheduled Indonesia's repayments for the vast amount of military hard-
ware provided over the past several years, but repayment obligations remain
substantial—$25 million annually in the case of the USSR. ”

25.

1.8(a)(4)(5)

1,3(a)(4)(5)

to
met

1.3{a)(4)(6)
ae 4
1.8(a)(4)(6)
ath
1. Baas)

|

30. It is the stated Policy of the Indonesian :

ady «xists—that direct foreign
W forcign investment is limite

10 [_ _|

overnment—for which the
investment shall be gradu-
d to production-sharing ar-

legal framework alre
ally eliminated. Ne

Ee

rangements, an Indonesian device for obtaining foreign capital on a medium-
term, self-liquidating basis. The time span for nationalization of existing direct
foreign investment varies from 15 ta 30 years, depending on the company
involved, but the pace could be quickened by political developments. Agri-
cultural estates are particularly vulnerable to takeover, and complete nation-
alization of these holdings is likely to come first. Least vulnerable are the
foreign oil Companies, now operating as contractors to the Indonesian Govern-
ment under recently signed agreements,

31. Prospects, The Indonesian economic situation wil] continue to deteri-
orate, Far-reaching internal reforms and large-scale foreign aid are necessary
to halt the decline, but these requirements will almost certainly not be met.
As long as confrontation is continued, Western countries are not likely to
extend the economic assistance needed. Neither the USSR nor other Com-

methods and increased agricultural efficiency could, in time, reduce the need
for heavy rice imports and thereby release substantial foreign exchange for
other urgently needed imports. However, there is little chance of any im-

32. The rura] masses, who make up about 80 percent of the Indonesian
population and to a large extent comprise a subsistence economy, will prab-
ably remain passive in the face of ‘economic distress, Urban living standards
will probably continue to drop rapidly in the absence of substantial outside
aid. In the cities, the problem of public order could become critical if food
shortages persist and nublic services continue to deteriorate, If so, the normal
governing process ral cease to function, and martial law might have to be de-

heavy-handed Suppression, The economic situation may contribute to dissidence
in the outer islands, as Djakarta continugg to exploit their natural resources for
the benefit of the Javanese economy.

the UK response to his actions,

J

ed "

1.3(a)(4)(5)

ad

34. Prospects. Over the next few vears, we look for a continuation of con-
frontation and the drift to the left which has accompanied it. Indonesia's
growing cordiality toward Communist China will probably continue; it is based
on a near identity of short-term interests in the Afro-Asian world and Sukarno's
admiration for Mao. The two have cooperated to mutual advantage in the
organization of several Afro-Asian conclaves, and Chinese leftists in Malaysia,
probably with Peiping’s concurrence, are cooperating in Indonesian subversive
efforts there. Such ties are likely to become closer, even though Sukarno and
most of his top leaders are aware of the long-term dangers of growing Chinese
strength in Southeast Asia, Most, however, see the Chinese threat as a distant
one, to be considered when more immediate obstacles to their ambitions are
overcome.

35. The USSR has been disappointed at the meager gains achieved in Indo-
nesia at so much cost in military hardware. At a minimum, Moscow had hoped
to become the predominant foreign influence in Indonesia, but today the USSR
clearly ranks behind Peiping in the affections of Sukarno and those of the PKI.
Moreover, Moscow has been unable to obtain significant Indonesian support
for Soviet participation in the forthcoming Afro-Asian conference. The grent-
est Soviet asset in their effort to retain some influence with Sukarno is their vast
military assistance program. Sukarno's need to retain Soviet aid and to service
and replenish the weaponry already acquired from the USSR will deter him
from following policies openly offensive to Moscow. He might even grant to the
USSR such tangible toncessions as satellite tracking stations and the limited
use of Indonesian air and naval facilities.

36. Events elsewhere in Southeast Asia where the “new emerging forces” are
clashing with the West will have some impact in Indonesia. Victories for the
Viet Cong or Pathet Lao might embolden Sukarno to more forceful action against

Malaysia. [

Ba readies would probably continue his vocal support for the “national
liberatfon" movement in almost any circumstance. The mainsprings of Sukarno’s
foreign policy actions will in any case continue to be found primarily in purely
Indonesian considerations,

37. The road ahead for Indonesia is a troubled one of domestic deterioration,
external aggression, and overall Communist profit. This prospect will not
brighten until and unless Indonesia's energies are turned from foreign ambitions,
which probably include Portuguese Timor and, in due course, the rest of New
Guinea, and are devoted to the development of this potentially rich country.
It is unlikely that such a shift will occur so long as Sukarno dominates Indonesia.

12 _ ie

1.3(a)(4)(5)

a gee arcane toon ean mmm ey

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy os _
is for the Information and use of the recipient and of parsons under his jurisdiction on Gi

need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the.
following officials within their respactive departments: ine

, ; a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State.
7 b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, far the Office of the Secratary o
Defense and the organization of tha Joint Chiefs of Staff fete a
{ c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for:t
home. ol : Department of the Army Wet, Oi. ade, We Has
re re ; d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), for the Department off
‘ - Navy DSA IRE he
| ua s @. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department ‘of the Alf :
- Force

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission - ae
Gg. Assistant Director, FBl, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation ee

h. Director of NSA, for the Natianal Security Agency., , ene ee 7 ROR 4
I. “Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department 6

‘ ‘i . a Agency ; a Y Oy eros ( ‘ a Bhi ;

retained, or destroyed by: burning; in: accorda ca: with
applicable, security regulations, or returned ia the. Central, Intelligance “Agency byl
‘arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA... °°" ve alight ge ity EH

eee 2 This dacument may be

ae

1.3(a)(4)

wok $8 WE eS But a et La

yok.

ge ete are ee A and BRR UME: Prk
a vis, ide The: title of this document when used sep should be:cla hy
2 »-Sifleds. FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY. pate aa
2 a. Sed ; as ‘ : : ee “eh
i ao ne ee 2 ons ae 2 ’ : par
fy a 7 e :

fests a . ied
“", DISTRIBUTION:: ae

oo: White House:
. Nattonal Security Council

ae Department of State:
Ce eis Departmant of Defense
, aes bce : Atomic Energy Commission

Federal Bureau of Investigation
