Africa Review - South Africa - Israeli: Status of Relations
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107417, dated 1 May 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107417).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

2x
sce
2%
SS
Owe

ppm nn me

f
at

a

es
rae rat
oe

OO es

Seat

aiG

Paated
ch

_

“f

A
D

»
=
f
¢
¥
4
f
“a

1ew

Africa Rev

at
1

$ June 198

tau te! Sieg

ma _

AFRICA REVIEW yi

SUPPLEMENT
8 June 1981

CONTENTS

South Africa - Israel: Status of Relations . ..l

Relations between South Africa and Israel
have in recent years expanded to include
extensive economic dealings and close
political ties--and appear to be strong
enough to overcome their inherent draw-
backs.

Sopfet

SOUTH AFRICA - ISRAEL: STATUS OF RELATIONS eT

Ties between South Africa and Israel, once heavily
military and highly secretive, have opened up in recent
years to include extensive economic dealings, a growing
tourist trade, and a close political relationship. This
trend was fostered by former Prime Minister Vorster's
visit to Israel in 1976. The connection has mutual po-
litical drawbacks and potential pitfalls--chiefly for
Israel, which is trying to establish diplomatic relations
with several black African states--but the foundation

of South African - Israeli reJations is strong enough to
overcome most obstacles.

Affinities and Frictions

One of the keys to the relationship has always been
found in South Africa's influential Jewish community.
The approximately 120,000 Jews in South Africa are strong
Zionists and have extensive family ties in Israel. They
have contributed more per capita to Zionist funds than
any other Jewish community and stand second only to Amer-
ican Jews in total annual contributions. *

A number of other cultural and psychological affini-
ties underlie the relationship. The Afrikaners and Is-
raelis both see themselves as "chosen people" and as the
embodiment of Old Testament values. They both resisted
British colonial rule with eventual success. Moreover,
Israel and South Africa are virtual pariahs in the inter-
national community, and within their respective regions
both are isolated and surrounded by actual or potential
enemies. **

8 June 1981

Seotet

“ft

At the same time, several real and potential sources
of friction exist between the two sides. Many Israelis
view apartheid as morally repugnant and fear that too
close an identification with South Africa might label
Israel as racist. Israelis, moreover, are aware of the
history of anti-Semitism among the Afrikaners. Former
Prime Minister Vorster was one of many South Africans who
openly supported the Nazis in World War II, a fact that
led some Israelis to denounce his visit in 1976.

The South Africans also have some misgivings about
the relationship. In 1961 Israel, which then, as now,
was courting black African governments, voted for a UN
resolution condemning apartheid. In 1971 Tel Aviv made
a financial contribution to the OAU's liberation fund,
which Pretoria defined as “tacit support for black Africar
terrorism against white states in southern Africa." In
addition, some virulently anti-Communist South Africans
question the wisdom of close relations with “socialist"
Israel.

The Political Context

Relations between the two countries were low key
but amicable until 1961 when the South African Govern-
ment, in retaliation for Israel's UN vote against apart-
heid, prohibited South African Jews from contributing
funds to Israel. The Jewish community's emotional re-
action to the Six-Day War in June 1967, however, forced
Pretoria to rescind the ban and pe mit the free transfer
of funds and goods to Israel. a

Following the 1973 war, during which South Africa
provided Israel with an emergency supply of Mirage
fighter parts, Israel raised the status of its mission
in South Africa to an Embassy, ana the two countries
greatly increased their official exchanges. Black
Africa's severing of relations with Israel and a warmer
attitude toward South Africa by the Nixon and Ford ad-
ministrations helped ease what few reservations remained
in Tel Aviv about overt cooperation with Pretoria.

Prime Minister Vorster's visit to Israel in 1976
and the accession to power the following year of Israeli
Prime Minister Begin and other pro ~ South African mem-
bers of the Likud bloc ushered in the current renaissance

8 June 1981

2
secyet

: =

in the relationship. One measure of the mutual friend-
ship that now prevails has been the steady two-way flow
of important visitors since Vorster's visit. On the
Israeli side, they have included former Cabinet members
Weizman, Dayan, and Rabin, and Generals Meir Amit and
Chaim Herzog. South African VIP visitors to Israel have
included Finance Minister Horwood, former Minister of
Information Mulder, and former Defense Force Chief of
Staff Gen. Magnus Malan. Ps

Economic Relations

The most important growth in relations over the past
five years has occurred on the economic level. Two-way
trade, which stood at less than $90 million in 1976, broke
the $200 million barrier last year. The leading South
African exports to Israel are processed foods, fish meal,
tobacco, and base metals--particularly iron and steel.
Chemicals, electronic equipment, and machinery head the
list of Israeli exports to South Africa. or

The trade balance falls heavily in favor of South
Africa, a situation Tel Aviv has tried to offset through
such steps as guaranteeing South African investors in
Israel the right to repatriate their profits. The South
African - Israeli Chamber of Commerce has promoted joint
ventures, and both governments have passed favorable trade
legislation. The most successful joint ventures combine
South African capital and raw or semifinished goods with
Israeli technological know-how and management expertise.
Most of the joint projects are based in Israel--where
they can take advantage of Israel's preferential t ade
agreements with the United States and the EC. (or

Diamonds. When the diamond trade is considered, the
economic relationship becomes even more lopsided in South
Africa's favor. Israel, one of the world's leaders in
diamond finishing and polishing, gets all of its raw dia-
monds indirectly from South Africa. The international
diamond market is structured so that nearly all of the
world's diamonds--the vast majority of gemstones come
from South Africa and Namibia-~are sold at fixed prices
to a London syndicate, the Central Selling Organization.
The CSO, a monopoly dominated by South Africa's deBeers
group, then markets the raw diamonds abroad. Israeli

3
Sec

Isracti Imports From and Exports to South Africa

S Mahon U.S
160

150
Imparts
140

130 Exports

120
110

100

Uncla§sifled

diamond purchases from the CSO--which show up in Israeli
statistics as imports from oo Kingdom-~-amounted
to $217 million last year.

Among export commodities, diamonds are better
than a best friend to Israel. Some 20,000 Israelis, or
2 percent of the country's work force, are employed in
the diamond industry. Finished diamonds earn Israel
more than $1 billion annually, and constitute about
30 percent of its exports.

8 June 1981

Tourism. Tourist trade between South Africa and Is-
rael is brisk. In 1978, South African tourists in Israel
accounted for some $13 million in foreign exchange earn-
ings, while Israeli visitors provided South Africa with
about $3 million. South Africa's Jewish community domi-
nates the tourist trade, but, as “people of the book, "
South Africa's increasingly affluent Afrikaners are be-
coming more frequent visitors to Israel's ancient cities
and holy shrines. Israel has waived visa requirements
for South African travelers as part of its program to
promote tourism.

Military Relations

Intelligence liaison stems from overlapping regional
interests as well as each side's preoccupation with the
superpowers. Re Ee ES IEE tae eh

»

PS eee cS : § The intimacy of the inte ilgence rela-
tionship 1s symbolized by Tel Aviv's appointment in 1979
of the former head of the Israeli intelligence service
as Ambassador to Pretoria. (aT

Arms Sales and the UN Arms Embargo. Much of the
controversy over South African - Israeli relations has
centered on cooperation in the area of weapons develop-
ment and sales. There is no evidence to support persist-
ent rumors that South Africa, Israel, and Taiwan are
jointly developing a cruise missile, and recent media
reports that Israel and South Africa are collaborating

8 June 1981

in the construction of a nuclear-powered submarine in
Durban are without basis in fact. The list of weapons
of Israeli origin in the South African arsenal, however,
is extensive--a testimony to past large-scale arms trade
between the two sides. Included in Pretoria's inventory
are Reshef-class patrol boats, Gabriel surface-to-sur-
face missiles, Gallil rifles, and Uzi submachineguns.

it

Israel's decision tc interpret the UN arms embargo
against South Africa in 1977 as only covering future
dealings has contributed to the arms sales controversy.
Although the deal involving the Reshef patrol boats and
their accompanying Gabriel missiles was concluded in 1975,
delivery of the boats and missiles continued through 1978.
South Africa in fact is still building the boats under
Israeli license. {xf

Delayed deliveries, coupled with South African use
of Israeli middlemen to gain access to commercial inter-
national arms dealers, complicate our understanding of
current arms trading between the two countries. Despite

thirdhand accounts that Israe has made clandestine
arms deliveries to South Africa, there is no hard evi-
dence refuting Tel Aviv's official denials that it has
concluded arms deals with South Africa since 1977 or

is otherwise violating the UN arms embargo as it inter-

prets it. er

Nuclear Ties

Speculation about South African - Israeli collab-
oration in producing nuclear weapons has been rife since
1963, when Pretoria sold Tel Aviv 10 tons of nominally
safeguarded uranium. Prime Minister Vorster's proposal
in 1976 for a series of scientific and technical ex-
changes and the reports linking South Africa and Israel
to the September 1979 “event" in the South Atlantic have
raised such speculation to new heights. ao ae a

8 June 1981

Se t

No similar exchanges have taken place between the
Israeli Atomic Energy Commission and the South African
Atomic Energy Board, and both the Israeli reactor complex
at Dimona and the South African uranium enrichment plant
_ at Valindaba have been closed to foreigners. Siiynu———

Outlook

Although there is room for continued growth in South
African - Israeli relations, the phase of rapid expansion
may already have run its course. The outcome of the elec-
tion this month in Israel could have a dampening effect.
Prime Minister Begin's primary challengers in the Labor
Party have over the years made clear their reservations
about bilateral ties, and under a Labor government Tel
Aviv could be expected to put some distance between it-
self and Pretoria. Some cooling in relations could occur
even if the Likud bloc stays in power. Foreign Minister
Shamix is only one of several leading members of the

segrét

ruling coalition who have urged a deemphasis on the poli-
tical side of relations, presumably to improve Tel Aviv's
prospects for a diplomatic breakthrough in black Africa. yor

Economic ties will probably be immune to dramatic
shifts, but even here certain constraints could come in-
creasingly into play. The geographic distance between
the two countries--21 days by sea--has already inhibited
some categories of trade, particularly bulk commodities,
and could become more of a disincentive if transportation
prices continue to rise. On another level, Pretoria
could react to any Israeli-inspired cooling of political
ties by eliminating some of the incentives it has created
for investment in Israel. Even if relations continue to
flourish on the economic and political levels, the once-
substantial arms trade could dry up as Israeli deliveries
under pre-UN embargo contracts run out and as South
Africa's indigenous arms industry begins producing more
sophisticated equipment.

Overall, however, the foundations of South African -
Israeli ties are strong enough to endure temporary set-
packs. The major concern facing each partner is likely
to continue to be the one implied in recent comments by.
the Israeli diplomat in Pretoria, who said Israel's main
problem is to maintain a low profile in its Nembarrassingly
good" relations with South Africa. Ww - ote

8 June 1981

Se t
