Probable Developments in Eastern Germany Through 1952
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000046768, dated 2 January 1952.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000046768).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ap
ror RABete,

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient's
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties.: Fur-
ther dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the in-
formation for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

e. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart-
ment of State

_ Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force

Assistant to the Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

_ Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other De-
partment or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by ar-
rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

rQ sf Aa S

DISTRIBUTION:
Office of the President
National Security Council

_ National Security Resources Board
Department of State
Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Atomic Energy Commission
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Development Board
Munitions Board

wrt ARTs oem pen te

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN EASTERN
GERMANY THROUGH 1952

NIE~59

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticipated with the Central Intelligence Agency in the prep-
aration of this estimate. All members of the Intelligence
Advisory Committee concurred in this estimate on 7 Feb-
ruary 1952.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS

IN EASTERN GERMANY

THROUGH 1952

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the current situation and probable political, economic, scientific, and
military developments in East Germany through 1952.

ASSUMPTION
That there will not be general war within the period of this estimate.

CONCLUSIONS

1. In East Germany*, the USSR is de-
veloping a Communist-controlled state
which is being made an integral part of
the Soviet Bloc and which is being de-
veloped industrially to provide a maxi-
mum contribution to the Soviet military
and economic potential.

2. The reorganization of the political and
economic structure of East Germany
along Soviet lines and the incorporation
of East Germany into the Soviet Bloc are
almost certainly not regarded by the
Kremlin as a permanent substitute for
the ultimate formation of a unified Com-
munist Germany under Soviet control.

3. We do not believe that the Kremlin
will give up or weaken its control over
East Germany either as part of its strat-
egy for attaining control over a unified
Germany or as part of its effort to pre-
vent the integration of West Germany

*East Germany includes the Soviet Zone of Ger-
many and the Soviet Sector of Berlin. The German
Democratic Republic (GDR) does not include the
Soviet Sector of Berlin.

vith the West and West German rearm-
ament.

4. As a tactical manoeuvre, the Kremlin
might remove some of its more overt con-
trol mechanisms including some of its
military forces. We do not believe, how-
ever, that the Kremlin would so relax
its control over East Germany as to affect
the foundations of Soviet authority. -

5. The vast majority of the East German
population are opposed to the present
regime. There is, however, no evidence
of organized opposition. Further con-
solidation of the Communist position,
more complete incorporation of East Ger-
many into the Soviet Bloc, and continued
progress in increasing industrial produc-
tion, particularly of heavy industry, will
probably be the principal developments
in 1952.

6. East Germany will continue to

Strengthen the Soviet military potential
through serving as a channel for obtain-
ing critical materials and equipment from
the West, through providing scientific

sae. 2

manpower and research facilities, and
particularly through the flow of its pro-
ducts to the USSR. Uncompensated de-
liveries* to the USSR in 1952 are expected
to amount to approximately $1.7 billion.

7. The capabilities of the East German
Alert Police, which now number approx-
imately 52,000 men, are limited by inade-
quate equipment, insufficient training,
and low morale. The East German Air
Force will probably not progress beyond

the planning stage, and the capabilities
of the naval force will remain minor.

8. Soviet occupation forces in East Ger-
many constitute a poised threat to all of
Western Europe and the Scandinavian
peninsula. These forces include an esti-
mated 1,340 Soviet-manned aircraft and
ground forces numbering about 384,000
men, organized into 22 line divisions,
which form 4 mechanized and 2 rifle
armies.*

DISCUSSION

THE SOVIET OBJECTIVE

9. In East Germany, the USSR is developing
a Communist-controlled state which is being
made an integral part of the Soviet Bloc and
which is being developed industrially to pro-
vide a maximum contribution to the Soviet
military and economic potential. The reor-
ganization of the political and economic
structure of East Germany along Soviet lines
and the incorporation of East Germany into
the Soviet Bloc are almost certainly not re-
garded by the Kremlin as a permanent sub-
stitute for the ultimate formation of a uni-
fied Communist Germany under Soviet con-
trol.

10. We do not believe that the Kremlin will
give up or weaken its control over East Ger-
many either as part of its strategy for attain-
ing control over a unified Germany or as
part of its effort to prevent the integration of
West Germany with the West and West Ger-
man rearmament. As a tactical manoeuvre,
the Kremlin might remove some of its more
overt control mechanisms, including some of
its military forces. We do not believe, however,
that the Kremlin would so relax its control
over East Germany as to affect the founda-
tions of Soviet authority.

*Uncompensated deliveries include a large portion
of the output of the Soviet-owned factories (SAG's),
reparations, occupation costs, and other services.

PROBABLE POLITICAL DEVELOPMENTS

Current Situation

11. After the establishment of the German
[Tyamocratic Republic (GDR) in October 1949,
the Soviet Military Administration was suc-
ceeded by the smaller and more centralized
Soviet Control Commission, which governs
the Soviet Sector of Berlin and maintains
general supervision over the East German
regime. The Socialist Unity Party (SED)—
which is the Communist Party of East Ger-
many — has been given all key positions in
the GDR and has become the subservient
executor of Soviet policy. :

12. To maintain the fiction that East Ger-
many is a democratic multi-party state, the
Communists have permitted the existence of
purged “bourgeois” political parties, the

* The Director of Intelligence, USAF, comments on
conclusions 3, 4 and 8, and the supporting discus-
sion as follows:

“Conclusions 8, 4 and 8 give high assurance that
Soviet forces in East Germany will not be reduced
materially even for the purpose of preventing West
German rearmament. Although there is a logical
basis for such a belief, we should recognize that the
Soviet Union may not look upon the advantages of
poised military threat or control exactly as we do
at any one time. The possibility should not be
excluded from consideration that the Soviet Union
may see its way clear to stalemate or destroy the
effectiveness of NATO through such devices as with-
drawal of forces and insistence upon a neutral de-
militarized German state, while pursuing its gen-
eral objectives with force elsewhere.”

HY

eae 3

Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and the
Liberal Democratic Party. The Communists
use members of these parties to disseminate
both covert and overt propaganda to West
Germany. In 1948 the Communists created
two new parties, the Democratic Peasants
Party and the National Democratic Party, to
enlist support among elements of the popula-
tion reluctant to join the SED or not desired
within the SED. In 1949 all political parties
were forced into the National Front, an or-
ganization through which the SED directs
and controls all political activity.

13. The vast majority of the East German
population are opposed to the present regime.
There is, however, no evidence of organized
opposition. The regime has gained some sup-
port in the last two years as the result of Com-
munist education upon the youth, the slow
but steady rise in the standard of living, and
better concealment of Soviet controls and
exploitation. However, the wide-spread know-
ledge of conditions in West Germany gen-
erates dissatisfaction.

14. The regime has made great efforts to win
over the youth (age group 6 to 25), who
comprise more than a third of the population
and who have had no adult experience under
a democratic government. Although about
one-half of the youth are members of Com-
munist organizations, probably not more than
half of these are now active supporters of
the regime.

15. Substantial progress has been made dur-
ing the last two years in merging East Ger-
many with the Soviet Orbit. East Germany
is a member of the Council of Economic
Mutual Assistance (CEMA), an organization
established by the USSR to help coordinate
the economies of the Communist states of
Eastern Europe. East Germany has trade
agreements, cultural accords, and treaties of
friendship with the USSR and with most of
the Satellites, and it has a trade agreement
with Communist China. However, the status
of the GDR differs in several respects from
that of the other major Satellites: (a) the
USSR has not concluded a mutual assistance
pact with the GDR or permitted it to conclude
one with any of the other Satellites; (b) the

USSR has not created East German armed
forces comparable in size to the armed forces
of the other Satellites; and (c) the USSR has
not made the GDR a formal member of the
Cominform.

Probable Developments in 1952

16. The SED will probably become a some-
what smaller but more reliable and effective
party as former Socialists and unreliable or
suspect Communists are replaced by members
of the Free German Youth. The privileges
accompanying membership in the numerous
mass organizations controlled by the SED
will probably be increased in order to encour-
age their growth, and it will probably become
increasingly difficult for East Germans to
avoid participating in these organizations
without incurring serious political and eco-
nomic penalties. The “bourgeois” parties will
probably be permitted to continue their sub-
servient existence and the National Front will
remain. The amount of active support which
the regime receives from the youth will prob-
ably increase.

17. A number of issues and forces wil] con-
tinue to be troublesome for the Kremlin
throughout 1952 but will not jeopardize Soviet
authority in East Germany. Three of these
~—the desire for a unified Germany, the tra-
ditional German attitude toward the Russians
and other Slavs, and a sense of identification
with the West—derive from German history.
Others, such as the loss of the territories be-

, yond the Oder-Neisse, the imposition of the

Soviet system, reparations and general Soviet
exploitation of the area, and the attraction of
a free and more prosperous West Germany,
are direct products of the recent changes.
However, East German political, economic,
and social life is completely controlled by
Communists subservient to the Kremlin and
open opposition to the regime will almost cer-
tainly not develop in 1952.

18. There is little likelihood that the Kremlin
will conclude a treaty of peace with East Ger-
many until it has decided that it cannot pre-
vent the integration of West Germany with
the West and the rearmament of West Ger-
many. We do not believe the Kremlin will
reach this conclusion in 1952. Even if the

= eee

roa ra

ibege 4

Kremlin should conclude a peace treaty with
East Germany, it is probable that the Soviet
occupation forces would remain in East Ger-
many on “request” of the GDR.

PROBABLE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS

Current Economic Situation

19. East Germany constitutes approximately
one-third of 1945 Germany in total area, popu-
lation, arable land, and industrial capacity.
When the Kremlin stopped the removal of
capital equipment in 1948, East German in-
dustrial capacity was less than 50 percent
that of 1936. Since 1948, the USSR has been
attempting to restore the East German econ-
omy and to enlarge the East German indus-
trial base. Although recovery has been steady,
the Kremlin’s program has been handicapped
by East German dependence on the West for
some raw materials and industrial equipment,
by the effects of Soviet removal of capital
equipment, by the loss of East German access
to Silesian and West German coal fields, and
by uncompensated East German deliveries to
the USSR.

20. Industrial production in 1950 is estimated
to have been 85 percent of the 1936 level and
in 1951 to have equalled the 1936 level.* Con-
siderable progress has been made toward
greater economic independence from the
West. In 1950, 80 percent of the foreign trade
of East Germany was with the Soviet Bloc,
and this percentage will almost certainly in-
crease. However, although there has been
Slight but steady improvement since 1949,
the standard of living in 1951 was only two-
thirds that of 1936.

21. Progress toward nationalization of indus-
try, a goal of the East German regime, has

_ been made easy by the traditional role played

by the German state in the economy. Accord-
ing to official East German figures, 68 percent
of industrial production in 1950 came from
state-owned and Soviet-owned installations,
with the percentage much higher for certain

* East German Official statistics assert that industri-
al output in 1950 exceeded the 1936 level by 6 per-
cent. The 1951 Plan scheduled an 18 percent increase
in industrial output over 1950, making planned 1951
production 126 percent that of 1936.

individual industries, such as synthetic fuel.
This figure was scheduled to mount to 77 per-
cent in 1951.

22. The government controls agriculture by
allocation of seed and fertilizer, the Machine
Lending Stations, the Farmers’ Mutual Aid
Society (Communist-controlled farm cooper-
ative), and discriminatory crop delivery
quotas. There has, for all practical purposes,
been no collectivization of agriculture.

Five Year Plan

23. The Five Year Plan for 1951-1955, an-
nounced originally in July 1950 and revised
in November 1951, reveals quite clearly that
the organization of the East German econ-
omy is modelled on the Soviet pattern and
that the principal Soviet economic objectives
for East Germany for the next few years are:

a. To expand East German industry, par-
ticularly those heavy industries equipped to
contribute directly or indirectly to armament
production or capable of early conversion to
armament production. The average annual
gross investment in industry under the Plan
is scheduled to exceed the estimated 1936 in-
vestment in industry in this area by approx-
imately 45 percent, and industrial production
is scheduled to increase by 100 percent over
the 1936 level by 1955. Emphasis has been
placed upon the machine construction and
metallurgical industries and upon those enter-
prises manufacturing heavy equipment.

b. To absorb the East German economy into
that of the Soviet Bloc and to ensure max-
imum East German contribution to Bloc eco-
nomic and military strength. The four-year
trade agreement signed on 27 September 1951
by the USSR and the GDR provides for ex-
tensive Soviet exports of grain, coke, iron ore,
and pig iron to East Germany and for con-
stantly increasing East German exports to
the USSR of machinery, electro-engineering
equipment, precision instruments, and liquid
fuels.

East German Economic Contributions to

Soviet Strength

24. East Germany is an important medium
for obtaining from the West, especially from

Mitte, 5

West Germany, materials and equipment
which are important to the Bloc war potential
and which the USSR and the other Satellites
find difficult to obtain directly. We estimate
that at least one-half of the total imports
from West Germany are clandestine, and that
a large portion, perhaps as much as one-half,
of the total imports from West Germany are
shipped directly to the USSR. The remain-
ing materials and equipment are obtained for
East German industries, primarily those
which deliver products to the USSR, and for
the industries of the other Satellites.

25. Soviet-owned industrial enterprises
(SAG’s)* manufacture about one-quarter of
the total industrial production. They have
a dominant position in the basic chemical
industries and control about one-third of East
German brown coal production, two-thirds of
the potash production, one-half of the met-
allurgical capacity, and one-half of cement
capacity. SAG plants control about 31 per-
cent of the electric power generating capacity
and produce about 45 percent of the electric
power. The East German regime has no con-
trol over the SAG plants, which obtain pref-
erential treatment in the procurement of
workers and which receive materials on a
priority basis at prices fixed below production
costs. Most SAG production is delivered to
the USSR or exported on Soviet account.

26. East Germany receives no compensation
for most of its deliveries of goods and services
tothe USSR. We estimate that these uncom-
pensated deliveries to the USSR averaged
approximately $1.7 billion (in current dollars)
annually from 1946 through 1950. Uncom-
pensated deliveries in 1950 are estimated to
have amounted to about one-quarter of the
East German gross national product.

27. The most important goods provided the
USSR by East Germany are:

“When the Kremlin realized in 1946 that dismant-
ling of East German factories was producing a
cumulative detrimental effect upon production for
reparations by other factories, it transferred some
plants designated for dismantling to Soviet owner-
ship but left them in East Germany to be operated
with German labor and raw materials. A few of
these plants have since been “sold” to the GDR.

a, Uranium ores and concentrates. East
Germany is estimated to have supplied in 1950
approximately 40 percent of the Soviet Bloc’s
uranium ores and concentrates. This per-
centage may have declined slightly in 1951,
but East Germany remains the largest single
source of fissionable material available to the
USSR.

b. Engineering equipment. East Germany
exports to the USSR approximately 50 percent
of the total annual production of its engi-
neering industries. Some items, which involve
the use of highly skilled labor in their manu-
facture, constitute a particularly important
contribution to Soviet industrial and military
expansion, notably equipment for electrical
installations and railroads, mining, metallurg-
ical, and metal-working machinery, indus-
trial instruments, and machine tools. The
size of the East German engineering industry
is illustrated by the fact that its 700 major
plants employ about 700,000 workers and pro-
duce about 25 percent of the total value of
East German industrial production.

c. Synthetic rubber. East Germany exports
to the USSR about 50 percent of its synthetic
rubber production, or an amount equal to ap-
proximately 10 percent of Soviet production.
East Germany is the only Satellite which pro-
duces a significant amount of synthetic rub-
ber, and it makes most of the chemicals used
in synthetic rubber production. Its exports
to Poland and Czechoslovakia constitute an
additional contribution to the Orbit’s military
potential.

d. Synthetic fuel. East Germany furnishes
to the USSR about one-third of its synthetic
fuel production, an amount equal to about
25 percent of Soviet synthetic fuel production
or about 5 percent of total Soviet POL produc-
tion. The synthetic fuel industry of East
Germany is the largest and most highly de-
veloped in the world and now produces almost
60 percent more than estimated domestic re-
quirements. It is estimated that the current
East German POL stockpile probably
amounts to 50 percent more than the current
combined annual needs of the domestic econ-
omy and the Soviet occupation forces.

a

8, |

he 6

e. Armaments. For the past three years
East Germany has been converting part of
its industry to the production of small arms,
weapons components, and munitions. It may
recently have begun to manufacture heavy
armaments equipment, such as T-34 and
Stalin tanks. Although available evidence
does not provide data adequate for estimating
the current level of arms production in East
Germany, East Germany is the largest poten-
tial center for armaments manufacture
among the Satellites.

Limitations on East German Economic
Capabilities

28. The following deficiencies constitute the
most important limiting factors on the Soviet
program for expanding East German indus-
trial production:

a. The planned expansion of industry ex-
ceeds the supply of available skilled labor and
management and estimated ability to train
skilled workers, technicians, and managers.

b. East Germany lacks adequate supplies of
many of the raw materials necessary for a
modern industrialized economy. High-grade
iron ore, coke, copper, lead, zinc, nickel,
chromium, molybdenum, tungsten, caustics,
sulphur, and pyrites are extremely limited in
supply. Most of these raw materials are in
short supply throughout the Bloc.

c. Deficiencies in capital equipment also
hamper the program. Machine tools, steel-
making machinery, and electrical generating
equipment are the principal vulnerabilities,
and it has been difficult, if not impossible,
to obtain these items from the West, even
through clandestine trade. Most of the crit-
ical equipment needed in East Germany is
in short supply throughout the Bloc, but these
deficiencies will become less significant as
domestic production increases.

Probable Economic Developments in 1952

29. The Plan for 1952 schedules an increase
in industrial production of approximately 13
percent over the 1951 level. It is probable
that the over-all increase in production will
not exceed 10 percent. However, the level of
attainment in the key industries and the key

factories, particularly those manufacturing
military equipment, may more closely approx-
imate the target percentage. Stockpiling will
continue and East Germany will become an
increasingly important advance supply area.
The number of plants owned and operated
by the state will probably increase in 1952.
(All industrial facilities, with the possible ex-
ception of some small plants, will probably
be state-owned and operated by 1955.)

30. There is no evidence that the regime plans
to increase agricultural collectivization in
1952. Agricultural production and distribu-
tion are already effectively controlled. Col-
lectivization would stimulate opposition and
might result in reduced production.

31. Uncompensated deliveries to the USSR
will almost certainly continue through 1952
at approximately the average annual rate of
about $1.7 billion (in current dollars} main-
tained since 1946, though they will probably
be concealed more skillfully. The SAG’s
could be “sold” to the East German Govern-
ment, with little loss to Soviet control or
exploitation and with propaganda benefit, but
there is no evidence that this transfer will
be made.

PROBABLE SCIENTIFIC DEVELOPMENTS

32. East Germany inherited an important
portion of Germany’s scientific tradition and
resources. Although war destruction, emi-
gration of able scientists, dismantling, the
deterioration of laboratory facilities, and So-
viet regimentation have hampered scientific
development, the number of scientists in Eas.
Germany now approximately equals the pre-
war figure and the 6 universities, 13 technical
schools, and numerous research departments
and institutes remain important centers for
scientific research and education.

33. Scientific research in East Germany since
1945 has been primarily in the applied fields,
as distinct from basic or pure research, and
has concentrated upon the development of
substitute materials and the improvement of
processes in heavy industry. Research upon
important military items, such as guided mis-
Siles, was transferred to the USSR in 1946 and
1947, leaving research upon only a few mili-

—

i

'

> J Fg

—
-“~\D>
P-
tary items of lesser importance in East Ger-
“ many.

34. The USSR is encouraging scientific re-

+ search in East Germany. The GDR provides

ample funds for research, and_preferential
4 treatment is given to scientists. LMany scien-
ists have been returned_to East Germany
¥ from the USSR since 1949 The program to
ure scientists from West’ Germany has had
Clittle success, but contacts between the scien-
Phat of East and of West Germany do consti-

+ ute political and scientific benefits for the

SSR. Scientific research in East Germany
complements Soviet research in certain fields,
~ such as electronics and bacteriglogy. However,
the principal benefit to the USSR from East
German science is not access to a superior
bes of knowledge but the use of additional
‘scientific manpower and research facilities.

35. Scientific research in East Germany will
probably continue along the lines now estab-
lished. A rapid expansion of enrollment in
the educatioual institutions is planned. How-
ever, the current low standards of higher edu-
cation in East Germany will impair the ef-
fectiveness of the increased number of re-
search workers produced by this program.

PROBABLE MILITARY DEVELOPMENTS

East German Armed Forces

Ground Forces

36. The Alert Police, organized in 1948 to pro-
vide cadres for an East German army, has an
estimated strength of 52,000 men, organized
into 24 Alert Units, 15 schools, and small

* The Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, Department of
the Army, in view of the political situation resulting
from the Soviet-inspired German unification and
“peace” campaigns, believes that a major expansion
of the East German Alert Police Force in 1952 ap-
pears less likely at present than it did several
months ago. However, the following factors are
pertinent:

(1) The signing of the “contractual” and Euro-
pean Defense Community (E.D.C.) agreements by
West Germany, which commit West Germany to
participation in Western Defense would materially
change the political situation and might lead to in-
creased tempo in the rearmament of East Germany.

(2) The present Alert Units are organized as
cadres.

iii 7

specialist units. The Alert Police Force has
not expanded since November 1950, when it
reached its present strength. Its capabilities
are limited by inadequate equipment, insuffi-
cient training, and low morale. It is estimat-
ed that within a period of six months the
present Alert units could be enlarged and
combined to form an army of 8 divisions with
a total strength of about 100,000 men and
prepared for combat within the framework
of Soviet corps. Although it is impossible to
determine whether such an expansion will be
undertaken, present conditions and past per-
formances seem to indicate that such an ex-
pansion is not probable in 1952.*

Air Force

37. An East German Air Police Headquarters
was established in January 1951, but evidence
available thus far indicates that its functions
have been limited to registering Luftwaffe
veterans and politically reliable young men
and to drawing plans for an air force. Some
German pilots and crews are probably being
trained now in the USSR, but the Kremlin
could probably not integrate a German air
unit into the Soviet Air Force or form an East
German air force before 1953.

Naval Force

38. The capabilities of the East German naval
force are currently limited, and the personnel
is not considered completely reliable. Soviet
control is being improved through the elimi-
nation of all whose loyalty is suspect and
through intensive political indoctrination
courses. East German naval units have been

(3) Out of an estimated total strength of 52,000,
almost one-third (14,000-16,000) are officers.

(4) A reorganization of the Alert Police Force re-
portedly was planned for mid-December, 1951, but
~/as postponed because of a lack of senior staff and
commanding officers. The return of a second group
of 150 staff officers from advanced training in the
USSR. is expected in August, 1951.

Therefore, the A.C. of S., G-2, Department of the
Army, believes that an expansion of the Alert Police
Force in 1952 must not be discounted, and that the
last sentence of paragraph 36 should read, “Al-
though a major expansion of this force during 1952
appears less likely at present than it did several
months ago, the possibility of such an expansion
must not be discounted.”

t
'
F
i

Ser Rtn tive bie: ect etteltink Ime 4
eco Sy,

as 8

participating in joint training operations
with Soviet naval forces. These units are
now capable of limited anti-submarine, mine-
laying, minesweeping, and patrol operations.

Soviet Occupation Forces

39. Control of East Germany has pushed the
frontiers of the Soviet Orbit deep into the
flat coastal plains of north-central Europe.
East Germany provides the USSR an ad-
vanced offensive and defensive position. Soviet
control of the area constitutes a poised threat
to all of Western: Europe and the Scandi-
navian peninsula.

40. The bulk of the Soviet forces in the Sat-
ellite area is concentrated in East Germany
and constitutes the spearhead of Soviet mili-
tary strength. Soviet ground forces station-
ed in East Germany number 384,000 men, or-
ganized into 22 line divisions, which form 4
mechanized and 2 rifle armies. There has
been no significant change in the composition
or quality of these forces within the past two
years, and there is no evidence that any
change will occur within the period of this
estimate.

41. Soviet air strength in East Germany is

estimated at 1,340 aircraft. The movement
in the fall of 1951 of Soviet jet fighters from
six East German air bases temporarily reduced
Soviet air capabilities, but apparently these
aircraft are now being replaced. The quality
of the Soviet air force stationed in East Ger-
many has improved greatly during 1951. Jet
fighters have now replaced piston-engine
types, and jet light bombers are increasing in
number on East German airfields. Of the
Soviet-manned aircraft now stationed in East
Germany, we estimate 650 are jet fighters,
50 piston fighters, 170 jet light bombers, 90
piston light bombers, 250 attack bombers, 70
transports, and 60 reconnaissance planes.

42. The extensive Soviet program of airfield
improvement and construction in the Satel-
lite area has concentrated most heavily upon
East Germany, where 12 airfields can now
support sustained operations, and 13 others
p’obably can support limited operations by
medium bombers. The network of East Ger-
man airfields is the best equipped in Eastern
Europe and provides the most extensive and
up-to-date facilities for night-flying and all-
weather operations. Moreover, within the past
six months, there has been a considerable in-
crease in POL storage facilities and great im-
provement in the service and repair facilities.
