Consequences of the Death or Assassination of de Gaulle
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011788, dated 5 August 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011788).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Review
589-140
ad

poh)

4
*

eG

nm
Ie

ie
datory
ase # NLJ
ment #

SPL
tan
Docu

L
.é

:
a
oe,

Rele

27 Bee 19%

away

Approved fo
te

Da

ate

ma
y:

to

Me

weer

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 22-3-62

Consequences of the Death or
Assassination of De Gaulle

CONSEQUENCES OF THE
DEATH OR ASSASSINATION
OF DE GAULLE

THE PROBLEM

To assess the consequences for the internal political situa-
tion in France and the effect on French foreign policies of |
de Gaulle’s death by assassination or natural causes within
the next few months.

CONCLUSION

A constant threat of assassination hangs over de Gaulle.
But we believe that while some disorders might follow his
assassination, the succession would take place normally, as
if the President had died of natural causes. We do not
believe plotters have extensive military backing and without
such backing a coup attempt would almost certainly fail.
The most likely successor to de Gaulle would be a “notable”
of.the Fourth Republic, who would not have de Gaulle’s
unique authority. Relations with France’s allies would prob-
ably improve, but many Gaullist foreign policies would con-
tinue to have strong support and any basic alterations in
foreign and defense policies would probably come slowly.

DISCUSSION

1. A constant threat of assassination hangs
over President de Gaulle, who has already
experienced two attempts on his life since
coming to power in 1958. The end of the
French-Algerian war has loosed on French
soii thousands of lawless, bitter, and dis-
gruntled European expatriates from Algeria,
including many veterans of the OAS, who have
lived by violence for months and who still
regard de Gaulle with loathing. Spokesmen
of the OAS have declared the assassination
of the President to be the first step in a long-
range strategy to change the political climate
in France and eventually to reconstitute the
French presence in Algeria. There are prob-
ably some military officers who feel that
assassination of de Gaulle would be a patriotic
gesture against a man who in their opinion
had dishonored the French military establish-
ment.

2. The assassination of de Gaulle could
come about as an act of vengeance by an in-
dividual or a small group of malcontents, or
it could be part of a plot by elements of the
OAS. In the latter case, the plotters might
attempt to seize power on de Gaulle’s death,
in the belief that they could rally a sub-
stantial mumber of supporters among dis-
located settlers from Algeria and army officers
to carry out a coup attempt once they had dis-
posed of de Gaulle and possibly some of the
Ministers most closely identified with his poli-
cies. We believe that such an undertaking
would almost certainly fail because the OAS
has little popular support in France and would
receive little support from the military. An-

other motive—one with a longer range objec-
tive—would be the hope to set in motion politi-
cal deterioration which would lead eventually
to a rightist dictatorship. This more distant
hypothesis cannot be dismissed out of hand,
but it fails beyond the scope of this Estimate.

3. Most military officers, even those who
harbor deep resentments against de Gaulle,
probably view the loss of Algeria as a closed,
even if a sordid, chapter in French history.
They would almost certainly be unwilling to
identify themselves with a coup involving the
possibility of widespread violence unless it was
in a cause which would arouse patriotic re-
sponses among at least the rightwing of
French politics. Algeria is.no longer such a
cause. In any event, they would fear that
only extremists on right and left could profit
from such violence. In the absence of mili-
tary involvement, the security forces alone
would be quite sufficient to eliminate quickly
any momentary success that clandestine plot-
ters might achieve, such as the seizure of
some public buildings. By the same token
security forces would be likely to restrain any
demonstrations that might be mounted from
the left in protest against the assassins.

4. While some disorders might follow the
assassination, we believe the succession would
take place normally, as if the 71-year-old
President had died of natural causes. Assum-
ing no change in present constitutional pro-
cedures, the President of the Senate, Gaston
Monnerville, would assume de Gaulle’s func-
tions and would shortly thereafter call for

election of a permanent successor.! Monner-
ville, a cautious but dedicated republican,
would probably use his powers in such a way
as to insure that the succession process oper-
ated smoothly and that the transition was
accomplished with a minimum of political
tension.

5. Under such comparatively tranquil cir-
cumstances the probable choice of the con-
servative-dominated electoral college would be
a “notable” of Fourth Republic vintage, such
as Antoine Pinay. If the domestic atmos-
phere should become highly charged, or if
some dangerous external crisis should develop
over Berlin or the safety of the remaining
French settlers in Algeria, a Gaullist or a mili-
tary figure might be chosen. On the whole,
however, we believe the domestic atmosphere
would be relatively calm and that external
factors would not play a decisive role in the
choice.

6. Any successor to de Gaulle would, of
course, be unable to command the unique au-
thority enjoyed by his predecessor, and at
least initially he would almost certainly try
to compensate for his relative weakness by dis-
playing a more charitable and cooperative at-
titude toward Parliament. This would prob-
ably mean that the Premier’s role would be
expanded. The Premier, in turn, would prob-
ably prove more responsive to the evident
wishes of his parliamentary majority.

‘For the purpose of this estimate it is assumed
that the present constitutional provision for the
succession will remain in force. The text of this
provision is attached at Annex. De Gaulle is cur-
rently considering constitutional changes which
would affect the succession. There is speculation
that he is considering popular election of the Presi-
dent and possibly the establishment of an office of
Vice President. Without knowledge of what these
changes will be it is impossible to estimate at this
time what effects they might

7. Superficially, the arrangements described
above would appear to constitute a continua-
tion of the de Gaulle regime under the com-
mand of a less imposing leader. However,
essential ingredients of the old formula would
be lacking. Because the new President would
not enjoy de Gaulle’s sweeping popularity, he
would probably refrain from throwing his per-
sonal prestige into any political crisis with
Parliament or against any powerful special
interest groups. He would lack the aura of
indispensability which has made other leaders
reluctant to attack de Gaulle. Finally, he
would find himself falling heir to the many
problems which remained unresolved during
the long agonies of the search for an Algerian
solution. In this category are such issues as
the small farmers’ virtual revolt against gov-
ernment authority, the pied-noir problem in
the south, and wage and price problems.

8. Under these pressures, a successor regime
would probably in time drift back toward some
of the political and parliamentary practices
that were hallmarks of the Third and Fourth
Republics. Constitutional changes might be
adopted which aimed at redressing the balance
of power between Parliament and President,
although it is unlikely that the Presidential
system would be entirely abandoned. Even
though the constitution were not amended,
some of the more arbitrary powers which de
Gaulle has exercised would probably wither
away from disuse. But these relationships
would be worked out over time, and much
would depend on the men who held office, and
on the degree to which the parties could win
back their old roles. If the drift back toward
the multiparty system resulted in a return to
governmental instability, this would give the
OAS-type plotters their best chance of a come-
back.

.9. In general, the relative strengths of
France’s major political parties would tend to
remain much as they are now. However, two
trends would probably soon become evident as

domestic political issues began to dominate
the political scene. Factionalism would in-
crease inside the UNR, with various party fig-
ures trying to win advantages in the struggle
to inherit de Gaulle’s mantle. At the same
time, all parties would probably become in-
creasingly assertive as they saw the oppor-
tunity to improve their parliamentary posi-
tions by appealing to the voters on bread-and-
butter issues. Over the short run, however,
we doubt that dramatic political changes
would occur, or that dynamic new political
movements would be established, or that there
would be a polarization of political forces be-
tween right and left.

Foreign Policies

10. De Gaulle’s successor would lack his
unique authority at home, be preoccupied with
the evolution of the domestic scene, and would
lack his intense and highly personal approach
to foreign affairs. Assuming that the most
likely successor would be a “notable” of the
Fourth Republic, any probable successor
would almost certainly display a more forth-
coming attitude towards the US and toward
NATO, at least on the surface. Moreover, the
balance of political forces in the Parliament
is such that it would probably give backing to
@ more flexible approach to relations with
France’s allies. Only in the case of the elec-

‘tion of some such nationalistic figure as

Debré, which we consider highly unlikely,
would relations with France’s allies fail to
improve.

11. However, French nationalism has been
greatly revived under de Gaulle and he will
have left behind him legacies that few French-
men will be willing to forfeit. The great
financial investment already made in the
force de frappe and the French belief that this
has given them great political advantage will
almost certainly inhibit any early turning
away from the achievement of an independent

French nuclear capability. Strong tempta-
tions may develop to curtail certain aspects of
the program, but the desire to make France
“first on the continent” will probably operate
to preserve its main lines. The current Par-
liament has already moved away from its
earlier interest in perfecting a “NATO de-
terrent force” and has been giving more at-
tention to the idea of a “European force de
frappe,”’ which would exclude US participa-
tion. Interest in this objective would prob-
ably increase under the new circumstances, al-
though we believe any such project is far from
realization.

12. The departure of de Gaulle would also
stimulate hope of eventual European political
union among the strong body of integration-
ists in the center'parties, but we do not believe .
negotiations over the UK’s entry into the Com-
mon Market would be made significantly
easier by that fact. In fact, the relatively
greater political pressure which special inter-
est groups, particularly the peasants, could
apply on the new government would, if any-
thing, probably cause it to maintain its posi-
tion on strict terms for UK entry.

13. Finally, it seems likely that any new
regime would hesitate to make significant
changes in foreign policy, even if it were in-
clined to do so, until such time as the mood
of the country had been tested by elections.
Many Gaullist foreign policies will continue
to have strong popular support and a new
President and his Premier would probably
hesitate to change them for some time to
come. In short, while France would prob-
ably conduct its relations with its allies in
a more flexible and friendly manner, any basic
alterations in the content of foreign and de-
fense policies would probably come slowly and
only after a successor government had care-
fully assessed the mood of the country and
the balance of political forces.

ANNEX

MACHINERY OF THE SUCCESSION

Under the present terms of the Constitution the President
is named by an electoral college, of some 80,000 electors, com-
prising the members of Parliament, the members of the Gen-
eral Councils and of the Assemblies of the Overseas Terri-
tories, as well as elected representatives from all French
municipal councils. The controlling constitutional article
on the succession reads as follows:

“In the event that the Presidency of the Republic has been
vacated, . . . the functions of the President of the Republic,
with the exception of those provided for by Articles 11 and 12
below, [the President’s powers to initiate constitutional amend-
ments and dissolve the Assembly] shall be temporarily exer-
cised by the President of the Senate. In the case of a va-
cancy, .. . the voting for the election of a new President shall
take place, except in case of force majeure officially noted by
the Constitutional Council, twenty days at the least and fifty
days at the most after the beginning of the vacancy .. .”

oi

ay
e

ta
rd Shots a Yeti weve
