John P. Hayes
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126861, dated 3 February 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126861).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

me gegte ota geeeeta PERS
Coat t fine qinitivk

Cat 18 March 1953

SUBJECT: John P. Hayes

FEM. 18(¢)

3.4(b)(1)

1. John P. Hayes, the China-born, American missionary who was
put under brainwashing for a prolonged period in Red China, has,
given me the following impressions:

2. Regarding his success in surviving this agonizing period:

a. He attributes this first to faith. In this he agrees
with the statements made to me by persons such as Robert Bryan,
F. Olin Stockwell and others with whom I have discussed this point.
None of these men hesitated a moment on their reply. Hayes said he
had recourse to prayer, and it literally gave him stamina for sur-
vival. Hayes amplified in a significant manner. He said, "I gained
strength from feeling that other people, friends and strangers alike,
were thinking about me, and praying for me." This is a twofold at~
titude he reveals —- trust in an unbeatable, divine order, and
certainly that in some manner other human beings can influence his
destiny, too, by their sympathy and feelings for him. I have come
across this frequently. Wme. Kaslenko, the Soviet schoolteacher
who leaped from a window of the Soviet Consulate General in New York,
has testified to the strength she derived from hearing her name on
the radio from time to time, although she couldn't understand English,
and seeing reporters in front of the building. Fellow travelers and
so—called liberals were then uttering cries of indignation over her
"persecution" by not being let alone. Far from persecution, it was
the decisive element in saving her. All this, I believe from my
whole background and experience, is closely related, and to the
situation in Red China. The feeling that there is no hope is the
main weapon that the Communists have utilized, and in this we have
been manipulated into supporting them. They require, just as Hayes
had to have, a feeling of faith, that there is hope, before they can
shake off Communism. "I found certainty in prayer," Hayes also said.

b. Hayes also attributes his survival to "my sense of
mission." In this, he superficially disagreed with some of the
others who had gone through similar brainwashing. He was closer to
the Protestant attitude than to the usual Catholic, as told me by
priests who survived. The difference, however, is not in how it
seems to the listener -- to the Communist indoctrinator, — but to
the man himself who is being brainwashed. "After all, Itma
missionary," he said. He retained this sense of mission work all
the time, and this, too, gave him strength. This was, in other words,

-

Cc
@) Approved for Release

CS played e7sk Ds

i
/
/

é
i
oY

a sense of duty, deeply felt. The question arises whether this sense
of duty can be felt equally in other fields, such as the military.
I believe yes:— that patriotism can be such an element. The point
is not which of these faiths or loyalties is concerned, but whether
the individual has developed an attachment to it that cannot be

.. destroyed. ...Hayes said he was sincere in all that he told the Reds.
He said he never lied. This was in direct conflict with what other
missionaries did, and other non—-missionaries. They told me they had
kept their minds busy by outwitting the Reds, by "lieing like a
trooper” to give the impression that they were being convinced by
the Red logic, which took every ounce of one's acumen, for the Com-
munists exert great efforts to make sure that their victims actually
are sincere, and not trying to put over an act.

Then Hayes explained his interpretation of sincerity and
truth-telling. He said he told the Reds that, indeed, he was guilty
of not showing the prover feeling for the plain people, the masses.

His contacts had been the better-placed Chinese. "I did not go to

the people as I should have done." The Reds were right in this, he
said. Actually, Hayes was selecting this portion of the Red accusa-
tion with which he might find it possible to be "reasonable," to agree.
He was being cooperative, not "stubborn." He said, too, that he
confessed he had been a spy. "I told them yes, I had been a spy
under.their laws, but not in spirit." He pointed out to me that
Chinese Communist law forbids the sending of news or any other in-
formation to America, allowing this only to go to Soviet Russia.

"I sent information to my mission board in America, so I was a spy,"
he went on. In this, he showed that he was seeing the Red inter-
pretation, enabling him to answer yes to them, while his reply to

the same question asked by anyone else would have been in the negative.

What he was doing was showing that his "sense of mission"
worked out very much like the deliberate contest of wits engaged in
by the others who said they were "deceiving the Reds" as to their
views. Hayes, however, was intellectually fitted to do the same
thing in a framework that was truthful to him, and therefore no
special strain on his conscience. Where an individual is able to
do this, it is much preferable, I should think, from the survival
viewpoint, than having to think out what untrue twist you might be
able to get away with. This is the method utilized by Catholic
priests and nuns on most occasions, the Jesuitical approach. It
works.

ec. There was a striking contradiction even here, which
revealed how against the grain even the thought of lieing is to this
upright character. He remembered eagerly his "sense of mission" and
how he had been "sincere" and "told the truth," even though this was
cutting hairs. He admitted, though, "There were times I apparently
said things that I couldn't remember afterwards having said, and

which were false." He had told untruths, but under a duress that
had in it the most sinister aspects of brainwashing. All who have
survived the Reds in this, it is to be noted, have confessed what
the Commies wanted them to confess. Some, like Bryan, had to
undergo more rigorous treatment — Bryan told me he was grabbed,
thrust onto the floor, and given an injection in the spine, twice.
Hayes didn't tell me anything of this sort. How he explained it

' follows: : : >

d. Hallucination, he declared, is part of the Red-imposed
confession technique. "You're a bit hungry all the time, You never
have a satisfactory diet. You're sleepy all the time. You forget
things, get them confused. You admit and believe things that never
happened, while in this fog." In this, he is in completest agree—
ment with everyone to whom I have spoken, who has gone through
brainwashing, Chinese and non-Chinese alike. This imposed mental
and physical fog is the secret of the Communist confession technique.
(See analysis of Communist movie on germ warfare, and U.S. fliers
who confessed."

e. This is primarily the determination of a series of
facts, he pointed out, and their synthesis or juxtaposition to reach
false conclusions. Facts are rearranged in such a manner as to
create a ssemingly logical pattern, only it never happened. This
is nothing new; only it's callous use in this manner is new. Editors
of ‘our newsmagazines and foreign affairs specialists in public and
private life, who collect facts from items and articles culled from
a whole series of different agencies and sources, and who arrange
them in a pattern to give an analysis that sounds perfectly logical
and indisputable, do this all the time. Wherever the individual is
cut off from sources, or operates through third parties, this is the
result. Where the enviroment can be controlled comeletely, the
result is even more pronounced, as it was with Hayes.

f. Hayes pointed cut emphatically that this calculated re-
arrangement of facts to create the illusion of a conclusion that
never occurred in reality requires some form of threat, "actual
threats." There must be pressures (violence), too, he stressed.
These threats differ according to the individual being treated, the
indoctrinator giving the treatment, the time and tne occasion.
Treatment, like in any psychiatric establishment or hospital in
America, is geared to the patient. When a person is hungry and
sleepy, the implied decrease or increase of rations or sleeping
time constitutes threats of the most effective kind. These actions
are pressures, too. The foreigners are not threatened or put under
violence as openly as the Chinese, but threats and violence play
their part. These are adjusted to the need, though, which is for
tvoluntary" confession so you can be trusted to go out and "confess!!
in public, or react in public as the authorities desire, under all

circumstances. Hayes did not go deeply into this with me yet; I
hope to do so later with him. He was emphatic about this, though.

g- He, as did the other foreigners I interviewed, said
it was most important to keep your mind busy so as to survive
without actually being brainwashed. He did this through his sense -
of mission, he said, by his Sincerity. "I felt deeply hurt that
the Communists should think I had been a spy, and the Communists
saw I was hurt," he said. "They vould tell, and were impressed."
Here again he gave evidence of an element of Strength that I believe
would be difficult if not impossible for many of our intellectuals
to attain. Hayes did not seem bothered with evident contradictions;
they were in different grooves in his mind. our trained thinkers,
who are mechanically logical, indoctrinated by our higher institu-
tions of learning this way, would have the greatest difficulty
being able to do things and say things that did violence to their
sense of harmony, of logic. They would have to be tinsinceret! about
it, and this would create another problem, for Reds work hard to see
through "insincerity."

3. Regarding his future plans;

a. He eagerly desires to go to Korea, to talk to the
Cninese Reds who have been caught by us, and are in our POW camps.
He believes that they can be brought over to work for us. He feels
they would, in turn, be our best and most effective approach to
other Red Chinese, and others who have been under Communist influence.

b. He feels that in order to win against Chinese Communism,
mre must get into the minds of these people." The language pattern
is one way, he fervently believes. Hewes born and brought up in
China, and reads and writes it, apparently fluently. In his conver-
Sation with me regarding Chinese Communist lingo, he showed an
intense knowledge and a deep affection for fine points in the language,
and in the written characters. By using the terminology that the .
Reds use, he feels, we can create a rapport tnat can enable us to
plant anti-Communist ideas and turn Reds into decent folk. This
analyst agrees that this is a most important factor. The Chinese,
Hayes points out, have been hearing and reading a certain type of
language for some years now; inevitably they are used to it. Other
ways of speaking would strike them as strange, and could create a
hostility even among those who want to free themselves from the Red
boncage. Hayes pointed out that the Communists are extremely clever
in their propaganda terminology. They make sure they do not shock
decent feelings. They operate in such a calculated manner that they
can do this, whereas we, confident of our sincerity, use terminology
that displays a seemingly callous approach, and this makes ow task
harder, and sometimes impossible, often preventing a development in

our favor that otherwise seemed assured. For instance, Hayes said
the Red Chinese do not refer to this conflict as "psychological
‘warfare.'t He cringed a bit over the term. The Reds call it
"ideological warfare," he pointed out. This pits idea against idea,
and doesn't carry a sly or underhand connotation. For instance, he
didn't like the translation, "thought seduction," as used in the
book, "Brain-Washing in Red China," although he said the book was

“Too === -—-=—-thoroughly accurate, and-could not understand how a writer could
produce it without having himself gone through a brainwashing.
"Thought seduction" wasn't wrong, but doesn't quite convey the
Chinese tone, he said. He said the Reds talk frankly about this,
referring openly to "thought control." This open approach removes
much of the suspicion of it — makes it seem perfectly natural and
desirable. Jt is a most effective propaganda trick. Hayes feels

‘that he has the experience and ability to "get into the Chinese

mind” this way, and wants more than anything else to be given the
opportunity tc do so.

c. He stressed that we must not underestimate our enemy,
or his motives. This is another matter on which IT intend te go more
deeply with him. [I feel that here he is stressing the approach
that he used when he was "sincere" and remaining true to his 'sense
of mission" while under brain-washing, which enabled him to determine
what the Reds insisted on his confessing, and finding points on which
he couid confess without doing violence to his own lo-vrdélties, while
yet-satisfying the Commies. A person who can do this is natural
psychological warfare material!

4. He is robust although 65, a tall, strong-looking man, broad,
wearing a beard. He remarked that his beard helps him look like a
missionary, and he is proud to be a missionary; he wants to appear
like one. His wife, whom he married in China, does not have his
intimate knowledge of the language and its writing, but a very good
knowledge of it. She is British — a Scotswoman. (I do not know
whether she is a U.S. citizen.) They have five children, four born
in China. ne is a thin, elderly lady who shies away with harsh
reactions and harsh verdicts. They went through prison camp under .
the Japanese, but she had no bitterness, nor harsh words. She
eagerly sees the other fellow's side, in a pronouncedly Christian
manner. "The Communists are not all bad; some of their motives are
praiseworthy,'t she pointed out. She is a good woman, out very dif-
ferent, I feel, than her husband, who is a good man, but more
realistic. .

5. In prison in Red China, Hayes had three books — all in
Chinese, and all written by Mao Tse-tung. "I know them by heart
now," he said. This is part of his training to "get into the minds
of the Chinese Reds." He feels that what he went under was for
eventual good. This could, indeed, be the case, in our cold war.

t

6. Another point which he stressed was the "conditioning" of
the Chinese for Red propaganda pressures and brainwashing. This
I would rather call a climate —- we in the U.S. have known this
sort of thing, a political climate that made it almost impossible
to ferret out Communism or criticize Communism for a long period
of time. What this really means is that reactions and attitudes
are "conditioned! to consider certain approaches, certain points

of. view,-as fundamentally normal, as natural, and other standpoints

as basically wrong, and to have an open or closed mind to everything
they see or hear in accordance with this. Hayes believes he would
not jar against the Chinese Red, that he could fit into their
prejudices, and so be in a strategic position to undermine Communism.
This is a form of mind infiltration, of individual fifth columnisn,
that can be invaluable, if correctly pursued.

7. He is under his modest mission pay. If he went abroad,
to Korea, for instance, this would continue normally, but he might
be helped by having his expenses and other costs refunded.

8. have talked to quite 2 number of these brainwashed
gentry. JI am convinced so far, by what I have noted, that everyone
who goes through a brainwashing carries traces of it for prolonged
periods, or always. This is not necessarily bad; this can be good.
What is imnortant is to keep it in mind.
