The Situation in Venezuela
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013610, dated 2 October 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013610).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

2 |

| Sa NIE 89-61 i,
. ee a .21 November 1961

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency |
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of ©. .
‘State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Ores The Joint y anh
Staf,and NSA. | . os Bs
_ Concurred in by the. ) . i
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 21 November 1961. Concurring were The Director of In-
telligence and Research, Department of State; The Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chief of Staff for
Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant Chief of
Naval Operations (Intelligence), Department of the Navy;
- the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF; the Director
for Intelligence, Joint Staff; and the Director of the National
Security Agency. The Atomic Energy Commission Representa-
tive to the USIB, and the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of . 2,
Investigation, abstained, the subject mere ountie of their
jurisdiction. eee) yh

{

scien

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM... 1... ee et ee ee ee ee ee 1
CONCLUSIONS .. 1. 1. 1 ee ee ee ee eee ee we ee 1
DISCUSSION . 2... 6 6 ee ee ee ee et ee es 3
I. BACKGROUND ..... 2.2 ee eee ee ee ee es 3
II. THE PRESENT POLITICAL SITUATION .......+.--.. 4
Ill, ECONOMIC SITUATION AND PROSPECTS. .....-+.--. 6
IV. THE OUTLOOK ..... 1.6 2 ee ee ee ee ee 8
V. EXTERNAL RELATIONS ..... 2. 6 eee ee ees 10

THE SITUATION

IN VENEZUELA

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects for the Betancourt government, for the survival of dem-
ocratic government in Venezuela, and for orderly social and economic reform.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Venezuela, an extraordinarily wealthy
country in terms of its natural and finan-
cial resources, is nevertheless beset by se-
vere economic, social, and political prob-
lems which reflect the strains inherent
in a transition, in one lifetime, from mili-
tary dictatorship and an oligarchic social
order toward a democratic welfare state.
(Paras. 10-11)

2. The Betancourt administration, elect-
ed after the overthrow of the Perez Ji-
menez dictatorship, is a social democratic-
Christian socialist coalition committed to
the evolutionary reform of economic and
social institutions. It is opposed by ex-
treme leftists, including the Communists
and other Castro sympathizers, and also
by rightist elements, but, with the support
of the armed forces, has survived repeated
coup attempts, including several attempts
to assassinate Betancourt. (Paras. 15-
22)

3. Pro-Castro sentiment, once strong in
Venezuela, has sharply declined. In late
1960, the successful suppression of serious

disorders fomented by the revolutionary
left showed that it lacked sufficient
strength to coerce or overthrow the gov-
ernment. (Paras. 23-27)

4. Despite the resources available to it, the
Betancourt government is beset by severe
financial problems resulting from (a) the
end of the Venezuelan oil boom, with a
consequent decline in the growth of in-
come from the petroleum industry, and
(b) greatly increased expenditures for
politically necessary social welfare pro-
grams. Its difficulties have been further
complicated by a serious economic reces-
sion and heavy flight of capital. Unem-
ployment now amounts to about 12 per-
cent of the labor force and is rising.
(Paras. 33-36)

5. The government is counting heavily on
external assistance to restore business
confidence and to carry out its programs
for economic recovery and development.
Even with such aid, progress in these re-
spects is likely to be slow and uncertain.
(Paras. 37-41)

6. Popular dissatisfaction and impatience
with the slow rate of economic improve-
ment is likely to grow, especially in the
congested urban areas. This dissatisfac-
tion will provide the Communists and
other revolutionary leftists with further
opportunities for agitation against the
regime. At the same time, distrust and
dissatisfaction in business circles is likely
to continue, and some rightists will con-
tinue to conspire with reactionary mili-
tary elements to overthrow the regime.
Thus Betancourt will remain under con-
tinuing threat from both the left and the
right. (Para. 42)

7. On the other hand, Betancourt enters
the final half of his term with certain im-
portant advantages. His standing in the
_ Caribbean area as a leading exponent of
constitutional government and moderate
reform adds to his domestic prestige.
The military will probably continue to
support him against threats from the
right as well as from the revolutionary
left. (Paras. 43-44)

8. On balance, we believe that Betancourt
will probably be able to serve out his
term, ending in early 1964. Weare much
less confident, however, that his admin-
istration will have provided a stable foun-
dation for the continuation of constitu-
tional government. (Paras. 45-48)

9. Betancourt has carefully avoided any
appearance of dependence on the US, but
has done his part to keep relations with
the US on a cordial footing. His position
at home and in the area has been
strengthened by recent developments in
the Dominican Republic. He probably is
inclined to go along with an inter-Ameri-
can acceptance to the Balaguer govern-
ment in the Dominican Republic now that
the Trujillo family’s power over it has
been broken. He has broken diplomatic
relations with Cuba, and is supporting the
Colombian proposals for collective action
against the Castro regime. (Paras. 49-
51)

DISCUSSION

Il. BACKGROUND

10. Venezuela, an extraordinarily wealthy
country in terms of its natural and financial
resources, is nevertheless beset by severe eco-
nomic, social, and political problems. Thanks
to private foreign (principally US) develop-
ment and exploitation of its petroleum and
iron ore,! it has the highest per capita income
in Latin America and the government is
assured of substantial revenues and foreign
exchange. However, its population—7.5 mil-
lion—is growing at a rate of about 3.5 percent
annually and the hinterland remains gener-
ally undeveloped.? The rural population is
flocking to the cities in search of employment
and better living conditions, and is arriving
faster than decent housing and employment
opportunities can be provided. These new-
comers dwell in the poverty and squalor of
shantytowns, within sight of conspicuous
opulence.

11. The efforts of the democratic-reformist
Betancourt government to promote economic
development and social welfare are hindered
by private investors’ distrust of it, depressed
economic conditions, and financial stringen-
cies. The government’s program of radical
reform has antagonized vested interests, both
foreign and domestic, while its failure to ful-
fill popular expectations renders it vulnerable
to Castro/Communist agitation.

12. Venezuela’s present economic, social, and
political difficulties reflect the strains inherent
in a transition, in one lifetime, from a tradition
of military dictatorship and an oligarchic

Foreign private investment amounts to $6 bil-
lion, more than two-thirds of which is in oil. US
private investment amounts to about $4 billion, in-

cluding $3.2 billion in oil and $400 million in mining. ©

?The agricultural labor force (34 percent of the
total) generates about 10 percent of national in-
come whereas the petroleum industry (with under
two percent of the labor force) generates 21 percent.
About one-tenth of all Venezuelans receive 50 per-
cent of the total private income, whereas nearly
half of the population receives about one-tenth of
the total. Caracas, with only one-fifth of the popu-
lation, took 40 percent of total private income.

social order toward a democratic welfare state.
The economic and social transformation began
with the oil boom of the 1920’s. Modern polit-
ical development was blocked until the 27-year
dictatorship of Juan Vicente Gomez ended
with his natural death in 1935, and was
checked by another 10-year period of military
dictatorship, 1948-1958.

13. Constantly increasing petroleum revenues
enabled the Perez Jimenez dictatorship to
undertake spectacular programs of public
works and industrial development, but these
resulted in no substantial improvement in the
living conditions of the masses of the people.
All elements of society were antagonized by
the ostentatious benefits conferred upon the
favored few, and by the ruthless police state
methods of the regime. In January 1958, a
clandestine junta representing all of the sup-
pressed political parties succeeded in organ-
izing an effective general strike. In this crisis,
the military proved to be unwilling to act
against the entire population and instead
compelled the dictator to leave the country.

14. A military-civilian junta assumed power
in Venezuela pending the elections held in
December 1958. During this period several
attempts to initiate a reactionary coup were
frustrated by (a) the threat of a renewal
of the general strike, and (b) the continuing
unwillingness of the military to employ force
against the united population. The experi-
ence of this period had two significant con-
sequences. The junta’s dependence on mani-
festations of popular support led it to tolerate
and even encourage a considerable amount
of mob violence, or threat of violence, which
came to be a customary mode of expressing
political sentiments. This popular tendency
toward political violence in Caracas remains
a constant problem for the government. At
the same time, the parties recognized in “na-
tional unity” an effective defense against a
military coup. Accordingly, they agreed that,
no matter what the results of the December
election, a broad coalition government would
be formed.

15. This agreement was facilitated by the fact
that there were only minor differences of
emphasis among the three principal parties,
each of which is nationalistic and socialistic.
Accion Democratica (AD), the largest of the
three, is roughly comparable to the social
democratic parties of Western Europe, ad-
vocating a radical, but evolutionary, reform
of traditional social institutions. The AD,
dependent mainly on labor and peasant sup-
port, has developed a far more effective party
organization than its rivals, but is weak in
Caracas. The Partido Social Cristiano Copei
(COPEI) is comparable to the Christian so-
cialist parties of Europe and appeals to devout
Catholics in all walks of life. It differs from
AD mainly in its religious inspiration, as
opposed to AD’s secular approach. The Union
Republicana Democratica (URD) is more
amorphous and opportunistic than the others.
It achieved political importance by providing
an alternative popular leadership at a time
when AD was suppressed; its leaders are still
largely moved by personal rivalry with the
AD for leadership; its appeal is primarily to
less highly organized economic groups such
as artisans, small businessmen, and the slum
dwellers of Caracas.

16. The Communist Party of Venezuela (PCV)
achieved a certain respectability by its par-
ticipation, with AD, COPEI, and URD, in
the clandestine junta which organized the
general strike resulting in the overthrow of
the Perez Jimenez dictatorship. In order to
preserve this advantageous united front, it
was vociferous in its declarations of devotion
to “national unity,” but it was excluded from
the postelection coalition government. In
fact, the Communists are AD’s most ener-
getic competitors for labor and student lead-
ership, and there is no love lost between them.

17. In general, wealthy Venezuelans do not
participate in party politics, although some
few are influential party members and others
have participated in government as independ-
ents. Consequently, there is little conserva-
tive influence within the three major parties
and no effective conservative party to oppose
them. The wealthy, however, do exert a sub-
stantial political influence through personal

relations with particular politicians and gen-
erals, and through the capabilities of their
business and professional organizations to
exert pressures on the government. In the
view of many of them, the democratic social-
ism of AD is equivalent to communism.

il. THE PRESENT POLITICAL SITUATION

18. In the 1958 elections, AD won majorities
in both houses of Congress and Romulo Betan-
court won the Presidency with a plurality
barely short of a majority. However, AD ran
a poor fourth in the capital city, an ominous
circumstance since the government would
have to be conducted under the latent threat
of the URD-PCV capability to call forth the
Caracas mob. The re-establishment of an
elected government was auspicious, however.
In accordance with the pre-election compact,
an AD-COPEI-URD coalition government was
formed. Although the Communist protested
against their exclusion, they still found it ex-
pedient to proclaim their devotion to “na-
tional unity.”

19. Nevertheless, the Betancourt government
has had to meet repeated challenges from both
the right and the left. Numerous attempts
to overthrow Betancourt, or to assassinate
him, have been made by exiled followers of
Perez Jimenez and by other disgruntled right-
ist elements, in some cases with the active aid
of Rafael’ Trujillo, the late dictator in the
Dominican Republic. On the other hand, the
Communists and other leftists have sought to
foment disorder in Caracas by exploiting the
distress of the slum population and invoking
the appeal of Castroism.

20. The failure of these efforts has demon-
strated that the armed forces,’ still a critical
element of power in the country, are not a
present threat to the stability of the govern-
ment. They have notably failed to respond
to the appeals of disgruntled rightists. The
military leaders appear to be convinced that
an attempt to restore a military rule would
incur the united opposition of the political

*The armed forces consist of four coequal serv-
ices: an army of 16,000, a navy of 5,300, an air force
of 2,500, and an elite national guard comprised of
8,800 professional police-soldiers.

View oF THE CAPITAL CITY OF CARACAS

Che

PRESIDENT RoMULO BETANCOURT RAFAEL CALDERA, Jovito VILLALBA,
LEADER oF COPEI SECRETARY GENERAL or URD

parties and the population at large. Most
military leaders by now probably regard
Betancourt as the best alternative to an ex-
treme leftist government and, like their
counterparts in, other Latin American coun-
tries, are coming to see themselves as the de-
fenders of legally constituted authority. The
vigor with which Betancourt has acted to put
down threats from both right and left has al-
most certainly increased his prestige with the
military as well as with the public at large.

21. A serious threat to political stability has
come from the extreme left minority, which
by the end of 1960 had united in militant op-
position to Betancourt. The hard core of this
opposition has been provided by the PCV,
which is still among the largest in Latin Amer-
ica, although its membership has probably
fallen to about 30,000 from its 1958 peak of
about 40,000. It has considerable influence,
particularly in the Caracas area and in the oil
fields. Its youth wing in conjunction with
other leftists controls the principal university
and secondary school student organizations.
The PCV is AD’s principal competitor in or-
ganized labor and virtually controls the Vene-
zuelan press association. The PCV has not
effected any significant penetration of the
armed forces, although there are some Castro/
Communist sympathizers in the lower ranks
of the army.

22. The strength of the left opposition has
been greatly enhanced by the emergence of
pro-Castro left-wing elements in URD and AD.
The AD dissenters, expelled in 1960 for their
violent disagreement with the moderate pol-
icies of the old guard AD leadership, promptly
formed a new party called the Movement of
the Revolutionary Left (MIR) and advocating
a national liberation movement modeled on
Castro’s. Led by Congressman Domingo Al-
berto Rangel, it is the most aggressive of
Venezuela’s minor parties. Its strength is
mainly in the Caracas area and in eastern
Venezuela.

23. In an effort to force the government to
adopt Castro-like policies or to relinquish its
control, the PCV, working with MIR and ex-
tremists from URD, promoted a series of riots

and demonstrations in late 1960. During
the period of disorders, the URD leadership,
for some time dissatisfied with its position in
the Betancourt government and desirous of
establishing for itself a more radical image,
seized upon a dispute with Betancourt over
his policy toward Castro to withdraw from
the coalition.

24. During this critical period, however,
Betancourt was able to count on effective po-
lice and military action to contain and even-
tually suppress public disorder. The event
showed that, although the left was capable of
fomenting serious disturbances, it lacked suf-
ficient strength to coerce or overthrow the
government. Since this crisis, the President
has taken a series of political measures which
have at least to some extent neutralized oppo-
sition. He has maintained the partial sus-
pension of constitutional liberties instituted
at the time of the disurbances, suppressed MIR
and PCV propaganda organs, and arrested agi-
tators from URD as well as its allies. He has
been careful to use the suspension of liberties
only in dealing with those who seek to dis-
rupt public order; he is preparing to resume
constitutional guarantees, subject to the pas-
sage of a law enabling his government to regu-
late political party activities.+

25. Furthermore, the URD withdrawal from
the coalition actually strengthened Betan-
court’s hand. The President’s resulting re-
organization of the Cabinet to include only
members of AD, COPEI, and political inde-
pendents clearly established the administra-

‘The suspension of constitutional guarantees in-
voked by Presidential decree permits the govern-
ment to: prohibit public meetings, close down pub-
lications considered by it to be seditious, prohibit
internal as well as international travel, and search
homes and make arrests without a warrant. The
projected law on parties requires that a party not
subordinate itself to international political organi-
zations. It permits political demonstrations in open
places and political propaganda utilizing the usual
communications media only for electoral purposes
and only within the 12-month period before an
election. In addition, the law forbids political
propaganda which is anonymous, lacks respect for
the law, or is disrespectful to the President and
other public authorities.

tion as moderate left. This move, coupled
with his manifest determination not to allow
radical excesses, almost certainly increased
his standing with the military and with mod-
erate and conservative elements. Although
the government’s position in Congress was
weakened by the defections from the coali-
tion, the government parties still retain a
majority in the legislature.®

26. AD has scored considerable success in
halting the inroads of MIR-PCV-URD ele-
ments in the Venezuelan Confederation of
Workers—the major labor organization in the
country—and in isolating or eliminating their
influence. AD is still in a strong majority po-
sition in the labor movement * and controls the
landworkers federation, thereby exerting sub-
stantial influence on the peasantry. AD has
been less successful among student groups,
since the MIR defection caused it to lose its
one-time dominant position in the organized
student movement.

27. Pro-Castro sentiment, once formidable in
Venezuela, has sharply declined. Students,
teachers, ‘and intellectuals, and much of or-
ganized labor have been antagonized by the
authoritarian character of the Castro regime.
The peasants were never seriously affected by
Castroism. ‘The press and other communica-
tions media are now highly critical of the
Castro regime. Thus Castroist agitation in
Venezuela is now limited to the efforts of the
PCV, MIR, and URD party organizations.

* The strength of the various parties in Congress
is as follows:
CHAMBER OF

SENATE DEPUTIES
The Government Coalition
AD oy oe aideaadantia gee 32 58
COPED oiscieucld nts Sete §& 19
38 va
The Opposition
URD: os eh es het se 10 34
MIR eicdedce ads sh ae ees 1 15
POV oi. o00 eo ee 2 q
13 56
OUher cic elk ive dete tte os 2 .

*AD has won 201 of the 246 trade union elec-
tions held since February.

28. Political agitation, while concerned with
many issues of foreign policy, is now focused
on the deterioration in the economic situation
since Betancourt’s inauguration and the un-
even progress of the President’s social and eco-
nomic development program. The left ac-
cuses the administration not only of failing
to move fast enough on reform, but also of
adopting a program ill suited to overcoming
the fundamental social and economic im-
balances in the country. Conservative in-
terests criticize the government for being too
radical and blame it for the depressed state
of the economy. At the same time popular
dissatisfaction is rising over. persistent high
unemployment and cost of living increases.
The government, with little experience in eco-
nomic affairs, is hampered in its economic
policies by the need to compromise with a
variety of political groups. It finds it diffi-
cult to make effective use of Venezuela’s re-
sources.

ill. ECONOMIC SITUATION AND PROSPECTS

29. For years Venezuela’s gross national prod-
uct (GNP) has been one of the highest in
Latin America (an estimated $7 billion) and
until recently the boom provided by the de-
velopment of petroleum ensured the country
against foreign exchange shortages and un-
manageable budget deficits. Various levies
on petroleum production and profits still pro-
vide more than half of government receipts
(about $813 million), and petroleum, together
with iron ore, accounts for almost all of the
country’s exports.

30. However, the spectacular growth in these
extractive industries has not been accom-
panied by adequate development of other sec-
tors of the economy. Resources for many
years were devoted to grandiose programs of
construction of government buildings and
luxury housing, and large sums of money
fiowed into the hands of the rich, many of
whom in turn bought land or sent their money
abroad. Investment in agriculture, con-
sumers’ industries, housing, public health, and
education has been inadequate to meet the
needs, much less the aspirations of the bulk

of the population. There is still a funda-
mental imbalance in the distribution of na-
tional income, which remains largely in the
hands of a small percentage of the popula-
tion, mainly in the capital city.

31. The present government is committed to
implementing a $4 billion program designed
to promote diversification of agriculture,
agrarian reform, and improvements in
housing, health, public welfare services, and
education. It is placing particular emphasis
on developing the interior. With an eye to
reviving the construction industry and re-
ducing unemployment (particularly among
the slum dwellers in the Caracas area), the
government is also starting up a crash pro-
gram for expansion of housing and rural
water supply facilities, using bonds and com-
mercial bank loans to finance it.

82. Thus far the government has made little
progress in dealing with problems of urban
housing and urban unemployment, but has
done relatively well in education, in the exten-
sion of rural credits, and in agrarian resettle-
ment (mainly using government lands, in-
cluding those taken away from officials of
the ousted Perez Jimenez dictatorship). In-
deed Venezuela is the only Latin American
country except Cuba which has begun a com-
prehensive agrarian reform program. Gov-
ernment agencies have settled about one-
quarter of the estimated 150,000 families need-
ing land. Under pressure from powerful
campesino unions the government is now pur-
chasing numbers of large estates for settle-
ment projects. Although the program is ex-
pected to have desirable social effects, the
benefits in terms of increased farm production
may be limited by comparison with the large
investments being made. The shortage of
technical and supervisory personnel is a con-
tinuing problem.

33. Betancourt’s most acute problems, how-
ever, have been in the financial field. The
government has resorted to import licensing
and exchange controls to restrict the outflow
of foreign exchange, which brought a decline
in net official foreign exchange reserves from
$1.4 billion at the end of 1957 to $542 million

as of 8 November 1961. Meanwhile the regime
has run substantial deficits. The high level
of expenditures, with an estimated $2 billion
budgeted for 1962, in part reflects heavy serv-
icing charges on short-term loans used to fi-
nance previous deficits. In keeping with its
traditional practices, the government has
avoided currency inflation as a means of fi-
nancing the deficit. The accumulated debt,
including floating debt, totaled $888 million
in October 1961. The government plans to
seek long-term loans, both domestic and for-
eign, to refund much of this debt and to fi-
nance investments which are now included
in the budget.

34. The government’s financial difficulties are
attributable to a number of causes. One is
the end of the Venezuelan oil boom, which
happened to coincide with the advent of the
Betancourt administration, but is mainly the
result of conditions in the world petroleum
market. Another is a general decline in busi-
ness confidence attributable to loss of eco-
nomic impetus with the end of the oil boom,
to the political uncertainties of recent years,
and to apprehensions engendered by the so-
cialistic policies of the Betancourt administra-
tion. These factors have contributed to a se-
rious economic recession and an alarming
flight of capital at a time when new invest-
ment and economic expansion were sorely
needed. Despite the government’s efforts to
revive and expand the economy, unemploy-
ment now amounts to about 12 percent of the
labor force and is still rising.

35. Other important factors contributing to
financial difficulties are heavy government
outlays to pay off the debts left by the ex-
travagant Perez Jimenez regime, the operat-
ing losses of uneconomic state enterprises
which he established, and the costs of polit-
ically necessary social welfare programs.
Expenditures for social services and rural im-
provement have risen sharply under Betan-
court; many low priority projects have been
undertaken for political reasons. Public pay-
rolls at all levels, down to municipalities, are
bloated by the expansion of political patron-
age required to satisfy the demand in a coali-
tion government.

WEES». 8

36. The state of the petroleum industry re-
mains the chief determinant of Venezuelan
economic conditions. Oil production is high
and still increasing, though at a slower rate
than during the boom. The oil companies,
however, are reluctant to increase their in-
vestment in Venezuela, in part because world
conditions provide little incentive to do so, but
chiefly because they dislike the policies of the
incumbent regime. Betancourt has declared
that his administration will respect existing
foreign investments and concessions, but he
has refused any new concessions to foreign oil
companies and has sought instead to induce
them to accept service contracts with the
newly established Venezuelan state oil com-
pany. He has also denied any intention to
increase the taxes imposed on the foreign oil
companies, but the increase imposed just be-
fore his inauguration raised the government’s
take from the oil industry to an amount more
than twice that of the companies. The net
yield on petroleum investment has now fallen
to about 12 percent. In these circumstances,
exploration by private companies has virtu-
ally ceased, drilling is drastically reduced, and
new investment is not forthcoming—with de-
pressing effects upon the Venezuelan economy
as a whole.

37. Betancourt has made an attempt in re-
cent months to stem the tide of financial drift,
but has encountered considerable opposition
to proposed remedial measures. In May he
put before Congress an austerity and recov-
ery program envisaging a reduction in the
salaries of government employees, an increase
in taxes, a cutback in administrative expend-
itures, and greater efficiency in government
agencies. This program met with strong op-
position, not only from the parties of the far
left, but also from AD and COPEI, and was
modified by the Congress to eliminate part
of the salary cuts and tax increases. Never-
theless, the President has been able to abolish
some government jobs and to cut slightly the
salaries of government workers and the mili-
tary.

38. The government is counting heavily on
outside assistance to permit it to follow
through with its development program and
to re-establish business confidence in the

country. During 1961 foreign loans of some
$150 million, including $100 million from the
Export-Import Bank, have been obtained, and
others are in the process of negotiation.

39. Nevertheless, the prospect is that progress
in economic—as well as social—development
will remain slow. The agrarian reform pro-
gram, which envisages expenditures of 10 per-
cent of the national budget or about $166 mil-
lion annually, probably will not result in any
appreciable increase in agricultural produc-
tion for several years. Heavy expenditures on
housing, public services, and education, while
of considerable political value, can have but
little effect on national development for some
time to come. Much of the public money
which might be used for development will
continue to be drained away for political pur-
poses, e.g., payrolls necessary to maintain an
effective AD and COPEI apparatus,

40. Now that his political fortunes have risen
Betancourt is likely to make new efforts to
reduce administrative waste and inefficiency
and to encourage investment in economic de-
velopment. However, his efforts are certain
to be limited by domestic political pressures.
As a result, budget deficits and exchange
problems will probably continue to impede im-
plementation of the development program.

IV. THE OUTLOOK

41, The years remaining until the national
elections at the end of 1963 will be critical for
the cause of moderate leadership and consti-
tutional government in Venezuela. At best,
the Betancourt administration will probably
have a difficult time. The President’s meas-
ures to deal with pressing economic and polit-
ical problems are certain to arouse new op-
position even among some of those most at-
tached to the administration. Betancourt
probably will be under considerable pressure
to obtain additional benefits from the petro-
leum industry, which many Venezuelans be-
lieve able to provide the funds necessary to
solve national financial problems. He will
probably succeed in obtaining some new loans
and other external financial assistance, but
progress toward economic recovery and devel-
opment is likely to be slow and uncertain.

ae: | 9

42. Popular dissatisfaction and impatience
with the slow rate of economic improvement
is likely to grow, especially in the congested
urban areas. This dissatisfaction will pro-
vide the Communists and other revolutionary
leftists with further opportunities for agita-
tion against the regime. At the same time,
distrust and dissatisfaction in business circles
is likely to continue, and some rightists will
continue to conspire with reactionary mili-
tary elements to overthrow the regime. Thus
Betancourt will remain under continuing
threat from both the left and the right.

43. Although the regime will continue to be
subjected to public disorders organized by the
revolutionary left and attempts to overthrow
it by extreme rightists, it enters the final half
of President Betancourt’s term with impor-
tant advantages. His standing in the Carib-
bean area as a leading exponent of constitu-
tional government and moderate reform adds
to his domestic prestige. His demonstrated
ability for living with the diverse political ele-
ments, coupled with the breadth of his organ-
ized support, weighs heavily in his favor. In
addition, Betancourt, probably more than any
other Venezuelan leader, continues to be iden-
tified with change from the old days. This
popular image of the President, even among
many in the Caracas area, probably will do
much to reduce the adverse impact of his in-
ability to make spectacular achievements on
behalf of the lower class.

44, The military will probably continue to
support the Betancourt government against
threats from the extreme right as well as from
the left. Military leaders are probably con-
vinced that an attempt to restore military rule
would incur united and sustained opposition
from all the political parties. This considera-
tion, in addition to the growing tendency of
the leaders in the armed forces to favor legally
constituted government, will diminish the
likelihood of a military takeover. Moreover,
although the military will remain apprehen-
sive about some AD policies, it will probably
continue to see Betancourt’s moderate leader-
ship as the best it can hope for. Betancourt
is aware of this and, as in the past, is likely
to court military favor and to behave in such

a way as to command the crucial military
support.

45. On balance we believe that Betancourt
will probably be able to serve out his term.
We are much less confident, however, that
the Betancourt administration will have pro-
vided a stable foundation for the continua-
tion of constitutional government.

46. The national elections scheduled for late
1963 will be the only formal test of the popu-
lar appeal of the Betancourt administration
and no firm forecast of their outcome can be
made at this time. The constitution pro-
hibits the re-election of a President and there
is a good chance that this prohibition will ad-
versely affect AD’s bid in the election unless
Betancourt has made such far-reaching prog-
ress as to assure AD’s dominance of a new
government. As yet no member of AD can
be identified as the President’s heir apparent,
and in any event no individual on the Vene-
zuelan scene has comparable stature.

47. If by 1963 Betancourt has clearly failed
to make satisfactory progress in bettering the
lot of the Venezuelan people, the capability
of his extremist opposition will grow and be-
come particularly troublesome during the
electoral campaign. Any firm coalition of the
MIR, URD, and the PCV in favor of a single
candidate in 1963 would give that candidate
important strength. Thus, in a free election,
a candidate of radical tendencies or one, such
as former Junta President Larrazabal, with
considerable ambition but few fixed political
ideas, could be elected. Larrazabal, a career
military figure whose role as provisional Pres-
ident put him in the national spotlight, has a
considerable personal popularity, especially in
the Caracas area, and can count on some sup-
port within the armed forces. He might
again be willing to work with the far left, as
he did as a presidential candidate in the last
election.

48. The reaction of the military to a presi-
dent-elect whose character and orientation
seemed to it contrary to the best interests of
the country would be uncertain. The mili-
tary, perhaps with support from elements in
AD and COPEI, might move to prevent the
inauguration of an unacceptable President.

V. EXTERNAL RELATIONS

49. Venezuela has a record of close ties with
the US, based in large part on the mutual
interest of the two countries in the develop-
ment of Venezuéla’s oil industry. Betancourt
has carefully avoided any appearance of de-
pendence on the US, but has done his part
to keep relations with the US on a cordial
footing. Betancourt’s interest in obtaining
additional foreign economic assistance and
his desire to keep the US oil market open
will probably strengthen his inclination to
get along with the US.

50. Within the Latin American community
Betancourt has championed the cause of rep-
resentative government and the repudiation
of authoritarian regimes. This policy will
continue to foster close relations with Latin
American governments, like Colombia and

10

Costa Rica, which share his interest in democ-
racy. Betancourt, a long time foe of Rafael
Trujillo, the late Dominican dictator, has had
his position at home and in the area strength-
ened by recent developments in the Domin-
ican Republic. He probably is inclined to go
along with an inter-American acceptance of
the Balaguer government in the Dominican
Republic now that Trujillo family’s power
over it has been broken. He has broken dip-
lomatic relations with Cuba and is support-
ing the Colombian initiative for collective
measures against Castro.

51. In world affairs, Venezuela will continue
to support the West against the Communist
Bloc on most issues in the UN and elsewhere.
Venezuela maintains diplomatic relations
with one Bloc country, Poland, but Betan-
court is not likely to establish such relations
with the USSR or Communist China.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY _
DISSEMINATION NOTICE a ES Me

“e

1, This estimate was dissoritnatad by he’ Central intelligence Agee . This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the

following officials within their respective departmients. ‘ We
. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Dep riment of state
. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency :; :
. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department f the co
. Assistant Chief of N yal ae for Intelligence, for the Departmen of the

ae SS

= bf by aq fh oO

fe Loa
. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the De Pp
. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for The Joint Staff
. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the’ Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of vege

pan) ere “tapas

Navy
me t of ‘the Air Force

Director of NSA for the National Security Agency ‘:

Assistant Director for Scientine Intelligence, CIA, for any other = Department or
Agency, ty Figs i ee

2. This copy may be fctained: or destroyed a purning in ccdeied with applicable
security regulations, or returned to the Ceneet ee peoey. hy Cpa with

the Office of Central Reference, CIA. ee ae ee a

ye

3. When an estimate is disseminated averseas, the overseas deciniadts may retain it
for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be requested
of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC—D--69/2, 22 June 1953.

4, The title of this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified:

POR Oem.

DISTRIBUTION:

WARNING gums.

This material contains jgaigerretion 1. pitegiane
the National Defensg@iy he United States
within the meanig@#—er the espionage laws,
Title 18, UEO yf 793 and 794, the trans-
waieeion of which in any manner —
Pized person is prohibited by law. ~

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
