Soviet Defense Budget
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000096655, dated 4 October 1978.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000096655).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a eerie erin ee ee et SS

ectiggs 6668

a
7

The Director of Central Intelligencesjsanty CARTER LIBRARY i oe)
Washington. D.C. 20505 PRANDATORY REVIEW
CASE # NLC =

DOCUMENT #15

2 November 1978

MEMORANDUM FOR: Assistant to the President
for National Security Affairs

SUBJECT: Soviet Defense Budget

1. Attached is an analysis entitled "Soviet Allocation of
“Defense Resources to Selected Geograpnic Areas and Roles." It
responds to your request, made on behalf of the Special Coordination
Committee, dated 24 August 1978. As requested, it was prepared by
the Central Intelligence Agency in, caliaboration with the Department
ot Defense.

2. In accordance with the sensitivity of this and other
related inquiries, we are limiting distribution of this analysis to
SCC principals and those immediately involved in the project.

-_

LAV

STANSFIELD TURNER

Attacnment

cc: The Vice President
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director, Arms Control
and Disarmament Agency
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff

COPY CARTER LIBRARY

SEXET

Soviet Allocation of Defense Resources to

Selected Geographic Areas-and Roles
Summary

This study was prepared in response to a request
from the Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs. It covers two areas. First, it analyzes the
allocation of Soviet defense resources to three specific
activities: forces opposite China, homeland air defense,
and control of Eastern Europe. It estimates the cost in
constant rubles of these activities as an indication of
Soviet priorities. It also estimates what it would cost
iv constant dollars to reproduce these activities in the
United States to measure their magnitude for comparison
with US defense activities. Second, the study discusses
briefly several other aspects of Soviet defense activities

co

which display significant differences from US practices.

For forces which we believe have a primary mission
against China, we estimate that during the 1973-1977 period
the Soviets allocated about 12 percent of total ruble spend-
ing for defense. We estimate that the dollar cost of repro-
ducing these forces in the United States averaged some
$18 billion a year, about 15 percent of the estimated dollar
cost of total Soviet defense activities.

For procurement and operation of homeland air defense
forces, we estimate that the Soviets allocated about 7 per-
cent of total defense spending in rubles over the past five
years. The estimated average annual dollar cost of these
activities was about $8 billion--over 6 percent of the
dollar cost of total defense activities.* (We are unable
to assess with confidence the costs of Soviet research,
development, testing, and evaluation (RDT&E) programs for
air defense forces.) About 20 percent of homeland air
defense resources went for air defense against China and
are also included in our estimate of resources devoted to
forces opposite China.

*Pnese estimates are bpased on a broader definition than

the one used tn the US Defense Planning and Programming
Categories (DPPC). Under the DPPC definttton, Sovtet

atr defense accounted for cbout § percent of ruoble defense
spending and the estimated dollar cost is about $5 biliton--
tess than 5 percent of the cost of total defense activities.

SEQET SR M 78-10166

COPY CARTER LIBRARY

A ek

For control of Eas
quantitative estimate.
-proportion of Soviet defens

activity is very small.

Soviet forces statione
in the Western USSR a
ting to Soviet control.
for war in Central Europe i
and composition of these fo
exclusively by requirements
NATO. The Soviets plan to
stationed in Eastern Europe
stages of a war. Units pas
from the USSR would be resp
Soviet Warsaw Pact Forces~~—
of communication, and might
Bastern Europe if. necessary
trol operations arose, howe
employ reserve forces from
Consequently, we believe th
expenditures arising from t
such, are quite small--pern
training of reservists and
mobilization forces. The c
forces make to control in 5
any, cost over and above th
an adequate military postur

There are other Soviet
from requirements OF philos
the United States. These 4.
defense program, 4 large fo
Security Troops and a Sovie
personnel for functions tha
carried out by civilians.
on the costs of Soviet defe
defense costs because some
the US definition of defens
dent estimates for others.
costs of Internal Security
functions which the US wou
defense. The data imceLuce
these forces have military
affected by differences in
personnel because
regardless of w
costs of activities consid
United States.

1

ok

SEOKET

tern Europe,
However,

lso) are among
However,

they incluce
ho carries them

out, and they exclude the
ered not to be defense in the
ai
ie

we cannot provide a
we believe that the

e resources devoted to this

d in Eastern Europe (and those
many factors eontribu-
e on Soviet plans

level

evidenc
ndicates that the present
rces are dictated almost
For wartime operations against
use all of their forces now
against NATO in the opening
sing through Eastern Europe
onsible--together with non-
for safe-guarding Soviet lines
be diverted for control of
If a major requirement for con~
ver, the Soviets would most likely
among those mobilized in the USSR.
at any current Soviet defense
he requirement for control, as
aps some portion of spending for
or stockpiling equipment for
ontribution which Soviet military
astern Europe entails nist of oe oe Eo
at associated with maintaining
against NATO.

i

2
defense activities that arise
ophies different from those of
nclude an extensive Soviet civil
ree of Border Guards and Internal
practice of using military

in the United States would be
The data presented in this study
nse activities exclude most civil
of these costs do not fall under

e activities and we lack confi-

The estimates also exclude the
Troops because these troops have

a not consider related to national
the costs of Border Guards because
functions. The data are not

the mix of military and civilian
the costs of defense activities

-
—

a
—

COPY CARTER LIBRARY

ae eS

a TG ee

SEQRET

The resource allocations discussed above took place

--in the context of a general increase.in Soviet defense

spending. Over the past five years, total Soviet defense
spending in rubles has grown at an average annual rate of
4 to 5 percent. The estimated dollar cost of total Soviet
defense activities has grown at an average annual rate of
about 3 percent and exceeded total US defense outlays by
about 35 percent over the 1973-1977 period.

The resources allocated by the Soviets to forces
opposite China and to homeland air defense are numerically
equal to about two-thirds of this difference. Direct
-comparison of total us defense spending with the cost of
Soviet defense activities excluding these two categories,
however, does not provide a balanced measure of defense
resource allocation. It does not account for the flexi-
bility with which the Soviets can redeploy some of their
forces ox for categories of US defense spending which have
no direct Soviet equivalent.

The table on the following page summarizes Our
findings.

sg le Gg ge
Seger

z Estimated Soviet Allocation of Defense Resources to

rom —

Selected Geographic Areas and Roles

(Annual average for the years 1973-1977) L/

In constant dollars In constant rubles
Billion Percent Billion Percent
1977 dollars of total 1970 rubles of total

Procurement and Operating
Expenditures for
Forces Opposite China 18 15 6 12

-

Procurement and
Operating Expenditures
for Homeland Air

Defense 2/ 8(5) 6(4) 3(3) 7(5)
Subtotal 3/ 24 (22) 20(18) 9 (8) 18 (17)

Expenditures for

Control in Eastern ---- Not quantifiabdle; probably very small ----

Europe

All Other Procurement

and Operating Expenses 81(83) 66 (68) 29 (30) 59 (60)

Expenditures for : |

Military RDT&E 4/ 18 tay + aan V1) , - 23
Total 123 100 49 100

re

1/ All figures are rounded to the nearest billion or percent.

2/ Data for homeland air defense exclude RDT&E. Figures in parentheses cor-
respond to the air defense mission category in US defense accounts. See
page 5.

3/ About 20 percent of the resources for homeland air defense were for defense
against Chinese air attack, and are also included under forces opposite
China. The subtotal figures in this line eliminate this double-counting.

4/ We are unable to allocate RDT&E resources with confidence among missions.
We believe, however, that the amount of Soviet KDT&E activity directed
specifically againsc China is negligible and have included none in our
estimate of resources for forces opposite China.

iv

SE ET mop CARTER LIBRARY

a oa

SEQRET

: Contents
Page
Summary a:
Preface | | | Va
Soviet Allocation of Defense Resources to 1
Selected Geographic Areas and Roles
Allocations for Forces Opposite China 1
Allocations for Homeland Air Defense 4
Control of Eastern Europe 6
Other Differences Between US and Soviet 8
Defense Activities
Conclusion 8
Figures
1. Estimated Annual Resource Cost of Soviet 2
Forces Opposite China
2. Estimated Annual Resource Cost of Pro- 5

curement and Operating Activities for
Soviet Homeland Air Defense Forces

SEAKET
COPY CARTER LIBRARY

Purpose and Scope

This study was prepared in response to 4 request from the

assistant to the President for National Security Affairs. It
covers two areas. First, it analyzes the alloction of Soviet
defense resources to three specific activities: forces opposite

China, homeland air defense, and control of Eastern Europe.
Second, the study discusses briefly several other aspects
of Soviet defense activities which display significant
differences from US practices.

Derivation and Uses of Defense Spending Estimates

We derive our estimates of Soviet defense spending from
the "direct costing" of the various forces and activities that
make up the Soviet defense program for each year. The costs of
these elements, added together, yield figures for total defense
spending and its major components.

Our estimates of the Soviet resource commitment to defense
are presented in two measures--rubles and dollars. Both have
been calculated in constant prices so that they reflect real
changes rather than the effects of inflation. The ruble
estimates reflect our understanding of the cost of military
equipment and programs in the USSR. Ruble estimates are
useful for analysis of the economic impact of Soviet defense
programs, the resource choices confronting Soviet planners,
ana the relative priorities they assign to the forces anc
activities that make up the defense effort. Our dollar esti-
mates reflect the hypothetical cost of reproducing Soviet
defense activities in the United States. Because they are
in familiar terms, they give the reader @& general picture
of the magnitude of the Soviet effort and are useful for
comparison with data on US spending for similar programs.

Both the ruble ana the dollar estimates are measures of
the annual flow of resources to Soviet defense activities and

rae sek ee
This study was prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency tn collaboration
with the Department of Defense. Comments and questions are weleome, and

may be dirceted to

4.5(c)
4.6(d)(1)

i

_ do not measure fully the size,
“tiveness of the Soviet forces.

We present our estimates in two ways:
absolute magnitudes and in percentages tha
of total resources allocated to defense.
between the ruble and the d
the Soviet defense effort
rrencies.

shares differ slightly

mates because the components of
have different relative price

Both the ruble and the a
are subject to uncertainty.
estimates of the total resources allo
our estimates of allocations
believe that the overall d
activities is unlikely to
We cannot quantify the un
independent intelligence rep
Le

mate of total spending.

ollar
be in error by more
certainty in th
orts have co

SEQKET

of published Soviet economic data.

noted those areas in which the uncertal

acute.

composition ox military effec-

-in terms of
t indicate shares
The percentage
ollar esti-

s in the two cu

ollar estimates of resource flows
We have more confidence in tne
cated to defense than in
grams. We
Soviet defense
than 15 percent.

e ruble estimate, but
rroborated our esti-

is also consistent with our analysis
In this paper,
wey iS particularly

for the component pro
cost estimate for

we have

COPY CARTER LIBRAR|

ao par.

SEQRET

Soviet Allocation of Defense Resources to
oe Selected Geographic Area&és-and Roles

Our analysis of the allocation of Soviet defense resources
by geographic area and combat role is based on our best judgments
about the primary targets and missions of selected Soviet Forces.
These judgments are derived from evidence of the geographic
deployments of the forces, the technical characteristics of
Soviet weapons, and indications of Soviet war plans. We estimate
the procurement and operating expenditures for the forces them-
selves on the basis of their manpower strengths, equipment
holdings and activity levels. We estimate expenditures for
support activities directly attributable to specific forces in
proportion to the share which these forces comprise in the Soviet
oreer of battle. We allocate the costs of general support
activities that cannot be attributed directly to the forces
by prorating them on the basis of the costs which we can allo-
cate directly. In most cases, we cannot allocate research,
development, testing and evaluation (RDT&E) expenditures among
geographic areas and roles. However, we can identify certain
sets of Soviet defense activities to which no RDT&E costs
should be attributed because these activities have little
impact on Soviet military research and development programs.

Allocations for Forces Opposite China

The Soviets maintain substantial military forces in the

Far East. Most of the impetus for the buildup of these forces
in recent years has been the threat the Soviets perceive from
China. This paper defines selected Soviet forces in the Far

East as having primary missions against China during the 1973-
1977 period. These include:

-- all ground and tactical air forces in the four Eastern
military districts,

-- peripheral attack bombers in the Transbaykal
Military District,

-- G~ and H-class ballistic missile submarines in the
Pacific Fleet,

-- all strategic air defense forces within 200 miles of
the Chinese border,

-~- the SS-20 IRBMs targeted against China.

SEGET
COPY CARTER LIBRARY

SEQRET

During the period the Soviets operated 190 SS-l11 ICBMs
in launchers oriented so that they could cover targets in Asia
“-ag well as in the United States. We_have not included these
SS-lls as having a primary mission against China. If we were
to include them, they would raise the percentage of Soviet
defense resources directed against China by less than one
percent. Further, although Soviet heavy bombers and some
ballistic missile submarines are capable of attacking China,
we have judged the United States to be their primary target
and have omitted them from our totals for forces opposite
China.

We have also omitted costs for general purpose naval forces
in the Soviet Pacific Fleet. We believe that the size and
composition of the fleet has been dictated primarily by the
threat which the Soviets perceive from western naval forces
in the Pacific and that expenditures for the Pacific Fleet
would not have been substantially different if there had
been no Chinese threat. The Chinese navy is principally a
coastal defense force and poses little threat to Soviet naval
forces. Moreover, Soviet naval. operations in a war with China
probably would be quite limited.

Over the 1973-1977 period, the Soviets allocated some
12 percent of total ruble defense spending to procurement and
operation of the forces wnich we have identified as oriented
toward China. In dollar cost terms, this allocation averaged
some $18 billion, about 15 percent of the total estimated
dollar cost of Soviet defense activities. These data do not
include any RDTSE resources. We believe that the portion of
Soviet military RDT&E directed specifically against China is
negligible and that therefore Soviet RDT&E spending would have
-been about the same even without a threat from China.

Figure l shows that the Soviet resources committed to
procuring and operating forces against China over the past
ten years--the period during which the bulk of the buildup

took place~-have grown rapidly. They were nearly 15 percent
of the total defense resource flow in rubles in 1977, compared
to less than 7 percent in 1968. This trend reflects a major

expansion of Soviet forces in the Sino-Soviet border region,
including a doubling of the number of ground forces divisions
and a fivefold increase in the tactical aircraft inventory.

In addition to this expansion, however, a considerable portion
af the resources devoted to forces opposite China was for

. SEQRET 3 pign an’

mary CARTES

SEQET

Figure 1

Estimated Annual Resource Cost of Soviet Forces Opposite China

Ruble Spending

FILLION 197e@ RUBLES

ee

3e¢

28

ie

PERCENT

6&

63

'

7

£
SUPPORT

71

COMSAT FORCES

a ae

Estimated Dollar Cost

BILLION 1977 DOLLARS

32

20

1¢@

74 7? 62

ra)

i
SUPPORT

COMBAT FORCES

74

Soviet Defense Activities Opposite China As AL

in Rubles

74

Share of Total Defense Activities

PERCENT

22

z
SUPPORT

2?

* The estimate for support costs is less certain than

SEORET

in Dollars

Gact

18
COMBAT E
FORCES K
e
62. 74 74

that for combat forces.

7?

27

SUPP

COSY
FORQ

So ee eS ee

sSEQRET

modernizing the forces in connection with a general moderniza-—
tion program throughout the Soviet military establishment. For
this reason, even in the unlikely event of a full Sino-Soviet
rapprochement, we would not expect Soviet defense spending

to be reduced by the full amount expended on the buildup of
forces opposite China.

While the Soviets expended these resources, in large
measure, in order to meet the threat from China, they comprise
an element of overall Soviet military power, and could be
redeployed for other purposes. However, the extent to which
forces currently opposite China could be redeployed (for
example, in a war with NATO) would be constrained by the Soviet
need to maintain a credible force posture against China.

Allocations for Homeland Air Defense

Homeland air defense includes all interceptor aircraft and
surface-to-air missiles (SAMs) subordinate to the Air Defense
Forces (PVO-Strany). Although the Soviet air defense ested-
Lishment is very large, during the 1973-1977 period, only
about 7 percent of total defense spending in rubles was
allocated to procurement and operation of homeland air defense
forces. This is a relatively low share of expenditures by
historical standards, primarily because of temporary downturns
in procurement cycles for SAMs and aircraft. The estimated
dollar cost of homeland air defense forces averaged almost
$8 billion per year, over 6 percent of the estimated dollar
cost of total defense activities.* (About 20 percent of the
resources devoted ‘to homeland air defense--in either ruble or
dollar terms--was for defense against Chinese air Sttaex
These resources are also included in our estimate for forces

opposite Chana.)

None of these data incluée RDT&E costs. RDTSE adds still
more to the Soviet commitment of resources to air defense, but
we are unable to isolate the portion of Soviet RDT&E costs

allocated specifically to air Gefense.

Homeland air defense does not include tactical SAM systems

integral to Soviet Ground Forces or fighters assigned to Soviet

ee

* These figures wicluaz ce tain suprort cos7s that are omitted from tne
DPPC aty defence category. Using tne DPPC definttzon, homeland air cejense
resources comprised about 5 percent oj total yuble spending for 1973-1977
and about $5 billion, or Less tran $ percent of tne cotal estimated dollar
cost of Sovtet defense acttvitias.

4

SEQKET

SEQRET
Figure 2

Estimated Annual Resource Cost of Procurement and Operating
Activities for Soviet Homeland Air Defense Forces

Ruble Spending Estimated Dollar Cost
BILLION 19709 RUBLES
: , SILLIGH 1977 DOLLARS
16 19
- x
SUPPORT
z
5 SUPPORT 5
INTEPCEPTORS
INTERCEPTORS
i SARS { 8
‘is ait "4 77 63 71 74 77
Soviet Homeland Air Defense Activities As A
Share of Total Defense Activities
In Rubles In Dollars
PERCENT PERCENT
1S

15

se f

Bae soppoat: SUPPC
S S
een Wo;
a TNte4
FAD SANS AAD
’ : @
7 68 7t 74 TI

63 71

ry vetoes \< . : z
These support costs represent additional air defense support resources not included
Ju the DPPC. The estimate for these costs is less certain than those for other compon

SEQRET
5

ae a il

COPY CARTER LISRART

Re a a me een etme eaaaaaaaaaaeaaaaeaaaaaaaaaasaaaaasaaasasiaaaaasaasmssiaaasaaiaaaal

SEQRET

Frontal Aviation. The primary mission of these SAMs and
fighters has been support of the Ground Forces, but they

'-. Rave operated in exercises under the control of PVO Strany
and under some circumstances could supplement homeland
defenses. Less than one percent of Soviet defense spending
in rubles during 1973-1977 went to tactical air defense
SAMs. The estimated dollar cost of these SAM programs
averaged about half a billion dollars each year.

Figure 2 displays the time trend in resource alloca-
tion to homeland air defense and its components-~-interceptors,
SAMs and support. Resource commitment to these programs was
relatively high during the 1968-1971 period, reflecting
heavy procurement of the SA-5 SAM and Flagon and Foxbat air-
craft. It declined during 1972 to 1975 with a decrease in
procurement of SAMs and fighters. Spending has turned up
again in the last two years primarily because of Floager
aircraft procurement. Over the decade the Soviets replaced
almost 2,000 interceptors with newer, advanced models.

Control of Eastern Europe

We cannot quantify the proportion of Soviet defense
resources devoted to control of the non-Soviet Warsaw Pact
(NSWP) countries. We believe, however, that it is very
small. The Soviets probably regard their forces in Eastern
Europe (and those in Western USSR also) as contributing
to control of the Pact countries by their presence alone.*
In the past, Soviet military forces have been used directly
for control on several occasions. They put down revolts in
East Germany and Hungary in the early 1950s and invaded
Czechoslovakia in 1968. However, we believe that the size
and composition of Soviets forces in Eastern Europe during
the period of this study has been dictated almost exclusively
by requirements for war against NATO.

Since the 1960s, Soviet plans and exercises for war in
Central Europe have called for a force of roughly 55
divisions, organized into three fronts, each attacking
along a main strategic axis. In the early 1960s, this

*There are several otner elements that, from the Sovtet
view, contrtbute to Moscow's control of Eastern Europe.
These tnelude Communtst party controls, the Pact countries’

7 economte dependence on the USSR, and the ever-present
Sovtet advisors and secret poltce agents.

6
SEQRET

cony Carter Library aac’

‘force was to be composed of Soviet forces in Eastern

Europe, supplemented by forces moved forward from the

USSR and a few NSWP divisions. By the late 1960s, the
Soviets had modified their plans and, in order to lessen

the requirement for reinforcement prior to war, accorded

the NSWP forces a greater role in initial combat operations..-
This basic strategy has continued to the present.

Today, there are 56 Warsaw-Pact divisions in Central
Europe, of which 27 are Soviet. In all Warsaw Pact exer-~
cises depicting armed conflict with NATO in the central
region, all Soviet ground forces in Eastern Europe-~including
the 5 divisions in Czechoslovakia~-are committed to the
initial Pact offensive, as are all first-line East German,
Polish, and Czechoslovak divisions. There is no
evidence in exercises or in any other sources that the
Soviets plan to withhold any of their forces in Eastern
Europe from initial combat operations in order to control
their NSWP allies.

Soviet forces passing through Eastarn Europe from
the USSR would share with the NSwWP forces the task of
safeguarding Soviet lines of communications to the front
and could be diverted for control if necessary. However,
we believe that if a major requirement for control opera-
tions arose, the Soviets would most likelv employ reserve
forces from among those mobilized in the USSR. Thus, some
part of Soviet expenditures for training reservists and for
stockpiling the equipment for mobilization forces might
logically be categorized as related to control in Eastern
Europe. However, even expencitures for training reservists
and stockpiling equipment, which constitute a very small
proportion of annual defense spending, are determined
primarily by other factors.

Although the Soviets still distrust all six Pact
allies in varying degrees, the Soviets view of requirements
for war against NATO has led to the assignment of critical
wartime roles to several of the NSWP countries. The Soviets
seek to maintian the reliability of their NSWP allies
through a variety of measures, one of which is the threat
of military force. The contribution which Soviet forces
make to control of Eastern Europe, however, entails little,
if any, cost over and above that associated with maintaining
an adequate military posture against NATO.

7 |
SE KE a8 COPY CARTER MIERANY

. SEQXET

Other Differences Between Soviet and US Defense Activities

There are other Soviet defenSe activities that arise
from requirements or philosophies different from those of
the United States. One example is the extensive Soviet
civil defense program. We do not know the total cost of
the Soviet civil defense effort. We have, however, esti-
mated the cost of three major elements of the Soviet
program: full-time civil defense personnel, operation of
full-time civil defense units, and shelter construction.
For the year 1976, we estimate Soviet expenditures for
these elements to have been about 400 million rubles. The
estimated cost of reproducing these activities in the United
States is about $2 billion. The estimates of total Soviet
defense expenditures presented in this study omit all of
the costs of the civil defense program except pay and
allowances of uniformed military personnel engaged in civil
defense (about 500 million dollars, or 40 milllion rubles).

The Soviets have two types of militarized security
forces: Border Guards subordinate to the Committee for
State Security (KGB) and Internal Security Troops subordi-
nate to the Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD). We include the
costs of the Border Guards because these forces are organized
and equipoed as military units and have military tasks in
time of war. We exclude the costs of MVD Internal Security
Troops because they perform functions which are carried out
in the United States by police forces.

-The Soviets often employ military personnel in stafi,
support, research and other functions which in the United
States would be performed by civilians. This practice does
not have a significant impact on our estimates of Soviet
defense resource allocation because these estimates reflect
the costs of specific defense activities, regardless of
whether military or civilian personnel carry them out.

The Soviets also use some military personnel for solely
Civilian functions but we exclude the costs of these func~
tions from our estimates.

Conclusion

The Soviet allocations of defense resources to forces
Opposite China and homeland air defense, discussed above,
took place in the context of a general increase in Soviet
defense spending. Over the past five years, total Soviet
defense spending in rubles has grown at an average annual
rate of 4 to 5 percent. The estimated dollar cost of total
Soviet defense activities has grown at an average annual rate
of about 3 percent and exceeded total US defense outlays by
about 35 percent over the 1973-1977 period. The

SEC x 7 _
OPY CARTER LIBRARY

SEGRET

estimated dollar cost of Soviet defense activities for
1977, some $130 billion, was over 40 percent larger than
the total US defense outlay of $90 billion.*

aes : - a

Taken together, the resources allocated by the Soviets
to forces opposite China and to homeland air defense com-
prised about 20 percent of the total estimated dollar cost
of Soviet defense activities and about 18 percent of total
defense spending in rubles over the 1973-1977 period.

These two categories are numerically equal to about
two-thirds of the difference between the estimated dollar
cost of Soviet defense attivities and US defense outlays
for 1973~-1977.** Direct comparison of total US defense
spending with the cost of Soviet defense activities
excluding homeland air defense and forces opposite China,
however, does not provide a balanced measure of defense
resource allocation. It does not account for the ftexi-
bility with which the Soviets can redeploy some of their
forces or for categories of US defense spending which have
no direct Soviet equivalent.

Moreover, such a simple numerical comparison obscures
the fact that much of Soviet spending for these two sets
of activities was for force modernization within the context
of a general uvgrading of Soviet military forces. Even if
the Soviets had not perceived a threat from China, for
example, we doubt that their defense See would have
been correspondingly smaller. It is likely that a considerabl
portion of the resources expended for forces opposite China
would have been used to speed modernization of other strategic
and general purpose forces.

*Data on US defense outlays tnelude nattonal securtty programs
of DoD, the Department of Energy ana the Department of Trans-
portatton. Outlays for penstons are excluded. The data are
based on the DoD Five-Year Defense Program and the Budget of
the United States Government. We have converted
constant 1977 prices and to ealendar year tarms
Of compartson.

*4Theu do not, however, account for dtscrepanctes between US
and Sovtet defense resource allocation tn a number of tmnor-
tant spectfte areas. For example, the estimated dollar cost
of Sovtet tntercontinental attack pregrams during 1973-1977
was about §40 btllion, and exceeded comparable US ouvlays oF
some $23 billion by about 75 percent. (Addition comparisons
and analyses of trends in Soviet defense spending are detaile
tn Estimated Soviet Defense Spending: Trends & Prospects, -
SR 78-10121, June 1978, and A Dollar Cost Comparison of
Soviet and US Defense Activities, 1967-1977, SR 78-10001,
January 1978. Copies of these studtes are attached.)

d
