Military Information: Mukden Looted by Russian Army.
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000139023, dated 5 April 1946.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000139023).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

COUNTRY
SUBJECT
ORIGIN
THEATRE
SOURCE

SUB SOURCE
EVALUATION

WASHINGTON, D.C... .
INTELLIGENCE DISSEMINATION NUMBER A-CS044

China ORIGINAL RPT. UV 1509
Hana a da Nui:den Looted by DATE OF INFO. JUCUSt=Deconber 194
DATE OF RPT. 10 Zin 1946
ee . pistripuTeD £8 June 1946
_ CONFIRMATION
SUPPLEMENT
pote NO. OF PAGES S
> ATTACHMENTS

(SSU Note: The following is information taken from a
statement by a German resident merchant of Hukdan.)

1, ‘When the news of the end of the war came, there was a
general feeling of relief in Mukden. People had expected
the worst, seeing tank barricadés and gun positions being
erected in the main streets and witnessing a chaotic at-
tempt of evacuation of Japanese women and children.

2. Japanese army units were busy dismantling the gun
positions: in the streets. There was peace and order, al-
though a tense atmosphere prevailed, as the Ned Army was
rapidly progressing towards Mukden. But most people ex-
pected an orderly occupation, especially due to tha fact
that the Soviet Union was an ally of China and it was to
Chinese territory they came. ;

3. Advance forces of sirborne troops arrived in the
afternoon of 19 August. They were received with ex-
pressions of spontaneous Joy by the people, who offered

the soldiers food and drink. Immediate connection was
established by the advance forces with tho local community
of Russian emigrants, Emigrants of known anti-Soviet
leanings were arrested, The chief of the local Nazi group,
a lecturer of German and Latin at the Mukden Medical College

was also arrested,

4. My first connection with the Red Army was made on the
following day. Three officers and one driver came in, led
by a local Tartar and a neighbor of mine. They demanded

my car and after promising to return the car on the same
night “when all their equipment had arrived" they left
without doing so, I have never seen my Car since. On the
afternoon of 20 August, a First Lieutenant, accompanied

by a local emigrant, visited me and demanded cameras, He
gave me three minutes to produce ny valuable camera, secrot
military plans, etc. When I told him it would be absurd to
expect to find military plans in a German merchant's house
and also that I had no camera, he throatenead to shoot my
whole family. I invited hin bo search my house, Obviously
convinced about the truth of my asserticn, he produced two
bottles of beer, which I had to drink with him.

. U.S, AND BRITISH CPRICIAIS
OUT

APPROVED FOR RELEASE
18 DEC 1997

a

STRATEGIC SERVICES WNTT. WAR DEPARTULENT £-69044

im gies
5. Various cificers including two from the "Anti Rasvetka"
gave me orders to collect German property such as guns, type-
writers and cameras. The collection orders were always given
by the commandant. Eight hunting Tifles and 6 revolvers were
collected, On the following day, accompanied by two officers,
I collected 33 cameras. Later in the day, I was forced to give
. the officers in charge a list of my office equipment purchased
during the last few years. wo days later, the office was
cleared of all typewriters and portable furniture. All the
desks and cupboards were forced open and contents thrown out
and completely upset.

6. Many arrests were made on 21 August. Troops, now in the city
in great numbers, rounded up leading Japanese, as well as the of-
ficlals of the German Consulate, There_seemed to have been still
no friction with the population, who overlooked small pilferages
of street stalls, being glad to be liberated from the Japanese.
regime. In these days, however, looting of godowns, factories

and stores began, It seemed that occupation troops investigated

the contents first and after selecting the more valuable things,
invited the mob to continue what had been started. Many fires were
started and groups of ruffians marched through the streets on ex-
peditions of their own, The commandant had issued a proclamation
that life should go on as usual, guarantesing personal safety and
property, but it seemed that this proclamation was of little value.
Soldiers had now begun to stop people on the streets and take val-
uable pocket articles.

7 > Visits and.searchss in the homes increased. The officers vis-
isted me continuously. On 26 August, a general with six officers
inspected my house but I was assured afterwards that no more than
one room would he confiscated. Tha next morning, the same officer
billeted himself with us, leaving again after depositing some
clothing, two guards,and giving instructions on how to arrange the
furniture, We were busy with the latter, when he came back with
six or seven soldiers heavily armed with Brownings. We were told
to vacate the house within two hours, We were allowed to pack and
take clothes, etc., but no furniture. Wo pleaded for small living
quarters or for more time but were refused. We were continuously
watched by the soldiers who had distributed themselves all over

the house while we packed. We were later stranded on the road with
our baggage when a Dutch gentleman invited us to the civilian in-
ternment camp where we were given something to eat and also offered
shelter for the night. It was found out however, during the after-
noon, that a neighboring house was not cleared and we moved to our
friends flat there. After 24 hours of rain which arforded us some
rest, a Major, a Captain,a First Licutenant and two soldiers bil-
letted themselves in the downstairs office quarters of the flat.

8. The next morning the Captain invited us downstairs for lunch
and told us he expected my friend and me, as well as our wives, to
join them for dinner at night. Afterwards we should have to go

tTAL CONTROL U.S. AND BRITISi OFFICIAIS ONLY

- £0

STRATEGIC SERVICES UNIT. WAR DEPARWMENT A-69044

S -3-
with them on a hunt for valuable stores. He was especially interested
in clothing material and he gave us until evening to find out about
stores. We had to expect the worst from the party, and as the looting
job could not be turned down because of threats we found no other
alternative but to move to the small house of another German.

9~ On September 2, a Lieutenant with an unknown omigrant visited
the house again, introducing himself as the "Rayon Chef", The same
emigrant brought a party of five officers and twn men to us the next
day, a few hours after Mr. Rachim had asked us to give him one pearl
necklace and one gold watch as "presents for a Russian General". The
two soldiers lined up all six men of the house and searched our pockets.
Anything of value was taken while we were threatened with revolvers
and knives. Meanwhile, the junior officers started to search the
ground floor of the house and took some suitcases stored there. After
looting downstairs, the two junior officers and one soldier went up-
stairs and took all suitcases, empticd the wardrobe and chest of
drawers, brought everything downstairs and with revolvers, forced us
to load the baggage on the truck. My own loss, contained in 9 trunks
and suitcases, can be estimated at about US'$5,000.

10, With anothor gentlemen, I immediately went to the Commandant.

A young officer was ordered to procead to our house to”

investigate and made a detailed report. We took him to the "Kayon Cher"
who Jed the looting party to our house, but he now disclaimed any
knowledge of the men of the looting party. As the truck was not

marked with any number, we could, unfortunately give no clues. As we
expected, we never again heard anything concerning the matter, Al-
though we felt safe from further looting parties, as there was nothing
left, a drunken soldier broke into the house shortly after lunch one
day and with pointed revolver forced us to give him the cash we had.

in our pockets.

11. On 10 September, Mr. Rachim told me that our house was not oc-
cupled. It would however, ba occupied again and in the meantime he
would buy my furniture. He went over to the house with me. The con—
dition of the place can hardly be described. All my food and drink
stores had been consumated, the tins and bottles were lying everywhere,
together with hundreds of empty vodka bottles, egg shells, etc. °
Couches and cushions were slit open; all curios, cutlery, carpots,
curtains, morrors, easy chairs, gramophone records, radio apparatus,
record player, linen and most of the porcelain was stolen. The large
pieces of furniture in scratched and spoiled condition wore left.

He offered me a sum of one-third the value of the furniture, but under
the circumstances I could do nothing better than accept. The house
was not occupied by Russian soldiers again,

12, Throughout September and October, the whole town was searched for
items worth taking. The sentiments of friendship towards the liber-

ators had changed with practically the entire population. It was un-
safe to walk on the roads. Chinese of all classes were sometimes

CONFID CONTROL uss AND BEITISH OFFICIALS ONLY

ae Py

STRATEGIC SERVICES UNIT, WAR DEPAKTMENT A~69044

-4-
rounded up for work in buildings occupied by Soviet forces. Truck-
loads of machinery taken from factories was transported away.
Japanese and German engineers were forced to assist in dismantling
and packing the parts. :

13.' At the end of October, I was called by Messrs. Skorniakoff

and Kukarkin to the office of the Wnesch—Torg concerning my house. a
Major Novikov, who had recently arrived from Moscow, told me that
their organization would be interested in buying the house. I told
him that in order to fulf11l1 all obligations, especially due to the
darge loss of personnel in our firm, the house could only be sold at
a fair price and only if such sale would not cause any difficulties
to me afterwards, He mentioned that the Chinese Government had
granted them the rights to buy property here, and for me it would be
better to sell, as the Chinese would confiscate everything without
compensation. He offered a ridiculous price and I refused. Then he
told me that he would confiscate the house. I repliod that I could
do nothing against such a decision: but wa were in China and the
house could not be carried away; it must remain for final decision
by the Chinese Government. He answered that he could not protect
the house further and it would soon be in a similar condition to
most Japanese houses. Jie ordered me to como back two hours later
with my decision. When I visited again, another English speaking
Major talked with me. Twice, he increased the price but 1t was still
ridiculous. A few days later, soldiers of the so-called "Chinese

Red Army", apparently recruited from Manchuria, occupiod tha house.
For some time it was a center for propaganda leaflet distribution,
the whole forecourt being filled with cases of leaflets.

14, After a few days, a German acquaintance called on me and ad-
vised me to come to terms with the Wnesch-Torg. He told ma they
were now offering five times the figure mentioned at first. It was
still ridiculous. After a few days, Mr. Garbuchia came and told me
Major Novikov did not understand my tehavior; they could sand me to
Siberia for five years for not coopsrating with the occupation
forces. VPurthermore, they were now offering me one-third of the
price I myself had considered correct. All hopes were shattered
when the announced evacuation by Russian troops on November 18th was
repudiated. With the prospect of a long occupation by the Red Army,
no chanes to earn anything, and being at the end of former resources,
Iwas taken to the Wnesch-Torg to sign the purchasing contract.

15. One month later, I was again called upon by a lawyer from Harbin
who had made up a new contract, not only in Russian, but also in

Chinese, wx: demanded another signature. [Turthermore, he took me

to the Court for registration of the sale. The clerk in charge was
not in. The court officials refused to sign anything and sought to
delay the matter. More or less under duress, thay consentsd to stamp
the siles contracts after a day and a half of bargaining.

16. After a long suspense, the Russians started to make preparations
for withdrawal at the beginning of March. The more valuable articles
having been dispatched already, one could see trucks filled with

AL COiioL U.S. AND SRITISI OFFICIALS ONLY

-22

"STRATEGIC SERVICES LUTi) WAR DEPARTMENT A-69044

-5~
furniture, even with doors, windows, etc. Our office as well, was
once more visited in February. The locks were forcad open and
writing desks, book shelves, etc. carried away. It is generally
known, however, that in the latter period of the occupation the
patience of the majority of the population was exhausted and single
soldiers disappeared, or now looting attacks were opposed by strong
self defense: from the Chinese side. My description of personal
experience could be repeated in a similar sense from many quarters.
Unfortunately, my general observations are limited because during
the occupation it was more advisable to remain at home. But details
of the first few days of observation could be given by the inmates
of the Internment Camp. My own experiences can be verified by many
Chinese. I believe that the former emigrants readily assisted tha’
Red Army-in tracing people to be arrested as well as in looting.
Most of it was done in the hope of personal gain, some perhaps out
of fear. - . : ; _ : . "

/SSU Mashington Note: See” A-69039 for previous report of
Major NOVIKOFF in Mukden.7

CONST Tg AW CONTROL U.S. -AND BRITISH OFFICIALS ONLY
