Turkey's Position in the East West Struggle
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000010850, dated 1 January 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000010850).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a9
ES
ed

Ga
vege

COPY NO.1
FOR THE PRESIDE!

OF THE UNITED S7AT.

UGGLE

TURKEY'S POSITION
STR

-ELLIGENCE AGENCY

*

26 Feb

ed.

T-WEST
Publish

CENTRAL: INT

LL
_
r
~
wu}
ao
” i
“OU
Zz
Lil
“oO
=
cond
LL
fe
ra
and
4
4
=. §
- &

i hha eaerdeatadt aaa d Ld
eae

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

TURKEY'S POSITION IN THE EAST-WEST
STRUGGLE

NIE-9

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticipated in the preparation of this estimate. All members
of the Intelligence Advisory Committee have given their
concurrence to the estimate. This paper is based on in-
formation available on 23 February 1951.

TURKEY’'S POSITION IN THE EAST-WEST STRUGGLE '

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the will and ability of Turkey to maintain its alignment with the West,
and the courses of action Turkey might follow in the event of war.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Turkey is determined to resist Soviet
expansion. It is solidly aligned with the
West because this alignment offers Tur-
key its only hope of effectively resisting
Soviet pressures. At present one of the
main objectives of Turkish foreign policy
is to secure a clear-cut US commitment to
come to Turkey’s defense in the event of
an attack.

2. New Soviet or Soviet-Satellite successes
in expanding the Communist sphere of
control outside the Near East (even in
Yugoslavia) would not significantly affect
Turkey’s pro-US alignment as long as the
US demonstrated that its fundamental
aim was to continue the struggle against
the USSR. A shift in US policy to one
of hemispheric defense would oblige Tur-
key to abandon its pro-US alignment and
fall back on a policy of neutrality.

3. We believe that Turkey is capable of
halting at the Straits an invasion by Bul-
garian forces. Against a Soviet attack,
the Turks could probably maintain or-
ganized resistance for two or three
months and—with substantial Western
assistance—could hold for some time a
redoubt area in southern Turkey against
Soviet forces.

4. Short of general war, Turkey will con-
tinue to support concerted Western action

under UN auspices in opposition to So-
viet or Satellite aggression elsewhere.
The commitment of Turkish troops or the
provision of Turkish bases would, how-
ever, be contingent upon a firm assurance
of US armed support in event of Soviet
attack.

5. If the USSR were, without precipitat-
ing a general war, to secure control of
Iran, Irag, and Syria on one flank of Tur-
key and/or of Greece on the other, Turkey
would probably react as follows:

a. Even if Turkey were partially cut
off from the West by Soviet conquest or
absorption of Iran, Iraq, and Syria, it
would probably not alter its pro-US align-
ment, although in this event the Turks
would probably be obliged to adopt a more
cautious policy toward the USSR;

b. If the USSR or its Satellites we: to
attack Greece and if the US failed t: op-
pose militarily Satellite occupation of
Greece or refused to consider an attack
on Greece by Soviet forces sufficient jus-
tification for military action against the
USSR, Turkey’s attitude would then de-
pend on broader considerations. If the
US left no doubt of its determination to
support and supply Turkey to the utmost
of its ability, Turkey would probably still
maintain its pro-US alignment. If, on

Pik 1

hehe Ghee te 5h card AOE sh testbed mane NE

etd

the other hand, Turkey were unable to
obtain assurances of such support, Tur-
key would probably attempt to adopt a
policy of neutrality;

c. In the event that Turkey’s land com-
munications with the West were com-
pletely cut off by Soviet control of Greece
in the west, and of Iran, Iraq, and Syria
in the east and south, the Turks, lacking
firm assurances of US armed support in
the event of Soviet attack on Turkey,
would probably shift to a policy of neu-
trality and might eventually make sub-
stantial concessions to Soviet demands.

If, on the other hand, Turkey were gble
to obtain firm assurances of US armed
support in the event of a Soviet or Satel-
lite attack on Turkey, it would probably
still maintain its pro-US alignment.

6. We estimate that under any circum-
stances Turkey will resist aggression
against itself.

7. In the event of general war, Turkey, if
not itself attacked, probably would ini-
tially maintain its status of non-belliger-
ency but would do everything compatible
with that status to facilitate a Western
victory.

DISCUSSION

The Solidity of Turkey’s Pro-Western
Alignment.

1. The Turks are determined to resist Soviet
expansion and to preserve their independence.
They consider that alignment with the Us

‘and its allies offers Turkey its only hope of

effectively resisting Soviet pressures, which
since the end of World War II have been un-
remitting. In 1946 the USSR demanded a
share in control of the Straits and the right
to station Soviet troops there. lt has un-
officially claimed the Kars plateau area in
northeastern Turkey. Moreover, the USSR
has permitted its propagandists to denounce
the Turkish regime, vilify Turkish leaders,
attack Turkey's close association with the US,
and attempt to incite revolt agains. the Tur-
kish Government.

2. The Turks have stood firm against Soviet
and Satellite pressure. They have avoided
hasty or provocative actions against the USSR,
and have indicated a willingness to discuss
points at issue with the USSR. At the same
time, however, they have made it clear that
they are strongly averse to # policy of appease-
ment and are determined to resist any Soviet
attempts to encrsach on Turkey’s independ-
ence or territorial integrity. Moreover, they

have sought to ally themselves with the power
or combination of powers most capable of re-
sisting the USSR.

3. One of the main objectives of Turkey’s for-
eign policy is to obtain a US commitment to
come to Turkey’s defense in event of a Soviet
or Soviet-Satellite attack. Pronouncements
of US interest in Turkey's security and the
extension of US military and economic as-
sistance have given the Turks a large measure
of assurance, but they are still deeply con-
cerned by the-lack of a formal guarantee of
prompt and effective aid in the event of war.
The Turks would almost certainly provide base
facilities to the US in return for a definite US
commitment to come to Turkey’s defense
Having failed to obtain a firm US commitment
to date, the Turks have sought to obtain in-
direct US guarantees by seeking membership
in NATO or by advocating an Eastern Medi-
terranean security pact with direct US par-
ticipation. To the Turks, limited association
with the NATO for Mediterranean defense
planning represents only a slight improve-
ment over their previous situation. They con-
sider that the formation of a Mediterranean
bloc without US participation or ihe cenclu-
sion of mutual assistance agreements with
their neighbors without a US guarantee might

ere 2

actually be disadvantageous and they have,
therefore, firmly opposed them. While they
have reaffirmed their adherence to the 1939
Tripartite Treaty of mutual assistance with
France and the UK, they clearly vaiue it less
as a direct guarantee of British and French
assistance than as potentially an indirect way

of getting US assistance. Turkey’s participa- —

tion in the UN is animated to some extent by
the same motives. Turkey is more willing
than most members .to make the UN effective
but has little confidence in its present effec-
tiveness to check Soviet aggression.

Possibilities of a Shift in Turkey’s Align-
ment.

4. The Turks expect that the West may suffer
further diplomatic or military reverses but
believe that the US and its allies will be able
ultimately to contain Soviet imperialism or
defeat the USSR in event of war. A reduction
in the US power position as a result of further
reverses in the cold war would not alter Tur-
key’s basic alignment as long as the US af-
fered firm assurance of US armed support in
the event of Soviet attack on Turkey.

5. Even if Turkey were partially cut off from
the West by Soviet conquest or absorption of
Iran, Iraq, and Syria, it would probably not
alter its alignment with the West. In this
event, however, Turkey would be obliged to
adopt a more cautious policy toward the
USSR. A number of individuals not unac-
ceptable to the USSR might be brought into
the government, and internal security meas-
ures would be tightened. It is unlikely, how-
ever, that Turkey would agree to territorial
concessions, request the US military mission
to ieave Turkey, or otherwise appease the
USSR. ‘

6. If the USSR or its Satellites were to attack
Greece and if the US failed to oppose mili-
tarily Satellite occupation of Greece or refused
to consider a Soviet attack on Greece as suf-
ficient Justification for mpitary action against
the USSR, Turkey’s attitude would depend on
broader strategic considerations. These con-
siderations would include: (a) the degree of
military preparedness in Western Europe; (5)
Western military strength in North Africa and

the Eastern Mediterranean; (c) the attttude
of the US toward Turkéy and US strategic
plans concerning Turkey; and (d) the atti-
tude of the Western Powers in generaLand of
the US in particular toward Soviet aggres-
sion. We believe, however, that Turkey would
probably still maintain its pro-US alignment,
provided the US left no doubt of its determi-
nation to support and supply Turkey to the
utmost of its ability. If, on the other hand,
Turkey were unable to obtain assurances of
such support, it would probably attempt to
adopt a policy of neutrality.

7. In the event that Turkey were outflanked
completely by Soviet control both of Greece
in the west, and of Iran, iraq, and Syria in the
east and south, the Turks, lacking firm as-
surances of US armed support in the event
of Soviet attack on Turkey, would probably
shift to a policy of neutrality and might even-
tually make substantial concessions to Soviet
demands. If, on the other hand, Turkey
were able to obtain firm assurances of US
armed support in event of a Soviet or Satel-
ite attack upon Turkey, it would probably
stil) maintain its pro-US alignment.

8. The adoption by the US of a policy of
hemispheric isolation would cause Turkey
automatically to abandon its pro-US align-
ment. However, even if Turkey were isolated
from the West in this way, the Turks would
continue to resist Soviet pressure and would
attempt io maintain a policy of neutrality.
In time, a body of opinion favoring appease-
ment and accommodation with the USSR
would probably grow up and might eventually
dominate Turkish policy, but at present it ap-
pears more likely that the Turks would-—ii
necessary—fight for their independence, no
matter how suicidal such a course might be.

The Strengths and Weaknesses of Turkey’s
Position.

9. Turkey is one of the strongest anti-Com-
munist countries on the periphery of the
USSR and the only one in the Near East cap-
able of offering substantial resistance to So-
viet aggression.

a. Turkey’s strength derives to a consider-
able extent from the national unity and ho-

ere g

iS}

mogeneity of its population. In spite of Tur-
key's low standard of living and occasional
bitter controversy over internal issues, the
great majority of the Turkish people’ are
united in their opposition to the USSR and
fully support the government’s policy of align-
ing furkey with the Western Powers. The
basic and long-standing antagonism of the

Turks toward the Russians remains strong. .

Elements of the Kurdish, Greek, and Arme-
nian minorities and even some Turks might
be susceptible to Communist subversion if in-
ternal security broke down, but such a de-
velopment. is likely to occur only as a result
of a Soviet invasion. Turkey’s political insti-
tutions and relatively free press constitute
sufficient outlets for what little disaffection
exists, and subversion is effectively controlled
by the Turkish security services. At the same
time the extension of democratic procedures
is building a stronger base for Turkish na-
tional power.

b. Another major source of Turkish
strength is its army. With US aid the Tur-
kish Army has recently developed into a com-
pact, modern force of about 280,000 men. It
has a theoretical mobilization potential of

1,500,009 men, although it could not equip or -

provide logistic support for this number. Al-
though the full-scale recrganization of Tur-
key'’s defense establishment envisaged in the
US military aid program is not yet completed,
the combat effectiveness of the armed forces
has already increased considerably despite
the temporary dislocations inherent in con-
verting from old to new methods, weapons,
and equipment.

10. Turkey’s position is weak in the following
respects:

a. Despite major improvements made pos-
sible by the US military and economic aid
programs, the Turkish armed forces have in-
adequate supply services, are critically short
of technically qualified NCO's, and still lack
an effeciive air force.

b. Turkey’s economy is unable to support a
heavy defense burden. Because the economy
is largely agricultural, Turkey is heavily de-
pendent on outside supplies both for consumer
goods and military materiel. The necessity
of maintaining large defense forces is a strain

ET

on Turkey’s resources. Because of the lack
of industrial development, the number of
trained mechanics is limited. t,

ec. Turkey is particularly exposed to Soviet
pressure because of its geographice] pokttion.
It is located on the Soviet periphery, far from
Western centers of strength, and flanked on
the east and south by weak and unstable coun-
tries that are themselves highly vulnerable to
Soviet aggression. Large Soviet ‘and/or Sat-
ellite forces could be hurled against Turkey
with little or no warning. Because the ave-
nues of Soviet/Satellite land attack from the
Balkans and the Caucasus are widely sepa-
rated, Turkey would, in the event of war, be
obliged te divide its limited forces and fight
on two fronts without good interconnecting
transportation facilities.

11. Despite the shortcomings of its armed
forces, its economic weaknesses, and its geo-
graphical vulnerability, Turkey is capable of
putting up considerable resistance to Satel-
lite or Soviet aggression. ‘We believe it is cap-
able of halting at the Straits and possibly
even at the prepared defenses in eastern
Thrace an invasion by Bulgarian forces.
Against a Soviet attack, Turkey is believed
capable of delaying Soviet advances into the
interior of the country by stubborn defensive
Aghting. The Turkish armed forces could
probably maintain some form of orgarized
resistance for two or three months. A re-
doubt area in southern Turkey could be held
for some time if the Turks received substan-
tia] assistance from the Western Powers. In
any event, with outside support the Turks
could probably maintain guerrilla warfare
against Soviet lines of communication in Tur-
key.

Strategic Importance of Turkey.

12. The alignment of Turkey with the West is
of primary strategic importance to the US be-
cause of Turkey’s political and military
strength and its geographical position. Tur-
key adjoins Soviet and Soviet Satellite terri-
tories and lies across one line of Soviet pene-
tration into the weak and unstable countries
of the Middle East. The Turkish Army would -
be a major obstacle to Soviet advances in the
Middle East through Turkey. Furthermore,

GOO 4

Turkey’s pro-US’ alignment, in conjunction
With its military strength, deters the USSR
from attacking Turkey, because implicit in
that alignment is the Possibility that an‘ as-
sault on Turkey might lead the US to attack
the USSR. &

13. In the event of general war, Turkey might
become & forward air base for US air forces,
although construction of air facilities and
their protection from Soviet air and ground
attacks would be necessary before the US could
use Turkey effectively as a base for air opera-
tions against the USSR and its Satellites. At
present, Turkey is extremely vulnerable to air
attack, and its air facilities are incapable of
supporting medium bomber operations or sus-
taining fighter or light bomber operations.
However, the US is currently engaged in re-
constructing old and building new Turkish
air facilities, a program which should result
in considerable improvement within one year.
14. As long as Turkey controls the Straits,
Turkey might be able to Prevent the passage
of Soviet submarines and surface ships from
the Black Sea through the Straits to the
Mediterranean. . ~

15. In the unlikely event that Turkey should -

abandon its pro-US alignment, the effect on
US interests"in the Near East would be -éx:

tremely serious. There is little doubt that

pro-Western elements in most of the adjacent
countries, who now hold a precarious balance
of influence, would be seriously demoralized

and their influence weakened f Torkey aban-

foned its present alignment, .

Probable Turkish Courses of Action in the
Event of War. ,

16. We believe Turkey will stubbornly resist
any aggression upon its territory whether or
hot outside assistance is forthcoming. In
case of attack, Turkey will almost certainly
appeal to the US for military assistance, to
the UK and France for aid under the Tri-
Partite Treaty of 1939, and to the UN‘for such
Support as it can give,

17. In the event of a Satellite or Soviet attack
against Yugoslavia, Tran, or even Greece, Tur-
key would not on its own intervene militarily.
it would increase its frontier security and
make every effort to avoid provoking a Soviet

attack. If the UN or the US requested the
use of Turkish bases from which to institute
countermeasures, Turkey would provably com-
ply if it received a definite US commitment of
aid in the event of an attack on Turke¥® In
the ev:nt of further Soviet or Satelite at-
tacks in other parts of Europe and Asia, Tur-
key would support UN collective security
measures, short of commitment of Turkish
troops, but would oppose large-scale expendi-
ture of Western resources in “police” measures
against the Soviet Satellites which would re-
duce Western potentialities against the USSR
itself.

18. If the Korean conflict should lead to full-
scale war between the US and Communist
China, the Turkish reaction would be ambiva-
lent. On the one hand, Turkey would be im-
pelled to support action against the Chinese
Communists by its conviction that all nations
. threatened by Soviet imperialism must stand
together and by its destre to ‘demonstrate
" fully to the US its reliability as an ally, ° On
‘the other hand, the Turks would become in-

" greasingly concerned with

vis-a-vis

its security
Position at the moment. Turkey would, how-
ever, give diplomatic support to the US and
might continue to provide the services of the
Turkish Brigade? |
19. In the event of a general war in which
Turkey itself was not attacked, the Turks
Probably would initially adopt a non-belliger-
ent status. Nevertheless, Turkish politica?
leaders, both government and opposition, have
frequently expressed the view that Turkish
neutrality in the East-West struggle in war or
peace is neither advisable nor possible,
Consequently, even though Turkey were not
actacked, the Turks would cooperate with the
West and do everything compatible with a
non-belligerent status to facilitate a Western
victory. —
