Meeting no 40 - 10 October 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012419, dated 2 September 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012419).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MEETING NO. LO - 10th OCTOBER, 1961.

a Subject was picked up at RV No. 1 by M and J. at 2000 hours while
Roger provided surveillance cover. Subject arrived at the safe apartment

at 2013 hours. S.: Yesterday and today I was at the Embassy twice on each
day, both in the morning and the afternoons They are extremely busy at the
Embassy because all of the Embassy officers on the Ambassador's staff are
writing their portion of the report to MOSCOW for the month since the Ambassador
is going to MOSCOW in about two days and must take & full up-to-date report .
of the Embassy with him, He will report to MID and to whoever else he may be
required to. During his absence he will be replaced by NIMSHCHINO who will
arrive from MOSCOW in a day or two. The Ambessador will stay in the U.S.S.R.
for a considerable time because he will also participate at the Party Congress»
and also possibly will attend the conferences afterwards, These conferences
will be with the Heads of the Commnist Parties from various countries. The
Ambassadors to foreign countries do not always have personal contact with local
Communists, but they certainly confer with the Heads of or representatives of
the Heads of Conmunist Parties at conferences guch as will be taking place noW.
This is in line with the’ guidance of *protherly" Communist Parties.

(2) S.: Yesterday T spoke to the Rezident and today I spoke both with the
Resident and with his Deputy. Yesterday the Rezident told me he was very busy
due to the work he had to do 4n connection with the Ambassador's imminent
departure and he asked me for & brief run-down of my own planse I told him that
I was trying to have two visits to factories of interest arranged and he said
that that was fine and for me to do it in any way I saw fit but to include
SOLOVYEV who has & solid cover in the Torgpredstvo just like KUDRYAVISEV end
has no acquaintances here yet since he has only been here three months. When
he asked me how I planned to do this I said that ire would meet people at the
factories and I would 4ntroduce SOLOVYEV to the factory representatives and
request that the factory representatives obtain brochures or cther materials
for we as the representative of the Conmittee of K.N.T. of the U.S.SR. and

send this to me via SOLOVYEV in the future. He said that that was fine and

that /

8 LMAR 1992

Ho

a

that I should do it that way and that he had arranged for SOLOVYEV to
accompany me to JUMONT and then he asked when this would be, I said in one,
two or even three days and in addition we would visit & plant in PARIS. He
urged that the plants selected be in the category of those which produce
products on the target list of requirements and I gaia that I would try. He
said "I can see that you are really trying and I also want to say that some of
the brochures that you have brought are of considerable interest". I had
already given them all that I bave received to date and today w examined them,
about which I will tell you in a moment. He then asked if he could help me
in any way and I said thet I would come in on Friday to submit my local
accounting to him and to pass all the additional materials that I receive from
my acquaintances and contacts and write up ny report. 1 told him I would not .
com in to the Embassy on saturday since they have & short working day anyway
a there were a few purchases that I have to make for people back hom.
He seid that would be perfectly all right and possibly I would need even more

time to make my purchases.

& ) Last night Qa called me at about 2015 hours and asked me to come

mas the office today at 4730 hourse I called you last night about 2200 hours
and told you about this. I thought that he would have everything set up for
me today and would tell me about it at 1730. This morning earlier when I was
at the Embassy, SOLOVYEV and the Rezident asked me when the trip would take
place and I told them et it is still being arranged and thet it is
complicated but may be I would find out later in the day and when I did I
would advise him. KUDRYAVISEV insisted that on the 12th of October at 1500
hours I should be free because he wanted to take me out to dinner at &
restaurant. I may find things out from him and this will not take longe
Similerly the Rezident and ANANYEV also want to invite me for lunch or
dinner and this will probably take place on Friday.

They sso asked me to be at the Embassy at 1500 hours 80 that we

ould all together examine all my brochures and divide up those portions

which /

#40

-3-

which would go to GRU by Diplomatic Pouch and what would go to the Committee
by “heavy mail", At that time we. all sat together, that is the Resident, : i
KUDRYAVISEV, ANANYEV and myself and all we did was to examine my materials. 7
- pbout one third was separated out for GRU. It was a big pile, about tro
kilograms in weight. a7, s material which was the sample and its description, :
three brochures on heat resisting steel and your material on electronics were
included. Brochures from Bagneaux and Pechiney were all included in this,

The balance for the Committee was wrapped up and KUDRYAVISEV took it to his
office to forward to the Committee. I told them there would be more ma they
said they would again examine 4t with me and agein divide it up between GRU

and the Committee as they did with this batch, They examined it for over an
hour, very carefully and were quite satisfied, but requested me if possible

to get a little more on Bagneews x and! Pechiney since this material was of great
interest.

Se One hour after I left I was with HOOK. I spoke for an hour with HOOK
and he said very apologetically that he was unable to arrange any trips. He
says that I could not go to JUMONT, since they would not receive me for a week
and the plant that makes chemical equipment has its Director absent for some
time and could not receive me. (Babcock ani Wilcox). Neither could I go to the
electronics plent in PARIS, The people in JUMONT said that prior to any trip
there I should have had @ letter written to the Foreign Affairs Ministry of
France. I told HOOK that if he had told me that earlier I could have lad a
letter from our Embassy officially requesting this permission, but now it is
too late since it would be 48 hours before they would read the letter and they
would set up a visit for next week, whereas I mist leave on Sunday. Evidently
HOOK aid not know that this was necessary and he had just found out. He has
done a great deal and he feels very badly that He has ‘heen unable to make thes
arrangements he tried so hard to set up. His materials thus far are of no

great value but he does promise to get me mores I cannot complain since HOOK
has tried so hard, so I am glad that we are meeting now to decide what to do
next, ‘hat is important for me now is to make only one visit somewhere, not

two or three, and as far as other arrangements are concerned I can give them

plausible reasons 85 to why they did not work out particularly with the

postponement of the visit to JUMONT. My dear friends, all I need is one G
on A ne

_ #0

visit and some more brochures. G.: We already have the brochures, don't
worry about that, and they are good ones, you will see them later. You can
"say they came from both HOOK and WYNNE. Sv: bw friends, I want to ask you if
in some way through the Embassy of the United States or the Embasay of Great

perenne ott Se reir apne em ay rT ae

Britela Orequest wouLe BB fade” to a French ‘firm to receive me as an official

te gp etapa

representative (or a Committee of the U.8.S:R.)s I am not ‘thinicing clearly

ve ete

now since I just left HOOK; but see if you cannot eet. one visit arranged for-

tet ete ne ete wns oe ~
a ae
we

me. Tomorrow is a lost day also because HOOK asked me to call him only at
4600 hours (Next meeting's transcript my show a different turn to this expected
plan). I know he will try to do something all day tomorrow, and maybe by chance
something will work out but that would leave only Thursday or Friday in which to
moke a visit. Tomorrow I must go to the Embassy again and give them some reason
for the delay. This is the situation with respect to my trips and the work
for the Committee, Ge: Don't worry about the materials, you will have them,

Se: Qi also discussed with me the possibility of his taking a trip

© the U.S.S.R. in December, January or February. I gave him advice about how to
request his visa and what lectures to prepare, etc, He wrote everything dow
about the procedures that I recommended. J.: The only thing we can hope for
at this late stage is that by ‘gome small miracle gi con arrange one visit

for you. On this I am sure that he is serious but let us face the fact that

he 4s not dealing with the American public or the British public. For our
Embassies to intercede would be the height of fodlishness, since it would
Eactepte tp dhe Freak oor Extesert fim pou, which wold be dearesoor. (8.
translates). S.: I could have tried to make cmtacts through official
channels, but the results would have been worthless in terms of what I would
be show, so I thought that through special connections which I see you do not
have at your disposal, I could get to see such places where I would not be
invited to go officially. Je: Another point is that. you should not be too
successful here." If you are they may decide to send you back to PARIS and this
is the last place that we want to meet again, We want to meet in a place like
LONDON or America, under conditions that we can control and not in a place

where we have no control. Get Remember there are French regulations here

yy ,

Ho

abe

as laid down by their Ministry of Foreign Affairs with respect to visits to |
French factories by Soviets, Se: @M§was trying hard but he is not experienced
in these things. I could have gotten a letter a week ago as official as you
would want it, but now it is out of the question because time is 80 short I
now would not even mention this to the Embassy since the Ambassador is too busy
to be seen, if show such a letter for his signature would say that it is
useless to send it now since I am leaving on Sunday and why was this not done
earlier, At any rate if I could only have one visit and a maximum amount of
material I could introduce SOLOVYEV quickly to wherever we visited and it would
take care of the whole thing, G.: All @m&jcan do is to do his best, and that
he will doe St One thing Ido not understand is that if the Director of the
Chemical Equipment Plant is away why could not his Deputy receive me ?
G.: Every firm has their own internal regulations.
7e S.: I believe that we should meet twice more before I leave. Ge: Yes,
n Thursday and on Saturday. S,: And let us try as hard as possible for Gm
to make me an appointment to visit a fim, for say only an hour or an hour and
a half on Thursday morning, and send a car to my hotel at 0900 hours. I asked
him about this and I also told him that I would have a car for him in MOSCOW
all the time, All his guide has to do is to take SOLOVYEV and myself to the
firm and he can go, we can get back ourselves. This is ali I have to report
on this situation, I cannot add anything.
8. Se: Now let me check my notes to see if there is anything on other matters,
I think I have reported everything. Tell me, was ZASORIN's information on the
number of airoraft correct 7? I mst ‘now this in order to have an idea on how

to handle | ZASORIN ain _the future. (Subject was reassured that ZASORIN's

~ Ae em,

Been meet

anforsettcs was satisfactory and that he should cdntinue to respect him as a

eee TS cet are Nw eae porte. some:
Tee ead * A eidahati date aietiata cee Ladle. cnok ke ticaieeaTtideadtemmeesnes teen a

reliable Bourse: Decaune, oe lect of planes committed in various categorie ay

we Ret RNR re CORR NEE me pee on Ome eee ey a

me ne ee!

Ce ne x
press

was even —— than that reported and since no specific plane categories.”

were ‘given by ZASORIN it was impossible to determine. what “units “4t ‘referred to)a- -
Set cs tie dey MUNTEY eae pests ee TS in Pauses

working full blast, with Communists in every walk of life, The GRU officers

only approach those Communists who have had some military background or are

relatives /

HYo
<6:

relatives of such and only after they have had permission to do so. The

KGB should be watched by our French friends.

10. S.: By the way we have been working now constantly for six months,
out of which we have been meeting at close intervals like now for over two
months. All: We are well aware of this. S.: All I wanted to say is that
you have helped me to understand, you have guided me and I am very grateful
for this attention to me on your part and on the part of your leaders. G,: : We .
have planned to do just as you requested. On Thursday we will lay out the .
complete missions for you to accomplish in priority order, and you will soey
them down, In addition we will review all aspects of the operational plan.
On the last meeting on Saturday you will repeat to us the missions assigned
to you to be sure that you understand everything and then we will simply
relax and have a good tim.

446 S: TI must also remind you again that I need a book from you of some

Pew mary wee 3. tot ewes eee me marae gar”

_sort with a brief summary description in Russian of its contents. This book

must be of a type that the Soviets would be interested in having fully

which I can legend as coming from the materiel at GRU of which I have given —

you a list. (After a lengthy discussion explaining to subject how all this wuld
take time, he was shown @ book with the title ‘Man and Space' which was

borrowed from the Library of the U.S. Embassy and published in 1961. Subject
was so delighted with this book, although it is quite elementary in a technical
sense, that he insisted after still greater lengthy discussion that he wanted
to take this book back with him and that by Saturday a summary in Russian be
prepared for him, This summary he would re-work at home with appropriate
political overtones and presentation and re-type at prior to submitting it

to the officials who would decide if the book mr be of value as a complete
translation and publication. Toward this end the help of VARENTSOV would be
available and subject felt strongly that this would support his legend for
constantly requesting Soviet documents as ostensible background material for
the article he is writing. If the officials decide timt the book is worthy

—

of /

+ pemmetemnetene cemrenerets ab es ee ae wees

-7-

of translation and publication, subject would so advise us through Janet and would ..-
expect us to provide him at a later date with a full translation of the book )
which he would use to check the translation by the Soviet publications
translation bureau. It was agreed that M, would read the book and summarise
chapter by chapter in English and that G, would trenslate this sumary ‘into
Russian and have it available for subject at the letest ct Saturday's meeting.
Subject aleo asked for a book review on this volume translated into Russian

if the book were accepted for translation and publication, He insisted that

his acquisition of the book itself would be by simple direct purchase in PARIS
from a book store and that despite the fact that a number of copies may already
be in the U.8.S.R. from their U.S, book acquisition personnel, the idea of his
calling attention to the book as of value and writing up a summary thereon is
the significant point, Though tts nppeare Like betanteysamsh tous, it may |

~, nll
be possible that subject knows w what _he he is talking about and this can do him
Sa TOES GR ve ERO IN TAO ar pnanrenrarer ener

aps EET TIA ied

considerable good and no harm at ail.)

— . a ieemnnenamanasaas meee ene

12. G.: How soon do you expect the full iaieiceion after you advise
through Janet that the book will be published ? Remember this may take two
months to translate for the full text. Se: That is too long, don't you have
experts where one reads it out in English and the other writes St straight off
in Russien ? Ge: No. And besides you don't translate a book like you cook
blini, to quote you. 5S: Before you get the word that it should be translated
you coulda pick up the book reviews on it and have that ready. (The length of
this summary would ran to about half a pase per chapter, witk onciationw: an wn
the significance of the contents and the total would be approximately six pages.
Subject was now shown 4 new set of brochures mostly English, but with some
French, and he proceeded to sort them out as to which would be of interest to
poth the GRU and to the Committee and which were not necessary at all, He also
received several general directories. After the piles were selected, those
which subject desired were later wrapped up and he took them with him to deliver
to the Embassy next morning). .
(3) Ge: Now we will get into our questions, First of all let us clear

up one we had at the last meeting. You said that a large strategic missile

base /

-8-

base is defended by V-758 in addition to aircraft. 5.: Ani in addition
this can be supplemented by conventional anti-sircraft batteries. Ge: sho
told you that this was s0 2? Set I asked this question ten times, I often
asked VARENTSOV how our missile sites and 4{ndustrial centres are protected.
I was always told that this 4s done by the combined PVO weapons available, This
includes the proven and accepted anti-air missiles, the V-75, as well as aviation
and all types of conventional anti-aircraft artillery. Ge: What is the precise
role of these V-75 missiles ? Se: Their role is to protect against hostile "8
aircraft which approach the missile base, but the V-75s are not adjacent to
the site where the missile base is, but some distance away. They may even be
several hundred kilometres aways Ge: Well, that is something else, that is
the whole point of the question. Before we had the impression that you meant
these ay Ved SoG were Boer toe ae ya st oe es they are
picked up by ae just as PONERS' aircraft was/and the missiles V=75 go into
action as soon as the hostile aircraft is within their range, but the aircraft's
target could be 400 kms, away. .
14. G.: Do you by any chance know or have heard of a GRU officer by the
neme of Izmail Aleksendrovich NETSVETAILO 2? Set There was & General TSVETAYEV
who died, but I have not heard of this name, he sounds like an Asiatice
Ges That's right and he was supposed to have been here at the French
Exhibition. S.: He may have come here under the auspices of the KGB or from
the Ministry of Foreign Trade, the KGB does not give us lists of who they send,
that is to the Committee, and neither does the Ministry of Foreign Trade.
I never ran into this fellow.

Get The next question deals with your experience in Turkey. You
gaid that the GRU Legal Rezidenturas in NEW YORK and WASHINGTON co-operate
and also that tne GRU has Tegal Heridenturas’ itr. AITRa ane LPA.. Dir these
two Turkish Rezidentures also co-operate and if 80 to what extent ? S.: Yes,
they do and I have tola you about this naturally. For example, I remember I

received a cable once from ISTANBUL saying thet a potential agent under

assessment /

eee rt

Stepanovich KARGALTSEV ? Set I remember him and I knew him, Ge: How about

assessment was going to ANKARA from ISTANBUL. We were sauneice to check -

on the hotel he was staying at, and they gave us two possibilities, and the
duration of his visit. GIRIN and I went out to look for this Turk. Te went out
and made this check for the ISTANBUL Rezidenture and sent them the results. And

I remember that we sent them a coded message, using numbers, with the results.
Between Rezidenturas they use one-time pads for coding end these can be transmitted
either by phone or courier. If by phone it is called a telephonagram. There ‘
is very good co-operation and mutual support between Rezidenturas in the same : 2
country, just as between WASHINGTON and NEW YORK. i
4G. «Get ‘Is there a senior Rezident, to whom the other Rezident is
subordinate ? St No. Both are completely independent. Each has its own
operational funds, its om agent net and its own airect communication channel
to MOSCOW. Neither one knows what the other sends or receives from MOSCOW.
We for example have three channels for commnicating with our people in the i
U.S.A., one is communication with the Illegal Residentura and the other two «ok
are to each of the two legal Rezidenturas.

17° G.: Try to recall the people in Turkey. Do you remember Ivan

Sergei Polikarpovich TRISHIN ? S.: I remenber him also, I pelieve they were on
both Naval officers. G.: Do you know what they were engaged in? 5.3 In | |
the first place KARGALTSEV was 4n ISTANBUL and so was TRISHIN. And I was in,
ANKARA, but I got to know them and KARGAUTSEV came to visit me 4n ANKARA and

he was a Captain 3rd Rank. They were there at the same time as I was in Turkeys
J had KARGALTSEV together with other ISTANBUL officers to dinner at my hom.

He is a short, thin mn, It was standard practice to invite visiting officers
from ISTSNARUL to our homes or to restaurants when they came to ANKARA and they
would always entertain us in the same way when we went to their town. Ge: Do <
you know if they were possibly engaged in support operations for illegals ?

S.: I believe that this is an absolutely reasonable assumption and they were

more busily engaged in support operations for illegals in ISTANBUL than we were .

in ANKARA, In the first place ISTANBUL is a large city of some 1,200,000 and

-

ar a a ceed

wo

-10-

there would be more illegals in that area than in ANKARA which is a large

village, but even so I remember that I personally geve support to illegals via

a dead-drop. They were travelling (mersh-rutnik) illegals.

18, Get Do you know who they we

re or what you gave them, §.: No. Not

at all, but I received a signal that the D.L.B. was cleared. I do know what I

put in, since it was money. It was 5

second time. Ge: Did you have speci

,000 lire at one time and less on the

fic missions concerning 4llegals' support,

Gege the acquisition of documentation, a mil drop or legend material ?

S.: Illegals are given missions of this kind and so is the Legal Rezidenture,

They send their information to MOSCOW for them to use as they see fit. Ge!

What support activities of this nature did you do 7? 5Se% I remember that at least

one letter every month end a half would come from MOSCOW for us to post locally.

All of us did this, IONCHENKO, GIRIN and myself. G.: How about documentation

for providing a background legend ?

S.: We did this also. There has always

been an Illegal Rezidentura in Turkey, but I don't know anything about it but now

that an experienced man Like General SUDIN has been sent there he may break up

the Rezidentura into several units or develop them further. I don't know what.

There were missions to get all kinds of items of local clothing to the last

detail, I also did this twice during ny sixteen months there. These items

were sent back by diplomatic mail. I went out with GUR'YEV to buy this. The

clothing we bought was of the type commonly worn in Turkey. They were all simple

items of clothing. Ge: How about documentation itself ? 5S. Yes, I remember

an incident there where Turkish worke

rs were hired by the Embassy to do repair

work and their passports were picked up and I remember that the Consul who was

a KGB mn, Viadlen FEDOROV, called me at that time. Incidentally both FEDOROV

and Aleksey VOSKOBOY are now studying at the KGB Institute beyond Pokrovsko-

Streshnevo about which I told you before. The latter called me from there

just before I left for PARIS and I will see him when I get back,

196 S.: Now FEDOROV when he would get such passports in Turkey would

either work on them himself or give them to us and we would write everything

from those passports on & special documentation index book (something like a

x

very /

/3

a a oo, mo OC Ff YO

very elaborate document identikit), There would be numbers keyed to every
shade or colour and every possible dimension is keyed to numbers, We would
make references, for example, to page 32, line 3 and the Centre would know
exactly what we mean since they have an identical book, I never told you about
this before, this is something new. By numerical references every letter in
every line of the passport can be spotted for size etc, and every other detail,
If three lines lower on the passport different lettering in size and colour

is used, there would be a corresponding numerical index again by page and Line
and that would identify 4t exactly. This is called “etealony". All shades . i
of colour and all types of lines in paper including wavy lines, can be pinpointed.
Using this book which is Top Secret and only for clandestine operations, it is
possible to duplicate any document in the world. This is a very cumbersome

and detailed process to write up and the description of a passport may take

ten pages. G.: How do they handle descriptions of paper texture ? 5S: For
this they do many things. They try to buy similar paper, then they try to get ,
blenk samples and finally we have quite a collection of stolen actual passports, i
from all countries, When a duplication or a forgery is to be made of say a i
Turkish passport, an actual passport is looked at, together with the report on .
the “etalony", The documentation expert can then see wm.t changes may have
taken place and he can spot any dot or special mark and the measurements are
done to the millimetre, When FEDOROV gave us such a passport we would have to
work on it for a day or two. After that the passports would be returned to the
workers who bad been enpeced by the Enbaner for several dsyx. This is done in
all countries and is called technical intelligence.

20. S.: Special requirements are occasionally sent out and in every
country all new items in the photography and the audio-radio field are always

picked up and samples continually sent to MOSCOW. All types of radio spare

parts are purchased as the Centre orders us to and quite often a clanéestins
agent piece of equipment would be composed of totally non-U.5,S.R. parts.
The prevalent types are West German, American, English and French models.

’ 4
»

‘this /

=12—

This is particularly true C08 equipment given to Illegals. Gs: To whom is
this equipment and documentativn sent at the Centre by the pocacntars ? Does
it go to FEKRENEV ? S.: First of all all of the mterial goes to KISELOV
(alias KRYLOV) (in 1955, now to the new Chief KARPOV), the Directorate Chief
and there according to the requirement submitted by the other upravleniye, they
distribute the incoming material, mostly to the First Otdel of SHELIGANOV:
(Technical Intelligence Section) or to BEKRENEV (Illegals Section, primarily

documentation material for illegals' use). By the way KARPOV is the Chief se

the Directorate now and still uses the same pseudo as KISLENKO did, Ge: Does
not the Illegal Rezidentura do mst of the gathering of such documentary
material 7 &: That is absolutely right because the others often find it |
impossible to get such materiale Ge: In addition it would seem tmt the
Illegals would be better acquainted with what they or other Illegals would
primarily need than officers in the Legal Rezidentura, S.: That is also ~

correct, and let me again mention that that is why they sent SUDIN down there,

since he will probably attempt to develop the illegal operations there and >

place illegals at U.S. bases at ADANA and other places, whereas in the past

” Turkey has been a very hard nut for us to crack. _ ee a
@.) Ge: Now let us consider this GRU woman. Illegal you mentioned before

who is in ANKARA, Do you remember what you said about her ? Se: Not quite,

I can't quite place her. Ge: You even described that she was in a shop near

the Red Cross building on the main boulevard in ANKARA on the left hand side

. going down to the Soviet Embassy, S,: Oh yes, but she was not alone in this,

there was also a man involved, This was on Attaturk Boulevard going by the
Red Cross building, just as you said and they run a jewelry shop, mstly
silverware, When I arrived they told me not to contact them, but just to
watch, There was an old man involved and this younger woman in her thirties,
G.: Shat nationality were they or did they purport to be 7 S.: I was told
that they were Jugoslavs who had migrated to Turkey some years ago. Ge: Was
this a man and wife ? S.: No. But they were both members of the same family
and there were other children in that family who were born in Turkey, He was
an old man and she could have been his daughter, but I never had specific

information ca this. Our instructions were merely to see how they were getting

~13~

along in terms of their being arrested or not, alive or ill and were they in
a stable financial position. This mission was particularly assigned to ny
predecessor, KONDRASHEV and when he turned over the Military Attache affairs
to ma, as well as GRU matters, he told me just to keep an eye on them but not
to contact them until the Centre gave instructions, If I had a mp of ANKARA
I could spot the store for you easily. |
(At this moment a brief pause was made to change tapes).
@,) G.: Can you desoribe this woman ? S,: I've already estimated her Ble.

She is about average height and I can't remember her as being particularly
attractive but I can't remenber any better than that, The man is over sixty.
G.: If they are being paid through what channels do they receive money 7?

S.: Of course they are being paid and they get it via dead drop, possibly

once every three months, I don't remember the detain. j Cet Have they been
working for a long time now? S.: Yes for a very long time. I'd say for
decades before the last war. G.: Were they always in this location ? . ;
Be: That I do not know but they were there at the time that I was there,

that should be very easy to check up on from the records of the store's
‘ ee vets Ft od
proprietorship, The store should be most easy to find, A** is the only silver
shop in that immediate vicinity.

Get We will now return to the old set of questions, When you
described the "MARS" as two-stage, what did you man ? and is it obsolete now
and being discarded ? 8: No. It has been further improved and instead
of the "MARS" they now have the "LUNA" which replaces 4t. But the "MARS" is
mot tinnciete since tthe bere mde @ gonet omminsr ct ther ard these my Se
possibly ten thousand of them, which are too many simply to use up in practice.
It has a very simple construction, The “LUNA" is larger and has the same sort

of functional characteristics anda better range. G.: Did you say they are

tee eee: qnaenennnin nites fee

both two-stage rockets 7? S.: Let me explain the meaning. The rocket flies
as one single unit, but they have an upper and lower set of jets for propulsion
which work together in a fixed relationship as the propellant. The rocket does
not separate into two stages during flight. That is the true meaning of a two-
stage rocket. These rockets have two levels at which the thrust is developed,

but it flies as one unit.

on. / JO

-

-th-

b) Ge: It is well known that the automobile factory ‘dn GORKIY builds
whicles or carriers for heavy rookets. Have you heard from either Serge
Sergeievich or BUZINOV that rockets are also nade there ? S.: I have heard
that rocket assemblies are sansrantacsd there. I have heard about ‘this from

two sources, POZOVNYY was ome and I mentioned the other man to you, he was

at the Academy with mee
Ge: Is “LUNA” in serial production ? And is it issued to troops ? ; of

S.: Yes it is in serial production and has already been given to troopse

266 Ge: Is the "KORSHUN" obsolete or is it still in use ? S: It is

in use and they have made a large number of them. It cannot even be written

off like the "MARS" since there are a great number of these rockets in stonsce.
It is still a basic T.R.A. weapon and it is a liquid fuel rocket of the T.R.A.

I cannot tell you why it was not shown in the Parade.
3) G.: Have you heard anything further on the status of delivery of
missiles to the satellites, particularly during your last stay in MOSCOv ?

S.: I reported to you before that certain categories of ‘rockets are being

given to them, particularly T.R.A. rockets, The satellite troops are being
trained in using these weapons and Soviet instructors are assisting in the
training. There are many test firings. The only new development is that all
this is being fixther perfected, Gs: When are they expected to be operational
in satellite armies, for example the armies of the D.D.R., the Czech and the
Polish ? S.: It is estimated that they are operational now. They have already
had test firings and this can only be done if the preliminary training has been
completed, After troops have gone through rocket firing training it mst be
clear that these rocket units are operational. Even in the case of guided
missiles the entire difficulty is in making the computations, The actual

tiring technique is relatively simple. The satellite troops might still require
more experience in mking their computations to strike a target exactly, but
there is no problem in their ability to fire rockets.

G.! When GOFFE was the Commander of Artillery in the Sub-Carpathian
Military District, did he have free rockets or missiles under his control

then ? Se: He certainly d.4 and that was one reason why he was taken from

there /

an nd

AYO
“15=

there as a man who had practical experience in Goatating such rockets, in

addition to his being a capable man and General.
Ge: Remember you mentioned that at the Engineer Academy Imeni

KUIBYBSHEV may be concerned with construction problems and training of troops

for siting smaller missiles. Does it have anything to do with the larger

missile base construction such as MOSKALENKO controls ? 8! This Acadeny

4s in MOSCOW on ulitsa Obukha, They have several faculties there. They train -
fortification specialists and pioneer engineer troops who are écicemnes with
ell types of field fortifications and I told you that they also train engineers

in the construction of every type of auxiliary and basic equipment on the

. ground for missile sites including bunkers etc. Ge: Would this inolude all

types of rockets, even ICBMs ? 5.2 Absolutely, for all rockets, This
Academy is a general academy and it trains engineers for every category of
engineer work. Get Sven for GUASS which is the Chief Directorate of Airfields
and Special Construction of the Ministry of Defence ? Se: Absolutely. All
that must be specified is what special training mist be given for the type of
engineer required, This academy is the only engineer acadeny in the U.S S.Re
All other engineer training installations are schools or higher schools, These
train junior officers, The Academy has a special faculty which trains engineers
for engineering construction for rockets.
306 Ge: Does GRAU control any plants at all or does it just have
representatives at plants to keep an eye on production ? 8S,: They have
voyenpredy (military eopeesntatives) and these representatives are charged
with the checking of each item of military equipment completed. They would
condem any defects and particularly for rockets they must check every item
on a technical check sheet (formar) before they sign it and accept it for
delivery to an Army depot. Everything must fall betecen allowable tolerances.
There is not just one representative at a plant. There are brigades of them
and they are all subordinate to GRAU. There is a special GRAV Directorate
thet is organised to handle the representativern, G2 Is the terminolory
of the organisation consisting of officers who staff this correct as the
Otdel Tekhnicheskogo Kontrolya ? 8.: The terminology is correct, but it is
a Directorate, not an otdol, This is an snormous organisation and consists

' UF

4S

# YO
~16- shite

of thousands of officers which are sent all over the country and it is so large
that it even has its own Personnel Section which in turn is subordinate to the
Personnel Directorate of GRAU. There are many other personnel sections in GRAU,
each one servicing the different GRAU Directorates. Many of my classmtes

from my VAK course were sent to GRAU where they went out as military

representatives on rocksts,. : 5s
Gs) Get Where is the T~10 tank produced ? S,: In the Urals, near. )

SVERDLOVSK, but exactly where I do not know. Gs: How about the T-55 tank ? |

8s This is built 4n CORKIY and also in the Urals, Incidentally this —_—-

Lieut. Colonel I just thought of, his name is GOLUB. He graduated from the ,
Artillery Academy in 1959 and he works in GRAU on rockets and he had been a

former Adjutant of VARENTSOV's, His name is Vladimir and his wife's name is Nina.

He is running around with some woman, a draughting engineer and I think that

Nina is VARENTSOV's girl friend,

32. Ge: In July you mentioned the amount of money spent on tank peeeantinn

in one year, Do you recall what year this figure was for? &: I cantt

remember, When VARENTSOV mentioned it, he was complaining about his being

criticised for putting up permanent artillery housing shelters instead of canvas,

After I gave you this information in figures I don't remember it any longer.

336 Ge: Do you think you could find out from POZOVNYY about the production

of strategic bombers in general and details of production designers, perticubrly

of those plants at KIYBYSHEV and MOSCOW - FILI, S.: Yes, I could easily,
“Get That's fine and that would be of great interest,

@) Ge: Is KASHIN still at KAPUSTIN YaR ? Sw: One of my first problems

when I return to MOSCOW is to get KASHIN transferred from KAPUSTIN YaR to the
Dszerzhinskiy Academy where I have already made arrangements in the Personnel
Section. G,: Will he tell you all about his work there when you see him ?
St Of course he will, he will tell me everything and let ma again emphasise L
to you that people like KASHIN and POZOVNYY I can very simply invite to my home

for a modest entertainment andi I can record all their conversations on a tape-

recorder with ease and security, I admit that it would be dangerous to record

the /

nae eo" - ALLO

-17=

the conversations of VARENTSOV, the Minister or people on the General Staff.
(Subject again makes a request for @ miniature wire recorder to carry in his
pocket and a second one of a small Jsize table model which could be concealed
in his home), When KASHIN returns I will get very valuable information on A
rockets from him because he is getting ready to present the materials that
he has collected for his Diploma, |

Get Who told you that female astronauts would be launched in
sputniki next year 7 a his. was told to me by both BUZINOV and POZOVWNYY.

2 rn © ea

They said that they wented to astound the world end they have already selected

€:..8 group of athletic type women to train for this, 29 .o2ccen...

en ETE FASE

Ge: Do you recall that at the Rumanian Reception in early August,
KHRUSHCHEV spoke of a hundred megaton bomb, not one megaton as you mentioned ?

8.: The point is that KHRUSHCHEV was drunk and he wasn't speaking of megaton
equivalents of any kind, he was speaking of the actual weight in tons. He
mentioned a hundred ton of actual weight, mixing up nuclear yield with weight.

He just mixed everything up and both Sergei Sergeievich and BUZINOV told me about
this. G.: Did either one of them make any statement on the military
feasibility or value of such a weapon, namely a 100 megaton TNT equivalent yield ?
8: No, that is pure fantasy. That may be desirable but no-one ever mentioned _
this.

(WYNNE was about to ring, but subject said that he would rather work
a little longer with us and not go out with WYNNE that evening, but oa
request that WYNNE be given the suitcases with his purchases made by us ‘Bo |
that WYNNE could deliver them to his hotel at 1000 hours on the next day.

This was done by Roger during the next hour).

G.: The last group of questions deals with your speciality, the GRU
and particularly the counter-intelligence aspects, Now listen carefully and
you may remember, since you were involved in these things as a desk officer
at one time, jaan the GRU ‘Pifth Directorate, the Sabotage boys, have any
operations planned for India, Pakistan and Ceylon and if so, specifically
what 7? S.: The Fifth Directorate had a whole programms planned for every
country in the world for a long time and of course this includes these three

countries. They are continuously refining the information to suit this plan,

I/ | a g

# Yo

~18-

I can tell you the exact things they wanted to know since I was sitting on

the desk, From the Rezident in PAKISTAN I was constantly receiving data on

drop zones. There were complete area descriptions and all terrain details

and also orientation points and even signals that could be used in parachute

or airborne operations, All mejor centres and other targets were clearly

oriented with respect to each drop some, The entire local_ police and security
situation was_alao discussed, This was a very complete report and it was |

assigned by the Fifth Directorate. Specific data is either put in operational

’ despatches or in some cases as an annexe to another operational despatch. hen

this is delivered to the Fifth Directorate they study the entire report and give

us (Fourth Directorate) a written evaluation of the report. It may say that it

was thoroughly prepared, or incomplete, or it was well prepared tutlacked the

following details which they request clarification on.

39. SetActivity against Pakistan is more active than against India because _

the agent net in India is on conservation and we know about all we need to

know about India, but Pakistan is considered to be an enemy country, just as

Turkey and Iran ares. When I was there at the Centre Colonel FUKOVSKIY and

VOLKODAYEV were sitting on Iran, Since then VOLKODAYEV has been sent to the

Academy and FUKOVSKIY to TEHERAN.

Se: On Pakistan they | have also all details on every source of water

Len ert ra Mere ee Tt OAR mt op eae ey
hom Bree penne ser ee at

Seemed Shee

emer 2

supply and every dam and reservoir, This is both for flooding purposes and

for contamination, _Bvery © tunnel. in every country is known be the Fifth

Directorate. Of course they also know about ell industrial cantteadaucn: ©

contribute to a military effort. They mke analyses of how destruction of
these would affect the military potential. Such strategic data are compiled
and delivered to the First Directorate (Operations of the General Staff).
All other targets, however, are kept in GRU for action by clandestine means
such as Bonitamination, assassination, sabotage, etc. The only information .
given to the Gieral Staff is that which can be used by combat arms of the
armed forces, including Navy and Aviation, The other targets would be ‘acted
: against by agent groups organised on the territory of the USSR as well as by ————
agent groups within the target country, These latter include Illegals as well
as other agents.
ee /0

}

HYO

-19=

&,) Ge: In order to obtain this data and fulfill the mission, is the
Indian Commnist Party involved in such operations, either independently or
under control of GRU ? S.: They are certainly used and under the direction
of GRU officers who are in cover positions there. G.: In other words you have
GRU officers under cover in these countries who would male contact with local
Communist Party leaders and levy missions upon them. 5S,: That is exactly
right. Of course our military people do not meet Communists openly, although
they may shake hands with them at receptions. Only GRU officers under cover |

' do this and that is why the stress is to have more and more GRU people under

- covers .

(2.) Get Is India used as a base for operating against Pakistan or vice-
versa ? And are Conmunists used for this too ? 5: | Of course they are and
they operate from there against Iran too. This is simply a third country agent
operation, which is very common.

() G.t What would you say in the India, Pakistan, Ceylon area is the main
GRU mission priority of such categories as espionage, disinformation, political
action, sabotage, support of illegals or any other action ? 8: In the first
place all missions of all categories are assigned simultaneously and their
execution is done in proportion to the ability to fulfill them. If this were
not so and a supplementary mission not earlier mentioned were levied, the
Rezident could simply say "®hy did you not request that sooner, I had a chance to
get that before", Therefore missions emanating from all Directorates, such as
the Fifth, the First and the Informtion Directorate are all set out together,
Ge: Do you mean then that there is no first priority mission ? S,: No. .
There is a first priority mission. The first priority is always fir the creation
of an agent net and for ite expansion. Ge: Is there a second priority ?

S: Noe After this alj are assigned together and are at the game level. ’
The Rezident knows everything that is assigned for a year, but the individual

ease officer will be given missions of varying types and number depending on

his own capabilities and the accessibility of his agent to targets of

intelligence value, Therefore the first priority is always on the creation

and /

-20-

and expansion of an agent net and all funds are given to this priority in the
first instance, All other missions are on the same level and are secondary.

Many of the secondary missions so called are accomplished by opportunity, for
example, one source may be able to provide an answer to one requirement but

not another.

Gas). Ge: What was the degree of KGB activity in those countries and what

are their prime intelligence missions ? S,: The KGB are concerned of course
with recruiting agents in political intelligence, the obtaining of political |
information and in economic intelligence, And on occasion they would get
military information but they would keep this for themselves so that they would
get credit for it at Headquarters. They might tell us about it after they had
already sent the report in to Headquarters. There were very many of them there
and of course there are very many of them there now. G.: More than GRU officers
in number ? 5&.: Yes. Much more than we. G.: In about what ratio ?

Se: About two to one. For example in our own committee now we have sbout ‘ ,
seven people and they have about fifteen. G.: How was it in Turkey ?
S.: I can count it right up. There was I, GIRIN, YEMELYANOV, GUR'YEV, ISAYEV :
‘and CHICHERIN. This would ae six active operational case officers, I am not
counting code-clerks and other assistants, They had YERZIN as Chief, FEDOROV
and VOSKOBOY, POKROVSKIY, a Journalist » & Second Secretary and another Second is
Secretary, two. Third Secretaries and three operational chauffeurs who were case
officers, whereas we had only one, TIPTSOV. There was a great mob of them in
ISTANBUL, the First Secretary was the Chief and they had all kinds of KGB
officers under Torgpredstvo cover. Some of them had the job of watching other
Soviets, whereas the other section were engaged in active intelligence work,
recruiting agents, etc. They were about two to one there and herein PARIS

as NEDORUB told me at the Exhibition, the place is full of KGB - one can't a2
turn around to spit without hitting one,

(s-) Ge: hat were your GRU table of organisations strengths in Pakistan

and India ? 5S.: In 195) when I was first considered for assignment to Pakistan

there were only five of us. For quite a while there were only three in Pakistan

under DUBROVIN, the Military Attache, All he had was a chauffeur and an

interpreter /

SS

wYe
241m

r

interpreter. To this he was given two GRU officers under cover and that was

all. Later the Military Attache, who was the Rezident also had two assistants, .
but he also haa five GRU officers under cover, The reason why they have more under
cover now is because now they have GVF representatives there and TASS
representatives, and also more Torgpredstvo men. Ge: Are they all.in KARACHI ? -
Se: No. There are only two in KARACHI, When the Government decided to set up

&@ new capital in the mountains two went there and other Torgpredstvo men travel

throughout the land from city to city. G.t How do you cover East Pakistan?

So: By making frequent TDYs there. There is quite an agent net there and others
“under development. I mentioned two agents there. |

(16) Get How about India ? Arentt you fairly scattered there ? 8S.: Yes,
They are in three cities there: NEW DELHI, CALCUTTA and BOMBAY. They all

travel back and forth extensively. Get How many people did you say GRU had

in India ? S,: At the time they were planning to send me there, let me count

them up .«. there were ten operational case officers in India and again I do not .

' count code-clerks and other personnel,

Ly Ge: I believe this completes the list of questions I have. S.: When
‘shall we meet next time, the day after tomorrow and then on Saturday ?

Ge: The next time we'll cover completely all your EEIs end priorities and
your operational plan and on Saturday you will recite them back to us and we
will oorrect them and then we will just relax. S.: Will I practise with the
radio transmitter again 7? G.: No. That will not be necessary because when it
is ready to be given to you it will have a complete description of all the parts
and all procedures inRussian as well as photographs of all the parts and labels
pointing to them in Russian. S.: I give you my word that in my life in MOSCOW
I have atsolotely no free time in the evening tc do any additional work such

as studying English to improve it. I am just too tired after my daily grind,
My cover job requires so moch effort. Although I do not need to fuss with
@elegations as mich as before thanks to my new job, I mst supervise other

ease officers in their arrangements for taking around all kinds of foreign
delegations, However, I always attend receptions. Ge: Your work on the

Committee line is pretty complete now is it not 7 S.: Yes. That is alright

and /
10

eee

ie : HYo
and I can certainly give them enough mterial to confuse them and supplement
that with all kinds of gifts. Of course others also bring back gifts but it

is all little junk, except that a Chief like GVISHIANI always gets worthwhile
gifts. I always bring better gifts than the others,

48. (Subject was told that he could arrange his trip to VERSAILLES with
WYNNE at 1000 hours the next day when he saw FYNNE and the timing would be such
to permit him to make a factory visit should one be arranged for hin).

Get On Thursday, for the sake of security we decided to make the time at

2030 instead of 2000 hours but at the same place because it is very good.

Se: Yes. It is a fine place, and we will meet then at 2030 hourss Pleaso-
ask HOOK to arrange a trip for m. G.: There is no need for us to press HOOK.
He will be glad to do it himself fou sed if he possibly can. S: I will do
everything for HOOK when he comes to MOSCOW - get him a car and met him at the
airport. H.: But under no circumstances can you use HOOK for any operational
reason whatsoever, S.: I don*t see any reason for this and particularly as
you say don't do it, I certainly won't. However I will meet him and take care

of his delegation and arrange lectures for him and receptions, He will

_ probably come from America with an American delegation, and not a mixture of

French and American, I explained this to him today and he agreed with m,
By ell means be sure that WYNNE stays as the representative of his firms and
does not break away from them as I suspect he would like to do if you subsidisc:
him, Let him form his delegation for going to MOSCOW at the end of the year
or in the first part of 1962, He: This is being done. S,: I will let you
know about the TIKHONOV delegation that I may accompany to England in the
early part of 1962 and it would be interesting to know if they would give me a
vies to the U.S.A. if I were to take a delegation there. At any rate we .
probably will not meet again for about four months, And as a mtter of fact

I do not see, since we have arranged communications, what useful purpose
there would be in meeting sooner,

O (After farewell amenities, subject left at 2345 hours, He was

delivered by M, and J. to the area of the footbridge over which he crossed

and went to his hotel).
