The Prospects for Indonesia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012244, dated 3 February 1962.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012244).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

hh NIE 545-62
/ MMR ARY 7 March 1962

Jha
a re ' _ HlOny Ke

. : ‘the
\ ee Or | \ ‘ # NU. ss
OocunE “aN ‘00

- Sh yy

‘

ey

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

Number 55-62

ee

<3

ie
tading Pieces
: Sieh wk, 7
NRCS

oe sey wey. ! wk |
a “Submitted, bythe : fe gay lus Hos oe : :
+ DIRECTOR OF, ‘CENTRAL INTELLIGENC E A UN tedlte} nhs i
poy bite “ay Pee Atak arts ye fay! on Mu : viel i
he. “ Concurred: in: by thaw, ao :
“UNITED STATES” INTELLIGENCE HOARD... , . |
ve As indicaiad overlout oy
i MARCH3 19628 ma, ws, Be 4 a
“ee. wet Me coeeres
yp a eas pt i ita
a t
ay  f
t ; , : ‘ ‘ 4
i Sve ,
“te Dive

sCURUERAT

: ‘ : \ fan they
y :
, i .
ned ae “his. vestimnaia Weer dina Adoby ihe Coteead este aype pence re ays ;
oe rae a cupy-t befor the forte on pnat edge Hida ot: ihe Gen tpaed cand Gb yeeran oF
pe at  ponisdic tion rien we Per De le hiiows Taine: ‘i Adh Wiusoseeal Coccobatfel ade. es tertie ne
oe hae: authoricod ily Hyer leant ollie tals wihin Weve aa nye Hao eee
' i ; vy
: 1 Pac Dacha ol Vyatedlaggentve cs sane Hooch, im tha bee qpeaircad seh Seta
: hie whe Dhaene, brafose melissa! Avion pe bea abe Ctl ot | ee ae
' iy ' ‘ seine ot i eee ;
a Pera oth ; An stank blebaol “wea. [a nw bats Wiypeus a, Papen taunt ot
a pat ‘ a a tthe Dopertanit: cafe ‘they Auuy y ah
te on, . 4 . ec vad AAssistont ¢ heed, oh ie ay “Ute Waypesae ead’ oe thas Pte quer Seta
thea 2 ihe! IMavy 4 ae eh 4 pe
‘ ie ' oa LA Hon tdwet of stall, flange HAD, door thes Hagiauniin oa
; ° ohiare ; in
a f Director dee Intebbqedse, foray Teeth few the beaat Sect
ieee a og Drader ol badelligenen, ADO | ben the Ades Berepypy feet te
; . e A Assisbaad Pedder, PUL far: the Perdercal Wonca cb Gaye tigpeattone
er Es Ce oy Deer of EEDA, for the Platine Socmaghy Aqua 9
\ fa, ' CAsttaad Director bor Cantead Befarence, Of) bor aay ahi Prepetete ce
; : 5 Aquin y ; of
‘ | pe t
i r aul Uns sayy abely fon taba an dlostroyadl hey Viva vitengy tot java coeed a od

applicable sie oaty eeqpobation, Ga gedayage! be dhe Ccmtab batotbye ane oy oe

aueanyorment with tha CHhea att optral Katecones,

im |

4

i

t +s

| Ao dhe title of this ethno whoa eased wepumatel, bor tbe to tk
: sihod POR CPPlTAL USE OrUWy

ee wee

PES ARIBG Od

White House

Hational Secuaty (ours
Deporhiaent ol babe
Deparment ol Datars
Atomic biergy € Ginmtsion

Pedloral Burouu cdf diveshaqohens

eS es Lo

ee en

ey

WAG ted

|

aud | | |i

; —ODISSEAMIAVATIOEE Elon

(IA

cab bbe ete

‘a

! igh
i

'

vt
a

M Hy
f ) ‘

{ oe

The following anitelligence orgameatians

this estimate:

[he Central latelhqedee Aqeuey
Somenty of fdate, btefense,

slath and PISA.

COUCULEIGE |
Direc for of Tite Plaggense er cane
ee Director Dajanse Intalliqence Aqancy:
Assistant Chiat of Stafl tor inte Mien,

Assistant Chiat ol Naval Operations (tntaftigene %),

partes pated

and the mifellgence ol
tar Arany, tha Davy, Ihe

Dopartment al thier

Assetanl ( hve: fof Stall, tatebligane a, AIS AR. us

ae a4 ss A

“juiciins id Pate at,

pee PE Aone A

Wit yet oi ho » une

We ap AN ae ae

My on!
Ve, mon uy

A: aes

, ; Director bor Intelligence, Tom Stoll
Bg tr af the Nanhonal Soculy Ageny oe,
cond . x ' v t te _ 1 ° in :
aH wily Lt es wh
- Abstaining ae ag ates
ses deal : cle

n
‘

lomie. Enauy.. Commision, | Rapresentative i

yy ck “4 ‘
s foi ti “Taf ue |
hb I Ed “ue

At i ie

seh nye ede, : 1

: ‘ ‘ :

i! Djractor,t padaral Burov ob Jvestigation, the suf

' (a

tony
vl pe re
: ad {:
Wi Ms ;

a

LR Sie as os

ta the preparation ol

inceations of the Depart

An Loree, cb dhe dorm

PReseareh, Doparinent of otete

Avy!

Rad ob the Novy

he Hi i re Bulag

the. USB, andl the. ‘Assisjant an

roc, being ‘outs of “thei

ed
fe.

saci caiaeaiin

i
aay Pe wy

LL

THE PROSPECTS
FOR INDONESIA

THE PROBLEM

To analyze the major trends in Indonesia and to estimate
probable developments over the next year or so with special
reference to Indonesia’s international orientation and to the
West New Guinea dispute.

CONCLUSIONS

1. Until a settlement Satisfactory to Sukarno is reached
with The Netherlands, the West New Guinea dispute will
continue, to overshadow and Strongly influence all other
foreign and domestic issues in Indonesia. Sukarno will
probably draw even closer to the Bloc position on major
international issues as Indonesia continues to rely heavily
on Soviet military aid and political support for the prosecu-

tion of the West New Guinea campaign. The Indonesian
Communist Party (PKI) wil] continue to exploit the issue

and to obstruct a negotiated Settlement. The diversion of
army energies into the West New Guinea campaign will
continue to hamper its efforts to reduce PKI Strength and
influence. President Sukarno wil! probably continue to be
successful in balancing the army and the Communist Party
off against each other while retaining for himself the con-
trolling power position. In the event of Sukarno's death, it
is likely that the successor administration would be headed
by top ministers in the present cabinet with Nasution and the
army assuming the predominant role in their support.
(Paras. 5-8, 12, 16-22)

ae |

CL

2. A West New Guinea settlement, although it might ini-
tially enhance the prestige of Sukarno and the PKI, would
cost both an issue that has proven politically profitable for
over a decade. The PKI, especially, would be forced to seek
new issues and would probably turn to further “anticolonial”
campaigns against such targets as Portuguese Timor or
Western economic interests in Indonesia. Tt is unlikely that
any efforts of this nature would be carried very far during
the period of this estimate. In the event of a settlement,
the army would probably give greater attention to counter-
ing PKI influence in the country. (Paras. 19-20)

3, Sukarno almost certainly believes that Indonesia can-
not rely solely upon diplomatic pressures for a prompt settle-
ment of the West New Guinea dispute. In any case, he will
continue the buildup of Indonesian forces in eastern Indo-
nesia and the frequent use of threats of action. We believe
that chances for a negotiated settlement of the dispute are
slightly better than even. owever, a8 Indonesian military
capabilities improve, Sukarno will become increasingly prone
to employ military measures short of an all-out invasion in
an effert to weaken the Dutch bargaining position and
thereby pressure them into meeting his terms for negotia-
tion. We consider an all-out invasion of West New Guinea
to be an unlikely course of action for the Indonesians during
the period of this estimate. (Paras, 31-36)

4. The economic outlook for Indonesia over the next year
or so is definitely unfavorable. The most serious problems
will probably be the intensification of inflation and the con-
tinued decline of foreign exchange reserves. Sukarno is
unlikely, however, to concern himself with remedial meas-
ures. On the contrary, continued economic frustrations will
probably provide him an additional incentive to raise the
pitch of the West New Guinea crisis. (Paras. 28-27)

a

a

: Cr

L

a

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

5. President Sukarno's campaign against
the Dutch to achieve control over West New
Guinea has always been a major factor in
Indonesia's domestic politics and foreign
“policy. Sukarno feels strongly that Indone-
Sian independence will not be complete until
“the liberation of West Irian” is achieved and,
over the years, he has been able to project
this attitude so skillfully that the West New
Guinea campaign has acquired the status of a
national crusade. Sukarno has successfully
used the emotional and nationalistic response
on the West New Guinea issue to silence do-
mestic opposition, to divert public attention
from mounting economic problems, and to
consolidate his position of leadership under
the system of “guided democracy.” In terms

of foreign policy, Sukarno has come to dis- ,
tinguish friend from enemy almost entirely on »
the basis of policies and actions with respect '

to West New Guinea.

6. In recent months, Sukarno has moved to
increase greatly the intensity and urgency of
the West New Guinea campaign. The effec-
tiveness of his anticolonialist propaganda line
was somewhat weakened Carly in 1961 by in-
dications of Dutch readiness to move more di-
Tectly to prepare West New Guinea for self-
government. Later in the year, failures to
gain solid Afro-Asian support in UN delibera-
tions on the issue confirmed Indonesian mis-
givings on this score ang increased their
sense of urgency for a resolution of the dis-
pute. With the virtual cessation of the sepa-
Tatist rebellion and no immediate problems of
governmental structure or political balance
to divert his energies, Sukarno has been free
to concentrate upon West New Guinea.
Massive Bloc arms shipments have enabled
him to place increasing emphasis upon the

i

employment of military pressures for achiev-
ing his objective. Accordingly, the West New
Guinea issue has come to overshadow and to
affect significantly all other foreign and do-
mestic matters. -

7. In developing their tactics, Indonesia’s
major competing elements, the army and the
Indonesian Communist Party (PKI), are
taking their lead from Sukarno’s reactions to
the changing course of the West New Guinea
dispute. Indonesia's faltering economy and
its overly ambitious Eight-Year Plan appear
to have little claim upon the nation’s limited
resources as compared with the wealth and
human effort being devoted to the West New
Guinea buildup. Moreover, Indonesia’s inter-
national orientation for the next year or two
will be strongly influenced by the degree of
support on this issue being provided Indone-
sia by the major powers.

Il. DOMESTIC POLITICAL TRENDS

8. Sukarno. Although Sukarno’s personal
popularity has been on the wane for several
years, he retains two key assets in maintain-
ing his controlling position: (a) a mystique
among Indonesians stemming from his role as
the leader and symbol of the Indonesian revo-
lution; and (b) a consummate skill in the
manipulation of individuals, groups, institu-
tions, and issues. Under his “guided democ-
Tracy” concept, he has eliminated the influence
of the non-Communist parties and stripped
Indonesia's institutions of representative gov-
ernment of all meaningful powers. This
Narrowing of the political base has left the
army and the PKI as the only contenders for
political power. Sukarno continues to be suc-

cessful in balancing the army and the PKI off
against each other while retaining for himself
the controlling power position.

| 3

L

9. The Army. The army has been involved
in politics and in the administration of Indo-
nesia particularly since 1957 when it became
responsible for implementation of the Martial
Law Decrees proclaimed to cope with regional
dissidence. Although several of the decrees
have been lifted and Sukarno himself has
taken over as Central War Administrator
from Army Chief of Staff General Nasution,
the army has continued to exercise wide au-
thority at provincial and local government
levels and to administer many {mportant in-
dustries and business enterprises. Much of
its administrative and political effort has gone

into competing at all levels with the PKI -

which it regards as the principal threat to its
authority and to the future of the country.

10. The army has strengthened its political
position during the past year. With the
termination of the rebellions in Sumatra and
the Celebes, the split between anti-Commu-
nist elements, which had weakened the army
and divided its leadership since 1957, has heen
ended. Surrendered rebel troops and many of
their commanders are being integrated into
army ranks, mostly in Central and Hast Java
where the PKI is strongest. There has also
been a substantial improvement in the unity of
the military services. Sukarno has replaced
Air Force Chief of Staff Suryadarma, a pro-
Communist sycophant, with Dani, one of the
air force leaders most acceptable to General
Nasution. Nasution and Dani, along with
Navy Chief of Staff Martadinata, present an
anti-Communist army-navy-air force front
for the first time, thus reducing Sukarno’s
scope for his common tactic of playing on
divisions within the high command. Nasu-
tion may be replaced as Army Chief of Staff
while remaining Minister of National Security.
Even if this were to happen, he would prob-
ably continue to be the dominant military
figure and to hold the support of the key army,
navy, and air force leaders, at least during
the period of this estimate.

L

11. Although General Nasution feels a basic
sense of Joyalty to Sukarno as the irreplace-
able leader of the diverse trends within the
Indonesian nation, he continues to resist Su-
karno on those issues which he feels vital to
army interest. The army is especially sensi-
tive to any attempt to enlarge the role of the
PKI in Indonesia's national life. The opposi-
tion of Nasution and his circle of key army
leaders has deterred Sukarno from appoint-
ment of Communists to the Cabinet. The
army also has been instrumental in the in-
definite postponing of the scheduled 1962 par-
liamentary elections at which the Commu-
nists would probably have demonstrated their
substantial voting strength. Cautionary ad-
vice from the army has restrained Sukarno
from overly impulsive moves in his drive to-
ward “military confrontation” with the Dutch.
Finally, despite frequent interference with
these efforts by Sukarno, Nasution continues
to encourage regional military commanders
to harass the PKI by all legal and semilegal
means. The more zealous commanders have
had considerable success in preventing the
expansion of PKI influence at local levels, and
in disrupting their organizations and jailing
their leaders.

12. The current mobilization for the West
New Guinea campaign is absorbing an in-
creasing amount of the army’s attention,
leaving less time for its civilian administrative
responsibilities and its anti-PKI activities.
By directing the army energies into an “anti-
imperialist” crusade of his own making, Su-
karno has at least temporarily deflected the
army leadership from its efforts toward grad-
ual reduction of PKI power. Nevertheless,
the tide of public opinion stimulated by Su-
karno's emotional approach to the West New
Guinea issue has obliged the army to go along
with the President's views or risk being isoa-
lated from the people. By placing himself

at the head of the multiplicity of military and
clvilian staffs directing the current mobjliza-

a

dasic
lace-
i the
t Su-
al to
sensi-
f the
yposi-
army
»0int-
The
1e in-
2 par-
mmu-
‘ their
ry ad-
karno
ve to-
Jutch.
- with
-tinues
anders
nilegal
‘gs have
ag the
‘Is, and
jailing

e West
an in-
vention,
strative
‘tivities.
1 “anti-
ng, Su-
‘ted the
‘d grad-
rtheless,
by S8u-
est New
so along
ing iso-
himself
vary and
nohbiliza-

"Indonesian politics.

al

tion against the Dutch, Sukarno has assumed
the major role in military decisions which
could have the most serious consequences for
the armed forces.

18. The Indonesian Communist Party.
The PKI has nearly two million members and,
with the possible exception of the army, it is
the most influential single organization in
Most of its strength is
concentrated on the island of Java, but the
party has been making progress in recruiting
members and expanding its organization in
the outer islands, particularly Sumatra. The
party wields its influence primarily through
a number of nationwide front groups and
mass organizations, including the country's
largest and most effective labor organization,
SOBSI, and the largest peasant organization,
BTI. The PKI is strongly represented In
every important body of the central govern-
ment except the Cabinet. The party seeks,
through its mass organizations and its posl-

tion in government, to Make itself indispen- -

sable to Sukarno. It has,been the chief advo- :

cate of a militant approach to the West New
Guinea issue, thus playing upon Sukarno’s
aspirations and discrediting the army’s more
cautious attitude. Its greatest impact on
Indonesian foreign and domestic policies, how-
ever, is probably through the personal influ-
ence of a number of PKT leaders who, as part
of Sukarno’s palace clique, have ready and
continuing access to him. The relationship
between the President and the PKI appears
to rest upon the conviction held by each that
it is using the other to its own advantage.

14. The PKI does not appear, however, to
have increased its influence, prestige, or
organizational strength appreciably over the
past year. It has not been able to exploit
fully Indonesia's chronically poor, and worsen-
ing, economic conditions because of its sup-
port of Sukarno. Certain recent events indi-
cate that there may be significant limits to
PKI ability to carry out disruptive activity.

For example, the PKI instigated waves of
strikes and demonstrations during the sum-
mer and fall, but when the army met these
moves with firm and forceful measures, it
soon became apparent that the PKI rank and
file had Nttle enthusiasm for exposing itself.

16. There have been reports of dissatisfac-
tion within the PKI with the-leadership of
Party Chairman Aidit and with the party's
policy of supporting Sukarno and seeking to
expand PKI influence through legal political
means. The position of these dissenters has
probably been strengthened by the weak
showing of the PKI in last year’s strikes.
There are also signs that Sino-Soviet disputes
over tactics appropriate to Communist parties
in underdeveloped countries have been re-
flected within the Indonesian Party. The
PKI, which hitherto has appeared to receive
most of its support and external guidance
from Moscow, was disturbed by Khrushchev’s
pronouncements on Albania and Stalin at the
Soviet Party Congress and, by implication,
associated itself with Chinese Communist
views. If the party should fall generally
under Chinese influence, an effort would be
made to displace Aidit and the party would
probably turn toward more revolutionary
tactics.

16. However, it is unlikely that a change in
PKI policy, even {f it occurred, would pro-
duce significant effects during the period of
this estimate. It is unlikely that any appre-
clable segment of the PKI would be willing to
adopt an anti-Sukarno stance so long as West
New Guinea remains such a profitable issue.
Furthermore, the events of the past year indi-
cate that the PKI is not ready to embark
actively on a hard line without a considerable
period of preparation for a change of tactics.
In addition, the PKI would approach open
revolutionary activity with caution in view of
its disastrous experience in the Madiun up-
rising of 1948.

Gx a

—————

L

17. As long as the West New Guinea crisis
continues at its current intensity, the PKI
will be alert to exploit the opportunities
afforded for infiltration of the Indonesian
armed forces, for driving a wedge between
Sukarno and the military leaders, and for
estrangihg Indonesia and the West. To pre-
serve these opportunities, the PKI will prob-
ably continue to obstruct a negotiated settle-
ment,

18. The Non-Communist Parties. The
power and influence of the non-Communist
parties have continued to deteriorate during
the past year, and approach insignificance.
They are essentially parliamentary parties and
in the absence of elections they lack both a
means of demonstrating the extent of their
popular backing, and an incentive to solicit
and maintain such backing. With each
passing year, the fact that they can point to
a certain number of proven supporters in the
last election (1955) becomes less rheaningful.
In 1960 Sukarno banned the Socialist’ (PST)
and Masjumi parties which, deprived of
patronage and legal status, are disintegrating
rapidly. The two remaining major non-Com-
munist parties, the Nationalists (PNI) and
the Islamic Scholars (NU), have survived by
subordinating their own policy views to those
of Sukarno, but neither one exerts any real
influence. The army has shown some interest
in cultivating certain political party leaders
with an eye to utilizing such organizational
machinery and mass loyalty as these public
figures retain.

19. Prospects. Although it is unlikely that
the basic elements in the Indonesian political
situation will-change significantly over the
next year or so, the course of the West New
Guinea dispute will modify the balance of
power between Sukarno, the army, and the
PKI. Should the armed forces sustain a ma-
jor military setback in operations against the
Dutch, Nasution and his top commanders
would suffer a loss of stature in the govern-

[

ment and it would probably become more
diMeult for the army to influence Sukarno
and to pressure the PK]. The PKI, for its
part, would not hesitate to exploit any army

failure in order to improve its own relative
position.

20. A settlement of the West New Guinea
dispute would, at the start, enhance the pres-
tige of Sukarno and of the PKI as well. Over
a longer period, both would suffer from the
disappearance of this issue and would seek
other causes to support. This would be of
particular concern to the PKI, since the army,
relieved of the New Guinea preoccupation,
would be more free to reassert its opposition
to Communist influence in the country. It
is unlikely that either Sukarno or the PKI
would give major attention to constructive
efforts to cope with Indonesia's pervasive and
intractable economic problems. Instead, they
would probably look for new subjects of agita-
tion. These would probably have an “anti-
colonialist” cast; e.g., harassment and further
reduction of Western investments in Indo-
nesia, or irredentist propaganda campaigns
against Portuguese Timor or British Borneo.
During the period of this estimate, however,
it is unlikely that any efforts of this nature
would be carried very far.

21. Effects of Death or Incapacitation of
Sukarno. In the event of Sukarno’s death,
the army and the PKI would find themselves
in direct confrontation with regard to the suc-
cession. Sukarno’'s current arrangements for
succession to the Presidency provide that the
office be filled by the First Minister (Djuanda)
and the Deputy First Minister (Leimena) in
that order. Both of these Ministers and their
close associates would probably be amenable
to working fairly closely with Nasution and
the army upon whose support they would de-
pend for the stability of their administration.
Nasution would probably be content to exer-
cise his predominant influence behind the
scenes as long as the civilian leadership met

|

. i]
Pld bab

vith
ti
“Ted
EEE
phe
Larne
esha
Alb ti
. adsl
(tas i
niuibse
27
1s (hig
tve du
bead se
fo ave
app
Lowey
One.
p Ublie
Ves, in
resent
poverr
Poanet
iieng!
Lhaeoe¢
mined
ml the
ith thie

Wl DG
3.
nomic
budget
Tritt Dia
iInnatic
ilonesié
txchan
Joint,
uo relat.
lialf of
exchan
of the y
iip the
Thents {

gallu! otk hod i

feb Gi bbe da

coed dd cs stosthb h th Peer en)

i old

1 i I | | |
i vl ' ha i 1

j milo :

‘ foul i

‘ ud | itt im

( i 4 ( Cyl wy la

\ | i i Leda se A Gy 5

in f | I t Ht | tila

| ith | q I f fa

| log broad dy
; ig ioe ion Hasreygrpa dt

i 1 (ois bye bene Vd by

| i bee dal ea lili dah av vl pti
‘ : re 2 oe
' Woe de AW Ages Fe ee |
; \ | bts tbaad bot lait UC dbeat,
at 2 rele ga Awe Bel pare le Laing ae
DP pee ii a e aelip e ATE oe Cr ee
iol ee | rhin Uihevcrioee ath tab We dtu perl

fh. cata client! ae bisa bret bth thet Lorte rk

; Pub tp eet bathe tbe drgpebe be tha the yt
be beet ee te thot oe dre Caves Soqtaa Chie

ite be davd fr edb ee bate yy hie
Lada Te Uyeye ate tab OP betba Ebi hat toe taal

thot dat
vata parol hdd

ti. tisk ue bated he gle btibe Whe bias

ee cs ee Ge
badad

potbebictt lh pbetape CEPA Pas

fe

Hh Deeb bh be CORR Ab SPEER PEC gy

Phe cbebe thera tithe ab hie bcdonbe aac: eeae

bis adder chad barean he Pv ek
Ha toerst there boo dis Dy thie tenes
Ind ta Ubie

im Eby Gere rel

vicetiede
Fecaedpts Coole Lae il
teat bevel tin HOHE Ob at uber ipee Cane
tiidd thaeds WPAN, (oa bebe
cobrbibiired! Cher bike GP

first boo the

choagel tee te Ede bod eaupen

ede td b Pee byes Medel ays
pot OK hath dbop ine spork eattdaes ana
roebalieeth, hiapty level oof Haporta WW Ghee est
hobfool Pott ded) ta sehions taibeads OF) boreapen
exebohpt reserwen Wid comlired ta thie ate
af Ee see des pibe a sharp Cab a daporbs dine
bay The deeb oes toate. Thay capital pay:

foeibs Jen ebb senvaeny: were bso ar ipa.

ob li dt boy tach ' ib |, : i
i
( lt
i)

1 Il ' 4
| , |

opaan robo 1
bord j be hehe 4
hero dd. oh ah ‘

a ellie | ' i
Vey puedo ved | | .
tloude oo (a a \ i , \ t
trod | | it ion vt
Pde veeti wae cette ‘ 1 1 if i
vl peel deel \ \ \ i eeu eb thld, thas £6
cn re | es ia
Cee es Oe ee fae its
sia chal te taedhi vodae ob eb pee be Tees seb) Lo .ti taal
‘| ped vipa abe foee db trbe lo meade b vb oee Por ta
(ata

1

ve ee rite EI prbdae ape add (his

a ere veeed ocavadateoct

ee ee Ivil

thoioh Viva vote tub toes

ee Dee Davedetnae be bea cide baer ote

Plea, verte td die beads that be finde te Focus dal

tag) fey pthedbbeors ooh Eber oc ee idab baa beetaa ta

en ee

poetab eal bere dheehid re vil

poet nt bbe debe ter b rhe Pobre ree ape rib edb ose

ceed shiththaat ey adel fre re ee

eeritk. el babe Cerca deetly, one etiie ee  tbae rae t

virreotbeth ol GO teade debéatire oo TEbve ce deddtboi «

pedidibit wabae ae bea there y Teede ta one Chie
Pike cb payed Whee foe | preeolirdily
iEbatbuits Cheer

thalva Chora sillpouitiredal wobbly Cheede diate rtaiebtotial

aren re Se OD

prolteiess darpgedy Lar tha betips
pith veel Ehiey eal abroeed) corkidiby Combbinitie
Hits stipprot tb ta bhie mabe reste

abdie. stile jobus

mb prea ryiiay cutiel

Hype he relataenebaye will Che bihoe

however, Che datlti. ab Goad cats chore read
pe Go dive pene rated enbhte deca Len the
QS0R Getiotie aederb eeiviecs Beaker da cy
way Comipaable bo Thick Gehl by ora battbia, ret
His db diel any pereeplihde efbeck an Tae pon
etolly hostile atlibode of The nitibary boward
(he PRE Ciarebob siperybon at Phe bearing,
aapeeksoat (he notary pubebiaise ia recnien'’s
His probably prevented Spaced Commins

a

political gains in officer ranks. This wariness
of Soviet influence is likely to continue, at Jeast
during the period of this estimate.

26. Despite the vast Bloc arms sales to In-
donesia, the bulk of Indonesian trade con-
tinues to be with the Free World. The Bloc
accounted for only 9.6 percent of Indonesia's
total foreign trade in the first half of 1961,
principally as a customer for rubber; this was
@ slight decline from 1959 and 1960. After
Malaya/Singapore, the US is the most impor-
tant customer for Indonesian exports (prin-
cipally rubber, tin, and oil), the second largest
supplier of imports after Japan,

Japa-
4cat Lepalauuus payments Will total he2Z3 mil-
lion by 1970. Western oil and plantation in-
terests in Indonesia are still extensive despite
continuing government restrictions on foreign
operations and investments.

27. The economic outlook for Indonesia over
the next year or so is definitely’ unfavorable.
The Hight-Year Plan, which began on 1 Janu-
ary 1961, has gotten off to a slow start and
cannot in any case be expected to show quick
results. Sukarno appears to have little in-
terest in or comprehension of economic mat-
ters and he is unlikely to follow a consistent
policy of stabilization and retrenchment. He
habitually reacts politically to economic prab-
lems. For example, the deteriorating eco-
nomic situation gave him an incentive to raise
the pitch of the West New Guinea crisis. Po-
litical and economic frustrations will prab-
ably lead him to further harassment of foreign
economic interests,

IV. FOREIGN_RELATIONS AND PROSPECTS

28. Over the past several years, Sukarno has
shifted Indonesia's neutralist policy slowly to-
ward the Bloc position on all Major inter-
national issues. Soviet military aid and un-
stinted Bloc political and propaganda support
for the West New Guinea campaign, more than
any ather factors, have drawn Indonesia into

[

be amssettnnt et ns

2

this close relationship with the Bloc. Su- V.
karno’s leftward drift has also been a result
of his disappointment with the absence of

neutralist support for his West New Guinea Ne
crusade at the Belgrade conference and his si
earlier exclusion from the Tito-Nasser-Nehru pu
talks in Cairo. There is also a much-improved ais

relationship with Communist China, as con- ;
trasted to the strained situation which ob- un

tained only two years ago, and closer official che
contact with North Korea and North Vietnam. i
29. pas
dip.

seti

the

gen

Ways, tar

; 7) fe

Dut

that

Net]

don

32

polic

New

80. If a negotiated settlement is reached on tiate
the West New Guinea issue, some improve- peric
ment in Indonesian relationships with the than
West is likely. [— ingn
1. that

Sta)(4)i5y 28
However, Sukarno's continued pres- mode
ence in a leadership role will probably guar- road
antee a continuation of Indonesia's pro-Bloc picion
orientation in international affairs. If the trans

West New Guinea dispute enters the stage of

open hostilities, it is likely that Indonesia *Th
would become further alienated from the West sites
and progressively more dependent on the Com- able e
munist states. In such a situation, pro-West- that ¢.
ern voices in the armed forces would become aoe
silent and Sukarno would move even further to the
into the “socialist camp.” tiating

:

SMa.) |

ViOWId ub bul th

Sboobut death ov ra ee |
New Citi a oa la oy . ; i
slomal tatitticti Oo ;

PUUPprane a eee ml lobes : i
bio (Vinee eat or thay ; a boas
Sidemet crue bin bcp bo. : 1 \
Uniforiily Gente te ; LG
matic presotlbe ss dere ad mo, : \ er
quish thie le daen ne roi. boot , vant
Sukarno foteaibeas de tht. a ee ta i re en)
passed wher Teer ua a ees oa . , boa de td td ,
Giplomiitae pace wie cet be te 7 Da
settlement of tha une Ihe, ee eee po dd ee apes booty \ tos i
therefore, bo tia ak a bead 4 bo boato tee bb
feney on Ws miter oe Ee et tt
especially ba tl ch ody taattitin cay cents Pobre tere yee
tery Dudldipe tec ber tebe et eg ne pth Fe tee ee
ing thresh at toathil Ce Peer tine mo pe
Duteh  stikathvas etree bag cad hada Pere Pee ge Be pres
bret tut i bouitidte vty ou mit ya |

that wilbonh setete  atebbicidie poe li. bia
thal oda peedila en | im Fn en

! Netherhends will cot die perth a be tt born
. . ee be toe dn beaealeu floats
donesian Levan
: rn Ida ve bbe boeete ba vet ode
; S2. Deespibe bb tb bei tebe bet ri abo Pestech bbb ve rl i
1 policy al meek bda Coalveathabtecs, lin tla | Svrtadauebe et colo daa oe (eeuey bhi at i
New Gane area, (he cheie. tr oe dep TO
tiated settlemie cat at tha. th [rl Voahtitie Cau HTL rete ar EEEEe Ete kn rate |
. . re | ‘ ee ee ee rola robe
period of Uap citunithe are tae th de hed as moyen’
| than even st bdvona cattle feeive be etl ' udde col otiteted cal
| eee hr Ti belt. rede stibed Chad coe OL wicl faite da
BAC) wootild oo otthe Lecnabtadbe dre pe ace bisls dana bac aed
prea EER de preta Pticcee Dert tee peerbaa tb bern
bt apa val Phas frachodae bata prbrabeatols hice iti
a : aly mode cele vd bya ‘ : 1 ‘
Toadblocks do abeteetiert ty ritibebel ul a ve hen ‘| ; ‘ " : " -
. 4 led ' (it vil Ed wtld merle .
Picions and Touleh retusal te ayaree te the ces I 7 lo. a iL
out , ' VEEP EERE sbbae oa Hobe
transfer of Sey roupe ons
wal fer of adiiinabs bration Cnet tly te bade We ranbe mt The tector atl coutheri cent

ab West Wew Cittiied Phokee ved Helen pites,

i Cibo ctebedithote. Seb ath bieione shake ape abtern
muebk be cethee tively tabereep bed erie beats

Mareover even Gb tothndy oteees bab, Pie toely

1.3{a)(4) Hoent operation tate bt he comverted tite a

pout by Dbeb commberatbaedes ubesc a cei

_ Hite and nepobbieltone. bolbiwed qb ly We
| fhebefore cho mel bebtewe Phiat fie Phideanies deans

L

will attempt such a substantial operation until
they have achieved alr superiority over the
waters off these coasts, a situation not likely
to exist before the end of this year. The
possibility cannot be excluded, however, that
Sukarno might order such an operation at an
earlier date either in exasperation or in an
effort to force the Dutch to the conference
table.

36. An all-out attempt to take West New
Guinea by military action would necessarily
involve a large air and amphibious assault on
Biak, the primary center of Dutch military
power. The Indonesians can now easily

a

muster the 6,000 ground troops, 1,000 para-
troops, and the airlift which would be required,
but waterlift capabilities are a serious Nmita-
tion. Above all, the long sea voyage involved
would make prior neutralization of Dutch sea
and air strength based at Biak necessary if
the invasion canvoy were to reach its destina-
tion. Although Indonesian military strength
will continue to increase, we estimate that
they will not achieve the capability for suc-
cessfully carrying out such an operation dur-
ing the period of this estimate. We there-
fore regard an all-out invasion of West New
Guinea as the least likely Indonesian course of
action over the next year or so,

a

Se

|
|
