Probable International Reactions to Certain Possible US Courses of Action Again
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132496, dated 4 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132496).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

“TOP—GEREREE— pane
; > mann TS #1h2225_p oes

| CEN AL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY [Senna
CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM 2 Pobmry 19666 Fy ,

RELEASE IN FULL 1997 fr #X od

: E

MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR

SUBJECT: Probable International Reactions to' Certain Possible
US Courses of Action against the Castro Regine

Introduction

1. the purpose of this nenorandun isto assess.the principal jx.-:,
international reactions to various types of action the US night
take to bring down the Castro governnent in Cuba -. especially
the nature and tagitude of possible Bloc countermoves and the
possibility of serious adverse reactions on the part of Latin
Auerican countries or others in the Free World. The possible
actions here considered are: (a) provision of active support,
of varying degrees of Dagnitude and overtness, to an attempt
by Cuban opposition elenents, internal or in exile, to overthrow
Castro; (b) military invasion of Cuba with US forces; or (c)
establishment of a naval blockade of Cuba in international

waters,

2. We must enphasize that actual international reactions ni
might be greatly influenced by circumstances which cannot be
accurately foreseen -- by the precise nature of the US action; by
the manner, speed, and success with which it was carried out; by
the extent to which drastic US action might appear to be justified
by possible new Cuban provocations; or by possible changes in
Cuban relations with other Latin American countries. However,
we believe that some valid generalizations can be made on the
basis of the situation as it has developed so far and, of the

ae

nature of the possible US actions considered, fob de Me
Sino-Soviet Bloc Reactions
See ee eS VEUOS |

3 Bloc leaders from the start have recognized the value
of a revolutionary, pro-Conmunist Cuba as a Sous of iritation
and enbarrassnent to the US, as an exanple for vaiuttoasy
movenents elsewhere in the hemisphere, and as a center for
Communist as well as Cuban agitation and propaganda throughout
Latin America, The Bloc has provided Castro with extensive

political, econonic, and nilitary support.

4, Moreover, the Cuban example has assumed increasing prog~
inence in Cormunist assessnents of the world situation. Cuba is

being depicted as a prime example of the thesis that colonial

-2-

i) 1 heh.
ane w

wee ee ee

regimes are inevitably toppling under the impact of revojutionary
nationalisn, and that Bloc strength can prevent the imperialists
from intervening to reverse this process, In the Bloc's view

the Castro regime is farther along toward the next stage «=

the advent of Cormunist power «- than any other Free World
country, While more recent Soviet pronouncements have tended to
mininize specific military cormitrents to Cuba as well as
Khrushchev's implied threat of last summer that Cuba was under
the protection of Soviet missiles, the Soviets have if anything

reinforced their political alignment with the Castro regimes"

d« For these reasons, the Bloc would regard Castro's down-
fall as a substantial political defeat and would respond
vigorously to any major US move -- overt or covert and whether
or not supported by others «= to bring it about, Its efforts
woulc probably be directed primarily at hensanel oer the Anerican
threat to Cuba by political means, utilizing fe ene process all
opportunities to arouse syupathy for Cuba as a victin of colo-~
nialist aggression, and to depict the US action as a threat to
the peace. To this end, it would probably stimilate and support
Goes: detonstrations against the US in various countries of Latin

Anerica and elsewhere, It would probably derand action by the

UN to censure the US and preserve Castro, nost likely through

-3-

‘ ise
“ne ye

es ee ES tt meee a (Tp no enennr meerren nny es eee ene,

strong resolutions calling on the US to deepest but possibly also
through establishment of some sort of UN presence in Cuba. The
USSR would firmly oppose any US move to establish a blockade

and would use all diplomatic and legal means at its disposal

to deny it international acceptance.

6. To lend urgency to its political approach, the USSR
would seek to heighten the crisis and play on worldwide fears
of general war. Khrushchev would probably issue generalized
warnings about the possibility of wider hostiJ ties and night
try to give them greater substance with threat ning actions.
In the event of o prolonged military struggle |between Castro
and US-backed opposition forces, the Bloc would alnost certainly
seek to dispatch nilitary supplies or possibly even small numbers
of “volunteers," although the latter appears unlikely to uSe

Te However, we believe that the Bloc would avoid a direct
nilitary confrontation with US forces. The Communist leaders
almost. certainly recognize that they have little or no carpa-
bility to counter US nilitary power in the Cuban area and that
US sensitivity regarding Cuba is very great. Certainly they

would not wish to risk general war over this issue. Although *

the Soviets would probably seek to test a US bilockade, for

oe

ARES: :

example, they would alnost certainly do so with & nerchant vessel,
perhaps announcing that it was loaded with tdoacturts and other

consumer requirenents, rather than witk a weenie:

8. Even if the US succeeded in bringing Castro down, Bloc
leaders probably believe that they could offset this defeat to
Sone extent by depicting Castro as a partyr to American imperi.~
alisa, which took advantage of Cuba's spall siize and closeness
to the US, The Bloc leaders would probably also feel themselves
impelled to increase pressures elsewhere in order 66 restore ‘the
image of Communist advance, A decision about whet to do would
dezend on many factors, such as the local circunstances at whate
ever spot was under consideration and their appraisal of the new
political situation created by the US action, ineluding any

reassessrent of US willingness to resist Bloc noves elsewhere,

9. Especially if the us action were obvions or acknowledged,
Khrushchev would be under pressure eszecially fron Communist
China tc give up his present concilfatory line and to shift to
@ Dore nilitant policy. The atnosphere would rake it difficult,
for a tine at least, to hold any US-Soviet discussions looking ¢

toward an inprovenent of relations,

Latin Anerican Reactions
ee Ae UL ONS |

10. Castro's atature in Latin Anerica has carkedly declined
over the last year, although he still cornands @ good deal of
syopathy anong lower incone groups of the area. His dictatorial
nethods, his political meddling in other countries, and his close
collaboration with world communism have progressively alienated
many who initially felt that Castro was bringing & long needed
social revolution to Cuba, Official opinion, at least privately,

has generally crystallized against Castro, and the orate tendency

wees EONS

of pany secretly to applaud his Yankee-baiting Sie subsided.

The majority of Latin Anerican governnents apperently felt that
the US economic enbargo was justified and virtually all have at
least privately syopathized with the US decision to break diplo--
matic relations. Peru and five lesser countries -- anong then
the authoritarian regines -- have also broken or suspended diplo-
ratic ties with Cuba, and four others kave withdrawn their

anbassadors fron Havane.

li. Most Latin American leaders still are reluctant to take
a public stand against Castro for fear of stirring up the vocif~
erous and scnetines strategically placed ninority of pro-Commné.

nists and other leftists who look to Castro as @ symbol of their

a ae

ARR Pee

own revolutionary aspirations, Moreover, these leaders themselves
continue to be influenced vy traditional fears of US donination
of the hemisphere. One or two Latin Anerican governnents (e.g.,
Ecuador and perhaps Mexico) are still inclined to work for a
negotiated settlenent between the US and Castro. The stand of
Brazil's new president is uncertain, Thus, we see little likeli-
hood as matters now stand that the OAS can be induced to partici
pate in or officially sanction anti-Castro measures of the drastic
nature considered in this nmenorandun, However, many Latin American
leaders probably expect that the US by itself will sooner or
later feel compelled to take increasingly strohg measures agsinst
Castro. Indeed, some sectors of Latin American opinion already
criticize the US for not dealing sufficiently forcefully with

the Cuban regime,

12. Despite the likelihocd of outcries from the far left,
most Latin Anerican g0vernnents would at least privately approve
of unobtrusive US Supycrt for an oprosition move against Castro

. which they believed likely to win broad Sopulee Autos in Cuba,
Perhaps a few governnents such as those in Venezuela and ee

would be more inclined to approve if they had been consulted by

the US in advance, Sone, indeed, would probably be willing to

a

provide ccvert assistance of their own for such a move, par-
ticularly if they were assured that the US gonial commit itself
to overthrow the Trujillo dictatorship in the Doninican Republic.
This last issue is critical to Venezuelan President Betancourt,
whose mcderate leftist government is widely respected in the
henisphere. If Betancourt supported new US noves against Castro
in return for US cornitments regarding Trujillo, a nunber of

other Latin American governnents probably would fall in line.

13. Willingness to go along would be greatly weakened If.
the US role were such as to suggest that the US was imposing a
new regine rather than assisting the Cubans thenselves to settle
their own destinies. | Direct participation of US combat forces
in action against Gast within Cuba itself would cause a
violent and bitter reaction throughout the henisphere, va pipeced
in strongopposition in the OAS and UN. These reactions would
be especially deep and lasting if it apreared that the US was
atten-ting to install another reactionary Betista-type regine

in Cuba,

14, The Latin American reaction would algo be adverse if
: is
the US established a blockade of Cuba in international waters,

though it would probably be less {otense than in the case of

-8 -

US cumbat o.erations within Cuba. At lensst in the absence cf new
and ;ersuasive Cuban ;rovecations, nost Latin American ccuntries
wile conderin a blockade unless it were in su, ort of an arned

insurrection within Cuba of which they stherwise ovpreved.
Reections Elsewhere in the Free Wsrld
ae arene 20 ne. free World

15. The cther free world nations have for the most zart not
been deeply invclved with the Cuban issue. The Western Europeans
have preferred t: let the US handle Cuba as it secs fit, and the
Afro-Asians have taken little note of Cube, which is far fron
their syhere of interest, However, drastic US actions (and
Sceviet counteractions) might create strong opposition by sticu-
lating fears cf general wor and by creating (eeeeaay for the

Afrcesisians) an imzression of ranyvant coloniclisn.

16. The reaction would be ninimal in the case of unobtrusive
US su,pert for an or position attenpt against Castr:. This night
preduce a good deal of cynicisn threughcout the world absut the
US rele, but if quickly successful little cther lasting reaction.
However, an o:eretion in which US particivaticn ies carkedc, or
cne which resulted in ,rolcnged and inconclusive ‘fighting, would:
prebably generate wides.read pressure for moves to internationalize

and contre] the situaticn.

On ym.
oe

ver ete eget wee eee mee ee ee Ft re ree ee eee ee

St TT ee eee i emer ee ee

17. Actual US nilitary intervention in Cuba vould alnost
certainly evoke widespread and vehenent political opposition,
even if carried out so rapidly as to present the world with a
“ foit accompli, It would renind many people of the Soviet
intervention in Hungary, It would provoke o al veiadidets, un
favorable response anong the Afro-Asian nations, who are, like
the Latin Anericans, extremely sensitive to vat they consider
great power disregard for the rights of gmlien nations, par-
ticularly in colonial or former colonial areas, In sone re-
spects the US might be placed in a situation comparable to that
of the British and French at the tine of Suez, with even many
of our NATO allies likely to take the position the US did at

that tine, |

18, Although US imposition of a naval blockade in inter.
notional waters would probably cause somewhat less international
furore than an overt US military invasion of cuba, there would
be widespread rece;tivity, particularly in the Afro-Asian world,
to the likely Castro argurent that the US was trying to starve
the Cuban people into submission, Since nost trade with Cuba
is carried on by ships of other nations, moreover, a blockade ¢

would pose the question of international acceztance in a particularly

-_ 1G -

-—Per-srenst—

acute forn. Even anong these nations shevaiee not particularly
syopathetic to Castro, there would probably be widespread resent.
rent at having their own ships halted and dentna of the US right
to do s0, Although we would not expect military counteraction,
even by the Bloc, there would be great zressure on the US,

diplomatic and legal, to abandon the blockade,

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

Wd oF (uA ZL

ABBOT SMITH |
Acting Chairman

a is

OP ge
