Cuban Policy Toward Latin America -- National Intelligence Estimate
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115453, dated 2 May 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115453).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

@.

, ms
:@)b
:

~ Cs ateal
4
> latelliccace

Lean leat oof

Cuban Policy Toward
Latin America

Natioaa! Intelligesce Estimate

THIS ESTIMATE IS ISSUED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE. y

THE NATIONAL FOREIGN INTELUGENCE BOARD CONCURS,
EXCEPT AS NOTED IN THE TEXT.

The folowing intelligence organizations portidpated i in the preporation of the
Estimate: 3

The Central Intefigence Agency, the Defease ‘leloligence Agency, the National Security
Agency, and the intedigence sroeniiatons of the Departments of Stote, Trecwry, and
Energy.

Abo Participoting:
The Assistont Chief of Stoff for; Comes Department of the Army

The Director of Naval Ini , Department of the Novy
The Assistant Chief of Stoff, inteSigence, Department of the Alr Force
The Director of Int , Headquarters, Marine Corps

CUBAN POLICY TOWARD
LATIN AMERICA

information as of 23 June 1981 was
wed im the preparation of this Estinote.

THE ESTIMATE

Two years ago, Cuba reverted to much more militant support of
revolutionary insurgents, especially in Central America. Castro sees
promising opportunities through the promotion of insurgency to ad-
vance the cause of revolution in the region, restore a sense of revolution-
ary momentum at home, and enhance Cuba's security—by helping
sympathetic regimes come to power in the area and by pursuing policies
to justily and possibly increase Soviet aid and support for Cuba. Serious
domestic economic and political problems and other adversities have
made Castro more rather than less militant on behalf of regional insur-
gents, a reflection of his frustrations over these problems and of the
increased influence of his hardline advisers. Despite Castro's signals of
an interest in reducing bilateral tensions with the United States (par for
- the course with new US administratlons), he almost certainly will not
make any significant foreign policy concessions to improve relations.
Under most circumstances—certainly much short of a danger of
impending US military action threatening his survival—Castro probably
will continue and even expand his support of regional revolutionaries.

Soviet perception of the opportunities in Latin America created by
the revolution in Nicaragua appears to have lagged Castro's. Subse-
quently, however, Moscow not only has backed Castro's return to mili-
tancy in Central America but has stepped up its own efforts to exploit
instability and support Cuban activities in support of Insurgents. Mos-
cow almost certainly will continue to encourage and to underwrite Cu-
ban assistance to Insurgents—to maintain a degree of revolutionary
momentum and to undermine the US position in the region. It also
hopes to keep the United States embroiled in Latin America and with its
allies in Western Europe over how to respond, and to exploit any res-
urrection of the Vietnam syndrome here. Only if the United States were
to raise substantially the costs and risks to the Soviets of their
troublemaking in the region would the Soviets pull back—and that
could be only temporary—from their support for the insurgents, al-
though US political pressures could lead Moscow to be more cir-
cumspect tactically. Soviet circumspection with respect to Latin Ameri-
can insurgencies, however, would not imply any reduction in Moscow's
determination to retain its stake in Cuba. Any US military challenge to

Note. A whsequent edition of this Estimate will include the “Supporting Anstysia ~

the Castro regime almost certainly would bring a major crisis in US-
Soviet relations.’

The Soviet-supported Cuban challenge to US regional interests will
continue to be formidable. Cuha Is supported by the revolutionary gav-
ernments in Nicaragua and Grenada, and usually by Mexico. Prominent
out-of-office leaders in a few other countries have close tles with Ha-
vana. Cuba has strong clandestine networks and sources of support
among a spectrum of nationalists, leftists, and radicals; and socia! and
economic pressures in many countries will present new opportunities
for the growth of pro-Cuban radical movements.

Nationalism and suspicion of US intentions run high in Latin
America, even in the more conservative countries, and have reduced
the ability of the United States to direct events or to mobilize anti-
Castro measures. However, greater US political, economic, and security
involvement in the region—while not likely In the near term to alleviate
substantlally the root causes of instability—could shore up beleaguered
governments, help bring about nonviolent change, and thus reduce
Cuba's ability to gain the advantage.

' A forthcoming Interagency tniclligence paper will assem Soviet Latin American policy la greater detail,
including the awans and instruments that Mancow ases te encourage and support Havana's revolutionary
policies.

&

sat

Latin America always has had high priority in Cu
han forcign policy under Castro, despite substantial
and active Cuban invelvement in Africa and ebe-
where in the Third World. Castro's persistent abicctive
regarding Latin America and the Caribbean has beea
to undercut US influence and enhance his own, ulti
mately through the promotion of revolutionary gov-
ernments that look to Havana for guidance. In addi-
Lion to his commilment to revolutionary causes, Castro
is influenced by his close ties with and dependence on
the USSR, and & driven by his hostility toward and
{ear of the United States: he sees US and Cuban in-
lerests in the region as irreconcilable. In effect, there-
fore, he sces a compelling need to expand Cube's in
fluence in order to curb Washington's freedom of
action to isolate and bring pressure on Havana.

The USSR holds similar objectives loward the re-
gion, though Moscow sees # as a less immediately
important theater of its overall competition with the
United States than does Havana. Because Castro sup-
ports the USSR’s foreign poticy goals generally and
shares its objectives in Latin America specifically, @ is
difficult to assess the extent lo which the USSR influ-
ences Cuba's regional policy. Cuba's extensive activi-
ties and the survival of Castro's regime itself ull-
mately depend on massive Soviet economic and
military aid, and thus on Soviet approval. Because of
the scope of shared objectives, as well as close consulta-
tions with Soviet officials and awareness of the limits
of Moscow's tolerance, Cuba genctally has had consid-
erable latitude in implementing its policies. As a rule,
Castro acts essentially on his own initiative in his home
region, as contrasted with greater Soviet controls over
Cuban activities in Africa and the Middle East. In the
1960s, this led to sharp tactical differences with Mos-
cow over the utility of Cuban support foe weak insur-
gent groups as lo cultivating good relations
with moderate and conservative governments.

During most of the 1970s, while Castro followed the
Soviet line of emphasizing diplomatic and commercial
relations, he never renounced revolulion. Two years
ago—this time with Soviet approval—Cube reverted
to much more militant support of revolutionary Insur-
gents, especially in Central America. At the same time,
Castro has shown greater belligerence toward a num-
ber of ather countries, especially Colombia and Ven-

ezuela. This sharp change in Cuban priorities reflects
Castro's sense of greater potential for resolution
Victories through military force than he had
envisioned before the success of the Sandinistas in
Nicaragua in mid- 1979.

Castro's emphasis on support of insurgencies abso re

fects his frustration over domestic peoblems, Including
a stagnant economy and serious deficiencies in hous

ing. transportation, public services, food, and coms!"

sumer goods. Popular frustration and widespread
hardship have fed the leadership—hardline ckements
of which have been strengthened by Cuban
setbacks—to look to outside Issues such as revolution-
ary duty, the threat to Cuban security, and solidarity
with Third World compatriots as a diversion. New
support fur insurgenctes also grows out of Castro's
limited gains from cultivating tegional governments,
and from setbacks to his International prestige gen
erally as a result of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.

In short, Castro sees promising oppoctunities
through promotion of insurgency to advance Cuban
objectives in the region and to restoce a sense of revo-
lutionary momentum at home when little else seems to
be working to his regime’s advantage.

Despite the USSR's traditional caution regarding di-
rect involvement in Insurgency in Latin America, the
Soviels loo saw greater opportunities for advancing
their interests in the region as a result of the Sandinista
victory In Nicaragua. Beginning in 1980, Moscow nol
only backed Castro's return lo militancy in Central
America but also stepped up Its own efforts to exploit
Instability and support Cuban efforts In support of
Insurgents—particularly through arranging for war
supplies for Salvadoran leftist extremists. If the United
States were substantially to rabse the casts and risks to
the Soviets of their troublemaking In the region, they
would be likely to display for a lime greater tactical
prudence. Moscow would be likely to recommend tac-
tical caution to Havana as well, and to underscore is
strong desire to avoid a US-Cuban military con-
frontation.

Such a shift in Soviet tactics would not imply a
change in long-term objectives to undercul and sup
plant US Influence in Latin America, but simply a
recognition of the obstacles to their ambitions under

&

prewnt power realities in the region Thus, \foscow
alowed certainly will continue to encourage and under:
arite some measure of Cuban assistance to insut-
gcnis—te maintain & degree of revolulionary momet-
tum. and abo to keep the United States embroiled ia
Latin America and with its allies in Western Europe
over how to respond, and to exploil sny resurrection of
the Vietnam syndrome here. Nor will tactical pre-
dence on the part of the USSR necessarily imply aay
reduction in its determination to retain its slake in
Cubs. In fact, Moscow bs likely to see any serious
threat to Cube as a major crisis in US-Soviet relations.
The recent sharp increase in Soviet military shipments
to Cuba probably is intended to make this point, as
well as provide for Cuban retransfer of arms to the
Nicaraguan regime and to regional insurgents.

For their part, Cuban leaders are now more com
cerned about US countermeasures than at any time
since the early 1960s. Castro is not convinced that the
USSR would defend him against US military actions,
especially In the absence of a formal defense treaty
with the Soviets despite his efforts to get one. He sees
Cube as the vulnerable, exposed edge of the Com-
munist world and a prime target for a US counter-
move against Soviet activities elsewhere. His expres
sions of concern during the Invasion of Afghanistan
and the Polish crisis bear witness to his worry. Thus,
since late 1980, the Cubens have given signal of an
Interest in reducing bilateral tensions, peimarily to
avoid punitive US actlons and secondarily to obtain
economic benefits—a tactic they have employed early
in preceding US administrations. Because of current
heightened concern about US intentions, Castro has
temporarily reduced the actual level of his support to
Salvadoran insurgents and might do so to other re-
gional revolutionaries. But his ceepseated antagonism
toward the United States has not diminished; and, as ta
the past, he almost certainly would not make any
policy concessions—including

US relations. In fect, his most likely response to opes
US pressure would be to step up his troublemaking
activities, to throw the United States onto the

defensive.

Outlook

Castro, while mindful of US warnings and Soviet
concern that he avoid actions that would provoke a US
mililary response toward Cuba oc a major US-USSR

crims, probably: will continue over the neat yoae or or
lo peor ide Mrong hacking ta the revolutionan gen cern:
ments and movements Cubs now supports. The focus
of his efforts will be in the Central American and Ca-
ribbean region, albeit with an eye on South America
for opportunities. His assistance earlier this year ta the
M-19 insurgents in Colombia and his pressures on lefl-
ists In other countries to prepare for insurgency prob-
ably indicate that he continues to sce militancy as the
best course for keeping the United Rates at bay ated
for surviving any forceful showdown.

When diplomacy fails to achieve Cuba's objectives
In a vulnerable country, Castro will allempt to exploit
local economic and gocial problems, political instabil-
ity, and points of tensions with the United Sates. This
is done primarily through youth, labor, political, and
cultural organizations that are sympathetic to Cuba,
and frent groups for radical elements. Cuba will abo
make good use of manpower-intensive developmental
assistance to selected countries, earning good will and
propagandizing at the same time. Although Cuba is
hard curtency poor, it can provide personnel-intensive
aid such as doctors, teachers, construction workers,
and disaster assistance. Considerable media and propa-
ganda coverage ts also provided, extolling the virtues
of Cube, the Soviet Union, and Communism, while
criticizing the United Rates.

Use of Cuban combat forces in Latin America to
assist insurgent groups is not anticipated in the near
term. Despite such use in Angola and Ethiopia, Cube
and the Soviet Unlon do not consider the presence of
Cuban troops there to constitute a direct provocation
to US interests as Cuban troops in Latina America
would. The greatest potential for the use of Cuban
troops In the region would be in response to a serious
threat to the Sandinista government In Nicaragua.

Nicaragua. Castro has more influence and prestige
at stake in Nicaragua than he has ever had in 8 Latin
American country. Havana will continue to provide
extensive political, technical, and security support to
solidify the revolutionary regime. Military equipment
and training will be provided by both Cuba and the
USSR. Castro's commitment lo the regime's survival is
so intense that he would be strongly motivaled lo use
Cuban forces to defend the Sandinistas against a serious
external or domestic challenge. Only fear of impending
US military retaliation—especially if backed by urgent
Soviet warnings—would deter him if he conclude!
Cuban intervention could quickly stabilize the
situation.

EI Salcador. The bold expansion al Cuhan support
far beflist eatrenist insurrents during 1980-—specially
prnision of abundant military supplie in conjunction
wath the USSR, Nicaragua. and other countries —ue-
dicated Castro's eagerness to promole another revolu-
tionary triumph. In response lo US pressures, Cube
and Nicsragua have sharply cut back the flow of arms
and ammunition. But other, less conspicuous forms of
assslance have not been similarly reduced: guerrilla
training, combat planning and intelligence support.
Cube will not abandon the Insurgents and, even undet
sharper US pressures, Castro will probably arrange for
sufficient external aid to underwrite the insurgents’
continued potency as a disruptive and destructive
force. He probably would consider a resumption of
more generous and conspicuous support if the insur-
gents gain military and political momentum. He will
also continue his campaign lo discredit US assistance to
the junta in world opinion. In any case, he probably

will increase Latin American and European political
backing for the revolutionaries and thus provide
protection for Havans against US retaliation.

Cuatemala. Castro assigns less immediacy to the
insurgency In Cuatemala, which is not as advanced as
the one in El Salvador. Nonetheless, Cubs will con-
tinue gradually and quardedly to expand its support to
strengthen revolutionary groups If the Salvadoran
insurgents either succeeded in gaining control of the
country of failed outright, Cube would consider
sherply expanding assistance to Custemalan insur-
gents, lo sustain revolutionary momentum In Central

America.

Elsewhere ta Latin America. Casiro will continue
to try to cultivate strong, friendly, supportive relation-
ships with those countries he believes will best benefit
Cuba's interests—for example, Mexico, which has sup-
ported the Nicaraguan Sandinistas and has criticized
US policy in El Salvador. Panama, though seen as 8

less faithful friend, will remain imgggtant to Cubs
” for political, economic rposes. At
the same time, however ro's cult rd line to

ward moderate and conservative governments, to-
gether with his mililancy in Central America, has al-
ready strained relations with Colombia, Costa Rica,
Ecuador, Venezuela, and a number of other countries
in the region, some with which he had previously

sought to improve relations. He probably will increas:
ingly view the hemiphere as polarized between
groups of revolutionary and reactionary governnrents,
increase Cuban criticism and low-risk actions aimed at
undermining most conservalive military reginiex, and
view «most of the democratic governments as
reactionary—with relations either remaining coal of
deteriorating.

A number of factors—including Cuban and Soviet
uncertainty about US Intentions—will tend to restrain
him from pushing confrontational policies even mote
vigorously and widely than at present. He may also he
checked, at least in the near term, by the relative ab-
sence of revolutionary conditions and capabilities in
some larget countries, and by the prospects for legiti-
mate changes in governments in the region thal would
be favorable to Cuba. Moreover, his more pragmatic
advisers are likely to warn thal more confrontations in
the region would undercut Cuban chances for winning
broad support for Central American insurgents.

We nonetheless believe that there fs some chance—
perhaps 20 percent—that Castro, in reaction to serious
new domestic problems or foreign policy setbacks, will
adopt more belligerent policies In Latin America gen-
erally than we have estimated. In such a siluation he
would conclude that Increased hostility with the
United States was incvitable, and would fatalisticalty
accept the consequences of more aggressive pursuit of
revolutionary breakthroughs Cuba would then be
even more eager than it bs now to help leftist extrem-
ists to organize and launch armed revolt, and to em-
ploy purely vengeful and terrorist methods to weaken
regional governments and undermine US interests
Such aggressive policies would tend to undercut Ha-
vana's overall objectives in Central America.

Paradoxically, the more prudent Castro's activities
in support of Latin American revolutionaries, the
more likely Cuba would be to make significant and
lasting gains in the region. By patiently orchestrating
broad political and international support for revolu-
tonary movements, Castro would Increase the costs to
the United States of deterring their success, either in
the target countries of by attempting directly to con-
strain Cuba.

But almost whatever course Castro follows in these

respects, his challenge to US regional interests will con-
Linue to be formidable. Despite Cuha’s many weak-

newes, Ho retains considerable assets for furthering its

interests.

— Massive mililary and economic support from the
Soviet Union.

— It ts supported by the revolutionary governments
in Nicaragua and Grenada, end usually by
Mexico.

— Prominent out-ol-office leaders in Venezuela
and a few other countries have close ties with
Havana, and one of more of them may gain
greater Influence through elections during the
neat few years ‘

Cube has strong clandestine networks and
sources of support among a spectrum of national-
ists, leftists, and radicals throughout the region.

— Mounting social and economic pressures in many
countries will present new opportunities {or the
growth of pro-Cuben radical movements.

— Nationalism and suspicion of US Intentions run
high, even In the more conservative countries,
and have reduced the ability of the United States
to direct events or to mobilize antl-Castro mea-
sures in the OAS of by other means.

Greater US political, economic, and security tn
volvement in the region, while not likely in the near
term to alleviate substantially the root causes of in-
stability and the pressures for change. could work to
reduce Cuba's ability to galn advantage—by helping
to address pressures through nonviolent politics, by
shoring up beleaguered governments, and by caising
the costs and risks of Cuban militancy.
