Meeting no 16, London, 05 May 1961WITH Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012404, dated 5 April 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012404).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

" Meeting #16, London, 5 May 1961

(@) Subject arrived at 2105 hours on 5 May 1961 at Room
360 at“Mount Royal Hotel, London. |

2. G: Did you have trouble getting free from WYNNE and
the delegation? S: We just parted -- he was here Just now
with his wife; we drank whiskey, seid goodbye and he left --
what do we need him for? G: But this evening with the delega-
tion? S: The delegation was here Just now -- everything fe
finished. J: Okay, let's get to work.

3. G: Well now, tell us in detail what haprened with
MERRIMAN. S: 1 am net completely sat’ sfied. G: Why? ©:
Everything went with a four -~ not a five. When one gets m'xed

_ up with an old man -- Both you and: I explained exactly when he
should come, but he was seven minutes late. I went out to meet
him -- you were going out and I speke to you at the entrance.
(Subject had met H and M on the hotel staircase as the latter
were leaving.) You left and he arr‘ved soon after that ‘na
cab. JI led him in and SHAPOVALOV and GENERALOV were waiting for
him. The REZIDENT had decided to introduce both SHAPOVALOV and
GENERALOV. I kept them [n the hall, opposite the restaurant.
The old man arrived seven minutes late and apologized. J had
explained to him and so had you that twenty minutes was’the Iim:t,
but it was impossible to break up the conversation for an hour. I
-got up, said ] was in a hurry, ordered coffee and drank it and
still he stayed. “It wasn't only he -- it was GENERALOV. too. ee
GENERALOV got it from the, REZIDENT for this. He put questions to
him. GENERALOV's eyes Lit up, but MERRIMAN found ‘t d‘fficult te
understand that there would be time for conversation in the future,
that {t was not necessary {ust then -- elthough he had been warned.
- On-the way Il had told him, "Do your best:. Arrange all conversat/ on
~" as guickly as possible and finish” (in English). I explained to
him all this and he said yes, yes, yes -- but he did not understand
me. You told him teo. H: Yes.

: fe &¢ Well, MERRIMAN began to talk about cement -~ every-
thing went well -- we should be thankful. 1 lcoked .at. GENERALOV
~- his eyes lit up -- it seems that he has no acyuaintances -- he
is very passive -- if only his English were better. Then
MERRIMAN stood et the entrance, showed off his siiver things,
smoked a c'yarette, showed us how, he said, nething weuld tarn’sh
it -- corrosion or anything -- 8 whole hrur! As soon as I knew 1
should havr yone and got a taxi. GENEHALOV made a second mistake
and I reported this to the REC IDENT. He offered to take ME-RIMAN
in his operational car -- that s, he let him see the license
number, They are ‘diots -- they dontt know how to work. G: But

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

3 {MAR ‘882

eae eee

oN . ia 4 - ose iy we He
Sie ‘ :
, ; ; : a ae
ae. Peres Be eh Dag Pegg esis se ‘,
Tetebe ‘, r 1 ‘€ : ;
r) : :

#16

this was not 8 minus for you? S: No. I will tell you everything
~~ why am J] dissatisfied? The conversation dragyed on, they were
pushing MERRIMAN -- coffee and more coffee .....° “Why don't yeu ge
i a away?” The hour passed and 1 knew that ANDREWS wes duc to arrive.
an .. ~ This was why I was worried, but he d'dn't know this. ‘I sSynaled
to SHAPOVALOV I wantdd to take him off to the toflet. G:
Couddri*t you just have spoken to him in Russ{an? MERRIMAN doesntt
understand Russian. S: He would have flared up, "I wanted to
Study MERRIMAN further”. JI thought to myself, “there ts time for
| this -- at some lunch, you Yool-<= you were in America, they taught
you, surely you can firtsh this off."
5S. S: Everything at first was excellent. Then someone sat
aa down behind me. I -fclt that he was listen'ng to our ccnversation.
I wondered “f you had given someone the job. G: Not on yeur life}
| St Men Il asked this man, "Excuse me, what time ¢s !t7?" He shcewed
stich me the time -- the man was just an inquisitive passer-by. But this
i "WAS nonsense too -~ We came out tc the street, went te the operetional
car and get ‘n and Just then ANDREWS came by, He saw us and turned
around. What could 1 do ‘n this sftuation? He ceme up and greeted
us,."How are you, Mr. GENERALOV? 1 balieve that you have had an
cperation", and sc on. GENERALOV said to me, “I didn't want to
-- meét ANDREWS again at all. He has seen us with SHAPOVALCV and
MERRIMAN'. JI said, Whose fault is thet? Why did you drag out the
conversation like that -- why do you work so clumsily?’ I will
inform the KECIDENT" .. which I have done. They exchanged visiting
Card’ -- everything was clear, he ca'd. He handed cver the mater al
69 “Goodbye”. Now they took him on further; “To hell with you", I
, thought. I sat with MERRIMAN and SHAPOVALOV with him ir front. We
went about three kilometers and then said goodby: and dropred
MERRIMAN and they arranged t: meet on Friday,

ae 6. S: What !s my request? That MERRIMAN should not tele-

phone on Friday. Let them call and inv’te him. G: Def nitely.
That is clear. St: Tell MERRIMAN his scleres's should get worse
and he should stay away from work; this {s my rejuest. If they do
not ring him, he should wait two or three weeks -- no less.
MERRIMAN did not say everything -- what he did say he said well -- :
a but he salt it tediously. Everything should have been put off until;
oe the next time. And that other fool too cee. Well, we said g-odbye |
to one enother. And ANDREWS told WYNNE he had seen MEERIMAN with
; (Subject's true name) and with others from the Embassy. H: That 1
know already.

Sut Gt Have you seen the REZIDENT sine» then? =: Of course.
We“left MERRIMAN and went to the Fmbatsy to repert oo the PEZIDENT.
At the beg'nnin, GENERALOV ran -ff te the REZIDENT while ZHAPOVALCV

Jee

a)

ed

a

ew

, , Ed

#1E

and Iowrete up @ report on me and on the project, excellently
written .. abeut the work of the delegation with me us leader ~-.
about al] the new information to answer ,uest ons for our national
technical problems. But this is not the point. GENERALOV who ran
to the REZIDENT told him about this und said, "You knew, this is

an interesting old man. I decided to ask him seme things". He

was already preparing him. He said, "some stranger near (Subject's
true name) was sitting: behind us, bes‘de him.” -He also mentioned
that ANDREWS had met us on the way but didn't pay much attent:on ta
this. "Well, so what? We wll use him unwittingly. We will bulid
up an acquaintance w'th him and receive information -- get.te know

, people through him." My re.uest is that the old man shruld do

everything that you say, without taking the Initiative. Initfative
on his part now would be wrong. Hs: It is difficult to work with
the old man. lL: Yes, he should not ring up -- GENFRALOV invited
him to lunch and MERRIMAN returned the nvitation. He should let
them pay first -- the Embassy wiil invite him. MERRIMAN pleased
them -- he conducted himself well, he was interesting, he told
stories. GENERALOV mentioned one of h‘{s ac.vaintances, a Professor
sesees MERRIMAN said, “I know him very well". Everything wes
friegpdly and in balance. MERRIMAN took them in.

*
f.

ot Io will write up my report solidly. If only there had
bee we of this lonuewindedness. The stranger appeared during
the secend half «f the conversation. If only we had not met
ANDREWS. This means that we did not fulf' ll cur plan ent rely .and
properly, if we exam’ne every detafl. Three things should not have
»happened. There should have been no second man r- for all the tine
“at least. He could have ceme at the end. More than half the

, conversation cculd have taken place without him; there should have

been no meet no w'th ANDREWS and there should heave be-rn no such

long<W ndednecs.

Ge You reported all this yourself? S: Yes. After ]
finiNaé the conversation with SHAPOVALGV, I said, “I must gu sce
the REZIDENT; he may have something to say to me about his conse-
wuent decisions". The REZIDENT was asked and he sai¢ very well,
let him come. I went intc the basement ‘n House #3 and reported

t: him. He sa‘d, "Everything Is normal and vocd. We will use him
unw tt noly and we will not give him agent tasks.’ I said, "Well,
I've told yu everythin,"., He said he wuld send a personal letter
with me, wished us a happy Journey and sald that tomorrow I will
see the Ambassador. We shock hands: there was a short conversation
and that was sll. G: You still don't uenew his surname? S: Whom
could ] ask? He didn't give h’s reme. As soon as 1 get back,
within five minutes, 1 will know his surname -- by another channel
and t will be more realistic t: do it this way. But his name and

rt

47,02
‘ . = S

£16

watronym’c 's Lev Sargevevich. Now I] come to WYNNE ....

10. Hs: Now, before we get cn with this can we just ask hew
he explained away, how he had briefed MERRIMAN before these men
(i.e., SHEPAVLOV and GENERALCV) arrived? Gs: (translates). S:
Just as we agreed the day before yesterday. I telephcned and said
that MERRIMAN had invited me home: he had prepared someth:ng and
wanted te say goodbye to the delegation. The whole delegation was
there at first: he took leave of them and left. G: Excellent.
That is a beautiful legend (he explains in Fnglish). The delege-
tion was there for two minutes -- thanked MERRIMAN -- and left.
Everything was normal. H: 1 didn't quyte get how he gave the
brief to MERRIMAN about the cement. Gn th: telephone cnly? G3
(translates). S: When I left Moscow, specialists asked me to
clarify certain questions en cement machinery. H: We know that.
St’ I met MERRIMAN at Oxford’ after we had visited "Edgar Allen".
(George explains in English). S: Today I have remembered a con-
versation. When MERRIMAN was in Moscow he promised the specialists
there that he would send them something and that he would keep fn
touch with them so everything, would go as planned. ;

Gy) 33 Now about WYNNE -- he and I had a conversat on teday
at 1 hours; I was at his place. Gs: Have ycu spent the day
buying your things? ‘: I was 4 long t-me at the Embassy check’ ni
accounts end then I went to the shops. G: Then yeu have done
everything? S: Not everything. I will ask you to hely me in some
things. I've done everything fcr-myself and I've yot the presents
-~ everything has gone well. At 1630 1 wentit<: KYNNEts home. He
said, “Well, let's have & lest drink.” Then he said, “I weuld Like
te invite yeu to supper.” J] sasd that it wes not necessary and I
had te meet the delegation. Then lc said, “Well, then my wife and
I will come and say grodbye« te the delegation. We had « drink cr
two. J] rang from WYNNE's, telling the delegation we were coming in
ten minutes -- everyone arr'ved., Mre. “WYNNE came: we went to the
bar and had « difnk, sat for a couple «f minutes and then they went
off. I went te my room, caltected some jhotographs and catalogues
of where we had been: the others went to do the r pack ni, and then
I came to you. C: How about the receipts? fC: J will tell you. tn
a moment. I had a conversation with “YNNE. He told me that he hac
speken with you and had received Instruct ons. -G: ‘You seid this?
=: No, he told me this since he har ryoken to you t-day. Regard-
ing money, I sa d that in general I am net werons for mney -- that
{t is net necessary te give me meney..e... You see, when t +
necessary toe speak Englisch, I understand WYNNE very well, unl ke

- Well he sa'd, “It1ll do everything, that they ask me te co
and I] only need meney." Oc WYNNE's inood is net a bad one. On

ips

!

|
” |

o

receipts he has given all the Instructions: he has already had
receipts made for all the times we were in, and we will get the
receipts for this hotel tomorrow. G: Excellent.

Ss: 1 have a request. In the morning -- we are leaving
at ll =~ you should tell someone that when all our things are (at
the alrport) nothing should be opened. There should be no
formalities over excess welght. They should take no money and

there should be no talk about this matter there. (H says that

WYNNE will arrange for the payment of any excess baggage. G noints
out that the baggage must be wefghed and that representat‘ves of
AEROFLOT work on this at London Airport.) S$: That will be fine.
I"21l explain that to my people. . ar

7 Gy G: Then about WYNNE. I beseech: you -- do not promise
him afl sorts of things, It is not necessary to make him premises
Which will be difficult to fulfi1i -- You see, this influences hin.
St I did this already in Moscow ~- I told you. Gt JI know, but

. ow It is just not necessary to make him any promises. We will do

what ‘'s necessary -- {f you want something special done, let us

-know and {t will be done. Connections with him are very bed cpera-

tionally. Si I understand,/ but from my side I do not wish to ask
you to do what I promised at the outset. Yesterday .. when 1 said
how 1 felt about the ¢’st of the conversation with him -s G: Now
you cantset your mind at rest. You know ycurseif that you have
taken steps. &: Well, sc much for WYNNE.

ce ik.) sz And we have finished about WANNER haven't wer’
; a should be absolutely quiet ({nactive). What {fs bad about

XN
By, ettuts.

wwe is thet he does notuunderstand me and I do not understand
him. When I safd to him, "You promised -- about steel -- perhaps
you will be coming to Moscow again tc give lectures... You lectured
us very Interestingly {n that field, and so on. Writs us some sort
ef cpen article and we will have ‘t published -- we often publish

WIT think about ft. 1 know MYSOVSKLY (one of our main specialists)

say rockets? H: Because he os a rocket man, you see. G; Because
he 's a s'mple mortal. He does not assess things as you and I de.
He fs not an Intelligence off'cer. S: I understant that heat-
resistant steel is the business of a specialist. Why did he “ay
that? He made the r ears ge up...e.. "What a Whalei™, they thought.

was interested 'n heat-resistant steels for rockets..." ‘hy dic h:

“of , articles by foreign authors on technical questions." He said, "I
MA.

GENEPALCV was shaken -- what @ focl -- straight cut ef
the ctnversation he !nvites us toe leave n his eperational car. And
now -- jt coesn't matter that we met ANDREWS. daes ‘t, or that
ANDREWS told WYNNE? G: No. S$: Good. Just so that you know. 1
Wasn't happy about it. If we had f nished 20-25 minutes earlier,

~Se
“

#16

St Then something else. Are you getting ready a second
Min H: We will give !t to WYNNE who will give 't to him (Sub-
ject) In Moscow. G: WYNNE can do this easily -~ it ¢s only a tiny

thing; he can take ‘t with him and hand jt over -- no problem. %?
Well, 1 wanted to ask. I do not want to keep two Minoxes at home,

I wilt think about it. Hr We could get the Minox in his DLB. ©:

1 have worked this out. You have given me enough film for 1000
frames. To take the Regulations (250-270 pages) with two frames to
@ page -- will need 500 frames. Then 1 will already have used more
then half. 1 am worried about film. Additional film should also

be provided because 1] already have another book to copy. G: The

a of the Regulations are small enough for one frame each. H:’
This is the next question 7 was going to ask him. I propose that he

should receive more cassettes from WYNNE. How many does he think he
‘will be able to take? You see th's is quite important because as

{t {s difficult to get them In otherwise bulky packages like this <«-
as opposed te small messages. How many does he think he will be
able to take from WYNNE so that he has gct a supply for two or three
months2?~(G explains.) °

Sf My number one project is the Field Service Regulat’ ons

ott is very important and interesting end there fs one Book~
let-SY¥ Chief Marshal of Artillery, VORONOV -- a modern evaluation of
rocket forces. This (ts thecretical (there is no description of
rocket’), views on the!r massed employment In miTitery cperations --

a qood booklet. 1t 18 op Secret. Gne can sce ‘t only be pre-

‘Senting & pass. ‘If 1 can work on it, it will. be very interesting.

Then I will have the basic manual and there will be lectures on
ining (intelligence).

t We are giving him twenty films through WYNNE. Now,
idea {mn his own mind -~ what {s his conception as to when
he \would’ want to pass over further material? Does he think that he
willwant to do it at the end of June or July -- that js, after”
Does he want to ¢o ft every month or every two or three
months? How does he consider the situation? (G translates.)

° Let us not waft for many months. 1 have thought about
this. s ig a very goo¢ cuestion. Here ‘s my plan -- I will pre-

I Ve already -~ you will have enough work for a month. I have
thought about the fotlowing suggestion although I did not mention it
before. KING knows me, he ‘nv'ted me when I was Icoking after
WYNNE's delegation. I met h‘m_and hs wife and got to know him well
when 1 was at that fool's -- GQRaugpie. Let KING organize some-
thing and ‘nvite, about ten people from the Committce ( Ua
arranged th:s BARDAK fer 100 y:eople -- with @ negre -- when he got

re€ much as possible before the arrival of WYNNE -~ some of th’s

himself a flat and we went to the flat housewarming /-) Lome
celebration should be arranged -- the birthday of the Cucen's

son and with this as a pretext he could organize. I want to give
you my opinicn as an intelligence officer. I liked Qa -- if he
weld take films and additional material when 1 offer :t to him I
would give it to him ~- with your permission and cn your erders.
H: No. $: No? Then another man at Siw s place? H: ees

man -~_ cur man.

S: Or at ts. But 1 do not want to workwith
. He We dontt want you to either! S: He kept my.
packet’ for two days. After. this they ranghhim up -- now a newspaper
and now a question from the Committee through that Interpretere
secretary of his -- I gave you his name -- a Russian who works tn
the Ist Directorate (KGB) (--half these people should be chased cff,
They are informers.) His neme 's SENATOROV. Without doubt,
WME, already knows that 1 have been in England for 16 days. He is
no fool and he knows that we will definitely have been active ih
the tactical and strategic fields. He understands this without
| your werds or questions. He knows thet I’ am in England. He knows
1 of the wishes which I admitted to him. G: He did not understand
| your wishes-since he did nothing -~ He is a complete fool! S: He
, understood everything. He even asked me whether I wanted to Live ‘n
the Soviet Union or to defect (ILI K NAM YEKHAT'). Jt Oh really?
f. Thatts a new one. S: I told the man everything ahout why I was
making the requests -- and he understood ¢varything, but you are
right -- he fs 4 cemplete fool.

i

+ Can we just go back to MMR fora moment? © Under no
ciregq dnces must he attempt to say anything or pass anything to
KING fr Sum arranges an invitation for members of the Comittee
then he must only act when & man makes himself known to him. (G
interprets.) St And what will you say te this man?) Gs: He will
have the signal (Note: A tie-clasp had been given to Subject and an +
identical one would be worn by anyone whe was to contact him.) “S$: .
What will you tell this man? I will walk around, lock at everything
w- all the rooms yo [nto the kitchen, te the teilet. Your man
should watch me. I will contrive @ situation 'n which 1 am alone end
I will give him a package of exposed f!lm. G: He will be our own
trusted man and no one else will know. Ss: Cnce he has them, that's
all. Then it {s your business. Has MMP aiready been warned that
he should keep silent? ~-because he knows everything regarding
hime onc OM. OH: I know. J have done this. S$: Will (ae

interfere? Gt No. ©: QQMMMMMwill keep vulet. G:
Absolutely. ‘£: That's clear.

a? | | | | a : = | , , , | : ee

Q) H: He only wants to handover, then, at the meeting?

Does rule out any question of the lady with the-pram and all
that? G: Ch no, now H: I should like to get back to this time
factor. (G interprets.) S&S: There will be new mater:al frem me
each month -- sometimes a large quantity, sometimes less. But you
cannot invite me to an Fnglish funct!on every month. I must he
asked tc the Australian, English -~ and if I become deputy to the
head of the section -~ to the American (Embassies). I can be
invited by the Australians, the English, and the Canadians -- once
by each in every three months, without repetition by anyone in
that time.

G: It is possible that you will be ‘nvited once in two
mon on an average. St No. I don't want te keep material. for
two months. H: Once a month. That's all I wanted to know, because
if we are going to use this ploy during the summer, using the lady

'in the park with the pram, I have to give her instructions how
often she has to be there == this is the whole point I want to get
at. (G Interprets.) S: This is my suggestion: on the first
Sunday of each mohth -- st different places, the f‘rst place woul! be
where I suggested -- opposite the statue of REPIN. Can she go out
walk’ng with the child in the evening? G:.No, It would not be nor-
mal. H: “And she will only push the children cut -n the pram in the
ijmediate rayon where she lives. She can't push it 211 over town
without taking a car. Ss: Doesn't she take the child out for air .
before {t goes to sleep? (G interprets Hts remarks.) S: The park

is a different matter. G: She lives "perhaps two or three biocks
from the park; she can sit or walk in the park. It w 11 always he
ina park. But in which park? -- the one net. far from her flat.

Gad

Ye St: 1 have a question. Suddenly 1] have an urgent message

| «- Like the cecasion when Marshal ROKCSSOVSKIY was sent to the
Trans~-Caucasus and VARENTSCV was there -= all the rockets were pre-

pared and ready to fire at Turkey -- this happened. If something
— like this ‘should happen == how cculd I keep silent? Through what
:; channel could I inform you?. H: This is a thing on which I propose
os . te give him instructions through WYNNE. At the moment we have made
(3 6Aane)} ‘arrangements so that we can tell him that we have left a message in
. h’s TAINIK, but we have net yet given him any [nstruct‘ons on the
return method. I am heping te be able to lay on @ drill Involving
~  & telephone call at a given time cn a given day cnce a week, so
‘that he can tell us to go and clear the dead drop, but only once a
week, What I pr pose should be arranged, if he agrees, {s that he
should be able to deliver more bulky mater'al such as Minox
cassettes or anything else once @ month but he should be eble te
inform us of something short which he can write down and put in his
small] dead drey once a week. But that I will only arrange after
WYNNE hes gotten back. (G interprets. H: I am hoping te have 411
this arranged so that I can send In the ‘nstruct‘ons thrcugh WYNNE.

t

'-10-

flo : | az

“

S: That is very good. But one must foresee this -- for
what could happen? The Marshals and everyone go somewhere -- this
" 18 the very bas!s of cur work, All else 4s geod snd important, but
st! ft such a situation might arise. ROKOSSCVSKLY and VARENTSOV and
a another one --I-mentioned him, a General -~ at ready. They. were
a} easy to. strikeddana. j G: Well then, the radio and the Minox will be
N ae ie Embassy~at #1 readiness and the films will be handed over to
a" you by WYNNE with a message from us. S: Then this ts all agreed,
and I will be told, when you work it out, how to contact you fn an
emergency but only when I have something of real importance to
report -- such as the removal of KHRUSHCHEV or the imminance of
»military action. H: Or only !f he himself knows, for instance,
‘that he fs going to Canada then he should use [t for that sort cf
purpose because the sooner we know, the better we can arrange things
.-~ as well as critical intelligence. (G translates.)

my

“30. “He I would still like to come back to these twenty films,
because the biggest problem, which we have not yet really tackled
is how to re-supply him. You see, we can pass him messages through
the small DLB but there is a much more difficult problem cf re-
supply to him of Minox films and, therefore, 1 would really prefer
(although we don't expect him, Heaven knows, to use more than twenty
| films a month) to:vcive him a larger supply when we have e safe
| Opportunity through WYNNE than to have to run risks tn order tr get
supplies to him. J would much sooner give him a three<month supply
{f he can hide it rather than to do {t through other hands. (G
translates.)

31. £2 Then we should hide them fn shirts cr !n some good
, flat box -- a cigarette box or something like that. G: On the
subject of the radio set, that ‘s also what I have on mind -- if ycu
could have {t hidden. S$: I cannot do that strasght away. The
dacha is not mine. There are people there, the clandestine situa-
tion {8 poor. Now something else I should like your advice on --
perhaps J] can rent a dacha frem someone who has to go: abroad ~-
z suddenly for a year -- perhaps 1 could even buy cne on credit --
: why should I buy cne if 1 am going away? H: That {s not necessary.
' G: If you get the chance of renting a Dacha, by:all means gc ahead.
* St On a Dacha I could do: some digging, plant some flowers and make
as caches and not even a dog could find them ~~ if they suspected me
even, G: Are you thinking cf sne near town where you can yo
ee easily? <2: Of courge one can gc to a Dacha in the winter, and
there I would have my cwr recom. Gr And yeu would go to work from
there datiy? ‘S: Rerhaps sometimes, but net every day. But in
[summer one can live there the whole time and cr to work every day
iv~ We are ellewed te de this in the summer. G: But cnly during
vacation time? You would have tc go inte town by train when you
are work'ng? Wouldn't jt be far cut? S: It could be es much as

'

-ll-

i "Maine 7.

7

‘VARENTSOV receives 10,000 old rubles (or 1000 new rubles). He

a

OKRUGI). Colonel-General SHTEMENKG was appointed to deputy
commander of an OKRUG. G: Up to the present moment? 4: Yes. I
know this. G: And Chief Marshal of the Air Force, GCLOVANOV?

Has he retired? S: He {6 not working now; he has ret red. G?

For @ long time? S: Yes, I have net heard of him for a long time.
G? pre caueL w~ Whatiis he doing? $1: I'11 tell you about him.
Now almés of them are.in Moscow. G: MALENKOV too? S$: Yes.
I was told that he had been seen there recently. KAGANOVICH lives
not far from VARENTSOV, on the Frunge embankment -- he often walks
along the embankment with his wife and can be met there. MOLOTOV it
very ?11 at the moment. G: He is in Austria? S$: Now he is back.
He was {n Mongolia, fn Ulan Bator. G: Then they. sent him to

Vienna. Sz. Yes. Now he ts ‘n Moscow. He !s very ‘ll and 's under

treatment. MALENKOV is ‘in Moscow. SHEPILOV often walks along
Gorkiy Street and was seen not long @g6, He looks flourishing and

.'8 well dressed, they say. I saw him also. Where they work I do

not know. G: How abotit KIRICHENKO? “S: He Is retired, in Kiev.
G: And ZHUKOV? S: He l¥vea in Moscow on Grancvskaya Street
beside the VOYENTORG and opposite the Krealin hospital. Marshal
SOKOLOVSHIY lives there too. His {s a large house with huge
apartments in it. ; ; : |
S:  ZHUROV lives most of the time at a Bacha cut along
phe Riblevskiy Shotese. By order of the Council of Ministers he was
piven a pension of 550 (new) rubles. G: That's 4112 ©: It's a
hisgrace, According to the regulations, a Marshal has ne right to
retire. He Is listed as continuing to work actively -- like BUDENNY,
whe does nothing, Dut who has sn office in the grey bulliding on--:
Antiplevskiy Alley -- a house with a large tower. He has his office
there ~~ a Colenel is his Aide. Sometimes he comes ta large lec-
tures -- I have seen him. He enters, works on Command Training. He
has & phone to the Kremlin but he does nothing. He receives h s
full salary as a Marshal -- since the last reform he receives 1200
new rybles a month. G: Is he higher than ZHUKOV? S: Yes. .
received more but they have cut him down. The Council of Ministers
decided to ret‘re ZHUHOV. I saw the order -- ‘f I had had a Minox
you could have had a photograph of it!” It wes-:signed by KHRUSHCHEV,
and witnessed by the Ministers -- GORKIN was Secretary of that time.
It read, "The Ministers of the USSR acree to the request «f G S.

‘CHUKOV, Marshal of the Soviet Union, that he should be ellcowed to

retire", A special resolution can remove a Marshal or creste
Generalissimo -- and this was a special resolution. Then later there
were timilar resolutions on KONEV, on SOKOLOVSKIY and on TIMOSHENKCG
and like ZHUKOV, the!r pensions were set at 5500 rubles. But ZKUKCV
had money, from savings. A minist«r rece‘ves 2500 rubles.

The head cf the General Staff recef{ves 2600 rubles. Th
commander of & branch cf service -- & Marshal cf the -eviet Unien

#16

ie like BIRYUZOV of the PVO received up to 1800 rubles. VARENTSOV
ae got 1200, now it is less -- everyone gets less now. KHRUSHCHEV
‘ said, “They have grown very fat. We cannot create intellectuals

Jy Veo | gad capitalists like this ee" and so on. But Marshal ZHUKOV --
He saved his money and as Minister he had a representation
allowance. So he had his savings. A Marshal of Tanks ~- 4

3 Commander -~ received 1800 rubles. Such Commanders, Chief Mar-

Bn shals and Marshals of the USSR, or a Chief Marshal in charge of

- arms of service, ordinary marshals like VARENTSOV in aviation or

tanks got 1200 a month. When my father-in-law died -- this is how

1 know this in such detail -- his wife received 75,000 (old)

to rubles. AtMajor General's widow got 50,000; A Colonel-General's

: : widow -- 100,000; a Marshaits widow still more. Now if anyqne

= important dies, the widow receives 10,000 -~ not bad +-- 100 new

= rubles! That is not a pension but a single payment to cover

funeral expenses, My mother-in-lew received 2500 (old) rubles a ‘

4

month for herself and for htr son VALYA, the brother of my wife.
Now he has come of age and gets ‘nothing. The son of a dead -
eneral and she gets 80 rubles. She lives on her savings. She has
£000 (new) rubles left. This is how they save billions for rockets.
Any complaints and the little bit wIlI be taken away. “But all are
restlk&Ss -Ctone ‘says to-ea trusted fr‘end -~ KHRUSHCHEV should drop
dead,the SVOLOCH, and that FURTSEVA should be drownédsand we will

i

|

+ kill that Minister ZVERYEV who has been recently made a deputy.

i. 42. Gs: Do you know a General of Artillery, MUSATOV7. S: 1

- know many Artillery Generals but I do not remember him. G: ‘Or

Colonel! SHUBNIKOV? -S: SHVEINIKOV?.. -- He has just become Major
General and 's In command of Persdnnei. G: No. SHUBNIKOV. S:
There is no SHUBNIKOV -- there is a SHUBIN. SHVEINIKOV, a Major
General, is in the Artillery, is jn command of the Cadre Directorate

of the Greund Foroers.

Ga 43. Gt Do you know YASTREBOV and SERGEICHUK, who are ‘con-
cerned with the delivery of the arms outside the Bloc? S$: The —
names are quite correct and exact -- there are such colonels. They
work in GAU.
— . Gz: Do you know any of the people who have designed new
Lee .,{ - tanks, artillery pieces, and so forth, and who have received
A an prizes for their work? S: There was a great inventor ~~ DYAKONOV,
a Colonel of the Engineers. He invented a good howitzer, he was
from the conventional artillery. Now everyone has gone over into
rockets. I_know about ten of these people but I have forgotten
A

thelr names. All their portraits, with underneath a description of
what they Invented, are in the Academy, There is a gallery of oil

paintings of “artillery inventors --"I“cculd simply look at them
and copy.them for you. In the Dzerzhinskiy Academy there is a hall

ee: ee

: . : ‘ ‘ || |

73. S: GRU radio operator or driver. (K-126)

7h. S$: Why do you not want to receive from me tomorrow
evening # signal to show that all is well? G: We want tc know
that everything :s alright at work, as well as with you personally.
£3: If everything {fs not alright, I will turn up at the American
or British Embassy! G: Don't run te an Embassy. S: Where to
then? G: It is better to go to esnother country. 5S: How could
I get to another ccuntry? This is something else we must think
about. If I cannot go to an Embassy, Can J stop a diplomatic car?
I know the car numbering system. J: Let me explain. While the

Soviet authorities de not have the right to enter an Embassy,

|
|
|
|
|
|

they can stop any car, diplomatic or mot. It is impossible to
go frem an Embassy to an airport. (6G interprets.)

%

& S: When ] was studying at the Rocket Academy there was
an i Ttant order and a number of discussions. One of cur stu-
dents, in the rocket faculty --there_was already a rocket faculty,
the hth facult of which the Deputy was GR » who is now In DDR.
PETRENKO was t e Chief, a Colonel; now he {s ea General, The stu-
dent went by the “UDARNIE® cinema; saw 8 foreign car stop and was
asked in broken Russian and English, ‘where {s America House?”

Ue said, “I know. I will show you " and he got in the car, say~
g, “Go that way.” The militia saw that the car had a diplomatic
P. on it and then sawa Soviet military uniform In the car. They
opped the car as the first cressreads with a red signal; stopped
he car and pulled him cut. He was thrown out of the Academy
nd was reprimanded along Party lines. This was done &s an example
cg everyone else. All he wanted to do was to show them the way.
he foreigners .(.in.the car) were not detained. The foreigners .--
ere going to America Hous<, perhaps as tourists. Gs: Can anycne
ot S: Yes. This was one thing that happened. It would be al-
ight if there was obvious danger, but to live there endlessly --
‘that for? If ] stop & diplomatic car, I sheuld do so ina suitable
place, like by the Ukraine where one goes under the bridge where
the gate is. 1 kmow many places where one could stop a car with-
out being seen by the militia; unless, of Course, they were cpenly -

followed. Then I know that I could get to the Amer‘can cr British

Embassy at great speed. 1 know,however, that they would net let
me cut of the country. They weuld ‘nveke an alarm that 4 General
Staff Officer disappeared and all front.ers would be closed!

@) S: When I was at the Academy :n 1952,an Air Force Colcnel,
whe waS an instructcr in special training, went cut of his mind. He
went off drinking and neither his family ner anyone else could find
him. He went te a friend at a remote place and ceroused with wesnen.

22

The Minister was Informed a@nd he ordered the frontiers closed,
There was a special patrol, because they thought that he might
try and get an aircraft and fly cut. This was done as a pre-
caution. Then he re-appeared. He was reprimanded, dismissed,
and put on 4@ pension. He was one of my Inetructors. Well,
one would just have ta sit in the Embassy and Live.

77. Gt: Do you know the LOTKOVs -- father and son? The
father is a Colonel and he was an instructer, S: I know him
very well. He was an instructor, but not his son.

S: Anyway, I do not think that this danger exists.
G: B it {s better to know beforehand what tc do. S: Of .
course. J: The point ‘s this -- we consider him ours. There
is no question cf that. The fact ramains that the Soviets dé
not. The fact also remains that we do not have planes that fly
in-regularly. Even if we did, only tte Embassy itself is con-
sidered extraterritcrfal,. It Is not that wedon't want to helr!
(G interprets) Gz: My advice waid be that !f you suspect any-
thing, you should try -- together with your family -- to get
tc East Berlin under some pretext. S: They would not allow it.
If a thousand tourists are going, they check ten thousand and
_ reject nine thousand. H: The pofnt is surely this, to take it
very realfstically. If they knew what he is doing, they would
not give him the opportunity t< get tc an airport. But If he
feels that there might be somefsuspicicn, which they cannot preve,
then he stops immediately in order te allay their suspicions. If
they know he !s not going to get a chance tc run away anyhow.
If they are suspicious, he must stop work. (G interprets. }

C5) S: There can be nc question cf gcing to an Embass
under y circumstances. They would catch me immediately. Bint
if, in the case of danger, I could stop a diplomatic car at some
favorable spot...G: Then where would you go? To the Embassy --
and then what? There would be discussions and so forth and they
weuld demand that you be handed beck as a Soviet citizen. It. is
better tc devise beforehand a plan fer getting somewhere tc safety
by secret means ~~ to a frontier, the Finnish frontier,whichever.
ig nearest. J: George, I think this has a bearing on a very ma
portant point. This {5s why we have bean stressing from the very
beginning that security is the most fmportant factor. We would
rather not see him or hear from tim frr one year than risk his
neck in any way. (G interprets.) S: How can I endanger myself? ~
1 shall photcgraph se carefully that no one will knew. I will

23

ne me /¢ Ep4G, 196] a
“435, sk A KGB officer (T-46). This Js an exce}tent
photo group.

136. S: A\GRU officer who now works in/the Information
Directcrate (T-:7).

137. St MM GRY Strategic Intelligence officer (T=-}8).

138, S$: Now works !n my group of S68 under ROGOV . A
paval man. He finished at the Academy with me (T-9).

139. Ss A Strateg e Intelligence GRU officer (T-56).
iho. Sz A Strategic Intelligence GRU officer (T-58).

1hi. Ss: A GRU office o now works inthe Information
Directorate (T-62). :

142. St This is BELAKH {T-63).

1h3. S: This man/now works in the Operational Directorate
of the GRU (T=66).

Wh. S: This/man {s in the Information Directcrate. (T-67)

1h5. S: ZACULIYA. He was throw cut and now he is fn
Afghanistan as gxssistant to Vasya FOKIDKA. He finished at
the Academy w! me. He ff in the Air Focce. He was fh India.
J: Yuriy? Sy Yes (T-75).

116.5: A naval officer who finished atthe Academy with
me (T-77). We have gone through my whole classNit seems tc me
by now ‘

ih7. Jt These are all. Ss: Yes, this was a fine set of
phetographs. (This ended the operational phase cf the lest meé
ing.) $: If this ends everything fer me tonight -- tcmorrow I
will run in to say goodbye for Just a few minutes. Iwill be.
here at 1615 exactly. .

-

is8. Toatts in wine were drunk tc Subject; grap photograrns
were taken with e Polaroid camera with Subject and cne cf each
participant Individually.

1h9. S: JI believethat in this forst phase cf our associa-
tion wehave werked intensively and have achieved productive md
valuable results. .

25

| on

#16

150. Subject discussed Georgian wines such as NAPEREULI,
SVILULY, etc. and said that KHRUSHCHEV had ordered these names
to be discarded andreplaced by numbers since all the Georgian

names were those of princes.

151. St There {8 a very nice girl here at the hctel
but I had no time to get acquainted with hér. Here ts her
picture (her name was Valerie Williams, one of the hotel
receptionists). I asked her if she had a photograph of
herself, She said, "No." So I gave her ES and askech her tc
have her picture taken. G: Just for’memories sake. She
took the money and this morning she gave me this photograph
and wrote this nice letter. She explained that it {is for- |
bidden for employees to go out with guests andshe seht her
best wishes. You see how I spent the last of my pounds!

152. A toast of best wishes for success and for Subjects
well being and security was drunk. J: Now bade Stbject fare-
well since he was to leave early in the morning. Subject
embraced J (which gesture was repeated next morning for the
other three participants). Subject carefully packed the various
items he wag to take with him after they had been checked.
Subject put all compromising material in a coat pocket,

153. J wished Subject"all the best" on behalf of his gov-
ernment and himself and stated that these meetings would be cnly
the beginning of a long and fruitful association.

15h. Subject stated thatwthis@ssociat{onywould continue
until the end of his days and “hoped that allwould meet again.
He said that he was now completely at ease. He added’ the
request that he should be protected and promised to fulfill
all his missions. esd

155. Subject departed at 0045 hours on the 6th of May 196r.

30
