Memo from Richard Helms to Director DIA Concerning Military Thought: IntelligeE
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012300, dated 2 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012300).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1.3(a)(

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "Intelligence - to the Level
of Modern Demands", by Major-General Ya. Malakliov

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which

appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal "Military Thought" ("oyennaye Mysi") published by the.
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander. :

2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of
any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

Hh ae. tin MO OX a RICHARD HELMS _
we ee 4 ro. = iz . 2 at Pog

Enclosur ae Ps ;
| | 1.3(ayay

a =
APPROVED FOR RELEASE | |

3 0 JUN 1992

1.3(a)(4)

Original:

ccs

4.3(a\(4)

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

Military Assistant to the..President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Bead Ventene s: U. S. Air Force

Director of Special: Investigation
Inspector General, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

_ Director, Division of Intelligence -

Atomic Energy Commission
Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation

Chairmen, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee |

Deputy Director for: ‘Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates

Assistant Director for Current Intelligence

Assistant Director oe Research ann Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

4.3{a)(4)

dla)

4.3(a(4)

COUNTRY : USSR
: /
SUBJECT / | MILTTARY THOUGHT: "Intelligence - to the
' Level of Modern Demands", by Major-General
Ya. Malakhov
DATE OF INFO: January 1961

APPRAISAL OF

CONTENT : Documentary

SOURCE : A reliable source (B).

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled
"Intelligence - to the Level of Modern Demands", written by
Major-General Ya. Malakhov.

This article appeared in the 1961 First Issue of a special
version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl (Military
. Thought). This journal is published irregularly and is
classified TOP SECRET by the Soviets. This issue was consigned
to the printer on 13 January 1961.

Headquarters Comment: Until some time after 1958, operational

and tactical intelligence operations and training reportedly

were coordinated by the” Operations Directorate of the Chief
Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff, Soviet Ministry 4 3ta)(4)

of Defense. Se Headquarters Comments 1 and 2 on page
“12 of ceranasibe a ,

ame 8

ele

1.3{a)(4)

4 3teNt6) ;

Intelligence - to the Level of Modern Demands

by
Major-General Ya. Malakhov

Lieutenant-General M. Kochetkov's article, "The
Elimination of the Lag in Operational and Tactical
Intelligence"~ touches on a series of problems, :
the practical solution of which has important

significance in raising intelligence to the level of
modern demands.

While we entirely share the author's opinions on
the basic tenets of the article, we should like to
state some views on this problem.

Recently, both in the pages of the military press
and at the critiques of command-staff exercises and
troop exercises, there has been repeated talk about
raising the role of intelligence, about its exceptional
significance for the achievement of success in combat
and in operations,. and about the lagging of intelligence
means (sredstvo razvedki) behind the means of destruction.
Unfortunately, however, in practice, nothing is being
done to bring the potentialities of intelligence into
accordance with the demands which present themselves
_ aiid with the tasks which confront it. oo
; In our opinion, this results from the fact that
there is no single intelligence organ (razvedyvatelnyy

organ) in the Soviet_army to direct operational and
tactical intelligence in the military forces. ~

1. Special Collection of Articles of -— | 4 Stayi4
"W4litary Thought", Second Issue, 1960. — 7 {4}

. Oe)

1.Bfa)4

In actual fact, the Chief Intelligence Directorate
(Glavnoye Razvedyvatelnoye Upravleniye - GRU) of the
General Staff has no such organ, and its guidance is
limited to agent and radiotechnical intelligence in.
border districts and in groups of forces.

The intelligence department of the Main Staff
(Glavnyy Shtab) of the Ground Troops does not direct
operational intelligence in the districts on a daily
basis, but at operational-strategic command-staff ’
exercises and maneuvers the reconnaissance detachment’
(razvedyvatelnyy otryad - RO) of the Main Staff of the
Ground Troops prepares the appropriate materials for
critiques and draws conclusions on its state. .

This all results in the fact that the supervision.
of the training of personnel and of the activity of
operational and tactical intelligence are carried out
at the center by several chiefs, and are in essence
uncoordinated by anyone. Thus, for instance, the
chiefs of. intelligence of border districts receive
directives from several chiefs of directorates and
departnents of the Chief Intelligence Directorate,
from the chief of intelligence of the Main Staff
of the Ground Troops, from the Chief Directorate of
Combat Training and sometimes also from the headquarters
of troops of the Antiaircraft Defense (Protivo-
Vozdushnaya Oborona — PVO) of the Country. Each is
interested, not in the state of intelligence in the
district as a whole, but only in individual questions
which concern their department (vedomstvo). This
seems to be the only way in which one can explain a
situation in which the problematical questions. of
intelligence are not resolved. Moreover, we still
have no manual of military intelligence, .or technical
means for reconnaissance against nuclear/missile
weapons, or appropriate means of communication, while
the methods of intelligence employed by the troops
are extremely primitive and do not ensure the solution
of this complicated pice

Se l1.3aya)

7,3{a)(4) |

1.2a(4}

The absence of a single organ for the supervision
of operational and tactical intelligence in districts
results in the fact that the resolution of even simple
problems takes years. For example, combat reconnaissance
patrol vehicles (boyevo-razvedochnaya dozornaya
mashina — BRDM) began to reach the troops in 1958, but
the problem of installing a machine gun and optical
observation instruments in them has not been decided to
this day.

It is known that no new technical means of Zi
intelligence will give good results if there are
not well-trained personnel to use then.

The Commander-in-Chief of Ground Troops, Marshal
of the Soviet Union V. I. Chuykov, at the critique

of the command~-staff exercise "DON", explained: :
"Equipment in itself, no matter how perfect, will not
ensure the radical improvement of the state of .
intelligence. Commanders and staffs at all levels |
must learn the correct way of organizing intelligence’
practically and of directing it continuously”.

Meanwhile, intelligence officers, who would know
intelligence equipment well and who would know how
to organize and carry out intelligence in modern *
operations, are not being trained properly in the
military-educational institutions.

The higher intelligence courses for intelligence
officers, the intelligence faculty of the Academy
i/n M.V. Frunze, the intelligence sections of the
Academy of Armored Troops and of the Air Forces .
‘Academy, as well as the Military Institute of Foreign
Languages, have been disbanded. It seems that in the
existing higher military-educational institutions very
Little attention is devoted to the training of officers
in the intelligence field. There are, therefore, .
frequent cases of officers who return to the troops
after graduating at these institutions without even
elementary knowledge, not to mention ability, in the
organization of intelligence.

aes be 1
mz

me 1.3{2)(4)

All of this has resulted in the fact that only a
limited number of intelligence officers with
specialized academy education remains with the troops.
The situation with regard to intelligence officer
personnel can be illustrated by the example of the
Belorussian Military District. Of all the intelligence
officers in the district, starting with the intelligence
chief of a unit and higher, only 20 percent have
graduated from higher educational institutions. At
the same time, in the last three years only one officer
has come from an Academy for intelligence duty with
the troops of the district. All of this makes it
necessary to select for engagement in intelligence
duties officers who have neither theoretical training
nor practical ability in this work, which in -turn ©
affects the quality of the intelligence training of
the troops and the combat training of intelligence
subunits.

In our view, there is an urgent need for the
serious reorganization of the training and advanced
training of the intelligence officers of all types
of armed forces and of all arms of troops.

In the training of intelligence officers, in our
opinion, attention should be given,first of all, to
the study of the technical means of intelligence and to
their potentialities, to modes and methods of organiz-

atayay

ing and executing reconnaissance against. nuclear/missile -

weapons, and to knowledge of the organization,
armament,. tactics, and operational art of the probable
enemy. Taking into account the fact that there are
almost no well-trained interpreters with the troops,
and that the military—educational institutions are

not training officers who know foreign languages, it
is advisable that the training of officers who are
proficient in foreign languages should be organized.

We share completely the opinion of the author
of the article on the revival of intelligence in the
arms of troops, but the solution of this problem —
in the sequence of the headquarters of a front-army-
division must lie not through the channel of chiefs

4.2(ayiai

of intelligence of the appropriate commanders of arms
of troops, but in the inclusion of such specialists
in the intelligence sections, departments, and

. directorates of the combined-arms headquarters. We
consider this method more expedient, firstly, because
in the conditions of modern combat time (not in hours
but in seconds and minutes) acquires primary
Significance, and this demands the shortening to the
minimum of the channels (instantsiya) along which
tasks for, and information from, intelligence organs ~~
pass; secondly, because, in order to evaluate the
situation properly, all information must flow to a
single organ, which would collate, accumulate, and
analyze it and draw the appropriate conclusions

and thirdly, because, ‘as Marshal of ‘the Soviet
Union V.I. Chuykov pointed out at the critique of

the exercise "DON, "Only the combined-arms headquarters
can plan intelligence activity purposefully and can
utilize, for its execution, the various forces and
means, taking into account their capabilities and

the conditions of the situation".

It is most necessary to review and to. strengthen
technical equipment as a means of obtaining intelligence
data, as well as the organs concerned with their
processing. Let us take, for example, radiotechnical
intelligence units (OSNAZ). These are of low mobility
because of the bulk of the intelligence equipment
which they carry and, perhaps, are simply not suitable
for operations under field conditions.

- As is known, the commanding officers of motorized-
rifle and tank divisions, and the commanders of combined-
arms and tank armies, have received and have at their
disposal long-range missile means of destruction, but
so far they possess absolutely no forces or means capable
of carrying out intelligence to the. possible depth of |
fire-destruction of targets.

We ‘consider that each sucanaine officer (coumandee)
must have at his disposal the forces and means necessary
to assure continuous and vigorous conduct of intelligence,
at least to the depth of the range of fire of the means
available in the pompees aan of a given unit, large unit,

or formation.
ane
mm

4.3{a}(4)
