Thesituation in the Caribbean Through 1960
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132418, dated 2 November 1959.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132418).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

5 FS i
Caren Poet

MISLED

A
¥.

ire)

rer

28 DED UEe Ter
is EEE Teen
i aNtehitea? Op OTS Of;
ig eat 6 vs
tf

ae ¥
eclors Ot ra 3
ty LAER Sin AR Bt ag
Assistant Chietrore
oe Rage at s faeecx et

INieTHO

0)
os

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM .
CONCLUSIONS
DISCUSSION
I. THE SITUATION AND OUTLOOK IN CUBA .

A. The Present Situation .
Introduction as. 2
The Communist Party .
The Government .
The Military .
Organized Labor . ,
The Economic Situation .
Foreign Policy .

B. The Outlook. .
The Regime .
The Communists .
The Opposition
The Economy...
US-Cuban Relations “at
Other International Relations .

Il. THE SITUATION ELSEWHERE IN THE CARIBBEAN .

A. Introduction

Panama

. Guatemala bee et eat ae oe Oe Go Ee a ey
eANICATACUG: oe ok Ge BR Bi yotey  e-k, poe ao ge
- Dominican Republic . : rare

. Haiti . i a

. El Salvador . .

. Honduras .

Costa Rica

en LORE ReRon::

ANNEX—ESTIMATED MILITARY STRENGTHS

Page

TODD tn om I w & © Dw

nll

THE SITUATION IN THE CARIBBEAN THROUGH 1960:

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects for political Stability in the Caribbean in 1960 with
particular reference to Cuba, Panama, and Guatemala.

CONCLUSIONS

Cuba

1. Barring his assassination, we believe
that Fidel Castro has at least an even
chance of remaining in power through
1960. Neither the deteriorating economic
Situation nor the growing but disor-
ganized opposition appears likely to pre-
sent a serious threat to Castro’s position.
If he were eliminated, Rail Castro and
Che Guevara—both staunch pro-Com-
munists if not actual Communists—would
probably assume control. However, it is
unlikely they would be able to maintain
control for long and Cuba would almost
certainly be in for a period of violent po-
litical upheaval and terrorism. (Paras.
14-16, 24, 29-31) \

2( Communist influence will almost cer-
tainly continue to increase in 1960, largely
as a result of the influence the Commu-
nists exert through Raul Castro and Che

*This estimate supplements SNIE 80-59, “The
Situation in the Caribbean through 1959,” 30
June 1959, and parallel sections of SNIE 100-3-59,
“Threats to the Stability of the US Military
Facilities Position in the Caribbean Area and
Brazil,” 10 March 1959.

Guevara and Communist success in
placing adherents in key positions in the
government. ) Nevertheless, we do not be-
lieve that during this period the Com-
munists will be able to force Fidel Castro
to adopt policies to which he is opposed.
(Paras. 11-13, 25)

3. We believe that, at least for the period
of this estimate, Castro’s attitude and
policies will further the objectives of the
Communists who will try to avoid giving
Castro any cause for believing that they
are seeking to move in on his position
as leader. In these circumstances it is
unlikely that Castro will take the drastic
action necessary to curb their growing
influence. In fact he probably will be-
come increasingly dependent on them
and he may turn more to the Bloc for
assistance. (Paras. 25-27)

4. Castro, while proclaiming a neutralist
policy, will almost certainly continue to
maintain a strong anti-US position. If
the US were to take economic action
against Cuba, such as reducing the Cuban
sugar quota or eliminating the price dif-

f
i
3

dasieeRateatnant Te CTO S

ferential, or if US-based attacks were
carried out against Cuba, Castro’s anti-
US actions would be intensified. He
might impose restrictions on the use of
the Guantanamo Base and might even
demand its evacuation. In any event, he
will almost certainly press for an upward
revision of benefits from the base. He
might also enter into wide-ranging agree-
ments with the Communist Bloc. In 1960
Castro will probably resume diplomatic
relations with the USSR and recognize
Communist China. (Paras. 23, 32-33, 35 )

DISCUSSION

|. THE SITUATION AND OUTLOOK IN CUBA

A. The Present Situation

9. Introduction. After a year of power the
Castro regime remains a revolutionary move-
ment in political turmoil. Its leader Fidel
Castro has moved ahead vigorously with a
radical nationalist program which seeks to
free the mass of the people from what he
considers to be their economic and political
servitude to the wealthy classes and to US

interests in Cuba. He has, however, failed
to establish a coherent set of political and eco-
nomic structures. In this fluid situation ex-
treme radical elements, almost all of whom are
anti-US and many of whom are pro-Commu-
nist, are more and more taking over the direc-
tion of the government and the economy.

10. Castro appears to have been motivated not
only by his social ideals but also by an over-
riding ambition to strengthen his image as
the Cuban national liberator. Inexperienced

{
i
§

meena wee stu:

Eee

teak

SECRET 3

in government and highly sensitive to criti-
cism, he has proceeded in an often inept,
highly unpredictable, and sometimes irra-
tional manner. To counter growing opposi-
tion, Castro is now directing his appeal almost
exclusively to Students, workers, and peasants,
whom he has begun toarm. These elements,
together with the bulk of the original 26th of
July Movement and of the Cuban armed
forces, now composed largely of former rebels,
constitute the base of Castro’s political sup-
port. In short, Castro seems to be more and
more preoccupied with defense of the revolu-
tion and with assuring the continuation of
his own monopoly of power.

11. To the extent that the Castro revolution
is a first step in a fundamental Social revolu-
tion, disorders, violence and anti-US demon-
strations can be. viewed as inevitable. The
Situation is complicated by the presence of a
well organized Communist Party, again one of
the strongest in Latin America. The party
is exploiting the chaotic conditions of con-
temporary Cuba and Castro is making little
effort to curb it.

12. In this atmosphere of radical] change, er-
ratic leadership, and anti-US sentiment, the
most dangerous aspect is the opportu-
nity given to international communism to
strengthen its position in Cuba and the Carib-
bean area. While the USSR for some time
gave little propaganda attention to Castro, it
more recently came out strongly in favor of
his regime as a national liberation movement.
Communist China, which has become increas-

ingly interested in Latin America, is also in-.
' volving itself in Cuban affairs.

13. The Communist Party. While the numer-
ical strength of the Cuban Communist Party
(Popular Socialist Party—-PSP) has not risen
significantly above the June 1959 estimate of
17,000 members, the influence of the Commu-
nists has expanded considerably. The PSP
maintains extremely active press and front or-
ganizations and continues to expand its or-
ganization, while the old-line political parties
remain dormant, demoralized, and inactive.
Avowed Communists continue to build on
their pre-1959 base in trade unions, the edu-
cational field, and the entertainment industry.

The top Communist party leaders have, for the
most part, remained in the background, and
the party has deliberately refrained from an
all-out membership drive or other actions
which might cause Castro to regard it as a
competitor for political power. The Com-
munists have had great success in penetrating
the 26th of July Movement and in exerting
influence primarily through Raul Castro and
Che Guevara, both staunch pro-Communists
if not actual Communists. Through them
they have been able to place their supporters
in key positions throughout the principal
areas of government, particularly in the
powerful Agrarian Reform Institute.

14. The Government. The Cuban Govern-
ment continues to be dominated by Fidel
Castro who rules as a dictator. There is no
prospect of elections and the regime has in-
creasingly restricted individual liberties.
Castro has ousted the first revolutionary Presi-
dent, Urrutia, who dared to protest growing
Communist influence, and has reorganized the
cabinet to give key positions to his extreme
leftist advisers. The power of Rati Castro
was increased when he was given control of
Cuba’s newly created Ministry of Revolution-
ary Armed Forces. His comrade Che Gue-
vara, who for a while held a top post in the
Agrarian Reform Institute, recently replaced
a moderate as President of the National Bank.
The new labor minister is a follower of Raul
Castro, and his counterpart in the important
public works ministry is probably a Commu-
nist. Moreover, many other important gov-
ernmental functions are rapidly being ab-
sorbed by the Agrarian Reform Institute,
which is headed by a pro-Communist and in
which Communists and leftists are gaining
Strength. In addition, the general level of
competence in executive agencies is deterio-
rating rapidly as experienced, moderate offi-
cials leave the government and their jobs are
filed by youthful and inexperienced radicals.

15. The Military* The regime has attempted
to strengthen its control by unifying and reor-
ganizing the armed forces, the police, and in-
vestigative agencies under the single ministry

*For Military Strengths of the Caribbean coun-
tries, see the attached Annex.

ale 4

headed by Raul Castro. Nevertheless, the
armed forces, whose officers were purged and
largely replaced by the guerrilla leaders after
the revolution, remain in a state of confusion.
In an effort to contain dissidence, the regime
has carried out at least two more large-scale
purges which have seriously undermined mili-
tary morale. These purges followed the resig-
nations of the Air Force Chief Diaz Lanz, now
in exile, and Huber Matos, a respected provin-
cial army commander who has been sentenced
to 20 years on a charge of treason. Both of
these men resigned in protest against growing
leftist and Communist influence on the regime.
While most of the army is probably loyal to
Castro, it is undisciplined and disorganized
and has little military capability except for
guerrilla operations. The air force, largely
purged of its dissidents and stripped of nearly
all trained pilots and maintenance personnel,
is also now probably for the most part loyal,
but has ceased to exist as an effective combat
arm. The loyalty of the navy, the service
least affected by the revolution, is doubtful.

16. Organized Labor. Organized labor in
Cuba did not climb on the Castro bandwagon
until the moment of Batista’s departure. In
the subsequent maneuvering by the Premier to
bring labor under the influence of the 26th of
July Movement, the important Communist
minority in organized labor increased its in-
fluence at both the local union level and in the
national directorate of the Confederation of
Cuban Workers (CTC). The 26th of July
Movement has received more than one rebuff
from organized labor, and, although a protégé
of Raul Castro now heads the Ministry of
Labor, Ratil appears to have been more help-
ful in furthering the goals of Communist ele-
ments than in extending the influence of the
regime. He was instrumental in persuading
the delegates to the recent CTC Congress to
elect three pro-Communists to key spots on its
directorate and to disaffiliate from ORIT, the
western-oriented, hemisphere labor organiza-
tion. He is also encouraging the creation of
a purely Latin American labor confederation.
Since the CTC Congress, several prominent
anti-Communist labor leaders have been

ousted. Because of these recent developments
and the increasing strength of the Communist
minority, organized labor is losing its inde-
pendence.

17. The Economic Situation. After it took
power, the government committed itself to
an economic policy designed to break the
dominant position of the relatively few
wealthy Cubans and of foreign, principally US,
capital. Although no clearly delineated pro-
gram has been announced, it is clear that a
high degree of government direction, if not
government ownership, is envisaged. Broad
decrees have been issued giving government
agencies, particularly the Agrarian Reform In-
stitute, wide powers to intervene in the econ-
omy.

18. In the past six months the regime’s drive
to tighten its control over private business has
accelerated. Outright expropriation of prop-
erty is only now beginning, but there is widen-
ing apprehension in the business community
caused by the regime’s erratic, arbitrary, and
often ruthless intervention in the economy.
The appointment of Che Guevara as President
of the National Bank brought forth a sponta-
neous expression of public lack of confidence
in the government’s financial policy. Deposi-
tors withdrew at least $50,000,000 of savings
from banks. However, the economic situation,
while deteriorating, is not yet critical, and in
some respects, notably that of food produc-
tion, has improved somewhat.

19. Castro’s lieutenants have imposed a net-
work of sweeping state controls over the pri-
vate sector of the economy and have taken over
supervision of a variety of foreign and locally-
owned properties including cattle ranches,
telephone companies, petroleum concessions,
domestic airlines, and hotels. Some of these
are scheduled for expropriation as are a num-
ber of other enterprises, including sugar
plantations and mills, oil refineries, and insur-
ance and banking enterprises, which as yet
are not under government control. Sharp re-
ductions in rents and utility rates and in-
creases in wages have been ordered by the gov-
ernment; the tax structure has been revised,
and tax collection made more effective.

=

ERIS Ae RFE >

SECRET

20. Business has responded to these measures,
and to the appointment of Che Guevara to the
Presidency of the Cuban National Bank, by
restricting credit and reducing investments.
Private construction, discouraged by fixed low
rentals, has virtually halted. As a conse-
quence of the general business slowdown, un-
employment, always high during the May-
November slack season in the sugar industry,
was higher in 1959 than in previous years.
Public works initiated by the regime to relieve
unemployment pressure are causing a heavy
strain on the national budget. The cost of
living is rising, partly because of a reduction
of imported goods, and partly because of in-
creases in the purchasing power of lower in-
come groups.

21. On the other hand, despite the reverses
noted above, the Castro regime has avoided
crises expected in its international payments
and in the budget. While 1959 exports were
below normal and tourist expenditures and
capital inflow were cut sharply, imports were
sharply curtailed and outpayments on tourist
and investment account likewise declined.
The estimated resulting 1959 balance of pay-
ments deficit is less than in recent years.
However, total Cuban foreign exchange re-
serves are dangerously low, standing at $50
million according to Castro, as compared to
$111 million at the end of 1958 and a 1959 peak
of $149 million reached in May. The national
budget deficit, according to preliminary esti-
mates, will be considerably smaller than in
1958 reflecting increased receipts including
collection of back taxes.

22. Because Cuba has a predominantly agri-
cultural economy, the outcome of the agrarian
reform program will have an important bear-
ing on economic stability. It is not yet clear
whether the program will be a success or a
failure. To date no major agricultural hold-
ings have been broken up, and indeed in most
cases the old management remains, although
under the supervision of government agents.
Following the establishment of cooperatives
and the assignment of unused lands to land-
less farm workers, there has been some in-
crease in the production of foodstuffs. The
land reform program will not affect the 1960
sugar crop, since the government does not

Loa)

expect to take over large cane lands until after
the spring harvest. Thus the major test of
Castro’s agrarian reform program will come
after this date.

23. Foreign Policy. The Castro regime has
abandoned Cuba’s previous pro-Western, anti-
Communist position. It has indicated that
it will follow a neutralist policy, and will
align itself with the underdeveloped nations
of Asia and Africa. It has assumed an in-
creasingly strong anti-US position. At the
same time, there has been virtually no criti-
cism of the Communist Bloc and a favorable
attitude toward increased relations with the
Bloc. Manifestations of this new policy have
been: Cuba’s withdrawal from the hemisphere
anti-Communist labor organization and its
plan to set up purely Latin American labor and
student organizations; abstention on the vote
to seat Communist China in the UN; threats
to withdraw from the Organization of Ameri-
can States; and the increased number of cul-
tural and trade group exchanges between
Cuba and the Bloc.

B. The Outlook

24. The Regime. Barring his assassination—
which could occur at any time—we believe
that Fidel Castro has at least an even chance
of remaining in power through the next year.
Castro’s elimination would have an immediate
and drastic effect on political stability. Raul
Castro, his appointed heir, and Che Guevara,
Ratil’s close associate, would probably assume
control of the government. It is unlikely,
nowever, that they would be able to maintain
control for long, and Cuba would be in for a
period of violent political upheaval and ter-
rorism.

25. The Communists. Communist influence
in the regime will almost certainly continue to
increase in 1960. Nevertheless, we do not be-
lieve that during this period the Communists
will be able to force Fidel Castro to adopt
policies to which he is opposed. It is possible
that the unpredictable Castro might turn
against the Communists if he came to feel that
his authority was threatened by them. If he
decided to do so, his popular appeal probably
would be sufficient to insure his position.

Teed qtcisee enyeenerme oe

7

PORES BIHAN TEE

SEGRET 6

However, we believe that, at least for the
period of this estimate, Castro’s attitude and
policies will further the objectives of the Com-
munists who will try to avoid giving him any
cause for believing that they are seeking to
move in on his position as leader. In these
circumstances, it is unlikely that Castro will
take the drastic action necessary to curb their
growing influence. In fact he probably will
become increasingly dependent on them and
he may turn more to the Bloc for assistance.

26. Thus, the outlook within Cuba for the
Communists is increasingly favorable. In ad-
dition their ability to complicate Caribbean
affairs and to exacerbate Cuban-US relations
will increase over the next year. However,
their leaders will probably try to avoid pro-
voking intervention by the US or the OAS.

27. The USSR probably will encourage the lo-
cal Communists to gain as much position and
influence as they can, and is prepared to offer
considerable comfort and assistance to an
anti-American, neutralist regime.

28. The Opposition. Despite Castro’s still
widespread lower class Support, we believe
that opposition to him will continue to grow
in many important sectors of Cuban society.
As a result of his extreme policies, the opposi-
tion now includes virtually all of the upper
class, much of the middle Class, important
members of the Catholic hierarchy, many in-
tellectuals and professionals, some military
personnel, and—within the government and
the 26th of July Movement—a growing num-
ber of disillusioned moderates.

29. As the base of Castro’s political support
narrows, and as Castro comes more and more
to believe that he is in a beleagured fortress
assailed both from within and without Cuba,
it is likely that his actions will become in-
creasingly intemperate. At the Same fime, it
is also likely that his opponents in these cir-
cumstances will tend to coalesce and find some
moderate leader. However, at the present
time we know of no such leader who is capable
of unifying the opposition. While armed at-
tacks from exile groups or even armed resist-
ance groups inside Cuba are probable, we do

not believe that such attacks currently pose a
Serious threat to Castro, in Spite of the dis-
organized state of the Cuban armed forces.

30. The Economy. Cuba's economic position
will probably not become SO precarious as to
result in serious political consequences dur-
ing the period of this estimate. Despite the
internal economic frictions resulting from
government efforts to increase State direction
of the economy, it is probable that the Castro
government will be able to maintain a viable
economy for at least the period under con-
Sideration. It is almost certain that there
will be a further reduction of national income
as the impact of government policies comes to
be felt. Unless the agrarian reform program
results in a serious cut in agricultural produc-
tion, we believe that this reduction in national
income will not be of any great magnitude.
In view of the government’s policy of redis-
tributing income, the standard of living of the
great majority of the population probably will
show no decline and may even improve.

31. A substantial reduction in Cuba’s sugar
quota in the US market or the elimination of
the favorable price differentia] would have an
adverse effect on the country’s economy.
However, even if such a reduction were made
by US congressional action this year, its effects
would not be reflected in Cuba’s export earn-
ings until 1961. The political impact, how-
ever, would be immediate and adverse for the
US in Cuba and in much of Latin America.

32. US-Cuban Relations. In the year ahead,
the outlook for US relations with Cuba is dark.
There is no likelihood that the regime will
desist from using the US as a whipping boy
or from attempting to sell its anti-American
line in Latin America. On the contrary, its
anti-US actions probably will be intensified,
particularly if the US Congress reduces Cuba’s
sugar quota or if US-based anti-Castro groups
attack the regime. Even though the regime
has made little reference to the US Naval Base
at Guantanamo in the past, Cuba will almost
certainly press for an upward revision of bene-
fits from the base. They may also impose
certain restrictions on the use of this facility
and might even demand Us evacuation.

=

wey!

“Na EUR

LE PSEA MG ENC ato

SEkorrt 7

33. It is possible that US-Cuban relations
could degenerate to the point where the safety
of US nationals was in serious question.
Should the inadequacy of routine evacuation
efforts necessitate the use of US military
forces to cover the evacuation process, Latin
American reaction would probably be varied.
In general, however, Latin American reaction
would largely be determined by the Cuban
response.*

34. Should the US decide that direct military
intervention were necessary to preserve its
Security interests in the area, most Cubans,
including the military, would react violently.
However, some Cubans would welcome such
intervention, and might at least passively as-
sist the operation. Most Latin Americans
would probably regard US unilateral action as
an unjustified invasion of Cuban territory, but
most governments would probably not object
seriously to such action if the situation in
Cuba had degenerated into anarchy and ter-
rorism. OAS sponsorship of intervention is
highly unlikely short of outright Cuban ag-
gression against another state.

35. Other International Relations. The
Castro regime probably will continue to move
away from Cuba’s traditional alignment with
the West in the UN and will probably resume
diplomatic relations with the USSR and rec-
ognize Communist China. Castro’s attempt
to head a neutralist bloc in Latin America
will have little success in view of the appre-
hension and dislike aroused by Castro among
area leaders. Preoccupation with its increas-
ingly difficult domestic problems may work to
reduce the regime’s involvement in Caribbean
revolutionary movements, but these move-
ments will continue to derive considerable
inspiration and at least some assistance from
Castro’s regime in Cuba.

“The Director of Intelligence and Research, De-
partment of State would delete the jast sentence
of the paragraph and amend the second sentence
to read as follows: “Should the inadequacy of
routine evacuation efforts necessitate the use of
US military forces to cover the evacuation proc-
ess, most Latin Americans would oppose such
action unless acquiesced in by the Cuban Gov-
ernment itself.”

il. THE SITUATION ELSEWHERE IN THE
CARIBBEAN

A. Introduction

36. Fidel Castro emerged from revolutionary
victory as a symbol for those forces seeking to
destroy the old order throughout the Carib-
bean. His disruption of things traditional in
Cuba, his flouting of the US, and his aggres-
Sive antidictatorship campaign put new life
in exiled and domestic revolutionary groups
of several Caribbean countries, many of which

jhe materially supported. In so doing, the

Castro regime became the prime mover behind
a rash of unsuccessful invasion attempts
against Panama, Haiti, and the Dominican
Republic, and provided support for rebel in-
cursions into Nicaragua.

37. Castro’s early policy of supporting and
even sponsoring movements aimed at over-
throwing other authoritarian or oligarchic re-
gimes in the Caribbean suffered setbacks, and
it now operates only on a spasmodic basis.
The prompt OAS intervention against the
Cuban-based invasion of Panamé last spring
and Castro’s growing preoccupation with do-
mestic affairs have also contributed to a de-
cline in revolutionary activity in the area.
The possibility remains that Castro may at
any time revive and even step-up his earlier
policy of actively encouraging revolutionary
invasions against Caribbean dictatorships.

38. In fact, the Castro revolution has tended
in certain ways to strengthen the position of
other authoritarian regimes, e.g., those of
Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic.
Moderates and conservatives with no love for
authoritarian rule in their countries, but fear-
ful of the ‘implications of drastic social and
economic upheaval on the Cuban model, have
rallied to support the status quo.

r

cone

Poy,

eben!

bx Hf

Bie.
SSA

ANNEX—MILITARY STRENGTHS

TABLE 1: ESTIMATED ARMED FORCES
PERSONNEL STRENGTHS

Ground’ Air Naval

‘Includes army ground forces, national guard,
and police units.

2? Number of trained pilots in parentheses.

*The army strength figures are based on a pro-
visional TOE of the Revolutionary Cuban Army,
April 1959. Exact figures are not available and
there are indications that this strength is being
reduced by forced and voluntary “discharges of
army personnel who served under Batista and of
alleged active counterrevolutionists.

‘Exact number unknown. ‘The air force has 59

pilots with varying degrees of efficiency.

TABLE 2: ESTIMATED MILITARY AIRCRAFT?

CUBA (As of 15 Dec. 1959)
- ne 17 B~26
A 20 Ftr/Bmr (Sea Furies, F-47, F-51)
15 Transports (Mostly C47s)
12 Helicopters
14 Trainers (Including 7 T-33s)
24 Miscellaneous
102 Total
Naval Air
6 Prop ASW (TBM-3S)
10 Prop Trainers (N28)
2PBYSA (Catalina)
4 Miscellaneous Trainers

‘With the exception of the aircraft in the Cuban Rebel Air Force, virtually all other aircraft ess train-
ers) are in tactical units and considered to be operational.

TABLE 3: COMBATANT NAVAL VESSELS

Small
Sub- Sub-
De- Patrol marine marine Motor

stroyers Escorts Escorts Chasers Chasers Gunboats
(DD) (PF) (PCE) (PC) (SC) (PGM)

dependencies Jomoico; Antigua, Mone 5 O00 Se.
Barbades, Dominica Grenedo, Sa nt ek sd Sa t
3
fo
. / -
nae 3

A, . LD Ey
Ran \ ra
~ \ ;
es we
2 Caicos “a
. o ISLANDS Fe
5 damoica)
On on

Great neque) ques

SX

ISLANDS
~~ fee/ (amekead
Be
Moanzanitto \
= Guantinamo “y
7 Santiogo de Cubs . “0 ls
‘ co ee ee ae

me cep ation’ Sy,
CAYMAN ISLANDS ote aie Santiago, ae
te> — Gamatesy —y

Ny
»DOMINICANS ia
! >. jo REPUBLIC %
. es u co
: _ Ne Ba PUERTO
. C ‘0 Sa eee Jo eee 7eyGAS, 3 : - RICO WS)
JAMAICR ‘se ‘ ~
wk “af
‘SH iS
RAS
(a
ot Hs BM
wie
‘Ne <
La Calba Z ,
‘ula CARIBBEAN S ££ A
ONDURA Ss
aS
anneal
gi Esuciaatrn - or ied Taal!
fa, 1908)
AN5C ms
3
NUCAR AGUA a Aruba,
oot S Cura _ oH
Bluenelds 70 \ Cr a ‘
: WICLEMSTAD vat
—— \ :
a TS oN
N ~ fc ve.
Garrenquins / Matecaibo,
ul

atenct

MU Sef

/
/
“N

TT , od ™
“Buca aman — _.,

DELETED TEXT

‘PROGRAM --

RELEASE AS SANITIZED

Le

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW

1997

LATIN AMERICA

Cuba Sending Diplomatic Mission to Mediterranean Coun-
tries: Foreign Minister Raul Roa is to head a Cuban diplomatic
mission which will leave on 2 January on a trip designed to
enhance Cuba's international stature and to stimulate inter-
est in a conference of underdeveloped nations to be held in
Havana in April 1960. Special invitations were extended to
Roa by the UAR and Yugoslavia. He will also visit Libya,
Tunisia, Morocco, Greece, and possibly other Afro-—Asian
countries which Cuba is currently cultivating.

The group will be guests of the UAR Government at the
opening of the Aswan High Dam, and Roa will probably hold
discussions designed to facilitate urgent efforts by both
countries to increase their trade with each other substantial-
ly, particularly in sugar and cotton. He may also discuss the
possibility of an exchange of visits between Castro and Nasir,

both of whom apparently see added prestige for themselves in
stronger Cuban-UAR relations.

The Castro government described its "new" foreign policy
in a review issued on 26 December as a third position based
on morality rather than materialism, independent of both
capitalism and Communism, and similar to that of Afro-Asian
neutralist countries. Cuba seems to be carrying out this
policy by loosening its political and economic ties with the
US, expressing hostility toward the US and its international

objectives, and adopting a tolerant attitude toward the Soviet
bloc. ee

30 Dec 59 CURRENT INTELLIGENCE DIGEST Page 7
