Weekly Review - Vietnam: Fallout from Son Tay DeletedD)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126891, dated 5 November 1970.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126891).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE

CONTENTS

(Information as of noon EST, 3 December 1970)

Page i WEEKLY REVIEW 4 Dec 70

Vietnam: Fallout from Son Tay

Hanoi appears to have taken a down-to-earth
war is hell’ attitude toward the Son Tay raid
and US air strikes a fortnight ago. A high-level
and knowledgeable North Vietnamese official re
portedly said last week that Hanoi did not con-
sider Son Tay an escalation and will not make US
air attacks a major issue. He explained that the
Communists realistically expect the US to con-
tinue aerial reconnaissance over the North and to
retaliate when these flights are challenged. The
threat of reprisals, however, would not deter the
North Vietnamese from trying to shoot down the
planes, but, the official went on, Hanoi was not
of a mind to allow such matters to seriously
jeopardize the Paris talks.

This attitude has been reflected in the way
the Communists have played the affair: their
propaganda has been noisy, but it has not gone
beyond the position Hanoi has taken on recon-
naissance since the bombing halt two years ago—
that reconnaissance is a violation of North Viet-
namese sovereignty and that the Communists will
make every effort to stop it. Air strikes, however,
are termed in propaganda as a violation of the US
agreement to stop the bombing. In more than two
years Hanoi never has raised these as excuses to
either stall or break off the talks.

Despite its apparent relaxed attitude about
some aspects of the air and commando raids,
Hanoi is plainly embarrassed and wary that they
were brought off with such ease and it is trying
hard to plug the holes in North Vietnam's internal
defenses. A flood of domestic broadcasts has re-
flected new measures, under close party control
and high level military supervision, designed to
ensure faster and more effective reactions from
both militia and regular army units in the coun-
tryside. There has been mention of 24-hour
watches, better coordination, harder training, and
many more outposts, sentinels, and bunkers.

the North's defenses

Aside from shoring up
Hanoi probably is seeking to fire the collective
energies of the North Vietnamese populace to thé

level prevalent earlier in the war, but which ha
flagged since the US bombing halt in 1968. Hanc
may also harbor some hope that by painting ar
impressive picture of fortress North Vietnam, the
allies may be dissuaded from mounting new com.
mando assaults.

With so much attention riveted on POWs,
Hanoi also has taken some steps to dress up it:
image on the prisoner question. The Foreign
Ministry last week broke with past practice anc
provided to a Western diplomat information that
first had been requested more than 18 months
ago on the whereabouts of missing American pi-
lots. Radio Hanoi also has started to broadcas:
brief taped holiday messages from US captives as
in past years. A fairly prominent Western journal-
ist, moreover, has been invited into North Viet-
nam and he almost certainly will be permitted tc
film American POWs, The overriding considera-
tions for Hanoi are its image and its belief tha:
eventually it will be able to squeeze some conces:
sions from Washington in return for a genera:
prisoner release. Although neither a tougher poi-
icy toward captives nor any wholesale releases are
likely, some additional gestures such as providing
more information on missing American airmen,
may be made to lend weight to Hanoi’s profes-
sions of leniency.

Troops, Supplies Move in High Gear

Hanoi is continuing to send substantial num-
bers of troops, both replacements and complete
units, down the infiltration trail this dry season.
Some 17,100 North Vietnamese soldiers set off in
November, the highest monthly total since Feb-
ruary 1969. Over half are earmarked for COSVN,
probably for duty in Cambodia; about 4,400 are

Page 4

WEEKLY REVIEW

headed for northern South Vietnam: and about
2.500, including a regiment of North Vietnamese
regulars, are most likely bound for southern Laos.
A minimum of. four other regular regiments have
also started south since September. One clearly 1s
going to COSVN, two are now in southern Laos
and a fourth is just above the DMZ. Moreover,
two division headquarters are moving south
through North Vietnam and one is nearing the
Lao and South Vietnamese borders.

Although threats now have developed
against the northern provinces and lower Military
Region | of South Vietnam, and the central and
southern sector of the Lao panhandle, the pattern
of over-all Communist dry season deployments in
Indochina still is unfolding. It seems clear that
many of these units are still on the move while
others have been assigned to protect the vital
Communist supply arteries running the length of
Laos.

Communist truck movements in the Laotian
corridors have again increased after several weeks

of reduced activity caused by
rains and intensified bombing.
| eee organizations as far south as the

onttuence of the Cambodia, South Vietnam, and

Lao borders are handling truck and waterborne
cargo. Various sources confirm a recent sharp
increase in truck traffic on two main North Viet-
namese passes into Laos and around the western
end of the Demilitarized Zone. It will be several
weeks, however, before the substantial quantity
of supplies now moving will reach the tricountry
border area.

The level of resupply during the latter part
of November was apparently higher than that of a
year ago. This trend is likely to continue. During
this dry season the Communists will have to send
more supplies just to maintain the force structure
and level of fighting of recent months in Laos and
South Vietnam, Increased materiel will be needed

Page 5

WEEKLY REVIEW

to offset losses caused by allied incursions last
spring, the rainy season depleticn of stocks, the
Joss of the Sihanoukville supply route, and the
new need to supply increased tactical and rear
service forces in Laos and Cambodia.

Action Picks Up in the South

In South Vietnam, Communist military ac-
tivity picked up this week, but still featured the
small actions that the enemy has been emphasiz-
ing for over a year and a half. The enemy shelled
several province capitals and numerous smaller
towns and military bases throughout the country.
Casualties and damages were generally light.

The sporadic timing of the attacks reflects
the current Communist practice of letting local
field commanders set their own timetable for
action. This permits the enemy to take advantage
of local conditions and strike when ready—in con-
trast to previous so-called “highpoints,”’ that were
generally well coordinated and often captured
headlines abroad.

Individually these attacks seldom inflict
heavy Casualties or damage, but they are cumula-
tively substantial. For example, the Communists
have succeeded in overrunning some 65 govern-
ment outposts in the Mekong Celta so far this
year. Although scattered successes an this scale
have not rolled back pacification gains, they do
help create a significant amount of insecurity in
rural areas where the government is trying to
consolidate its control.

Despite Communist emphasis on guerrilla
tactics and other economy-of-force methods to
keep their losses down, South Vietnamese forces
have triggered clashes that were costly to the
enemy, especially in the Mekong Delta. Late fast
week, for example, heavy ground battles de-
veloped in three delta provinces as the result of

aggressive ARVN operations. Stepped-up US and

4 Dec 70

aha? Reno

See

MAb ae

oy

rf,

ease

nr
w,

Sea reat as

South Vietnamese operations in the coastal low-
lands of the northernmost provinces comprising
MR 1 have also flushed out concentrations of
enemy forces and accounted for over 400 Com-
munists killed there each week.

Some South Vietnamese commanders are re-
organizing their forces to improve their perform-
ance in the many localized actions. For example,
Major General Ozu, who assumed command of

MR 2 last August, has directed his two divisions
to operate in small units rather than in the often
cumbersome multibattalion operations of the
past. He has given his territorial security
forces~Regional Forces and Popular Forces—a
new system of goals and quotas to encourage
more aggressiveness against the enemy. Already,
Ozu claims that the ratio of enemy-to-friendly
casualtie l i last sum.

mer.

Page 6

WEEKLY REVIEW

4 Dec 70
