Cuban International Activities Inimical to US Interests
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000117892, dated 4 October 1972.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000117892).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

793

: | $ Kovember 1962

‘CUBAN INTERNATIONAL ACTIVITIES IWIMICAL TO US INTERESTS

Table of Contents

Summary

PART 1: Current Cuban International Activities Hostile
to the United States

Overview ‘of Geographical Scope and ‘Methods —
Latin America

Africa

Middle East

Other International Actions.

PART II: Possible Additional Cuban International Actions
ns Hostile to US Interests in 1963-1964

Overview

Latin America

Africa and the Middle East
Other areas

PART III: The Military Threat Posed by Cuban and Soviet
ee Military Assets in Cuba

Trends in the Acquisition of Military Equipment

SEGAET /NQSORN /NOGPATRACT A

is 1 Scab Ld cra cea ace anion ae OE :

Appraved Wer pesenne
}

Date

-

Re oF ester rent

i

794

6 v0 I

041

2

3g

_§ Novester 1962
CUBAN ACTIONS INIMICAL TO US INTERESTS: SLUPPMRY

The Castro regime is engaged in a broad range of activities designed te

e radical change and undermine US influence worldwide. From the Cuba ~
perspective, the US is, and always will be, the principal threat. * ve Belfeve —
these actions will continue as Tong as Fidel Castro and hfs

_ pemain in power. Only the intensity varies, determined by the conditions in

each country and Cuba's ability to exploit them. Six former US presidents
tried to negotiate Cuba into accommodation; all failed and

— lee virtually no prospect for a
genuine accormozatior with Cusa on major issues in the next two years. This,
despite the fact that a modus vivendi may continue on some secondary but
potentially troublesome issues like air piracy. ; .

PART 3: Current. Cuban international activities hostile to the US

In overview, Cuba has active subversive and military operations in Latin |

America, Africa, and the Middle East while also using diplosacy, propaganda,

and covert action for anti-US purposes wor Id-wi de.

In Latin America and the Caribbean | . .

Cuba is directly supporting active insurgenctes in £1 Salvador, .
Guatemala, and Colombia and: is. laying. the. groundwork. fn Honduras,
Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, and Chile. Mundreds of Latin
American terrprists and guerrillas have been trained in Cuba in
recent years.: .

--Havana is heavily engaged in the consolidation of power in
Nicaragua and Grenada.

“Liwhere guerrilla strategies are presently non-productive, Havana fs
~~ relying on a mixture of diplomacy, propaganda, and non-violent
covert action to undercut US influence. |

In Africa: : a ;
--Cuba now has over 40,000 military and civilian personnel propping
up Angola and Ethiopia and working in more than a dozen other
countries. : Other African targets of Cuban-assisted subversive

groups are South Africa, Namibia; Zaire, ané Morocco. |
In the Middle East: |

“Cuba has aligned itself closely with the PLO and the radical Arab
States (Libya and South Yemen). -_

a -i- a
gar ngsertn nope Rac

ee ee

pear ween ROE TE SET a TE TBI I

 SEERET /ROFORN /ROCOR TENET (QR

In Europe:

Cuba uses political and economic tactics to create and exploit
differences between Washington and its allies.

PART 2: Possible additional Cuban activities hostile to US interests in 1983-84
Po "During the coming 12-18 months, these activities will continue and in
‘leertain areas, will expand. The very nature of the Castro regime precludes
anything but an adversary relationship between Havana anc Washington. Latin
America will continue to be a priority target. ; . |
(leSubvers fon will continue apace, especially in Central America, but
i also in Colombia and Chile.

--Cuba will try to encourage and take advantage of the leftist drift
in Suriname and Bolivia.
_ e-Concern over change in Panama's orientation could cause Havana to
begin supporting subversive efforts there.

--If the Sandinistas are seriously threatened from without, Havana ~
would almost. certainly send additional combat forces: unless: ~
deterred by. the credible threat of US military forces. ,

ee]t is not certain, however, that Cuba'< oromotion of subversion
will steadily increase in all cases. “Jnder certain circumstances,
Castro could be willing to reduce his revolutionary profile
temporarily if convinced it would advance his overall goal of
diminishing US influence in the hemisphere. ©

: . ee
i--Cuba can be expected to promote strongly the creation of a regional
i organization that excludes the US. |

ang

In Africa, Havana will maintain its military support for Angola and
‘Ethiopia: ; |

Nee reluctance to withdraw troops from Angola, as Tong as the
stability of the Marxist-Leninist government is in doubt, will
- hinder a Namibian settlement.

a--A military threat to Mozambique from Soutl Africa could bring an
jncreased Cuban military presence there. :

paar accra!

pa

- Elsewhere, Cuba is Tikely to:

Continue {ts cooperation with the PLO, Libya, and other retical
Arab states.

—Expand its efforts to create or exacerbate tensions between the US
and its European allies.

PART 3: The military threat ed by Cuban and Soviet mtlitaryrelated
asserts in Cuba.

oy Cuba has over 250,000 persons in its arned forces, and an air force with
- more than 250 PIS fighters.

—Cuba serves as a base for Soviet intelligence gathering and
propacanda activities in the Western Hemisphere. The Targest
Soviet signals intelligence collection facility outside of the USSR

3 is Iccated near Havana and is di-ectly primarily at US. government,
comercial, and military communications links.

~

SD «cs cous seve
~ Pare ree ag turn. around base: for: Soviet air. and: naval units: .
—
so serious potenti al threat is Cuban capability to harass or interfere

with sea an? air routes in the Caribbean/Gulf of Mexico/Straits of
Florida areas. This would be of pa~ticular concern because of the
Sn amount of US commerce -- particularly oi] — that passes through
this region and when unhampered transit from southern US ports and.
> through Caribtean sea Tangs would be required, Such as for US
me reenforcement of MTO. ¢ .
ed

-iii-

Vd

PART I: Current Cuban International Activities Wosttle te the US

Overview of Geographical Scope and Methods

ciate

eo:
x 2

i
4

re” ps

7 Cuban activities hostile to the United States run the gamut
from universally accepted diplomatic, commercial, military, and
cultural practices and behavior to covert destabilization,
disinformation, terrorism, and guerrilla warfare. Tactics are
chosen according to the possibilities seen im each ceuntry, But
the fundamental goal in each case fs the same./

Fer Tanneries.”
fete We

eid :
Subversion, encompassing anything from espionage and the
promction of coups to the training, funding, advising, and arming

' of paramtlitary forces, is employed against governments that

refuse to support Cuba's anti-US policies.) The list of targets

P33

of Cuban subversion incluces governuents friendly to the US and

countries where there are important US commercial interests. i In

target countries where insurgency is not yet practical, Cuba is

working behind the scenes to unify the teftist forces, help them }

develop broad Tinks to the population, give them international
exposure and. support, and provide them with political and

-

paramilitary training to enable them to create and take advantage
of political opportunities. }.

Havana is also. using diplomacy to increase Cuban: influence:
in a numter of countries fand convince governments that
confrontation rather than accommodation is the appropriate way to
cial eiti wasnington.; This diploeatic approach is bolstered by
strong doses of propaganda designed to exploit frictions between
the US and {ts allies and sow distrust of US intenttons. bhere
possible, trade is used ito undercut the US or US businesses or to
provide Cuba with entre into political circles where anti-US ©
policies can be promoted. / . .

-PWavana places especially heavy emphasis on cultural
activities as a means of creating good will toward Cuba and |
establishing contacts with cultural, intellectual, academic, and
sports figures who can then be exploited in an anti-US fashion.
The Cuban leadership has consistently given high priority to
maintaining and expanding the already-established, broad body of
literature that places a hostile, highly ideological
interpretation on history and current events with the intention
of promoting popular misconceptions about the US and thus
poisoning US relations for many decades.

i
|
|

. SEER PRO OEN TOC O NT RET

oT ctrewmstances allow, Mavana fs not above using both the
hare and soft epproackes at the same time in one country.
Colombia, for example, recognizes that the Cubans ere committed
fn theory to improving formal ties through overt channels while

continuing covert support for Colombian insurgents. Many

gcoveraments, Nowever, have mot Tearned that the existence ef
Giptomatic relations with the Castro regime is no insurance
against Cubana subversion. } - wae

th

-

The scape of these activities hostile to the US fs pet...
limited to a few countries or even to one general region. {It fs
worldwide. Only the intensity varfes, determined by the .
conditions in each country, Cuba’s ability to exploit thes, and
Soviet support.| Although Cuba has forty thousand troops and
other personnel in Africa, the main focus of its attention will
continue to be Latin America.| |

In Latin America and the Caribbean, iCuba is ¢irectly
supporting active insurgencies in three countries (E1 Salvador,
Colombia, and Guatemala) and working with warying degrees of.

- ntensity to create the organizations and political conditions
propitious: for insurgency-in four others (Costa Rica, Honduras, |
the Dominican Republic, and Chile) | While investing heavily in
the consolidation of the regimes in Grenada. ((600. Cubans in
country) and Nicaragua \(7,000 to 8,000 Cubans in country),, Havana
is ovértty hostile to three other countries (Uruguay, “Fdraguay, |.
and Haiti) {but apparently recognizes that little can presently be
dane to initiate successful armed struggle there. ‘Elsewhere in
the region, Havana is depending primarily on diplomacy and non-
violent means to convince governments’ to support Cuba's effort to

_ isolate the US.; . ;

In Africa, Cuba-“now has over 40,000 military and civilian
personnel propping up Marxist-Leninist regimes in Angola and
Ethiopia and working in more than a dozen other countries. | Other

' african targets of Cuban-assisted subversive groups are South
Africa, Namibia, Zaire, and Morocco. Reluctant to withdraw
troops from Angola, the Cubans are a key obstacle to 2 Namibian.

settlement. |

In the Middle East, Cuba has aligned itself closely with the
PLO and the radical governments of the region, which is
mpolemented by a very aqgressive Cuban’ policy against Israel.

n these circles for Cuba's position on such™
§ssues as the consolidation of Sandinista rule in Nicaragua and
the provision of international recognition and juridical status

.

to the Salyaedoran imeekgenteel Puvic effectiveness, however, {5
currently’ constrained by EWE need to renegotiate the Castre
regine’

indebtedness with a number/ef these co ries. |

Simttarly, Cuba’s impending toss of the chairmanship of the

Bonaltigned Rovement--and Castro’s obvious pro-Soviet bias during -
s three-year stint fn the chair--fs blunting its efforts ta
portions of the Third World. [Wavana, mevertheless, will comtiase:

to try to use the movement to generate anti-US sentisent and is
certain to take advantage of the seventh summit in India early
wext year as a launching platform for anti-US rhetorTc.| Mavasa
continues to try to embarrass the US in the United RaitTons on the
issue of Puerto Rican independence and can be expected to attespt
to extract advantage from Nicaragua's success in gaining a seat.
on the Security Council.

Latin America

After the ouster of the Somoza government in Nicaragua in

S78, Latin America again becawe a major focus of attention ia

Cuban foreign policy circles. ,Havana tried quickly to duplicate.
the success elsewhere in Central America but setbacks there and
in Colombia in early 1981 dashed the Cubans’ hopes for quick

victory and caused them to. shift. to a medium-term strategy (two. |

to three years). At the same time, Latin American reaction to. --
the events in the Falkland Islands convinced. the Cubans that the
time was ripe to mobilize the region's governments to create a..

multilateral organization excluding the US and: deal a death blow...

to the Organization of American States and the Rio Treaty. |

In Central America, Nicaragua remains the key. The Castro
regime sees the consolidation of the Marxist-Leninist Directorate
there as important enough tofjustify a secret military pact which
commits Cuba to Nicaragua's defense. An estimated 5,500 Cuban
civilians and some 1,500 to 2,000 Cuban military personnel
currently in Nicaragua; are evidence of the Castro regime's .
readiness to back e Sandinista government.

Nicaragua is also seen by Havana as an invaluable| platform

from which to support insurgency in €1 Salvador and Guatemala and

as an important transportation center through which Centra?
American leftists, insurgents and supporters of the extreme left
can travel to and from Havana without detection! Despite Cuban
calls for a "negotiated political solution™ in Central America,
iflavana's efforts to train and supply Salvadoran and Guatemalan
“fnsurgents have shown little sign of abating. Cuban and
Nicaraguan efforts to organize the Honduran far left and prepare
it for eventual guerrilla warfare are also continuing as are
Havana’s plans to destabilize the Monge government in Costa

Rica. Cuban speeches at the International Theoretical Conference:

OTS 8 a»

i
|

we

SECT CTTROTURNT RU ee? Se

in Havana in April indicate clearly that the Castro peeiee 1s

firmly wedded to the armed strvgsie goctrine in Centra

America. The catl for negotiat

buy time for the verrillas

take power.

After the death of Omar Torrijos
away from its support of the extrene

ons ts sieply a ploy devetoped te

and mistead Western opinion or te t.
them into a position of influence from which they eah eventeatly

Panseantan policy shifted

Teft in Central America.

of considerable concern in Havana,

tions to help the far left
step up its organizational and political work. The Castro regise

will probably increase subversive operations in Panama if it
perceives that the Panamanian eee tilt away from the

continue. |

professes to understand that the Mexican governsen $1) not _

toterate interf

While the Cubans are §&
to the Mexican government,
economic problems coul
repercussions.

opportunities as they arise
for the moment have good pr
Cuban influence. The Cuba-

Cuban-sponsored military buildup the

till confid
they probab
far-reach

In the Caribbean, Havana is ouick to take advantage of

ent about their close ties
ly are wary that Mexico's
ing political |

ae — naa

but, except for Suriname, does not
ospects for a dramatic expansion in
Grenada alliance, and the alarming

re; has raised sensitivities

fn the Caribbeam ministates, and Havana wilt probably find JTocal

Sa

i

| er

oe

#08

- Mevertheless, the
, Cubans continue their efforts to expand their contacts with
“Veftists and intellectuals in the region and probebly intend te
wse Radio Free Grenada to blanket the area with aati-us

. propaganda.

Euba ts also working vigorously te ingratiate itself with
the Bouterse government in Suriname, and the Cuban presence in
Paramaribo is Tikely to increase.

me The cooling tn Cu an-Guysrese relations
for Havana to improve its image in Caracas

has made it possibl

* by shifting. to a more neutral position in the Guyana-Venezsela

dispute over the Essequibo region.

Beer no ee

i In South America, Chile remains the target of occasional
inftitrations by Cuban-trained terrorists but even Havana.
realizes that conditions for a successful insurgency fn Chile--as
in Uruguay and Paraguay--simply do not exist. Nevertheless,
Havana is working to develop the infrastructure necessary for

organized opposition once conditions improve. At the same tine,

Havana. is wooing Bolivia, Argentina, and Venezuela with an eye to
promoting the demise of the OAS and replacing it. with an: all

Latin Awerican organization through which the region, acting as a

whole, can confront the US and force its dewands on Washington. .
‘the new government in Bogota has demonstrated a willingness
to downplay Havana's blatant intervention with the M-~19-
insurgents in early 1981. The Cubans probably now view Coloebfa
in the sane fashion they view Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela--
countries where emphasis on Ciplomacy, at least for the mogent,
is more likely to produce dividends than an aggressive, |
subversive approach. Nice easel

Africa .

Cuba remains active in Africa but clearly does not view the

area as having the same political potential that it had tn the
1970s when Havana was involved in a major effort to expand formal
ties in the Third World as a means of reducing the Castro
regime's diplomatic isolation. Entrenched in Angola, Cuba has
reason to act with restraint when tempted to embark on Targe-
scale military operations elsewhere. | fhe remarkably successful
Grive during the last decade to expand Cuban influence has slowed
markedly as Havana's attention has shifted to Latin America and
Cuba's chairmanship of the Nonaligned Movement draws to an end.
Nevertheless, the Castro regime's revolutionary commitments in
Africa, its military dependence on the Soviet Union and,
therefore, its need to support Soviet policy, its need to export
Tabor, and its desire not to alienate African allies, all point:
to Havana's continued strong interest in the region and probably
an increase fn the Cuban civilian presence there. 7

ov

on

security assistance.

eed

| Ena Angola, Havana will probably not risk the expulston of
fits forces by acquiescing fn serfous negotiations for an internal
settlement or solution to Namibia./ The Cubans Nave indicated
clearly that they intend to keep their 20,000 to 25,000 ‘combat.

troops im country as Tong as the Marxist-Leninist régime there fs

threatened by South African-backed guerrillas. [The Cubans were

reported to have modestly increased their forces in tate summer
with veteran reinforcements from Cuba and now seem to be taking a
greater part in the actual fighting against Angolan ‘nsurgents.

The civilian presence in Angola remains about &.500.: Even though

Havana now has formed diplomatic ties with Zaire,’ Cubans ina
continue to support insurgents -:ho hope to
jre’s Shaba Province.

In Ethiopia, the Cubans have limited themselves largely to
‘garrison duty, having been withdrawn from comhat after the defeat
of Somali forces in the Ogaden campaign. {There are now an
estimated 11,000 to 13,000 Cuban military personnel in Ethiopia

with another 1,000 civilians aiding the Mengistu government in

various capacities such as public health, construction, and
education,’ The Cuban forces serve as a strategic reserve to
deter renewed Somali adventurism and to protect the Mengistu .
regime. [With Soviet logistical help, they also would be capable
of rapid deployment elsewhere in Africa and Southwest Asia.:

JIn Mozambique, Cuba now has an estimated 800 to 1,000

military personnel with another 1,000 civilians in political and
technical advisory positions. The current threat to the Machel

government posed by South African backed guerrillas raises the

possibility that Maputo may ask for Cuban combat troops. We
believe Havana's response would depend largely on Soviet

wishes. The Cubans clearly have a distaste for taking casualties
in combat, but they would probably provide a large number of ©
troops at Moscow's urging and with the proviso that the Soviets
assured logistical support. { :

As for Namibia, Cuba continues.to support SWAPO. Cuba would
undoubtedly view a SWAPO-dominated Namibia-with favor. Should
SWAPO come into control in Namibia, Cuba along with the Soviets
and the East Germans, would offer to provide technical and

middie East

Cuban efforts to expand its influence in the Middle East
-enjoyed a measure of success until the war between Iran and Iraq
forced the Castro regime, as chairman of the Nonaligned Movement
into the role of sediator. Relations between Havana and Ba hdad-

soured as the Iraqis erceived a Cuban tilt toward Iran.

_— me As in Africa, Cuba
w nue to protect its interests tn the Middle East and, to
‘earn hard currency, will try to increase its non-diplomatic
‘presence there.

The presence of ¥@ Pcubans in Libya, mainly involved
fin the fields of construction and public health, suggests &
warmth in bilateral ties that is deceiving. Castro's and
Qadhafi’s egos have clashed.on more than one occasion and neither
appears to place much trust in the other. At the same time, Cuba
fg anxious to develop access to Libya's weatth and, in addition |
to. increasing the number of Cuban workers in Libya, Castro may be
willing to provide Cuban support for Libyan adventurism aS &
means of ingratiating himself with Qadhafi. The relationship has

- already paid off for Cuba in terms of Libyan financial support.
for Havana's allies. in Grenada and Nicaragua.}

Havana has good relations with the PL
: ques The Cubans ~
apparently were incensed at Moscow Taiture to help the PLO in

the recent debacle in Lebanon, but Havana itself was in no
position to provide more than propaganda support and backing in

dnternational forums. Cooperation with the PLO enhances Havana's
ability to engagé in subversion worldwide and increases the .
likelihood that Cuba's clandestine resources will be used 7
selectively to hetp achieve PLO goals. However, the PLO is not a
monolithic organization. It is a coalition of several disparate
groupings, with variations in ideology, ranging from moderate to
Marxist-Leninist, some of which are well-disposed to the Cuban

- connection}

am, Cuba also has provided training for Polisario forces and
[continues to maintain a medical team of about 200 Cubans at a
$Polisario camp in Algeria. We suspect there may be a handful of
Cuban military advisers there, but Algeria's reluctance to permit
Havana to increase Sts assistance means that Cuba's support will
be limited mainly to propaganda and backing in the UN and
Nonaligned Movement, The Castro regime, nevertheless, iS
strongly committed io backing the Polisario in its war against
Morocco. .

-7-

)

Cuba stilt has[an estimated 650 ®
personnel in South vemeniproviding mit
militia, and ensuring thegovernment’s
orfentation. Some Cubans reportedly h
training foreign insurgents--for examp

4litary and civilian |
itary advice, training the
leftist potttical

ave been involved in

te, Omani guerrillas and

dissidents from Worth Yemen--and we assume this type of activity |

ersists.
Other inter

Other International Actions

Heartened by the erergence of var
parties. as Yeading forces in 2 nuaber

_fEurope, Havana sees great opportunitie
“between Washington and its Western all

for exasple, would like to generate We
pressure ,on Washington to cease its ai
government in £1 Salvador; the Cubans
arms, the government would succumb to
would also like to see @ repatition of
_Ricaragua or similar actions that emba
US prestige The Cubans are finding,
to exploit frictions is being hampered
renegotiating outstanding loans with a
Europe and Japan.

Havana is continuing its progras

. {nf luence both. public and private opin
aspect of this effort is to help creat

US military assistance to the governme
this end, the Casirs regise -- in conc

_ $s promoting the corcept of a negotiat

Central America. Knowing it has great
it is also promoting a comparison with
in Vietnam as a means of souring US pu

military aid to the Salvadoran government.

In the Nonaligned Movement, Cuba
interests and is working to activate p

however, has been reduced markedly by
of its role as chairman over the past

Cuba has a vast, well organized i
over the years with Soviet encourageme

fous democratic socialist

of countries of West

s to exacerbate frictions

jes. the Castro regime, —

st European diptomatic
litary support for the

believe that without US

the insurgents. Havana
french military sales to
rrass Washington and damage

however, that their ability
by Havana's necessity of .
nusber of creditors in

of tong standing =

fon in the US. JA key

e opposition to. continued. |
nt of £1 Salvador. Toward
ert with the Soviet line --
ed political solution in
appeal for the US media,
the US military experience
blic opinion on additional.

t

continues to reflect Soviet
ro-Soviet attitudes and to
Cuba's effectiveness,

nfrastructure, built up
nt_and support, for

expanding its influence ‘abroad in a variety of ways, tegal and

illegal. jThe Cuban Communist Party Ce
Department, for example, determines wh
dn a particular country--at times, Hav

diplomatic approach and subversion co}

ntral Committee's America
at approach fs to be used
ana utilizes both the
ncidentially--and then

becomes directly involved in policy execution. If a decision is :
made to follow the armed struggle route in a particular country,

ranean:

SECRET /BUPURR/ RULURI RAL GUN

7 [sze,cerecy Committee’s Department of Special Operations provides

Togistical support, ensuring that the appropriate facilities ef
the Cuban armed forces and security services are prepared for any
task from training foreign recruits to shipping sunitions

_ secretly.|

The party, in coordination with Moscow, periodically holés
International Theoretical Conferences to establish the _ 7
§{deological lines it expects revolutionary groups to follow. iThe
Cuban Interior Ministry uses its elite Special Troops to train
foreign recruits in any skills needed for clandestine or
fasurgent activity, be it frogman training, paratroop training,

‘querrilta tactics, hand-to-hand combat, weapons familiarization,
communications, or use of demolition charges. ,
. , . .

Cuba also has an outstanding propaganda apparatus--Radio

Havana, Prensa Latina, newspapers, magazines, covert publications

and radios, journalists’ organizations, and a stable of foreign
writers and intellectuals--which is used to help shape public
opinion around the world, give international exposure and
prestige to insurgent groups, and undercut US credibility. The
Interior Ministry-also has an efficient intelligence collection
apparatus, the DGI, and an internal security force, the DSE,.
which penetrates exile communities abroad to promote friction and
discredit refugees..

overnmental entity can be, and has

Any Cuban ministry or §
, ent operations when necessary.

used to support insur

1e ng Industry and Ministry of Merchant MFarine
and Ports provide facilities for shipping arms clandestinely as
does Cubana Airlines, a branch of the Transportation Ministry.
Even Cuba's mass organizations--for women, students, peasants,
union meabers, and the population in general--operate schools
where foreigners are trained in ideology and techniques for
organizing and promoting mass organizations in their own
countries.:. - a

eens

The Cuban experience in subversive operations dates from the
time the current leadership was carrying out the Cuban revolution
in the 1950s. The Castro regime, therefore, has 2 large number
of experienced cadres ready to train foreign insurgents in the
skills of the trade or take the field with them to carry out the
revolution. §— _ .

a PART IIS Possible Additional Cuban International Actions
Hostile to Us Interests tn 1583-84
. ~ : .

Overview
' The very nature of the Castro regime precludes, anything but
an adversary relationship between Havana and Washington. Castro =

needs this adversary relationship:
-- | To guarantee Soviet aid indispensable to his survival
. , (In the present climate of US-Soviet relations, Castro
. | would hardly expect the Soviets to take kindly to a
. Tapsrochewent with Washington that threatened Soviet
i

interests im Cuba).

of

=< To justify and excuse continued austerity at home (he
ae wses the US as the standard whipping boy whenever in
7 need of a scapegoat).

- To allow him to assume a major role on the world stage
(portraying the US as hostile permits him to assume the
hero's role in a David vs. Goliath drama). .

Castro fs in power. The guerrilla elite that dominates the
current leadership developed its political beliefs Curing the

guerrilla struggle against former dictator Batista. The
exserfences of thae cemsatgn and the initial years of power ~.
consolidation created an unswerving commitment to the philosophy

of armed struggle and a visceral distrust of US intentions. |
: From their perspective, the US is -- and always will be --

the principal threat. Jiresoting revolution fs seen as a means of
Gefending Cuba from the US threat (f.e.: the US has limited

resources and cannot make war on Cuba, {f it 1s busy fighting a. '
aumber of small wars elsewhere). It also provides allies such as .

 Wfcaragus and Grenada. [

co ae,

\The future holds no change in the Castro regime's ant4¢-US
ortentation. Strategy anc tactics may change to suit the —
Opportunity, but the general policy goal--to reduce US
influence--will remain the sare. Havana's efforts are likely to
be directed in several different areas.:

| This adversary relationship will not change as long as

a er

nr

NE aa ace eee

Latin America

— Eatin America will be the priority target probably for the
remainder of the decade. Subversion will continue apace, -
especially tn Central America, and Cuban support for Nicaragua

will remain a@ very high priority. ad De

-10- oe ee

In the event of a war between Nicaragua and Honduras OF @
serious threat to Sandinista control posed by armed exile groups, |
Cuba would probably {increase its military support to Nicaragua. j

The Cuban ‘Air Force and Cubana Airlines have the capability to
fly several thousand combat troops with their personal weapons
into the Managua area within about two weeks. Control of the
airfields in Nicaragua is critical to the performance of this
operation. — . -
‘Cuban Air Force fighters could fly directly to the Managua.
area and operate from there if fuel and ordnance are -
prepositioned. Inserting MIG fighters directly from Cuba would
‘be a very difficult and risky operation, however, unless the
runway at Pueriyv Cabezas vn the Atlantic coast is lengthened to

provide a refueling stop.

> Cuba has the ability to airlift up to a4 battalion of ground
troops or paratroopers. to several smaller airfields in Nicaragua,
and could even air drop them if necessary. Cuba lacks the
capability to airlift bulk cargo, however, and would have to send —
any tanks,. artillery, helicopters, and large radars by ship.
Most heavy equipment would have to transit the Panama Canal
because Nicaragua's Atlantic coast ports lack the facilities to
unload them..: se
. ; Cuban merchant vessels provide a modest sealift capability,
but only a few small draft vessels can use the Atlantic coast
posts. The Soviets have recently delivered one amphibious
Tanding ship to Cuba--and a second {is enroute--but their capacity

_ Panama is obviously becoming a serious concern in Havana,.
and an effort 1s Tikely to be made to convince the Panamanian
extreme left that resorting to armed struggle will eventually be
necessary to achieve true independence. Cuba will urge the far
left to send recruits to Cuba for training as a contingency,
should the Castro regime's efforts to, improve relations with the
Panamanian government fail and the Cuban presence in Panama be
threatened.) .

Havana will watch events in Mexico carefully to guard its
interests there and ta antage of any opportunity to sabotage
US-Mexican relations. j|Cuba will try to expand its influence in
Suriname and. will devote considerable effort to consolidating the
revolution in Grenada. It is reasonable to expect Havana to use

Grenada as a base from which to propagandize the eastern :
Caribbean and to conduct lfaison with leftists in that area.-,

“Cuba's greatest potential for military {intervention in the
eastern Caribbean will be realized when the new airfield in
Grenada {s completed next year. Although it is not scheduled to
open until 1984, it could be ready for military operations befqre
then once the runway is complete and fuel storage {s provided...

EE

7
:
|
J

‘Trinidad and Tobogo might find it fntinidating.
wilt also give Cuba a convenient stopover for troops en route te

Grenada could then serve as a staging base for Cuban ground and

air operations in support of its friends in the area. Grenada,

- Surfname, and possibly Guyana would find this potential for swift

military support comforting, while others Tike Venezuela and
The airfield
Africa. e

. Havana-fs certain to expand its efforts to destroy or at
Teast weaken the OAS and, through wooing new governments in a a
number of Latin American countries, to create a few regional
organization that excludes Washington. This is a major —

preoccupation of the Castro regime, and it may be willing to
reduce its subversive profile in certain countries if convinced

such temporary retrenchment would contribute significantly toward
that end... . -

Africa and the Middle East

The Cuban presence in Angola, military and ctvilfan, will

continue. at high levels, as Tong as Luanda needs and requests:

Havana's support to stave off collapse. It al serves both
Soviet and Cutan foreign policy objectives. Jai though the Cubans
-are reluctant to become more deeply involved in combat in Angola
or elsewhere in Africa--Such as Mozambique--Havana will do so if
necessary to remain in Moscow's good graces. Cuba is simply too.
dependent on Soviet economic assistance to say no without a major

justification. —

‘As for a Namibian settlement, Havana will work to scuttle it
4# Moscow so desires. Without such pressure, however, Havana

would probably want to avoid the onus of such meddling so long as

a settlement meant nothing more than a token withdrawal of Cuban
troops. On the other hand, if a total Cuban troop withdrawal {s
a condition of -a settkement, Havana and Luanda would not comply,
no matter what the outcome for SWAPO. In any event, Cuban

support in Angola for SWAPO and the African National Congress
will continue. |

The Cuban combat forces in Angola and Ethiopia are primarily
dedicated to defending Marxist-Leninist regimes in those two
‘countries from their foreign and domestic enemies. Providing
additional military advisors and instructors to these or other
African regimes is well within Cuba's current capabilities.
‘Providing. combat troops to Mozambique*or any other nation would
}be much more difficult unless the troops could be taken from.
those already in Africa. Calling up additional reservists for
internationalist combat duty would raise the domestic costs to

the Castro regime, and would require another large airlift and

sealift operation. Considerable Soviet assistance to airlift .
heavy equipment and to provide logistical support would also be
necessary. © ‘ - e- .

cel

though. the:
et Cuba. pay.
sc tupporting their

h ts

for Soviet in

ce collect hemisphere.

he-darg
cility. outside of.
moa “primarily at US”
_UBSK fs Nee rected Oreos VinksSe
| Soviet. naval. cnariti cont ce aircraft. Operating TrOw Cuba
‘almost ae gusty, for. the Pieter  ehe ae
surveillance ‘of. US ‘naval ves ¢-exercisi

ransiting the Atlantic. Ocean. oo
ary concern. “would: be.

woe During. a major: world. war,: Cuba's: 5 prima

survival. ‘and defense of. the- istand.. eine sizeable and welle
equipped Cuban military” ‘would. b ted to offer ib]
stiff defense of t

he homey ance 4

. a number ef
US targets would be vulnerable to Cuba's increasing offensive.

military capabilities. A more serious potential threat {fs Cuban
capability to harass or Snterfere with sea and air routes in the
Ceribbean/6ulf of Mexico/Straits of Florida areas. This would be
of particular concern because of the amount of US commerce --
particularly oil -- that passes through this region and when
- ynhampered transit from southern US ports and through Caribbeas
sea tanes would be required, such as for US reenforcement of
MATO. . The presence of Cuban FOXTROT-Class submarines intensified
this threat. Use of air bases in Wicaragua and possibly in
Grenada would put Cuban fighter aircraft within range to threaten
the Panama Canal and sea lines of communication in the
€aribbean. The Soviets would likely continue to use Cuba during
a war.as a base for intelligence collection against US military
operations, They might also use the istand to recover Soviet
- combat aircraft or naval ships. .

Trends in the Acquisition of Military Equipment

The Soviet Union has provided Cuba an increasing amount of
technologicall sophisticated military equipment over the past
two years, \and the scale of arms deliveries is not slackening.
Fighter aircraft, surface-to-air missiles (SAMS), and new radars
to improve Cuba's air defenses have been at the top of the
_ Vist. Further deliveries of MIG-23s, SAMS, and possibly some :
M16-25. Foxbat interceptors can be expected in the next few years.
Recent construction of naval support facilities: in the
Cientuegus arcs suggests the Cuban navy will also be expanding
significantly. At least four more submarines, some larger
surface combatants, and more amphibious landing ships are
expected. While these improvements will not greatly alter the
minimal direct threat Cuba poses to the continental US, they will

serve to further intimidate US friends in the Caribbean.

- 4
