Memo from Richard Helms to Director DIA Concerning Military Thought: CertainN Q
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012304, dated 4 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012304).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

: 1.3(a)(4!

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 23, D.c.

28 DEC 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: ‘The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT: "Certain Questions of the
Control of Troops in Modern Operations", by .
Major-General A. Morozov, Lieutenant-General :
NN. Lyashchenko, and Lieutenant-General of
. Tank Troops V. Arkhipov

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which
appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the
Journal “Military Thought" ( Weyanseve Mya") published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the Level of
Army Commander.

2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of
any part of this document in any other form should be addrdgsed
to the originating office. f

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

RICHARD HELMS

Enclosure

 4.3a)(4)

4.324)

~4.3{a)(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE °° 0" 822

Original:

cece

The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

‘The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Director, Division of Intelligence
Atomic Energy Commission

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
‘Assistant Director for Research and Raposte

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

~r,

4.3(a)(4}

COUNTRY : USSR

SUBJECT BBeccrrany THOUGHT: “Certain Questions of the

Control of Troops in Modern Operations", by
Major-General A. Morozov, Lieutenant-General
N. Lyashchenko, and Lieutenant-General of Tank
Troops V. Arkhipov.

DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

APPRAISAL _ ‘
OF CONTENT <: Documentary

SOURCE : A reliable source (B)..

Following is a verbatim translation of an article titled
"Certain Questions of the Control of Troops in Modern Operations" -
written by Major-General A. Morozov, Lieutenant-General
N. Lyashchenko, and Lieutenant-General of Tank Troops
V. Arkhipov"™. ,

This article appeared in the 1961 Second Issue of a
special version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya Mysl
(Military Thought). This journal is published irregularly —
and is classified. TOP SECRET by the Soviets. It is distributed
only within the Ministry of Defense down to the level of Army Commander.

1.3(a}{4)

4.3fa(4) -

Certain Questions of the Control

of Troops in Modern Operations

The nuclear/missile weapons and other achievements’

of science and technology have served as a basis for
the further development and improvement of the theory

Nof military affairs, and of the equipping and organiza-

\ tionaZ'structure of the troops. As a result of the
changes which have taken place in the nature of
modern operations, the combat capabilities of the types. -
of armed forces and arms of troops are basically
different from the operations and the combat possibilities
of troops during the period of World War II. The

substance of these changes has already been mentioned in
our press.

All this has Apmplieated, to a great degree, the
direction of the combat activities of troops and has
demanded of the organs of control more precise and
coordinated work, ensuring swift reaction, Flexibility,
and combat efficiency in troop control.

It is evident that under such conditions of armed
combat it is of the greatest importance to have more
perfected forms and methods of troop control, utilizing
all the latest achievements of science and technology,
especially those of electronics, telemechanics, and
automation. With this purpose in mind it is necessary
to improve considerably the organizational structure of.
staffs and their technical equipment, especially in view
of the fact that staffs have undergone virtually no
changes in the organizational sense since World War Ii.

The experiences of World War II and practice in

postwar exercises show that the commander's skill in
directing troops depends, to a large extent, on his

4.3(aN4).

1.3(a)(4).

4.3(a}(4}

ability to find the correct forms and methods of
control that would best answer the nature of the
armed conflict and would fully conform to the
situation. It is considered that the most favorable
| conditions for uninterrupted and firm control of
troops was secured for the commander at the primary
command post. However, despite all the positive
vqualities of this control organ, it was, and continues
vto be, unwieldy, with a large number of persons
directly subordinate to the commander and having ,
many Channels in the work.

All this artificially complicated the coordinated
vand exact work of all elements of the command post,
Vit burdened the commander's activities with secondary,

and sometimes insufficiently coordinated, matters and. -
distracted him from thoughtful, well-rounded analysis
of the constantly changing situation and making timely
decisions. In some commanders this bred indecision,
lack of initiative, and the inability to make a
courageous and correct decision quickly, based on a
thorough knowledge of the developing course of events.
As a result the commander was forced to resort to
systematic briefing by all his commanders, in the
course of which he became familiar with the situation
and made a decision.

A similar method of work by commanders and staffs .
took a lot of time, and often troops did not have
time to prepare for impending actions. If in the
past this did not lead to appreciable results, then
in modern conditions this practice has completely
outlived itself and can have a fatal influence on the
course and outcome of a battle and an operation.

In searching for more perfect forms and methods
of control, wide dissemination was given to the
“ practice of controlling troops by an operational group,
small in composition and headed by a commander who
guided the activities of the group in accordance with
the given situation. The advantages of this method
of control consisted of the fact that the exact and

1.3104)

coordinated activity of a well-trained and efficient
operational group which, besides the commander, had
only a part of the directing staff immediately
connected with control, ensuring flexibility and
operational efficiency in making quick decisions,
and. briefing the troops on their missions in a timely
manner, excluding the many stages and loss of time
for various coordination. The fact that combat and
operational documents were produced in a brief and
clear form, without unnecessary details, warrants
attention. Often battle orders and instructions were
written directly from the commander's words, then
were graphically plotted on maps, and less often were
put out in the form of written documents. The missions
of the troops were given orally with subsequent written
confirmation.

at

N The operational group had high mobility and the .
ability to deploy and redeploy secretly. All these
advantages became evident in a clear and obvious form
when controling tank and motorized troops during the
years of the past war, whose experiences can greatly
influence the further improvement of forms and methods
of troop control.

However, we consider that the plain transfer of
experience in the control of troops with the help of
operational groups will not ensure a solution of
all the most important problems that confront the
organs of control in modern operations. Besides, it
should be taken into consideration that often these
operational groups replaced the staff as a whole,
actually removed it from the direction of combat

\, operations . It seems to us that the principle --
the commander carries out control over the troops
personally and through his staff -- should remain

' "unchanged, and that the commander is obligated to
rely on his staff to an even greater degree.

N “The role of the staff, as the pasic organ of theN
commander for ensuring firm and constant control of
the troops, has grown significantly. In relation to

1.3 (ay{4) .

4.3(a)(A).

ae Bs Side Pt ee Me

the staffs of‘ the various arms of troops, it is the
highest staff, and during the organization of
coordinated work its directions must be received

_ for strict execution.

As a result of this the role of the chief of
staff also increases.* He concentrates in his hands
all the results of the many-sided and coordinated
activity of the whole staff and must be ready
/four or five words missing/ essential information .
€o the commander, for making a quick, well-founded ;
decision and to ensure that the troops are informed
of their missions in a timely manner. All this
will relieve the commander of the need to listen to
a large number of commanders and will immeasurably
raise the role of the staff as the only operational
organ headed by thé chief of staff, who is, at the
game time, the deputy commander.

It is apparent that the existing organization of
the staff does not fulfill modern requirements,
because of its unwieldiness, its many channels, and
lack of operational efficiency, and that it is in
need of basic‘ improvements. In order to avoid
improvisation, which can be observed now in exercises,
we propose that a pérmanent (under combat conditions)
\vorgan for direct management of troop combat operations
be created on thé base of the field command of a front
(army), which would have a harmonious organizational
structure. It would be limited in composition,
flexible, mobile, and adequately operational. The
basis of this organ has to be composed of part of the
operational and intelligence directorates (departments),
of the combined-arms staff and the staffs of the arms
of troops and types of armed forces. Such an organ,
detached from the field command and called, for example,
ithe control center, can and should appear as the main
organ providing the commander with firm and constant \J
management of the combat activity of troops. At the
front this organ will be the operational control center;
in the army -- the tactical-operational control center,

4.3(a)(4)

and in the division (corps) - the tactical control center.

1 aad) ;

In our opinion, the control center has to be
created to fulfill the basic function of providing \
constant control of the troops -- an operational
function -- under the direct leadership of the chief
of staff and to actually be the forward command post.

“ - The operational control center (at the front)

has to be composed of: the commander of front troops,
a member of the Military Council, the chief of staff,
the operational directorate of the staff, operational
units from the apparatus of the chief of intelligence’,
of the chief of missile troops and artillery, of the
chief of PYO troops, and in some cases operational :
groups from the staff of the air army of the front
and the navy (VEF); also the minimum number of
personnel necessary to provide support, servicing,
and protection.

N The nucleus of the operational control center is
made up of the operational unit of the staff of the
front with the chief of staff at its head; its
basic working apparatus is the operational and
intelligence directorates. Besides, in all
operational matters the apparatus of the chief of
missile troops and artillery, the apparatus of the
chief of PVO and the operational groups of the staff
of the front air army and VMF, are subordinate to the
chief of staff, as the first deputy to the commander |

N of troops. The chief of operational control has to
direct all practical, everyday, executive aspects of
the work of the operational center, of control and
supervision over its quality and timeliness.

~The make-up of. the operational control center, \ oy
the principle of its work, and coordination with the

system of various control points are shown on

Diagram #1. -

The immediate work of the operational control center
(at the front) is carried out, in our opinion, on a so-
“ called operational Plotting board, understood to mean
- a unified work area of the command, officers, and
generals ~~ who represent the various departments,
directorates, and operational groups. Maps (plotting
boards), that continually show the situation in an easy-
to-follow manner, are located at this work area.

1.3{a){4).

“Ge

4,3(a)(4)

1.3(a)4)

aequay [OrQUWOS
Twuctywszedg we jo wT ITsOdwoD

a

t{ werdeyg

oe a
| Tree
oO JTepiewsog4”

Se ed \
ny

YoUBIOPORIFC souer

om Jo

4.3(a}14)

4 3laylay.

Caras
=
&.
2
Canal

 4.8(a)(4)

teyneg Tor}U0] TruoTzezedQ UY Jo Atom ey} JO BOTZEZTUERZO 12 westerC

Re. . BAR - ITUIAV P ads
jo daorl . go dhoro sdoorl oTtssy
Tenopzezedo Teaopzer0do © soTuy Jo Tru

rego T 219709

ae f_|
&
t 7 i .

quowzze leg
‘RuctaesyueIz0

SUOT7WOTFUNBLIOD
jo yzoddng 20s dno

woTIENgTS Teuopperedd f°
Tersu99 eq3 jo det

Of fire
dnoazo

S jo uoty

Supuueti Tevoypzesed) oof OFISTTON 105

& JO qUaEARCEC
SISOFIIO woF7sITd

= 1048s

JFRIS JO JeFUD 7
soo | a eee esas
n z a :
7 ~— = : ~ 44 oe [ seyorng dass me acess : =
~

the organization of the work of the operational

control center on the operational plotting board appears to be as

follows:

In the main,

- 4.3(8)(4)

As shown on Diagram #2 all situation information
~goes to the operational plotting board of the
control center. Its location.is the basic work area
of the front troop commander ,: the chief of staff,
the chief of the operational directorate, the chief
of intelligence, and, when necessary, the chiefs of
the arms of troops and chiefs of the operational
groups of the staff of the front air army and VF,

“The operational plotting board is operated by _
the operational Planning department of the ‘
operational directorate. The chief of the operational
directorate and the chief of the department of
operational planning are responsible for continuous
operation of the operational. plotting board. In our
opinion, all the work is done on three maps: the
map with information about the enemy, the general
operational-situation map and the radiation situation
map. Access of persons to the operational plotting
board should be strictly limited.

It would be ‘best to usea light prefabricated
building to house the operational Plotting board,
where all the above-mentioned persons could work
together and where there would be facilities to
allow for concurrent work of the duty shift of
plotting board operators. Specially adapted staff
busses, and in individual cases even army supply
directorate (USB) and standard medical (UST) tents,
can be used for this purpose when necessary.

The special control points (operational units)
of the chief‘of missile troops and artillery, the
chief of PVO, and the operational groups of the
staff of the front air army and the VMF, and also
other departments and groups included in the

Nt composition of the operational control center, are
located close to the place where the operational
plotting board is housed,

ey ' 4.3{ay(4).

1.3(a)(4).

3(a)(4)

The remaining personnel of the field command, who
are mt part of the operational control center, will
become part of the command post or rear area control

Npoint (TPU), in accordance with the functions they

‘ fulfill. The interlocking of all three elements
of the field command -- control center (the forward
command post), the command post, and the rear area
control point --— must fulfill the needs for a
concealed and dispersed deployment in the terrain,
and should be provided with reliable internal F
communications that would permit the carrying on of '
conversations in the clear.

tod The organizational structure of the control centers
‘that. .we propose gives us the opportunity to relieve
the front troop commander (army commander and division
commander) of the great loss of time needed to hear ;
the situation reports, and will give him the opportunity
to allot more attention to situation analysis and execute
purposeful direction of troop combat activities.

The organization of such a control center also gives
\ us the opportunity to eliminate the separation of collection,
processing, and reporting of situation data about friendly
troops, about the enemy, and especially about the
radiation situation, which is very important under
modern conditions. All information will be concentrated
in one ‘place and is reported directly to the commander.

At the command post there has to be a reserve
operational plotting board with a group of plotting
board operators, that would duplicate the plotting of
the entire situation, in order to provide for the
control of troops when the control center (PKP) |
is moved or in the event it is put out of action, to
assume the control of troops.

On an analogous rear area operational plotting
board must be entered all the rear area situation -data,
that is essential to making decisions concerning
uninterrupted materiel-technical and medical support.
The plotting of the missile rear area situation has to
be done with extreme attention to.operational use.

ey (34).

-1]0-—

1.3(a\().

1.3(a}(4}

In our opinion, a necessary condition for stability
~“ of work at the control center has to be good technical
equipment, especially with regard to means of
communications and specially adapted staff transport.
First of all, we have in mind, the need to organize
and maintain. dependable communications with all sources
(shown on Diagram #1), providing situation data to
the operational center. In this, special attention
has to be given to the creation of separate communications
channels for the command, for chiefs of troop directions
(napravleniye), for the chief of missile troops and
artillery (only in the channel to subordinate units and
large units), the chief of PVO (in the channel of PVO
troops), the chief of intelligence, and also special
communications links with the general staff, with
coordinating large units (formations) and with the
staff of the front air army.

Just as important is the internal voice communications

\ net, and also the television equipment which would ensure

a free exchange of conversations within, as well as

between, every control organ. Besides, a number of

monitors (korréspondent) (who are relied on for this)

must have the opportunity to determine that conversations

on the internal system are in progress, by means of

a special indicator (tablo), and when necessary to

monitor the conversation in parallel or participate in

it.

An important consideration is the need to transmit
all reports to the operational plotting board, or the
orders (commands) from the operational plotting board,
via the.internal. voice system, to the chiefs of
directions or to control points of the chiefs of the
armg of troops, by clear text. In turn, they both,
in communicating with the troops, must receive and
transmit by means of encoding devices or cryptographic
security (SUV) documents.

VV Such control centers already exist at the command

posts of large units of PVO of the Country and in the

staffs of fleets, and they fully justify their existence.

It seems to us that there is a direct need to test, during
exercises, a similar system of control in the ground troops.

4.3(a){4).

me i

1.3{a){4).

1.3(a)(4)

Considering our special interest in fulfillment
of staff operational functions, we consider that
operational control, as the basic function of the
apparatus of command and of the staff also has to
undergo changes in its organization, that would
fully reflect the nature of the work they perform,

N It is expedient to have the operational control
of the front staff composed as follows: chief of
operational control and his deputy, the departments ,
of operational planning, operations (12 to 14 persons,
basically direction officers), information (6 persons),
radio countermeasures (4 persons), and organization
(10 to 12 persons).

Vv The operational planning department, composed
of 10 to 12 persons (6 to 8 operations officers,
one chemical, one engineer, 1 or 2 nuclear weapons
specialists) prepares suggestions for making decisions
regarding the use of front troops in an operation, and
prepares the decisions of the front troop commander,
in graphic or written form. During the course of
combat operations, the officers of this department
plot all the operational situation data on the
operational’ plotting board /4 or 5 words missing/
reports to the command. They also maintain the
radiation situation map, without which it is difficult
to determine the degree of safety of friendly troops
while they execute any maneuver on the battlefield,
and take into account the average doses of radioactivity
received by units and large units. The indicated
composition of the department can ensure work at the
control center in two shifts. :

\ _ Practice shows that the operational directorate
has to solve many organizational problems in addition
to the operational ones, and has to utilize the working
staff of the basic departments for this. This practice
does not justify itself. It seems to us that it is
necessary to include a reconnoitering group (2 or 3
persons) in the newly organized organization department,
for carrying out reconnoitering of control point areas

4.3(a){4).

4.3{aj{a}

and the placement and reldcation of the latter. It
should be assigned the duty for the area where the
control points, units and subunits of support,
servicing, and protection and also the organization
of chemical and radiation detection are located; for
this purpose it would be expedient to give the group
a special observation post. Moreover, the organization
department must have an administrative support group
(2 or 3 persons) in charge of matters dealing with the
organization of food and administrative outfitting of
control points, and a group to perform classified
work (5 or 6 persons), serving the whole staff of the
control center.

The total staff of the operational directorate
will. be about 50 to 55 officers, enlisted men, and
employees.

The diagram of control centers and other views
on various questions of troop control, and the
organizational structure of the control organs that
we propose, are not necessarily without fault. It
would be desirable to have other opinions expressed

on the respective questions, which will help to solve
them correctly.

Major-General A. Morozov

4.3(aj{4).

1.3(a)(4}.

1.3(a){4)

* * * F
Planning the use of nuclear weapons in a front
offensive operation is the principal question in modern
conditions, but it is solved by applying the old methods
of planning to the new conditions.

Experience gained from the exercises carried out in
the Turkestan Wilitary District brought us to the following
conclusion. As a result of the fact that, at the front,
nuclear warheads and means of delivering them to the target
are found under the subordination of various chiefs (the
air army commander and the chief of missile troops and
artillery), a lot of time is wasted by the troop commander
when making the decision to use these weapons in an
operation for the coordination of the questions: with
which weapons by whom, where and when must ‘the strike be
made. Normally, upon receipt of the operational directive, |
the chief of staff of the front informed the commanders ;
of arms of troops and the chiefs of directorates and
services about the combat mission received and announced
the preliminary decision of the front troop commander.
After this the plans for using nuclear weapons were prepared
simultaneously in the operational directorate, by the chief
of missile troops and artillery and in the staff of the air
army. Later these plans were coordinated by the chief of
staff of the front; in order to do this he listened to the
views of the appropriate commanders, which consumed a lot
of time. As a result of the limited time, the problems of
Planning the use of nuclear weapons, recording the rate of
use Of nuclear weapons, and the ix@diationusttuation;, its
analysis did not achieve the requisite solution,

A conviction arose, as a result of analysis, that the
need had arisen for a special. organ attached to the troop
commander and the chief of staff of the front, for planning
the use of modern means of combat, because the content of
the questions solved by the staff of the front and the
amount of work do not correspond to the existing organ-
izational structure and had exceeded its limits.

When preparing for the front commander-staff exercise
that was carried out in April 1960, a special group was .
created under the operational command of the staf? of the
front to plan the use of nuclear weapons and was composed
of seven persons. The group was headed by the deputy

| 1.3(a)(4).
|

-14-~

1.3(a}(4).

4.3(2\(4}

chief of the operational directorate. It was composed of
the senior officers of the operational directorate, the
staff of the chief of missile troops and artillery, the
air army staff, the chief of chemical troops, the engineer
troops staff, and the front staff intelligence directorate.

The group was assigned the following four basic
tasks: preparation of considerations concerning the use
of nuclear weapons for the front command, control and
recording of the receipt and rate of use of nuclear weapons,
recording of the radiation situation, and organization of
troop antinuclear protection. Before the start of the
exercise the volume and procedure of the work of the group
and the functional duties of each officer were delineated.
The chief of the group had to prepare and report ‘to the
chief of staff, or to the front troop ‘commander, proposals
for the most expedient use of nuclear weapons, and during ~-
an operation to summarize, analyze, and report all infor-
mation regarding the use of nuclear weapons by both sides,
and in particular, the radiation situation in the areas
of combat operations and in the rear area of friendly
troops.

It was decided that during the exercise the group
would.be located at the front command post since, basical-
ly, troops are controlled from there, However, experience
showed that under the conditions of the Middle-Eastern
(sredne-véstochnyy) Theater of Military Operations, when
the commander often leaves the command post during the
operation, and directs the troops from the forward command
post, a group of this type has to be located with the
front Commander at the forward command post. One staff
bus was allocated for the transportation and work of the
group. 7

In the future, in our opinion, with the creation of
such a group (department) it is necessary to take into _
consideration its ability to divide into two parts which
have equal capacity for work, so that in case one part
is put out of action the other can continue to fulfil the
assigned mission.

When, during the exercise, the directives of the
Supreme High Command for an offensive operation were

-15-

received, the group began its basic work of planning the
use of nuclear weapons, Based on the operational
orientation given by the chief of staff of the front,
which was attended by the group chief, the group was
given its primary assignment -- to plan in detail the
use of nuclear weapons in the first strike and during
‘the fulfillment of the immediate and follow-up missions
by the front troops.

First of all it was determined that the front would,
have 48 units of nuclear ammunition available for the
start of the operation, ready for use, including 34
missiles, 6 front cruise missiles (krylataya raketa),
and 8 atomic bombs. During a thorough analysis of the
Situation it was determined that it was possible to use
only 36 of the 48 units for the first strike, because
of the 18 troop missiles, 12 missiles were located in
divisions deployed far from the State border, and their
use in the operation would be possible only after these
divisions were committed to combat. Then enemy targets
were evaluated and it was determined that it would be
necessary to neutralize and destroy 29 targets with the
first strike. However, using its own facilities the front
could only carry out a strike against 20 targets and use
25 units of nuclear ammunition. The remaining 9 targets
were located far in the rear, and strikes against them
could be made more expediently by the means of the Supreme
High Command.

After identifying the targets, the coordinates of the
epicenter of the explosion, the numbers, yields, types
of Warheads and the nature of the burst, a chart was
drawn up, showing the nuclear. strikes to be carried out,
with tentative determination of the results expected
from the strikes. . :

In this way the group determined in detail the targets
and the number of nuclear warheads for each target in the
first strike for fulfilling the immediate and follow-up
missions, and also those held in reserve by the front
troop commander. All this work was coordinated with the
chief of missile troops and artillery and the air army

T3{ay{4) .

-16-

4.31014).

4.8(a)(4)

commander. The front chief of staff and the front troop
commander were forwarded the proposal for the use of
nuclear warheads, which became the basic plan for the
use of nuclear weapons.

A separate plan for the use of nuclear weapons
was not prepared; everything was represented graphically
on the plan of the operation, including the targets of
the strikes, the yield of the charge, the type of burst,
the time of the strikes, and alternate targets were also.
shown there. The ratio of forces in regard to warheads
and means of delivery, and the distribution of nuclear
weapons by missions were set out in tables on the map.
Unified signals were established to carry out the nuclear
strikes and were brought to the attention of the missile
units and aviation. Combat orders for antinuclear ;
protection of troops and installations were developed and
were coordinated with the chief of chemical troops, chief
of the rear, and the staff of the air army. During the
Planning period of the operation, the group prepared a map
showing all the targets slated for neutralization and
destruction by nuclear weapons, and the location of friendly |
troops and rear area installations; later nuclear strikes
of both sides and the radiation situation were entered on
the map. In this way the first stage of the group's work
in planning the use of nuclear weapons ended.

During the combat operations, the group was busy
identifying enemy targets, and when the troop commander
made the decision, they planned the strikes against them,
took into consideration the receipt and rate of use of
nuclear weapons, and also kept track of the radiation
situation, especially in cases of surface bursts. The
results of the enemy strikes were analyzed and conclusions
were drawn concerning the radiation situation and the .
possibilities for friendly troops to operate. Through the
staff of the chief of missile troops and artillery and
the air army staff the group kept track of the delivery of
nuclear strikes and plotted them on the map; the dispositions
of the troops were also plotted on the same map.

pt] 4.3(2)(4).

-~L7~

4.3(a}(4}

The group received information about the enemy
through an intelligence officer of the intelligence
directorate, from troop reports, and from air army
staff reports.- Based on this information, targets
that had to be destroyed or neutralized by nuclear
means were identified and evaluated. Conclusions were
reported to the chief of the operational directorate
and, more often, to the chief of staff of the front,
after which the troop commander made a decision and &
assigned the mission of carrying out the strike directly '
to the chief of missile troops and artillery or to the
commander of the air army by word of mouth or in writing;
in the latter case the orders were prepared by the group.

While working out the proposals to use nuclear
weapons the group was in constant contact with the
directorate of artillery armament, the air army staff
and the front rear area staff, and was informed about
the réceipt and readiness of nuclear weapons and the
provision of the missiles with special fuel. An officer
from the chief of missile troops and artillery supervised
the deployment of combat formationsof missile units
and officer-pilot supervised the basing of delivery aircraft;
all this information was also plotted on the map.

During the exercise the group tried to keep track
of losses inflicted on friendly troops by enemy strikes,
but did not fulfill this task because it did not get
the necessary summarized data from the troops. They came
to the conclusion that the groups can give the losses
only for separate strikes and for individual large units,
and that the organizational and operations directorates
should have the information about general losses as a

result of nuclear weapons as well as from other means of
destruction.

During the exercise the special group did not have
selector communications (selektornaya svyaz) with the
other directorates of the front staff. This should be
considered to be an abnormal situation. Experience
gained from the exercise showed that the group must have

~18~

1.3(a)(4):

4.3(a(4)

such communications with the intelligence directorate,
the combined command post of aviation and PVO, and
also with the troop commander and chief of the front
in order that all the information about the enemy that
reaches the intelligence directorate and the combined
command post be transmitted immediately to the special
group and be quickly plotted on the map and reported
to the chief of staff and the commander.

‘As shown by the experience gained from the exercise,.
it is essential to have a map-screen (karta~ekran)
on which all the enemy targets slated for neutralization
or destruction are plotted. This will greatly simplify
the work of the front troop commander.in, making a
decision about the carrying out of nuclear strikes.

It should be considered a fault that officers --
representatives of staffs and directorates -- were not
part of the operations directorate and were constantly
overloaded with work in their staffs and directorates
which reflected negatively on the work of the group.

Because such a group was organized for the first
time in’a district, many questions had to be resolved
by feel, but during the exercise it played a big role
and rendered considerable help to the front command in
the timely and purposeful planning of the use of nuclear
weapons. In many ways it simplified the work of coordinating
strikes between aviation and missile units. At the critique
of the exercise, the district troop commander pointed out
that the group performed a large, useful task and that in the
future it is necessary to create similar groups.

The group was created under the operations directorate
of the front staff, but during the exercise it worked
under the direct management of the front chief of staff
-and front troop commander and provided them with informa-
tion, because in the final analysis, the decision to use
nuclear means is made only by the troop commander. In.
addition fone line missing7 did not fulfill the missions
assigned fo it.

eae : 4.9(a){4)
oe ee

219%

4.3(a}

y 4.3()(4).

In connection with this, the conclusion arises
that there should be a similar permanent element
directly subordinate to the chief of staff of the
front who would work in close contact with the operations
directorate. The staff of such a planning organ must
be part of the T/O and be prepared in advance.

In our opinion it is necessary even during peacetime
to have in the staff of the military district and
directly subordinate to the district chief of staff r
a_special department of modern means of combat and troop
protection trom weapons of mass destruction subordinate

ectly to e strict chief of staff. n peacetime

this department has to train the lower staffs in
matters of planning the use of nuclear means, develop .
measures for and manage the protection of the troops from. .
the means of mass destruction. In wartime such a department
has to be expanded into a special directorate headed by
the deputy chief of staff of the front. It should concern.
itself with planning the use of new means of combat and
measures for protecting troops from weapons of mass
destruction.

Lt. General N. Lyashchenko

1.3(4)(4)

a 2 a. a itegeN es ae’

We consider it necessary to enumerate a series of
y Suggestions for the improvement of organizational
structure of modern staffs, their equipping, and methods
of work.

The existing organs of control, as was already
mentioned’ in our press, do not fully conform to modern *
conditions; they are too cumbersome, have little
mobility and their means of movement do not have
adequate cross-country ability over the terrain, It is
enough to point out that the staff and command of the
army have up to 1,500 persons in their composition and
up to 350 various motor vehicles, the staff and
directorate of a division -- up to 500 persons and more
.than 100 various motor vehicles. These staffs are tied
to the roads and bridges; it is difficult to move them;

a lot of time is required for their deployment and
redeployment, especially of army staffs. When, during
offensive operations, tanks and motorized-rifle divisions
move at a speed of 80-110 km per day, the staffs lag
behind the troops.

It is also Known that under conditions of mass use
of nuclear/missile weapons the commander's decision has
to be made, relayed to the executors, and carried out in
a very short period of time, in many cases calculated in
minutes or even seconds. Great command mobility is
necessary for the successful control of nuclear/missile V
weapons. It is possible to have missiles with nuclear
charges, tank, and airborne troops and not attain success
because of tardiness in the combat use of these means.

It is necessary to review the organization structure
of the staffs and sharply reduce the number of personnel
and the means of transport in them. Success in the control
of troops during modern operations will depend not on
the number of generals and officers in the staff, but on
the quality of their training, experience, the coordination
and operational efficiency of the work, and also on the

omens 4.312)(4).
aa

1.31a)(4)

4.3(2)(4)

technical equipment of the staffs. The control methods,
by small operational groups, used in the tank troops
during World War II, can be wholly and fully utilized
even under modern conditions. The staffs and directorates
of these large units and formations moved up in tanks

or motor vehicles with radio sets, were noted for

their high mobility and were trained and adapted for
troop control in mobile types of combat operations.

In our opinion, instead of an army staff and
staffs of the commanders of arms of trooops and services,
it is necessary to have a single staff for field command \
of an army with the chief of staff of the field command
as head; at thé same time he would also be the first deputy
army conmander. Organizationally the army field command
must contain:

~ the army command;
- chief of staff of the field command;

~ department of operational and combat management of
troops in operations and ‘in battle;

- chiefs of arms of troops and services and their
departments;

- the Party-political apparatus;

- army deputy commander for the rear area and control
organs for the rear area.

‘The staff of the army field command must have the
necessary combat and technical equipment supply units and
supunt te. ‘subordinate to it.

In our opinion, the army field command, from the

_ operational-tactical standpoint must be divided into a forward
command post (PKP) and a rear command post (TEP) .

fe
The PKP can be composed approximately as follows:

- army commander ;

-22-—

4.3(2)(4)

- member of the Military Council;
- chief of staff of the army field command;

~ a group of officers from the operations, intelligence,
and communications departments;

- chief of missile troops and artillery with a group
of officers;

- chief of engineer troops with a group of officers;
- chief of chemical troops with a group of officers;
- chief of the PVO with a group of officers;

- deputy commander of the rear area with a group of
officers;

- a group of officers, sergeants, and soldiers for
combat security and guard duty.

In’ our opinion the PKP of the army must have altogether
45 to.50 generals and officers, 70 to 75 soldiers and
sergeants, six tanks (three T-54 and three PT-76), 15
armored personnel carriers BTR-50P, 10 airplanes or
helicopters, and also the necessary means of communications,.
radio sets, radar sets and television sets mounted in tanks,
armored personnel carriers, helicopters, and airplanes.

The army rear command post will ensure, on orders
from the army commander, the supply of technical equipment
to the troops and, at the same time, will be the reserve. cael
control point in case’ the PKP of the army is put out of
commission. It is headed by one of the army deputy
commanders and can be composed approximately as follows:
- deputy army commander:
- deputy chief of the army political department;

- first deputy chief of the army field command staff;

131014)

4.3(2)(4).

~ 4.3(a)(4)

- deputy chief of the rear /one or two words missing/;

~ a group of officers from the operations, intelligence,
chemical, engineering, political, PVO, and communications
departments, and the depdrtment of the chief of missile

' troops and artillery;

!
I
i
'
I

- yrear area officers, specialists in artillery, tank
armament, motor vehicles and tractors, quartermaster, i
and fuel and lubricant (GSM) supply.

Directly subordinate to the army rear area command
post will be:

ote

~- reserve commands for divisions and regiments;

- troop units and subunits for the elimination of
the effects of enemy nuclear attacks and antinuclear
and antichemical Protection;

- depots and portable repair plants.

The advantage of this organizational structure of
the army field command is, in our opinion, that all
departments of the presently existing staff, and also
the chiefs of arms of troops and services, will be directly
subordinate: to the chief of staff of the field command,
Since he is the first deputy commander. This will make it
possible to concentrate all planning of an operation (battle)
and the control over all forces and weapons in an operation |
and in a battle, in the hands of one person.

In the divisioncommand there should: be, in our
opinion, 12 to 15 generals and officers, among them a
divisional commander, chief of staff of the division command,
chiefs of arms of troops and services, and the Party-.
political apparatus. Analogously. we propose thatthe army
unit sub-divide the division command into a forward command
post (PEP) and a rear command post (TKP).

The division PKP should have 5 medium tanks, 3 PT-76
light tanks, 3 armored personnel carriers and an air

Cae
es 132)(").

~24~

1.3(a}(4).

4.3104

flight (zveno) (3 to 5 MI-1 or MI-4 helicopters).

The creation of PKP and TKP as part of the army field
command and division command increases, in our opinion,
the combat readiness of the staffs, the mobility of
command posts and their viability.

The existing: cumbersome staffs reveal themselves
by the presence of a large number of antennas, radar
sets, busses and motor vehicles with high bodies. . -
Besides, .these vehicles are easily shot up with automatic
weapon fire, and -are pierced by mine and shell fragments.
Under these circumstances it is difficult to camouflage
the staffs and reliably ensure their viability. During
combat operations in separate directions, in the presence
of gaps and breaks in combat formations, with a sizeable
separation of individual units and large units from the
main forces, the staffs can be destroyed not only by
nuclear weapons and aircraft, but also are subject to
tank and infantry attacks, including enemy diversionary
groups.

For this very reason the control points which we
propose should be in tanks (T-54, PT-76), armored
personnel carriers, and armored staff cars, as a result
of which they will have cross-country ability to go
anywhere, maneuverability, be small in number, have high
viability, and will not stand out from the other tank
and armored personnel carrier subunits. The presence of
airplanes and helicopters in the control points will make
them even more mobile and maneuverable.

In line with the change in the organization of the
staffs, it is necessary to review the methods of planning
operations and combat actions, and also the manner of
troop management during the operation. In our opinion
the plan of combat and operation under conditions of a
nuclear/missile war has to consist of short combat
documents. The absence of lengthy operational pauses,
during which the planning and preparation for approaching
operations was previously carried out, will probably make it
necessary to carry out all planning during combat operations.
Under these conditions there will not be time to prepare
‘voluminous documents.

ee | 1.3(a)/4).

-25-

3{ajt4).

4.3(a)(4}

In’ our opinion the plan for an operation and battle
has to indicate the goal of the operation (battle), which
enemy grouping will be destroyed by nuclear weapons,
which targets or territories are to be taken by combined-
arms large units and units, the depth of the mission,
the direction of the actions (mainly of the airborne and
tank troops), the time for fulfilling the mission, and
also the questions of supply of material-technical equipment
and Gontrol of the troops. All this should be noted on _
maps. i

‘As soon as we abandon bulky operational plans and
other operational documents, and superfluous military
bureaucracy, cumbersome staffs will not be needed and
there will be more operations and real management: of the
troops.

Everyone knows that the generals and officers of
modern staffs and directorates of armies and divisions
waste two=thirds of their time processing various
types of documents that often are not needed for their
work, and only one-third of their time is used for the
direct control of troops, which is also done by only
a small group, and not by the overwhelming number of
staff generals and officers. To abolish decisively
the unnecessary paperwork that has increased 2 or 3 times
during the postwar period means the release of a large
number of officers for specific control of troops in combat
and operations. It would be more useful to employ the
released generals and officers for the creation of reserve
PKP and TKP which can be used in case the basic control
points are put out of commission.

The oreacieaticoust structure of Teepe units, and units
exerts great influence on the firm control of troops.

In our opinion the modern organization of an arny,
motorized=-rifle division, and tank division do not
conform to the conditions of modern missile/nuclear war.
They are cumbersome, have little mobility, inadequate
maneuverability and are difficult to control during
combat and battle. This organization has had its day
and has become obsolete, the same as the organization of
modern staffs.

am 1,3(a}(4).

~26-

4.a(a){4).

oe

Without going into detail, we propose to switch
to the brigade principle of structure for the combined-
arms formations. Modern ground troops, it seems to us,
have to’ be composed’ of missile divisions and brigades,
of tank, mechanized, and airborne brigades. |

The army (possibly, it is better to call it the
mobile combat group ~- BPG) is not constant in its
composition. Its composition depends on the combat
task’ to be fulfilled, the depth and width of the offensive
zone, nuclear weapon support, and other conditions.

In the makeup of the army (BPG) it is necessary
to have about: 5 to 7 tank or mechanized brigades (in
any ratio), a missile brigade, two airborne brigades,
l or 2 engineer brigades, 1 or 2 chemical troop brigades, - —
3 to 5 medical battalions (detachments), a rear services
brigade, and a reserve brigade. For combat security the
army (BPG) has to have an aerial reconnaissance regiment,
an armored reconnaissance regiment, reconnaissance
{S to 8 words missing7. Besides, it may receive 1 or 2
missile brigades, an air division of fighter-bombers, a
river-crossing brigade, and a chemical protection
brigade as reinforcements.

The tank brigade must consist of from 3 to 5 tank
battalions, and a battalion of organic missiles
(voyskovaya raketa). <A brigade may have up to 100
tanks, 50 percent of them light; in a mechanized brigade -
correspondingly 3 to 5 mechanized battalions, 1 or 2
tank battalions, and a battalion of organic missiles.

All army rear services elements should be combined
into a rear services brigade, and the rear services of
tank (mechanized) brigades ~~ into a rear services
battalion. The rear services have to be deployed on
tracked or other vehicles with high cross-country
ability. Helicopters have to play the principal role
in the supply of nuclear weapons, for which the army has
to have a regiment of helicopters (30 units), and about
10 helicopters in a brigade. —

4.3{a}(4}.

~27<

1,3(a}(4).

Tank and mechanized brigades have to receive clear
and specific tasks in great depth in order to achieve
the final goal of the operation.

Notifying troops of their tasks has to be done
by short combat orders through technical means of
communication, by personal contact, or by delivery
to battalions or brigades by airplane, helicopter, or
tanks ,of situation maps with the assigned mission.

It seems to us that the methods of control of troops
stated above will provide the opportunity to plan a
battle and operation in a more efficacious manner, and
control the troops in a more concrete manner during
them,

Only a few general problems regarding organization
of control in modern operations are stated here. They
can be resolved in greater detail and checked out only
during command-staff and troop exercises. For this
reason it would be expedient to carry out a series of
exercises for the purpose of detailed study and develop-
ment of problems of troop control, since the methods
of troop control that now exist are in need of
fundamental review.

Lt.-General of Tank Troops V. Arkhipov

ay 1.310)(4).

~28—

1.3(a}{4).
