Noel Field RevelationsS of Karel Kaplan-reports on Noel Field and the Rosenberg
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000028650, dated 3 May 1977.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000028650).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

J = e % :
. oe oe oan e
oo on cole : (: < oa t} *
CEN. <AL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY : as
ee WASHINGTON, D.C, 20505
i” mc 20138

7

C . +
- 4 f &
| Wetl Awd ©
MEMORANDUM FOR: Director
Federal Bureau of Investigation

- ATTENTION : aN
SUBJECT : Revelations of Karel Kaplan E
Ee
1. With reference to your memorandum of 19 May 1977 \ B
entitled "Karel Kap} 15 = Czechoslovakia" vy
Pentitled \

and the memorandum §
"Reports on Noel Field g é attached
items are being forwarded for your information. -

2. When the other articles from the Italian periodical
Panorama become available they too will be forwarded.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR FOR OPERATIONS
owe”

oN Attachments: .
As stated above.

Aunraved far Release

TE pee tt ee s
ee Fg

eng ae ee A RES 6
* - . - a A ne

Part Ii. And I Saw a Name: Rosenberg i

[3 May 1977, pp 169-192) ;

e A file in the Prague archives on Julius Rosenberg,

: executed in the United States in 1953 for espio-
nage on behalf of the Soviet Union. It had been
gathered in 1947. "A remarkable revelation," say
two American historians who dealt with the Rosen-°

Lerg case.

"The matter is extremely delicate. It lends itself too readily
to manipulation of every sort. And besides, it's not in my
field. I am a specialist in Czcchhistory, and I can teil
what & know about the history of the communist movement, but I

‘know nothing about American history."

This was the first response of historian and Czech communist lIea-
der Karel Kaplan (PANORAMA's N? $75 carried the first instalment
of Kaplan's recollections on Stalin and his decision to start a
war in Europe), when, during one of many conversations in his

Little apartment in Munich, where he now lives with his wife,
Vilma, the name Rosenberg came up.

It: was the PANORAMA correspondent who first. mentioned the nane
of the Amcrican couple, both conmitted communists, who were sen-
tenced to death in 1953 for atomic espionage op. behalf of the
Sovict Union. There was talk of the political trials in Czecho-
slovakia during the years fron 1948 to 1954, during the Stalinist

- era, and the Rosenbergs were cited as an example of politicai
trials on the other side of the wall. 'Maybe there is something
in the Prague archives that relates te this. case," said Kapian,
who knows those archives as no one else can. He is in fact one
of the very few people -- five or six in all -~ who had free ac
cess to these files for a whole year; from April 1968 to April
1969. What does Kaplan know about the Rosenberg case? It was
not easy to get him to tell.

Karel Kaplen, 48, a historian with an international reputation
and a Party officiat from 1948 to 1968, then expelled like all
_of Dubcek's people, at the time of the Prague Spring was
consultant for historical sciences to the Central Committee of
_the Czech CP, was, in that spring of 1968, given an assignmert
of extreme delicacy and cnormous political importance to Czecho-
slovakia by his top superiors in the Party: to write the defi- .
nitive history of the political trials, the story of how the |.
dream of a socialist Czechoslovakia had been turned into tragedy-

ine Already thoroughly familiar with the history of the trials, in
a: which he was concerned both as a historian and 4s a politician
fece 2 fron 1963 onward, Kaplan found himself suddenly given conplete
~ ge AVE —

ENCLOSURE

’ "hea a ; \
= freedom, along with his colleagues, to examine tens of thousands
i> . of potentially explosive docinents, on which no one had ever be-
“ss fore been permitted to lay hands. They contained damaging evi-
dence not orly against Czech leaders like former President hKie-
ment Gottwald and his son-in-law, former Defense Minister Alexgj

Cepicka, but laid serious charges against the Sovict Unien it~
self. °

"The name of Rosenberg was one of many that passed before my
eyes," Kaplan says- But that was not what I was looking for. f
paused for a moment because naturally I remembered what the Rosen-
berg case hed meant to us, too," Kaplan recalls.

The answers Kaplan and his colleagues were looking for, gathered
on 300 typewritten pages, never saw the light of day. The docu-
ment, known as the Piller report (Jan Piller, a member of the
Central Committee Presidium, was responsible for labor policy),
has until now remained secret: in the West a condensed version
of it was published, the only segments to slip through the meshes
_of the Party until now.

The Soviet invasion of August 1968 and Dubcek's replacement 8
months later with the present Party secretary general and Presi-
dent, Gustav Husak, was what prevented publication of the report.
As PANORAMA readers could see for themselves from the historical
essay in our last issue, both the Soviets and Czechs had good
reasons to keep the report undcr wraps.

After much insistence, Kaplan agreed to a discussion of the Rosen-
berg case with two American professors invited to Munich by
PANORAMA. They were David Kennedy of Stanford University in Ca-
lifornia, a specialist in 20th century American political his-
tory, and Allen Weinstein of Smith College,:in Massachusetts,
who brought suit to obtain most of the FBI files on the Rosen-
berg case and is now. writing a book about it- The discussion
took place in a Munich hotel on 27 March. In mid-April, Wein-—
stein met with Kaplan again. Shortly thereafter some irrespon-—
sible leaks passed across the Atlantic and give an inaccurate
picture of the information on the Rosenberg case in Karel kKap-

Jan's possessions

c PANORAMA: It may well be impossible to talk about the Resenberg
case without getting a bit emotional, pro or con. Believing or
not believing in the innocence of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg is
in fact more a matter of faith than of concrete legal proof. it
was so, according to many of the scholars who have dealt with the
matter, even for the judges who decided the fate of the two ac-
cused. "By your betrayal you have changed the course of history
to the detriment of your country," said Judge Irving R. Kaufman
fron-the bench where he presided over the court. These were high-
sounding phrases, but, uccording to a lot of people, they only
thinly cloaked a Jack of solid facts on which to base the harsh
senlecnces

endo: TRIE SR es bere

“ ¢

KENNEDY: That's true. It was a highly political trial. You
must. keep in mind that American public opinion was strongly
oriented, after the experience of war and victory, toward a re=
turn to the isolationism of the 'thirties. Let the rest of the
world, particularly Europe, stew in its own juice, was the
attitude of the avereec American during those years. President
Harry. Truman, Secretary of State George C. Marshall and his suc-
cessor, Dean Acheson, decided on the contrary to take on a lead-
ing role in world politics. Hence you had, first of all, in
1947, the tough talk of the Truman Doctrine, astutely designed
to scare the American electorate to death- Then there was the
political manipulation of some court cases, those of Alger Hiss
and the Rosenbergs above all, for politicai purposes. These
were not trumped-up triais, but even 50 they helped awaken pub-

lic opinion to what the group then running things in Washington

then considered the. communist peril.

say that even in the United States

ad the political role created in Cze-
the prosecuting

KAPLAN: You might perhaps
there were those who playe
choslovakia by Public Prosecutor Josef Urvalek,
attorney in the Rudolf Slansky trial.

KENNEDY: Certainly, even though the overall situation in the
two countrics was different. America, right after the war,
experienced a brief period of euphoria. We had won. We had the
atom bomb. We were the strongest of all, we were all-powerful.

Then in 1949 came the shock of the coup d'etat in Prague. And,
before the year was out, the Russians exploded their first atom
bomb, and only a little while later, in the spring of 1959, the
Korean War broke out. The American drean of a lasting peace
guaranteed by American omnipotence was shattered. The people
were asking why and, as often happens, the easiest and most per
suasive answer was: find the traitors. It was the old, old
explanation of history as the doing of conspirators. Look for
the traitors! And this soon became the warhorse of the Repub-
Licans, who were in the opposition at the time. That was how
we got to McCarthyism and the charge of treason levelled against
the entire Democratic Party, which had been in power for almost
20 uninterrupted years. The Rosenberg case has to be looked at

in this context. r

PAXORAMA: After 26 years of impzssioned debate between those

who think the Rosenbergs were innocent and those who think they
were guity, do you know anything new about the Rosenberg casc?
WEINSTEIN: Not much so far, since 211i the investigations have
been concentrated, not ca the case per se, but on the trial and
‘on the very harsh sentence which was; to say the least, an ob-
scenity. But alinost nobody has dug inte all the things that
happened prior to the trial, or into hor the FI happened, in its

wong ret

“
+

hunt for spices who may have passed eeente ee
to pick on Julius and Ethel Rosenberg. crets to the USSR,

PANORAMA: Granted that the trial was heavi i

prevailing political climate, there is Seen eee uicae
unanswered question: were they guilty or were they innocent?
WEINSTEIN: . No historian can make himself a ‘judge and hand down
a sentence, That is what the courts are for. The historian
can and must investigate. And insofar as I am concerned I can
gay that nothing in all I have examined up to now, proves that
the Rosenberg's were innocent.

PANORAMA: Are there additional pieces of evidence of guilt,
besides those introduced at the trial?

WEINSTEIN: Incredible though it may seem, the FBI had evidence

that would have been of great help to the prosecution, and did
not use it. For example, a letter seized on 15 June 1950 in
the house of David Greenglass and written by Greenglass's wife,

‘Ruth, to Greenglass while he was working as a mechanic at the

secret nuclear base at Los Alamos in New Mexico, where they
build the bombs that were dropped on Japan.

Greenglass, 4 sergeant in the army, knew absolutely nothing as.
to what the pieces he was making under the direction of the sci-
entists were to be used for, nor did he know the reason for ail
the secrecy that surrounded the base. It was his brother-in-law
Julius Rosenberg who explained it to him: “Julie (that's what
everybody in the family called him) was here and told me what
you are probably working on," wrote Ruth Greenglass to her hus
band on 31 July 1044. Well, the prosecution would certainly
have scored some heavy points by asking Julius Rosenberg how is
the world he happened to know; in 1944, a secret no other Ameri-;
can knew, with the exception of a few dezen people in Washing-

ton.

PANORAMA: Why in the world wasn't the letter produced and placed
in evidence by the prosecution? ‘

WEINSTEIN: That is one of the many mysteries surrounding the
Rosenberg case. I think I shall explain it in my book. JF'd

like to ask Professor Kaplan now if he has anything to tell us.
After all, we are in the same boat: I have had access to hither~
to secret documents through a lawsuit under American law, and he
has had the same kind of access thanks to the particular straits
in whith his country found itself in 1958. - e

PANORAMA: Professor Kaplan, I know that you don't like to talk
about this matter. But you must, be aware of the historical in-~
portance of your testimony. Up until now, in fact, ali anfor-
mation about the Rosenberg case has come from American, or at
Yeast from Western Sources. j

. r
re

ic ebioaeiione meena

C - oo . om
KAPLAN: As I have already said, the ree oe case is very deli-
cate, it is not my specialty, and what I know about it I learnt
by chance. Anyway, there js in the archives of the Central Com-
mittee of the Conmunist Party in Prague a file on Julius Rosen-_
berg; set up prior to 1950. The file is in a folder which con-
tains notes and details relating to an intelligence network set
up by the Czech secret services in the United States in 1947.

PANORAMA: What does ell that mean?

KAPLAN: I couldn't say for sure. I repeat, I-was never directly
concerned with the Rosenberg case, nor could f have foreseen hap-
pening onto that particular file during my research in 1968.
However, since I was interested in the intelligence network set

up by the Prague secret services in the United States {I was

looking into it in connection with the Pield case, which was

indeed of great importance gn shedding broad daylight on the po-
litical trials), I can offer some theories.

- The fact that this file exists may mean either that the Czechs
-were indeed in contact with Julius, or that they wanted to make
contact with him. And here again it is impossible to make asser-

tions based on guesswork.

PANORAMA: Rather that proof, what we have here are strong indi-
cations to support one point: ‘Julius Rosenberg was known to the
Prague secret services even before he became, following his arrest
in July 1950, @ protagonist in the dramas played out on the front
pages of every newspaper in the world.

“KAPLAN: Certainly, even though what is in the Prague archives

does not constitute proof that Rosenberg was a spy for Czechoslo-
vakia.

PANGRAMA: At this point, though, there are some things to clear
up. The Rosenbergs were found guilty on charges of spying for

the USSR during the peried when David Greenglass was at Los Ala- .
mos, that is; between 1944 and 1946. And at that time the SVAB
intelligence agency was not yet active in the United States, since
4t was not founded until 1947. Forthermore, during the trial,

gn March of 1951; there was talk of contacts between Julius Rosen-
berg and Soviet diplomat. Anatoly Yakoviev, but never any mention

ef Czech agents.

WEINSTEIN: Julius Rosenberg began passing gjnformation te the So-
viets at the beginning of the ware Minor stuff, petty industrial
espionage. It should be emphasized furthermore that the United ©
States and the Soviet Union were allies then in a no-quarter war
against nazism and fascism. And that Julius Rosenberg and his
wife (Ethel's role in this whole business has yet to be clearcd
up), might perfectly well have felt that he was performing a quasi-
Yegal action. The USSR then was in fact no longer mercly the onc
country ta have adopted the political ideoloy in which he hbelic-

yed, but was also cornitted to 2 herculean erfort shovilder to

shoulder with the Unitcd States.

- - =

And then, into tne life of Julius. Rosenberg, who was certainly
not a spy on the level of Rudolf Abel, came a great event, one
destined to change his existence totally, and tragically: by .
one of those imponderable and perhaps random decisions of mili-

tary commands, his brother-in-law, David Greengiass, was sent to

Los Alamos. ‘Suddenly, in the eyes of his Soviet friends, Rosen~

berg became an important personage. Maybe he even thought so

himself. Anyway, there is nothing. to indicate that Julius, once

the war was over, ceased his activities as an informer, and it

is quite possible that he had contacts with mee agents as well.
the

PANORAMA: But why did the Soviets have to use/Czechs after 1947?

They had maintained direct contact for at least 4 years, 50 they

could perfectly well have continued them.

KAPLAN: The.entire system set up by the Czech secret service in
the United States had, as one of its principal aims, to provide
aid and support for the Sovict spy system. Czechoslovakia still
had a coalition government, was still not a communist country, and
so its diplomats were not nearly so closely watched, in the United
States or elsewhere, as were the Soviets.

.The Czech role may heve been to stand in for their Soviet col-

leagues in making certain contacts, or tc provide local agents
with the funds required for operations. It was a collaboration
between Prague and Moscow that went beyond the area of action of
the intelligence services. Nor is it even certain that this col-
Jaboration was imposed by Moscow. Quite the contrary. For many

. Czechs during those years, it was what you might call a point of

honor to help the Soviets in their battles on the international
level.

WEINSTEIN: The contact between Julius Rorenberg and the Czech
services in America explains one point in the Rosenberg arfair
that hus hitherto been a mystery: why in the world, according

to the testimony given at the trial by David Greenglass, would

Julius Rosenberg have told his brother-in-law, in May 1950, to
flee to Mexico and from there, after a stopover in Switzerland
or Sweden, to head for Czechoslovakia? In Prague, according to
his testimony at the trial, Greenglass was to get in touch with
the-Soviet ambassador. ; :

PANORAMA! This sheds light on one detail of the affair. But,

on the whole, does the document Professor Kaplan saw in the ar-
chives explain what in many ways is still the mystery of the
Rosenbergs; or docsn't it.? Does it tell is whether the Rosen-
bergs were guilty, or not?

WRIXSTEIXN: The proof that the Prague inteiligence people knew
Rosenberg pricr to his arrest adds a very important. dimension to
the whappy affair, one which none of those who have been looking

eo he te ne ae ee ee Pe me oe

4 < 1)
into the case, whether they leaned toward innocence or guilt,:
had dreamed they would have to take into ¢onsideration. And
for that matter, it should have been imposible, working aS we *°
do with Western material only. :
KENNEDY: I must lay down a premise. The new revelation Dr.
Kaplan has imparted to us and which we’believe because we have
no péason to doubt his word, obviously does not change the to-
tally negative judgment we have formed as to the imposition cf
the death sertcnce. Having said that,, I showld like to remind
you that the Rosenberg case left two’ great questions unanswered!
did the Rosenbergs really pass info/mation to the Soviets, I
mean were they actually guilt of treason? Was the information
reslly important? es

PANORAMA: The majority of scientists questioned on that point
agree that it was note Basically, it consisted of sketches
drawn from memory by 4 sergeant whose scholastic record was any~
thing but brilliant. ~

KENNEDY: Be that-as it may, the answer to the second question
gis highly technical. As for ¢he first question, though, 4s to
whether they were guilty or innocent, it seems clear to me that ~
what Professor Kaplan has told us confirms the theory shared by
many (and, I repeat, quite independently of any opinion as to :
the trial}, that the Rosenbergs were indeed involved in espion-—
age for the USSR. As ¥ see it, in the present state of our know-
edge of the case, this is a revelation of the utmost importance.

WEINSTEIN: I should 1ike to add that it is not possible now, and
perhaps it neve wili be possible to know exactly what the Rosen-
bergs did. I.would also emphasize the point that you have to
distinguish between the guilt of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg and
the unbelievable and cruel death sentence. But, having said

that, I should like to say that what I have learned from rrofes—

sor Kaplan, as to whose intellectual honesty there can be no
doubt whatever, is of extraordinary historical significance.

Spy Bunt

~

The Rosenberg case is linked with the history of the atcmic bomb,
with the sense of safety which the possession of the terribie
new weapon gave the American public for several years, and with
the sense of loss that struck them when the United States! great
rival, the Soviet Union, exploded its first nuclear device in
the fall of 1949. Qnly treason on the part of U.S. communists
and inflitration of Soviet spies in America,, many Americans be-
lieved, could have given the Russians the atomic secret. And
that is how the hunt for the traitors began. 4

Londen, 2 Frbsuary 1950: British scientist Kiaus Fuchs, who had
worked on the American atom bomb at Los Alamos, N.M., was arres—
ted for espienace. Fuchs confessed. °

Wheeling, West Virginia, 9 February 1950: an un : ic
Senator, Joseph McCarthy, for the first time ee ee oe
Feommunism” and "treason" against many unidentified State Depart-
ment: officials. Overnight, McCarthy, whose charges turned cue in
most cases to be baseless; became a national celebrity.

Philadelphia, 23 May-1950: FBI agents arrested Harry Gold, a
chemist, who confessed to having worked with Fuchs in atomic
espionage for the USSR...

“New York, 16 June 1950: David Greengiass, mechanic, a sergeant

at Los Alamos during the war, charged with having passed atomic
information to Gold in 1945, was arrested. Shortly thereafter,

he "told what he knew."

New York, 17 July 1950: The FBI arrested Greenglass's brother-
in-law, Julius Rosenbergs 32, machine-shop owner, who had been
fired in 1945 from an army desk job because he was a communist.

New York, 11 August: Julius Rosenberg's wife, Ethel, Greenglass'
sister, was arrested.

Laredo, Texas; 18 August: Escorted to the border by the Mexican
police, Morton Sobell, 33, a university classmate of Julius .
Rosenberg's, was arrestéd, : ,

New York, 6 March 1951: The trial of Rosenberg and Morton So-
bell, on cherges of atomic spying for the USSR. The events date
back to the days when the U.S.A. and the USSR were allies against
nazism, but the climate now is very different, and the charge is
pitiless. their loyalty went not to our country, but to comnu-
nism," said prosecuting attorney Irving Saypol in his summation
to the jury. David Greenglass accused Julius of persuading hin
to pass along atomic secrets at Los Alamos. Gold admitted again
having picked up intelligence from Fuchs and Greenglass. The
charges said that the intelligence was passed on to Soviet di-
piomat Anatoly Yakovlev. Emanuel Bloch, the Rosenbergs! defense
counsel and a lawyer for the CP of America, argued that the char-
ges against his clients, unlike those against Gold and Green-

glass, wer? invalid.

§ April 1951: Judge Irvin R. Kaufman pronounced the Geath sen-
tence on Julius and Ethel Rosenberg» Morton Sobell got 30 years.
All three protested their innocence.

October 1951: Committees for the Rosenbergs? defense were formed.
More than in the U.S.A., where the earlier Alger Hiss case had
somewhat sated the public's interest, the pro-innocence campaign
built up in Europes : ;

a ALAS pa

25 February 1952: The death Sentence was confirmed on appeal.

30 December 1952: Attorney Bloch, as American law allows, tried
to persuade Judge Kaufman to reduce the sentence. Why didn't |
the Rosenbergs plead guilty; and get a lighter sentence? "Be-
cause," Bloch explained to the judge,."deep’ down in their hearts
they believe they are innocent." oy

January 1953: Two Nebel Prize-winners, Harold Urey and Albert
Einstein, ask clemency for the Rosenbergs. The pro-innecence Cam~

paign was still growing.

‘25 May 1953: For the third time, the Supreme Court, despite fa-
vorable opinions from two of the justices, refused to hear the

cases

16 June 1953: "Once again we solemnly declare our innocence, ™
wrote the Rosenbergs in a letter asking for clemency from Presi-
dent. Dwight D. Eisenhower. Only a confession conld save them
from the ele¢tric chair. A telephone line was kept open in the
prison in case of a last-minute clemency decision.

29 June 1953: Having refused to make any confession, the Rosen-
bergs died in the electric chair, while in Washington, London,
Paris, Rome, and Stockholm silently weeping crowds mourned their
passing. They faced the end, wrote the NEW YORK TIMES, “with a
composure that astonished all present.*® ;

Almost 24 years have gone by since that day, but the Rosenberg
g@ase, the most controversial of all the postwar espionage cases,
é€il1l enthralls and touches people all over the world. There
have been countless pleas for a review of the trial. “History
Will vindicate us," said Ethel Rosenberg before she died. "The
Rosenbergs," wrote the American weekly NEWSWEEK a little while

. ago, "lie in ah tneasy grave."

PART IV: REVELATIONS FROM CSSR ARCHIVES _(conclusien)

{24 May 3977: Triple Play for Stalin, by Karcl Kaplan]

{vextf The whole truth about the Field Case. Washingtor
> eharged him with spying for the Sovict Union. The .
Soviets were trying to make him confess he was work~
“dang for Allen Dulles. Actually, he was a tool in
Stalin's hands, used to unleash one of the most
massive purges in the communist world.

He was a4 secret agent, but who was he working for? He was used
in the most cynical. possible way in a gigantic political game.
But by whom? The Americans or the Soviets?

“For 30 years; now, these questions about the incredible affair

of U.S. diplomat Noé1 HPaviland Field, who disappeared in Pragite

in 1949 and surfaced again, 6 years later, in Budapest, have been
waiting for an answer. Nobody has been able to come up with the
apswers until now. So impenetrable was the cloud of dust and con-
fusion kicked up around Field that in 1949, just as a lot of peo-
ple in Washington were accusing him of spying for the USSR, over
in Budapest the secret service and Soviet agents were using tor-—
ture to make him confess that he was a special agent for Allen

~ Dulles, the Grey Eminence of American espionage.

- Numerous inquiries came to a dead end. Two books about the affair,

one by Plora Lewis, a NEW YORK TIMES reporter, entitled "Red Pawn:
The Story of Noel Field," Doubleday, 1065 and one by British re-
porter Stewart Steven ("Operation Splinter Factor," Hodder &
Stoughton, 1974), came to diametrically opposite conclusions: he
was an ignorant tool in Soviet hands, according to Flora Lewis,
and a disturbing element used by Allen Dulles to put an end to the

. political careers of Eastern European communist lesders, according
to Steven. ;

Karel Kaplan, the historian and former comaunist leader who in
1968 had access to the secret archives of the Czech CP (PANORAMA
595), now has the final word about the Field case. It was the
Soviets, says Kaplan, who made use of that jdealistic and some-

. what ingenuous American, and who transformed an intellectual with
a gentle eye and a generous heart, a dyed-in-the-wool conununist
who had worked for the Moscow secret services during the ‘thirties;
into the number one prosecution witness -~ without his knowledze
=~ in the dreadful political triais that transpired from 1949 to
1953 in Hungary, Czcchoslovakia, Poland, and Bulgaria.

It was a heliish plan, one in which Stalin had a personal hard,
and one*which worked perfectly.
 PNCLOSUBE
Ba ee
OS 2/7 L ~

1 3
i poe ee - eee -- eat ee a Ree lt ee come
: i : ‘ _ Tt ee ee neal © ‘.
- = ‘

1
* i *

oe % ° ; @ oo ,

. . tO G- Ls @}

ee The Kremlin's aim in 1949 was the full and absolute affirmation
of Sovict power in all of Eastern Europe. To do this, Stalin

had to break with his own communist ruling class, and replace it ~
with more pliable men. © .

Ficld knew almost all the communist leaders, whom he had helped
during the war when they were fleeing to escape Hitler's police.
‘Phe plan the Sovict secret service came up with, despite its
erucl cynicism, was Little short of genius:” pass Field off as
an American spy, in direct contact with Duiles, and get him to

_ dist dozens; hundreds of names.» Every name had a death sentence
pinned to it. :

%T>o those cf us who were working on the Piller report on the po-
Jitical trials in Czechoslovakia," recalls Kaplan, who for the
past several months has been living in Munich, "shedding light on
the Field case was pf the utmost importance: it would have enabled
us to add one more crucial bit of evidence to prove that the Krem—
Jin was wholly responsible for the deaths and persecution of ~
thousands of sincere communists."
a %
During the investigation of the Field case, whose findings were
published in a 120-page study originally attached to the Piller
report (Study ro 35 by the working group prepared for the Reha-
bilitation Commission of the Central Committee) several details
came to light in connection with Alger Hiss, one of Ficld's friends
-. and a colleague at the State Department in Washington, who was
found guilty of espionage when he was tried in 1949, and has re-

cently filed a petition for review of his cases

Karel Kaplan's two preceeding articles, one on Stalin and one on the
fomintern, and the discussions of the Rosenberg case have been
picked up and commented upon in the press all over the world. The
essay on Noel Field, which Kaplan wrote on the basis of the docu-
ments he exanined in the secret archives in Prague, is the last
of the series written by the Czech historian: a world-wide exclu-
give for PANORAMA readers. :
Mario Margioccsc.

End of a Dream .
. way to
fpuring the 3 morths he was held they tried every conceivablic/tor-
ture on him," Czech secret police chief Karel Svab reported from
Budapest in ‘August 1949 directly to President Klement Gottwald,
tRut no matter what they did to him, he confessed nothing that

wag not already known. * ;

The object of all this attention, both from his torturers in the
Pas Hungarian police and from two very high-ranking Czcch officials,
_ was a g5-year-old American communist, tall, thin, intelicctual-
3 looking. "A typical American; cordial, kind, with a wonderful

. smile. He woulie look you strode. gn the vye in an open and
friendly way." That's how he is remembered many yours Later by

a ‘ ‘ , & : c } : ,
os the tenants of the apartment building in Marseilic where he was
ae Living in 1941. | P

His mame, Noel Haviland Field, never attracted the notoriety of

his friend and colicague, Alger Hiss, or the tragic renown, in
connection with a shameful trial and a cruel death sentence, Qf
Julius and Ethel Rosenberg. And yet, strange though it may sccm
to someone who has never dug deep into the records of the espio-
mage cases of the immediate postwar years and of the political
trials toward the end of the ‘forties, the case of Noel Field;
his wife Herta, and her brother Hermann, played a crucial role
in the history of the Soviet bloc. Born of the cold war, it

: helped to fuel and inflame the conflict between the two rival
guperpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union.

‘In the summer of 1949, it was not only two very high Czech 6ffi-
cials like Gottwald and Svab who were interested in Field. From
the Kremlin, Stalin himself was following developments day by .
day, determined, with his secret service, to exploit the American
idealist to set up the hideous machineery for political trials

of the Eastern European communist leaders and to show everybody,
especially those party members who might have notions about inde-

pendence frem Moscow, who was really boss east of the Elbe.

Just having known Field, even years before, for thousands of sin-
‘cere Hungarian, Bulgarian, Czechoslovakian, Polish, and East Ger-
-man communists, meant arrest, torture, long prison sentences and,
in many cascs; death. °

But who was Noel Field? Was he really a dangerous American agent

with a direct line to Allen Dulles, ‘head cf American espionage in

Evrope during World War II, as Moscow wanted pecple to believe?
To find out, and to understand the political and police machinery
which, from the very beginning, determined the course of the whole
affair, we have to go back a few steps, and sce Noel Field dur-
ins the crisis in his life as an active American communist, when

.° the outbreak of the cold war, in 1947 and 1048, shook his world
to its foundations and drove him, unknowingly, straight into the
trap set for him by the Sovict secret servicee

It had been a jong, cold, winter and, early in April, it was
still snowing on the mountains around Lake Geneva. Noel Field
spent leng hours pondering his future, thinking back over the war
years and their horrors and their great hopes,, and turning over
and over in his mind the menacing unknowns of the present.

-

i By now he had time to think. <A few months earlier, in October
oe 1947, the board of the Unitarian Service Committee had informed
him from Boston that he was no longer head of the American Uni-
tarian Church Rescuc Mission, sct up in Europe at the outbreak
of the war to succor the victims of fascism.

. | ~3-

A

ae i a el ed

Enthusiastic and. ..edicated, convinced that 2b was serving a po-
litical, not merely a humanitarian ideal, and well supplied with
funds, Field had transformed.the USC into one of the most impors
tant aid centers on a war-torn continent. But in the spring of
1948 there was no longer any room in the organization for a left-
ist intellectual who stood accused by those who had escaped from
the clutches of the Gestapo; of always giving precedence to the
communists. . a ; : :

To Field, the loss of his job was the final bit of proof, if he
had needed any more, of the end of a dream he and many other left-
ist American intellectuals had cherished for years: that of mak-
ing the wartime alliance between the United States and the Soviet
Union into a solid and lasting friendship in the name of freedom
and pregress for the people. : :

. What to do? Fieid had to decide, in April 1948, whether to stay
in Western Europe and look for a job as correspondent for some
American newspaper, or to go through what the former British

Prime Minister, Churchill, had 2 years before dubbed the Iron
Curtain, and settle in one of the new socizlist countries. There
he had many friends, whom he had aided during the war with every
kind of assistance, with money and introductions into allied
circles in Europe, could perhaps repay those favors somehow. The
Soviets themselves owed him a considerable debt of gratitude which,
Field was sure, they would:‘certainly not cverlook.

The fact was that for 3 years, from 1933 to 1936, Noel Field, as
- @ young diplomat who had signed on in the State Department in
1926 as deputy vice consul to the Western Furopean Office, had
collaborated with the Kremlin's intelligence services. His mo-
tives had had nothing to do with greed for money or cynical indif-
ference to his own country's interests, but stemmed from his con-
*viction, rocted in the 1933 decision of the "leftist" administra-
tion of Franklin Delano Roosevelt to recomize the Bolshevik Go-
vernment of the USSR, that the United States and the Sovict Union
had a common mission to save the world from the abyss into which
capitalism and the imperialism of the European powers were driving
it. In those months, the USSR inspired a srowing admiration in
Noel Field, so great as to move him to approve its political, so-
cial, and economic objectives as well as the concrete steps of

Soviet policy throughout the world. 2

ca

He was supported in those convictions in 1933 by several friends
whom Field and his wife, Herta, a young. German woman with a strong
and determined character, bound te her husband"by ties not only
of decp affection, but by shared political idcas, had met in
Washington. Foremost among these friends were Hede and Paul Mass-
ing, two German anti-fascists who had made a hairsbreadth escape
from the Fithrer'ts bloodhounds, and Alger Hiss, a brilliant young
attorncy who worked for the Agriculture Departnicnt.

. A

i ack ~ a ue ‘ ’ = . 2 c , so 3 - ve 7 Sp geo .
. : Z ge eee gieee 2 : - * ™
et we we ee er ot a a er ee ee ae] Z - 1 ese ecee ss . Pe ee ae - - . é,

Ha an nd
a

C3 :
After leaving Germany, the Massings had sont’? let of traveling,
and they had more than ideological ties with Moscow. In America,
where Hede Massing arrived in 1933, followed shortly thereefter
by her husband, they had a specific secret mission to perform

for the USSR intclligence service: they were to recruit intel~
jJigence -sources in Washington among politicians and bureaucrats.
They also helped recruit Field. This has been described in seve-
ral books, including Hede Massing's own "This Deception,” pub-

- lished in 1951. Documents in the Czech archives conform this.
‘Alger Hiss, by now about to be transferred to the State Depart-
ment, where he was to have a swift and brilliant career, as was

_ shown during his trial in 1949, already had relations with the

Soviet security services.

The Massings did not know Hiss. Jt was Field who introduced them;
inviting them all to dinner at his house in the spring of 1935.
According to what Hede Massing testified in 1949, when she had
already abjured communism, at that dinner party there was actually
a little verbal clash between her and Hiss, since both of thein
wanted to get exclusive rights to Field's collaboration (this
episode is recounted in Massing's book). The two intelligence
networks, the one Hiss was in contact with and the one the Mas-
sings were setting up, were in fact keenly interested in the do--
:euments on American foreign polucy which Field, once his initial
fear and reluctance had been overcome (at first he would merely
pass on verbal swnmaries of the material that-came across his
desk), was beginning to supply to them. ; :

In 1936 Field decided to leave the United States and transfer,
still as a State Department official, to a job. at the League
of Nations in Geneva. The post offered to Field in Geneva was
‘4n-the disarmament section, and one which, the idealistic Field
was convinced, would help to drive away the gathering storm
clouds of another ware

Unforeseen Event

In Geneva, the Fields settied into a lovely house, Villa La Chotte,
in the little town of Vandoeuvres just outside the city. In the ,
Swiss city Field was put in touch with a new representative of
‘the Sovict security agency, and began to work with him. That did
not last long, however, because the agent quarreled with the Krem-
tin and was liquidated. Not long after that, in August 1937, a
top agent in Soviet military intelligence , General Walter Kri-
vitsky, made contact with Field and invited the American diplomat
to come to Paris. According to the gencral, this trip, called for
on only a few hours! notice, was necessary because one ef the

top men in the Sovict intelligence service had defected, and some-
thing had to be ‘done (other sources say it was to be actual phy-
sical elimination -- Ed.). Krivitsky and Field reached agreement
on the overall operation, and then the general put Ficid on touch
with an agent who explained to the diplomat what his role was to
be, But an unfercseen event, which was to have future conse Ghene
ces in Field's relations with the Soviets, cancelled the whole

7
‘

er: +f

th
'

Page ay EOS

“ business’

7
“
a
147.
an
ied
oy

>
%

Soviet agent who wo

a ae

* , oe
.

.- . a ' =

: a is 2

Krivitsky himself defected to be kien: intelli-
gence service, and wound up 4 years later shot to death with a pis~-

tol in-his room in a small Washington hotel.

The plan to get rid of the traitor, of course, was out in the open,
and therefore had to be scratched. Field, who knew nothing about
the defection, thought ‘the general had been discovered and elimi-
nated, lost all contact with the Soviet intelligence people. Only
Zater did he find out why the Soviets had not thought of sending .
another agent to get in touch with Field: the fairly murky role
that American had played in two events as suspicious as may be
called for prudence. Some people in Moscow, in fact, thought that

_ Field might have helped Krivitsky defect.

That Field was nevertheless quite uninvolved in the whole thing
was demonstrated by the fact that in May 31938 he and Herta light-

‘heartedly took off on a trip to Moscow, as tourists. Had he had

anything whatever to do with the Krivitsky affair, Field would cer-
tainly not have been so rash as to venture into the very den of

the Kremlin's secret service.

During that short stay in the Soviet capital, the Fields again
‘ran into the Massings. ° With their help, Field tried again to join

the American Communist Party, and this time he succeeded, at

Yeast partially. He was not admitted as a full member, but only
through a special affiliate run directly by the Comintern, the
Conuunist Third Internationale, and‘kept secret. even From the

‘leaders of the American CP. The Soviets in fact had no interest

in allowing people like Field t9 make their CP membership known,
and for that reason they had instituted secret membership, via
the Comintern, some time before. During that stay in Moscow,
Field was also given a password with which he could identify the
uld be sent to renew centact with hin.

Shortly after his return to Geneva, the League of Nations shut- up
shop, as it was foundering in the worsening climate of war. Early
in the spring of 1939 Hitler invaded and dissolved the State of
Ozechosizvakia. Noel's brother, Hermann Field, who wes in London,
left for Poland to work for the British Trust, 2 humanitarian or-
ganization that managed to save hundreds of Czechs from the clut-.
ches of the Gestapo. In 1941 Noel and his wife Herta, too, after
joining the Unitarian Service Committee (whose headquarters was
Marseille), could plunge enthusiastically into the work of succor-

ing war victims.
For Field, this was the beginning of a long period of frenzicd e
work. He travelicd constantly between France and Switzerland and
took advantage of that fact to act as courier anong various froups
in the anti-fascists struggle. He made contact with the leaders or
communist and antifascist groups all over Europe, particularly
with the Czechs, Poles, Hungarians, “and Germans. Ficld did not
want to be confined to a supporting role, but longed to be on the

front lines in the struggle against hitlicr-

=o

cm

-

tas He considered it altogether natural and in harmony with Soviet

ee foreign policy to carry on the gathering of intelligence about

: the political, economic, and military situation in the nazi-occu-
pied territories and to pass on that intelligence to any anti- :
fascist power that might indicate interest in having it. Undoub-
tedly he would have preferred to work with the Soviets, but that
direct link secmed to have been severed, at least for the time
being. In 1943 a Moscow agent had turned up, with the all-impor-
tant password, He had asked whether Field was still disposed to
collaborate and, upon receiving an affirmative, reply, ordered the
American diplomat to draw up a detailed report on his meeting with
Krivitsky and on his own activities over the past several years.
Field hesitated not a moment in agreeing to the collaboratior or -
in doing what had been asked of him. When he handed in the report
he was told to wait for further contact, but he waited in vain.

While the Soviets did not seem particularly interested in Field's
offer of collaboration, a degree of interest in the intelligence
‘collected by the hundreds of people Field had known as director

.of the USC was manifested by the American intelligence services,
the oSS (Office fuer Strategic Services), predecessor of the bet~-
ter-known CIA, whose Berne office was run during the war by Allen
Dulles, who later became dircctor of the CIA. Field sent them ;
some information, data of at best limited importance and helpful
only in the military struggle against Nazis. :
Toward the end of the war Field also went to Paris with a recom-
meadation from’ Dulles, intending to set up 4 German Anti-fascists
Committee for Eastern Europe- The suggestion, as recounted by
American historian Arthur Meyer Schlesinger, Jr., then a young
corporal in the Paris 0SS, did not arouse much enthusiasm: the
idea was to set up an organism which, relying mainly on refugees,
would gather intelligence of all kinds about Germany and about
the territories-still occupied by the Germans. So the last 2
years of the war passed in constant traveling from one refugee
camp to another, visits to hospitals, and growing hopes for the
final victory of the anti-fascists forces.

fhe Letter to Dulles

In April 1945, during the final weeks of the conflict, Field did
something destined, within a few years, to change his existence
totally and to subject him to unimaginable trials. Of itself, it
was innocuous enough: just a letter asking that backing be given
Tibor Sz¢envi . a Hungarian anti-fascists and communist who was later
to die on the gallows when the Stalinist triais hit his country. -
The letter was addressed to somebody with whom it was quite nor-
mal in those days, even for a communist like Field, to have rela-
tions: Allen Dulles. To make sure Dulles got it, Ficld gave the
letter to a Swiss acquaintance, together with a covering note say-
ing: "Dear Sirf I enclose the letter for Mr, Dulles which I pro-
mised this morning. Sincerely, N-H. Fiecid."

-77

ae é a+ ’ >
noe ? > “.?
er. - « ate

-

ut "USC aid to the victims of fascism did not end with the termination

ef hostilitics. And Field, who had always given the communists most
among the antifascists his organization helped, continued to do *
50. In some Easterxz European countrics, he even managed to get

2 communist onto the USC board. In Czechoslovakia, for example,
the job was held until 1946 by Gejna Pavlik, a veteran. communist
activist who had taken part in the October Reyolution in Russia,
and one of his jobs was to provide Field with information as to
the country's economic and social situation. Paviik had reported
this activity of his both to Jaromir Dolansky and Villiam Siroky,
both of them very high ranking officials in the Czech Communist
Party, both of whom told him to go right ahead with it.

Furthermore, immediately after the war, and still in contact with
,. the European communist leadership groups, Field was able to meet
7 gn Switzerland with several of the foremost figures in the Czech -_-
_€P, among them-Arthur London, the future deputy foreign minister
and one of the three acquitted among the 14 on trial in the Slansky
case, Evzen Klinger and Otto Kosta, both high ranking officials
in the Ministry of Information. ;

All this activity came to a stop at the end of 1947, as we have
seen, when Field was fired. At this point, in addition to the
metter of finding another job, there was another more urgent prob-
lem: at the end of 1948, all American sojourn permits for Europe
4apsed. In order to be able to stay in Eurcpe’ and work as a re-
porter, as was Field's intention, you needed a new American so--
‘Journ permit, which was hard to get now that a lot of stories
about Field's CP membership were beginning to circulate in Wash~
ineton, or else you needed a new sojourn permit for one of the
new Eastern countries. What to do? .

Pield's uncertainty came to an end with the arrival in Switzerland
in April 1048. with an invitation to come to Czechoslovakia as a
-prize for ali he had done during the war, of Klinger and Kesta.
Ficld, delighted at the prospect, accepted the invitation anda
month later left on a lengthy visit to Prague and Warsaw. His
* objective: to get a sojourn permit and fine a job.

He hoped to get all this without difficulty in the East. He made .
the rounds of friends he had made during the war, #11 of them now
-holding down important jobs. He considered, as a beginning, set-
tling down for a while in Prague and writing a book for Western
readers about the people's democracies. He had already begun
gathering the necessary data. : =

7s Among the people Ficld saw in Prague was Vitem Novy, a member of
oy the Party CC, a member of parliament, and editor-in-chief of RUDE
oe PRAVO, Rudolf Margolius, who in 19§9 was to be named deputy minis~
Be ter for Forcign Trade and in 1952 was to climb the seaffold with

Rudolf Slansky, Kare] Markus, Alice Rohnova, and Gizcla Kischova.
All gave him letters of recommendation for a sojourn permit.

* ~f-

MIECTCE, ao moa. Wea gy werner re Tmo
viet security peopic. 3

In Poland, too, Field asked his old friends for help. He made
contact with Jakub Berman, @ member of the Politburo, in charge
of intelligence, and then the nunber-2 man in Poland. Berman pro-
mised to help him. In September he contacted Leo Bauer, an im-
portant official in the German CP, who gave him word from East Ger-
man leader Paul Marker, whom Field had helped to escape to Mexico
in 1942, word that there would be no obstacles to his joining the
Party. ‘ y

In October and November 1948, the so-called "intelligence sector"
‘(Evideneni Oddeleni)}, of the general secretariat of the Czech CP,
headed by Svab, gathered information about Field. To do this;
Svab!'s men turned to the American's friends and acquaintances, al-
most all of whom had nothing but good things to say about him.
Somebody even came up with the letter sent on 13 November 19428

to Geminder from the central office of the Unified Party of East
Germany (SED), ‘signed not only by Marker but also by another top
party leader, Franz Dahlem, asking that American communist Field
be granted permission to stay temporarily in Czechoslovakia.

Puring that same period Svab tapped A. Jandus, of the "party pro-
tection" section, to tail Field. Jandus used a woman, a member

of the CP, who knew Field well, and from her he found out that
Field "for his book, needed to make the acquaintance of some re~
presentatives of the opposition." That there were already some
suspicions about Field, perhaps stemming from this very eagerness
of his to meet representatives of an opposition which, since the
covp d'etat of February 1948, no longer officially existed, is
evidenced in the report drafted later, in June of 1949, when Field
had already been arrested. "Our prudence in dealing with Field
has proved justified," said the report, “in light of the copy of

a highly interesting letter found in Pavlik's safe-deposit box

* (Pavlik-Politzer was arrested later, at the time of the Slansky
‘trial -- Ed.) The letter is addresser to 'Dear Leo' (probably.
Leo Bauer -~ Fd.}. Field confided to Leo that he had pulled all
the strings he covld to get a Czech sojourn permit, and complained
that even so, he had not succeeded. * (From the Archives of the
Czech CP Central Committee, Files from the Interior Ministry,

372/z 82.) A

In any case, whether they actually had some dcubts about Ficid or
whether, after they had arrested him, they were trying to show
that they had had, the men of Svab's section, in October and No-
vember 1948 came out in favor of granting the sojourn permit, al-
thoush there was a catch: Field would first have to answer sone
questions put to him by the sccret police. tt was on this occa-
sion that Ficld told the Prague intelligence people about his past

ac

7

from the transcripe Ob vic yuuwsvs verses gh wee Meee: lea

with somebody from the Moscow intelligence headquarterse At this
point, however, the Prague intelligence people, who had beer plan
ning to enlist Field as one of their own agents, lost all interest

. gn him. They were not about to get into competitien with their

Soviet colleagues and snatch an agent away from them.

The upshot of the questioning was a report from the regional se-

-cret police official of the Prague section, in which it was sta-

ted that N. Field has socialist ideas." The date of the report is
20 November 1948. Shortly thereafter Field got a visa valid un-
til the following May, and immediately left for France and Swit-

zerland to settle his affirs there before establishing permanent

residence in the new people's democracies of the East.

Meanwhile several things of extreme importance to the future of
Noel Field and that of his wife, Herta, had been happening. About
some of them, which were headlined in all the papers, Field was
completcly aware. - bout others, planned in deep secrecy by the
espionage headquarters of the Eastern countries, he was completely
in the dark.

Three months before he got his visa from the Czech authorities,
while he was staying in Warsaw in August 1948, Field had found
out that the Massings had testified before the, House Un-American
Activities Committec, having meanwhile abjured communism and ser
vered all ties with the Soviet Union. Field, although there was
no formal evidence to support it, was sure that the Massings,

in their depositions, had mentioned him, too, and in fact this
streng suspicion had spurred him to even greater efforts to obtain

_the longed~for sojourn permit from sone Eastern-country. The
“more so since, 2 months after the alarming news about the Massing

testimony, the American press had informed Field of another dread-
ful event involving him: on 16 October, in fact, the NEW YORK

HERALD TRIBUNE had published the news that the HUAC had relcased

the so-called Chambers deposition, a 1,300-page document including,
in addition to accusations lodged against American commmists by ex-comr
and journalist Whittaker Chambers, an additional early deposition

“from the Massings. Then, in Pecember, Chambers produced further -

documents which he had had in his possession for years; which
showed that during the 'Thirties there had been. two groups of So-
viet agents cperating inside the State Department, one headed by
Alger jliss, the other by Noel Field. Clearly, this increased
Ficld's insecurity and convinced him -- if indeed he needed con—
vincing ~~ that he could never return to the United Stetes. And
when he refused the official summons to return to America, where
the Congressional investigating committee wanted to question him,
that road was cut off forever. He even considered, as he said
Later under questioning by the Hungarian police, the possibility
that the Amcrican police might try to kidnap him or silence him
forever.

10-

fhe actual attack, though, came from another waailers from the

quarter he had served, not from the one he was working against. °
$

The Czech secret police had begun to take an interest in Field,

who bade fair to be a good agent in future, back in April of 1948,

more or less at. the same time when Kosta and Klinger, unaware of

the secret service plans, had gone to Switzerland to invite Field

to Czechoslovakia.

The Prague secret services were looking for collaborators among
American citizens. They had actually sent some of their agents
to the United States, among them a woman member of the CCP who
had been a member before the war, and who had spent some of-the
war years in America. She was neither a very capable person, nor
suited to this very “delicate sort of work. In view of the diffi-
culties she was encountering, she had herself asked to be relieved
of her mission and brought home. The only fruit of her work had
been a few reports on the situation in American intellectual and
-. progressive circles in which, among others, she had mentioned
Field's name (she had known him for years) as a possible collabo-
_pator with the Czech secret services. She had also suggested that
Field be recruited into the secret service and officially given
the mission of organizing the intelligence network among his own
_fellow-citizens. : ° ‘

She was not the only one to mention Field's name to the top peo-
ple in the secret services. In the summber of 1948, while the
; former American diplomat was in the Eastern countries, he was
—“— . recommended as an agent by a lot of-other people who knew him well.
F Via Arthur London, the letter Field had written to Dulles at the
-end of the war had come back to Czechosiovakia. In Prague, the
letter was received by the security forces, specifically by the
official in the Czech secret services who was working with Ame-
rican intellectuals and who was interested in Field.

On 19 November a secret police official, by the name of Wehle, who
was later hanged during the purges, was telling his colleagues
that Field knew Dulles. The proof? A letter, 5a2G SOAS, written
- by Field at the end of the war. Even though the official was con-
fusing Allen Dulles with his brother, John Foster Dulles, the fu-
ture Secretary of State, the name Dulles was automaticaliy synony-
mous in the East -- and not without reason --*with the idea of

peril and threat.

Ses But Wehle had‘not found out about the letter from London. Some-

ey body had already spoken to the Czech authorities about the famous

asl message from Fictd to Dulles, : A copy of the
uy letter, which was later to be the prime piece of evidence of Ficlid's
vee Collaboration with American intelligence, had already been sent to

& 21s

Pragve in the spring of 1948 by the Soviet intelligence eoamand
for Central. Europe, whose headquartersm run by General Belkin,
were in Vienna. Why that move?

The seiaenstion, after lengthy examination of all the documents
relating to the political trials in Czechoslovakia, seems pretty
simple today: Soviet intelligence, probably on direct orders
from Stalin, was already laying the groundwork for a great poli-
tical trial in the people's democracies, anid had already given
some thought to assigning Noel Field a role in this grand stage
production. :

The trouble for the Soviets was that nobody in Prague was impres-
sed by the letter, and nobody there attached too much importance
to it. Notwithstanding their having received the copy of the let-

_ter sent them by the Soviets, the Czech police in 1948 actually

t

issued a visa to Field, as we have already seen, thus roukeeese:
his status as a socialist.

In view of the skimpy results he had achieved in Prague, Belkin
and his men went prospecting elsewhere and, since the famous Field
letter to Dulles dealt with the Hungarian communist leader Szonyi
they turned to Budapest. One of the leaders in the Czech secret
police, I. Milén, one of whose jobs was to keep in touch with the
Hungarians, stated later that he had learned from his Hungarian
colleague, Cclonel Szics |. that the whole Field matter had popped
out of "Field's letter to Allen Dulles, which dated back to the
end of the war and which had fallen into the hands of the Hunga-
rian intelligence people. I know that the same ictter, or one

like it," said Milén, "was also in the hands of our secret ser-
vice," (Archives of the CCP CC., File G, Commission I, item 752.)
In‘ the latter half of January 1949, Sziics. spiced in Prague. He
had come to ask his Czech colleagues! help in shadowing and perhaps
arresting Noel Field. From the notes made on 23 January by the
secret service man in Slovakia, Valaseck, concerning that meeting,
we find that the help was to consist in arresting Field and hand-
ing him over to the Budapest people.

During that period Field's friends in Czechoslovakia and Hungary °
already knew that he was suspected of spying on the people's de-
mocracics and on the USSR. The news had come from Budapest. The
Czech President, Klement Gottwald, tricd to call his country's
intelligence sleuths off the matter, and showed no desire to au-
thorize Field's arrest. Latcr on, of course, he changed his mind,

and* had this to say about sis decision: "If even General Belkin ©

has verified the facts in this matter, do what they ask."

On § May 1949, at the invitation of <6 representative of Czech in-
telligence, Noel Field went to Le Bourget airport in Paris, and
boarded Air France flight 240 non-stop to Praguc. Wholly in the

«j=

4

i nn ao - (3
. é we 23
dark as to what wes going on, he kissed his wife Herta goodbye,
promising that they would soon be together for good, in the Czech
capital. Here, meanwhile, the stage was being set, down to the ~
last detail. ane

1.
Arrested : \ ; . :

fhe Interior Ministry informed the Hungarians of Field's arrival,
and asked that SzucS. come immediately, bringing with him the
evidence of Field's criminal activities. The ministry people also
wanted Matyas Rakosi, the leader of the Hungarian communists who
officially hed the final word in this matter, to make a request
directly to Gottwald to use the Prague police to make the arrest.
On 9 May; Gottwald received the following telegram: please comply
with our request and arrest Fieid, recently returned to Prague.
Rakosi." . ;

On 11 May, the Czech secret service arrested Field and immediately
shipped hin off to Budepeste Two weeks later; from 24 to 29 May,
the representative of the Soviet police, General Belkin, stayed
on Prague. He was there in his capacity as responsible for the
safety of the Soviet delegation to the Czech communist congress.
He talked with the Prague leaders about, among other things, the
"Field case," since he was concerned with it as a special ad-
viser to Hungary. The leader of the Hungarian Party delegation
also mentioned the matter to the Czech representatives.

In Budapest the Hungarian secret police, working with the Soviet
advisers, particularly LIKHACHOV and Makarov, tried out several
interrogation procedures on Field, using cruel tortures. But

"* nothing worked, They could not get him to confess his’ non-exis-

tent spying for Dulles, much less having set up a network of

- agents in the people's democracies for the purpose of cutting the

Eastern countries off from the Soviet Union. Even Colonel Sziics

‘Jike Svab, marvelled at Field's having stood up under so much and

Field by the American authorities, beginning in the summer of

such dreadful torture without confessing anything.

All the butchers found out was that Field had collaborated with
Soviet intelligence and about the pressures brought. to bear on
1948, to get him to come home. They were given reason to recollect
the unflagging aid Field had given during the war to the anti-fas-
cists, and particularly to communists. They got an explanation

as to why Field had written that famous letter to Dulles. They
wrenched from him information about the book he was writing, and ;
the names of those who had given him completely innocuous informa
tion about the development of the people's democracies.

They also got a lengthy list of communist leaders, practically
all of those Field had known and helped during the war yearse
this was the origin of the list of people who became, thanks to

*

= 35

ps i i

C2 ' Soviet re es suspect of espionage fo ere It was

a Sa enough for Field, all unknowing, to have mentioned their names]
Le The Dulles Ictter becane the foundation on which:to build the

great political. trial of the Seerctary of the Hungarian Comnunist
Party, Lazslo Rajk, which ended in three death sentences, inclu-~.
ding that of Tibor Szmyi. -

oF -

A Crucl Game

Neither Field nor his wife, nor yct his brother, Hermann, who as
we shall see had been arrested after him, ever appeared before the .
court, either on charges or as witnesses. They were kept in the
shadows, used, and not only in Hungary, but in Bulgaria, in Ezst
Germany, and in Czechoslovakia, as mysterious witnesses who had
testified for the prosecution. No less than 300 top people in

the East German CP, for exanple, were stripped of their office

and imprisoned solely for having known Field briefly in the past.

Why this apparently absurd behavior on the part of the secret po-
lice in Hungary and in the other countries, particularly in the
Soviet Union, who were actually the Stage directors and producers
of the Field case?

First of all, the Field case was the contribution of the Soviet
secret police, working with their opposite numbers in the people's
democracies, to demonstrating the inherent rightness of the ideo-
logical formulas and the political line of the Cominform. Speci-
fically, support was needed for Stalin's linc on the heightening

of the class struggle and on the penetration by enemies into the
_communist world, and evidence was required to back the charge that
American imperialists were trying to isolate and scparate the peo—
ple's democracies from the Soviet Union; lastly, the Soviets could
use some emphasis on their charge that the Yugosilev leaders were
anti-Soviet imperialist agents. All these ideological and "the-
oretical" formulas with which Marxism-Leninism was then being
interpreted were the fruit of the cold war and, at the same time,
constituted the facade designed to mask the real intentions of
Soviet policy, which was then one of preparation for war on the
Vnited States.

Set against this background, the Field character offered several
potentials for profitable use. Most important of all, though, it
was a chance to strike at the heart of the rhole ruling class in
Lastern Europe, whom he had known during the war. It was the most
effective, albeit the cruellest way to root ouf any vestige of re_-
sistance to the new lines of Soviet policy and to rid the apparatus
-~ and sometimes the carth -- of people who, for one reason or
another, no lenger enjoyed Moscow's full confidence.

IT is #tso more than likely that, in the Ficld affair, the not
al nys bloodicss struggle during those years between the Aricrican
aid Seviet antelligence forces played a part. The American police

~14-

- * . a :
wel ot + pad discovered m2 espionage system of unh Field had been part.
a ; It is true that-it had not been operating for more than 10 ycars,

rican agent. They sacrificed their own man, who for one thing
was of no mcre use to them and toward whom, over the Krivitsky
affair and in the wake of the "Massings' betrayal," they had some
suspicions, and they turned him from a Soviet agent into a spy
for American imperialism. And since Field's whole family had par-
ticipated one way and another, at least through their political
activism, the whole family was caught up in the pitiless game.

Herta Field, worried to death over her husband's disappearance,
and not having heard from him since 10 May, arrived in Prague in
August, accompanied by her brother-in-law, Hermann Field. They
searched desperately among their friends in Prague, trying to -
pick up some trace of him. Herta had already written, when her
husband had first vanished, to Arthur London, deputy foreign mi-
nister: "I am certain," she had said in her letter, "that he has
fallen into some trap set for him by agents of the American Go-
vernment on 11 or 12 May.” a ;

From the moment they entered Czech territory, the police had fol-
lowed the Fields! every move. Ms.Field, who had told both London
and Markus she was coming, met with the two communist leaders in
a hotel where the police had installed hidden microphones.

From the tapes of that conversation, which were immediately tran-
scribed by the secret service and is new in the Party archives in
Prague, we see Ms, Field's deep concern for her husband's safety.
“The lady, completely unaware of the cruel design of the people who
had orchestrated the whole affair, announced her desire to seek
help from ~- ironically -- the Czech secret service. She was cer-
tain that, after the Massing and Alger Hiss cases, her husband had
been kidnaped by the American police, and that sooner or later he
would be haled before an American tribunal. She did not know what
* to do: all she hoped vas that she would somehow be abie to help .-
her husband, even in such extraordinarily difficult circumstances
aS political kidnaping. She asked the secret service to confirm
or deny the kidnaping theory, so that, if necessary, she could
“organize a massive press Campaign to save Field from the Amcrican
judges. Both London and Markus approved her decision to ask the
Czech intelligence people for help. e

*

oo

At the police Station, where she went immediately afterwards, Herta
Ficld once more revealed her fears, as shawn by the transcript of

5; the conversation. On that occasion, she described in detail th-
Aine espionage uctivities in which her husband had been engaced whilc

he was still ab the State Department in Washineton,.

me ie Be 2 (Ricio ge
. .

Her information also coincided with what Noel had told his tor-
turers in Budepest. Even the lists of names which the two pro-
vided were more or less identical. In the end, the Czech police
promised to help find Noel Field, and assured Herta that they
would keep her informed: actually, tney were very eareful not t6
1ift a finger, fearing that Herta and Hermann would mount a news—-
paper campaign that would have ruined, or at least complicated’
the plan that had been laid to make Noel Field the accuser in all
the political trials.

Shortly thereafter, on 22 August, Hermann went to Warsaw, where he ~
mew a lot of people. But, as he was preparing to return to
Prapuc, he was arrested, repeatedly interrogated by the Polish po-
lice, and thrown into jail.

The nocse was about to tighten around Hermann, too. .
On 25 August the head of a special section of the Central Commit-
tee of the Czech CP, 0. Papel, asked Party Secretary Slansky whe-
ther there wes any reason why Herta Field should not be arrested.
Almost simulteneously a similar query came from Budapest. The
decision, in view of the importance of the case in which, as every-
body knew, Stalin took a personal interest, was left up to Gott-

: wald. The Czech commmist leader and President of the Republic
fave his consent on 26 August, but attached a recommendation that

-the secret services not get invoived in the affair. By the time

it was framed, however, that recommendation had already been made

a dead letter by events, because the Czech secret police were up

‘ _to their necks in the business by then.

On 27 August, through some friends who already knew the truth,

the police told Herta that they had managed to get news of her
husband, and informed her that they would take her to where Noel
was. Herta, with several police officials, set off in a car for
. Bratislava. There she was taken into custody by the Hungarian
police. In the following weeks every attempt on the part of Elsie
"a Field, Hermann's wife, to find out what had become of her husband,
& * was in vain. The United States consular authorities, under pres-

sure from the public to explain the mysterious disappearance of

three American citizens, one after the other, tried in vain to
find out what was going on. Erika Glaser, a young German anti-.
-fascist whom the Fields had met in Spain during the final months
of the civil war and had sheltered as their own daughter on several
occasions, determined to try to find them: she disappeared in
Berlin in September 1949, and wound up in Siberia.

For § years, even though their nane still sent terror into the
hearts of all who had known them or even heard of them, the Ficlds
seened to have vanished into thin air. .

Hermann was the first to be heard of: he left the Polish prison
ef Miedzsyn at the end of September 1954 and, .after receiving an

-16-

WEEE Cait SO eee : . Pas

Sndemiity of $50,€. i’from the Polish Governf dt, returned to the
United States, where he is now teaching architecture,

The last one to regain freedom, in 1955, when Khrushchev'!s de-
Stalinisation campaign was alircady dismantling most of the police
apparatus established during the dark Stalin years, was Erika Glat
ser. Meanwhile, on 17 November 1954, Bucapest Radio announced
that "it was no longer possible to sustain the charges laid in the
past" against the Fields, and Noel and Herta were freed too.

With a decision that was somewhat surprising at the time, they de-~
cided not to go back to the United States and settled dow instead
in a pretty little hillside house on the outskirts of Budapest,
where Noel gied in 1972, and where Herta lives still.

‘They still professed unwavering faith in the politica] creed to

which they had devoted their entire lives. “Both of us feel the
symptoms of premature old age," Field wrote to a friend in 1956.

"Out faith in a better future," he added, in that same letter, "has |

never Jeft us."

COPYRIGHT: World Panorama, Arnoldo Mondadori Spa, 1977.

6182
CSO: 3104

crt eet or eng ere p—eeeersasaneeracnapTusstnaneptttmenen
