Guyana
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119172, dated 4 November 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119172).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

VW

2-67
7 December 1967

SNIE 87

aL

SPECI

oR

MATE

t

a

IGENCE EST!
7.

NUMBER. 87.2-6

LL

TONAL

des

rse

CE

EN

RAL INTELLIG

CENT
neurr

ECTOR. OF

DIR

r by the :
NTELLIGENCE BOARD ©
feat 2S Stee:
67.

in

Co

over

i
ber. 19

cate:
ecem

‘i

"STATES I
an

1
at

nd

ns participated in the”

se ~s on

The following intelligence organization
this estimate: ne

The Central Intelligence “Agency and the. ‘intelligence. ergonizati
a the Ni Ppt

mae)

ions, of

. Concurring: : Be :
-Dr. R. J. smith, for the Deputy Director, Cer

Mr, Thomas L. Hughes,
of State a

Vice Adm. Vernon L Lowrance, for the
ars ne eee wae.
Gen. Marshall S. Carter, the Director, Notional Security ye M

Abstaining: a ol ;
Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the ‘Assistant "General Manager, “Atomic ‘Energy Com.
mission and Mr. William O. Cregar,.* for ‘the’ Assistant | “Director, Federal _

Bae

Bureau of Investigation, the subject. being’ “outside of their jurisdiction. :
Ste eel x-t pad x =

s, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans- *

mission or revelation of which in manner to an ‘unauthorized person is prohibited.

af

_ sug

CONTENTS

Page

THE PROBLEM ..........000 0c cece et ene eens 1
CONCLUSIONS  ... occ nnn tenet enee 1
DISCUSSION 2.0. ce ee nent nee nes 3
I. BACKGROUND 22... een ene nes 3
Il. THE BURNHAM GOVERNMENT .........0- 000s eee 1... 4
Il]. PREELECTION MANEUVERS ............ 000 see cece eee ees 5
IV. SECURITY FORCES ......... 0.20.00 ccc ene ees 7
V. POSTELECTION PROSPECTS ............ 20 cece e eee eens Tees 8

GUYANA

International boundary

Administrative district
boundary

National capital

Administrative district
capital

Surfaced road
Unsurfaced road or track

1_100_300_ 500 700

\
ik Hoimia

1

Orinduik /

~~
Sw4

SURINAM

‘%,
™%
RUPUNUNI

a

“

a
ff
to a

f

7,
a A

v-. a
ee 48 Fink

&. MOUNDARY REPRESENTATION [9%
Inor NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

§3012 3-66

GUYANA

THE PROBLEM

To consider the prospects for Guyana, with particular attention to
problems and consequences of the coming parliamentary election.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Voting in the coming election, which according to the Consti-
tution must take place by the end of March 1969, will again be pre-
dominantly along racial lines. Cheddi Jagan, the East Indian leader
and an enthusiastic Marxist-Leninist, has a basic advantage: The East
Indians are now probably a slight majority of the population. The
Negroes, almost all of whom support Forbes Burnham, the present
Prime Minister, constitute about 44 percent.

B. Burnham, whose coalition with the small, conservative United
Force (UF) has always been fragile, is working on various schemes
to enlarge the Negro vote. He will try to obtain a substantial number
of absentee votes from Negro Guyanese residing abroad. Beyond this,
he is exploring means to merge Guyana with one or another Caribbean
island (most likely St. Vincent) so as to increase the proportion of
Negro voters.

C. If Burnham became convinced that such arrangements would
not suffice to keep him in power and Jagan out, he would probably
- rig the election. In any case, he would have to rely on the small
civilian police and Guyana Defense Force (GDF), both of which are
predominantly Negro, to maintain order. They probably could do
so, except in the unlikely event of a major East Indian uprising.

D. Prospects for a second Burnham Administration would depend
in major part on how he won. A merger with St. Vincent, for instance,
would almost certainly raise fears, among East Indians and UF sup-
porters, of discrimination and possibly even of persecution under a gov-

syptt |

f

ermment completely controlled by Negroes. Such fears could produce
unrest and some violence. If Burnham returned to power as head
of a coalition in an election that appeared reasonably fair, prospects
would be good for continuing stability and further gradual economic
progress. The need for outside economic aid would nonetheless
continue.

E. If Jagan’s party won, he would probably not be permitted to
exercise power. Burnham could use force to keep him out, or suspend
the Constitution and rule by fiat, or even press for a grand coalition
which he himself would seek to head. Alternatively he could permit
Jagan to take office—only to subvert his government at a later date.

F. In the unlikely event that Jagan did take and hold power, the
Communist orientation of his government, more than its actual capabili-
ties, would make it a new disturbing factor in hemispheric affairs,
especially in the Caribbean area. Communist countries would make
considerable propaganda capital of the fact that such a government had
come to power by free elections. The USSR and some other Com-
munist governments would move quickly to establish diplomatic or
trade missions in Georgetown. Both the Soviets and Castro would
probably provide Jagan with small amounts of economic aid.

G. A Jagan administration would, however, be beset by powerful
internal opposition and would not have the resources for an adventure-
some program abroad. Thus, Jagan would not try to launch an in-
dependent Communist revolutionary effort on the continent or in the -
Caribbean, though he probably would cooperate in the overt and clan-
destine activities sponsored by the USSR or Cuba. Such actions would
encourage Venezuela to press its territorial claims against Guyana and
perhaps even to undertake military action.

Set
Aieceet

fe

DISCUSSION

I, BACKGROUND

1. In the racially turbulent years of 1963 and 1964, few would have predicted
that within three years British Guiana as Guyana would be capable of making
a relatively smooth transition from colony to independent state. Even fewer
would have been optimistic over the country’s chances of surviving as a nation.
Nonetheless, the coalition government of Linden Forbes Sampson Burnham
which led the country into independence, and has ruled on its own since 26 May
1966, has provided a stable government and presided over a modest recovery
of the economy from its decline during the period of violence. Now the country
is moving toward a new election which will test whether this condition of
relative tranquility and progress can continue.

2, Almost like an island in its geographical isolation from its neighbors, Guyana
was for much of its history a rather sleepy outpost of the British Empire. A
militant, multiracial independence movement which sprang up in the late 1940's
under Cheddi Jagan and Forbes Burnham, as the Peoples’ Progressive Party
(PPP), increasingly preoccupied the British as did the later ascent of Jagan
to the premiership. The path to independence, however, was impeded, on the
one hand, by the reluctance of the US and UK to turn the country over to
Jagan and his American wife, both avowed Marxist-Leninists, and, on the other
hand, by Burnham's defection from the PPP to form what later became the
People’s National Congress (PNC).

3. That split in 1955 marked the end of the multiracial movement. The East
Indians have since followed Jagan, and the Negroes have backed Burnham.?
Their organizations are more racial pressure groups than parties. Racial ill-
feeling and strife were intensified during Jagan’s last term as Prime Minister
(1961-1964), largely by his ill-considered attempts to push East Indian interests
in the labor unions and by the Negroes’ violent retaliations. With the country
in turmoil, Jagan found himself forced to call for British troops to maintain order.
A year later, he signed an agreement with Burnham and with Peter S. D’Aguiar,
the leader of the small conservative United Force (UF), that they would accept
whatever political solution the British Colonial Secretary might devise to pave
the way for the granting of independence.

+The East Indians are mainly Hindu or Moslem and, with the exception of a number of
business and professional men in Georgetown and other towns, they live in the country, working
on their small rice fields or on large British-owned sugar plantations. With the abolition of
slavery, the Negro population left the sugar estates to move to the towns, where they work
in factories and hold most of the positions in the civil service and police. Negroes and mixed
strains are about 44 percent of the population, as against the East Indians who are slightly
above 50 percent. The remainder consist of American Indians, whites, and Chinese. The
statistics we use here, though the best available, are by no means fully reliable; they are
projections from the data of the census conducted under British auspices in 1960.

ft 3

ral

4, To Jagan’s dismay, the Colonial Secretary implanted an electoral system
of proportional representation on a countrywide basis to replace the former
system of plurality elections in each constituency. The election in December
1964 followed the new system, and the PPP received 45.8 percent of the vote
and 24 seats in the Assembly, the PNC 40.5 percent and 22 seats, and the UF 12.4
percent and seven seats. In coalition, the PNC and UF were able to establish
a majority government, to agree to terms for independence, and to provide for
the country’s peaceful transformation.

ll. THE BURNHAM GOVERNMENT

5. Since 1964 the country has been run by this uncomfortable alliance, bound
together principally by a mutual fear of Jagan’s regaining office. The UF,
made up as it is of European businessmen, native Indians, and other ethnic
minorities, greatly distrusts Burnham and feels that he is attempting to under-
mine it as a party. Burham’s relationship with the UF leader, D’Aguiar, has
been far from harmonious. There are basic differences in viewpoint and per-
sonality, and to a lesser extent undercurrents of racial suspicion. Burnham
envisages a broad, ambitious program of spending on public works, while
D’Aguiar as Finance Minister was strongly inclined to the balanced budget.
After a series of quarrels over fiscal policy and personnel, D’Aguiar finally re-
signed in September 1967. The coalition, however, remained intact as the two
other UF members stayed in the Cabinet and a third was added.

6. Despite these frictions, Burnham’s coalition government has presided over

a general economic improvement. Increased foreign aid and investment have
contributed to an average growth rate in real gross national product (GNP)
of three to four percent a year since 1964. Investment by the Reynolds Metals
Company and the Aluminum Company of Canada, Ltd., in the bauxite industry
has increased considerably, as have the receipts from the export of bauxite -
and alumina. Government spending on public works has buoyed up overall
demand, and business confidence has largely been restored. It is noteworthy
that even after his resignation from the Cabinet, D’Aguiar sought to dispel the
fears of his followers in the business community by announcing his intention
to expand his business interests in Guyana.

7. All the same, living conditions have not noticeably improved for most
members of the population—which is now in the neighborhood of 700,000. We
estimate per capita GNP in Guyana at about $280 annually, as compared to
an average of some $385 for Latin America. The country suffers from a high
rate of unemployment (about 20 percent) and of rural underemployment, and
the labor force is growing rapidly. Production of the three major export com-
modities, rice, bauxite, and sugar, does not provide enough jobs to alleviate
the problem of unemployment. The sugar industry is plagued with high fixed
costs and is undergoing wage problems with the unions. The rice industry, a
traditionally East Indian bailiwick, is highly inefficient and has long required
heavy subsidies. The Burnham government has been trying to make it more

) a

sgftts

competitive by improving the quality of rice grown and by gradually cutting
down on subsidies. The government-controlled Rice Marketing Board and
the Rice Development Company, which had a combined loss of about $2.4 million
during the 1966 crop year, expect a small profit in 1967. The growth in bauxite
mining helps with foreign exchange problems but provides little additional
employment for the growing labor force.

8. The government’s economic performance has not had any appreciable effect
on basic political loyalties. The East Indians may vary in their enthusiasm for
the PPP and for Cheddi Jagan. They may even credit the government with
restoring political stability and making some economic progress. Nevertheless,
Jagan is without rival among East Indian leaders and, for most East Indians,
voting for a candidate of another race rather than for Cheddi would be un-
thinkable. Even in those villages where the government's public projects have
improved living conditions, East Indian political attitudes seem the same. “This
is Burnham’s road now, but ours after the elections,” has been a typical response.
On the other hand, the Negro part of the population shows no greater signs of
pulling away from the PNC and Forbes Burnham. Jagan’s appeals for the
establishment of a multiracial worker's party have met with little reaction among
the Negroes, and most of that adverse.

Ill. PREELECTION MANEUVERS

9, Race and personalities of the leaders thus continue to dominate the political
scene. Within their racial composition, each of the two big parties encompasses
various groupings. The PPP includes conservative shopkeepers and doctrinaire
Marxists, Hindus and Moslems, students and back-country rice workers. The
PNC is much more an urban party; it has some workers in village sugar mills
among its members, but its main strength is among the civil servants and the
laboring class in Georgetown. The UF, though very much smaller, is -also an
unusual admixture: its leaders are business people but many of its members
are native Indians. Some strains are visible within each of the parties. Jagan’s
recent attempts to increase the discipline and the Marxist-Leninist orientation
of the PPP have alienated a small number of party moderates. Burnham has
met with discontent on the part of certain labor leaders who want money spent
on projects which will benefit them and not East Indians in the back country.
There has always been a modicum of friction among members of the UF, but
it has not come to much since they have no other place to go.

10. Despite a professed common purpose, the UF’s underlying suspicions
of Burnham have grown rather than receded. Apart from inevitable divergencies
over spending, the UF suspects, with some justification, that Burnham is attempt-
ing to absorb it or sizable portions of it, particularly the native Indians, into
the PNC. Many members of the UF are uneasy about how committed Burnham
really is to democratic processes and suspect that, if given the opportunity, he
would rule as a dictator. Some are concerned that he may be aiming to establish
strictly Negro rule in Guyana. Anxious as the UF is to keep Jagan out of office,

a 5

wa .
aes.

fe

it is also anxious to survive as a brake on Burnham rather than as a politically
irrelevant coterie. Mutual suspicions between the UF and Burnham might
nonetheless become so strong that the coalition would not survive until the
election. This would not, however, preclude a renewal of the same coalition
after the election.

11. Burnham seems aware that, in spite of the existence of fissures within
the big parties, voting will again be predominantly along racial lines in the elec-
tion which the Constitution requires to be held before the end of March 1969.
Burnham has for some time been reassessing his prospects in view of the fact
that the number of East Indians of voting age is now probably approaching
50 percent of the total electorate. Burnham’s preferred corrective to this situa-
tion is to find some way to enlarge the number of Negro voters.

12. Burnham’s first efforts to improve his election chances took the form of
encouragement to Negroes from neighboring states to emigrate to Guyana. Few,
however, have come to swell the rolls of the PNC and the unemployed. His
administration has introduced a bill which would make new registration manda-
tory for all Guyanese voters—a measure likely to favor the Negroes because of
their concentration in the urban areas where registration would be easiest to
accomplish. He has also been attempting to arrange for a substantial absentee
vote among overseas Guyanese, who are preponderantly Negro. How large
that vote would be is hard to estimate, but Burnham himself claims—probably
with some exaggeration—that there may be 60,000 overseas Guyanese, and
that participation by half of that number would “not be unbelievable.”

13. Burnham is ambitious to play a leading role in Caribbean politics, and
has cast a covetous eye on the overwhelmingly Negro population of the former
British colonies in the Lesser Antilles. In particular, he is anxious to graft onto
Guyana an island or two of the West Indies Associated States. These islands.
are associated not with each other but individually with the UK, on whom they
depend for their economic livelihood. With a total population of some 400,000,
Antigua, Dominica, St. Kitts-Nevis-Anguilla, Grenada, and St. Lucia have five
separate governments and constitutions. A sixth entity, St. Vincent, has yet to
receive its independence and has been negotiating with Burnham as to merger
with Guyana.?

14. The government on St. Vincent and the UK both seem agreeable to that
merger, but doubts remain whether Burnham can pull it off in time for the
election. It is not clear what changes might be required in the Guyanese Con-
stitution. St. Vincent is still a crown colony and has not yet attained associated
statehood with the UK—a legal prerequisite to a merger. The British Govern-
ment has expressed its intention to continue its subsidy to St. Vincent whether or

*St. Vincent has a population of 90,000, approximately half of which is under 15. Some
33,000 persons are eligible to vote. The island’s economy has long been dependent on a
subsidy from the UK which is currently half a million pounds per annum. The Colonial
Office is scheduled to furnish 550,000 pounds for development aid for the next two years.

‘ ft

“y

sy

not a merger takes place. If the merger does take place, Burnham will probably
eventually expect the US to furnish more aid than it has been providing to
Guyana alone.

15. Although Burnham professes great respect for the tradition of open and
honest elections, he nevertheless feels that the fate of the country hinges on his
reelection. His search for ways to enlarge the number of Negro voters indicates
a determination to win by respectable means. But if he became convinced that
the various arrangements he has been exploring would not suffice to keep him
in power and Jagan out, he would probably rig the election results. There is a
chance that he might postpone or even cancel the election, either of which would
be unconstitutional. Whatever device he might employ, he would have to rely
on the civilian police and the Guyana Defense Force (GDF), both predominantly
Negro, to prevent any resulting turmoil from growing to the dimensions of the
violence of 1963-1964.

16. Cheddi Jagan and the PPP are quite convinced that Burnham intends to do
anything he decides is necessary to keep them from forming a government. Per-
haps to prepare for such a contingency, Jagan has attempted to shape the PPP
into a more tightly disciplined party. While he has eased certain religious
leaders and moderates out of key party positions, he seems to have no current
plans for any form of insurgent action. Never a decisive leader, Jagan will prob-
ably wait to see what Burnham’s course of action will be before determining his
own. He knows that Burnham needs scant excuse to jail him, or to outlaw his
party, and that the Negroes are generally more adept than his own East Indian
followers in the tactics of violence.

IV. SECURITY FORCES

17. The government has emphasized improvement of the civilian police force
and creation of the GDF to increase its internal security capabilities. The police
force has been expanded, its training intensified, and its equipment improved.
Currently numbering close to 1,800, the police are expected to reach their au-
thorized strength of 1,900 before the end of 1968.

18. The government has made good progress in establishing the GDF to
replace the British troops that left in October 1966. Its present active force is
1,000 men in two infantry battalions. Some 300 “first class” reservists are avail-
able for deployment in the event of a call-up; the hundred or so “second class”
reservists are over-age personnel or dropouts from the GDF who still have some
reserve commitments. Fifteen British officers, including its commanding officer,
are training the GDF and fill billets in it.

19. Both GDF and police are overwhelmingly Negro. The ratio of Negroes
to East Indians is about three to one in each and the officers are mainly Negro.
Nevertheless, in line with the recommendation of the International Commission
of Jurists, the government is attempting to rectify the racial imbalance of the
forces and has increased the enrollment of East Indian recruits.

sy 7

of

20. Some questions remain as to the ability of the security forces to keep the
peace. They would probably be effective in coping with sporadic violence or
disturbance, but their performance in a situation comparable to the riots of
1963-1964 would be hard to predict. There is doubt whether, in the event of
racial violence on a large scale, the men would perform effectively as integrated
forces or would revert to racial loyalties. Another problem exists as to the
eventual Guyanese leadership of the GDF. The present British commanders
are under contracts which will expire before the election, though they may stay
on as advisers. ; .

7

V. POSTELECTION PROSPECTS

21. If Burnham wins, the postelection prospects will depend in major degree
on how he manages to do so. If he were returned to office as head of a coalition,
and as a result of a more or less normal and reasonably fair contest, the prospects
for his government would be good. He would require continuing economic aid
from the US, and if he got it, Guyana would almost certainly make gradual
further economic progress.. He would more than likely again have trouble
within the coalition, and opposition on the part of Jagan and the East Indians
would become increasingly bitter. But there probably would not be disorders
and violence of such magnitude that the Guyanese security forces could not
control them.

92. If, however, he blatantly rigs the election, or if he wins by means of a
merger with St. Vincent or another Caribbean island, the political situation is
likely to be more unstable. Should Guyana join with St. Vincent, for example,
the additional number of Negro voters in the new nation would produce fears
among East Indians and UF members alike that the Burnham government would
become solely a Negro-run institution and that they would be excluded from
power indefinitely. Jagan would be the first to claim that the merger was en-
gineered by the US and would use it in his anti-US propaganda in Guyana and
abroad. At least initially, some unrest and violence would be likely. The
Guyanese security forces would probably remain loyal to Burnham and be capable
of preventing violence from getting out of hand.

23. If, in spite of Burnham’s preelection activities, Cheddi Jagan’s PPP gained
a majority of seats in the Assembly, Cheddi probably still would not be permitted
to form a government. Burnham might call upon the security forces to keep
Jagan out, or suspend the Constitution and rule by fiat, or even try persuading
Jagan to join in a grand coalition which he, Burnham, would head. Any of these
actions, with the possible exception of the last, would raise racial tensions and
produce danger of violence—both probably more inflammatory than the merger
possibility discussed above.

9A. It is possible that for appearances’ sake Burnham would let Jagan take
office—only to subvert his government at a later date. It is unlikely that Burn-
ham would go into loyal opposition, but if he did, Jagan would still face a highly

. ff

safer

troubled tenure. The Negroes in opposition would probably be more militant
than the East Indians have been, and Jagan could not count on the security forces.

25. However determined Jagan was to take measures to favor the East Indians
or to carry out Marxist economic policies, he would be severely inhibited by
circumstances. Sooner or later, he would have to make numerous concessions
to the Negroes or risk being deposed. He has talked of nationalizing the im-
portant foreign enterprises, but he is probably aware that expropriation of the
foreign aluminum companies or of the big British-owned sugar properties would
be disastrous economically. He would, in any case, encounter certain economic
difficulty. There would be a loss of confidence on the part of private investors,
and most of the economic assistance from which the Burnham government has
benefited would probably not be forthcoming to Jagan.s His friends among the
Communist countries would probably provide some help, but less. Cuba would
most likely give Jagan a favorable price for Guyana’s rice crop and the USSR
would probably give limited credits.

26. In the unlikely event that Jagan did take and hold power, the Communist
orientation of his government, more than its actual capabilities, would make it
a new disturbing factor in hemispheric affairs, especially in the Caribbean area.
The USSR and other Communist countries would make considerable propaganda
capital of the fact that such a government had come to power by free elections,
and the Jagan government would support the Communist nations in international
forums on basic issues. The Soviets and some other Communist governments
would move quickly to establish diplomatic or trade missions in Georgetown. Yet
a Jagan administration would be beset by powerful internal opposition, and its
internal weakness would require it to move cautiously in order to retain power
while trying to strengthen its political base. It would not have the resources
to carry out an adventuresome program abroad. Thus, Jagan would not try
to launch an independent Communist revolutionary effort on the continent or in
the Caribbean. He probably would cooperate in the overt and clandestine
activities sponsored by the USSR or Cuba. All actions of this kind would en-
courage Venezuela, certain to be suspicious of Jagan regardless of his policies,
to press its territorial claims against Guyana and perhaps even to undertake
military action.

*In 1965-1966, the US committed $18 million in aid to Guyana of which $13 million has

been drawn down.
sight 9

&

CENTRAL’ L INTELIGENCE as |

_ : sore en eae
1. “This document was “disseminated i ie ceed etigens ‘Agency. This copy
is for the information and u use e of the 2 Fecipient Nene of etna his jurisdiction ona

“hoes

need-t -to-know " basis. eee “suthorized by ‘the ”

a.

shas

cee ?

Department “of the ray, § for. the

- £. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
.g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Inyestigation ‘

h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency’:
i. Director of Central Reference, CIA, for.

‘

2. This document may be retained, or * destoyed by"t burting i in accordance with (3
applicable security regulations, or returned to. ‘the ‘Central Intelligence Agency by a

Fe

arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA. * tee . Sys
yee ER ER

_ 3. When this ‘document is disseminated yerseas, “the 0

retain it for a period not in excess of ‘one “year. At the ind of this eared; the

document should either be destroyed, returned to” ‘the. forwarding ‘agency, or per-

mission should be requested of the forwarding agency “to retain ‘it in accordance with oe

rey

FOR yaa ONLY

DISTRIBUTION: ne
White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
