National Security and National Priorities
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098729, dated 3 August 1990.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098729).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Page: 1 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 1

BRS Assigned Document Number: 000006700

AFS Number: 904K0022A Entry Date:
Classification: UNCLASSIFIED Status: [STAT]
Language: Russian Country:

Document Date: 01 Jun 90 Category: {CAT]
Report Type: JPRS Report Report Date: 12 Sep 390
Report Number: JPRS-USA-90-010 UDC Number:

Report Series: Soviet Union Start Page: Bi

Report Division: End Page: 5

City/Source of Document: Moscow SSHA: EKONOMIKA , POLITIKA ,
IDEOLOGIYA

Author(s): Yuriy Aleksandrovich Shvedkov, candidate of historical
sciences and senior scientific associate at Institute of
U.S. and Canadian Studies; passages in boldface as
published]

Report Name: USA: ECONOMICS, POLITICS, IDEOLOGY
Headline: National Security and National Priorities

Source Line: 904K0022A Moscow SSHA: EKONOMIKA, POLITIKA, IDEOLOGIYA
in Russian No 6, Jun 90 (signed to press 25 May 90) pp
13-20

Subslug: [Article by Yuriy Aleksandrovich Shvedkov, candidate of
historical sciences and senior scientific associate at
Institute of U.S. and Canadian Studies; passages in
boldface as published]

FULL TEXT OF ARTICLE:

1. (Article by Yuriy Aleksandrovich Shvedkov, candidate of
historical sciences and senior scientific associate at Institute of
U.S. and Canadian Studies; passages in boldface as published]

2:.: [Text] At the-beginning.of this new decade, the world is clearly
entering the initial period of a new non-confrontational era, but it
will be a complex and contradictory period: The past is trying to
assert its influence, and the future could bring previously
unforeseen dangers. From the standpoint of the possible annihilation
of all life on earth, nuclear arsenals are beginning to appear
senseless, but they are still being improved. Modern communication
systems have almost erased national borders, but violent outbursts of
nationalism are spreading throughout the world. Scientific and
technical progress is crossing new frontiers in production, the
improvement of public health care, and the enhancement of the welfare

Approved for Release yp
Dates ypq I

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 2 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 2

of all mankind, but this has been accompanied by the threat of the
catastrophic devastation of the environment, radiation and toxic
poisoning, the pandemic spread of AIDS and drug addiction, poverty,
and hunger.

3. All of this is naturally affecting many countries of the world to
an equal extent and in different spheres, including the major
powers--the USSR and the United States. In these countries it has
become essential to set future national priorities and determine the
place of national security concerns among these priorities, or, to
put it more simply, to accomplish the sound and thoroughly considered
distribution of the far from unlimited budget funds.

4. We must take a far from abstract interest in the increasingly
heated debates over U.S. national priorities, and especially the
relative significance of national security issues, which became a
kind of idol to which trillions of dollars were sacrificed in earlier
decades.

5. The indisputable improvement of the international situation has
not produced significant results in this sphere yet. After all, the
President requested 309 billion dollars for military needs in fiscal
year 1990, or 28 percent of all federal expenditures, and received
congressional authorization to spend 305 billion. The
administration’s request for fiscal year 1991 amounted to 306.2
billion dollars, which will cut expenditures by around 2.5 percent
with adjustments for inflation. Furthermore, allocations for the most
dangerous programs, like the SDI, are to be increased. Now, however,
congressional leaders are suggesting that national security requests
will be cut severely from now on, and four out of every five
Americans polled have expressed the opinion that the administration
should pay more attention to such problems as the declining quality
of education, environmental pollution, drug addiction, and the
increasing number of poor and homeless Americans.

6. Etymology of the Term ‘‘National Security’’

37. - The- term-*“national security’‘ made its.appearance in American
political science a relatively short time ago-- in the first postwar
years. Before this, the prevailing term in U.S. terminology, just as
in the terminology of other states, was ‘‘defense,’’ or ‘'defense
capability,’’ reflecting the natural desire to defend one’s own
territory and borders. It was even used during the years of the two
world wars, although this was less a matter of the defense of the
territory of the United States, which was protected by two vast
oceans, than of the defense of friendly countries.<sup>l<reset>

8. The new term came into national use with the passage of the 1947

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 3 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 3

National Security Act, providing for the establishment of a National
Security Council as a presidential advisory body. It was responsible
for the substantiation of decisions on foreign, defense, and economic
policy and the defense of national security interests against foreign
threats. This attested that the term had transcended the boundaries
of military policy, not to mention defense policy. It is indicative
that the same act envisaged the creation of the Central Intelligence
Agency as part of the NSC with extensive authority to carry out and
coordinate all of the subversive intelligence activities of
government agencies. These innovations were connected with the
globalization of American strategy, which caused the ‘‘cold war’’ to
become a confrontation between opposing socioeconomic systems and
military blocs. The assigned purpose of this confrontation was not
only military, although this was the main purpose, but also
political, economic, ideological, and even subversive. As time went
on, the scales of the military confrontation, based on the escalation
of the arms race, actually grew instead of contracting and acquired
self-generating properties.

9. For this reason, now that the cold war policy has become outdated
and the United States is facing many new internal threats as well as
external dangers, it is understandable that fierce arguments have
broken out in the American political community. The focus of these
arguments is the question of whether the term ‘‘national security’ ’
has become obsolete after more than 40 years, and whether the time
has come to update the term, supplementing it with new priorities
regarding the security of Americans. After all, today many of them
are dying not on battlefields, but as a result of the spread of crime
and drug addiction, as a result of traffic and industrial accidents,
and as a result of the AIDS epidemic, and the welfare and well-being
of future generations are being attacked by competitors from Japan,
Western Europe, and the new industrial nations, which acquired
economic strength with the help of the Americans themselves during
the cold war.

10. Ina joint statement entitled ‘'‘American Priorities in the New
World Era,’’ prominent American political scientists R. Barnet, L.
Brown, S.-Cohen, and others remarked that the subordination of
various aspects of U.S. security to the idea of confrontation with
the USSR reflected a dangerous warping of Washington strategy in
domestic and foreign affairs. ‘‘We have united,’’ the document says,
‘*to issue this statement because we are deeply concerned about the
future of our country. For decades America spent lavish sums on its
military potential, ignoring the economic, social, and ecological
problems on which its security and strength as a nation will
ultimately depend. As a result of our own actions, we are on the road
to ruin, and if we stay on this road, we will soon become a less
prosperous and more vulnerable society.’'<sup>2<reset>

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 4 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 4

11. In accordance with the current interpretation of national
priorities, American political scientists are already singling out
aspects of security other than military and confrontational
ones~--economic, social, ecological, and demographic aspects. These
include not only direct threats to the health and life of the present
generation of Americans, but also threats capable of displaying their
destructive force in the future. Obviously, this means that the
Washington administration will have to consider the thorough
reordering of national priorities both within the country and abroad.

12. Military Aspects of National Security

13. ‘‘National defense is the chief enemy of national security.’’
This seemingly paradoxical remark was made by American researcher K.
Boulding. He was trying to explain that the arms race was undermining
national defense potential instead of strengthening it.

14. In fact, the country which was the first to develop and use
nuclear weapons and which then worked tirelessly on the improvement
of all types of weapons of mass destruction, does not have absolute
security in the military sense today. Furthermore, the use of its
arsenals would put America and the rest of the world on the verge of
total annihilation.

15. The critics of Bush’s national security strategy have pointed
out the fact that current budget priorities are essentially the same
as they always were and do not take changing realities into account.
Researchers who have analyzed the designated purposes of military
expenditures have concluded that they are largely inconsistent with
common sense.

16. Strategic arms: Large sums are to be spent on the development
and deployment of half a dozen new nuclear systems, including the MX
and Midgetman missiles, which will duplicate one another and for
which funds have already been allocated (around 100 billion dollars
in the next 5 years). Most of the advanced systems are designed not
to -deter-attack, but. to be used-in complex-war scenarios involving
conventional and nuclear weapons. They are to be used to fight a war,
and not to strengthen peace. It is widely acknowledged in the United
States that the deterrence of nuclear attack would require only a
small fraction of the U.S. nuclear arsenal, no more than a few
hundred single nuclear warheads, especially if the other side has the
same weapons.

17. Ally commitments: Even according to official admissions, more

than half of the United States’ current military expenditures are
connected with its commitment to the defense of Western Europe.

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 5 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 5

Renowned American historian and political scientist G. Kennan has
described these expenditures accurately as ‘‘indefensible’’ and ‘'
wasteful.‘’ He remarked that ‘‘the military confrontation in Europe
is disproportionate to the threat the two sides face. It is too
expensive, burdensome, and dangerous to keep so many weapons and
troops in the middle of Germany.’ ’<sup>3<reset>

18. American experts have cited the following arguments in support
of this conclusion. Western Europe already has military-industrial
potential comparable to that of the United States and could defend
itself if necessary. Part of the U.S. contribution to NATO is helping
West European competitors challenge the position of American
businessmen in world markets and even in the U.S. market.
Furthermore, under the conditions of substantial reductions in the
armed forces of the USSR and other Warsaw Pact states in Western
Europe, the sense of the ‘‘Soviet threat’’ is disappearing, and
attitudes in favor of closer economic and technological cooperation
with the East are growing stronger.

19. Finally, any war in Europe would be suicidal for both sides
because of the many nuclear power plants there, but little has been
written about this in America. As American author E. Janeway
stressed, ‘‘The economy of Western Europe has installed its own
deterrent in the form of an entire network of commercial nuclear
power plants. Any attack on Western Europe will cause a Chernobyl
reaction of gigantic proportions, which will be all the more lethal
because it will be more difficult for Russia to defend itself against
this than against the invasions of Genghis Khan, Napoleon, and
Hitler.’'’<sup>4<reset>

20. As for the Asian-Pacific region, which also takes around 60
billion dollars out of the U.S. budget, American experts do not doubt
the ability of Japan, and now of South Korea as well, to defend
themselves without Washington’s help in the event of a local
conflict. The buildup of U.S. air and naval forces in East Asia and
the Pacific would make sense, they feel, if there were a chance of a
new world war and if there were some reason for military operations
against -the USSR in Europe and the Far East... but this prospect is
clearly improbable at this time.

21. Military potential in the Third World: Large sums are also being
spent on the maintenance of American military bases and armed forces
in the developing countries, but, as American experts have pointed
out, the shift in Soviet foreign policy in favor of the peaceful
resolution of regional conflicts could turn the USSR into a partner
instead of a rival of the United States, and, what is more, into a
partner interested in the settlement of local disputes.

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 6 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 6

22. Besides this, there is a growing awareness in the United States
that the many different threats to U.S. interests in the Third World
are primarily non-military in nature and are connected largely with
the economic and sociopolitical effects of the debt crisis in the
Latin American and African countries. ‘'The standard of living is
declining,’’ the previously cited statement of the American
researchers says, ‘‘and dissatisfaction is growing. This is
threatening democracy and stability in such key countries as Brazil,
Mexico, Peru, and Argentina. The strict austerity measures connected
with the debts are enough in themselves to reduce American exports to
the Latin American countries and increase the flow of illegal
immigrants to the United States from those countries. In this sense,
U.S. economic policy, especially the particularly high interest
rates, due partially to the deficit financing of military
expenditures, has hurt U.S. interests more than any hypothetical
USSR-incited aggression could.’ ’<sup>5<reset>

23. This means that the American expenditures on the maintenance and
support of U.S. armed forces abroad, which absorb a huge portion of
the national military budget, have had at least two extremely
negative effects on the security of the Americans themselves. First
of all, the presence of these forces in different parts of the world
increases the danger of unplanned and, possibly, unpremeditated
conflict with unpredictable consequences. Second, the maintenance of
these forces has been a waste of colossal material and human
resources that would be far from superfluous in the safeguarding of
other aspects of the American people’s security.

24. The economic implications of the arms buildup: The soaring
military expenditures, financed by the taxpayers and also by foreign
loans to some extent, during the years of the Reagan administration
lowered the level of capital investments in production and slowed
down the growth of labor productivity. The tax reforms of these years
did not lead to the modernization of industry. Insurmountable
deficits in the federal budget and in foreign trade and international
payments reflected the assault of Japanese and West European
competitors on the U.S. economy.

25. Of course, administration spokesmen like to point out the fact
that the United States is now experiencing its longest period of
economic growth in many years (but, we must say, at slower rates) and
that there are many new jobs in the country (but these are almost
exclusively in the sphere of non-industrial services). These
arguments have been questioned by respected economists and
financiers. Here is what S. Schlosstein, who was until recently the
vice president of Morgan Guaranty Trust, a well-known investment bank
on Wall Street, has to say, for example, in his book ‘‘The End of the
American Century’’: Today America is a country ‘‘which has watched

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 7 Of -11T
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 ; Page 7

its population’s standard of living decline, its industrial influence
threatened by foreign competitors, its political system undermined by
the nearsightedness (and money) of pressure groups, the indicators of
.its public education fall to a disastrously level, its children
suffering from the emotional trauma of divorce and the absence of one
parent, its society disintegrating under the influence of drugs, its
national defense weakened by fraud and mismanagement, and its status
as the global leader questioned--and all within the lifetime of a
single generation.’ '<sup>6é<reset>

26. Expenditures on military R & D rose from 13 billion dollars in
1960 to 60-100 billion in 1986--i.e., to a sum exceeding total
government expenditures on the development of new power engineering
technologies, public health care, the enhancement of agricultural
productivity, and environmental monitoring. The countries with a
lower volume of military R & D, especially Japan and the FRG, were at
an advantage. Foreign competitors acquired stronger positions in the
American high technology market and even in the country’s financial
markets arid its leading commercial and investment banks.

27. This situation is now regarded as a serious threat to the
well-being of the United States. This is attested to, for example, by
a NEWSWEEK public opinion poll. When Americans were asked what posed
a bigger threat to the United States, the military strength of the
USSR or the economic strength of Japan, most of them (52 percent)
said it was Japan, and only 33 percent said it was the
USSR.<sup>7<reset> These feelings are motivating researchers to
analyze other, non-military components of national security.

28. Non-Military Priorities

29. President D. Eisenhower once described the reciprocal connection
between the military and socioeconomic elements of security quite
eloquently. ‘‘Each weapon we produce,’’ he said, ‘‘each naval ship we
launch, and each missile we build ultimately represent a theft from
those who are hungry and have nothing to eat and from those who are
cold and have nothing to wear.'’’<sup>8<reset> This statement is still
relevant -today. It has- been_acknowledged that the gap between wealth
and poverty has never been as great in all of the postwar years as it
is today. The burden on military expenditures has begun to threaten
the health of the American economy and society.

30. The spokesmen of the Bush administration try to address the new
problems of American society, but without cuts in the military budget
it will be impossible to find enough money to solve them. This is why
most of the arguments in the American Congress today focus on the
redistribution of budget allocations.

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 8 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 8

31. Economic security, in the opinion of American experts, should
meet at least two conditions. The first is the preservation of the
country’s economic autonomy and its ability to make decisions on
economic development in the United States’ own interest. The second
is the maintenance of the present standard of living and its
continued elevation. Many American experts are worried about the
prospects for the fulfillment of these conditions.

32. The large budget deficits and the practice of covering them with
borrowed funds are constantly increasing the national debt. In 1989
it had already reached 2.8 trillion dollars. In 1989 the interest on
this debt cost the government 240 billion dollars, or 12 percent
above the 1988 figure. These interest payments have become the second
largest budget item, surpassed only by military expenditures. It is
obvious that in the event of a recession, this accumulation of debts
by the federal government will seriously complicate its financial
operations and will place a heavy burden on the standard of living of
subsequent generations over the long range.

33. The gap between imports and exports has led to a situation in
which the dollars the Americans spend on foreign goods have begun to
return to the United States in the form of direct and portfolio
investments. At the end of 1988 the latter amounted to 1.79 trillion
dollars, as compared to the 1.25 trillion in American investments
abroad. Japanese and other foreign businessmen have begun buying real
estate in the United States and U.S. banks and industrial
corporations. Direct foreign capital investments in the United States
rose from 14 billion dollars in 1971 to 329 billion at the end of
1988--i.e., a 23-fold increase. Now they exceed the direct capital
investments of American firms abroad, which totaled 327 billion
dollars in that time. A particularly irate wave of dissatisfaction
was aroused in the United States when Japanese concerns purchased the
controlling stock in such prestigious American firms as Rockefeller
Center, Columbia System Records, and Columbia Pictures at the end of
1989. One of the editors of the influential magazine FOREIGN POLICY,
T. Omerstead, had this to say about the takeovers in his article
‘‘The Sale of America’’: ‘‘The most common apprehension regarding
foreign-capital investments is that they will restrict the economic
and political autonomy of America. Foreign indebtedness and foreign
ownership mean dependence and vulnerability. Ownership goes along
with control over economic decisions and influence on political
decisions.‘'<sup>9 <reset> Obviously, it is too early to speak of the
United States’ dependence on foreign owners, but events in the
American economy, just as in many other spheres, are developing at
great speed. The United States already cannot make decisions as
freely as it did just a couple of decades ago in at least the fields
of international finance and trade.

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 9 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 9

34. The social aspect of public security, as the last few decades of
U.S. history have demonstrated, consists of the pronounced property
inequalities in the richest Western country, which became much more
apparent under the Reagan administration, the tense relations with
ethnic minorities, which occasionally turn into open conflicts,
organized crime, and drug addiction.

35. Recent American statistics indicate that 13.1 percent of the
Americans live below the poverty line (in comparison with 11.7
percent in 1979) .<sup>1l0<reset> The Bush administration’s intention
to allocate 4.2 billion dollars for aid to the poor and homeless was
an official acknowledgement of their pitiful status. It is true that
the 3-year program will not begin until fiscal year 1991, and even
this will depend on the improvement of the state of the budget.

36. The United States has turned into the largest market for illegal
drugs, and Washington has won the reputation of the ‘murder
capital.’’ Around 650,000 Americans are already behind bars, and more
and more’ new prisons are being built.

37. Ecological security has become a matter of increasing concern to
the American public along with national and international security.
According to a report of the National Center for Public Opinion
Research, in 1989 Americans named environmental protection as the
highest priority in the distribution of budget allocations for the
first time, relegating the problems of crime and public health care
to a secondary position. In 1989, 75 percent of the respondents said
the environment was the biggest problem, whereas only 51 percent of
the Americans expressed this opinion in 1980.

38. Of course, it would be difficult to expect the American
administration to cover all of the direct and indirect ecological
costs connected with the production of nuclear and chemical weapons
and other military activity in the next few years, but it will have
to allocate large sums for this purpose. At the end of summer 1989,
for example, Secretary of Energy J. Watkins published his plan to
combat the radioactive pollution of the areas surrounding enterprises
producing nuclear- warheads... It is.a 30-year-program, requiring 21
billion dollars just for the first 6 years.<sup>ll<reset>

39. The demographic aspect of the security of Americans clearly has
to presuppose satisfactory rates of increase in the healthy,
educated, and professionally trained population. American experts
are also beginning to feel justifiable concern in this area. An
article by Professor G. Foster from the National Security University
of the Armed Forces on demographic shifts on the global and national
levels and their implications for U.S. security, for example,
stresses that population growth in the United States will stay below

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 10 of il
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 10

the world average even after the addition of immigration figures.
Whereas the population of the United States represented 6 percent of
the world population in 1950, in 1988 the indicator had decreased to
5 percent, and by 2010 it could fall to 4 percent. By that time,
however, the percentages of Latin Americans and Asians in the total
population will rise considerably (from 7 to 11 percent and from 1.6
to 3 percent respectively between 1980 and 2010). Most of these
people, just as many black Americans, will have no chance of getting
the necessary training for jobs in advanced fields of
industry.<sup>12<reset> They can be described as lifetime dependants
or permanent welfare recipients. As a result, the education and
professional training of the younger generation will be even more
acute problems for the federal and local governments than they are
today.

40. Therefore, even a brief summary of the non-military aspects of
U.S. national security indicates that the government, in spite of its
budget difficulties in the next few years, will have to cope with the
need for’ riew colossal investments within the country, without which
the very survival of American society will be threatened.

41. Many U.S. politicians and even experts on the military economy
see the solution in sizable cuts in the military budget. The size of
the proposed cuts ranges from 100 billion to 160 billion dollars.
Obviously, the process could begin with coordinated unilateral
reductions in the military budgets of the USSR and United States,
followed by more specific agreements in this field. After all, the
military budget of the USSR for 1990 has already been reduced by 8.2
percent.

42. These cuts in the military budgets of the two powers would be
all the more significant in view of the fact that the internal
problems complicating their development, from the budget deficits and
the related shortage of capital investments to the pollution of the
environment, on which the health of the population largely depends,
are closely interrelated and are common to both powers. Of course,
there are significant differences as well. The American society is
suffering-more-from drug addiction and crime, for example, whereas
the USSR is experiencing the dramatic exacerbation of ethnic problems
and difficulties in the consumer goods market.

43. It is clear that many of the items on the agenda of USSR-U.S.
dialogue will determine the future of all mankind. Broader
Soviet-American cooperation in averting the new threats endangering
not only the United States and USSR, but also the rest of the world,
and in solving so- called transnational problems will provide strong
momentum for the mobilization of the appropriate UN mechanisms and
for international cooperation in general.

UNCLASSIFIED

Page: 11 of 11
UNCLASSIFIED

Concatenated JPRS Reports, 1990
Document 1 of 1 Page 11
44. Footnotes
45. 1. SSHA: EKONOMIKA, POLITIKA, IDEOLOGIYA, 1988, No 11, pp 81-85.
46. 2. WORLD POLICY JOURNAL, Spring 1989, p 203.
47. 3. ARMS CONTROL TODAY, 28 September 1989, p 4.

48. 4. E. Janeway, ‘‘The Economics of Chaos. On Revitalizing the
American Economy,’’ New York, 1989, p 353.

49. 5S. WORLD POLICY JOURNAL, Spring 1989, p 215.

50. 6. S. Schlosstein, ‘‘The End of the American Century,’'’ New
York, 1989, p ix.

51. 7. NEWSWEEK, 2 October 1989.

52. 8. Quoted in ‘‘State of the World 1989,'’ edited by L. Brown et
al, New York, 1989, p 136.

53. 9. FOREIGN POLICY, Fall 1989, p 125.

54. 10. INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE, 23 October 1989.
55. 11. BUSINESS WEEK, 14 August 1989, p 44.

S56. 12. THE WASHINGTON QUARTERLY, Spring 1989, p 8.

57. COPYRIGHT: Izdatelstvo ‘'Nauka’’, ‘‘SShA-- ekonomika, politika,
ideologiya’’, 1990

UNCLASSIFIED
