Possible Developments in Katanga
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011835, dated 4 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011835).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

SNIE
7 December 1961

[3 ca)

L3BJ LIBRARY

Mandatory Review
Case # NLJ_87-> 94
Docament #__/

SPECIAL

NUMBER Qe

1.3 cor

POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS IN KATANGA

Appr
Data

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the

preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency

and tke intelligence organizations of the Departments of

State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Atr Force, and The
Joint Stag.

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 7 December 1961. Concurring were The Director of Intel-
ligence and Research, Department of State; The Director,
Defense Intelligence Agency; the Assistant Chtef of Staff for
intelligence, Department of the Army; the Assistant Chief of
Naval Operations (intelligence), Department of the Navy;
the Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF; the Director
for inteligence, Joint Stag; and the Director of the National
Security Agency. Tie Atomic Energy Commission epre-
sentative fo the USIB and the Assistant Director, Federal
Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the subject being outside
of their jurisdiction.

oved for Redease

é,

19 Tan 1990

\ pom

seroma ass ten Ament

a Senatiiniaineeinintieiinuaaiarsamnarenaorie oem ee dereat pons

SM he ete

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This estimate was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on
a need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments.

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Departinent of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Intelligence, for the Department of the
Navy 7 “ig
Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
. Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for The Joint Staff
. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Director of NSA, Jor the National Security Agency
Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency.

2. This copy may be retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with applicable
security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by arrangement with
the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When an estimate is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain it
for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the estimate should
either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be requested
of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4. The titie o7 this estimate when used separately from the text, should be classified:

FOR OFFIC. re XY

Sor gp ag rm

WARNING

This material contains information affecting
the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws,
Title i8, USC, Secs. 703 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of which in any manner
to an unauthorized person {s prohibited by law.

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigaticn

Got eee as ee ig pine 5 Bae tS ed LCR een MP }

~ en ecmenceernenetre nate te EE

FE ET

POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS IN KATANGA

THE PROBLEM

To assess (a) the possibilities for negotiation between the Central Government
and Katanga; (b) the consequences of Tshombe’s departure or ouster from Katanga;
(c) the consequences of a continued impasse between the Central Government and

Katanga.’

THE ESTIMATE

i. INTRODUCTION

1. The reintegration of Katanga province
into the Congo Republic is now becoming
such a critical issue as to threaten the posi-
tion of Prime Minister Cyrilie Adoula. At the
moment, negotiations between Adoula and
Katanga President Moise Tshombe are sty-
mied by the inability of either to bring ef-
fective pressure to bear on the other. The
essential issue is the form of political organi-
zation for the Congo: confederation as de-
manded by Tshombe or a federal-type ar-
rangement with a fairly strong central gov-
ernment as held by Adoula and the moder-
ates. However, the strict limitations on their
bargaining powers—imposed by conditions be-
yond their control—make each reluctant and
indeed unable to offer concessions to the
other. Moreover, the fighting which has
broken out during the past several days in the
Elisabethville area probably will affect the
possibility of initiating systematic discussions
of the constitutional issue. Exactly how, it is
as yet too early to tell.

‘This estimate was prepared in the early days of
renewed fighting between UN and Katangan forces.
Accordingly, it is possible that assessments (a) and
(c) may be overtaken by events.

il. SOURCES OF TSHOMBE’S STRENGTH

2, Tshombe receives strong backing through-
out much of the province from his own Lunda
tribal groups, and, in association with his
chief lieutenants, Interior Minister Munongo
and Foreign Minister Kimba, enjoys tribal
support throughout southern and eastern Ka-
tanga among the predominant non-Baluba
peoples. Tshombe also obtains important
financial resources from Katanga’s mineral
properties, which account for about 50 per-
cent of the Congo's budgetary income and
which are still iargely owned and operated by
Belgian interests. Katanga presently re-
ceives about $44 million annually in tax rev-
enues and dividends from the Union Miniére
and related cormpanies. These contributions
are paid to Katanga. via Brussels, and are
used for Tshombe's military and other ex-
penditures. Tshombe also receives consider-
able advice and guidance from the Union
Miniére managers in Katanga; they, in turn,
are to some extent dependent upon him for
protection and for the right to continue to
operate.

3. White settlers in Northern Rhodesia and
Angola fear an extension of the Congo's dis-
order into their areas. To prevent this, they
are willing to give some political support and

~ a 1

> ens me ee «tty sn at

to countenance the passage of some mili-
tary supplies, mercenaries, and advisers to
Tshombe. They are also willing to grant
Katanga continued access to the sea for its
exports. In Katanga, the remaining Beigian
colons—-upwards of 15,000—contribute to the
comparatively healthy economy and provide
badly-needed technical and administrative as-
sistance. Moreover, some 500 Belgian colon
“minutemen” and a 400-man European mer-
cenary force constitute an effective core of
military strength and in addition provide
leadership to Katangan troops. The lat-
ter, up to the present at least, have proved
superior to the Central Government’s unruly
army.

{fl, TSHOMBE’S ATTITUDE TOWARD
NEGOTIATION

4. Tshombe harbors grave doubts about the
wisdom of negotiating with Adoula. In his
eyes, Leopoldville lacks sufficient political
strength and administrative ability to govern
effectively. He is afraid that the radicals
nolding important positions in the present
wr anustration will soun prevail over Adoula.
“r+; ‘nese circumstances, and recalling Lu-
‘sciba'’s fate and his own earlier mistreat-
mer* at the hands of Congolese politicians.
Tshombe fears for his personal safety should
he go to Leopoldville. He fears for his politi-
cal future should he accept any offer for high
oftice in the present Central Government. He
is also suspicious that any arrangement he
might make with the Central Government
concerning Katanga’s revenues would fail to
survive for very long once he gave up his “in-
dependence.”

5. In Elisabethville, Tshombe is the strong-
est leader, but he is dependent upon the po-
litical support of his aides. It would be dif-
ficult for him to go far to meet Adoula’s de-
mands without incurring strong opposition
from Munongo, Kimba, and their followers,
the Lunda tribes, and the Europeans.
Neither Munongo nor Kimba, the more ex-
treme of the Katanga separatists, would be
acceptable to the strong radical elements in
the Central Government on whom Adoula

must depend, even if he personally could ac-
cept Tshombe.

6. In these circumstances, it is unlikely that
Tshombe will undertake serious negotiation
with the Central Government unless signifi-
cant new pressures can be brought to bear
on him. We explore below the various pres-

sures which might be employed, including _

diplomatic and economic measures, moves by
the Central Government, and actions by
the UN.

W. KATANGAN VULNERABILITY TO
PRESSURE

7. Diplomatic pressure on Tshombe has been
notably unsuccessful. The Belgian Govern-
ment itself can exercise only limited author-
ity over the many private Belgians and Bel-
gian interests involved. There is probably
little more that Premier Spaak can accom-
plish in view of his own political problems in
Belgium. Because large sectors of public
opinion in Europe are favorable to Tshombe,
and because some moderates within African
colonial and ex-colonial areas feel likewise,
most of the European colonia) and ex-colonial
powers are unenthusiastic about applying
pressure on him. In any case, we do not be-
lieve that mere persuasion, in the absence of
strong military or economic pressure, will
have any decisive effect upon Tshombe'’s posi-
tion.

8. Presumably, economic pressure on
Tshombe could be exercised through attempts
to force the Union Miniére, for example, to
pay taxes to the Central Government instead
of to Katanga. and to permit the Central
Government to acquire dividends paid by
commercial interests operating in Katanga.
However, we believe these measures would
take many months to prepare. and their use-
fulness would depend heavily on the willing-
ness of the Belgian Government and other
European commercial interests to cooperate
fully in their execution. While these meas-
ures would—if effectively applied—substan-
tially reduce the financial resources available
to Tshombe, they probably would not in
themselves force him to accept Adoula's

Ame mt SS 6 nt He aL or ARR + i pee tenn EI tithes See han tnieete eet an ay a

—

terms. Moreover, Tshombe could take coun-
termeasures in Katanga itself which might
blunt their effect.

9. Tshombe is weak in the northern half of
Katanga, largely populated by the Baluba
tribes. The Central Government is attempt-
ing to establish a Baluba state there, and has
succeeded in stirring up some sentiment to
that end. It has been assisted by some 2,000
troops from Stanleyviille, whose entry into the
region has been facilitated by the UN. How-
ever, even if such efforts should achieve some
Success, they would not get at the major
sources of Tshombe’s strength, would perhaps
strengthen Gizengist influence in Katanga,
and would open up the prospect of uncon-
trollable tribal warfare.

10. There would be a strong incentive for
Tshombe to accommodate to the Central Gov-
ernment’s terms if real strength and order
developed in the areas now only nominally
under Central Government control. If
Tshombe ever came to realize that he was
becoming isolated because the Central Gov-
ernment had effective armed forces, a func-
tioning econcmy, and strong international
support, then he would find it very difficult
to hold out against negotiating some kind of
arrangement satisfactory to the Centra? Gov-
ernment. However, the problems confront-
ing the Central Government are so enormous
that it would be many months before it could
project so strong an image.

11. The greatest threat to the Katanga Gov-
ernment is that posed by UN military opera-
tions now going on in the province. What-
ever may have been the immediate cause for
the collapse of the cease-fire, the UN now
appears to be attempting through a show of
military force to convince Tshombe and his
lieutenants that the die is cast and that he
had best come to terms while he can still bar-
gain. Given their present Strength and de-
Ployment, UN forces will probably have great
difficulty in accomplishing this, and may be
able to do little more than maintain their
Present positions. With some reinforcement.
which now seems to be taking place from

3

within the Congo, they may be able to estab-
lish limited control in certain areas. How-
ever, the withdrawal) of forces from other
parts of the Congo is leaving those areas dan-
gerously exposed to new disorders arising
from army indiscipline, tribal enmities, and
political intrigues,

V. THE CONSEQUENCES OF TSHOMBE’S
DEPARTURE OR OUSTER

12. It appears that pressure upon the Ka-
tanga Government for a negotiated agree-
ment with Leopoldville will be very difficult
to apply effectively. It is, of course, conceiv-
able that Tshombe and his lieutenants might
be removed by more forceful and direct
means—-assassination, accident, or full-scale
UN intervention. In such an event, there
would be a virtually complete political vac-
uum in the area. There is no obvious local
leader who would be generally acceptable
throughout Katanga. There would be aspir-
ants for leadership, including some in the
present Katanga Government, and a number
of tribal enclaves might be established.

13, The most serious problem which would be
posed by the destruction of the Katanga re-
gime would be the danger of large-scale tribal
warfare, either as a natural consequence of
confusion in the wake of Tshombe’s removal,
or as the result of an attempt by the Cen-
tral Government to impose an administration
unacceptable, on tribal or other grounds, in
considerable portions of Katanga. If it were
to avoid complete chaos, the UN would al-
most certainly be forced to exercise extensive,
if not virtually complete, governing authority
in Katanga for an indefinite period.

14. In the event that Tshombe should be
eliminated through assassination or an acci-
dent which left his principal lieutenants un-
harmed, the latter would attempt to continue
the Katanga regime and to carry out essen-
tially the same policies which Tshombe has
pursued. However, they would be more er-
ratic and extreme, and would probably be
confronted with more internal dissension and
conflict, partly of their own making.

VI. CONSEQUENCES OF A CONTINUED
(IMPASSE

15. Adoula has been under great pressure to
solve the Katanga problem ever since he be-
came Prime Minister. He has always been
vulnerable because he lacks strong political
or tribal support in his own right, and he
has been dependent upon a variety of politi-
cal forces, extremist, moderate, and tribal,
whose support might be withdrawn at any
time. If he fails to reintegrate Katanga soon
he may be ousted by the extremists; more-
over, he runs a similar risk should he lower
his sights and come to an accommodation
with Tshorabe on essentially the latter's
terms. His political position would obviously
be greatly strengthened, not only against his
political enemies in the Leopoldville Govern-
ment but against Tshombe as well, if he
could demonstrate that he had access to sub-
stantial funds, military supplies, and foreign
assistance not available to other Congolese
politicians.

16. At the moment, Adoula is probably hoping
that the UN will rescue him from his diffi-
culties. If the UN should fail to resolve the
Katanga problem in the present context, he

himself may feel compelled to undertake mili-
tary operations against Katanga, and to ob-
tain military assistance from non-UN sources
in order to de so. If he cannot get this from

the West, he will probably accept offers al-
‘ready made by the Soviet Bloc. Ironically,
‘even if the Katanga problem were settied on |

Adoula’s terms, his political future would still
be in jeopardy. Opposition to Tshombe has
been a unifying force; it has brought med-
erates and extremists alike together under
Adoula. Once this force is removed the radi-
cals would be disposed to try to overturn
Adoula.

17. Whatever may be done to resolve Ka-
tanga's separatism, the Congo as a whole
seems likely to remain in turmoil for many
months to come, with UN presence required

for an indefinite period if a minimum degree
‘of order is to be maintained. Aside from the
" problems of Katanga and the Gizengists, the

Congo seems likely to remain plagued with the
problems of lack of army discipline, mas-
sive unemployment, lack of national con-
sciousness, tribal rivalries, and lack of lead-
ership and training at all levels of govern-
ment and in the economy as a whole.
