Meeting no 15 - London, England, 04 May 1961WITH Penkovsky
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012403, dated 4 April 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012403).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

v > of :
ae : - 8 ie
wr oY
* a : 0 :
; 1 — 5 .
5 . . 5 2

veeting FIE, London, England, . Ma 1961

(Subject arr ved at 2010 hours on l May 1961 to Room 360, Hotel
Mount Royal in London. Upon entering, Subject was shown blown up
prints of the exper‘mental shots he had taken previously. KINGS-
~BURY, the photo Instructor, vas present.)

1. 6: Did yru take this under electric light? S: No, day~
light. H: ch! Daylight. 5: May 17 G: How was the lighting?
5: It was cloudy and it was the second half of the day. (Repeats
In English) second part cf the day, about u ctclock, KINGSBURY:
VZ— at o'clock, yesterday afternoon. 8: A surprising
shot -- very clear. 5: 1 work under similar conditions which 1
will photograph later. This is why I don't go into detail. G:

You sea how clear and exact everything in the written text is. St

„ Rot bad. See how the frame goes evenly all around. G: Now see,
here is already a little bit of an overlap. 5: Ch yes, I see. 1
cut it a little bit on this frame. This is what should be watched,
and here is the second part. (Subject 5 pound note.)
G: These are the results which can be had if done properly. 52. 1
always believed it could be done. G: We wanted’ you to know that

it was not for a lost cause to use this camera. It is e shame to
risk everything and then maybe nothing will come out photographically
— but here is what you can get. You can read every printed word.
KINGSBURY: The exposure was Just about perfect. G1 The amount of
light was ideal -- perhaps you can remember the exposure? 5: Yes,
perhaps I can remember — and also the distance between the 1 ia
and the table. G: Now you know from your own experience that the
closer you approach the equivalent electric light intensity, the
clearer the picture. S: That's how 1 did it. G: ‘Now, do you want
to re-do some more? 5: Not really. KINGSBURY: I think he has
gotten the idea fairly well. These are very good shots.

2. S: 1 should have told you about Pakistan and about this
business ~~ (Subject had received a note at the Hotel desk to call a
number). G: Did you take care of this matter? Sz At the Embassy
no one told me anything I was not worried. I had to straighten
this matter out with you. I made no phone calls to this number, not
one. G: Well, who is he? 8: I don't know. H: He is from TASS?
G: The representative from TASS? H: That's the TASS representa~
tive, KONEV. Gs Heis the representative from the news service. E:
Ro, he's with TASS. This telephone number is the TASS phone, their
London number. S: Then why does he live here? 6: He does not live
here. He called you on the phone. 5: Then the number he left was
not the Hotel number? 1 asked you before; this Is what was confusing
me. Gt At a certain time a man called you and wanted to get in
touch with you. He left a number for you to cali him. 5: When we
first arrived there was a, TASS representative here — when WYNNE gave
the reception. So, maybe he wanted to ask something of the delega~
tion. Tomorrow I] will call. H: This is someone from TASS. 6:
That's all. He just wants you to call back. S: Tomorrow 1111 call.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE .
3 AMAR 4992 a _

#15

3. Gr What shall we start with? H: I think there are a few
things here we ought to do with photography. G: Maybe we should |
start with photography, since the photographic expert is here right
now. S: Ch yes, then if there are any questions - One minute, «+

May 17 H: Yes. (Subject practicing loading the Minox with a new
cassette). S: Someone was already snapping this. G: No, not yet.
Now, once again — now, now. 8: It is not loaded is it? H: No,

no. There's no film in this, is there? R: No. S: In this the
position — when the dotsccome together, can 1 load 1t7 G: of

course. You load and unload only when the dots are like that, and

only then. 5: And if a dot is dislodged, 1 can't load it then? .

G: No. It means that the point has not been reached yet for you to
load it. You should not load it when it's off center, right? K:

You must not. It's possible... Gr It's possible, but you may

stretch the frames out of position. 8: But 1 won't break it will

17 ASK him... Kt No, but ‘the pictures will overlap. G: What

if he tried to unload it before the dots are lined up? k: No, that |
won't matter; it Just means that he will have to open up the camera |
shutter so many times. G: But if he tried to force it open before

the dots are limed up... K: It won't hurt. G: It wontt hurt.

St So then, the dots should be lined up (ICC NA TCOCHKU). k: In
other words, if he wishes to remove the film before taking all the
pictures it's quite possible, providing that he operates the camera
three times. H: Three times? R: To put the exposed f! In inside

the light-tight container. G: You can unload it when the dots are

not lined up. The difference is «~ say you are on picture #25, and

you want to take out the film. You have to move the frames three

times. 5: Oh, I see, in order to tear it off. Gt. No, so that the
unexposed film can be wound up in a dark place. Then you can open

it. Ss: I see. I wilt work only, only on 1/100 of: a second and on

30, because 30 centimers is the right distance. R: 0.3 (meters).

.. he St Now tell me under what circumstances there can be
breakage?_-What can get broken and under what conditions? Let him
explain that. 6: (Translating above to K). R: It needs careful
handling -- 6: You must handle it gently. What fs fit that might
be forced, or bent, or hurt? Ki Well, the mechanism 1 8 delicate,
and it is possible for it to break any time. 61 Yes, but in what
manner, in particular? That's what his point is — what should be
avoided? K: There's nothing he can avoid nothing. It will just
be mechanical failure. G: If it breaks, it can Just be because the
mechanism {s so delicate -- 8: But 1 cannot repair it myself? k:

Ro, we'll give him a reserve camera, 8: Does tt have to be oi led!
RK: No, no, no, no. G: Whether he has one or two — it doesnt
make much difference what he carries. EH: We can give him one now,
and then later another. This one has been overhauled today, so
there should be no trouble with it. We will give him the reserve
I

— —

ö | | | | | 1

#15

one at the end of the month. S$: Now when 1 begin to work -- here

I am, working — always is it necessary to lower this when 1 do
this? K: If he doesnt click, it will show a blank, that's all.

G: If you dont click, you Just let the film frame go by. S: Is
this correct? 6: No, no. f you click then you open the shutter
and let In the light. S: Okay «- Now suppose J] have taken ten
photoes and I have to take out the film quickly. I do this - one,
two, three, four and -~ R: Take out the film. 6: Minimus of
three beyond your ten frames. KR: Don't use it again, of course.
That: film is finished. 6: Don't use that roll any more. 81 No,
no, no» That's correct. I wontt, I have to clear-up all the ques-
tions. Now, to reload - here 1 have taken ten pictures, and I have
taken them out; the indicator shows this number. In order to reload,
do I have to make the clicks up to 50 and line up the dota? R:
Right. 8: Right now, I can't load It? KR: No. 5: Potnt-to-point,
Red and Black -~ and R: Begin. 5: But I can't load it the way it
is now, why? 6: Because it won't be even. He wants to know what
Will happen if he loads it like this,, S: What if I'm in a hurry,
and don't have time to click it7 G: (to K) If you put it after
the ith frame? 5: In such position? R: Well, you risk getting
overlapping pictures. G: Overlapping? K: Tes. Instead of a
space between each photograph, you may have an overlap. G: This is
what you are risking. The film may not be In proper position, and

you will constantly be getting half of one and half of the other.

S: Why? ‘G: Because it is not set up to center the film. 82 1
see, What if I have to make ten more pictures in a hurry, and I have
to take them out ~- I start with a zero? R: ves. S: But you can't
start with this position? G: You might, Just be chance, hit it
right == by chance. K: Well, George, if hets going to take ten
frames of one — and then ten of another, he may’ just as well go on
on the same film.. G: This 1s Just a theoretical question not a
practical one. He meant ten at once, and in a half-hour ten again,
something like .. S: 111 watch the frames, that's all.

5. R: The frames exposed earlier -- I'd just like some com-
ment on them — how much light? H: Just a moment. You would Like
to know about the other film that was done in daylight? k: Yes.

G: This is about those which we developed for you before. K: That
had about the maximum exposure. In other words, the light was
maximum. 51 And you could not read anything? Ask them -- when it
is a bright day, what am I supposed to do, move the table back? G:
Exactly. 51 Now it will be summertime; it will be bright - how
does he advise, as an example, if there is a bright sun? G: He
wants to know -- if the sun is too bright — how many meters from
the window? K: I can only say that he must remember the light with
which he had the most success in the past. G: I will be necessary
for you to remember and try to recreate the light‘with which you had

3.

very
not be good. Ji I think he's got

room. H: «~ Or perhaps, vith hls back to the window. 8; No, there
will de shadow. d: Shadow is nat so important. Ez His om Shade

is alright. 8: If it's a very bright dsyt G: On a day when the

gun is bright, if you stand vith your bask to the window there 4 shadow,
yes, Gut there will bo sufficient reflected light. 8 Only? 8: Yes, because
the aun is so bright. Tt will come out anyway — and it's better this wy than
to risk ovex-exposure. 8: It's clear, Anyway, T'II try to pick a hoppy

mücl 1 un. 1

65. d: You already have some 1d enz you've been feeling around.
You already know what to avold, besides, asyou know, the bulb is more

burning. It's even more secure for a fost “put-eway”.«~ the Lastrument
under munlight ,
8: If T use the bulb - it is 100 and 60 watts. 8

The will be good. (K is leaving. Bveryone goédbyes Rin end
him.) di (to ) Tou have the little cassettes which he might need? E: Tes,
T have lots of these things. If I cen unt reseuber vhare they cre.

[
82 T have an inportant smowxenent, vary inportent. Today, he
0 1 45 going to meet his recruited agent as well as other people
| St the Pakistan Eubasay. Of course, he will talk to several people, but he
i must be watehed, He told me today that he has content with, and vants to recruit,
i am English Conmmntst., 5

ae

. mnt they are “feeding” hin a Little, If fwere exter to
be hare snother lo days oF so, I wuld ever the eatiee’ Ant.

T heard thet Pubbassy was very gravely ingwaseed and hun sixeady notified
zac, about that sentence of 82 years, 2s is a very sentence, I
heard thet the wretch who received t te 38 youre old. its

Sea unt elne! 81 How, kern are the bills rer the things which 1
have baught so that you will kuow whet Tin baying, 3: Em woxwy about that.

Tuaum 5 a ie

money, thet X have been vevarded. He gives mp glances ant hints, which «
that I should "tx him" algo, : hin’ ont

be T would have been “burned” together with the dosumts, T don'ts
know whether you would have flown ma out or whether I would hre lived there.

i |

eens on en — —

#25

— —

FFC You exit yourself thst
oot when you sow bin. 81 Very pleased? But I sak you, please

eee — be wil thin l. e m

eee eee wert something in return. Ef there is the guin fro
his action - . He is a poor sen. T went you to darsrand de
JJ 8 Perhaps T on no} king myself clear.
Gs You are warvying for nothing. ‘hie will not herren. 8: Bdey wo hed a
conversation of this kind. d: He's inquisitive? Ads is nom of biz business.
CC ee ee Sui be will sey, “Wheat
ar seoundyel are you? You begged me so over there d hre you don't
8 It ta uo matter thet T get une Eren hen
from the government. Why don't you share want you gett” Mun ts we.
wheat I felt. Tem sow of it. G: Ee ig setisfied, He 4 very well

don"t need WHEE". G Ra, it von"s be like that. Mo. 31 T Aid not tel you
bu T felt it. I n a very sensitive person end T felt 2%. d: There
ig no eee for 18. 81 T swear I om not wrong. I think thet. I told hin in
Moscow, "If I have it good, you'll have 36 good", F
r very iagortemt matter, eapacially sine I'm
going to meet Mn at the ex] of May. T ask you to rename Mn tonorrov, den

| |

S15

him thet (Subjeet's true seme) ia a kind man. Gio iid kath tha Stes a es
forbidden you to give himsomey. 8: That's it. Tell ban that you have forbidden
me! i: fats 18 right. 8: Tell hin, "You will get everything. ork a bit
nore”, ee eas ee aa tts Sees a

. . E: Sere 13 another detail ~~ you must know everyiicing. Vhen we
yore ut that night bor, he invited a cimrade and two gixle, for himself.
X bod ay om (ivi), T said to hin, “It is arbarrunadng for me to pay. „
You give her the woney." eet cae ee

5 N
— wt . chia vill — x received this
note today { eall) and T decided to talk to you right evay. N
— Subjeek's true name) has asked for sam mary to "thank you”
but we „ ß 8 a

enough for both oth Mid and for 8s. tt is clear to you whet e shout
WYNNE? d: Yea, of course . 8: Thank you

12, Hs Ani Just in thds comectton, I'd like yoo total hin that be
shouldn't zin to Mag this tusiuess of aneting with FLA because thet
would upset him, 6: GOOCH! Mol E: tinder so crm tense, 8: (almost
isitguantly) Nr. Herold, don't you thixk 2... Hs Yes, yea, I know.

Ss T wouldn't any u word. 5 ef sextion hed to te
yeyarted. 3: You are right -~ and WHE dowan't ask anything.

13. Br So, rn donee erregen morning at 9:30. ‘GOIRALOY doen't |
feel ot ell well. By the way, e way in rina bus, ee did net do
anything. He warised very badly in respsst te Intelligence. Ave there British

—

Fs

advanced. Here are 15 days to account for ~~ that's 32 pounds Per person.
leven daya we wert here and 5 days in the other oities. Euch of them hes to
account for 32 pounis. VC WEE knows alt

hotel n the food. d: Younre speaiting of breakfasts, but thab does Bot sppear
anywhere. ee e included in the r price, 8

ont brankiiost, ani then we end nch, G: Ahn, end lunch! 8; Ln - and
we don't poy this aemey. The specialists ase so happy? Well, led then be,

G: Well, theve WII be it vont expoay. 8: Seow Reel
“Inching Iwekfest”. I: if they hove special breekfash they will gut
it on the DLLL | . Wut a righk, Ant this must

+ e: Seni teeekfast
now show up ou the bilis. All thet showli be ghown de E. Per day ged the nome od
the hotel. VVV en thay do that fox then? Rs T

thay srecliver vith momy there. For s kopotka thay willl kali n mm. tals 18
why I ack this. T explained all. this ie ¥
ACTOS goch On one, all extras on ambher. 5: We domi md eaptos of the
fond bills, G: Yea, bud ar the hebel they have to separate chef MIA somehow.

Et Comsch. dG: ah, they out. Hs Gh, they ars alright?

a; Yea. 2: dul HeraG Rayel? $: Ga tier Mou

ker the county and Arran — co how! fi I should be ag it happened,
Tarte mib we spent herve, then 8. So hat the total wuld be 11 days, oni then
the 3 days an the other cities vill mke 4416. (d tronalening) I The bilis

for the 5 days were alright. Now you went separate bills for room only for
avery man, and seperate bills for extras. Gt You see, he ean up the
5111 alone fer k 160. Tt has to de & 32 five tines.s;this is

time or later, we can finish thea up. I want de co over the main
things. What are we going to cover in order? Operational,
What and how things will be done. Then X will —

Ve vont open then; ar en purpose. 8: Even one is not cpenedt
G: Ho, they have to be like this. 9: I understodd from the instructions
numerals axe bigger, aren't they? 6: Ten, mich mot quite this lergs,

but almost as large. 8: These ere the first ones (code), and these the second
I You write with these (code): 8: And I decode with thase

d: Eines we have about 20 minutes „ Twill go over the
instructions, ‘Then we will review then when you com back. 8: Shall
b bes cookies 3

when I get hone, Sundsy. d: If hals going to stay longer,

Saturdey and z
let's get on the road with this. 8: This 1 a historic rom. Someday there
will be a uemorkel plague here. —

i - , é 5 5 8
95 5 1 1 5 mae bes 7
. : = 1 =

#15

7. Gs Lat us begin with this (radio code ani signal plan), t
Till tell you. De radio man will ba eoning tocheck things. He will cam
Just as you leave. He will walt. When you return, be will have tuned every-
thing up and all will be ret. Before that, I want to... 3: Ami then X41) take
ny instructions sheets, Hz Well, let's show kim how to do 44. fz Perhaps
i showld talk a bit first, and you listen and check and ses bow T understand
it. Gon we do it that way? d: We ean. Plesse go dend. That's very important.

18. 8: At the predesigusted. tine, ab the exact hour, I reesive wy
Arten.

sound for 5 necenda. How, in one ylace £6 says 5 seconis,

Anal to me for rant after tie tath nage

{ J l begin. his ie clear. Naw, E get the first § mebers. he
vases oun fer weg the second one 1 i

the lost three 4 of groups. There enn be no nore

than 100 of thee: manber (wilt wervespand)t If the deat two rambers

are 78, then 2b will be 765 groups. Gorrent? d: BL 3

81 After Arat Zim: group, wich is by way of an dudicator, ta

* 8 * 9 . 2 .
a | ; |

#25

will be followed by « repetitdon of the message. After the gepatition, during
which T enn check and comreet everything, T vill again get the group — ny

gtreioend

+o my control chart * three dete, dash — a 3 — ete, & toh w~ 5 on ote :
‘So nau, after this I hure written dow: ths mmerieal mecning, ani I heve

eee er ee ge en
groups. Now I begin to decale

Herd g 31. JJ 8
e N. Gels then a Pune JFC These gr
seperstions meantivee ave 33 of thes. How tell ms what all its Tens.

2. 8: This, the Arat Aer 7 danch pad I mst
ure end whieh Ife: to begin with. @: In what dtwtanes ig this? S: IT T have
already worked with Lt before. Gr dash the we only af ib ig the

Crone appears — only
it is the first time you are receiving it. OF course, if in a "Live"
menage «.. to tell you here to lor. have, there or elemhers..
81 They all have different mabern. Ur And thoy are all 20 (decoling pets)
~~ you reckive on the 2's. 3: Aud on tht L's, T send. 81 Yes, you seni,
Etthes Sv or voile. We are not using any redn righh now 87 Ws 15 for
wt foe tha GWT G: & the went. N Glien to the redio gies. Ta it elenr?
32 Tt e clear. Gs So, this 4 the first monsage by radio = Live message.
S: This tireth group ls to dell moe wich pad to use. Gd: The rat time!
Toe peeomd message ~~ telegram + wm't hoe thie! R
6d 8

get the wander of the book. Br In the + „„
Serzror, RABOCHSY tang. G: This, WI be the first Line. Ten Lt goan
on am] on and on cm? nis with amie’. Hera take @ lock at it.

a: Aha! Yes, I understani it na. en ee
only given for control purposes. Gr So, you begin with thig aber —~

?
3 , ö |
|

2 * ‘ : : 5
;

45

first gebunliy real. message muber. 81 fo in the first teliigram, the real
group will be thw thint one, ant in the second message, the real. grasp will
be the second one. After, this ons vent awer. 5

22. 81 How I ask you, plesse show - ag though this Pee were
not there. G: Surely. 8: Here is the Sirst page, the fires} Zine; end here

ven 7 cote & fra the pod TL) f 1. logloal result. , ge
CC D everything you lire to. No one
A* ta run nr. 8: These things ZII leave here. T wender if th be
Errm the Fanny. Xt is probably eee to 6 fr che
this rom. Gi Ha, better from your ren, a

Subject e to col gr. prepared Wy Georgy fad Pula ( Sabgeet

12

#15 |
decodes the messages, Subject ha unioretants £6 all ant doesnt went to
wate ‘ine going over ali the datatie but tenn errs

Winter. 6: Ber again let mo tine the ——— et nistor,
(Subject J &: Anywsy, a wild n n Listen on the short weve, mt
an this om, b bel. . YO Con Heer the mows of the day. I is the

E. Trax: What I want you to de 48 be venice weet T heve
written dm here. duet follow Lt with your eye. c Cen you sesomise what
eel oe ia Haren ind so you can eecgnize ih, 81 T Reve one question,

hin show me how the multinie Boral « the dots - after my
Si Bete giving me 125, (0. eee to Baal) ie wis ant ele dre ben bv.
ty : oh practice tape)” fay ate ae et lag — I'LL go slew -
711 give you tee, ading Sign, Fine shout this, 4b i be so pls;
. tke they €9 hare

mating Lt fast rignt new because bets 4 bing 18 .

13

— —

115

with it. n (Trenelating to Subject): .
written in Russian -- and o photograph illustrating the set, (Paul, explains
detalis of the RE-22. Subject is made to go through the tuning in process,

and ig shown the differences in the tone and the noises «- ani is
told to get used to the one which is better for hin.] Faulks Sow shall w
we review the battery charger once more? (Subject reviews the for

one Mate later another three rings. i: This means everything is alright.
Gs uf anything io wrong, then call the sane way bot ring 5 tines - « to be

to soled

June. ane, VERS wits ba ta weeeas Wy Sem ont ot ey ce Se een

the ‘th of dune. G: Probably 1t wil de in late May ox perhaps £4 will be
‘on the let of Juan. Anyway, you vill. meet him at the aizports check to make
gare that his baggege hes cleared Custens with no trouble. Tam you will

eur and you wll go off with it, after you drop Min off at his hotel. There
is no need for him to take it into the hotel, 81 No, why earry ned rag
G: Now let us repeat this again. E

81 TI be meeting mg ond I will. de enrrying my briefcase, where everything
of mine will be sapped up end ready. i: Yea, yes, this poist is also
included 1n our plan. oe ee WYRME the material wich you here

Acadeny, ote. Gs Te you consider 1d necessary for some regton to write us a
only if it is weceusery. If you went te write u letter in plein text, the
same thing gone. After WERKE receives the material ren you

Seen e must be alerted ox to the ne of Kur e cru. . Les,
this will be done.

Ls

innocent item.
car and will put your material in 18. 8: Ge must hang on to 18.
0 a 8 : - to
Exbegay at artes opportunity. He will be expected there, ie will.
Geliver the docunents, which in tum, vill be sealed and sent here, If by
treveling bie, Sham lis fe tee ef eher 19 55 8d fü, f. an e dn

and things in there and it won't be notiend,. 6: So, you will have a triefease
or a ll sultease. 8: Briefcase, 02 Tt depents on the size of chat a inetde,
zT have soueching I would like to ask. I don't Like the idea
or WINES walking around the streets, ete the nan vho is going to be expecting
iin, should be sonevhore y even if he kas to be waiting thers 4 long tine.

at He wonts a wen to moet Hm. 8:
hotel, Hs This Ml. be dangerous, 6: I will draw suspleded ct: Gs MI

arrange with this mn wn he (W¥IGS) showla pick up the shipment of itess ven
are to be passed to you by UE. Tf you say to Nn, LI see you tomorroy

‘with the nan to vhon he will give wnteriel, He will then be able to

15

un, , He will not keep them G: You bare to let bin know when you
Will meet him zo thet every dan be prepared and reedied ut the Ea
or held under seal. for you. B: clear. I will work this out.
Gs What gart of things might be there? For iy „ Due mom cassettes,
berhaps another receiver, some more instructions -- in addition to your
purchases. . :
32. 81 think sbout this special resetver. I don't
you sent 1t to me just yet. I still have to find a

he knows exactly when he will meet you, he can go to the Exbasey u half-hour .
before, pick up the stuff, ond then see you and give 4% to you, : This is all
very cles. N 5

not before, d: when the wan you, the three
times. 8: Exetly ct 10 lock inthe morning? G: At 10 lock. (Aside to
E): Shall the dnl de wok? R: Nes, it wild

do the deat drop aa soon es I Ser che signal? Gt Ten. 8: Sof gs

cor and go =~ af 10:15 I'll be there. d It 4 easy enough to m

at 16: axaghly. 81 If I take a text, I will get to the Center in 7 mes.
19 tinates before the phone call so that everything will be inorder, &: It

tan stay there a half hour or u half day 17 the children are nat playing them.
T have rel ene in this dead drop, but At should not gtay there long,
no longer thon an hour. e e e e

16

G: Now, we me still we gay WHEE is uot there. If
evex you go anywhere in Moscow =- to sone offfcial „ reooptions,
thexe will be Western sone
himekf, aml soya, “ PREKE"... Bi Aud also the

pected aad arpa 8: Or I wilt. give hin sossthing. 6: How, as
another recogaition nin, harr is a Little gift for you. Ii is of n
valve but the men will wear ons like this. Sr Apt I have one tke it.
VF d: Is 4d blue dr Black? R; This om in black;
these two ore bine, & let's take the blue ones. Et No, becnuse this man

identical ti
&: I won't wear 1.
Geis to, r He beep tke Minn enn ust to be sh to

. recognize
an coer B(Repoata the secognttion mig]: “Greetings fran Cherles EN,
ond lis wife." wee A iss Os ts ces GL 81 Teas far

Sunne the first
G: Yes, the seme tine. 10 obeleck in the evening, Moscow time.
35. e explains thet the recipient of the package wilt be vatting around
for sous time and thot 37 8
te time to
after the Heu. —— Qi Se net place = over the will,
of courses «= 4 where the wall joins the tulliing. 5 BE: this

. Reberexsinsya,.,. &: Walt, let u sketch 16. 1 know the Nn; eee waa thaws
155 times. Wow, here's how I uviuxstani tt. (Subject sketebss surrouniing aren

dine «- scbualiy t doesn't matter too much, anyway, you have to extend the
davitetion from your office. You will be asked how meny people ara invited”
if you gay tue ox three, I won't get in on it. You must mextion the “

Gf our committer - gur end selentific Persal, and
invite about 8.16 people Of course 40 peaple wou: coms, bah this will
to the Culef of the Section ant individuals be Ten I'll be ehie

sad nob ‘two If you do the Latter they will only went che bie f
5 ann oP two poeple. you ey miy 1 N
chern. I: Right, we'll fix that up. a :

38. at How with respect ...
time, & month Aber will do. Just xewesber, the first Seburday of the month,

8: . the first soturdey ta August. Gi Tea, the eurliest date 13
the first Satuntay in August. Tf foe gau russen it 48 not a good day, make

1% next month, Té's not such a big effort for our mon to be en the alert on that
one day of each muuth. E will be watting, Er Be will bo waiting tn any kind
of weather? 8: OF course, S: If t is ruining, ond T coms by cn. 6: So mich
the * in eb the Fight thas gas Setting whos ext wets s Be gan step

215

i is Laborieht * to
know whet text to une. 81 Ho, I here thet. Who will accent 467 E: Ab the
mt offices, Dect, and oe eat tt, Gi Ve are talking of the Veatern

Bay, “T° is ‘

and Eh nngggde ern country nobody undarstenis what 1t's all chout axyvay
at the message goes ureolested. 81 * I red a whamy? 81 You send this

by N E-I-E. -H. FN : Oh, ty telegranh: 5 G goes
end such a ct, etc.) 8: "Alex", that's a nise none, 5 N

tie ena i ALL instructions to you shout how ue pass material to the Lady

AL, 8: Rere is enother method (T after). When to ue 4% will depand
it 1 mst have a quick emrgency meeting with somone,

wilt be playing. 8: Very good. in Can you tell us Ws Wil. be chy best dar
for yout 31 Fer this operation? Sad, since it 40 my day off.

*

— — —
ai ow

5 ——
5 1

65

43. sa tow, in the moot extrene gaze, 2 for sume reason ve CHt t
une oxy af the ¢ SET stent. Be comivtes is frequently visited
hy TRB imerieans cam in dige, but mame frequently
tie * AE — and some other nases T fron tte Firn
of LEISA oF Bast Arm Wr ere is §
rere tees orten come to the * 1 will try to come out to da
toa a Ceran mat Te won't matter If exe other ar. 11

greetings anil , He will en for ny naw. when T give kin my tre nate,
; you at euch ext such u tine? (the tine
thet T am here nos.) Tt seems to mé that Tsay you when I wap there u SS

Geitish AAL I was ab the exaibit; 1 vas im Lenzen everyone Nn

dm — the center cnt, ALL this in as u lest resort. Tals te 2 means by anden

2

— — ———2—äͤ

— ———— — ([Qll — . ——äbö . — —ä0⸗ — ——ꝛ— —
| | | | | 1
. 8 „ 1 i 8 8 8

Hs

2 They all give thety sons, even the female inberpreters,
VVV
5

ett WLLL collect her we the yo voce will have to be put
Au the prem amt go quietly {Subject muggeste thet be should male r
kind of ceement either about the Deby cr chout the cormliage an he deposits his
suterial, to woke the pause more leoking. Nerven egress. )

4S. 82 ‘There io just aus thing thet te not quite satistetary to m
Theat is thet the lety will have ucthing for oe. dt als aight be dangercas,
: Tr we have things for bin, m will give kin instructions where SS

: wight coupronige - you
pully thinge? Tt ge to put toe mush inte my dad drop = a Mali box is
all 46 wilh hola, I: Then, there wilt be be instrustions where the reat of the

and when they may be weedy for — ene coe — Pa
b *

e + this ermatden is xvodkets ranges <<
1.506 K and shove. Find oat, if you can, the areas

Want depres of aceurnay do your people expect to resch wlth the atd of the
geodetic date which they may have now? ee
Which tanerks ave comsddared to be of stwategia importance? . mony ulsetles
io Shey elise to thees texerhe. Gr Besse rugect Uied foon te begiaaing

2

— —

we
———
—— —

115
48, h (Eluborating) vhat ende red most whrnhegioally --
bases, whether thoy ave in England oo Tina? Is
thia of primary thes — to out off our abanle cagubliities? or
ave haar estimntas? How much is allothed te thist ext —
exe the re Nos at oe Tite £4 all on the
rockets. Just xepoching that you should detail
Jeu canoes roekets. T en underlining €h beemusg Goey are not just
Kamera, but boon eue owt. 8; T groen thet these
onl » @: Bow, what S carpe: seated in
antd-rocket (the 2 mes)? In other words, the misstios

Si Sow and this ie the Tant -~ tf possthin, eine, yhotograpy sy
renpect 0 5 br ue arr. 8: You will have
. in a wr short tine. d: that's what

nes of Mosoor,
wales — gona avd geared —- 1 to 2, 000; 1 te 100, 000 and

4 to 200,008, 8: Tf you con get any Serre or other type apa, Please de,

| as 7 | | |
35 1 .

&: How three mow Little trans, Those 150 * thet you
—: Suedtigras eo cae et
8 i

Werd th Lord? fz This will all go in here for the ties being. Later
ferent pocht. Tl leave the other things ali here

n. .
Sh, ot iat ue beve a piece of wagte gaper (for wrapping). T hove given
tits and think about 18. ¢: Gur mont dep oe 2

Ho, ee the one
are the . 60. 16. photos.

*

57. Be T. don't wart to skip over ths code clerk, Are 4 one thet
Looks vary n 1. GEHERALOV, bur 16% a Woy bad photo. (3664)

58. 41 Bere is the ony Remo, (1650) te 4a the Tb are
Lav HSSS TSH. N

59. S: Ee 49 ome trom N. Ie Ben Just arrived, (11904)

Go. |S: e is smother from KGB, also recently y arrived, this one com |
1 Unten ene ott ome Later, the Comittee ar Seokuical tafetenre es, (4566)

GL, Dt Mele 4e IVANOV. (9946) captain gra Rank, he gradusted fron the
deedeny with me in 1955, ie Ls married to GORKIN's daughter, .

Sh. By Here is onother duty officer al scurter gurt. 40.2)

1. The one thet looked Like MLT x. — —— .

the cue who 2s coming out to see MERRIMAN tomorrow, Ze the other 5. 3
Hane Ont! They do look alike, don't thoy? Mey axe different paole, however,

4 N N ‘ N
| | 1
‘

56. 8; Here is ny Erden SHAPOVALOY. (10943)
67. 8: Herve is smothers Courier Guard. (11572)

68, 8: re is VORONIN, Zhenta (Yevuenty). Tab za the one I talked
about before. (8213) iis Me, dalia, hos kinged me. Fre 4 one from KGB.
He graduxted tram the Academy in 1954. You show keep on tuning -a
F ᷣͤ K Gr ig 4% the business of

69. Sy He is en fie tought me me Operebional”
Fan- of HOA (HE). 12005) Hew be Sen chmatieur for the MGR
I gave you ls ds the one who meskes .. devices in

Saree

9 F 1 feel that thise ave u fresh
baten. whole regten: Fre is Teer MILCVIDOY. W lett here. (709%)
777 C
S: Ze has been crepted by the N.

Ti. F es 5 x imum 18 2 ou
yoo suat aun a last rece Gs dust have It hand.
r ene, 21) thet out e, $1 Bo one bold me here ent I
didn't vert te ask. .

ee

1
Tuik the 2 —
wae
“OREO wt
5

Dm. 81 2 will
* 687 —— oy of oo Se ee

The ee ee e's a bird!
He decodes, rams. Te mever gous get dione. (ences ae that $6 4
beesuse ‘the photis are grouped by years.)

75. as Sl SES Tar te 28)
Es is tha Chiefer the Zr Direction url) in

25

S: Reve is Col. KZT, Ane Mikhailovich. He is the
nOxS who hes tub sisbers dag cen 1 rere pm ons a bref
ane #2 the other. (2733) He works at the MD Acdeny, Cate? Instructor, as
c told you,

By Here is cnt who works in GAY an & Senior Offeer in the ord
8. (5597) He is der General SCKTL Oy. He is a Colonel.

(ia 87 this one is u GRU officer and works in the Sef birecterate.
Be Pore n offtoer who now works with your KaV.

( 8. T1 have to look at "Gl again. T have to Linz that code clerk.
rie arrived very recently, < don't know when he arrived. Are these all

Operatic fore, rersebex?

: Yea, yea. B: At thot tine I showid you several nik , mow T don't see

thes, Hs Bo, thome were in the other voluses, You see these are M reren
OOS. :

eu. is: Hare is one from GRU, dn officer who works Henentap in ny
seerton * ROGOV. Wok in dir, das in 6. (2903)

82. 8: Aare nk a ave not hove thet T mentioned before. Are these
SLL the Aba? Et Be, just for the last nm youre, Lanz time we hed
1957, 1999, 1952, 1955, 1958. EW kets 1114 8d in leat three years.

83. 8: T don't ges VOROIIEA, dal ai Deen she work there or not?
1 No, she dees not work there, She just had n baby girl. She Lives here.

GY. Bt Still can"; find the “SUIPRIE", the code clark. G: That's
no problem. J: Let's pour ther drink. Hs Ari. It's not too bea, not
Sow today. Er We dem f heave too much legs for t , tha
e011 seme of qr photos, and a couple of questions. ‘that's all, 81 So, thts
material T Jemeing here. 3 Alrighh, Si This iz 11 N all, wy notes,
wnt to express somthing not quite eier to me. We have been wostius here,

26

ra a — —

need to know, (Subject locks at same photos taken of hin} 3: This 1 for
Nikita Sergeyevivh, I will, show him how te practs dan. (n
ee ond Joking. )

FR Gant „ Seve you Beught anerytictay Dann? 8: Rot
yet. T stilt hey 1er. * have ke buy a few mae Franks and ae cis
aud ends: TH. heave to de this tosorrow. Gs You got the one for

: Yes, &: Th Was a good one? 5: Yea, vary: .
ir. ond Era. (subject's True mans): e You, fron Mr. and B. Gr An frem
un! BowHenRal? ken tut have tine to tints shopping tosorrow

hurt to boy & few enter things for presente,

Au right. . ~ both far opevattonal end personal .

Everything
Purposes, Avtar ali che pirwamake - are they not operational eatponses?
uf erirse, 8: Now, 1 lewve my briefeane ar ui * ar. T met think.

acne

; Hee KB ‘ : EH

Mae bin 15a (London, England): 4 May 196

1. (Subject knocked at door at 1420 hours on 4 May 1961,
Mount Royal Hotel, Hoom 360. Only H end J we-e present. The
unexpected visit was prompted by a mote left in Subject's maile
box which he could not understand.) 8: I ran here for a few
minutes to mention two things. First of all I spoke to SHAPOVALOY
at the kmbassy this morning. At 7 ofcloek, as he explained bo me,
there will be a reception at the Pakistani Embassy. SHAPOVALOV
will be there. Hi: car number is 462. H: 4627 3: Tes, the
gum of the numbers is 12 <= that makes 1t casler to romember.

He will be alone, without his wife. From what could be made out
of the conversation, his friend will be there. f

2. 82 Wow at 2 otelcck, when I was picking up the key,
there was a note addressed to we. (Opening letter) Hount Royal
Hotel, Mr. o----tlev rang and would like to contact you. ele-
phone 9831." That aust be the number. Who is this? (H and J
trying to fi zure out the name) KORDIV, KOsDIEV, KORIEV? Maybe
itta KON:LV? KONEV - that's right! 8: That's Marshal KONEVI!

J and H: No, taat’s impossiblel

5. 8: I was in the imbassy today and no one told me any-
thing. Anyway, I did not call tals number. I was at the tmbassy
today, all day, and no one told me anything. I ask you to please
Clear up this matter. I will be here this evening at 2000 hours.
EH: Well, all right. 3: Whe can that be? I did not call on
this phone. (telephone ringing; I goes to answer it) .

4. 3: The letter was with the key and when I went to get it
at 2 o'clock the letter was with it. They didn't say anything
about this to me at the Embassy. H: I dontt know who it 43.

8: Is it this hotel? Doe they have four digit numbers? H: This

is a telephone number. He can find this out. 5

5. 8: Well, I'll be here at 8. Now I am going to WYNNE.
My people are working at the Embassy. I was running; around there.
I had lunch there. I saw everyone there and SHAPOVALOV brought
me here by dar about 2 hours ago. I repeat his auto number is
462. He drives it himself... In the Pakistan imbasay. 30, 1111
be here at 8 otclock tonight. H: All right. 3: I11 be here
at 8 and at 9 we will have to make an interruption. The delega~
tion will be coming and I will have to meet them and we will have
to eat together. H: Alright ;

6. (Subject left at 1425 hours, having stayed 5 minutes.)
