Panama: Prospects for Relations with the US
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013597, dated 3 July 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013597).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

a pigs: aie

T NIE 84-68
LB CONT DISSEM 28 August 1968
Miniece - Cyt 2 ck foreds
ator 2, : tee tk igo.
Case # NLA EY | a ae oa

“NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE § ESTIMATE
NUMBER a4. 68

Poncine: omit for. dsiiens

With the US

°)

g

3

: 3

a tt
| PR

Submitted by
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

As indicated overleaf .
28 August 1968 —

Approved for Release | 47 9
Date : i

Po a Ee a a i eee Ri a a

ECUTIVE SECRETARY,

CONTR

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organization of the Depart-
ments of State and Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Vice Adm. Rufus Taylor, Deputy Director, Central Intelligence

Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, the Director of ears aod Research, Department
of State — ae

Vice Adm. Vernon L. Lowrance, for the icice Defense Intelligence Agency
Lt. Gen. Marshall S$. Carter, the Director, National Security Agency —
Dr. Charles H. Reichardt, for the Assistant General | Manager, Atomic Energy Com-

mission
Abstaining:

Mr. William O. Cregar, for the Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of edict
the subject being outside of his jurisdiction.

WA
This material contains information aff

within the meaning of the espiona
mission or revelation of which i

e National Defense of the United States
, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

BOUB,
Excluded Stomatic
downg ig and
degirtioytion

CONTENTS
Page
THE PROBEEM: 62 xiretohretanatiulattet Gu biel. glee hd ont ene ahinccte, 1
CONCLUSIONS? 4.30 Gea eue eh puedes os hades oe bade taste yes oe hee 3 1
DISCUSSION i acetates Beate cela ais Ot oh ABS see deo Et? Ott area 2
Te BRORGROUND* ics. ho act se hele tse Panne tance ea anual ae whee howe 2
Il. THE ARIAS ADMINISTRATION .............. 00.00. cece eeeccecee. 3
III. INTERNAL PROBLEMS ...........00. 0c c cece ccc ccc cccccccccee. 4
A. The Guardia Nacional .. 0.000000 cece cece cece eccceee 4
B. The National PASSERINE fest dt Se ths seeeng dn Ns Si carn a Seed lg sua Be 5
C. The Economic Situation ........0.0.0 000000 c cece cece ceccceeee 6
IV. RELATIONS WITH THE US ........0.. 0.00 ce cc cecceeee 6
A. Outstanding Problems ..............0.0.0000 cc ceeeeeeee ele toee Reese 6
B. Short-Term PYOSDOCIS:, sia eto al neice Gos sten a each ay dans wb tales wnkeados 8
C. Longer Run Considerations .........0.00.0 00000 c cece eee eeeeee 8

ANNEX: KEY ASPECTS OF THE 1967 TREATY PROPOSALS

Gaim

PANAMA: PROSPECTS FOR
RELATIONS WITH THE US

THE PROBLEM

To assess the situation in Panama and the outlook for new canal
treaties.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Arnulfo Arias, who is scheduled to take office as President of
Panama on 1 October, is committed to securing canal treaties which
will appear more favorable for Panama than those negotiated with
the US in 1967 and to carrying out some part of his extensive program
of domestic reforms. His success in these exceedingly difficult tasks,
and indeed his tenure of office, will depend heavily on his ability to
work out a modus vivendi with the hitherto hostile Guardia Nacional
and with a National Assembly strongly influenced by representatives
of the oligarchy.

B. We believe that Arias, who was summarily deposed during
his two previous terms as President, will initially move with reasonable
caution on many sensitive domestic issues. Though he has a reputa-
tion of being unfriendly to the US, he is now apparently convinced
that reasonably harmonious relations are essential not only for obtain-
ing new canal treaties but for the overall success of his administration.

C. The major areas of contention during negotiations will prob-
ably be over issues of Panamanian sovereignty and the size of the US
presence, the primary sources of Panamanian resentment under pres-
ent arrangements. If Arias can present to the assembly before the
end of 1970 treaties that appear to be more favorable than those nego-
tiated by the preceding administration, we believe the chances for
approval will be better than even. Proposals submitted after that
date, however, would become involved in the election campaign of
1972, and their chances sharply diminished.

gd 1

PRINCIPAL PROPOSED CANAL ROUTES

t
BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION if
MOT MECEESARILY, AUTHORITATIVE

4]

OR
ae es: (aa

ty

ome ne wees International boundary
® National capital
Railroad

Road
Beemer tent Canal

25 75 Miles

0 25 50 75 Kilometers

59611 8-68

CANAL ZONE

—— eee = International
boundary

National capital
Urban area
Panama Canali
Railroad

Road

10 Miles

Paimas
Bellas

10 Kilometers

BAY OF
PANAMA

59612 8-68

D. If treaties approved by Panama, under Arias or any succeeding
administration, failed of ratification by the US, relations between the
two countries would become seriously strained for an extended period.

E. Over the longer run, whether or not Arias survives in office,
and whether or not he obtains approval of new treaties, the US presence
in Panama will remain the central issue in that country’s political life.
In fact, canal treaties approved by one administration would almost
certainly be challenged in subsequent elections. Thus, over the fore-
seeable future, there will probably be recurrent strains and crises in
US-Panamanian relations, particularly during election years. If Arias
is forced out of office, anti-US extremists would have an opportunity
to garner support among his followers.

DISCUSSION

1. BACKGROUND

1. On 3 November 1903, the Republic of Panama proclaimed its independence
from Colombia. On 18 November, Panama’s plenipotentiary, the French
promoter-engineer Philippe Bunau-Varilla, signed a treaty granting the US the
use and control, in perpetuity, of a canal zone 10 miles wide in return for a
payment of $10 million and an annual rental of $250,000 in gold. On 15 Janu-
ary 1904, the Panamanian Government was organized and a constitution was
drawn up.

2. Ever since then, the country’s special relationship with the US has been
the key factor in its economic development, and has repeatedly been involved
in its domestic politics. This is mainly because the Canal, which is owned,
operated, and defended by the US, is both the country’s most important economic
asset (generating altogether at least two-fifths of Panama’s gross national product
and two-thirds of its foreign exchange) and a conspicuous reminder of its de-
pendent status. Panamanians have always resented the terms under which the
canal is operated, particularly the provision authorizing the US to act as it
would “if it were the sovereign” over the Canal Zone that cuts the country
in two, “to the entire exclusion of the exercise by the Republic of Panama of any
such sovereign rights, power, or authority.” This resentment has served to
imbue Panamanian politics with an intensity of nationalistic feeling which is
unusual even for Latin America, and which is continually exploited by the
oligarchy to divert attention from the excessive share it takes of the material
benefits derived from the Canal and other economic activity.

3. Panamanian efforts to change this basic relationship have produced some
modifications in the treaty of 1903. In 1936, for example, the US, which had
previously sent troops into Panama on several occasions, relinquished its right
to intervene to guarantee Panama’s independence and adjusted the annual pay-

2 Ga

ws

ment for use of the Canal Zone to $430,000. In 1955, the payment was increased
to $1,930,000, and the US agreed to provisions extending substantial employment
and commercial benefits to Panamanians. But such changes fell far short of
the hopes of the Panamanians both for increased government revenue from
the canal and for recognition of their sovereignty over this national asset.

4. US-Panamanian relations continued gradually to worsen, and in January
1964 a minor incident involving sovereignty in the Canal Zone triggered serious
riots in Panama City and Colén. The riots, and Panama’s subsequent breaking
of relations with the US, dramatically underscored the need for changes in the
existing treaty arrangements. By April 1964 the two governments had agreed
to seek prompt elimination of the causes of friction, and diplomatic relations
were restored. At first, progress was facilitated by the cooperative attitude of
the administration of President Marcos Robles (elected in May and inaugurated
1 October 1964), and the assurances of President Johnson (December 1964)
that the US was willing to negotiate new treaties with the Government of
Panama. But it took until mid-1967 to negotiate them; what emerged were
proposals for three new treaties for the operation of the present lock canal,
for the building of a new sea-level canal, and for the defense of the canals.
Furthermore, Robles’ inept presentation and defense of the proposals were quickly
exploited by those opposing them; this fact and the approach of the election
of 1968 made it impossible to secure a consideration of the proposals on their
merits.

5. The Panamanian elite groups that had supported Robles in 1964 split over
his attempt to impose David Samudio, his Minister of Finance, as his successor.
While some oligarchs accepted Samudio, despite his profession of liberal and
reform-minded ideas, others came to terms with their traditional opponent,
Amulfo Arias, who though a man of considerable wealth is also the leader of
Panama's only mass-based party. Despite the all-out efforts of the administra-
tion in an election campaign marked by a degree of violence, fraud, and official
interference unusual even for Panama, Arias won the election (12 May 1968)
by a substantial margin. His victory was made official only after General
Bolivar Vallarino, head of the country’s defense and police force, the Guardia
Nacional, shifted from obvious support for Samudio to a position of insisting
on a reasonably honest count of the ballots. With a cynicism typical of Pana-
manian politicians, the Samudio forces, which earlier had supported the treaty
proposals, now denounced Arias as a US puppet, imposed by a US-dominated
Guardia Nacional to secure new treaties more favorable to the US than to
Panama. There is still an outside chance that Arias may not be permitted to
take office on 1 October as scheduled.

I. THE ARIAS ADMINISTRATION

6. As president, Arias will face major problems in three different but inter-
related spheres: (a) in his relationship with General Vallarino and the Guardia
Nacional, which remains Panama’s final political arbiter; (b) in maintaining

*See Annex, “Key Aspects of the 1967 Treaty Proposals.”

Dt dl 3

“Siekad,

support in a National Assembly strongly influenced by the oligarchy; (c) in con-
cluding canal treaties with the US on terms which at least appear better than
the Robles government could get—and yet are still acceptable to both countries.
Serious miscalculations or missteps in any one of these spheres would probably
cost him his chance for success in the others—and could indeed abruptly end
his hold on power.

7. Arias’ previous record as president of Panama gives little basis for confi-
dence in his ability to overcome these various challenges, or to establish fruitful
relations with the US. Arias was president on two previous occasions (1940-
1941 and 1949-1951); each time he was charged by powerful opponents with
arrogance and emotional instability and was removed from office after he had
attempted to override certain constitutional restraints. He sought to keep
Panama neutral in World War II, has cooperated with anti-US forces on other
occasions, and has charged the US with supporting his removal from office in
both his previous administrations. Arias has also indicated that the treaty pro-
posals negotiated with the Robles administration must be renegotiated to bear
his personal stamp.

8. We do not know whether Arias has learned from experience; he has gen-
erally behaved more arbitrarily and unpredictably when in office than when out
of it. Particularly in the last several years he has behaved with notable modera-
tion. At the time of the January 1964 riots, he restrained his followers rather
than exploiting the situation for short-term political profit. Throughout the
long negotiations on new treaties, he confined his attacks to assertions that the
Robles government was illegal, and he was noticeably restrained with respect to
the substantive issues being negotiated. During the recent campaign, he pro-
posed an extensive but relatively moderate program ‘of administrative, economic,
and social reforms closely in line with the concepts of the Alliance for Progress.
He declared his intention to seek advice and assistance from all sectors interested
in the general welfare and has set up committees to study specific problems and
to consult on them with US representatives. At 68 he realizes that this is his
last chance to make his mark in Panamanian history, and apparently feels that
a reasonably harmonious relationship with the US is essential to that end.
Finally, he is aware that the presence of the Guardia and the strength of the
conservative forces in the National Assembly provide restraints on his freedom
of action.

II. INTERNAL PROBLEMS
A. The Guardia Nacional

9. The most urgent internal problem facing the new administration is its re-
lationship with the Guardia Nacional. Arias and the Guardia have been con-
sistent enemies. Vallarino only reversed his commitment to Samudio when it
became apparent that Arias was winning a majority too large to be easily over-
come by manipulation of the election returns. Moreover, in the counting of the
votes for seats in the National Assembly, Vallarino and Arias each intervened

A el

directly in an effort to ensure the “election” of deputies favorable to his par-
ticular interest.

10. The role played by the Guardia Nacional in the election campaign of 1968
marked the end of an extended period during which it had abstained from direct
and forceful intervention in national politics. Since overthrowing Arias in 1951,
its leaders had served as the loyal supporters of subsequent administrations repre-
senting the oligarchy, and had concentrated on using US assistance to improve
the professional skills and equipment of the Guardia. Though Vallarino and
other key officers eventually acquiesced in the election of Arias, they still dis-
trust him and fear that he intends to bring the Guardia under his direct control.
Thus Arias will face formidable opposition from both the Guardia and the
oligarchy if he attempts to dominate the Guardia and to end its role as the final
arbiter of Panamanian politics, or to force reform measures through the National
Assembly.

ll. The way in which Arias handles the Guardia will be crucial to his survival
in office. If he attempts to make changes not acceptable to its leadership, there
is at least an even chance that the Guardia will take steps to remove him. The
outcome might then depend on whether Arias could bring his followers into
the streets in large enough numbers to face down the Guardia. On the other
hand, if Arias moves slowly and carefully with the Guardia leaders, he can
probably reach a modus vivendi with them. But this would be at best a fragile
truce, and the Guardia would continue to be a restraining influence on Arias.

B. The National Assembly

12. The National Assembly is scheduled to convene on 1 October, but the
manipulation of the election returns and award of seats are still in progress. It
appears possible that Arias’ Nationa] Union coalition may wind up with as
many as two-thirds of the 42 seats. Although his Panamefiista Party is the
largest political movement in Panama, it will probably hold not.more than 15
seats. The remainder of Arias’ support will be divided among the four small
political parties that broke with the Robles administration. Now that the election
is over, the coalition partners are much more concerned with advancing their
particular interests than with assuring the success of Arias’ program. Thus
Arias will be faced with the necessity of making arrangements with party leaders
and individual deputies to secure the necessary majority on each measure re-
quiring legislative approval.” ,

13. The most important of the four parties in the political coalition opposing
Arias is Samudio’s National Liberal Party. Samudio has maintained an in-
transigent attitude toward Arias and will almost certainly continue to oppose
him. The other parties in the opposition, however, have limited followings

*Some measures require only a majority of the deputies present while others must secure
an absolute majority (22) of the membership. Treaties appear to fall in the first category,
but some argue that treaties may be affected by procedural rules of the Assembly which could
require approval by a two-thirds vote of the total membership.

Wii. 5

and also are primarily vehicles to serve the interests of their leaders. At least
some of them are likely to seek an arrangement with the new administration
to protect these interests. As a result Arias will have some bargaining power
with them, particularly in the first years of his administration*

C. The Economic Situation

14. The Panamanian economy has been expanding fairly rapidly in recent
years, but most of the population still lives at or near the subsistence level.‘
Also, though the rate of unemployment has been decreasing, it continues at
about 10 percent in the most important cities, Panama City and Colén, where
there is also considerable underemployment. It is, of course, these cities that
show the most conspicuous contrasts between the poor on the one hand and
the wealthy Panamanians and the US. citizens in the Canal Zone on the other.
About 50 percent of the country’s population is engaged in agriculture; half the
farmers are essentially outside the money economy and are ill fed, clothed, and
housed. These problems are intensified by a 3.3 percent annual rate of growth
in population. The population, now some 1.3 million, has doubled since 1940,
and will probably double again by 1990.

15. During the first half of 1968 the unsettled political situation caused a
slowdown in private investment and tourism. The new administration probably
will inherit a depleted national treasury but will have available some $35 million
in US aid previously authorized and not yet disbursed. Moreover, much of
the momentum for economic growth follows automatically from activities con-
nected with the canal. Thus, unless there is prolonged or recurrent political
unrest that continues to discourage investment and tourism, the economy will
probably resume its rapid expansion. Yet even if the Arias administration
carries out a number of its proposed programs in behalf of the poor, the reduction
of the widespread poverty will proceed only slowly.

IV. RELATIONS WITH THE US
A. Outstanding Problems

16. A basic and continuing problem in relations with the US is that Panama’s
political institutions and leadership are inadequate to deal rationally with an
issue as charged with hypernationalism as the canal issue. The population does
benefit from existing treaty arrangements; the oligarchy, handsomely so. Yet
the canal is viewed by Panamanians generally as a sort of treasure trove whose
assets have been sequestered by foreigners and which must be retrieved. Thus

* Panama has also various extreme leftist, pro-~Castroite, and Communist groups that have
tried, with little success, either to infiltrate the pro-Arias forces or to spur opposition to Arias.
These are all small in numbers, and have been important only in their ability to exacerbate
a situation such as occurred in January 1964. None of them is represented in the National
Assembly.

‘Panama’s GNP has been increasing by about eight percent per year. Per capita GNP
(estimated at about $550 in 1967) is already well above the average for Latin America.

6 or

Arias—like his predecessor—must seek terms acceptable to Panamanian na-

tionalists at the risk of disrupting the economic benefits that flow from the present
US-Panamanian relationship.

17. In renegotiating the canal treaties, the issues involving sovereignty will
probably be more serious than the size of the payments to Panama and the
day-to-day details of operating a canal. In fact, eventual Panamanian control
of the canal and an early substantial increase in Panama’s role in its administra-
tion are issues on which no Panamanian politician can give much ground and
long survive. Many Panamanians resent the presence of US personnel employed
in the Zone, whose jobs, wages, and standard of living contrast sharply with
their own.

18. The arrangements for the defense of the present canal and of any future
sea-level canal are also a particularly sensitive issue for the Panamanians. The
political leaders genc¥ally recognize the need for .US forces to protect the lock
canal, but public opinion is strongly in favor of a reduction in the large US
military presence. The traditionally close relationship between the US defense
forces and the Guardia Nacional also becomes involved in domestic politics when-
ever the Guardia takes action some political group considers hurtful to its in-
terests. The small size (fewer than 5,000 men) and relative weakness of the
Guardia reinforce the impression, held not only by the Guardia itself but by
most Panamanians, that ultimate power and control over Panama rest with
the military forces of the US stationed in the country.

19. Other Latin American countries are also interested in the results of the
negotiations for new canal treaties. Although the Latin American countries
generally tend to sympathize with Panama, few if any are inclined to subordinate
their own interests to those of Panama. The west coast countries, particularly
Peru and Chile, are concerned lest new treaties result in sharply increased tolls
for transit of their exports and imports. From 80 to 90 percent of the inter-
national trade of Chile, Ecuador, and Peru passes through the canal, about 65
percent of Bolivia’s, and 33 to 50 percent of Colombia’s. Colombia is concerned
that new treaties will disrupt its special transit rights through Panama—which
incidentally are another bone of contention between the US and Panama.

20. The Panamanians appear confident that the US will construct the new
sea-level canal in Panamanian territory, but the site has not been settled. A
US team has been surveying a route through the eastern part of the isthmus
(the Sasardi-Morti Route), an area so sparsely populated that the use of nuclear
devices in excavation of the site is being considered (see map). Use of nuclear
explosive devices for a canal, however, would require an amendment to the
Test Ban Treaty of 1963.5 Such an amendment is not likely to be adopted soon
enough to permit specific agreement on nuclear excavation of such a canal to
be reached during the Arias administration. Other sea-level routes are also

*An amendment requires the concurrence of a majority of the signatories, including the
US, the USSR, and the UK.

CER. 7

being considered; one in the Zone, one in Panama near the Zone, and one in
Colombia.®

B. Short-Term Prospects

21. Arias’ majority in the National Assembly is large but inherently unstable.
We think that while Arias will attempt to enact some portions of his domestic
program, including less controversial aspects such as construction of public
housing, schools, and roads, he will husband his majority for consideration of
the treaties he expects to negotiate with the US. If the treaty proposals can
be submitted before the latter part of 1970, and if Arias is able to show that he
has obtained more favorable terms than Robles, there is a better than even
chance that the National Assembly will give approval. If not, the chances for
approval will be slim and the treaties are apt to be delayed indefinitely. Any
proposals submitted after 1970, even if they included more favorable terms,
would almost certainly become involved in the presidential campaign of 1972.

22. We believe that Arias will give a high priority to his administration’s
relationship with the US because he realizes that if he can secure treaties with
more favorable terms his personal prestige will be considerably enhanced and
his chances for carrying out domestic reforms improved. He appreciates the
considerable impetus the Panamanian economy would receive, at least in the
short run, from the initiation of activities involved in constructing a sea-level
canal.

23. In sum, we judge that the administration scheduled to assume office on
1 October 1968 has a better chance of securing approval of new treaties and
of certain aspects of a domestic reform program than obtained in 1964-1968
or would obtain under any likely successor. We think that Arias’ interest in
the smooth progress of relations with the US will have a moderating influence

upon his actions. If he attempted to move too rapidly or too arbitrarily the
Guardia would probably remove him from office with the approval of the

Panamanian elite. i

C. Longer Run Considerations

24, Whether or not Arias survives in office, and whether or not he obtains
approval of new treaties, the US presence in Panama will remain the central
issue in that country’s political life. If Arias is not able to secure that approval,
the Panamanian political system is not likely to produce another leader who can,
at least for some years to come. Approval of the treaties by an administration
controlled by the Guardia would be regarded as a betrayal of Panamanian
interests, especially as the Guardia has frequently been depicted in Panama as

* Colombia has also undertaken studies to determine the feasibility of building a multi-
purpose project including a lock-type canal, but this would only serve ships of limited size.
A route through Nicaragua is no longer being considered; construction by conventional methods
would cost upwards of $10 billion, and nuclear excavation would require the resettlement of
one million people.

8 Sr...

ae.

controlled by the US Government. Furthermore, if Arias were removed by
the Guardia, anti-US extremists would have a favorable opportunity to garner
support among his followers. This might result in the emergence of a mass
political movement under virulently anti-US leadership.

25. As we have indicated, the construction of a new sea-level canal would
give a considerable impetus to the economy. But once the new canal became
operational, perhaps 15 years after agreement, the indirect benefits from a sea-
level canal would significantly decrease, because it would require much smaller
forces to operate and defend it. If the new canal is remote from the two
large cities which prosper from the location of the present canal, their economic
problems will become acute.7 Thus measures to ease the effect on the Pana-
manian economy, such as increased US assistance for development of other
sectors of the economy, would probably be required before the new canal opened.

26. If the Panamanian Goverriment approved more favorable treaty terms, and
those terms then failed of ratification by the US, there would be a broadly based
and bitter anti-US reaction in Panama, and US-Panamanian relations would
probably be seriously strained for an extended period.

27. The chances for ratification by Panama of treaties dealing with such
vital matters as canals and bases will decline sharply if not disposed of before
a Panamanian election campaign begins. Even then, the provisions of treaties
arranged with one administration almost certainly will be condemned as inade-
quate by the opposition and made an issue in the next election. In short, we
expect that over the foreseeable future there will be recurrent strains and
crises in US-Panamanian relations, particularly during election years.

"Nearly 75 percent of urban employment in Panama City and Colén is related directly or
indirectly to operations of the present canal.

~~ 9

ANNEX

KEY ASPECTS OF THE 1967 TREATY PROPOSALS

There are three proposed treaties: the Lock Canal Treaty, to govern all aspects
of the present canal; the Sea-Level Canal Treaty, to govern a new interocean
canal; the Defense Treaty, to provide for the security and neutrality of both
canals,

The Lock Canal Treaty would supersede all presently existing treaties. Speci-
fied areas needed for operation of the canal are designated as the Canal Area,
which is to be administered by a Joint Administration. Other areas are desig-
nated as Defense Areas pursuant to, and administered under, the Defense Treaty.
All other parts of the present Canal Zone revert to Panama.

The Administration of the Canal Area will be governed by a Board of nine
members, five appointed by the President of the US, four by the President of
Panama. The chief executive officer of the Administration will have a deputy;
one will be a US national, the other a Panamanian. The Administration has ex-
pressed rights and powers in connection with operation of the canal and the ad-
ministration of the Canal Area, and can make laws relating thereto. Certain
criminal laws can be enacted only by a two-thirds vote of the Board. Legal
matters within the Administration’s jurisdiction will be litigated in courts estab-
lished by the Administration. With respect to all other matters, Panamanian
law applies and Panamanian courts have jurisdiction. The treaty continues
certain rights and benefits enjoyed by employees of the present Panama Canal
Company and Canal Zone Government, as well as specified privileges to oper-
ate by such US agencies as the Public Health Service, Smithsonian Institution,
and Coast and Geodetic Survey.

The canal, the Canal Area, the Administration, and ships passing through the
canal will (with minor exceptions) be exempt from Panamanian taxes and cus-
toms duties. Employees of the Administration and residents of the Canal Area
will not (again with certain minor exceptions).

Tolls, payable in US dollars, will be established by the Administration.
Panama is to receive 17 cents per long ton of commercial cargo, rising in five
years to 22 cents (this could have provided some $16 million in fiscal year 1969).
The US is to receive 8 cents per ton, increasing in two years to 10 cents. Re-
maining proceeds from the Administration’s revenues are to be shared equally
between Panama and the US.

The canal will remain neutral and open to vessels of commerce and of war
of all nations on nondiscriminatory terms.

The Lock Canal Treaty will expire at the end of 1999 unless superseded by
the Sea-Level Canal Treaty. Property not needed for the sea-level canal will
revert to Panama.

The Sea-Level Canal Treaty is considerably looser. It gives the US the right
to build a sea-level interocean canal; the US must give notice of its intent to

alll 13

—

do so within 20 years of the entry into force of the treaty. The US cannot
construct an interocean canal in any other country during the 20-year option
period, unless by notice to Panama it surrenders its option. And during the
option period, Panama may not construct, or agree to let others construct, a
canal in Panama. The US is responsible for design and construction of the
canal and may, subject to Panama’s agreement, use nuclear excavation methods
consistent with IAEA standards. The US, after consultation with Panama,
may let other states, organizations, and individuals participate in financing canal
construction. Or Panama, in agreement with the US, can undertake the
financing.

Within general areas defined by the treaty, Panama will provide the use of
land and water areas needed to construct and operate the canal. Where there
is no private interest on the date the treaty is signed, Panama will provide the
necessary areas without cost; otherwise the US will pay compensation as part
of the construction cost.

The canal will be operated and maintained by a Commission, governed by
a Board of nine members, five appointed by the President of the US, four by
the President of Panama. If others participate in the financing, provision can be
made for their representation on the Board. Either the chief executive officer
of the Commission or his deputy will be a US national, the other will be
Panamanian.

The Commission’s rights and powers are spelled out in some detail. They
are designed to provide the necessary authority to operate and maintain the -
canal. Panama is to be the preferred source of certain specified goods and
services, provided quality and cost are satisfactory. Panama is responsible for
law enforcement; security is covered by the Defense Treaty; the Commission
may “adopt measures for the protection of the sea-level canal installation.”

Broad exemptions from Panamanian taxes and customs duties are provided
for both construction and operation of the canal, though the Commission must
pay Panamanian taxes on commercial enterprises it operates.

Canal tolls and payments to Panama are to be fixed in the agreements for
financing construction; the treaty itself merely specifies certain factors to be
considered: e.g., contribution by Panama of its territory, resources contributed
by others, the interests of world commerce.

Provisions for neutrality and nondiscrimination are like those in the Lock
Canal Treaty.

The treaty remains in force for 60 years from the opening of the canal (though
not beyond 2067), or until the option to build it expires or is surrendered. All
property and rights then revert to Panama.

The Defense Treaty gives the US the right to use for Canal Defense (which is
defined) certain specified areas. These are essentially the same installations
now existing in the Canal Zone, though some are to be relinquished, and though

14 ua”

the list is subject to revision by mutual agreement if and when the sea-level

canal is built. The operational rights given to the US are in substance those
it presently enjoys.

The status of US armed forces and accompanying civilians is to be roughly
as provided in the NATO status-of-forces agreement. Exclusive US jurisdiction
over US personnel in the Canal Zone and exclusive Panamanian jurisdiction out-
side the Zone are to be replaced by a countrywide system of concurrent
jurisdiction.

The Defense Treaty terminates five years after termination of the Lock Canal
Treaty, or until the US no longer has a treaty obligation to Panama to defend
an interoceanic canal in that country, whichever is later.

A separate exchange of notes gives the US the use of training and maneuver
areas at Rio Hato for 10 years, renewable for successive one-year periods.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1. This document was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and. use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need-to-know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective departments:

. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Department of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), for the Department of the
Navy
e. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force
. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation
. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency
. Director of Central Reference Service, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

oa

-— FTO -14

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Central Reference Service, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

4, The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-

fe a?

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

ET
CONT

DISSEM
Ol lt py E 29 e261
Sols 40 Soe hee
Q3AIB0S
T

CONTR

DISSEM
