Syria's Radical Future
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012205, dated 1 September 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012205).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

_ oe, _ EBITBRARY ? Lb

Bg 7 ae  . Sewer cuandatory Review — - - el
| RASC U NEY O03/5 ses
Document § Ze

_ CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY ee sre

OTe

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

10 October 1966

ae , ae = —e = = -4,8(a)(4)(5)

SUMMARY

In the past two deeades, Syria's conservative and middle-of-
the-road political elements have been rendered powerless, and the
army, dominated by radically-oriented officers, has emerged as the
sole arbiter of politics. The present radical military regime is
unstable, as any foreseeable successor is likely to be. The pros-
pect is one of a succession of extremist military governments, and
there is seme chance of domestic rebellion by minority groups.

On the whole, we doubt the Communists will come to dominate
a Syria. We think it more likely that, over time, there will emerge

in Syria an ideology that combines communism and many of the
accepted tenets of Syrian nationalism.

Syria will probably try to maintain its good relations with
Moscow, but the latter, while finding Syria's radicalism on the
whole favorable, will be careful-in its dealings with erratic and
unstable Syrian regimes,
4.3(a)(4)(5)

* This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared by
the Office of National Estimates: and coordinated with the . Office
' of Current “Intelligence and the Office of Research and Reports —
in the Directorate of Intelligence.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

9 APR 1992 -

DISCUSSION

1. The unsuccessful attempt by Syrian Commande Chief
Salim Hatum to seize control in Damascus early in September
marks the latest in the long series of coup attempts which
have enlivened Syria's two decades as an independent country.
When his move failed, Hatum, a member of the Druze minority
of. southeast Syria, fled-with thirty or more associates to

_ — Sorden, E ie press 1.3(2)(4)(5)

interviews, Hatum asserted that Syria had become a Soviet

satellite. Some support for his assertions can be drawn from
_ the extreme left radical tone of the Damascus government, from
the actinns.of a Syrian labor organization in ousting "enti-
revolutionary" personnel from state-owned businesses, and from
strong Soviet propaganda support of the Damascus regime. In
fact, however, the situation is far more complicated than a
confrontation between Communists and enti-Communists, with

Major Hatum on the side of the angels.

2. Hatum was a prominent member of the military junta

which seized power in Damascus on 23 February 1966. ‘The junta

§-E-USR<EST

tes eee T

represented the radical wing of the Baath party,* which had itself
mounted a successful coup d'etat early in 1963. Though originally
a civilian political organization, the Baath by the late 1950s had
eome to the conclusion that the use of military force was the only

feasible route to power. But this meant extensive reliance on arny

(officers, thus facing the Baath leadership with the problem of main-

teining party discipline over military figures who had the force to
contest the party's wishes. |

«

3- The period from the first Baathist coup in March 1963 to

the second in February 1966 was a time of constant struggle for
dominance between the: moderate and radical factions of the party.
On the whole, the moderate faction predominated. It ineluded

party founders Aflaq and Bitar, the military strongman Amin al-

the civilian party members in Syria. These men recognized the

* ihe Arab Socialist Resurrecticn(Baath) Party has a pyramidal

__ gtructure with Lesser organizations electing higher ones.
Party elections are normally free, and open discussion of
issues is permitted, but members are expected to abide by
policy decisions reached by duly constituted party bodies.
The party is panArab; each Arab country is considered a
region of the Arab nation, and the party therein is headed
by a Regional Command. These are in turn subordinate to the
National Comiand. The latter is elected at general party
congresses, but has traditionally been dominated by Syrians.
The present National Command was elected in 1965 and consists
of 6 Syrians, 3 Iraqis, 2 Lebanese, 1 Jordanian, end 1 person
from the Arabian Peninsula, probably a Saudi.

ow. oe Bo

dongers and difficulties inherent in implementing the Baath's
socialist doctrines, and hence moved very slowly in enforcing
nationalization, especially in agriculture. The podieai. wing,
composed principally of activist army officers, urged rapid and

complete socialization and centralization of economic affairs.

It gained control of the Syrian region's party organization in
late 1965. ‘The moderates, in control of both goverment and
Notional. Command, then dismissed the radical-deminated Regional

Command, The latter's response was the February 1966 coup.

4. Once in power, “however, “the radicals themselves proved

torn by factional rivalry. Even before the shooting stopped on

23 February, Hatum became convinced that his colleagues had with-

held support from him in the hope that he would be killed in the

fighting with President Hafiz's bodyguards. These maneuverings

owe little to ideological differences hae 4.3(2)(4)(6)
something to

animosities between Syria's various religious sects -- Sunnis,

Alawites, and Druzes,* -- and a great deal to personal rivalries

¥ Syria's population is 70 percent Sunni (Orthodox) Muslim.
The Alawites account for 11 percent and live in the mountainous
coastal area. The Druzes of southeast Syria are about three
percent. Various minor Muslim and Christian communities make
up the remainder of the population. :

na en

and lust for power. The regime continues to style itself Baathist
and to insist that it is the legitimate Arab resurrection movement,

but in fact, it is a military regime.

5o During its first six months in power, the radical govern-

mens moved on several fronts to broaden its base: of support. Ie
tried to speed ie the pace of. agrarian eepoeas it endeavored to. :
win moderate Boathists to.its cause; and it allowed increased .
freedom for the Syriar Commnist Party. It also sought ausnere
2rom the USSR. It had little tine, however, to devote to these
pursuits, as its major energies were apes on factionel intrigue

and maneuvering for greater power.

6. The events of 1966 appear to have ended an era which began

with the first coup d'etat in 1948. In these years, conservative

and moderate power has been progressively debased and the army has .
emerged as the sole arbiter of politics. The traditionally powerful.

landlord-merchant families were largely finished politically by 1956

-- - or so. The moderate politicians who were given a chance at governing
a Syria by the army after the breakup of the UAR showed little ability

and leadership. In sum, both conservative end middle-of-the-read

political: forces have been rendered powerless, if not wiped out. )

On the more radical side of things, the experience of the Baath
itself has been that the military establishment will ultimately
control the party. In practice, the military has shown itself

increasingly radical in outlook. .

Te Developments : in , Syria! 8 ‘pasicalty agricultural economy
have lagged behind the radical trend in political matters. Although
they were displaced politically, the traditionally powerful great

Pomilies kept a ‘measure of economic influence for a tins. More

importantly, a merchant- entrepreneur group ‘of less prominence
contimed ‘to. control much of Syria’ 8 agriculture aaa trade, and .
. to prosper from it. Sporadic efforts to transform the economy
from private enterprise to socialism started during the UAR -
period with the confiscation of the largest agriculturel holdings
and continued with the nationalization of industry and most of
the SAPOTe: trade after the Baath came to power. These measures
were ttatanad by the influence of a core of conservative .
So Breer seas y who remained in: control of the central ae, and.

by the sovcrumentts reliance on former landholders and industrial

managers to run their former properties and businesses. As a
‘result, the econcuy has come through the past decade in seineenbiy
good aneDSs economic growth has been interrupted mainly by: the
; effect of the region's notoriously fickle rainfall.

“2-6. es

S- -E-T

8. The radicalism which is in the ascendancy in Syrhis a
disjointed sort of thing. No single party political grouping
Sea be said to represent it. That portion of the Baath party
in Syria which supports the present regime probably xmumbers

only several hundred, people. The Communi st party is ial tadl

but available evidence ‘indicates ‘that it is iil-represented

in the Syrian militery establishment. The: junta's members are
for the most part in their thirties and early. forties, products

of the decane military . system. Pa ee

1.3(a)(4)(5)

9. The question in regard te Syria's future then is not
‘whether it will be moderate or radical, but what will be the

kind and intensity of its radicalism. In the ‘first place, the

longevity of the present regime is dubious. There are serious
animosities. existing among some of its principal figures > almost

any one of whom might seize an opportunity to assert his primacy.

In addition, there are almost certainly Baathist officers loyal
to the ousted pan-Arab (National) Party Command who are conspiring
to restore “Legitimate” Baathist rule. Also, despite the Baath’s

efforts to purge the Syrian Army during its years in office, there

are probably pro-Nasserists and other potential opposition elements
within the Syrian Army with their eyes fixed on the Presidential
poLe.ce. SiR

. —— 1.3(a)(4)(5)

10. In eny case, it seems likely that no successor regime
would be stant more stable than that presently in office. It is
eonceivable that astrong man might emerge at the head of the
Syrian government ond hold office for an extended period, ‘but

ia = --. ‘the army is split into so many factions that the chances of
euch a development are poor. The prospect, therefore, is for a
series of military governments succeeding one another at
. irregular intervals. There is some possibility that maneuverings
and purges in the military establishment may serve to trigger

internal rebellion by, say, the Druzes or the Alawites. The

former, in particular, have traditionally been willing to resort
to arms, Again, we cannot discount the possibility that the rank

and file of the army may lapse into indiscipline and unreliability,

-

— ay te ea Bo

ad

although this is highly secouiauive in view of our very limited
knowledge of enlisted men's attitudes. ALL things considered,
however, we think the chances are against Syria sliding into a

state of anarchy.

“LL. Some radicals prominent in the present regime have:
announced their intentions to reshape Syria's economy along
more socialistic lines. In particular, they are pushing for

ss. ¢ a the distribution of land. to Peasants and ‘the replacenent of

_ “antierevolutionary" managers in industry. In its effort to
mobilize domestic support, the present regime might enbark ont
just such a hasty program of socialization, which could inflict
serious damage on the economy. However, it is at least as
likely that political maneuvering Will keep the regime so. occupied
that the econony Will continue to operate largely on its own as
it has in the past. While shortages may appear and unemployment.
probably will increase, economic troubles probably will not be

critical for the goverment of the day.

13. Internationally, Syria will probably improve its already
close relations with Moscow, on which it depends for all its
military supplies and for substantial economic aid. The strident

anti-Western positions which are a feature of Syria’s public

- bs

geow in size and influence,

cate will almost geveeanny Santee: “they will in the great .
mojority of instances be parallel with those of Moscow. The
Soviets will probably find Syria's radicalism on the whole
favorable to thats interests » but they will probably exercise
caution because of. the erratic and unstable nature of

prospective Syrian regimes.

13. . Such conditions offer obvious opportunities for the
Syrion Communists. While the seeuent military junta in Damascus
is likely to be chary of granting much leeway to any political
organization not under its control, the Communists will

cireumstances, the Commmist Party of Syria (CPS) is Likely to

~1.3(a)(4)(6)

Its leaders may come to believe that the party eaita: én ies
own, seize control of the government and make an effort to do
so. They will certainly endeavor to infiltrate the army in
any case. On the other hond, the Syrian Communists may pursue
a strategy of supporting any regime in Damascus which espoused

a generally radical point of view, while resisting too close an

identification with such a government, believing that it probably

would not last long and would eventually discredit itselr and
all its backers. Thus, the Syrian Communist ad would ae

to establish ties with willing Leftist disteners » and to
attract as much popular sympathy as possible. In time, this
could result in the development of a Local ideol ogy in which
Communism and many of the accepted tenets of Syrian nationalism
had become identical. the net effect of this development gota
pe a naticnalism more noisily pro-Soviet than before, a general

willingness to adept social and economic schemes based on

Commanist models » and a growing | emotional identification with the

Communist Bloc.

1h. It is too early to say whether the CPS ‘ecdeeanig
has chosen either of these alternatives. On balance, however,
we believe they are more likey to follow the latter course
than to make - overt effort to seize power. They probably do
not have enough members in the army or the government well

| ’

enough placed to make a Commmist coup feasible. [x
1.3(a)(4)(5)

15. In 1958, Syria sought to encounter growing Communist
strength by seeking and getting union with the UAR. The
experiment failed, but Nasser still retains a measure of
popularity among Syria's lower classes. There is some possibility
a . that similar fears in the future might stimulate an effort by
anti-Communist officers to reconstitute the UAR. [xg
1.3(a)(4)(5)

4.31€)(4)6)
