Annual Report on Npic Interagency Liaison with Attachment Titled ChronologicalL
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000139171, dated 3 April 1980.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000139171).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Yd

t TCS-19979-80
14 May 1930

Copy _8

MEMORANDUM FOR: iirector, tational Photographic Interpretation Center

FROM
: Liaison Officer, NPIC

_ SUBJECT > Annual Report on NPIC Interagency Liaison (uy 1974

1. (U) Attached is a chronological listing of documented contacts
that NPIC has made with nonintelligence-oriented agencies throughout
calendar yaar 1979. [ know that many more informal exchanges have
occurred, especially with acacemia, that though not important in them-
selves, reflect a growing acknowledgement of NPIC's dominant role in
imagery exgloitation.

2. (U) Wel! over 26 agencies are represented in the 1979 chronology.
Among these are components that have relied on NPIC guidance and support
for many years. Others like the YSUA Foreign Agricultural Service, the
USD Malional Cartographic Infonsation Service, and the National Oceano-
Graphic and Atmospheric Agency are relative newcomers who are just becoming
interested in remote sensing techniques. The degree to which APIC provides
technical assistance to such agencies will directly reflect upon its
reputation as a focal point for imaging exploitation technology and, in its
broadest sense, as a national Center.

3. (U) The cost to NPIC for pursuing this responsibility during 1979
has been small. The Center has provided special photegraphic processing
and enlargement support to some of the agencies, briefings and tours to
others, and has entered into agreement with the EPA, which involves the one
year loan of an HPIC special light table, to that agency. In return NPiC
has received advanced knowiedge of rescarch programs being pursued by the
civil conmunity and other non intelligence agencies, has acquired special
requested unclassified prints and photographs, and has become privy to the
innovative thinking of many U. S. leaders in remote sensing and its aoplica-
ticns.

UEAIVATIVE CLBY ___ 498973
(2 OECL XAREVYWON _20 Years

CESIVED FAOM_ C.9c.),)
fae alot Gey .
ancraved for Rae: an “te AANDLE VIA
LOTTO

aan “  TALENT-XEYHOLE

: ot q . te Livktkta |
ay wn genres tos
i le ew a eee eT Dat rr ee
| : ee tod

TCS-19979-&6
Page 2

SUBJECT: Annual Report on MPIC Interagency Liaison (U)

4. (S) Ny intent for calendar year 1980 is to conduct my liaison
at essentially the same pace as the previous year, maintaining all my old
contacts and establishing new contacts =

Attachment:
a/s

Distribution:
Copy 1 - NPIC/ODIR
~ NPIC/SS
- NPIC/TEG
- NPIC/PSG
- NPIC/CIG
‘NPIC
- NPIC/ TSG
- NPIC/TSG/LO

COMO Om > Ww Ao
i

ne

13 Aug.

16 Nov. -

29 Nov. -

ATTACHMENT TO
TCS-19979-80

Chronelogical Listina of NPIC Contacts

niin the fons Intelligence Oriented Conmunity

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)

29 Jan. -

(U) MPIC received from the EPA Environmental} Photographic
Interpretation Center (EPIC) several requested unclassified
prints and enlargements depicting the use of photos to moni-
tor pollution, land use, tree vigor, and the effects of
shallow water currents on shore lines. These photographs
were used in Mr. Cino Brugioni's briefing to the Smithsonian
Associates -in April 1979,

(U) The EPA/EPIC requested the loan of the'NPIC controlled

Spectrum Light Table for approximately one year. The required
paper work was accomplished, the memo of understanding was re-
viewed by the OGC and the memo was signed by Directors of NPIC
and EPIC. The table was shipped to the EPIC in early December.

(U) The EPA/EPIC provided on request several unclassified
color transparencies and prints of domestic scenes to NPIC.
These were uSed as photographic illustrations in the NPIC
family day open house in December.

(U) Arrangements were made for a visit by Chief, TSG to the |
EPA/EPIC. Director, EPIC provided a briefing on his responsi-
bilities and a tour of his facility.

Sandia Laboratories

28 Sep. -

(S) A visit was made to Sandia Laboratories to discuss with
Mr. Don Lundergan an ongoin project that is looking into
means to detect

ne ee.

10 Oct. - (S) Mr. Lunderyan visited NPIC/IEG and TSG to review efforts

He also discussed the utility
for assisting in the

conducted on t}
of

I].

A.

B.

solution of the probles. A meeting was a: with the

Deputy Mirectur, MPIC to discuss certain

aspects that

Sandia felt it could support.

The United States Seological Survey (USGS)

USGS Topugraphic Livision

29 Jan.

13 Mar.

2 Apr.

2) Jun.

17 Jul.

15 Aug.

20 Sep.

11 Oct.

(U) Alden Colvocoresses provided NPIC with several LANDSAT
photoes and a report depicting the utility of LANDSAT for
detecting and mappina shaliow water shoals. The material
was used by Mr. Brugioni in his briefing to the Smithsonian
Association.

(U) NPIC answered a USGS request by providing them with
special enlargements of LANDSAT coverage. The USGS is look-
ing into the utility of LANDSAT coverage for making 1:24000
scale maps.

(U) NPIC answered a USGS request for maximum enlargements
of LANDSAT coverage These enlarge-
ments will be used t
quality of LANDSAT coverage,

(U) Mr. Colvocoresses requested special enlargements to
mapping scales of a current LANDSAT acquisition’

His intent is to depict the capability of using LANOSAT
photographs as a map base. The material was provided to
him prior to his 15 July deadline.

(U) NPIC personnel visited Mr. Colvocoresses to discuss
the results of his briefing on the use of LANDSAT as a map base

(U) NPIC hosted a briefing to the imagery Community on
future LANDSAT Programs, given by Alden Colvocoresses. He
also outlined USGS plans to investigate other types of col-
lection that could be used by them in the space shuttle era.

(U) NPIC fulfilled a requirement from the USGS topographic
Division for special enlargements of selected LANDSAT
imagery. They are investigating the use of optimum repro-
ductions of LANDSAT imagery at precise mapping scales for
the making of medium scale maps.

(U) NPIC provided additional enlargements of selected LANDSAT
coverage to the USGS to aid them in their mapping studies.

USGS - Special Mapping Center
14 May - (U) The Director of the USGS Special Mapping Center provided a

briefing and tour of his facility to NPIC/TSG and IEG analysts.

2

CC. USGS - iahional Cartographic Information Centr (NCIC)

@4 Jul. - Gu} USGSINCIS provided to MPIC u retentic: cany Ff,
canned slide talk stow depicting the charter end uals

. or NCiC. The briefing was provided to interested sFle
personnel and now resides with the NPIC Interagency
Liaison Officer.

28 Aug. - (C} Several NPIC members were invited to attend an all
day Syinposium celebrating the inauguration of NCIC's
Map and Chart Information System. This system incorpor-
ates the indexes of more than 80 map libraries into one
computerized information system. rine index is an excel-
lent tool for anyone establishing ground truth,
for special studies. .

IV. National Aeronautics & Space Administration (NASA
A. MASA Headquarters

| Feb - (U) NASA Headquarters provided NPIC with several LANDSAT
prints of various European capitals. This was in answer
to a request to NPIC from General Aaron, who was responding
ta several ambassadors' requests for satellite coverage of
of their areas of responsibility.

16 Feb. - (5) NIC answered a NASA request for information on
target specifications. MPIC provided them with the reso-
lution and contract specifications and with the name of the
USAF contract monitor ©

13 Mar. - (U) HPIC requested and received several JPL processed
calor photographs of the planet Jupitor. These images
were used by Mr. Brugioni in his briefing to the Smithsonian
Institute.

B. NASA Ames Research Laboratories

24 Sep. - (U) C. Lucas visited the NASA/Ames Research Center,
Apolications Aircraft and Future Programs Office (AAFPO) at’
Moffett Field, California. He discussed with the C/AAFPO
the future plans for his office and their interface with the
USDA/Forestry Service. The AAFPO js planning to acquire a
TRI aircraft by mid-198] and has already placed orders
for two IRUS II Cameras. The office has had several require-
ments from the state of Alaska, the Forestry Service and
the various wildlife-agencies to cover large areas within
the U.S. using primarily color and color IR film in their
optical bar camera. In the spring of 1980 at the request of
USDA/FS they will be Flying several thousand Square miles of
Coastal Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Florida to document
1979 hurricane damage to these states.

HANDLE VIA
sm TALENTS YE to

me -

C. NASA Johnson Space eenter

1 Oct. - (U) JIE visited Dr. John Dornbach, Life & Space Sciences
Nivision (L&SSD), NASA, Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas.
Or. Dernbach reviewed the new reorganization of L&SSD Tocus-
ing on their three primary functions, space medical research,
axlralerastrial geology (primarily Luna rock analyses) and
reasearch in earth observation from space. Of primary inter-
est to MPIC is the fact that Dr. Dornbach is the NASA contract
monitor for the NASA large format camera that will be in-
stalled in the third shuttle. He envisions additional
slippages in the shuttle program, hinting that the first
launch may not be until summer/fall] 1980. Should that be the
case the large format canera (which is on schedule) would be-
come operational in late 1981, early 1982. This twelve inch
focal length camera is being constructed at ITEK. The
metritek lens is “distortion free" (less than 10 microns) and
is designed for photogrammetric use. The lens Js color cor-
rected and capable of achieving 80 lines per millimeter on
3404 film. The camera will provide stereoscopic coverage,
has a film capacity of 4000 feet and a ground resolution of
75 feet from an orbit 294 nm (60 feet from a 145 nm orbit).
NASA is also looking into an alternative plan to put the
camera aboard a multimission space craft that would be placed
in position by the shuttle, but could work independently for
up to 60 days, and then would be retrieved by the shuttle.

D. MASA Goddard Space Center

19 Oct. - (U) Several MPIC personnel attended a group tour of the
Goddard Imagery Processing Facility, where the facility
demonstrated the support to and exploitation of LANDSAT,
HIMBUS, The neat capacity mapping mission and the synchron-
ous meteorological satellites.

E. NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL)

25 Sep. - (U) {MMMM visited Or. James Burke of the Technical Staff
at the HASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Los Angeles, Calif.
The latest images of the planet Jupiter and its moons were
reviewed and discussed and a tour of the imagery processing:
facility was provided. Plans for the January 1982 launch of
the JPL Galileo space craft from the Shuttle and its planned
rendevous with Jupiter jn mid-1985 were also discussed. Mr.
Burke stressed the need for continual exchange between NPIC
and the JPL especially in the realm of ae imagery en-
hancement.

Y. Department of Enera DOE

10 Sep. - (S) QM met with Mr. John Meinhardt to discuss a pend-
ing visit to Sandia Labs to discuss Wee

: 4 LE YIA
GA | aie TALEN

wate

VI. tational Archives

23 Teh, (U) Mr. Dino “rugioni held 4 press conference concern-
ing the Auschwitz article. CBS, NBC and ABC television
networks were represented,

10 Apr. - (i) MPIC provided Mr. Dick Youso of the National Archives
d negative report on their efforts to enhance an old
Spanish Land Grant. Mr. Youso was provided the names of
several contractors who may be able to provide the re-
search necessary to accomplish the task. ~

VII. The smithsonien Institute

24 Apr. - (U) Mr. Dino Brugioni gave a presentation on the Evolution
; of Aerial Photographic Reconnaissance to the Smithsonian
Associates, staff and volunteers,

14 Aug. - (U) Mr. Dino Brugioni met with officials of the Smithsonian
Institute concerning his Providing a lecture to the
Smithsonian Associates at a later date.

VIII. United States Department of Agriculture (USDA)

A. Forestry Service

12 Feb. - (U)- Mambers of NPIC/TSG and IEG visited Mr. Ray Allison -
of the Forestry Service to request unclassified photography
which depicted how the Forestry Service used film products
in their analyses. (The Forestry Service subsequently pro-
vided several photos for MPIC, as requested.) Mr. Allison
also briefed NPIC personnel on a future Program that will be
conducted by the USDA, USDI, NASA and uSsDC Which will result
in establishing a sophisticated earth resources package in
a future space shuttle.

1 Oct. - (U) Mme visiteg Or. Phil Webber, USDA Forestry Service,
Johnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Or. Webber discussed
the continuing studies being conducted under the Nationwide
Forestry Applications Program, mentioning his close relation-
ship with NASA Ames U-2 manager Jim Cherbeneau. He mentioned
the domestic renewable resources inventory that the FS is
Conducting using both LANDSAT and Scheduled U2 coverage. He
is very interested in being brought up to da the latest
camera films He plans

Lo visit MPIC the next time he is in Washington to discuss
these areas, . ;

B. Foreign Agricultural Service

1 Oct. - (u) QED visited Dr. James Murphy, C/Crop Condition
Assessment Division, Foreign Agricultura} Service USDA,
vohnson Space Center, Houston, Texas. Or. Murphy has the

responsibility for conducting follow-on Project Lacie
ctidies and his five year plan encompasses the operational
exploitation of products from LANOSAT D, the Large Format
Canara and the Agristars collection efforts. His procuct
witl be projections on all cerea] crops throughout the
world. His customer will be the World Food Board. He has
prioritized the geographical areas where cereal crops are
grown anc will concentrate first on the various wheats,
soybeans end rice. He currently has one PI station (with
plans for at least five more) designed around the ESL IDIMS
and a HP 3000 computer. He has the standard ESL earth
resources package and has added some software of his own. |
He also mas access on-line to a large computer where he has
additional data bases. Two bases which may be useful to NPIC
aré: a data base which geograpnically locates all USSR
weather stations and another whicn Can provide descriptions
of sot? type for geographic areas throughout the world,
based on a 12 mile by 12 mile grid system. These data bases
Can be combined and correlated with daily weather reports
to arrive at information important to the growth cycle of
vegetation.

1X. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)

“ May. - (U) MPIC hosted a briefing by NOAA on the Joint USDA, NASA,
USOC, USDI and AID Multiyear Research Program entitled
“Agriculture & Resources Inventory Surveys Through Remote
Sensing (AgRISTARS)." Members of HPIC, OIA and OGCR attended
the briefing.

X. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)

Jan. - (U) Throughout the past two years NPIC has maintained
informal contacts with the FBi through its membership on
the NPIC-chaired Terrestrial Information Exchange (TIE) Panel.
Although most contacts involve the technology surfaced
within the panel, a significant amount of technical informa-
tion concerning exploitation as well as mensuration is ex--"
Changed to the mutual benefit Of all concerned.

3 Oct. - {U) Mr, Jerry Richards, Liaison Officer for the FBI visited
Mr. Richards discussed the FBI input to the

f mandged Terrestrial Photogrammetry Course being held jn
March 1980. During the discussions he mentioned that the
FBI is looking for a low cost aerial surveillance capability.
He was provided a brochure on the E.P.A. enviropod which
appears designed for his needs. Subsequently Mr. Richards
asked for and received the address and telephone number of
the D/EPIC/EPA who designed and presently has one of the
camera systems. A meeting has been arranged for the FBI to
visit EPA/EPIC and view the camera and its products,

XI. United States State Department
> tate bepartment

30 May - (U) Mr. Dino Brugioni met with the Israeli minister and
briefed him on the Auschwitz photos,

6 . MAMDLE Via
* oe Vie ; TALE NC YHOLE

24 Aug. - (U) ONPIC/TEG provided to AID with a requested analysis

Sep. - (J) providec embers af the State
Department with a briefing on Systems Resclution.

XIT. The United States Coast Guard (USCG)

2 Oct. - i “MMM 2itended a meeting hosted by the U. S.
oast Guard, and OGCR/ERAC. The meeting was held at
OGCR/ERAC to initiate some thinkin

The decision was to establish an ad hoc group that would
review current capabilities and arrive at potential

proved rs A 2: well as delineate lucrative
avenues to conduct research against current inabilities.

24 Oct. - (TSg@K) Visit to U. S. Navy NOSIC, Suitland, Maryland:

———

6 Nov. - Wm arranged and hosted a visit by Commander
ames Kenny, U. S. Coast Guard, to NPIC. Commander Kenny is

a member of the a Ad Hoc a a into means

XIII. The U. S. Army Materials Evaluation Research & Development Comnand MERADCOM
A.

HANBLE VIA
TALER TRAC THC |

go aa rie a tour of the USAETL

aes,
and a demonstration of an experimental field deployment
of the U. S. ee

SE iagery reedout system.

XV. Miscellaneous

2 Mar. - (U) Mr. Dino Brugioni provided a briefing sponsored by
the Brookings Institute to a Conference for Business
Executives on Federal Government Operations.

18 Jul. - (U) Sm met with members of the CIA Office of General
Counsel to discuss the legal aspects of pheyne) ng technical
SHPROne to the civil community.

ae c $i: Alf:
Ny ‘ 2 ote
: } tye iw af

ST tates ome te ree ee gem ee cee eee eee,

vee eee ee a Se Caen
