National Intelligence Estimate Number 36.1-66-THE Outlook for the United Arab
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012090, dated 4 April 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012090).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

S{a)(4)(5)

1

os
(2
ig
E

3(a)(4)@)

4

A
a

Tope

Pa et

®

Ls

3(a)(4)(5)

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

24 May 1966

MEMORANDUM TO HOLDERS
OF NIE 36.1-66:

THE OUTLOOK FOR THE
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC
(Dated 19 May 1966)

.-CORRIGENDUM ~~

Page 1, Conclusion B, Line 8: Chace “(1962-1965)” :
(1965-1972), .

A.a{ay(4)(5)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

THE: PROBEEM® siscc2.c08s 32 cree oo ehaina die AA ead eed Rta oad Shades ee 1

* CONCLUSIONS: 3 coke 228 See gad Udaeld Web bk ware eed Pe dee Medea PM 1
DISCUSSION? v2 css. Pee ale cMee Seeee et  ea a vd eat ace aoe ante Sted e Siek ols 3
I. THE UAR’S MOUNTING TROUBLES ...................... 00055. 3
Economic Problems ...............0 0. ccc cece cece ccuccvvvceeuneccs 3
Stalemate in Yemen .......0. 000. e ce ceecceeeece 6
Political “Unrest? a< <0! aGen Giese eleeane eek ne okie da eMel Pe 6

JI. THE REGIME’S RESPONSE ..... 2.0... ccc ccc cece eeece 7
Domestic Changes: 5.4 ne ees, eed eRe Pete hates Peau wes 7
Foreign Affairs paiva tne ekd a eeiotne ote Ader. a a heated elk fod atten Cale oh as 8
--=- - JU. THE GENERAL OUTLOOK ..... 2 ~ Pema lene Si tee pth ates Se Mets 9
Hcouomic: Prospects: fas. ote sng one onan add nada d tn un keeot eral 9
Poreion POMC» 2.054: incite aba hie test Mth a gt worse ery sae eins 10

Domestic Implications of the UAR’s Foreign Relations ............... en 82)

; THE OUTLOOK FOR THE
UNITED ARAB REPUBLIC

THE PROBLEM

To assess the situation of the United Arab Republic and to estimate
developments in domestic and foreign affairs over the next few years.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Growing economic difficulties, the costly stalemate in Yemen,
and other troubles have produced considerable discontent and even
some active opposition in the UAR. The regime has responded by
overhauling the security apparatus, by searching—unsuccessfully—
for some solution in Yemen, by cutting civilian spending, and by
stretching out its five year economic plan to seven years.

B. The program of domestic retrenchment, particularly the cuts
in civilian consumption, should help in dealing with economic prob-
lems, but it will have to be continued for several years to be effective.
Foreign exchange earnings will probably be increased by recent im-
portant oil discoveries. To meet its economic goals, the UAR has some
$1.1 billion in aid pledged by Communist countries and about $500
million promised from various Western sources; it will, however, still
need about $2 billion during the Second Plan period (1969-38634 a
partly in foodstuffs and partly in other types of aid. US willingness
to supply PL-480 food will greatly affect the willingness of other West-
ern donors to contribute to Egypt. The UAR’s need for Western aid
will be an important but not overriding consideration in its conduct of
foreign affairs.

C. We see no better than an even chance of a settlement in Yemen
in the next two years or so. ‘ Nasser is highly unlikely to accept a humil-
iating withdrawal. We also believe that he will try to avoid the risks of
escalation, though there is some danger of clashes involving UAR and
Saudi forces. His most likely course is to retrench militarily, holding

a

the more defensible areas and hoping for some kind of face-saving
settlement. In the meantime, antagonism between Nasser and the
Saudis is likely to exacerbate inter-Arab relations generally, under-
mining the detente of the last two years or so.

D. Unless Nasser’s troubles get much more severe than at present,
we doubt that his regime will be in serious danger of being replaced.
A successful move to do so would require considerable backing from
the armed forces; this appears unlikely in the near term. However,
unless the government improves its economic performance and man-
ages to revive greater political support, it will become more vulnerable
in the long run.

E. US-UAR relations have fluctuated considerably over the years,
and present indications are for a downward turn. This results mainly
from the reviving antagonism between Nasser and the more pro-West-
em Arab leaders—particularly Faisal. It is exacerbated by Nasser’s
troubles with the British in the Arabian Peninsula, by his resentment
at tightened US aid policies toward the UAR, and by his belief that
the US is increasing support for his adversaries. It is also encouraged
by Soviet gestures toward the UAR.

DISCUSSION
{, THE UAR‘S MOUNTING TROUBLES

1. During the last few years, Nasser’s government has been facing tougher
"problems than many which confronted it in the first decade after the 1952 revo-
lution. In its earlier period, the regime achieved an impressive series of suc-
cesses. Domestically, it was helped by its leaders’ own fresh revolutionary en-
thusiasm and favorable contrasts with the old regime, by the ease with which
it could tap the great wealth of a small minority to help finance its social and
economic programs, and by the availability of large amounts of foreign exchange
accumulated in previous years. Externally, Nasser emerged as the champion of
Arab nationalism against receding British power, and was able to take credit for
ending the decades of British occupation in Egypt. He also broke new ground
by enlisting Soviet political and material support, thus ending Egypt's historic
dependence on the West. And he emerged from his greatest crisis—the 1956
Suez affair—not only in control of the Canal, but with the prestige of having
frustrated the “imperialists” and Israel.

9. After nearly 15 years in power, the revolution has inevitably lost some of
its elan. Popular aspirations remain high, but it is no longer possible to satisfy
them through dramatic reforms paid for by soaking the rich and the foreign com-
munity and by drawing on foreign exchange holdings, since these sources have
been largely exhausted. Efforts to build a socialist, secular state have alienated
various elements of the populace. The economy has continued to grow, but it
has become overextended as a result of efforts to do too much too fast, and large
segments of the population—beneficiaries of the earlier reforms—have come to
feel the pinch of heavier-taxation, inflation, and growing shortages of consumer
goods. Western imperialism is no longer such a useful scapegoat, since its ves-
tiges survive only in areas remote from Egypt. The Israeli problem remains a
source of humiliation. A number of Nasser’s fellow-revolutionary leaders in the
Arab and Afro-Asian world have fallen or are in serious trouble. The UAR’s
relations with the major Western powers have generally deteriorated in the past
few years, causing them to curtail economic aid. And the UAR is bogged down
in a costly stalemate in Yemen with no end in sight.

Economic Problems

3. The First Five-Year Plan (1960-1965) called for investments of nearly $5
billion in order to raise total output by 40 percent (seven percent a year). In
fact, the economy did expand by between five and six percent annually during
this period. Industry grew rapidly, and became more diversified; the produc-
tion of chemicals, light machinery, and consumer durable goods made notable
gains. Electric power output more than doubled. Food production gains were
less striking, but output nonetheless grew slightly more than population.

ee ; 3

UAR: FOREIGN EXCHANGE HOLDINGS’

1955-65

1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 A265

*Exclusive of gold haldings which varied between $174-188,000,000
until late 1964 when they dropped to about $140,000,000.

Dota approximately as of end of period.

Million

Dollars

UAR: TOTAL FOREIGN CURRENCY DEBT”
; 1955-65

neta

1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965

a **xcluding US loans repayable in Egyptian pounds.
Data opproximately as of end of period.

or ae i. mE 1.2(0)(4)0)

ECONOMIC INDICATORS *

1960-1965
1960= 100
GROSS AGGREGATE PERCAPITA AGGREGATE
CALENDAR DOMESTIC INDUSTRIAL AGRICULTURAL AGRICULTURAL FOOD
YEAR PRODUCT” PRODUCTION OUTPUT OUTPUT PRODUCTION
1960 ........... 100 100 100 100 100
1961 .........-. 106 112 92 90 102
1962 wees eases 109 130 107 102 110
1963 ........... 118 143 108 100 113
1964 ........... 127 149 112 101 115
1965 .........-- 133 155° 118 102 118

* Unless otherwise indicated, data are for the calendar year. Data are based primarily
on official UAR statistics. .

* Fiscal years, 1 July-30 June.
¢ Estimated.

4, However, this impréssive record conceals a number of weaknesses. The
UAR had used up virtually all its foreign exchange reserves by 1961, and sub-
sequent growth was made possible only by a net inflow of about $1.8 billion
in foreign economic credits and grants, ranging from long-term Communist
loans to US PL-480 and short-term borrowings from Western banks. Moreover,
much of the aid received was consumed directly or used to produce consumer

.goods, as Nasser attempted to sell the attractions of socialism by increasing

living standards. Domestic savings, scheduled to increase from 13 to over 20
percent of gross national product, rose very little, and investments fell below
plan targets. Defense expenditures roughly doubled and are currently budgeted
at approximately $410 million a year? This is about eight percent of Gross
National Product (GNP)—a rate above that of most advanced industrial nations
and more than double that. of all but a few “devéloping nations. Finally, the
annual rate of population growth has gone up from about 2.5 to nearly three

percent; in absolute terms this brought the UAR’s population to about 30 mil-

lion, and it is growing by nearly one million annually.

5. The effects of Nasser’s overambitious programs began to be apparent in
1964, Despite massive foreign aid, excessive imports led to foreign exchange
shortages; this forced the regime to adopt import curbs, which curtailed the

availability of consumer goods and industrial raw materials and components.

However, only minor efforts were made to reduce consumer demand. Prices,
which had been stable for many years, began to rise and black markets devel-
oped; these problems became worse after PL-480 shipments were interrupted
in early 1965. Industry was particularly hard hit by the shortage of imported
items; after expanding by about ten percent annually for several years, the
rate of growth in 1964 and 1965 fell to about four percent. Nonetheless, until

1Between 1961 and 1965, the UAR also received Soviet military equipment priced at
about $250 million, and repaid about $200 million of its military debt to the USSR.

2 This includes expenditures for missile and jet aircraft development and the war in Yemen,
and probably includes an estimated $25 million due annually for Soviet arms.

gre aan
'
‘
i
\
\

late 1965, the regime balked at “making any major changes in its economic
policies, resorting instead to debt postponements and new foreign borrowing.

Stalemate in Yemen

6. In Yemen, the UAR has been unable to win and unwilling to withdraw.
Since 1962, the venture has cost heavily in Egyptian lives and money, as well
as prestige. By mid-1965, between 50,000 and 60,000 UAR troops were in
Yemen, unable to achieve anything approaching victory, and casualties had
reached estimated totals of between 5,000 and 8,000 Egyptian dead, and perhaps
10,000-20,000 wounded, captured, or missing. Initially, Nasser intervened to
to help the Yemen republicans in line with his policy of supporting like-minded
revolutionaries, and because it promised to give him a foothold in the Arabian
Peninsula. He doubiless envisaged a quick and easy success against the royalists,
which would have resulted in preponderant Egyptian influence in Yemen. It
would also have represented a setback for Nasser’s Saudi rivals, who openly
backed the royalists, and for the British, Instead,
the Yemen Arab Republic (YAR) has proved weak and ineffective, with only
limited support in the areas over which it does claim control. The royalists
still hold much of the country, and Yemeni resentment of Egyptian heavy-
handedness has become almost universal.

7. The UAR’s frustrations in Yemen have had repercussions at home. The
Egyptian people are unhappy about the costs and casualties, and among the
military there is widespread anger and humiliation over the failure to win.
Within the government, there are almost certainly divided counsels over how
to proceed. Some of Nasser’s chief political and military advisors probably
favor cutting their losses and withdrawing, or at least reducing UAR forces
and hanging on to a few strong points until a face-saving settlement is worked
out. Others probably want to increase the military. commitment and try for

" - some kind of victory.

Political Unrest

8. The stalemate in Yemen and the country’s economic problems have led
to political unrest. Discontent became apparent in late 1964, with grumbling
about food shortages, black markets, and high prices; there were some small-
scale protest demonstrations and sporadic illegal strikes. Popular demonstra-
tions at the funeral of the Wafdist leader of pre-revolutionary Egypt gave the
regime cause for thought. These events were overshadowed by the discovery,
in mid-1965, of a Muslim Brotherhood plot to assassinate Nasser and overthrow
the regime. Two aspects of this affair were particularly unsettling to the
leadership; (1) the plot was discovered only after it was well advanced, and
more by accident than by efficiency on the part of the security forces, and
(2) some of the people involved were “children of the revolution’—technicians,
engineers, and scientists—-whom Nasser had believed to be immune to the
appeals of the traditionalist Muslim Brotherhood.

*At about the same time the regime also discovered another—though less serious—plot
organized by men with some link to the Chinese Communists. ;

1.3(a)(4)(5)

Pome  5-> AS,

ll. THE REGIME’S RESPONSE
Domestic Changes

9. By mid-1965, these accumulating difficulties convinced Nasser that remedial
action was required. It became apparent that the security apparatus needed
reorganizing, the grandiose economic plans had to be scaled down, and the
burden of the Yemeni involvement had to be lightened. Prime Minister Sabri,
an ardent socialist and strong advocate of UAR activism abroad, was hardly the
man to preside over the necessary changes. Indeed, it probably was necessary
to replace Sabri in order to convince both Egyptians and foreigners that a change
was taking place. His successor, Zakariya Muhieddin, was known to favor a
more pragmatic economic policy and to be’ less enthusiastic about foreign adven-
tures. Such considerations, more than Sabri’s alleged pro-Soviet orientation and
Muhieddin’s reputation for being more friendly toward the West, probably were
behind Nasser’s decision to install Muhieddin.

10. Muhieddin, who is Minister of the Interior as well as Prime Minister, is
concentrating on domesti¢”problems. He has moved with considerable vigor in
a number of areas. He has purged the administration, removing over half of
the provincial governors and all the provincial security directors. He has been
less tolerant of the activities of local Communists—many of whom had been
released from prison in 1964 and given jobs by the government. Muhieddin
and Nasser have also warned the people that a period of austerity is necessary
and that the country cannot consume what it cannot produce or pay for. Taxes
and prices have been raised to curtail civilian consumption, some uneconomic
projects have been dropped, and increased attention is being given to industries
with export potential* The government has also established a birth control
program, though whether it will have a high priority over a prolonged period is
uncertain. In any case it will have no appreciable. effect on population growth
in the next few years. fe : :

11. These measures restored foreign confidence somewhat and led to some
new foreign aid. In general, Muhieddin’s economic policies are moves in the
right direction and have improved the domestic economic situation. They will,
however, have to be supplemented by improvements in economic planning and
management, and continued for several years, if the UAR is to maintain its
rate of growth. Moreover, the government needs to find some way to rekindle
the popular political support that it had in the 1950s; so far it has not had any
notable success in doing so.

12. The military continue to be a source of concern to Nasser. He has been
apprehensive over the attitudes of troops returning from the Yemen. There
have been recent revelations of smuggling and corruption in high military as
well as civilian circles. Some ten officers have been arrested on charges of
conspiring against the regime. The government probably fears that there are
other plots as yet unknown to it.

“However, the regime apparently has decided to continue, at least for a time, its costly
and trouble-ridden programs to produce jet aircraft and surface-to-surface missiles.

Foreign Affairs

13. Nasser’s most critical foreign problem arises from Yemen. In August
1965, he went to Saudi Arabia to try to negotiate a settlement with King Faisal,
whose support of the Yemeni royalists has been crucial to their cause. Both
Nasser and Faisal then saw advantages in bringing the conflict to an end, and
they contrived a compromise settlement which provided for a cease fire, an
end to Saudi aid to the royalists, a phased withdrawal of UAR troops, and
the formation of an interim coalition government in Yemen to conduct a plebi-
scite on the future form of government.

14. The Yemeni accord has not been successful. The provisions for a cease
fre and a halt of Saudi aid have been largely implemented. However, there
have been disagreements over the composition of the coalition government, a
question not covered in the accord. Nasser and the Yemeni republicans insist
that two-thirds of its members be republicans; Faisal and the royalists are
holding out for a 50-50 division of government positions. Nasser has also
insisted that Faisal agree to keep the royal family—the Hamid al Dins—out
of Yemen. Nasser has pulled back UAR troops from some important areas
im the Yemen and has returned a few troops to Egypt. He has done this,
however, not in compliance with the agreement, but in order to deploy his
forces in more tenable positions and to lighten the burden if a protracted
occupation becomes necessary.

15. Underlying these specific disagreements is the growing distrust and antago-
nism between Faisal and Nasser. Faisal now believes that Nasser intends to
keep his troops in Yemen regardless of last year’s agreement, not only to protect
the YAR but also to undermine the Saudi and British positions in the Arabian
Peninsula. Indeed, Faisal-insists that Nasser has become a tool of the Soviets

in the area. Nasser, in turn, suspects that Faisal is working for the destruction
of the YAR, which would indicate to the world, and particularly to the Egyp- .

tians, that their sacrifices for the Yemen revolution have been in vain. Nasser
considers that Faisal is determined to oppose him in South Arabia and the
Persian Gulf and is cultivating dissident elements in the UAR. Faisal’s active
campaign for closer ties among Islamic countries is viewed in Cairo as an effort
to isolate the UAR and its brand of Arab Socialism. Nasser has recently
attacked Faisal, other Arab rulers and Western powers on this score and has
asserted that he will keep his troops in Yemen as long as necessary to insure
the survival of the Yemen revolution. He has threatened to occupy Saudi bases
supporting any “aggression” against Yemen.

16. During 1965, Nasser made some moves to placate the US. These moves
took the form of limited adjustments on various issues, rather than any single
outstanding concession, and in most cases he had other motives in addition

to be had for the asking.

to placating the US. Nevertheless, he became aware that PL-480 aid was not_

1.3(a)(4)(5)

ae 3.312) (4)(5)

li. THE GENERAL OUTLOOK

17. US-UAR relations have fluctuated considerably over the years, and pres-
ent indications are for a downward turn. Nasser suspects that the US is con-
spiring with his adversaries in the area and in Europe to weaken and isolate
him. His frustrations vis-a-vis Washington are fed by his resentment at impor-
tant US sales of arms to his rivals—Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Israel—while
| PL-480 aid to the UAR is now extended in reduced amounts and for shorter
| periods. Nasser is making countermoves by stepping up political and propa-
ganda attacks against Faisal and other conservative and moderate Arab leaders,
and by cultivating closer relations with the USSR—notably through the Kosygin
visit. He has also stepped up public criticism of the US.

Economic Prospects

18. On 1 May 1966, Nasser announced that the period of the UAR’s Second

Five-Year Plan would be extended to seven years. Although revised objectives

have not been announced, apparently the national income goals previously set

for 1970 have been postponed until 1972. This would imply an average annual

growth rate of about six percent over a seven year period, rather than an aver-

age 8.5 percent growth rate for five years. The investment target has been

increased from about $5 billion over five years to $7 billion over seven years.

Because of increased opportunities for domestic savings, however, total foreign

borrowing requirements are only slightly higher, and it appears that the annual

foreign borrowing requirement has been scaled down from about $600 million

to about $500 million.

} eae 19, The stretched-out plan appears more compatible with the UAR’s capabili-

ties. Nonetheless, the UAR will have to achieve several simultaneous improve-

ments in economic performance if it is to maintain its recent rate of economic

growth, and reduce drawings on external resources somewhat below the un-

usually high level of the First Plan, as well as meeting its debt service obliga-

tions. By 1972, debt service payments will rise from their present level of about

$250 million annually to at least $300 million. Earnings from exports, the Suez

’ Canal, and tourism will have to grow rapidly enough to cover these increased

! payments. Foreign currency payments for imports and other current expenses

will have to be held close to present levels. Finally, domestic savings and the

proportion of investment goods produced in the UAR will have to increase
rapidly enough to make possible the necessary rise in total investment.

20. If the UAR can obtain the requisite foreign aid it has a good chance of
succeeding in these tasks. Success, however, will also require sustained effort
to follow through along the more realistic lines recently adopted. While mili-
tary expenditures are unlikely to decline, civilian consumption has already been
considerably curtailed, and the government is unlikely to lift restrictions on con-

er I pe ee ae ee - ob Hag fe 2
4

em 9

'

i
:
‘
i
t

vet paoen?

sumption in the near future. .The UAR’s earnings from its traditional sources
of foreign currency earnings—cotton exports, Suez Canal fees, and tourism—
probably will continue to grow steadily. Moreover, a sizable oil field has been
discovered in the Gulf of Suez. It seems likely that in a few years the UAR
will be earning substantial sums from petroleum exports—perhaps $50-100 mil-
lion annually by 1970. The sum could be even larger if there are strikes in
promising areas in the Western desert. Finally, the benefits from the Aswan
Dam will be increasingly felt throughout the economy over the next few years.
Nonetheless, the UAR will still need about $3.5 billion in foreign financing be-
tween 1965 and 1972, minus any debt postponements it can arrange, if it is to
maintain its five to six percent rate of economic growth.

21. So far the UAR has secured commitments of over $1.1 billion in aid from
Communist countries for the Second Plan period; substantial additional com-
mitments from these sources presently appear unlikely. It has also obtained
from a wide variety of non-Communist sources pledges of aid and of invest-
ment that total about $500 million, plus a $55 million PL-480 agreement with
the US that expires in June 1966. Over $120 million of this sum is from West
Germany and probably will be slow to materialize while diplomatic relations
remain suspended. The other major Free World commitments are from Ku-
wait, Japan, France, Spain, and Italy, and from US oil companies and Western
banks under private agreements.

22. Thus the UAR has commitments for about $1.7 of the $3.5 billion it needs
by 1972. Since the amount of aid in the pipeline at any time cannot be reduced
below $200-300 million without hindering growth, the UAR still needs nearly $2
billion more through 1972, divided about equally between foodstuffs and other
types of aid. Its prospects for securing more assistance from Western sources—
both public and private—depend heavily on ‘its ability. to obtain PL-480. A
continuing supply of PL-480 foodstuffs enhances the willingness of European
countries and private Western firms to provide financial backing; without PL-480,
the UAR has to use foreign exchange for food imports, thus limiting its ability
to handle new debt servicing obligations. The UAR’s need for PL-480 will con-
tinue to be an important but not an overriding consideration in determining
Nasser’s foreign policy.

Foreign Policy , -—

23, Nasser’s dedication to nonalignment will not mean evenhandedness as
between the US and the USSR; there are too many areas in which Soviet and
UAR interests are more immediately compatible than are the interests of the
UAR and the US and other Western powers. This is generally true with respect
to remaining Western installations and special political positions in the Middle
East and Africa, Western commercial and oil interests, and—to a certain extent—
the Israeli question. Moreover, Nasser is aware that his complete dependence
on Soviet arms is likely to continue.

|
‘

10 mm

24, Nasser’s troubles with the West and with his local adversaries have no
doubt made him anxious for greater Soviet support. During the Kosygin visit,
however, the Soviets apparently showed greater caution about commitments to
the UAR than Nasser would have liked, and in any case there remain limits
on how far Soviet-UAR cooperation is likely to go. In particular, we still doubt
that Nasser would violate his basic principle of opposition to foreign bases by
granting military base rights to the USSR.

25. Nasser deplores the Sino-Soviet split and Communist China’s quarrel with
India, as well as the more general disarray among the nonaligned states. He
believes that these developments weaken his struggle against Western “im-
perialism, exploitation, and racism.” He will seek to secure the backing of the
Communists and the Afro-Asian states in his controversies with the UK, the
US, Israel, and Saudi Arabia.

26. UAR policy toward Western European states will vary. Cairo will wel-
come improvements in relations with France, hoping to benefit from de Gaulle’s
differences with the US. However, French-UAR relations are not likely to be-
come very close, in large part because of French ties with Israel. UAR relations
with West Germany are unlikely to improve much because of frictions over
West German-Israeli ties and UAR-East German relations. Nonetheless, Cairo
~ will seek to maintain such relations with West Germany as will assure con-
tinued economic assistance. There is little prospect of improved UAR relations
with the UK.

27. Policy in the Arab World. Nasser is aware that his position of dominance
in the Arab world has eroded.® In an attempt to reestablish his position, he is
trying to rally the Arab revolutionaries against his conservative and moderate
Arab rivals. He may abandon the cooperative line which he initiated in the
Arab Summit conferences,-particularly if~he thinks that Faisal’s campaign to
organize a conservative Islamic alignment is succeeding. While Nasser will
remain the single most influential Arab leader, he is not likely to regain the
paramount influence he had in the late 1950s, when he personified the Arab
revolutionary movement. He is no longer the only Arab nationalist leader cap-
able of facing up to the West, of getting aid from the Soviets, and of carrying
out major social reforms. The other Arab leaders, once overshadowed by him
or on the defensive against his movement, have successfully resisted UAR efforts
to run their affairs. Moreover, the Egyptian people appear less interested in
Arab or world affairs than they were a decade ago, and political “victories”
abroad would not help the regime much at home. Indeed, the major foreign
problem, as far as most Egyptians are concerned, is how to end the involve-
ment in Yemen.

28. Nevertheless, Nasser appears unwilling basically to subordinate foreign
affairs to domestic considerations. He sees an indissoluble connection between
the revolution in the UAR and that in the Arab world at large. He is convinced

*See NIE 36-66, “The Eastern Arab World,” dated 17 February 1966, for a general dis-
cussion of trends in the Arab world and in Arab-Israeli affairs.

am M

that his leadership and approach alone can enable the Arab world to eliminate
its legacy of colonialism and backwardness. While he realizes that his oppor-
tunities for playing a dominant role are presently less than they were a few years
ago, he probably believes that, in time, upheavals will occur in such places
as Libya and Saudi Arabia which he can exploit.

29. For some time to come, Nasser’s policies in the Arab world will be
strongly influenced by the trend of events in Yemen and in the Arabian Penin-
sula generally. Essentially, Nasser has three broad choices open to him. On
the one hand, he can try again for a settlement with Faisal on Yemen. Such
a basic policy shift would require more concessions to Faisal than we believe
he is likely to make. At the other extreme, Nasser could try for “victory” in
Yemen by renewing a military offensive there, and perhaps attacking” Saudi
border towns. We are doubtful Nasser will follow this line; he probably thinks
that it would not fundamentally improve his military position in Yemen, would
cost him Arab sympathy and badly needed Western aid, and would even risk
military clashes with Western forces.

30. We think that Nasser’s most likely course is to retrench militarily in Yemen,
holding the more easily defensible areas, and probably withdrawing some troops
from the country. This would have the virtue of reducing the burden on the
UAR while preventing a UAR defeat. Some fighting between UAR and royalist
forces may occur, and perhaps even between UAR and Saudi forces as well.
Such clashes are likely to be limited, but will carry some danger of drawing
both sides in deeper. Nasser may make new attempts to reach a settlement
with Faisal, though the longer he delays the harder it will be to reach a settle-
ment satisfactory to him in the face of growing Yemeni antagonism. However,
the chances of a settlement do not depend entirely on Nasser; the degree of

_ flexibility shown by Faisal will be important, as will the-attitudes and policies
of the major powers. All things considered, we see no better than an even
chance of a settlement in the Yemen in the next two years or so. In the mean-
time, Nasser will make recurrent political and propaganda attacks upon Faisal
and other Arab conservatives. He will also continue his attempts to undermine
the British and Saudi positions in the Arabian Peninsula.

31. Israel. We foresee virtually no chance of the UAR moving toward any
settlement with Israel, though Nasser will continue to avoid actions which risk
hostilities with the Israelis. He is aware that they are able to defeat his forces,
and that both the US and the USSR are opposed to Arab-Israeli hostilities. j

Domestic Implications of the UAR’s Foreign Relations

32. Under the most favorable conditions, the UAR is not likely to achieve,
in the next two years or so, the kind of widely-felt economic progress that
would substantially enhance the regime’s domestic political appeal. Even with
the benefits from the Aswan High Dam and with substantial amounts of foreign
aid—say $250 million a year from the West plus the pledged contributions
from the Communist countries—economic expansion is bound to be slow in

2 one

{

a ee ee ee

en et

the next year or two, becoming more rapid only toward the late 1960s. At best,
therefore, the kind of domestic discontent which arises from economic grievances
will persist. We doubt, however, that grievances of this kind will endanger
the regime’s control of the country.

33. If, on the other hand, there is a near cessation of Western aid—including
PL-480—the UAR will face major economic dislocations and hardships. While
the UAR could reduce its need for imported foodstuffs somewhat by curtailing
consumption, it probably would have to make up part of any major curtailment
by imports from other sources, probably costing some $60-70 million annually
in hard currency. Such outlays, in conjunction with the reduction of other
Western aid, would probably lead to a sharp decline in industrial production,
since UAR industry is heavily dependent on imported raw materials and semi-
manufactured goods. The rate of economic growth would decline substantially.

34. Drastic cutbacks in Western aid would be regarded by Nasser as politically
motivated and would almost certainly lead him to strike back at the West
throughout the Middle East, though not to the extent of risking military clashes
with Western—or Israeli—forces. Nasser apparently is already growing in-
creasingly restive over what he considers a US policy of making aid conditional
on his good behavior. It is likely that this feeling will strengthen the UAR’s
tendency to adopt attitudes and understake activities unfavorable to the US.
However, we believe that the UAR’s leaders, while prepared to accept the sup-
port of Arab Communists and exploit the East-West contest to their own political
advantage, will remain ready and able to repress local Communists if the latter
seem to threaten the regime’s interests.

35. There remains the question of how such severe economic difficulties and
foreign controversies would affect Nasser’s hold on the country. In these cir-
cumstances, Nasser would probably have some initial success in rallying domestic

_ support by blaming the UAR’s troubles on the West. However, the level of dis-

content would soon rise, particularly if Nasser had been unable to extricate the
UAR from the Yemen. In addition, too close an identification with the Com-
munist world and too great alienation from the US probably would intensify
this process. Strains within the leadership would also increase. We cannot
judge with confidence how secure Nasser’s position would be under such stress,
chiefly because we know very little about the political attitudes of the military
officer corps. We assume that Nasser, a practiced conspirator himself, will con-
tinue to keep close watch over the loyalties of his officers. The chances seem
to be against Nasser’s overthrow in the near future; he has done too much for
too many people in Egypt, and he probably still retains too tight a grip on the
ultimate source of power—the armed forces. However, several more years with-
out at least occasional successes either at home or abroad could cause dissatis-
faction to grow to serious proportions, even to the extent of sparking serious
moves against him. Any such moves, to be successful, would almost certainly
require backing by military elements.

ama 13

Intelligence. Agence :

fe

forwarding “agency>:
Yetain # in“accorda
