The Outlook for East Germany
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012249, dated 4 January 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012249).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

el Pp ts

i I Lo by Junbary lao

we ane Cy W ? Le Js +t
wl PINE Lp ay 29

‘ /

i ewpenninerne s

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
\

, NUMBLR 124-66

Pine LIU EOGK ay kes, ee FMCat ys

‘ulanitted by

ADR Me oS

veka ne phys annem edlcse een mee 4
, Wage a Hos awe . oh he a
foo - DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

Concurred In boy the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

o baucated overlaaf

A 1S IAINMUARY 1966

ann re . '
on = i “ a .
is 7 an “ a ’ h a.
¢ 7" em moot, ! ‘5 ‘ : . was
at PN ean “ts fre
| kee Attica ca te wie a
P.M | .
: r,
' 4t ; ey

en : t .
eee be a . Hostage
bey ‘ voy

a oy “ ‘inn .

| Approve FOR nF FASE

JULY

> aan

The following intelligence organizations participated in the Preparation of |
this estimate:
The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelli

gence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, and the NSA.

Concurring:

Mr. Richard Helms, Deputy Director of Central Intelligence
Mr. Thomas {. Hughes, T

State

he Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of

Hiewth nant Gon. Gf Josear fy F, Coarvall USA). Ditector, Gefense [ite {i
ch ite PAP RE A carter UP Lined ef

theft

Dr. Charles ii. Reichardt for the Assist

ant General Manager for Administration, ,
Atomic Liergy Commission and Mr. William ©, Cregar for the As:istont 4.
the Dire.ior, Federal Burequ af Investigation, the subject being outside of
their jurisdiction,

1
“We

. WARNING...’
This material

contains Information affecting the
within the ‘meaning of the etplanage

mission or revelation of which In an

PE cate Cee oe.
National Defense, of the United States a
nt ‘laws, Title ‘18; USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-. ae
y manner to an unauthorlizdd person Is prohibited.

'

. GhouP 1
Excluded from automatle
\ dawngrading and
-___declassification

a fe ane

Vatvngapee

f % ctell
‘ ye

eee eet

telah bathed ond dea,

THE OUTLOOK FOR
EAST GERMANY

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the long-term outlook for Kast Germany and to examine
major trends in internal and external policies over the next several
years,

CONCLUSIONS

A. The East German regime is more stable. and the leadership
more confident, than at any other time in its history. Popular support
is still minimal, hut a resigned wecephance of the regime has become
general, Improvement in the economy will be slow and uneven, but
major reversals are unlikely,

B. The regine will remain heavily dependent upon Soviet support.
and the Soviet voice will remain decisive in foreign affairs. Within
a framework of close cooperation with the USSR, the Kast German
leadership may inake limited moves toward greater independence from
Moscow and a less repressive internal order. ‘The departure of
Ulbricht could lead to crises within the party, but is unlikely to en-
danger the survival of Communist authority.

C. The regime's slow. eradual accretion of acceptance al home and
abroad will probably continue, This will make it increasingly clifli-
cult for the West, and particularly for West Germany, to deny the
existence of the Mast German regime as a fact of life.

Seri
DISCUSSION

I dn Angust L961. betore the Wall was erected aerass Berlin, the East German
regime was in deep trouble. The cnermous mumber of people Heeing to the
West was symptomatic of the regimes economic and political crisis. The situ-
ation was in great part the result al overcoufidence. Ulbricht bad fully expected
that Khenshehes’s Berlin campaign would Tead toa decisive political hreak-
throneh in favor of Bast Germany. [fis overconfidence had also bern reflected
in ambitions and totally aoreatistic economic plans: ta overtake \West Germany,
and in his willingness to mim the risks of forced-dratt collectisization al awri-
aultire. By the summer af 16. the Bast German government faced a@ near
panic among the people, au economic crisis. it decline in morale and in ils awn
authority, and arise in passive resistance in the countryside. The situation
demanded drastic measures.

2. The Wall was. in effect. the prerequisite for dealing with the crisis. The
East German regime then began, with Soviet encouragement, fa mave gradu-
ally in a new direction. ‘The abortive Seven Year Plan was quietly buried, and
in 1963 the “new economic system” was adopted in an effort to revitalize and
rationalize the economy. Simultaneously, the Olbricht: regime began to take
some carefully controlled measures to case internal tension. Crucial to these
developments was the fact that Khrushchev's challenge to West Berlin had heen
decisively defeated asa result of the Cuban missile crisis in 162.

l. THE INTERNAL SITUATION

3. In the past four vears there has heen an obvious inerease in the stability

of the regime and the self-confidence of its leadership. Por the first time since
the war. the labor force is not being drawn off by flights of refugees, and the
economic planners can assume that it will remain stable An ecanamic recovery
has been evident since 1963. ‘The population, though basically anti-Cammunist,
has had to come to terms with the regime, And in its relations with the USSR,
especially since the overthrow of Khrushchev, the Ulbricht leadership has skill-
fully exploited East Germany's position in Central Kurepe to enhance the USSH’s
interest in the regime’s long-term survival,

4. The Party and the Leadership. Vhe Socialist. Unity Party (SED) has
evolved into a surprisingly disciplined political instrument, Under Ulbricht’s
leadership it has proved capable of surviving repeated political and economic
crises. The party now minnbers LS million members and candidates—about 10

The population of about (7 uillion inehules a lubor fores of over 4 willion. From 1950
unti) August 1961. the net Joss ef population by emigration was iMore than 2,100,000, in-
cluding a great many metibers af the moat productive elements of the population. ‘The
excess ot live births aver deaths has cansistently averaged Tess than one-halk of ene percent,
lowest in Eastern Europe. [pn 1063, the population incrensed for the first time since LOAK,
It has very slowly begin to approach a nennal distribution by age and ses. but a consider-
able gabalance will remain tor at least a weneration, of old aver ound and of females aver
males. For about the nest 10 sears the niuher ef workers will change litle, while the
umber of dependents toa voung ar too ahd to work will dierease slowly.

: SEORET

pr

percent of the population and the highest number since 1950. It continues to
he a mass rather than an elite party. The fact that membership has risen by
130.000 since the Wall suggests that many East Germans are resigned to making
their careers in the German Democratic Republic and believe that party
membership will help.

3. Perhaps the mast important challenge to the party and to internal stability
will he the question of the succession to Ulbricht. Far 20 years he has domi-
nated East German polities. {fe has been skillful and resourceful. not only in
coping with internal problems but in adjusting to the modulations in Soviet
policy, But he is now 72. and his era is drawing to a clase, Most of his con-
temporaries in the German Communist movement have disappeared or are
politically inactive. Ie might he removed with Soviet connivance. or he could
avadually withdraw from active rule. but it seems likely that he will die in office.
In any event. within the nest several vears the future of East Germany will
almost certainly pass to the hands of a different leadership.

6, At present it appears that the strongest figure is Erich Honeckor, age 53.
His power position includes membership on the Politburo, the party Secretariat.
and the National Defense Council. He is active in almost every phase of party
affairs. The Premier. Willi Stoph, age 51. is also a contender. The party has
not had to contend with a succession issue before and there is no established
process for the transfer of power, Qld animasities and rivalries are bound to
revive, and any new leadership will lack Ulbricht’s prestige, authority, and
experience.

7. For these reasons, the immediate succession phase will probably take the
form of a “collective leadership.” The Soviet role is a special. stabilizing factor.
and it can be assumed that the Soviets have made their own views clear,
If the need should arise the Soviets would almost certainly exert the strongest
possible political infuence on the East German party. But the Soviets could
misjudge the situation and their intervention might only aggravate it, Despite
these possibilities. it is likely that the succession will be accomplished without
a major crisis, and almost certainly without oa breakdown in Communist
authority.

8, The character of a new leadership, however, is an open question, The
next generation of leaders, as represented in the present 18-member Politburo. is
of different hackgraund and environment from Ulbricht. Most of the full mem-
hers are in theiy carly fifties. As a group thev reflect the diversity common to
present-day Communist elites, Some are technicians, some ideologues, some
party bureaucrats, Eight of them joined the ald German Communist Party in
the late 1920s and early 1930s. The others came into the party after the war.
or during their sojourn in the USSR. Most of them achieved stature in the
party after the death of Stalin.

9, Thus, the new leadership is not likely to be a carbon copy of the Ulbricht
regime, either in stvle or in approach. The problems it will face will he more
complex in many respects. One trend already apparent is the increased

one

importance of technocrats, As economic policy maves over the untested ground
af experimentation and retorm, these specialists may carry more weight in
party counsels, As demonstrated by the recent policy disputes which ap-
parently led ta the suicide af Erich Apel. the East German planning chiet.
there is a high potential for clashes between the economists and politicians.
Under a new leadership, especially a “collective,” such clashes might grow
increasingly difficult to resalve.

LO, The regime and the Pcople, The general atmosphere in Eust Germany
has long been more restrictive than in other Communist: countries of Europe.
The regime has always had to maneuver carefully between tightening and re-
laxing its controls, Since 1956 this disparity from East Europe has become
more pronounced. But in the Jast two vears the East German regime has taken
a number of limited measures to produce a more relaxed atmosphere—pen-
sioners’ visits to the West, the Berlin piss agreements, and an increase in other
travel and contacts with the non-Communist world.

11. At the same time. the regime remains extremely sensitive ta outside in-
Huence from both East and West. [t fights an ideological war on twa fronts.
It has to contend with pressures for liberalization generated by the example
of other East European states and with the impact of the vast camplex ot
Western influences ta which its people are exposed. They have casy access
to Western radio and television, and are aware of the developments in the West
and the world at large, Consequently the regime must spend a vast amount of
money. time, and effort in combating the effects both of Western influence
und of “revisionism” fram within the Communist world.

12. Popular snpport is still minimal. The population has become more re-
signed and submissive since 1961, however, and this trend seems likely to con-
tinue, The regime will permit only that degree of relaxation which. in its view.
is necessary to win greater cooperation from the people, especially in the effort
to achieve certain economic goals. Such relaxation, if accompanied by the
kind of limited economic gains that appear likely, would serve to reduce some
important causes of present popular discontent. Over the long term, hawever,
there is the possibility that concessions by the regime will generate popular
pressures for a liberalization well beyond what the regime considers sate.

13. Intellectuals, The regime's policy toward intellectuals has fluctuated
hetween periods of some relaxation of controls and harsh crackdowns. Even
during the more relaxed period, however. the Ulbricht leadership has lagged
well behind most of East Europe and the USSR in permitting greater freedom
af expression, Partly because of the relatively high level of control. it is difficult
to judge the extent of intellectual dissidence and its political content. We think
that as in other Communist countries of Europe there is considerable questioning
of the regime's policies among East German intellectuals, and this will be a
continuing problem. Yet whatever intellectual dissidence may exist is not or-
ganized or cohesive. The regime will probably be able to keep the problem
under control and intellectual dissidence in itself will probably not produce
uny important political change.

4 pal

pal

14, National Consciousness. The prablems af the East German leaders might
be considerably eased if they could invoke the spirit of nationalism. as has been
done in Poland, Rumania. and even Czechoslovakia, But nationalism in Ger-
many is inherently hound up in the question of unification. As long as Soviet
and East German poliey is directed toward perpetuating the division of Germany.
national feeling must embody a sense of separateness from the majority ot
Germans.

15. The effort to develop a distinct East German national feeling has met
with some success, The long separation has led to seme aeceptance in East
Germany of the two-state concept. Despite the general dislike of the regime.
the population displays some sense of pride that whatever has been achieved in
social and economic progress hus been accomplished despite formidable obstacles.
Conversely, West Germany's “economic miracle” provakes some resentment of
Bonn. Finally. whatever lingering hope there may have been for early reunifica-
tion was destrayed hy the Berlin Wall.

16. The regime's dilemma over nationalism. however, is hound to persist.
It will gradually be heightened by the fact that the current of nationalism is
running strong thraughout Eastern Europe and in West Germany. Invoking
all-German sentiment will tend to keep alive ties with the Federal Republic.
which the regime is anxious to destroy, There is also the danger that an effort
to exploit nationalist feelings could easily take an anti-Seviet turn, The regime
cannot afford to ignore national fecling and will continue to try to use it. It
will also remain extremely sensitive to the dangers invalved and will proceed
only with great caution. A successor regime to Ulbricht is likely to be less sure
of itself in dealing with this dilemma.

17. The Military. The East German military establishment has no independent
voice in the formulation of policy nor does it exert much influence on policy. We
foresee no change in this situation. It fs doubtful that the military will play
an active role in the succession period: if it did. it would he a conservative

force. backing the Soviet-sponsored line and a continuation of the Ulbricht
tradition.”

Il. THE ECONOMY

1S, The economic situation has improved markedly since 1961. At that time
Ulbricht’s efforts to force the pace af economic growth had led to serious trouble.
Inflationary pressures had built up, large resources were tied up in unfinished
investment projects, and “praduction for production's sake” had filled the ware-
houses with unsalable goads. The regime has brought these problems under
control. In 1961-1963 inflationary pressures were eased by holding the line
on wages, raising consumer goods prices. and informally rationing butter and
meat. Most of the major investment projects started in the late 1950s have heen

“East Germany's auilitary role in tha Warsaw Pact ts considered in NTE 12-05, “East
Europe and the Warsow Pact,” 26 August 1063, Secret.

Bx :

Bt

finished. The new economic system of planning and management, adopted in
1963. tended to discourage production as an end in itself, and emphasize
salability and profitability as the criteria for economic decisions.

19, Short-term Outlook. The outlaok for the economy in the short term is for
continued improvement but at a moderate pace. For a few years the rate of
economic growth will be at abant present levels, 2-3 percent, but below the
higher rates of the late 1930s, There will he some modernization of industrial
technology, a particularly important problem. Agricultural output will prob-
ably increase at a slow rate, though large imports of grain. meats. and dairy
products will still be necessary. The economic refarm pragram will probably
continue to evolve somewhat unevenly, but In the main it will prabably be
beneficial to the economy.

20, Living Conglitions. The populace naturally hopes for a better standard
of living. and the regime continues to promise tt. The present outlook is for a
gradual improvement. chiefly in the availability of more consumer goods and
some increase in quality. Towever, these improvements will fall far short of
satistving popular demands, By East European standards the average Enst
German will be well off, hut most af the peaple will remain highly conscious
of being much less well off than the West Germans, As far as these compari-
sons can be made, the gap hetween living conditions in East and West Germany
has even widened in the early 1940s, If present trends continue, it will probably
increase in the late 1960s.

21, The Long Term. The longer-run outlook for the East German economy is
more uncertain, While the continuation of present policies will assure modest
gains, these advances may he at the cost of storing up serious troubles by the
end of the 1960s. There are a number of basic disadvantages to be overcame.
Demographic prablems remain severe; total employment declined slightly during
the past five vears and will probably decline somewhat mare during the next
five. East German industria] technalogy is in large part obsalescent by Western
standards. and resources must be shifted from new investment to replacement
and modernization of the existing industrial plant. Productivity is still increas-
ing, but not at a rate sufficient ta stimulate economic growth beyond the present
modest level. Thus East Germany must make a major effort to modernize its
industrial plant and raise efficiency.

22. But the East Germans are caught in a vicious circle, The prospects for
modernizing their technology depend to a great extent on acquiring new plant
and equipment from the West. To do this, unless they obtain Western credits
or investment, they must incrense the salability of their goods in Western markets.
But outdated technology makes many of their goods unacceptable in the West
and thereby limits the chances for expanding trade. In sum, the long-term
economic outlook will depend on whether the East Germans succeed in the
effort to compete for foreign markets. Our estimate is that their chances are
not very good,

6 > -

Sct

23, Coping with these longer term problems involves politics as well as
economics. In arder to push exports and raise efficiency, it would probably
be necessary to accept a temporary decline in growth and output—a mast un-
welcame prospect for any political leadership. If these decisions are deferred.
as seems likely, then it may he that the new difficulties will confront Ulbricht’s
successors. An additional uncertainty is the level of Soviet support. Recent
indications are that the Soviets have not met the East German desires in their
new five-vear trade agreement; since East Germany is vitally dependent on
Soviet supplies of raw materials, new adjustments in East German economic
planning will be called for. Finally. there is the question af trade with Bonn.
The East Germans would like ta shift the pattern to include more imports of
complete plants and major items of equipment, preferably on credit, But this
is primarily a political decision, which might call for East German concessions
in other areas, And this problem, too, might he faced by a new leadership,
rather than by Ulbricht.

as

24, On balance we think these prohlems. though important, will not menace
the survival of the East German regime. But they may hegin to undermine its
confidence and stability hy the 1970s,

Il]. FOREIGN POLICY

25. The USSR. East Germany's foreign policy is determined almost exclu-
sively by its dependence on the USSR. The Ulbricht regime or any likely
successor probably could nat maintain itself without some significant degree of
Soviet support. The possibility for independent East German action on im-
portant issues is, therefore. largely theoretical. While the SED has achieved
considerable autonomy in internal policies, the Soviet voice is still decisive in
foreign affairs.

26, We believe the prospects are for continuing close cooperation in Soviet-
GDR relations, though East Germany's position is likely to become less obsequious
and subservient, The period since 1963, and especially since the fall of Khru-
shchev, has already been marked hy an East German assertiveness in relations
with Moscow. East German remonstrances, for example, probably contributed
to Soviet refusal ta sign new trade or cultural agreements with Bonn that would
again recognize West Berlin's ties ta the Federal Republic. Moreover, the
Soviets also apparently intervened on Ulbricht's behalf in Prague over the
same issue.

ws

27. Maintenance of a Communist regime in the GDR will almost certainly
continue to he a crucial element in Soviet policy. Differences and frictions
will arise from time to time, but mutual interest in the status quo will probably
keep any divergencies within bounds. If polycentric tendencies in international
communism grow, as it seems likely, East Germany will probably assume
greater importance to the USSR. The large Soviet military establishment sta-
tioned in the GDR will continue to be Moscow's decisive means of influence;

one 7

a

for its part the East German regime will continue to feel the need for these
forces.

28, Relations with Bonn and Berlin. Tn tactics toward Bonn and Berlin the
Soviets also seem to have relinquished some limited autharity to the GDR.
The Ulbricht regime apparently had cansiderable freedam in negotiating the
Rerlin pass agreements, The harassments last April. when the West German
Bundestag met in Berlin. were evidently prompted bv an East German initiative.
Tn the absence of major Soviet moves on the Berlin question, however. the
East Germans are likely to he restricted to marginal challenges to the Western
position in Berlin. The GDR's moves will nevertheless tend to keep tensions in
Berlin relatively high. On balance. however, the issues are too sensitive and
Soviet interests too immediate for the East Germans to he permitted an in-
dependent policy in this area.

29. Saviet and East German interests dictate an attitude of basic hostility
toward the Federal Republic. Nevertheless, the regime's greater self-confidence
and hopes of influencing Bonn’s policy have led ta an increase in contacts. The
volume of interzonal trade has increased. there are more travelers in both
directions, and cultural exchanges have risen. There have heen “technical”
agreements clearing away some old issues and an interest on both sides in
negotiating aver new issues—East Berlin passes. prisaner exchange. We expect
this trend toward more contacts to develap, but East Germany's relative position
is growing somewhat stronger. Bonn’s political leverage in interzonal trade
is declining and the continuation of contacts and negotiations gives increasing
plausibility to East Germany's claim to he a sovereign power.

30. Eastern Europe. In terms of atmosphere, moad of the people, and
ideological tone, East Germany compares unfavorably with most of Eastern
Europe. Moreover, in other East European capitals Ulbricht has personified
the worst aspects of Stalinism and the regime suffers because of a general
antipathy to Germans. Events in Eastern Europe, particularly nationalist trends
and desire for greater freedom of action vis-a-vis Moscow and the West, have
further tended to isolate East Germany from its Communist neighbors.

31. Future relations between the GDR and Eastern Europe are likely to be
inconsistent and contradictory. Both the East Germans and the Soviets have
a great interest in retaining unqualified suppart for their German policy; to
this end, the Ulbricht regime and its successor will make some effort to adapt
policies to coincide with the more liberal national currents in the Bloc. On
the other hand, the East Germans will resist any development of normal rela-
tions or understandings between Eastern Europeans and Bonn. The rise of
the Federal Republic's activity in Eastern Europe already confronts the East
German regime with a serious competition far markets and influence, East
German influence in Hungarv, Rumania, and Bulgaria is likely to sufter as a
result-of Bonn’s growing economic invalvement. But Eastern Europe is likely
to remain committed ta East Germany if only hecause Czechoslovakia and
Poland will feel the need for a separate German state as a butter against Bonn

8 Pad

”

SGT

and will regard the presence of Soviet forces in East Germany as essential.
pending any European security agreement.

32. The Non-Communist World. East Germany's prime objective in this area
is international recognition. At cansiderahle economic cost (8350 million in
aid) the regime has made perceptible. theugh limited. gains. In 1035, East
Germany had trade and/or consular representation of various kinds in 16 non-
Communist countries; the number was 34 by 1960, and 37 by 1963, In the
wake of hostile Arab reaction to the publication of West Germany's arms deal
with Israel. the East Germans made a determined ctfort to gain recognition in
the Arab world. As a result, the UAR and Syria now have the same level of
consular relations with the Federal Republic and the GDR. Yemen has broken
relations with Bonn and established a consulate general in Enst Berlin. We
cloubt that East Germany will gain recognition de jure fram any important non-
Communist countries in the next few years. But we do expect that in more
countries the Federal] Republic and the GDR will he placed on roughly similar
levels of representation, as in the case of the UAR, If so. the effect will be to
erode Bonn's declared policy of breaking relations with those non-Communist
countries which recognize the GDR (the Hallstein doctrine).

33, East Germany's long-term chances of improving its international status
are basically conditioned hy Bonn’s ability ta use the Hallstein doctrine as a
deterrent. Thus far only four countries (Yugoslavia, the CAR, Yemen, and Syria)
have opted for higher-level ties with East Berlin in the face of a break with
Bonn. The trend toward greater contacts, trade, and formal agreements be-
tween Enst and West Germany may eventually erade the latter's claim to sole
representation in the eyes of third parties. This is a dilemma for Bonn. not tor
East Berlin. which gnins from even the slightest increment in recognition,
Compared with ten years ago, the chances af international acceptance of East
Germany have grown considerably.

34, International Implications. An important point of debate in West Ger-
many is whether new trends in Eastern Europe and in international communism
can be exploited to isolate East Germany, or whether more direct contacts and
dealings would contribute to the emergence of a more liberal and national trend
in East Germany once Ulbricht departs. Our principal estimate is that over
the next several years East Germany will continue to gain in stability and
viability. If this is correct, it will hecome increasingly difficult for the West,
and particularly for West Germany, to deny the existence of the East German
regime as a tact of life.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This dacument was disseminated by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy.
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within thelr respective departments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defensa Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of

? Defense and the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for the
Depattiieat of the Anny
% (don tond Chet of Wawel Gren ia uinitciigense), for the bepertment of the
ay
bo Avitent Chirf of Stett, Intelligenes, USAF, for the Depariient cf the
bore
fo Pietes ef ist Wigence, ALC, to dhe bode Energy Canter tins

g. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal bureau of Investigation
h. Directar of NSA, for the National Security Agency
|, Director of Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returnad to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When ‘this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may
retain It for @ period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or per-

‘, mission should be requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with
|AC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953.

1a shed: FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

ie :
‘ cov) DISTRIBUTION,
: ee White House
+: ; + National Security Council

Department of State

Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas-- . ~~
