Attitudes of Other Latin American Governments Toward Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132654, dated 1 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132654).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

‘ —GReRET——

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

FFICE. OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW ProcRay
"RELEASE IN FULL 1997 13 February 1961

STAFF MEMORANDUM 12-61 (Internal 0/NE Working Paper - CIA
Distribution Only)

SUBJECT: Attitudes of Other Latin American Governments toward
Cuba

le Official opinion in Latin America has by now generally
crystallized against the Castro regime, and for the most part
Latin American governments are somewhat less fearful of
stirring up pro-Castro opposition at home than they were
initially.* How far individual governments might be prepared
to go in manifesting their opposition to Castro would depend

very heavily on circumstances.

¥ihis subject is to be re-examined in the forthcoming NIE 80/90-61,
“The Impact of Castro on Latin America and the Caribbean Area,"
for which we have requested extensive reports from the field
as well as the usual agency contributions. The estimate is
scheduled for completion at the end of March.

or ye

leks

2. In general, however, the 19 Latin members of the OAS
(with the obvious exclusion of Cuba) would appear to fall into

the following categories:

a» Eight (Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, and Venezuela) are avowedly anti-
Castro and would welcome, if not throw their full weight

behind, collective measures against him.

b. Five (Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Haiti, and
Uruguay) are generally anti-Castro but in varying degrees
less militantly so; they would probably go along with

less extreme OAS moves against Cuba.

ec. Four (Bolivia, Ecuador, Honduras, and Mexico)
now appear for domestic reasons either unwilling or unable

to come out openly against Castro.

d. Two (Dominican Republic and Brazil) are special
cases. The Trujillo dictatorship is fundamentally opposed
to Castro and Castroism, but in its present beleaguered
contition is erratic and unpredictable. Brazil's new

president has reserved his position on Cuba.

ey ye

3. Attached is a summary of the present position of
each Latin American country.
ATTACHMENT

ATTITUDES OF OTHER LATIN AMERICAN GOVERNMENTS TOWARD CUBA ~

The First Category

1. Colombia. President Lleras Camargo is convinced
that Castro must go, but he prefers that this be provoked by
OAS action and that the anti-Castro effort be supplemented by
measures to bring down Trujillo. He is under increasing
pressure from the leading political parties, the press, business

people and others to break with Cuba unilaterally and soon.

2. The provisional government of El Salvador, in the
throes of reestablishing order after overthrowing a pro-Castro
junta, prebably would be in favor of an OAS airing of the
Cuba issue. In the meantime, there is a good chance that it

may break or suspend relations with Cuba.

3. Guatemala. The Ydigoras government, which broke
relations with Cuba last year, is aggressively anti-Castro.
It would participate in an OAS condemnation of Castro or stronger

MeaSurese

or gr

4, Nicaragua is a determined opponent of Castro and the
Somoza government ts relations with him are suspended. It

can be counted on to support almost any OAS solution on Cuba,

5. Panama has been hit hard by Castro activists and the
government there, under strongly pro-US leadership, is one of
Castro's implacable foes. President Chiari has withdrawn
Panama's top diplomat from Cuba and is dealing with agitators
effectively. However, he is hesitant about doing more alone >

probably for fear of appearing to be under US pressure,

6. Paraguay. The Stroessner dictatorship, whose domestic
trials have for some time included attackes by Cuban-influenced
guerrillas, has suspended relations with Cuba. This government

would back collective measures on Cuba.

7- Peru. The Prado government, fearful of growing Castro-
Communist agitation, broke with Cuba before the US did and is
firmly against Castro. It is repressing Castroites at home

and would take part in an OAS procedure against Cuba,

8. Venezuela. President Betancourt and his colleagues
are unequivocally committed to a pelicy opposing pro-Castro
(and cther extreme leftist) elements within their country,
and have withdrawn their ambassador from Havana. However,

-\-

Sener

ry ye

Betancourt is dedicated in the first instance to the elim~
ination of Trujillo and the lengths to which he will go on
Castro depend on whether or not the US (and perhaps other

members of the OAS) commits itself to assisting him in his
primary mission,

The Second Category

1. Argentina, The Frondizi administration, hcwever
sympathetic it has been with the US on Cuba and regardless
of its refusal to tolerate excessive Cuban agitation, is not
itself ready to break with Cuba. Most officials in the ..
administration probably feel that something should be dcne
about Cuba. Nevertheless, feeling somewhat removed from the
dangers of the situation and able to ecntrol pro-Castro
elements at home, they are inclined to await a collective
OAS solution or s.me blatant transgression by Cubang in

Argentina befcre severing ties with Cuba.

2e Chile, The Alessandri government is firmly anti-
Castro, but there is scme feeling among political leaders that
Cuba is a US problem, Certainly in Chile there is little

interest in unilateral measures against Cuba, at least until

-5-

or ah.
i

some incident justifies this; Chile hopes for ccllective
action, In any event, because the naticnal leadership fears
pro-Castro sentiments among many voters, it is not likely to
take any strong stand on Cuba befcre the 5 March congressional

election,

3. Costa Rica, widely respected for its democratic
government and stability, is against Castro; pro-Castro elements
are relatively unimportant there. President Lchandi prefurs
the miltilateral approach to the Cuba problem and would break

relrti-ns if this cculd be handled thr ugh the OAS.

he Haiti. Castroism is not an issue of any dimension
in Haiti; Cuban meddling ended last year in a break in diplomatic
ties. Because the Duvalier rerfime counts heavily cn US
assistance and is wary of Castro's overseas operstions, Haiti

probably will ccntinue to follow the US lead on Cuba.

S. Uruguay. The plural executive here has been disturbed
by the use of the Cuban diplom-tic establishment as a focal
point for propaganda and subversive activities. It has withdrawn
its ambassador from Cuba and caused Cuba to pull out a high

official in Montevideo. However, Uruguay, like Argentina, is

-~6h =

1 la.
mye

not willing tc severe ties with Cuba unilaterally although
it would almost certainly go along with the OAS on this

matter.

The Third Category

1. Bolivia. President Paz has also had difficulties
with Cuban and other pro-Castro agitators, but his position
is such that he probably calculates it is in his best intcrest
not to be openly anti-Cuban. Paz led the drastic reform
revolution cf 1952 and is now under mech pressure to follow
through frem extreme leftists in the official party, most of
whom admire the rapid changes wreught by Castre ané are
Ccmmurist-influenced. Vice Presicent Lechin has been in the
forefront of a number of pro-Castro rallies. While Paz is
beholden t: the US fur its considerable assistance uver the
years, he apparently now feels thet he must accept Communist
Bloc aid and this is also contributing to Bolivia's soft

policy on Cuba.

2. Ecuador. President Velasco Ibarra has relied upon
foreign pcolicy issues -=- such as the border dispute with Peru --.

to divert attention from his own shortcomings. He has tended

-7-

1 le.
mye

to see the Castro issue in terms cf how he can use it to
advantage. Also, while Velasco Cislikes Castro, he probably
hopes to avoid trouble with the local Castroite minority
unless this becomes necessary. He has attempted to initiate
inter-American community mediation of US-Cuban differences;
his reaction to any collective effort initiated elsewhere

is uncertain,

3 Honduras. The government here seeks to carry on
friendly relations with Castro, even though it has displayed
ecnsider-ble irritation over Cuban pressures. Its soft policy
on Castro even at home can be attributed tc the effectiveness
of pro-Castro operations in a country where there is dis~
illusionment with the government's failure to press ahead with
rapid refcrm. Nevertheless, the Honduras leadership would
probably bend with the majority decision in the inter-American
community on Cuba, particularly if the Central American states

were all in faver,

4. Mexico. Leading officials here would like to see the
Cuban dictatcr done away with, but they are careful to keep
their sentiments submerged. In this they are influenced by

Mexico's leftist revolutionary heritage, the nationts traditional

- 8

oa fai.
a

policy of staying out of inter-American disputes, the extreme
political liability of seeming to follow the US lead, and the
strong sympathy of a few weight-swinging politicians for

things Cuban and Communist.

The Special Cases

1. Dominican Republic. The dictatorship here is in
trouble at home and is a target of many countries on Latin
Amcrica, the OAS, and the US. It is reacting to this situation
with erratic and often unpredictable measures. Hence, how
Trujillo will checse to deal with Castro will depend on the
situation at a given moment; he no Icnger has any clear cut

policies.

2. Brazil. The new prevident*# feeling about Cuba is
uncertain, nevertheless, it seems unlikely that Quadree
would sacrifice what he conceives to be Brazil's reputation
as an emerging world power by too close an identification
with Castro's small country revolution. Nor will he be likely
to tolerate much pro-Castro activity at home if it comes to
interfere with his program. On the cther hand, Quadros visited

Cuba early last year, probably with a view to attracting the

-9J ~

wath.
of ge

leftist vote by demonstrating sympathy for Cuba and his
independence of the US. Moreover, while Quadros in his
inaugural address complained about Communist interference
within his country and elsewhere in the hemisphere, he

reserved his pesition on Cuba.

Sharh Hllon chen

Robert R. Hendon

-10-

a gi.
ogee
