Worldwide Issues - NewW Thinking" on Krasnoyarsk Welcomed
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000100162, dated 2 October 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000100162).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

OV-89-218

14 No pmber j ; : Fi November 1989

ao Will vénti “agayants] It would appear then that, judging by every-
: » also, as th les in ensuring these interests, Washington intends to
Bick tinue to rely on force. Generally speaking, this is

, prphically illustrated in the Asia-Pacific region. This

| Promote both eq. ce on force is expressed there in the build-up of the
, the US, p TCsid, ~~ of the U.S. military presence. It rests on the military
han agreement u = and the Pentagon’s other facilities. The network, I
Bae me Omg remind you, extends around the entire perimeter of

ge continent of Asia. There are almost 350 such strong-
aints in the region. To this one should probably add
dat the second largest grouping of U.S. general purpose
forces, making up the unified command in the Pacific
Qcean zone—second only to the West European group-
ng—is stationed in Asia and the waters of the Pacific
Qcean. These forces, it should be pointed out, are

’ Alesandrdvic vee
2d, Cordzo ee : +
go una swered 2
df the act that
ood of road ¢j

the complete ‘evga _ extremely sizable.
the terrjtory of ‘Be

es : -MAsdrianov] Yes, more than 500,000 men. Moreover, a
* MRM — qasiderable part of this contingent is accounted for by the
+ US. Seventh Fleet. Incidentally, I should note that its
-, forces are concentrated mainly near the Far Eastern bor-
‘densofour country. This naval grouping includes up to 200
warships. Among them are 7 multipurpose aircraft car-
+ ¢em, 32 nuclear-powered submarines, some 30 ships have
Ipegtange cruise missile launchers on board. In addition
i $a this naval armada, there are !,200 combat aircraft. On

vember] thete y
st demphst!
nce of the
10. Thess pi ‘
iON assotiate
ment, a d | weg
e country’s pond

Jnited State ~ fag of all this, the United States has concentrated a

retained} oa! _@asiderable part of its strategic offensive weapons in the

oy Protes « Pacific Ocean zone. These include, in particular, nuclear
quino

powered submarines of the Ohio class.

iaid, theyt #

y @ .{Vedenyapin} By and large, then, it should be admitted
. THE SH. that the process of militarization in the Asia and Pacific
ticles that ith Rylon is, alas, building up at quite a dangerous speed. At
‘aised tHe que the same time as stepping up its military presence in this
acilities in {thy tensive zone, the United States is trying to ensure that
service: en ane Asian states, too, build up their military muscle. It
2 validify che aie ts 10 be acknowledged that many of the region's coun-
91, and on tis 4 Ws have essentially already been drawn into the arms
ing thelser® = @ee. How can one fail to concur with the conclusion of
spine talks [élite Ge magazine AFRIQUE-ASIE which has written that
tuled for Seas eath the facade of a carefree tropical paradise, the
Vashingtoay) <3 Pacific Ocean conceals what is one of the most milita-
‘ssion |t0 Ga zones of the world? There, for all to see, is a
1c CO aggering U.S. military presence.

Ygayanis] All of this seems rather strange, to put it
peat ala time when the process of disarmament talks
Tway. Incidentally, I should recall that the United

Sites—as indeed do the other countries of the North

tic B

loc—regard their naval forces as a sort of

the PRI “wd Cow. Washington stubbornly resists any proposals
ae % Sart talks 9 limit; a ans 7

‘oun a Mall justified ie States’ naval activity. Is this
attire { when, } i

| thes is teadi + In Europe, for instance, a process

developed ng My a strengthening of mutual trust is being
BE Rbection an sehen the genuine prerequisites for a
2 teace reall ‘ey forces are being created? Can a stable
a1 ¥ O€ secured if the arms race continues on the
-Tsubm
n,

it that there can be but one answer to that

a)

WORLDWIDE ISSUES 7

{Andrianov]} Our country believes that the risk of mili-
tary confrontation at sea is just as great as on land. And
it is for this very reason that the Soviet Union is
insistently calling for talks on naval forces to be started.
This is a major, truly global problem, the solution to
which is dictated and stubbornly demanded by our far
from simple times.

[Vedenyapin] I believe it is quite simply imperative that
it be solved. It is on the basis of this that the Soviet
Union has put forward its initiatives. They are widely
known, and were set out by Mikhail Sergeyevich Gor-
bachev in his speeches in Vladivostok and Krasnoyarsk,
Murmansk, and Belgrade. These proposals are an inte-
gral part of the package program to ensure pan-Asian
security. The way to this is clear: Reduce the level of
military confrontation, extend confidence-building mea-
sures to the region, and develop broad international
cooperation among the countries of the Asia-Pacific
region. Only these routes are able to ensure genuine
peace, stability, and mutually beneficial cooperation
among the states of Asia and the Pacific Ocean.

{Agayants] We are coming to the end of our meeting at
the Roundtable. It’s participants, Boris Andrianov and
Gennadiy Vedenyapin, as well as program presenter,
Nikolay Agayants, thank you for your attention,
esteemed comrade listeners. Goodbye and all the very
best.

‘New Thinking’ on Krasnoyarsk Welcomed

PM0911160189 Moscow IZVESTIYA in Russian
3 Nov 89 Moscow Evening Edition p 6

(Stanislav Kondrashov “Political Observer’s Opinion”:
“Hundreds of Millions: Have They Been Wasted?"’]

[Text] At the Supreme Soviet last week describing our
foreign policy, which is imbued with the new thinking,
E.A. Shevardnadze also cited, for comparison’s sake as it
were, a few examples of the old, pre-perestroyka foreign
policy and old thinking.

Afghanistan is one of them, the most strident which,
though no tonger spilling the blood of our soldiers, is still
fresh in Our memory and confronts us with the acute
need to realize and master all its lessons. By no means
the whole truth has been told and analyzed as yet. But
people are waiting for it, especially from the Supreme
Soviet and its Committee for International Affairs,
which has received instructions to this effect.

The second example is on a smaller scale, but it is also
strident. It is the affair with the Krasnoyarsk radar
station, built in violation (the minister officially
admitted this for the first time) of the 1972 Soviet-
American ABM Treaty. The “unfinished project” the
size of an Egyptian pyramid will be totally dismantled
and pulled down. However, it might be a good thing to
preserve it in our memory and history as a latter-day
monument, dating partially also from the perestroyka
period, of the materially and politically damaging diktat
Aporoved for Reizase,

Date: Lo May iy *

8 WORLDWIDE ISSUES

of our own military-industrial complex and of the short-
sightedness—putting it mildly—of the political leader-
ship. This is a case where acccommodating our own
military complex made it easier for the other, the U.S.
military-industrial complex to step up the arms race.
Apart from everything else, it is yet another example of
mismanagement and wastefulness. You may say that it is
not the biggest such example, involving “only” hundreds
of millions of rubles. Not the tens of billions of rubles
which, in E.A. Shevardnadze’s estimate, were spent on
the creation of the infrastructure of military confronta-
tion on the Soviet-Chinese border which, given a more
sensible policy, could have been avoided. However, on
the other hand, even hundreds of millions of rubles don’t
grow on trees. They should not be wasted where tens of
millions of people live below the poverty line. But the
fact is that they have been wasted.... And that is why
people live as they do....

The official admission that the construction of the Kras-
noyarsk radar station was a violation of the ABM Treaty
evoked lively comment in the West and among Officials
and journalists. It was rated as unprecedented, as yet
another dramatic step along the road of perestroyka
which opened up much that is unprecented for people
both in our country and abroad. At the same time
Western reactions, naturally, note that the firm stand
maintained on this issue by President Reagan, who has
now moved out of the White House, and by his admin-
istration (as well as the current administration) has been
vindicated, since it is now shared by Moscow, too. There
is also malicious glee on the part of conservative elc-
ments which continue to voice mistrust. Here is the
viewpoint of THE WALL STREET JOURNAL:
“Unquestionably, something interesting is happening in
the Politburo’s corridors of power. Seeking new agree-
ments, new loans, and access to the civilized world, the
Soviet Government has admitted the existence of the
problem of confidence. This is why, after 70 years, it is
admitting patent facts in the hope that it will be trusted
on everything else. This is not enough.” The newspaper
then goes on to demand that the Soviet Union admit that
the outbreak of anthrax in Sverdlovsk in 1979 was
caused not by contaminated meat but by an incident ia
the production of biological weapons in violation of the
1972 Convention banning biological weapons. Inciden-
tally; U.S. scientists, having met Soviet colleagues last
year, agreed with the Soviet version of what actually
happened. This however fails to convince THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL. Its logic is based on the biblical
saying: Having lied once, you cannot expect people to
believe you....

So, in the West, our minister’s frankness has been
appreciated and commented on in different ways. Yet in
our country there has been silence on this sensation of
the first order. I am writing this both as criticism and
self-criticism, and also as an example of the power of the
inertia of the past (of the old thinking, if you like) among
ourselves, among us writers on international topics. As
far as we are concerned the ancient taboos have not lost

%
s
*

F

FBIS-SOV-89.218 :
14 November 1989 ‘

ate

their force and the concept of sensitive topics persists :
even if these taboos are being removed “from above?
and the sensitive topics are touched on in public, at the {
Supreme Soviet. However, in my opinion they are still ¥
only being touched on, sketched in broad terms. They are?
still not being fully revealed, and no effort is being made i
to dig deep, down to the spot where the fountain of truth é
gushes from the earth. 4

of
<

Let us turn to the minister's words: “We studied the 7
issue of this station for 4 years.... The leadership of the ;
country did not learn the whole truth immediately, In :
the end we became convinced that this station was built 4
where it should not have been.” §
It is true that this affair dragged on for a long time. The!
current admission was reached in stages, as it were. From
1984-85 onward I myself was present more than once’
during specialists’ disputes, when Americans were
claiming that the Krasnoyarsk radar station was a viola:
tion of the treaty since it could be used as a missile attack |
early warning facility, which would make it part of a:
missile defense system of the country’s territory banned |
under the treaty; while our specialists, rejecting the U.S; ?
interpretation, claimed that the station’s sole purpose 5
was to track artificial earth satellites and other space +
objects. Our specialists among themselves, and in discus -
sions with people on “our side,”’ sometimes doubted the .
cogency of this argument, but they acted in accordance

with one of the unshakable bastions of the old thinking ©
and misconceived patriotism: In the interests of one’s

country it is possible to deny the truth... even if it can be

scen plainly (after all, this truth, as I said earlier, is the

size of an Egyptian pyramid) by U.S. spy satellites. It was

thought possible and necessary to deny this truth even if;
this denial played into the hands of the US., champions .
of the arms race and “star wars.” ce

Allow me to recall that the construction of the Krasno-.:
yarsk radar station always served as President Reagan $ -
trump card when, with reference to Soviet violations OV
the ABM Treaty, he put forward and substantiated his -
astronomically expensive “strategic defense initiative a
projects. This is a perfect example of the fact that, in & ~
cramped, suspicious, totally transparent and morcovel ”
mutually interdependent world. the truth is not jus
sensible but also profitable and any attempts—deliberalé =
or otherwise—to swindle the other side are fraught ™ =
introducing tension in political relations and with fa
ruinous military expenditure. Aa

Stage by stage Moscow has moved toward recogninyt
that the U.S. concerns were justified: In early Sepien ee
1987 three U.S. Congressmen were for the first si 6.
admitted to the “unfinished project” near Krasnov" a:
then construction was officially put on ice, and a be
followed by the proposal that the radar station See |
placed under the aegis of the USSR Academy eee Pes
(removing it from under the aegis of the Minis” rs
Defense) with a view to turning it into an intem2” as
center for space research.... At the recent ber C2
American meeting in Wyoming in Septem os

NZINg
mber
time
vatsk,
5 was
ild be
ences
ry of
tional
pviet-

‘t we

FBIS-SOV-89-218
= 14 November 1989

“= announced our decision to dismantle the object of dis-

pute and, together with the rephrasing of our stance on
the ABM treaty, this seems to have improved the pros-

s for achieving an agreement on 50-percent cuts in
strategic offensive arms. Finally, there was E.A. Shevard-
nadze’s statement to the Supreme Soviet.

Let us, once again, return to the question of whether the
hundreds of millions of rubles spent on the gigantic radar
station were wasted—a station which, incidentally, will
be more difficult and expensive to dismantle than the
intermediate- and shorter-range missiles, of which we
also had considerably more than the Americans, were to
destroy. I will answer this question as follows: They will

WORLDWIDE ISSUES 9

have been wasted if we do not take the trouble to get to
the bottom of this sad story. What the minister said was
not enough, but in a wide-ranging speech it was hardly
reasonable to expect more. I do not know whether it
would be expedient to set up a new commission. How-
ever, it is essential that details are published regarding
both the cost of and the responsibility for this project
and regarding the way something like this could happen
at all. Incidentally, informed people say that the ill-fated
construction began in 1979, at the beginning of that year
rather than the end, which was when Soviet forces were
sent to Afghanistan. What is more, they also claim that
the foreign minister has already received a deputies’
written question asking for details.
