Probable Developments in Indochina During the Remainder of 1951
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000008004, dated 2 July 1951.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000008004).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

sy

OT BOR Der eek OE
ASSISTANT DIRECTOR,ONE

Pare "% i
a : 5 a 4 a? ag? ag! gay

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

i

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN
INDOCHINA DURING THE
REMAINDER OF 1951

Reeieel ric

NIE-35
’ Published 7 August 1951

x
+

eye NCE:

gmormation affecting the na-
‘tee ie } States within the meaning
i. aud 32, ag amended.
bs p_gontents in any

SR RY RRR INOS PAE RI A BE
#

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipient
designated on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of the recipient’s
office who require the information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa-
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a, Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Intelligence, for the Depart
ment of State

0. Assistant Chief of Staff, G-2, for the Bepecenant of the Army

c. Director of Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy

d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air Force
e. Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission

j. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency

2. This copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Inteliigence Agency by ar-
rangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CIA,

OLSTRIBUTION (NI Series) ;
Gfflee of the President

National Security Counell
National Security Resources Board
Department of State

Office of Secretary of Defense
Department of the Army
Department of the Navy
Department of the Air Force
Atomle Energy Commission

Joint Chiefs of Staff ‘

Federal Bureau of Investigation
Research and Lavelopment Board
Munitions Board

> ape aT RR iy AA i

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN
INDOCHINA DURING THE
REMAINDER OF 1951

NIE-35

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticlpated in the preparation of this estimate. All members
of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this
estimate on 2 August.

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN
INDOCHINA DURING THE
REMAINDER OF 1951

NIE-35

The intelligence organizations of the Departments of State,
the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff par-
ticlpated in the preparation of this estimate. All members
of the Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this
estimate on 2 August.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN INDOCHINA DURING THE
REMAINDER OF 1951 *

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the current situation and probable developments in Indochina during _ -

the remainder of 1951.**

CONCLUSIONS

1. The current military stalemate in In-
dochina appears likely to continue at least
through the end of 1951, unless the Chi-
nese Communists directly intervene with
forces over and above the estimated 30,000
“volunteers” which they can introduce as
individuals or in small units in probable
continuation of present assistance to the
Viet Minh.

2. If the Chinese Communists directly in-
tervene with large forces over ahd above
those introduced as individuals or in small
units, the French would probably be
driven back to a beachhead around
Haiphong. The French should be able to

hold this beachheau for some time, unless
the Chinese Communists achieve air su-
periority.
3. Direct .Chinese Communist interven-
tion is not likely as long as the Chinese
Communists are extensively committed
in Korea. :
4. If hostilities in Korea end, or the Com- =
munist commitment there can be sub-
stantially reduced, there will be an in-
creased likelihood of direct Chinese Com-
munist intervention in Indechina. On
balance, however, we consider such inter-
vention unlikely during the peried under
review.

DISCUSSION

The Current Situation

5, The present military situation in Indochina
is one of stalemate. In the perlod since Gen-

eral de Lattre de Tassigny assumed command, -

the Franco-Vietnamese forces have repulsed
the Viet Minb grive to conquer Tonkin, and

firmly hold the key Red River delta around =~
Hanoi and Haiphong (see map). French suc-

cesses apparently resulted from: (a) the ener-
getic leadership of General de Lattre, who re-
vived flagging French morale; (b} MDAP aid;
(c) the arrival of French reiniorcements; {4) »

* The emphasis in this estimate is on probable developments in the key area of Vietnam, -
and particularly Tonkin which is the focal polnt of present military operations.
#4 This catlmate covers only the first part of the 1951-62 dry season, the season most favor
able for large-scale operations, Available inteZligence did not permit a reliable estimate ca 2
. yond the end of 1952,

‘

the inexperience at large-seale warfare of the
Viet Minh guerrias; and (e} the lmitations

of Chinese Communist support, The inades

qnate staff work and jack of supporting arms
of the Viet Minh forces placed them at @ ser-
fous disadvantage in pitehed battles with the
French, who were strengthened by the timely
arrival of US military aid, including aircraft,
napalm bombs, patrol and landing craft, and
ground combat materiel. The Chinese Com-
munists, upon whom the Viet Minh forces are
dependent for logistical support, have been
supplying them with ammunition, light weap-
ons, and some artillery. Seme 10,000 Chinese
personnel have been infiltrated into the Viet
Minh in cadre, technical, and advisory capaci-
ties. This number is believed to be increas-
ing. However, the Chinese Communists,
while apparently maintaining roughly the

’ game level of material assistance as of last

December, have not intervened directly or
with substantial “volunteer” forces or notice-
ably stepped up arms ald. Under these cir-
cumstances General de Lattre, drawing rein-
forcements from other areas of Indochina and
skillfully using mobile reserve forres, was able
to hold the France-Vietnamese military posl-
tion intact and to inflict heavy losses on the
Viet Minh.

6. Political developments, however, have been
less favorable. Despite the gradual French
fransfer of cortain responsibilities, the Viet-
namese government has been slew to develop
and has continued to suffer from a lack of
strong ieadership. It has had to contend
with: (a) French reluctance to relinquish ulti-
mate control of political and economic affalrs;
(b) lingering Vietnamese suspicion of any
French-supported regime, combined with the
apathetic and “fence-sitting” attitude of the
bulk of the people, which as deprived the gov-
ernment of broad-based popular support; (c)

the diffleulty common to all new and inex- .

perienced governments, of training the neces-
sary personnel and bullding an efficient ad-
ministration; and (da) the failure cf factional
and sectional groups to unite in a concerted
national effort.

7, In January 1951 the opportunity arose of
tcrming a broad-based cabinet representing
most non-Gommunist group fa eae in-

ge an ae mins Sea at meas eS EHR nes a aaaaal

stead Premier Huu formed a cabinet composed
primarily of members of his own pro-French -
faction. Although Huu hes displayed some
administrative akill and his government has
gained slowly in effectiveness, the weakness
ef the Huu cabinet and its alleged “French
puppet” status have limited its appeal to Viet-
namese nationalism and have alienated strong
nationalist groups, including the powerful Dai
Viet group in Tonkin, Communis¢ control of
much of the country and Viet Minh infiltra-
tion of large areas under nominal French con-
trol have also discouraged many people from
openly allying themselves with the govern-
ment.

8. Efforts to create a National Vietnamere
Army—an essential prerequisite to growth in
the political stature of the Vietnam govern-
ment and to an ultimate non-Communist so-
lution in Indochina—-have made some prog-
ress, and Vietnamese units have performed
ereditably in recent engagements. French
intention to proceed with the building of the
Vietnamese Army is evidenced by thelr as-
signment of sizeable French cadres and train-
ing missions to assist in organization and
training. Plans call for the exparsion of the
army from its present strength of 54,000 to
100,000, However, it will take considerable
time before the planned forces are organized,
trained, and equipped in battalion units, and
even longer before effective divisional units

' ean be put into the ficid. Progress in the

formation of the army is retarded by lack of
capable officers at all levels of command,
8 ortages of equipment, and the apathetic at-
titude of the population. At the same time,
tlifferences of opinion between the Vietnamese
jeaders and the French, particularly over who

"will exercise control over the Vietnam Army,

have prevented full cooperation and maxi-

mum progress in the army’s development.
‘Delay in establishing a Vietnam Army under

Vietnamese control has been a 2ontributing
factor in limiting popular support of the Viet-
namese regime.

§. On the opposing side, the political struc-
ture of the Vieb Minh has been reorganized
upon more openly and aggressively Commu-
nist lines, following the usual pattern of ye-
litical development | in other Communist coun-

triea. Phe Communist Party role haa been
atrongthened, with strieb party-lners coming
riore into the foreground and Ho Chi Minh
himself apparently Playing a less important
part. This develop.nent may have been timed
to forestall any “nationallst-doviationist”
tendencies in the Vict Minh, and as a prelude
to greater Chinese Communist participation
in and direction of the movement, fn the ab-
sence of further military victories, Viet Minh
popular support appears unlikely to increase.
While we aze unable to determine whether
the Viet Minh is actually losing any of its
popular appeai, the regime apparently 1s de-
pendent more and more on tightened Com-
munist controls. These tighter controls may
prevent defections and facilitate the exploita-
tion of people already under Viet Minh control.

Viet Minh and Franca-Vietnam Capabilities

10. The improved morale of the French forces,
scheduled reinforcements, the gradual in-
erease in Lhe Vietnamese Army, and the con-
tinued arrival of MDA? aid will probably give
the Frencn, by October 1951, the capability of
launching a limited offensive and possibly of
recovering some lost territory. However, the
French and Wetnamese will not, in the perlod
under review, be alice decisively to defeat the
Viel Minh.

11. On the other hand, we consider it highly
unlikely that the Viet Minh ean seize the
Hanoi-Haiphong avez, even with continuation
of the present type of Chinese Communist
assistance. Although the Viet Minh, with
continued Chinese aid, will be somewhat
atrongthened by the end of the yalny season
in Oetober, the Franco-Vietnamese forces will
receive substantial quantities of MDAP aid
during the next few months, and at least sore
of the 16,000 to 26,000 relnforcements prom-
ised de Lattre (of whieh four battalions are
believed? to have arrived).* French alr
strength, which i: completely unopposed, will
be further increased. The French Navy,
which is to be reinforced by an aircraft car-
rier, can increasingly hamper the flow of sea-
borne supplies to the Vieb Minh and facilitate
French amphibious operations. Moreover, by

* See Appendix for a table of eppesing forces.

: x 2 . Peas ; au
ema) erik oe agree rie ee PEE

December the Freneh ring of fixed defenses —
around the delta will be completed. Under.
these circumstances, the French would have —
the advantage of fighting from fixed defenses,
whieh would permit them ta assemble larger
mobile reserves and to inke advantage of their
superiority in conventions: as distinct from —
guerrilla warfare.

Chinese Communist Capabilities ond
Intentions

12. It is a basic Chinese Communist anc So-
viet policy to promote Conimunist contro) over -
Southeast Asia, and Peiping and Moscow rec-
ognize Indochina as a key to this reglon be-
cause of its strategic location and because of
the advanced revolutionary situation already
existing there. Peiping has siready auppurted
the Vieb Minh regime by recognizing He Chi
Minh's regime and by providing it with tecn-
nical and material ald. There are numerous
indications of Chinese preparations for greater
milltary suport of the Viet Minh, possibly jn-
cluding direct intervention with Chinese Com-
munist forces.

13. The Chinese Communists are capable of
substantially increasing their present type of
aid to the Viet Minh, particularly by the in-
tegration of sizeable numbers of personnel as
individuals or cadres into the Vict Minh Army.
We believe that the reinforced France-Viet-
namese forces could hold the bulk of their
Tonkin perimeter agalnat L.. Viel Mink even
if the Vict Minh were supported by as many
as 30,000 infiltrated personne), alihough with
such additional eupport the Viet Minh mirht
win some jocal victorics. Continucd Chincse
Communist infiltration en a large scale, how
ever, would gradually make the French posi-
tion increasingly precarious.

14. Turning to Chineze Communist capabill-
ties for large scale intervention with their
own forces, we estimate that roughly 110,006
Chinese Communiat Held ferce troops could
new be made available and logistically sup-
ported for an Invasion of Indochina. ‘The
poor transport net and forbidding terrain of
the border region limit the forces which could
presently be employed to thal number. They
could be logisticady supported only for. short.
offensive operations of about one week at a.

time, passing to the defensive during the in-
tervals for replentsiment, of supplies. How-

ever, the Chinese Communists are slowly in-
creasing their capabilities for stockpiling sup:
plics by improving road and rail supply routes
into Tonkin and are improving airfields in the
border region. Consequently Chinese Com-
munist logistical capabilities for offensive
operations are gradually increasing. —

15. In addition the Chinese Communists have

the capability of mounting intense air at-
tacks of short duration against the French,
whose aircraft are concentrated on three vul-
nerabie airfields in Tonkin. Successful Chi-

- nese Communist air attacks of this sort would

materially enhance Communist capabilities
for large-scale ground operations. Commu-
nist air superiority in the Tonkin area would
also materially hamper French surveillance

‘and naval blockade of the Tonkin Gulf, and

consequently permit increased over-water aid
to the Viet Minh.

16. if the Chinese Communists intervene be-
fore the end of 1951 with 106,000 troops, they
could probably eventually drive the French
into a beachhead at Haiphong. The French,
however, should be able to hold this beach-
head for some time, unless the Chinese Com-
raunists achieve air superiority.

17. The Chinese Communists will undoubtedly
be influenced in deciding whether or not to
intervene directly in Indochina by the future

_ development of the situation in Korea. So
~ Jong as the Chinese Communists remain heay-

ily committed in Korea, we consider it unlikely
that they will intervene directly in Indochina.
Although the Chinese Communists might
drive the French from Tonkin, such a major
victory is not assured. An indecisive and pro-
tracted campaign would place additional se-
vere strains on total Chinese Communist re-
sources.

18. If the Korean fighting is stopped under
conditions which appear to remove the threat

of renewed UN attacks, transportation diffi-.

culties in the border region would continue to
limit the ground forces which could be sup-

ported in Tonkin, but’ the possible diversion .
of resources from the Korea-Manchuria area:

would permit early intervention with greater

assurance of the continued arrival of supplies oe
and replacements for the operation, We esti- ~~]
mate that by two months after a Korean _:

armistice, Chinese Commurist capabilities for
invading Indochina could ve significantly in-
creased, while air capabilities could be greatiy
increased. The Chinese Communists and the
USSR might then consider that Indochina of-
fers more favorable opportunities for a- quick

and decisive victory with less risk of US and J
UN intervention than did Korea. They might.
_ ealeulate that the US and UN would be tun- ,

willing to undertake another operation of the
Korean type and that some UN members
would be unwilling to defend what they re-
gard as French colonialism in Indochina.
Thus in the event of a cessation of hostilities
in Korea, the likelihood of early Chinese Com-
rounist intervention in Indochina, particu-
lariy after the rainy season ends in October,
would increase.

19. On the other hand, the Chinese Commu-

nists would probably hesitate to intervene
openly in Indochina while they were negoti-
ating for an over-all Korean settlement, in- |
cluding the withdrawal of UN forces, and these

negotiations would doubtiess take considera-
ble time. Moreover, if Communist acceptance
of a cease-fire in Korea indicated a desire to
seek a temporary “relaxation” of world ten-
sions, early intervention in Indochina would —
be unlikely. We also believe that the contin-
uing inadequacies of its line of communica-
tions, the strengthening of the French forces,
aud the risk of foreign imtervention, would
probably lead Peiping-to conclude that it still
could not count with certainty on achieving
a quick and decisive conquest of al! Tonkin,
but might become involved in another pro-
tracted and costly campaign in which the risk
of foreign intervention might increase, Final- |
ly, the Communists might expect that through -
increased cadre, :aaterial and technica) aid
to the Viet Minh they could still wear down
the French and achieve successes without the
necessity of early large-scale intervention.

20. On balance, therefore, we believe that the... —

increased Chinese prepayations in the Tonkin
border region probubly reflect an intent to
facilitate the flow of “volunteers” and mate-.

Mal aid to the Viet Minh forces, while prepar-

’

ing for possible large-scale intervention, rather ‘s

than an intent to intervene during 1951.

21, ‘Consequently, the .probable outlook
through the end of 1951 in Indochina is one

of continued military stalemate, if the Chinese ©

Communists do not directly intervene. The
tightening of Viet Minh political control, the

‘flirther: ‘davelopment of the Viet Mir

and increased. Chinese Communist aid
probably be balanced by the arrival of
reinforcements, more MDAP assistance
progress toward creating a Vietnam
Some territory may change hands but w
not foresee any major victories on either
at least through the end of 1951.

"APPENDIX

Opposing Forces in Indochina as of 1 July 1951

Franco-Vietnamese Forces:
French ground forces 150,500
Armed Forces of Associated States 70,700
Auxiliary troops : 70,000
Semi-military forces (railway guards, ate) 80,000

371,200
French Air Force ; : 6,858
French Navy and Naval Air Force 10,000

Total 388,058

Viet Mink Forces:

Viet Minh regular forces : 120,000 (est.
Regional militia . 40,000 ¢" )
Irregular forces 85,000 (” )

Total ase 245,000

Opposing Regular Ground Forces in Tonkin:

Franco-Vietnamese troops 80,000
Viet Minh troops 85,000

r

%

pra Beliiaa seine aril iaiatl atti. some site a alsieaiabis wnt Sa

My, silty

“Lert igpt th,

FN ly yy
x

Le

I
29 MAY 1951

YU Niak Mintchatd area

Arpa subject fo constant
Viat Minh attack

mw Franch garrison post

oO French air base

sonsmnn Franch dalenae lina

sponte allroad

137,490,000
8 20 40 Us) 120 Mites

fr
OS y4d40 GO 120 Ktametats

RNa Vientiane gs
oS OAS

a a Siem Roap

maa

"fue cac BA

fSavannakhet

‘&

“attopau)

. \
AT Rontumi

¢
O9D EA

CAMB
d Katie

prom Penh WAS,
Soai
Tak 0 Rieng_,

chau Dog)

1p SaintJaeques

{COCHIN
CHINA

“5 an i)
