Major Problems of Italian Government Policy
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000009591, dated 2 March 1949.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000009591).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

eee

tee

wT

Noe
Mate +
.

LI

PO

FOR THE PRESIDE
OF TAE UNITED STATE

9
ENT

REA OE
. ™s

R

z
as :
O
aa

anth

OVE

MAJ
ITALIAN G

OR P

"§

WE

VW

THORS SeINSGISHd .

“S AHXVH 40 SuadVd

XUVAITT N

NVHOUL

Td SeXHvh

Sut

hii
GAG

ea ace |
fie

gd sarees of

ait eran ame Ti
ih Pa : A ue tig a Gs

bbe tte RR Ls ean S DRA ee re
a be 8 Lal Doe serch cael dd al eT Be es i a” Rei

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

1, This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the ea
designated on the front cover and of individuels under the Jurisdiction of the recipient's —.
office who require the Information for the performance of their official duties. Further
dissemination elsewhere in the department to other offices which require the informa- |
tion for the performance of official duties may be authorized by the following:

a. Special Assistant to the Secretary of State for Research and Intelligence, for
the Department of State _
b. Director of Intelligence, Gs, USA, for ‘the Department of the Army
e. Chief, Naval Intelligence, for the Department of the Navy.
d. Director of Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Alr Force

e. Director of Security” and Intelligence, AEC, for the ome Energy ‘Com-
mission 2

J. Deputy Director for Intelligence, Joint Staff, for the Joint Staff

g. Assistant Director for Collection and Dissemination, CIA, for any other
Department or Agency. :

2. This copy may be elther retained or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency | a)

arrangement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CLA__

DISTRIBUTION:

Office of the President . .

National Security com =

National Security Resources Board

Department of State ee ae ee 1 eee es
Office of Sccretary of Defense
Department of the Army aes
Department of the Navy _
Department of the Alr Force
State-Army-Navy-Alir Force roo ehne Committee |
Joint Chiefs of Staff Ss
Atomic Energy Commission - Be oe . ee
Research and Development Board

MAJOR PROBLEMS OF ITALIAN GOVERNMENT POLICY

ac me “1 ‘i S Seales bse as oa a mew 38 :

Premier De Gasperi faces two fundamental problems: (1) to persuade the appre-
hensive and war-weary Italian public to support a definite alignment with the Western
Powers and, (2) to present to the Italian people tangible economic benefits In order.to_ __
strengthen popular confidence in the government.

‘The major determining factor in Italian foreign policy will be essentials in the _
East-West struggle: To this struggle, Italy’s principal problems pf foreign policy are

colonies, return of Trieste, and modification of Peace ‘Treaty restrictions upon Ttallan
military capabilities. Italy will probably find it necessary to align itself definitely with _

the West, even though public opinion at present lags behind the government's willing-
ness to take this step.

De Gasperi could inspire public confidence fri his administration elther by offering =
the Italian people an early improvement in their standard of living or at least by.

sponsoring a bold and comprehensive legistative program of economic reforms. Neither = =
Gevelopment seems probable.= Despite the solid economic gains achieved in_ Italy
through the ECA, no improvement In the popular standard of living Is likely to become _

evident within the next six months. Moreover, the De Gasperi Government has falled

80 far to show any signs of having or of soon developing any program of long-range
economic reform for Italy. A variety of industrial and agricultural problems remain
unsolved.

In industry, the high production co: costs of Italian manufacturers hinder the develop-
ment of foreign trade. Uneconomic industries are still subsidized by the State. Strikes.
and slowdowns, though unlikely to cripple Italian economic recovery, still impede it. ~
Unemployment continues to be a major problem, and emigration, which might other- >
wise ease it, is greatly restricted by a variety of factors, particolarly a lack of out-
lets. Taxation in Italy remains inequitable and inefficient. The economic plight of
the Italian middle class ts grievous and shows no prospect of relief.: Italian agricultural
yield, though increasing, is inadequate to restore the Italian diet to its prewar Jevel °° --
without resort to Gisproportionale imports o of foot: _ Pang tatge plinke improvements >

will be hampered by the opposition of interested pressure groups.

Because of this limitation, and because of the Inherent difficulties of the domestic
problems, De Gasperi is unlikely to win public approval of his forelgn policies on the
basts of having created popular satisfaction over his approach to the general problem :
of domestic needs. On the contrary, unless adequate social and economle Improve- —

Note: This report has been concurted in by the intelligence organizations of the Departments of a
State, the Amy, the Navy, and the Ale Porch Tt is baséd on information available to oA
on 4 March 1549. :

woe ae £ . ne ere ete cers e at prec a Rs 2h aa ay
sty See Pe i a ee me Saas es x
: ‘

Fe REE an gta Tr RS RC ae peat ree een een tA! ls, pone ea REE HERA, EOE Re gee

~ the Left, particularly to the Communist Party. Although such a shift would have, ~~

ments through ECA ald and governmental action become apparent to the Italian
_ public, a decisive part of the population fs likely to shift its support from De Gasperito . .
except for withdrawal of moderate Socialists, no serious immediate effect upon the com-
position of the present goyernment, the shift would probably result in a Joss of cur-

rent majority support for De Gasperi’s Christian Democratic Party in the national...
_ elections of 1953.

yananvpneanerenetsasarkiastasaampninertcidumbasninerrnmcal=. scan Sorm

11 elm ente menrnennn te huarenpinennnin fod

MAJOR PROBLEMS OF ITALIAN GOVERNMENT POLICY

1 Posrrion oy THE Dx GAsPERI GOVERNMENT. oe

_ The imminent threat of economic collapse and political chsos which overhung the
De Gasperi Government at the beginning of 1948 had by the middle of the year been _
removed, permitting De Gasperi, still Premier, to turn from paccngass crises to Inore
fundamental questions of foreign and domestic policy. -

. The national elections of 18 April 1948 gave the Christian Democratic pate [ es
majority of seats in the new Parliament and confirmed the right of that Party to be ~
the dorninant element in the Cabinet until the holding of new elections, scheduled for =
1953. This base of Christian Democratic political strength was broadened by the con- —

_tinued Cabinet participation of the conservative Liberal Party and of the mo Pion crete
leftist Socialist Workers (PSLI) and Reputtican Parties. _ _

. Even before the April elections, the inflation that had been leading twat | eco-
nomic collapse and soclal upheaval was slowed down by the vigorous deflationary meas- -
ures taken by Budget Minister (now President of the Republic) Einaudi in September —

1047. Although this anti-inflationary program acted as a temporary brake on manu: -
facturing, the level of industrial production has since resumed its upward course, and
wages and prices have remained reasonably steady. A further stabilizing factor was _
the assurance that the US, through the European Recovery Program, would provide
considerable materials and credits for the rehabilitation of the Italian economy and
the gradual ralsing of the Italian standard of living, which even A In He prewar period
had been lower than that of most European countries.

Thus, by the summer of 1948, having been relieved of the critical threats. to
Italy’s economic situation and his own: political position, De Gasperl could turn his _
attention to the problem of guaranteeing the political and military security of Italy.
through alignment with other Western. Powers. _ The Communists and left-wing --
Socialists, comprising one-third of Parliament, have Offered bitter opposition on this.
issue, and have forced the government to approach the problem with caution. In —
addition, many moderate Socialists and the left wing of the Ct of the Christian Democrats have
argued for a clear-cut course of Italian neutrality. ; Z

De Gasperi realizes that he would obtain greater popular ira for his (otsiee: abe
policies if he could achieve a ‘conspicuous success in fulfilling domestic needs. He
faces special difficulties, however, in obtaining the long-term measures of economic
and social reform necessary to this success. The extreme Left will oppose whatever
recommendations the government may make in this field. Moreover, difficulties inher- < .
ent in attaining the promised and badly needed changes are aggravated by the reluc: >:
tance of the Liberals and even many of the Premier’s own party to support any far- ae)
reaching economic or soctal legislation. Despite these obstacles, De Gasperi | realizes
that failure to take positive action would make him vulnerable to criticism from the...
moderate Left as well as the far Left, would strengthen the Communists, and would =. —

“handicap the success of the ERP, thereby hainpering achievement of better living
conditions and prolonged social stability in Italy.

2. Forgicn Poucy PROBLEMS.

a. The Western Alliance. ~~” :

The central problem of the Ttalian Government in its conduct of foreign affairs
is to win the support of the Italian people for close political and military alignment

with the West. The Premier has been vigorously ‘supported by Foreign Winister Sforza

and Defense Minister Pacciardi in preparing the ground for an alliance, but there —

continues to be strong popular opposition to surrender of neutrality and to any mili--

tary commitment which would expose Italy to reprisals. Consequently, the Commu: —---—

nists, and the Socialists of the far Left have had some success in thelr campaign to
discredit the Government by denouncing as war-mongering anything ‘that indicates -

official sympathy for a western military pact. Even let {-wing members of the Premier's ~~
own party have protested his favorable disposition toward military pacts, although the =

left-wing party leaders have indicated that for the sake of party discipline they would

follow the majority.. The moderate Socalists have also shown thelr disapproval of a _

military alliances. . Their leader, Saragat, has, however, recently conceded that &

gat’s moderate Socialist following continues ‘@ivided on the question of whether or
not their Cabinet representative should oppose Italian military commitments.

At the present time, most Italians would prefer to participate in a politico: _ 7
economic European federation. The projected Council of Burope appears to be a step — =

toward such a federation, and Italy has agreed to particlpate in the Loridon discussions
(scheduled for late March) regarding organization of the Council. Italian representa-

tives in any European union, whatever its form, would find their main supportintwo

otherwise conflicting groups: the Vatican, which favors a European federation as 8 ~

means to halt the spread of Communism, and the moderate Socialists, who see such & .

federation as the framework for @ socialist Europe which could develop Into a “third 7

military pact “for defense” would not be inconsistent with Socialist principles.- Sara- oe

force” between the US and the USSR.” Though the Italians ere impelled toward 8 oe

western alliance by natural inclination and eoime governraent pressure, they fear. its
potentialities for involving them in war. sete ii

dD. Relations with the Western Powers.”
Though Italy's relations with the UK have been poor since World War I,
those with the US and France are presently excellent. Sosa. :
The traditionally close ties between the US and Italy are strengthened by

Italy’s hope for economic rehabilitation through US aid. In addition, Italians are cur- re
rently prateful to the US for forcing delay in the UN's consideration of the colonial

question, which they believed was at the point of being settled in a manner unfavorable

* to Italian interests.” Italians look to the US, the Latin American countries, and France = Be
to champion Italy's interests when the matter is taken up at the April 1949 session =
of the UN. F a :

- The favorable attitude already expressed by France toward the return to Italy
of its former colonies has been one of the factors in improving relations between the
twocountries. Another is the promise of the French Government to improve the work-

{
i
i
t
|
{
j
H
i
i

of the Western Powers to invité Italy to participate therein.

an Atlantic Pact, although this resentment will probably be diminished by the decision © :

c. Colonies... ;

Ultimate disposition of the colonies will have some bearing’on the willingness
of the Italian people to support fully a western military pact. Italy, basing its claims

on the assertion that the colonies were acquired before the advent of Fascism, would
like to have them returned, partly for reasons of prestige, partly because of fancied .
economic gain, and partly because of their supposed usefulness as an outlet forthe
surplus population. — Wide sections of the press and various nationalist pressure groups
assiduously keep colonial aspirations alive. Though any “disposition short of fol”

return to Italian control would bring an adverse Italian reaction, most Italians are
probably reconciled to eventual UK control of Cyrenaica. On the other hand, the =
mere report that the US and UK favored awarding most of Eritrea to Ethiopla elicited _ es
much popular bitterness as well as @ threat from Foreign Minister Sforza that he and |
other cabinet members would resign if such @ decision were carried out. Assuming
loss of Cyrenaica, Italy still wishes to participate in administration of the other colonies,

despite the fact that the Government will have difficulty in securing the funds to

es.

Et ES SERA
Regkte scree tes RUAE TenNe

d. The Peace Treaty. .
- .-.. The government's case for revision of the military clauses of the Peace Treaty Sh
~-----~ §g based primarily on Italy's inability to defend its borders for more than a few weeks,
in view of which fact many Italians feel that participation In the Westem security..- =. <» ae Pe ee
_ arrangements as presently constituted would provide thelr country with little actual ae
encious protection and would leave it at the mercy of an antagonized est s

€. Italy’s Relations with the USSR: Src glo ae es

Because of this desire not to antagonize the Soviet Union an n-and Deckuse of gen-
uine economic needs, Italy's relations with the USSR and the satellites continue.cor- a
rect, and trade between Italy and Eastern Europe is being developed. Recently con-
cluded trade and reparations agreements between Italy and the USSR should result
in economic benefits to Italy, thereby Increasing the domestic prestige of the Italian
Government. The government can impress the population with the fact that the
contemplated trade amounts to almost ten percent of Italy’s present foreign: com-—
werce. Furthermore, whether or not the ambitious goals of the Italo-Soviet agree-
ments are reached, the Italian Government ¢ can ae to these aoe as proof

The withdrawal by t the USSR of its ase Aappoeto of Italian eeeil claims,—- —
although causing an immediately unfavorable popular reaction, has not greatly affected
oficial relations between the two countries. Because Italian hopes have boen eens
tered on western support of Italy’s claims, Italian bitterness over any unfavorable
solution of the colonial or Trieste question would be directed more toward the Westthan.. ie Eee
toward the Fast. Soviet obstruction of Italy's entrance into the UN, however, fs a sore ahs
point because of the extreme importance which Italy, for reasons of national pride, Pe.
attaches to regaining diplomatic parity with othér nations. Omission from the Italo-.. ae ks eran Cees
Soviet trade agreements of the word “frlendship,” indicates that, whatever thelr com-_ one ate
plementary economic needs, mutual trust. Pecan the two governments remains ata
low level. . -. feat of

f. italy and the Soviet Satellites. -
Similarly, Ttaly’s relations with Eastern Europe are based are e based largely on economic:

rather than political affiniltes. . “ Current megotlations 1 with Yugoslavia Involve discus-
sion of Italian reparations to Yugoslavia, compensation for Italian properties_con-
fiscated by the Yugoslav state, and conclusion of a fishing treaty; these discussions may :
result In expanded trade relations. between the two countrles. The Yugoslavs have
made other friendly gestures, such ag the return of Italian civilians who had been =
captured by the Yugoslav forces during World War Il. — In recent months, therefore,
tension between Italy and Yugoslavia, has considerably lessened.

‘The Free Territory of Trieste, however, continues to-be a source of friction
-between the two countries. Itallans are counting heavily on the earlier recommenda-
tion by the Western Powers that Trieste be returned, and undoubtedly assume that. wee

the return of that territory would follow upon an ItaNan participation in a western bloc.

if

LWT Ce ie Sag oe
eg mona Adal BS hal

al

4

a
ee oe

DUT, ATE up anya

0
La bat ge led vets |

TPR PEE We Te

«eke ee id

wee

Pe ee ea re

i ainaleaii pe

; 9. - Probable Developments in Foreign Policy. é :

The

De Gasperi Government will take a definite position on the side of the

West, both for reasons of national security and because western support is indispensable |
to a favorable settlement of Italy's major problems in foreign policy, The timing of -.._-

- Ttaly’s actual

commitment to the western bloc depends on various fluld factors, Includ-

ing international tension. This. tension, it appears, has won De Gasperi the backing
of his Cabinet for an alliance of Italy with the West, but protracted parliamentary dis-
cussion would follow any proposal by the Premier that Italy participate in the Atlantic

Pact at this time.

~

. Neat

3. “DoMestiC PROBLEMS. cae hens

: Because De Gasperi was elected on the understanding that economic iraprovement

vutnerable to

would result from US aid, the government will obviously lose popular support and be

Communist attack if the public fails to see material proofof thé promised

prosperity. Actually, the ECA has already helped to bring about & substantial meas-— i
ure of economic recovery, but the effects have not yet appeared In material form to

ard of living

pefore 1953.— Thus, the governmen

ot retaining its publie support through proof of immediate economle gains. In eu ot

actual gains,

however, the government might be able to inspire some confidence in its

domestic polictes by proposing and attempting to carry out a legislative program that
. would be clearly designed both to complement the ERP and to satisty some of thelong-

standing demands of most Italians for economic an

program the

improvement in the standard of living be achleved.

| d social reforra. Without such &
ECA cannot in eny case attain ultimate success nor_can any marked

A review of some of the salient problems of economle recovery.in Italy will Mus

trate the diMtcuities of attaining-any marked Improvement in the standard of living
within the life of the European Recovery Program and the even greater difficulties of |
achieving any perceptible change within the next six months. ,

Se

*. -@i° Agricultural Needs. a, Be

" - yn'agriculture, the immediate probiem Is to secure inaximum yields of food, and
thus, without disproportionate imports, restore the Italian diet to at Jeast its prewar
(1938) level. Despite the progress made during 1948, even this modest goal will not

be achieved

with the 1949 harvest. Fertilizers, insecticides, and farm machinery are __

still insuffictently utilized, despite the greater quantity of these supplies now available.
In some areas, an increase in yield may ultimately depend on the enacting and imple- _
menting of legislation to reform land holdings, as required (though without specifica:
tion of time) by the Constitution of 27 December 1947. Such long-range reforms, how-’

ever, would

not affect present agricultural production, and the uncertainty which %

surrounds these reforms has restrained many large landowners from investment in

improved agricultural techniques which might otherwise increase this production.

=e

Progress toward agrarian reform will be slowed through the opposition of
vested interests and the need of educating tenant fanners in methods of operating

small holdings. Nevertheless, large sections of the rural population will demand @ -

7 program of agrarian reform as the price of their confidence in the government, even
: _ before implementation of such @ program Is possible 2s cei eee
c. Industrial Production... - Bea Sa oe eet eee
_In industry, during 1948, the prewar (1938) level of production was attained,
and long-term potentialities in this fleld are good. The high cost of production, how-
ever, presently handicaps Itallan exporters in the development of forelgn markets.

Contributing factors include obsolescent industrial equipment, obligatory retention -
of unneeded workers (especially In the mechanical industries), and a variety of bur-

densome taxes. ERP ald will permit modernization of some manufacturing plants,
but none of these high cost factors lends itself to quick solution.

Increase in industrial output is further hampered by the presence of certain”
uneconomle industries which were developed during the Fascist regame in order to

make Italy economically self-sufficient and prepared for war. _ These industries, mostly
in the mechanical field, are still subsidized by the state. _ Although the government
recognizes the ultimate advantage of abandoning them, it is reluctant to do so because
they provide a livelihood to many workers for whom there is now no substitute.
employment.

d. Sirikee and Slowdowns. — E

Industrial production has been somewhat hampered by Communist-inspired —

"ta eg ‘
teh alata At

Sane yt
J 4

strikes and slowdowns, which are likely to continue.” The Communist-dominated Con:
federation of Labor (CGIL) has recently favored the use of the slowdown, rather than

the strike, in the hope of winning a wider support emong organized labor and lessening
public antagonism to labor demonstrations. Within the CGIL, the opposition of a

Republican and moderate Socialist minority is diminishing the effectiveness of the

slowdown. However, in strikes called on economic issues, such as wages and the dis: ee | Eee i

missal of workers, the CGIL_continues to attract non-Communist support, even at

times the backing of the Cathotic-led Free Confederation of Workers (LCGIL). Never-

theless, the government wil! probably be able, by devoting & minimum of attention

et oes wa

to the basic issues involved, to keep such strikes and slowdowns {rom crippling economle

recovery.
. @. Unemployment and Emigration. af
Unerployment perennially handicaps the solution of all other problems of the

Italian economy. The population is increasing by approximately 500,000 a year, and

each year about one-quarter million more people enter the labor market. Unemploy-

even fulfiltincnt of the government's goal of providing a million additional jobs in ~

Staly during the life of ERP_ (1948-52) would represent only the estimated increase
in thg employable population for that period. Emigration, which might otherwise pro-

_ wide a practicable means of reducing the number of the unemployed, is presently
- restricted by a variety of factors, Including shortage of trans-Atlantic shipping and
the reluctance of many countries to accept immigrants. During 1949, permanent
exiigration is not likely to exceed that of 1948, about 90,000. ‘Thus, approximately
million and a half unemployed in 1952 are in prospect.
_ i f.. The Tox System. ; ;

The Italian Government faces a further problem in its system of taxation. -.
Despite tax evasion by Italian manufacturers, their production costs are considerably _
increased by social security charges and by the “turnover tax” which they meet at every .

. stage of industrial output. As a result, the high cost of Itallan-manufactured goods
a impedes the development of Italy's export trade. Moreover, the large part of national.
revenue derived from Indirect taxation falls disproportionately upon the poorer classes.

The government recognizes the need of revising the entire tax structure, with emphasis

on a progressively graduated income tax, and is conducting studies toward this end.

A thorough overhauling of the presently inefficient administrative system of assess-

ment and collection of taxes would be a prerequisite to any such revision, Because =

the level of civic morality in Italy is notoriously low, however, the government willhave =
‘ great difficulty in achieving these reforms, and their implementation will probably =
be delayed. The existing forms of taxation in Italy will, therefore, probably continue to. ff
: burden certain fields of business enterprise and to demoralize low-income workers.
a These groups, however, could be reassured by a clear-cut government program of tax
; reform even before legislation and final implementation produced positive results,
g. The Plight of the Middle Class. : , ‘.

In the rapid postwar upward spiraling of prices and wages, the white-collar

workers and the middle class in general have lost ground, and no substantial relief
of their painful situation fs in the offing. The government budget cannot bear the _
additional outlay which would be required to restore the prewar real incomes of
public employees. People dependent in whole or in part upon Income from rents
cannot expect any appreciable increase In rentals, the one phase of the Italian price
structure which has been successfully controlled. Similarly, alleviation of the e0o-
nomic plight of other fixed income groups and the unemployed could be achieved =
only at the risk of creating new inflationary pressures. oes ce
h. Elements Odstructive to Reform.

Even a steady movement toward economic expansion would not be reflected —
immediately in betterment of the lot of most Italians. Moreover, the movement
toward cconomic expansion will be slowed here and there by the special pressures of
interested groups. Some industrialists will seek to cmploy ECA-financed raw materials
in the manufacture of high-profit items regardless of thelr contribution to recovery.
‘The Communists, on the other hand, will continue their agitation fo have ECA counter-
part funds devoted to temporary relief projects which can provide no basic, sustained.
advantage to the Italian economy. Besides their efforts to encourage squandering of
4 FCA ald, the Communists, who control @ third of Patiiament, will promote lengthy .
4 debate In order to delay legislative action essential to a recovery program. © aaa

= ‘ ars a
= ot 5 i> “ 4 Saar
E ee tak ee rh) ed IE OT ELE Pee Se aah seek, .

1. Probable Developments in Domestic Policy. ee —
The inherent difficulties of resolving the problems of economic expansion in -
~~ Italy and the obstacles interposed thereto by interested sectors of the population will
— gontinue to block attainment of tangible improvement in the lives of the people.

Within the next six or eight months, at least, improvement of this gort will not be
impressive. Despite these limitations on what it can offer in the immediate future,
the government could inspire public confidence by sponsoring a bold, comprehensive
legislative program. To date, however, it has failed to give indications either of having
or of soon developing such a program. ~ Consequently, the government cannot look
forward to winning popular approval of its foreign policies on the pasis of having == é
created popular satisfaction over its approach to the problem of domestic needs. s : Be
There remains, moreover, the danger that by 1953 an important segment of
the Italian public, if adequate social and economic improvements through ECA ald ~
and governmental action are not forthcoming, will shift its support back to the Left, —
particularly to the dynamic Communist Party. — This reaction would not immediately
affect to a serious degree the composition of the’ present government, but it:would~
probably lead to the withdrawal therefrom of the moderate Socialists. “The national _
elections of 1953, however, would probably result in a decisive loss of popular support ©
- for De Gasperi’s Christian Democrats.° ">: Rees | Noga ert ee

® No mention was made in section S above, “Domestic Proviems," of a domestic threat to the _
De Gasperl Government, namely_the Communist paramilitary organization (approximately < _
£0,000 armed men), primarily because this organization has not to date become an operative
a or disruptive factor affecting government policy on elther of the two fundamental problems.
"“- - treated In this paper. ~~" es ee — . ss Se

*
