Intelligence in Recent Public Literature DonovanN in Perspective by William M Henhoeffer)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000047425, dated 1 January 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000047425).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

+
.

: ; 2% j / 4? Nf. : ite alae hry 4
Studies = inlelgence_1 Vol aT @s ( t Ps

Assaying the books
INTELLIGENCE IN RECENT PUBLIC LITERATURE

DONOVAN IN PERSPECTIVE

William M. Henhoeffer

OSS uses the most wonderful place to be young’ We young
ones had everything—belief, enthustasm, opportunity, vic-
tory Life rushed on in excitement and in confidence thet
we were a spectal group of colleagues with an importar.t
mission for our country °

By 1 January 1982, centenary of the birth of the Agency's founder and
chief of the OSS. the interested reader would find four full-length bocks about
him. Corey Ford's Donovan of OSS was published in Boston in 1970 and
London the following year. Thomas F. Troy's Donovan and the CIA was
issued in 1981 by the Agency’s Center for the Study of Intelligence and later
that year by a ccmmercial publisher in Frederick, Maryland Two more works
appeared in 1982: Richard Dunlop’s Donovan:—America’s Master Spy and
Anthony Cave Brown’s The Last Hero:—Wild Bill Donovan, published by
Rand McNally end Times Books, respectively. With over 2,100 pages of text
and four pvints of view at hand, it is possible for a reader not only to be caught
in a maze of intelligence specialists’ arguments, complex yet almost always
interesting, but also, more broadly, to begin to measure the man’s place within
the context of American and twentieth century history. This essay is cast
mainly on that genera! Jevel.

Leadership; Positive and Negative Aspects

All four authors emphasize Donovan's leadership qualities, and particular-
ly what they regard as positive results of that leadership. They praise his
ability to evoke strong loyalty from his subordinates. They tell us he could in-
spire an employee with the feeling of working for him personelly at a vital
task. This message has been amply supported in several recollections of peaple
directly associated with Donovan: Lawrence R. Houston's review of the
Dunlop book published in the Washington Times in November 1982 was a
case in point; so were the vigorously stated, upbeat comments of three OSS
veterans—Louise Bushnell, Virginia Stewart, and Elizabeth McIntosh—to
Headquarters personnel last spring, and Ernest Cuneo’s more recent? presenta-
tion to Agency military reservists added other interesting atmospherics

7
—

ADPREVGG FSR BELTAGE
* Former O55 member Caroline Bland, quoted in Dunlop, p 307 bate sees

Z 63

es Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

a]

Donovan

These encomia to Donovan's qualities of leadership are hable to aroue an
today’s Agency employees a sense of relative deprivation Serme of the
informal standards he set are still observed the willingness of Agesey
managers to work on occasion without full financial compensahon and their
tendency to shun some of the “perks” routinely demanded by their counter
parts elsewhere in the federal government, reflect Donovan's own profesienal
lifestyle But in other ways we have changed greatly since the OSS penod and
although changes were bound to occur, they have not all been pnprovenents
The layers of bureaucracy within the organization are mere pumiereus and fess
permeable We sense the need for conferences on ethis and tatedhvernce ard
perhaps even for an ethical code for our profession whereas Tis Character
seemed to imbue the entire OSS with something appreachins an ethics!
consens.is. The Donovan style also encouraged among the rank and fle of bes
organization an exceptionally strong concern for the wellure of other enigpley-
ees OSS under him seemed to have been a true company of colleagues

Before lamenting too long ua the golden days of the past we sherk!
reflect on certain negative consequences of this impeane personabty All four
books on Donovan show that his Jeaderstup sometimes had an adverse inijest
on the internal management of OSS All four allude te a brief “pala ©
revolution” that came to a head in February 1944. an which some of he
subordinates demanded that he either travel less or delegate mere aitherity te
his immediate subordinates, or both Donovan. we are told. angrily rejected
their rezommendations and continued to rule as before

The second negative consequence of Donovan's ¢haristrestir persenal;
was that it sharpened the bureaucratic nvalnes in whieh OSS and us
predecessor group the Coordinator of Information’ wiesitabl, fosmid peelf As
one of his aides recorded privately, Donovan, with all tus beret. ated
expertise, was also “so aggressive, $0 scattez 2d. so prove gine that | he excites
anger” According to Ernie Cuneo, Fiesident: rrankiin Delano RB: meee
encouraged bureaucratic competition throughout his adimarastratinn bey setting
up organizations with overlapping responsibilties Donevan relished this ty pe
of challenge, and although the four authors tend to blame tas rivals more than
him for the use of unfair tactics, itis clear that he was eager and resourceful in
“conducting ungentlemanly warfare” (Duntop’s term:

} Edgar Hoover of the Federal Burean of Investigation for eviiple
emerges from these four books as a villain, whose enduritg enrtity toward
Donoven seemed greater than his dedication to the tiatienal interest But
Donovan sometimes crossed into territory Clearly Hoover's responcabilty, and
not by accident. It is difficult to justify Donovan's authorizatien for his ateney
to break into an embassy on US territory, without even consulting U.e Burea's
Moreover, as long as the Bureau was assigned responsibility fuse Colles ting
intelligence in Latin America, Donovan should hase respected that demarea
tion if only to preserve the quality of what purported ta be intelhgence From
today’s vantage point, one concludes that the national intezest would have
been better served if Donovan had vetted with the FBI, fer its es aluatien, the
“top secret” information his people had obtained from Mexican communist
and left-wing Jabor leaders on the possible presence of “one thousand" or more

64

_ Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425 ernest

= Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan

Japanese agents and covert Japanese “bases” on the Baja Penimula To do so,
however, would have alerted Hoover to Donovan's bureaucratic transgression,
and so Donovan passed the report directly to FDR

In his relations with the US military establishment Donovan sometimes
chose confrontation where a more prudent official would have sought
cooperation. He decided, evidently on his own initiative, to make a top secret
film report on the Pear! Harbor attack in order to find out who had been at
fault. Accordirg to Dunlop he “ignored the Army and Navy's opposition” in
the matter. The field photo team he sent to Hawaii was, in various ways,
“brash and arrogant.’ Moreover, despite Secretary of War Stimson’s insistence
that he see the film before it was released, .he head of Donovan's photographic
unit tried to smuggle a large portion of the film to Donovan to be shown to
FDR. The Navy managed to confiscate the film and lock it up ina vault In
retrospect, whe can blame the Navy?

Pranks and Provocations

Donovan's shenanigans (the word is used advisedly} against his military
rivals were sometimes provoked by them, and sometimes by him Dunlop
recounts the story of a dinner party where an admiral remarked that
Donovan's organization was “a Tinker Toy outfit, spying on spies ” We have
Donovan's word for it, presumably, that the admiral actually did bait him that
way; it is hard to imagine the admiral himself confessing to such a tactless
comment, or to the aftermath In any case Donovan rose to the bait by
suggesting that his outfit “could get your secret files and blew up your
ammunition dump " The admiral, of course, laughed at the suggestion A few
minutes later, Dunlop records,

Donovan excused himself from the table, presumably ta go to the
washroom He telephoned his headquarters and within an hour
several high-ranking Navy officers showed up at the Nav: Building
demanding to see the admiral The sentry saluted and said the
admiral was not in.

“Then,” said one, “we'll wait in his office.”
Once inside the officers went to work.

One, a safecracker, opened the safe and removed its top secret
contents Then the party leit and drove to the ammunition dump,
where they dressed down the officer of the day for not demanding
their security clearances at the gate. When the OD left in rehef,
they planted dummy dynamite tubes They sent the admiral’s top
secret Bles and a report on their activities to Donovan at the dinner
party. As the party was breaking up, Donovan handed the admiral
his files without comment, and explained where he could find the
dummy charges at the ammunition dump (p 45}

Donovan was not above using meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff to
impress the military in unusually creative ways. Dunlop tells us of the “Hedy
Lamarr’ fireworks device, contrived by Stanley Lovell], the chief of OSS

"65

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425,,,

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan

Research and Development, to create a distraction for an OSS spy Urying to
avoid capture. Alf the spy had to do was pull a tiny wire Joop and the device
initiated the roar of a falling bomb Donovan took Lavell to a JCS meeting
mentioned the device to his audience and moved on to other subjects Lovell
as prearranged, pulled the ring and Cropped Hedy inte a metal wastebasket
“Two: and three-star generals rushed for the door as a mighty roar ended
Hedy's performance ”

Ditnlop’s book is replete with anecdotes hhe these, and the other three
authors provide several more Many of Donovan's pranks led ta more serious
consequences, but the basic point is the same if yeu happened to be on
Donovan's side in Uhese episodes, or can assume thal allegnunce vicarousty
now, Donovan emerges as an exceptionally brave and clever nian whe
deserved your loyalty No wonder the morale in OSS was hith Yet at ale
should be possible to understand the resentment Donovan's peers came to feel
toward him, and the seriousness of his aide’s observahon that “he excites
anger

Moreever, from the vantage point of a contemporary historian. there as
much to be lamented in these stories In his review of the Troy book. Notre
Dame history professor Bernard Norling summarizes the bureaucratic rvatrins
affecting Donovan in this way

Some forty different agencies. all of them invelsed in intelcen. «
gathering in some way. defended their turf from the threat of
encroachment with remarkable imaginstion ard a tenacity that
would have excited a bulldog There were endless hearmits, rene
merable drafts and redrafts of proposals, interminable sqtabtiles
about the definitions of words, continuous efforts to either redace
or scatter the functions of OSS, endless rumiers “inspired” leaks te
friendly newspapers, fierce infighting about who should be directed
by whom, and resort to that final refuge of the bodsered burean-
erat, additional studies

Norling finds the bureaucratic wrangling with Dinovan at the center to
have been “squalid” and “appalling” —one of those aspects of World War Il
which should cause one to wonder what the other side was hhe af our side was
winning Norling has a point

OSS Achievements, Positive and Negative

Bureaucratic wrangling notwithstanding, Donovan and the OSS did
contribute to the winning of World War H, but historians are by no means cer-
tain how much. OSS intelligence activities as such are outside the scape of
Troy's book. Corey Ford and Dunlop let the British provide the bettom hne
Ford records that in 1966 Admira} Louis Mountbatten teld OSS veterans thet
he doubted “whether any one person contributed more to the ultimate sictory
of the Allies than Bill Donovan” In the foreword to Dun?op's biography Use
wartime head of British intelligence in the US. Sir Witham Stephensen
CIntrepid’), pronounces Donovan “one of the most signfieunt men of our
century” but shows polite reservation about the organization he headed He

56

sApproved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan

salutes the fact that by the end of the war “Donovan's OSS was comparable
quantitatively with the combined efforts of British Intelligence and Special
Operations Executive” and then adds that “qualitatively too, much of OSS's
work was without doubt of first-class importance {yy any standard “ That is net
damning the OSS with faint praise, but the praise is cautious

Stephenson’s verdict on OSS, nevertheless, is considerably more flattering
than the one offered by David Kahn in his review of the Troy, Dunlop. and
Cave Brown bonks (Washington 19 December 1952) Kahn is of course entitled
to his opinion, but he greatly confuses anyone who has read the books the con-
fused this reader anyway) by claiming that two of the authors support that
opinion. Kahn puts it this way:

Neither Cave Brown nor Dunlop assesses the overall contribution of
OSS to the war effort The reason may be that it could net have
been very great. OSS had only a handful of agents in Germany. as
Joseph Persico made clear in Piercing the Reich, and they reported
mainly low-level intelligence. neither Cave Brown nor Dunlop go
into this OSS had no agents in Japan or her captured areas

The trouble is that Cave Brown devotes an entire chapter to an overall
assessrnent-~" Farewell the Tranquil Mind”—in which the language. in this
reader's judgment, is as thoughtfully chosen and gracefully expressed as the
title. Dunlop. true enough, does not offer an assessment but, as indi ated
above, Stephenson's preface provides a kind of summation Regarding the
“handful of agents” in Germany. whatever Persico may hase thonght abont
their number and effectiveness, it is clear that Cave Brown and Dunlop die
not ignore the subject or trivialize the effort Dunlop records that Donovan
“sent more than 200 agents into Germany between September 1944 and VE
Day” (p. 454) Cave Brown describes OSS penetration operabens in Germanys
as ‘very large scale” and. as his treatment of Allen Dulles’ efforis indicates. he
considers that come were high-level OSS, as Dunlop in particular illustrates,
had numerous agents operating behind Japanese lines

Kahn's def nition of “significant” seems to be limited to the achievements
in cryptanalysis which contributed to major naval and air victories such as
Midway. No coubt Donovan would have accomphshed more had he sue-
ceeded in adding that to his organization's capabibties But Cave Brown surely
does not dismiss OSS accomplishments as trivial Whereas Kahn states that
“the spy was of no more importance in intelhgence than the foot soldier was ait
combat during the battle of technologies that was World War HL." Cave Brown
implies in his “Farewell the Tranquil Mind” chapter that (4) World War fl
was more than a “battle of technologies” and (b) the spy was no less important
in intelligence than the foot soldier was in combat Cave Brown declares Ghat
the number af decorations earned by OSS personnel for gallantry ane
proficiency-—on the average of one for every cight employ ees—-constitutes in
itself “a tangible, remarkable achievement to the OSS's performance,” and
goes on to pay a special tribute to Donovan for accomplishing so much at so
little cost in casuallies-

Despite the magnitude of the worldwide effort engaged in by the
OSS, Dcnovan lost fewer men killed, wounded, and captured in its

67

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C0Q0047425,

BEES PO rr ee

Approved for Release: 201 4/09/ 12 C00047425

Donovan

five years than he had Jost on an average week in the teens hes
during the campaign season of 1915 In all, 143 men and woemer
exchiding subagents, were killed in action, and about 300 ten ased
women were wounded or captured while on acave seruce Yet thee
damage Donovan did to the enemy in World War [i was far greater
than that in World War I And here was anothes important
demonstration of Donovan's theories An outpounmng of bled was
not always necessary in order to cause the enemy Severe damiaye
Two examples will suffice to show what is meant The OCs wha.
took part in Noah’s Ark in Greece suffered no more than 23 dead
and wounded (and none was captured, On the cther hand they
Paralyzed large formations of the Wehrmacht for more thass
eighteen months and killed or wounded at least 1,400 of the ener,
In Switzerland Dulles’s information that the Germans” mise
experiments had reached an advanced stage produced a dev attabiry
attack by the Royal Air Force. In turn, that atta: k delayed Germas,
production of operational missiles, thereby saving hundreds af na
thousands, of lives and many acre: of human dwellings

Cave Brown and Dunlop list several other OSS successes, only a few of
which are acknowledged by Kahn tand those are behttled OSS operatic an
France achieved more than the disruption of the rad Tovement of ore SS desi
sion and more than the provision of fine and detailed postive intediiyers eer,
southern France, they helped to ignite the uprisings comeing wath the Athed
invasion of France Kahn also disputes Cave Brown's case fer OSS trdicest
role in ensuring the success of D-Day Cave Brow NS argument. spetled cyt at
considerable length, is that OSS operations in Hungary and the Balk ene tee!
down German divisions there long enough to prevent timely reinfor ene rt ad
German defenses in Normandy. If the argument 1s accepted as valid ther OSS
must be considered to have played a role fairly comparable in ats strates oon
sequences to the role of cryptanalysis cited by Kalin in the Buttle of Midway
Kahn will have none of this He disputes Cave Brown's contention that ate O98
operation in Hungary helped to persuade Hitler of the need to oconps that
country The OSS team sent to Hungary parachuted in on }3 March 1444 an
according to Kahn, the war diary of the German high command shows that the
order to occupy was issued the day before But he misses the main elements im
the story, what Cave Brown says is that the whole process of secret
negotiations of several months duration between OSS and representatives of
the Hungarian, Romanian, and Bulgarian governments. desigried to rermeve
those countries from the Axis camp, became known to Hitler well before the
initiation of the tactical phases of the operations (e g Parachuting of an OSS
team into Hungary). Cave Brown contends that these ©35 intelligence
defeats—and collectively, in his judgment, they constituted OSS's greatest
failure of the war—nevertheless served to convince Hitler that the Alhes
intended to invade Europe from the south “Once that idea was implanted”
says Cave Brown, “there was nothing any of Hitler's military advisers cesatd fe
to eradicate it.”

68
Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C0Q0047425

fa, Spee Sittin. gcse camming

#Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425=« ae

Donovan

To Win by Losing

The lesson continues to be relevant to our profession in helping us to judge
what we do in its proper context. What can be considered in strict, narrow
terms as an operational failure may in the long run help to produce a strategic
triumph. This may occur not only in clandestine or covert operations bul also
in other aspects of intelhgence, especially intelligence analysis The kindest
fate of certain intelligence estimates may be that they are ultimately proven
wrong because the dire message reached an intelligence consumer in time for
policy action which otherwise would not have occurred It is not always
possible, of course, for those who exerted themselves to make the operation
succeed, or the estimate correct, to understand matters that way It is not
always true that their superiors are wise enough to do so e:ther

Returning to our reflections on the Hungarian; Bafkan operational failure.
one wonders how wise Donovan and others were in judging it The thought
arises that perhaps he might have realized well in advance that the operations
had been compromised but allowed them to go forward precisely in order to
further the broader, strategic objective. He had some warnings, Cave Brown
tells us, through Allen Dulles in Bern, that the Nazis might be aware of the op-
erations, and he might also have been alerted by sources outside OSS te g_ the
so-called ISOS material). At one point Cave Brown expresses bewilderment
that Donovan put the Hungarian project—Project Sparrow —on held in view
of these warnings and then, for reasons that do not immediately seem
compelling, allowed it to proceed

In the fictional world of John LeCarre the hypothesis that Donovan, in
effect, intended the operation to fail but deliberately refrained from commu-
nicating as much to the OSS men directh involved would be plausble In the
real world, the reader would need far more evidence than these books on
Donovan provide that such duplicity actually occurred More hkely Donesan
himself became personally committed to carrying out the operation no matter
what the odds. As Peter Wyden demonstrates in his Tie Bay of Pigs. it
becomes increasingly difficult psychologically to halt an important operation
once it is set in train, and increasingly easy to ignore positive intelligence
pointing teward the likelihood that the operation will fail H that is the way it
happened in Donovan's case, he would not be the last high-ranking Western
intelligenc2 official to be caught in such a net.

Just as an intelligence failure can sometimes help produce a policy success,
an apparent intelligence success can sometimes help induce adverse conse-
quences lazer. The testimony that Cave Brown and to some extent Corey Ford
and Dunlop provide concerning OSS relations with the Soviet intelhgence
services is worth some reflection. At one stage of the war, for example, FDR
authorized Donovan to make direct contact with Fitin of the NKVD, and
largely through the impact of Donovan's forceful personality, Fitin tentatively
agreed to Donovan's terms for intelligence collaboration Score one for US
intelligence. But the very success of Donovan's approach permitted J Edgar
Hoover to warn FDR of the danger of Soviet penetration, and aroused the sus-
picions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff as well. Donovan was thereupon ordered to
break off the negotiations. The effect of this abrupt change of direction can

69

___ Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C0004 7425 eencreea ranmmeah Terra TTINERERSSIROCE

_Applovedior Reledse: 20 taeii2 Cees

Donovan

only have greatly increased Soviet suspicions about their putative ally and
thereby further strained an already uneasy partnerstep

Nearer the end of the war OSS began to target the Soviets One such
effort, as described by Cave Brown, was Casey Jones, which Donesan planned
in August 1944 and executed early the neat spring Paired with another
operation, Ground Hog. and carried out jointly with the Briteh, it) was
‘designed to “use the postwar confusion to get photo coverage of all Central
and Western Europe, Scandinavia, and North Africa ” Ground Hog was atmed
at collecting “geological data of military interest ” The Questionable aspects
arise from the fact that this project was begun during the war, that al gave pri
ority to those areas occupied by US and British forces that were scheduled te
be turned over to the Soviets, that parts of Albania, Yugoslavia and Bulearia
and al! Soviet-occupied parts of Germany were pkotomapped. that Casey
Jones involved about 16 squadrons of US and British heavy bombers modifed
for acrial photography, that while some of these aircraft canned their true
inarkings, others apparently were unmarked, and that the purpos of thes
project was not candidly discussed with the Soviets

All of this must have gone down well in Washington at Hie time Tt could
be portrayed as a successful large-scale operation wath no casualties Tt wnald
serve as a resolute rebuff to those who were always ready ta accuse GSS of
being soft on the commies It would also serve as a good sturt on a px stwar
national intelligence service After all, with all thas ampertant deta in band
bearing on likely problems of strategic pehey interest: whe conld doubt that a
centralized organization ought to be established to preside ewer thas vast baal
of newly acquired material? Zbigniew Brzezinski once remarked in brecun
ter maga7ine that “power not only serves policy, it tempts it” A deniotstrated
intel igence capability hke Casey Jones becomes an argument for perpetiating
that capability

But what were the Soviets supposed to think about all this? As Case
Brown points out, they were eventually prisy to some cryptic State Depart:
ment requests for permission to photomap Berlin, Vienna, and Prastie -- boat
nothing about Albania, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria nor the rest of Sexiet-
occupied parts of Germany. Their own spies in Britain and the US may have
ferreted out some of the unadsertised goals of Casey Jones But how were thes
to dismiss the likelihood that these overfiights represented contingency
planning for military operations against them, and the possbility that among
this vast assemblage of aircraft there might be some capable of a nuclear
attack—a capability the Soviets already knew that the US and Britain
possessed? Cave Brown details how the Soviets both protested these ene reac he

- ments of their air space and ordered their fighters on occasion to shoct at the

US and British intruders. Several shooting incidents occurred prior to VE Day

He concludes that “there can be Jitthe doubt that these operations were
among the factors that caused great tensions between the Russian and Western
Allies during the last weeks of the war” The judgment seems almost too mild
Let us step back a bit. In the 1950s, those of us being academically trained in
international relations were told by our professors and read mn ent teathooks

70

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425,,

te Dproved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan

that all the duplicity and double dealing among the Allies during World War
If and the early postwar period were the fault of the Soviet Union Our side
played it straight Finally, in belated response to these repeated Soviet
unilateral, unprovoked acts of bellicosity and espionage we began to bolster
our military strength, and direct our intelligence capabilities against the
Soviets. It haz been hard to shake that version of history from our minds The
revisionist explanations in the Jate 1960s and 1970s did not make much
impression because they al] seemed tuo strident and ill-informed Now. after
reading Cave Brown's testimony presented as part of a sophisticated, ther-
oughly researched appraisal of the foundation of the modern American
espionage establishment, we are finally compelled to revise somewhat that
comfortable assumption about the origins of the Cold War

Cave Brown's relatively calm verdict on Casey Jones contrasts with his
appraisal of two examples of unilateral OSS activity within areas of British
jurisdiction. Both occurred in 1945. One involved the initiation of positive
intelligence collection in countries due to receive their independence, notably
India and Burma Cave Brown describes this program as “palpablh, the
committing of espionage against a friendly power” The other required
attaching to the court of King Peter I] of Yugoslavia, whe was beneGtting from
British Gnancial support and protection in London, an OSS agent who would
report independently on Peter's steadily dimming prospects for regaining lus
throne. Cave Brown terms this operation a “clear breach” of Anglo-American
agreements not to “spy on each other.” Moreover, the fact thal “an act of espi-
onage against America’s leading ally” had been “sanctioned in Washington”
meant that “the Grand Alliance had disintegrated and that the brilhant
American comradeship of arms .. was now atanend Whether it was te be
revived or not would remain to be seen ™

Arguably Cave Brown has made too much of these two aperations They
were rather modest in scale—no squadrons of bombers on photomapping
missions—and were not directed at Britain itself Moreover, the British
intelligence authorities knew that the US government had locked on with
generally benign neglect when the British unilaterally gathered intelhgence
and conducted various operations on US territory No one should get excited
about it now, but does anyone believe that the apparatus Stephenson admits to
having administered in this country—"'the British secret and rovert organiza-
tions, all nine of them,” the communications division “hand]:ng more than a
million message groups a day,” and so forth—was concerned solely with
liaison or joint Anglo-US operations? Yet the sensitivity shown by Cave Brown,
loyal subject of the Commonwealth, to the two unilateral OSS operations in
the British sphere of influence is useful in underscoring how even any Soviet
officials who were inclined to be friendly toward the US and Britain in 1945
must have regarded Casey Jones Casey Jones, this writer therefore argues, was
an intelligence success that contributed something to the makings of a serious
strategic failure.

Representative of the Opposition

Donovan exercises cortrofling influence over Knox, strong influ-
. ence over Stimson, friendly advisory influence over President and

71

___Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425__.

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan
Hall... Being a Republican, a Catholic and of trash descent, he
has a following of the strongest opposition to the Administra:
tion ... There is no doubt that we can achieve infmtel, more

through Donovan than through any other individual {Quoted in
Corey Ford, p99}

So wrote the Director of British Naval Intelligence to the Comimander-.n
Chief, UK Mediterranean Fleet in 1940 He was urging the British admiral ts
welcome the man sent by FDR to see if the British could bedd out against a
German attack and whether, therefore, the US should begin to shed ats
professed neutrality and begin to supply material aid Donovan concbided that
the answer to both questions ought to be yes, thereby contradicting the siew
strongly advocated by the US Ambassador in Londen Joseph Kennedy As a
result the British obtained 50 destroyers from the US through Lend Lease. and
the U* moved inexorably toward war against Germany on the side ef Britain

erofessor John Lukacs of LaSalle College used te tell his history classes
that the most important single fact ef the first half of the Twentieth Century
was that the Americans and British speke Enghsh He would then remind bis
students that great consequences can ensue from the presence of a sing’:
individual The vote taken in the United States shortly after the Revelation to
make German the official language—the country contamed nearly as many of
German stock as of British Isles descent at that time and the sentiment ran
strong to divorce the new nation from the old master culturally as well as polit

i ically—failed by one vote Suppose that voter had not been there

Similarly, if Donovan had not been on the scene, whe else could have pre:
vided testimony of sufficient weight to overnde cur can Ambascader’s
opposition to Anglo-American military partnership agauwt Hrler? For the
crucia. element in Kennedy's disdainful attitude was based not of an objective
assessment of British military capabilities, but on the emotional bias Gf an Trish
Catholic American against all things English °

i Under those circumstances it was important that an equally promanent
Irish Catholic American was available to speak up for the Faglshmen, and
contradict the Kennedy counsel Moreover, as a Republican he was able to

help neutralize the isolationist wing of that party Other oronunent Regisble
cans were sympathetic to the British (Wendell Wilkie. for example. pledged
| not to oppese FDR on this issue in the 1940 presidential campaign’, so that in

this regard Donovan did not stand alone But in being able and willing to con-

test the strong isolationist currents within two parallel constituencies, the Lrish
: Catholic (overwhelmingly Demaratic) and the Republican feverwhelmingly
Protestant}, Donovan was unique

Lawrence Houston, in his Washington Times review of the Dunlep hook
is troubled by the “impression” conveyed by Dun‘op that “Donovan, almost
single-handed, turned the American public Trora isolation to intervention
* “DP hate all af those goddamned Enghshmen from Churchill dews ° he tel an Americat
while he was stilt Ambassador Quoted in David E Koskoff, yoseph F Reniedy A Loe and
Times (Englewood Chifs, New Jersey Prentice Hall, Inc 1974

72

[renee

_ Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425 emnerrEn

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan

against the Germans in World War I" Houston counters this by citing a $952
book coauthored by William Langer, Donovan's head of Research and
Analysis, The Challenge to Isolation, which contains only four references ta
Donovan. “none of them showing him in a major role ~

To this objection one must respond that Houston is correct in understand:
ing Dunlop’s message, but then Corey Ford conveys the same “Impression”
and it is supported by influential British spokesmen such as the above quoted
Lord Louis Mountbatten, the Director of British Naval Intelhgence, and
Stephenson. Secondly, the Langer book concerns mainly Republican Party
isolationism. and does not take seriousl, the importance of art: British
sentiment within ethnic groups Langer’s strength —-one of the reasons he was
so useful as head of Research and Analysis—~as his ab:hty to interpret the
broad cucrents of world history as understood in traditional terms The 1952
work appeared when US history was also being told in rather traditional terms.
which tended te slight the role of minorities The role of Insh Catheheism an
complicating the course of US history was not addressed by mainstream
historians of that period, to them one’s Erish Cathohe heritage was something
to be outgrown, like acne

Corey Ford, Dunlop end Cave Brown have thus provided a needed
corrective in emphasizing that Donovan did not outgrow it. and that at a
crucial juncture of US and world history Donovan's role was enhanced by it
Corey Ford and Duniop show, moreover, that Donovan suffered discrimina
tion in his occasional forays into politics from those who were anti-Irish anced
anti-Catholic, and also, ironically, from Irish Cathohes whe acc used him of
selling out that heritage. Some Irish Catholics spread rumors tha’ Donovan was
not a gocd Catholic These rumors have proved sufficient’) pervasive overs the
years to have been transformed into the assertion (eg in Joseph O'Grady's
Hou: the Irish Became Americans) book that Donovan was Pretestant

On occasions other than the Lend Lease episode Donovan tried to use his
Irish Catholic background to help the British Dunlop tells us of Donovan's
March 1941 trip to Dublin undertaken “at the request of Recseselt and
Churchill" At that time the threat of German invasion of the British Isles, pos-
sibly preceded by invasion of Ireland, had receded, but il still seemed coitv al,
from the British point of view, that the Irish Free State allew Great Britain to
use its ports to counter German submarines Donovan tried unsuccessfully to
induce the Taoiseach (Prime Minister) Eamen de Valera to make that
commitment to the Allied cause. The luncheon meeting attended by Donovan
de Valera, and the head of the Catholic Church in lreland did nat pass
pleasantly. As Dunlop put it: “Donovan was incensed when the prelate
remarked that he did not see much difference betweer. a Nazi victory arid
British dominion, and he blistered the churchmen with his opinion of the arts
British myopia shown by some Irish”

Only a distinguished Irish Catholic American could have delivered such a
dressing down Dunlop records that Churchill was pleased with Donoy an’s top
to Dublin and well he should have been For at 2 minumum Dono-an’s
position must have shaken de Valera’s certainty that the vast Irish American

73

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C0004 7425, camrsmsctar sarranees TRE caRCTTNistAt aE

ene Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425,,

Denavan

hinterland was behind his eggresuvely anti-Briteh neateality For the rest od
the war de Valera’s neutrality tilted toward the Alhes-—for example deewred
German fliers were interned for the duration of the war. whereas downed EY
and British fliers were promptly seleased Had the [nob candinal’s virw ef
neutrality gone unrefuted, the stury might hase ended differently

Dunlop also iustrates how Donovan and the OSS suffered an the
Washington bureaucratic infighting from accusations that the; were ton pre
British. When Donovan's proposal to continue the OSS function atcer the war
was leaked to the media, the “leakees”, principally the Ghocage Tabune. were
those who consistently pandered to ante-British sentunents among thea
consumers

Rocats

Cave Brown offers a perspective om Domevon's Irish Cathedse background
that differs markedly from what is said in Gorey Ford aed Durdop. theust, be
agrees with them that it forms an important pact of Derovan’s pelith a!
biography On this aspect of Donovan, Cave Breean’s padeiments seem te have
been formed with a carelessness quite unty pical of the rest of bis book To wit

Item: Fle underplays the fact that Dunovan’s grandparents came from ute
of the areas of Jreland hardest hit by the Fanune Joseph Keaned.s

grandparents came from Ireland at the same time The percened fecay of
that experience was very strong and Jeng laste a Bish cankine US eff arf
! recent memory was known te remark to frends that he had ba bteeth be. are

the British had starved his grandfather in the Farnine The passece acrns the
Atlantic in “coffin ships” intensified the bitter memery Cave Broan i
ludicrousl, inaccurate in suggesting that becatne the Donenans Wraseld on
ships of British registry their accomm:exdatians must have been supercon tf:
those provided ky other countries Terry Coleman (Pa-cege to Ameria west,
one of several historians who have compared those accommedatvans, wefaver
ably, to tLase afforded African slaves

ftem: Having failed to appreciate how strong fechngs aba the Farone
would persist in any family that survived it Cave Brown durches te the
opposite extreme by professing to find a “Fenian” elencent in Uae Dorn san
household when Donoven was growing up “Ferjaz:” property connotes an
active participant in a conspiracy to destroy Britysh rule in Ereland by armed
force It is surely stretching that term to apply itt the Daaeovan family Tree
young Donovan recited poems by James Clarence Mangan, whe bonged te decd
“the brilliant Irish hosts” into battle, and the enemy Mangan envisioned was
the “old Saxon foe ” It is likely, also, that the newly arsed Irish immcrants
who visited the Donovan hausehold in the 15905 and E59 found that enmity
toward England was not discouraged by the ceuntry of their adeustion “Brith
Isles immigrants were, in fact. required to swear on their preprinted
citizenship certificates that they renounced allegiance to net ort eves
: foreign potentate, but especially the "QUREN OF GREAT BRITAIN AND
TRELAND"-—-an oath to which this writer’s County Derry grandfather for
example, subscribed with evident joy) But Donovan's brother Vincent a+

A A NC ss ae

!
1
E
|
|
|
74

Pome Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425 Bae ae

mg pproved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425

Donovan

quoted by Corey Ford, surely had it right in suggesting that his brother's
“dream of leading an Irish regiment into battle” had been fulfilled when he
would “command the bravest of them all, the Fighting Irish pf New York's
69°'—for the US, not for Ireland, and as Britain’s ally, not hes enemy °

Item: Having ascribed a “Fenian” family environment to Donovan Care
Brown is somewhat at a loss to eaplain how Donovan and the British got along
so well together when they first met during World War 1 Cave Brow n's
solution has been to offer as a plausible scenario (on pp 30-35 of his bork and
in remarks made in January 19$3 on a local TV station’ that British
intelligence recruited Donovan to spy on the Germans during World War 1
and then essentially put his name in the hles until Stephenson re-activated
him, so to speak, in 1940 Troy has taken out after Cave Brown in his
newsletter (Foreign Intelligence Literary Scene, February 1953:, arguing that
Cave Brown has greatly misconstrued a passage in Troy's book Troy says the
absolute minimum about Donovan's Irish Catholic background in that book,
no doubt because he does not consider it germane to his story vf bureaucratic
warfare—thovgh arguably some of the vigor with which Denevan pussned
these battles, and perhaps much of the protectiveness and personal attention
he displayed toward his own rank-and-hle, were typical of wha! one might ex-
pect of a latter-day Celtic chieftain In any case Troy realizes that to label
Donovan as a British spy. without conclusive proof, is to slander Donovan as
an American and as an Irish Catholic

Item: Hay ing allowed for the strong possibility that Donovan had worked
for British intelligence prior to World War li, Cave Brown seems surprised at
Donovan's lack of docility toward the British during the war He invokes the
authority of certain unnamed British officials that Donovan continned to
display certain “Fenian” tendencies during the war Case Brown presumably
is referring ta those occasions when Donovan objected to attempts by the
British to control all OSS intelligence activities in the European Theater of Op-
erations Ed Sayle, curator of the CIA Historical Intelligence Collection, called
to this writer’s attention a memorandum from Donovan to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, in which he observed, inter aha, that the British had developed “the
habit of control” over other countries’ intelligence services in physical
proximity to theirs “through their relations with refugee governments and
refugee intelligence services ” But, as Donovan stressed, “we are not a refugee
government.” Sayle’s comment is that Donovan's argument was not the
emotional outpouring of one’s ethnic ancestral juices, but the properly
reasoned statement of an American patriot. Perhaps, but this writer would
wager that some Britons at the time might have judged otherwise, and that the
Irish Catholic in Donovan made his pencil bite into the paper as he drafted
those words. In any case, Donovan showed himself here and on other occasions
to be anything but a British agent. He was at most what some Russians refer to

* Even as a toy, Dunlop records, Donovan was willing to side with a “narrow hack if be
thought that boy was being unfairly bulhed “Narrow back” —still ssed sn seme Irish Catholic
neighborhonds— neath, encapsslates a set of ethnic, rehgieus. and class disinchens referring
plimarily to a Protestant of British Isles descent vho has inherited affluence Denesan in ather
words, had learred at an early age to judge situations objectively and act on these consichiers

75

Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425,

‘Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047429 ENE

Donovan

asa doverifel’naya styaz'—an influential person in one country who hac come
to believe that the national interests of his or her country usually coincide with
those of another country, and therefore might be counted on to give Lavorable
consideration to a request for assistance Donovan's relationship with the
British was of that kind And the argument itsel{—"we are not a refugee
government”—was worth making, not just to deal with the immediate
problem, but for the longer term good relationship between the intelligence
services of the US and Britain

The Last Hero?

Except for the foregoing, Cave Brown is generous to Donovan in his
overall evaluation of the man himself and the organization he created Its as
appropriate for him to quote Eisenhower's tribute to Donovan as “the last
hero” as it is petty for David Kahn to dispute the appellation One world hope
that more Americans might achieve as much for their country as Donesar did
but one comes away from these four books with doubts about that The world
has become so complex and compartmentahzed that it is difficult for any one
individual to distinguish oneself as much as Donovan, in personal bravery.
intellectual advancement, and broad political and military influence. or ta
have such achievements as widely acclaimed in positive lerms AS a natien.
moreover, we have grown more suspicious of would-be heroes, even theuch
sometimes we regret that we are so cynical In some sense, then, the epitaph yn
the old language of Donoven’s grandparents does apply 1 bheidh a lettherh
eris ann”“'We shal] not Jook upon their like again ”

76

i
| Approved for Release: 2014/09/12 C00047425 ~ :
