Probable Developments Following the UN General Assembly Resolution to Te Rminat
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011833, dated 4 November 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011833).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

otter e 74

F

APS dale atc an

ee ApEtte 1h ays

Maggot

“tet

Authenticated: :

AOD OR MLSE

npernngagiersen 1 rane

“YDecember | 1966"; 3: Z

SPECIAL

| SS ee Bee |
NUMBER -70-2:66 Aue ease |

(Supplements SNIE 70-66) Mandatory Review. ee
Case# NLJZ99-924 <1]
Document — - aca ee

General Ase Resolution to. Terminate.

SR ae, Pos

Submitted by

DIRECTOR OF. CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE =

Conturred_in by-the-

“UNITED” STATES INTELLIGENCE. BOARD.
As indicated overleaf —.- .
1 December 1966

RU 980,

pany

eaten

waste et

Waa

’

a Matty +

THE PROBLEM

“PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS. FOLLOWING. THE .~
" UN GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION TO TER-

MINATE THE_SOUTH-WEST AFRICA MANDATE

To estimate probable developments, particularly reactions of key.
countries, following the recent UN General Assembly resolution ter-

minating South Africa’s mandate in South-West Africa and placing the

territory under direct UN responsibility.

SUMMARY. AND- CONCLUSIONS

A. The October_1966 UN General Assembly resolution ending —..

South Africa’s mandate in South-West Africa and placing the territory

under direct UN_résponsibility has set the stage for a confrontation

between the UN and South Africa. Talks through diplomatic channels

may produce some new South African proposals, perhaps leading to - --

a plan by which Pretoria would continue to administer the territory

under UN supervision. But it is highly unlikely that the South Africans .__

will agree to give up administration of the territory or to accept UN

supervision of its administration.’ We believe the African states will

settle for nothing less than the ouster of South Africa from South-West
Africa, (Paras. 1-2,9) -

B. We believe it unlikely that the Security Council would adopt
mandatory economic or military sanctions against South Africa. - Even

if the Security Council did adopt mandatory. eccnomic sanctions, itis" ~
unlikely that all iinportant countries would effectively. enforce the.

measure. If all South Africa’s major trading partners cooperated in

Me. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,

"believes that it is possible that the Soath Africans might accept some degree of UN supervision

over their administration of South-West Africa, although he agrees that the chances are against
such an arranyerent.

applying economic sanctions over a protracted period, this might bring
some rmodification in South African attitudes. But in this case, we
think it more‘likely that the South Africans would become even more
intransigent. (Paras. 11-17, 21-24)

C. We further believe that any attempt forcibly to dislodge South
Africa’s hold on South-West Africa would require a major military ef-
fort, even if backed by a Security Council resolution or by a “Uniting
for Peace” resolution of the General Assembly. It is virtually certain
that none of the major European powers, including the USSR, would

provide sufficient financial or military force to oust South Africa from
South- West Africa. (Paras, 25-26) Price

DISCUSSION
“1. ‘THE SOUTH-WEST. AFRICA ISSUE IN THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY

A. Introduction

|
|
___ 1, In October 1966, the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution terminating |
South Africa’s mandate in South-West Africa and making the territory a direct
UN responsibility. The resolution also established an Ad Hoc Committee for
“South-West Africa to recommend practical means to administer the territory prior |
~ to independence, and to report to a Gencral Assembly special session by April
1967. For the next few months, the matters of principal importance will be the
_ attitudes of the black African states, the work of the Ad Hoc Committee, and the
~~ reactions of South Africa. As the period of initial maneuvering draws to a close,
the UN will face the problem of how, in fact, to remove South-West Africa from
South Africa’s jurisdiction. At this point, the positions of the permanent mem-
bers of the Security Council and of certain other interested countries will gain in
importance.
|
|
i

B. Black African Reactions

2. For most black Africans South Africa is the real target. South-West Africa...
is important primarily as a means of bringing US and UK power to bear on South 4
Africa. The black African states, already frustrated and bitter over the in-
cfectiveness of numerous past UN resolutions, will seek to apply new pressures ~~
to precipitate a showdown. ~

3. As a first step, the Africans will almost certainly-seek an early test of South ___

Africa’s intentions with regard to the General Assembly resolution. The Africans

are aware that in order to obtain the widest possible backing for their cause at

the UN, they should build a case suited to UN procedures. Therefore, they will

probably press the Ad Hoc Committee to send a political mission to South-West - - ~

Africa or, alternatively, to South Africa. The Africens almost certainly calculate

that Pretoria would refuse to permit a UN mission even to enter the territory, . |
and that this would make more certain a showdown between the UN and South

Africa at the, time of the special session. Even if the South Africans were dis-

posed to allow a UN group to visit the mandate, such a gesture would fall far :
short of satisfying the Africans who want to separate South-West Africa from...
South Africa’s control.

C. South Africa’s Reactions Fitna

4. Prime Minister Verwoerd’s death and Vorster’s succession have not altered
South Africa’s basic intransigence on the South-West Africa issue. Retention of
the territory is regarded by most white South Africans, regardless of party al- a
legiance, 2s a matter of national prestige and as necessary to the security Of Se ee
their country. The International Court of Justice (IC]) decision in July 1966 dis-

missing the case brought by Ethiopia and Liberia? was seen by the South
- Africans as a vindication of their legal and moral position. Hence, they were
offended to have the US and UK Goveruments endorse the proposition that
Pretoria has forfeited its right to the mandate. The fact that the UK and
' France. failed to support, and the US voted against, South Africa’s position in
the General Assembly has contributed further t) the beleaguered state of mind
of the South African whites.

5. Without yielding any of the substance of their position, the South Africans
are unlikely to take provocative action if they can avoid it. New to the job
and aware of the pitfalls, Vorster is likely to act cautiously in foreign affairs, He
has allowed South Africa's representatives abroad a litde more freedom of action

‘than they had under Verwoerd, and this has given the appearance of some
flexibility. - ‘Their responses, particularly the" Foreign” Minister's, to the recent
General Assembly debates on South-West Africa have been moderate. More-
over, the South Africans have misgivings over their growing isolation from the:
West, and the government hopes to keep lines open to the US and remain on
good terms with the UK, if possible.

6. In these circumstances, Pretoria will probably avoid bringing troops into the
territory, which would violate the terms of the mandate. -Nor do we think that

South Africa will annex South-West Africa or begin to carry out the Odendaal __

Cormmissioa recommendations to establish “Bantustans,”. which would serve
chiefly to inflame many UN members. But it will almost certainly tighten its
already powerful grip on South-West-Africa by further-istegrating some of the,
territory's administrative and financial institutions with those of the Republic;

by increasing the police force, and by gradually introducing stronger intemmal~- ~~~ ~~~

security measures in the territory. None of the skirmishing in the UN will have

much effect on the situation in the barren reaches of South-West Africa, There —

is little likelihood of significant political action by nonwhites, both because of
tribal disunity and tight security controls. Externally based nationalist groups
will probably attempt to infiltrate guerrillas, but there is little doubt that South
African security forces can deal with any threats that arise.

7. The South African Government would prefer to remain in the UN. It will
be likely to do so at least until the Genera! Asseinbly has acted on the Ad Hoc
Committee's report, and beyond that time if possible, depending on the nature
of any Security Council action. South Africa would almost certainly leave the
UN if sanctions of any kind were voted, or at the first sign of enforcement action.
The government would do so as a matter of national pride, and would have
broad public support.

8. Indeed, the South Africans are increasingly confident of their ability to

ride out sanctions, particularly in view of the failure of sanctions in Southern --.

Rhodesia, and because of their own steadily growing self-sufficiency. Moreover,
ey have considerable confidence_in_their ability. to stave olf the imposition of

See Abeee: SNIE 70-66, “Probable Repercussions of the South-West Africa Issue,” dated
2 June 1966, SECRET.

sanctions, because other nations Mould also suffer from them. They can
_ fetaliate economically against the UK, directly.as well as by action agairst the

small, poor states of Botswana and Lesotho, and to a lesser extent Swaziland,

which are virtually economic hostages to South Africa and for which the UK
“feels responsibility.

' 9. Talks through diplomatic channels may produce some new South African

" proposals, perhaps leading to a plan by which Pretoria would continue to ad-
minister the territory under UN supervision. But it is highly unlikely that the

~South Africans will agree to give up administration cf the territory or to accept
UN supervision of its administration? We believe the African States will settle
for nothing less than the ouster of South Africa from South-West Africa,

10. Sometime after the’ Ad Hoc Committee reports to the General Assembly,
it will have probably become apparent that there was scant hope of negotiating
Seuth Africa out of South-West Africa. The General Assembly then wotld al-
most certainly call upon the Security Council to compel compliance with the
Assembly's earlier decision to strip South Africa of its mandate. In this arena,
the reactions of the major powers would be-of crucial importance since they
would be called upon to deal with the key questions conceming the territory:
how control is to be wrested from South Africa; who is to administer the area

oace the UN obtains control; who is.to-fnance the administration?

I, THE SOUTH-WEST AFRICA ISSUE IN THE SECURITY COUNCIL

A. Reactions of the Permanent Members of the Security Council . ”

11. Each of the permanent members of the Security Council will probably

seek to avoid or at least to minimize-its direct entanglement in this intractable

issue, and will strongly resist new and potentially expensive commitments to the

UN or to the African cause. On the other hand, each will strive to avoid, insofar
as possible, giving offense to the Africans. ~ Some of the permanent members

will seek whenever possible to avoid vetoing African-backed proposals. De- ore
velopments in the Security Council will depend in part on the circumstances of LEAS
the moment at the UN, positions taken on earlier resolutions, and the precise Pacer aes
terminology of the resolution at hand, as well as considerations of national ine ~

terests apart from those in play at the UN.
ef <

13 (a)

fn
. (YS

*Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, The Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State,
believes that it is possible that the South Africans might accept some degree of UN supervision
over their administration of South-West Africa, although he agrees that the chances are against
such an arrangement. He believes that even limited South African concessions on this issue,
however, would introduce a new element into the situation which might affect the course
of events projected in the estimate.

3 | al

sete * nite Bie sh ale bade

16. The USSR. Since South-West Africa is etabarrassing to the Western
Powers and enables the Soviets to curry favor with the Africans on the cheap, the
USSR and its allies will continue to expioit the issue to back publicly the African
position at every opportunity. The USSR is on record at the UN favoring Se-
curity Council action if necessary to take away the mandate, though it ap-
‘parently adopted this position reluctantly. Propaganda statements apart, how-
ever, the USSR to date has acted with considerable restraint in this matter, and
we think it would prefer that the Africans cope with the South-West Africa prob-
len inside the Organization of African Unity (OAU). And there are limits on
how far the USSR is prepared to go on behalf of the Africans, particularly in
the UN.

- 17. We think the Soviets will not take the lead in any proposed Security Coun-
~ cil action. Above all, they will seek to avoid being maneuvered into a position
‘where they would be the decisive force, or where they might have to cast the

decisive vote. They would, however, go along with economic sanctions; on the

calculation that this would make considerable trouble for the West and very
little for themselves... They-would readily support diplomatic sanctions. If a
proposal for military sanctions came to a vote in the Security Council, the USSR

might Gnd it expedient to support-it- despite-its-record of opposition to UN

peacekeeping forces. - Moscow's past opposition to UN peacekeeping forces has
been based on the proposition that the General Assembly has no authority to

initiate military action; Moscow has not denied that the Security Council has

such authority. In the unlikely event that a UN force is authorized by Security .

Council action, it is possible that the USSR might offer token nancial or material
support, but it would be highly unlikely to provide military manpower.

18. Nationalist China would almost certainly support almost any African pro-
posal because it needs African backing on the question of Peking’s membership
in the UN.

B. Altitudes of Other Interested States

19. Portugal. Salazar can be counted on to exercise prudence in conducting

Portugal’s policies with respect to the South-West Africa problem. Essentially, -
of course, he hopes that Portugal’s overseas provinces, Angola and Mozambique,

can avoid being caught up in the dispute. They can do so unless the UN
should undertake to mount a naval blockade against South Africa, .In that event,
Salazar would probably cooperate with South Africa, for he would not want
an independent black African state immediately south of Angola. However, he
would not do so blatantly. Salazar is probably confident that he could cary
on low-key cooperation with South Africa without much fear of interference from
the UN, since any blockade or sanctions against Mozambique and Angola would
have adverse effects on neighboring Malawi, Zambia, Congo (Kinshasa), Swazi-
land, and Southern Rhodesia, all of which depend in large measure on transport
routes through these territories, ,

aspen seasase tle

Rte inal

~~ resolution to withdraw diplomatic chiefs of mission), followed by communications

sia ACY

= G. The Security Council and the Black: African Nations-
241. Many members of the Security Council are likely to urge a graduated ap-

proach, beginning with limited political sanctions against Pretoria. (eg.. a

cutoffs, voluntary trade sanctions, selective mandatory sanctions, and the like.
The Africans will be impatient with this approach. --They would demand at
least selective economic sanctions to begin with (most likely zn embargo on oil
shipments), and they would probably make a strong effort to apply full sanctions
against South Africa. By achieving support for any kind of economic sanctions
the Africans would hope to commit others irrevocably to their side.

22. Pastly for this reason and partly because the Africans are well aware of ~
the OAU’s weaknesses, they would probably scuttle any Security Council attempt
to turn over the South-West Africa issue to the OAU, as the regional organiza-
tion concerned.— Nor is there more than a slim chance at best that they would ——.--- ...
return the problem to the ICJ, as the UK and France would like.

23. Despite the factors mentioned in the preceding paragraphs militating
against the imposition of mandatory economic sanctions by the Security Council,
we cannot exclude the possibility that over: time some of the attitudes of the
permancat members may be modified.” UN consideration of the South-West
Africa issue will be a prolonged process, not a single decisive confrontation, and
the development of the Rhodesian situation may make it more difficult for certain
UN members to vote against sanctions.

D. Enforcement of Sonctions

24. If the Security Council adopted a resolution imposing economic sanctions
on South Africa, it is unlikely that all important countries would effectively en-
force the measure. ‘The South African economy is sufficiently strong to cushion
the impact in many ways, probably for a protracted period of time. If all South
Africa’s major trading partners cooperated in applying economic sanctions over
a protracted period, this might bring some modification in South African attitudes, = = =
But in this case, we think it more likely that the South Africans would become

even more intransigent.

25. If economic sanctions were inyposed, and it became clear that South Africa
remained essentially unshaken, the Africans would then concentrate their efforts
on gaining Security Council support for military sanctions against South Africa. —-_—__-_ -
Failure to win Security Council backing for military sanctions might lead the as
African countries to press for General Assembly action. Should the Security
Council fail to agree on military sanctions, two-thirds of the members of the
General Assembly could recommend collective measures, including the use of

Roce af! Rote Vikas aime ip dewan peste

: : ‘
sats mei ato nomortamsr cranes ihn EN cot ica meee led ean ats) eee P ts mer

armed force, similar to the “Uniting tor Peace” resolution approved during the

Korean crisis in 1950. Subsequent action, however, would require some solution

to the longstanding problem of financing UN peacekeeping operations, and it

would’ be necessary to overcome Soviet and French objections to General

Assembly efforts to establish military forces. Moreover, it would require active
" support by at least one major power. - ;

26. We believe that any attempt forcibly to dislodge South Africa’s hold on
South-West Africa would require a major military effort, even if backed by a
Security Council resolution or by a “Uniting for Peace” resolution of the Cencra!
Assembly. It is virtually certain that none of the major European powers, includ-
ing the USSR, would provide sufficient financial or military force to oust South
Africa froin South-West Africa.

janes ates ae mee *

mee aie Gtr. oe oN epee ee ma od A am a ane wt te eee caimamcmammmmman mw) aa ows + e teat wt tna neem ene tee sp meed ama waters + Me

aye erence Saar Tes ited REN

ee em *
