The Military Buildup in Cuba
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132651, dated 4 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132651).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

NOT RELEASABLE TO

. 9 February 1961
‘FOREIGN NATIONALS ° OCI No, 0592/61-C

CONTINUED CONTROL Copy No.

cS
a

THE MILITARY BUILDUP IN CUBA

A Report Prepared by an Ad Hoc
Committee of the United States
Intelligence Board

THIS MATERIAL CONTAINS INFORMATION AFFECT-
ING THE NATIONAL DEFENSE OF THE UNITED STATES
“WITHIN THE MEANING OF THE ESPIONAGE LAWS,
TITLE 18, USC, SECTIONS 793 AND 794, THE TRANSMIS-
SION OR REVELATION OF WHICH IN ANY MANNER TO
AN UNAUTHORIZED PERSON IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.

Approved by the United
States Intelligence Board
7 February 1961

Pid HISTORICAL f REVE

Dory

nw»
’

MILITARY BUILDUP IN CUBA

Table of Contents

PART I Conclusions (SECRET)
PART II Discussion (SECRET)
PART III Chronology of Significant Events Since

1 January 1959 (SECRET NOFORN)
Annexes Annex 1 Arms and Equipment of Cuban Army (SECRET)
Annex 2 Cuban Air Force Equipment (SECRET)

Annex 3 Soviet Bloc Policy Toward Cuba (SECRET)

Bee f Gerers] Maw of Cuhe Which flee theres
Snes: Songs ate te ee CY Ce ta ad AREA pa
Annex 5° A List of Dates When Selected
Countries -Recognized the Castro
Regine (UNCLASSIFIED)
Aunex 6 A List of Dates When Countries
Broke or Suspended Relations
With Cuba (UNCLASSIFIED)
THE PROBLEM
To assess the extent of Sino-Soviet Bloc military
collaboration with the Castro regime, to examine in detail the

Cuban military buildup since Castro came to power, to estimate

the intentions of the Castro regime with regard to this buildup,

I
CONCLUSIONS

1. The Bloc has already extended considerable military assistance
to Cuba in the form of more than 30,000 tons of military equipment and
LPO rrr,
some military and economic technicians and advisers, Thus far, some
re 10 helicopters, 12 Czech piston trainers, and a wide assortment of arm-
aments ranging from small arms thru heavy tanks have been positively
identified. An estimate of the total quantities and types of equipment

received thus far is shown in Annex 1, here is no hard evidence that

[cupa has as yet received MIG aircraft, nbr is there firm evidence] that

_

re eye SE te cles aon DRM ie OM a hate ar e o o tT
Cuba, Bloc assistance is likely to be continued and expanded, though
it is highly unlikely that Soviet nuclear weapons or the) latest models
of major military itens Will be included in the foreseeable future,
Military training of Sabene in the Bloc is continuing and some may
have already returned for duty in Cuba. Soviet Bloc military techni-
cians are in Cuba. No Chinese Communist military personnel have been
identified as being in Cuba at this time.

2. No Sino-Soviet Bloc country is likely to conclude a formal
mutual defense agreement with Cuba sonmiteiae 48 to active participa-

tion in military operations in defense of that country, or to estab-
lish military bases there. Khrushchev'ts statements implying Soviet
military support for Cuba in the event of a US attack have been

qualified and were calculated to create a presumption of Seviet in-
tentions rather than an actual Soviet commitment. At the same time,

these statements opened the way for the Soviet Union to claim credit

for deterring an attack by anti-Castro forces, We believe it highly

t

unlikely that the USSR would consider the survival of the Castro
‘Tgime so luportant aa to require it to pursue courses of action
that would risk war with the US. |

30° There 1s currently no evidence that any Sino-Soviet Bloc
country has dispatched or is organizing a "volunteer" force for
military service in Cuba. Moreover, it is unlikely that any Bloc
country would seriously contemplate the development of such a force
for deployment to Cuba, in view of the difficulty in supporting
such a force logistically and the risk of having such a force be~
come involved in a conflict with the United States under circum-
stances disadvantageous to them,

4. Tne Sino-soviet Kloc nas neverxhe tess; gone 4 Ong wey
toward identifying itself with the maintenance of the Castro regime.
Its economic assistance is considerable. The successful Soviet
effort to provide Cuba with all its petroleum needs has been at
considerable expense and disruption to its normal tanker operations
and the Soviet Union has given priority to other Cuban needs even
on oceasion at the expense of other trading partners,

S. The Sino-Soviet Bloc's support for the Castro regime is
part of its larger efforts to isolate the United States and to
weaken and eventually ‘destroy its influence throughout the world,
The Soviets desire to establish Cuba as a seture base of operations
for furthering their aims throughout Latin America, The Castro.
regime has already become an effective instrument of the Bloc to-
ward achieving these ends in Latin America and, to a lesser extent,

among underdeveloped and emerging nations throughout the world.

~2 -2-

in short, for most practical purposes, the present Cuban Government can
be regarded as Communist, and its military dependence on the Bloc is
steadily increasing, Cuba, under the present Communist control, pro-.
vides a better base of Operations for subversion and propaganda through~
out Latin America than the Soviets have ever had. The strongly anti-
United States and pro-Soviet regime of Castro's serves their purposes
well; it gives a native color to Communist agitation and limits the risk
of a hemisphere-wide reaction against outside Communist intervention,

6. The Soviet Bloc military equipment already shipped to
Cuba, as well as prior military purchases by Castro from Western

wULGCeL L.

we ey ee Nae he ee eee a i a -* + co o c

- SS ne

forces there. As a result, the Cuban ground forces are probably now
better equipped than those of any other Latin American country, with
the possible exception of Brazil, though the Cubans may have some
initial maintenance difficulties and, over the longer run, some spare
parts problems, The Cuban military buildup is reflected in the great
expansion of perSonnel in the Cuban military and militia forces. Be-
fore Castro, the ground forces consisted of a 21,000-man army and a
national police force of 7,650, The present Cuban ground forces
consist of the Revodutionary Army of approximately 32,000 the
Revolutionary National Police of 9,000, and the militia estimated at
nore than 200,000. [the combat capabilities of the army and the

militia are still low, but dnereasing steadily, . The navy and the
en,

.air force have generally deteriorated in capabilities, and are to be

considered as ineffective combatant units,

7. %Initially, the purpose of Cuba's military buildup was
self defense. Anti-Castro guerrillas have been active in several
areas inside Cuba and exile groups pose a constant invasion threat,
However, the current sharpening and eevuuetieniae of ali the in-
struments of police state control suggest that the related motive
of tightening the dictatorship is an equal, if not presently the
prime, purpose of the military buildup. The regime, which has set
out to impose a thorough socio-economic revolution on the country
at a faster pace than almost any other government in history, evi-
dently estimates that its domestic Siiectaves can be achieved only
throuch the rerimentation of the Cuban people under a police state,
This clearly parallels the objectives of the Cuban Communist Party
and thus furthers -the aims of the international Communist movement.

8. The militia is a primary instrument of the state in.
strengthening and extending its control. Drawn from rural and
urban lower income groups, 4. hard oore of!.the. militia is-well-

‘

equippéd:and is organized with increasing efficiency while a larger
portion is undergoing regular part time military training. Some
militia units have been assigned to duties normally carried out
by the armed forces. The militia provides the government: with a
substantial armed force with wien to control the Sopuluce as a
whole and subjects a relatively large number of Cubans to military
discipline and political indoctrination. At the same time, it con-
tributes toward solving the serious unemployment problem. Commu-
nist influence in the militia is extensive. /On the other hand,

militia fighting capability has not really been tested and the

fact that large numbers of militiamen have been pressured into service
may be a factor in the many desertions of militiamen to date,

9. The Castro regime is convinced that the Cuban revolution is
‘the vanguard of “the anti~imperialist rebellion" that will inevitably
sweep all of Latin America. It is actively encouraging and covertly
assisting Communist and Communist-influenced revolutionary groups
in other Latin American countries at every opportunity. Its methods
include intensive propaganda supported by the Castro-subsidized
international news agency that has close working ties with Sino-

Soviet Bloc news agencies and reflects the propaganda line of Moscow

Communist—oriented student and labor groups with propaganda material
and financial assistance: ‘The arks buildup in Cuba will permit the
Cubans to supply weapons to pro-Castro groups in other countries,
Receipt of Bloc military equipment permits Cuba to furnish Western-
manufactured arms now in their possession for this purpose. The
reshipment of Bloc arms to other Latin American countries will prob-
ably be avoided for some time in order to remove the unfavorable in-
plications that might arise from their discovery,

10. Cuban subversion is further supported by the Castro-sub-
sidized travel to Cuba of numerous Latin Americans who are exposed
there to further political indoctrination and, according to fre-
quent reports, given military training.

11. Direct Cuban intervention against another government in

the form of a large scale Cuban-based invasion force does not ap-

pear likely at present. Cuban assistance to rebel movements in

other countries will probably continue, however, Under certain
circumstances, only a small quantity of weapons would be suffi-_
cient to seriously threaten a government already weakened by
internal subversion, Cuban arms aid is likely to be limited for
the most part to Communist or Communist-~influenced groups and pro-
vided when Cuban leaders estimate that the planned revolution

has a reasonable chance of Success, There is as yet no evidence
of direct Cuban involvement in the various Central American

outbreaks in mid-November,

policy by trying to suppress the Cuban
revolution,’ and charged “Eisenhower's gov-
ernment" with supporting reactionary

forces not only in Cuba but also in Laos
and the Cargo. Despite the belligerent
tone of his remarks, however, Khrushchev
continued to be vague in pledging Soviet.
support and promised only that the "Cuban
people can always count on the support
and aid of the Soviet people." ©&

4 January 1961 The Panamanian government recalled its
ambassador to Cuba for urgent consulta-
tions. According to a usually reliable
source, the ambassador was to return
immediately to Havana and notify the
Cuban Foreign Office that its ambassador
in Panama had been declared persona

non grate. The same source reported

Se AY SA Ss mepiieh. Wash tr Tye fclar errroting Co epee
repiacement ior the Cuban ambassador

for a period of at least two or three
months pending further determination
regarding a possible break in diplomatic
relations. & ai

6 January 1961 In a speech to party leaders, published
as a Kommunist article on 17 January,
Khrushchev said that “solidarity with
revolutionary Cuba is the duty not only
of the people of Latin America; it is
also the duty of the socialist countries,
of the entire international Communist
movement, the proletariat of all areas
of the world." 42 eee Sek

% January 1961 Bucharest announced that a 1961 protocol
to the five-year Rumanian-Cuban trade
agreement had been signed. Provision
was made for Rumania to supply Cuba with
industrial goods under a $15 million
credit agreement. SLE:

7 January 1961 Soviet Deputy Foreign Trade Minister
Kuzmin stated in Moscow that the USSR
would ship 4.4 millicn tons of petroleum
and petroleum products to Cuba in 1961
as well as 200,000 tons of mineral
fertilizers. Agreements for these

commodities were gs

ned during Kuzmin's

trip to Cuba.

9 January 1961 “Che" Guevara, reporting on his tour of
' the Bloc, revealed that "various socialist

countries" had concluded a multilateral
payments agreement with Cuba under which
Havana can sell to one country and buy
from another. The arrangement is unique
in Sino-Soviet trade relations with non-
bloc countries and it again underscores
the special position Cuba occupies vis-
a~vis the Bloc. Altogether Bloc countries
are scheduled to take 4,000,000 tons of
Cuban sugar in 196l--about two-thirds of
the expected crop--at a fixed price of
four cents a pound. @

12- January 1961 After long deliberation, the Uruguayan
National Council of Government decided
tc Geelere the Cuhan srheceador to
MONLEVIGEO anG we First secretary Gi
the Soviet embassy there as persona non
grate. Both diplomats presumably were involved
in the pro-Castro demonstrations and
street fights which had led to a govern-
ment raid on Communist headquarters and
the arrest of — ersonus on the previous

13 January 1961 Under the terms of a five-year technical
assistance agreement signed by Cuban
and Bulgarian officials in Sofia,
Bulgaria agreed to accept 20 Cuban students
in its universities as well as one hundred
workers for "technical training." "Che"
Guevara reported on 7 January that similar
agreements reached during his tour of nine
Bloc countries provided for the training

of 2,700 Cuban technicians in Bloc countries.

13 January 1961 A large number of mobile radar stations
have been observed in “the vicinity of
the Cuban naval base at M

He also reported that Cuban military
personnel are being trained in the
operation of these radar stations by
Czech instructors, and part of the

training program consisted of identifying
commercial aircraft flying to and from

14 January 1961

attended the Cuban revolutionary
celebrations in Havana returned to

El] Salvador. They were believed to

be armed with new plans and instruc-—
tions for pushing the provisional
Salvadoran government further toward
the left and allegedly returned with
$500,000 from the Cuban government.

A second report, which originated

from an untested source, stated that
Fidel. Castro had personally informed
the Salvadoran visitors in Havana that
he would assist in defeating the
Salvadoran army should that group attempt
to take over the Salvadoran government.

16 January 1961 A five-year trade and payments agreement
between Cuba and Albania was signed in
Tirana on 16 January. ...#ith this-agree-
ment Havana completed its current round
of economic negotiations with the Bloc
and now has signed formal economic pacts
with all twelve countries of the Sino-
Soviet Bloc. Under these agreements, a
total of $245 million in long-term credits
has been extended by the Bloc to Cuba.

20 January 1961 The American embassy in Moscow reported
that “solidarity meetings" in Soviet
factories, as described by a number of
press reports, featured pledges of support
by Soviet trade union groups for the
Cuban revolution. Accounts of these
meetings usually featured the “warning"
that in the event of a US attack on Cuba,
the Cuban people would have the support
of all peoples, "and first in line will

be the heroic working class of the Soviet
Union." Beto

25 January 1961

Saree
LaF IIE.
eit “=!

—

_ DISCUSSION -
Sino-Soviet Kilitary Collaboration With The Castro Regime

1. Following the seizure of power by the Castro regime in= January
1959, intermittent Cuban military contacts were made with Sino-Soviet Bloc
countries--notably Czechoslovakia--but these apparently did not result
in firm military aid commitments until the early summer of 1960. Ags
Cuba's efforts to purchase military goods in the.Free World became
increasingly difficult throughout 1959 and early 1960, Cuban arms pur-
chasing missions traveled to the Bloc to investigate new sources of
Supply. Discussions reportedly covered a whole range of equipment
Tate Fee e Cee be Keen Gee ELecleLG,

2. These preliminary ‘contacts may have crystallized during First
Deputy Premier Mikoyan's visit to Cuba in February 1960, when Moscow
abandoned its policy of aloofness toward the Cuban revolution and public~
ly announced its Support of the Castro regime. Mikoyants visit Signaled
the beginning of a series of trade and aid agreements between Cuba and
nearly all countries of the Sino-Soviet Bloc. As political and economic
contacts were established, it became apparent that the Bloc intended to
back up its propaganda support for Cuba with a major campaign of material
assistance.

' 3. Soviet activities in exploiting the rapid deterioration of US-
Cuban relations, however, were inhibited during the spring of 1960 by
the impending summit conference and President Eisenhower's scheduled
visit to the USSR. With the collapse of the summit in Kay and the can-
cellation of the President's trip, these inhibitions were removed and

the Bloc launched a more intensive drive to expand its influence over

-l1-

tf

the Castro regime. In the post-summit period this campaign has included
public attacks on the validity of the Monroe Doctrine and assurances of
Soviet support in the event of economic or military measures that the US
might undertake against Cuba, These assurances--including the ambiguous
references to retaliation with missiles-~have been phrased broadly enough
to cover the supply of military equipment and technical assistance withou:
committing the USSR to specific military action in support of Cuba.

4. Soon after the summit collapse in May, Cuban military negotia-
tions apparently were undertaken with the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia

Czech-Cuban talks in Havana during May and June were immediately followed

up by a trip to Prague and Moscow by Cuban Minister of Armed Forces Raul

- -

oom eee mee a eo) ebore-

to provide for future deliveries of Bloc arms.

5. During the summer of 1960, probably in early July, at least one
partial cargo of Czech small arms and ammunition was delivered to Cuba,
along with five Mi-4 HOUND helicopters. Shortly thereafter, about 60
Cuban military personnel were sent to Czechoslovakia to receive military
training, including flight and artillery instruction, By the end of
August nearly 150 Cubans were receiving military training in Czecho-
slovakia. — “

; 6. Further military talks during July and August probably were hel
concerning detailed arrangements for the delivery of Soviet Bloc arms,
accompanied: by military technicians to provide the necessary training.
Not until September 1960, however, did major shipments get under way.
Since 8 September 1960, there has been delivered more than 30,000 tons
of military materiel to Cuba. Additional deliveries are expected in the

near future,

1

7. Because of the stringent security precautions surrounding
the off-loading of military cargoes in Cuba, information on the exact
total quantities of Bloc material is fragmentary. Shipments have con-—
Sisted of helicopters and piston traines aircraft, a complete range of
land armaments, including tanks, field and antiaircraft artillery,
military vehicles, and large quantities of infantry weapons and ammuni-—
tion. In addition, radar and communications equipment may have been
delivered. Total estimated value of these shipments is about $50,000,000,
Considering the type of equipment and estimated Bloc deliveries, the

Cuban ground forces are probably now better equipped than those of any

ac? a a fa eae tn ee otter Bese) ee at, arent hIA evreantion of Tere 7

They will probably experience some initial difficulty in providing
adequately trained maintenance personnel for this equipment. Over the
long run some spare parts problems may arise. These estimated Bloc
deliveries provide the Castro regime with suitable armaments for
defensive purposes against external invasion by non-nuclear forces,
as well as being very useful for Cuban internal security needs.
8.~\Reports persist that MIG jet fighters are already in Cuba,
but these have not been confirmed, Soviet vessels have delivered
crates which could accommodate fighter aircraft, but the observed
dimensions of these crates do not correlate with those used to deliver
jet fighters to other areas.. Moreover, it is believed that Castro
would have displayed such military items during the 1-2 January anni-
versary celebrations along with other Bloc military equipment for
prestige purposes and as evidence of Cuba's military strength.
Numerous reports have been received of the establishment Of Soviet
missile bases and the presence of Soviet rockets in Cuba, but none

of these have been confirmed. In early January, a source of the

that an unknown quantity of rockets,

Soporte.
Le “aydraulic launchers and six Soviet rocket experts had arrived in
Havana, The source submitted more detailed technical data concerning
these rockets than has been contained in previous reports. A thorough
technical analysis of the information reveals no known Soviet missile
fits the dimensions or details reported, and that no missile, in
fact, would be operable given the technical details included in this
report. |

9. Bloc military deliveries to Cuba thus far have Significantly
assisted the Castro regime in its attempts to develop a greater mili-
tary capability. Despite a long build-up, the Cuban army had almost
no antiaircraft defense capability, and artillery and armored support
waS negligible before the arrival of this type of Bloc equipment. in

addition, the considerable quantities of modern Bloc small arms and

ammunition have enabled the regime to establish-and maintain an expanding
civilianmilitia. If the Soviet Bloc follows its pattern of furnishing
military equipment to non-Bloc countries, it is very unlikely that Cuba
Will be provided with nuclear weapons, missiles, highly advanced air-
craft other than MIG-15's ead. 1715 dh§ other sophisticated weapons,

10, Several Small groups of Cuban military trainees reportedly
were sent to the Bloc prior to the summer of 1960, but no information
is available to confirm these reports, In July and August, however,
two large groups of Cubans were sent to Czechoslovakia and their mission
probably involved military instruction, including artillery methods
and training as pilots and ground crews. Altogether, at least 150

Cubans have probably been receiving military training in Czechoslovakia,

and perhaps a small number in the veer. bite there is no evidence

. that the pilots have completed their training, some of the ground
force trainees may have already completed their training and returned
to cuba. \ It appears likely that cadets sent for pilot training in the
Bloc had little previous military experience. If so, these student
pilots may be receiving only preliminary flight instruction in Czecho-_
slovakia and they may return to Cuba for jet transition training on
Bloc aircraft) which if not already delivered) can be expected to
arrive by the time this training is completed. |
11. Precise information is unavailable on the numbers and activi-

ties of Bloc military technicians in Cuba. Based primarily on Bloc
military technical assistance to other non-Bloc countries and the
ectiroted perme shinwante te Cube thus fer, jt is believed thet fro~

100 to 200 Czech and Soviet technicians currently are working in mili-
tary capacities for the Cuban government. Other reports have indicated ~---
that this number may be somewhat larger, but we believe that most of
these have tended to be exaggerated. No Chinese Communist military
personnel are believed to be in Cuba, although. the possibility cannot
be entirely discounted,

| 12. Soon after the arrival of the first large Bloc arms shipment
in September, Czech and Soviet technicians reportedly were assisting
the Cuban military in assembling equipment and installing such weapons
as antiaircraft batteries. They are employed also as instructors in
military courses and as ad¥isors to individual military units.

13. There is no evidence that Soviet Bloc or other nationals

are being trained in the Bloc for military duty in Cuba. There is

no evidence that any Sino-Soviet Bloc country has dispatched or is
organizing "volunteer" forces for military service in Cuba. Moreover,

it is unlikely that any Bloc country would seriously contemplate the

cevelopment of such a force for deployment to Cuba in view of the
difficulty in supporting such a force and the risk of having such a
force become involved in a conflict with the United States.

14. Cuba's military forces have been drastically altered since
J January 1959. The traditional forces remaining in Cuba following
the fall of the Batista regime have been weakened through the replace-
ment Ofomany experienced career men with untrained recruits who were
judged to be more loyal to the Minister of Revolutionary Armed Forces,
Raul Castro. Further, the regime has transferred many of the respon-
Sibilities of the conventional armed forces to the newly-created
Revolutionary Militia, which the government considers to be a politicall:
renee meliahle riljterr-foreer— —- so

15. The ground forces under Batista consisted of a 21,000-man
Army and a National Police Force of 7,600 who were relatively well-
trained and well-disciplined by Latin American standards. Following
Castro's victory, virtually all elements of Batista's ground forces
were gradually removed. About one-fifth of the present Revolutionary
Army of some 32,000 men were active in guerrilla operations against
Batista, and the remainder is composed of personnel who joined the
Revolutionary movement when its success:had been assured. A similar
Situation is believed to exist in the 9,000-man Revolutionary National
Police organization. Much of the Army effort since 1 January 1959 has.
been devoted to non-military activities; personnel assigned to public
works projects account for the troop strength increase over Batista's
army.

16. Recent efforts toward increasing training and improving the

discipline and appearance of troops appear to have had considerable

success. Arms shipments from Free World and Soviet Bloc countries
have largely eliminated previous shortages of field and antiaircraft,
armor, and close support weapons. The d¢ncreased emphasis on training
and the presence of Bloc military advisers in Cuba is alleviating the
present shortage of personnel trained in the effective utilization of
these weapons. Training of various units has progressed to the point
that they are capable of handling, transporting and firing assigned
weapons; unit firing exercises have been conducted. No combined arms
training is known to have taken place. Tactical communications and
military transport facilities continue to be inadequate for modern
combat. However, deliveries of large amounts of Bloc military trans-
Toe t webiotee awn beater eee. thie Ineresrcing the mobili¢t- -7 7"
Cuban ground forces. It is expected that the combat capability of the
army will increase-steadily. eee

17. The civilian Revolutionay Militia represents the major in-
crease in the size and capability of Castro's ground forces over those
available to Batista. It is estimated to have more than 200,000 men-—
bers. First appearing as early as November 1959, loosely-—organized
units of students, workers, and farmers were officially established
in early January 1960. Training varied widely from unit to unit and
reflected the initiative and energy of individual commanders. In
general, however, militia training has been more uniform ~and extensive
than that conducted by the Army. While a sizeable proportion of the
militia are volunteers, there have been large numbers of young men
and women pressured into service in the militia. This factor may in-
deed be behind the many desertions of militiamentto date and also may
adversely affect the loyalty and fighting capability of the militia

'when the chips are down.

ae: dee

gradually assumed many duties

-18, During 1960, militia units

which formerly were exclusively performed by the Army and National
Police. They effectively performed crowd control duties, such as at
the time of the Cayo Cruz ammunition dump explosion, and they have
acted as security forces in port areas while Soviet Bloc arms ship-
ments have been unloaded. In addition they have effected the take-
over of intervened businesses and are used in guarding vital indus-
tries and utilities against possible sabotage efforts.

19. Beginning in November 1960, a reorganization was initiated
with the design of producing better organized, more closely controlled
battalions, commanded by Militia officers who were graduates of rugged
OCS-type training. Uniforms and modern Soviet Bloc small arms are
being issued all Militia units. Additionally, training of tne miisitia
units on heavier Bloc equipment, and organization of Militia mortar
and artillery units were started in early November. Personnel in these
units function as full-time active duty militiamen; they are between
18 and 30 years of age, are volunteers to the maximum possible extent,
and are drawn largely from the company-size units. Their level of
training is equal to that of equivalent Cuban Armywunits. Full-time
active duty Militia infantry units now bear the brunt of counter-~
guerrilla operations. ) Nevertheless, their fighting capabilities have
not really been tested; and in fact, they seem still to be ineffec-
tive in counter guerrilla operations now going on in the Escambray
mountains. \ Militia sbhools for officers have been established in
Pinar del Rio, Matanzas, and Oriente Provinces.

20. The Cuban Navy has progressively declined in combat capa-
bilities since the fall of the Batista regime. Total personnel

strength has declined from a pre-Castro figure of 6430 to an esti-

As SO ESE SNE oh PEE

mated 4000-5000 at the present time.

The Naval Air Arm was dissolved
by the government in July. 1960 and its functions and equipment trans-
ferréd to the Air Force. The 31 US Navy-trained pilots who had com-
pleted training during the past seven years were discharged. The Navy
was drastically purged after the discovery of an anti-Castro Couspivasy
in August and virtually all ships were deactivated. In the meantime,
navy personnel have been assigned to duties of a non military nature,
such as working for the National Institute of Agrarian Reform, serving
as administrators in intervened businesses, and assisting in the con-
struction of public works projects. In October and November, as a
result of the government's fear of the possibility of an invasion,

ell neweld shins end ereft were heetily resctiveted, partiv +t eta
crews and partly with iill-trained recruits& Since November regular
patrols have been maintained off the north and south coasts of Pinar
del Rio and Habana provinces and off the Isle of Pines, while sporadic
patrols by small craft have been maintained off the remainder of the
coastline. At present the Cuban Navy's patrol capability is fair;

its combat capability is negligible. ,

21. At the time of the takeover from Batista, the Cuban Navy
consisted of the following: 3PF, 2 PCE, 1 PGM, 2 AG, 2 ATR, 9 YAG,
and 29 YP. No additional ships have besa asa Since that time,
although Cuban purchasing missions have unsuccessfully sought to buy
15 high-speed Coast Guard craft, three motor torpedo boats, and two
buoy tenders from West European countries after funds were budgeted
for this purpose in July 1959.

22. The capabilities of the Cuban Air Force have deteriorated a

sharply since the downfall of the Batista regime. It appears that the

“

primary mission of the Cuban Air Force in the pre-revolutionary period
was to support the ground forces in maintaining internal security.

The Air Force never had acquired a good offensive or defensive capa-
bility against the forces of other nations, and it probably would have
been able to offer only token resistance in such an action.

23. The loss of personnel through systematic purges and numerous
pilot defections since January 1959 have reduced the combat capability
of the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force (CRAF) almost to nil. In June
1959, a drastic purge of the Air Force--which probably was in response
to orders from Raul Castro--resulted in the dismissal of most of the.
force's rated pilots. The continuing defection of civil air lines
WE Teka et Jerrer thie source of holeterine the number of nitate
available to the Air Force.

24. The total personnel strehgth of the CRAF remains unknown.

At the present time, it is estimated that approximately 100 Air Force
personnel are now undergoing training in Soviet Bloc countries-~-prob-
ably including pilot and maintenance training--but there isuno confirme
tion of this estimate. Some training is probably being conducted in
Cuba, but the types of training, instructors, and numbers participating
are unidentified.

25. Although the total inventory of CRAF aircraft has increased
from 63 to 111 since 1 January 1959, there has been little change in
totals of combat-type aircraft. The serviceability rate of the CRAF
aircraft is presently estimated at 15 to 20%. The increase is
reflected mainly in helicopters, piston trainer and transport aircraft,
with the latter probably representing expropriations of aircraft from

private owners, since no information is available concerning

-nequisition from..other sources. The Cuban government has tried un-

successfully to acquire Hawker Hunters from Belgium and the UK, heli-
copters from the UK and the US, Vampires from Italy and Canada, F-86's
from Canada, Fiat G9l's from Italy, and Provost jet trainers from
Austria. No aircraft are known to have been delivered from Free World
sources during 1959. (See Annex 2 for a breakdown by type of Cuban
military aircraft in 1958 and at the present time.) ,

26. In Cuba there are 10 airfields, excluding the USN air-
field on the Guantanamo Naval Base, with hard-surface runways 6,000'
or more. All of these fields have runways that are capable of sup-
porting jet fighter (HMIG-15 and 17) operations. Parking and fuel
fentlitios sre ranersliv limited et most of the airfields. This rir
facility system is more than adequate for the CRAF and would support
a major increase therein. (See map, Annex 4)

27. Since early 1960, the Castro regime has made a serious ef-
fort to augment Cuban air facilities capabilities. Several new air-
fields have been built and many of the already existing facilities

| have been significantly improved. This construction is summarized as

follows:

a. Managua--At Managua (23-02N/082-19W), 10 nautical miles
SSW of Havana, a new runway is under construction; it is estimated that
it will be 5,000' x.120' upon completion. Present einencions aes ap-
proximately 3,350' x 120', and the surface is probably packed earth
or crushed rock. :

b. Siguanea--Siguanea airfield (21-37N/082-55W), on the
Isle of Pines, has one runway which has recently been extended to

6,000'; its width:is 100'. The surface is crushed marble over marble

base. Construction appears to be temporarily suspended.
c. Cayo Largo--A natural-surface landing strip 2,040'
x 135' has recently been prepared at approximately 21-37N/081-33W.
A cleared area 1,050' long is believed to be a possible extension to
the landing strip. oe |
d. New Santa Clara airfield--a new airfield is under con-
struction at 23-31N/079-55W, about 8 nautical miles NNE of the old
Santa Clara airfield. Present dimensions of grading work are estimated
to be 9300' x 280'. The runway is not completed but is usable.
e. Baracoa--The runway at Baracoa airfield, 23-01N/082-38W,

formerly referred to as Domingo Rosillo, has been extended to 5,450°.

ee ee” ey A eer ee eae Pea et ies aS
field at 22-17N/081-O08W has been extended from 5,500° to 6,700'. Its
surface has been reported as probably hard packed sand and gravel.
Considerable clearing and excavation at the SW end of the strip has
been reported which couldcindicate preliminary preparation for ad-
Gitional construction and enlargement. A new airstrip is under con-
struction near Jaquey Grande at 22-29N/081-O08W. Dimensions are ap-
proximately 4,000' x 150', and the surface appears to be packed sand
or gravel, which is ready for either macadam or concrete surfacing.
A new airstrip is under construction in the Playa Giron at 22-04N/
081-02W, and Gage Ramona aves at 22-O09N/081-024. Approximate dimen-
sions are 4,400' x 100'; surface is probably rolled and -crushed rock.
About 3 miles West of San Blas at 22-07N/081-O00W, an unidentified
installation is under Cone ietien which may be a pOSSiwle HF/DF

site.. The site consists of a circular depressed cleared area

o%3
=

approximately 390' in diameter , which has tou eaualls spaced jines
of approximately 100' in length each. There are grading and clearing
activities in the general area. This area suggests early stages of
HF/DF construction.

g. Antonio Maceo airfield at’ 19-58N/75-52¥--Concrete
extension is underway at both ends of each runway. Upon completion,
the main runway will probably have a total length of 7,430'. The
secondary runway will probably have a total length of 4,485".

h. Jaime Gonzalez airfield at 22-10N/080-24W-~Concrete
extension is. underway at both runways. The main runway is being ex-
tended to approximately 4,400' and the secondary runway is being ex-
tended to evvroximately 3,300°.

28. The principal objectives of the current military buildup
are self-defense, internal security, and to a lesser extent the ex-
port of arms and trained men to other Latin American countries for
revolutionary and subversive purposes. Given the Cuban emphasis on
guerrilla warfare, a civilian militia, and subversion, the arms the
Cubans have been receiving--especially the large quantities of small
arms and automatic weapons~-lend themselves to use in connection with
all of these objectives. The weapons employed for defense against
attack from abroad can be used with equal facility against internal
subversion and anti-Castro rebel forces, to arm the militia, or to Bi
supply revolutionary groups located in or moving into other Latin
American countries. It does not appear that the current arms build-
up will place the Cubans in a position to attack any of their neigh-
bors with an orgenized, overt military force within the foreseeable

future, L

-29. Cuba'ts efforts to strengthen its military posture have

resulted, at least initially, from a genuine fear of foreign-based
; “
invasion. Various Cuban statements indicate that Castro views ar in-

*L-

vasion of the island by anti-government Cubans, supported indirectly
or covertly by the United States, as a probability. (the Castro regime
claims that rebel groups are presently being organized in both the
United States and Guatemala, with the knowledge and support of both
governments. ) It is probable that the Cuban government views a direct
attack by US armed forces as a possible but less likely event. The
caution with which they have treated the question of Guantanamo--—their
obvious desire to avoid provoking direct US military intervention--is
evidence that they consider such action a definite possibility. They
are also aware of the serious threat to the security position of the
United States posed by Cuba's move into the Soviet camp--a threat
which increases with the Cuban arms buildup.

30. In addition to reflecting a genuine fear of invasion, the
heated and continuing Cuban charges of an imminent US-supported in-
vasion have been part of a major propaganda effort to villify the
United States. This effort is designed to enlist world sympathy for
the cause of the Cuban David against the US Goliath, and to draw the
attention of the Cuban people away from the economic difficulties which
they now face and to prepare them for further sacrifices.

31. A well-equipped military force (with special emphasis on an
elite, politically reliable hard core within the revolutionary militia)
would serve two principal functions in maintaining order within Cuba.

First, it would enable the regime to deal effectively with the anti-

Castro rebels within Cuba who pose a threat to its stability. Second,
it would provide Castro with a means of extending government control
over Cuban society-~a policy which is presently considered at least
of equal importance as the objective of self-defense.

32. Janta-Castro groups currently active in Cuba, situetvaliy
in the Sines Escambray area, are not strong enough to pose a
significant threat to the stability of the Castro regime. However,
large military forces are being used in the Escambray area in an
effort to eliminate the growing active anti-Castro guerrilla forces. |
Although the armed opposition within Cuba presently remains largely

unorganized, is not unified, and lacks leaders with widespread public

eeenet the hietawe Af the 2Rth of July Hovement itself deracrts-tod
the ultimate potential of such forces. Further, opposition elements
located outside Cuba are seeking to combine their forces and may, in
the future, be in a better position to provide support to those rebels
who have remained in Cuba. This s turn makes it incumbent on Castro

to attempt to maintain his forces at a level sufficient to enable him

to meet any foreseeable counterrevolutionary move from within cuba. |

33. The current buildup in arms may now be directed primarily
toward extending the Castro government's control over Cuban society
and institutions. The major tool of control is the Revolutionary
Militia, which serves several purposes. It provides the government
with a substantial armed force through which the Cuban populace as
a whole can be controlled, and it premotes loyalty to Castro by sub~
jecting a relatively large number of Cubans to military discipline

and political indoctrination under the leadership of people dedicated

to the revolutionary government. If necessary, it can also provide
Castro with a counterpoise to the regular Army, whose political
reliability may still be questionable as the result of Castro's ef-
forts to reduce its influence. Finally, the milita offers the gov-
ernment an organized work force for use in economic development and
military construction projects, and to reduce the high unemployment
which is plaguing the Castro regime.

34, Since Fidel Castro's assumption of power, Cuba has been
involved in several attempts to overthrow other Caribbean governments,
During 1959, the Castro regime.sponsored or gave indirect Support to
invasion attempts against Panama, the Dominican Republic, Nicaragua
mae’ Morte. Te wri lstrnw builden provides Cuba with an increased
ability to furnish military aid to Communist and pro-Communist
revolutionary groups in these or other Latin American countries in
the future. Soviet Bloc military equipment now in Cuba permits the
use of older, Western-made equipment which would be difficult to
trace, for these purposes. There is as yet no evidence of direct
Cuban involvement in the outbreaks in Guatemala, Nicaragua And Costa
Ricajin mid-November. -

——™ 35, Cuban leaders and propaganda media repreatedly refer to the
Cuban revolution as the vanguard of the anti-imperialist revolution
“that will “inevitably sweep" the rest of Latin America. Private
-statements of Fidel Castro reveal his conviction that the United
States is "finished" as a great power and that Cuba must therefore
Side with the "socialist countries which will win the current ideo-

logical struggle." “During its present confused state," the United

- States must be kept on the defensive, Castro told an Old friend

) last September. The Castro regime has become an effective instru-
ment of the Sino-Soviet Bloc in its drive to weaken and eventually
destroy US influence in Latin America as well as in other under-
developed and emerging nations. °

36. The Castro government has made no secret of its antipathy ©
toward most of the governments of the other Latin American Tepublics,
charging that these governments do not represent the will of the
people. It is clear that Cuba is determined to export its revolution
to the rest of the hemisphere. However, direct Cuban intervention in
the form of large-scale Cuban-based invasion forces does not appear
Jikelv et the present time, The reaction against Cuba throughout
Latin America would be too strong at a time when Cuba needs Latin
American Sympathy in its struggle with the United States. Further, _
the Cubans probably fear that such action might provoke US or OAS
-Antervention in Cuba--something they wish to avoid.

37. It can be expected, however, that Cuba will intensify its
eiforts to weaken and subvert other Latin American governments,
particularly in the Caribbean area. In addition to its all-out
propaganda effort, Cuba will probably furnish arms, training,
financial, and other covert assistance through pro-—Castro groups
and the Communists apparatus throughout the area to dissident and
insurgent Latin American elements. Direct military aid is useful
when the climate for rebellion is ripe within a given country, how-
ever, and the larger part of Cuban energies in the other Latin
American countries will probably be expended in promoting such a

climate,

CELI ARR REE INSE SEO SETI gE aE

38, The Cuban government is engaged in organizing, financing,
and training of revolutionary movements. One facet of Cuban assis-
tance in the training of potential revolutionaries against other
Latin American governments is the Castro regime's subsidization of
travel to Cuba of numerous Latin Americans for purposes of ideological
and military indoctrination, Numerous delegates to the Latin American
Youth Congress in Cuba last summer, for instance, remained to partici-
‘pate in the international Communist<financed “International Work
Brigade," The week-long congress of the youth section of the Cuban
Popular Socialist (Communist) Party last April also broughtt:dilégites
from a number of Latin American countries, as did the ceremonies in
Tot sesieie em tha Went ah Satiaenite with the Strupgles of the Teatin
American Peoples." The latter event, sponsored by the Communist-
controlled labor arm of the Castro regime, ended with a manifesto
calling for the initiation of an “anti-imperialist and anti-feudal
revolution in all of Latin America." This manifesto did not include
any call for an open Communist revolution, Ft has frequently been
reported that Latin Americans from various countries have received
military training as well as political indoctrination in Cuba after
participating in these events. Also frequently reported are instances
where representatives of various Latin American Communist and pro-
Communist organizations who are sent to Sino-Soviet Bloc countries -
‘for training spend a period of time in Cuba on the outward or the
homeward leg of their journeys,

39. A major effort to overthrow a Latin American government

was the attempt in June 1959 to oust the unpopular Trujillo

- 18 -

dictatorship in the Dominican Republic. In this case the’Cubans
underestimated the'strength of the Dominican regime. The two forces
which landed in the Dominican Republic from Cuba~-one by air and the
other by sea--were trained and armed in Cuba and led into battle.-by
* Officers of Castro's army. The group that landed on the Dominican
coast was escorted there by units of the Cuban Navy. The invading
forces, primarily composed of Dominican exiles, included a heavy
sprinkling of Communists,
40. The abortive “invasions" of Panama in April 1959 and of

Haiti in August of the same year were by small groups from Cuba who

evidently did not have high-level Cuban official: support but in the

weg sew aa me ee Decent - the - exneditiante-nrencrations faa denene
“ture probably took place with the knowledge and approval of some
Cuban authorities. Of the numerous rebel raids into Nicaragua, .a
few were equipped with weapons from -Cuba and led by Nicaraguans who
had sought Cuban support for their adventures. However, none of
these efforts is believed to have been directed or fully supported
by Cuba. In fact, Cuban leaders are known to have had difficulty
with the highly factionalized Nicaraguan exile groups that had
sought support in Cuba. The Cubans had difficulties in deciding
on a "trustworthy" Nicaraguan group which at the same time had any
Significant revolutionary capability. Several Nicaraguan, as well
as at least one Panamanian and one Haitian exile group, have been
jailed in Cuba as they were preparing “invasions, evidently either
because they were considered the"wrong" exiles or because their

chances of success were estimated to be nil.

> 19 -

41, There is evidence that Cuban officials estimate that
Guatemala may be a country now ripe for revolution and that they
have therefore decided on a program of support for the Guatemalan
Communist and pro-Communist revolutionaries. A usually reliable
source with high level contacts in the Cuban government reports
that "Che" Guevara has offered arms and money to the. Guatemalan
Communist party and to a Communist-influenced Guatemalan revolu-
tionary group on the condition that the Guatemalan Communists have
the principal directing role in the revolution, Ex-president Arbenz
of Guatemala jand former Guatemalan Communist leaders Fortuny and
Pellecer arel in Cube and prohably will be utilized in the Cuban
plans, In the case of Guatemala, as with other Latin American!
countries, the Cubans maintain that a genuine revolution can be
achieved only after the regular armed forces are destroyed and the
"masses" are armed, aS in Cuba. In his frequent Speeches in Cuba,
Arbenz has repeatedly said that his greatest mistake was in not
arming the people--an omission which permitted the “militarists,"
bought with “imperialist money," eventually to seize power and
destroy the revolution,

42. The government of Venezuelan President Betancourt ,(now
under heavy domestic pressure from strong Communist and pro-Castro
political forces} is another target for Cuban subversive action.
Leftist Venezuelan deputy Fabricio Ojeda, who has spent consider-
able time in Cuba in recent months, is reported to have secured
official Cuban support for an armed revolt in Yenezuela,

43. Castro agents, of both Cuban and foreign nationality,

-1.20 —

‘are traveling from Cuba to Latin American countries to promote
revolutionary activities, Their objectives range from courier
missions to organizing of student, labor, and revolutionary groups
and the carrying out of sabotage missions.” Hector ALDAMA Acosta, _
head of Cuban intelligence activities in Mexico, is charged with the
coordination of all revolutionary activities in Central America.

The use of Cuban ambassadors to control these activities has been
proven in a number of Latin American countries,

44, Intensive Cuban propaganda is furthered by Cuban diplomatic
missions which in numerous cases, such as in Bolivia, Honduras,
Panama. end FJ] Salvador, have nrovided Communist-oriented student
and labor groups with propaganda material and financial support.
Numerous reports. connect the Cuban embassy in most Latin American
countries with the distribution of .anti-US and pro-Castro propaganda
and financial support to local "Friends of Cuba" societies and
leftist organizations.

45, The Cuban revolutionary line is also spread throughout
Latin America through the facilities of the Castro-subsidized in-
ternational news agency Prensa Latina, which has close working ties
with the news agencies of the Sino-Soviet Bloc, This propaganda
organization which has offices established in nearly every Latin
American country disseminates the propaganda line of Moscow and
Peiping throughout Latin America. It frequently has distorted
news stories so as to reflect unfavorably on the local govern-
ment-—-a course which has evoked protests from the officials of

several Latin American countries, including Mexico and Costa Rica.

46. The activities of Castro agents throughout the hemisphere
have frequently resulted in countermeasures being taken by security
and diplomatic authorities in many Latin American countries. In
a number of cases, blatant attempts to undermine the sovereign
rights of other Latin American governments have resulted in the
arrest of pro~Castro agents and the expulsion of Cuban diplomatic

personnel,

Tit.

CHRONOLOGY OF SIGNIFICANT EVENTS SINCE 18 November 1960

A source described ‘as paiiabie reported
seeing four new two-seater piston engine
Czech trainer aircraft--later identified
as Z-326 planes--flying. at San Antonio

de los Banos airbase. The source re-
ported further that the pilots of the
aircraft were “very experienced," putting
the aircraft through difficult maneuvers,
idly Czechs or

18 November 1960

‘Sepa Seas 5 :
Eker bss Sos
Mpa SHS

Se ae
: that Soviet military eauies
‘ment arriving at San Antonio de los Banos
airbase during the six-week period prior
‘to 12 October included: 8 long-range
guns of an estimated 105mm; several
Reettres awn ecres ¢ Oerliken-te-c /
Gaus MGUNUvEea On rotating mobile Piarivauo,
3 new "Stalin" tanks (later shipped to
an unknown destination); and 7 or 8
crates approximately 23 feet long and
8 feet wide, one of which allegedly
contained a tubular section resembling
part of an aircraft fuselage or rocket
section. The same source reported seeing.
no evidence as of 12 October confirming
rumors of the presence of a squadron of
MIGs or Czech or Russian pilots or +

19 November 1960

o

20 November 1960 aes
expressed his extreme concern to.a US
embassy officer over the Castro govern-
ments acquisition of a huge store of
arms, which he was convinced were
destined for distribution to Castro-

type extremist groups throughout Latin
America. He expressed the opinion 7
that the entire continent is facing —
a grave hour and that action must be
taken very quickly to eliminate the
' danger posed by the Castro regime.

21 November 1960 ' Brazilian police seized 30,000 Cuban
propaganda booklets as they arrived in
Rio de Janeiro in a. diplomatic pouch

ee

28 November 1960

29 November 1960

30 November 1960

Yous

from Havana addressed to the Cuban
embassy. Authorities said that Cuban
propaganda material was being passed
on by the Cuban embassy to two Com-
munist publishing houses,

SAR

Se IIR ig Te tee ees Beg

The US Army Attache in Havana received
a report that junior officers of the
Revolutionary Army at the Managua army
base were plotting against the Castro
regime. The officers, who were said
to believe that only an army uprising
had any chance of success in ousting
Castro, allegedly planned to concen-—
trate their efforts on seizing Havana
after aking over the Managua base.

RAG TLS

One type of Bloc weapon received in
evertitv br, Cube see nositivelr

2G€UtITieG as a Czech quad 12.7-mn
antiaircraft heavy machinegun SDH K,
according to the US Air Attache in

Havana. Known locations_of. these -. —.-..---
weapons were given as Campo Libertad
airfield and San Antonio de los Banos
airbase, but the-attache commented that
most major milita installations probably
had the weapon. * ;

Cuban National Bank president "Che"
Guevara signed a new Communist Chinese-
Cuban economic cooperation agreement at
the conslusion of his visit to Com-
munist China, Under the agreement, the
Chinese were to provide Cuba with a

$60 million interest-free line of
credit from 1961 to 1965, and China
agreed to import one million tons of
Cuban sugar in 1961--double the amount
agreed upon in the July 1960 agreement
between the two countries. A joint
communique signed the same day by
Guevara and Communist Chinese Vice
Premier Li Hsien-nien declared that
both countries would “unswervingly support
the peoples of Latin America, Asia, and
Africa in their just struggles to oppose
imperialism and colonialism, strive to

30 November 1960

November 1960

1 December 1960

safeguard national independence and
develop their national economy and
culture, and that they will fight un-
remittingly in defense of world peace....
The Chinese side...reaffirms the un-
shakable stand of the Chinese Govern-
ment and people that they will do
everything possible to support and assist
ust struggle."

ae told US Embassy “officials

“he had been reliably informed that

Castro had deposited $200,000 in a
Houston bank some three months before
the late October coup against the

Lemus regime. The funds allegedly
were transferred to the Banco Sal-
vadoreno and were dispersed under the
direction of ex-president Oscar Osorio,
reputedciv the organizer of the corm.

be men vba a ere e Ve hu December wee

that new transfers of Cuban funds in-

‘creased the total to $350,000,

An untested source reported that during
his visit to Moscow in early November,
Ernesto “Che Guevara had a half-hour
talk with Piemier Khrushchev, in the
course of which Guevara asked for
Soviet missiles. Khrushchev flatly
refused, according to the report,
promising instead some automatic
weapons dating from World War II.

Upon his arrival in Peiping later

in the month Guevara allegedly hinted
that he was very annoyed, not only

by Khrushchev's refusal to give
missiles to Cuba, but also by the
Soviet leader‘ts tone. He complained
that Khrushchev did not take the Cuban
revolution and its potentialities in
Latin America seriously. @&

The Russian.i freighter Deputat Litsky
unloaded four Soviet helicopters in
Havana, and some arms may have been
included in the shipment,

to the US Naval Attache.

1 December 1960 Two Cubans who had been operating a
powerful shortwave radio transmitter
were arrested by Venezuelan forces
during the leftist-inspired rioting
against the Betancourt government.
Although the Venezuelan government ;
did not charge the two men with being
Castro agents, it did indicate it was
aware that some connection between the
Castro regime and the Venezuelan up-
risings existed, but authorities said
they were not prepared to present
evidence to this effect. Reports that
insurgents had used Cuban- supplied
Czech arms were still uncon med as
of 3 December. & Be

2 December 1960 A Cuban delegation to Hanoi signed
agreements between Cuba. and North
Vietnam establishing diplomatic
Rete PONS: betyeen: ane ree countries

‘ oF
ary 2 She eee a re Se ois ~el

an economic and escnniedd cooperation

6 December 1960 A joint communique issued at the end
of "Che" Guevara's visit to North
Korea contained an unqualified demand
for US withdrawal from the Guantanamo
Naval Base and harshly condemned the
United States as the “common enemy of
the people of the world and a sworn
enemy of the Korean and Cuban peoples."
In addition, the two governments
signed a series of trade, payments,
banking, technical cooperation, and
cultural exchange agreements.

7 December 1960 After leaving Hanoi, the Cuban delegation
- headed by Deputy Secretary for Foreign
Affairs Hector Rodriguez Llompart, made
; arrangements in Ulan Bator for the
= establishment of diplomatic relations
between Cuba and Mongolia. ,

21 December 1960 According to informed sources, anti-
Castro forces who raided the Cuban
embassy in Lima, Peru earlier in

26 December 1960

29 December 1960

30 December 1960

December seized a number of documents
purportedly establishing ample grounds
for the breaking of diplomatic re-
lations between Peru and Cuba. The
documents allegedly contained proof
that the Castro regime, through its
ambassador in Lima, paid out “hundreds
of thousands of dollars" to promote

a favorable attitude toward the Cuban
revolution and to assist Peruvian

Communist organizations and activities,

‘An untested scurce reported that 75-mm

anti-aircraft guns of Communist Chinese
manufacture had arrived at a military
camp near the airport at Santiago de
Cuba. The AA guns were deployed in

12 four-gun units, according to the.
report, and Chinese-manufactured

usea vy the troops.

The Peruvian government broke relations
with Cuba when the former felt that an-
anti--Castro editorial campaign in Lima
newSpapers and the publication of some
of the correspondence seized in the
raid on the Cuban embassy by anti-Castro
elements had aroused sufficient popular.
backing for such a move. Prior to its
29 December action Peru had been ex-
ploring the possibility of obtaining
Colombian and argentine agreement for

a Joint rupt. in diplomatic relations

: @ Chinese
Communist officials who received Ewiss
transit visas for theiz trip to
establish the Chie 2 Cominunist embas
io Havana. 4 =
estimated to be fairly reliable added
that the above nine cfficials were
included among the 36 to 39 Chinese
Communists scheduled to arrive in
Havana before 1 January 1901. See

Sy

31 December 1960

1 January 1961

2 January 1961

2 January 1961

Khrushchev sent a congratulatory tele-
gram to [Fidel Castro on the occasion of
the second anniversary of the Cuban
revolution in which described Cuba's
successes as “successes for national
liberation all over the world." The
Soviet premier also pledged the “soli- |
darity and support of the Soviet people"
in the struggle of the Cuban people for
independence and economic development.

Sis working on plans
call for some unspecified action

on the part of the Castro regime against
the US Naval Base at Guantanamo, ccording
to a fairly reliable source. && pea ene
has divulged no details of his work, but
he allegedly has repeated several times
that ection materislizing from his

paaduaiy weak Vane Padce DO

February or March 1961.

The Castroxgime celebrated the second
anniversary of its assumption of power by
staging the greatest show of military
strength ever seen in Cuba. The parade
was highlighted by the display of

weapons recently acquired from the Soviet
Union and-other Bloc nations. According
to press accounts, about 50 heavy JS-3
and JS-4 tanks were included in the
parade, as well as an undetermined
number of 55-mn and 105-mm cannon, truck
drawn field artillery, mortars, six--
barrel rocket launchers, four-barrel
anti-aircraft guns, and anti-tank guns.
Militia units were equipped with
automatic rifles, machine guns, bazookas,
and mortars of Bloc origin.

At an‘anniversary reception at the Cuban
Emoassy in Koscow, Khrushchev made «2 speech
Sharply critical of US policy particularly
in regard to foreign bases, and he labeled
as "foul slander" repcrts that the Scviet
Union had set up rocket bases in Cuba
directed at the United States. The Soviet
premier warned that the present US Govern-
uent “is pursuing an extremely dangerous

ARMS AND EQUIPMENT OF CUBAN ARMY

Received

Item Bloc Deliveries

1 Jan 1959 from
Free World
Sources since . Total
1 Jan 1959 Identified 1/{Estimated 2,/

1. Armored Vehicles
a. Medium Tanks, T34 104
(Bloc) |
b, Heavy Tanks, JS-2
(Bloc)
c, Assault Guns, SU-
100 (Bloc) —
d, Armored Personnel
Carriers, BTR-152
(Bloc)

21
50
150

Dutch" (CUS)
£. Lt Tk M3A1 (US)
g. Med Tk M4Al
_w/76-mm Gun (US)
h,. Med Tk Comet
w/77-mm Gan (UK)
i, Scout Car, M3Al,
White (US)
J, Armored Car, M8
(US)
2. Motor Transport
a. Trucks, 1/4-T 500
4x4 (Bloc)
b. Trucks, 2-T
4x4 (Bloc)
ec. Trucks, 4.1/2-T
6x6 (Bloc)
d. Trucks, 3,5-6T
6x6 (Bloc)
e, Trucks, 10-T
6x6 (Bloc)
£, Sedans (US)

1/ Types and quantities reported by reliable sources and verified in
photographs.

2/ The figures in this column are based on an analysis of tonnages,
types and quantities of materiel delivered by the Bloc to other countries,
the size and composition and organization of the Cuban military forces,
and reports received from Cuba. The estimated figures are a rough order
of magnitude, :

600
~ 200
100
25

On Hand Received

. Item
1 Jan 1959 from : .Bloc Deliveries
Free World
| Sources since]. Total
1 Jan 1959 ; Identified 1/|Estimated 2,

Motor Transport
(Continued) ©

g. Jeeps (US) |
h. Trucks (US) | 158

i. Busses (US) 28
j. Ambulances (US) 19 :
k. Cmd Recon Car 4 i
3/4-T (US)
1. Motor Cycles (US) | 149 .
m. Special Purpose | 19
Vehicles (US) |
n. Trailer, 1/4-T(us): 30
Oo. Trailer, 3/4-T(US) 3
p. Trailer,1 1/2-T :; g
(US)
Preiten Torso _m - | 7 ly

Wave. Lath (Le,

3. Field Artillery

a. S7-mm Anti Tank
Gun M1943 (Bloc)
b. 76-mm Field Gun
M 1942 (Bloc)
ec. 85-mm Field Gun
D-44 (Bloc)
d. 122-mm Howitzer
M1938 (Bloc)
e. 122-mm Gun...
M-1931/37_ .
££. Multilaunch Rocke
Launchers (Bloc)
25-mm Hotchkiss
AA Gun (Fr)
h. 37-mm Gun M6 (US)
i. S7-mm Gun, Salute
Gun (UK)
Jj. 75~mm Pack Howitzer.
(Us)
k. 105-mm Howitzer,
Pack (It) { i
- ky Types and quantities reported by reliable sources and verified in
photographs.
2/ The figures in this column are based on an analysis of tonnages,
types and quantities of materiel delivered by the Bloc to other countries,
the size and composition and organization of the Cuban military forces,
and reports received from Cuba. The estimated figures are a rough order

of magnitude.

stem

4. Mortars

a. 82-mm (Bloc) |
c. 160-mm (Bloc)
d. 60-mm H2 (US)
e. 81-mm

a. Quad 12.7-mm
AAKG (Bloc)

b. Twin 3O-mm AAA Gu

KH 53 (Bloc)
c. 37 MM AAA Gun

M 1939 (Bloc)
7. PRo-rm AAA Gun

Bw L255 (bloc,

6. Rocket Launchers

a. Launcher, Grenade

Cal 30 H7A3 (US)

_.b. Launcker, Grenade

M 8 (US)

ec. Launcher, Rocket

3.5" M2

7. Recoilless Rifles

a. 57-mm HW 18 (US)
b. 75-mm (US),

8. Machine Guns

a. Browning Cal.30,
M1919A6 (US)

b. Browning Cal.30
M 1917 (US)

c. Browning Cal.50

- K2 (US)

d. Coit Cal.30 (US)

e. Lewis, Cal.30

5. Antiaircraft Artillery

Received

from Bloc Deliveries
Free World
Sources since Total
1 Jan 1959

‘Identified 1/\Estimated 2

200
72
18

17
14(US)
72(It)

122
30
90

26

75
60

28(US)
70( It)

me ©

103
110
90

69
6

1/ Types and quantities reported by reliable sources and verified in

photographs.

2/ The figures in this column are based on an analysis of tonnages,

types and quantities of materiel delivered by the Bloc to other countries,
the size and composition and organization of the Cuban military forces,
and reports received from Cuba. The estimated figures are a rough order

of magnitude.

—_—_—.

8. Machine Guns

Item On Hand

1 Jan 1959

(Continued) b, apiicee bets chis
£. Vickers, Cal.30
g. MAG, Light,
7.62mum
8 A. Rifles, Carbines
and Submachine Guns
a, Rifles & sub-
machine guns
b. Thompson Cal 45 1,098
(US)
ec. Steyr-Solothurn 40
9-mm (Aust)
Cl. Maral:-Brodich 25
Sm
e. UZI FN 9-mm 25
£. Rifle, Cal.30 M1 5,700(US)
22,000(It)
e Rifle, Cai.30 ~— {17,400
Springfield 1803
. Rifle, Cal.30 1,000
Mauser
i. Rifle, Cail.30 7,800
Enfield ;
4. Rifle, Sniper, 27
Cal.30 M1903A4
k. Rifle, Cal. 22 243
Mossberg
1. Rifle, 7.62-mm FN(26,000 -
(or more
(Belg)

Rifle, assored
(heid by Castro 4-6 ,000
forces)

Rifle, Automatic 177
Browning, Cal.30
Rifle, Automatic 20

Mossberg, Cal. 22
Carbine, Cal. 30 | 3,100
M1 (US)

Free World
Sources since
1 Jan 1959

1,500(Bel)

Bloc Deliveries

Total

Identified 1/jEstimated 2/

60,000 - 200,000

1/ Types and quantities reported by reliable sources and verified in
photographs,

2/ The figures in this column

are based on an analysis of tonnages,

types and. quantities of materiel delivered by the Bloc to other countries,
the size and composition and organization of the Cuban military forces,
and reports received from Cuba, The estimated figures are a rough order
of magnitude, :

Received
from
Free World
Sources since
1 Jan 1959

_ item
Bloc Deliveries

8 A. Rifles, Carbines
and Submachine Gins
(Continued)

q. Carbine,Cristobal
automatic, Cal.30
(D.R.)

r. Carbine, Kragg
Cal.30

9. Pistols & Revolvers

a. Pistol, Colt
MI911A1,Colt 45
b. Pistol, Star
Cal.45 (Sp)
c. Pistol ,Remington
oe

(- TF
G. Pistols,Assortea ZUU
e. Revolver, Colt 10,750
Cal.45 (US) .- -. .
£. Revolver, S¥, 340
Cal.45 (US)
g. Revolver, Colt 100
Cal (US)
h. Revolver, SW 45
Cal .38
i. Revolver,Assorted 200
10, Ammunition
a. Assorted a 6000-15000
; tons
b. Cartridge,Cal 7.62 52,000,000
(Bel)
c. Cartridge, 9~-mm | 3,000,000
| (Bel) .
d. Cartridge, Cal1.30 : 2,734,000
(Norway)
e. Cartridge, Cal1.50 1,920,000
Ball - (Norway
& It)
1/ Types and quantities reported by reliable sources and verified in
photographs. ;

2/ The figures in this column are based-on an anilysis of tonnages,

types and quantities of materiel delivered by the Bloc to other countries,
the siz» and composition and organization of the Cuban military forces,
and repurts received from Cuba, The estimated figures are a rough order
of magnitude.

-Item {On Hand Received

1 Jan 1959 from Bloc Deliveries
; - | Free World
Sources since Total
1 Jan 1959 Identified 1/|Estimated 2,

10. Ammunition
(Continued)

£. Cartridge, Cal.50
APITE&ET

g. Shell, Mortar .
8l-mm light

h. £hell, Mortar
8i-mm heavy

4. Shell, Mortar
81l-mm smoke

Jj. Rocket,3.5"Heat ©

k

1

Rocket, 3,5"
practice :
- Round, howitzer
. 105-mm, M2Al
r. Fandcrenedes,:
Mark ij]
n,. Antitank grenades

o. Handgrenades,

_ assorted
11. Communications
Equipment
a. Telephone, EE-8 . 24
b. Telephone, types | 1,423 |
unknown a
ec. Switchboard 7
SB-18/GT
d. Switchboard : 1
SB-22/PT
_.@. Switchboard : 41

Type unknown
f. Switchboard ~
- (10 line) ~
g. Switchboard
- (63 Line)
h. Radio Set, AN/GRC-7 1
1. Radio Set, AN/PRC6 39

1/ Types and quantities report
photographs. ae

580,000
_ (It)
20,000
(It)
12,000
(It)
8,000
(It)
8,000
(It)
3,000
_ (it)
16,000
(It)
20,ano
(horway)
65,000
(Bel)
15,000 |
(Bel)

140
(It)

42 (it)
3 (It)

ed by reliable sources and verified in

2/ The figures in this column are based on an analysis of tonnages,

types and quantities of materie
the size and composition and or
and reports received from Cuba.
of magnitude.

1 delivered by the Bloc to other countries,
ganization of the Cuban military forces,
The estimated figures are a rough order

. Item On Hate : “Bloc Deliveries

: 1 Jan 1959 from
Free Yorid
Sources since Total
1 Jan 1959 Identified 1/ | Estimated 9

il. Communications
Equipment (contd) ;
j. RadioSet ,AN/PRC-
10 31
k. RadioSet,AN/VRC- ;
10 i
1. Radio Sets,Misc 116 —
‘m. Remote Control
_ Eq ,AN/GRC-11 2

12. Miscellaneous

a. Radars, fire
; control (Bloc) 6
b. Radars, AA
. (Bloc) 4
ce. Binceculer: | ae
6 x 30 (It).
d. Binoculars :
8 x 30 (It) 25
e.. Compass,MK III 60
f. Plotting Board
K10 10
g. Riot Gun, Gas 73
h. Mines, HEAT M6 122
4. Flame Throwers
(It) 7
j. Aiming Circle Ml 3
k. Very Pistol (US) 56
1. Pyrotechnic Pro-
jector, Hand,
Mig 17
m. Mine, AP : 24,000
(Belg)

1/ Types and quantities reported by reliable sources and verified in
photographs.

2/ The figures in this column are based on an analysis of tonnages, txpes
and quantities of materiel delivered by the Bloc to other countries, the
size and composition and organization of the Cuban military forces, and
reports received from Cuba. The estimated figures are a rough order of
magnitude.

Sub Total ll

Annex 2

Cuban Air Force Equipment

1958 .-1960

FIGHTER |
F-47 14 |
F-51
Sea Fury ‘s coe ney | i4
{

ee re

Sub Total | _ i4 -' 18

Lt Bur
B-26 17

Sub Total 7 ae — “17

Sub Total — ----

Transport
C-47 10
V¥C-53 1
C-46
C~54
Lockheed-Lodestar

Helicopter
H-19
HOUND (MI-4) USSR
HARE (MI-1) USSR
H-13
UH-12

Sub Total

Trainer & Miscellaneous : hie

PA-~18 5 ;
~N-28 i 6
T-33 8
T-6 7

T~7 . 1

o

* Possibly as many as 10 MI-1's may have been delivered.

Trainer & Miscellaneous
(Continued)

Cessna 310

PBY-5A

C-45

L-20

ZLIN-326 Trener-Kaster (Czech)

Sub Total

Grand Total

Jet

wl

ANREX 3

SOVIET BLOC POLICY TOWARD CUBA
eee

The Sino-Soviet Bloc has gone a long way in identifying itself
with the maintenance of the Castro regime, Following a rela-
tively long period of temporizing, Moscow first moved to
establish close relations with Havana last February through
the visit of First Deputy Premier Mikoyan. The joint commu-

. nique issued at that time provided the outline for future
Cuban political support of the Bloc in the international
arena in return for substantial Soviet economic assistance to
Vaneku., SOWVEEL accivaries in exploring Lhe rapid duientece
tion of US-Cuban relations, however, were ‘inhibited at that
time by the impending summit conference and President Eisen-
hower's scheduled visit to the USSR.

“With the collapse of the summit in May and the cancellation
of the President's trip, these inhibitions were removed and
the Bloc launched a more intensive drive to expand its
political and economic inf luence in the Castro regime,
Exploitation of the Cuban situation became a prominent
element in Khrushchev's aggressive post-summit campaign to
isolate the US and brand it before world opinion as openly
pursuing a policy of aggression and provocation. Khrushchev's
acceptance on-3 June of an invitation to visit Havana symbol-
ized the new boldness of Moscow's moves to demonstrate the

USSR's ability to breach the Monroe Doctrine and challenge the

-l-

U.S. in its own backyard. Missions by key Cuban officials to
the Bloc presaged further important gains in Bloc influence
over the Cuban economy. and Soviet willingness to move ahead
with military assistance. The new and aggressive phase of
Soviet support was highlighted ig..July by a series. of public
statements pledging Bloc aid against any economic or military
measures that the US might undertake against Cuba.

In a speech on 9 July, Khrushchev declared, "figuratively
speaking, Soviet artillerists, in the event of necessity, can

with their rocket firepower support the Cuban people if the

ewww perm teen a iawn ARR Mee He Hea cove Brews frtervr ct:
. Cay . . . - . . ae + . . we a ed - “

against Cuba." A communique signed by Khrushchev and Raul
Castro on 21 July stated that the USSR “would use every means

to prevent US armed intervention against Cuba." These pro-

nouncements were designed to deter any military intervention

ome

by anti-Castro forces and to place the USSR in a position to;
claim credit for having protected Cuba if such intervention

. does not occur. Khrushchev, however, has carefully avoided
any binding public commitments to take military actions in
the event of an external attack on Cuba. YWhen asked about
his “rocket threat" at a press interview on 25 September,
Khrushchev said "you needn't worry....Since America does

not intend to.attack Cuba, this means that there is no danger
whatsoever." There is no evidence of a formal mutual defense

treaty between the USSR and Cuba and it is unlikely that

-2-

Moscow would be willing to undertake any commitment of this

nature. Khrushchev's interview with Cuban journalists on 22
October showed his reluctance to be drawn into too precise
a reiteration or elaboration of his 9 July statement. In
response to a request by the Cubans to comment on the
"imperialist" contention that the “rocket threat" was “purely
symbolic," Khrushchev. said, "I should like such statements to
_ be really symbolic, as the enemies of the Cuban revolution say."
He added that it is “essential that the imperialists' threat of
intervention" does not materialize so that there will be no
DOGG Bees GE EE ee een rir
assistance to the Cuban people against upEneesionnt In an
apparent effort to avoid any impression that he was retreat-.
due from his July statement, - Khrushchev assured the Cubans
that Soviet rockets were ready in case of need.
The statements in July were coupled with official attacks on
the val vai ty ‘of the Monroe Doctrine and a significant expan-
sion of Bloc polation with Cuba. For the first time Khruz
shchev also injected the USSR into the issue of the US naval
base at Guantanamo Bay by charging that a "treaty without a
time limit on terms enslaving to a smali nation is sheer
iniquity,'t and pledging Soviet support for Cuba should the
US undertake “aggressive action’ against the Castro regime,
in reply to any further "legitimate" demand by Havana.
Following a Jigesous ts reaffirmation of the Monroe Doctrine,

a TASS statement dismissed it as “long defunct" and charged

a

the US with using it as a cover to meddle in Latin American
affairs. The Soviet UN delegation also provided full support
for Cuban charges against the US in the Security Council.

In the past five months the Bloc has further solidified its
position--all Bloc countries have signed economic agreements
with Cuba and all except East Germany have now established
formal diplomatic relations, The USSR and some other members
of. the Bloc have apparently gone to considerable lengths to
grant Cuban economic requirements top priority. They have also
wea linnes 4. See. wee ee ee ee LiL Ul.wic three.
statements and extensive propaganda agitation,

Moscow's support of the Castro regime and its exploitation

of tense Cuban-American relations has been part of its larger
and more extensive effort to discredit and isolate the US in
the post-summit period, Cuban complaints against the US in
the UN offered the ideal vehicle for advancing Moscow's own
objectives and provided Soviet charges with greater credibility
and nén-Bloc support. Over the past several months, one of

the principal bloc objectives has been to exploit the situation
to discredit US policy and arouse neutralist sentiment against .
the US in the UN. There is auple evidence that Moscow hoped

to encourage neutralist action by fostering the impression that
a US invasion of Cuba was imminent and that the USSR might be
compelled to intervene, As early as July, when the US reduced

the Cuban sugar quota, the USSR began £0 put pressure on

-4-

neutralist states for support of Cuba by drawing parallels
with the Suez crisis. The limited success of this tactic_was .
apparent in the UN General Assembly in November when Cubats
proposal to refer its complaint against the US to the plenary
instead of a committee received only 29 votes, including 15
neutrals, In exploiting the latest Cuban complaint against the
US, however, the Bloc failed to stimulate any support although
both the Bloc and Cuba have carried on an extensive psychologi-
cal warfare campaign claiming that a US attack was imminent,
Bloc in an area of traditional American predominance was re-
flected in the proceedings and results of the Moscow confer-
ence of 81 Communist parties in November. The Cuban Communist
delegation reportedly was one of 14 non-Bloc parties partici-
pating in the work of a preparatory commission which developed
an initial draft of the 6 December Statement of Communist
parties, The Cubans also reportedly co-sponsored a proposal
that all intra-Bloc disputes be resolved by majority vote-~-a
move which strongly supported the Soviet position in the de-
bates with Peiping. Bloc interest in Cuba was further re-
flected in the Statement‘s doctrinal innovation on “national -
democracies,."" The Statement defines a “national democracy"

as a state which pursues an anti-iuperialist foreign policy
and "makes possible the struggle for carrying out agrarian

reform and implementing other democratic and social reforms."

-~5-.

East German party leader Ulbricht made it clear in a speech in
mid-December that the term "national democracy" was invented -:
with Cuba in mind, He stated that “undoubtedly the revolution
of the Cuban people has created a national democratic state

| which has already fulfilled the’task of national liberation and
democratic revolution and which is now waging a struggle for
further social progress." He differentiated between this situa-
tion in Cuba and the UAR, which was still economically depen-
dent on capitalism and had not yet developed a "democratic or-
Gee bee wosey ee au CLpseduing Une Colaniciion of £2 “LE ll
democratic revolution" he implied that Cuba had reached the
stage when it would be possible to carry out a "direct ‘trans-_
formation from original confitions to a socialist revolution
avoiding the long road of capitalist development." While the
Communists thus have made clear their view of the "national
democratic state" as one which could serve as a "peaceful
transition to Communist rule, they have been equally clear in
differentiating between sich a state and a "people's democracy"

or Communist state, Thus the Moscow conference had the effect

of placing an ideological stamp of approval on Cuban internal
policies, but at the same time implying that the Communists
‘there Should continue to wield their influence behind nationalist
leaders rather than attempt an open seizure of power in the near

future. As Khrushchev put it in a 6 January speech, published

-~6-

as a Kommunist article, it is the "duty" of socialists to
support such national democratic revolutions.

In the face of a change of administrations in Washington,
Soviet statements on Cuba have reflected the Soviet leaders! “~
ewareness that heavy exploitation of the Cuban situation

after 20 January could jeopardize Khrushchev's efforts to
improve Soviet-~American relations as the prelude to top-level
negotiations, While Soviet propaganda took advantage of the
period between the US elections and the inauguration to give

full support to Cuban charges against the US, in early January

Khrushchev went out of his way to shift all blame for the situa-

nd Bee a ee

ception at the Cuban Embassy in Moscow on 2 January, while
Sharply critical of US policy, he carefully directed his
charges against President Eisenhower's administration. Both
TASS and Pravda emphasized that the break in diplomatic rela-
tions was the responsibility of the Eisenhower administration
and attempted to create the impression that the new President
had disassociated himself from the action,

During the past two months the Bloc continued to build up its
economic position in Cuba. While Cuba continues to import
foodstuffs, vital machinery, and spare parts from non-Bloc
countries, the new agreements concluded during Cuban National
Bank President Guevara's recent trip through the Bloc clearly
indicate that Havana is planning to depend almost entirely on
the Bloc as a source of supply. The Yugoslav counselor in

Moscow reported, however, that the Soviet Union rejected

-7T-

10,

Guevara's request first for $300 million, then $150 million,
then $100 million and finally agreed to supply hard currency
only for those items required in constructing the specific
plants promised by the Soviet experts in Cuba, Moscow's
reported attitude may reflect the Soviet leaders' confidence
that the economic penetration of Cuba has sufficiently pro-
gressed to a point. that it can impose its own terms on Castro
and gain greater control over Cuban policy. Bloc assistance
now is an esSential feature of the Cuban economy and future

plans for industrialization and expansion rest almost solely

at aoe Ea -

assistance. The extent of Bloc efforts was evident in Communist
Chinats $60,000,000 credit--at that time the largest Peiping
had yet offered to a non-Bloc country.

The existence of an openly anti-US regime in Latin America
provides the USSR with some documentation for its claim that
US power and influence is declining. The close relationship
between the Bloc and the Castro government also serves to
demonstrate the Communist claim that the Monroe Doctrine is
invalid and that, as Togliatti put it, "no international
problem can be treated without taking into account the
existence of the socialist nations. Cuba, the Congo...are

all problems that must be examined and resolved in light of
this new balance of power.'t Cuba provides a better base of
operations for subversion and propaganda through Latin America

than the Soviets have ever had. The Communist parties will

oe "¢

’ probably avoid seeking an open seizure of power in Cuba or else-
where, A strongly anti-American and pro-Soviet but not
avowedly Communist regime like Castro's serves their purpose
far better; it gives a native color to Communist agitation and
limits the risk of a hemisphere-wide reaction against outside
Communist intervention. At the present stage, the main Soviet
aim will be to help the Castroist movement and its imitators
throughout Latin America to win a mass following, primarily

in order to pressure governments toward anti-US stands, The
Soviet leaders realize that, because of the history of the
inter-American system and past US preeminence in diplomatic,
weer ey Che LAA Ley ELE LLG, bee ee Len the UE dn Le.

America. will be doubly injurious to the US world position,

CUBA

MILCE 100
CAMPO LIBERTAD 5
y, JOSE MARTE INT'L oy istanos
HAVANA
peanecs wer NAL 4. KCORONEL PASCUAL
Aare ., .
~ PINAR j IM ATANZAS * Sante 7
“DEL. Eee { Gove + Cabbie mel
Lo see SAN ANTONIO AL LAS “viLLas Jap ws.
°° DE LOS BANOS. Oe od
2 O'SAN JULIAN ae eden . oon
‘me OCORONEL MARTIN ross?“ " 2 CAMAGUEY ¢
. - MARRERO Trees tenet =f + herent
us O ..- “¢ Prerta Manet:

“camecver

_ CAMAGUEY/?

INTL é
ATLAATIC OCEAN i

. ‘ 7 . , “paca oe
CULT OF wEXICO . CARIEBEAN SEA : ORIENTE Keng, ,ferecoe
©

rag

.
Bayona Seams Sortene
nero

picnna MACTTRA | Santiogs

. 6" Glos CANos
ANTONIO MACEO / a _

O Airfield 6000 ft or over
LEEWARD

POINT
7 FEBRUARY 196!

me

TAMAMA

om

UNCLASSIFIED
ANNEX 5

—

Dates of Diplomatic Recognition of the Castro Regime by Selected
UNE LES as

United States ---~----~--- January 7, 1959
United Kingdom -—~---~~--~- January 7, 1959
France --~---~--~—~~~-~..-- January 7, 1959
Belgium ----~-----_+------ January 7, 1959
Canada ---~---~~~~-~-~-~.- Jenuary 8, 1959
USSR -~-+~------~~-- wae January. 10, 1959
Czechoslovakia ~--~-~-—-~----~ May 17, 1960*
Poland —---~~~-~-~--~-—-.-~..-+ June’4s, 1960*
North Korea -~-~~-—--------~ August 29, 1960*
Communist China -~-~--~---- September 28, 1960+
Bulgaria -~--~--~-—~---~-~_- October 8, 1960*
Rumania -~~-----~~—~-.~-—-~-~ October 26, 1960*
North Vietnam ---~-~---~-~-~- December 2, 1960*
Mongolia -—-~~~----~---~~-~- December 7, 1960%
Albania --~----------.-_-- December 15, 1960+
Hungary ---~------~--~-~-.- December 18, 1960*

*The dates given are those on which the respective Bloc countries
announced their intention to establish diplomatic relations with
Cuba.

N

_ UNCLASSIFIED

Cc
£4

UNCLASSIFIED
ANNEX 6

Countries Which Have Suspended or Broken Diplomatic Relations with

e Castro Regime
a eS ASB Ae

Dominican Republic --------~ relations broken June 26, 1959.

Haiti WoT oonanw——aw----~--~-= relations suspended August 29, 1959
Guatemala -----------_-_____ relations broken April 29, 1960
Nicaragua -~~-~~---~--~.--__. relations suspended June 1, 1960
Paraguay -~--~-~--~~L- relations suspended December 5, 1960

ween relations broken December 29, 1960
nt a ee relations broken January 3, 1961
we CTRL

UNCLASSIFIED

~
