) 16 Mecch 1979


indicated that abeut 3-5 sanptes Ci, witTl be seTected to
brief higher authorities on passtble release.


- (2B1n a related action, WHR. reported that the
yesterday revtewed the declassiftcation study prepared by the

group and approved passing tt on to the PRC for further action. No date
has been set as yet for the PRC review. The study contains no recommenda-
tfons. The canclustons state that the review graup were not able to agree
on a single action. At this point memhers of the inteTltgence
community ar to any immedtate release of the satelTite imagery.


Civil agencies (Interfor, EPA, Agriculture, etc.) are linge up tn favor
of immediate declassification for wider civil ..-poses. Aer ) /


*6. NPIC Support to Nan-Intelligence Government Agencies


. oN .
cl” (OgwO}0EM met with QD today in connection with hts
recent repart on NPIC interagency Ttatsfam activities. AEM asked
uo. : to prepare an NPIC notice restattng his responstbtTities as a focal paint
: for NPIC tnteragency activities. was also requested to revtew the


legality of these arrangements tn cannectton with HR 7-F (annex £).
Specifically MMR fs to tnsure that we have documented authority for all
of our on-going arrangements and/or to pofnt out current gaps or un-

> certainttes about such arrangements. (16 Aprit) ,~


"7. OGC Request
PSS yesterday WEBMD, 06C, called AEM and asked if we could


find out what analyst worked on compartson case


referred to a memo to the Army dated 5 February 1977 wht @


originated in NPIC citing a request concerning a
ee of TSG/PHD was requested to research this matter to see whether
NPIC indeed had ever worked on such a photo compartson project.


( Q ) Brown reported to AEN
project. This was relayed by AEM to
time.


+.
¥8. Air Force Weapons Laboratory Briefing


( ) Received a cable from Dan Stillman, Group Leader, LASL-10 in
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Mr. Stillman states that he has learned that
and QRMMDD from NPIC will be in Albuquerque on 17-12
es Anril ta brief at the Air Force Weapons Laboratory and he requests that


v-tond their trip long enough to brief at LASL. Additionally he
+ QB and SEE present the 1978 activites


Bnnray. ep”
Aopraved for Relegse*


Pes ~ ee <7


Roose
set a


that PHD had no records af any such
No further action at this
