Guatemala the Climate for Insurgency(truth Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000027517, dated 1 January 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000027517).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

[e) i ‘ oreign
a ssessment
Ley Center

Guatemala:
The Climate for Insurgency

Aq Intelligence Asscasment

2

womens 24 81-1007! |
some Sehreary (NE

cw Ql]
s Fok Aes for Belson

PAG neo Bog

Guatemala:
The Climate for insurgency (v)

The Radical Left

The Guatemalan radical left—including both terrorist §
groups and sympathetic front orgamizations represent-
ing labor, peasants, and students—is the most tena-
cious in the hemisphere. It has survived constan .
repression and viliating internal dissension, Drawing
on their years of experience in subversion’

: = he radicals are again challenging
the government ina campaign reminiscent of ithe vio-
tence that wracked the country during the mid- and

jate 1960

Guerrilla Groups
The modern guerrilla movement can be traced ta 1962

and the formation of the Rebel Armed Forces
(FAR)—an alliance of the Guatemalan Community
Party (POT). d'ssident military officers, and leftist
students. The FAR spawned the first significant ter-
rorist campaigns, which peaked between 1965 and
1969. A feheged xoverniet counterinsurgency pro
gram killed several Lop leaders, decimated cadres, and
broke up support networks. The FAR repudiated ihe
PGT in 1968 for not helping enough in the fighting.
and out of a series of factional splits and mergers grew :

the now predominant insurgent group, the Guernila The Democratic Front Against Repression (FDCR),
established in 1979, represented a fledgling bid to

Army of the Poor {EGP).A second major group, the
Organization af the People in Arms (ORPA), began duplicate the broad front tactics of Nicaraguan and
operations Seam peril ‘ ; Salvadoran revolutionaries. During 1980, it focused on
publicizing human rights violations in Guatemala and
in promoting @ nega ‘ive iaternational view of the gov-
ernment of President Lucas. In their travels throwgb
Europe, Latin America, and the United States, FOCR
representatives tried to project an image of nonparti-
san and nonviolent opposition to repression, their pub
lic statemegts, however, echoed the propaganda of 'h
ety MM Lt te

insurgents

Propaganda flier eahorting the
Guatemalan people ta join the
four guerriila groups in the
Siruggie against the “criminal
Lucas government” and the
“esaasnin Army.” Guatemalan
are also urged to support ac-
ively the insurgents in £1
Salvador.

CONMEMOAE MOS £20 08 OCTURME
[MPULEANDO LA LUCHA FARA DEASOCAR
BL GORE AO CRIMINAL OF LUCAS

Cis oartre Orgmecec oc Aerthe <ear a
EGP, FAM, ORFA ) PGT

Llama Area si Pantie On GC arteeniang Fee Ee ela lth

- A nireneee Comber mamene le re prebe ie! goblerna f tne patrones ome te Acs obrtomas
beceligrom yp arger macs Ureto toon fog medaoy a ene alcamee,

— A nrarpore nm maseemente ete Carre Revol nara Popular am puland y is igh po
mecerea cua Orpenacmnts Rernlecorat ws pete tet nerves y meyores pope al
tpt che noose,

7 A spopat ae wumears le hehe rectoroe del berdsco Furtla herwean de Bl tatredos y

‘ Maged fe poh phe comebacrrn,

La UNIDAD REWOLUCQIONAR LA, POPULAR
¥ DEMOCAATICA ACERCA EL DNA DEL
TRIUNFG FARA NUESTRO PUEBLO

Custemala. 19 de Ocratve de 1980,

= es

oe ion og SL

meer retire mnt
i eee ae.

Guerrilla communique in which
ibe “EGP reves ls the truth
regarding the victorious attack
oo the Cotzal garrison and re-
futes tbe lies of the Army.” Coa-
Uradicting Army tpokesmen, the
guerrillas claim to have killed 35
to 40 soldiers. in reprisal, “the
Army of the rich and iu North
Americas, (srarli and
Somocista advisers” massacred
60 men, women. and children ia
that Indian town, “But with this
genocidal attitude, the only
thing they accomplish is height-
ening of the awareness of tbe
people that POPULAR
REVOLUTIONARY WAR IS
THE ONLY PATH LEFT TG
FOLLOW. ..."

COMUNICADO DE PRENSA
EL EGP INFORMA LA VERDAD SOBRE EL VICTORIOSO
ATAQUE Al CUARTEL Ci COTZAL ¥ REFUTA LAS
MENTIRAS DEL BILACITO.
Zl QICKCITO GUERAILLERO DE LOS POBRES -BGP- ia
foras a ta Prensa nacional a intercnaciofal y al Pe
blo guatesaltecd, sobre el ateque cua victoricsanen

te Lievaroh a Cabo trabstadores indfgenas en artes dal Frence Guerrillerd
Edgat tbarra, al lunes 23 de Julio,

fee dia, # tou 5:20 horas, nusstras fuarzan intefsarom un ate
Rostipertenco an gran ascala contra ef Cuarcel Militar da fan Juan Cotral,
fflepartecenco de rf Guichd, ene} cual habfan encre 80 y 100 keldites fuer,
Letente erasdos, Bajo wl meando de dos oficteten geatetaiceccs y dos au-d-
ficteles de le odiade guardia somociaza.

feapuds de 20 ainutos da inceneo anfrancaptante (raconocide publica-
mente como a1 seyer habido antra el ejdrcice y lat fuerres guareillerag),
al fuego de fustlaria de nuestros Kerdicos combetioantes guerrillerce le
caved o] anemigo lan sigtentes bajas Eoaprotbadss: 7
» Murteron une de loe oficiales guatesaltecoe (que at fud reconocida por
ol fer de Luces ante 14 iwportbilidad de oculterio) y loa dow off-
clalag sotocistas, que aperectan como miembros de la Guardia de Kacten-
da, Corturadorer de officio,
- Entra 34 7 60 Ralbiles muartos.
« Incre 24 7 30 eatddtes herizoe que han aido distribuides en diferentes
noopitales ollitares del pats (Hyuehueterangs y Guatemala).
- Ajueticfamos a doe elecentce del poder local: Juan Ramos Chasey # Bo-
mingo Redrigues Cheney, gufae 7 oral ae del ejdrecito.

Puestres fueres no aufrieron af una sole bala. Port eso 41 enamlgo -
ho he podido presenter ni una bola arma capcurada.

Faeta las O7-535, euendo ya nues iran fuatcas guerrilleran ag hebfan +
retirade, ilegacon refuerzos enenigcs craneportedos an helicopteroe desde
el tusrted da Chajul. Poco después ls aviecidn comenzé a bomberdesr #1-
centre y low alrededoras del Pueblo y del cuartel, provocande tants conty
eida cue wma bowba cayd an pleno cusrtel, F los katbiles dispaeraron contra
te aviacidn, El cuartel quedd précticamence deatrulde y actualaente ha +
aide casocupade. Porlertorsente al eja@rcita desaté una ferog y salvaje ae
gacte concra ta poblacién civil, ante eu incapacsdad de golpcar a las fuer
tee geerrillerad.

La masacta @ continuade, conctandoea Seata #l Jl de jJulfo 60 muertoa ys
daasperecides, entre aifos, guljeres, howbrea adultos y ancianos. fon aoe
coberce repreetan, el aj@rcito de fos ricos fF Sud apesotes forteatericwes
farcelfea y pomociecar, craen qua pedran engatar al Pueolo y ateler al EGP
de lee grandee aosee populares. Para con esa acctitud genocides lo tinfcs +
que hecen ag acelarer la tome da conetencia de todo #] Pustlo de que LA
GUERIG POPSLAR ALVOLUCIONARIA ES EL UNICO CAMINO QUE UE QUEDA y aumencar +
wu integracién @ laa (ites guerrilleras.

HASTA LA VICTORLA SIEMPRE
EJERCITO GUERRILLERO DE LOS POBRES

Guptevata, & de agoeto da 15980.

EJERTITO GUERRILLERO DE LOS POBRES

Selected Socio-Economic Regions

Wastern Hightends: P-edaminantly Indian; minitundia, avbsstance agnculture
Pacific Coest Plantation Zone: Ladine and Indian, letifundia, export cropa
Northern Transversal Zone: Settiers pradominantty Indian: lactyedia and munifundia:

if subsistence and @aport crope
Principal Coffee Ares: Latifundia and minfundis
f ‘i
aes , ns . : ”. 5 ot _
ats “3 : ! .
_Mexico ae oe
_o pee "wee Ba —~ ec” A ep wae
hes mea a 4 eas ; me oe “pemorag a
diht be oe 2 , ;
er ar Heres ps _h ‘
a 2 re . oad Belize.
ff y. . wee . ; {U.K} ? Candbean
TA sees: a:
i aie “ fet ne 47), 7 oemat , Saa
: ‘ * . 5
”
' i
' !
j
i
: :

x: = Pes . ; ¢
; = une ELS Saivade fn.
Pacific Ocean age} iar. STiags

oa A, 4

2
hiner : att rm fig

Unctasaified

: a5 a a fe ars. B , h 4 ce. %
ie 1
| : 6

In Guatemala City and other areas, terrorist acts
include assassinations, kidnapings, and bumbings.
Uniformed personre] are attacked indiscriminately;
particular individuals may be targeted for revenge
because of specific actus of repression. A few busi-
nessmen have also been killed at random. The radicals
hope these tactics will accelerate polarization and
undermine the confidence of domestic and foreign
companies and investors

Indian Recruitment

he percentage of the indig-
enous population supporting the guerriila movement
apparently remains small aad geographically limited.
Most Indians still distrust the revolutionaries and
would prefer to sit sut the struggle—ihey sympathize
with neither the insurgents nor the government

Whether the guerrilla organizations can widen their
appeal to the Indian masses depends toa significant
degree on a variety of socioeconomic factors thal are
ending the isolatior of the Indian commynities and
eroding their traditional lifestylc~.' This process is
producing a less submissive generation of Indians. But
the changes affecting the indigenous population do not
necessarily produce revolutionaries. In fact, the decline
of the old culture has been accompanied by a strong
desire among young Indians to participate in the
national mainstream. Economic opportunity could pro
vide an outlet for that desire, while the lack of opportu-
nity could become a major factor in the radicalization
of Indian youths.

Government Response to the Radical Challenge

Guatemala possesses the resources to offer more social
mobility to its poor. Concern over the potential for
insurgent successes has caused the government to be-
gin significant social and economic reform aimed at
improving the living conditions of the lower classes. (u)

An economic downturn in 1979 and early 198Q-—-
brought on by rising prices of imports, a squeeze on
credit, and the disruption of Central American trade—
is Likely to cause a cutback in the government's reform
program. Nevertheless, the economy is basically
strong, and continuing high prices for most agricul:
tural exports and the expected significant increases in
oil production promise to ease the situation over the
long term. (vu)

So far, the country’s rapidly growing middle class—
between 15 and 18 percent of she urban population—
sees little attraction in revolutionary activity. The
main interests of working class youth also appear to be

' See the appendia for a more detacled discwasion of the socio

gconomic changes affecting the Indian population. (U)

employment, education, and social mobility. If eco-
nomic conditions decline significantly, however, the
radical left would probably gain many new adherents,
particularly among urban and rural youth. (u}

Current economic problems, therefore, threaten nol
only the stability of the urban sector but —by reducing
tax and other revenues——the continuation of govern-
ment-financed social welfare programs for rural areas.
The Lucas government, aware of the potential difficul-
ties and particularly concerned over agitation by leftist
labor unions, raised minimum wages significantly in
$980, doubled the traditional Christmas bonus, and
implemen-ed other measures benefiting bath urban
and rural workers. Nevertheless, the antagonism of the
authorities toward politically active unions, coupled
with the murders of labor leaders and others by rightist
death squads, undercut government efforts to gain
good will. {u)

Repression and Reform

The ruling classes traditionally have viewed the na-
ronal government primarily as an instrument for
maintaining the peace, providing minimal services, and
allowing laissez faire capitalism to run its course. Even
today, despite the new emphasis on social programs,

the ratio of government expenditures to national in-
come remains one of the smallest in Latin America.

(u}

The Lucas regime, however, has initiated a significant
break with [he past. Although continuing to believe
that prosperity in the private sector will ultimately
benefit the poor, the government is investing in the
public sec:or and making the other expenditures— at
least partially because of the current business decline.
Budgeted public spending has risen from $282 milli.
in 1978 10 $418 million in 1980, while estimated ars > 5
capenditures went up by $91 million from 1978 to
1979—a major increase compared to the record of
previous regimes. (U)

The government's programs and activities are high-

lighted by:
* The Social Action Plas, emphasizing employmeni
and basic services in rural areas. .

» A variety of reform measures including tand dis-
tribution, wage hikes, and improved public retatics 2.

+ Armed “orces’ involvement in civic action and sori: |
welfare programs. (U)

The Social Action Plan

The government's main effort in the area of socio-
economic reform is embodied in its ambitious Social
Action Plan. Aimed primarily at the rvral poor, the
plan intends to generate jobs and provide basic serv i.
tothe large segment of the population that has failed 10
benefit from the economic progress of the past two
decades. On paper, the plan looks good, but about one-
third of the proposed projects are still under study and
many of those already approved are bogged down in
the planning stages. The overall results may not be
apparent for several years and it is questionable
whether the government has the intention of the capac-
ity to fully implement this far-reaching program. (U)}

Government technocrats have warned that should ci r-

rent trends continue, conditions will have deterioraicd

further by the time President Lucas’s term ends in

1982:

s More people will be suffering from malnutrition,
which now affects 80 percent of children under five

years of age.

« Illiteracy, now reaching 80 percent in some rural
areas, will have increased.

« Unemplicyment, now at 30 percent, will have in-
ereased. (u)

The plan's goals, .herefore, are to “quick!y reorient
state activity,” emphasizing programs “to increase
employment and income, provide basic services to
impoverished com munities, and improve administra-
tive efficiency.” Qver the neat two years, te plan
budgets $566.7 million for health, housing, education,
and child nutrition, (u}

The Social Action Plan seems to be a pragmatic effort
to gear new programs to local realities. For exampie, it
deemphasizes hospitals and doctars, which provide
services only to a smail segment of the rural populz-
tion, and siresses public health clinics staffed primarily
by paramedics. Reversing previous policy, the gavern-
mem is also promoting birth control information and
the distribution of contracepiives through these clinics.

(vy)

Other Gerernment Measures

A number of other government programs dovetail with
the Social Action Plan and are a key to its success or
failure. These inc’ude incentives to industries moving
to the provinces, resettlement of Indians, higher mini-
mum wages, and & stepped-up public relations cam-
paign. Like the broader Social Action Plan, these
peagrams are aimed primarily at improving the lot of
the rural poor. (U}

A new decentralization law offers substantial tax
breaks and other financial incentives to businesses that
relocate plants outside Guatemala City, Government
planners hope that as firms relocaie in the provinces,
employment opportunities will increase significantly
and help ameliorate the sharp disparity between rural
and urban income. (U)

The government has undertaken fittle land reform—in
the traditional sense of breaking up large land hold-
ings. instead, the Lucas regime has focused on coloniz-
ing jungles in the Northern Transversal Zone with
cooperative units that will receive technical/
agricultural assistance as well as access to roads, mar-
kets, schools, and health clinics. (u)

SS Se oe
Figuce 4 ,

Government of Guatemala Total Actasi Public
Sector Expenditures, 1974-80

(lavestmeot and Operating Costs}

Miltien §
mage Tots! goveramani of
Guatomala gapendituroe
pa Tp ‘Petal
900 _eipendhyrea
jad: ' of
oe ‘inatitutiona
; j working
a Jin pared area
$00
—_ ; Total rural
ae erpenditures

ue Insikvtiona
f working la
a gre Oeeee

—_ Bae eS 107e-Luces tokes offica

Oo ee el ew ake |

1974 1075 TER 1077 TE7R 1R7R 1880
Buurce, Agency lor interr aboe Dareiopmant

Unctaasified
‘Mal? ee 74)

A top priority is resetuement of Indians from the
Western Highlands, where overpopulation and soil
exhaustion are major problems. The administration
elaims that 22,000 titles have been granted during the
past two years, but many obstacles remain. Un-
controtled deforestation may ruin the agriculiural
potential of the new lands, for example, waile critics
charge that the whole program is merely perpetuating
the traditional dependence. of small farmers on tem-

Low wages, traditional for agricultural workers, led to
unprecedented work stoppages in Pacific coast planta-
tions in February 1980. The authorities reacted with
uncharacteristic restraint, and eventually decreed a -
minimum wage nearly three times higher than the

10

General Lucas personally

e
2
£
‘-
3
i=
=
a
=
3
2
<
3
]

3
g
z

{u)

4
2
Z
=
g
3
ra

i ys

v1

sp.

previous rate for workers in COtLon, sugarcane, coffee,

and livestock—the main exports of agrobusiness.
Wages for urban workers also were raised substan-

tially. (v)

Some targe landowners laid off workers. however, and

athers refused to meet the minimum wage. despile a
public threat by the Labor Minister to prosecute those
who refused to comply. Even ifa nationwide minimum
wage were instituted, workers’ purchasing power
would still continue to erode because of inflation —
currently 13 percent and likely to increase

pread antipathy toward

Concerned over signs of wides
nd internationally, the

its policies both domestically 3
government has initiated a nationwi
campaign ¢mp
program and depi
nationalistic citize
percentage of Indiar.

atrocities against the |
rallying point the Maya Indian heritage. This Lactic

could be particularly effective because of the massive
numbers of Guatenalans who retain an Indian iden-
tity, and because some officials do maintain chase
relations with the indigenous population. President
Lucas, for example, iS intimately familiar with the
Indians of his native Alta Verap22, and speaks the

Kekchi language. (u}

cting soldiers 45 compassionate and

de public relations
hasizing the benefits of its social welfare

ns. The government stresses the high
soldiers to discount allegations of
ndians, and exalts as a patriotic

—y

fete ee ern te

Guatemalan Army public rela-
tions advertisement: “Let us
mointain peace in Guatemala.
Soldiers are men of the people.
People like yourself. Who love
and cherish Guatemala as you
do, Lam your brother. You aft
my drother. We area single
Guatemalan moe.”

EN GUATEMAALA

LOS SOLDADOS SOMOS PUEBLO.
PUEBLO COMO TU. QUE SIENTEN Y AMAN
A GUATEMALA COMO TU.

?

Soy tu
hermang.

o°

Somos
una miame
rata chapina.

v2 i : 5 A it are 1 Pye Ria

|
ras |
|
|

Reacting to international and domestic criticism of
forced conscription, the Ministry of Defense issued
new recruiting and pay regulations in July. Material
benefits were raised, and now even include a monthly
allotment to compensate families for the loss of a

workin

Rightwing death squads often
geck lo make a psychological im-
pact on the local populace by
dumping the bodies of tbeir vie-
tir slong public roads.

OTHIPLE CRIMEN, —
Hebitastes de ta flac
Torclila de Eorulatla
tem coe estapor ce
quedares feq cuerpan
sin vida de Salvoder
Del Cid Merrecte, Feit
cians Cardone Coetre
ray ¢ ince Bariilas Pe
tapengre, meerton a
ree ayer por bombred
deeconotldes Lae ajo
cuteces det irtgha ert
wre. previamecale oth
ren 6 Pad Fictimad oo
loo manos Boris sibs,
Adsedetcn macria coe
refagad d¢ meirelbeta
‘8HS)

ae ee

Appendix

Cultural Change Among
Guateinatan Indians and Its
Impact on Guerrilla Recruitment

New Aspirations

ee Poe ndigenous

culture is experiencing a profound transformation as

long-established attitudes and patterns of behavior are
being altered by diverse factors:

* Traditional minifundia (smal plot) agriculture is
unable to provide adequate Jiveli’. sods, thus inten-
sifying dependence on the nation. cney economy.

« Missionaries and catechists have .- <¢7 the concept
of social justice as well as undert:cen “atalistic
religious beliefs and rituals.

© The Indians have increasing communication with the
outside warld

These changes—guerrilla leaders reason—could pro-
duce a generation of Indian youth whe will seek a
better life by overthrowing the capitalist systera P|

But these changes could go cither way; an eapanding
horizon does not necessarily produce revotutionaries,
and, in fact, the decline of traditional! culture has been
accompanied by a strong desire among young Indians
to enjoy the benefits of participation in national life.
Whether Guatemala's socioeconomic sysiem can
accommodate changing Indian aspirations is an issue

that will be resolved over time (ll
: SO nae eg

7

Cultural Challenges and Guerrilla Probkms

Radical left propaganda, an integral facet of the : .- :-
egy to legitimize the insurgency and gain foreign cup.
port, Gepic-s Guatemiaia’s Indians as a homogeneci's
mass being collectively oppressed. This stereotype ig-
nores the linguistic and cultural diversity among In-
Gians, as well as the economic progress enjoyed by a
growing number of Indian merchants. Guerrilla propa-
gandists also give the inaccurate impression that ail
peasants are Indians. Although most of the rural po,
lation in the Western Highlands is indigenous, most of
the peasants in the eastern zones are not. Furthermore,
not all Indians are peasants; many are active and
successful in commerce. Anthropological studies ir-
creasingly refer to an emerging indigenous clite in
various locales. (u}

Indians generally consider themselves racially disthuce
from the doninant, Spanish-speaking Ladino ponul>»
tion of Guatemala, but the distinction is primarily
cultural rather than racial. The most obvious clea”.

is that of lar guage: however, this also separates f::
dians from each other, since many Indiaa language:
and dialects are spoken. In the same manner that each
dialect is limited to 2 specific arez or locality, the
traditional cultural orientation of the Indian centers on
his native community. This localism, with its particu-
lar code of bitaiior and set of deliefs, distinguishes the
treditional Indian from the Ladino, who views himss'f
as part of a wider Spanish-American culture with
centers in Gaatemala City and abroad. (u)

Lading domina‘ius of the economie and government
structures in the ster Highlands has been facili-
tated, in part, by she rural Indians’ general lack of
knowledge atwut ine ouside world, During recent
decades, hcwever, the Indians’ isolation has been re-
duced by a hos: of factors including new roads, literacy
campaigns, foreign missionaries, an increase in mi-
grant labor, and the availability of transistor radios.

=

a
~
e
2
3
i
=
c
a
Py
3
o

F]
a
2
Z
2
5
:
E
"4
4

=
-_

These have beat ght a growing sophistication that,

while making sc.ne Indians more accessible to insur-
gent appeals, has made others strive for personal ¢co-
nomic advancement within the national mainstream.

{u)}

The insurgents are attempting to take advantage of
changing Indian aspirations by promising that a

revolutionary government would bring about social
and economic improvements that could never be at-
tained under the present capitalistic system. ae

Revertheless, before a substartial number of
Indians takes tte risk of joining the armed redellion,
the radical left must prove that it is capable of syccess-
fully challenging the armed forces miltarily. é

The lefts task is compounded by a growing fragmeata-
tion within mary indigenous communities, a result of
culture changes that pit old values and practices
against new social and economic aspirations. Although
the attendant polarization has made some Indians
increasingly susceptible to insurgent appeals, it also
has reinforced the desire of others toward material
benefits within the present political order. (u}

Over the last few decades, a major factor coninbuting
to polarization among the Indians bas involved tra-
ditional Indian religious organizations known as
cafradias, whose power and influence have declined as
indigenous participation in modern commercial activ-
ity has increased. In the past, the most prosperous
Indians bore many of the heavy financial costs of the
cofradias—including fiestas and rituals in honor of
patron saints—tbhus enabling these organizations to
level wealth, promote group solidarity, and reaffirm
traditional! cusioms, Now, however, individual Indians
are more likely to use their money for personal
advancement, a reflection gf the inroads made by
modern Western cunure Bd reover: class divisions ars
emerging in some communities as wealthier Indians
marry among themselves, thereby establishing an ec
nomic elite mere likely to favor the status quo gam

19

The reduction of the socioeconomic and religious
significance of the cofradias has been accelerated by
Protestant and Roman Catholic religious modernizers,
who have attached the system as idolatrous and waste-
ful. Primarily concerned with sociai justice rather than
traditional religious practices these innovators work
through native converts or lay catechists—usually
assertive, Hileraie youths—to focus the attention of the
Indians of human rights and other issues. (U)

: +, = ah e
* Ag EGP manifesce states: “Christians play a6 important rote ip Le
gonsciousness reismtg and organization of our people ond bave case
of their farth a generous force for the liberation of Guatemals....
Aware Christians rbould undersiand and deliewe that eben perce ful
mead to achieve justice have been exhausiod, revolutionary vik
is Jegitimate and just. fn our cowaUry, one cannot be a Christing
without being e revolutionary.” Fidel Castro himsecIf made avertu ces
to Christian mulitans in his 197! proposals in Chile for “prelcgic
allinnces between Christians and Marsists” and on other cocas ious.

(v)
gen

Despite the advances of Indian merchants, the sack st-
ing system keeps most Indians in anin“svior pweto
vesting control of native commerce iaryé vin wade’
hands. For exzmple, the bulk of the au Sara! ids
in the Western Highlands—-the area where indigen cus
involvement im guerrilla groups has beast: ai ors
nounced—are owned and farmed in small var <i> oy
Indians. The produce, however, is banght and cite b
uted in the Ladino-dominated macxndt (co ow, thus ren-
dering the Indians largely dependent ar ital segment
of the population generally opposed te a. y form of
change. (vu)

For the Indians, the pic siom of i4e narkeling system
is exacerbated by the m. -fuad’2. ur small parcels of
land, which traditionally have supported the indig-
enous population. Now, liowever, increasing over-
population, further subdivisions through inheritance,
and the poor quality and meager productivicy of the
land have r.ndered the eainifundia inadequate. (v)

Faced with the erosion of their traditional economic
base and unable to secure emptoyment near home, an
estimated half-million fndians from the Western
Highlands migrateeach year to the Plantation Zone
for seasonal work. ae

Gvatemala’s export economy—primarily sugar, cot-
ton, and coffee—largely hinges on indigenous migrant
workers, but high inflation is eroding the earnings from
plantation labor. The eatent of Indian dissatisfaction is
illustrated by the massive work stoppages thal swept
across plantations in the Escuintla and Suchitepe sez
departmenis in February and March of 1980, resulting
in government decrees nearly .ripting the minimum

3}

Recognizing the potential for widespread unrest ita-
plicit in the economic plight of the Indians, the Guaie-
malan Gr -ernment is conducting a large-scale pro-
gram lo resettie Indians in the jungles of the Northern
Transversal Zone. Plans to ¢xpand the work begun Ly
Maryknoll missionaries at [xcan by creating coopera-
tive unils with access to schools, health clinics, tech:
nical assistance, and outside markets may founder,
however, on the admin'strative inadequancies of the
bureaucracy. (u}

Another serious problecn is the dramatic rise in value

of formerly worthless jungle land because of the

discovery of oi! in the zone and the building of the

Transversal Road connecting newly opened lands wiil,

the Caribbean coasi and the national road network.

Ladino speculators and developers @EUEME @is*- ¢
ave scquired large tracts of land in th

IM ANCIENT TIMES Moses
galhered together the leaders
af the pecpie to lead them out
of Egypt.

Biblical Citation; Exodus 9, 16

Ons mission 5 to detiver the
people from slavery.

TODAY the poor must unite
and work together fo attain ihe
kingdom.

They are taking Jacinto, WE
MUST HELP FIM!

Translated excerpis from Com
rade Christ (Crista Comperero}
a series of Christian
revolutionary pamphiets using
Biblica! references to raise ihe
consciousness of the people,
particularly Protestant converts,
and foster agitation for social
justice.

Unctassified.

ANTES Moses

Avestra fared 29
Sccar @ gveble de
Id escidvitud

AHORA
para gicanzar e! rena

muchd 38 Tava
4 At .
pA TWEMOSLO if

20

feunid a
para sacarlo de Egipte

10S difigentes dei pyedio

[cite Biblica = ExXCOO 5, 6}

JO$ podres renemos Que unirnes y frobajar

oY

Me ee

bd

eT

Comrade Christ compare: the
suffering of the peopte of isract
under Egyptian bondage with
the exploitation of Guatemaian
peasants by referring to the
Panzos massacre:

IN ANCIENT TIMES God
wanted. through Moses, '0 tree
His people from slavery.

We cannot bear thes hard work
any longer.

United we shall change (hig
situation.

TOCAY God does not want
slavery and death for our
brothers.

They killed more then 100
peasants n Panos.

In the face of thea, what must
we do as Christians?

Now thevefore, Deboid, the cry
of the children af israel is come
ynto me: and have #150 seen
the oppresson wherewith [he
Egyptians oppress ihem.
Come now therefore, and f will
$end thee unto Pharaoh, thal
thoy mayest Bring forth my
people the children of Israeli out
of Egypt.

Exodus 3, } 10
Unclassified.

ANTES 0108 quido, por medio de Moses, sacar
a Su pueblo de ia eachvifud

YO fg aquantamns
estos Gros reba log

wide
combiaremcs Ge
asta P poetic
akacidn ft

t: : ~
‘ : :

AHORA Dies no quere ia exciavifus y
la muerte Se Mmestros Nermanes.

ate #3To
; ade’ Tenemog
motgron mda de can que Sacer

cOmpesinos gh

cornea
oratiangg?

H TUF : ¥ 4 '
Ei clamor de joe hijeos da large ma Legods
nosta mi y Ne Viato 1a opresion @ qua oe
egipcios ioe sometan.

| Va, pues, yo te anvio a Faradn pura que saques
de Egipte a mi pueblo, os AYO de lerael *. |

éila
piblica
