The Short-term Prospect for Cambodia
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000024836, dated 4 April 1973.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000024836).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

fAL.TIZED COPY,

SPECIAL
NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE 3 ,
ESTIMATE — : | |

The Short-Term Prospect for Cambodia

7 a 57-73
24 Moy 1979

Se ug KT 2. 289

er es

ee he ee ee ie Be ee i

Pare Tere
“at bag eB
‘rate :

zee

Bp
val

THi; ESTIMATE 1§ SUBMITTED BY THE DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AND CONCURRED IN BY THE UNITED STATES
INTELLIGENCE BOAR. '

The following inte “yence orgonizotions participated in the preparation of
the esfimcte: .

The Centrof Intelligence Agency ond the intelligence organizations of the Deport-
ments of Stote and Defense, tha NSA, and the Treasury.

Concurring:
The Deputy Director of Centrat b-tefligence
The Director of Intelligence ond Research, Department of Stole
The Director, Defanse Intelligence Agency
The Director, Notional Security Agency
The Director, Division of Internotiong: Security Affain, Atomic Enargy Commission
. The Speciol Assistont to the Secretory of the Treasury

Abstaining:
The Assito-t Director, Federot Bureou of Investigation, the subject being ovtide
of his jurisdiction.

WARNING ;
This moterio! contains information offectiag the Nationol Oeferse of the United Stotes
within the meoning of the erpionoge fows, Title 16, USC, Secs. 793 ond 794, the trons-
mission or revelation of which in eay monner fo on unauthorised person bb prohibaed.

- oa eee i we Pe ee i tod ee ge . eee a Raa |

Pe ad

eh rented ere eee, aay sepa so ee ee ee

. sesmenntnrneneaeacemaiame sammie Dan nenmein tee menientaie hnineetietia Lt ee a, tT a Pee)
+ 4 7 A : i

*
a

rome en
-

Pa a

+

SNIE 57-73

FOR CAMBODIA

-

me.
eee

*

THE SHORT-TERM PROSPECT

td ee Le ed

.
ee a
oo
*
=

+ Pete eee eg et

/

TRE SHORT-TERM PROSPECT |

a FOR CAMBODIA

NOTE , é
This Estima‘c considers the outlook for survival of a non-xommunist
government in Cambodia though the end of 1973. The problem Is
addressed under two opposing ¢ sumptions regarding US bombing
in Cambodia; (1) the bombing (3-52 and tactical air suppcrt) con-
tinues more or less ut present levels; or, (2) the bombing :s ended
within the next few weeks as 2 result of Congressional action

Sn ET ee re ie re mr 6 rie eC me

Ce ees

wat abet

TPAEETENY oe
Bar ye age

n arigts 5 Mos. nt roy,
AP paRee- eth gy CRB aR arate yee ror el ty bey
veh Uy eee oa eel “8. fait’, same

PRECIS

The Khmer insurgents, with many communist leaders responsive
to Hanoi's direction and contol, have the military {nitiative fn Cam-
boalia; the government's military and political position has steadily
eroded over the past year. US alr support has been the mufor prop of
the Cambodian Government. Hf US bombing continues, the chances
are better than even that a non-communist government in Phnom ~
Penh will be able io last out the ycar.

Obviously, if the government demonstrated an abliity to come to
grips with the military and political problems facing Cambodia, the
odds would improve somewhat. But there is little basis Icr expecting
any substantial improveinent in the performance of FAN < or the gov-
emment over the next six months. Meanwhile, the Insurgents will be
hard at work consolidating and expanding their contre? throughout ;
the countryside. Thus, even if the present government survived the vad
year, it would probably have suffered a net decline in strength relative . :
to the insurgents.

But if US support were to cease in the near term, the Lan Nit regime
could not survive for long, perhaps no more than a month or two. Most
Cambodians would believe that it was only a matter of time before

_the conimanists in one way or another gained control of the country.
Pressures for a deal with tie communists would Increase.

; ny) tal 4 vaste: 204 °
sme
.
astepneRnnatiarenelecial aa ATS A SOS AC ee wT aOR
Pa

LEP a Lael a a

roe apne ees ee :

*
+ eb em he

The communists might decide to press for a complete military take-
over of Cambodia. Their chances of accumplishing this would be
good, But Hanoi at least would probably want to test other alternatives
before taunching an all-out military effort, in part because such an
effort would not be without some risks and costs and would not avto-
matically improve the communist position in South Vietr 4m—-still the
number one objective. ot :

_ Thus, unless there were a total collapse of organized resistonce, the
communists would be more likely to try to arrange a coalition govern-

ment, holding in reserve the ction of setzicg control by direct military
ection, Under the circunstarices, they could more or less dictate the
terms and get what they felt necessary.

However the successor regime came to power and whether or no?
it was headed by Sihanouk, the Khmer communists would be the pre-
dominant force, and Hanol would be calling most of the shots. Such
a regime would Le hostile to the interests of Wishington, Saigon, end
Bangkok. The non-communist aspect of such a government would be
Bittle more than a fucade. ;

Over time, “he deep Cambodian hatred of the Vietnamese might
" generate some resistance to Hanoi’s dictates. Sihanouk would also
almost certainly attempt to maneuver to undercut the communist role
in the government. The odds, however, would be against him.

A communist takeover in Cumbodia would be fn political and psy-
chological terms extremely unscttling In both Saigon and Bangkok
Both capitals would be acutely concerned as to what it meant for
them, particularly conceming the prospect of continued US support.
Both would seek new assurances from the US and would feel increas-
ingly [sofated and beleaguered if none, or not enough, were forth-
coming from Washington. .

By itself, the enhanced communist position in Cambodia would
not bring about a major shift In the present balance of military power
in South Vietnam (a view the South Vietnamese leaders would prob-
ably share); it would, however, ease communist logistic. burdens and
give them greater flexibility in developing their streagth and future
strategies. The South Vietnamese would fear that the communists
would use Cernliocdlia as a base for organizational efforts against South
Virtram as well as a springboard for a major military offensive in
South Vietnam.

In terms of overall implications for the future of South Vietnam,
Laos, or even Thailand, the tnstallation of a communtist-leaning regime
in Phaom Penh could be of less significance than the efrcumstances
which brought this about. Uf the Prestdent were forced for the jirst
time hy the US Congress to halt military action in Indochina, this
would be seen as a vital turning point, forecasting the end of eny
siguificant CS military role in this arca. 2

+
' . i

re ee oe ean ee be Es I Ha EE be EGE _

. +

AN

Pat iss is
$Me y
rr ceaatay L

eS Lee
cat SMe
fT al

wy tee a

SREB |

ay

1
rx
Sealed
ie
ft
4
te
ita"s3.
i.e

THE ESTIMATE

I. THE FORCES AT WORK IN CAMBC'D!A
AT PRESENT

1. The Communist Position. The Cambo
dian fnsurgents clearly have the military
initiative in Cambodia. They have relatively
uncontested run of most of the countryside,
are able to cut the government's supply lines
with Ettle difficulty, and have several major
towns effectively surrounded. There are at
beast 40,006-50,000 regular Khmer insurgent
combat personnel, including separate com-
pany and platoon size units" 20 addition, the
Victnamese communists are estimated to have
more than 5,009 regular combat troops ar4
some £1,000 administrative services personnel
ia Cambodia, though most of these are con-
ocmed with South Vietnam. There are, how-
ever, an undetcrmined number of North Viet-
namese Palson pertonnel ag well as some
North Victnamese artillery and sspper units

*There & also o barge number of Cambodian fn-
urgent guerilla perenne, These feces are poorly
ermed ant tained, but they do combtute @ man
power pool for pculble upgrading into the prepular
communist forces; H & povwible that some ppgrading
gay have already ocvurred without bein, detected.
Thus, the regular comlat strengsh of the insurgent:
fp Canibrali~ suay ectually exceed the official .stimste
of 40,000-50,000 ten.

operating with the Khmer communists. Finely,
though not yet full: developed, the Khmer
communists have ra Increas‘ogly effective po-
litical infrastructice.

& Despite their remarkable growth over the
past few years, the Khmer communists are
still beavily dependent on.Hanof for their
military supplies. Fa“her, the Khe? com
munist movement (historically) & virtually a
North Victaanicse creation. The cure of the
insurgent apparatus & compo«d of Cambo-
dian communists trained fn Worth Victnam
and infiltrated into Cambodia over the past
several years, in effect providing Hanel a
built-in contro! mech: nism. Even though the
Khiner insurgents have attained considerable
freedom of action, Hanol probably still sets
the gencral guidelines goveming insurgent
policy in C: nbodia. Further, so long as the
fighting continucs in Cambodia, there will be
8 basic commonality of interests between the
Xhmer Insurgents and the North Vietnamese.

3. The Co rrrments Position, ne govern-
ment’s military position bas deteriorated
markedly over the past several months, De
spite a numerical advantage and heticr equip-
ment, government forces (FANS) have not
buen able to cope with the communists. Phnom

Peul's efforts fn its own bebalf have become
ies and kess offective since the ill-fated
Chrnla I campaign in the late fall of 1971,
when North Victamese units gave FANK
_@ drubbing from which, psychologically, &
has never recovered. Hampered by poor Irad-
ership, corsuptian, pay problems, and repeated
faftures in the Ficld, FANK has become In-
‘ereasingly demoralized, Incidents of units
brealing under fire or refusing to fight are
fnervasing. What little military starch FANK
has recently displayed has been largely owing
to the availability of US seria) support.

4 Politically, the Lon No} goverment has
also been Ineffective, clearly unable to face
the realities of the situation, Petty Intrigue
and personal interests have taken precedence
over Pational survival. The situation has im-
proved somewhat with the departure of Lon
Nol's brother, Lon Non, from the scene; he
had persistently connived to fsolate Lon Nol
and te block the participation of ether Cam-
boctian leaders In the government. The entry
hito the government of Sirk Matak and In
Tam, both more aware than Lon Nol of Cam-
benlia’s precarious position, is a stengthening

Weactors will be able to rice above their per-
sonal rivalries and make an effective start
toward addressing the country’s pressing
problems. Nor would the departuse of the
myopic Lon Nel—a possibility that he peri-
oidically- ratses—necessarily result in more
effective goverrmental action, though it would
keave more capable mea ‘n charge.

I. PROSPECTS IF UNITED CATES
BOMBING CONTINUES

5. Inpact of thé’ Bombing, US supgort—
financial, logistical, and particuiarly bemb-
ing-—bas been the major prop of the Lon Nol
government. Militarily, the bombing has
helped to keep the communists forces at bay
by complicating their supply problems and

move. Even so, ft remains uncertalr Uhat new -

_ making ft difficult and costly for them te

mass troops for major military action. Partly
for this reason, they have not undcrtak-o
Lirge-seale action to scize and hold the ke
arcas still in government handé. :
@ Politically and psychologically, the bomb-
ing has ulso bolstered the Lon Nol guverno-
ment. It has provided the regime with time
in which to by lo sort out fts many political
and o-ganizati::ina] problems. It bas alse served
to sustain yorernment hopes that the military
hreat might be checked and whe insurgent
claim for a significant political volce resisted.
This has led Lon Nol to believe that he need

* not approach the fnsurgents on anything but

bis own terms. So long as Lea Nol does not
have a change of mind and remains en the
scene, the odds do not favor Phnom Penh ec-
tively pursuing # negotiated end to the bos-
tilitics. :

9. There arc, however, those in the Cambo-
dian Government who, unlike Lon Nol, believe
that 8 negotiated settlcment Is the only way to
rezlve the situation To them, the US bombing
and the time that & buys gives thy govero-
meant a chance tu improve its position so that
it could enter into negetiaticns from some-
thing other than a position of adject weakuess.

& Hanofs Perspective. Although US bomb-
Ing has been instrumental in scstrining com-
munist military action In Cambudia, It f not
the only factor involved. Indced, if Hanol and
its Khmer allics were willing to commit the
resources and suffer considerable losses, they
euuld probably overrun Cambodia écspite US
bombing. But while there are probsbly some
within the Khmer Insurgent movement who
would advucate such a course, Hanoi'’s per-
spective Is Indochina-wide and South Vietnam
is the number one target.

@. Hanvi controls essentially what it nor ds

in Cambodia te protect and suppurt its post-
tion in South Victnam. A communist regime

Pa

Hanol's position since its maintenance and
Management would probably require ext-
sidcrable resources, especially since the Khmer
Insurgents are nut yrt organized sufficiently
to run the cuuntry. In addition, Hanoi cannot
be entircly sure that the US would not retaii-
ate against North Victnam itself in the event
of a mafor communist military effort to take
Phium Penh. Having regard for its relations
with the US, Peking would probably advise
Hanol to forege such blatant sction. Finally,
the communists contd not be certain that they
would not face stiff resistance from some
FANK clements, particularly those defending
the capital.

40. Fn Suin. 1f US bombing continues, the
chances are better than even that a non-
communist governinent in Phnom Penh will
be able to bast through the current rainy
season and somewhat beyond. Obviously, if
the govcrmnent demonstrated an ability to
come to grips with the military and political
problems facing Cambodia, the odds would
improve somewhat. But there Is little basis
for expecting any substantia] Imorovement in
the performance of FANK or the government
over the next six months. Meanwhile, the in-
surgents will be hard at work consolidating
aml expanding their cuntrol throughout the
countryside. They would probably make miure
headway in such an effort than would the
government. Thus, even if the present govera-
ment survived the year, it would probably
have suffercd a net ¢ccline in strength reta-
tive to the Insurgenis.

itl, PROSPECTS If UNITES STATES
BOMBING IS ENDED IN
THE NEAR TERM

M1. The Impact. The Cambodian faders
have shown Fite awarencss that US alr sup-
port might soon be cut off. The shock would
be profound. There would be little the US

in-Phoom Penh might fnitially complicate |

could do tu cushion the blow, promises of
continued military and cconomic assistance
would be mistrusted. FANK's demoralization
would be sceclcrated, and the army would
ecase te pose any significant impediment to
communist military action, except perhaps
around Phnom Penh itsclf. The &nport of
both military and efvilian supplies would be
severely curtailed as the communist moved
to cut the major supzly routes, which are
pow kept open primarily by the efforts of
US tactical air support, Even if US alr trans-
port were available, in the absence of tactical
alr support, ft Is doubtful that FANK could
kong sccure als fields or prevent a buildup of
antiaircraft guns around drop rones st be-
Icaguered provincial cupitals or even at Phnom
Penh itself.

12 Meanwhile, a number of Ieading govern-
mental figures would probably try to leave
the capital, and any semblance of viable ad-
ministration would soon disappear. Whatever
political structure remained would he para-
fyzed, waiting for forces outside its control to
setde Cambodiay fate. No non-communist
figure on the scene would be able to rally
support fur a “go-it-slone” strategy. Despair
would be the everwheliming reaction, accom-
panied by the belief that it was only a matter
of time before the communists in one way or
another gained predominant, if not total, con-
trol of the country.

13. In these tircumstances, Hanoi and the
Khmer Insurgents might Se sorely tempted
tw prss for a complete military takeover.
Their chances of accomplishing this would be
grod, and they might be able to pull it off

_ without a significant commitment of North

Victnamese fores to the effort. Evco so, in
the belicf dhat time was on their side in any
event, they would probably want to test other
means to achicve their eads before launching

a ee a ee ae

. eny af! out military push. A variety of factors
would cuntribute bo such eo decision:

—They would hope tu minimize the risk of
US military rctavolvement oF retaliation.

—Although they would not think ft likely,
they would want to minimize the risk of
any ThaS or South Vietnamese Interven-
tion, 3

—{n light of the fact that most of their
objectives cuuld be attained by less costly
swans, they might calculate that the pos-
sible military losses would outweigh the
gains.

—Pcking would almost certainly advise
Hanoj to forego such action, claiming
that i was unnecessary and needlessly
provucative.

34. Thus, instead of a strictly military ap-
proach to the Cambodian situation in the
wak. of an end to US bombing, the commu-
nists would be more likely to opt for a political
solution, eecumpanied by considerable mili-
tary pressure. Should this approach prove
unprahictive or unduly kngthy, the commu-
nists would be prepared to move for a military
takeover. The communists, however, would be
‘in a very strung bargaining position. The US
would have little leverage and the Cambodian
Covernment even hess. With the removal of the
US acrial umbrella, the non-cummunist post-
tion could only get worse. Pressures In Phnom
_ Penh for some kind of a deal, however dis-
advantagcous, to Leing the fighting to an end
would mount.

15. The establishment of a coalition govern-
went in which the communists would be the
donsnant clement would probably be a satis-
factory short ren outcome to Hanoi. A rectum
of Sinanouk would give the government in
Pliwnn Penh a symbol of legitimacy. And
Nurigh the orth Vietnamese would still be
wary abvut Sihanvuk’s reliability, they would

probably calculate that he would be beholden
to them and they would Lave such a strong
position In the goverament that he could be
Kept on o relatively dght teash. Peking, for its
own ends, would ako champion such 8 solu-
Gon and wold urge Hanii to take this
epproach.

IV, THE CHARACTER OF A SUCCESSOR
REGIME :
16. No matter how a collapse of the Phnom
Penh govcroment came about—military de-
fcat or negotiations—the successor regime
would be under strong communist influence
end hostile to the interests of Washington,
Saigon, and Bangkok If he had not alresdy
feft the country or been pushed aside, Loo
Wul would have to ga; the communists wil
not deal with him. Even & Sihanouk became
the tituiar head of 0 coalition government,
the communists would be the predominant
force and Hanui would be eu'ling most of the
shots. :

17. The emergence of historically dep
Cambodian hatred of the Vietoamese could
eventually serve to limit Hanof’: influence by
leading the relatively well-orgs nized Khmer
insurgents to try to assert sore degree of
Independence from Hanoi. Moreover, Siha-
nouk, despite his professions of being only
a symbolic figurehead In any new govern-
ment, is not a toady end he & a Khmer
nationalist. It is not bis style to sit mockly
on the sidelines while someone else controls
the levers of power, In time, he would almost
ccrtainly attempt to mancuver to undcrmine
North Victnam’s role in the government, play-
ing Peking off egainst Hanoi if possible and
mancuvering in other ways among the powers
to gain some independence of action. The odds
would be against him but, over tims, he might
have some success.

Y. THE IMPACT ON SOUTH VIETNAM,
t4.05, AND THAILAND

28. In ferms of overall Implications for te
future of South Vietnam, Laos, or even Thal-
fond, the instullation of 2 com muntst-leaning
regime in Phnom Penh could be of less signifi-
cance than the efroumstances which brought
t about. If the President were forced for the
* first thine by the US Congress fo halt military
action In Indochina, this would be seen os 6
pital turning point, forecasting the end of ony
significant US military role in shis aru.

39. South Vietnam. The existence of a com-

munist-dominated government in Phnom Penh

coming abvut after a cessation of US bombing
would be In political and psychological tenas
extremely unsettling to Saigon, producing a
fecling within the government of vulnerability
and isolation. It would fear the growth of fcel-
ing within the population that the scales were
tipping In favor of the communists In Indo-
china. Thicu would want to test what the turn
of events In Carnbadia meant for South Vict-
nam. A request for new US guararitves of eto
nomic and military support would be almust
certain, and Saigon would press for advance
assurances of US air support in the event ofa
communist offensive into South Victnam fron
Cambodia.

90. By itsclf, a strong communist position in
Cambodia would not bring about @ major
shift in the present balance of military power
in South Vietnam? Under eurrent corditions
of limited combat, the inmediate impact of
a fall of Cambodia would be primarily psy-

chological, although in time it would give the -

—————

The Director of Naval Intelligence believes this
estimate understates Ihe bupact that the fall of Cam-
bodia would have on Sotth Vietnam, particularly the
‘ment populatad portion —the Delta. Hi fe his fodgenent
that the impact would be eubsisrtial, and that the
fr real evel of Insurgency would be such that ghere
would, in fact, he a nape shift in the pr ani batance
of power.

communists more flexibility in working to im-
prove their mifiiiary position arm] io develop-
fag their future strategy. The greatest mili-
tary gain sccruing to the communists would
be the easing of their logistical burden, par-
ticularly in South Vietnam's Military Regions
3 and 4. Hanol would have the option of
shifting more of its supply effort to a ss
route using Cambodian ports. This & al-
rcady possible on a small scale, but 8 larges
dort would be casier with the access to Cam-
bodia’s port facilities, But Hanof's ability to
make extensive use of this route would depend
on the willingness of Peking and Moscow to
provide the material and possibly the shipping
for such an effort. It would also depend on the
vulnerability of the Cambodian ports to alr
attack or naval quartntine by the
Vietnamese.

£1. The communists would also galn access
to a substantial inventory of Cambodian mili-
tary equipment and sepplies, some of which
could be made available to communist forces
in South Vietnam But anless Hanoi were
contemplating major military action in South

* Victnamn, it already bas more or less what it

needs in Cambodia for continuing the struggle
in South Vietnam along present lines.

@2 Leos and Thailand. The non-communists
in Laos would be discouraged by the tur of
events In Cambodia, but the Immediate in-

events in Laos would be mi Imat The
Vientiane government, however, would be
concenied that the US unwillingness to Fup
port the Lon No} regime reflected s similar
sttitude toward the situation in Laos”

2. The political and psychological imyact
in Thailand would be greater than In Laas.
Bangkok hes made ft clear that looks to
the US to presene a non-communist ;

bodia, As a rcxvlt, Thailand tends to view
US-policy iv, Cambodia as a gauge of the reli-
ablfity of the US commitment to Thailand.
Mf Cambodia went under as a result of a tack
of US support, the Thal Icadership would
want to obtain some new and concrete as-
gurances from Washington. If the US did
not or could not respond in a manner satis-

. factory to the Tha! leaders, they might be

prompted ty acevicrate the ongoing process
of scarching for alternatives to the close rela-
tionship with the UE They would be very
slow, however, to actually disengage from
the US until thcy were confident that any
other arrangenent would in fact protect their
pational interests.

a
S
4
Ly
?
A
3

ae prow ark ang Say i
.
