Short-term Prospects for the Tshombe Government in the Congo
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011837, dated 3 July 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011837).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

is eed LIBRARY
Sandatory I Review
Cake # NLJ 84295

Document #3

SPECIAL -

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE-ESTIMATE |. -

NUMBER ee

/

{fo

SNIE ig, 2~
5 August 1964

304

Short-Term Prospects for the RGAIOE:.. _

‘Government | in the Congo

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL- INTELLIGENCE
Concerred in by the
UNITED STATES INTECUGENCE BOARD
As indicated overleaf

5 AUGUST -1964.-——-———--

Approved £08 | for Rebesuy 8 ee

Date “lo. Tain 1990 seg

re emmmttateneatentdiet ett nhs Hecmsege Mein ween Eom nan

sgt

The following intelli

gence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate:

the Central Intelligence Agency ond the intelligence organizations of the Depart.
ments of State, Defense, and NSA.

Concurring:

Director of Intelligence and Research, Department of State
Cirector, Defense Intelligence Agency

Director of the Notional Security Agency
Abstaining:
The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to the USIB and the Assistant Di-

rector, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
jurisdiction.

WARNING

This material contains information affecting the National Defense of the United States
within the meaning of the espionage laws, Title 18, USC, Secs.793 and 794, the trans-
mission o¢ revelation of which in ony manner to on unauthorized person is prohibited.

eclossificction

-

SPECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE —~

NUMBER 4 39

|
|
‘Sith stor tent an atte ne a arene tT a online teeta hem am ANPSNaN ad < = atte

Short- Term Prospects. for the Tshombe |
Government in the Congo |

SHORT-TERM PROSPECTS
FOR THE TSHOMBE GOV-
ERNMENT.IN THE CONGO

THE PROBLEM —- .--—-- <= ee

To examine the prospects for the Tshombe government during the
next six to nine months.”

CONCLUSIONS

A. In recent months, regional dissidence and violence have as-
sumed serious proportions, even by Congolese standards, and pro-
duced the threat of a total breakdown in governmental authority.
The difficulties confronting Prime Minister Tshombe are enormous.
His greatest need is a military force which can handle the various
rebellions. His political position will be threatened by other aspirants
to power. We think the chances are about even that he will be able
to remain Prime Minister over the next six to nine months. If Tshombe
is able to avoid anarchy in the Congo, he will have scored a consider-

able achievement, but there is little prospect of establishing a central ~~

government which will have a substantial degree of authority through:
out the country. (Paras. 1-6, 11-13, 15-16)

B.— Should Tshombe fall; the prospects aré dark. — Extrernists would

be likely to gain increased influence in Léopoldville, secessionist
regimes might break off and disorder would spread. (Paras. 14, 18)

C. We believe Tshombe will adopt a generally pro-West orienta-
tion within the confines of a pro forma non-aligned policv. He will
probably remain close to the Belgians and susceptible to their in-
fluence; we believe he will cooperate with the US. Although still
suspect by many African leaders, we believe Tshombe would become
generally acceptable in Black Africa if he succeeded in providing a
workable solution to the Congo's problems. (Paras. 21-23)

* Under the newly approved constitution national elections are to be held during this period.

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

1. Prime Minister Moise Tshombe was long the principal adversary of those
who were seeking to fashion a central authority in post-colonial Leopoldville.
His appointment testifies to the kaleidoscopic nature of Congo politics and
the extent of the desperation felt by President Kasavubu and General Mobutu
in their efforts to preserve the Congolese entity. Political parties have little
effect on the national scene, although thev are often influential in areas of their
tribal base. No man or party has a solid claim to a national political following.
Only a handful of the country’s peiitical Bgures have any concept of the national
interest or the responsibilities of national leadership. The central government
has lacked the minimal instruments of power such as a loval and effective mili-
tary force end a reasonably competent bureaucracy.

2. These problems, plus the corruption, irresponsibility, and perhaps above
all the inertia of the Congo's inexperienced politicians, both government and
opposition, stymied Adoula's efforts to rebuild the administration, brought
fledgling political institutions such as parliament into disrepute, and widened
the gap between Leopoldville and the provinces. Although outside assistance
and the UN presence preserved the Congo's basic territerial integrity, Adoula
was able to exercise his authority outside Leopoldville enly unevenly and
sporadically, relying on financial subventions and the Congolese National Army
(ANC). By and large, provincial officials were inept and often corrupt and did
little to further national objectives. The ANC in mati instances fed anti-
Leopoldville hostility by acts of brutality and pillage. In time, focal grievances
and the deterioration of order sparked the growth of numerous, disparate rebel-
lious groups in several provinces, notably Kwilu, Kivu, and North Katanga.

3. Many other reasons also help account for the rise of the rebellious groups.
Longstanding tribal feuds, which had been repressed by the Belgians before
independence, have revived in the absence of effective security forces. This
has been tke case particularly where one tribe dominated the government of
a city or province which embraced other tribes as well. In areas where tribal
disputes are not important, political discontent has arisen from such conditions
as the abseace of familiar consumer goods and food and the ineffectiveness of
governmental authorities.

4. Rebellious outbreaks in the provinces have been encouraged and probably
in one case started by exile groups based in Congo (Brazzaville) and Burundi.
These groups are composed of some 150-200 extremist followers of Lumumba
and Gizenga and have adopted the label of the Committce of National Libera-
tion (CNL). Although the CNL is badly divided and its members Jack political
stature or a sizable following in their own right, they have been given small
scale Soviet and Chinese Communist financial support.

5. The necessity of appointing an interim government at this time of widespread
dissidence, the dwindling in the support for Adoula. the departure of the UN
military force, and a threatened total breakdown of governmental authority
were immediate considerations which led President Kasavubu to call on Tshombe
to form a government of “national reconciliation.” In addition, Tshombe. with
access to the wealth and control of the votes of southern Katanga, was clearly
a strong force to be reckoned with and if excluded from the national scene

“could have become a fonnidable threat.

Il. THE TASKS FACING TSHOMBE ~~ © ~~ =~

6. Tshombe's primary problem is to restore a modicum of internal order by
checking tribal and local dissidence which has assumed serious proportions even
by Congolese standards. He must rapidly demonstrate convincing leadership
qualities and obtain an improved performance from the security forces while
keeping the perpetually squabbling and divisive political factions at bav. To
achieve the last of these objectives, he will have to make political truces and
accommodations with rival or potentially rival leaders, particularly in Leopold-
ville. Many African leaders suspect that Tshombe is a puppet of Western
imperialists and his domestic foes can probably count on the sympathy and
political support of the more radical African states, e.g., Algeria and Ghana, and
perhaps some subversive assistance. For. all these reasons, Tshombe is under
pressure to achieve some quick results.

*, In attacking these tasks, Tshombe can muster some important assets. [He
is widely known throughout the Congo and is sympathetically regarded by those
regional leaders who favor a high degree of local autonomy. He is the dominant
political figure in the economically. important southem Katanga area. If only
for a time, he is apparently receiving support from widely diverse figures in
the central government, including Kasavubu. Mobutu, and Surete Chief Nendaka.
Their continuing support. at least for the next few months. is virtually a pre-

requisite to his survival in office. Since no parliament can be installed prior
to the national elections, now scheduled for early 1963.-Tshombe cannot con-
stitutionally be removed from office except by Kasavubu.

S. Tshombe's flair for politics may be his best resource. There is evidence
“that his return to the Congo was well received not only in Katanga but in
several areas fed up with Leopoldville’s bumbling and eager for a change.
Tshombe is ambitious and usually adroit and is at ease in the ceaseless maneuver-
ing characteristic of the Congo's political milieu: in the past he has not hesitated
to make and break tactical alliances with conservative or radical groups. e.g.
the CNL, for political gain. He has considerable personal charm and magnetism.
He might be able to establish himself as a national figure with a colorful brand
of personal leadership of the stvle popular elsewhere in Africa.

9. Tshombe has already set his personal stamp on the central government.
Despite considerable enthusiasm for a broadly based government of national
reconciliation. Tshombe has in fact formed a “Government of Public Safety.”

with virtually all ministerial power residing in his hands or those of his long-
time collaborator, Minister of the Interior Godefroid Munongo. President
Kasavubu, who technically has authority over defense matters, Mobutu and
Nendaka, are the only other important figures in the government.

10. In his initial moves as Prime Minister, Tshombe has concentrated on
refurbishing his position in southern Katanga. Meanwhile, he has tried to
bolster his popularity in other provinces and to win the Support of some
elernents of the left. He has sent Munongo to crush the North Katanga rebellion
which has spread as the ANC in that area has nearly collapsed. This effort
has thus far been without results. He is assembling # force of former gendarines,
both from those who took refuge in Angola and those who remained in Katanga.
He apparently found much opposition to his plan to incorporate these men into

the ANC and may now be planning to merge thein into the police system. Else-
where, he has dismissed some of Leopoldville’s worst appointees in the provinces.
and has released a host of political prisoners, including Gizenga. These vigorous
efforts to dominate the scene have of course evoked some concern among leaders
of the various factions displeased at being excluded. It remains to be seen
whether Tshombe can escape the fate of others who have previously sought or
gained power, ie. becoming the principal target of “all other individuals and
factions, irrespective of nominal party affiliation, which aspire to the manifold

benefits which accompany public office in the Congo.

Ill. TSHOMBE’S PROSPECTS

A. Internal Security. tps TA oe eek pe

11. Above all, Tshombe-will probably seek to give the inipression that he is
effectively in charge in the Congo, and to convey to the Congolese people the
impression of vigorous leadership and action. He has been attempting to resolve
tribal insurgency by cheap and easy means, e.g., arranging for payments of
arrears in salaries and engaging in palavers with tribal and provincial leaders.
Nevertheless, intra-tribal animosities and local grievances are-difficult to sort
out, and while Tshombe was enthusiastically welcomed at Bukavu and Stanley-
ville. little other success is visible. He is turning to harsher tactics and he is
likely to use such force as is available to him, including the ANC, his ex-Katanga
gendarmes, and white mercenaries. ;

12. The crucial question is whether Tshombe will be able to achieve a sig-
nificant improvement in the performance of the troops at his disposal before
a major part of the Congo falls to the rebels. Mobutu and Tshombe are cur-
rently working together and Mobutu seems to recognize the necessity for more
professional advice and training. Without competent leadership of the troops
at the operational level, neither the demoralized ANC nor Tshombe's gendarmes
will be able to deal with present and expected uprisings. Tshombe is seeking
to furnish such leadership through the use of white mercenary officers. A few
such mercenaries have alreadv returned to the Congo and a good manv more
are ready in South Africa and elsewhere. We think Tshombe is willing to face

4

the unfavorable repercussions which will almost certainly ensue both in paris
of the Congo and in other African states from the use of white mercenary officers
leading Congolese troops, He will probably also be able to get additional mili-
tary advisors and equipment from Belgium and elsewhere in the West, but we
: believe he plans to use such advisors in staff positions in support and planning,
functions.

13. The rebellious groups are generally unorganized. weak and are quite
independent of each other. Their successes in most cases have been duc to the
absence of opposition rather than to their own abilities. [t is probable that
even small government forces. if disciplined and well led, could scatter the
insurgents. Indeed, if Tshombe could give the impression of momentum in
reasserting national authority and if his forces could score a decisive victory or
two, there is at least a fair chance that the insurgent groups would lose heart
and that insurgeney would cease to be a critical threat to the government.
On the other hand, there is practically no chance that sparadic outbreaks can be
entirely eliminated.

14. If further reverses were suffered by government forces. however. there
coulé easily be a virtual collapse of the discipline of the troops, and individual
units might commit thenelves to provincial political factions as they did in
1960-1961. In these circumstances, the situation could deteriorate into a multi-
plicity of small scale, uncoordinated revolts, causing disorder and marauding
over much of the Congo. If Tshombe’s difficulties persist. Congo extremists
mav be able to forment an anti-Tshombe civil war or establish an insurrectionary
regime supported by radical African states and by Communist representatives
in Brazzaville and Bujambura. This threat would mount if one of the larger
cities in the eastern Congo. e.g. Stanlevville or Bukavu, fell to rebel forces. In
such an extremity, Tshombe would probably ask the Belgians to. intervene
militarily.

B. Politicol

15. Although Tshombe would almost certainly prefer to run a one-man show,
he is aware of the staggering difficulties of leading a government in the Congo,
and we believe he has sufficient tactical Mexibility to make deals with various
groups. He has said that he intends to restore the prestige and authority of
the chiefs in those regions where traditional patterns are especially strong, and
he probably hopes that through subsidies and other means thev will be able
to control the wilder jeunesse s armed political vouth) elements who have been
tespansible for much of-the turbulence in the provinces. For the present.
Tshombe probably believes he has little to fear politically from the still leaderless
and out-maneuvered left, though he may bring in additional individuals from
the CNL should his administration falter or should he come to believe the CNL
sufficiently important.

17, If Tshombe is to accomplish even this much, he will need continued mili-
tarv and economic assistance. Professional military advice and some equipment
will probably represent the most urgent needs, though Tshombe will also need
considerable numbers of UN and Belgian administrative experts. He will also
probably continue to require food and additional funds for stepped-up public
works and subsidies in the provinces. As in Adoula’s case, however, such sup-
port would offer no guarantee of success.

1S. If Tshombe lost office either because of internal political intrigues or
because he could not deal with the internal security situation, the likely conse-
quences would be grim. Tshombe would probably withdraw to his Katanga
stronghold, raising the threat of another secession attempt on his part. On the
national scene, we believe extremists and pro-Communist figures would take
advantage of widespread disillusion and apathy and gain considerable influence
in what passed for a central government.

C. Economic

19. The bulk of the approximately 15 million Congolese people are dependent
upon subsistence farming. hunting. and fishing, and will remain largely un-
allected by wider economic considerations. Despite nearly four vears of political
turmoil, most of the modem sector of the economy still functions at approxi-
mately pre-independence levels. The large European-owned and -operated
mining enterprises and plantations are self-sufficient and, although they have
had some transportation problems. they have remained largely unaffected bv
widespread strife. They provide most of the Congo's badly needed foreign
exchange, and they can probably continue to operate short of a further break-
down of puble order. The most serious economic problems arise in urban
centers where there is inflation and chronic unemployment. and in provincial
centers where there are food and other shortages as a result of the dissidence
and the consequent interruption of communications and transportation.

20. The Congo Government now receives annually some $85-90 million in

economic and technical assistance, including about $23 million from Belgium.

about $45 million from the US, and about $11 million from the UN. In addition,
Belgium provides some $35 million annually in debt services. Because Tshombe

recognizes that Belgium will probably continue to be his best source of technical
and administrative aid, and because Belgian business interests in the Congo
are likely to support his cause, we believe he will maintain close econoinic ties
with the Belgians. Given present levels of external assistance, we believe that
economic grievances will almost certainly not represent a major threat to the
government during the next six months or so.

IV. FOREIGN POLICY

21. We believe that Tshombe will adopt a generally pro-West orientation
within the confines of a pro forma non-aligned policy. In the past, he has
shown a disposition to turn first to his contacts and friends in the West, particu-
larly the Belgians, to help his cause. He feels at home in the West and is
impressed by Western achievements and power. Since coming to office, he
has taken some pains to suggest that he harbors no grievances over the West's
hostility toward him and his former secessionist regime. Moreover, although
Tshombe has flirted with the Soviets on occasion, it has usually been in the
context of maneuvering for advantage on the Congolese scene or because he
felt threatened by the West. He is almost certainly aware that he can hope for
little support from the Communists, although he may perinit the Soviets to
reopen their embassy. By and large, we believe Tshombe will rernain close
to the Belgians and susceptible to their influence, but as evidence accumulates
that they cannot meet all his needs, he will probably turn increasingly to the
US and, perhaps, to France.

22. Tshombe almost certainly holds the US largely responsible for the UN
military action which destroyed his Katanga regime. Now, however, he is aware
of the Congo's present and prospective dependence on the US for aid and
military equipment. He is likely to prove generally cooperative on matters in
the UN and elsewhere, at least-so-long-as he thinks the US is not actively
opposed to him. However, should Tshombe come to believe that the US was

reluctant to support his administration, he would react sharply and seek methods”

of exerting pressure on the US, e.g., by propaganda calculated to embarrass the
US Government domestically,

23. Tshombe is still regarded with suspicion and host:lity by many African
leaders. This was demonstrated at thé July Cairo meeting of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). These feelings will be intensified if he gives other
Africans cause to believe that he maintains friendly- relations with the South
Africans and Portuguese. He has, however, taken some steps to improve his
acceptance in Africa, e.g., the release of Gizenga, and approval for Mrs. Lu-
mumija’s return to the Congo. We believe he will permit the Angolan Govern-
ment in Exile to continue to operate in the Congo, although he will probably do
little to facilitate its endeavors. Although Tshombe stands scant chance of re-
habilitating himself sufficiently to receive the blessing of Ghana and Algeria, there
is little these states can do at the moment that can seriously affect him. By and
large, however, we believe Tshombe's eventual acceptance by mast of the African

2

‘elke

states will depend largely on his success at home. Most African states simply
want a political solution which would avoid chaos in the Congo. If he can
provide a workable answer to the Congo's problems, we believe he will obtain
fairly general acceptance in Africa.

~V, THE LONGER RANGE

24. We believe that Tshombe has almost “certainly” set his sights on the
presidency, hoping thus to become the effective boss of the Congo. If, in the
‘next ‘six tionths or so, he can maintain a modest degree of economic stability
and secure some improvement in internal security and administrative order,
he will be in a strong position to consolidate his political position in the
national elections. Beyond these considerations, no clear estimate of prospects
in the Congo is warranted, other_than that it will remain an area of chronic
upset-and of possible major crisis.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

. This document wos disseminoted by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
s for the information ond use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a
need to know basis, Additional essentiol dissemination may be authorized by the
following officials within their respective deportments:

a. Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
b. Director, Defense Intelligence Agency, for the Office of the Secretary of
Satan Bea eotet Pekan tear Saas Defense ond the organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
c. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army, for
the Department of the Army
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Ogerations (intelligence), for the Department of
the Navy
@. Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of the Air
Force
~ Director of Intelligence, AEC, for the Atomic Energy Commission
. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Sureau of Investigation
. Director of NSA, for the Notional Security Agency
- Assisteat Director for Central Reference, CIA, for any other Department or
Agency

ow SO me

2, This document may be retoined, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
coplicable security regulations, or returned ta the Central Intelligence - Agency by
arrangement with lhe Office of Centrol Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients” mayo s0 =

tetoin it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the
document should aither be destroyed, returned to the forwarding ogency, or per-
mission should be requested of the forwarding ogency to reta'n it in accordance with
(AC-D-6? '2, 22 June 1953... - soos i Bab Egat

4. The title of this document when used separately from the text should be clas: --

sified: FOR OFFICIAZOUSE ONLY

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council

Department of Stote ; iia I gris
Department of Defense
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Sureau of Investigation
