Pakistan:defense Industry Struggles for Self-sufficiency
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000107402, dated 1 September 1989.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000107402).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Appr
Date

. ol,
cs Directorate of ; Lo . Le SER
%\ Intelligence ys i

$

Pakistan: Defense Industry
Struggles for Self-Sufficiency

A Research Paper

Comments and queries are welcome and may be

directed to the Chief NESAR

oved tor ue

Reverse Blank

Pages: f/f - Vill

Exemptions: )Y) lhl (3)

Pakistan: Defense industyy:
Struggles for Self-Suffciency mm

The Defense Industry in Pakistan's Ecoaomy

Pakistani decisionmakers justify the resources devot-
ed to the defense industry by citing its benefits for the
overall economy. Islamabad can point to Jobs created
and export sales as payaffs for the expense of seeking
independence in armament. Defense plants have
trained tens of thousands af skilled workers and
managers. Some have transferred these skills to the
private sector. Plants such as those run by the
Pakistan Ordnance Factories also produce items—
such as chemicals and machine parts—used by civil-
fan industries

We doubt that Pakistan has a comparative advantage
in arms production. Considerable subsidization, as
well as outright corruption, characterize the govern-
ment's relationship with the defense industry. For
example, few Pakistani businesses can match the
Security, pay. and benefits provided by the defense
industry. Pakistan Ordnance Factories, in particular,
has used this advantage to attract skilled employees.
A recent article reports that Pakistani workers re-
gard a fob at POF as a “plum.” probably acquired in
part through political patronage. Many technicians
Spend their entire careers with the organization,
having little incentive to work in the private sector.
We believe subsidized salaries and benefits deplete
the national treasury and deprive the private sector af
manpower, money, talent and raw materials that
could be more productive!y eniploved elsewhere.

Pages: of?

Exemptions: Ba) @) (3)

AA eng raepae LL

Sales af Pakistani Armaments

Pakistan Ordnance Factories is aggressively seeking
customers for its arms and ammunition. Islamabad
hopes that low prices and a “no-queslions-asked”’
Sales policy will attract Third World countries. POF
afficials boast Pakistan has Sold ammunition and
infantry weapons to more than 30 countries. The list
comprises mostly Middle Eastern and Asian nations.
but the United States and France have also pur-
chased Pakistani defense-related items, according to

{slamabad

Users of Pakistani ammunition like its low cost but
complain about its quality,

Oman buys cheap Pakistani
ammunition but that Omani soldiers despise it. Their

Figure 2. Lt. Gen. Talat Masood now runs the Miitecy Technilegy ©
Defense Production Division af the Ministry of : °
Ocfense. He was formerly head of Pakision Submachineguns Jam repeatedly when fring POF-

Ordaance Factories iy made ammunition. The problem is probably related

10 low-powered propellent charges. One soldier: fired
several rounds at an oncoming truck only to watch
them bounce aff its windshield, according to the
defense attache

—_—_—$_$

arms exports in 1985 and planned to triple this figure
over the next few years. We believe, however, that

- €xport earnings fluctuate from year to year and may
not be increasing. Lt. Gen. Talat Masood, at the time

Pakistan Ordnance Factories exports LS to 20
"percent of its production and has sold aminunizion to

nations in Asia and the Middle East. According to a
military journal, POF carned about $50 milion ‘rom

Figure 3
Organization of Pakistan's Defense Industries

Minister of Defense
Benazir Bhutte

Minister of State
for Defense
Ghulam Sarwar
Cheema

Secretary for
Defense and
Aviation

Syed lial Halder
Zaidi .

Defense Industrial
Cooperative Council

Secretary Cor
Deferse Praduction
Lieutenant General

Talat Masoud

Predactien Overchaul/Rebulld

Pakistan Ordnance Director General
Factories of Armament

Procurement Research/Devejopment

Oirector General
Defense Procurement

Defense Science
and Technology
Organization

Armament Research
and Development
Establishment

Motor Venicle
Research and
Development
Establishment

Heavy Rebuild
Facility (Taxila)

Pakistan
Aeronautical
Comptes (Kamra)

wmaar esl de

nead of POF, said the organization earned ony
$35 million from exports in 1983, according to 4 press

a

Production Decision Making

Pakistan's defense industry is under the overall con-
trol of the Ministry of Defense. The Sceretury lor
Defense Production heads the Defense Production
Division—the oversight body for Pakistan's arms
factories. overhaul facilities, and research establish-
ments.’ Press reports indicate the division projects
future procurement requirements and oversees both

production and procurement of arms and eqelpneat.

* The current holder of this post is Lt. Gen. Talat Massaxt, who
headed the Pakistan Ordnunce Factories uatil ad: 1 Sy

Islamabad has long paid lipservice to the nee
restructure the defense industry to spur greater effi-
ciency and creativity, but it has done“little to bring
this about. Calls for a greater relignce on market
incentives to allocate costs and production have been
made by Pakistani officials for Years. Talat Masood
said in 1984 that Pakistan Ofdnance Factories should
be run more like commercyal enterprises ta spur
innovation and allocate césts bette

industry would be reshaped into quasi>
corporations to impose “greater financial discipline.”
A recent article iu: the Pakistan Ordnance Factories
stressed the organization's need for a more open,

|private-enterprise-like form of governance, implying
ithe persistence of problems noted several years ago.

Pakistani officials continue to urge private-sector
investment in producing and marketing military
items, but we doubt that private firms will produce a
significantly larger share of Pakistani armaments. In
July, Defense Secretary Cheema wooed businessmen

a ee ee

(Sophisticated arms from PMTF
are aimed at self-reliance.

Light, tet rugged and eftectiwe Pad TE foal Artilery weapon rytbams are bectwd
by proven cupendebiliry ia combat

PORTABLE ANTS TANK
ROCKET LAUNCH ER IMOG. 7};

Otel hE OF ALC BO Cre C RS ALT AN

PAKISTAN MACHINE TOOL 7°
FACTORY (PVT) LIMITED Cie}

4 Ce tte dagen

|

Demme Re ee ORR tet FOALED Fe Sem Fey ome PL IL Fein OE SRE oe

Figure 4. Several private and quasi-public Pakl- -
stant Arms produce arms and military equip-
meat. This i§ an advertisement foe the Karachi-
hated Pud:stan Machine Tool Factor

We estimate that the defense industry receives about
15 percent of the defense budget and a similar share
of the milltary's foreign exchange allocation.’ This
nearly cquals the share India allocates for arms
production and for weapons research and develop
ment, which allocation we estimate at 18 percent of
New Delhi's much larger defense budget. Roughly
half of Pakistan's defense industry funds go to POF,
in our judgment. In 1977, the last year for which such
numbers are available, 7 percent of Pakistan's Gefense
budget went to POF, according to defense attache
reporting. We believe POF receives a similar share
today. A recent press article stated that POF’s budget
was more than 3 billion rupees ($150 million), but we
believe the published figure excluded POF's forcign

exchange allocations iam

Production and Coproduction

Pakisian Ordnance Factories is the heart of the
nation’s defense industry. Although it is located at
several sites, the organization's headquarters is in
Wah. a company town that is home to most of the
roughly 40,000 POF employees. A military journal
reports POF treats its workers well by Pakistani
standards, providing comparatively good pcy and
benefits. The employees repay POF's benevolent pa-
(crnalism with loyalty. A recent press article reports
that many skilled technicians and engineers spend
(heir entire careers with the organization. Although

*Pakiscant officials hinted to US diplomats that the military is
allecated about $1 billion in foreign exchange each year. Thus, the
defense industry's foreign exchange allocation is probably about
$150 million, excluding whatever funds are earned through arms
exports and maintenance of foreign aircral

Pakistan Ordaance Factories

The government-owned Pakistan Ordnance Factories
is the largest industrial enterprise in Pakistan. It
controls 14 factories, employs roughly 40,000 work-
ers, and produces $400-500 milfion worth of products
annually, according to press and defense atiache
reports. Most af the factories are at Wah Canton-
ment. Others are nearby in the [slamabad-Rawalpin-
di area. The POF complex includes:

" « Weapons Factory. This facility has produced riffes
and machineguns under license from Heckler and
Koch of West Germany for more than 20 years. The
Weapons Factory is POF's showcase, boasting com-
puter-aided design processes and computer numeri-
cally controlled machinery.

« Small-Arms Ammunition Factory. Makes rifle and
pistol rounds and rifle grenades. POF is acquiring a
rotary ammunition plant from a US firm to replace
the aging equipment in this facility.

Machiaegua Factory. This plant makes Tvpe-54
12.7-mm machineguns under litense from China.
according to press reports. -

e

Artillery Ammunition Factory. Manufactures med:-
um-caliber artillery ammunition, as well as erc-
nades and aircrafi bombs.

Tungster-Alloy Factory. Uses computerized mia-
chinery to produce penetrators for the L64 195-mm
iank round and a 100-mm round designed by POF.

Carbide Factory. Probably associated with the
tungsten facility.

Tank and Aatitank Ammunition Factory. Produces
tank and antitank munitions of 100 am and larger.
according fo press reports. Located at Gadwel.

s

* Heavy Ammunition Factory. Produces artillery and
mortar rounds, and fuzes for antitank rounds. The
facility was built with Czechoslovak assistance but
is installing computerized machinery, Located at
Sanjwal.

Explosives Factory. Two plants at Wah and Havel-
lian make explosives for POF munitions.

Propellant Factory. Produces about 1,200 tons of
single-base and double-base ammunition propellant
annually with Chinese assistance, according 10
press reports. Has static test stands for rocket
motors and artillery. Located at Havellian

Clothing Factory. Makes uniforms for Pakistan's .
armed services. The US Consulate in Karachi *
reports the factory was being expanded and mod-
ernized tn 1988.

« Brass Mill. Produces brass sheets and other com-
ponents for ammunition manufacturing.

Filling Factory. Manufactures explosives and as-
sembles ammunition.

Woodworking Factory. Makes boxes and crates for :

animunition iy

Pakistan Ordnance Factories also operates several
subsidiaries, most notably Wah Industries and Wah
Bofors, which use excess capacity at the Wak facility
to manufacture products for civilian use such as
chemicals, explosives, and machine parts, according

toa reliable source

Figure $. The sprawling industrial complex at Waa is home to
Pakistan Ordnance Factorles and thousands of its emplovee sg —

the lack of better opportunities in the Private sector | Vircually all of the weapon systems and equipment

probably helps POF retain its skilled employees, we produced in Pakistan are made under coproduction
believe their loyalty is a key factor in POF's canabilj. 2greements, according to open sources. Defense plants
lies, 7 have licenses to manufacture or assemble a vapigty of
products, including West German small-arm

POF is undergoing gradual expansion and moderniza- ’
“uon, It grew steadily during the last decade under
Talat Masood

Press reports say POF's showcase <"
. plant, the Weapons Factory, recently attained greater
capabilities and efficiency by installing computer. ;
numerically controlled machinery. Military journals :
report that other POF plants—which some observers.

have compared with Western facilities in efficiency

and capabilities—are being modernized or expanded.
In the last few years new capacity has been added at:
several plants, according to press reports _

Pages: GP -4S

Exemptions: (2) Gd) & 3)
