Transfer of Soviet Antisubmarine Warfare Technology to Warsaw Pact Countries
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000098720, dated 6 July 1981.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000098720).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tries

“Co

act

argaw. P

ee

wee & we

: : Bane : : oe a wp satg yn ee Se acer e ;
en Pe eres we te 2 tenndctet evt wet see tos eeoted eocttnrtein cenit dened Od am tw

° E 7 a
7 ' * ". ,

i

RN

Transfer of Soviet
Antisubmarine Warfare Technology
to Warsaw Pact Countries iy

An Intelligeace Assessment

Information available as of | August 1981
has been used in the preparation of this report,

The author of this paper iS]ENEIE Office
of Scientific and Weapons Research. Comments and

queries are welcome and may be addressed to the
Chic ear errs OS WR, on

eee

This paper has been coordinated with the Office of
Strategic Research and the National Intelligence
Officers for Strategic Programs, for USSR -Eastern
Europe, and for General Purpose Forces}

Avgust 198!

Overview

Transfer of Soviet
Antisubmarine Warfare Technology
to Warsaw Pact Countrieqyyy

The USSR is transferring antisubmarine warfare technology to the navies
of the Warsaw Pact Alliance, including East Germany, Bulgaria, Poland,
and Romania. None of these countries has an antisubmarine warfare
mission beyond that of defending coastal areas against submarine incur-
sions, and even this mission is made possible only by the acquisition of So-
viet technology. Most of the Soviet equipment transferred so far to these
countries is obsolescent or deteriorates in performance after delivery. Thus,

these forces now do not represent a significant threat to US or NATO sub-
marine operations.

East Germany has received most of the Soviet technology and the widest
variety of weaponry. In 1978 East Germany received the relatively modern
Soviet Koni-class frigates, Haze helicopters, and also current Soviet
weaponry and electronics for the Balcom-4 frigate, a ship designed and
built by the East Germans. This may indicate that similar Soviet transfers
will be made in i. future in an effort to bolster the antisut marine warfare
capabilities of Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria.

The Soviets apparently intend to optimize the Warsaw Pact countries’
antisubmarine warfare capabilities for local waters. This is consistent with
the wartime roles assigned to the non-Soviet Warsaw Pact navies—combat
operations in the Baltic and Black Seas. All technology transferred thus far
was originally designed by the Soviets for their own coastal defense. The
weapons and sonars have extremely limited ranges and could not perform
effectively in the open ocean. The surface ships and submarines that have
been transferred are unable to perform on the high seas. Thus, the current
threat to US and NATO submarine operations from non-Soviet Warsaw
Pact navies in the open ocean is virtually nonexistent.

Warsaw Pact countries have not been involved in antisubmarine exercises
with the Soviets outside of the Baltic and Black Seas, nor are these
countries encouraged to conduct any significant research and development
on antisubmarine warfare systems, either for themselves or for export.

The above information (ma

August 198]

me

one

Contents

v
8
a

Preface fies see vii
"Background | a
~Typesof Technology Transferred ttti<is~=~S~™S " 7
SBE OD RI epee RE ag :

ee eS ““BastGermanyss—<CSstsSS ~
." eee ae Se ee he BRS ne eee Tee 7
ia Sas oi “Poland ti(<‘i‘SS*~*~*‘~s~*~*~*~S™
Te ne ee ee Romania Fete ge ee Te pe Pees
oT Submarins s—SSCS :

Aircraft

Bulgaria
Poland

:
|
|

"De Se io 68 ne har at RS OR A Vapwuw nA
P 4 ' 7 ; é : - .

ee ~~ East Germany nove
are Sie Pl ans Falls Min oe seat ne
2iecae, (eles cee SP es nee eRe 2
ES POSS SS eee etal Ora aot Mae Soe cist 2
Pe eee EEDORE ke tee, ee he eee eg ‘
le So enc ty ope Oe Nee a gs
; Mines
| "~~" “Overall Etfect of Transfers on WP and USSR Capebilites
i
: Appendix
Roo eee Description of Soviet ASW Technology Transferred H
Figures
1. Koni Frigate 6
finn siace HazeHelicogter _ 7
3.

"East German Baloom-4 Frigate a gy

Transfers of ASW Craft to the Warsaw Pact Nations

“Description of § Soviet ASW Technology Transferred tothe
_Warsaw Pact Countries

"~ “Soviet ASW Weapons in the Warsaw Pact Inventory,

Preface

thc

This paper delineates, describes, and assesses the antisubmarine warfare
technologies obtained by the non-Soviet Warsaw Pact navies from the
USSR. Judgments are made on the impact of this equipment upon the
overall effectiveness of the Warsaw Pact navies. Although the scope of this
study is limited, it represents a mandatory first step before the jarger issues
of worldwide naval technology transfer and the antisubmarine warfare
capabilities of Warsaw Pact countries can be put into perspective ym

A

eneocctpeapenmeistaaanns. snare eran nn te ome

”
Le oe nn o Na

Transfer of Soviet
Antisubmarine Warfare Technology
to Warsaw Pact Countricqyp

Background

The Warsaw Pact Alliance (WP) was established in
May 1955 with the signing of a Treaty of Friendship,
Mutual Assistance, and Cooperation. The Warsaw
Pact signers were the USSR, East Germany, Bulgar-
ia, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Hungary, ane
Albania. (Albania withdrew from the Alliance ir
1968.) From its inception to the late 1960s, the WP
did not have an effective antisubmarine warfare
(ASW) capability. Also, the Soviet ASW programs
had not resulted in any significant developments QB

The ASW technology that eventually was incorporat-
ed into the WP forces represented early Soviet devel-
opments. The first Soviet effort to develop an ASW
capability was the construction of the Artillerist-class
submarine chaser in the mid-1940s. Although this
ship was not transferred to the Warsaw Pact, the
Kronstadt-class submarine chasers and the Riga-class
frigates that followed it were transferred. Beginning
in the mid- 1950s, the Soviets built slightly improved
ships, such as the SO-1-class submarine chaser and
the Poti-class patrol escort. The latter ships were
selected for transfer to the WP countries. The Soviets
built their Whiskey-class and Romeo-class diesel at-
tack submarines also during the 1950s, and cight of
these eventually were transferred to the WP coun-

trics

The Soviets also began in the 1950s to develop ASW
aircraft. Although many of the early Madge/BE-4
seaplanes were transferred to Communist China, none
of these extended-range aircraft were ever sent to the
WP countries. The most recent Soviet ASW heli-
copter is the Haze/Mi-14. The Haze probably will
replace the Mi-4/Hound helicopter, which has been
used in most of the WP countries gm

Types of Technology Transferred

Data relating to quantity and types of Soviet plat-
forms transferred to the WP are fairly reliable Si

lists the number of platforms that have been trans-
ferred to East Germany, Bulgaria, Poland, and Ro
mania. Table 2 shows the performance characteristics
of the platforms and lists some of their significant
ASW sensors and weapons. The appendix describes in
detail the ASW platforms, sensors, and weapons that
have been transferred to one or more WP countries uy

Surface Craft

East Germany. East Germany was among the early
recipients of ASW surface craft from the Soviets.
East Germany has received the largest number and
variety of surface ships of any WP country. Included
in the transfers were Rigas, SO-1s, Shershens, and
Konis. The Mirkas were considered for transfer but
were never delivered. The transfer of these surface
ships has bolstered the East German capability to
defend its coasta! areas against submarine incursions.

In 1956 East Germany received four Riga-class frig-
ates from the Soviets. In 1960 the Soviets modernized
their Rigas by replacing the RBU-600 ASW rocket
launcher with the modern RBU-1 200 that has a
longer range. We do not know whether the Rigas
transferred to East Germany were modernized in the

sofa

WEE: oo)

“Kuwwusd ys8q ‘OpuenuoSESY 1” 2q ABW 63990001704 20K
-20H1/VST-¥ S1BOIPU] COUDDIAD sRORUAI “pEpnpoU! OU qFROYIV
AABN, UBULIH weg

Du) B} Porssego USER BATT SHIZIY OF OEP OL “6961 91 FFA WH
6x8} yy DOUPdas OF opHW Bujaq ss0m SUE IBY) 2)VOTPU} WEP TWO >»
“93818I91/] 84) W} POLRDPUY UIEQ FEY OFT HOROUTUAIED Uy JOQUWAN «
“popnsay 9q 01 AI11Qude>

SY WesoysNs aavy Iq YR ASV Aly VU .0U DUE edige OF) »

9 9 186 ¢ 9 Osé6l wit /szeH
——“wa ON wa ON n A WAAC A WA N8 GW PERO
A eae 7

ee iy ee SSeS ag ee 7061 ~S~S*C« WNW oP ooMIOY
See ee ae + wer oO ere Ugg IS ne ee ep OAA

oe ee en ct eo
pce ge ay ee a eee : a GT LLL a gn VON
a BETS E898 ~~" Eger 180g opedann /eaqEIES
FA Cie RT a eal EER Se EL a TORU
oo € € wwe c ¢ suet ons e961 toons gonned nog”
ae SS OLE Bee en ne ae ee es61 phonep/apoy
Pe eo ep at ee ee a ane’) ns "i).) Spi o aaett Eee
eT rate 9 9 €961 0 TT OSET-PIN OF POSE I-PIN yuo poured 9E581/1-OS

a pee z 7 es-us6l 0» 9560‘ *OS6I-PIN ey (CT)

t ¢ #6 0 6 sser ot wer mere mn ame D SEL HWQ NE /IPETEVOLY
anes pear foes aa en A te teh oe atlantis eal
POHTEQ 10] PUMIPQ PURE MO, peraAIEd PYTH OO 10, posoaifoq “pee UO Jeo] Posaag parse TER a8

Neen eee eee ee es 52,

werwoy purjog : eyeing Auwuss) Vy essn adh y fend

S2UNUMOD JY ABTITAL 0) ASSN HOLS "ID MSV JP wsojeues

re Si

ET

»

_— me -

same way. No general modernization of the aging
Rigas appears to have been altempted by the Soviets.
We believe that the Rigas have been or will soon be
completely removed from service in both East Ger-
man and Soviet Navies. Only one remains in the East
German Navy, although it may now have been deacti-
vated or placed in reserve status

East Germany received 12 to 16 SO-1-class large
patrol craft in the mid-1950s. All of these ships have
been phased out of service. The Soviets also are
phasing out these aging vessels

The 18 Shershen-class torpedo boats delivered to East
Germany between 1969 and 1973 are still in active
service. Although these boats function primarily in an
antiship coastal defense role, they carry depth charges
that can be used against enemy submarines. The
Soviets stopped construction of the Shershens in the
early 1970s. The Shershen has been exported in large
numbers by the Soviets, and more may be taken out of
the Soviel inventory for use in the WP navies ib

The most recent delivery of Soviet surface craft to

East Germany was two Koni-class frigates that were
transferred in the late 1970s (see figure 1). The Koni
is a useful addition to the East German naval forces,

Bulgaria's first acquisitions of surface craft from the
Soviets in 1957 were two Kronstadt-class submarine
chasers. At about the same time, two Riga-class
frigates also were delivered. in 1963 the Bulgarians
received six SO-1s, and six Shershens were received
from 1969 to 1978. The most recent delivery, starting
in 1975, was that of three Poti-class patrol escorts.
The Potis represented considerable improvements
over the Kronstadis because of their greater range
and speed; they also had newer sensors and arma-
ment. The effectiveness of the Poti, however, was
hampered because of its limited ASW capability. In
addition, the Poti was designed as a submarine chaser
to operate in groups for optimum sonar performance.
All of the surface craft delivered to Bulgaria are in
active service. All of the Soviet ships delivered to
Bulgaria, including the most modern, are character-
ized as aging and obsolescent. Nevertheless, (hese
ships add materially to Bulgaria's capabilily to defend
its sea lines of communication against submarines in
“Black Sea Overall defense of the Black Sea is
further enhanced through regular combined Soviet-
Bulgaria ASW exercises in the area

Poland. Of all WP countries receiving surface craft
from the Soviets, Poland has received the feast. It has
received Kotlins and may have received Kronstadts.

although its weapons and sensors are ofearly 1960

Soviet vintage. The Konis, built by the Soviets,
showed only minimal improvement in performance
over Rigas. Thus, the Soviets apparently decided to
use them only for export. Thus far, the Soviets have
built only four Koni frigates for export.

The transfer of the relatively modern Koni to East
Germany in 1978-79 indicates that the Soviets were
at least encouraging 4 modernization of the East
German Navy. The Koni, while unsuitable for the
Soviet Navy, appears to be a useful asset for East
Germany

Bulgaria. Bulgaria ranks second to East Germany in
numbers of surface craft received from the Soviets.
Included in the transferrals through 1978 were Kron-
stadts, Rigas, SO-1s, Potis, and Shershens gj

* The remaining two were delivered to non- WP countries, Yugosia-
via and Algeria. in 1980

In 1970 Poland received a modified Kotlin-class
destroyer, sometimes referred to as the SAM-Kotlin
because of its SA-N-I installation. Although the
modified Kotlin is not primarily intended for ASW, it
does possess RBU-2500 ASW rocket launchers for
use against enemy submarines. It is still active in the
Polish Navy. Poland also may have received abvul
nine Kronstadts from the Soviets. None of these is
currently active in the Polish Navy Ill

The Poles participate occasionally in ASW exercises
in the Baltic. Although the Poles contribute little to
WP ASW effectiveness, this participation probably

represents a Soviet desire 10 include Polish forces in
more joint exercises, thus showing WP harmony #>

x

wooss
cs oor 9% 96S 1961 toned /tnod
@ eho ep
ay Ee COTE ONE OE sort weet fino
yuo poured
ee ST 06t o9 Oty sot sfs01/1-0S
wv
a 96Ct vot O16 S61 ge eR
s260y> DULs0UR
él oe EN $9 wts Bho! -Qns/iperevos 9
: St ae fe - ees: ee
pourersng

wovocy «wR = Awoucog = NUKE =—_ POT IINY = PUEPOWS

ye (usu) SoUBIApUD (uy) poods (x) 1usus08;NG (w) weeg = (ts) (a Bus]
ren AS
|e os 2 OKUIS MSV . a SPSS IIS) AONE) Fd SONS OEIERD poe id 201 wah joe 9)

SoC.) EY MELE A 0) POLSI;OwEL]L
ABOpORRIAL ASV 4 9S Jo BopspIeag

aa «

BRE 210 HU

“SOULIBUIQNS INADT UO >»

“popnyauy aq 01 Art1qedwo MSV

ywopoysne envy KOuD INQ “YR MSV AvU}d 1OUos¥ eciYs SOLE
“kon

s1q1 u} paxoprevoo 10U eom “vadoos}sed 20 Nsw F YORE “#20{qO
0209-20100 *1] SUIS [SULERD Aypyqedes ausos sasy ley) EPH ©

anw
wwe LPI 000°7 1 6T1T WN 6L6l Vet /ozeH
wn
o1Rw It oss Iz gor CS6t | BUTI /PUROH
=o ~~" (a) cop ~
I i «Ra a aR yey
posiow
aqnegz | Meg tl ; wee
8 9901 tre'l x) O94 oer rere /Aomere
_ ponsow Se Tee ya oe
ane uy Qn eZ pene
ore't 004" __ of 89. «LE6t «=: FRAP /oowod
BouENS pomsewars ee a
Lz 001% covt TI OL6 9L6t «=o BIER /ON
yeoq opedsoy
at wy ya svt _t¢ uve 6set [waqesons
Oo Osis 000't %% yz «$96 11 IN
17
or ost 000'! ve v7 C96N 2108) / PUTIN -

Figure 1 East German Koni-

class friar gD

Romania. Romania has approximately 100 nautical
miles of coasitine, which is flanked on the north by the
Soviet Union and on the south by Bulgaria. Romania
has a substantial number of coastal! patrol craft for
defending its economic zone of influence (very likely
they will defend their sea lines of communications and
the WP forces when they are in port}. Delivery of
Soviet ASW-related surface craft to Romania has
been small in numbers and varicty. Three Kronstadts
were transferred in 1956 and are still in active service.
Three Potis were the most recent acquisitions and
were transferred in 1964-67. The Romanians may be
reluctant to become closely lied to the WP by accept-
ing Sovict-offered equipment

Submarines

Only two Wursaw Pact countries — Bulgaria and Po-
land —have received submarines from the Soviet

Union

Balgaria. In 1972 the Bulgarians received two Ro-
meo-class diesel attack submarines (SSs), which re-
placed two aging Whiskey-class SSs transferred to
Bulgaria about 15 years carlier. The Raomeo-class
submarines could provide defensive ASW barriers in
warlimegy

she

The aenuisition of Soviet submarines strengthens
Bulgaria's Navy and gives it a modest capability to
conduct coastal operations against targets in the
Black Sea. The two Whiskeys are retired. The two
Romeos were built by the Soviets later than the
Whiskeys but have similar propulsion systems. The
Romeos have an improved hull form, better snorkel-
ing, and quieter features than the Whiskey. The
Bulgarian submarines, with their accompanying sen-
sors and weapon systems, are too outmoded to add
significantly to the ASW capability of the WP coun-
tries ;

&

t

Poland. From 1962 to 1965 four Whiskeys, identical
to those delivered to Bulgaria, were delivered to
Poland. The Polish Navy is more balanced than its
non-Soviet Warsaw Pact allies because it has the most
submarines (four) and a larger naval air force. These
four Whiskeys provide barrier defense for Poland's
coastal waters. Poland probably gains much valuable
experience in evasion tactics when it participates in
the ASW exercises involving the WP countries. Nev-
ertheless, Polish participation provides little enhance-
ment to the ASW capability of the WP nations

a Boi army seta esa

Figure 2. East German Haze/

Mi-14 ASW helicopter Beam

Aircraft

Although the Soviets have exported fixed-wing ASW
aircraft, none has been transferred to the WP. Many
helicopters have been transferred to the WP, but it is
not certain how many have an ASW roles

East Germany. East Germany is one of three WP
countries to have received the Haze helicopter (see
figure 2). Three were delivered in late 1979 or early
1980, and six were delivered in early 1981. The Haze
is the best ASW helicopter in the WP inventory. It is
the first in the WP forces to simultaneously have a
dipping sonar. magnetic anomaly detector (MAD),
and a radar. Some evidence indicates that the Haze
also is instrumented with a relatively modern ASW
data link designated Zenanag

Zenana is a very-high-frequency (130 to 135 mega-
hertz— MHz) Soviet Navy interrogate/transpond
data system. This system uses tonal transmissions
between surface combatants and helicopters 10 direct
the helicopters to the general area of underwater
targets. Zenana almost certainly is used for helicopter
stalion keeping: it may also have additional use in
determining target data in conjunction with a shore-

based control center that performs ASW analyses. in

early 1980 before the second delivery of the Haze,
East German helicopter crews were observed partici-
pating in Soviet exercises using Zenana. Jn addition,
reports indicate that an ASW data analysis center
may be constructed near Stralsund, East Germany gy

The developments in early 1980 indicate that the
Soviets are bolstering the helicopter ASW capacity of
East Germany and Poland, and they may increase the
capability of Bulgaria >

Bulgaria. Bulgaria has received six Haze helicopters
from the Soviets. They have not been very active, and
it is possible that one of the Haze helicopters in (he
Bulgarian Navy has crashed i

i
Poland. During May and June 1981, the Soviets ?
delivered six Haze helicopters to Poland. Before deliv-
ery, Polish pilots underwent extensive training on
these helicopters at Bryusterort in the Soviet Union.
Delivery was made to the Polish air and sea recon-
naissance base at Darlowo. If the same pattern of
delivery of Haze helicopters to East Germany is

possible, however, that MADs were on board the

sya

Sonars

We believe that, in most cases, the sonars transferred
by the Soviets probably included thase installed by the
Soviets aboard their own ships. many of these sonars
are not kept in good repair :

helicopters that have been transferred to East Ger-

many.

Weapons

Many nonnuclear ASW weapons have been exported
to the WP, including RBU rocket Jaunchers and
munitions, torpedoes, and mines. The exported weap-
onry is almost always less effective than that in the
current Soviet inventory. Weapons effectiveness re-
quires not only proper maintenance and practice, but
also proper target location and fire control. The
transferred sensors cannot perform the necessary tar-
get definition with sufficient accuracy or in a timely
manner. Therefore, the weapons pose no threat to
NATO submarines. Some of the weaponry actually
may have been obsolete aay

Sept

Table 3

Soviet ASW Weapons ia the

Warsaw Pact Inventory

Weapon WP Ean
Germany

Bulgaria Romania Poland

§ Delivered.
* Cannot determine which WP country.

This table

Torpedoes. East Germany, Poland, Bulgaria, and
Romania have received a number of Soviet torpedoes
$3 centimeters (cm) in diameter. Included are the 53-
XX antiship series (53-38, $3-39, 53-56), the antiship
SAET-50, the Electricheskaya Torpeda (ET), and ihe
antisubmarine SET-53. All except the 53-56 antiship
torpedo appear to be obsolete in the Soviet inventory.
These torpedoes are most likely proven, single-purpose
systems, because the Soviets have avoided multipur-
pose types until recently. We cannot identify which
WP country received which particular type torpedo
(see table 3)

The newest torpedo delivered to the WP is the
SET-40 antisur-narine torpedo for use aboard the
East German, Bakcom-4 frigate (figure 3). The Soviet
version of this torpedo, which is 40 cm in diameter,

oa

yale

~

i

has electric propulsion, a range of 9.6 kilometers (km) WP countries
and a speed of over 27 knots (kn). It has an active and
passive acoustic guidance system and explodes either
on contact or by active acoustic influence signals. This
is the first small torpedo that has been sent to Eas:
Germany for use on its ships a

Torpedoes such as the E-40-65A are believed to have
been designed for smaller combatant operation. They
have become popular within the Soviet submarine
community because of their light weight and small
size. They may find wider utility in the WP forces

Mines. No data are available to deterinine the status Ee Pee cae a ve 7
of Soviet mine exports to the WP countries. Only one As currently structured, the WP navies pose virtually
Soviet mine with ASW applications, called the MAG no threat to US and NATO forces

by the Soviets, is believed to have been exported to

East Germany aap

Overall Effect of Transfers
on WP and USSR Capabilities

The Soviets appear to be satisfied to keep the ASW
capability of the WP countries at levels that are
effective only in the shallow waters off the coast of the

10

aa ea a i ae
a cr i nT ne eee ee
eh eh TEE

Appendix

Description of Soviet
ASW Technology Transferred

Surface Craft

Kronstadt class. This is @ submarine chaser that
appears to be an outgrowth of the World War Il
Artillerist-class, but it has a larger and improved hull
design. The Soviets built about 230 of this class. None
is in the Soviet inventory, but some are still in use in
the WP countries

Riga class. This frigate serves as an escort ship. Uny
64 Rigas were built by the Soviets between 1952 and
1956. Rigas have been or soon will be removed from
service in the Soviet and in the WP navies {i}

SO-! class. This is 2 large patrol craft. The Soviets
built about 150 SO-1s between the mid-1950s and
late 1960s. They are still in service in the Soviet and

WP navies

SAM Kotlia class. This is a modified Soviet Kotlin-
class destroyer having a surface-to-air missile (SAM)

launcher (for an SA-N-1 GOA missile) in place of aft EB

twin turrets. Nine SAM Kotlins were built by the
Soviets and are still active. One has been transferred
to Poland

Poti cless. This ship is a patrol escort that is designed
as a submarine chaser and operates in groups to
optimize sonar performance. Ut represents a consider-
able improvement over the Kronstadts but still lacks
seaworthiness and effectiveness. Only 70 Potis were
built by the Soviets, and six are still active in the WP
navies

Shershen class. The Shershen is primarily designed
for an antiship role. It has some ASW capability by
virtue of its weaponry. Nearly 100 units were built,
and $8 units were transferred to Third World nations,
including the WP. All appear to be in active status ag

Koni class. This is a modern frigate that the Sovicis
have built for export except for one which is used for
training in the Black Sea. Construction of an unk-
nown number is under way; with the exception of one
Koni, which will be used for training in the Black Sea,
all of thes appear to be for export. Four ur five have
been completed to date. The Koni has no torpedo

Lubes

Mirka class. This frigate was built between 1963 and
1966 and consists of two basic types designated I and
Il. The two types have different ASW armament.
Type | has one quint 406-millimeter (mm) torpedo
tube cluster and four RBU-6000 rocket launchers;
type I] has two quint 406-mm torpedo tube clusters,
two RBU-6000 foekes a Lasers and 2 an vinleroad

ee The Mirkas spparenily ices in-
teriavctase frigate designed to fill the need that was to
be filled by the Petya class

Submarines

Whiskey class. The Soviets built about 236 Whiskey
submarines with design features based on the World

War If German-type XX{ submarine. Many variants
exist, including missile carriers and radar pickets

oe

having a folding antenna on the sail. In wartime, it Acoustics
can perform useful roles in defensive barriers, includ- The sonars aboard the Soviet craft transferred to
ing minelaying operations gag some WP countries represent Soviet developments in

the 1950s and 1960s and are used mainly for coastal
Romeo class. The Romeo-class submarine has a pro- en re

pulsion system similar to that of the Whiskey. The
hull form of the Romeo represents an improvement
over the Whiskey, and the larger snorkel induction on
the Romeo permits snorkeling on two engines rather
than one as on the Whiskey. Shrouds surrounding the
propulsion screws on the Romeo provide some propel
ler quieting. The Romeo can carry about 20 mines in
place of its torpedoes. Wartime roles for this subma-
rine would include defensive ASW barriers Bil

Aircraft

Many helicopters have been transferred to the WP.
some of which nave an ASW roledy

Hound /Mi-4B. The Hound is a four-blade, single
rotor, medium-size helicopter used in large numbens
as a transport in many different types of Soviet
aviation units. The Hound B is used in a land-based
ASW role in Soviet naval aviation
Saph NESEY.

% The Soviet Union &
and WP countnes are replacing the aging Hound B
with the newer Haze A helicopters gp

Haze/Mi-14A. The Haze A is an amphibious variant an
of the Hip/Mi-8 helicopter. Haze A is designed ;
primarily for an ASW role. It is superior in speed,
payload, range, and sensors when compared to the
Hound and Hormone. The Haze A has a large chin
radome, a weapons bay, dipping sonar, and MAD
gear. The Haze A is designed primarily for land-
based operations, but it can make emergency water

landings

Sensors

The sensors aboard the Soviet surface ships and

submarines transferred to some WP countries are
probably identical to those on similar Soviet platforms
at the time of transfer J

sf 12

eS Dt

mem EVR ree ae cern MS eae Maen Olam amee 8

or

Weapons

The Soviet Union has exported many ASW weapons
to WP countries. These weapons include rocket
launchers and munitions such as torpedoes, mines,
and depth bombs

ASW Rocket Lauachers

RBU-900. This rocket launcher uses thqieieiii
projectile, has eight berrels, and a maximum range of
900 meters. This weapoo was introduced ih the
Soviets in about 1949 andigesieeee Egon es

RBU-1200. This rocket launcher was introduced in
1959. It uses ce projectile, has a range of

2GA8 ars ; a it
has five barrels and i is fixed mounted with provisions
for manual loading} ©

RBU-2500. This launcher has 16 barrels, a range of
2,800 meters, and was introduced by the Soviets in
1958. It is a fully trainable launcher and uses the
RGB-25 rocket. It typically is associated with the 15-
to 23-kHz sonar (Titan/Vychedga)

RBU-6000. The RBU-6000 has 12 barrels and was
introduced in 1961. It is fully trainable, automatically

Its maximum range is 6,000 meters

Torpedoes

Data on torpedoes that were transferred are insuffi-
cient for us to identify the specific torpedoes or the
WP country receiving them gy

53-XX Series. The 53-XX series torpedo was stand-
ard Soviet weaponry in the late 1930s and early
1940s. These $3-cm-diameter torpedoes use air
stream propulsion and gyro guidance. They have
speeds ranging from 45 to $1 kn and ranges of about
4,000 meters. They explode on impact and are pri-
marily antiship weapons. The 53-38, 53-39, and 53-56
torpedoes have been sent to WP countries. The 53-38
is now obsolete ay”

SAET-S0. This was the first Soviet acoustic homing
torpedo; it became operational during the 1950s. It is
53 cm in diameter, has an electric propulsion system,
a speed of 23 kn, and a range of 8,000 meters. The
SAET-50 has gyro/acoustic guidance control, ex-
plodes either on impact or by magnetic influence, and
is an antiship weapon yyy a

SET-53, This weapon, which represented a blend of
World War [1-German technology and indigenous
Soviet underwater sensor technology, was first used
operationally in 1960. This $3-cm-diameter torpedo
has electric propulsion, a speed of 23 kn, and a range
of 8,000 meters. It is an antisubmarine weapon. It has
gyro/acoustic guidance and explodes on impact or by
magnetic influence. Noise and stability problems with
initial versions of the SET-5S3 led to many modifica-
tions. The SET-53 is not believed to be in the Soviet
stockpile, but early variants are believed to be in the
WP navies ag

soph

ET. The ET designation is derived from its name
Electricheskaya Torpeda, and it is the basic design
for all Soviet electric torpedoes to date. It is $3 cm ir
diameter, has a speed of 29 kn, a range of 5,000
meters, and explodes on impect yy

Mines

A number of Soviet naval mines have been trans-
ferred to the WP. Available data indicate that only
one mine type with an ASW utility may have been
exported fl

MAG. This mine was first introduced by the Soviets
in 1940. It is a moored type that is detonated by
contact through a galvanic-action antenna and, in
some cases, by chemical horn. It is launched by
surface ships and operates in water depths of 460
meters or less Jf
