Meeting no 37 - 2 October 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012417, dated 1 September 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012417).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

MEETING NO. 37 ~ 2nd OCTOBER, 1961. CG

:

CG) Subject was picked up at the new RV point, the Chaillot Palace, by M,
and was surveilled from another car by Roger. Subject arrived at the safe
apartment at 2010 hours. G.: Did you call the French girl ? S.: Yes, but
she is busy today and tomorrow evening and tomorrow evening I will be busy

* because the Exhibition is closing, I have to be present during the closing

ceremonies and there will be a sort of banquet in the evening, where I mst
also be, | : .

2. Se: The delegation has arrived and they have thirteen people, four

of them are metallurgists and the other nine are from various enterprises.
They are staying at the Trianon Palace Hotel. Amongst them there are two
co-opted KGB workers, one of them is the Chief of the Delegation and his name is
Aleksander Pavlovich PICHUGINA (Nos 14 on Delegation List, designated as
Engineer of the Moscow Institute of Transportation Engineers), Today the KGB
of the French Rezidentura called him in and briefed him on the local pattern Sa
of behaviour for the ication’ namely that no-one should go out alone, that
they should not go out excessively and that a regular schedule should be
established. PICHUGINA reported to the hapaty KGB Rezidentura Chief here,
whose name is ROMANOV, I have not yet found out the name of the KGB Rezident,.
PICHUGINA reported on the status of the delegation's mission, their general
disposition, etc, and in addition aaia that one of the delegation members,

an Armenian whose name is Aleksander Sergeievioh SAFARYAN (No. 17, listed

as EngineerTechnologist of an Armenian SSR Sovnarkhoz), an elderly man who

is short and wears glasses, has brought with him at the request of a friend
of his, also an Armenian, from YEREVAN, a bottle of cognac and caviar to be
given to a friend of the sender, a French Armenian, He had given him the
address of the French Armenian, When this was reported to ROMANOV, the latter
said that this could only be done a few hours before the delegation was Fy
depart from PARIS, At that time SAFARYAN could go in the company of the
delegation chief or the deputy to the delegation chief, to that address and
deliver the package, At this time it was forbidden to get into contact with
the French Armenian who could, in some way, develop the Russian or talk him

U i ——

into /

JO

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

9 iMAR 1992

2.

into staying behind or pass him seme valueble gift to bring back to

_his friend, The visit could only be made at the last moment and very ¢

suddenly,

Je Se: The others who cece in this groip werer~

Georgiy Vladimirovich BURDENKOV (lis ted 3 Nog 2 as an engineer of
ViMII (the Higher MOSCOW Research
Institete) end he is 2 electro-
enercy engincer of the City of
MOSCOT) o

He is ths other co-opted K¢3 man.

Then comes, Faina Borisovna GIMOYAN (listed as No, 3 and is an engineer of
the Ways and Means of Communication of
the Armenian SSR Sovnarkhoz).

She is an elderly Armenion women.
The next one is: Marlena Asho! sovna OVAKILYAN ‘(Liste 2d Wo, “43 as a chemical
engineer of the Armenian SSR
Sovnarkhoz).
She is a sympathetic yours woman of abcut 28, whose father is a
prominent Director in the Armenian Hepublic, You can look him up under the

prominent people I gave you a list of. Look under the Armenian SSR and his

first name is Ashot, and he i

9
‘d
5
:
de
$
9
ae
_s
ity
§)
a7

pela b are IutNe

The next one is: Susanna Semcnevna PIRULYAN ne tod 2s Nog 15, an enginecer-
economist of the Armenian SSR
_ Sovnarthoz).

Then there is Boris Viedimirovich YEPLOY (Listed a
, . of the f

gs Nos 19 ond is an engince
actory "October Revolution"

The next one is Kormey Denisevich TOVSTYOR (listed as No, 20 and is a scientific

: - yorker of the Chernovitsi Government
‘Universi ty of the City of ee
Ukrainian 8S. SHR)

And the last one is an interpreter Yelonna Fil iecoene TOLUACHEVA (listed as No, 21

cna is en interpreter of the MOSCOW
City Sovnarkhoz).
lie Gs: How about the othe: four ? S,: The nine I save you are all on
the propos2d List but the other four are in caaiticon to those on the list;

they are mectallurzists and ath ouch ‘LT: mit thou bricfly I ao not Jnow their
nevm2s yet and I will meet with then accin tecvorre., Tedsay a cable arrived
stcting thet tventy others are coming, some may be also on this list and scne

mo be in additicn to these er this lint, In cddition to the four

metallurgists vho have arrived, with then also cozs LAPTEVA tho is our

, oo 2 2 eh Set Ae iE
: intexpreter /

.- with the President of the firm, Compagnie Generale d'Eleotricite, 30th August,

-3-

interpreter from our Committee in MOSCOW. And they are staying at the
Hotel Excelsior Opera, The other nine live at the Trianon Palace Hotel and
in addition we also have reserved bookings where necessary at the Palace Hotel.
These are the three hotels they use for our delegations, The last one is where
the Automobile Specialists will go to. I have continuous contact with these : :
delegations, I saw them today and I will see them again tomorrow, This one ,
has its itinerary already esteblished with TRANSTOUR. My job isto findout = =,
the exact itinerary and upon examining the towns that they will visit to arrange
places for the delegation members to visit in accordance with the individual
specialities and backgrounds of the delegation members. In this veapect we
already have quite a bit established, |
50 Se: Here I have brought a copy of the proposal written by KUDRYAVISEV
in his om hand, He is the Counsellor as you know for Soience and Teohnology “
and this is an extract from his diary and four copies have been made; one
goes to our Committee, one goes to INTOURIST, one goes to the European Section
of the Foreign Office and the fourth copy goes to the files of the Embassy.
This is the record of his discussions; he gave me this copy because it applies
to the delegation which has just arrived, concerning which arrangements have
aoengr ier male. When otibesss crane ihe vill ene ether asronremertr alowpty
for them, If he did not have this for this delegation then I would have to
arrange visits for them for two or three hours at one factory or another,
be Se: Here he writes as follows: (subject now reads the entire text
.of the handwritten two~page report. In view of the fact that subject could
not leave this with us since he needed it for use on the following day
photography with a polaroid camera was made and after two trials a reduced
sire copy of each page was made with legible text) |

= On upper left hand side was written "From the Diary of KUDRYAVISEV I.P.". —

~ On the upper right hand side was written "Account of a Conversation

1961". The text was "Today I had a discussion with the President Compagnie
Generale a'Eleotricite, Paul DUPONT, who came to the Embassy on the
recommendation of DELGOFFS for the purpose of clarifying some questions

regarding /

Oo emt ee ee etrerem tm

#37

‘ ohn
regarding the organisation of the work of a group of touciete who are
electrical specialists who are arriving in France during the period of the
Soviet Exhibition, My conferee told me that their company is an amalgamation
of ten firms and produce a wide variety of electrical equipment and are willing
to receive these tourists in order to show them the following enterprises -
The Atelier de Delle in LYONS (Apparatus using medium ana high woltages) -
the LYONS Cable Factory (Le Cable de Lyons) = The Savoie Transformer Company ~ .
(Atelier de la Savoienne), not far from LYONS. According to the words of
DUPONT, these factories are the most modern and will unquestionably be of
great interest to our specialists,
I thanked DUPONT for this information and I promised to inform our
organisations which are interested in this about him". (It was signed
Counsellor for Science and Technology, I, Kudryavtsev", Below a distribution
list was written:- “one copy to GKKNIT; second copy to V/O "INTOURISI" ;
third copy to the first EO (First European Seotion of the Ministry of Foreign

. Affeirs); fourth copy to file").

Te While the photographic set-up was being arranged, subject said: By

the way Harold, will you please find the graduating olass photograph we looked

at the other day. I have remembered the names Of several more officers. I

remembered that the Party Secretary was Lieut. Colonel of Engineers PAVLOV

(No. 61). And I also rember two others, Noe 42 is Lieutenant Colonel

RYAZANTSOV. He is a line officer. He came to the olass from the Ural military
district and went to the same place after graduating, and this other one that

‘I remembered ~ he is half-Russian, half—Jewish, His name escapes me, it is | ‘
something like ZUKMAN. That is Noe 43. He is an Engineer Major who is working :
near ROSTOV about 150 km, away at the factory which produces fuels and
explosives I told you about before. He is the one involved in making these
so-called powder pencils or candles for TRA weapons,

8 After the photography, subject said: With respect to this delesatio
which has just come and the other one which will cane I will cmsult with ;
them in terms of what cities they are going to visit, KUDRYAVTSEV will give them
hie prepared itinerary plan and if he doesn't have enough, I may even ask HOOK
to indicate where interesting places are. I will not travel around with the

delegation, Gs Of course anything that HOOK arranges is primarily for

your /

es S oe

Se

your benefit. S,: That is right and let me mention one other thing that
is important, HOOey. I had a conversation with ANANYEV. He said that now
that the Exhibition is Closing all you need to do is to tell us what
arrangements you have made for visiting places and we will assign Milchai}
Kug'mich SOLOVYEV to you. He knows French well and he can help you
Photograph eto, SOLOVYEV is an operational case officer about whom I tola
you before (he works in KUDRYAVISEV's Seientifie-Technical Group). or =
i this conversation will take place after I have discussed thia with HOOK, wi
j whom Twill meet on the 5th October, When HOCK calls me that morning I will
ask him to met with m @S5 soon as possible, I will bring him a present of
Russian cogac and caviare and we will discuss the possibilities of visiting
Frence and obtaining brochures, G,: Is SOLOVYEV the operational driver
: also? S.: Yes he is, He speaks French well and he has been formerly
stationed in Switzerland, and he will be ny assistant,
- Se Get How do you expect to work this ? If you go out alone with
: SOLOVYEV, do you expect to take photographs of military targets en route ?
So: Primarily I will go to the places nhich HOOK sets up for me to visit,
i. In addition HOOK will give me som brochure materials and these will be
supplemented with what WYNNE bringse This is all I have to report
regarding the delegations and my work therewith, .
10, Get For how long did you say this delegation will be here 2
Set They will be here for twelve days. Of this time they will sank four
to five days in PARIS and the balance of time they will spend making trips
throughout France, I will know the details tomorrow, (¢,: Possibly you
will gO on a trip as set up by HOOK even before the delegation goes,
Se: It mikes no difference; once they go on the trip I have nothing more
to do with it, G.: When do you think you will go on your trip after
speaking to HOOK, Go you think it rill be em Pridey o> = Saturday 7 Sus No.
I think it will be during next week, since I will only meet with HOOK m
Thursday and that evening we have a meting together to examine the plan, ee
Possibly on Friday HOOK will show me something in the damedinte neighbourhood
of PARIS, I asked him to dy this, On Monday or Tuesday of next week I

will probably go out of the city somenhere, giant sees

oa ba es os

=6—

7 11. Now I need some biographic data on HOOK, (J. produced a typewritten
Peper on which the basic background data and place of employment of HOOK
were itemised), Since this material was written on U.S, Embassy paper,
subject was requested to re-write all of the data in his om hand in Russian
on a sterile piece of paper and George wrote out for him the correct English
and Russian equivalents of the data which subject put in Russian text for
himself, After writing all the information down in his ow hand in his om -
notes, subject asked Harold what information was obtained for him on the Paper
Symposium at Oxford, Harold gave him a paper industry journal with a page

and a half summary of the symposium in which it was stated that the Symposium

| ended on 28th Septenber. He was told that the reports would be formally
published in two or three months, Despite subject's displeasure in not having

: the results of the Symposium in hand as desired by HEKRENEV, the Chief of the

: Dllegals Directorate, for his false documentation programme, subject saw the

_ point that he could not have these results before they were published, He

- will be given the paper industry journal later as ostensibly coming through

: WYNNE since he could not present it to the Soviet Embassy now because WYNNE
is currently in BEIGRADE,
. 12, Set WALD there be any more brochures from WYNNE for me which I need 2
Ge: Yes, there will be, S,.: And I need something on the paper industry
too, Gt This is not WYNNE's field but we will try to get you what we can,
Se: When will WYNNE com: here ? He: We do not know exactly, but he will be
here before you leave, .

(ey Se: What else do we have on our programme, Do you have qestions
for me? G.:! Of course we have, First of all we will te gin with this
concept, _ Prior to the time that you have your transmitter, which we will
discuss later, here is a concept for establishing @ signalling system in
the event that you have the most urgent information to pass to us, This
is for a time urgency that is s0 vital that you cannot wait for the next
meeting with Thank and must pass this information through your dead-drop,

>

: The /

ces | _ a,
#37

The concept is that you place a signal om this light-pole ve spoke of
before, (A very lengthy discussion took Place on the manner of placing
~ & amidge or numerical signal or some other sort of signal on ths lamp 3
7 post. In addition every possible variation in signalling by phone and ;
by signal was discussed, In the middle of this @iscussion it was pointed :
out to subject that the sole purpose for such contact was for the most
urgent type of commmication to use This was further spelled out in ~
precise language, namely that if Soviet military action wore imminent
or that Soviet military action as the result of an action on the part of
the West as a result of a Soviet ultimatum would be imminent, was the _
nature of his communicating to us by this mans, - a
(%) It was finally decided in principle, with the details to be worked
out later that such communication would be transmitted to us as follows, _
At a time to be definitely set » but tentatively established at about ; |
0830 hours on any day, subject would telephone on a number to be given him
and would ring continuously until the telephone was answered, If a male le
. voice said “Hullo” or anything else, subject would hang up and again mke
"the same call and again hang up if a male voices answered the phone, During 4
the late hours of the previcus evening, as a double check subject would have My
placed a dark asmidge a few inches below the number 35 on light=pole Noe 35
at the signal site, The recipient of the message, which obviously should
be the party for whom it was intenaea, Since it would be a male voice, would
- immediately check the pole to be sure that the telephone call could not have
been in error, despite the double call, In this: case » and only in this . : "
case, would subject load the drop with his urgent message at approximately .
0845 hours, lmowing that the dead—drop would be clearea within a half hour
more Or less. He would make his call from a public Bhone booth, timing a
himself to be sure that it would be available at about 0830 hours, Then, SR
knowing that he had already placed the signal the evening te fore » he could
leisurely load his drop and proceed to his office, which is directly en oe
route in a matter of minutes, Should a female voice answer the phons he

would /

#37

~8~

would still have the option of hoping to hear a male voice on his second
call, if he did not hear a male voice on his second call, he would assume
‘that his message was not received by the party for whom intended and he
would not load his drop and he would be forced to make contact on the next
day. Under no conditions would subject be obliged to say one word on the |
telephone, concerning which subject has a nik sensitive apprehension,
particularly sinoe he is sure that the KCB has a tape recording of all such

Phone calls and they could sr match his voice or break it phonetically

if he were under suspicion as “the last straw in his defence against any

possible acousation, The details of the above principles which were adopted

will be finally agreed prior to subject's departure), H.: I think we

have come to an understanding of this emergency procedure and we will take
it up again later before he goes back when we have the details all worked

out.

(15.) He: Let us do questions on the Krenlevka first, then we will go
into the radio demonstration and if we have any time left we can cover some
more questions to the extent that time yore tae Ge: First of all how
did you obtain this kremlevka directory 7? Set This directory belongs
to GVISHIANI, I had been working in his office and I had the chance to
Photograph it, The cover was red; isn't GVISHIANIts name written on it
somewhere ? He: No. The name doesn't appear, &S.: Here is exactly how
I did it, I was working in GVISHIANI's office late on Saturday for him
and there I photographed the Government Office telephone directory, but
this Kremlevka I took house with me overnight and photographed it at homes,
Ge: What are the peculiarities of this telephone system ? S.: It is
classified as a Government telephone system, There are two such systems,
One is called the V.Ch, which ties in MOSCOW offices to its central and
the lines go throughout the land to all the oblasts where there are cities
and to all oblast conmittees of the Party wherever a responsible Party
official may be stationed, It isa high frequency system One mst request
from the central switchboani to be connected = one cannot dial & number

“te on /

#37
=Ju

on this aystem, The caller's number is asked for and given when a long-~

distance call is made, The Kremlevka is exclusively a MOSCOW cirouit which

. inter-connects all the main Government offices, There is none like that in

_ LENINGRAD. You probably have read in the instructions that the system is

under KGB supervision, It is stated that Top Secret dcnveveat tis are

prohibited, but all and everything is discussed on this line despite the =~
admonition, G.: Is it also a high-frequency lines ? S.: Yes, it is but — te, % |
it is not on the same frequencies as the line going throughout the land
which is called the V.Ch. G,: One can dial a number on this one « 4s
that right 2? Se: Yes, and four digits are used. G.: Is it ever called
the Vertushka ? 8: Yes, it is, It is called either the Vertushka or
Kremlevka; it is the same thing. Vertushka is the slang expression while
Kremlevka is the official designation. G.: Is it correct to also call

it a V.Ch, type system? S.: Yes it is but again I repeat that its V.Ch.
frequencies are in a different range from that of the line called the V,Ch,
I forgot to mention that the long distance V.Ch, line rms to all countries :
of Peoplets Democracies, : ts
16./ Get Is it possible to be connected into the Kremlevka system from :
the municipal line or vice-vereza ? 8: No, absolutely not. The only thing | 7
that oan be done is to tap in to the cable if one knew where to do this and #
the conversations could be overheard if technicians can analyse the frequencies, :
In this directory all members of the Ministry of Defence are not included and

in case of similar last names the office of the individual is stated to avoid
confusion, Gs: On what basis is it determined whose name appears ina __ ee
directory and whose does not or who gets a Kremlevka telephone and who does
not 7 S41 All those who have important positions in any committee would
have this telephone, Some people would have two telephones for example,
the Minister of Defence would have his office in the Ministry of Defence

listed and he also sia an office in the Kremling G,: Is there not a

astermination cm ‘the basis of which one does or does not receive this

telephone 7 S.: Yes, there is, This is set by the (upravlyayeshchim

delami) Executive Officer of the Council of Ministers or the U.S.S.R.

He also determines who should be included in the special and restricted

ining / . 3

. iad ! ' #37

-10-—

dining room roster and in the roster permitting those to go to closed
stores, This also includes special hospital privileges, It is the same
old aystem of who gets a more elegant dacha and who gets a shabbier one,
This Exeoutive Officer has a big office which services the Council of
Ministers, I just remembered that at one time CHERDAYEV was the Executive
Officer, G.: Do not the various committees of the Central Coumittee
propose or direct who should be given this telephone also? 3 Of courss
they do; the Executive Officer merely handles the mechanics for which he

mn instructions, |
Te Ges On what lines are all the headquarters of the Militery Districts
ected with the MOSCOW Headquarters ? 8,: All of these military |
headquarters are connected on the V.Ch, line to the Ministry of Defence which
is the same line which connects all Party Headquarters and Governmental
Headquarters, Of course this cable is such that it is a multiple
conversation carrier and the various conversations are transmitted on various
frequencies, Ge: Suppose a military alarm message is to be sent out to
ell the Headquarters 7 Se: It would go out on the V.Ch, line to all
military centres, political centres, etc. as-required. Soviet technology
claims that neither this V.Ch, line nor the Kremlevka can be monitored,
Ge: Do they ever encode conversations when particularly sensitive
information must be passed and by means of the V.Ch, system? &: Yes,
This is sometimes done since ‘the Eighth otdel has a sub-section at on
military headquarters, which can code and de-code. This is called a Shifr~
telegram, Of course these messages can be sent either by wire or radio,
then used on the V.Ch. line it is called a telefonogram, The message
is transmitted by numbers,

Het Why does MOSKALENKO have two telephones ?-S: That is

because he is considered to be very important as the Conmander of Strategic
Rocket Forces and one of these could be the number of his headquarters in
PERKHUSHKOVO and the other one in MOSCOW. G.: Presumably KHRUSHCHEV has
. all telephones ? S.: Yes, but his home number is not given in the

Krenlevia, neither is that of MIKOYAN, However I imow that they both

have /

ee rn

ee eee

HE

o1i98

have a home number tied in because in an earlier edition of this directory,
KHRUSSCHEV' s home number was listed,

190 Get Sinoe when has this Kremlevia system been in operation ?

Set I woula say sinos about 1930. I'd like to say this about the system,
we once had a lecture om it. It is possible to find the key to the
electrical frequency oirouits used. ‘The important thing is to locate the
cable and to work out the formila (regim) to break the conversation.
Another thing I forgot to mention is that all outstanding designers such as
rocket and airoraft designers are also listed in this directory, such as
CHELOMEY. He: If we were to compare the names in the Kremlevia here with
the names in the directory of the Academy of Solences, thereby could we not
determine who are the important men working in various fields 2? S.: Of
courses this oan be done; this can all be established, I told you that in

LONDON, and you will see that only the important scientists will have a

Kremlevka telephone. This is an important analysis and this work should te

done because it will provide s01id information.

206 ("John" asked that if the decision to attack were made, how would

this order be tranamitted to the various military commanders in the Soviet

Union and other places such as the D.D.R.)s Se: The commmnication means

that would be used would be all those which have commmications security.

All V.Ch. lines would be used, And coded telegrams would be sent to all

thogze commanders of every echelon who have sealed orders, They would be

told to open their sealed orders and act accordingly. Therefore this message
would be transmitted by the V.Ch. by coded telegram and coded radio messages,

It would be interesting to listen to the conversations on the Kremlevias

I am sure that ‘bur technology sould break the electrical code if they could &
only get at the cable as they did in BERLIN,

2le Get These are all the questions for the time being, Now you

stand up and give your demonstration with the radio equipment and explain
everything yourself about what you understand about its operation, "John"

will just stand by while you demonstrate,

: | (For /

So emwemmepenr se we es

Wet e enema aye ne ities an fheede tee
.

oe

, #37
1 2—

(For a period of about forty minutes subject slowly went through
the description of how he would use each item of equipment. He connected
and separated all electrical and physical contacts which are necessary to
Join together for various phases in the process of transmitting a short-range
coded radio message. Subject begen with the keyer which placed the “eodea
text in groups of five numbers on the tape. His procedure for using the one- ;
time pad was also reviewed to remind him how to do this without reference to _

_his printed instructions and for the purpose of refreshing his memory as to

the number of additional groups needed with his encoded message text. Subject
made the expected few errors and learned mre thoroughly when corrected,
Although he understands the procedure well, not only is actual practice
necessary and desirable but sien he does receive the instruments, they will
of course be completely desoribed as will their use and functions in his

printed instructions, At this point the important thing is that subject

likes this device and feels that it will serve a very vital purpose in
affording secure two-way commmication should all other means be denied
by oiroumstances in the future).

After the demonstration, although it was already 2300 hours, subject .
seid that he would like to clear up some of the questions we had prepared
for him so it was decided to cover two sets of questions (eeapee with
VARENTSOV's and ODINTSOV's articles, |
226 Got Throughout VARENTSOV's article certain general military terms
were used which refer to sizes of units. I have them all listed and will
read them to you slowly, For each of these, after you have defined then,
we would like to know which specific size unit each term could apply to;

I will read those off also, For example here are ‘the general terms:
Zveno; gruppirovka; ob"edineniye; soyedineniye; chast'; and
podresdeleniye, ‘These are standard Soviet military terms, S: That is

absolutely /

absolutely right. Ge: Now the point is, exactly to which of the

following does each term apply and to what does it not apply ? Division;
brigade; front; military district; an army 7?

236 8: I understand, let us take them in order, What was the first
one 7 Get Zvenode Sez The zveno ds a rule as a specific term is used in
aviation, It ise small wit of aviation (3 planes), The concept of a
zveno can be that of a link in a chain, It could te also used in a context
like this: in testing rockets at the technical site when a certain Sites
of assemblies are checked the Coumander may say “There are many errors in
this zveno", Ges Does it apply to infantry ? S.: No. but you can say
something like this, that the signal gveno of an infantry unit is not adequate,
In short these are general terms for a very small portion of equipment or
personnel and the only specific meaning is that used in aviation,

2he Gat Next 4s gruppirovia, S,: This is a very wide concept. It
could be a grouping of types of combat arms such as infantry with tanks and
possibly with aviation, These could be referred to in connection with the
grouping of forces on a specific sector of the front lines or in a specific
direction, It is a large pices usually and could consist not only of
divisions, but even could include armies. In fact it is rare to say there
is a gruppirovia of divisions. That would already be an ob"edineniye.

The gruppirovka is generally larger and its meaning is directed to the

fact that a number of combat arms are involved,

256 Get How about cob"edineniye ? S,: That isa specific groupment —
of a single type of combat arm, for example a higher conmander my put
together a speoific number of artillery units into one groupe

26 Get How do you dotinfe @ soyedineniye ? So: In the Soviet

Army when one takes specific organic units such as a battalion or a
regiment or a sa ia and when any combination of these are put together
for a partioular tactical purpose this is called a soyedineniye, The’
soyedineniye, like the gruppirovka, also involves putting together various

types of combat arms, but it is for a amall composite uit as compared with ——- |

the /

v3 7
of ken

the larger one in the gruppirovin,

27 Ge: How about chast' ? 8: This is a specific organic unit
Of any category, It could be a regiment or a battalion, It coula also
be an aviation squadron, G.: In other words it is any wit, generally
smell, which has its own fixed table of organisation, Se: Yes, That is

right,

28. Ge: Nowa podragdeleniye 2? S.; That is any tables of Organisation

sub-unit of which the unit itself is composed, For example, the company

is a sub-unit of the battalion. A platoon is &@ sub-unit of a company.

Tt applies to any type of troops, |
290 Get The next question also in VARENTSOVts article context is this;

. he named rockets as the R-170, R=30, R~300 and R-~550, which are of course
different from academy usage, Have you heard of these before and are they
real or cover designations ? S&,: These are all cover names but for entirely
new types of rockets, I gave you the index designations for all the rockets
we studied at the Academy except the Krylatka which I was not able to get yet,
but these are all new rockets he refers toe Ge: When are such designations
as these used 2 S.: These cover designations can be used in Top Secret
articles such as the type he wrote, In lower classifications this would not
be permitted, they would simply state 8A = whatever it might be. Hes In
the artillery Journal, which is still Top Secret, they did use the 8A
designation, Sy: After all a Top Secret document can certainly refer to °
materials of a lower classification, but not the other way round, Even
at the Academy we were categorically forbidden at examinations or during
lectures to refer to the word "rocket", The word “indeliye” ("manufactured
product") was used, .
30. Ge: The article also Speaks of the reductions in time for
preparing a missile for launching, It said the missile , preparation was
reduced from 2 hours to 35 minutes. The data preparation was reduced from
95 to 8 or 10 minutes and the geodetic tie-in time required was reduced

from 24. hours to between 14 and 2 hours, 8,; First of all 4t still takes

a /

are

15

a considerable time, sometims days, not only hours to check the rocket at
its technical testing site prior to being moved to the launching site,

This still remains as it was and all of these procedures at the technical
site which include the first, second, third testing categories ata. still .
take considerable time, But what the article refers to is that when the —
missile is brought up to the launching site, there they have worked out
procedures which save considerable time, The preparation means that the _
finel checking of the rocket mst be made with the rocket already mounted on
the launching pad, The data is obtained much faster now from the geodetic
calculations in tying in the location of the target in respect to the rocket.
And the inclusion of the necessary data into the various collimators and
aiming devices to direct the rocket to its target, must also be done. This
is too part of ‘the missile preparation. The data preparation means working

“out the geodetic data into the numerical values by which the rocket mechanians
' will be set to direct itat its target. This total tims at the launching pad

iteelf beginning from the moment the rocket is brought up until the launch
button is pressed, has been considerably reduced from hours to minutes. The
actual geodetic computation which produces the required data in the past

had taken several days, as I mentioned front VARENTSOV's remarks to CHUIKOV,
but now they have reduced this tine, not only by having greater experience,
but by having computed second and third order triangulation co-ordinates from
the first order triangulation co-ordinates, Of course when you mention 14

to 2 hours, this still depends upen what type of rockst you are talking about,
There are still large rockets which require several days of computation to
tie them in to new sites, G.: Can you explain by what means they were able
to accomplish this ? S.: That is very simple. It is the result of
continuous training and they were able to work out computations faster and
faster. In addition to training better maps have been prodiced of the areas
where the launching sites are to be used, so that more accurate and faster
tde-in data of the rocket site with respect to the ground, could be made,

In addition to this there have been improvements in optical instruments,

31e Ge /

zi

~16—
316 Get When Sergei Sergeievich wrote this article he referred to
recent exercises and war games. Do you know which exercises or manoeuvres
he referred to? Se: In the first place at all major manoeuvres there
are representatives from every committee and from the headquarters of avery.
combat arm, Whenever rockets are used in conjunction with these exercises
i everyone concerned with rockets from whatever viewpoint writes up summaries
and conclusions of their own, I am sure that VARENTSOV used a number of
exercises and the reports thereon to form his Own overall conclusions,
Manoeuvres varying in size are going on frequently in one Place or another
and all rocket employment is very carefully written up and analysed, 80
although the manceuvres were no doubt recent that he referred to, I believe
‘ that he mist have used the composite data from a number of manoeuvres.
32. Get Can you define the following terms as applied to missiles and
Fi combat actions of a front = strategic, operational and tectical 2? 8: In -
the first place when you consider a front Operation, the strategic objectives
and operational objectives would be examined together and at one time,

ee

° However, the commands which control these weapons will be different,
MOSKALENKO for example would control the firing of strategic rookets, but
KONEV the Commander of the Front, though he does not command these rockets,
he would know that at a strategic range MOSKALENKO plans to launch say six
rockets, The operational rockets would be under the control of the Front :
Commander, The tactical rookets would also be under the Front Sonnets
except that he would sub-allocate them to lower echelons, G.: The
confusing concept is to differentiate between the ranges at which the
strategic and operational rockets are used, Set To ‘me it is perfectly
clear, I do not understand how it can be confusing, Take all three tyson
of rookets assigned for use in one direction, Let us use for an exen ple
West Germany. KONEV, the Front Coumander would know that MOSKALENKO will
lay down fires by rockets up to say La Manche, He will know how many
rockets and the time of launching, but of course KONEV will not command
these rocket forces, Let us assum VARENTSOV will be assigned as the tactical

rocket /

aioe 4 ee

ee ae
4

1 -eeeetrtee wane Nena erceemes om.

Pree tet ee

ete Ree Me Mee me eee Wher

tactical rockets,

#97

.

rocket chief of this front and KONEV will tell him to fire up to a depth

of say 2,500 kms, against targets in the operational rear of the eneny.
Shorter range tactical rockets would fire say up to a range of 1,00 kms,

And these fires would all be co-ordinated under KONEV's command and
VARENTSOV's headquarters. Hes But what are the renges for these tactical .
and operational rockets 2 G.: You see » at what point does one category of
rockets terminate its range capabilities for the other category to take over
from there, There seems to bé an overlap in the ranges, S,: I see, Well,
let us say then that the tactical ranges for the TRA. (free rockets) and

heavy artillery operates at ranges from 100 to 200 kms, The operational

rockets would operate from say 200 kms, to 1,000 kms. and even beyond that,
And anything beyond that would be strategic weapons, For strategic rockets

we must includs types such as the R~1h with a range of 4,500 los, I.C.B.Ms
and also include missiles launched into space. KHRUSHCHEV is planning to use .
space rockets. Of course the overall control would always be centralised .
right up on the Central Conmittee level, They will dstermine what yields

of atomic warheads will be delivered by what rockets, even down to the

336 Ge: Now, referring to ODINTSOV's article, S.: You.mean the article
On the rear areas ? Ge: Yes. He referred to a missile troop exercise

called "DON", Do you know where this was held and when? &: This was an
internal exercise in one of the internal military districts and I do not know
exactly which one but it was held in ny Opinion a long time ago. I think
more than a year ago. I'm glad you mentioned his name, because I have Just
remembered that under his editorial guidance they are now publishing four
separate sections of manuals on rockets to be used as texts for study at the
Academy. Everything is included in these manuals that is taught at the five
faculties, The manuals were written by the collective efforts of specialists
and instructors, There is already one manual publiahed which is Top Secret
with a very limited distribution for study of rockets at the Academy,

All / | —

-18—

.

: All eub~divistons are there beginning with the schematic composition of

. the rocket; all checks and tests required, all equipment needed for this,
etc, ‘In short all the material which we had studied from separate lectures
and study have now been incorporated in this manual, I certainly will be
hunting for these four sections, |

3he Get QDINTSOV in this article states that each rocket installetion
should have the following number of missiles for a two-day coubat operation,
For tactical and operational/tactical installations - 3 missiles at each —
installation; for troops anti-air installations (voyskovaya zenitnaya) -

6 missiles at each installation and for Arny troops (T.R.A, ) (voyskovaya
armeyskaya) ~ 8 missiles at each installation, What are the last two

categories of missiles and how does the last differ from the first ?

St ALL of these values are units of fire (boyevoy komplekt). At one time ;
T gave you values of this type and the same value exactly for the anti-air

etre oneness emo

installation. And now in this article the inference is that this was alt.
checked, tested and adopted. The last category, namely the Voyskovaya.
armeysiaya includes without exception all T.R.A, installations and in addition

© ceenme a miemer ree

. would have short trange guided missiles, For example such as the R-11,

The difference between this category and the first one is again a matter of
range, all the short-range missiles will be in the latter category, but there ©
will be a lot more of the guided missiles in the Operativno - Takticheskikh
because a greater range is required. Thus far all T.ReA. in the Soviet Arny .
is restricted to shorter ranges, but if in the future new fuel developments
are made, particularly using solid fuels, then the T.R,4, equipment my be.
also used for operational FANZe Se .

D5 Get In the rear area support of missile units of a front, what

is a “Parkovyy Divizion" (Motor Pool Battalion), Is ‘tt only the vehicles an
for moving missiles or does it have other functions 7 Set This is |
exclusively the transport equipment for moving rockets ~ nothing else,
You mst have figured out the designation of the prticer I told you abeee
who works in the large artillery base near MOZHAYSK. I sent you his

characteristics /

19

characteristics, his name is Yevgeniy, The sub-unit which’ he conmands,
which is abbreviated as the PKP, or rather PETs, that is the transportation —
service of this Tsikla (cyole ? aeaning within the artillery base compound),
This includes transportation by rail since rail lines run into the base as
well as motor transport. I was thinking about this because I have failed |
up to now to give you a manual of military abbreviations, And I was thinking |
of this designation I just mentioned because you may have had trouble |
breaking it down, since I did not spell it out for you, I will be sure to
get you this manual of abbreviations because it will be mach easier for you
to figure things out,

360 G.t We'll stop with this question now, because we want to work

Up more reference questions and we want to save the ones we have already
for later meetings, Now we will plan for Thuraday, because that will be

an important day, What do you propose to do ? In the morning you are
expecting a telephone call from HOOK, 8: He should call me shortly after
0800 hours and I will try to arrange with him to meet as soon as possible,
because after I met with him I may have to report something or other to

the Embasay, I do not expect to take any out-of=town trips this week,

If he arrenges @ short visit for Friday somewhere in PARIS or the suburban
area, then I will go visit that place on Friday together with SOLOVYEV,

If not, then Itl1 gO visit whatever he has set up for me next week,

31. Ge: If you go out of town with SOLOVYEV by car and particularly

in the outskirts of PARIS, be very careful about taking photographs because
since Soviet vehicles are well known, you will draw a surveillance car in
very close pursuit, S,: I don't think I'l] take any photographs, That is
not so important. If I coula pick up some Preohures or other types of
documents, that would be much more important, I ean get a camera at the
Embassy at once, but I haven't asked for it. If HOOK could get me som

“places to visit and some brochures regarding electronics, that would be ideal,

Then if I could find some person I could introduce SOLOVYEV to I would
consider my missions to be fulfilled, How about this man with the Russian
nams 2? Ge: We ‘decided to drop him completely, it was too risky. Se: I

, | think /

#37

“20-

think you are right and I even had an experience at the Exhibition of a
possible provocation, A Russian speaking Frenchman said that he had
escaped from Siberia in 1925 and was born in RIGA and wondered if he would
be given a tourist visa now and not be jailed again if he took a trip to
the USSR. I referred him to the Consulate and when the man invited me to
a restaurant to discuss this further, I said I had no time. This could
have been a provocation, |

38. Ge: Of what help could we be to you concerning your itinerary ~
when there would be no point to spot military installations to you en route
since you cannot photograph them, S,: I'll have to cancel this request

to you. Since you cannot arrange this as you did in England and you have
to expose yourselves to the French Counter Intelligence dn order to make
such an arrangement here, it is better to drop it, If SOLOVYEV and Ilmppen
to see a military air base we can write up a report thereon on the a sis of
visual observation, I need some material from England yet, especially on the
type of military industrial items I reported to you about so that I can
give some materials to CHEREDEYEV to send home via GRU channels. Both he
and I would get credit for this at GRU. Materials of lesser value we will
send to the Committee, ‘hen I get to MOSCOW and deliver the presents to

SEROV and if I did accomplish something here I would ask SEROV himself, or

ROGOV to call GVISHIANI and thank him for sponsoring my trip since it

benefited CRU. At the same time I will bring presents to GVISHIANI and
others in the Committee and they will all be inclined to send me off on

another foreign trip in three or four months. However, I definitely will

not go abroad again during the rest of 1961. I will even attempt now to
work to GVISHIANI and SEROV to see if I can get a visa to the United States,
If the Amricans give m a visa, then our KGB will not have an argument
ageinst m that I on known to the West as an intelligence officer and
spotted, I am worried a bit now because as time goes on and it is already
the 2nd October, I do not have any valuable materials at hand yet, but
particularly in connection with this long list of target items that I

reported to you on. Ge: All this may develop favourably after you met

- HOOK /

#3 7
=P

HOOK, That is.when we will review the whole situation and see what can

be done. S,: When I gave them the document on the Nimonio-115, that
created a mst fevourable reaction, they were delichted with it,

390 J.: Suppose HOOK would assign a man to go with you mm trips,

how would this affect your situation with respect to planning to-go with
SOLOVYEV. Would you all go together ? S.: In the first place HOOK should
not go with m anywhere, just mike the arrangements. If he assigns a man,
that is fine but the man should not go with us, he should go in his om car
and I will go separately with SOLOVYEV in our Soviet car and meet the man
wherever he sayse I could go alone with the man in his car for a short ride
in PARIS or the outskirts of PARIS without SOLOVYEV, that would be allright,
but on a longer trip I would go alone with SOLOVYEV and meet the man at the
factory site, and on second thoughts, may be SOLOVYEV and I will take a
camera along, At any rate, please try to provide something of value for

ms because I came back from LONDON twice with something good and this time

in PARIS I have nothing to bring back.

(10. Ge: Tell me specifically what would be the best assistance you

could get fron Gm? S.: I already told him, I said that I would like

to have some brochures on something like Nimonics and other heat resistant
steels, Other than that he should arrange for me to go to certain factories
end simply give me the address and appointment times and the name of the
person I am to meet. I will pick up any brochures I can from such contacts,
but HOOK should also try to collect a group of brochures for me, I cen
legend the acquisition of these very easily. G.: Of course, whenever
SOLOVYEV goes with you, your legend will be restricted to exactly that

which SOLOVYEV also knows, S.: That's absolutely right, but I can meet
Wher alone or mike a short trip alone and that is none of the Embassy's
business, Although they treat me very well and have complete trust in me,
SOLOVYEV speaks no’English at all, only French. Je: I would like you to
do one thing when you speak to@jgg& and even more particularly to any

’

Frenchman /

22m

Frenchman you my meet, take it easy and don't press too hard, S.: Thatts
right, and I will not introduce HOOK to anyone, not even to SOLOVYEV, he

will remain my ow acquaintance exclusively, J.: Would you go togiie's
home if he invited you ? 8: Alone ? With the greatest of pleasure,
(Subject was show a nunber of books, inoluding a catalogue by ARMCO and a
very fine French business firm directory for all major industries in France,
Subject was impressed by the latter book, but kept stressing that the nature _
of brochures that he desires would be in the category of restricted or
documentary type brochures similar to that we previously gave him on
Nimonic~115,.

Wie Subject then described further how everyone in theSoviet Union at
every level of officialdom was an absolute grafter and has his hand out to
receive bribes and gifts, Subject enquired as to the status of our having
acquired some of the numerous gifts which he planned to bring back and was . i
shown the rare wines of 1917 vintage and other items, He then was trying to
reconcile the size of the meny items already acquired, such as his candelabra
and his framed picture of the sea, which would not fit in any normal suitcase, hs
G. suggested taking the fram apart, but subjéct was reluctant to do it, and

though the most practical way of bringing it in would be simply to wrap it

in paper end carry it aboard the plane (Western plane) and get it to MOSCOW

that way, for some reason subject was reluctant to do this, In order that

subject could contact us by phane if he were to be free on Wednesday evening

for a pre-arranged entertainment by a lady it was arranged that subject call

the safe house just prior to 1200 hours on Tuesday and say in English that

he is feeling well or not well in case he is going to be tied up. At 414145

hours on 5 October, subject oalled and stated that He was feeling fine, ‘The

place for the rendez-vous would be shown to subject while en route to being

taken hor fren the meting. The sesting for Thursday was set for the san

new RV point which worked very well and again the time would be at 2000

/

hours /

iS

hours, Subject left at 2330 hours and was driven by Roger together with
Je and "John", En route the RV point for his Wednesday night appointment
at 2100 hours, in the event that he should be free, was shown to him, He

was delivered to the general pare ounee of his hotel without soancant)s
