Toward a Military Government in Peru
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000097280, dated 6 September 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000097280).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BOARD OF
NATIONAL ESTIMATES

po ee eae
| Pe aD
= a
29
LB] LIBRARY
sateen A
Document #
SPECIAL
MEMORANDUM

TOWARD A MILITARY GOVERNMENT IN PERU?
See anaIRnRREEI RE ERRmenmnmenEneeneeammenaeeoemnamenetaen = ter aemeteeneeeensemmenecee nee

Approved for Release
Date M

Sven

28 October 1967
No. 8-67

1 a

WARNING

This document contains information affecting the national
defense of the United States, within the meaning of Title
18, sections 793 and 794, of the US Code, as amended.
Its transmission or revelation of its contents to or re-
ceipt by an unauthorized person is prohibited by law.

GROUP |
EXCLUDED FROM AUTOMATIC
DOWNGRADING AND
DECLASSIPICATION

See:

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES

28 October 1967

SPECIAL MEMORANDUM NO. 8-67

*
SUBJECT: Toward a Military Government in Peru?

The Belaunde administration, long considered one of the
model governments in Latin America, has come upon difficult
times. During the past few months, it has been faced with a
legislative crisis, a growing inflation, signs of unrest in
several towns, acute budgetary and balance of payments problems,
and the need to acquiesce in a devaluation of the sol. In view
of his weakened political base and growing economic troubles,
Belaunde obviously feels that he must give high priority to
maintaining good relations with Peru's military leaders. This,
in addition to his own conviction that Peru must now begin to
replace its antiquated military holdings, lies behind the ar-
rangement for purchase of supersonic Mirage 5 aircraft from
France -- and behind Belaiinde's refusal to abrogate it.

* This memorandum was produced solely by CIA. It was prepared
by the Office of National Estimates, coordinated with the
Office of Economic Research and discussed with the Office of
Current Intelligence.

Group 1
Excluded from automatic

downgrading and
declassification

ke

Belaunde's relationship with the US has already come under
strain; the emergence of a new irritant in the long-standing
dispute between the Peruvian government and the US-owned Inter-
national Petroleum Company is adding to this strain; and re-
lations will worsen further if the US Government proceeds with
@ Major cut in economic aid.

We see some danger that Belavinde might be overthrown within
the next few weeks, and we believe that the chances of a military
take-over will subsequently increase. Whether or not the gov-
ernment of Peru comes under the acknowledged control of the
military establishment, its policy is likely to include two of
that establishment's firm resolves: (1) to carry out its program
of modernization -- i.e. procurement of advanced military equip-
ment abroad -- impervious to argument, pressure or reprisal,
and (2) to maintain public order no matter what disgruntlement
the country's economic troubles produce.

eRERE

1. ime was when Peruvian military leaders needed little
or no pretext to intervene politically. In fact, during Peru's
century and a half of independence, three-fifths of the presi-
dents have been military men or men of recent military background.
Only since World War II has there been a significant change of
attitude among military men -- change which involves a growing
respect for constitutional procedures, for civilian rule, for
social progress. The last military seizure of power ~- in 1962 --
was designed to prevent the election to the presidency of victor
Raul Haya de la Torre, who did not receive enough votes to be
elected outright, but who would have gained control of the Exec-
utive if Congress haa been allowed to choose. Most of the military
leaders honestly thought Haya's program would be a calamity for
the country as well as for their interests. They sanctioned new
elections for the following year, and, with their blessing, @
fragile party coalition, and a smattering of Communist support,
Fernando Belaunde Terry won some 39 percent of the vote and a

six-year term as president.

2. Under the Peruvian constitution, 4 plurality of more than
one-third of the popular vote suffices to elect the President.

Belaunde has been a minority president from the beginning, and

( a
some two-thirds of the members of Ganetens belong to the two
parties whose leaders he defeated in 1963: the Apristas (Haya
de le Torre's American Popular Revolutionary Alliance -- APRA)
and the Odrifstas (the party of the former president and dictator
Manuel Odria -- National Union of Odriistas -- UNO). When
Belaxinde won, the populist APRA and the conservative UNO formed
an opposition coalition which was none too constructive in the
beginning and has become more and more obstructive over time.
The government coalition of Belaunde's Popular Action Party (AP)
and the small Christian Democratic Party (PDC) is far less pow-
erful. Belaunde has managed to put through the Congress a number
of bills in keeping with his moderate reform program, but the
cumulative effect of trying to deal with the opposition majority
has caused him increasing frustration and brought him close to

despair.

3. Belaunde's program of reform and development has tended
to be over~ambitious in terms of Peru's financial resources, but
clearly responsive to some of Peru's most urgent needs. In
pressing it, he has posed a challenge to strongly entrenched
economic interests. Despite the repeated opposition and inter-

ference from Congress, his administration managed to accomplish

See?

a good deal. Yet ali along Belaunde has had much more success
in expanding the spending side of the budget than in expanding
revenues. This is but one of the practical difficulties which

are now catching up with hin.

The Pattern of Economic Strains

ibe 58 CC eee

4. The Peruvian economy was booming when Belaunde came to
power and the boom continued until 1966. During 1961-1966 Peruvian
gross national product increased at an average annual rate of over
6 percent, the highest in South America. Rapid economic growth wes
based on & rapid expansion of exports, especially of fishmeal
and copper, each of which now accounts for about one-quarter of
Peruvian exports. Since 1963, however, production in these fields
has stagnated, and the increase in export earnings came from the
favorable prices which prevailed until the latter part of 1966.

The Belaunde government used much of these earnings for economic
development, government investment in infrastructure rose rapidly,
and there was also substantial private investment, both domestic
and foreign. With these investments Peru took considerable
strides in modernization and developed new export and import
replacement industries. The economic advance, however, was rapid

enough to cause growing strain. Imports grew faster than exports

-5-

-- imports more than 100 percent between 1960-1966, exports about
75 percent. With incomes rising and population growing some 3.5
percent a year, consumer demand rose faster than the supply of
goods available and prices increased steadily, although inflation
was kept under control. The lack of responsiveness of food pro-
duction, a result of both physical and institutional limitations,
was one cause of the inflation. The increasing government budget
deficit was another. The inflation, coupled with a fixed foreign
exchange rate, slowly eroded Peru's competitive position in the
world market. Growing trade deficits were covered thanks to
rising assistance from the US which reached large proportions

in 1965-1966.

5. Peru's economic boom came to an end as a result of 4
sharp decline in the world market prices of fishmeal and copper
in late 1966. As the trade deficit continued to grow, ‘capital
flight reached a high level in anticipation of a devaluation, and
official reserves declined in spite of emergency assistance from
foreign banks and the IMF. Devaluation was undertaken on
1 September. With its foreign exchange earnings reduced and its
foreign indebtedness increased, Peru has had to curtail imports.

In turn this has forced & deline in consumption and investment.

=p foe va

Devaluation, by raising import prices sharply, 9150 brought a cut
in real wages and 4 lessening of public confidence in the govern-
ment. Demands by the military both for modern weapons and for 4
balanced budget will require & cutback in Belaunde's development
program -- and this will add to unemployment. Thus the economic

problems are creating multiple political strains.

6. Moreover, these problems will almost certainly persist
for some time. At best, imports will have to be held down for &
year or so. If the US cuts its aid to Peru, imports will fall
further and the effect on the economy will be severe. If the
government balences the budget, many Peruvians will be hurt
either by growing unemployment or by increased taxes. If, on
the other hand, large deficit spending continues, real incomes will
be further eroded by inflation. In any case, the conflicts of
4dnterest between consumers, investors, and the military aie bound to
become increasingly acute during the next year or so. ‘The devalu-
ation will probably have the effect of stimulating exports,
especially of fishmeal, and over time a broader economic recovery
seems likely. But economic growth is unlikely to be nearly 48
rapid as in the first half of the 1960's. This will be the case
whether or not the military comes to power. The speed of the recov~

ery, and the subsequent growth of the econony will, moreover, be

a a

influenced by US actions affecting the level of official aid, as
well as by the degree of confidence of foreign private investors

in the Peruvian government.”
Politics -- More Than Usual

7. Since the election of 1963 there has been & splintering
tendency within each of the major political parties and coalitions.
Belatnde's support has become less cohesive, and the APRA-UNO
coalition, which was willing to go along with a limited social
reform program early in the Belaunde administration, has become
increasingly obstreperous. Thus, in July 1967, Belatnde tried a
show of strength to bring the Congress more under his control.
After his supporters were declared losers in the election of new
Senate leadership, he ordered the members of the AP-PDC alliance
to boycott the session until the Senate President-elect, Julio
de le Piedra (UNO), agreed not to serve. The boycott prevented
@ quorum for 39 days, and encouraged in the public a growing

lack of confidence in both the legislative and executive branches

anand

% One unsettling factor here could be the emergence of a new
Srritant in the long-standing dispute between the Belaunde gov-
ernment and the US-owned International Petroleum Company. The

new matter of disagreement concerns prices the company may charges

post-devaluation.

gpereen-E-T
d =
—-~

of government, as evidenced by an increased drain on Peru's
foreign exchange reserves. Three days before the legislative
crisis was ended, with foreign exchange reserves nearly exhausted,
the Central Bank withdrew its support of the Peruvian sol, allow-

ing it to seek its own value in open trading.

8. Throughout the legislative crisis Belaunde publicly
took the stance of a disinterested executive, although, according
to a reliable source, he had a contingency plan to close Congress
and govern by decree with military backing. It is not clear
whether he took any action to resolve the problem other than to
encourage rumors that there would be a military coup if the
legislature did not convene. These rumors gained impetus when
the long-expected devaluation took place. They undoubtedly had
some impact, and new Senate leadership, which included AP-PDC

representation, was chosen.

9. In spite of his success in preventing a legislative
quorum, there was to be no clear victory for Belaunde. To avoid
legislative censure over the de facto devaluation and the pro-
posed unbalanced budget for 1968, his cabinet resigned. Belaunde
then appointed Edgardo Seoane Corrales, who is his chief rival

within his own party alliance and a presidential aspirant for

-9-

Soeeeet

1969, to be prime minister and foreign minister of the new cabinet.
This was @ maneuver to maintain the AP-PDC alliance while exposing
Seoane to a share of the difficulties and criticisms which the
government is sure to experience in coming months. The new
cabinet already includes strong military figures, at least one of

whom asserts that Seoane's tenure will be brief.

10. However that may be, the new cabinet has emphasized the
need for new taxes and stricter collection of revenue as the neces-
sary means to finance government expenditures and promote fiscal
stability. The APRA-UNO opposition, although more conciliatory
on this issue than before the legislative crisis, would much
prefer to cut spending. Business interests, too, are opposed
to additional taxation; indeed for a brief period in September,
Peruvian exporters actually refused to export their products
and thus forced Belatnde to withdraw his proposal for a tax on
such windfall profits as they would gain from the devaluation.
Belatnde's effort to improve the overall political climate by
means of occasional meetings with the top opposition figures,
Odria and Haya de le Torre, does not seem likely to gain him

much -- at least not in the short run.

Present Military Attitudes

11. The composition of the Peruvian military establishment
has been changing markedly. Increasingly it has become a vehicle
by which members of the lower-middle class can advance socially.
More and more cadets in the service academies come from the
lower-middle class and from the families of laborers and peasants.
It should also be noted, however, that views of the wealthy class
are still strongly represented in the command structure, particu-
larly by some naval and air force officers. In addition, there
are, of course, military officers who have personal political

ambitions.

12. More enlightened in many ways than it used to be, the
military remains determined that no government which would sub-
stantially diminish its role can be allowed to come to power.

It is in this context that the military has felt compelled to
keep the presidency from the control of Haya de la Torre. While
APRA in general is remembered for its attack upon the military
garrison at Trujillo in 1933, and for its involvement in the
Callao naval mitiny in 1948, Victor Ratil Haya de le Torre is the
specific focus of military hatred. It is possible that APRA will
be allowed to win the presidency when Haya is no longer its

candidate.

13, The policies pursued by Belaunde and the AP-PDC Alliance
have actually been akin to APRA‘'s traditional demands for social
reform; the military has accepted Belatinde because he has not
tried to decrease the importance of the military establishment.

In fact, the military forces have been an active participant in
the President's social and economic development programs, build-
ing roads, bridges, and irrigation projects. They have also par-
ticipated in a colonization scheme which joins members of the
military and civilians in an effort to open up new agricultural

lands in the interior.
Arms Purchases

1k. Recognizing his need for continued military support
and aware of the military establishment's requirement for new
equipment, Belatnde has approved the purchase from France of l2
Mirage 5 supersonic jets and several jet trainers. The cost of
the jets, including spare parts and trainers, is estimated to
be $25-30 million. Negotiations are underway for 100 light tanks,
anti-aircraft equipment, and rocketry. Delivery of the jets and
perhaps of the tanks is to begin before the end of 1967. A
French training mission will probably arrive with the first ship-

ments. The decision to purchase French supersonic jets was made

when it seemed clear to the Peruvian military that the US would
not make its F-5 aircraft available for sale to Peru before
1969-1970 at the earliest. It was made despite the fact that the
US Embassy had repeatedly told President Belavnde that he could
not expect a $40 million program loan if the deal went through.
And Belaunde has said that it is now too late to abrogate it, even

if the US makes its offer of F-5s more attractive than before.

15. It is not only the President and the military forces in
Peru who feel that new military equipment is required. A supple-
mentary military budget of some $160 million was passed by the
Congress early in 1967 for arms purchases over the next few years.
The Peruvian public also seems generally to favor such purchases.
The press recently had a field day with headline allegations con-
cerning the threat posed by Chilean armamentismo, charging, in
particular, that Chile was acquiring guided missiles from both
the US and USSR. This fiction was 80 widely believed in Peru that
even Belatinde and Prime Minister Seoane thought it necessary to
query the US Ambassador about the extent of US arms support to
Chile, and the Armed Forces Ministers spoke for eight hours to @
closed session of Congress about their need for modern arms to

counter the Chilean threat.

-13-

Qutlook

16. Because the military does not pretend to have the
solutions to Peru's economic problems, it is doubtful that economic
issues alone would precipitate a coup. The military clearly will
not tolerate a cut in the military budget by the Congrees or the
President. Its insistence upon more modern equipment may result
in the loss of a much needed program loan from the US. The
political opposition is unlikely to suggest a military budget
cut, but will insist upon other governmental austerity. Out~
side pressure on Belaunde to resist military spending will only
intensify military influence in the government. There is no in-
portant participant in Peruvian politics who would publicly
attribute any part of Peru's economic difficulty to military

spending.

17. It is unlikely that the Peruvian Congress will enact
important long-range economic measures during the remainder of
Belainde's term. The President's spending for reform and devel-
opment will come under increasing attack as the cause of Peru's
economic difficulty. Belaunde will almost certainly try to put
the blame upon the US for such aid cuts as may occur. His cor-

rective action will be to propose new tax measures to raise

~ 1h -

Pa

revenues and reduce imports, and perhaps to attempt wage and
price controls. Such executive-legislative agreements as may be
reached will be intended as much to ward off possible military
takeover as to set things straight in Peru. The election of 1969
is already too close for the opposition parties to allow the
Belaunde administration any great success in solving current
problems. The military, under these conditions, might prefer

to remain as the threat, rather than intervene.

18. If prices rise but wages do not increase accordingly,
there will be agitation among the lower and lower-middle class
urban workers, and disorders will occur. Student groups will also
be involved. A general strike has already taken place in Arequipa,
and unrest is evident in other towns. Such developments increase
the likelihood that military leaders will insist at least upon
stronger participation in the government. In the event of wide-
spread discontent, including rioting and effective mass strikes,
President Belavinde would probably declare a state of siege and
call upon the military to support him; if he did not do so, the

military would likely move on its own, perhaps to govern by junta.

-15-

tee a
os

aan “se F

19. The Argentine example has not been lost on Peruvian
military leaders. If they did take power, however, we think
that they would be less interested than the Argentine military in
retaining it indefinitely. They might even seek to conduct an
election close to the June 1969 schedule; however, they would want
to assure that the prospective new civilian leadership had enough
strength to maintain political stability and to begin an assault
upon some of Peru's enduring economic problems. Finding and
agreeing upon such civilian leadership would not be easy; once

having taken power, a military regime might find it hard to let go.

20. Instead of taking over the government overtly in the
traditional Latin golpc,the military might try to manage Belauinde
from behind the scenes. They could rely on his egreement with
their principal objectives, but, given his deep sense of frus-
tration, such a tactic might merely induce him to abandon the
struggle and resign. Or the military might increase their already
heavy weight in the Cabinet and the administration. They will in

any case hold the keys to power and decision.

21. Whatever the outward forms of control, we believe that
Peruvian politics and foreign relations for some time to come

will evolve out of this dominance by the military. Peru is

Me ig
wooo

unlikely to devise and execute an economic program sufficiently
austere, comprehensive, long range, and vigorous to solve its
serious problems. With these problems continuing or growing worse,
the temptation will grow to blame the US for Peru's troubles, and
to look elsewhere in the Free World for sympathetic support.
Whether or not the government of Peru comes under the acknowledged
control of the military establishment, its policy is likely to
include two of that establishment's firm resolves: (1) to carry
out its program of “modernization” -- i.e. procurement of advanced
military equipment abroad -- impervious to argument, pressure, or
reprisal, and (2) to maintain public order no matter what dis-

gruntlement the country's economic troubles produce.

FOR THE BOARD OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES:

ee ay ae

SHERMAN KENT
Chairman

-17-
