El Salvador: Performance on Certification Issues - TruthH Commission I)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000049227, dated 3 June 1983.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000049227).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

on central batethisenss P ee

EI Salvador: Performance
on Certification Issues

Interagency Intelligence Assessment

Approved for Release NIC M 83-1001!
Pe nee 43 July 1983

NOV 1993 Lg

.

NIC M 83-10011

EL SALVADOR: PERFORMANCE
ON CERTIFICATION ISSUES

, Information availsble as of 11 July 1983 was
used in the preparation of this Assessment.

een

KEY JUDGMENTS

The government of El Salvador has made continued progress an
most certification issues during the past six months Progress in achiev-
ing substantial control over the armed forces and prosecuting those
responsible for the murders of six Americans has been marginal at best,
however. As in previous assessments, our primary base of information
continues to be eumpanabiengpebenannstlereiiiiSi eat annnaan |) | ch

we judge as accurate and objective FB

Improvement has been most evident in the area of government
reforms. Agrarian reforms have made steady advances, particularly in
the distribution of land and titles to thousands of new beneficiaries.
Recent banking laws also have completed a process begun in 1980 to re-
organize financial institutions and reallocate credit to the general
public.

Cooperation among moderate elements in the government has
increased over the last six months, with an attendant erosion of extreme
rightist influence. This has énabled the administration to step up the
process of democratization, especially evident in the enactment of an
amnesty law that has reduced the number of political prisoners by 70
percent. Other advances include the creation of a Peace Commission
charged with seeking political reconciliation with the guerrillas and
completing the draft of a new constitution

Major weaknesses remain, however, in the government's ability to
safeguard human rights, particularly in the countryside. Killings by
rightwing death squads and elements of-the armed forces continue.
Efforts by the military high command fo instil] respect for human rights
among the rank and file have had somé effect in elite units, but little in

poorly trained garrison units and civil defense forces.

The cases involving the murder of the six US citizens have yet to
reach trial stage because of continued legal and procedural bottlenecks
in the weak criminal justice system. Conspirators in the killings of two

Note: This Interagency Intelligence At&eliment, approved by the Nationa! Forsign Intelligence
Board, was prepared under the suspices of the National Intelligence Officer for Latin America. The
Asesrnent was prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency. the Defenss Intelligence Agency, the National
Security Agency, end the intelligence organization of the Depertment af State. Also participating were the
intelligence organizations of the Army, the Navy. the Air Foros, and the Marine Corvs GP

1

Us Jabor advisers, moreover, continue Co aveid proseculon following

appellate court decisions to drop current charges until new evidence can

he developed ee

DISc us

Human Rights

“Making a concerted and significant effort to
comply with internationally recognized human
nghts.” (Criterion for judging Salvadoran Gov-
ernment's performance.

1. During the past six months, the Magana adminis-
tration in El Salvador has continued to make progress
on some human rights issues, particularly as evident in
the recent implementation of the amnesty law. As
noted in previous assessments, however, the measure-
ment of progress in El Salvador is a relative thing.
complicated by abuses of prisoners before detention in
& government facility and the use of violence by
extremists against their perceived political opponents

2 The insurgent war has intensified this year as the
guerrillas have stepped up efforts to broaden their
areas of control and inflict major damage on the
country's already crippled economy. The rate Of com-
bat deaths on both sides has increased, but the rate of
civilian political deaths ' has not changed substantially.
figures for the firs
six months of 1983 show e slight incresse over those for
the last six months of 1988—178 civilian political
deaths versus 160. The average so far this year,
however, Is well below the monthly death rate of 217
for all of 1982 (See accompanying chart.

3. The trend toward improvement {s also reflected
in the recently enacted and swiftly implemented
amnesty law. Since it went into effect in May 1983,
the authorities have released more than 500 of the 783
political prisoners in jail at the time amnesty went into
effect—guerrillas and labor leaders as well as leftist
intellectuals suspected of subversion and detained
under the emergency decree. Most of those teleased

‘Political deaths are those that take place outside a song af
combat and which clearly sugges « political motive—for exexiple,
civilians murdered because of suspected complicity with the inewr-
sents. Civilians killed as a result of being caught in « crossfire er
other military-related activities are classified as combet doy

»>STOMN

had been held at the relatively modern Mariona Presson
outside the capital

4 Qaim, visit the facility frequently

the prisoners are well fed and are
Teceiving excellent treatment, including access to
schooling and rights to conjugal visits in private darmi-
tones. In addition, who recently visited
the Hopango Women's Prison indicate that more than
half of its 92 political prisoners have been released
under the amnesty. Conditions there are reported as
good, and some of the common criminals stated they
are denied privileges that are extended to political

detaine

5. We believe the government may extend the
amnesty beyond its mid-July cutoff in an effart to
altract political exiles and disenchanted members of
insurgent groups inside the country. Despite the mnex-

EI Salvador: Insurgency-Related Civilian and

Military Deaths, 1981-June 1983

Tout Number of Civilian Deaths

Monihly Average Number of Military Killed of Wounded

(98) su)

exniitiaeen

pectedly high number of polities) prisoners wha have
benetited from tne law, at reportedly has altracted su
far only about 200 guerrillas and camp followers
Nevertheless, qa the government's [lu
man Rights Commisson—which is currently invest
gating reported cases of abuse of ciwilians by both
guerrilla groups and armed férces units and attempt:
ing to locate over 100 missing persons-—appears apli-

mustic that others will take advantage of the law ,

WER wvecrrillas are required only to sign a formal
request for amnesty, and that they are not interregal-
ed or required to provide details of their past actions.
Like the released political prisoners, insurgents secking
amnesty are free to remain in the country or to leave.
Meanwhile, the Amnesty Commission's recently estab-
lished rehabilitation committee is assisting beneficia-
ries in finding work or in resettling on land belonging
Yo the agrarian reform agencies. Those desiring to

leave El Salvador are offered free passports, and |

discussions are under way with governments in Latin
America, Canada, Australia, and Western Europe pver
resettlement programs. ;

6. Despite these and other efforts—including
massive publicity campeign—we believe that fear of
reprisals from the extreme left or right will inhibit
most guerrillas and political exiles from taking advan-
tage of the amnesty. The government hopes that fair
treatment of Insurgents turning themselves in will
spark additional defections, but this may be offset by
accounts of former political prisoners of abuses before
their internmen

b tly are continuing. Qi
government and military
o ility for sations employed

by the Army In combat situations before prisoners are
transferred to detention centers. The positive effects of
the amnesty program could be further offset by recent
death squad activity against some prisoners who had
been released before the smnest

Control of the Armed Forces

“Is achieving substantial control
ments of its own armed forces.’

a

military pemains mised The aiibtary i elbuie bd
elforts to professionali ce 10 tanks and tistics bs
human oghts Neverdgieless, the mtensity of the que.
vil

rilla war particularly recent: massacres Caplin

soldyers-—and its influence on domesti. lawless ne:
probably have generated continued abuses by atin

forces elements agains! the civilian popula QR

). Military leaders are raintaming then efforts os
reduce human ngbls violations within the sens
forces. Moreover, reporting indicates more preciso is
the last six months tn fire control dunn Gightiig be
populated areas, particularly on the part ab coumbat

pilots and artillery un SD

10. Improved fire discipline also has been note wor
thy among US-trained infantry battalions that have

been engaged in heavy counterinsurgency campaigns
in San Vicente and Morazan Departments ene
troops moving bite

e a ed towns are treating
local inhabitants with greater consideration. This has
sometimes resulted in more voluntary provision of
food and shelter by local inhabitants, as well as
information an guesrille activities.

of captured prisoners—whase numi-
continues to improve.

the Army Increasingly
treating guerrillas and interrogating them
humanely. They are then evacuated to San Salvador
rather than being left in the hands of local command-
ers. Some of those captured have related the concem
eal leaders over the superior performance of
US-trained units and their ability to generate more
positive attitudes among peasants toward the govern-
ment.

12. In addition, the new Defense Minister has
issued s human rights manual to all military units in
the country. Similar guidelines have had only limited
impact within the security forces over the past two
years. Nevertheless, this action helps reinforce the

1]. Treatment

mmitment to curb abuses by field commanders and

their troops wy

Moreover,
within the

eGee —“*s

ay have ¥
the victims were: Meme
e n Indian Association who were

military anstitubian itself frequently reduce the avadl
ability of so have found that
nihtary personnel are Bcharged from the

service tor bornan rights offenses and other crmuanal
acts, pending tials in civilian courts: These cases cease
to be the responsibility af the military and quickly
become burned in the labyrinth of civil and criminal

justice p dings In one _easern department, for
evrample dentified 17 e:vilan
court ca ilitary personnel. All

had been separated from the armed forces for serious
crimes such as assault, rape, kidnaping, and murder
Mast cases were still pending, although two had
resulted in acquittals, and a few others in convictions

14. Government efforts to investigate mass slayings
that occurred last fall have stalled because of a lack of
witnesses—a frequent problem that underscores the

continui j 0 polarization in El
Salvador who conducted their
own ing t regular Army troops

in Usulutan ia ea and civil defensd forces in
Santa Ana Department summarily executed a total of
19 peasant farmers in two separate incidents. Victims
were either suspected guerrilla sympathizers or targets
of personal vendettas fostered by other local peasants
and landowners. Some participants in the killings have
been detained by suthorities, but possible witnesses
have refused to make official depasitions. One eyewit-
ness subpoensed by civilian courts was murdered
before he equid testif

15. Another widely publicized mass Peas under
investigation

farm Gaaniive of tai Hoias;

targeted by local cattle ranchers following land dis-
putes. Individual members of the local civil défense
forces and some 200 regular troops led by an Army
captain were involved. The captain was placed under
military arrest in April pending further investigations
by government prasecutors of charges that his depart-
mental commander, Colonel Araujo, ordered the kill-
ings. He has since been released. Araujo has publicly
admitted sending his troops to Las Hojas on search and

destroy massious agaist known subbversives

civil defense personnel
command have threatened wit-
nesses with death, thus prompting peasant leaders to
seek protectian fram the National Guard The local
Guard commander has promised to patrol the Indian
cooperatives and provide them with weapons for self-

protect on Py

16 Other Qe,
SR — sccests that some mili-

tary elements continue to engage in random acts of
violence. Disappearances and unidentified bodies stil!
are reported in areas controlled by specific units of the
armed forces. Mast of these,
re victims o
however, has identified the
Cavalry Regiment and the signal garrison in San
Salvador with illegal detentions and elimination of

suspec’ ir sympathizers. Further-
more, eported earlier this year
that Alr Force security ps at llopango airbase

abducted and killed three civilian workers for reasons
unknown

.

Progress on Reform

e
“Is making continued progress in implement-
ing economic and political reforms, including
land reforms.’

17. The Magana administration has made steady
‘progress in economic, political, and land reforms
during the lest six months. This period has been
characterized by Increasing cooperation among the
major parties in the government, reflecting « growing
mpturation of the still-fragile democratic system as
well as < “” of power of some extreme right

elements.

18. The continuing movement toward reform was
not affected by the recent power struggle in the
military, which resulted in the resignation of Defense
Minister Garcia in April. Although Garcia had been a
primary force for moderation and had earned the
enmity of extreme rightists for his support of reforms,
his reptetement by General Vides represented both
the transition of power through established procedure
and the continued dominance of th» pragmatic main-
stream of the officer corps. Furthermore, the impact

ot the crisis in the military was defused by the
intervention of President Maygana, who, im requestuig
Garcia's resignation, asserted his civilian authority as
constituhoanal head of the government

19. Vides's generally conservative political onenta-
tion and ties by marriage to the landed aristocracy
suggest he may be less committed to the reform
process than was his predecessor. In addition, extreme
rightists appear to believe he will prove less adept than
Garcia at keeping the military out af partisan Sones
This view gains credibility with Vides's recent dp-
pointment af Colonel] Carranza as head of the Trea-
sury Police. Carranza is an important rightist figure
with links to extremist Assembly President D'Aubuis-
son. Nevertheless, Vides has so far shown himself
cognizant of the need to reinforce the moderate
policies of Magana—in part to satisfy US policy
requirements—and we believe that the military under

his command will continue to support the govera- .

ment's efforts to strengthen refo

20. Neither factionalism in the military nor esgalat-
ing insurgent attacks have deterred the arm

(redistribution of large landholdings to peasant cooper-
atives), while Phase III (land to the tiller) has benefited
some 305,196 formerly landless peasants.* Since Octo-
ber the government has exceeded most of its immedi-
ate goals with regard to title application and distribu-
tion. Applications for new titles, for example, have
climbed from a cumulative total of 98,615 in October
to 64,637 as of 17 June 1983. During the same period,
cumulative distribution of permanent titles to Phase IJ
properties has grown from 400 to 2.453, suggesting
that changes made last year in management of the
program are now paying dividends. While the govern-
ment is still behind in its schedule for distributing
provisions] titles, the rate of distribution has increased
markedly since January from a cumulative total of
34,674 to 42,415. ‘

21. Progress on land reform continues to be clouded
by rumors and allegations of large-scale evictions of

peasants by former landowners, gage,

he government

© This number includes direct beneficiaries and their dependents
based on a formula of six individuals per (amily QD

is about to undertake a survey to determine the
number of illegal eviQuons, and at recently began a
nationwide publicity campaign to discourage such
actions Meanwhile indicates

that the armed forces continue their efforts to return
evictees to ther new lands As a result, any heretofore
unreported evictions are now more likely to came to

the attention of-the authorities Ce]

2° The ability of Magana to continue reforms in
the face of rightist opposition has been reflected in his
handling of economic issues. This spring, for example,
the administration implemented the final step in
reforming the banking system by offering up to 49
percent of the equity in nationalized banks to private
investors, with limitations on the arkount an individual
investor can purchase. The offer capped a three-year
struggle to take contral of credit out of the hands of o
few wealthy families. In a further sign that extreme
rightwing influence is waning, the Assembly recently
defeated a campsign by maior coffee growers to
weaken the powers of the National Coffee Institute,

thereby con ting to equitable returns for small
producer

23. The inability of the far right to prevail on
economic issues is mirrored in its overall reduction of
power in the government during the past six months.
In February a dispute in the Assembly concerning rule
changes and a cabinet appointment sperked increased
cooperation by moderate right and liberal deputies
against obstructionist parliamentary tactics by far right
leader D’Aubuisson end his party. This enabled Presi-
dent-Magana to replace a rightwing minister with a
maderate from a nongoverning political party, thereby

cing the share of power for D'Aubuisson’s faction
and strengthening executive leverage with the Assem-
bly. Subsequent maneuvers by moderetes succeeded in
eliciting D’Aubuisson's public declaration to resign
upon completion of the new constitutio

Elections and Negotiations

“Is committed to holding free elections at an
early date and, to that end, has demonstrated
_.. good-faith efforts to begin discussions with
all major political factions in El Salvador.

24. Plainths for elections has been hampered by
partisan differences over posts to be contested and the
eligibility of candidates, as well as disruptive changes
in the electoral timetable. Nevertheless,

=== that the major parties in the government
have informally agreed to hold the presidential ballot:
ing on 13 November A mavor hurdle, however, will be
the promulgation of the consnutution, without which an

electoral code cannot be developed nor the structure
of a new government determined.

25. Other problems such as funding and organiza-
tion for the electoral contest finally are being ad-
dressed by the five-man Elechon Council. Although
the Council remains insistent on devising a new
registration system before November, some polttical
leaders now acknowledge that such a program almast
certainly is not feasible. Officials of the rightist Ne-
tional Republican Alliance and the liberal Chnstian
Democratic Party, for example, recently have indicat-
ed that they will accept open registration—such as
existed during the March 1982 elections—for the sake
of expediency.

26. Open registration may inspire pastelection
charges of fraud among partisan groupings, but it
should help encourage another large turnout gn the
part of voters unable or unwilling to return to sbecific
municipalities as would be required with formal regis-
tration. Turnout will stil] be determined to a consider-
able extent, however, by the ability of the five guerril-
la factions to coordinate their efforts to sabot the
befloting more effectively than in March 1982

27. The government's Peace Commission

has made recent contacts with political
or the insurgent allisnce in an effort to determine
their interest in the amnesty program and psrticipe-

tion in elections.

Magana has indicated that,
if contacts show promise, willing to
postpone elections unti! next year. This would provide
more time for leftist groupings to prepare their cam-
peigns QUI, Magans also apper-
ently believes that the prospect of leftist participation
In the election would contribute to blunting the im-
pact Sy guerrilla operations during the preelection
Period.

28. We believe, however, that efforts to generate
Positive leftist interest in the balloting are likely to
Drove ineffective. The insurgents continue to reject the
electoral process in favor of negotiations leading to

_

Having increased their
tmulitary pressure, the insurgents naw are engaged in
maior diplomatic lobbying far a dialogue with the
governments of El Salvador and the United States T |

power shanng alrangement

Murders of US Citizens

“Good-faith efforts to investigate murders of
six US cittzens and bring to justice those respon-
sible for those murders.”

28 The case of the five National Guardsmen
charged with killing four US churchwomen in 1980
has again been set back by judicial procedures. A
lower court decision to begin trial proceedings was
overturned this spring by an appellate court, which
cited irregularities in the presentation of physical
evidence. Technically, this only postpones an inevita-
ble jury trial and allows prosecutors more time to
organize their case. however, are
skeptical of the government's ability to win a convic-
tion. They point out that government attorneys are il]
prepared and poorly motivated to handle the case,

argue can be strengthened by
use of 8 private prosecutor to represent the interests of
the families of the victims This, however, has not
occurred.

30. Two other National Guardsmen have confessed
to murdering two US representatives of the American
Institute for Free Labor Development (AIFLD) in
1981 and are due to stand trial following an appellate
review of the evidence The court, however, has
rejected formal requests by the Attorney General to
prosecute two other psrticipants in the crime, Lt
Lopes Sibrian and businessman Hans Christ. QB

the government has one
yess to introduce new evidence or the case will be
officially closed. QD Indicates that the Magana
adminstration is pressing for p tion and probably
will appes! to the Supreme Court.

31. Lopez Sibrian, meanwhile, remains on active
duty but in administrative detention and Is not al-
lowed to travel outside the country. Hans Christ

residing in Miami, apparently under an
assumed name. Another conspirator, Captain Eduardo
Avila, remains In hiding subject to arrest as a murder
suspect atid Knmy deserter.
