Clandestine Service History - the Berlin Tunnel Operation 1952 - 1956
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000115525, dated 5 July 1967.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000115525).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

i

Ree eee a =

+

Other copy held by: DDP Controlled by:

Copy No. 2

Gaour 1
Excteded (rom antousti.
dawncracing and
* “eoclassification

of 2 Date published: 24 Jupe 1968

CS Historical Paper
No. 150

CLANDESTINE SERVICES HISTORY

THE BERLIN TUNNEL OPERATION

1952 - 1956

Date prepared: .

Written by:

e
4
TN oe mead eemnmmns eeete co ements ae

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREFACE: 20) Ge eS BS et ate Aas i
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. . 2... 0 ee ee 44d
I. INTRODUCTION. ........206- 1
if. ‘SEARNING. 2 Ga oS eee SKS 6
“III, IMPLEMENTATION. ... 2.0... 17

TERMINATION. . 2... ee ee ee 8

PRODUCTION. . 2... 0s ee ee ee 25
VI, AFTERMATH. 2.2... ee eee 27

Analysis of the Reasons for the

Appendix A
Discovery of the Tunnel

‘Appendix B - Recapitulation of the Intelli- .
gence Derived

Appendix C - Typical American Press Comment

Appendix D - East German Press Comment

HEHEHE

REECE ER CCO RCRD GEE EE

PREFACE

SE Berlin Tunnel project) came into being

sometime in 1952 (the exact date cannot be established) and
ceased as an active operation in the summer of 1956, The
writer served as Headquarters case officer on the project from

the winter of 1952-1953 until the summer of 1954 and then as

the field case officer until February 1955.

.

eae , —_ —_
were intimately associated with the
planning and implementation of the project at the policy level
and very kindly offered suggestions for the preparation of

this manuscript. Their comments have been ‘incorporated and

Ep omieaagy, fo ah ight

are greatly aupeeeiated, Savers other individuals, ineluding
a who were in a position to offer valuable
advice were absent from Headquarters during the period the
paper was being prepared ana thus unavailable to assist.
When this project was first discussed with the then
Director of CIA, Mr. Allen Welsh Dulles, he ordered that, in

the interests of security, as little as possible concerning

the Project would be reduced to writing. “at is probable ‘that

‘few orders have been so conscientiously obeyed, ‘and yet ‘there

cee

se,

are a great many cubic feet of files connected with this pro-
ject. These files mainly concern technical and administrative
eross Only those details which, in the opinion of the
writer, are necessary to a broad understanding of the manner
in which the project's objectives were accomplished have been
included in this paper. Those interested in additional data
may wish to consult the files.

In addition to setting forth significant developments,
the writer has attempted to provide insight into the reasons
for certain courses of action. At times this required a
speculative approach. The judgments derived from such specu-
lation were shared by all those actively concerned in the
management of the project, and it is the writer's hope that
they are accurately expressed in the following paper. Any
error in this respect, however, is the sole responsibility of

the writer.

August, 1967

{PH HIP

N
a 7 ame

Figure

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

1 - Map, of Berlin
opetai Map of a. BecetoPe Berlin
- Aerial View of Rudow section, Berlia
- - Dirt in thie Basement
- VYopos Studying the Tnstallation :

2
3
4
a
6° - = Beat German View of the Compound
7 “Brings on the Shield

8 ~ Excavating Using the Blinds

9 - View of the completed Tunnel

10 - construction of the vertical Shaft

11 - Ticimeted vertical Shaft

12 - View of Cables and Taps

13 § Shaft and Tunnel Entrance in Warehouse Basement
14 - Converted Fork Lift and Dirt Box ;

15 - Target Cables Exposed

16 - Schematic View of Tunnel

17 - Initial Stage of Construction of pre-Amp Chamber |
18 - Pre-Amp Chamber

19 - Tapping Bridle

20, - Lead-Away Lines

a - * goviet press “priefing

Te , .

22 1. INTRODUCTION

The exact moment when the idea emerged of digging a
tunnel to intercept Soviet and East German communications is
somewhat obscure, A number of factors must be considered,
among them the following:

a, As early as 1948 U.S. Intelligence Officers
became interested in the benefits to be derived from
tapping Soviet and Satellite landlines on a scale not
previously considered necessary. ‘The loss of eencete
sources during this period created gaps in our intelli-
gence coverage which were particularly unfortunate during
this period of Cold War escalation. It became evident

that the tapping of certain selected tandiines might pro-

duce ‘the information needed to fill a number ‘of the gaps
in our overall intelligence picture.

b. In the late 1940's and early 1950's the U.S.,
through the priefings of "returnee"™ German scientists

(those who were taken by the Soviets after World War II

to work in Russia) and other sources, became avare of a

.

Peer

an p 4 :
os D ; é +
= .

e. In the late 1940's the, O“fice of Communications,
in the course of its continuing efforts to prewide secure

communications for the Agency, became aware of a principle

which, when applied to target communications, offered

certain possibilities... Plans to exploit this technique

were immediately formulated.

These factors then. served as additional incentives (above

and beyond our normal collection requirements) to focus atten-

tion on Soviet landline targets. In mid-1951 exploratory

n Washington to plan the mounting of an

discussions were held i
Germany with special enphe>

a

attack on. ‘Soviet landlines in Best

sis to be placed on the Berlin area.

and by March 1952 all of the

77

during the latter part of 1951,

pertinent technical material had been assembled and sufficient-

pointing of the most important

ly analyzed to permit the pin

Soviet circuits,

Subsequent events proved

this information to be completely correct. er
Yarious methods of tapping these circuits were explored

and one sampling operation was run in the East Zone, unfortu-

nately with negative results. By january 1953, ) however, the

effectiveness off — ue ;
had become such that a’ 15-minute] sample

was obtained of the prime target circuit. |

The longest continuous sample obtained was

29. minutes and ‘most samples were of two to three minutes‘?

duration. special mention “ghould| be made: of ‘the. tact that

8
ws
~~.

- ait was “ecessary to maintain a 24-hour atch over a six.

month periga « on “our” end of the cable to record these =.

os

llateral collection effort continued on the

Meantime co

communications systems involved and the

uid b¢ done - the next

|4-1983) we knew it co

step was the problem. ‘of “{nstalling a permanent tap on the

frarget dines.

Be precisely at zat poi
- ee one
purpose of tapping ths ee cables began to come i

At this oat (nid

iciabehdokasolals

nt the idea of a tunnel for the

nto focus

cannot be pinpointed. fi

While it should perhaps be possible to credit
é f
one jndividual with the initial concept, ‘it appears to be a

pit difficult to do so. At any rate

tap the target cables began to take definite shape.

ap

wer:

oo

i

II. PLANNING

__inspection of all sites from which it might be possible

served to "narrow the choices to two anaes:

The site actually used |

was selected after careful deliberation which

included, but was not limited to, the following factors:
a. . The location of the permanent water table

(which is normally relatively high in Berlin} was ascer-
tained to be 32 feet below ground surface. It was con-
sidered that this fact would obviate the nece sity for
the use of compressed air, watertight locks, LG wdter=
tight construction with a corresponding reduction in the
attendant engineering problems.

bs ‘The length of the tunnel was considered to be

not aes ‘although “at far exceede anything | which

c. Land was available on which to construct an

installation from which to begin the tunnel.”

d. Complete collateral information on the area

was available

At this point the following major questions remained
unanswered:

a. Was it indeed possible to dig a tunnel of this
magnitude (approximately 1500 feet) clandestinely, con-~
sidering the fact that the border at this point was
heavily and constantly patrolled by the East Germans,
and hit the targets?

b. ; If the answer to the above was favorable,

what was to be done with the spoil (reckoned at approxi-

mately 3,000 tons of sand)?

c. What type of

in such a remote area (this portion of Berlin was at that

time a ngquattersville". of shacks and hovels constructed

from rubble by refugees from the East German Zone)?

In pete the erent question, "Could the tunnel be
dug?", was never ay a ‘debatable “one---those concerned more
or less decided that given sufficient money and personnel the
job could be done. ase judgment fortunately proves sound.)
The second question, "Where do we put the dirt?", haunted the
minds of project personnel for many weeks and a re many
ingenious ideas were brought forth and discarded for one rea~

son or another until the suggestion was made : facetiously that
ee

we "dig 2 hole and put the dirt in ait

‘This in effect was

the solution. “at this time no ) convincing

Figure 4 - Dirt in the Basement

4 ‘e

LAV ta trey |

ARAN

planning for .the project continued

"throughout 1953. ana in ‘December’ of that year the Director of

Central Intelligence approved the terms of reference which

covered Bathe implemen-

tation of the project. A series of conferences in late 1953 os
and early! 1954 led to the following decisions:
a. The U.S. would:
(1) procure a site, _ “erect the necessary

structures, and drive a tunnel to a point beneath

the target: cables;

&
Paras aeiog

signals produced

(3) process in Washington all of the tele-

graphic material received from the project.

b. ,
(1) drive a vertical shaft from the tunnel's

_

|

3) : end to the targets; aa — we
i |

10°

x 1
; . !
a . : , ' : . . i . .
a q
4 :

UuoTIBTLTBIsUY eyy BZuTApnig sodo, - ¢ aan3ty

at

, oe

UOTPELTVISUL ayy BupApnzg sodoa = Gg BINITTA

i il i | i | a | g | i

punoduog 04} JO MatA URUTED yseq - 9 aansta

punoduopg 94} FO ABTA usur8y 4yseg - g OINBTT

y

(2) effect the cable taps and deliver a
usable signal to the head of the tunnel for

recording; and ; ‘ ¢

process the voice recordings

from the site. y

.

ae

Activity thus ‘proceeded ‘on three fronts’- in Berlin steps

were taken to lease the necessary land and right-of-way ease-

ments for the site’ and a contract was let with a German con-

we

tractor. The compound, which was roughly the size of an aver~
age city block, was fenced with chain-type high security
fencing and contained the main operations building (the one

story with basement type warehouse previously described),

See PE PEPER P EERE

combined kitchen-dining facilities and barracks, and another

building which housed three diesel driven generators to ‘

re ; >
provide power for all facilities. aay Sanitary |
: eee

eee

‘i 7

provisions consisted of a cesspool. (The logical placement

‘

of the cesspool was such that it was situated only a few feet
from the tunnel site. It later developed when the tunnel was
dug that this was quite unfortunate because working conditions
in the sector adjacent to the cesspool were, to say the least,
highly unpleasant.) Planning called for the completion of
this work on 27 August 1954.

For assistance in actually digging the tunnel it was

decided to request help ‘from the
and to this end the
were briefed on the project. The initial contact vith >

a-:- made personally by Mr. Allen Dulles to

trained engineer, had just been peerresey ———_— 9

From the first moment he learned of the operation, General

Trudeau was an enthusiastic supporter of the concept. ae
(the only available

member of tho ee, «i any experience in

tunneling) to head the project. This proved to be an excellent

choice tor ee turned in an outstanding job. By

mid-summer of 1954 he had firmed up the engineering plans,

selected a crew of engineering. personnel, and actualy. con-

structed | a “mock-up tunnel some 150 yards long working under

operational conditions at a high security base a

Fd
Some mention should be made of the actual method of construct~
ing the tunnel. Studies of the soil structure in the Berlin
area showed a high percentage of sand. For this reason it was
decided that the tunnel should be lined with steel. The same
sand content contributed greatly to the danger of cave-ins at
the face of the tunnel, and to eliminate this risk a shield
was devised Es horizontal "blinds"
so arranged across its face that should even dry sand be
encountered the danger of cave-ins was virtually eliminated.
The tunnel liner was formed of sections of heavy steel piaye
so constructed PES g Shee bolted together, five sections formed
a steel ring approximately six feet in diameter and 15 inches
long. Provision was made for. bolting these rings together to
form a continuous tube of solid steel. The men docked under
cover of the shield described above (which was slightly ger
in diameter than the steel liner) and when sufficient, material
had been excavated, the shield was forced forward with hydrau-
€ jacks and a new section of liner was bolted in place.
Since this method left a void of isopeainarely one and one-
half inches around the liner (remembering that the diameter
of the shield was grzater than that of the liner), screw-type
removable plugs were built into every third section of tunnel
liner. This permitted removal of the plugs and the forcing

of grouting material under high pressure to fill the void |

TRE

pletug eu} uo Spurtd ~ L eanatg

itt
\:
i

\

Tae

wh
ro ayy

PTOFUS ey} UO Spuyta - LZ SANaTE

sputiqd oui 4utsn Suppeavoxg - 8 einata

SPUTTA O84} Bute Aupzeawoxy —- B aImn3atd

———

after the liner was in place. It was calculated (and subse-
quently proven to be true) that this method of construction

would not permit settling of the soil and detection of the

tunnel from the surface. (See fig. 9.)

ee

Meantime engineers constructed a mock-

up of the tunnel's terminal end

Available

wiested that the cables were buried ‘some 27 4 hes_

deep along the side ‘of a heavily coevouan eicuvay. The tap
of the vertical shaft (see fig. 11) then needed to be
approximately 12 to 14 inches below the surface of the high-
way in order to give the tapping crew room to work below the
ceiling of the shaft, and the whole structure had to be
capable of supporting the weight of heavy trucks since the

tunnel and tap chamber lay directly beneath the highway. (See

fig. 12:) vonstaerevte care was devoted. to. dnsulating’ the

Tauuny pezyeTduog ay} FO KATA - 6 GANSTA

BRRREEEE

‘jeuuny, pezeTdwog ey, JO ABTA — 6 ein3ta

ee)
et
a
pI
wy
ot
a
Qo
4
et
M4
o
>
o
pa
re)
Lal
°
S
°
ot
-»
3)
s
be
P
w
S
o
oO
t
o
nw
o
he
=]
os)
ont
bey

ed eee

Construction of the Vertical Shaft

Figure 10 -

i

i

|
E | | ve | I

n.
OW
=)

e

ae]
a
os
7)
o

rt

a
is]

.S)

ed
ro)
3
o
pay
>

\
|

3/

tap chamber to prevent its acting like a huge drum.
Considerable thought was given to the quantity and
content of the material available from the target and the
manner in which it was to be processed. It was in this
field, perhaps, that we experienced some of our greatest
problems. It had been decided very early in the project's
planning stages to maintain the strictest possible security
measures. AS a minimum precaution security checks were made
on each individual who in any way became knowledgeable of the
project's mission, and the same standards in force for clear~
ances cor < were utilized. A list of
briefed personnel was maintained, special secrecy agreements
were executed, and special briefings were given to all knowl-~
edgeable personnel. It was in the assemblage of a process ine

team that we experienced our greatest problem in maintaining

- . nates
| | | | | “| | | “| | | |

security standards. Since the material to be processed was
largely Russian voice, it was thought that we would need
linguists with near native fluency in Russian. It is axiomatic

that native fluency is usually available only in natives, and

3/tn spite of the insulation, it was a weird sensation
to be in the chamber when an iron-shod horse trotted across
it. We also suffered some anxious moments one foggy morning Z
when the microphone in the tap chamber gave forth with a ee Se Aes
continuous series of dull thuds. After the sun burned away
the fog, visual observation showed that the East German
police had set up a temporary automobile checkpoint directly
over the chamber. The "thuds" the microphone picked up were
caused by the police officer in charge stomping his feet on
the road surface to keep warm.

15

learable for the project.

pale

natives were not c

fa’

i
i
=
=

a :

a

Iii.

IMPLEMENTATION é

By 17 August 1954 things were beginning to take shape

and the situation was as follows:

a. The German contractors had completed the sda

compound and we were in possession.

b. All of the pasic supplies, equipment, and :

nel were in Berlin ready to start construction

person
elf involved transporting 125

on the tunnel. This in its

tons of steel tunnel liner #70" the ZI to Berlin. The
initial shipment across the East Zone to Berlin consisted >

of one and one-half freight trains, the loss of any pack-

For security

_ age of which could have blown the project.

iazposes all sensitive” items

were double crated aud band

Similar items were

e they left the ZI.
or deception purposes.

drop tests befor

aifferently packaged £

Cc. Space at Headquarters was secured and the

had assembled 2 crew and was

quipment

:
+

pe all It should be noted that personnel and equip- 4
&

ment were programmed initially to exploit approximately
& percent of the anticipated take. In retrospect, per-
haps this could be considered overly cautious. In
justification of this decision it should be said that no
one had ever tunnelied 1,476 feet under clandestine condi-
tions with the expectation of hitting a target two inches
in diameter and 27 inches below a main German/Soviet
highway. - There. were those who manifested certas? reser-
vations be the feasibility of so doing, and it is greatly
to the credit of those senior officials, both civilian

and military, that, in spite of these reservations, the

project. was permitted to proceed

In late August 4 ‘Sertical shaft some “16 feet in:diamete

was started in the warehouse basement floor (see fig. 13) and

ground water was encountered at 16 feet instead of at the pre-

_ dicted 32 feet. Such examination as could be safely undertaken

under the steady observation of East German border guards and

Sone off icials indicated that a clay lens existed in this

“spot creating a “perched Water tables the —

pees pepe a

sement |

arehouse Basement

3
Q.
@
a
3
o
a
o
he
a
=
s
wt
do
oO
a
--J
*
»
s
i
et
QO
g
=]
a
B
ue]
i=]
ao
»
Lal
a
&
mn

Figure 13 -
Shaft and Tunnel Entrance in W

Sao EN Brame:
— a.
|

ry

Careful visual observation was maintained and tunneling
operations stopped each time the German guards walked over
the tunnel on their regular patrols. Pumps were installed
to take care of the excess water. Observation logs were
maintained, and since the highway under observation was the
main road from East Berlin to the Schoenfeld Airport, consid~
erable Order of Battle information was obtained. It was also
possible to estimate quite accurately the relative importance
of individuals visiting East Berlin by observing the security

precautions taken by the East Germans and the Soviets,

Both sides of the tunnel were lined with sand in bags
as the tunnel proceeded and the excess spoil was hauled back

to the basement of the warehouse. To facilitate movement, a

wooden track was laid on the floor of the tunnel and a con-
ee . es 8 <;

verted electric fork it was used ‘to ‘pull‘a ‘string. .of

tired trailers back and forth in the tunnel. (See fig. 14.)
Cool air was supplied to the face of the tunnel through duct~
work from an air conditioning unit located in the warehouse.
The tunnel was completed on 28 February 1955. Construction
of ue tee chamber commenced 10 March 1955 and was completed,

with ‘the three target cables eres on 1 28 March 1955 (See

rae Sage RE Te +

BS

- pt omnatda

sod Vita pie ITT AIOE POYTOAUOD

pesodxy poeTqud yesrey - GT emati .

ma

length of the Lincoln Memorial reflecting pool) and that the
first half sloped down and the second half sloped up. (See
fig. 16.) The lack of an adequate base line made the survey-
ing problem especially difficult. The engineers decided at
one point that an object of known size in the East Zone would
be useful as a reference point, so a baseball game was organ-
ized with the objective of knocking a baseball as far into the
East Zone as possible. This scheme was frustrated by the
friendliness of the East German guards who kept returning the
baseball. Nonetheless, the engineers expressed confidence
that they knew their position when the tunnel was completed

to a point which could be contained in a six-inch cube. They

Te ails is probably one of the greatest enemies
of electronic equipment. To guard against this problem the
section of the tunnel immediately adjacent to the tap chamber
was insulated and sealed with mar ine-type plywood to form, in
effect, a closed room. (See figs. 17 ‘and 18.) Vapor barriers
a heavy "anti-personnel" door

and, in addition,

Bans ae

were erected

‘concrete as constructed to. seal off the funnel.

a
ie

wee Teas

Schematic view of Tunnel

Figure 16 -

Ce tenes
.

1 [apr prosus OS
J aAS Sf) LOO
odly
UOHl/OWIG

mot To Stale

Qa
ab
be
<
i
w
oo
©
<
*
ws
=
<
ue
-
[- 4
a
>=

OSIMATE

DIMENSIONS APPR

measures which would be taken at the site. The following
position was finally approved:
a. The posture of the U.S. would be one of flat
denial of any knowledge of the tunnel. :
b, The tunnel was mined at the point it crossed
the East-West Zone border with demolition charges capable

of caving in the tunnel liner should the Soviets attempt

=

forcible entry into the cover installation.

ae Cc. "47 "anti- Personnel" door described above was
installed.

d. It was agreed that the installation would be

defended against forcible entry with all means at hand.

SETAE. AS SARA gaat

All equipment for isolating and preampli—”
fying the sigiais and passing then down the tunnel for record-
ing was in place before each tap was made so that monitoring
of each pair could begin as soon as it was tapped. (See figs.
19 and 20.) Careful check was kept of the temperature and
4/tnis doorzbore the following inscription neatly . lettered

rman: and Cyrillic: "Entry is forbidden by order. of the.
It was reasoned. ald ‘this ee meat give

zaquuyg duy-otd

i
.)
a
R
a
at

requeyg duy-eld - 8T emnats

Figure 19 ~ Tapping Bridle

alate.

4
'

*

a)
aoe

be
a:
*

Tapping Bridle

: See
:
ay

maintained with. the. tap crew. in

humidity in the tap chamber to prevent the possibility of the
introduction of moisture into the target cables thus causing
faults. The moisture in the air caused by the breathing and
perspiration of the technicians doing the tapping operation
forced the suspension of the operation several times to
permit the air conditioning equipment to dehumidify’' the
chamber, All the components in the electrical isolation net-
ie were individually selected and subjected to rigorous
tests to insure maximum reliability, and the lead-away cables
were eatibecusted of the best available uateriaie. sheathed in
lead, and handled in accordance with the highest telephone

company standards, The strictest possible visual watch was

short,.in this, as in all

aspects of the oper tion, every effort was ma
success even though in many instances it meant delay in

achieving the objective.

I¥. TERMINATION

The tunnel was discovered (see fig. 21) 21 April 1956,

‘after 11 months and 11 days of operation. A memorandum pre-

pared on 15 August 1956 (reproduced in its entirety as
Appendix A) examines in detail all evidence available as of
that date on the reasons for the discovery. The conclusion
reached was that the loss of this source was purely the result

of unfortunate circumstances beyond our control - a combina-

tion of the fact that one of. ‘the cables agin very poor

physical condition (this was ‘known from the beginning) and a
long period of unusually heavy yainfall. It appeared that water

enterer | the cable in suttsctent quantity to make it inopera-

he cable. and

causing discovery of the ape

oo
3 is
:

ee eR eS

EEE — EES

i Vv. PRODUCTION .

‘ The following statistics may be of interest in evaluating

the project:

a.

d. A small processing unit

was maintained at the Berlin site to permit on-the-spot

monitoring of engineering circuits for the protection of

the project and scanning of the more productive circuits

value to warrant electrical transmission to Washington

Waa ::- produced.

e. Processing of the backlogged material con-

a closely controlled systen

consists.of a summary of the value of the material received

it

VI. AFTERMATH

a

As previously noted: considerable’ thought was given
during the entire life of the project on the result its
discovery would bring. In retrospect it is probably correct
to say that, among those most actively concerned ,with the
project's management, a consensus developed that the Soviets
would probably suppress knowledge of the tunnel's existence

rather than admit to the world that Free World intelligence

organs had the capability of successfully mounting an opera-

3

tion of thiS’ihagnitude. In other words, it was felt that for

the Soviets to admit that the U.S. had been reading their high

Level communications. eireuits mould. cause the Gov rets to lose

consequence the movie’ course of action was exactly contrary
to expectation.” e

The Commandant of the Soviet Berlin Garrison, who would
normally have controlled the handling of-the situation when
the tunnel was discovered, was absent from Berlin and the

Actin commandant, Cocarige ivan A. pe ca: was in charge

press corps to a briefing and tour 9°

f the tunnel and its

facilities. As a result the tunnel was undoubtedly the most

highly publicized peac

etime espionage enterprise in modern

times prior to the "Y-2 incident." Worldwide reaction was out-

standingly favorable in terms
Non-Soviet Bloc sentiment can be g

a. There was universal ad

of the installation and the imagi
undertaking. -_ -

b. The non-Communist

4ncluded informed Soviets) on the t

and unconcealed delight to this ind

U.S.

Soviet Union, which

_almost universally regarded &

“in espionag matters, was capab

in such matters.

tated such

“guigilling its role of F

c. Coupled with regret that

measures, thoughtful edi

native

s a stumbling neophyte

£ a’ coup against the

of enhancement of U.S. prestige.
enerally summarized as follows:
miration (and this

echnical excellence

nature of the

world reacted with surprise

ication that the

had long been the acknowledged master

the Cold War necessi-

torial comment

applauded this indication that the U.S, was capable of

ree World lead

intolerable indecency. Appendix D consists of a study of
East German press reaction to the incident.
For their contributions to Projec awards

were made to the following individuals:
Distinguished Intelligence Medal

Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
“Intelligence Medal of Merit
Intelligence Medal of Merit
Distinguished Intelligence Medal
dgence: Medal, of ‘Merit

AT her the project went into the production phase it was

d

necessary “to brief a great many people to properly utilize

the product. In all almost @

personnel were cleared

for the project

———

exact yeéord of those persons
A heir par

APPENDIX A

Chi

NOTE: This assessment was prepared by the
immediately after the discovery of the tunne

15 August 1956

7 DISCOVERY BY THE SOVIETS OF eho ed

Analysis of all available evidence - traffic passing on

alll

the ‘conversations recorded from a microphone

rget cables,

installed in the tap chamber, and vital observations from the

site - indicates that the Soviet discovery of &

purely fortuitous

A descrip-
tion of the events leading to these conclusions is contained

in this paper.
“Following heavy rains in the Berlin area a number of tele-

phone and telegraph cables were flooded and began to fault

betweehKarlshorst.and Mahlow on the night of 16 April 1956.

major fat

lt was discovered on cable
ae ree vered on cabt

aS STALL ADE

SO

PIRSA AGERE 5
eg

PES

ae ve

ee Some
BESS

ae

” SINS ASSIA NARA Lan or tenement iL OMA Aad enamine

cata §

Lees # 5

APPENDIX B

RECAPITULATION OF THE INTELLIGENCE DERIVED

aterial and some typical consumer

derived from the

comments.

SS
ee

ay

ny t

APPENBIX C

TYPICAL AMERICAN PRESS COMMENT

WASHINGT ON POST
1 May 1959

The Tunnel of Love

Tha United States Government has not yet niade
any oficial reply to the Soviet and East German
allegations and protests concerning the 300-ya
tunnel nat American intalligencs operatives are
said to have built underneath the porder’ between :
West aad East Berlin for espionage purposes.
Meanwhile, assuming the story to be correct-—we
cannot help thinking the Communists have made
‘e509 much fuss about their '

a gricvous mistake to rais
discovery. They are even said to have conducted

special propaganda tours through the tunnel and

to have exhibited the wiretapping and other record:
ing apparatus that the Americans are supposed 10
have installed inside it. ’

The probable result of all this has been to give :
the anti-Communist resistance in East Germany & |
good deal of amusement and encouragement. c :
tainly it must have served to strengthen the im
pression of American resourcefulness and thereby
to restore some measure of our prestige—which
apparently had been deteriorating sinee the equive~
cal altitude taken by the American authorities in
the East German uprisings ot dune, 1954—among
the caplivo population. The reaction of their

™ Kinsmen in West Germany is probably prety.

‘good index to. their OWN, AS a ;
In West Germany the “story has been acceple

at face value with astonishment and delight as an

evidence that the tradition of Yankee resource-

fulness and ingenuity js not a myth afier all. :

Espionage is one game in which the ‘Communists

were deemed, even by their encmics, to be par-

_a ticularly expert and our own side to be dismally
inept, Very few Germans, 4S the Frankfurter ,
Neue Presse exultantly observed, even suspected ... or,

that the Americans “were capable of so much ; ai

cleverness”; and it would be even more devastating
tige it it were disclosed that =:

to Communist pres }
the espionage tunnel had been in operation for”

gome time before the Communists became aware.
of it. ve eee
Indeed, if the

heen the product 0

‘Snteresting paralte

the siege of
“Union officer. Penn

conceived the idea. of ‘mining th
1 under them, The tunn
nally set off; 3
b

though the opera

of the failure of Un
orders, the boldness.
admiration veg sin

wee
i

7 A
at
Zz

Pas

» S

<>

3S
Z
ita]

A Lot of Money: Truckloads of Ret
: army troops and cars crowded witl
Volkspolizet stead by. Mobile penerator

BERLIN
were humming to provide lights for th

Woaderful Tunnel ; were |
i aecasion, and at the entrance ta hol

Kerlin, city of rublte, refugees. and l 3
: an a ; | dug in the ground, a calenel af the Rue
son hand te plain

nerasmnal parches ui glitter, is an Mired
Hitecack dream ai subterfuge and suspi- ! pele 5
jon. In back sirects, darkly mysterious: ; all. Ten feet helow, its entrance abale cl
houses lurk behind high wite fences sug: i ae cot ly the Russe eae ait fe
sstive of darker and more mysterious i ,, For many 3 ont! a Acaaared stl :
“i : : Tho Big Coflor. F ine ie: piems yin diameter and 00-6oo yaats loo
crammed with clectronic ctpaipaanl. ¢

doixes within. x the super-scerecy surroun
37 separate, agencies od Western inteili- struction and operation of Rudow’s radar © aes, ti veceiiaty ;
gence known to be at work in Berlin, station had fed the gossip of bored Amez- i bles, (ape recurter, ventilating 3p"
jeans in the occupied cily- ‘There were: and pun Of aN preety ee
Ther vo wratives——some “fashionably ‘ those who remembered 3 civilian engineet - eS aa ot : ihe ses a arte ale
*Hormed in the grey flannel of New York's j hired to supervise the job; he had quit ia separate chamber where they were tink
MMadi-on Avenue, some with armpit hole © disgust because ibe Tluepeun's scemed $9 | 1g two East German ast ae amt a th
stem bulging under hlue serge——report to (ne: sey build a cellar big sien to {used by the Russians. What was at |
sdigerent headquarters, and rarely know drive through with a dump (rick? ne American end? The newsmen were |
~— abot their colleagues are up to. ‘ asked. and was told to mind his own busi- permitt ed to know As the’ + crated Wwe
In all Berlin, there is no spat better ness. Others recalled sccink friends whom i aril - sandhag harrier inal the w
sured te the Hfiseheodk scheine of things they knew to be engineers suddenly D° + its air ny suphasianl by a en read
hae 3s rustic, semi-fererted) corner known pearing at the station Wea! Se ih sal (i : é
on the US. side ae. Rudow and in the of the US Anmy Signal, C se American sectors”
Resian zone, just er the way, as Alt- ne ‘ od sh mn t
Glnicke.  Seli-important ducks and | ins thought they had found a better one. , with a note ‘ai admiration,” “was huilt
t last years. ‘The pariy responshle 1

o'clock, an ADETYs | have had a lot of money.”

ewsmen recently counts

edad wae ke commissars in Alte |. One night at 7
Ulienicke’s cobbled st 4. Uerlin’s ‘ aes °
aa ky weet anes evlin’s only ghunky Sovict colonel named Ivan Kotsi- ‘ho wa onilde? Nol wi
st Bere ' hy Was rospwels 2 Nobady. nei
i fhe the Pentagen, the State Department.
|

working windmill turns lazily in the
Dreeze near by. and clase to the boundary "ubs ealled a press confere0t in Es

West stands a U.S. t+), : 7 7
radar station, bending its reticular tur to 7 aa = urpose: to aera the building by"
merican organiza ions”

the operations at j of a secret

. the Central Intelligence Agencs- was
ing. But as Berlin's" yapers crated |

separating East and
h the news. anc Hicrlia editor
: 4

East Berlin's busy ni oe i

Scadneield Airport. Two rings of barbe tunnel under Fast German termtory, swith {4 ranking US

wine guard the lonely radar post, 20 the criminal intent 0} spying.” Oliered a \ whether yout peo}

: | chance to s€¢ for themselves, the Western : but whoever it 3s, le
newsmen were taken to a site some 500° aye

behind them & detachment of uniformed -.: yards from the radar station at Rudow: ,” :

Signal Corps men live @ life as secret, °
we isolated as monks fic EEE fpr ee:

—

Sate en eh RM AGORA. ie 52 Soe

pete heme Ae RI RIM i :
ere eles

oan : . BOSTON FOST
“ | Cites m./ 267,872
\ i

196,496

* *

Front cel Osher ‘

OO : Pace pése Peso :
. arnt
S - S50
plat ye
rs a Facet . ~ . roe eee sot ye er ty
-" Hope It Is True ~*~ 55
: og >
oye. a erican intelligence agents:
apes : :dug a tunnel in Berlin, tapped 2 telephone cable, andi
trecorded conversations-over the Red communication net-' *
: work, which the Reds,made with considerable fanfare.
‘and during a conducted, tour of the spy tunnel for cor-,

jresponden gives us some faint hope. ne
: Frankly, we didn't kriow that American inteligencd

iagents were that smart.. Infact, we were beginning to. :
think that what the Central Inteligenés Agency.needed)

j was-a Tew. TéSsons, on the fundamentals of espionase, - ot
| trom"somie defected Russian agent. But, now we. take it}
tail back. If the Soviet charges are true, American intel;
iVigence agents Have actually. collected some important! :
hy saformation, cdnceraing, Sovick ralitary, SBSreVons ands,

installations | in, East Germany. Pe ee jorote
“We ope that American intelligence agents have’

infiltrated the Sovict department of foreign affairs,: oe
‘planted western 'sympat

Soviet charges that Am

pereerneny

hizers in the heart of the Soviet! :

d started a stream of microfilmed copies °
ts towards thesia a.

iS
“This is not just tit for tat—but:4

‘in the United States.
‘stark necessity in'the world of cynical power politics. "4
Bi emcee renee etc ae

———————

F ewmeono feed MAY 121225

ee
Moncy Well Spent ce j

There is only onc ag
ington which does not account tor t
money it spencs. %
\ Agency, headed By alien Wy : :

Dulies, has never reported to Con- : os
| gress. A special commiticc, appointed :
py the President, did make “3 survey

jot the agency's activities and was aD~- i :
{parently ‘saushed that it was efficient.
[So secsce are
that ever °

Ac-

jto the CIA. .. at .
qe Naturally enough, Congress worries
‘from time to- time that this: money
may not be well spent. Last week some
| news came out of Berlin which should

calm such. fears
; overed that their

The Russians dis¢

main . telephone cables from

gst Berlin to points east were tapped.

the western sone, con- .
}ines,, arid ee

They blame this V:
on american Intelligence.

Our officials have expressed horror.
charge. They naven't,” they say,
+ idea ‘ot where the nes}

mers are jqughing. Good
Intelligence, they say-f
so “we, that the

on

forse an s eal wig SSRN on cepa ‘meme un SO eT pee cy a ewe a ors
: Mar i 7 o0 ‘ -

= aA
a , CIA MAY HAVE ORDERED WIRETAP TUNNEL -- DREIER

Alex Dreier at 6:00 P.M. over WMAQ (Chicago) and the NEC

_ Radio Network: .
_ And now under the heading, special report, part one.

—lGreat~—Seitainawth-tts-frogman-spy who turned “out to be-not
So.successful in-hio~-secretiveness—has. nothing .on-us. We have a
- tunnel we dug undor the communist sector of Berlin and which the
reds exoosed to tha light of day, as you probably Know, a short
while ago. Well, our NEC correspondent, good friend and colleagua,
Frank Burkholzer, has investigated the story of the wiretap tunnel
and he says there's just one conclusion -— it's ours. We dug it,
we equipped it with electronic equipment to listen in on commmnist
East German conversations for a whole year before they found. usa out,

pres

“Presumably we should be embarrassed but nobody in Berlin is.
, : /In fact, there is a hint of American and West German pride in know
ing that we pulled off an espionage trick on the Reds for a change.
a Of course, the East Germans are making a good thing of it by con~-
- . ; ducting tours through the tunnel to impress their people with the
fC) - dastardliness of the American spies, but that may backfire on than
-£) because the East Germans are not beyond getting a quiet chuckle at -
od outwitting of their commmist rulers.

"Burkholzer tells us Ahat the United States is oe ali
over the listening ‘post ‘tunnel. Now, the tunnel is on the outskirts
of town with our end being located under a so-called experimental
radar station beside a garbage dump. It runs straight under a plowe
. field that has white border marking posts above it. The Russiars
tt . have made three openings for the tourists. One is near the wiretap,
: another at a point about 150 yards out in the field. When amons *
asks an American why there isn't any radar at the experimental radar
station, the usual answer, according to Burkholzer, is, we said it
was experimental, didn't we? Want to make something of 1t7"

. x . WNaturally the arny and the government in Washington aren't
| a going to admit anything unless they have to. No one telis who

“ordered. the eavesdropping tunnel built or who paid for it or who
ag othe Is Sending and the pes Perhaps it was the 2 von of a

NEW you HAY 27 1956
EEERALD TRIBUNZ
<< es IN,

fm ne 7 Pa ae

hy as ne, a 3 pear, ‘

ow | Partin Rees IoekisSee} - - .
oe fs

| ULS. Wire-Tap Tunnel’

" Sandbag Barricade | ey oe

By Gaston Coblentz ;

a By Wircless to the Heratd Tribune
(7 1956, N.Y. Merald Tribune ine. ae ae ee aaias
27) BERLIN, May 26—One of SHIDS trance
the greatest sights of the cold}! toe chee ee ecceird foe
war is the “American spy tune paps 2 yards past the point
ree Rid on exhibition in Zest: core und tunnel cromes under

i
“We have no fault whatsoever
© find with the technique,” one

vw
.

ae ts elt tml

i The $00-yard tunnel repre- oa pharutioe tal See a pn kes 3 aa
sents a venture of extraordinary! °° a voice calls out “halt” in’ fi

audacity—the stuff of which|>o man. :

thriller Alms are made. If stl” ye is clear that if the visitor: Shae vase 2
was dug by American Intelli-/ outa continue westward past +

genee forees—-and that is thet.s.6 parricade he would emerre

" : -  qgeneral assumption—it is n at a low but promincnt: .

@ pscriaing example of their American building with radar.

capacity for daring undertakings.Jquipment on the roof. ‘Thei

s Seldom has an intelligence(, | gins ieebl

: . orzanization executed’ & mere ulin is suerounded by barbed]
‘sxillful rand diffieult operation] «morican soldiers. ripeaertt 4 yt
‘than that accomplished by thelnan warn: La iatapicer ariel

‘tunnel's diggers: the tapping of forbidden.” : i

959 Communist long-distance} 4 study of the area sugces'

telephone lines running uncer=ing pessibility other than that

‘‘ground in Berlin, The lines ap--the radar building encloses the

‘parently included some TURNING ‘western end tonn:
i to Soviet satelite state in East-} etme eb this was necessary to protect:
- ‘ern Europe, as well as Sovict, Clay Mauled Away delicate equipment im the other-:

| i

‘army circuits in Germany. j ‘The men who dug the tunnel|wise dagk and cold tunnel. :

z a - Snack BAY ‘Thrive: --Iobviously Jabored under two| Finally. there is the complex,

ayes tmajor handicaps. They had tojtapping equipment, all of Ameri-!

_l ‘The tunnel, discovered by the work very silently to avold-de-jcan or British manulscturc4

Communists a month 270 and,tcction, and they had to haul|This includes eight racks
“mow, the main: sightseeing. at-“away secretly the thousands of/boosters to carry the tapped con.
traction in Berlin, can be visited tons of clay they dug out, since! versation back to ths:.western)

Spy making “a ~ twenty-minute Dig pilgs of earth near the sector, end.of the tunnel and ‘also tof |
drive from the center of Berlin border would have alerted thelhelp prevent ‘detection ef ‘the

: ‘to the southeast comer of the Communists. ‘taps. :

‘eity. 4 ‘Apparently the excavated: There are three power-control

A mobile snack bar is doing. carth was hauled away in closediimits near two Jong racks of

ltrucks brought into the radar|ccutpment inte which the 259

etatgyerytn:

Pry ae

Complex Equipment
Beyond the door is a compart-:
tad ment seven fect long housing

equipment to maintain certain:
fevels of temperature and hu-
midity. The Commonists say!

@ thriving business ‘near the:¥ 4
icastern end of the tunnel, caters/building. Possibly the samejCommunist lines lead from
w= jing’ to East, German factoryi"tucks bought in the sections of|three main cables. Here.the in-

jacienations brourht to sce thelcoruzated iron tubing which/dividual” monitoring taps ‘are
A work of "American imperialists."Jine the tunnel, The wtmost/made. > Along the opposite wail
; After inspecting the tunnel, Secrecy, must have been used tolof the tunnel is a row of benches,
lene factory workers record their;*¥old stirring up local talk. with Mucrescent lighting over-
fwindignation” in a visitors’ book, 1pe Communists estimate that{nead. “‘Vhe. compartment 3s
lrhe book contains the signa-|this part of the work took sev-lpainted g, battleship gray. ~
jtures of foreigners on both sides¢7@! months, Considered Great, Experts

of the Iron Curtnin. Even a!

Sudanese official is listed, ~ of

. The tunnel, six fect in di-

ameter:and with its roof twelve
‘Heeb below the surface, was duz

from point 200 yards ifsic

the Amorican {scctor. of : West,

Berlin: it: xuns “eastward to a;

point 300 yards inside the Rus-|

qnave rae that the tunnel had! -
inoused in # Epecial ninety-foot-j Bi aiscover ee i ;
: iene ccaparuneat at ppc rl The men who did the actual :
oti aah jtapping must have been. among: -
detachment * en en - a aattie great experts in the ficldy
-|Peopie's Pollce and a communi.) Thi compartment begins Withthey did. a remarkably tidy:
cations expert are on hand toi® thick steel door et Bs Wester nicce of work: °/ gate:
explain every detail. They readily cnirance, On the dowr—one off ‘the Communists say the In*
: lexoreas thelr admiration for thethe tunnel’s nicest touches—“!sstaltation. apparently \operateds
‘fenitl of the project's builders, Me euuien by Gertor several months before :t was?
; : aan ve . . Ueruiscovered, There is no expla :
= of the Commanding General”. ‘tian of chow ft was detected.

ween ove o war mw eoteaty egov be

een ee ects:

: ict fet
I9n0 = savant tiriven out to tie radar site i ;
éPe AG Adi AN fbi Ging Robert Tuckman, Asso-| the borders of the Germal
4 BY Calhh GUN pee au democratic republic?” b

ee re

Jicisted Press ‘bureau chief.

"Barbed wire surrounded the! asked. ;
Pens a Thank You -

ay THN MEL station and its permanent
H iY (al h, : type buildings. ° Our answer, in halting Ge

4 ony te
2 N : '
(> GALS
: : : . OF Watehed by Yanks, | man, explained that owne!
: ton 7 Neth, la tesy a ntry | ship of the tunnel has ne
Ps | -. | : Chiat. boxes watched us, thru ficld’ heen established, but that i

- Q American soldiers in’ sc
Li :
glasses a3 We sauntered to-|g time of “tension,” the righ

; | V . . ward na oe inl ora ness or wrongness depende
moe Q ynunist border, down a dir : :
E . : ket 3 UL S, Renorters cr, dirt] pon .the side oft the fenc
| ° tha P rt road, bordering an open. field, from which the operation wi
4

: ~~ aa *. We could sée knots of Vopos: ©.
‘s four Eerie Bore ‘around mounds of earth exca-| viewed. :
hora ; He showed us a book i

a , enegey vated to reveal two sections of which tunnel’ visitors wel
‘ BY JOUN ts THOME SON; the tunnel. loa Tked to inscribe their 0 i
ie ay 88 ae Taree, « NOeeSS the ‘Bordes, Vopes!2°°0 Dee kel - ac
US e's ees dock us fo their commarder,| 2075 9852TUNS, . Page

se, or
cans, and of

: : oe ican ews ia on tee ipast seen and women waiting res oH

s t wna a}lesed “Ar PErOURG 1D (45 tour the tunnel after wateh-| Vie Oho.
t the alleged “American SPY |; : . 7 ler ang asxcd us to. Sig
; ; ‘unnel,” derrowed 300 yards $298 9 communist movie of its’ "T.4 t9 keep the reco
2 } under Berlin's little Jron Cure] discovery. The commander: | ois in oike East Gt
‘tain, and peercd into the examined ou > passports, 5 ne teen t to use 0
ae gloom of the Amcrican sectog smiled, Pa aie faites stalemionts tee propaganda,

sover the shoulders of two {FE a d into the: Lote, in my handwriting:

Aa {German communist tommy tunne oe : “We wish*to thank t
S : .E gunners. - . Y| Encased in stec] and COR: | oF lizei ve mack: 4
Be | 4 erete was the alleged-wire tap yon tind an ough tc ab ow

lm,

~~ Our host.in as ceric a set-l

ting as‘was ever devised by a laboratory,” directly undera he tunndl.”. 0% os

“mystery> writer, was a jack paved road leading from Bere ee nearer

“Dooted officer of the East Jin to the Russian air base at arse c oa
i Schoenfeld. The commander, 0 60" 3

German communist police, the ho dcclined to -give his. : : ;

+.“ Vopos," or Volkspolizel, + 5
f tr t thir - name, said that 216 telephone
Our tour was the third per Times in three big cables we :

tapped. .
Fluorescent Jighting_.illu-

“of minated ‘aiswitchbogrd, banks} -
t it"of current boosters, ampli-} _ Chicago Tribune

the labels of British,or Ameri-!

Reds Man Guas =" {
Pumps sent hot and cold:
water to an air conditioning! —~

Sifuated in line with an ¢x- unit. Other long pipes held:
oil or air. The tunnel was: . :

erimental American army; -

aie station . (the D eelanet made of bolted sections of cor-! : F
- cgay it is 2 dummy], owner- rugated stccl, lined on the, .  .°

‘ship of the tunnel has ‘not Sides with sandbags. ‘ ‘

“been officially admitted by Walking back: 300 yards, we:

‘the American command, here reached the east-west border.
“or in Washington. oy Theres behind sandbags two*
West Berliners are _con-'YOUnE Vopos crouched with

cans built their guns and a powerful:
- searchlight, aimed up the tun-
the American

jits*
“have ¢
~~ No one exp af,
“ithe tunnel today when ‘War.

APPENDIX D

ft

NOTE: This analysis was prepared by the \ «Ree
staff as part of the wrap-up of the opera ton, —

ROUND-UP OF EAST GERMAN PRESS
REACTION TO THE DISCOVERY OF THE
WIRETAP TUNNEL AT THE BERLIN SECTOR BORDER

{Sources as Indicated)

The following is an analysis of the East German press
reaction to the discovery of the wiretap tunnel at the sector
border between West and East Berlin. During the period under

review - 24 to 26 April 1956 - a total of 31 dailies per day

s

and four weeklies were available for scrutiny;

the dailies Peported gad commented-oa the incident.
Mostly concerned with reporting and commenting on the

incident were the East Berlin papers which, in some instances,

devoted full pages of their local sections to reports and pic-

tures on the tunnel in addition to their front-page or second-

a

page accounts of developments, The provincial press gave front-

ee nt

page treatment to the matter only in few instances ‘generally
ane, 2 oe sles Sr eee eess
refrained from large articlesor 2c mnentarles and often

= yee banat

Lae

carried pictorial material with only brief exp dnations:

least coverage was noted in the provi

é

than SED (Soziali chlands -

stische Einheitspartei Deuts
Communist Party Germany) affiliation; none of these papers

published any commentary, or any cartoon of their own, on

the subject up to 26 April, in fact. one OR S

Describing the tunnel as inspected by the journalists

the papers pqinted out
ructed, that

after the Soviet press conference,

that the installation was well designed and const

the installation was costly and equivalent to a modern tele-

phone exchange, and that the material - of British and Amer i-

can origin - used in the installation was of such quality. as

to guarantee long service.

The East Berlin papers, which were leading in the reports

on Cae ASGuE. obsmased the matter ag a “bitterly. serious inci-

dent”. “which “represents an

““internations

"breach of the norms of international law." The papers, in

their commentaries, addressed the West Berlin Senat, demand~

ing an all-—Berlin understanding and stressing. “the nécessity

for united action, and insinuated suet Berlin is being kept

divided merely for the purpose of providing: the = espionage

agisaage? *

between the different developments, such ag the press confer-
ence, the Soviet protest, the GDR Government protest, etc.,
put, as a rule, the commentaries dealt with the incident as
a whole. Later, when the first reaction of the West Berlin
press was available, the central press swooped down upon the
west Berlin press for attempting to pelittle the incident and
to divert attention from the "seriousness of the matter.”

The few caricatures published by the papers were designed

to slander the Americans.

Day by. Day Reaction
24 April 1956
On 24 April 1956 six East Berlin papers printed the ADN

hes Nachrichten, Bureau 7 General Germa

(Allege eines Deutsc

News Office) © £ individual reports on‘ the; Sovie ‘press

conference, reported on the inspection of the tunnel by the
journalists, and carried excerpts fen General Zarenko's letter
of protest (1 - 6). DER MORGEN and BERLINER ZEITUNG (5 and 6)
printed only the abbreviated version of the ADN release. six

provincial SED papers (7 - 12) carried announcements of the

By

discovery, brief report

=
—
aa

Provincial papers of other party affiliations carried no

reports.

25 April 1956

ee

On 25 April 22 provincial papers came out with the ADN
version of the report on the discovery of the tunnel (13 - 34);
the six provincial SED papers which had carried a brief announce-
ment the day before followed.up their reports by more exteasive
accounts of the press conference, the letter of protest, and

the inspection of ne tunnel a3 - 18). Papers of other party

affiliations joined “tn the’ reporting campaign on this day.

Only MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME , of all provincial papers, published

an "eye-witness" report containing a description of the tunnel

y ie sae AA
ch” produces, F “an foreign’

PiGe Te ces ae ag pit garage ee, as ON hea ERMA T ote eae

tea deg Hee SCHWERINER = oheerRiriNG: watch printed the long
version of the ADN release, reproduced the first picture. of

the tunnel (22).
Meanwhile whe central press, - in. addition to supplementary

wre.

reports < on the discovery. of the tunnel, “descriptions of the

terial. showing 8

s°an daternati mal scandal":

|

|

"preach of the norms of international law," pointing out that

the United States violated the Buenos Aires Treaty on Telecom-

munications on the one hand and the GDR's sovereignty on the

other hand (35 - 39). NEUES DEUTSCHLAND spoke of a new,

hitherto unsurpassed "gangster act" of the U.S. secret service

(35), NATIONAL ZEITUNG termed the incident as a "sensational

1" (36), NEUE ZEIT stressed that there is
nd

international scanda

no word "strong enough to brand such wickedness" (38),

JUNGE WELT declared that "this had to happen just to those

who - always babble about Communist infiltration but can never

dressed to the West

soiaiaielebuaals

prove it” (39). All conucntanies were ad

cares Berlin Senat, demanding an all-Berlin understanding for the

purpose of biainapenaes whe ES TERROR? adherence to NATO

achieving th

EB PRS Be eae Pas, ares

sea

Neliey.

“ 7 eae atiare 30

all shades," dissolving the . espionage centers: aa the

Pe iee

city,” and achieving a ‘normalization in the situation in

Berlin.” Three papers reported on. a meeting held by the

National Eroot at Bike Glienicke, at which the population adopted

a resolution protesting against this "provocation.! Franz

he Oc gupation costa and

oct

TRIBUENE, moreover, referred to 4 report by the HAMBURGER

ae ANZEIGER to underscore the fact that the installations in the
tunnel were not of provisional nature but designed for long
service (40). DER MORGEN, describing the tunnel, added that
West German correspondents who inspected the tunnel noted with
satisfaction the declaration of the Soviet Lieutehant Colonel
that "quite obviously, German quarters have no part in this"
(41), while NATIONAL ZEITUNG briefly referred to an announce

ment. made ag the, ATE Glienicke mecerte to the ettect that the

hanet was open for public taapedtion (36).
NEUES DEUTSCHLAND reproduced the first caricature on the

issue. The cartoon showed a garden which is divided into two

by; n= full of

flowers’ "and the opposite Bide <a’ barren’ piece ‘of land ‘with’

parts.

a sign ndicating the. “Democratic Sect

a molehill topped by @ flag with the dollar sign. A strong
arm is pulling out of a hole in the Democratic Sector a mole
wearing ny S,-marked earphones, some corel Army trousers

with plugs and pliers showing from the pocket, and a U.S.

Army ‘cap bearing the legend "Espionage." The cartoon is

“Do Not Burrow in Other People's Yards" (35).

yal

ohn

re)

au

vthat:

printed the text of, or large excerpts from, the press release
on the GDR Government protest (42 - 56). Six papers reported
on the inspection of the tunnel by the population, the press,

and representatives of the diplomatic corps (42, 49, 59, 60,

‘65, and 67). Four papers referred to a report carried by the

West Berlin TAGESSPIEGEL according to which Western journalists
were prohibited from inspecting the mouth of the tunnel on the
Western side (42, 43, 51, and 58), and four papers referred

to FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE which had spoken of an “eloquent

silence" about the affair on the part of the Americans (42, 51,

55, and 58). A total of four papers reported on the Alt-~
Glienicke meeting (51, 60, 61, and 67). NEUES DEUTSCHLAND

gave excer pes from Fisher's BReSens quoting him to the effect

oe

“the people of. West Berlin, in “particular, the. ‘SPD members,

SR ee ar, SER aM 2) SAP owes

will be invited to inspect the tunnel (51). Three papers re-
produced caricatures (51, 52, and 56), six papers pareieds:
commentaries (51, 52, 53, 54, 57, and 58), and one paper came
out with an editorial (55). Three East Berlin papers, through
their commentaries, swooped down upon the West Berlin press

for ae Rees tde toward the incident. Sacked DEUTSCHLAND

accused the West Berlin papers of attempting to. belittic the.

JUNGE WELT lashed out at the West Berlin DER TAG, saying that,
by its opinion, the West Berlin paper manifests its total loss
of any sense of decency >: Besides, DER TAG is not in the least
disturbed about the violation also of Weat Berlin's territory
(52). NATIONAL ZEITUNG held that DER TAG now admitted what it
has been denying at all pines namely that West Berlin is a

de facto part of NATO, ede she that DER TAG now vegadas ag
"customary" the military espionage of the United States on

GDR territory in addition to the seudieuary frontier-city

policy," the "customary" partition, and the "customary"

diversionist activities of the KGU and other underworld

organizations. The paper stressed that all Berliners fully

aETEe with the FRANKFURTER ALLGEMEINE which said that the

tapping post is a feature of West Berlin's misuse as a NATO

base. The paper emphasized that GDR policy will ogee ane to

serve all-German understanding and relaxation of international

Sh ck peees

tensions. “But it must be kept in mad that the success of:

this policy will not enty depend. on the volume of ‘the appeal

we need are contact points above the ground and in full

light, namely all-German talks, and not underground trenches
in the cold war" (55).

The first commentaries carried by provincial papers dealt
with the incident as an example of proof for East German press

reports on hostile espionage. VOLKSSTIMME , Karl-Marx-Stadt,

pointed out that the tunnel represents "a document" which is |

quite apt to dispel all doubts of those who have hitherto
bout the’

goat

Sa

been inclined to regard East German press reports

underground activities of Western espionage services |:
_ vexaggerated" (57). MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME quoted several

‘such a vileness"

workers who voiced their indignation over

affair’ as the population is outraged

VOLKSZEITUNG stressed that anyone reading about the discovery

of the tunnel will inevitably weigh the Soviet attempts at —

pedehag 4+

eee ey

maintaining peace against the efforts made by the.U.S.

nage service, adding that this "breach of international’ law"

istratio
paaaes

o

iF BATH
ERY CRO
Sah yeaa ,

qguna™

4

NEUES DEUTECHLAND on caybeatore noceed an Anerigun noldicer teya

ing dn vata te “milk G dincounected, Gversizdd telephudae ren

culver {nto a buckee marked “CIC ehile another soldive is
thoughtfully standing by (33). JUNGE WELT reproduced & cage: :
toon showing a cole wearing a U.S, Aray cap on its besd lod

a telephone receiver on its back balting before a sign vehideis

warns that “spies are now facing danger." Thue cartcon iu : :
captioned, "The, Underworld that Shuns the Light," and foot~ ;

noted, “Damned, we did not put up that sign” (52). Fin

%
KORT showed rats wearing U.S, Arcy caps being disturbed hy

& Russian soldier in the.operation of what looks like a

aan

acing the soldic

communication center. ‘Two rats are sho

in surprise, another standing with arms raised, and still :
another escaping through an opening in the wall, The !
|
caricature, is entitl d, “Unpleasant Surprise,” and footnoted, 4
PPLE Be meee : me eas nix : f

ee Pees

sturb

Mussians

"It is’an’Effrontery.of, the

(Burrowing) Work" (56).

Fn eee
Ey
: T
| '
SOURCES
3 = 1956
1. NEUES DEUTSCHLAND 24 Apr
2. NEUE ZEIT 24 Apr
3. TRIBUENE : 24 Apr
| 4, NATIONAL ZEITUNG 24 Apr
i 5. DER MORGEN 24 Apr
ee 6. BERLINER ZEITUNG 24 Apr
aia 7. FREIHEIT _ ' 24 Apr
: 8. SAECHSISCHE ZELTUNG 24 Apr
4 9. VOLKSSTIMME, Karl-Marx-Stadt 24 Apr
= 10. MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME 24 Apr
11. LEIPZIGER YOLKSZEITUNG 24 Apr
24 Apr

Saat 12. NEUER TAG
13, FREIHEIT: io ti Le , 25 Apr

| 14. SAECHSISCHE, ZEITUNG .. ae 25 Apr
' 15. VOLKSSTIMME ;- Kari-Marx Stadt 25 Apr
gor 16. MAERKISCHE VYOLKSSTIMME 25 Apr
17. LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG 25 Apr
18. NEUER TAG 25 Apr
aera 19. LAUSITZER RUNDSCHAU
peau 20, VOLKSSTIMME, Magdeburg
| ee - DAS ,VOLK, ,Erfurtse. Ser
or 22 SCHWERINER | VOLKSZE 1 Te Te
xe 593° OpRE rE “ERDE See
: OSTSEE ZEITUN
o- VOLKSWACHT
Bo: FREIES WORT. | ;
SAECHSICHES TAGEBLATT «25 Apr
{ BIE UNION 28 25 Apr
oe NORDDEUTSCHE TK NACHRICHTEN 2 25 Apr
MAERKIS ee ee oe Ma 25 Apr
BRANDENBURGI WEUESTE NABBR. ~ - 25 Apr

BERLINER ZEITUNG
43. SAECHSISCHE ZEITUNG 26
44. DAS VOLK, Erfurt . 26
45. NEUER TAG : 26
46. FREIHEIT 26
47. DER MORGEN . : 26
48. TRIBUENE 26
49. BAUERN ECHO . . 26
50. DER NEUE WEG : 26

| 51. NEUES DEUTSCHLAND 26

52. JUNGE WELT ess. | 26
MAERKISCHE VOLKSSTIMME
LEIPZIGER VOLKSZEITUNG :
NEUE ZEIT 26
FREIES WORT ‘ 26
VOLKSSTIMME, Karl-~Marx-Stadt 26
NATIONAL ZEITUNG 26
VOLKSSTIMME, Magdeburg 26
_MAERKISCHE . UNION... : ;

“FRELE

ee?

a mares
LEIPZIGER=VOLKSZEI TUNG “e859 aie Ei
63. VOLKSWACHT , 26
64, SAECHSISCHES TAGEBLATT ; 26
65. OSTSEE ZEITUNG 26
66. LAUSITZER RUNDSCHAU : 26
67. DIE UNION” ~ : : 26
68. SCHWERINER VOLKSZEITUNG 26
