NIE 11-8-61: Soviet Capabilities for Long Range Attack
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000139371, dated 1 January 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000139371).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

30 January 1961

MEMCRANDUM FOR: Mr. Allen Evans, State (INR)
Comcnel 3. Re dram, USA (adST)
Captain H. W. McElwain, USN (CNT)
Colonel R. M- Lawson, USAF (AFCIN 2B3)
Colonel K. T. Gculd, USA (J-2, The Joint Staff)
Colonel R. Pe Halloran, USAF, Director of Opera-
tional Services, NOA
Mr. Randolph V. Zander, Defense £050)

Ww
vy
w
S
“QD
Pad)
¢
4
ry

SUBJECT= NIE 11-S-61: SOVIET CAPADILITIES FOR LCNG RANGE
ATTACK

le The attached terms of reference are forwarded for revileWe

2e itis requested that your representatives meet with us at
1000, Wednesday, & February in Room 115 Administration Building to
discuss these terms.

AL L Ley

v Le yy “Gee
CHESTER L. COOPER

Deputy Assistant Directcr

National Estimates

~
oo?

O yes
~~ > wt y .
a \ i L(FKEA G
DISTRIBUTION B
Plus Chairmen, GMAIC, JAEIC,SIC

APPROVED FOR RELEASE soy:

7
noyig DEC 02 1897 Lv

syftex
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

30 January 1961

SUBJECT: TERMS OF REFERENCE: NIE 11~8-61: SOVIET CAPABILITIES
FCR LONG RANGE ATTACK

THE FROBLEM

To estimate probable trends in the strength and deployment
nf Soviet air and missile weapon systems suitable for Long range
attack, and in Soviet capabilities for such attack, projecting for-

ward for about five years where possible *

SCOPE AND METHOD

l. This estimate will supersede NIE 11-3-€0, published on
1 August 1960. It is scheduled for completion in May 1961. In
the Discussion section of the new estimate, we propose to treat the

problem of nucbers of Soviet weapons somewhat more generally than

* The weapon systems considered are heavy and redium bonbers,
related air-to-surface missiles, ground launched missiles
with ranges of 700 nautical miles or more, and submarine-

launched missiles.
sught

p=

we did in NIE 11-8-60. We propose to describe those aspects of
the problem on which there is agreement in the intelligence con-
munity, and to set forth briefly and concisely any areas of disa-
greement. We also plan to include in the estimate several factors
affecting overall Soviet capabilities, such as reconnaissance and
ECM, which we have not previously covered in our papers on long

range attack.

2. me of our objectives is to preduce a Discussion section
considerably shorter than that of NIE 11-8-60. We intend to rely
heavily on Annexes for the detailed treatment of specific problen
areas. The problem areas to which we desire to direct special at-
tention in preparing NIE 11-8-61 are listed later in these terms.
In each case, contributors should prepare both a generalized state-
ment and a detailed analysis for backup and possible use in an
annex. Where a particular agency or committee is the primary con-

tributor, this is indicated hy a marginal note.

SPECIFIC PROBLEM AREAS

A. General Soviet Policy

1. In view of the observable trends in Soviet force structure,

and in cilitary and strategic doctrine, what broad policies

~2.

a

syfter

do the Soviets appear to he folinwing in the further de-

velopment of forces for long range attack?

2. At what general pace, and with what degree of urgency,
are the Soviets acquiring additional capabilities with
weapon systens in the categories of ground launched nis-
Siles, submarine launched missiles, and aircraft delivery

systerns?
B. Soviet Cperational Concepts

1. In the event of war Curing this period, what would he the
geceral cethod of operational employcent of Soviet forces
for long range attack against US and other Western dases,
forces, and strengths? What types of targets would the
Soviets seek to attack, with what means, and with what
general tining? How would this rethcd of operational en-

ployrent change as the period advanced?

é€. What teans are available to the Soviets for the effective
command, coordination, and control of forces for long range

attack? Are rew neans likely to he developed?

flor

a

C. Soviet Programs for Production and Deployment of Missiles

1. What in your judgment are the Likely current force goals
of Soviet deployrent programs in the various types of nis-
siles for long range attack? Include consideration of
theoretical Soviet nurerical requirerents for these nissiles.
To what extent is Soviet programming likely to have heen or

to be influenced by such theoretical requirerents?

2. What are the likely dates, past or future, of various
oilestones in Soviet programs for production and deploy-
ment of nissiles -- for example, the dates of initial
operational capability, beginning of serial preduction,
start of troop training, beginning of planned operational

buildup, etc.?

3. What is the evidence bearing on likely Soviet rates of pro-
duction and deployment of missiles? What are the rajor
factors affecting these rates? For ICRMs, what are the
inplications of the 1959-1960 firing program at Tyura Tan,
and of Soviet development of heavy ard light nosecones?
Consideration should he given to any constraints which
might affect Soviet prograns, such as econonic factors

and the availability of nuclear materials for warheads.

- ko

sults

sagt:

What ceployment concepts for ground launched ballistic

missiles, especially the ICBM, can be adduced from the
available evidence or from analogy with other Soviet nili-
tary programs? What is the estimted tire required for
the construction and preparation of the Soviet ICBM site

configuration?

What general training philosophy do the Soviets appear to

be following in the training of specialists and crews for
the operational enployrent of gen tes for long range attack?
How is this reflected at Tyura Tan, Kapustin Yar, and other

test ranges?

Is the USSR likely to deploy ballistic nissiles at rela-
tively constant rates? What circumstances would be likely
to cause changes in Soviet force goals or in Soviet pro-
duction and deployrent rates? (e.g., follow-on ICBM's, the
Soviet antinissile progran, and changes in tke strength and

ccuposition of Western forces.)

In sun, what in your judgcent is the probable range of Soviet
operational strength in wissiles for long range attack now
and in the future? Contributors should set forth a coupre-

hensive summary of the evidence and argument bearing on their

-~5 -

sughtr

(froa NIE
11-5-61)

SIC

Air Force

a

conclusions. The available evidence, or lack of it, should

be assessed in relation to US intelligence collection capa-

bilities fron all sources.

Perfornance Characteristics of Soviet Long Range Weapons
Systeus

1. Table of ground-launched nissile characteristics.

é. Tables of borer perforrance characteristics. New tables

should be prepared, showing the perforrance of Soviet bon-
ber weapon systens, with and without air-to-surface missiles,
and including perforrance under conditions of low as well as
high altitude operations. For each bocher type, capabili-
ties to carry decoys, ASMs, and other penetration aids

should be shown.

3. Bonber cperaticnal factors. Erief discussion and sucmary

tables should be prepared on: (a) Soviet in-cormission
rates and staging capabilities with and without a veriod of
preparation; (b) abort rates taking into account staging,
refueling, and other pertinent factors; (c) navigational
and berbing techniques and accuracies, including the ef-

fect if any of navigational errors on ASM utilization.

-6-

Sf

srg

Navy 4, Sublaunched missile system performance. Brief discussion

and summary tables on the performance of submarines and
their uissiles, and the operational factors affecting
their employment as complete weapon systens. Include
such factors as navigational techniques and accuracies,

tice required to fix position, ready, and launch, etc.

Air Force, 5. Maps of potential target coverage by bembers and nissiles.
Navy

Reccnmend and contribute to caps showing ranges which
could be achieved against US and overseas areas by various
types of boubers and missiles under realistic conditions.

Include antiship operations by ASM-equipped RADGERs.
E. Neployrent of Weapon Systems

Air Force 1. Borber deployment map.

Contribute to an updating of the deployment map in NIE
11-8-59, adding the deployment of BADGERs in Naval and
Tactical Aviation. Add, fron NIE 11-2-60, nuclear weapons

storage facilities asscciated with bomber bases.

CIA/RR 2. Missile deploynent.

poo

(coordinate Brief discussion and map describing areas of deploynent
with GMAIC)
where known, and discussing the factors likely to affect
Soviet choice of deployment areas. Include any evidence

of Soviet storage facilities for missile warheads.

F. Bonds ard Warheads

JAERIC 1. What are Soviet capabilities to employ nuclear, chenical,
(coordinate
with SIC) biological, and radiological weapons in their long range

delivery systens? Include summary tables.

2. What factors would affect Soviet selection of these weapons,

and what choices are they likely to make?

G. Soviet Long Range Reconnaissance Capabilities

SIC 1. What are Soviet requirererts and capabilities for recon~
(coordinate

with JAEIC, naissance in conjunction with long range attacks, at
€MAIC)

present and as the period advances? Include armed recon-

noissance against targets of uncertain lccation.

2. As the period advances, what reconnaissance capability
can the USSR acquire through the use of satellites and
of manned or unmanned vehicles? Is the USSR likely to

develop vehicles expresely for this purpose?

~8.

oft

‘SIC
(Coordinate
with JABIC,
GMAIC )

syn

Is the USSR likely to obtain a capability to acquire and
act upon information during the course of a major long
¢fange strike? How good a capability for danage assess-

ment can they acquire?

Soviet Capabilities for Electronic Warfare

l.

What are the USSR's capabilities to support its long range
striking forces by ECM? Include airborne and shipborne

measures.

Direct special attention to possible Soviet measures to
create tassive disruption of Western detection and con-
munication capabilities by ECM satellites, by long range
jamming, by high altitude nuclear detonations, or by

cther unusual means. Would the use of such neasures have
any adverse affect on Soviet offensive or defensive opera-

tious?
