Memo from Richard Helms to Assistant to the Secretary of Defense Concerning TrR
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012288, dated 2 August 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012288).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

cae es - CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY Cs7)
WASHINGTON 25, D. C, 4.3(a)(4)

MEMORANDUM FOR: Assistant to the Secretary of Defense
(Special Operations ) ; F

SUBJECT : “Trends in the Development of Tank Forces of :
the Soviet Army", by General of the Army
A. Zhadov

, 1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
‘trends in the Development of Tank Forces of the Soviet Army", by
General of the Army A. Zhadov which appeared in a special TOP
— SECRET issue of the Soviet military. journal Voyennaye Mysl

(Military Though ).

2, This article was acquired by 2 Soviet official who has
provided reliable information in the past. =

FOR ‘THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

Enclosure

~ 4,3(a)(4)

APPROVED FOR RELEASE 3 0 JUN 1992

ccs

tay’ |

Military Representative of the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S. Air Force

tee 3

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Army z

Director of Naval .Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence | =

‘Assistant Director for National Estimates ©

Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

Assistant Director “for Research end Reports

3(2)(4)

Fee

Pa

le

COUNTRY 3. USSR
SUBJECT | eats in the Development of the Tank Troops
of the Soviet Army", by Army General
A. Zhadov

DATE OF INFO: 1961 (Prior to May)

. APPRAISAL OF

CONTENT : Documentary —

SOURCE: Reliable Soviet source (B) who has access to this
type of document.

1.3(0)(4)

Following is a verbatim translation of an article entitled
"trends in the Development of the Tank Troops of the Soviet Arny",
written by General of the Army Aleksey 5. Zhadov, First Deputy
Commander in Chief of Ground Troops.

The article appeared in the 1961 Second Edition of a special |
version of Voyennaya Mysl (Military Thought) which is classified
TOP SECRET and is issued irregularly. According to the preface,
this edition contains articles never before published and some
speeches which have been delivered prior to being published in.
this form. It is distributed only within the Ministry of Defense
down to the level of Army Commander. § Dei oe. A

ee

ake

4.a(ay(4?

Trends in the Development of the Tank Troops
of the Soviet Army
by

Army General A. Zhadov

Historically, Soviet military theoretical thought has responded
actively and sharply to ajl1 problems of military science which have
arisen with the appearance of new means of armed combat, technical
equipment of armies, change in the organizational structure of the.
troops, and the methods of Suptovine them in battle and operations.

Recently the pages of our journals on military theory and special
research works have carried different opinions on the outlook for the
further development of armor technology and on, the organizational
forms of tank: groupings (obedineniye) and large units (soyedineniye)
in the composition of the ground forces.

In this respect the article by Marshal of Armored Troops P. oe
Rotmistrov, "Paths for the Further Development of the Tank Troops of
the Soviet Army" (Special. Collection of Articles of the Journal
"Voyennaya Mysl", First Issue, 1961) merits attention. In this
article a series of recommendations are made concerning the outlook
for Soviet tank construction and the organization of the principal
large units of the ground HOE Ce which have a definite eas ereae
interest.

At the same time it must be senpsdeed that the’ formulation of
several questions and the way in which they are elaborated are not
convincing.

Marshal of Armored ‘Troops Comrade’ Rotmistrov gives -primary
attention in his article to the conditions which determine the
further development of tanks, the role of armor protection of tanks
in connection with the development of antitank weapons, the signifi-
cance of heavy tanks, and several eres dealing with eee
organization of cou troops.

1.3(2)(4)

4.3(a}(4d

Let us examine these questions in the same order in which they
have been formulated and give our point of view, withcut claiming to
furnish a full exposition of the problems connected with the con-
temporary development of tanks and the organization of tank troops.

At the present time the basic trends in the development of anti-
tank technology have been determined above all by the availability of
missile-nuclear weapons and by the rature of a future war as a highly
maneuverable one with the broad application of the means of mass
destruction. Comrade Rotmistrov speaks about this point correctly in
his article. - :

However, it is impossible to agree with his statement that "the
tank troops, in close cooperation with missile troops a) aviation, . |
will be the deciding power in the ground forces". (p. 26 :

In our opinion, such a point of view is aiataion:

It is well known that large units of combined arms (tank and
motorized rifle divisions), other arms of troops, and aviation will,
as a rule, successfully carry out their tasks only if the results’
of missile-nuclear strikes are ably utilized. Specifically, during
battles and engagements these strikes will be the main means of
destroying the enemy. There is no need to prove the truth of this
statement.

The role of tank troops in achieving the goals of a battle, an
operation, and of the war as a whole will be great, but this role
should be examined from the point of view of effectively utilizing
the results of missile-nuclear strikes, for these in the final analysis

constitute the principal. force for the destruction of as enemy.

At ve beginning of his article Comrade paler steoy correctly
observes that the tank combines three basic combat characteristics: |
firepower, armor protection, and. mobility. However, in “the subse-
quent a account, instead of examining all of these.questions from. the
point of view of the nature of a future war, and determining the
further paths for perfecting the combat characteristics of tanks ,
and above all of their armament, he first and foremost promotes the
concept of heavy armor plating Of tanks.

4 -Afa) (4)

1.3(a)(4}

Tank armament. The tank is a combat ‘vehicle and its existence
is justified if it possesses powerful armament.

It is well known that during World War IT (The Great Patriotic
War) the maneuverability of our medium and heavy tanks was significantly
superior to the German "Tiger" and "Panther" tanks, but until the middle
of 1943 they were inferior in armament. These tanks, which had guns
of 75-88 mm., higher muzzle velocity, and greater grazing range, caused
great damage to our tanks. However, when our tanks and assault guns
(SU) received guns of 85-152 mm. this superiority was practically
eliminated.

In the postwar period’, with respect to the perfection ‘of tank-
armament, we have paid more attention to raising the accuracy of fire,
in motion, armor-pliercing capability, and the feasibility of delivering
fire at night even under conditions of poor visibility. However, the
artillery systems with which our tanks are now armed are not much
more powerful than those on our tanks at the end of World War II.

It is true that we have recently developed artillery systems with
a muzzle velocity for armor-plercing shells on the order of 1,000 m/sec
and greater for rifled guns, and 1,600 m/sec for smoothbore guns. But
even these artillery systems, provided for the armament of medium
tanks, are only transitional.

An analysis of combat operations and some Bese “shows. that
a modern tank should be armed with the most modern (perspektivnoye)
missile weapons, which will enable effective destruction. at a great
distance of any enemy tanks, either moving or stationary. Under
contemporary conditions on the field of battle there will also be .
many other targets, such as self-propelled artillery, protected by :
armor, armored carriers, armored prime movers, and various targets
with light cover which must be annihilated from great ‘distances
without expending heavy-caliber artillery shells or missiles in the
process. For the destruction of these targets, tanks should have,
besides guns or missiles systems, other powerful armament, such as —
heavy-caliber machine guns or small-caliber guns, since the machine
guns now on tanks do not enable the destruction of varied and
numerous lightly armored and other targets at a distance of 1, 300-

' 2,000 m. and more. . .
nn

he

1.3{a)(4)

GE 300,

The antiatomic protection of tanks. Together with powerful
armament, modern tanks should afford dependable biological pro-~
tection of the crew from the contaminating elements of nuclear
weapons, and mainly from penetrating radiation. Solving this
problem only by increasing the thickness of the armor has not proven
feasible. The steel armor should guarantee the necessary strength
of the hull of the tank against the effects of the blast wave.
Dependable biological protection of the crew may be achieved by
using a special "lining", which will stop the stream of neutrons,
or by building special structures inside the tank into which the
crew must be put. The latter require structural changes in the tank,
the reduction of the crew to 2-3 men, and the automatization of all
processes of the conduct of fire, driving, and communications. The
necessary work in this direction is already being carried out.

The armor protection of tanks. In discussing the role of armor
protection of tanks, the author strongly attacks those who promote.
the idea of increasing the maneuverability and transportability of
ground forces large units by decreasing the weight and overall ’
dimensions of tracked and other combat vehicles. ,

Nor do we propose increasing the maneuverability of ground
forces large units and units (chast) by sharply weakening the
armor protection of tanks and other combat vehicles.

' However, in deciding this question there cannot be yet another
extreme, which, as a matter of fact, Comrade Rotmistrov advances,
defending the necessity of retaining heavy tanks having thick armor.

Ever since tanks became a massive weapon on the field of battle, ©
they inevitably called for the creation of new means of -combating
them. The competition of armor with projectiles has continued over
a pettiod of forty years. In. this single combat between armor and
antitank fire, as of today the latter has retained the advantage.

Incidentally, this is conceded even in the works of the Academy
of Armored Troops which have appeared under ‘the editorship of
Marshal of the Armored Troops Comrade Rotmistrov. Thus, in the Lae
Collection of the Works of the Academy No. 177,.-which appeared last ,
year, it is candidly pointed out that the armor protection of tanks
lags behind the development of the means of its destruction, and in
connection with the appearance of antitank guided missiles, this lag

1 Btay(a)

4.3(ay(4)

has become even greater.

Defending the concept of powerfully armored tanks, Comrade
Rotmistrov casts doubt upon the effectiveness of modern antitank
guided missiles (upravlyayemyy reaktivnyy snaryad - PIURS). ants
Presenting the tactical-technical data of these missiles, which
our potential enemies have, he categorically asserts "that their
appearance in the family of weapons of mass destruction and tanks
does not for the present afford sufficient basis for concluding
that it is inexpedient to provide our basic types of tanks with ;
powerful armor protection". (p. 30.) r

It is well known that every weapon has its positive and negative
Sides. For the present even antitank guided missiles have their
negative side. However, in appraising these means of combat, -Comrac&
Rotmistrov emphasizes primarily their deficiencies. But this does_
not detract from the effectiveness of antitank missiles and the broad
prospects for their development. They are becoming more and more
universal and can be used not only for all types of ground combat
vehicles, including tanks, but even against helicopters. It is
inconceivable not to reckon with this possibility.

The development of the PIURS, of course, does not mean that
tanks have been repudiated. This merely presents us with the
problem of searching out new ways of defending tanks from antitank
weapons. 2

It is well known that the KV heavy tank was developed by us
before World War II for breaching fortified areas, defense zones, t
and also for combat with enemy tanks. But in the course of the war
our troops usually bypassed fortified areas. Therefore, heavy tanks
were used as a means of close support of infantry in breaching strong
position defenses, and especially for combat with enemy tanks. As

.& result of the large amount of metal consumption, «the high ‘cost, and
their insufficient maneuverability, a very limited number of these
tanks were produced during the war. Instead of heavy tanks for combat
with assault guns (shturmovoye orudiye) and tanks of the enemy, we
began to produce a large number of assault guns’ (SAU) on the chassis
of medium and heavy tanks. pease

Therefore, our self-propelled and ordinary artillery, and also
our heavy tanks, bore the main brunt of combat with enemy "Tiger"
tanks and "Ferdinand" assault guns. By. virtue of the great weight

m3

~6-

| 1a

and slight mobility of these enemy vehicles on the field of battle,
and in spite of their heavy armor, they were successfully shot up
even by our medium tanks armed with 85 mm. guns.

Under modern conditions the problem of breaching enemy defenses
will be solved mainly by atomic weapons. .And, in general, the type
of defense in place used in the last war will rarely occur.

It may now be asked, is there a need for heavy tanks to solve
the problem of breaching defenses? Of course not.” ~~ ‘

Knowing this, Marshal of Armored Troops Comrade Rotmistrov tries
to analyze heavy tanks as a means of qualitatively strengthening ‘
medium tanks, reckoning that the latter are inferior in power and
armor protection to the medium tanks of our probable adversaries. |
For this purpose, the American medium tank M-60, the basic tank of
the U. S. Army, is compared with our T-55-tank. But the parameters: - [
used in this comparison do not give a correct conception of the combat
qualities of these vehicles. Nor: is it easy to compare an American
tank with our T-10M, insofar as the latter is considered a means of
qualitative reinforcement of our T-55 tank.

In the case in point, comparisons are made of parameters such
as armor protection, unit of fire, engine horsepower, fuel capacity,
caliber of gun, and muzzle velocity. For example, the horsepower ;
of the T-55 engine is 580, while the M-60 has a 750 hp engine. How- - |
ever, taking into consideration the ‘relative weights of the two vebicless.
the unit power ratings are identical. The fuel capacity of the _*
American tank is twice as great as ours, but the rated cruising range
of both tanks is practically identical. As far as the armor protection
of our medium tank is concerned, the armor on the turret is signifi-
cantly thicker than that of the "M-60, while the armor protection of
the hulls is almost the same,

' Despite the somewhat greater caliber and muzzle quidciey of the
armor-piercing shell of the American tank, in comparison with the
armor-pliercing shell of the gun on our medium tank it does not enjoy
Ay particular advantage with respect to effectiveness.

In comparing our T-10M heavy tank with the M-60, we see that the
armor protection of their. hulls is the same, with the exception of the
armor on the turrets, whére our tank has much thicker armor. In terms
of armament, the muzzle velocity of the armor-piercing shells of both

4.3214)

4.3{a)(4)

1.3(a4

tanks is identical, and differ only in their caliber. But the
presence in the unit of fire of the American tank of a subcaliber
projectile (and possibly a shaped-charge shell too) renders it a
sufficiently strong weapon for combating our heavy tank. The
cruising range of the M-60 is almost twice that of our tank. Both
tanks have power plants of identical unit power rating. Consequently,
their mobility on the field of battle in moderately rugged terrain is
about equal.

As is evident, it is hardly proper to speak of specific advantages ts
of our T-10M heavy tank over the American medium and heavy tanks.”

The necessity for having heavy tanks is also based on the fact
that the Americans have at their disposal different systems of
artillery of 150-2h0 mm. “on ‘tracked ‘chassis, which is a means of
reinforcing their medium tanks. Combat with this artillery is
supposed to be waged by heavy tanks with the thickest armor protection,
as though our medium tanks were not capable of carrying out this combat
over great distances. Such claims have hardly any basis. ,

Tt seems to us that in order to achieve superiority over the enemy
we do not require the production of. heavy tanks, which are three times
more expensive than the medium tanks and only slightly superior, but
rather a sharp improvement of the combat qualities of our.medium tanks,
primarily the-power of their armament. ~~ ; TSO Ge ae oe el ea

—_—_—ae

As we pointed out above, this problem in tank construction has.
pasically been solved successfully already. We now have a medium*-" ~
tank which is not inferior to, and even surpasses, the modern heavy’ ~
tank in terms of armament, armor protection, and protection against
the contaminating elements of nuclear blasts. Moreover, it has a
higher rated cruising range and greater maneuverability. .New models
of such tanks will be armed with artillery systems with a muzzle
velocity for armor-piercing projectiles of 1,015 - 1,600 m/sec, which
will be capable of piercing the front: armor on the American M-60

tank at a range of more than 1,000 m, and the side armor at a distance

of 3,000 m. i 7 A fee

These tanks are not only not inferior to, but significantly
outclass, a11 known models of foreign tanks with respect to the
parameters of rated cruising range, maneuverability, armor protection,
and weight. te

1.3{a)(4

4.3(2)(4)

Therefore, there igs no reason to fear that the repudiation of
heavy tanks may entail the loss of our present qualitative superiority
over enemy tanks.

But this certainly does not mean that we should immediately remove
our modern heavy tanks from the arsenal and have them melted down. In
case war should break out, they can be used successfully for filfilling
many combat tasks.

Having called for a scientific approach to the solution of the
question of heavy tanks, as we have seen, Comrade Rotmistrov does not
propose anything new in the field of tank construction to correspond
with the requirements of a possible war, but merely defends the old
trend in the development of tanks, leaning solely on the experience
of World-War IT. ‘ ~Y s

Considering exclusively tha mobile nature of a future war, the .
inereased role of airborne troops, and the necessity of transferring
motorized rifle divisions by air over significant distances for ful-
filling combat missions which may arise in the course of an operation,

' we will require, besides a basic type of medium tank, a light tank
with powerful conventional and missile armament. —

Our present light tank, the PT-76, has for the present only one
quality - it is amphibious. But’ this tank has such weak armament and
large dimensions that it cannot be transported by air. Therefore our -
efforts should be directed toward pa Ae eer Gate would be
powerfully . armed and whose weight and dimensions would allow.it to.
be transported by air. At the same time, such a tank should possess
tactical mobility which would enable it to cross water barriers afloat, .
and high speed on the field of battle. Such a tank is highly
necessary both for fulfilling reconnaissance tasks and for other
types of combat support. Sg 7

Under modern conditions, a high and reliable degree of destruction

of the enemy with missile-nuclear weapons will often permit an attack
. to be carried out without the infantry having to dismount. . This |
circumstance means that we must have a highly maneuverable armored

carrier with a powerful antitank missile wéapon and a small-caliber

gin or large-calibéY machiné gun. The design of such an armored

carriéey should have the necessary antiatomic’ resistance and should

assure biological protection of the personnel inside. Its di-

mensions should afford the gimultaneous transportation of a 10-12

man rifle squad. In connection with this, it is advisable at the ’

4.318)(4

' 4.3{ay(4)

OPES . sees 4.3{a)(A}

present time to have a rifle platoon consisting of two squads so
that its organizational structure will not be disrupted in movement
by armored carriers. It should be emphasized that even in peace-
time such a squad would be more spunky and lively.

Marshal of Armored Troops Comrade Rotmistrov very sharply
criticizes those comrades who propose new organizational forms of
the basic large units of the ground forces. In particular, those
comrades who propose the creation of a unified organization of the
basic large units of the ground forces are just about viewed as
dangerous people who have encroached on such concepts as "tank
troops", “tank formations" (gruppirovka), tank armies, and tank
divisions. It seems to us that it is incorrect to speak from such
positions about people who propose new forms of organization of our
troops. Life itself raises ‘problems -of perfecting the organization
of the troops. shed

Alluding to the experience of the Second World War, Comrade
Rotmistrov declares "that.not rifle divisions, reinforced by tanks,
decided the sucgess of an operation, as French military theorists
Ga) » but rather tank divisions, tank corps, and tank armies”

p. 34).

It must be stated that Soviet military theorists and practitioners
have never propounded the role of tank and combined arms large units
during the past war in such & way... 2

Everyone knows that during the Second World War the success of
offensive and defensive operations was decided by precise coordination ~~
of rifle large units and. groupings, reinforced by artillery and tanks,
_ with tank corps and armies, along with the massive utilization and
support of artillery and aviation, and also the constant support of

operations by special branches of troops and by the rear area.

Incidentally, neither the Germans nor the Americans, and the
French even less so, ever gucceeded in achieving such harmonious
coordination. On the whole, German reliance on tank troops and
aviation proved to be unsound. a ;

Unfortunately Comrade Rotmistrov's discussions of the experi-
ence gained in World War IT neglect this side of the question.
Ascribing an exclusive role to the tank troops, he introduces as
an example the meeting engagement at. Prokhorovka on 12 July 1943.

a . 1.3(a)(4)

|

-10-

-43faytay

ae 4.3(0)4).

In his opinion, during this engagement the strikes of the German

tank forces were countered only by our tank troops, and specifically
by the Fifth Guards Tank Army under the command of Comrade Rotmistrov.
The Fifth Guards Army, as he writes, not only did not follow the

order of the commander of the Voronezh Front on the joint delivery

of a counterthrust, but did not withstand the enemy onslaught, and
left the line being held. :

It is impossible to agree with such an appraisal of the events.
For the delivery of a powerful counterthrust at Prokhorovka, General
Headquarters (Stavka) had reinforced the Voronezh Front significaritly
at the expense of the strategic reserves. In this counterthrust
there participated powerful forces of all branches of the troops
composing this front, and by their joint efforts (and not merely by
the Fifth Guards Tank Army) halted -and “then threw back “to ‘thetr
original position the tank corps of the enemy. We render due credit
to the performance of the Fifth Guards Tank Army, which played an
important role in delivering the counterthrust. But other armies
of the front also played an important role in the execution of this
action. To ignore this fact will lead to excessive exaggeration of
the role of the tank troops and, in particular, of the Fifth Guards
Tank Army.

It is well known that the forces on the Voronezh Front were not
able to develop a counterthrust on 12 July because of the extremely
complicated situation on the southern face of the Kursk Arc. And in -
this respect, the task posed to the troop commanders of the front was
not fulfilled. Among those who did not fulfill their mission of
12 July was the Fifth Guards Tank Army. Therefore, a one-sided
accusation of only the Fifth Guards Army for non-fulfillment of the
order sounds clearly unconvincing and unobjective.

As far as the performance of the left flank corps of the Fifth
Guards Army is concerned, which Comrade Rotmistrov writes about, it |
must be stated that on 12 July large units of this corps repelled the
blows of superior enemy forces from the line being held. Only towards
evening did the enemy succeed, by employing its superiority in tanks,

in forcing back one division of the corps a fairly short distance.
In his article Comrade Rotmistrov time and again emphasized the

necessity for a scientific approach to the utilization of the experi-
ence gained in the last war. At the same time, in disucssing the

4.3eh(4}

events at Prokhorovka, he definitely digresses from this criterion and
attempts to compare incomparable quantitites. It is well known that
the Fifth Guards Army in the engagement at Prokhorovka did not have
tanks and that this substantially limited their combat capability in
a battle with a strong tank formation of the enemy. Quite different
was the situation of the Fifth Guards Tank Army, which had (together
with the attached tank corps) around 850 tanks and assault guns. In
evaluating the role of tank corps and armies in operations during the
last war, it is impossible to compare mechanically their combat
capability with the combat capabilities of rifle divisions, corps, and
combined arms armies. Every comparison which lays claim to being’
scientific should be based on a deep analysis of these and other large
units and groupings of troops.

It is generally né¥essary to state that ‘it ‘is impossible to take
isolated examples from the experience of combat operations of the
troops during World War II and on the basis of these to draw con-.
clusions about the organization as of the present and the possibilities
of basic large units and groupings of the ground forces.

It is quite clear that the most serious and dangerous error which
can be committed in using examples from military history for the
dévelopment of military theory is to attempt to transfer mechanically
the experience of the past to the present. In spite of his great
experience in military-theoretical research, it seems to us that
Comrade Rotmistrov has committed just such an error. 7

Modern trends in the development of the ground forces consist —
of continuously equipping them with new technical means of combat.” -
In this respect the relative preponderance of tanks 1s growing
particularly fast. Under thése conditions there can be no question
of diminishing the role of the tank troops. We can merely consider

At he. ghee Cae time we have He pes ‘of divisions - - motorized
rifle and tank - and these afford the requisite maneuverability and
the introduction of vigorous and decisive actions into battles and
operations. Tank divisions possess great penetrating power which .
increases their independence in conducting combat operations. They’ —
are more mobile and maneuverable and have very high cross-country
ability off roads, better resistance against nuclear weapons, and
less cumbersome organization than motorized rifle divisions.

| — 13a)

-12-

1.3(a)(4)

——"

However, the experience of many exercises shows that the presence
of heavy tank regiments in these divisions reduces their operational
maneuverability and complicates the supply problem in the course of
battle. Therefore, army tank commanders have made what we belive to
be correct proposals on replacing these regiments with medium tank
regiments. Heavy tanks would then be placed most purposefully in
heavy tank divisions or in separate tank regiments.

Our motorized rifle divisions have fewer tanks than tank divisions,
but are superior to them in artillery, and particularly fn antitank
weapons. Therefore a question arises regarding further perfecting .
of the organizational forms of both divisions in order to achieve a
successful combination of the positive qualities in both.

Nor is it possible to agree with Comrade ‘Rotmistrov concerning
the advisability of creating a light motorized rifle division. ,
Judging By the type of missions which are assigned it, and also by. -
its technical equipment, such a division would not differ particularly
from the present airborne division.

And now several words about our armies. We do not know who has
raised the question of abolishing our present tank armies, as
Comrade Rotmistrov conjectures. At the same time, an analysis of the
combat capabilities of modern armies and the experience derived from
large command staff and army exercises show that a combined-arms army
with a composition of two tank and three or four motorized rifle -
divisions with appropriate missile and special weapons (considering
that this army operates in the direction of the main efforts of a
front) is not inferior in the number of tanks to a tank army composed
of four divisions, and in other factors will be significantly stronger.

A tank army has great penetrating power and great mobility and
maneuverability, particularly in operations in areas with a limited
number of roads. But under modern conditions the development of
an attack at a high tempo creates an extremely difficult situation:
with respect to the deployment and introduction into an engagement
of a tank army. Often a tank army cannot break away from a combined
arms army, which also has tremendous mobility. Moreover, the enemy,
knowing of the presence of a tank army in a front, searches it -out,
and having detected it will attempt to destroy or weaken the army
principally by strikes of missile-nuclear weapons. This is why we _—
should seriously study the organization and means of combat employment
of modern armies in operations. Owing to these and other circumstances, —

SD 1.312).

23

~ 4.3(8)(4)

i ate
a

we should, study profoundly the organizational forms of modern armies.

It is incomprehensible why Comrade Rotmistrov places the necessity
_for the existence of the’ tank division, when no one doubts this, in .
direct dependence on the existence of the tank army. These are two
different questions and should not be confused.

There ig no doubt that in the last war tank armies and tank corps”
basically played a fundamental rofle in the development of operations
| at high tempos. Under modern conditions high tempos of development
| of operations will depend mainly on the skillful utilization of nuclear
weapons and missile troops. In this respect, not only tank, but also
combined-arms armies, must develop high rates of advance. Ina
number of, cases, the latter will have more, not less, tanks than tank
armies of four divisions.

In meeting engagements, principally nuclear weapons will play ‘the
major role. The success of operations by tank and motorized rifle
large units will depend on the skillful utilization of these weapons.
Therefore, there is no need to speak of some special exception of
tank large units and groupings.

Life goes forward, and our armies are being equipped more and’
more with the latest means of armed conflict, which requires
corresponding organizational development, and we should welcome all
generals and officers who work at the solution of this complicated
and serious problem.

n°

~14.

— 4.3(a)(4)
