Probable Consequence of the Egyptian Arms Deal with the Soviet Bloc-the Arms De
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000011348, dated 3 September 1955.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000011348).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

eT tae aA!

SNIE 30-3-59
12 October 1955

_-—QORSELBED TS #032680

BFECIAL
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE

NUMBER 30-3-55

PRORIBLE CONSEQUENCES CF THE EGYPTIAN LEMS
DEAL WITH THE SOVIET BLOC °

(ndvance Copy)

Sutcitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of thie estincte: The Centre] Intellivence Agency
ard the intelligence organizations of the Deyartuents of
Btate, the Aray, the Navy, the Air Force, ond The Joirt Stoff.

Concurred in by the
INIELLIGINE ADVISORY COMMITTEE

on 1%, October 1955. Conerirring were the Special Aesistant,
InteLlisence, Departnernt of State; the Assiotent chief of
Staff, G-2, Deportnent of the Ary; the Director of Nevel
Intelligence; the Director of. Intelligence, USAF; ani the
Deputy Director for Intellisence, The Joint Staff. The Atonic
Enercy Corrmiasion Representative to the IAC, and the iseistant
Director, Federol Burcou of Investigntion, atetsined, the
subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

fio gothy
gn gatiinl- : ee
Pp ye nee we. PU sass
LDPE LD

~-POP-SECTET- ae

277997

ROL -SECRT—

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
LL October 1955

SUBJECT: SNIE 30-3-55: PROBABLE CCNSEQUENCES OF THE EGYPTIAN ARMS
DEAL WITH THE SOVIET BLOC

THE PROBLEM

To estimate, in the light of the recent Egyptian arms deal
( with the Soviet Bloc: (a) the likelihood of Israeli or Egyptian-

instigated hostilities assuming no change in present US policy;

(t) the effect of certain possible US courses of action on the
situation; cn (c) the outlook for Soviet exploitation of this

and possible sinilar deals with other Arab states.
CONCLUSIONS
A. ‘The Soviet-Egyptian arma deal hos substantially increased

the risk thot Israel will Jounch o “preventive war." Such Isrneli action

49 not likely within the next few weeks. The Israelis will probably

--PEP=SECRET

wish to dctermine nore precisely the magnitude of the threct posed

by Soviet Bloc willingness to arm the Arabs, to explcit the

favorable trend of Western public opinion, and, most importantly,

to determine how far Isrnel can rerlistically depend on Western

and particuloxly US support ia mintoining its territorial integrity._
In the cbsence of convincing evidence of Western determination to
preserve the territorial status quo, there is very real danger that
Isrnel will undertcke "preventive war," peosibly in the next few
months, and it would oloost certainly be nore willing to take risks
which could touch off o new round of hostilitics. An Isroeli “pre-
ventive war" my start in the forn of border raids where responsibilities

end intentions my initiclly be obscure. (paras. 5~6a)

Al. If it becare unumistakably clear to beth sides that the US
was prepored to use any nenns necessary, including military force, to
halt agoressioa, it is alnost certain that no "second rout " would
develop. However, if the US declined to guarantee the territoricl
status qio in o new ond nore direct pledge than that contained in
the Tripartite Declaration, it would be extreLely digficult to deter
Jeraeli preventive actica, since neither the Israelis nor the Arabs
would be likely to believe that the US would in fact intervene

effectively agninst Israel. (pora- 9)

oat &

_TOP-SEDRET ~

Bh de eee Se

( ~ OP=SECRER-

B. Aseuning that it is netuolly foplencnted the arns deal is
likely to strengthen 6 tendency toward Egyption militancy, ond increase
the danger that local clashes will develop into large-scale fighting
However, pending absorption of the new equipnent Egypt will probably
feel constrained to avoid serious difficujties with Israel. Over
the longer run, the grovth of Egyptian military strength will almost ~

certainly stimilate scce Ecpyption interest in o "secom, round" against

Israel. (Paras. 2, 7-8)

C. Should a "second rout" oecur in the near future, in which
the US sinply let events take their course, on Israeli victory would
( be almost certain. Under these circunstences Isracli ebility to
seize ani hold considerable portions of all ite neighbors’ territories
would be Minited largely by its Inck of reserve supplies and the
ae probability of UK intervention if Jordon were invoded. The effects
of a “hnnds off" policy on the part cf the US would have an extremely
adverse effect on its position in the Arobd world and would retard

US efforts to build indigenous Middle East defense. (Peras. 11-12)

Dp. A convincing indicotion of US determination to intervene
effectively in the event of aggression would renssure both sides.

Nevertheless, the Arnbs would pegord it prinorily os a guarantee cf

~ ili -

_ROPLSECTET

Me ee wee ter 8 hl TRIE TN CAI TEA OF

-- POP-SECKET

Isracl's present position. Arab resentnent would in tine increase,
porticulorly if growing Ares military coLevilitics plnced the Arabe

in the ..sitden of the ones being restrained. (Paras 10)

BF. Soviet arus aid te Ecypt wihl c.arMeate if nt block the

achievenent of two major US chjectives in the Middle E-st: an Arab-

Isrneli ecttlerent ond the creation of cffective regiutal defons-
arran jenents against Curnmmisnu. It is likely t. stimildate neutrolist
tendencics in Eyypt awl sther Arab stetes, and to enhance tic

for subversion ami political penetration.
evproilities of local Commnists/ Althcugh we believe tint the RCC

‘

ig deteruinea te aveid close y Jitienl aligavent with the S:victs,

{rereacing military aml eesnasic dependence 30 the Blue :i jit eventuslly

deprive it of sone cf its frovliu te chocse its srfentaticn. (Paras. 13-16)

- eo a

7POP-SECHET—-

ret,

= POP-BECRET >

The frns Deal ond its Military Inplicatiors

1. On 21 Septecber 1955 the Soviet Bloc ocreed to furrish
in exchezige for Egyptian cotton a supply of arms at barqair rates -
which, occording to the Feyptiens, includes 200 jot fighters ond
light bombers; 100 "heavy" tanks; six notor torpedo Sones: and two
subcarines -- and all together with recesoory spare porte. '
initial shipment of 37 Ught gct baubers om 63 MIG-15's is re-
portedly to be delivered by December 1955 and the 100 tanks care to
be celivered at on unspecified carly date. The Egyptians indicated
that Bloc technicians would be mde available over a go-day period

to iistruct the Egyptions in mintenance and operation.

2, dAssuning that the Dloc actually supplies these itenus, in
ters of rilitery hardware aleve the deal would: (a) give Keypt verked
qualitative and quantitative superiority in covbat aircrart over
Ysracl, which is already inferior in muacbers of aircraft to the arab

states as a group; (b) significantly reduce Israel's present rwerical

oal-

ROP: SECRET —>

-PoP-SECKET-—

sugeriority in tanks; end (c) furnish Foyt with neans of haressing
Teracl's shippin;. Sous ef the cquipnent will probably be ,laced in
operation within a few months ofter delivery. Huwever, it is estizated
that oven under optimus eouditions, invelving lorce Blve training
cigsions over an exteniled yeriol, at least o yoor woul prebebly be -
required after delivery before nost cf the equizuent euuld be effectively

“

used is, unit operations.

The Effect cn 1s roeli C surses cf fAetion

3. The aris acnl constitutes a severe peychulvyical blow tu
Isroel. 3% a uinirwn it will in tine reke the Eyyytians sre avle
and villin; to stard up te cr retalinte agginst Isrecli nilitory roids,
thereby Jesscuing the likelihnewd that Ysracl's activist raidiz: tactics
will foree the Arate to pac yeace. At o wexisan: it crins natertally
eloser the syectre of a iacwth of Arab uilitary strenJth which would
lenve Israel décipabie at deferling iteelf effectively. Althoujh the
Iercelis probobly recoynize that the militery effects if the orm:
deci will not be immediately folt, they probably believe that they

have only Muitted tine to aAjust te the situation.

“POP.- SECRET

( TOP SCT

lh. These considerations are almost certainly stimlating
dncreasine pressures within Israel for a bolder and more agpressiv:
effort to resolve the basic problen of security once and for all.
The Isracli government has responded with strone pressures on the
US for corpensating arms aid and for a specific security guarantee, ~
ae and there will almost certainly be additional efforts, within the
relatively narrow limits of its potential resources, to procure
arms elsewhere if they are not available fron the US, eanvhile,-
Isracl is almost certainly canvassing the possibilities of military
solutions. Prime rinister-designate Sen Gurion had previously
epnouncea that Isreel will tace forcible measures if necessary to
end the Eeyptian blockade of the sea route to “lath on the Gulf of
Ageba. The Isracli General Staff, which recommendce expulsion of
ser the Epyptians *rom the Gaza strip a fev months aro, is probably,
pressing for at least limited territorial advances for tho purposes
of elininetine trouble spots end otherwise improving Isrsel's position
at tocticaelly velnerable places along the border. “oreover, considcr-
ation is probably being given to the merits of a "preventive war"

while Isracl still holds - decisive military cde,

se iri pale eis sR a ie eek pian a ao an cena thee ee, eee ET TT

ae

TOP SECRET

5. The Soviet-Egyptian orns deal has substantially increased the
risk that Israel will lJounch o "oreventive war." It is unlikely, however,
that Israel will initinte such action in the next few weeks. b2fe.
committing themselves to on outrizht war policy, the Israclis wilt
probably wish to determine nore precisely the mgnitude of the threat
posed by Soviet Bloc willingness to arn to Arabs, to exploit the
favorable trend of Vestern public opinion, ond, nore {mportantly, to
deternine how far Israel can reolistically depend on Western and

particularly US support in maintaining its territorial integrity.

6. Particularly if the prospects of UN ond Western counteraction
in curbing incidents are uncertain, ve believe that Isracl, in its
present cood, will olnost certainly be nore disposed than before the
aris deal to take chances in execution of its activist pelicies.

Such a rove night touch off a new round of lnrce-senle hostilities,
whether by design or otherwise. Israel's proposed nove to force the
Gulf of Aqata right prove such a stepping stone to war, as night

olso on Israeli nove to intercept arms shipnents to Egypt or

resuyption of the work to divert the Jorden waters in the deoilitarized
zone ot Jisr Banol Yacub cn the Syricn border. ShoulA Israel find itself
engaged in major elashed with one cf the Arab states it would probably

be inerensingly disposed to take advantage of the situntion to seize

the troubicd aren or otherwise inprove its tactical position. Should

-~-& o

TOP SECRET

meme RS Set meni er ne

TOP SECRET

the intervention of other Areb states appear to be in the offing
4t would probably attempt to seize the initiative and in so doing

rake a genercl conflict inevitable.

Sa. Moreover, in the absence cf -ouvincing evidence of Western

determination to preserve the territorial status quo, there is very
real danger that Israel will undertake a "preventive wor; ,
possibly within the pext few nerths. The Exyptian orps deal, perticul-
arly if followed up by a sirilar deal with Syria, threatens Isreel
with on tras race which it canwt afford to sustain with its am
resources and which vltimtely threatens to leave it irmapable

of defencing itself effectively. Urless Isxnel obtains ccuntere
vailing arns aid or a new and more dircct US pledge of pronpt

and effective ‘military intervention to preserve the territorial

status quo than is ‘now provided in the Tripartite Declaraticr,

it is likely to conclude that war offers the orly vay cute

Under such circunstances, Israel is alsc likely to play cown the possl-
bility of effective Westen: ttervention cgairst a preventive vor by
{ervacl which the latter would portray 48 4 defensive reacticn to

Arab ageveselon fuspired andl armed by the Soviet Union and which vas

necaxpanied by offers to negotiate a fim peacce An Israeli "preventive

war" may start in the form of border raids where responsibilities and

jntentions may initdally be obscure.
- Se

TOP SECRET

ae
eee

* MSR ly

TOP SECRET

7- We believe that Erypt's acceptance of Bloc arns has been
notivatec far less by thougizts of a "secon round" than by: (2c) ine
necessity to shore up armed forces norales; (b) by an acute sence
of vulberability to Icraecli niiitary harasstexct ard possible invaston;
ami (c) by ite desire to follow through on its announced policy of
dndepenasnes fron both great power blocs. However, the arms “eal, assuming
that it is actually inplenented,
jis likely to strengthen o teiteacy toward greater ‘rl ldteney vis-a-vis
Yaroel already vonifest in the Eqyption goveruvent's recent sponsorship
of comenco cperations in the Gaza areas This wil increase the danger
that local clashes will develop into lerge-scale fighting. For the
inuediate future, the Boyptian regine will probably feel constrained
to avoid serious difficultics with Israel, perding the arrival of the
new equinre moent ond the trainirg of conbat-effective unite. liwever,
even durirg this irterin period the difficulty of holdirg Eyyptian
local camnmlers ard troops in check will probably create increased

hozaris of o PLlareup.

8. Over the longer run, the growth of Exyptian military
strength will almost certainly stimulate some Egyptian interest
ina “secon rowd" against Israel. Although the RCC regine has

ranifested concern over the fact thot Israeli possession of the

-6=

TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

Negev cuts Enypt off fron lond cocmugication with the other Arnb
states, it hos 50 territorinl ambitions of its own in Isrnel, will
probably retain o healthy respect for Isrneli combat effectivenes: ,
and -~ despite its attenpts to free iteelf from dependence on the
West <= will probably remain fearful of festern sanctions. Assuning
that Egypt believes itself greatly strengthened by Soviet arns ond

support, it aight be tempted to mike wor on Israel os o means of

soliaifing its leadership in the Arab world. While the deterrents
nentioned ore likely to prevent such octica, ot least in the nenr future,
Egypt will alnost certoinly do its best to impress the Teroclis with

( {ts will end obility te dcfend its interests awl noy therefore end
up with fully as aguressive and activist o policy as that new being

pursued by Israel.

Consequences of o Strengthening of US Policy Regordin y Interver.tion

Ta ee) Tele
Wire cea

9. If it becnne unmistakably clear to doth eides thet the US
wos prepared to use any menns necessary, fneluding nilitary force, to
holt oggression, it ie almost certoin that no “second round" would .
develop. However if the US declined to guarantee the territorial
‘totus quo in a vew and nore direct pledge than that contained in the
Tripsrtite Decloration of 1950, it would be extrepely difficult to
deter Israeli preventive action since neither the Isroelis nor
the Arabs would be likely to believe that the US would in fact

ek intervene effectively against Israel.
enone -7-
TOP SECRET

TOP SECRET

10. f convincing imlication of US deteroination ty intervene
effectively in the evert of cuoression would renssure both eldes.
Noo Henaee the Arabs would regard it peimrily as a guarentee of
Israeli" 5 jresent position. Over the longer run, the concept of
the US as a policensn, even 4f backed by the UN, would bea source
cf increasing Arab resentrent, particularly if increasing drab
nilitery cepabilitics placed the Arabs in the position of the ones

my

being restrained.

Probable Consequences ¢ of o US "Ik "hrs orf" Folicy in Res Response ty
ae “on _Isracli Attock i

ll. If aggressive Israeli action showld lead in the near
future to n “secoml round," in which the US stocd asice and ict
develojyrents take their course, ell the Arad League states vould
alucst certainly becare involved, amd an Isreeli victory would
alnost certainly be the outcome. Aminst Arab opposition alone,
we estimte that Israel eculd now seize all of Arab-
controlled Palestine, portions of Egyptian, Syrisn, and Labane se
territory contiguous to Israel, aml scue Jordanian territory enst
of the Jordan River. Israel would probably have to reckor with
UN intervention. However, the moot Luportant Mnitations to Toraeli'e

ability to consolidate these gains would be its own lack of reserve
~~ 8 -~

TOP SECRET

nape y

ay

TOP SECRET

supplies aml the probability that the UK, because of ite special

treaty sbligations, would feel carpelled to intervene, at least

with air and naval forces, if Jordan were invaded. Egypt's
capabilities would be gubstamtially improved if it coule netual):
cuploy Soviet Bloc nilitary pexrsounel In sine its new veop..4ns
againet Israel. However, 4t cpocars unlikely that the USSR, uvler
present circuustances, would be willing to accept the risks of

hostilities with the West which such a move would involve. 4 defeat

of the srabe would probobly be followed by a period cf disurder’ in

one or more of the Arod states, a condition which the USSR would

alnost certainly attergt to expicit.

12, A“honds off" policy on the part of the US would have an
extremely adverse effect on its peeitior in the Arab world, and

would retard US efforts to budld indigenous Middle Enst defense.

Probeble Soviet Objectives oné Prospects for Success

13. The earns deal with Eeypt represento the post drarmtic
nove in a Soviet canpaign in the Middle Enst which has becr. under=
way for sere tine. Armjor objective of this canpaign is alnost

certainly to stiffen Arab resistarce to Western policies in the

- G-

TOP SECRET

ee

pete

ee

laa heady OM ay

TOP SECRET

arec, porticulorly the efforts of the US and UK to develop anti-
Communist defense arrongenents and to retain their bases. Since

the signing of the Paghtod Foct,” Egypt has led Arab opposition

to Western defense efforts, and Syria ond Snuwii Arabia, the othe
recipients of Soviet arns offers, have been Feypt's chief supporters.

Horeover, the USSR alnost certainly appreciates that US-UK difficulties

in creating o deferse syaten will be esriously incrensed: (2) by
any beightening of Arab-Isreelt eonsiGang (b} by ce Western Pevers
losing the odvautage of being the only significant source of arys
for the Arab states; and (c) by invidious cocperisons in /rab ninds
between the spectaculor aucut and easy terus of Soviet aid
promised to Egypt, ani the relative handful of nateriel viich

Iraq has been receiving a8 a menber in good standing of the

és “northern tier" group of natizms.

ih, In addition to its veefulness in uniernining Western
defense efforts in the area, the USSR prcbably regards the crus
deal a reans of strengthening reutralist temiencies in Eqypt ors
other fxub states, if caly by weakening their dependence or, the

Vest ol increasing Bowlet tarzaining power. Euypt's decision to

® Txkey, Iraq, the tk, emi Fokistan ere now nenbers of this pact.
( can

laste o haces TOP: SECRET

( TOP SECRET

accept arns fron the Dloe ir. exehance fer cotton, topether with
recent agreenents for substontinlly increased barter trace in
non-rdlitary iters, would probably increase Egyptian reliance on the
Orbit fer cortinuing ening needs and rmaintenance Sestteh aay, Pe
rertet for Esypt's privary expcet iten. Finelly, the Soviets probe
ably will see jrerensed opportunities for subversion oid political

penetration, not only thrcugh increased Soviet influence, vut

also through the tntroduction <7 Soviet technical ard caxrercial

pero:meel in the Arab states.

A

15. Ve believe that the RCC ie determined to avolé my kind
of close alignrent with the Seviet Bloc, It is nost unlikely that
Eeyrt would pay o price far Seviet arcs in the fern of any yind
of political coumtnents when it hos been unwilling to pey such a
price for Western axis The eux opprehersive, suspicious nationalisn

that caused Eqypt to reject alimmert with the West ina Midtle Enst

defense organization will probably work with equal farce ageinst
ony efforts of the ‘yadexe: toyebtein a special position in Fuypte.
Should Egypt Lecone inereasingly dependent on the Bloe econanicclly
and nilitarily, ani at the sere tine pore fpolated from the West, it

night eventually lose sone of its freedon to choose its orlentation.

TOr SECRET

16. On the other bend, Soviet chances for fostering Ecyption
reutralien ore more praieing and drmedinte. Strong neutrelist
tenlencies already exist within the RCC and anong its supperters.
Egyptian receipt of Soviet ‘ors cia is likely to stren-then this
gnelination, particulorly since Soviet oid will raise Egyption hopes
of the cdvantages to bedorivel fran playirg off the Sovicts and the
West against each other. Initially at least, ircigenous Cocmmist

standing will be inprovel by Ecyption acceptance of, Soviet Tloc aid.

17. &t present, the KCC rejdime probably overestimates its
ability to han@le both the short aml loncer-range risks of accept~-
ing the Soviet orns offer. The sheer technical problens of assen-
bling axl maintaining the relatively modern mterial involved,
quite aside fron training Euyptinn personnel to use it effectively,
will place the regina unter strona compulsions to adit pxeater
numbers cf Bloc technicians awl treining personel for Longer
perivis then it protably now thinks will be necessary. Fav
acquired the arms, Fasr will be reluctant to close Ecypt's doors
to the peracmmel needed to imke then useful. Forticularly if the

USSR itself ari the Dloc reprosentatives sent to Egypt ore careful

ajo.

TOP SECRED.

at the cutset te avoid the sppcarerce er having political or sub-
veralve cesigns, this reluctance will becouse ever greater. find if
Isracl should continue to provoke end frighten the ‘regime Ly acti:
vist policies on the border, the reeasurea to seek Bloc techniceal

art military help vould Le great. This, in turn, would lead te
increneec. Soviet bargaining power and opportunities for penctrae
tion, with consequent advorteges to long-tern Soviet political

geols. Sintlorly, growing econoriie dependence on the Dlee as a
rorket for Egyptian cotton, night give the USSR fncreased power to influence
Ecypt either by threats or inducerernts. In accord with its :
current policy cf relaxation of tersions, the USSR will prooobly

te very cireumspect in ite relations with Fgypt in syder 0; encourage
nations around the periphery cf the Commmrist Bloc to adapt 5
neutraliet course a8 an inexpensive end, indecd, profital:le ears

of nesucing their independence and security.

ToP SECHET

18. REuyptian acceptance of Dloe arns ond assertion of an
“indepondent foreign policy” has unde oa profourd iopressiocn in
other frab states snd increases the chances that Syria would
accept a Sovict arus offer. In view of the basic instability oc:
the Syrinn political situation, the greater potential of the well-
organized Syrian Commmist Party (whose leader is a nerber of

Porlianent) ami the strength of leftist elenents in the arry, the

possibilities of an increasingly leftist course in Syria are con-

aicered preater.
¢

19. Saw Arabia's resistance to Bloc penetration is probably
( muck preater than Syria's and the chances of its accepting Jarpe-
seale Dloe arns aid my be considered less. However, its inereasing
conflict with the UK cnd the strong feelings af the ruling fardly
recarding the threat fron Pasherite Iraq and fron Iarael would

ineline the Saudi government to help finance Arab oxrns éenls fron

whichaver source as long a3 Arab capabilities against Isracl are
thereby strengthened and/or Iraq's plans for hegauony anong the

Arab states checked.

te ee

Le ee ee apne a oe

By-Products

20, Apert fron the inproved prospects for lccal Cocmarists
ond the encovragerent to, neutralisc in the Middle East orisin,; fron
the Soviet-Byyptian arms deol, it is possible that the USSR has in
view the develojaxenut of further contentions and difficulties 41. the
Middle East. The oppenrance of a leftist trend in Syria, for exonple,
would probably bring heavy pressures on the US and UX frou Turkey ond
Iraq to pernit intervention in Syria vefore the situntion becape -
irretrievable. This nivht confront the Weat with the choice of
either permitting a serious increase do inter-frab tensions or ine
periallirg the Baghiad Fact structure. Furthernore, the greatly
inerensed denger of arose ees and arwed conflicts in the cron
resulting froa the deal is Mkely both to set one part of the Arab
world against the other ard the Arcb world os ao whele a,nirst
Israel. The fact that these Lasic. cleavages in effect run at cross-
purposes to eoch other is likely uerely te add to the contusion and
to the prospects of geseral detericration that would probably offer
mich preater long rm aivantages to international Coaamisr than
would the pursuit by the Arab states of reutralist policics. It is
possible that the USSR will atteupt both to exploit the “spirit of
Geneva" ani to disrupt the Western position in the Middle East by
effering cancellation of the Egyption aris denl in return for US
withirawal fron the Divihran bose and the abondonnent of British
nilitary arrangerents with J apace ond trag. The USSR might also
proposes a stabilization of the Arab-Israeli situation by a quadriper-

tite (US, UK, France, USSR) guoruntee.

=
