Probable Developments in Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119708, dated 2 November 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119708).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Approved 1 December 1953
Published 4 December 1953
_ The Intelligence Advisory Committee concurred in this
estimate on 1 December 1953. The FBI abstained, the .
subject being outside of its jurisdiction...
. The following member organizations of the Intelligence
_ Advisory Committee participated with the Central Intel- -
ligence Agency in the preparation of this estimate: The

‘"“! dntelligence organizations of the Departments of State, .
y the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and the Joint Staff.

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

E approved £0F Releas®. |
; Date 9 B

’ National: Sécurity Council *

cet Mae Federal Bureau of Investigation
Diteotor. se “Collection. and. Di Semi ation, CIA, for any other

7 . _ ‘Department or Ag p eficy

‘either retained ; or destroyed by burning in accordance with

spplaain ‘abanity Golations, or” returned to ‘the Central Intelligence Agency by
a arrangements wy “the. Office of. Collection and Dissemination, CIA.

3. ° They erseas ‘dissemination of this. intelligence will be limited to axperiod of

one year less; at the: end: 1of which time _it will be destroyed, returned to the fOxyard-

1 yee ate

ing a fency, ‘or permission: iT vested ‘of that. “agency to retain it in accordance With
zs AC-D-69/2; 22. June © 19538

~ “White: House

Department of State
Department of Defense |

. Mutual | Security Agency . oe
Operations: ‘Coordinating. Board ”
Atomic Energy Commission .

Federal Bureau of Investigation meee

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS

IN BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the current situation and probable developments in Brazil through
1955, with particular reference to the stability of the government and the probable

development of its foreign policy.

CONCLUSIONS

1. The. political situation in Brazil is
characterized by growing social unrest
and increasing nationalism. The chief
factors in this situation are (a) Brazil’s
sustained effort to maintain a high rate
of economic development with emphasis
on industrialization; (b) the accompany-
ing inflation and rapid urbanization,
which have caused particular distress
among urban lower income groups; and
(c) Brazil’s failure to obtain from the
United States the amount of financial
assistance to which it feels entitled.
These conditions facilitate ultranational-
ist and Communist agitation.

2. President Vargas was elected primarily
on the strength of his appeal to lower in-
come groups, but he must enlist conserva-
tive support in order to obtain a con-
gressional majority. So far he has
pursued a middle-of-the-road course.
Most conservatives distrust him, but sup-
port his administration and seek to ex-
ercise a moderating influence on it.

3. Vargas is politically committed to
maintain a high rate of economic develop-
ment, which can be accomplished only
with substantial amounts of foreign capi-
tal. Substantial foreign private invest-

SECREP—

ment is precluded by the prevalent na-
tionalistic attitude toward such invest-
ment and by the uncertain economic
outlook. Some modification of Brazil’s
investment policy and a retrenchment
program may be prerequisite to substan-
tial foreign developmental loans. Re-
trenchment is politically dangerous in
that its immediate effects will probably
be to intensify existing economic dislo-
cations and social unrest. Vargas, how-
ever, will undertake the minimum which
he considers necessary to obtain further
substantial loans. He will also take po-
litical action designed to soften the eco-
nomic requirements of foreign lending
institutions.

4. If Vargas succeeds in obtaining such
loans and in checking inflation, his po-
litical position will be reasonably secure
and he will probably continue to pursue
moderate policies during the remainder
of his term. Otherwise he will be under
increasing extremist pressures, but will
probably not be threatened with expul-
sion from office as long as conservative
elements, including the Army, are satis-
fied that he has done all that could be
done to improve the economic situation.

oh) A

Re a caatat vate nth thee

Se a a ee et OA YF

en a a a ee see

wane ot ae

~f-e ee

9. In the event of a severe economic de-
terioration Vargas might be able to se-
cure conservative support for a more
nationalistic program. On the other
hand, Vargas might abandon his conser-
vative connections and seek to establish
an authoritarian labor-leftist regime. In
the latter case, however, the Army and
the conservatives would probably depose
6. The Communists have no prospect of
gaining control of Brazil by electoral
means or by force, but their influence
will probably increase through their ex-
ploitation of popular issues and their in-
filtration of the bureaucracy and of or-
ganized labor. Their immediate objec-
tive is the exploitation of social unrest
and Brazilian nationalism to neutralize
Brazil as an effective ally of the United
States.

7. Brazil will almost certainly continue
to support the United States on major

issues between the US and the Soviet
Bloc, but, if not granted the special con-
Sideration to which it feels entitled, with
particular reference to further develop-
mental loans, it may pursue an increas-
ingly independent course in economic
matters. A desire to strengthen its bar-
gaining position vis-a-vis the United
States will be an important factor in Bra-
zilian diplomacy. Brazil will seek to es-
tablish closer economic relations in Latin
America and with Europe, including ef-
forts to increase its now negligible non-
Strategic trade with the Soviet Bloc.
It may also re-establish diplomatic rela-
tions with the USSR.

8. Brazil will continue to oppose Argen-
tine bids for leadership in Latin America
and the development of an Argentine-led
bloc.

9. In the event of general war Brazil
would almost certainly enter the war ac-
tively in support of the United States.

DISCUSSION

I. INTRODUCTION

10. Brazil’s continued cooperation with the
United States is a matter of great significance.
Brazil is a major power within the Latin
American community and exercises consider-
able influence in the Organization of Ameri-
can States and the United Nations. More-
over, Brazil is strategically located with
respect to sea and air routes in the South
Atlantic and is an important source of stra-
tegic materials, notably metallurgical manga-
nese, quartz crystals, beryl ore, mica, and cas-
tor oil. It is the only Latin American coun-
try with known sizeable deposits of atomic
energy raw materials. The Brazilian armed
forces are capable of making an important
contribution to Hemisphere defense.

11. Except in some areas (e.g., Sao Paulo) lit-
tle progress has been made in developing

86RES

Brazil’s large human and material resources.
The naticnal economy continues to depend cn
exports of agricultural products. These ex-
ports have not been sufficient to sustain the
postwar rate of econemic developmcnt. The
industrialization that has taken place since
1930 has been accompanied by savere infla-
ticn and by econzmic and social strains, espe-
cially on the rapidly growing uzban middle
classes and urban labor. Industrial and c-m-
mercial in‘erests have acquired greater politi-
cal p-wer, which prior to 1930 was largely
reld by a narrow oligarchy of landowners and
Army leaders. More recently lower income
urban groups have bezun to exert pressure
for greater representaticn in the government
and for betterment of their lot. The frustra-
tions which are inevitable in the process of
such rapid and uneven econ7mic development
as Brazil is experiencing are exploited by na-

ZB

shegye

ave

tionalists and Communists. Brazil, however,
has been less subject to political violence than
most Latin American countries.

NH. POLITICAL SITUATION

12. As in many other Latin American coun-
tries, the postwar pressures in Brazil for accel-
erated economic and social progress have con-
tributed to increasing political stresses and
Strains. These pressures are more funda-
mental than the character of any particular
administration as a determinant of political
developments.

13. The dominant personality in the present
political situation is 70-year-old Getulio Var-
gas, who was elected President in 1950 to serve
until 1956. Vargas, a key political figure in
Brazil since 1930, has been an astute Oppor-
tunist. He has shrewdly manipulated one
group against another and has successfully
posed as the friend of the underprivileged.

14. General resentment of the Sao Paulo
oligarchy’s prolonged control of the federal
government and the severe depression caused
by the contemporary slump in coffee exports
and prices enabled Vargas to seize the Presi-
dency by force in 1930. Seven years later,
with Army support, he established a quasi-
fascist regime called the “New State,” an
ideological facade for his strong personal rule.
Under the “New State” Vargas espoused cul-
tural and economic nationalism, established
federal control over the states, abolished polit-
ical parties, suppressed all opposition of both
the left and the right, undertook government
intervention and initiative in economic devel-
opment, promoted industrialization, con-
cerned himself with amelioration of the living
conditions of the urban masses, and sought to
mobilize and control urban labor as a political
force through government-sponsored labor
unions. It was during this period that the
urban lower income groups began to become
an important political factor.

15. In October 1945 the Brazilian Army, in
response to growing opposition to totalitari-
anism, ousted Vargas in a peaceful coup and
paved the way for the constitutional election
of General Eurico Gasper Dutra to the Presi-
dency. Dutra’s administration (1946-1951)

was moderate; political parties re-emerged
and popular participation in politics in-
creased. However, the conservative ruling
groups failed to cope effectively with the grow-
ing economic hardships experienced by lower
middle class and labor groups. Partially as a
result of this failure, Vargas retained a large
personal following and built up a political
machine. In the 1950 presidential campaign
he exploited the discontent of the lower in-
come groups and the inept leadership of the
two dominant conservative political parties
and received about 49 percent of the popular
vote, as compared to 30 percent for his nearest
competitor.

16. Vargas returned to office with substantial
popular support, particularly that of the
urban proletariat. However, he has not at-
tacked the problems confronting Brazil with
the vigor and self-confidence which charac-
terized his earlier administration. While this
difference may be in some degree attributable
to his more advanced age and reported ill-
health, it stems more directly from the at-
tendant circumstances reviewed below.

17. Vargas is in power at a difficult time in
Brazilian history. Heavy migrations from
the back country into the rapidly growing
cities have brought hundreds of thousands of
Brazilians into their first contact with higher
standards of living, glaring inequalities, and
the insecurity of urban existence. Distressed
by inflation, the urban masses generally are
increasingly dissatisfied with their level of liv-
ing and clamorous for its improvement. At
the same time middle and upper class con-
servatives, including Army leaders, are dis-
turbed by the adverse prospects for maintain-
ing a high rate of economic development and
by the growth of labor-leftist and Communist
strength, which threatens their dominant
position in Brazilian life. Moreover, these
elements are highly sensitive to any supposed
denial of the international recognition to
which they feel Brazil is entitled. These
frustrations and tensions facilitate the incite-
ment of an emotional nationalism. Brazilian
nationalism and the economic strains brought
about by overexpansion have in recent years
imposed considerable limitations upon foreign

SHER  =275

ae

* - - 4 .

private investment and upon Brazil’s ability
to obtain development loans from the Inter-
national Bank, which in turn has seriously
impeded the achievement of either the social
benefits demanded by leftist elements or the
economic development desired by conserva-
tives.

18. The absence of well-organized and respon-
sible national political parties makes it dif-
ficult for the government to align stable sup-
port for political and economic programs.
Brazilian politics has traditionally been based
on regional rather than national interests,
and on personalities rather than principles.
The parties which have emerged since 1945
have begun to espouse political and economic
principles and national programs, but regional
and personal interests still predominate.

19. To obtain a majority in Congress Vargas
must secure the support of conservatives who
opposed his presidential candidacy. He per-
sonally controls the Brazilian Labor Party and
is also supported by the Social Progressive
Party, but these two Parties together hold only
19 percent of the seats in the Senate and 27
percent of those in the Chamber of Deputies.
For even a nominal majority Vargas is de-
pendent on the mainly conservative Social
Democratic Party, which opposed his candi-
dacy but generally supports his administra-
tion. The representatives of these three
Parties constitute 67 percent of the Senate
and 63 percent of the Chamber. Even So,
party discipline is so lax that, to obtain ma-
jorities for specific measures, Vargas must
often secure the additional support of mem-
bers of the mainly conservative National Dem-
ocratic Union, the nominal opposition. Thus
Vargas cannot present a coherent, well-
defined legislative program, but must seek
major legislation piecemeal, through shifting
ad hoc parliamentary combinations.

20. Most conservatives distrust Vargas because
of his opportunism. They have been con-
cerned about his apparent indifference to
Communism, his labor-leftist backing, and the
indecisive character of his economic policies,
While a number have remained in opposition,
many others have decided to support and if
possible dominate the administration. How-

SECRET

ever, conflicting vested interests have thus far
prevented the conservatives from agreeing
among themselves on legislation to alleviate
Brazil’s economic problems. The June 1953
appointment of Oswaldo Aranha, one of Bra-
zil’s most prominent conservatives, as Minis-
ter of Finance has tended to mitigate the
differences among the conservatives and be-
tween them and Vargas. Aranha has beccme
the dominant figure in the Vargas cabinet.

21. Vargas’ necessary concessions to conserv-
atives antagonize his lower income group sup-
porters. The largest single segment of these
Supporters consists of the government-con-
trolled labor organizations whose estimated
1,700,000 members constitute approximately
10 percent of the total labor force. These
lower income groups, although increasingly
restless, are not strong enough to provide an
adequate base for political action. Recently
the opportunist Minister of Labor, Joao
Goulart, has made some attempts to build
up a stronger, Peronist-type labor organ-
ization. Thus far the clearly expressed op-
position of conservatives and the Army, and
Opposition within the labor movement itself,
have deterred Goulart from carrying any
plans of this nature to fruition. However, his
collaboration with Communists to further his
objectives has enabled them to increase their
influence.

22. The Brazilian Communist Party (PCB)
lost strength when it was outlawed in 1947.
Since 1950, however, and especially during
1953, it has made considerable progress in
recruiting new members and raising funds.
It is currently estimated to have 60,000 mem-
bers subject to party discipline and a much
larger number of sympathizers, and its
Strength and influence are increasing. The
Communists draw their support largely from
urban labor and lower middle class groups,
although professional men, intellectuals, and
retired military personnel are prominent in
the leadership of the Party and its front
organizations. Communist Strength is con-
centrated in and around the city of Rio de
Janeiro, in the important states of Sao Paulo
and Minas Geraes, and in the strategic
“hump” of Brazil. .

* eH 5°

23. The immediate objective of the Commu-
nists appears to be to stimulate anti-US na-
tionalism in order to neutralize Brazil as an
effective ally of the United States. They in-
cited vigorous opposition to the ratification of
the Brazilian military assistance agreement
with the US. Although ultimately defeated
in that case, they (in conjunction with ultra-
nationalists) successfully promoted the enact-
ment of legislation which excluded the par-
ticipation of foreign capital in the develop-
ment of Brazil’s petroleum resources. More
recently the Communists have concentrated
on exploiting the social unrest caused by the
rising cost of living and on promoting closer
relations with the Soviet Bloc. On both is-
sues they enjoy considerable non-Communist
support.

24. Vargas has remained largely indifferent to
Communist activities and the Communists
have now begun to operate more openly in the
leadership of popular movements and to renew
pressure for legalization of the Party. Mean-
while a number of Communists and sympa-
thizers have already infiltrated the govern-
ment (including the Foreign Office) and the
labor organizations. Despite new legislation
designed to curb Communist activities, politi-
cally motivated appointments to key positions
in the Federal Police have considerably weak-
ened the enforcement capabilities of its politi-
cal section. An investigation of Communism
in the armed forces has discovered few Com-
munists there, but has revealed the existence
of an apparatus sufficiently well-organized to
arouse concern among Brazilian military
authorities.

Il, ARMED FORCES

25. The armed forces, organized and trained
along US lines, have an approximate strength
of 194,000. The Army, with a strength of
104,000, consists of 7 infantry, 1 armored, and
4 cavalry divisions, supplemented by numer-
ous separate combat units. The Navy, with a
personnel strength of 20,000, has a combat
strength of 2 light cruisers, 7 destroyers, and
smaller escort, patrol, and mining craft. The
Air Force, with a personnel strength of 20,000
(including 1,140 pilots), has approximately
920 combat, transport, and reconnaissance air-

SECRET

craft, including about half of the 60 British
jet fighters ordered for delivery in 1953. In
addition, there are about 50,000 militarized
police available for local or regional use.

26. The operational effectiveness of the three
combatant services is high by Latin American
standards as a result of their reorganization,
Te-equipment, and operational experience with
US forces in World War II and of the assist-
ance of US military missions. Their effective-
ness is impaired, however, by a lack of ade-
quate support facilities, poor maintenance,
and general obsolescence of equipment and
dependence on foreign sources for resupply of
material, munitions, and fuel. A severe dol-
lar shortage and the high cost or unavail-
ability of US military supplies have caused
Brazil to turn to Europe for some aircraft and
heavy military equipment, to the detriment
of Hemisphere arms standardization. How-
ever, procurement from this source is also
severely limited by lack of foreign exchange.

27. The Brazilian armed forces are adequate
to maintain internal security and to deter ag-
gression by any neighboring power. They
could not repel a major overseas invasion
without US assistance, but Brazilians do not
expect any such necessity to arise. In the
event of general war they could probably pro-
tect strategically important installations and
facilities from extensive sabotage and from
possible raids. The Brazilian Navy and Air
Force have limited convoy and antisubmarine
capabilities, but effective patrol of the long
Brazilian coast would require the active par-
ticipation of US forces. With US logistic sup-
port the Army could provide a small expedi-
tionary force, but Brazil is presently disin-
clined to provide forces for service outside the
Western Hemisphere.

28. The Brazilian Army has been a decisive,
though normally passive, factor in Brazilian
politics. (The Navy tends to remain aloof,
the Air Force to follow the Army’s lead in po-
litical matters.) The Army is predisposed to
uphold the established government, but con-
siders that it has an overriding responsibility
for the preservation of Brazilian civic institu-
tions and the maintenance of-order. In a sit-
uation threatening prolonged civil strife the

28]

- Ser 6°

Army would be likely to give more weight to
this sense of civic Tesponsibility than to lega-
listic considerations. The Army’s action in a
given contingency would depend on its judg-
ment as to the gravity of the threat to estab-
lished institutions and the relative amount of
disorder which would ensue from the alterna-
tive courses open to it. The growth and or-
ganization of the urban proletariat tends to
inhibit political action by the Army insofar as
the Army would prefer to avoid action which
might provoke bitter popular resistance. At
the same time the Army is disturbed by this
development and any precipitate attempt to
mobilize the proletariat as a countervailing
force might provoke the Army’s immediate
and decisive political intervention.

29. Most of the Army’s leaders opposed the
election of Vargas in 1950 because they dis-
liked his labor-leftist backing and feared that
he might again resort toa dictatorship. Never-
theless they have given his administration
their passive support. The Army’s leaders
have been increasingly disturbed by Vargas’
lack of an effective economic program and by
his indifference toCommunism. In 1952 they
forced the resignation of a Minister of War
who supported a nationalist-Communist
clique in the important Military Club. How-
ever, their dissatisfaction has not reached the
point at which they would either initiate or
support a move to depose Vargas by force. No
such movement could succeed without active
Army participation.

IV. ECONOMIC SITUATION

30. Brazil has experienced rapid economic
growth in the past seven years. The total
production of goods and services has been in-
creasing at an average rate of somewhat under
6 percent a year, or about 3 percent a year per
capita. Funds devoted to public and private
investment have greatly exceeded the
amounts which Brazilians were willing to save
and investment by foreigners has not come up
to Brazilian expectations. Moreover, a major
part of investment has gone into long-term
basic industry projects and very little into im-
provement of agricultural and minerals pro-
duction which furnished the bulk of Brazil’s
exports. The result has been sustained and

SECRET

rapid inflation and a deficit in foreign ex-
change transactions, which increased rapidly
after the outbreak of the Korean War. The
number of urban wage earners has grown
Tapidly under the impetus of industrialization
but the level of living of this group has been
declining rather than increasing.

31. The sustained inflation has been manifest
in a constant rise in the cost of living, particu-
larly among the growing urban concentra-
tions, with a particularly. sharp increase since
1950. For example, in Sao Paulo the cost of
living index has risen by more than 700 per-
cent since 1939, Wage rates have increased
much less. Steady increases in the prices of
foodstuffs and consumer goods have resulted
in part from the increasing strains on the
antiquated agricultural, transportation, and
distribution systems as urban population has
increased. Additional inflationary factors
have been a largely unchecked credit expan-
sion, inefficient tax collections, and unbal-
anced federal budgets. In the past year, how-
ever, some headway has been made in modify-
ing these inflationary financial Policies.

32. The foreign exchange deficit reflects Bra-
zil’s tendency since World War II to live be-
yond itsincome. Until recently the Brazilian
Government has been Willing to incur mount-
ing foreign exchange deficits because of hopes
that with foreign financial assistance eco-
nomic development would soon Permit a per-
manent solution to the country’s foreign ex-
change problem. These hopes have been so
Strong that the government has given rela-
tively little attention to increasing agricul-
tural and mineral production for export. The
Sizeable foreign exchange surpluses accumu-
lated during the war were expended within a
few years. Special impetus was given to im-
ports by rapid credit expansion and overvalua-
tion of the cruzeiro, and, from 1950 to 1952,
by liberal import licensing policies based on a
fear of shortages following the outbreak of the
Korean War. Until foreign exchange restric-
tions were imposed on J anuary 1, 1952, private
net capital outflows and large profit remit-
tances on foreign investments at the favorable
official rate added to the drain on Brazil’s
foreign exchange.

=2yz

oe re ae lta ap ah ee lee ee Se

- Se 7

33. By mid-1953 Brazil’s commercial indebted-
ness with the US and other creditors had
reached $850 million, approximately two-
thirds of the value of its annual exports.
This situation has been somewhat relieved by
a $300 million balance of payments loan
from the Export-Import Bank, by loans from
private banks in the US, and by arrangements
with European creditors. During 1953 Brazil
has been able to reduce the rate of accumula-
tion of foreign exchange deficits by drastically
cutting imports and by improving to some de-
gree the marketability of some of its exports.
These measures, however, have not been suffi-
cient to close the gap between imports and
exports. The government maintains that the
current volume of imports of consumer goods
and foodstuffs (20 percent of total imports)
cannot be further substantially reduced. It
cannot, without adversely affecting the level
of economic activity, cut deeply into imports
of raw materials and fuel (55 percent of im-
ports). It has also been reluctant to cut
significantly imports of capital goods, which
would jeopardize the rate of growth to which
economic activity has been geared in recent
years.

34. The problem of Brazil’s development re-
quirements was the subject of intensive study
by the Joint Brazil-US Economic Development
Commission, established in July 1951. The
Commission recommended a number of speci-
fic projects emphasizing the development of
transportation, distribution, and power facili-
ties. Brazilian hopes for loans from the
Eximbank and the International Bank
(IBRD) to finance these projects have not
fully materialized. To date Brazil has ob-
tained from these Banks a total of $130 mil-
lion for specific development projects as com-
pared with Brazilian expectations of $500
million (including $380 million for projects
recommended by the Joint Commission). The
effect of the $130 million in loans has been
minimal in relieving Brazil’s present foreign
exchange difficulties because the loans were
granted for intermediate and long range de-
velopmental projects. Moreover, the foreign
exchange crisis which Brazil hoped the loans
would prevent had already materialized by
the time they were granted.

“STR

35. The IBRD thus far has refused to meet
Brazil’s request for loans in addition to the
$41 million now being negotiated on the
ground that Brazil’s present economic policies
make it impracticable for Brazil to increase
its financial obligations. The Bank has urged
Brazil to facilitate development and exploita-
tion of Brazilian resources, especially oil, by
encouraging foreign investment and to pro-
mote fuller development of Brazil’s agricul-
tural potential. The Vargas administration
has reluctantly recognized the unlikelihood
of securing financial assistance of the magni-
tude it expected at the time the Joint Commis-
Sion was created. It has also recognized that
it must re-examine its present economic poli-
cies if it is to secure sizeable credits from the
US and the IBRD. It has, however, hesitated
to take concrete steps toward readjustment,
primarily because any of the alternative
courses of action involve political decisions
which the government at this time would pre-
fer to avoid making.

36. The existence of important petroleum re-
sources in Brazil is suspected on the basis of
geological indications, but has not been
proved. Exploration and development of such
resources might be of substantial advantage
in reducing Brazil’s adverse balance of trade.
At present Brazil must import almost all of
its petroleum requirements. Such imports
now constitute 13 percent of total imports and
Brazilian requirements are rapidly increasing.
Present prospects for petroleum development
are poor, however. Brazilian capital and
technical resources available for the purpose
are inadequate. The IBRD and Eximbank
are unwilling to grant loans for petroleum
development because adequate private foreign
capital is available on reasonable terms.
Meanwhile Brazilian ultranationalists, abet-
ted by the Communists, have secured the
passage of a law prohibiting the participation
of foreign capital in petroleum development.
In view of this law, Brazilian oil resources will
not be substantially developed in the near
future. In general, the prevalent nationalistic
attitude regarding the exploitation of Brazil's
mineral resources has deterred the participa-

tion of foreign capital in their development.

263

ee a ere

- ~CeRE 8-

V. FOREIGN POLICY

37. Brazil has traditionally regarded itself as
the particular friend and ally of the United
States in Latin America. With a self-confi-
dence based on its vast extent and relative
political stability, it has considered itself su-
perior to its Spanish-speaking neighbors and
the natural associate of the United States.
Moreover, the United States is by far Brazil’s
most important coffee market and the only
important source of needed financial and
technical aid. For these reasons Brazil
strongly desires the friendship and support of
the United States and is highly sensitive to
any US tendency not to accord Brazil special
consideration and favor. At the same time

Brazil is sensitive to any implication of US -

tutelage.

38. In recent years US-Brazilian relations
have been impaired by growing Brazilian na-
tionalism, which has produced friction in both
economic and politico-military affairs. An
important factor in this development has been
a growing feeling in Brazil that the US
undervalues Brazil’s friendship and tends to
take it for granted. In particular, Brazilians
feel that US economic and financial assistance
to Brazil has not been commensurate with
Brazil’s past services and present strategic im-
portance to the US, or with Brazil's value to
the US as a moderating influence in Latin
America and in UN affairs.

39. Brazil cooperates closely with the US in
the Organization of American States and has
consistently supported the US in the UN on
basic issues between the US and the Soviet
Bloc. Thus far Brazil has made no move to
restore diplomatic relations with the USSR,
which were broken in 1947, and maintains
diplomatic relations with only Poland and
Czechoslovakia among the Bloc countries.
Brazil's trade with the Bloc is at present
negligible. There are, however, mounting
official and popular pressures for closer rela-
tions with the Bloc. This idea is attractive
because of Brazil’s need to find new markets
for its exports, and perhaps also as a means
of strengthening Brazil’s bargaining position
vis-a-vis the US. Communists and their sym-
pathizers are pressing it for their own ulterior

on a large scale.

purposes, with considerable nationalist sup-
port.

40. In the Latin American community Brazil
has always opposed Argentine bids for leader-
ship. At present Brazil is principally con-
cerned regarding the efforts of the Peron
regime to expand its influence in neighboring
countries. It views the recent Argentine-
Chilean economic treaty with disfavor as the
possible forerunner of an Argentine-dom-
inated economic bloc. Brazil has sought to
counter Argentine penetration of Uruguay,
Paraguay, and Bolivia, and, for its own part,
has cultivated its relations with Peru, Colom-
bia, and Venezuela. Fundamentally, how-
ever, Brazil deprecates the idea of competing
blocs in Latin America and promotes instead .
the concept of Hemisphere solidarity.

VI. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS

41. Regardless of the policies pursued by
Vargas during the remainder of his term,
Brazil will continue to be subject to great
political and economic stresses and strains.
Vargas, dependent on both the right and left
for support, will probably pursue a middle-of-
the-road course at least until the congres-
sional elections in the fall of 1954. He will
continue recently initiated efforts to avoid
foreign exchange deficits and will attempt to
control inflation. In these efforts he will
probably be able to enlist the active support of
influential moderate-rightist elements which
are anxious to improve Brazil’s international
economic situation.

42. Vargas will probably succeed in establish-
ing less inflationary government financial pol-
icies. Nevertheless, the cost of living will
probably continue to rise and social unrest
will probably increase among the urban lower
income groups. This trend may lead to con-
Siderable popular disorder, but will probably
not by itself present a serious threat to the
Stability of the government.

43. The nationalistic attitude prevalent with
regard to the exploitation of Brazilian mineral
resources will probably continue to deter for-
eign investments in this field. Brazil’s petro-
leum resources will probably not be developed
Should the result of the

—~836-RET

ost

1954 congressional elections strengthen Var-
gas’ political position, he might attempt to
liberalize the nationalistic petroleum law so as
to attract foreign private capital. However,
in view of the nationalistic emotions aroused
by this issue, it is unlikely that such an at-
tempt would succeed.

44. Vargas will continue to seek foreign devel-
opmental loans. He will undertake the mini-
mum retrenchment which he considers neces-
sary for that purpose, and will also take politi-
cal action designed to soften the economic
requirements of foreign lending institutions.
If he should succeed in obtaining large devel-
opment loans before the 1954 congressional
elections, his political position would be great-
ly strengthened. A failure to obtain loans by
then, however, would not greatly weaken Var-
gas’ political position if he had adopted domes-
tic measures which the moderate conserva-
tives believed would alleviate Brazil’s eco-
nomic difficulties.

45. Vargas will probably continue to pursue a
middle-of-the-road course throughout his
presidential term, unless his political position
is seriously weakened by the results of the
1954 elections. In the latter event, he might
adopt a more nationalistic course in response
to increasing extremist pressures.

46. In the event of a severe economic deteri-
oration, conservative groups might counte-
nance a more nationalist program if they
foresee no quick end to Brazil’s difficulties.
It is also possible that Vargas, should he be-
come apprehensive of a deterioration of his
political position, might take extreme meas-
ures to build up mass support. Should he
appeal to the masses over the heads of the
Congress and the military, or should he move
precipitately to consolidate organized labor as
a source of political support, he would prob-
ably be removed from office by moderate and
conservative elements, including the Army,
which are hostile toward dictatorship and
toward labor-leftist elements.

47. Reports that Vargas is in ill-health sug-
gest the possibility of his becoming physically
or mentally incapable of coping with the
strenuous problems of governing. The con-
stitution provides that in the event of the

SECRET

“SS FCRE 9

President’s death or incapacitation the Vice-
President should serve the remainder of the
term as President. The present Vice-Presi-
dent is Joao Cafe Filho. If he came to power
he would probably pursue moderate policies.
He would in particular avoid alienating the
conservatives, including the Army, since he
would probably estimate that his crucial sup-
port would come from those elements.

48. The Communists will continue to enjoy
ample opportunities for agitation, in view of
the continuing economic and social disloca-
tions of the mass of the people. They will
probably continue to exploit those issues
which already have aroused considerable pop-
ular feeling, in particular the rising cost of
living. Their association with such issues will
probably enhance their influence and further
their efforts to obtain legalization of the
Party. Their primary objective will continue
to be to stimulate anti-US feeling in order to
neutralize Brazil as an effective ally of the
US. The Communists will be unable to win
control of the government, but their influ-
ence in official circles and popular opinion
will probably increase.

49. Brazil will almost certainly continue to
support the United States on major issues be-
tween the US and the Soviet Bloc, but, if not
granted the special consideration to which it
feels entitled, with particular reference to fur-
ther developmental loans, it may pursue an
increasingly independent course in economic
matters. A desire to strengthen its bargain-
ing position vis-a-vis the United States will be
an important factor in Brazilian diplomacy.
Brazil will seek to establish closer economic
relations in Latin America and with Europe,
including efforts to increase its non-strategic
trade with the Soviet Bloc. It may also re-
establish diplomatic relations with the USSR
and other nations of the Soviet Bloc. These
developments would enhance the prestige and
influence of the Communists in Brazil.

50. Brazil will continue to oppose Argentine
bids for the leadership of Latin America. It
will oppose any Argentine political or eco-
nomic penetration of neighboring countries
and the development of any Argentine-dom-
inated economic bloc in South America.

7
—y>

*~ eGR Ene . 10

51. In the event of general war Brazil would
almost certainly enter the war actively in sup-
port of the United States. Its contribution
would consist primarily of making available
strategic raw materials and air and naval

bases, and of honoring its commitments to
furnish forces for Hemisphere defense. Un-
der pressure it might also furnish a small
expeditionary force for use outside the
Hemisphere.
