Guatemala: 1984-1995
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000117912, dated 5 August 1995.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000117912).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

yn

Central Intelligence Agency
Inspector General

GUATEMALA: 1984-1995

ALLEGED HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES
CONCERNING SELECTED U.S. PERSONS AND MYRNA MACK

(95-0152-IG)

September 15, 1995

Frederick P. Hitz
Inspector General

one

Be Se ae ee eS.
ORES eet

A. R. Cinquegrana
Deputy Inspector General
for Investigations

| All portions are
classified speter
et wan RETOBSS
| Aporoved een L ¢7

This page(s) was missing from the original

Page /~ 1

THE ALLEGED ABDUCTION AND ABUSE OF SISTER DIANNA ORTIZ

66. Dianna Ortiz resided in Guatemala for two years while
teaching indigenous children in Huehuetenango. On November 1,
1989, she traveled to Antigua to attend a religious retreat at the
Posada Belen. According to Ortiz, while in the back yard of the
Posada Belen on November 2,1989, two men, one brandishing a hand
grenade, kidnapped and forced her to accompany them by bus to
Mixco. There they were met by twomenina police car. She was
forced into the police car and driven toa building where she
allegedly was tortured. She was then thrown into a pit with other
torture victims, some already dead. During a subsequent torture
episode, an individual by the name of Alejandrs appeared on the
scene and ordered that Ortiz be released because she was an
American. While being transported to someone Alejandro said was a
“friend of the American Embassy,” she escaped from the vehicle,
obtained money from a female passerby, and took a public-bus to a
travel agency. She then contacted the Maryknoll pnests who came

42
SEGRM!

for her. Ortiz visited the Papal Nuncio and departed Guatemala for
the U.S. on November 4,1989.,

me
Teste

67. The Station and Embassy reported on the Ortiz case from
November 1989 until May 1995. Despite much U.S. and Guatemalan
Government interest over the years, the case remains unsolved. As
early as November 1989, the Embassy reported that Ortiz’s
statements regarding the incident were inconsistent and
contradictory. She was criticized for being uncooperative with
Guatemalan authorities, and this hampered the investigation of her
alleged kidnapping. In 1990, the Guatemalan Government concluded
that the reported kidnapping of Ortiz was fabricated. At that time,
the Embassy was not optimistic about a resolution of the case and
determined that the case was inconclusive.

68. In 1991, Ortiz's attorney filed suit in the US. against former (y )
Alejandro Gramajo Morales. ( by3
:é OLE LYS legume Bene ; : 7 y

ms
ws

Minister of Defense General H

~

ector

cose Ssh. The Guatemalan
overnment reopened the investigation in 1991 based On pressure
from the U.S., but Ortiz continued to be uncooperative and
unresponsive to questioning. Her visits to Guatemala in 1991 and
1992 to re-enact the kidnapping were unsuccessful because Ortiz
provided little information to assist in the investigation. Her
allegations about the kidnapping, rape and torture continued to be
vague.

69. In 1992, a U.S. special investigator and a U.S. special -
Prosecutor independently reached the conclusion that inconsistencies

Guatemalan Government pursued the leads in an investigation but
was unable to make a positive identification of the abductors. |

43

Spot

spon

70. Ortiz visited Guatemala twice in 1994. However, the
investigation did not progress because of a lack of new information.
In 1995 a federal judge in Massachusetts decided in favor of Ortiz
and others in their law suit against General Gramajo. The decision ete
was based on the grounds that, as Minister of Defense at the time of
the Ortiz kidnapping, he authorized the torture. $47.5 million was
awarded to Ortiz and eight Guatemalans residing in the U.S. who
alleged human rights violations by the Guatemalans. As of May
1995, no payment had actually been made to any of the plaintiffs.

CIA Reporting

71. The Ortiz matter was handled primarily by the Embassy's
American Citizen Services Section. CLA reporting on the case
consisted of six Station Reports and four Intelligence Reports. With
one exception, information originated by CIA refutes Ortiz’s claim
that she was kidnapped, raped and tortured by Guatemalan
Government officials. The only report that substantiates Ortiz's claim
is a draft cable, dated October 15, 1991, that was found in Station
files. SO

72. November 7, 1989 Station Report. The COS met with the
Minister of Defense on November 4, 1989. The Minister of Defense
noted that the police had requested and been denied an interview
with Ortiz. Therefore, a judicial order had been obtained so that
Ortiz would be forced to Speak to them. The Minister of Defense said
that the US. could not have it both ways by complaining that the
Guatemalan Government does not follow legal precepts and then,
when it does, ask that it not do so. The COS agreed, but noted that
the religious personnel involved in the case had better access to the
U.S. press than did the Guatemalan Government. To pursue the
matter in Guatemala would lead to even more unfavorable publicity.
The Minister of Defense recommended that the COS Speak to the ©
Chief of Police, who agreed to let the matter pass.

73. October 15, 1991 Draft Station Cable. According to this (Da)

> . wee pe ne dae soto. ee Ry em
we tet A Oe eee eee at Ot a ee Bole ee ao
Sed Sasi, 5 2d a te ae Ci Seo oe ee Tg LD eae .
DNS. eee e pene SEES Jer tie a se RTE. See ate

ae

leftist guerrillas and this led to her arrest. He said that Ortiz was in
fact kidnapped as she claimed, probably by the S-2 office of Military

DNs,

Zone 302, with headquarters in Chimaltenango. & VENUE hie SARS
opined that Ortiz was probably not raped or otherwise mistreated as -=
she claimed, since women were not usually sexually molested and

her captors would have killed her had she been subjected to physical
mistreatment. Women were sometimes drugged and then released,
leaving them disoriented and unable to recall what happened to

them. This may, accordin Pate have been the case
with Ortiz. Although @iipsecesasemmam vas unable to provide further
details about Ortiz, he was clear i in stating that she, in fact, was
kidnapped.

74. This draft cable contained additional information about
alleged human rights violations in Guatemala. There is no indication
the cable was ever forwarded to Headquarters.

75. December 20, 1991 Intelligence Report. Gages
that Guatemalan President Serrano aieaieced: one

Minister of Defense General Luis Enrique Mendoza Garcia due to
Mendoza's continued blocking of the investigations of several human
rights cases, including the assault on Ortiz. Serrano hoped that
Mendoza’'s dismissal eventually would help alleviate international
pressure on Guatemala regarding the military and human nights
issues.

76. The Station sent the information to Ene epa on
December 20, 1991 and it was disseminated Gaeeiatseseaer eee
on December 21, 1991 to:

U.S. Embassy, Guatemala;

NSA;
State, INR;
DIA;
Treasury,
White House Situation Room; and
USCINCSO.
“45
So” .ec

77. April 9, 1992 Headquarters Cable. Headquarters requested

that the Station provide an assessment of the Ortiz story and any
information the Station may have regarding the incident.

Station was not involved in Ortiz's CuuTent visit to Guatemala. Plans
to reconstruct the alleged abduction, torture and Tape were aborted
because Ortiz became ill. She wa

primarily by the Emb
Station report contain

neu me, and
tigation was undertaken to attempt to identify
llegedly involved in the kidnapping. §

* -
3 >.

extensive inves
police officers a

the

bas pares Pport
the story told by Ortiz. Upon completion of the investigation, the
investigators were convinced that Ortiz invented the Story and that
senior officials of the Roman Catholic hierarchy in Guatemala
collaborated in turning the alleged incident into a political cause.

_~

Spot

ee

81. The Station report commented that neither the Station nor
the Embassy found Ortiz's story credible. There were too many
contradictions of fact, refusals to cooperate with law enforcement

investigators, and convenient fainting spells when direct questions
were asked about events. |

82. This Station report contained no reference to the
information confirming Ortiz's story contained in the October 15,
1991 draft Station cable prepared by Station ns

ae

-. . ete
bare” od :

two days before Ortiz left her post in Huehuetenango in
late October 1989, two guerrillas were captured near San Miguel
Acatan. The two guerrillas had only one carbine and one round of
ammunition between them. They were transported to the military
zone in Huehuetenango and interrogated. They told military
authorites that they had not eaten in three days and that they were
waiting for Ortiz to bring them food and ammunition. No other
information was provided in the Station report.

wet:

84. February 16, 1994 Intelligence Report ¢

es

23 f cast further do = e
Said the former site of the Guatemalan Military Academy could not
possibly have been the location, as alleged by Ortiz, where she was

“47

spr

sere

detained and physically and sexually assaulted by members of an
unidentified Guatemalan Government security force.

55. GRE explained that the Guatemalan Military
Academy was the location of the D-2 of the Guatemalan Armed
Forces General Staff from 1982 until early 1985 when the D-2 moved
out of the building and the site was tumed over to the D-5 (Civil-
Military Affairs) of the General Staff. Qe <aid that the

ae See

D-2 had detention cells located in’a converted laundry at the
Academy, but that these detention cells were dismantled in early
1985 when the D-2 moved out of the building. Furthermore,

Tigh Dats,
a aa ee

acces Said that there had not been either an intelligence
service or any facility for holding persons at the Academy since then.

errs
apts fhe

eal so

ee eee
ay ter eyes = -
* 7% 6 Te 5

86. speculated that Ortiz may have been
shown the site by persons interested in assisting her in fortifying her
case against the Guatemalan Government and who would have
known the site was formerly associated with government security
forces. The Station sent this information to Headquarters on
February 16 and it was disseminated See peeE a Se EE

on
February 17, 1994 to:
State, INR
DIA
Intelligence units of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps,
and Air Force;

Treasury Department;

White House Situation Room;
DOE; and

USCINCSO.

87. November 8, 1994 St Sits, URIS
wi STE Se cere gthat Ortiz fabricated her story as part iT l
of a Guatemalan "National Union (URNG)-directed ) \)

SE ie * oe

commented that a foreign ()B)
2 Sm during one of Ortiz's

post-1989 visits to Guatemala. a explained that the

foreign journalist advised 8 Mm that he leamed from

URNG sources that the Ortiz story had been fabricated by the URNG

and that it was intended to force an end to SMM funding of

Guatemalan security services. @ aaesaid that he could not

recall the name or nationality of the foreign a ess or ‘recall when

or where the meeting between the journalist and jaa =

SERED t00k place.

88. A Station comment noted that three separate events
surrounding the Ortiz case made her story appear questionable.
First, Ortiz claimed that the site where she was held and tortured in
1989 was the old Military Academy that the D-2 moved out of in
1985, reportedly completely dismantling the holding facility. Second,
Ortiz submitted to the Guatemalan courts an affidavit from a U.S.
medical doctor attesting that the doctor had seen the alleged scars
from cigarette bums on Ortiz's back. However, Ortiz refused to
permit a Guatemalan court-appointed doctor to verify the scars.
Third, Ortiz claimed, that during her torture, a Caucasian North
American male identified as “Alejandro by her kidnappers visited
the site and spoke with her. Ortiz claimed that this same male took
custody of her and told her that he would drive her to see a "friend of
the North American Embassy." According to the Station, this portion
of Ortiz's statement appeared to be an attempt to force the conclusion
that Ortiz was kidnapped and tortured os a Guatemalan security

NE ee

SESPRET

69. November 11, 1994 Intelligence Report. According to
eee in early November 1994, the Guatemalan military
has 1 never T operated ‘clandestine prisons” to hold po litical prisoners as
claimed by the URNG and its supporters Sigs peg Saidthat. ==

captured guerrillas were held at military zone headquarters and at
D-2 facilities, but that calling these “clandestine prisons” appeared to
be an intentional exaggeration and misrepresentation on the part of
the URNG. The holding cells located in the old Military Academy,
where the D-2 was formerly housed, were used to hold persons while
the D-2 debriefed them. The D-2 completel y dismantled the cells
when the D-2 relocated from that Site.

90. A Station comment included in the Report stated that
Ortiz's claim that she was held and tortured at the site of the old
Military Academy was viewed as proof by the Guatemalans that
Ortiz fabricated her claim to have been kidnapped and tortured. The
Guatemalans believed she must have been told what to say by the
URNG or its supporters.

91. This information was sent to Headquarters on
November 11, 1994 and was disseminated (=aee= =
on November 11, 1994 to:

NSA;

State, INR;

Sate (SU)

Intelligence units of the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, ( byl 3)
and Air Force;

Treasury Department;
White House Situation Room; and
USCINCSO.

“~~ Although there was no sugges

92. December 91994 Station Report. Ambassador McA fee

contacted COS G5g@RRSeaEeMEE and said that she had received a call
from a State Guatemalan desk officer who had been contacted by
Ortiz. Ortiz inquired about an alleged “Media Management Course"
sponsored fap“ Guatemala as reported in the "Central America
Report." Qa told McAfee that this was
With The Media" course given &

November 14 and 15, 1994 as an
Management Seminar. § :

probably the "Relations

’ oe on
nsion of the Incident

fegere

exte

The course provided
training to a broad segment of Guatemalan officials within the

ion that
Ortiz or the others, he was sued on the grounds that, as Minister of

ve

conducted a search of Station files for craft cable traffic related to
human rights cases that the Station ma not have forwarded to
Headquarters. According to Wiig

; - contained
no cables that had not been forwarded to Headquarters.

sty

she

97. CIA records contained 83 reports dealing with Ortiz. These

Other Reporting

included FBIS reporting, Embassy telegrams and Defense Attaché ~

Reports. They are summarized as follows:

¢ November 3, 1989 FBIS Report. According to the
press, Guatemalan Archbishop Prospero Penados
del Barrio reported the kidnapping of Dianna
Ortiz, a 20 year old nun from Colorado. Ortiz was
reported kidnapped on November 2, 1989 in
Antigua, Guatemala, where she was attending a
seminar with other nuns.

+ November 4, 1989 Embassy Telegram.
Ambassador Stroock reported Ortiz was taken to
the home of the Papal Nuncio. Stroock visited the
home and noted Ortiz had large bruises /scrapes
on her left cheek. According to the Nuncio, she
also had burns on her back. Stroock noted that
Ortiz looked traumatized.

* Movember, 195) Si (/)(/)
reported that Archbishop

Prospero Penados del Barrio announced the
kidnapping of Dianna Ortiz on Novemiber 3, 1989.

+ November 6, 1989 Embassy Telegramt Stroock
reported he made another attempt to visit Ortiz on
November 4 but was not allowed to see her.

+ November 6, 1989 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy suggested press guidance for the State
Department based on available details regarding
what happened to Ortiz. The guidance stated that
Ortiz appeared to have been physically mistreated.
However, she declined to provide details.
Embassy officers attempted to meet with her on

53
SEGRET

sabger

four occasions to learn what had happened, but

were unsuccessful.

November 7, 1989 Embassy Telegram. Because of aera
interest in a separate kidnapping in Mexico, the

Guatemala City Embassy provided details to the

U.S. Embassy in Mexico regarding Oritz's

kidnapping, release and departure from

Guatemala. -

November 8, 1989 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that the story released by the
Archbishop surrounding the alleged
disappearance and subsequent reappearance of
Ortiz contradicted in important ways the story
initially told to the Ambassador and Embassy
officers. The Embassy noted that Ortiz's refusal to
speak to U.S. representatives, either in Guatemala
or the U.S., and the insistence on maximum
publicity by those around her, led the Embassy to
" question the motives and timing behind the story.
Stroock urged a full investigation by appropriate
U.S. law enforcement agencies.

November 8, 1989 FBIS Report. According to the
Guatemalan press, the Guatemalan Government
denied the existence of the “secret jails" denounced
by Ortiz. The press reported that Ortiz was
kidnapped, raped, tortured, and held by three men
for 24 hours. -

November 16, 1989 FBIS Report. According to the
Guatemalan press, former Guatemalan Interior
Minister Valle described Ortiz's account of her
kidnapping as “surprising and incredible." Vale
noted that, if state security forces were responsible
for the crime, they would never have used a public
bus to transport the nun from Antigua to Mixco, as

<
st

we LL

a COT

secher

she claimed. He also criticized Ortiz's failure to
provide Guatemalan authorities with information
so that they could investigate the incident.

November 16, 1989 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported on continued Guatemalan
Government, church and local press reaction to
Ortiz's kidnapping and torture story. On
November 9, Guatemalan President Cerezo said he
doubted Ortiz's story. On the same day, an Army
captain in the Presidential Guard charged with
investigating Ortiz's case said he was at a dead
end. The Papal Nuncio told Stroock for the first
time that Ortiz was visited and treated by a doctor
before she left Guatemala.

-

November 20, 1989 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that the Guatemalan Mutual
Support Group had linked the United States with
the kidnapping of Ortiz. The link was based on
Ortiz's testumony that one of her alleged
kidnappers mentioned “a friend in the US.
Embassy."

November 27, 1989 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy received a copy of the police
investigation report of the alleged torture and
kidnapping of Ortiz. The report, according to the
Embassy, stated that all the bus drivers who drove
on the Antigua-Mixco route were interviewed but
none of them remembered any woman matching
Ortiz's description boarding the bus.

December 1, 1989 Embassy Telegram. Stroock
met with two American Maryknoll priests to
attempt to overcome religious community
suspicion and antipathy toward the U.S. Embassy.
Both priests recounted numerous past atrocities

$5
a

STE ©

NE eee

sehen

against villagers and priests that they attributed to

the Guatemalan Army. Neither priest accepted the

general proposition that the human rights

situation had improved under a civilian se
government.

+ December 19, 1989 State Telegram. State
Department issued its Central American update
for November and noted that the Ortiz case had

created a furor among religious and human rights
groups in the U.S. It noted that the case may lead
to renewed attempts in Congress to restrict
assistance to Guatemala.

+ January 12,1990 FBI Report. The FBI reported to
CIA, DoJ, State, Panama City, and two FBI field
offices on the kidnapping of Ortiz. The FBI report
provided no new information.

¢ January 26, 1990 Embassy Telegram. The
' Embassy reported that the investigation of the
alleged kidnapping of Ortiz was stalled in an
Antigua court. The presiding judge had prepared
letters requesting that the appropriate U.S.
authorities take a sworn statement from Ortiz and
require that she undergo a physical examination.

¢ February 1, 1990 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that a Guatemalan
dermatologist told Embassy officers that he had -—
examined Ortiz on November 3, 1989 and treated
her for minor facial lacerations and bums on her
back. The dermatologist stated that there could
have been as many as 100 lesions or bums on her
back. He explained that there were no follow-up
visits because Ortiz left Guatemala for the U.S. the
o— next day.

Segre

Ne

+ February 3, 1990 State Telegram. The State
Department issued its final version of the 1989
Human Rights Report for Guatemala. The report
mentioned that the alleged torture case of Dianna er

l . Ortiz was under investigation. It also noted that

the Guatemalan Government opened an ~

investigation into the case and requested

additional information from Ortiz. However,

Ortiz did not accedé to the request and the
| perpetrators remained unidentified.

¢ March 12,1990 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy

reported that Guatemalan Minister of Interior
Carlos Morales Villatoro told reporters at a press

| conference that he believed the Ortiz incident was
a "self-kidnapping.” Morales criticized Ortiz and

| another recent kidnap victim for fleeing
Guatemala without presenting their cases before
the appropriate authorities. The Embassy

\ commented that Morales expressed the conception
held by many Guatemalans that Ortiz fabricated

| the entire incident.

Guatemalan National Police provided a booklet to
the Embassy entitled " Report on Investigations of
Human Rights Related Cases in Guatemala:
January 1989-February 1990." The Embassy
| commented that the booklet's discussion of the
Ortiz case provided information already known,
with the exception of the claim that a psychiatrist
| had asked Ortiz to go to the retreat in Antigua.
This claim, according to the Embassy, was .
4 _ consistent with public statements by Morales that
there were "certain aspects of Ortiz's life that he
does not wish to make public.”

| . ¢ March 15,1990 Embassy Telegram. The

sett

feed ce

yas

+ March 15,1990 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that Minister of Interior Morales and the
police concluded that the reported kidnapping of
Ortiz was a fake. It also stated that one of the local ee
newspapers carried a paid advertisement from the
conference of religious persons of Guatemala that _
disputed Morales's statement that Ortiz did not tell
the truth.

+ April 3, 1990 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that Ortiz's attorney, Paul Soreff, told
Stroock that he would write a letter to the public
stating that neither he nor Ortiz accuses any
employee of the U.S. Embassy of partidpating in
her abduction and torture. The Embassy
commented that it was not optimistic about a
definitive resolution of Ortiz's case. Ortiz's
physical and emotional states were said to be too
fragile to allow her to be interviewed by anyone

_ other than her closest colleagues.

+ April 6,1990 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that Ortiz's attorney Soreff told Minister
Morales that he was outraged by statements that
Ortiz was involved ina “self-kidnapping."

Morales told Soreff that as far as he was concerned
the investigation was over and that it was a “self-
kidnapping." Morales stated that the burden was
now on Ortiz to make her case.

+ April 30, 1990 Embassy Telegram. According to
the Embassy, Soreff told Stroock that Guatemalan
President Cerezo agreed to appoint a Special,
Commission to examine the Ortiz case. Soreff and
other members of a delegation visiting Guatemala
to discuss the Ortiz case accused the Embassy of

- bias and of spreading misinformation about Ortiz.

58
segter

| eT ne

SEQRET

+ May 31,1990 State Telegram. The State

Department reported that Soreff met with State

officials in Washington and requested that they

press for the establishment of a Guatemalan Sots
Special Commission to investigate the Ortiz case.

Soreff requested a letter be sent to President

Cerezo indicating the U.S. considered resolution of

the Ortiz case to be important.

+ June 14,1990 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy

reported that President Cerezo told Stroock that he
believed the Special Commission should
investigate and resolve the Ortiz case.

September 27, 1990 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy's 1990 Country Human Rights Report
stated that no progress was made in the Ortiz case.
It reported that a police investigation and official
statements cast doubt on Ortiz's claim that she was
abducted and tortured by security forces. The
Report noted that, despite many requests, Ortiz
had not provided further information to
Guatemalan or US. officials, and the case
remained open with a lack of information
hampering a serious investigation.

November 23, 1990 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that it opposed a representative
of the State Department in Washington meeting
with Ortiz. It stressed that such a meeting was a
“lawyer's stunt” meant to blunt criticism of Ortiz's
year long refusal to talk to FBI investigators.

December 6, 1990 Embassy Telegram. Soreff told
Stroock that he wanted the commission to look
into the Ortiz case to be formed and operating as
President Cerezo had promised. Soreff told

‘Stroock that Cerezo refused to meet with him.

“59
SEGAET

Neer

According to Ursuline head Sister, Francis
Wilhem, Ortiz began to remember more details
about her alleged kidnapping and torture. Ortiz,
according to Wilhem, said that she now
remembers that she was repeatedly raped, that rats
were dropped on her, and that wine was poured _
on the cigarette burns on her back and dogs were
brought in to lick the wine off. The Embassy
commented that the Ortiz case is inconclusive and
will remain so until she is willing to come forward
and answer questions.

December 12, 1990 Embassy Telegram.
According to the Embassy, Sister Wilhelm issued a
press release that stated that the Guatemalan
military and police were responsible for the
kidnapping and torture of Dianna Ortiz. Asa
result, they chose not to doa thorough
investigation of this case, instead calling her
disappearance a ‘self-kidnapping."

December 17, 1990 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that the Ortiz case was being
given extensive local publicity and was a subject in
local electoral politics.

December 20, 1990 Press Report. The local
Guatemalan press reported that President Cerezo
made a formal commitment to a group of U.S.
legislators to allow Ortiz to take part in the
investigation to ascertain who kidnapped and
raped her.

February 13, 1991 Embassy Telegram. A
delegation representing Ortiz concluded its visit to
Guatemala. The group issued a statement asking
that a Guatemalan Presidential Commission meet
before the end of February, or the Ortiz case would

60
a

t
if
ty

Le =k

cher

be referred to international public opinion and the
world press.

May 7, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy's
April 1991 Human Rights Summary for Guatemala
noted that Guatemalan President Serrano, despite
earlier promises, announced he would not form a
commission to investigate Ortiz's allegations.

June 21, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that it polled every U.S. and foreign
service national employee at the mission and did
not find anyone who matched the description of
“Alejandro” that had been provided by Ortiz.

July 5, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
issued a standard reply letter to be used regarding
the Ortiz case. The letter provided details on
Ortiz and the Embassy's involvement in the case.

July 20,1991 State Telegram. State Department
tTansmitted guidance on responding to Special
Investigator Carl West's request to discuss the
Ortiz case with Embassy officers. The Department
requested that the Embassy contact Ortiz's
attorney and ask West to submit his request in
writing.

August 1, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that a religious legal delegation told
Stroock that the Guatemalan Government was
now Serious about investigating Ortiz's case.
Members of the delegation noted that Ortiz's suit
against former Defense Minister General Gramajo
was the result of Gramajo's continuing allegation
that Ortiz’s ordeal was the result of a lesbian affair
gone bad. .

“61

seq ET

August 6, 1991 Embassy. Telegram. The Embassy

issued its Human Rights Report for July 1991

Stating that a recent delegation led by Soreff was

pleased with President Serrano’s decision to name se
a special investigator and prosecutor to examine

Ortiz's case. ~

August 13, 1991 FBIS Report. On July 21, the
Guatemalan press reported that former
Guatemalan President Cerezo said that he was
aware of security forces involvement in the
abduction and torture of Ortiz. However, the
Embassy reported that when the Deputy Chief of
Mission spoke with Cerezo, he denied that he ever
Said such a thing. :

October 17, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that Ortiz refused to meet with
Special Investigator West—-who was invesHgating
Ortiz's case on behalf of the Guatemalan
Government.

October 21, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported in its FY 1991 Human Rights
Report that the Guatemalan Attorney General
appointed a special prosecutor and an investigator
to examine the Ortiz case.

November 22, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The

Embassy reported that retired General Gramajo L
called the suit filed by the Center for

Constitutional Rights a political maneuver and

Stated that “nobody believes the Ortiz Story.”

December 6, 1991 Embassy Telegram.
Guatemalan Special Prosecutor Linares explained
to Stroock that he would not travel to Kentucky to
interview Ortiz because he felt uneasy about the

62

SeCpe

bud RL

sehger

terms of the interview. He noted that he urged
Deputy Ombudsman Morales de Sierra to go
instead.

December 6, 1991 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy forwarded a copy ofamemorandum .
from Deputy Ombudsman Morales de Sierra to
Ombudsman De Leon describing Morales's
attempt to interview Ortiz in Kentucky. Ortiz,
according to the memorandum, was not
cooperative and would not respond to questions.

December 31, 1991 Embassy Telegram. Unknown
assailants fired several shots at the home of the
Deputy Human Rights Ombudsman who was
working on the Ortiz case.

January 3, 1992 State Telegram. State's final
version of the FY 1991 Human Rights Report for
Guatemala mentioned the Ortiz case as one of a
number of human rights cases that remained
unsolved.

January 7, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
Teported that Human Rights Ombudsman De Leon
Saw some improvement in Guatemala's overall
human rights situation. De Leon stated he
believed the Archbishop had gone beyond the
evidence in his statements about Ortiz.

February 7, 1992 Embassy Telegram. Stroock
reported on plans for an Ortiz visit to Guatemala.

February 21, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported on Ortiz's upcoming visit to
Guatemala and her availability for an investigative
interview. Special Prosecutor Linares called fora
complete investigation into Ortiz's case and stated

"63

SEGRET

soQger

that her judicial statements were essential to
clarify inconsistencies in the facts.

March 24, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported on Stroock’'s meeting with Human Rights
Ombudsman De Leon. Stroock told De Leon that--
Ortiz planned to visit Guatemala Apnil 5-9 and
would stay at his residence.

April 10, 1992 FBIS Report. FBIS relayed a
transcript of Presidential Secretary General
Orellana's statement on Ortiz's return to
Guatemala.

Apmil 15, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that Ortiz's visit to Guatemala provided
little, if any, new information to enable the
Guatemalan Government to investigate her case
and bring the perpetrators to justice. The Embassy
indicated that Ortiz's advisor carefully controlled
her time and she was not exposed to any risk of
contradicting herself or providing additional
testimony that might have cast doubt on her
version of events concerning the kidnapping.

April 24, 1992 Embassy Telegram. A Guatemalan
official told Deputy Assistant Secretary Joseph
Sullivan that Ortiz's allegations about the rape,
torture, and kidnap were vague. He stated his
belief that the case was being manipulated
politically and would be very difficult to resolve.

April 30, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
provided a summary of Ortiz's visit to Guatemala
and Carl West's investigation. West, according to
the Embassy, stated that inconsistencies in Ortiz's
statements made it impossible to determine who
may have committed acts against her. Both the

64

SECRET

Let

+

_ May 19, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy

-June 1, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy

sper

Ortiz’s version of events.

Special Prosecutor and Judge Secaira doubted \

May 6, 1992 State Telegram. The State
Department authorized a limited waiver of
diplomatic immunity to permit Stroock to provide
answers to questions conceming the Ortiz case ata
Guatemalan court hearing.

May 12, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
provided a list of questions from Judge Secaira that
Stroock was to answer at the court hearing on the
Ortiz case. i

reported that the Guatemalan Human Rights
Commission report described naming a special
prosecutor in Ortiz case. | \

reported Stroock's responses to Judge Secairo's
questions at the Ortiz hearing.

July 6, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that Monsignor Flores told Stroock that
he doubted Ortiz's story.

July 7, 1992 Embassy Telegram. Stroock reported
on a meeting with Onitz's attomeys where he
requested they provide a listing of actions they
would like the Guatemalan Government to take in
the case. Stroock stated he would continue to
press for resolution of the case.

July 7, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy

reported on Stroock's testimony to the Guatemalan a

court on the alleged abduction and tortureof _”
Ortiz.
65
SEC

‘
‘

seChet

+

August 14, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy \\
reported that Judge Secaira had been unexpectedly
transferred.

f

September 23, 1992, Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy stated that Stroock requested that |
President Serrano respond to a July 31,1992 letter |
from Attorney Shawn Roberts who was now
representing Ortiz.

+

+

September 28, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The /
Embassy reported that Human Rights A
Ombudsman De Leon Carpio told the Deputy i
Chief of Mission that Ortiz's story was very
confused and she was not cooperative in efforts to
resolve the case.

¢ November 18, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The \
Embassy transmitted its Human Rights Summary
for September-October 1992. The summary stated
that Judge Secaira resigned from the Ortiz case as a |
result of her transfer outside of the capital. |
|

+ December 10, 1992 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported Ortiz's psychological health was
improving and she planned to return to
Guatemala.

¢ March 9,1993 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy H
reported on Ortiz's plan to return to Guatemala to
complete judicial procedures, and of the Embassy's |
plan to assist in the visit.

+ March 31,1993 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy i
reported Ortiz's return toGuatemalaon March21
to complete judicial procedures. It also reported /

— that she identified ten policemen who resembled
* her captors.

66.

SECT

Perr . “

+

ad

+

+

soe

April 5, 1993 Embassy Telegram, A Guatemalan

Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) note to the

Embassy requests names of U.S. personnel

collaborating with Guatemalan Security Forces in a
October and November 1989.

April 28, 1993 State Telegram. The State
Department disagreed with the Embassy response
to the MFA inquiry’and stated that it was unclear
what the MFA means by the word “collaborating.”

May 6, 1993 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
proposed a different response to MFA and it was
approved by the State Department.

October 27, 1993 Embassy Telegram. Ambassador
McAfee met with the Guatemalan Foreign Minister

and provided him with a letter from the Senate
Appropriations Committee that requested a
information and authorization to access military
installations in connection with the Ortiz case.

October 28, 1993 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported McAfee met with Bishop
Gerardi who stated that, because of intransigence
by the armed forces, his office considered closing
the Ortiz case. Gerardi believed Ortiz was being \
excessively manipulated by her advisers.

January 21, 1994 Embassy Telegram. McAfee met
with Bamaca’s American spouse, Jennifer Harbury,
Ortiz and members of the Blake family. |

July 25,1994 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy /
reported that former National Police Director
Cifuentes stated he summised Ortiz was abused by

soldiers. Cifuentes promised to review the “7

"67

sAynet

case file and develop a strategy for continuing the
investigation.

November 5, 1994 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported McAfee met with Ortiz and two
other members of “Coalition Missing” to discuss
the Harbury/Bamaca case.

November 8, 1994 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported Ortiz met with McAfee and
expressed concern that officials in the Guatemalan
Government had a vindictive attitude toward

Harbury.

November 18, 1994 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy reported that Assistant Secretary John
Shattuck and McAfee met with Prosecutor Ramses
Cuestas. Cuestas stated the Ortiz case was stalled
due to an inability to identify a suspect in the
abduction. Cuestas said he hoped for a resolution
of the case in four to five months.

December 29, 1994 Embassy Telegram. The
Embassy issued its Human Rights Report for 1994.
The report mentions that Ortiz retumed to
Guatemala in January and November to press
authorities to take action on her case.

April 20, 1995 FBIS Cable. An FBIS cable from
Panama City provided a transcript of Gramajo's
interview after the $45.7 million judgment against
him by a USS. judge.

April 27, 1995 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported MINUGUA (the UN Human Rights
Verification Commission) Director Leonardo
Franco stated former Minister Gramajo requested
intercession to obtain a public statement from the

68 —

SECRET

a |

—

seQRET

Embassy that Ortiz was permitted to leave
Guatemala as a result of former Ambassador
Stroock’s intervention. eB

¢ May 6,1994 Embassy Telegram. The Embassy
reported that Gramajo stated he expected to run
for President and expressed concern over the Ortiz
lawsuit.

Personnel Recollections

98. Agency personnel who were knowledgeable of the Ortiz
case recall the inconsistencies and isclalescletlesesea. in Sse S various
testimonies about the incident. ye ess ee

100. According to former Ambassador Stroock, Ortiz suffered
some form of trauma. However, her story and the alleged connection
to the Embassy did not withstand scrutiny.

69
