Contact Report
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000135889, dated 3 January 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000135889).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Persons Present: (
. + Places ¢ hie =
4 Date: 9 and 10 January 1954 Se

Reason for Contact: Discussion of Matters Pertaining to PBSUCCESS

I. SUBJECTS DISCUSSED

A. ( Joriefed ( Jon operational, zone of reponsibility, financtal
am support matters as follows:

1. a. General -( ) 78 told that in his conversations with Rufus

to keep the following in mind: ~

(1) The conduct of operations from this point forward will i
based on unconventional warfare program. This program consists
of a tying together of ( ) legs.
At the same time keeping them riciu cumpartoented.

(2) ¢ Jeni ( — - )legs are being carried out independently of
( y bat each has the sole responsibility of servicing
J These ties are being made at headquarters level.

j}'s assignment, once the new concept has been success-
fully established, would be in the field of ( Jonly.

oe (3) Insure that Rufus knows that his operationd plan may be

studied carefully in order to preserve full implementation

. of his slant as well as to fully ut ze this planning to
date. His plan, as submitted, will’built around, added to,
and unfeasible portions, if any, discarded or might be com-
pletely discarded. The sole purpose of the final operational
plan being to conduct the operationd//#7d4/ py unconventional
warfare means. This term allows flexibility to the greatest
degree. ( Jwas warned that in the( )field he mst
make Rufus acqusiated with the general framework around which
headquarters was basing ite thinking and planing so that head-
quarters planning would coincide with Rufus' so that the
reasoning behind our request to him would be apparent and
the final operational planx7f¢ would be compatible with his
intra-organizational coordinktion and planning.

ye \\

(4) Each item of the besic framework would be subject to change as

{ \information and pertinent information on Rufus' assets

vs nufus' former plans is made available tc headquarters and

eur gualn ted might show some items to be superfluous and

some might be more easily accomp¢lished by hitherto unrecognized

or unconsidered aasets; however, as stated above, € _ )was to

insure that all concerned realized what the basic planning

would be built around. 4

-2-

b. Ds informed that at present we are conside
ring

mauy key points with which Rufus will be concerned in the
target country.-One was Coban garrison; two was Zacapa;
three was Jutiapa; four was Mazatenango garrison or field;
five was Quezaltenango garrison or field; six was Quiche
garrison or field; seven Guatemala City and central zone
and garrisons and fields end major coomo points; eight was
Gan Jose; nine was Puerto Barrios garrison, port and field.
Cc tives informed that having studied slightly into the
gevigeepnical and active Bpposition ani as yet being uninformed
as to the exact assets aveilable in Rufus‘ organization, it
was highly possible that Mazatensngo, Quezaltenango and Quiche
might have only folding blocks thrown between them and Rufus'*
operations to forestall our entry into the action during the
movement into target sreas and operations egainst targets near
the border. (_ Jinformedf _/that a pouch had been
sent toy. —marxed eyes only as .cquested byl Tpre-
viously oucsining Rufus' latest operation plans never before
studied by headquarters. The pouch has not F¢t/Pded/Med dt hdd /
reachedl Jas of this date, Jf 13 J , but a preliminary
discussion of the contents of the pouch Leaf” to believe
that the strongest approach to operational pians s be
based around past planning and preparation. It was mmirx
decided between [_ JantS _[that on arrival of Rufus'
plans, headquarters would study ror feasibikity and convert
the plan into an unconventional warfare operational plan
sufficient so that upon Rufus' arrival for conference with

on posathly 25 January, an operational plan could be dis-
cussed with “{At that time acceptance of such phase could
be ironed out and the firm operational planning to proceed from
that point.

The operations against each separate target would be compart-
mented except at Rufusj staff level. To maintain this con-
partmentation, separate staging areas for each operation would
be obtained. In each case the staging area should bef a

i of the target whe. .easible.
The sesection and obtaining of these sights inf_ _{ would be
a priority job for i ‘through Rufus during wc cemainder
of January. It was inttiaily thought thet thef- =
would arrange for rsa cites within its jurisdiction at [

request. C_ “Torought up the fact that some 150 men Agpyx are uc
located wit. w.uce housing areas £ J It was agreed
that this situation would continue insofar az ye _jis

concerned with emergency staging cites designed to recive the

men just short of jump-off time. Storage of pre-invasion
weapons and equipment would be made in the vicinity of these
~-emergency steging cites. Operational preparations would be
made in the present housing area C was

5-2 =-$oya-¢o te examining the problems being encounte.ca a.og these

lines. He waa told of cites to be located should be isolated
farm areas. He may find such farms 4{mpossible to obtain in the
interests of security and to obtein black isolated bases on the
border in place of those. Those observations should be clarified
prior to the meting approximately 27 January and we would discuss
the action concerning same at that time.

the _treining now being laid on to commence 11 January

is to produce, as d&scussed, four staff men, ten organizers, ;
ten shock troop leaders, four sabotage experts and two, assination “ -
specialists. As discussed, the four staff men will be returned

to Rufus to assist in his planning. The ten organizers and ten
shock troop leaders would be retgined and as two-man teams provide
the trained specialists leaders“and/or viewpoint: for each specific
target. These leader organizer teams may: (1) Send the organizer
to the target to conduct organization while the shock troop .
specialists remain at the safe cite collecting personnel, training
and preparing them for action, or (2) the organizer might enter

the target area only long enough to {nstruct the selected leader
who is already within the target complex. He will instruct them in
organizing for partisan warfere and for setting up future actions
of supplying those partisans that sre organized and to conduct
special courier supply operations as necessary. fhe shock troop
specialists for that particular target might only instruct already
positioned leaders or possibly lead a shock tropp action from the
outside or act as adviser to already selected leaders for shock
troop action from the outside. This man might be released to train-
ing and leading reserve units if we determine such personnel are
available. ‘The actual employment of these organizers and shock
troop leaders can only be determined after Rufus’ evaluation of

his assets and capabilities are thmox thoroughly studied and
assessed. Since it is necessary in order for Rufus‘ preparations
to get the fullest attention to have an operational plen in his
hands by 1 March at the latest,) _Jwss told that it was

a priority necessity to turn in the biographical data on Rufus '
assets %& Rufus' operational plens immediately.

Sabotage experts produced from the training are ip turn conduct

a 3-weeks' course at 4 appropriate safe areas

for approximately 16 selected team leaders. Where it is possible.
those 16 team leaders will have recruited from within the target
area and each will be responsible for a target near his natural
habitat. When possible, an excuse for 3 weeks absence from the
target area may be formulated for him, and a sabotage leader will
be reinstated immediately to recruit and train this team and

coumence his operations again where evaluation and assessment

of our present assets near each sabotage target have been

compiled and PA Jlrequeste have produced sufficient information

‘from Which speciric targets have been selected, Gt may be considered

“Lo ne-- —-more feasible to use the trained expert as an instractor to persons
on the spot in certain instances as well as melding back into
his natural habitat and lying dormant until time to start. This
flexibility and planning mst be msintained until a final opera-
tional plan is forthcoming approximately 1 March, however positive
sabotage target planning should be in {_ =|hends from this
headquarters 15 February so thit Rufus ~— ---uit accordingly.
It is tentatively the trend of planning that the sabotage program
will be in three stages. Stage one is passive ssbotage which will
be that produced through the effectiveness of psychological warfare
efforts. This will not be a directed sabotage program nor will
Rufus! _|personnel be responsible for any pootion of it.
Stage two is an active stage which in any case will not be,
activated earlier than two to three days prior to the movement
to the target of the special units (tactical radio operator,
shock troops, etc.). It is entirely possible that a study

_may show the feasibility of holding this second stage to occurf P

merely hours short of H-Hour or even possibly to occur simultenecously
with Stage three. Stage three will be D-Day H-Hour over sabotage
using demolitions and arson and other overt means to coincide with
the opening of overt JJaction aimed at cutting commmication
lines, complete demolition of the main radio stations and blocking
reinforcement by the active opposition. As stated above, designation
of these targets should be forthcoming by the middle of February and
recruiting should commence accordingly. Again after a atudy of the
evaluation of the existing assets it will be decided whether assets
exist within the vicinity of the target or whether training
specialists will return and recruit a team to conduct the mission
or whether training specialists instructing existing assets and
provide for equiping them?" The ‘mission is to be initiated in
concurrence with the attack or whether it is only set up to be
used if needed during the attack and consolidation. This plenning

will comm as a portion-of the final operationel plan due approximately
" 1 March,

f. The assassination specialists would be utilized to return to Rufus ‘ ad

_}teams for instructional purposes. These K teams should
be compartmented now and EEI's on their targets to be compiled for
them and their operational plans fitted into the over-all pisn.

g. The Commo trainees will be turning out both the resident operators
(located near the target but compertmented from the activities at
the target) and tactical operators (located at the staging cite

” :

-5-

until just prior to the operation) who will be. the camunt
cation link during overt operations on D-Day, and additional
cases where the target commander is merely part of the target

garrison, the tactical redio. tor will be positioned with
the protective unit end Bae vith the partisamocttitn wil
will be at hour. Individusl cases where the target

Will be attacked by shock troops from the outside. In combined
situations a tactical radio operator will travel With the shock
troops The rest of the radio operstors will not enter into the
phases, but will provide intelligence befored and after the
operation, Using proper clandestine procedures, we will effect
the contact with the leader of the underground and serve as a
message center between the underground leader and Rufus. When
the D-Day operations commence, tranamission of radio traffic
will go through the tactical radio operators. During the entire
proceedings [ _|will be getting field messages direct 7
from both tactical and resident radio operators.{ + “Twill
stand as the messagenduring the whole operation. The first and
best two radio operators will be sent to Rufus to establish
direct commo link between! and Rufus. All incoming
intelligence will be forwarded to Rufus immediately. Al) Rufus'
instructions will be passed to target leaders by walt of [” ° TJ
This will in no way affect the speed of transmission nor will
Rufus‘ control of the situation be lessened by the fact that

the equipment and signal plan are at ( 7 Until the D-Day
trigger is pulled, headquarters will be atilizing this control
to end direction {to all operations. During the overt action
stage, headquarters can only act as a disseminator of messages
end will be set.up to handle the heavy traffic quickly. It

igs now estimated that 5 hours round trip traffic can be expected.
Rufus to headquarters to Rufus end Rufus to headquarters target
commander and vice versa. Allowing for decoding, answering, and
recoding. Rufus should personally conduct the principal city
target country operations physically at the scene of action. It
is realized the princpel value thet can be geined from in-
stentous redio commnication from Rufus to his individual unite;
however, there is little that Rufus can do with instaneous com-
monications in this situation and the major job of conducting
this principal city operation will occupy his whole tim and
end attention. The 5-hour time lag will keep him well informed
as to the events of the country before phone lines are re-establishc
and inter-target consolidation 1s accomplished. Incidentally,
£ NAquestionea C_ __]concerning his
faciiities at that station and it was umvittingly elicited that
they could handle a amall team of American radio operators and
in this wa {_ bas in mind for bringing up to the chief of
the project tne possibility of using { _|'2 directly re-transmit

—,

messages from the individual units straight to Rufus and
vice versa once the overt operation is coumenced, making
"Jen info station, as { Jj's capability of being
oy able to do anything about overt operations would be very.
_ limited, and Rufus need for immediate information fron hig
sub-units is great.

h. The operational planning will allow for three different stages
of planning the first being the one just discussed, the second
being to accomplish the consolidation once stage one hes been

\ completed successfully. The third stage will be planned to
insure that guerfilla warfare can be conducted by such unite
ff whose stage one waa not completed succesafully. This
guerilla warfere would be carried on until such time as con- .
solidated areas could come in touch with the units comucting
guerilla warfare. The tactical radio operator can be nsed with
the isolated unit to direct area re-supply and direct recontact
with ¥7 units which have successfully completed stage one.
This stage of the planning requires more thorough study.

2. Finance- .

@. The $19,090 pouched to you in care of J_ ° fo alts

to be dispensed at the rate of and vitnin the Limtation vhat

we discussed XHXXME at our last meeting. This breakdown
will be accounted for as follows: .

= aC \

Item , Minimum Maximm
Food, 35 men & 15 guards : $ 1,500 -$ 2,500
Pay, gd. force, 15 men . 300 . 500
Medical supplies 100 100
Clothing 500 T>0
POL 100 250
Lend rent 300 500
C _}ffice, 2 men & rent 200 500
Tras ,~.tation facilities 200 ree
3,200 $ apne
Emergency fund .
TOTAL $ “6,850
(2) For holding 220 men | 11;

(Incl. selection SAB. experts)
Emergency fund 1
TOTAL 12

As per our discussion the accountability for January expendi-

tures will be your responsibility. In view of the fact that

your negotiations {_ are unfirm at this-time;-you will be-- -

responsible for the acvusspe pith eine / disbursement, of funds for
camp until such time as you are cted to turn over= ~

the accommtability and responsibility to

In addition, specialists for running the Commo training camp
will be pouched to, dispensed by and accounted for by the
Commo men at the training camp.

Comex writ
As discussed, the other phases of project expenditures magmeke..(27)
a 7| andl “Twill be the responsibility of those officers in-.

cuarge of theix phase and will be of no concern to you.
Your February finances will be delivered et our February meeting and
accounting of January expenditures, {insofar as possible, made at thet
time.

Scope of Responsibility-

a.

The entire project as discussed has been broken down tnto(_ A
‘= gi 3) andfL “Yconsists of (1) training
and (2) operations. §_ bas been responsible for training,
{ncluding directing the conduct of training and insuring that
training meets project standards. Your responsibility is in
operations asi _\cage officer, which officer (1) directs the
principal agent an all{. matters to see that = % standards
are maintained in the fiestas of (a) recruitment; (0, urspersal of
funds; (c) preparation for operations 4ncluding all contacts

made by the principal agent, all commitments made in the project
pamed by the principal agent, and the conduct of all preparations
so that {_ operations can be carried out as the operational
plans direct;s(d) conduct of ] airs in accord with
project headquarters directives; (e) security in that the principal
agent fully understands the necessity of confining the development
of the operational plans to his immediate staff.

It is not expected that this direction of the principal agent by

\ would be in the form of commands to be followed or else,
nor 18 it expected that complete leeway would be even intimated by
i. Vin dealing with the principel agent. _] has been
Coumauued to employ methods of presentation so thay we preparation
for operations are carried out within the framework given by projec
hesdquarters. Latitude would be considered in every EK case to
allow for {_ “}) advice and experience to be utilized and for
Rufus} advice and experience to be utilized, but such latitude
would be checked out through me when practicable and I have
peer J\that he would he directed within the framework

a:

of my directive. - _l was informed that every attempt
would be made to give his advice complete consideration, ani
that he is to work within the directives which have been  _
broadened as far as possible for his implementation.

headquarters through (1) monthly essessment of [ _| personnel
as to their ability, morale, and their state of :caucutss;

(2) bi-weekly assessment of the training program as directed;
(3) monthly accounting of expenditures,; (4) maintain a close/
bibliographical analysis on all recruited personnal and all
potential personnel being considered f *

a. £ “Ywes instructed to afd his sdvice on the practicality of

tne planning and form an indigenous perspective for us in our
planning, and from his knowledge of the active opposition advise
on the practicality of all matters under consideration by project
headquarters.

TLODS -

e. f ee maintein compartmentation between training and

&-

ot

_\ command_channel is streight to this office.
“J connections with the training camp have

been Limited to, (1) setting up of the camp and camp procedures,

as directed; (2) presentation of[ “1 to project personnel

in the necessary spirit; (3) liaison withl_ Dwithin the
Limt¥¢{Pxk of our previous discussion; (4) delivery of the

bodies and assessments to the training arrangement (all assess-
mente to be known to the training chief by code mumber only);

(5) delivery of bodies from the training area to the staging
area; (6) furnish] ~ “Tcontact and coordination with Rufus

to insure that his personnel receive instructions to properly
motivate and prepare them to come up tol “lstendards of
training; (7) bi-weekly assessment to this office on

progress and standards; (8) close coordination See al
end{_ _{for the purpose of implementing operational ideas

and training; (9) the reception of incoming equipment and training
as and disposal of equipment for training as ¢ set up in December 2
23 and & =Tcontact report; (10) It is not anticipate
however, in the eveuv {_ “Al considers training standards are not
sufficient or are above tne capability of the personnel, he is to
inform “\but to take no steps except directly through me.

Cc “lis to operate independently of the n{
except to keep them informed on matters they neea to mus order
to cover up illegal operations connecting the U.S. Government.

oe Awith -£ {receive his approval before
(1) making contact witn[_ indigenous personnel outside

of Rufus! '¢f organization, or (2) acquire land within the jusis-
diction of C_ _) ~esponsibility.
-

Ce tis to dtscuss all mee Face the jurisdiction of

h.

i.

j-

a we &

NOTE: After a discussion with £ Jon the situation at

3, it was deciuct against placing him
withiu tne garisaicvion{[ _ Win the manner he
is placed under the £. =-— ae ees ve reason for this
being the present utiiwww of £ “ J
mostly as a Como link with headquarters rather unan oeing
acquainted with operations that are going on within the area.
Further discussion on this matter will be taken up between
the chief of project and Chief of Pw.

co Dis to reckive Lincoln approval before recruiting non-
Rurus personnel for any witting deal within the project.

c Dx reports, verbal and written, and his eae are to
be auurcssed to mee:

‘

Support - °

b.

have the sole function of
making { T]sctivities a success.
The initial equipment is arriving as discussed in the £. D
c 322, 23, 24 December meetings. (OTE: Black flighy w.ange-
Louvs memorandum PM to Chief of Project) C. ‘turned over
te £ athe requirements of the black flight landing £ >
as presented £ Jthrough “Fontact,
x IL “Jgave initial ayprovas tn the plan;
wuvecres', Final approval would have to be given bf 7
That approvel was forthcoming on 12 January. If there are no
changes in plan, no word will be received Bw:
If for some reason, changes in plan are fo: wicuming, tucy ~.L1
be cabled forward commercially to [ ~ Ja meiling address
drop located in Florida. As of thin uae, afternoon of 13 January,
the commercial cable has not arrived. All planning is being | con-
ducted as if the initial arrangements by £
[Jao hold #f true at the point of landing o1 tne viack flight.
,suose arrangements can be found in cable form, Lincoln to headquarter
insofar as briefing of the pilot is concerned. Im addition to the
above, it was brought out byf ‘ D that at 7 o'clock on each
evening ell personnel at the tui, ield, except military personnel
are removed from the vicinity of the landing field. This leaves
the operation in control of the chief of the air group army at the
field. Rufus't men will be in the control tower conducting the
instructions of the plane as it lands in accordance with the
pilot briefing cable sent to headquarters. C J wilt
conduct security around the field. Rufus' men witt o¢ uandling
the fork lift equipment that will comprise the unloading of the

3
Pe it
=. x

equipment for the plane. Taxi instructions will be given to the
_.. pilot, a 4,000 gallon refueling truck will come to a standby
- position just opposite the plane and will stand off uless
= Called: by. the ‘plane. Emergency refueling has been arranged and
4f called for the truck will be handled and Udf¢/ the hose handled
by Rufus! men. [~ ) will be in the background to help conduct
the indigenous sidae or the operation, although he will not appear
except under emergency. Upon the approach of our plane all other
planes in the area will be directed away from the air field and
only an emergency landing might be conducted during the time of
the off-loading of our plane. Z army trucks will be
standing by until the plane arrives at a taxi stop. All unloading
persdénnel will be Rufus! men under the direction of the Rufus labor
pusher. Trucks are to be off-losded and will immediately proceed
te the training ares with the MM gear vhich is the ~
gear for the training camp. The trucks contacting the
gear are to proceed to a central unloading spot which witt oe under
the continual supervision of [ J until such time as the
training cites for £ ‘activities have been made available.
c. (1) A break-down of equipment per target for placing at the
safe cite areas for that target is being considered. The
sion total of initial equipment would be placed on hand for
delivery to present underground assets is as discussed in
the arms and equipment assay [ JJ emorandun. This is
week designed to make oll men self-ewxsicient during the short-
term active operational period as to weapons, equipment,
medical and survival rations, to operate with full sufficiency
and self-sufficiency for a ten-day period. [ ~ * Drought
up the possibility that the men would not be wisiuy, to
exist on evil tasting survival rations, and it was diszec ee
that such would be the case 4€ there were plentiful supply,
but £ Jd brought up instances in which the emergency
rations nad been used successfully and it was agreed that
training should be slanted so that the men would understand
the necessity -for 7¢ living off the rations for a short
. period. { Jfelt that under those conditions the
men coula ve mentally conditioned to depend upon the rations
rether than along logistical supply lines C

The
method of getting the materiel into tuc sare vive was discussed
in that [ Jis selecting and will forward for consideratic

air fielas aronog with their security hazards from which black
flights could bring the materiel for a safe cite to the

field nearest that safe cite. A further[  rtrdy of this
plan will be presented to the chief of projece «rth
suggestions by Chief of PM having seen the set up at £ a
The method of getting equipment and materiel into the

target area to presently existing underground forces, the time
of movement of the equipment to the target area is yet to be
firmed up, except that it is contemplated movement into the

staging areas will be by black flight to the nearest fields.

—— Movement into the undergroum will be determined by the

target area situation and will satisfy the individual case.
-  [ Jit is contemplated by FO - Jthat

continuous black trips by courier transports utilizing

C j surplus personnel as couriers and utilizing sub-

sequent stashing and caching would permit a build-up at

the target é area for the assets which are in position.

The 50-pound self-sufficiency Kit designed for the

occasion would enable shock troop and outside specialists,

including radio operators and incoming sabotage teams to

be self-sufficient transport and existing for the ten-day

maximum expected period. More research will be forthcoming

along this line of thought. The necessary scheduled ‘

report to chief of project will outlins in detail ‘the

pre-arranged staffing that has been cone on this subject.

(2) support requirements during the second phase of overt
Ss Joperations, in obher words a consolidation phase,

: = : will be limited to possible replacement of key instruments
and items necessarily destroyed by sabotage and to extra
consolidation requirements including operational funds
and propeganda materiel and L “Jspecial Commo gear will
be required. Suppart requirements for the third phase of
the overt ZL. operations will have been arranged, gathered
and packaged and ear-marked for an emergency black flight
so that if any of the units find it necessary to go into
this third phase, resupply can be arranged through their
tactical radio. This third phase operational plan will of
necessity be limited to a short number of weeks due to the
topography of the target country and the nature of the
expected consolidation of those unites successful in the
first stage. Proposed, detailed report for the preparation
for this third stage support requirement will be forthcoming
to the project chief on the Chief PM next report.

B. [ brought up the fact that some moths ago he had been alerted F J
C Jthet much Guatemalan money was available ir
Ac Cound prorue a certain amount of cash. The subject was brought up
with the Chief of WH end C  ° J was told to tell the man to acquire
$400,000 U.S. cash. The man for some six months now has announced that
he bas the $400,000 in foreign currency and is requesting of C_ J
that he produce the $400,000 U.S. cash. This matter has been brougat
to the attention of headquarters before and Chief of PM feels this
man has placed under commitment by this Agency and that a follow-up
on this commitment should be made immediately to take him from an embarrasr
ing position. [ jinformed £ Jthst this money would be forthcoming

Cc.

S set

1f the commitment is in truth es outl Mea to [ 7

inquired as to the report on { J contact with [ ]
L 4 on 16 December. £  S\fett contace between £ Jand
a Seoula be misconstrueu even by pes — representing
ves. policy. £ Ji instructions Ko ‘A tO go forward with
his plans to Jin his proposed operations could be nig-

approval from the Deputy of WHD, that stemmed frou occurences months
ago during whichc 3 asker £ _Jto feel Rufus out cones
future afd te £ D's forthcoming operation. Rufus gave his stamp

move to some time in February, J sent word to Rufus through

L that the February date nad been arranged and consequently
aurus Was employing £ J to convey his (Rufus') attitude on the
effeir. [ Ptfelt that he was there aS a representative of Rufus
and not as a representative of the United States. When it was pointed

which set of instructions he is going to follow. It is felt

by me thkt this position should be clarified for Lx 2 by the persons
who gave him Past com tments y if containment witniun the operations

of FBSUCCESS is truthfully expected to be of £ J

Since { ‘J final approval hes not been obtained on the
pre-arranged bisca riignt » it has been decided that a personal commercial
cable fror £ jo the Z Jmsiling address which
contains a negative attitude on any subject will be warning tof |

reason for dealy from thig end, he will send a comercial cable in

J% true name tof Jdfrom a pump company concerning
& pump that £ ? has ordered. The pump will J have a number. That
nomber will contain the new ETA of the airplane. iY the flight is can-
celled altogether,
not referf 3to an
the f°

-

-13- .;

r

is to be delayed, the number of days of delay will be indicated by
headquarters in the commercial cable to £ Joy indicating thet
the pump left headquarters so many days ago. «mne number of days

ago indicating the number of days delay in the ETA of the airplane.

E. COMMUNICATIONS
; not

x Jwarns that if communications are © 3 down to very quickest,
it 18 possible Rufus will establish his own commmications, which in
the opinion of the writer is only natural. The man in the field mf
at the time needs instantaneous communication. I hope that my proposal
for commmnications will be considered in that light and that if immediate
commnications are not established, Rufus will establish his own by other
means. Also in one case where radio Cosmo would have added to the -
efficiency of our movements, it was found that the necessary Commo stations
were closed for the weekend. It was suggested that headquarters’ auction
would activate a system to eliminate the situation. £ J was
notified and the three a day contact is now set up for weenends between
L -_.

PrP. £ dwas alerted to prepare Rufus for a trip to the Mismi area
aupprocdmately 25 January. Rufus will be ready when the detatis of
black flight errangements have been forwarded tc £ 3 Rufus will
be alone unless otherwise specified. £ J feeis that rather than
remrod a meeting fo f and Rufus, was a spirit of trust could be
incorporated into this meeting by allowing [  JjJand Rufus to spend a
day together before meeting with project personnel. This idea meets with
the full concurrence of Chief of P&M.

COMMENTS

Cc Jis a capable, eager, hard-working man. He needs direction from
yauiesdlonals. Such direction must be in the form of intelligent leadership
and must shy away from hand-shanckling restrictions. This statement is made
because of the realization of the inability of non-field personnel to grasp
the true problems facing our man on the spot. If we feel that this man
cannot work within the confines of a broad directive, we should remove him
because whoever occupies the duty that we have assigned te £ > mist

be allowed to use his initiative.
