Memo from Richard Helms to Director DIA Concerning Military Thought: 'the Most
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012303, dated 3 November 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012303).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1.3(a)(4}

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
WASHINGTON 25, D.C,

27 DEC 1961

MEMORANDUM FOR: The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency

SUBJECT : MILITARY THOUGHT; "The Most Urgent Problems
of Training Command Personnel and of
Increasing the Combat Readiness of Border
Military District Staffs", by Major-General a
A. Klyukanov

1. Enclosed is a verbatim translation of an article which
appeared in the TOP SECRET Special Collection of Articles of the .
Journal "Military Thought" Croyennaye SL) published by the
Ministry of Defense, USSR, and distributed down to the level of
Army Commander.

2. In the interests of protecting our source, this material
should be handled on a need-to-know basis within your office.
Requests for extra copies of this report or for utilization of

any part of this document in any other form should be addressed
to the originating office.

FOR THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR, PLANS:

RICHARD HELMS

Enclosure

i! to

| _ ) ) 1.304
APPROVED FOR RELEASE a.

3 0 JUN 1992

1,3(ayd) 7

4.3(a)(4)

Original; The Director, Defense Intelligence Agency
ec: Military Assistant to the President

Special Assistant to the President for
National Security Affairs

Director for Intelligence
The Joint Staff

’ Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence
Headquarters, U. S, Air Force

Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence
Department of the Arny p

Director of Naval Intelligence
Department of the Navy

Director, National Security Agency

The Director of Intelligence and Research
Department of State :

Director, Division of Intelligence
. Atomic Energy Commission

Chairman, Guided Missiles and Astronautics |
Intelligence Committee

Deputy Director for Intelligence

Assistant Director for National Estimates
Assistant Director for Current Intelligence
Assistant Director for Research and Reports

Assistant Director for Scientific Intelligence

.

~ 4.8(a){4)

1.8£2}(4)

COUNTRY  :. USSR |
SUBJECT (( Qerisruzx THOUGHT: "The Most Urgent Problems

’ OF Training Command Personnel and of
Increasing the Combat Readiness of Border
Military District Staffs by Major-General
A. Klyukanov

DATE OF INFO: 1961
APPRAISAL — Z
OF CONTENT : Documentary

a
f.

SOURCE ' A reliable source (B)::.:

Following is a verbatim translation of an article
titled "The Most Urgent Problems of Training Command
Persongel and of Increasing the Combat Readiness of
Border Military District Staffs', written by Major-General
A. Klyukanov. .

This article appeared in the 1961 First Issue of a
special version of the Soviet military journal Voyennaya
Mysl (Military Thought). This journal is published .
irregularly and is classified TOP SECRET by the Soviets.
The 1961 First Issue of Military Thought was sent for
typesetting on 22 December 1560 and sent to press on
13 January 1961. I+ is distributed only within the Ministry of
Defense down to the level of Army Commander.

Zz
me 200

1.2(a(4)

’ .a(a}{4}

The Most Urgent Problems of Training Command Personnel

and of
Increasing the Combat Readiness of Border Military
District Staffs

by
Major-General A. Klyukanov

Timely proposals have been appearing in the pages
of our military press with regard to the improvement
of the methods of operational training of generals,
senior officers, and staffs. We believe that, in addition
to the problems advanced by the authors of a number
of articles, the necessity has arisen to examine ways
of qualitative improvement of the organization of the
training of troop command personnel of border districts
with the aim of bringing it even‘’closer to the
operational assignment of troops and to the conditions
which the generals and officers will meet in a real
situation of the initial period of a war.

The maintenance of the constant combat readiness
of our Armed Forces in order to strike, if the necessity
arises, an immediate and crushing blow on the enemy,
demands from generals and officer personnel a continual
and comprehensive theoretical elaboration and a practical
fulfillment of a whole series of most important measures.

The command personnel of border district troops,
who will be the first to engage in battle, must pay
particular attention to working out measures for training
troops for swift combat action directly out of. concentra—
enon areas along definite Operations? axes.

d |
my 1834)

1.3(a)(4)

4.8(a}(4}

As is known, the concept of combat readiness of
troops includes a number of factors, including the
following decisive one - the comprehensive theoretical
and practical preparedness of generals and officers and
of their organizational ability. The higher the level
of the theoretical training and of the professional
and political qualities of officers and generals, the
higher the degree of combat readiness and combat
efficiency of the troops and staffs.

In order to be prepared for immediate combat .
operations along the probable operational axes ;
envisaged by the plan of operation for the initial
period of a war, the basic troop command personnel
of border military districts and-armies. (by the latter
we have in mind Military Councils of armies and the
command elements‘of line large units) must know the
operational assignment of the formations and large
units.

Unfortunately, commanders of large units and
commanders of armies do not know the specific combat
tasks which they must fulfill in the course of the
initial operations. This may lead to a situation
similar to the one quite well known from the sad
experience of the initial period of World War II,
when,as a result of the staffs' loss of control of
operational formations, some commanders of large units
did not know what to do during the surprise offensive
of the German-fascist army. -

In modern conditions of warfare, with the widespread
use of pnuclear/missile weapons, it will be difficult, in
the event of a short threat period, to accomplish
combat tasks to work out and organize the total sum

| of measures for repelling the enemy offensive, and it
| will be completely impossible to implement practical
| study of the directions designated for the conduct

of troop combat operations, of specific lines, and of
objectives on then.

ttays)

4.31a}(4)

4.3(a)(4)

If we assume that there will be no threat period
and that the enemy, by sudden massed strikes of
nuclear/missile weapons, aviation, and other means
.of attack, will unleash a war and will disable some
higher staffs, then the importance and acuteness
of the need for advanced (even in peacetime)
transmission of their operational assignments, even
if only to commanders of line large units and
commanders of border armies will increase many fold,
as will also the study of the probable directions
of their combat operations.

Undoubtedly, strict secrecy must be observed in
the study and elaboration of these important problems
which have great State significance. ‘To~these ends,
it is necessary to think through and carry out
a whole series of measures in order that the entire
operational plan for the initial period of a war along
a given direction remain secret.

We believe that staffs of military districts
should organize one or two special exercises a year
for commanders of armies and commanders of Tine divisions,
with a view to raising the readiness of the basic troop
command personnel of border military districts to assume
immediate control of units and large units of first-line
readiness in their movement directly out of. concentration
areas on predesignated axes and in their commitment to —
battle. In these training exércigzes and stiidies, there
should be an elaboration of the measures dealing with
the organization of troop combat operations in
accordance with their real operational assignments.

‘To these same ends, it is desirable to conduct
special tactical rides (polevaya poyezdka) along
probable axes and lines of troop movement in initial
engagements, both on the territory of the Soviet Union
and on the territory of the bordering peoples'
democracies. Our border military districts, as is
known, are located at various distances from the national
borders of capitalist countries. Consequently, the
conditions for conducting combat operations during a

1.3(a4)

4.(a}(4}

surprise attack by the enemy will be different for
the troops of different districts. Some will have to
operate independently from the territory or on the
territory of the Soviet Union. Others, in all
probability, will engage in battle in coordination
with armies of the countries of the Socialist Camp
either on the territory or from the territory of
these states. In our opinion, the above-mentioned
circumstances explain the great importance of careful
advance study by command personnel of concrete
operational axes in their areas, i:

In recent years, during command-staff exercises

on the ground dealing with the initial period of a
war, a@ provisional national border was usually
‘established deep within the territory of our country.
Staffs were concentrated and provisional groupings of
our troops and of probable enemy troops were created
behind this provisional border. The execution of
combat operations of the antagonists was carried out
in the zone along the provisional national border
and then te either side of it (in the direction of the
actual border or into the depth of the country), but
always on the territory of the Soviet Union. The
training goals of these exercises were fulfilled but
removed to a certain extent from the actual situation
in which troops find themselves in peacetime and from
those concrete tasks they will have to fulfill in the
first days of a war. Lo , nc ce
; Of course, such exercises are highly useful for the

numerous staffs and for the generals and officer
personnel participating in them, and it is extremely
necessary to conduct them in the future. However,
along with such exercises, command-staff exercises
under conditions existing in e border territory
shou e conducte or a ed number o roop
command personnel of border military districts.

In accordance with instructions of the Minister of

Defense in his directive on operational training for
1961, it would be an extraordinarily useful method of

aa |
ee

1 Blayta)

- $.8fayas

training troops and staffs to have a series of
exercises and group exercises which would begin
with placing staffs on combat alert and with their
transfer to the established concentration areas.

In such exercises and group exercises, the
possible nature of the combat operations of the
probable enemy's army should be studied not only
from the point of view of his approach to methods
of surprise attack and to the conduct of combat
operations in general, but’ also with regard to those
probable tasks which enemy troops may have in the
engagements of the initial period of a war. In
connection with this, it is necessary to take the

ouping of our troops, border armies, and military
stricts actually existing a é presen e

with their actual composition, TOE, number of large
units, units, and the areas of their actual
concentration. —

In the plans for these exercises, it is
essential to reflect the concrete conditions of
the disposition of the troops of a border military
district, the probable nature of the operational
situation and the tasks of formations and large
units, not disclosing by this, of course, the real
operational plan.

For example, the troops of the border Odessa
Military District are deployed at a distance of
700-1,000 kiloneters from the coastal borders of
countries of the aggressive military bloc (Turkey,
Greece). The probable enemy plans, by means of a
surprise launching of nuclear strikes by missiles,
aircraft, and naval forces in this direction during”
the initial period of a war, to destroy or annihilate
the vitally important administrative-political,
economic, and military centers of Albania, Bulgaria,
Rumania, and of the southwestern oblasts of the
Soviet Union.and, by a simultaneous invasion by
ground troor,. groupings deep into the territory of

ll
se ad 1.3(a}(4)

1.3(8)(4)

L.8(ay(4}

the socialist countries, to seize the most important
objectives and to rout the basic army troop groupings
of countries friendly to us.

It is to be expected that the enemy will assign
his troops the mission of destroying, by means of
nuclear/missile strikes, or of capturing, by means
of dropping airborne forces and by operations of
mobile units of ground troops, the existing crossings
over the Danube River and other water barriers and 2
also the basic passages across the Eastern Carpathians ’
and Transylvanian Alps, in order to cut off and isolate
the troops of Albania, Bulgaria, and Rumania from
Soviet troops.

In such conditions, it seems essential to us
that the basic command personnel of a district and
the personnel of its large units study the following
problems in the system of operational and command
preparation; the organization and the conduct of
marches over long distances; the crossing of water
lines, mountain passages and passes under conditions
of enemy counteractions; the organization and conduct
of meeting engagements as the most typical form of
troop combat operations under the conditions of an
invasion initiated by the enemy; the organization of
capturing and holding advantageous lines until the
second troop echelons, mobilized at the beginning of
a war, are brought up; the problems of the organization
of coordination with the armies of the peoples’
democracies; measures for materiel, technical, and
medical support, and other problems.

In the example under consideration, district
troops may encounter particular difficulty in the
organization and conduct of regroupings over
considerable distances with an exit, if such is
required, for example, into the territory of southern
Rumania and Bulgaria. The fact is that during the
conduct of a regrouping by combined methods (units
move on their own on wheeled transport and tracked
equipment is transported by rail), aPPrCR me tely

4.3/a)(4)

twice as much time is demanded for complete concentra-
tion of troops than if they had completed the march
exclusively under their own power. The difference in
width of railroad gauge in the USSR and in Rumania and
Bulgaria requires additional time for transloading tanks
and other tracked equipment, by dint of which tanks
will not be able to take part in combat operations
simultaneously with their units and large units which
completed the march by motor vehicle. We consider the
best method of regrouping under conditions of
nuclear/missile war to be the simultaneous movement

of units and large units under their own power. To
this end units of the Odessa Military District, for
example, are conducting appropriate studies to increase
the cruising range of wheeled and tracked vehicles

to 1,000-1,500 kilometers by ddding to the amount of
fuel. contained in the vehicles.

sf
fe

Measures for combat, engineer, materiel—technical -
and other types of march support will require
the most serious attention,and they need, in our
opinion, further study and clarification during the
exercises and group exercises. proposed by us. It
seems necessary to us, in this connection, to solve
all problems of the planning of regrouping and of the
conduct of our troop combat operations in coordination
with the Rumanian and Bulgarian armies.

We have dwelt in detail on one example in enace. to
show how important it will be, in our opinion,. to
conduct operational training of command personnel of
border military districts under conditions as close as
‘possible to the probable nature of military. operations
in a given operational direction. Such training,
carried out in advance in peacetime, will resolve a
large number of problems of a theoretical nature and
will fulfill practical preparatory measures of
organizational and bechatcRe procedure.

It is perfectly obvious that with attentive

examin&tion in each border military district, a
special list of problems, questions, and measures

a
ee

4.3faN4)

£824)

will arise which must be solved in accordance with
the given conditions of the theater of military
operations and with local peculiarities.

The Armed Forces of the USSR have good experience
in strengthening friendly contacts and in organization
of coordination W @ armies oO e Warsaw Pac
countries, and also in the study of the general
principles of combat operations from the command-staff
and other exercises to which command personnel and sone
staffs of formations of the armies of the peoples’ .
democracies are invited. Unfortunately, this experience
is not shared even with a limited number of generals
and senior officers of. the Soviet’ troops deployed in
the border military districts who, in case of war,
must personally direct combat operations of their
troops in coordination with the troops, and on or from’ —
the territory of the countries of the Socialist Camp.

For example, in the practical conditions of the
Odessa Military District, for raising the combat
readiness of large unit commanders and of the command
element of operational formations, and with the aim
of establishing coordination, strengthening friendly
ties, and becoming familiar with the armies of Rumania
and Bulgaria, for the study of the terrain, probable
lines of combat operations, water obstacles, mountain
passages and passes, road conditions and other .
peculiarities of the theater of military operations,
it is highly expedient to assign command personnel —
periodically to exercises of troops and staffs of the
peoples’ democracies, to Organize field and military-
historical trips, tourist trips,. and: excursions, to
send generals and senior officers for rest periods to
the sanitoria of these countries, and to utilize other
possibilities. All this will contribute to the careful
study of the theater of military operations and of
actual operational axes. — fk

Under modern conditions the small peacetime

composition of the ground troops of border military
districts will be reinforced, if the situation demands,

—
mmm 8)

39:

4.2104)

1.5(a\4)

with large units and formations by full mobilization

of the latter. These complex and responsible tasks,

naturally, must constantly be the cynosure of attention

of the command personnel and higher staffs. In light

of these demands on the command-staff exercises

proposed by us, it is necessary to explore all aspects

of the organization of troop control of a border

military istrict connected with the difficulties

of simultaneous solution of two problems: the conduct

of combat operations and the full mobilization of troops.
us, in the peacetime compos on oO roops or a

military district there aré line divisions (of increased

combat readiness) and divisions of reduced strength.

The field command of an army, army units, and front

units are also kept at reduced strength. It is natural

that the line divisions, after concentrating in their

areas as a result of combat alert, will initiate a

march to fulfill combat tasks, and that divisions of

reduced strength, army units and supporting subunits

of army headquarters will begin full mobilization.

Therefore, the commander and the field command of
an army must assure firm control of large units on the
march and of their combat operations in the event of
deployment for engagement with the enemy and,
simultaneously, to direct’ the conduct of full mobiliza-
tion. In this connection, the distance between the
large units executing a march or engaged in battle
and the areas of full mobilization, will increase
continually. This is why it is necessary to work out
.right now methods by which a reduced strength head-
quarters with limited means of communication could
assure uninterrupted control:.of troops until the
completion of mobilization and the bringing up of
fully mobilized units aad large units to the area of
combat operations of the first echelon of the army...

Therefore, problems of the organization of troop
control of border formations in the course of the first
operations of the initial period of a war demand urgent
study and practical assimilation.

Ses ot

‘Baty

t Stays}

Without question, the mastery of practical measures
for full troop mobilization is connected with the
removal of people and equipment from the production of
material wealth. This is an expensive measure for the
State and it is, therefore, undertaken very rarely.

At the same time, the demand for full mobilization of
various large units within the shortest time is
especially important for the formations of border
military districts, because the speed of buildup of
first-echelon troop strength, consisting of a limited ;
number of divisions of increased combat readiness, will |
depend on the period requiréd for fully mobilizing large
units and units of reduced strength, of which, as a rule,
the second echelons and reserves of armies willbe |
created.

As is known, the military leadership of the imperialist
states is planning in advance to launch nuclear strikes
in the initial period of war, against the most important
administrative-political centers, with the aim of disorganiz-
ing control and disrupting the mobilization and buildup
' of the armed forces of the countries of the Socialist
Camp. These intentions of the aggressive circles
must be considered in our mobilization preparations and
work,

In our opinion, it is necessary to organize joint
special exercises of the basic command personnel o e

roops and of m ary commissariats. n ese exercises
we shou work out an nvestigate a whole series of
measures directed primarily at:

~ the maximum curtailment of. the time required for
full mobilization of the troops;

- the protection of the personnel, motor transport
and other equipment withdrawn from the national economy
for the mobilization and buildup of troops, from
nuclear strikes and other enemy means of mass
destruction; P43

- the creation of conditions for stable and uninterrupted
control of the process of full mobilization.

—m °°"

-lj].~

48a)

The above-mentioned problems of improving the
training of generals, senior officers and of the
readiness of the staffs of border military districts
for control of troop combat operations do not encompass
the whole range of tasks, in support of troop combat
operations, which must be fulfilled by operational
formations and large units on their entry into
engagements of the initial period of a war directly
from concentration areas and of full mobilization
along designated directions; however, they are, in .
our opinion, most important in the problem of increasing
the combat readiness of our border district troops.

~12-

1.

pe)

faa)

* 4.3fay4)

1.314)
