Probable Reactions to Various Courses of Action with Respect to North Vietnam
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000118681, dated 4 January 1964.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000118681).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

APPROVED FOR RELEA

o YT 1997

TS# 185702-b

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

OFFICE OF NATIONAL ESTIMATES
2 January 1964

REVISED MEMORANDUM FOR THE DIRECTOR

SUBJECT: Probable Reactions to Various Courses of Action
with Respect to North Vietram

REFERENCE: MACV- QQ Op-Plan No. 34 A-64/ TIGER, 4.5(c)
of 15 December 1963 3,A(b)(V)

1. In response to General Krulak's request, we assess

below the probable Communist and international reactions to 13

specific operations given us from among those of the referenced

Cp-Plan. With one exception, the given operations are small unit

(South Vietnamese) airborne or maritime sabotage efforts against

specific targets (bridges, railways, dumps, etc.) in various areas

of North Vietnam. ‘The one exception is a three company (plus)

reid against a small island just north of the 17th parallel DM.

All of the 13 operations are part of general Krulak's Fhase I:

i.e., to bacmmiited ween apnout four months'time from the Op-

Plan's activation. We note that except for the island raid

This memorandum has been prepared with the assistance of
o/CI and DD/P.

noted above and a few other of the 13, most of these operations

Hea have already been approved. 1 (Cc)
3.4(p)(1)

2. In sum, we believe that:
Be Communist reactions to most of these operations

would be slight.

De Communist reactions would be sharper in the cases
of (1) Haiphong (No. 33, below); (2) Ile Du Tigre (No. 34); and
(3) the railroads near the borders of China (Nos. 54 and 55). ‘The
reactions would be felt primarily in South Vietnam and Iaos but
would not be so extreme as to change the character of hostilities

in those ccuntries.

C. The operations under review would not be likely to
lead to appreciably increased Chinese Communist involvement in the
area. Neither would these operations --~ with the possible excep-
tion of the Ile du Tigre raid -- lead the Soviets to believe that

the US bad made a significant change in its policies.

d. The 13 operations under review, taken by themselves,
and even if all were successful, would not "convince the DRV leader-

ship that their continued direction and support of insurgent activities

arte: jo es Se tS ee eS Se a

in the RVN (South Vietnam) and Laos should cease” -- this, according

to the reference Op-Plan, being their stated goal.

e. It is possible, however, that the North Vietnamese
Goverument might see these operations (especially if that against
the Ile du Tigre were included) as representing 4 significant in-
creese in the vigor of US policy, potentially dangerous to them.
If so, they would probably wish to halt the new developments at
an early date, and would therefore try to arouse internatioral
pressure for a conference to settle the problem of Vietnam be-

fore it expanded into a more general conflict in the Far East.

f. In general, such operations as the 13 here con-
sidered would probably be viewed with disfavor by most of our
rajor allies, Taipei and Bangkok, of course, would probably
support the US strongly. British officials in South Vietnam
would probably see these operations! merit and consider then
worth trying, but London's reaction -- particularly to any
international political complaints engendered -- would be com~
plicated by the UK's position as co-chairman of the Geneva
Conference and hence (with the USSR) principal guarantor of .

the terms of the 1954 Geneva Accords, which such operations

would violate. France would almost certainly be opposed to any
us/RVN attempt to carry the war to the North, and would probably
cause the US the most difficulty. Canada would probably find it
difficult to support the US in any North Vietnamese complaints
formally submitted to the Icc. If such operations helped generate
a Communist call for an international conference, this call would

probably find mich support elsewhere in the Free World.

ge The principal determinant of DRV prosecution of the
yar will not be damage suffered from such small-scale operations,
but the course of the war in the South and the degree o2 risk Hanoi

believes will be involved in its prosecution.

3. We assess the various operations below, under their
designated Op-Plan categories of I, It, or III. We note, however,
that these categories of {nereased expected damege to the DRV do
not necessarily corresyond to what we believe to be increased

reactions, We believe, in general, that:

a. Those small unit airborne and raritime operetions
not far north of the 17th parallel (all, that is, except Nos. 33,
34, 54, and 55 below, and whether category I, II, or III) would

probably provoke the least response.

is Vacs

b. The Haiphong channel operation (No. 33) and the
large raid against the Ile du Tigre (No. 34) would provoke greater

response.

Ce The sabotage efforts egainst the Hanoi-Lang Son
(No. 54) and Yen Bay-Iao Kay (No. 55) railroads would probably
provoke little if any overt response at first, but if successfully
contimied would probably provoke the Chinese to more threatening
outeries, increased offers of support to tke DRV, and attempts to

dnerease the Chinese presence in North Vietnam and northermmost Laos.

SPECIFIC RESPONSES BY CATEGORIES

CATEGORY I - HARASSING OPERATIONS

4. General description. This category includes small,
unspectacular demolition operations and small-scale intelligence
collection actions, including tactical reconnaissance probes by
small military units, temporary interdiction of lines of comminica-
tion, and general low level harassment. These operations may. be

launched and effected by land, sea, and/or air.

5. Svecific overations under consideration.* -

a. (29) Interdiction of Route T about 50 miles from

Lao border by airdropped 15-man team to exfiltrate through Laos.

b. (30) Interdiction of Route 8 southwest of Vinh by

8-man airdropped team.

c. (31) Interdiction of Route 12 by 15-man airdropped

tean.

d. (43) Amphibious raid by h-man team on Ly Hoa

Bridge across the Rao [a River near Radon.

e. (45) Amphibious raid by 13-man team on security

post at mouth of Dong Hoi River.

6. In essence, operations of this category have been taking
place since June 1963. Additional such operations will probably
evoke reactions similar to those prompted by past operations: €.Ge,;
propaganda complaints and spy trials, but little more. We share

the view expressed in the Op-Plan's Appendix 6 that Hanoi might

* For more details, see Annex.. The operation numbers are those
used in Appendix 3 to Annex C of Op-Plan 34 A-64/TIGER.

-6-

begin preparing é fornal protest to the ICC. With the Op-Plan, we
think it unlikely that non-Commmnist nations or the UN would become
concerned with operations in this category, and Communist China's
reaction would probably rersin confined to deminciations of the US

and its "puppets."

J. We believe, however, that operations launched from Laos
against targets well north of the 17th parallel and/or operations
involving the exfiltretion of teams through Laotian territory --
i.e., operation No. 29 -~- are not of the same order as the others
in this category. Some such activity is already going on, of
course, and if the level and success of present activity are not
markedly increased, Hanoi's reaction Is not likely to change in
any major respect. On the other hand, should Laos~based or Lacs-
exfiltrating teams begin achieving some substantial success, the
Communists would probably attempt strong local reaction and would
try to seize -- or, at least, to destroy -- the bases from which
such operations were being mounted, using whatever force was
necessary. Should this force require additional introduction of
North Vietnamese units into Laos, such units would probably be
introduced. ‘The chances of a general Communist offensive in Laos

would increase, but this is probably not the course the North

en ae

Vietnamese would initially follow. Charges of new US intervention
would almost certainly be made, especialiy if the US made extensive
use of helicopters or STOL aircraft for infiltration or resupply.
Such charges would probably create additional difficulties for
Souvanna Phoura and might prompt certain of our European allies,
especially the French, to assert that US actions were Jeopardizing

the LAOS settlements.

CATEGORY II -- ATIRITIONAL OPERATIONS

8. General description. These include small-scale resistance
operations, airborne and seaborne raids by small forces on important
military and civil installations, and demolition of important

facilities.
9e Specific operations under consideration.

a. (32) Seaborne 12-man team strike on Vinh Son radar

installation.

>. (34) 3+company amphibious raid on Tle du Tigre

(north of 17th parallel about 20 miles off the NVN coast).

c. (42) l4-man team amphibious raid on security post
and coastal defense battery north of Dong Hol.

- & -

a oe a nn ge eee
Sse

d. (x4) i0-man team emphibious raid to sabotage bridge

on Route 1 north of Dong Hoi.

e. (54) Airaropped 10-man long-term team for hit-and-

run attacks on Lang Son-IJanoi railway.

f. (55) Airdrepped long-term 5-man team to operate

against Yen Bay-Lao Kay railway northwest of Yen Bay.

10. Jn accord with Appendix 6 of the Op-Plsan, we believe
successful Category II operations will evoke DRV propaganda and
complaints to the ICC; but we do not agree with its judgment that
the DRV would be likely to respond by requesting any appreciable
increase in Chinese material assistance. Hanoi probably would
increase the intensity of Communist activity in Laos, though
probably not to the point of launching an all-out offensive.

We would not anticipate any major new pressures in the south,
gince we believe Hanoi and the Viet Cong are already doing all
they are capable of doing there without changing the nature of
the war. However, the Communists might undertake some specific
retaliatory measures: e.g., more intensive attacks upon South
Vietnam's rail system, increased terrorism aimed particularly

at Americans. etc.

ll. We do not believe, however, that all of the operations
in this category would produce similar degrees of Communist reaction.
For exemple, operations against the Lang Son-Hanoi and the Yen Bay-
Lao Kay railways --~ if repeated and successful -- are much more
likely to evoke a sharp Communist reaction than operations against
objectives in the southern portion of North Vietnam. with respect
to the Ile du Tigre, a three-company emphibious assault on @ forti-
fied island over 20 miles off the coast -- unlike the sabotage of
a railroad bridge -- could not be plausibly represented as the work
of indigenous dissidents. Whatever be the uniforms worn by the
attacking troops, the Ile du Tigre reid would be construed by Hanoi,
ard the world, as a deliberate incursion into North Vietnamese terzri-
tory by RVN regular forces -~ an incursion rade with US consent.
Some traffic and memoranda relating to the Op-Plan suggest that the
Ile du Tigre is part of the De-Militarized Zone (DMZ). If this were
the case, international political reaction to a raid against it would
be very sharp indeed. Even if attacking GVN forces could prove con-
clusively that the island had been fortified and was being used as
an infiltration training and staging base -- in contravention of
the Geneva Accords -- to the world, the GYN's guilt in launching

ea military attack against part of the supposedly sacrosanct DMZ

would probably be interpreted as greater than Hanoi's guilt in

making improper use of this plot of ground. However, we are con-

vince’ QS that the Ile du Tigre is 1.5(c)

3.4(0)(1) |
clearly North Vietnamese territory and is not located within

the DMZ.*

* No specific mention of the Ile du Tigre is made in the 1954
Geneva Accords or any of the protocols, appendices and annexes
to those Accords. The precise boundaries of the DMZ are spelled
out in a Ruling issued on 15 September 1954 by the Joint Central
Commission for Viet-~Nam in accordance with Articles 1, 3, 5, 6,
7, 8, 9, and 32 of the Geneva Agreement, raragreph I of the
Agreement's Annex, and a supplementary Ruling of 13 August.
(The text of the applicable ruling is given in the Lepartment
of State's International Boundary Study No. 19, “Viet-Nam .
'Derarcation Line'," 10 September 1962.) The Northern Boundary
of the DMZ commences with "An East-West line running from the
mouth of the /Ben Hai7 river (2.8 km north of Cue-Tung) (251-
850) to the village of Yen-Giu-Eac...." Hence the point on |
the coast 2.8 km north of Cua-Tung may be taken as the north-
easternmost point of the DMZ. ‘The Ile du Tigre is 14.5 miles
east and 9 miles north (or, on a direct Line, about 17 miles
northeast) of this point. ‘The Geneva Agreement and its related
amplifying documents make no mention of any seaward extension
oY the DMZ, However, even if the “territorial waters" of the
IMZ were presumed to be covered by & three mile -- or even &
twelve mile -- extension of its land boundaries, the Tle du
Tigre would still not fall within its purview.

We understand that the GVN asserts that the island is within
the IMZ. In the light of circumstances set forth above, this
ascertion would seem to have no basis.

CATEGORY III - PUNITIVE OPERATIONS

12. General description. These are semicovert resistance/
sabotage actions designed to damage and/or destroy facilities or
installations critical to the economy, industrial development, and
internal security of the DRV. These actions include raids by
company or battalion size military or paramilitary forces, airborne
or seaborne, sabotage by szall teams of important targets, and the
active iuaeienel on: recruitment and employment of resistance move-
ments within North Vietnam. Such actions are to be as covert as
possible, but the duration of such operations and size of the forces
required for their execution may result in their becoming basically

overt attacks on the Eanoi regime.

13. Specific operations under consideration:

a. (33) 6-zan seaborne team strike (by UDI) on dredges

and buoy tender in Haiphong harbor channel.

b. (35) +6-zan seaborne team strike on Ben Tuy POL dump

(near Vinh) designed to destroy it by use of incendiary rockets.

14. The probably reaction to Category III operations mst be

assessed on a case-by-case basis. The attack on the channel of

=o

Haiphong harbor (33) would probably evoke a vociferous response.

For some time the Viet Cong have been building their strength in
the Rung Sat area along the Saigon River (Saigon's outlet to the
sea). As a retaliatory gesture, Hanoi might order the VC to harass
shipping coming into Saigon. However, this is something the VC are
likely to do anyway, if they acquire the ability. Hence & success-
ful attack upon Haiphong would not in itself generate any new threat
to Saigon, though in retaliation the VC would probably intensify

their efforts in this area.

15. <A successful ground attack against the Vinh POL storage
depot (35) would probably produce a barrage of Eanoi, and Peiping,
propagenda. Henoil might try to launch a retaliatory Viet Cong
attack in the scuth (e.g., an attack against the storage facilities
at Nha Be near Saigon). The RVN operation might produce sore
neutralist grumbling and nervousness, but so long as the attacks
were launched by RVN forces on the ground at the time of the attack
(regardless of how they arrived in the target area), we doubt if
there would be any Free World reaction likely to cause the US

serious difficulzy.

FOR THE BOARD UF NATIONAL ESTIMATES: /
A hore o_o! Kean A
SHERMAN KENT
Chairman -
- 13-
See en ae a me aa

ANNEX : 30 December 1963

NORTH VIETNAM OPSRATIONS FRESENILY
UNDER ACTIVE CONSIDERATION

(Numbers keyed to Appendix
3 to Annex C to COMUS

4.5{c)

344-54)
CATFOORY I
29. (Atrops 1) Interdiction of Rte 7 by Abn Sp Fes, 15-man

. team (App 25 to Anx E to OPLAN 34-64) and/or
Air Opns #1, 15-rman tean.

Airdrop 15-man team for hit-and-run attack on
Route 7 bridge (VG 486 276) southeast of
Cua Rao. Team to exfiltrate into Laos.

Description of targets: bridge, 23' x 10', wood
vridge, 46' x 10', con-

crete

30. (Atrops 6) Interdiction of Rte 8 by Abn Sp Fes, 15-zen
team (App 2k to Anx E to OPLAN 34-64) and/or
Air Ops #6, 8-ran teem.

Airdrop long term 8-ren team to operate against
bridges and treffic on Rte 8 between WF 3088 4o2
and 400) — 455,

Description of targets: Bridge, masonry, arch
Bridge, 20' x 7’,

masonry, arch
Bridge, 33' x 10’,
masonry, arch

31.

13.

KS.

(Yarops 4)

(Varops 7)

Ferry Point, State of
bridge, 30' x 9' maso-
nry, arch, undetermined

Bridge, 36' x 10', masonry,
arch

Bridge, 157' x 7", masonry,
arch

Ford

Intardiction of Rte 12 by Abn Sp Fes, 15-man
teen (App 23 to Anx E to OFAN 34-64)

*Mer Ops #4, Amphibious raid, 4-man team,
bridges

Sabotage Ly Hoa bridge (XE 615 505). ‘4+-man team

Description of target. An 8 span, deck type
bridge, of steel and concrete construction,
extending SE/NW across the Rao Da. The tirddge
is single lane, approximately 480 x 15 feet,

th ea central span epproximately 19 feet
wide.

Defense. A guard tower is located at the +

SE end of the Ly Hca bridge and it should be
noted that a Swatow Fatrol Boat base is located
near Badon in the Song Giang approximately 10
NM from the Rao Ta.

“Ver Ops #7, Amphibicus reid, 12-ran team on
Security Fost

Sneak attack on security post at mouth of Dong
Hol River (XE 732 338). 12-man team.

3h.

he.

sh.

(Mexops 3)

(Marops 5)

(Airops 2)

CATEGORY IT

SEAL Team strike on Vinh Son, 12-man team
(App 7 Anx E to OPLAN 34-61 )

Amphibious raid Ile du Tigre by 2 Marine Cos,
1 Ren Co, UDI/SEAL, accompanied by mining of
Quang Khe (App.l& 5a to Anx E OPLAN 34-64)

‘Mar Ops #3, Amphibious raid 10-man strike
force, 4-man boat crew on Security Post.

Raid on security post (XE 593 552) and four
coastal defense guns (XE 596 553). 10-man team

*Mar Ops #5, Amphibious raid, 10-man team,
bridges

Sabotage Route 1 bridge (XE 599 542).

Descrintion of target: 44! x '3', deck type
bridge

¥Air Ops #2, Abn drop 10-man team on RR.

Airdcop 10-man long-term teem for hit-and-run
attack on Lang Son-Hanoi railway (between XJ
505 825 and XJ 509 811). Team to remain in
area for long-term operation.

Description of targets:
Bridge, 65'

Culvert (previous bridge,
23')

Culvert (previous bridge,

+323")

55. (Airops 3) *atr Ops {3, Abn drop 5-man team on RR

Airdrop long term 5-man team to operate
against Yen Bay - lao Kay railway northwest
of Yen Bay. Exact area depends on drop area
used.

Description of targets:
Approximately 100 targets

ranging from culverts t
3 track. railroad siding’

CATEGORY IIT

33. (Msrops 15) SFAL Team strike on dredges on buoy tender in
Haiphong Channel (App 15 to Anx E to OPLAN 34-61
and/or Mar Ops #15, 6-man tean.

Sneek attack to destroy channel buoys and navi-
gational aids. Mining Haiphong harbor
epproaches. Sink dredge or ships. 4 UDT
swimmers and 2-man boat crew.

Description of target: Two 300-ton, bucket
type, barge loading dredges (approximately 25 x
160 feet) and numerous buoys and navigational
lights.

Defenses: In addition to military and
security activity in the area it has been
reported that the harbor and channel are
regularly patrolled by naval patrol craft.

35. (Marops 2) SEAL Team strike on Ben Thuy by 4-zan force
(App 9a to Anx E to OPLAN 34-64) and/or Mar
Ops #2 6-ran team.

Sais

' Incendiary rocket attack on Vinh Ben Thuy
POL dump. (WF 761 648) 6-man team.

Description of target: Welled POL storage
area contains 5 large and 6 small revetted

vertical tanks, 2 semiburied tanks, 5 small
horizontal tanks and 13 storage/support
buildings. Petroleum pier observed on Song Ca
River south of POL storage area.

Defense: There is likely to be a night patrol
along the length of the river until reaching
the port of Ben Thuy, which is above the
target. . :

- A5-
