Situation and Prospects in Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000075265, dated 3 June 1963.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000075265).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

=
NIE 93-2-63
10 July 1963

e)

a

LB} LIBRARY
Mandatory Review
Case # NLJ 12-7
Document #3

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 93-2-63 |

Situation and Prospects in Brazil

Submitied by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE |

Concurred in by the
UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

Approved for Release 5.
Date wate f

As indicated overleaf
10 JULY 1963

ea

The following intelligence organizations participated in the preparation of
this estimate: ee ee ee ee

The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations of the Depart-
ments of State, Defense, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and NSA.

Concurring: =

Director of Intelligence and Researc , Department of State
Director, Defense Intelligence Agency . aan eee ee pone,
Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the Army ”
Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (Intelligence), ‘Department of the Navy
Assistant Chief of Staff, Intelligence, USAF 8

Director of the National Security Agency ‘

Abstaining:

The Atomic Energy Commission Representative to “the USIB, and the Assistant

Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, the subject being outside of their
jurisdiction. a eae ee oe

fy

This material contains information afjgalggyrr
within the meaning of the espiongs Rs, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
mission or revelation of whigfieny manner fo an unauthorized person is prohibited.

Gssification

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
NUMBER 93-2-63

Situation and Prospects in Brazil

=

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
CONCLUSIONS  pceneca ee ee ea ey Ss a RO ee eG 1
DISCUSSION oy 4 .cechtans Gabe ie ey Eee eee he aoe ee dg 3
I. THE BRAZILIAN PROBLEM ...............0 26 ee ce eee eee 3
II. THE POLITICAL SCENE ................ 02.2200 0 eee cee eee 3
The Goulart Regime ..........0... 0. 0c ee ee oak 3.
Supporters, Oppositionists, and Subversives .. ..._—........., 5
The Political Outlook ........... Seoeth Bete gate eae Bid han ee aed 7
III. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION ....................-.2.--4-... 8
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Brazilian Economy ....... . 8
The Foreign Payments Problem ............. 0.0.0... ceauene 9
The Inflation Problem .......... 0.0.0. cece -~.. 10
The Administration’s Response ............0 00.0.0 6 20s e ee eaee 10
Trade with the Soviet Bloc ............. 0.00002 260 ee eee .... 12
Economic Prospects ................. es ta ake A jeitetiteomedes 28 A 12.
IV. BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY .................... 0-22.05. 13
V. THE BRAZILIAN FUTURE .............-. 00262 e eee ees 15
Map follows 16

SITUATION AND
PROSPECTS IN BRAZIL

CONCLUSIONS

A. The evidence concerning President Goulart’s objectives is
varied and conflicting, but he is essentially an opportunist whose
inclinations and associations are populist and leftist. Under
Goulart, Communists and their sympathizers have achieved a
strong position from which to carry on a continuing expansion
of influence over Brazilian policy. Goulart has—like Peron and
Vargas—built his political power upon the labor. movement, and
it is possible that he would, if he could, try to.establish a regime
like that of Peron or Vargas or even one more clearly leftist.
(Paras. 6, 12, 41)

B. Goulart is a shrewd political manipulator who has skillfully
presided over a political scene of great complexity and diversity.
He probably can continue for some time the balancing act.he
has carried on to date, but he has not shown himself notably
resolute in resisting strong pressures, particularly from the left.
Thus, he is likely to move further leftward if that is where the
most vociferous and effective political opinion has been mobilized.
There is a danger that he will become a captive of the left.
(Paras. 8, 16, 17)

C. The further leftward Goulart may move, the greater will
become the disaffection of rightists, conservatives, and some
moderates. The military are reluctant to overturn a constitu-
tional regime, but Goulart would be in great danger of a military
coup effort if he engaged in patently unconstitutional action.
One major obstacle to a successful coup attempt is the gradually
tightening grip which Goulart is acquiring over the military
services through retirements and appointments. (Paras. 14, 18)

wae:

aa

D. It is still too early to determine how effectively the stabili-
zation program will be executed. In view of Goulart’s past per-
formance and political inclinations, it appears unlikely that he
will hold the line steadfastly against attempts to water down
the various commitments Brazil has made. (Para. 31)

EK. We believe that the Goulart regime will seek, by a continu-
ing series of actions and negotiations, neither to satisfy all US
and other foreign requirements nor to fall so far short that
the US and other foreign sources of aid would feel unable to
provide the necessary assistance. If aid should be withheld,
Brazilian economic and political tensions would become critical,
and there would be serious danger of a drift toward authori-
tarianism. Even if aid is provided Brazil in the quantities needed,
we believe there is a good chance that the course of Brazilian
politics will continue moving toward leftist solutions for its inter-
nal difficulties. (Paras. 42, 43, 44)

F. The chances still favor Goulart’s retirement from the Presi-
dency at the end of the term, and there is still a fair chance
that his successor will be more responsible. Nevertheless, the
profound political and economic instability of the country and
the strong positions being won by Communists, extreme leftists,
and ultranationalists will tend to push the country toward more
radical departures in domestic and foreign policies. This could
lead ultimately to the establishment of an extreme leftist regime
with a strongly anti-US character. (Para. 44)

DISCUSSION

I. THE BRAZILIAN PROBLEM

1. The question of President Goulart’s character and aims is the
principal one troubling Brazilian politics and Brazilian-US relations
today. Yet, the basic problem of Brazil, which has brought this ques-
tion to the fore, is the profound political and. economic instability asso-
ciated with rapid economic expansion, institutional weaknesses, popu-
lation growth, and the political awakening of millions of people who
hitherto possessed little political power and only a limited means of
expressing their hopes and expectations. In a sense, all the political
crises of Brazil since the beginning of the Vargas dictatorship in 1930
have derived from this economic expansion and political awakening.

2. The current crisis, precipitated by the dramatic resignation of
President Janio Quadros in August 1961, has been especially acute and
prolonged. Joao Goulart succeeded to the Presidency only after a com-
promise with those who distrusted him, and this distrust continues.
Goulart is and always has been supported by many of the same forces,
particularly on the left, which formed the basis of Vargas’ power. In-
deed, Goulart was a protege of Vargas and built up his personal political
strength by utilizing the funds and authority he possessed as Vargas’
adviser and Minister of Labor and as Kubitschek’s Vice President. He
has been suspect throughout his career to the more established and
conservative elements of the society, including the military, who have
feared not only the man but the forces which supported him.

3. A plebiscite in January 1963 restored to Goulart those powers of
the President which he had surrendered in the compromise that had
brought him to office. The leadership he exercises, the appointments
he makes, the directions he takes, the problems he encounters, have
placed the character and capacity of the President even more in the
limelight than before.

i]. THE POLITICAL SCENE

The Goulart Regime

4, While the figure of President Goulart now looms large in Brazilian
affairs, the government is by no means a one-man regime. The military
establishment, although it contains a wide variety of political opinion,
constitutes a major political element. The state governments have
wide powers, even including that of treating with foreign governments
on certain matters. The national political parties, though loosely or-
ganized and combining many heterogeneous groups, nevertheless con-
stitute political forces with which the President must treat. Organized

we 3

labor, despite Goulart’s very great degree of influence within it, is not
united in a single national organization or fully responsive to his
direction. The Congress must be accommodated on various issues of
financial and general legislative policy. The press, especially in Rio de
Janeiro and Sao Paulo, is also a force to be reckoned with.

5. One measure of Goulart’s importance is the depth and degree to
which he is criticized and mistrusted. On the right, fear and hatred of
the man is wide and deep. Some Brazilians, including many moderates,
view him as a demagogic opportunist seeking to create a Peronist-type
labor movement upon which to base a departure from present consti-
tutional restrictions and to gain a permanent hold upon the Presidential
office for his own glory and profit. Others see his aims as even more
sinister—to destroy democracy, to dissolve the alliance with the US, to
create a revolutionary society in Brazil, to align Brazil with the Soviet
Bloc.

6. The evidence concerning Goulart’s objectives is varied and conflict-
ing. In both past and present, he has had a close association with known
Communists, he has appointed some Communists and Communist
sympathizers to high office, including to his personal staff, and he has
removed a number of pro-US and anti-Communist officials from office.
On the other hand, he has also removed leftist officials, continued to
work with groups of all political complexions, and at times pursued a
moderate course. His collaboration with Communists has contributed to
the expansion of their influence in the labor movement. However, with
the Communists threatening his long-established control over left-wing
labor forces, he now appears to be encouraging a “third force” labor
movement loyal and responsive to him. He appears to be supporting
efforts to stabilize the economy in accordance with US requirements,
despite an outcry from the left. He has never put forth nor sought
to develop any rationale or blueprint for a radical reorganization of
Brazilian society. Nevertheless, he has—like Peron and Vargas—built
his political power upon the labor movement, and it is possible that he
would, if he could, try to establish a regime like that of Peron or Vargas
or even one more clearly leftist.

7. Goulart’s practice of playing off one group with another was re-
flected in the June 1963 Cabinet changes. He appointed a conservative
economist, Carlos Carvalho Pinto, as Minister of Finance, and a mod-
erate, Amaury Oliveira e Silva, as Labor Minister, but he also named
two extreme leftists, Evandro Lins e Silva as the Minister of Foreign
Affairs, and Paulo de Tarso as the Minister of Education. The removal
of General Kruel from the Ministry of War pleased the extreme left
but the right’s concern was at least partially assuaged by the replace-
ment of Admiral Suzano as Minister of the Navy.

4 Le

ae.

8. What the record does demonstrate more than anything else is
that Goulart is a shrewd political manipulator and a confirmed oppor-
tunist whose primary concern has been the acquisition and retention
of political power. At the same time, he has few, if any, convictions
as to broad policies and little comprehension of the grave economic
and financial problems facing his government or of the merits of various
means of attacking those problems. In strictly political matters he
has made few, if any, tactical mistakes to date. He compromised to
gain the Presidency and then manipulated his way back to full Presi-
dential authority. While accepting the military as a key factor in
the Brazilian body politic, he has progressively weakened its independ-
ence by removing officers from key posts and appointing others, in-
cluding leftists, whom he thinks will be personally loyal to him. He
consults people from a wide variety of backgrounds and political colora-
tion. He has sought support from opposition parties and groups by
including their leaders or representatives in his official family even
though some are sworn political enemies. In short, President Goulart
has demonstrated political skill of high order in presiding over a po-
litical scene of great complexity containing widely divergent political
ideologies and antithetical political interests. If he has goals beyond
political power, they are not clearly discernible.

Supporters, Oppositionists, and Subversives

9. In a political situation as complex as that in Brazil, and given
the political modus operandi of Goulart, it is difficult to identify groups
or political forces as outright supporters, oppositionists, or subversives.
Some who support Goulart are in fact Communists or Communist sym-
pathizers intent upon the subversion of the country; some who support
him, such as the ultranationalists, are occasionally extremely critical
of some of his policies, largely because they allege them to be pro-US
or insufficiently radical. Opposition to the regime seems to run the
entire political spectrum, but is predominantly on the right. Most
of Goulart’s supporters seem to be ultranationalists and leftists of one
variety or other, but he also enjoys support among moderates, in-
cluding many who are friendly to the US. The greatest potential threat
to constitutional government in Brazil may be the non-Communist,
ultranationalist, extreme left now seeking to control Goulart.

10. Among the opposition, there are of course some who can be clearly
identified. Many senior military personnel, both active and retired, are
strong oppositionists. (The non-commissioned officers include some
strong supporters of the regime, but they are not at present an organized
political force.) The governors of two key states, Carlos Lacerda of
Guanabara (the former Federal District of Rio de Janeiro) and Adhemar
de Barros of S&o Paulo, are active opponents who enjoy significant mili-
tary support as well as that of their own political organizations. Of

ba 5

We:

the national political parties, Goulart’s own Brazilian Labor Party and
the Social Democratic Party can be counted as supporters, but both
contain factions opposed to him. The other two major parties, the Na-
tional Democratic Union and the Social Progressive Party, are opposition
parties, but both contain factions cooperating with Goulart.

11. The Communist Party has been illegal since 1947 but has gradually
acquired considerable freedom of operation. It has only about 30,000
members and another 150,000-200,000 sympathizers. This is few in a
country of 75,000,000 inhabitants and 18,000,000 eligible voters. Yet, the
party and its sympathizers possess an influence and subversive poten-
tial far beyond that which the size of the party membership would
indicate. Communists or their sympathizers occupy a number of im-
portant appointive offices in the government, including military com-
mands. They hold important posts in the bureaucracy, labor, and stu-
dent groups. They virtually control three of the country’s five labor
confederations. Some half-dozen Communists hold congressional seats
under other party labels. The Communists work with such ultra-
nationalists as Leonel Brizola, a brother-in-law of Goulart, and, as
occasion warrants, with nationalist organizations such as the newly-
created Popular Mobilization Front. The Communists and their allies
exercise a strong influence in—and may be gaining control of—the
governments of the city of Recife and the state of Pernambuco in the
northeast.

12. The Communists have achieved a strong position from which to
carry on a continuing expansion of influence over Brazilian policy.
However, at the moment the Brazilian Communist Party probably should
be classified as a supporter of the regime. One of its prime objectives
is to regain legal status. Closely responsive to Moscow control, the
leadership is following a non-revolutionary course and is limiting its
activity to penetration and subversion of other groups and of the military
and civil services, and to agitation on behalf of radical reform. The
party’s present emphasis upon the gradual approach has led to the
splintering off of a small revolutionary faction of some 900 who call
themselves the Communist Party of Brazil. This group and those
peasant leagues which Francisco Juligo leads have received Castro’s
blessing and, at least until recently, financial support. The rank and
file members of the Brazilian peasant leagues, including those controlled
by the Communists and Juliaéo, appear to be primarily interested in
social and economic betterment and not in revolution.

13. The most immediate threat to the Goulart regime comes from
the right. Those who most mistrust Goulart’s character and aims are
rightist civilian politicians like Governor Lacerda, and retired military
leaders like Marshal Denys, who led the opposition to Goulart’s acces-
sion in 1961. The reasons for their distrust are simple and clear; they
regard him as a dangerous leftist or worse—an outright Communist.

6 Wins.

aa:

Moreover, he is charged with favoring and supporting a variety of un-
savory characters who if not all Communists are equally dangerous. He
is also deeply distrusted by the bulk of active military officers. In-
cluded in this group are many who have been deprived of influential
positions. This conservative and rightist opposition is located largely
in the populous Rio de Janeiro and S&o Paulo areas. Its only real
hope for displacing the Goulart regime lies in obtaining the support
of key military elements in order to bring off a joint civilian-military
coup.

14. There are two major obstacles to its success. One is the re-
luctance of the military to overturn a constitutional government, and
Goulart will probably continue to avoid acting in a patently uncon-~-
stitutional manner. This deep-seated military tradition of legality
clashes directly with military opposition to political extremism and
anything associated with Communism. The issue so divided the officers
corps in 1961 that if was unable to prevent Goulart’s succession to
the Presidency. The other obstacle is the gradually tightening grip
which Goulart is acquiring over the military services through the ap-
pointment to key military posts of his own followers and of career-
minded opportunists. The political views of the new Minister of War,
General Jair Dantas Ribeiro, are unknown, but he is almost certainly
loyal to Goulart. Command of the First Army in the key Rio de Janeiro
military district is in the hands of leftists loyal to Goulart. Some im-
portant commands still are held by enemies of Goulart, but the gradual
retirement or reassignment of senior officers is eliminating or isolating
from command many who are not entirely loyal to him or are most
disposed to join in a coup. Through these measures, Goulart has gone
some distance toward neutralizing the power of the military to move
against him.

15. The military constitute the only security force which could over-
throw the regime or, alternatively, protect it from subversion from any
other source. The Brazilian Armed Forces’ personnel strength is dis-
tributed about as follows: Army, 150,000;. Navy, 35,000; and Air Force,
26,000. The militarized police consist of about 90,000 men and in an
emergency form part of the Army; they are, however, organized in
state units and controlled by state governors. The civil police forces
of some 70,000 are under state control and are not designed for dealing
with major subversive action.

The Political Outlook

16. How Goulart conducts himself is a principal key to the future
of Brazilian politics. If there is any clear purpose in his policy, it
seems to be to weaken the centers of opposition and to prevent the
rise of new centers of power. This can explain his removal of military

Cie: 7

RES.

leaders he deems untrustworthy, his support of extreme leftists in
conservative strongholds, and his recent effort to develop a counter-
weight to Communist predominance in the labor movement. He prob-
ably can, if he will, continue for some time the delicate balancing act
he has carried on to date. If he continues this kind of approach, he
can probably preserve his freedom of action in the political arena and
prevent a rightist civilian-military coup. Within this framework, how-
ever, it is extremely difficult to confront such important policy problems
as the containment of inflation.

17. There is, of course, no guarantee that he can or will continue
his present course. We cannot be certain that he is not already so
involved with the extreme left as to be its witting or unwitting prisoner,
although this does not now appear to be the case. He may also be
forced further to the left by shifting political forces which he cannot
control. The Communists, extreme leftists, and ultranationalists may
succeed in organizing large and hitherto politically inarticulate groups
to such a degree of effectiveness as to confront Goulart with extreme
pressure. He has not shown himself to be notably resolute in resisting
strong pressures, and he is likely to move further leftward if that is
where the most vociferous and effective political opinion has been
mobilized.

18. The further leftward Goulart may move, the greater will become
the disaffection among rightists, conservatives, and some moderates,
and at some point even those military now disposed not to interfere
with constitutional government might join in plots against the regime.
If Goulart should embark upon a course—such as an effort to close
Congress and rule by decree or to prolong his term of office beyond the
end of the original Quadros term in January 1966—deemed clearly un-
constitutional by the military, those who are not close adherents of
Goulart would seek to overturn him. In such circumstances it is possible
that civil disturbances and even civil war might erupt. If he took
actions which were not clearly unconstitutional but only of dubious
constitutionality, the situation might become very confused, and the
outcome would depend greatly upon the balance of political forces within
the military establishment at the time.

19. Brazii’s political future will also depend greatly upon Brazil’s
economic condition and upon its relationship with the US. The Bra-
zilian Government initiated, in January 1963, an economic stabiliza-
tion program designed to gain US and other foreign economic assistance.
This program, as we indicate in the succeeding paragraphs, deals with
difficult problems and faces serious hazards, both political and economic.

8 ee

Il. THE ECONOMIC SITUATION

20. Strengths and Weaknesses of the Brazilian Economy. The Bra-
zilian economy expanded rapidly throughout the postwar period and
has considerable potential for sustained growth over the long run. From
1950 through 1961 real gross national product (GNP) increased at an
average annual rate of about six percent or nearly three percent on
& per capita basis. Investment, including foreign investment, has been
large and has been concentrated in the industrial sector, whose output
has expanded at an annual rate of nine percent. These very large
growth rates dropped sharply in 1962, when GNP increased by only
3.5 percent. Foreign investment, which contributed significantly to
economic growth, has declined in the face of nationalistic policies that
increasingly limit investment opportunity and security. During this
period of rapid expansion Brazilian industry made rapid strides, espe-
cially in chemicals, plastics, machine tools, motor vehicles, cement,
and paper.

21. The Brazilian economy, however, has serious imbalances. Elec-
tric power is in short supply, transportation and communication services
are inadequate, and the level of technology in much of industry is low.
Food production for domestic consumption has been increasing at the
rate of four percent per year, which barely exceeds the annual rate of
increase in population, now over three percent, and is below the rate
of expansion of urban population. Postwar economic progress, moreover,
has been unevenly distributed among the major regions and economic
classes in Brazil. The area in the triangle of Belo Horizonte-Rio de
Janeiro-Sao Paulo has been the principal beneficiary, whereas in the
northeast of Brazil—which contains one-third of the total population—
the per capita level of GNP probably has been declining over the past
decade. In the generally prosperous South the large number of chron-
ically underemployed slum dwellers is increasing, since urban popu-
lation growth exceeds employment opportunities.

22. The Foreign Payments Problem. Economic expansion in Brazil
has been accompanied by chronic financial crises. Brazil has had a
major foreign payments problem since the early 1950’s, and this is the
most urgent economic problem facing the Goulart administration. The
foreign debt now totals nearly $3 billion, most of which is maturing in
the near future. Payments now estimated at over $700 million due
in 1963 include $450 million owed to private and official US creditors.
In early 1963 Brazil had virtually exhausted its unpledged reserves of
gold and foreign currency. The 1963 balance of payments deficit is
now estimated at about $500 million.

23. The present magnitude of Brazil’s payments crisis is in large part
attributable to Brazil’s drive for rapid industrialization and its use of
short-term funds to finance long-term development objectives. Since

> ce 9

ed

1953 one balance of payments obligation has been piled on top of another
in order to maintain a relatively constant volume of imported petroleum,
semifabricated metals, heavy machinery, and other products essential
for urban-oriented development. At the same time, world prices for
coffee and other exports (e.g., cacao, cotton, and sugar) declined. Diver-
sion of resources from export production and the use of inflation to
finance development reached new heights under Kubitschek, who favored
industrial production for the domestic market and sponsored construc-
tion of a new capital at Brasilia. All these factors, combined with the
absence of new investment in export industries, have caused Brazil’s
foreign exchange earnings to stagnate. As a result, the country is un-
able to finance needed imports, to cover a growing burden of current ac-
count charges (profit remittances, freight, insurance, and commission
fees), and to meet heavy obligations on foreign debts.

24. In 1960, the final year of the Kubitschek administration, Brazil
incurred a deficit on current account of $538 million. In 1961, default
was averted only through a major rescheduling of payments and a
large infusion of new credits from the US, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), and other foreign creditors. Quadros committed himself
to a major financial stabilization program designed to reduce the size
of the deficit on current account, but failed to implement it fully; the
program collapsed after Quadros’ departure. The current account deficit
increased from $243 million in 1961 to $365 million in 1962.

25. The Inflation Problem. The recent high rate of inflation in
Brazil has aggravated the problem of foreign payments, not only by dis-
couraging exports but also by discouraging foreign investment and
encouraging flight of domestic savings. The level of prices in Brazil
rose by an average of about 20 percent per year during the period
1950-1958. This caused little concern since politically articulate groups
in Brazil have generally believed that inflationary policies are an in-
centive to economic development. Since 1959, however, prices have
been increasing at twice the previous pace or more. During 1962, prices
rose by over 50 percent, and in the first four months of 1963 prices rose
by 20 percent.

26. The primary vehicle for inflation in Brazil has been the policy of
covering the budgetary deficits of the federal government through ex-
pansion of the money supply. Budgetary deficits grew ever larger
toward the end of the Kubitschek administration, when government
spending was accelerated under his “program of goals’ without com-
parable increases in budgetary revenues. During 1962 the government’s
cash deficit was 280 billion cruzeiros (well over $500 million at the free
exchange rate which prevailed toward the end of the year) or about
a third of total budgetary expenditures.

10 IE

27. The Administration’s Response. Goulart took no decisive action
toward alleviating the mounting domestic financial and foreign pay-
ments crises until assured of restoration of the full Presidential powers.
Before turning to the US for assistance Goulart adopted a three-year
plan for economic development (1963-1965) drafted by a leftist-national-
ist adviser, Celso Furtado, and converted by San Thiago Dantas into a
working program for resolving Brazil’s problems. The plan sought to
maintain rapid economic growth while gradually reducing domestic
inflation. A seven percent annual rate of growth in GNP is to be
supported by annual foreign loans and capital investment of $500 mil-
lion to maintain developmental imports at the levels of recent years.
The rate of inflation was to be cut back to 25 percent in 1963, 15 percent
in 1964, and 10 percent in 1965 through various measures of internal
reform, including decreases in government expenditures and increases
in revenue, the reduction of subsidies, and the use of ‘“noninflationary”’
means to finance government deficits.

28. In late 1962 and early 1963, while exploratory conversations look-
ing to the procurement of US assistance were being held in Brazil,
the Goulart administration raised taxes on income and consumption,
devalued the cruzeiro, and removed subsidies on imported wheat, news-
print, and petroleum. In March, Dantas obtained a tentative US Gov-
ernment commitment of about $400 million in support of Brazil’s pro-
gram of stabilization and development through May 1964. This com-
mitment was granted in recognition of the Goulart administration’s
undertaking to carry out various stabilization measures and to nego-
tiate substantial assistance from the IMF from Europe and Japan. As
of early June the US had released a total of $84 million in aid to Brazil,
$30 million of which was used to repay the 90-day short-credit loan
negotiated earlier in the year. Release of further US aid remains con-
tingent upon achievement of satisfactory arrangements for the purchase
of US public utility properties as well as upon Brazilian performance on
stabilization and the progress of Brazilian negotiations with the IMF and
the European creditors. The IMF has extended $60 million to compen-
sate for declines in export prices for agricultural products but is awaiting
evidence of a sustained anti-inflationary effort before continuing negotia-
tions for a standby agreement with Brazil.

29. While the stabilization plan initially appeared to meet the re-
quirements of Brazilian politics admirably—solution of the financial
crisis without austerity—in fact it has encountered stiff political resist-
ance. Restrictions on credit to check inflation have produced a slow-
down in the industrial sector of the economy, particularly in the auto-
mobile industry, and have antagonized industrial and commercial in-
terests. The military and public employees opposed the restriction of
their wage increase to 40 percent as envisaged in the Dantas program.
In May the administration responded by agreeing to a 70 percent wage

Pll "1

increase but is seeking legislation for a forced loan in the form of higher
income taxes to finance this new budgetary cost. Nevertheless, the ex-
treme leftist-nationalist forces, led by Brizola, are out in full cry against
the administration’s stabilization program, the US-Brazilian under-
standings, the negotiations with the IMF, and the negotiated purchase
of foreign public utility holdings. The issue of land tenure, especially
a proposed constitutional amendment permitting compensation for ex-
propriated lands over an extended period of time, has also exacerbated
political frictions.

30. Trade with the Soviet Bloc. Concurrent with its effort to resolve
its financial and development problems through US and other foreign
assistance, Brazil has been exploring the possibility of broader economic
relations with the Soviet Bloc. Trade with the Bloc totaled $138 million
in 1962, which constituted 5 to 6 percent of Brazil’s foreign commerce.
In April of 1963 Brazil concluded a five-year trade and payments agree-
ment with the USSR to increase the value of Brazilian-Soviet trade con-
siderably above the 1962 level of $70 million. The agreement calis for
values of $160 million in 1963, $200 million in 1964, and $225 million in
1965, and Brazil received concessions that could facilitate trade with
the Soviet Bloc as a whole. The major commodities to be exchanged are
coffee, cotton, and rice from Brazil, and petroleum, wheat, and machinery
and equipment from the USSR. By 1965, if the projected trade volumes
are met, the USSR could provide up to one-third of Brazil’s estimated
import requirements of crude oil and petroleum products.

81. Economic Prospects. It is still too early to determine how effec-
tively the stabilization program will be executed. The plan appears
economically sound, it has been publicly endorsed by several administra-
tion leaders, including new Finance Minister Carvalho Pinto, and im-
portant parts of it have already been implemented. On the other hand,
President Goulart himself has yet to make an open and full commitment
to it, and in view of his past performance and political inclinations, it
appears unlikely that he will hold the line steadfastly against concerted
attempts to water down the various commitments which Brazil has made.

32. Should major US and IMF financial aid be withheld, Brazil would
be faced with critical balance of payments problems during the next
two years and would be forced to take drastic measures. Much of the
foreign debt might be defaulted if not repudiated, remittances would be
cut and perhaps prohibited, foreign private investment would virtually
cease, and Brazil would probably resort to a policy of extreme economic
nationalism. Relief from remittance and debt payment obligations
would permit the country to maintain at least a minimum level of im-
ports with current proceeds from exports, although lower growth rates,
increased unemployment, and even more severe inflation could be
expected.

12 Qua

33. The USSR, even with the collaboration of the Communist coun-
tries, could not be expected to fill the gap caused by the disruption of
normal economic relations with the US and Western Europe. However,
the USSR could at least ensure that the goals of the Soviet-Brazilian
trade agreement are met. In the event of prolonged US-Brazilian differ-
ences, the Soviets would probably consider that the situation offered
a sufficiently attractive opportunity to justify considerable efforts to
help. They would be particularly eager to do so if anti-US agitation was
widespread and led by the Brazilian Government itself. Although the
USSR would be reluctant to take on a large program, especially in view
of its heavy commitments in Cuba and elsewhere, Brazilian needs may
be such as to permit the Soviets to make an important contribution
without assuming major obligation for Brazil’s economic viability. For
example, the Soviets could supply much, if not all, of Brazil’s oil import
requirements (equal to 20 percent of total imports) although this would
divert supplies from other markets, In any event, whether or not the
USSR and other Communist States moved in to help, Brazilian politics
would almost certainly take on an increasingly radical tone, US-Brazilian
relations would become acrimonious at best, political tension would
rise between leftist and conservative elements, and the internal pence
situation would become more critical.

34. Even with US aid, Brazil will have persistent economic and finan-
cial problems. Programs for the northeast and for land reform will
still require difficult decisions and effective administration; food produc-
tion and production for export will need to be stimulated; much of the
economic infrastructure will need to be modernized and expanded. If
economic growth is to be sustained—-and the Brazilians are determined
that it should be—foreign capital investment, substantial technical as-
sistance, and probably some kind of balance of payments support will
be required for some years to come. In view of the very considerable
political, economic, and social instability which seems likely to plague
the country for many years, the climate is unlikely to be very favorable
for private foreign investment.

IV. BRAZILIAN FOREIGN POLICY

35. Brazilian foreign policy and Brazilian-US relations will be pro-
foundly affected by such domestic developments as the extent to which
Goulart’s government adopts radical policies, the reaction of conserva-
tive and moderate forces, the will and ability of the government to carry
out the stabilization program, and the degree to which Western countries
provide economic aid. It should be recalled that Brazilian foreign policy
during the past decade has become increasingly nationalist and “in-
dependent.” The “made-in-Brazil” label was present under Vargas and
clearly evident under Kubitschek. Quadros launched Brazil upon a
boldly “independent” policy with much fanfare. Goulart has been less

. ae 13

mane

noisy than his predecessors in asserting Brazil’s claim to international
stature, but he has continued the basic policy of his predecessors.

36. US-Brazilian relations reached a high point during World War Ii
after more than a century of harmonious relations. They have declined
partly from the growing nationalism of Brazilians of all political colora-
tions and the belief that Brazil is on the threshold of great power status,
and partly from the conviction that the US after World War II did not
reciprocate adequately for Brazil’s close cooperation during the war.
The decline in relations has been hastened by pressure from ultranation-
alists and extreme leftists who picture the US as responsible for Brazil’s
economic difficulties and as desirous of keeping Brazil in a subordinate
relationship with the US. Whatever the relations which develop be-
tween the US and Brazil during the next few years over financial ques-
tions, Brazil is unlikely to abandon its national and independent line. A
moderate or rightist regime might cooperate more closely with the US
put it would continue Brazilian assertions of independence in inter-
national affairs and leadership in Latin America.

37. In particular, the Goulart regime will probably not significantly
alter Brazilian policy regarding Cuba, and Goulart might seek again
to have Brazil play the role of mediator (as he attempted during the
October 1962 missile crisis) between Cuba and the US. He might go
so far as to seek Cuba’s readmission to the OAS and the re-establish-
ment of diplomatic and economic relations between Cuba and other
American nations. To dramatize further Brazil’s aspirations for leader-
ship of Latin America, Goulart will probably continue to make recom-
mendations and suggestions for joint Latin American action, especially
on economic questions. He seems unlikely to be deterred by the fact
that, except in Mexico, Brazil’s ventures in inter-American relations
have aroused jealousy and not won much approval in Latin America.
In general, we believe that Brazil under Goulart will increasingly seek
to limit the scope of the inter-American system and to play a larger
role upon the world stage.

38. We do not believe that the Goulart regime will align itself closely
with the Soviet Bloc. It will probably expand its economic relations
with the Soviet Bloc within economically feasible limits; indeed, it
would probably be advantageous for the Brazilian economy if it could
in this manner increase its export market and reduce its need for imports
from the dollar area.

39. There does not seem to be much chance that Brazilian-US rela-
tions will significantly improve during the Goulart regime. Indeed,
further deterioration could result, not only from circumstances sur-
rounding execution of the financial agreements, but from a variety of
other matters as well. Goulart will be particularly susceptible to pres-

14 ae.

sure from leftist and ultranationalist elements and will probably follow
anti-US courses on such questions as measures designed to isolate Cuba,

some aspects of the Alliance for Progress, and the status of US-owned
enterprises.

V. THE BRAZILIAN FUTURE

40. The longer term future of Brazil depends upon a variety of fac-
tors—the evolving character of Brazilian politics, the manner in which
economic problems are attacked and the degree to which they are
surmounted, and the way in which Brazilian-US and Brazilian-Soviet
relations develop. The character and aims of the Goulart regime and
the execution of the US-Brazilian financial agreements will greatly
affect the character of these longer term factors.

41. As we have indicated, Goulart is essentially an opportunist whose
inclinations and associations are populist and leftist. His political power
rests heavily upon the labor movement, and he is subjected to heavy
pressure from extreme leftists and ultranationalists. If, as a result
of these inclinations and pressures, he cannot or will not prevent the
Brazilian stabilization program from falling short of US requirements,
and if as a consequence needed foreign assistance is not provided, Bra-
zilian economic and political tensions will indeed become critical. In
this event, official pique and leftist pressure might cause Brazil to move
rapidly down the path toward ultranationalism and an authoritarian
solution, with ill consequences for US-Brazilian relations. On the other
hand, it could also lead Goulart and his associates to take the drastic
measures necessary to meet US and other foreign requirements. Con-
ceivably it could also lead to a coalescence of conservative and moderate
elements in an effort to remove Goulart and to establish a regime more
likely to win foreign confidence and to carry out a more austere economic
policy. :

42. We are inclined to believe that if needed foreign assistance should
not be forthcoming and particularly if current aid should be cut off,
there would be serious danger of a drift toward authoritarianism. The
extreme outcry against the US which would come from the ultrana-
tionalists and extreme leftists would strike a responsive chord in many
shades of Brazilian opinion. Most Brazilians are nationalists and have
long felt some disappointment about the extent of US help to Brazil,
and the economic hardships and dislocations which would result from
a deepening economic crisis would affect large numbers of peoples in
all classes. It would, therefore, be difficult to mobilize much support
for an effort to remove Goulart in what would appear as an effort to
please the US, and it would be much easier to gain support for meas-
ures—such as repudiation of debts, seizure of US properties, and in-
creasing cooperation with the Soviet Bloc—which would discomfit the
US and move Brazilian policy further leftward.

wa: 15

- 43. We believe that the Goulart regime will seek, by a continuing
series of actions and negotiations, neither to satisfy all US and foreign
requirements nor to fall so far short that the US and other foreign
sources of aid would feel unable to provide necessary assistance. Even
if aid is provided Brazil in the quantities needed, we believe there is a

good chance that the course of Brazilian politics will continue moving
toward leftist solutions for its internal difficulties.

44, We believe that the chances still favor Goulart’s retirement from
the Presidency at the conclusion of his constitutional term in January
of 1966, and that there is still a fair chance that his successor will be
someone more responsible and perhaps more steadfast in adhering to
gradualism and hemispheric cooperation. On the other hand, the pro-
found political and economic instability of the country and the in-
creasingly strong positions being won by Communists, extreme leftists,
and ultranationalists will tend to push the country toward more radical
departures in domestic and foreign policies. This could lead ultimately
to the establishment of an extreme leftist regime with a strongly anti-US
character.

sImAWOHN O09 OOF O02
S3IW 009

peoy
peoiey
Te}1de9 0129}1129) 40 opeysy
ieydeo jeuoneN
Asepunog 01393113} Joopeys3 ~~~
Auepunog jeuoreusayyy so

NVII0
IILNVTLy

Xinvia |
Rua syne

@ OVHNVAVW

‘dow Sup fo spniy oy

UNLIM omoYS 200 a0 STON JO
wopssassod © “(fh 27,52 ‘NS—0)
O}RGd ORS 2 O4Ped ODS ap sopauag

€9-9 SI6LE

rani) PW
punt}

4
nae
LLNPQUY

vena 8

+

NOTONNISY, ay

N¥HIO
ay OV

ale aN

VNy, (
Hoyt tot

2)

Tova son A
nue

hes

G. t 7
Z VIHWOTOO

hee RA eg ; 71 :

\. NA
oN ¥ ¥10908
VETAZANAA @

.
WANT IS } x

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY

DISSEMINATION NOTICE :

"1. This document was disiemineied by the Central Intelligence Agency. This copy
is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction on a

need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be authorized By the oP

following

b.

z-a

‘officials within their respective departments: —

Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State
Director, Defense unjeriaente. Agency, for the Office of ine Secretary of
Defense

. Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Department of the amy, for the.

Department of the Army

. Assistant Chief ef Naval ‘Operations (intelligence), for the Department of fe

‘Navy

. Assistant, Chief of Staff, intelligence) USAF, for the Deraines of the Air

Force.’

. Director of intelligence, AEC, for ite Atomic Energy Commission

. Assistant Director, FBI, for the Federal Bureau of Investigation

. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency

. Assistant Director for Central Reference, CIA, for ny. other Department or

Agency

2. This document may be retained, or destroyed by burning in accordance with
applicable security regulations, or returned to the Central Intelligence Agency by
arrangement with the Office of Central Reference, CIA.

3. When this document is disseminated overseas, the overseas recipients may retain
it for a period not in excess of one year. At the end of this period, the document
should either be destroyed, returned to the forwarding agency, or permission should be
requested of the forwarding agency to retain it in accordance with IAC-D-69/2, 22
June 1953.

4, The title of this document when used separately from the text should be classified:

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State
Department of Defense

Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation
