Meeting no 4 at Leeds, England, 23 April 1961
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000012394, dated 1 March 1961.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000012394).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Meeting No. at Leeds, England, 23 April 1961

1. By prearrangement jn London Subject was to walk fnto
the Icobby of the Hotel Metropole in Leeds during the evening
of 23 April 1961 whenever he could conveniently find free
time from his delegation. The delegaticn was staying at the
Queen's Hotel only two blocks away. G met Subject at the

entrance to the hotel lobby at 2220 hours and escorted him to.

Room 31 which had been prepared for audio recording and which
was occupied by Harold.

Tape Begins: ©

2. {As soon as Subject arrived he said that he was
almost hospitalized because he had stomach pains. After
visiting British firms in the Leeds area Subject, with his
delegation, stopped at a small restaurant and Subject drank a
whole liter of cold beer. ,As a result of this he developed
pains which were some sort of cramps.) S: 1 thought I had.
an appendicitis but since they examine all Strategic Intelli-
gence personnel and GRU every three months, 1 knew that 1
should have no symptoms of this. . MASKHNOV (GRU doctor)
examined me. You probably know him. ‘I suffered for about
two hours and WYNNE called a doctor. The doctor said.that I
djd not have an appendicitis but if the pains continued I ;
should be hospitalized in Leeds. He diagnosed my pains as an
extreme kidney Jrritation due to my having consumed a large .
quantity of cold beer quickly. I feel alright now except
that I'm a little weak from the anxtety of this ordeal. 1
was terrified about going to a hospital since the people -back
‘home who were not too willing to have me yo in the first
lace would probably criticize me for doing this deliberately.
They would say, "Why did he have to go to a hospital in
England when we have adequate facilities here?" Now 1 feel
‘alright and I think we can wort a lLittle‘while,.

pos

ee.

APPROVED F RELEASE

I_ know this—becaiise KOVALENKQ,. who 1s now.a colonel and was.

# Ss -2-

of K = *
at njght. S: I see. Then it ae you to decide oie

hours.

h. St: I have taken some notes here but they are
incomplete since people knocked on my door while I was writ-
ing. First of all, here is a note about target #1 which must
definitely be blown up by a bomb of one or two kilotons. |.

I mentioned before, a five kiloton bomb Js the smallest. we..
Vv

wieveloped. I l_know this for sure since the Mars yy.
VARENTSOV)_told me so. They have Gomputéd a one KiToto pe
charge, but tl they Rave not yet developed the practical adapta: 1
tfon theréof. Your scientists cam determine exactly what

size charge is necessary to destroy target #1 (the-General

Staff complex), but it should be designed for extensive sub-_
terranean damage which could probably be effected by a:shock

wave if placed in the right position. The timing fer this
destruction is very important and I suggest that it should -be
several minutes prior to H-hour because later there may not be

an opportunity. This destruction cculd be the signal for an
all-out attack by cther means such as aerial bombs and

rockets. Of course, it can be done a few minutes after H-hour,

or even simultaneously. The KGB structures are mostly old.
buildings although there are some new ones. In between the

four main buildings are many private dwellings with dark

entryways. It would be simple for anyone to place.a suitcase,

an urn, or a spitteon there. No one would pay any attention

to {t there. If they saw a spittoon they would es spit “Tr |.
it. t : . . o

5. Ss: The best time to set the explosion for would be°
between 1000 and 1100 hours hecause all of the Command
personnel would then be in the bulldings. We poor: workers»
begin our day at 0900 hours,: but Command personnel with late
breakfast engagements, etc., don't arrive until about 1000
-hours, All cables and reports for daily business are brought -

n about 1000 heurs. Remember. the KGB has. Seven sub- b-basements,

formerly the ad jutant.to-Pavel Artemyevich.ARTEMIEV5~£01 dediGm
his. He lives next door tome. He is._now a KGB colonel, who
Js..charged with the protection of the PVO nof.the-country._eH

‘offices which are scatteredin,MosGew.. He graduated from the
Frunze Academy and is a good friend of mine. I have often

‘Invited him to qo cut for a drink, but.when I do this I always
wey, for hfs cognac. Al11.KGB archives are also located in _.

arters and ire group of ‘butiding ld be
fee cea by about three bomhs, a

ee a Te

Fy -3-

6. S: I will draw this up for you fn detafl and show you oo
how easy it is to place charges in adjacent buildings, even
in the GASTRONOM. A bomb could be disguised as a basket of
fruit. (Subject then described the layout of the GRU
buildings, Entrance #3, adjacent to the POLYKLINIK of the
Ministry of Defense -- a three-story red brick building --
and particularly the pass bureau where packages, suitcases
afid the like must be checked In and left in custody while:
one visits the GRU offices.) S: An old lady takes care of
this and there is even a toilet there which Is little uséd.

A suitcase could easily be left there since the toilets are
in locked compartments. Then one coauld simply leave and it
would be hours hefore anyone would notice it. Many packages
are left overnight and during the day, officers even leave
bags cf grocerjes there tc pick up when they go home. A
simple round metallic tag is given as a receipt and the num-
ber of the tag is chalked on a suitcase until it Is picked
up. This would be a good place to plant a charge.

7. (Subject then continued describing the building
Complexes.on. Frunzenskaya and Naberezhnaya which house.the-—=
—LVOofthe~country,. the GAU Headquarters, and cther Defens.c ese

Ministry Offices«* He Suguyested. that two bombs would’ be
sufficient to destroy this complex whereas four would be
required to destroy completely the General Staff complex in
the Arbat area. Subject then described the headquarters of
the Moscow Military District only a few blocks from Sub ject's
residence.) S: A huge underground ‘shelter some 30 meters

in depth with all living facilities and operating areas for
the headquarters was built there during the war. (At meeting
#6, 25 April 1961 Subject plotted all of these suggested tar-
yets and cthers, totaling 2h, on a blown-up section of the
Moscow map covering the center of the city.) as 3

8. St: BERIYA was also breught to the basement of the |
Moscow Military District Headquarters, and was shot there by
a Gen. KOZLOV in the presence of other generals. This _
building complex was surrounded by armored cars and tanks,
all in firing positions, during the night when BERIYA was
executed. There was some apprehension -that- BERIYA'S. -KGB
cohorts would make an attempt to seize this headquarters at.
that time. An important signal center is located in this
headquarters now and there are switchboards for VCh lines
as well as telephone machines, Incidentally, BERIYA's body
was burned in gasoline in the basement of this building.
(Subject then continued to briefly describe the other targets

Mb

2 ; . Ele

Pi | =H

siderable detail in the map referred to above, during Meeting
#6. _MOSKALENKQ! uarters at Perkhushkovo was also cited
as a target for destruction. Su repeated the
incident of NEDELIN's death, adding that KHRUSHCHEV should be-
confronted with the lie since a great number in the USSR know
the truth. AS an example, there was widespread meurning in
Dnepropetrovsk due to the fact that many cf the personnel .
working at the launching site who also perished in the explo-

for destruction which were later sketched by him in con- VA

sion came from Dnepropetrovsk.)

9. S3 The PVO heedauart ers of the Moscow Military on
Distriston Kirov stfest_should eIs5 my am foyed. yy men= = =
oned this bul ng to you before and I will draw a detailed

sketch of it. One mine should be sufficient to destroy it... «>
There is a similar headquarters of the PVO In ether cities sp thet:
as well such as Khabarovsk where my grandfather-cnce-removed Uncle
is stationed. There {s also one in Baku. Klev also has one-

and it overlaps the PVO defensive zone of Lvov. The PVO

defensive zones have a Corps structure. There are no divi-

sions in the corps. They have brigades which, in turn, are.
composed of regiments. I,think this structure has all been
written up, that is, I described the exact military comple-

ment of the PVO rocket units. :

10. S: Another Important target is the KGB Headquars ye
of the Moscow Oblast. This is located near the main Bg

telegraph building on Gorkiy Street. It is a huge white

building, designated as the KGB of the Moscow Oblast. And, -

of course, as I mentioned before, all the headquarters of

the military districts should be blown up, as well as the
headquarters of the Groups of Forces. To cover them all

would require somewhere between 18 and 22, each one assigned

to place one mine. One man should not be assigned more than a
‘one task since the distances are too great between the head- ||
quarters. Bs

11. S: AS I mentioned before, it would be well to
destrey all of the regional VOYENKOMATY also, since they
have all the basic requisition plans for mobilization
invelving equipment as well as personnel. I worked In the
headquarters of the Moscow Military District at one time and
1 know exactly how detailed these mobilization plans can be.
If the regional VOYENKCMATY are destroyed, this would para-
lyze mobilization completely for a period of at least from
D-day to D plus 90. This is the planning time for the first.
mobilization echelon; D plas 160 18 the planning time for

‘the second mobiiization echelon Into which even physically
unfit persons may he taken. ,

.J
Ca

\

#4 ~6~

15. S: JI cannet arrange for WYNNE's expenses. He
could get British industrialists to subsidize him, but even
then I know we will buy very little at the exhibition. There
are only two million dollars authorized to purchase specific
{tems which are of interest to us, and that is all. They are
restricting expenditures because money Is needed for making
rockets. WYNNE will hesitate to spend money advanced to him
by the industrialists here since he lives on their small
commissions. They aive him cnly about 200 pounds per month.
Therefore I wish you would consider this. It is an important
matter. Please see Jf you cannot subsidize WYNNE. Gs: Don't
worry about this. We will treat WYNNE very well. Everything
will be taken care of, but do not get yourself {involved in
any personal dealings with WYNNE. We will take care: -of WYNNE
separately. Ss: Of course, he asked me to help him, and he —
has turned out to be a very wonderful person.

16. G: Our clandestine relationship is one thing, but
our dealings with WYNNE will be entirely adequate. It is
something different and under no circumstances should you be
involved in this. S: I felt it my duty to report this to
you. Gs: Remember, he may Inadvertently talk too much either
here or in Moscow. S: He is afriad and will not talk. G:
Remember he is inexperjenced {In clandestine matters. Ss:
That's right, he is Inexperfenced. However, he did take my
one letter and a document when I saw him off at the airplane.
I prevented any KGB officer from approaching WYNNE at the
airport since ] had a pass and simply said politely that I
was escorting WYNNE. Even though escorts usually stay behind
the gates, diplomats are often escorted to the flane ramp, and
I did also. He waved to me and I knew that the letter would
be delivered. I even went to the second story of the terminal
bujlding and waited until the plane flew off. G: I assure
you WYNNE will be adequately taken care of and everything you
request will be included, but don't talk to him about this
again. St: Very well, 1 "won't speak about WYNNE any more.

17. Ss: I just remembered -- do you remember when I was
looking at the picture of the KGBLREZIDENT in Londonvand 1
said VOROBYEV, Zheniya? It was actually IVANOV, -2
However, there is a VOROBYEV there also. val man.
The two resemble each other and when you show me the photo-

graphs again, I will point this out to yon IVANOV. graduated

fromthe Academy with me.

18. Gs: Now that you are through with your notes, let
us proceed to our agenda. The first question is this: When
you were at the Rocket Academy and studied the missiles about

v

Hh | ee
Tee. which you have reported In detail, in this nine months course
e you say only tactical missiles were taught and no strategic.
Stek missiles. Why fs this? S: There was a general (OBZORNAYA)
,lecture on strategic missiles, but these were not called_
GN’. ICBMs... They were simply referred to as missiles with ranges
wnt above 1,000 kilometers, The Academy has prepared its courses

for tratning officers in technical aspects of rockets
employed by ground forces. These rockets are studied in
great detalii with ali kinds of charts and diagrams.

19. G: Do you have a category of rockets which we call

; : IRBMs which are of greater range than your tactical rockets
idbni(is) but net as great as ICBMs; for example, say roughly between
the ranges of 600 to 1500 vilometers? S: We have no such
designation. We have only_one division, Everything I have
Lyles tai given you is under the control of VARENTSOV, and everything -
7 else including what you mentioned is under the command of the
frye) ‘Strategic Rocket Command of the Land under MOSKALENKO. These

are separate headquarters and they are always in. conflict with
f respect to requests for budgetary allowances. _ The ones who 2
a decide are KHRUSHCHEV together with SUSLOV, and ‘also MIKOYAN, _

rier Phen: etc...

wet

20. &: Up to now VARENTSOV. is still a Marshal of
Artillery, Actually he should be by now Chief Marshal of
Artillery, especially since NEDELIN's death. But they are not
giving it to him. Incidentally, on the 2nd of September
VARENTSOV will have his 60th birthday and my.wife-and
~nvited.to this.celebration. SOKOLOVSKIY will be there and
MALINOVSKIY will be there.” There will probably be an overt lV
order regarding the award of the Order of Lenin to VARENTSOV.
Everyone will bring gifts. I already know which artists will
be invited for musical entertainment. There will be souvenirs,
alhums, etc. I must also get him a good gift. His hobby is
collecting watches. He has a collection of watches. I want to
buy him a good, expensive watch, and have inscribed on it,
"From the (Subject and wife's true name)". I'm gcing to be the
major-domo, the bartender, etc., and the affair

place.at his hause the, Frunzeskoy Naberezhnoy, He has a oo
_Six=foom apart t_on the-Trourth-fto6r?

ot ae

21. G: To what extent were you told about the ICBMs? ..
icem | Ss: We were told that they exist and, as 1 have written, the
<j basic characteristic is that they are two-stage reckets.
Emphasize this to your scientists to spare them an analysis for
; more than two-stage reckets which do not exist. Next, the fuel
‘ capacity {$s much larger, and of course the overall Space jn the

7.

storage
At”

FY. athe
rocket. There is more high-calorifiec fuel which is a liquid
fuel. The only_solid fuel we have Is used for these free

reckets which look like pencils. They must be very careful

in handling these rockets especially when they are being
loaded. There was an incident when a rocket had its frame
siightly bent during loading and when it was placed In the
launcher the friction ignited the rocket, causing casualties.
G: Are they still trying to develop a_solid fuel for
rockets? St Yes, they are trying to develop atomic ener
fissfon. NEDELIN perished {in such a test,

22. G: Are there ‘any eperational ICBMs at all, or are
they only experimental? S: They are all experimental for
strategic purposes except for the one I mentioned which is,

as you said, of an intermedjate range. This {s the R-lh -— pwh.AS
about which 1 wrote stating. only that this rocket has now ‘wc &%

“been Included In our missile arsenal, that it has a range of wv Hee
over 1000 kilometers and that further data was unavailable to (P63
me. Otherwise the strategic rockets they have told me about, .

I repeat again, are two-stage liquid fuel rockets with a

length variation between [8 and 2 meters. But I have never
personally seen such a rocket or its Installation. The basic
objective is to have a high caloried fuel and to have all of

the circuits and control mechanisms working properly with

respect to each other; to reduce the deviation errors from

the planned trajectory, or to correct the errors to a zero
deviation position: and then the rocket can travel from one
continent to another. °

23. G: Now with respect to the rocket# which are in - .
production, where are their storage areas, manufacturing cen-
ters, etc.? You already mentioned that somewhere toward
Murmansk there were launching sites. Do you know of any

“others? “Sr Regarding thé bases (launching sites) in the

general direction of Murmansk, only five or six people would
have access to the location maps. One needs a special pass
to go to the First Directorate (Operations Directorate of

the General Staff of the Ministry cf Defense). Even when I
have to go to the Tenth Directorate (Countries of Peoples! —
Democracies), either Tam met by the officer Iam to see, -
after a phone call, or am told to go to a specific room or. |
they may issue me a temporary one-day pass. Everything {is
done in a recorded manner. They are so strict about Lost
documents. There was one case where an officer was court-
martialed for losing his working folio. Actually, two _.
officers were enemies and ene burned the working folio of the
other and the one whose folio could not be produced was tried.

#\. “oe

Gi! 2h. G: Did you have any inkling about rocket bases from
ine conversation? Ss: This 1 can find out in the future now that
qi. you have advised me exactly what is of interest. If yeu will

——

== repeat this to me as jEFI before I leave, I am sure I can find
tte out. Ven. ENTSOY, conversation would not be asa
Pp Z direct answer to a direct question. But he tells me things

like this -- "You know, they're not giving me enough funds, f
They even criticize me for having spent too much money for the
feat et erection of permanent-type protective shelters for artillery
be fy ordinance. Previously I was authorized tc use canvas, but the
lee bat canvas becomes weather-worn and disintegrates after a season,
lice ies and that Is a waste of money. So I built brick structures
es with permanent roofs, but the cost was criticized since the {
big priority for military expenditures is rockets," I have to |

‘approach him in a roundabout way, indirectiy, to conversation

we are interested in. G: “AS a Suggestion sometimes this

‘works well. One could mention that in the Western press one
hears about accomplishments in new missiles, particularly in

ICBMs, and the say, "Is it really.true, comrade-Marshal, that '
they have everything and wehave-nothing?". S: Thateds=sighti oo -
He certainly would answer a question of that Ikind.

ROS ens pas eee eet

ae a 25. S: 1 give ycu my word, and I swear by my child,
ae that he has so often told me "You know, (Subject's true first
ant name). with respect—to-LCBMs,_up_E9 now we donXt haveademn

: thing.._Everything.is only on paper, and there is. nothing—In,
‘eck actual .existence." He was epecliically teterrina to ICBMs.
Fe He continued, "Eor short..ranges we can! fulfill_the.missions,
| wut beyond that what?-—-There is nothing." G: 1 appreciate
Ge Fy the fact that you probably would not have access to deter-

mining the exact cocrdinates of the launching sites, but would
it be possible at least te find out from conversation that

someone had been say, off-hand, at a place like Novaya 7 |
and who might say what an extensive recket launching velop-
ment there Js there, should that. be the case. S: Thé¢re-

certainly could be conversations of that kind.

! 26. St By the way, Marshal VARENTSOV {s a very good: _
Aex(h¢ , administrator. He delegates many projected plans to his sub- .
ats , ordinates and then Just corrects and supervises what>what they
ieee have to do. I have friends in the Artillery Headquarters.

hae Beginning with his Chlef of staff of the Ground Forces .
Ae ~q Artillery, KARIAVILI, a colonel-general, Georgly Spiridonovich.
He recently had a 60th birthday but because of the fact that he
had quarreled with Z7HADOV -- his former name was ZHIDCV but
Stalin made him change to ZHADOV because 7HIDOV sounded too
Jewish. KARIAVILI lives across the river from my house on the

Ay -10-

1, Kotelnicheskaya-Naberezhnaya. Anyway, on his 60th birthday he

: did not receive an Order cf Lenin, but only a gold-watch.

.° Incidentally; VARENTSOV was also there and the ists who — |
were present are the same ones who are going go to VARENTSOV's
birthday party. I just mention this becaus hat's how I know
who they will be. ;

27. G: You mentioned 7HADOV. S: Yes, he fs the Chief of

Thaled ' 7 pane = :
ee Staff of the Ground Forces. G: Is ZHADOV in any way related to
Geechee . KHRUSHCHEV? S: No, there is no relation there. G! How about.

Marshal GRECHKO? S: ,GRECHKO, yes. He is married to some \~
relative of KHRUSHCHEV!s, exactly whom on't know. uw
“KHRUSHCHEV {'s certainly pulling him along. They say he is.a
fool. He did well on purely military matters before, but now fn
his present position as a deputy to the Minister, he its called a
fool. Anyway, this {s how ‘ZHADOV spoiled things for KARIAVILI.

28. S: Now I told you before about an aide-de-camp
ACcH SS PORUCHENETS -- a very intelligent artillery colonel, Viadimir
BUZINOV. He graduated from the Artillery Academy, and !s a
very smart fellow. He is the afde-de-camp to Sergey Se evich -
(VARENTSOV). His problem fs that he is broke. He has three.
Cc dren and receives less than I do. His wife drinks and also ~
smokes. -Her name is Anastasia... I know because I visit them at
home. He loves to drink too, and often I takel-him out because ©
he is-broke. He can drink up a half liter of cognac: at a time.
When he is_drunk he talks a_great.deal...It {is so easy to talk
to.him. All I say is, “What was all this excitement absit’6n
your last trip?", and he would say something like this, "Well,
there were maneuvers: KHRUSHCHEV came down and MALINOVSKIY, the
Minister, made a speech saying that he is introducing to the
comrades marshals and generals, the Commander-jJn-Chief of the
Soviet Union, KHRUSHCHEV." They call him that, even though his
rank js still Lieutenant-general. (Jokingly to G) - Just like.
your relative KHLOPOV. I promise to bring you his photograph.
He looks just like you. This BUZINOV-Is not“an adjutant wie
in effect, is nothing. BUZINOV carries Top Secret dispatches
and reports from VARENTSOV to the Central Committee. It is
even possible for him to show me some of these items. Of |
course he would be entirely black In this respect, that Is,
unwitting. G: .~That is the only way he must be, strictly
unwitting.

; 29. G: I have some more questions on subjects that need
leet clarification. All these questions supplement the fleld of
bistegs.2 | Knowledgeability that ycu have already shown familiarity with.
o ae St J understand what you want to know about rockets. All I
EX can say is that the experimental effort now to make ICBMs {fs

Vie f all based cn those shorter range rockets which have already
é ot ae

rh sce

been proven except that all dimensions would be proportion-
ately increased. G: I just have a few written questions left
and then ft will be time for you to go. S: Yes, I better go
soon but tomorrow I will go as early as you like and we can
work for a long time.

4

A !
SON 30. Gs: Please tell /us now all you know about atomic © fof;
~~ submarines. You previously stated that you were told that *
: there were up to ten submarines already produced in a serial Thay 0
production. S: This I found cut several months ago. Gi Not Sead.

‘This means that the submarines bperate on atomic energy fuel?
S: Yes — just like the icebreaker, Lenin. Gt May it be
assumed that they are continuing to produce additional ones?

wcl- S$: This I do not know. G: Where are these being produced?
fo Do you know? S: Yes, I know this -- that separate components
Pepe for the atomic submarine are made at Menzelinsk on the Volga,

ne te . (Note: §
yea’ “and_said-tt_was—not—Hezan—but_Zelencdolsk.) This is 30 kilo-
oN meters west of KAZAN on the Volga. Menzelinsk is the town 200
kilometers east of KAZAN which Subject previously reported to
have been the eastern town of the former Moscow Military Dis-
trict.

31. S: During World War Il this little town had a naval
base established there. All kinds of naval equipment was
mounted on vessels there. I almost married the daughter of the
rear admiral who was sent to this town as the chief of the base.
' His home was in Leningrad. I used to see the girl, Masha,

: there (Menzelinsk). Her father has since died. There were

also very large artillery crdnance plants there and storage

. dumps. At that time the Moscow Military District had a

i transient hotel there and my friend Col. Aleksandr Aleksandro-—

' vich MARENOV introduced me. He is now the Deputy to the

' Chief of the Political Directorate cf the advisors to Hungary.
The Admiral’s name was Nikolay NETSVITSKIY. Earlier, I worked

| together with MARENOV in the Moscow Military District in the

i Folstical Directorate and he was chief of the section of the
Komsomols. He is not an intelligence officer,

\\wr 32. Gs: Very well. They equip the submarines here --
ae a then what happens-- do they take them up the Volga? To
[om = another base? S: No. The atomic equipment is shipped in
i large packing crates to an assembly feint In the Leningrad Oblast.
tye G: Where in the Oblast? S: Ido nét know, but I believe it is

| somewhere In Leningrad or somewhere just out of town. In addi-
CMe f tion to Leningrad, there is also an assembly base somewhere itn
‘og | the Far East. G: Do you knew if there are bases in the White

‘Sea? “S: Yes, there are. G: Assembly pcints? S: of fhat, I
a am not sure. There are docks which receive the material from
{

ae ete we

Pale -12-=

Menzelinsk which are located in the Far East and somewhere
near Leningrad on the Neva River. I just remembered something 7
important. Near Leningrad they are digging extensive under- i”
ground shelters for these docks cr assembly points. They lead

right to the water and are like pans, or rather like our Moscow
subways, These are constructed very quickly.

33. Gs: How about the Belomor canal? Do they not take
submarines up this canal to the White Sea? S: I don't know if
they take them up the canal, but I heard that there are fac-
tories on the White Séaf, A year ago when I was on vacation tn
Sukhumi at a sanftartun, I happened to stay at a former naval
sanitarium.” There are ‘no longer ahy naval ones now because they
have all been pooled together. However, there I met a certain
first rank who lives jn the very areas that you are talking
about, north of Leningrad. .1 Couldn't ask him exactly where,
but he mentfoned that néar the sea there are secret bases where
much activity is goJng on. Whether they build anything there or
assemble, I don't know.

34. G: And do you know whether these submarines: ere...
equipped with rockets that can be fired even from at submerce
position? S: Yes, they have rockets that can’ be latinched

cther kind of submarfne engines, other than atomic, that have
recently been developed? S: The usual other motors are diesel
but now they have very powerful ones. I know of no other types.

35. S: Incidentally, we were told that your scientists
have. not perfected the exact nozzle feed which permits the pre-
cise desire per second of fuel consumption with the admixture
from the oxidizer. 1 described all kinds of nozzles in my
notes. G: By the way, what do you mean by a SHNEKOVYYE nozzle?
S: That is an orifice of a nozzle $n which a float or a ball
spulsates. G: J see what you mean now. It Is like a ball
valve. S: These nozzles operate to feed into combustion cham-
bers through the space between the Snner and outer wall. There
must be an extreme precision because an imbalance in feed would
cause a deviation from the desired rocket velocity. The work
of these nozzles is to feed a constantly uniform mixture cf
fuel and oxidizer into the combustion chamber throughout the
entire active portion of the rocket's trajectory. G: Do these

..

Ro ee

#u es
7 wi fe spate

nozzles act as a,carburator? S$: No, that my mixing chamber

called a SMESITEL'. Then {tt goes to the FORSUNKI or pressure °
nozzles. I think I wrote all this up. This is the very soul
of the rocket. ay ee

36. G: Would you have any fdea of where atomic weapons.

ef any kind, including hydrogen bombs, are stored? S: Where

nisetoat

‘Steele exactly, I do not know, but I have heard that there are two

hidden storage areas in the DDR where atomic warheads are, _
stored, Write this down. As to my source, Engineer Colonel

fete ess,

aré now five Facuities but at that time there were only four.
Colonel PETRENKO is the chief of one of the Faculties also.
GRYPLOV Is now in the DDR and is the chief of the GAU there.
This GRYZLOV Is concerned with the establishment of these.
bases jn the DDR. All of this js, of course, for rockets.

There are also hydrogen bombs of greater than 25 kiloton
equivalents which have been successfully. developed and tested.
G: Do you know where they are stored? S: I have nn fdea.

G: Don't be disturbed. These questions must be asked.

?

. 37. G: Now how about the bombs’ of any atomic type kilo-
neil 2 ton equivalents etc., what do you know about them and about
ae where they are stored? That is the type that can be delivered

- by aircraft. S: I already mentioned that everything has been

g computed down to as low as five kilotons but nothing lower.

hae | There are 25 kiloton bombs and of greater TNT equivalent.

’ 38. G: Do you have any idea how many bombs have been
ju : produced at least in round numbers, say 10, 100, 1000 or more?
. | S: I have no’idea. All I know is that atomic warheads are
hee? stored in one place and the unloaded rocket shells In another. a
G: I'm not referring to just rockets. Sr] understand. Il aoe

also mear that all bombs of an atomic character, whether they
be for rocket or other purposés, are stored secretly In _ 7
varlois places. G: I realize that these are difficilt ques-
tjons to answer. S: If we could recruit SOKOLOVSKLY who is
now retired, I think we would have our answers.

ice tm A 39. G: Here is an interesting question. How fs your
RAF long-range aviation coordinated with your long and shorter

l
| Tange rocket commands? It seems that everything is sub-
| ordinated so emphatically artillery, just how does long-range
aviation fit in? S: I can say this, ~- that KHRUSHCHEV has
made an crror which {s in our favor. At first he emphasized |
an increase'in aviation. I do not mean civilian planes or old
models, All that js junk. G: I réfer only to new strategic.

gat ae!

eds fr
I. x feats

ehh

i vi:
Bette)
’

fies

fener Nas
a

lac

#l : (edhe,

aviation. S: He is still maintaining long-range aviation,”
but is keeping the production at a very slow pace. We call
{t our DD aviation, long-range aviation. He still’ maintains ©
this, but even.some” jet: fighter units have been disbanded.

eee

For example there was one in which MIKOYAN's son, a=

lieutenant“colonel, was serving near Moscow. The entire
division Was disbanded. Capable, healthy officers were sent
to the Dzerzhinskiy Academy to study rocketry. They are re-

orjenting some Air Force personnel to rockets. During the aol
time I was attending there, they were Still wearing their © iY

ree

blue air force insignia before they changed to the black _
artillery Instgnia. “You might say that today KHRUSHCHEV ‘has
now assigned a less important role to aviation.

hO. S: In comparison to rockets, aviation now has a
relatively lesser significance. However, combat strength of
long-range aviation must be considered. They are still con-
Structing long-range bombers, but not on the scale or in the
numbers jn which they had been building them previously, for
example, under STALIN. STALIN had been all for aviation.
G: Would you sayithat long-range aviation Is being abandoned
in favor of rockets? S$: Definitely not. The fleet has been.
considerably reduced in favor of rockets, and much light
aviation has been curtailed in favor of rockets. In addition,

long-range aviation is not being built up as intensively as
before.

Wl. G: Is the long-range aviation command entirely |
independent? S: Yes, they have their own headquarters. It
is located as one goes past the crematorium and past the
University of Friendship where YERZIN {s an instructor. On
the same street on the left-hand side is the aviation head-
quarters, Marshal @HAVORONKOV is the chief. G: Is it not
on the Leningradshkgy# Shosse? 5: No, that js the Moscow
airport and there fs an air force command headquarters there.
That {s where at one time STALIN's Son, Vasiliy, a lieutenant-
general, was the chief of the aviation of the Moscow Military
District. He has since been imprisoned. He fs de-commissioned,
miserable, and drunk. It11 tell you about him sometime and
also about his (STALIN's) daughter. 1 know where they live.
It is not far from the British Embassy. It is near the Novo-
Arbatskiy bridge.

42. S: To sum up, avjation as a whole has been radically
reduced in favor of rockets. G: However, is it correct to say
that selectéd madern models of long-range bombers are still WP
being produced and {mproved and kept up at least on a minimum :
basis? S: Yes, and their headquarters {!s on this street going
toward the center of town. It is the Bolshoye Peregovskoye,

se
4 . é
: : ae
- 4 oF

Fu. -15-

and across the street fs the First Moscow Medical Institute.
The statue of PEREGOV holding the skull Is there. ;
N3. Ss: Marshal ZHAVORONKOV replaced NOVIKOV. Remember vé

Carte ts

NOVIKOV was removed Just like KUZNETSOV, the former navy od
‘ Chief. I belfeve Marshal ZHAVORONKOV {s also gone now, , oiril
Ane became chief of the ( which fs also commanded by a Marshal a zi

of Aviation. It11 ett you who the new chief of the Sovteé &
Air Force Js. 1 cantt remember now. NOVIKOV was retired for (é vi
Bow.te Personal reasons, They dontt Simply discharge marshals. It

takes a personnel action to do this, For example, ZHUKOV was
dismissed, but by a personnel action by the Ministry of

4 Moe. Bees Defense, and was awarded a pension of five and a half thousand
: rubles. But the Soviet Air Force exists as an integral part , :
eas of the Soviet Armed Forces, However, it does not have the :

weight that it used to have under STALIN. Now everything fis
subordinated to rockets. G: However, the Air Force chief

Aiae' must have under Als jurisdiction those rockets which are air
AS pal force type equipment, such as air-to-air and afr-to-surface?
—— =: That's absolutely tight. However, Surface-to-air -= that
is in the hands of the PVO. Rockets ifke the ones I described
Pr which the MIG carrftes  - that Is all under the atr force con-
Vee trol. These are the rockets that can fire an additional four
to five kilometers beyond the maximum ceiling of climb of the
MIGs,
Powe Wh. G: Have any attempts been made to develop an atomic
bopeljran energy aircraft engine? Ss: No. All they are testing now is
by: _Gus| hew'to have a rocket engine work on the fission of atomic

energy.

kS. G: This finished the list I have. How about our.
meeting for tomorrow? S: Let us arrange to meet tomorrow
about 2000 hours. G: That's fine. Then we can begin earlier
and we won't have to keep you so late. .I']] meet you in the
lobby again as I did tonight. (Subject said farewell to all.)
G: I'11 take you down out of the hotel. Remember it {ts not
SO good to come fn and out of hotels late at night since this
is a small town, not Like London.

i

6. S: What a relier it was to me when 1 was lying in
misery to learn that I didn't have to be hospitalized in Leeds,
Just think how hard it would be for us to continue our work with
me lying ina hospital, G: Dontt forget your key again so you
won't be running back between hotels looking for it, Also,
note the room number just In case, It is 31. (Subject left at
2335 hours on 23 April 1961, and was escorted by G to the

Street corner. He proceeded to his own hotel directly and with-
eut Incident.
