Estimated Pub Date - Zaire: Is It Reformable?
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000111428, dated 1 May 1980.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000111428).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

e
cae Dieectar of

{ aoe 5 Ceatral
-@ | Iatelligesce

Var

Zaire: Is It Reformable?

roved fo 38 June 1980
naiiieeD:

ZAIRE: IS IT REFORMABLE?

Information as of 11 June 1980 was
used in the prenuration of this paper.

Text not applicable

Pages itd:

PREFACE

This Interagency Intelligence Memorandum is limited in scope and
addresses four basic questions: is Mobutu’s Zaire “reformable”

Included is an annex on the importance of Zaire’s cobalt to the
West.

This memorandum was prepared under the auspices of the National
Intelligence Officer for Africa with contributions from the State
Department’s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, the Central
Intelligence Agency, and the Defense Intelligence Agency. It has been
coordinated at the working level.

Text not applicable

Page LV

S
OR
CONTENTS
Page
PREFACE. oooccccccssscesssesssseceecececseeesessesnene ceceeeseseesecaseessateqeretasusansns seeeeneaesanentss senses iil
KEY JUDGMENTS 000... cece ccc eee see ree ester iterate nett tee eee ah ]
DISCUSSION ooccccccccceceeccceeescecccececeeeeesee ners ees etesnesonenaescnessesin gs , 3
The Belgian Legacy: The Early Years in the Congo ........ 3
The “Pax Mobutu’ oo... ceteris treet Pere 5
The Current Mailaise and Mobutu’s Response ......0.0 0 ee 5
Prospects for Reforsn ..........cccccssesccccsneressscssseneeseeneeteeest se seeneencanes s geees oes 6
The Impact of Reform on Stability .......:...05 0c) te eet cts 7
Reasons for Absence of Revolt 8
pe era Sen Weal sae cunag suianaiies nbigles teen Aswhsana ttm chagnetaeeed 8 9
10
Ne cree ccscee cee ceceeceseeenscctenes cre seeecetees 1
Vv
E
Ste oe ee * ea ee a 3 Panes

KEY JUDGMENTS

There are limited economic, political, and military reforms,
however, that would not threaten his regime, and might well strengthen

it.

Moreover, African social institutions provide safety valves
that relieve somewhat the intense pressures of urban poverty.

SE

Kinshasa to other parts of the country, reviving secessionist tendencies.
Turbulence or disintegration in Zaire could hardly fail to have an
impact on Zaire’s neighbors in a variety of ways, not the least of which
is the possibility that Zaire would ag:tin become a theater for rivalries

among external powers.

DISCUSSION

1. Zaire’s problems loom larger to the United States
and other Western countries than those of most other
African nations, even though similar difficulties can

also be found elsewhere on the contine

2 The military incursion into the mineral-rich
Shaba region in March 1977 by Zairian exiles based in
Angola revealed the extent to which the Mobutu
regime had been weakened by a combination of world
market factors and poor management since its zenith
in 1972-73. In response to growing domestic and
international pressures

fobutu announced in July 1977 that
maior political, military, and economic reforms would
be implemented. The most significant political re
forms proved to be the holding of competitive elec-
tions to fill seats in the legislature, the members of
which had previously been appointed, and the cre-
ation of the office of prime minister. Responsibility for
upgrading Zaire’s armed forces was placed primarily
on the Belgian and French military missions. The
resultant Belgian-trained 21st Infantry Brigade and
the French-trained 31st Paratroop Brigade represent a
significant strengthening of Zaire’s military capability.
The central elements of economic reform in Zaire
have been adherence to an International Monetary
Fund standby agreement and reliance on expatriates
to staff key positions at tne Bank of Zaire, the Ministry
of Finance, and Customs.

3.

The Belgian Legacy: The Early Years in the
Congo

4. Although the difficulties that President Mobutu
and his predecessors have faced in trying to establish
Zaire as a viable and cchesive state are hardly unique
in Africa, the legacy of Belgium's colonial paternalism
and its hasty retreat from its principal African terri-
tory virtually assured an inauspicious beginning. In
contrast to the relatively orderly preparations for
independence that were instituted by the French and
British—in which political parties took root and aspir-
ing politicians were gradually brought into the admin-
istrative and political systems—the Congolese were
grossty ill prepared to take over the administration of
the new state.

5. By the time Mobutu seized power in 1965, Zaire
had experienced practically everything that could go
wrong in a newly independent African country. Inde-
pendence was followed by an Army mutiny, debilitat-
ing political infighting, fragmentation of the country
along ethnic lines, three regional secessions, and a
serie. of peasant uprisings. Many of these develop-
ments were exacerbated by sutside interests,

economic, and social life of the country in ruins.

6. The pre-Mobutu regimes depended heavily on
external economic and technical assistance, including
the continued service of large numbers of fereign
civilian and military specialists. Indeed, the foreign
rescue operations that were mobilized to maintain the
country’s viability during the tumultuous early
1960s—rangirg from economic inputs from aid contri-
butors and private investors to UN peacekeeping
forces—have remained permanent features of Zaire’s
history. They were manifested more recently by the
French, Belgian, and Moroccan involvement in the
Shaba crises of 1977 and 1978 and by international
efforts to maintain the government's solvency. Unlike
many other African countries where foreign involve-

“hasgie 1 Oriental
==

Occidentel 1-5"

2
Kaoasga” 1 Maui Mayi

Sy NY

~

SE

ment is rebuffed as neocolonialism, or at least is less
visible to the outside world, Zaire
welcomes it—albeit selectively.

The “Pax Mobutu”’

7. Even Mobutu’s harsnest critics grudgingly ac-
knowledge his success in maintaining a reasonable
degree of domestic peace and order in Zaire. Except
for opponents within the Zairian elite, many observers
until recently found few faults with Mobutu’s efforts
at maintaining stability. They viewed the political
system he began to construct after he came to power
as bein~ not markedly unlike regimes that were
emerging in other parts of the continent as African
leaders replaced the political frameworks left behind
by the former metropoles. Such moves as the establish-
ment of the MPR (Popular Revolutionary Movement)
as the sole politica! party and the gradual extension of
Mobutu's control over the armed forces were seen as
logical steps to strengthen the central government and
prevent a return to chaos.

8. Neighboring states were relieved that “the Congo
problem” no longer threatened their own stability and
shared the general African satisfaction that a blemish
had been removed from Africa's record. During the
“Pax Mobutu™ period that lasted through the early
1970s and was marked by relatively substantial rev-
enues from copper and other mineral resources, few
private investors or others in the international commu-
nity seemed to worry about how Zaire was governed,
but instead were more concerned with the investment
climate.

: TERE ee TATE

eg,"
details of how his system works are generally known

and have not changed significantly since he took
power. He rules more as a paramount tribal chief than
as a head of state in the Western sense. He is secretive,

OR

; In the early 1970s,
when Zaire had emerged from a decade of internal
rebellions, Mobutu embarked on a series of political
changes that were intended to create the framework of
a one-party state, to introduce into Zaire something of
the aura of an African “radical” state, and to give
himself the legitimacy that came from identification
with the African political mainstream. Perhaps the
best known of these enterprises was his unsuccessful
attempt to carry out his campaign for “authentic-
ity”— a kind of cultural revolution which had prece-
dents in other African countries and which empha-
sized political solidarity by stressing the introduction
of “authentic” indigenous practices to replace “colo-
nial” ways (for example, changes in personal names
from Europeanized to vernacular forms). This was also
an atiempt to create a sense of national unity, no
doubt inspired by Mobutu's confidence that he was in
full control and by the vague philosophies of other
African leaders who have sought to construct a frame-
work for their own particular style of rule. In the
event, neither authenticity in its various ramifications
nor any of the other innovations that Mobutu at-
tempted to introduce in the early 1970s took deep root
and Zaire’s political system has remained a highly
per.onalized one.

The Current Malaise and Mobutu’s Response

Ll. After 15 years, “Pax Mobutu”’ is still little more
than a truce enforced through Mobutu's domination of
the instruments of power. Tribal and regional tensions
persist, and social and economic problems—including
inflation, unemployment, labor and student unrest,
periodic shortages of necessities, and deteriorating
infrastructure—are now acute.

12. Many factors contribute to Zaire’s current diffi-

-culties—including a severe deterioration of the terms

of trade, the invasions of Shaba, costly economic
blunders, the burgeoning foreign debt, and the pilfer-
ing of scarce foreign exchange. The resulting deterio-
ration of the economy and public services has stimu-
lated public discontent, while international concern
over human rights has rallied some of Mobutu’s
detractors around the central theme of reform.

SE
OR

lowed at some point by other actions that are intended
to signal to domestic critics that Mobutu is not pre-
pared to go too far.

16. Mobutu has elegated major responsi-
bility for solving economic crisis to Western
advisers and gcvernments that are deeply involved in

17. Mobutu has pursued a similar strategy in the
military sphere.

conomic constraints weig against any
substantial arms expenditures, and a need for continu-
ous security has ruled out replacement of existing
forces by totally new ones. Instead, prompted partly
by Western pressure and partly by his own recognition
of the need for improvement, Mobutu has put in train
a series of important, though less sweeping, meas-
ures—reduction in the number of troops, creation of
three new brigades, improvements in messing and pay,
streamlining the chain of command, retraining a
poorly disciplined infantry division, and establishment
of a logistics corps. With the exception of the last two
of these, measurable albeit halting progress has been

ee

Aithoug e realizes
satisfy the Zairian intellectual elite, both this group
and the United States tend to advocate structural
changes in the government that accord with Western

conceptions of how reform is induced. aaa.

|

Mobutu and key armed forces officers hope the
reforms already made will become sufficiently institu-
tionalized to last beyond the tenure of these advisers.
One of the most significant of the referms—the
infusion of discipline in the armed forces—has proved
less effective. Thus far, with the exception of the
Belgian- and French-advised units, there does not
seem to have been a significant crackdown designed to
impress on the troops the importance of discipline.

Among other things, he has ap-
pointed a Prime Minister and given him some respon-
sibilities in the day-to-day operations of the govern-
ment. The legislature has been aliowed to voice some
criticism of the regime. A number of corrupt officials
have been replaced by competent technocrats, and a
cabinet shakeup earlier this year appears to have
improved the overall competence of the government's
ministers. Against this backdrop, some judicial reforms
have been enacted and amnesties for criminals and
political dissidents have been announced in order to 18.
placate those who point out the repressive nature of his
rule. Nevertheless, each move has usually been fol-

Prospects for Reform

The Impact of Reform on Stability

22) Fundamental political changes designed to Wh

esslize the regime would substantially ineresse
chances for instability by stimulating expectation

27 During his 15-year tenure, Mobutu has been
extraordinarily successful in controlling military plot-
ting and political intrigue. Through a variety of
methods—arrests, intimidation, bribery. zewards, aid

the shuffling of portfolics—he has been able to keep

potential rivals off balance.

30. Another factor is the effectiveness of the se
and security police. Al-
though ragtag and unprofessional by Western stare
dards. they can contain limited local uprisings and are
able to monitor antigovernment activities both at
home and abroad. Moreover, their reputation for

brutality also acts as a deterrent.

curity services—the Army

32 An additional important factor that probably

limits the potential for revolt is the population's fear of

a repetition of the internal

violence that characterized

bved
he

‘
oe

a

vi

irians simply are apolitical; others believe that
things could get worse without Mobutu.

24 The country’s size, diversity, and lack of social
cohesion helps prevent the coalescence of a viable
opposition. The central government's presence in
Zaire’s diverse regions, tenuous at best since independ-
ence, has deteriorated still further in recent years
Several of Zaire’s regions are so physically and psycho-
logically separated from Kinshasa that they are purt of
the country in name only. Deteriorating ruads, short-
ages of fuel, and limited contact between the capital
and the outlying regions contribute to their relative
isolation and lessen the likelihood that a revolt would
spread.

35. Ethnic and regional cleavages that migrants
bring with them to the cities remain deeply rooted.
This insularity helps to prevent the ccalescence of 3

broadly based dissidence in Kinshasa or in other urban

areas.

36 “Safety valves” to ameliorate economic hard-
ships in the urban areas to some degree belie the
statistical indicators pointing to ever declining living
standeids. Principal among these safety valves is the
village origin of many urban dwellers. In times of
shortages or hardship, family members go to their
home villages to be fed and cared for; when they
return they bring food mostly for family consumption
but for sa’c as well. Some observers point out that SO
percent of all urban women are engaged in some sort
of market activity; this contributes in small degree to
alleviating the distress of urban workers.

37. Because of the responsibilities inherent in the
extended iamily system, those members with jobs or
other resources must help less fortunate relatives. This
is in effect an informal but effective income redis-
tribution and welfare system that relieves an otherwise

bleak economic situation.

mere eth
ee N valent

we. a6 .

ANNEX

4
