The Outlook for Brazil
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000013620, dated 4 July 1966.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000013620).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Case # NY
i Doctines?
7 SUPERSEDES
~The Outlook.
Authenticated:

CUTIVE SECRETARY,

“18 August 1966 ”

NIE 93-66 - = 5

The following intelligence organizations participated in ‘the reparation of
this estimate: | a ot hee Ee : ;

Concurring:

Dr. R. J. Smith, Acting CIA Member of USIB 7 ;
Mr. Thomas L. Hughes, Director of Intelligence and Research, eee are of State
Vice Admiral Rufus L. Taylor for Director, Defense Intelligence Agency ,

Lieutenant General Marshall s. Carter, USA, : Director, ‘of the Netional Security
Agency © one

Abstaining: ? ee

Dr. Charles H. Reichardt for Asdiiaue Gonaral [ Maneaen Atomic Energy Commis-
sion; Mr. Sam Papich for Assistant Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation,
the subject being outside of their jurisdiction. a

e National Defense of the United States
ws, Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans-
any manner to an unauthorized person is prohibited.

This material contains information
within the meaning of the espj
mission or revelation of w

Page
THE PROBLEM! © cctcse- oe Oo oni Sata ee ick Soe epee at Nate uate he St RS 1
GONGLUSIONS 2 cts ree ened io Aan Goth netics ae ae Sead 1
DISCUSSION ™ secehithee scone arctic tay at hoagie BE ean leny Gill beteten ts oh
I. NATURE OF THE BASIC PROBLEMS ............00 cece e ee cceeee 3
IJ. THE CASTELLO BRANCO ADMINISTRATION ...............2....- 4
Economic Gains ......0.0. 00. ccc cee cn cece ene cece cnet beens nneenenes 5.
Political Losses ..... 0.00.0. cc eee e eee ee eanes Liguits $2 tebe Seceashiie eared 5...
I SPHE-OUTLOOK: soecacnergetitels Gh ck ene adetin tended 4 6
The Fall Elections ......0. 000.0 c ccc cee cee cece ee ee leceeetnecucues 6
The “Lame Duck” Period ...........0. 000. cece ce nse eet ensseuceeees 7
Economic: Prospects: iasqscih.c ner es SIS Bey BML IE ew terse catoo oe 8
The New Government ............ 0.0. ccc eee eee cc eeer sun eneeesees 9

BRAZIL

BOGOTA

PACIFIC
OCEAN

54510 8-66

CAYENNE Administrative units are estados
gS with the exception of the Distrito
Federal, and of Amapé, Rondénia,
oraima, and Fernando de Noronha,
which are territSrios.
BOUNDARY REPRESENTATION 18
NOT NECESSARILY AUTHORITATIVE

Paulstana

Sy J

PtAuy

ie)

Railroad
——— Road
w—=eewm= International boundary
soveraemesnne Estado or territério boundary
® National capitat
® Estado or territério capital
Persons per square mile
Q_ 25.130 260

200 490 600 Miles
200 400 600 Kilometers

THE OUTLOOK FOR BRAZIL

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the situation in Brazil and the prospects for the next
year or two.

CONCLUSIONS

A. Castello Branco has managed for the most part to preserve
constitutional forms without endangering the objectives of the revolu-
tion and has retained solid military backing. His economic correc-
tive measures are showing favorable results, but the results have come
slowly and the measures have provoked widespread dissatisfaction.

B. The administration is determined to see that acceptable candi-
dates are chosen in the series of elections scheduled for this fall. It is
taking steps to ensure that no opponents will become governors in the
indirect elections on 3 September in 12 states. But the touchiest elec-
tion will be the direct popular one to be held on 15 November for
federal congressmen and state legislators; Castello Branco may deem
it necessary to interfere directly and obviously so as to retain a work-
ing majority in Congress.

C. Costa e Silva, who has been War Minister, is almost certain to
be elected president by the present Congress on 3 October. He will
probably not exert much influence in the “lame duck” period before
his four-year term begins on 15 March. Castello Branco’s policies will
not change much in those months, though there will be some loss
of momentum.

D. General dissatisfactions will persist, but the new government
will probably succeed in keeping the opposition off balance and frag-
mented. At least to begin with, Costa e Silva’s control over the mili-
tary establishment will be firm, and we do not believe that a military
coup against him is likely during the period of this estimate.

E. Costa e Silva’s administration is likely to be a marked departure
from Castello Branco’s, not in its broad goals, but in style of govern-
ing, in choice of key advisors, and in certain lines of policy. In some
ways he will probably perform better; for example, he will give higher
priority to public relations and may reduce popular opposition to some
extent. He is likely to try for better relations with students and labor
organizations, but will take whatever measures seem necessary to pre-
vent a resurgence of the extreme left.

F. In other matters, however, Costa e Silva will probably not do
as well. In his efforts to “humanize” the economic program, he may
weaken present checks on inflation. Because he is less judicious
and more a man of action than Castello Branco, we see more chance
that he might resort to harsh, authoritarian methods. Finally, we
think that he will put more emphasis on Brazilian nationalism and
that in time this could cause friction in US-Brazilian relations.

DISCUSSION

I. NATURE OF THE BASIC PROBLEMS

1. Along with its wealth of resources and its great potential for long-term
progress, Brazil has an extraordinary array of political, economic, and social
problems. These stem from misdevelopment as well as from underdevelopment.
Efforts to deal with them are complicated by the sheer size of the country, the
continuing preoccupation with sectional interests, and the booming growth of
population.*

2. The central government has been gaining power over the years, but the
political system is a federal one and sectionalist attitudes remain important.
In part this is due to the country’s inadequate transportation and communica-
tions networks: with an area roughly equal to the US, Brazil has only one-tenth
as many miles of railroads and highways—and only about five percent of its
highways are paved. Sectionalist views gain strength, moreover, from the glaring
economic disparities between regions, especially between the prosperous, in-
dustrialized south-central area and the impoverished, agricultural northeast. The
political impact of sectionalism was apparent in the make-up of the traditional
parties; even the major ones were convenient alliances among state and local
interest groups, rather than national movements.

3. For the majority of Brazilians, the living standard is low. The per capita
gross national product (GNP) of about $200 is much below that of the other
large Latin American countries. In the northeast and in some other rural areas,
the peasants live in conditions comparable to those of South Asia. But, in the
south-central area, living levels are about on a par with those of southern
Europe. There is also a sharp contrast throughout the country between levels
of living in the cities and those of the countryside. Consequently there is
substantial internal migration, especially in the northeast, towards the cities,
which are growing at a rate more than double that of the nation as a whole.
Of the total population, only 55 percent is literate—even as defined by the 1962
government standard which required the individual only to write his name and
assert that he could read. Educational facilities are grossly inadequate; it is
doubtful that as many as 15 percent of the people have completed primary school.

4, The Brazilian economy made rapid gains in the period 1950-1961 under
the administrations of Getulio Vargas and Juscelino Kubitschek. Their con-
centration was on industrialization at the expense of agricultural development,
and industrial production increased at an average rate of nearly ten percent
annually. Agricultural production grew at less than half this rate, and most

1 With nearly 85,000,000 people, Brazil accounts for half the population of South America.
In 1900 the Brazilian population was only a little more than 17,000,000. It will pass
200,000,000 before the year 2000, if the present annual growth rate of about three percent
continues.

wa:

of its growth came from extending the amount of land under cultivation rather
than from an increase in productivity. But most important, their imprudent
financial policies—and especially those of Kubitschek—gave impetus to infla-
tionary trends.

5. Joao Goulart, who succeeded to the presidency in September 1961 after
the brief tenure of Janio Quadros, proceeded to make things worse. He set
new records for the deficit in the federal budget, and his nationalist and leftist
attitude led to a sharp reduction in foreign investment. In 1962 the GNP
growth rate fell appreciably; in 1963 it dropped to two percent and industrial
output showed no gain at all. In the same two years the cost of living rose by
50 and then by more than 80 percent. Goulart acted with equal incompetence
and irresponsibility in political matters. He permitted the power of leftist
subversives to grow, and his policies nurtured an expansion of corruption and
factionalism. Also, it became clear that he intended to try to continue in office
beyond the expiration of his term and that one of the ways he intended to ac-
complish this was to subvert the military hierarchy by turning the noncom-
missioned officers against their superiors, By early 1964 he had brought Brazil
to the edge of political and economic chaos.

Il. THE CASTELLO BRANCO ADMINISTRATION

6. The military intervention which overthrew Goulart in 1964 and installed
Castello Branco as President served to avert disaster. It was greeted with relief
and approval by most political and civic elements in Brazil,? and with apathy
by those who had previously been ardently vocal in support of Goulart. In
view of the urgency and magnitude of Brazil’s problems, the military leaders
proclaimed their action as an authentic revolution and resolved not to re-
linquish power to civilian politicians until the foundations for national recovery
had been laid. They armed Castello Branco with extraordinary powers with
respect to the rest of the political system—powers which they were later to
reinforce and expand.

7. For the most part, Castello Branco has exercised these powers with rela-
tive moderation and restraint. On some occasions, he has undertaken strong
action on his own initiative; in other cases, he has had to resist hard-line pres-
sures; and in still others, he has accommodated to such pressures. He has
recognized from the beginning that his administration and its policies would
continue to depend ultimately on military backing, and he has acted consistently
to maintain unity among military leaders,

* Among those who welcomed the overthrow of Goulart were most of the leading figures
of the Roman Catholic Church. The Catholic Church in Brazil does not exercise the same
direct influence on government and public opinion that is characteristic of some of the
Spanish-American countries. In 1964, however, Catholicism became the major vehicle for

to bring about social and economic reform. These leaders have been increasingly critical
of the performance of the Castello Branco government,

4 —_—

Economic Gains

8. Castello Branco has undertaken a program of corrective economic measures
devised by Planning Minister Roberto Campos and other officials of high tech-
nical competence. This included plans for the resumption of rapid growth rates
and for social reform, but its main emphasis has been on bringing Brazil’s
hyperinflation under control. To avoid the social and political unrest likely to
accompany a drastic deceleration, the administration has followed a deliberately
gradualist policy.

9. The results have been essentially favorable, but they have come miore slowly
and painfully than the administration had hoped. The spiraling inflation was
held to a rate of 87 percent in 1964 and cut back to 45 percent in 1965. So far
this year it is running only slightly less than the 1965 rate and far higher than
the government had hoped; however, this is partly due to necessary adjustment
of price distortions arising from earlier inflationary periods. The budget deficit,
for years a primary engine of inflation, has been virtually eliminated. Part of
the payments on Brazil’s large external debt have been rescheduled; for this
year and next, debt repayments will amount to about 25 percent of projected
export earnings. Exports expanded slightly in 1964 and considerably in 1965
to produce the first favorable trade balances since 1957.

10. The government’s deflationary measures and a severe drought which lim-
ited agricultural production caused GNP to fall two to three percent in 1964;
per capita consumption declined by nearly five percent. Tight credit and a
slackening of consumer demand led to an industrial recession in the first half

of 1965, but agricultural output for 1965 was high, owing chiefly to a big coffee
crop. For. the year as a whole, GNP rose by about five percent. Industrial
output had largely recovered by the end of 1965—a trend which continued dur-
ing the first half of this year.

Political Losses

11. Despite his many talents of leadership, Castello Branco does not project
the kind of image that excites the Brazilian body politic. It is difficult in any
case to keep people enthusiastic about taking bitter medicine when they see
no quick cure. The Castello Branco administration has been notably unsuccess-
ful in public relations on its economic program, as well as on other matters.

12. Most Brazilians have felt the hurt, in greater or lesser degree, of the
government’s economic corrective measures. Labor is dissatisfied that policies
originally designed to keep real wages constant have actually resulted in a
decline in real wages since 1964. The business community, which had gen-
erally supported the stabilization policies, has become more critical this year.
Marginal firms continue to be forced out of business; bank credit was tightened
again in the early part of this year; and many businessmen complain that they
can't keep up with the series of new regulations on taxes, financing, prices, and
foreign exchange. The coffee growers’ association is resentful because govern-

ment pricing policies are reducing their margin for profit. Moreover, the con-
tinuing increase of prices in 1966 gives rise to the contention that all the tribula-
tion is for nothing.

13. This general dissatisfaction with the government’s program has added to
its problems in dealing with the Congress and the political parties. Castello
Branco initially formed a congressional bloc to support the administration, and
his advisers were not above issuing pointed threats from time to time to keep
members of Congress in line. In October 1965, however, the victory of opposi-
tion candidates in important gubernatorial elections disturbed many of Castello
Branco’s military colleagues. At their insistence, Castello Branco promulgated
a Second Institutional Act, which extended the period in which the President
could cancel the mandates of elected officials, instituted indirect election of the
President and abolished all political parties. To replace the 13 parties which had
been represented in Congress, Castello Branco established standards and regula-
tions governing the formation of new “provisional” parties, designed to be na-
tional in scope and less prone to corruption and special interest than the old
ones. Only two qualified: the pro-revolution National Renewal Alliance
(ARENA) and the opposition Brazilian Democratic Movement (MDB). A
third group, the followers of former governor Carlos Lacerda of Guanabara
state, a dynamic political leader who has become a bitter opponent of the gov-
ernment, failed to qualify. Most of them are now affiliated with the MDB.

14. ARENA and MDB were brought into being not simply to strengthen
the administration bloc in Congress, but to provide a framework for the elections
this fall. It is Castello Branco’s hope that they can also, in the long run, become
the foundation for a new, and more effective, representative system of govern-
ment. ARENA, based largely on the old National Democratic Union and to a
lesser extent the old Social Democratic Party, has had many more members of
Congress join its ranks than has the MDB. It is not clear what role the MDB
can, or will in practice be permitted, to play in opposition. And the concept
of turning ARENA and the MDB into an enduring two-party system seems
dubious; they have been imposed artificially from above, neither can be con-
sidered a cohesive, disciplined entity, and both are sorely lacking in grassroots
support.

Ill. THE OUTLOOK

The Fall Elections

15. After some bold and shrewd maneuvering, Marshal (Ret.) Arthur da
Costa e Silva, the former War Minister, has managed to win the ARENA nomina-
tion and Castello Branco’s backing as the revolution’s candidate in the presi-
dential election to be held on 3 October. ‘The election is indirect, with Con-
gress doing the voting; ARENA has large majorities in both the Senate and
Chamber of Deputies. The MDB, after some vacillating, decided to boycott
the presidential election. Under these circumstances, Costa e Silva is certain
to win.

6 ial

16. In the September gubernatorial elections to be held in 12 of Brazil's 22
states, the government has initiated measures to ensure that no opponents will
be elected. In addition to decreeing that the election be indirect—by the state
legislatures—specific steps have been taken, such as the ouster of Governor
Adhemar de Barros of Sao Paulo and the requirement that ARENA state legis-
lators vote strictly along party lines, to avoid their casting ballots for opposi-
tion candidates. Faced with the certainty of defeat, the MDB national leader-
ship has urged that MDB state leaders boycott these elections as well.

17. The touchy elections, as far as the government is concerned, are the
congressional elections scheduled for 15 November. They are to be by direct
popular vote. An entire new federal Chamber of Deputies is to be chosen,
along with one-third of the Senate; new legislatures are also to be elected in all
the states. Discontent with Castello Branco’s policies is likely to hurt ARENA
candidates and strengthen MDB nominees, particularly in urban areas where
the labor vote is significant. Acutely aware of this, some 180 ARENA deputies
(of a total of 256 ARENA deputies in the 409-seat chamber) at one time peti-
tioned for a constitutional amendment that would permit them to run as in-
dividuals and not on a party ticket.

18. The administration has decided instead on other devices which will be
advantageous to ARENA. One is a provision permitting candidates in rural
areas to have ballots printed and distributed in advance. This will give ARENA
the opportunity to capitalize on its larger supply of funds and its better organiza-
tion in the countryside. Another is a requirement for linked voting: that is, the
voter must cast his ballot for state and federal candidates of the same party.
The fact that all or almost all of the governorships, with their patronage and
spending powers, will be in hands friendly to the administration should improve
prospects for ARENA in the state contests—and linked voting would carry over
this advantage to the federal ones. There is certain to be, as well, some careful
advance screening of candidates, with a number of disqualifications.

19, If, as the elections draw closer, the government thinks their outcome un-
certain, it might simply decide to cancel them. More likely, it will hold them
on schedule, anticipating some loss of support in Congress and the state legisla-
tures, but calculating that by various precautions it can ensure continuing work-
ing majorities. Although Castello Branco would clearly prefer to avoid the
necessity for starker action, it should be noted that the Second Institutional Act
empowers him to dissolve Congress at will or to unseat members without as-

signment of cause. ;

The “Lame Duck” Period

20. If the administration resorts to obvious manipulation during the actual
voting or to the dissolution of the new Congress, this might rally the opposition
and provoke some local disturbances, but no real threat to the government
seems likely to ensue. However, assuming that Castello Branco manages through
less drastic devices to obtain the required working majority in the November

iz: 7

congressional elections, the period until inauguration of the new president on
15 March is likely to pass fairly smoothly. Costa e Silva will be concentrating
on lining up key members of his government and preparing himself for office;
he may be absent from Brazil for substantial periods on semiofficial visits to
the US and other countries. Castello Branco’s policies will be a continuation
of those he has been following, although there may be a reduction in efficiency
due to the departure of some cabinet ministers who will be running for office.
Castello Branco may try to undertake-a number of actions which he considers
to be necessary but which might be politically awkward for Costa e Silva to
accomplish. These probably would include creation of a Ministry of Defense
and a permanent revision of the constitution designed to institutionalize the ad
hoc reforms of the revolution.

91. Most matters which might have provoked controversy between Costa e
Silva and Castello Branco have been ironed out in advance. For example, the
two men seem in complete agreement on the commanders of Brazil’s key mili-
tary forces—the first, second, third, and fourth armies. A different kind of
factor likely to contribute to a quiet interregnum is the season: from the begin-
ning of December to the beginning of March is summer vacation time. Con-
gress is in recess, school is out, Carnival is in. Political activity is seldom
intense in these months.

Economic Prospects

92. Despite some significant progress, Castello Branco will pass on to the
Costa e Silva government a wide range of unfinished business. A major dis-
appointment to the administration is that its stabilization efforts are only succeed-
ing in holding the increase in cost of living to 35 or 40 percent for 1966 as a
whole. This will be, nevertheless, an improvement over the two prior years.
More encouraging is the degree to which the government is reducing its budg-
etary deficit, one of the main causes of inflation. It declined from 27 percent
of expenditures in 1964 to 16 percent in 1965 and is estimated at only about 6
percent this year. Moreover, most of this deficit for 1966 will be financed
through Treasury bonds, rather than through the more inflationary procedure
of bank borrowing.

93. The overall economic growth rate for 1966 will probably be about five
percent, the same as for 1965. This year’s increase will stem primarily from
an increase in industrial output, however, while last year’s was mostly due to
an expansion of agricultural production, in which exceptionally good weather
was a factor. The economic prospect for 1967 is less certain. In part it will
depend on whether the new government modifies present policies and pro-
grams—and if so, to what extent. We believe that the achievements made so far
provide a foundation for gains in 1967 at least equal to those being registered
this year, both in terms of stabilization results and in terms of general growth.

94, Along with this fairly favorable prospect, the Costa e Silva government
will inherit a large accumulation of popular and business discontent. The bur-

(

den of this program of economic correctives is heavy, and it falls largely on the
lower income groups and marginal entrepreneurs who can afford it least. If
these groups feel any relief from the economic pinch between now and the
inauguration of the new president next March, it will probably be only slight.

The New Government

25, Costa e Silva, who will be 64 on election day, is sharply different in per-
sonality from Castello Branco, once his classmate at the Brazilian military
academy. Castello Branco tends to be reserved, contemplative, and judicious;
Costa e Silva is gregarious, shrewd, more ready to compromise, and often pain-
fully outspoken. Costa e Silva is not a member of the “Sorbonne” group of
military intellectuals of which Castello Branco is the leading figure, nor was
he a member of the Brazilian Expeditionary Force which fought alongside
American troops against the Germans in Italy during the Second World War.
He tends to be more Brazilian and less internationalist in outlook than Castello
Branco.

26. Costa e Silva is, nonetheless, a strong figure in his own right. More troop
commander than staff strategist, he retains numerous useful contacts among
officers in subordinate command positions. He is something of an opportunist
politically and showed cleverness, as well as boldness, in his maneuvering to
get Castello Branco’s endorsement for the presidency. His wife is politically
ambitious for Costa e Silva and influential with him.

27. While pursuing the same broad goals, Costa e Silva’s administration is
likely to be a marked departure from Castello Branco’s in style of governing,
in choice of key advisors, and in certain lines of policy. For one thing, Costa
e Silva will rely on different military advisors. Castello Branco himself will
not have much influence on the new administration. And in contrast to Castello
Branco’s strong preference for working with political figures formerly associated
with the conservative National Democratic Union, Costa e Silva will probably
seek to improve relationships with a number of members of the former Social
Democratic and Labor Parties.

28. Though general dissatisfactions will persist, the new administration will
probably manage to keep its political opposition off balance and fragmented.
Carlos Lacerda has been fairly well isolated politically, and we doubt that he
can make a comeback in the next year or two. Costa e Silva may give high
priority to a remolding and strengthening of ARENA to serve as a stauncher
political base. To the extent that he plays ball with some of the old political
forces he is likely to incur the displeasure of young hardliners among the
military officers. At least to begin with, however, his control over the military
establishment will be firm, and we do not believe a military coup against him
is likely within the period of this estimate.

29. Costa e Silva will probably face some increase in agitation on the part of
the extreme left, which has suffered a major loss of strength and influence since
the 1964 revolution. Recent terrorist activities in Recife, Brasilia, and Sao

ee 9

ome

Paulo are indicative of the continuing capability of antiregime elements to initiate
isolated violence. This capability is limited, however, and is unlikely to constitute
a serious threat to stability during the period of this estimate. Exiles in neighbor-
ing countries and their associates in Brazil may seek to mount an insurgency
campaign, but the present state of preparedness of security forces dooms such
adventures to almost certain failure.

30. In some ways, Costa e Silva’s administration will probably perform better
than its predecessor. We believe, for example, that he will give more attention
to public relations and will probably have greater success in cultivating popular
support. He will probably appoint some individuals sympathetic to the prob-
lems of student groups and labor organizations—elements of the population
with which the Castello Branco government was unable to maintain any rapport.
However, Costa e Silva is not likely to make changes sufficient to provoke a
serious military reaction, and he can be expected to take all necessary measures
to prevent a resurgence of the extreme left.

31. In other matters, we think the new government may not do as well.
Costa e Silva has said that while he intends to continue the anti-inflation pro-
gram, he thinks that it has been applied too rigidly in the past and that the
suffering of low-income groups must be eased. He js almost certain not to
include the present Planning Minister Roberto Campos in his cabinet, although
he probably will keep on most of the other economic technicians. Costa e Silva
is quick to admit that he knows little about economics; he may loosen present
stabilization measures—especially wage restraints—too much and too soon,
letting inflation get out of hand once again.

32. If only because Costa e Silva is less judicious and more a man of action
than Castello Branco, we see a somewhat greater chance that, in the press of
circumstance, he might resort to harsh, authoritarian measures. Such measures,
particularly if long sustained, would tend to sharpen existing political anti-
pathies, broaden the opposition to the administration and jeopardize prospects
for eventual resumption of constitutional, representative government. We also
think that Costa e Silva will be inclined to put more emphasis on nationalism
than did Castello Branco and that in time this could produce friction in US-
Brazilian relations. Similarities of attitude and interest on some matters are
likely to draw Costa e Silva’s government into closer cooperation with the
military government of Argentina—the more so since he and Ongania are
personal friends. These tendencies will cause concern in such governments as
those in Uruguay, Chile, and Venezuela, and may add to existing strains within
the Organization of American States.

10 , eg

Aue

_ THE CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY sie dh

— 1. This deeunient was Sane! iy the Central jheligeres Agency. This copy -
PF ete is for the information and use of the recipient and of persons under his jurisdiction oa...
ice - need to know basis. Additional essential dissemination may be. “authorized by the: a

following officials within their respective departments:

hte ee - is a ‘Director of Intelligence and Research, for the Department of State;
ee ae anane Director, Defense. Intelligence Agency, for the Office “of | the, Seer oF
i fine eas Defense and the organization ‘of the, Joint Chiefs" of, ‘Staff
es c. Assistant. Chief of Staff for Intelligence, Depa ment of, the Army, for the.

Department of the Army: Le
d. Assistant Chief of Naval Operations (intelligence), for the rasta of the’

e. Assistant Chief of Sto, Intelligence, USAF, for the Department of ‘the Air

: Force -.° + - . ~
”f. Director “of ipielng ence: “AEC, for the Atomic Energy, Commission
'g. Assistant Director, FBI, for ‘the Federal Bureau’ ‘of. Investigation
_h. Director of NSA, for the National Security Agency’
iE Assistant Director for Central ‘Reference, CIA, for. any

Lares

uy

ies security “regulations, or returned to the ‘Central ‘msl

seongenent stl ay Office of Central Reference, CA.
: Mig ns elie
vis. " disseminated overseas, |

fetal, it for. a poet in’ excess of ‘one year. At the "end “of th is” * period, me

yl Be Sy RE

document should” either be destroyed, returned’ to, the. forwarding" agency. or. per-

‘ mission should be requested. of ‘the forwarding agency fo"retain Sif in accordance with,
" IAC-D-69/2, 22 June 1953. :
ut

‘ “oee we *S <2

Ae The title, of this. "document when used separately fro
; rte

"DISTRIBUTION:
Naa House

_ Department of fo
Atomic Energy” Commission :

= Z rare oe Para woe 2
d & “oF . 5 L E or ‘ ms, e) Hage.
. fs - oe
: ° a o = . ‘
. + % eit 4 228 Se 6
