Probable Developments in the Arab States
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119699, dated 2 August 1954.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119699).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

BSP-lOF SARI
= = - NIE 36-54

Aan h (CD/IS

~ 4 a oT September 1954

a

NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
- NUMBER 36-54 |

- PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
ARAB STATES

Submitted by the
DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
The following intelligence organizations participated in the
preparation of this estimate: The Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, and The Joint Staff.
Concurred in by the
INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
on 7 September 1954. Concurring were the Special Assistant
Intelligence, Department of State; the Assistant Chief of
Staff, G-2, Department of the Army; the Director of Naval In-
telligence; the Director of Intelligence, USAF; the Deputy
Director for Intelligence, The Joint Staff. The Atomic Energy _
Commission Representative to the IAC and the Assistant to
the Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, abstained, the
subject being outside of their jurisdiction.

. _
copy wo. “~

. FOR THE CHIEF, .
ACQUISITION $ DISTRIBUTION DIVISION

DEPT.OF STATE

_ APPROVED FOR RELEASE
9 SEP 1997 ~98

is for

b. Assistant Chief o fait, G2, for the Deparime ae
c. Director of Navai In

d. Director of Intelligence,
e..Deputy Director for Intelligent

f. Director of Intelligence, AEC, fo
g. Assistant to the Director, FBI;for the-federal Bureau of’ Tnvéstipaiio

h. Assistant Director for Co ection and | Distergination, CTA, fofany’ “othe Dez
partment | or Agency

WARNI N G .. :
This material contains information affecting 1
the National Defense of ‘the United: States ©...
within the meaning of the espionage laws, ~
Title 18, USC, Secs. 793 and 794, the trans- ~.
mission or revelation of which In any manner ~>”
to an unauthorized person 1s prohihited by law.

DISTRIBUTION:

White House

National Security Council
Department of State

Department of Defense

Foreign Operations Administration
Operations Coordinating Board
Atomic Energy Commission
Federal Bureau of Investigation

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE ARAB STATES

THE PROBLEM

To analyze basic trends in the domestic and foreign affairs of the Arab states,
and to estimate probable developments through 1956."

CONCLUSIONS

1. Political instability, both regional and
national, in the Arab states may be ex-
pected to extend into the foreseeable fu-
ture. Area political problems mainly grow
out of the unresolved conflict between
Western culture and the traditional val-
ues and institutions of the Arab world.
The Arabs have not yet found a native
solution to this conflict, but they have
found expression for their discontent and
frustration in nationalist and other move-
ments, which, at least in the short run,
increase general instability. Another fac-
tor contributing to political instability is
the intense preoccupation of Arabs with
the Arab-Israeli conflict.

2. Indigenous leadership has shown little
ability to cope with the problem of in-

1¥or purposes of this estimate the Arab states in-
clude Egypt, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Saudi
Arabia, Yemen, the principalities of the Arabian
Peninsula, and the Sudan. The Sudan is in-
cluded, although only its northern half is Arab
and Moslem, because of its special relationship
with Egypt. Libya ts omitted because it is cov-
ered in NIE 71-54, “probable Developments in
North Africa.”

Note: (a) NIE-73, “Conditions and Trends in the
Middle East Affecting US Security,” 15 Jan-
uary 1953 and NIE 30-54, “Prospects for Cre-
ation of a Middle East Defense Grouping and
Probable Consequences of such a Develop-
ment, 22 June 1954 deal with subjects related
to this estimate.

(b) Appendix I contains comparative data
on the principal Arab states. .

—SHCRET

creasing production sufficiently to meet
the requirements of growing populations
and the need for improved standards of
living. It is probable that economic mal-
adjustment will become an increasingly
important factor for social and political
instability. As economic problems as-
sume greater importance relative to or
become identified with political problems,
there will be an increasing tendency to
seek extremist solutions of the right or
left.

3. The governments of the Arab states
will continue to be unstable and subject
to change. The most serious threats to
their tenure will come from the extremist
elements of the right and left. The key
to the maintaining of a degree of govern-
mental stability in the area during the
period of this estimate is the power of the
established governments to maintain con-
trol of the armed forces and to prevent
the moderate opposition from joining
with the extremists.

4. While current conditions and trends in
the Arab world on the whole are adverse
to the continuation of special military,
political, and economic positions for the
West, settlement of the Suez issue with
the UK and prospects for US military and
economic assistance may provide a new

~(O0 1

basis for Arab-Western collaboration.
However, Arab collaboration with the
West will be influenced by the extent to
which Western policies are brought in
line with the most fundamental Arab de-
sires; e. g., the elimination of the British
position in the Near East currently based
on “unequal” treaties, further change in
US treatment of the Arab-Israeli ques-
tion, and, to a lesser extent, change in
France’s policy towards its North African
possessions. Arab resentment of British
“imperialism” and the reduction in the
British world power position will continue
to limit the effectiveness of British in-
fluence.

5. The petroleum producing countries are
likely to press the Western oil companies
for further benefits, but such pressures
are not likely to lead to nationalization
during the period of this estimate, except
possibly in Saudi Arabia.

6. Official relations between the Arab
states and the Soviet Bloc have been in-
creasing, but most Arab governments are
probably not anxious to engage in closer
relations with the Bloc. However, they
might do so on occasion if they believed
they could thereby bring pressure upon
the Western Powers.

7. Communist activity in the Arab states
has increased noticeably over the past
year, and continued instability in the
area will favor a further increase in Com-
munist activity and strength. However,
within the period of this estimate it is
not likely that Communists will take con-
trol of the government of any Arab state.
Improved relations with the West would
probably eliminate some of the political
appeal of Communist and pro-Soviet
propaganda and improve the ability and
willingness of Arab governments to at-

—~SRCRET

-S-E-G-R-E-IY

tempt to correct the conditions which
contribute to Communism’s appeal.
However, the elimination of factors aid-
ing Communism and pro-Soviet attitudes
will be a slow process.

8. The idea of Arab solidarity against the
rest of the world exerts a strong appeal
among Arabs, but the Arab League will
probably continue to function effectively
only for such negative purposes as opposi-
tion to Israel. Moreover, there are seri-
ous rivalries among the Arab states, and
Egypt and Iraq are vying for leadership.
Effective military cooperation among the
Arab states is unlikely during the period
of this estimate, even under their own
Arab Collective Security Pact.

9. The Arab states will probably continue
the economic and political boycott of
Israel and will refuse to meet with Israel
for the purpose of negotiating a formal
peace settlement. However, in dealing
with specific problems of Arab-Israel rela-
tions short of a general peace settlement,
some Arab leaders have recently appeared
less intransigent. On the other hand,
the Israeli policy of “active defense” and
the redeployment of Arab troops to border
areas increase the danger that border
incidents could lead to extensive armed
conflict. If such conflict took place dur-
ing the period of this estimate, it is prob-
able that the comparative military capa-
bilities of the two antagonists would prove
to be much the same as they were at the
time of the Palestine War of 1948-1949.

10. The Egyptian Revolutionary Com-
mand Council’s (RCC) short-term pros-
pects of maintaining itself in power are
favorable. The Wafd Party and the Mos-
lem Brethren will remain capable of caus-
ing serious trouble for the regime, and
any such efforts would probably be aided

fo)

by the Socialist and Communist groups.
Moreover, the RCC faces serious political
and economic problems upon the solution
of which will depend its longer term
tenure.

11. Iraq’s traditional ruling oligarchy will
probably remain in power during the next
two or three years, but its effectiveness
would decline if Nuri Said were removed
from the scene. Iraq’s policies toward
the other Arab states will continue to be
influenced by the conflict between its am-
bitions to achieve Arab leadership against
the opposition of Egypt and Saudi Arabia
and its desire for continued Arab soli-

darity. Iraqi leaders are aware of the
Soviet threat and favor joining some sort
of regional defense organization which
the US would support.

12. Saudi Arabian relations with the US
Government and ARAMCO deteriorated
over the past year. ‘There are current in-
dications that Saudi Arabian relations
with the West are undergoing a change
for the better. However, if the general
deterioration of relations which took place
during the past year should continue, the
US Government might have difficulties
when the Dhahran airbase agreement
comes up for renewal in 1956.

DISCUSSION

1]. REGIONAL PROBLEMS AND PROSPECTS

13. Area political problems mainly grow out
of: (a) the social and historical relationships
in the Arab world itself, and (b) the unre-
solved conflict between Western culture and
the traditional values and institutions of the
Arab world. This conflict is reflected in the
century-old struggle on the part of the Arabs
to strengthen themselves in order to prevent
their political, cultural, and economic sub-
mergence by alien forces. The psychological
state created in the process has given rise to
ambivalent attitudes toward Europe and the
US which are reflected in the general attitude
toward the Soviet Bloc and the West.

14. There are certain trends and conditions
common to most of the Arab states.*. For at
least three decades, society in all but the most
remote parts of the Arab world has been un-
dergoing an increasingly profound and occa-
sionally violent revolution. The political, eco-
nomic, and cultural impact of the West has
led to the decaying of traditional Arab values
and institutions and is a basic factor in Arab
world instability. Arabs have become increas-
ingly resentful of the special interests and

*See NIE-73, “Conditions and Trends in the Mid-
dle East Affecting US Security,” 15 January 1953.

SOETRE IT

privileges of Western nations in Arab coun-
tries. Moreover, with the end of British and
French tutelage, the responsibility of leader-
ship has shifted to indigenous elements often
ill-prepared to assume it. Finally, the back-
ward economies of the Arab states have felt
for some time the disruptive effects of contact
with Western commerce and industry. The
Arabs have not yet found a native solution to
the conflict between new conditions and old
systems that would restore the foundations of
stability.

15. Despite their common Islamic religious
and cultural heritage, diversity is a stronger
characteristic than uniformity among the
Arab states. Their political development
varies widely, from the Arab traditionalism of
Saudi Arabia’s absolute monarchy to the
partially Westernized governments of Iraq and
Lebanon and the reform-minded military
regime in Egypt. In addition, there are great
differences between the states with respect to
their social and political stability, economic
resources and needs, and military and stra-
tegic importance.

16. The widespread discontent and frustra-
tion in the Arab world have found expres-
sion in nationalist movements. The doctrines

~/O2

of nationalism are not well-defined, and dif-
ferent nationalists emphasize different as-
pects. In general, however, the nationalists
seek: (a) the removal of the last vestiges of
imperialism and the recognition of the com-
plete sovereignty of the Arab states; (b) so-
cial and economic reforms in the interest of
public welfare and the increase of national
strength; (c) cooperation among all Arab
states and peoples for common ends, includ-
ing satisfaction of Arab grievances against
Israel; and (d) a revival, in varying degrees,
of their past glories.

17. Nationalism is strongest among the mem-
bers of the growing Westernized middle sector
of Arab society — urban intellectuals, stu-
dents, military officers, small businessmen,
and government employees. It also has con-
siderable mass emotional appeal, especially in
the cities. Its influence on government poli-
cies is most apparent in states like Egypt and
Syria, where the governments are susceptible
to the influence of public opinion and mass
pressure tactics.

18. Nationalist movements espouse both par-
liamentary and authoritarian political forms.
In all states, however, the spread of nation-
alist doctrines has tended to weaken the tra-
ditional power of the landlords, tribal leaders,
and wealthy merchants who previously dom-
inated most Arab governments with the sup-
port of interested Western powers, in most
cases the UK. At least in the short run, this
trend increases the likelihood of instability.

Internal Problems of the Arab States

19. Political stability. The governments of
the Arab states will continue to be unstable
and subject to frequent change. The key to
the maintaining of a degree of governmental
stability in the area during the period of this
estimate is the power of the established gov-
ernments to maintain control of the armed
forces and to prevent the moderate opposition
from joining with the extremists. Long-
range prospects for stability will depend upon
the success of Arab leadership in satisfying
popular aspirations by moderate and con-
structive reforms and in providing relatively
efficient government.

20. The most important threat to political
stability will come from the fanatic anti-
Westerners and the Islamic traditionalists on
the right and from left-wing elements often

under Communist influence. In some cases
these extremist groups may unite against the
conservative or moderate nationalist leader-
ship, and may even be joined by disaffected
members of the old ruling class. While such
an alliance is unlikely to be durable, it might
gain control temporarily in some states.

21. Economic problems. Serious and in many
cases apparently insuperable economic prob-
lems will contribute to instability in all Arab
states during the period of this estimate. In
most of the Arab states, production is inade-
quate to support the growing population; in
some, such as Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon,
the production potential is so severely limited
that future prospects are discouraging. Even
those countries which get substantial rev-
enues from oil are finding it difficult to adjust
themselves to new techniques, machinery,
social changes, and opportunities rapidly
enough to satisfy the sometimes exaggerated
expectations of the public.

22. Indigenous leadership has shown little
ability to cope with the problem of increasing
production sufficiently to meet the require-
ments of growing populations and the need
for improved standards of living. While con-
siderable attention has been paid to the need
for development planning, governments have
allowed themselves to be diverted by excessive
preoccupation with such political issues as
anti-imperialism and the Israeli problem. A
shortage of technicians and competent ad-
ministrators is also an important limiting
factor.

Communism in the Arab States

23. International Communism has in the past
made a comparatively small effort in the Arab
states and has as yet won only a smal! foot-
hold. Communist parties are illegal, and
Communists operate clandestinely or through
front organizations. During the past year,
however, there has been a noticeable increase
in Communist activity in the area. The
strongest national organizations are to be

—SECRET—

—~{2%3

found in Syria, Lebanon, and Iraq. The Syro-
Lebanese group is the key party in the area.
The Communists in Iraq have been very active
recently, but government countermeasures
may reduce their strength. The Jordanian
party, although very small, has shown in-
creasing strength during the last few months.
Several Communist groups operate in Egypt,
but there appears to be no unified party there.

Palestinian and Jordanian Communists hada,

part in the strike of Arabian American Oil
Company (ARAMCO) employees in Saudi
Arabia in October 1953. The leaders of the
strike were Saudi Arabs, none of whom are
known to be Communists. There is no evi-
dence that an organized Communist party
exists in that country. Arab Communists re-
ceive support from the Soviet Bloc through
Soviet and Satellite diplomatic missions, with
those in Cairo and Beirut being the most

active.

24. On the whole, the strength of the Com-
munist movement in the Arab states lies not
in the appeal of its ideology but in its ability
to relate itself to existing dissatisfactions and
adjust its propaganda to exploit nationalism
and the grievances of ethnic and religious
minorities. Communists rely heavily on the
successful agitation of the general hostility
toward vestiges of Western imperialism, dis-
trust of the established authorities, and wide-
spread dissatisfaction with prevailing eco-
nomic and social conditions.

95. Local and international efforts to expand
Communist influence in the Arab states dur-
ing the next few years will almost certainly
continue to encounter numerous difficulties.
Arab governments and peoples will continue
to regard Communism as an alien and hostile
influence. Strong family, tribal, and religious
ties will make difficult the organization of a
popular front against existing regimes and
‘Western influence. Although Communism's
chances of acceptance are greater among the
Westernized elements, it is precisely here that
it has to compete most strongly with nation-
alism, where the foreign orientation of Com-
munism is a serious disadvantage.

26. At the same time continued instability in
the area will favor some increase in Commu-

—SHORET

* a Are aN NY Be le ta tN ae RL ee mee et See tle ee

nist strength. The Communists may be ex- -
pected to continue to seek “popular front”
alliances with various nationalist or minority
opposition groups. They will emphasize
Communist and Soviet support of nationalist
opposition to Israel and to Western “imperi-
alism”; they will join in attacks on the cor-
ruption of the traditional ruling class; and
they will exploit the grievances of minorities
and the poor. Local opposition groups will
probably seek and receive Communist support
in efforts to oust existing regimes but, if suc-
cessful, would probably attempt to disas-
sociate themselves from the Communists.
Within the period of this estimate the Com-
munists will have some capability to incite,
abet, and influence mob demonstrations and
other mass pressures on weak or vacillating
governments. In the longer run, the Com-
munists may be able to gain a stronger politi-
cal position by developing a substantial fol-
lowing in the ranks of the intelligentsia, in-
dustrial labor, and certain religious and eth-
nic minorities.

27. Future Communist prospects will be
greatly influenced by relations between the
Arab states and the West. The effectiveness
of Communism’s attempt to arouse hostility
toward the West among non-Communist
Arabs would almost certainly decline if rela-
tions between the West and the Arab states
improve. Improved relations with the West
would probably eliminate some of the political
appeal of Communist and pro-Soviet propa-
ganda and improve the ability and willingness
of Arab governments to attempt to correct
the conditions which contribute to Commu-
nism’s appeal. However, the elimination of
factors aiding Communism and pro-Soviet
attitudes will be a slow process. Nationalist
distrust of the West is sufficiently strong that
any Arab cooperation with Western powers
will provide some propaganda capital to the
Communists and furnish the USSR with add-
ed incentives to step up its effort in the Arab
world.

Relations Among the Arab States

928. The idea of Arab solidarity against the
rest of the world exerts a strong appeal among
Arabs. The principal expression of Arab

~1d4

unity is the Arab League, a loose association
of the Arab states (except the Sudan and
the Arabian sheikhdoms) which functions as:
(a) a meeting ground for the representatives
of the Arab states; (b) a center from which
to promulgate a common Arab line on mat-
ters of external policy that jointly concern
the Arab governments; and (c) a secretariat
for the implementation of Arab policy toward
Israel, particularly the Arab boycott. Egypt

has sought to maintain the character of the:

League as an association of sovereign states;
Iraq, on the other hand, has shown interest
in federation or union. Egypt has also tried
to assume the position of leader, but it is
unlikely that the League will become the in-
strument of a single state or that it will de-
velop into a federation or superstate of any
kind. As in the past, it will probably be un-
able to act where differences exist among its
member states and will continue to function
effectively only in areas of agreement — chief-
ly opposition to Israel. Its activities are
likely, therefore, to continue to be largely
negative in character.

29. The member states of the Arab League
(except Libya) are also associated in the Arab
Collective Security Pact which provides that
an attack on the territories or troops of any
of the signatories will invoke a meeting of
the member states in which a decision passed
by a two-thirds majority vote will be binding
on all members. The Pact specifically states
that any armed aggression against one signa-
tory would be considered as directed against
them all, but it does not provide for automatic
mutual defense. Attempts have been made
to unify defense efforts, and in September 1953
a hierarchy of committees was established.

30. However, it is unlikely that the Arab Col-
lective Security Pact will lead to effective joint
military organization or to joint war or de-
fense planning. The original motivation for
the Pact was political rather than military.
The objective of its founders was to convince
the Arab public that the Arab governments
were taking action to counter the Arab defeat
in the Palestine War. Subsequently the Pact
has been advanced by the Arabs as an alterna-
tive to the organization of regional defense

—-SECRET—

under Western sponsorship. Despite its al-
most complete lack of military significance,
the Pact may prove to be an obstacle to the
organization of regional defense under West-
ern sponsorship. Arab leaders who are anx-
ious to maximize Arab control over any re-
gional defense organization will probably con-
tinue to urge that the Arab Collective Secu-
rity Pact be made the basis of all future re-
gional defense organizations.

31. In practice the Arab states have been un-
able to cooperate effectively on any issue, ex-
cept on the boycott of Israel, because the
divisive forces in the Arab world have gen-
erally proven stronger than the unifying
factors. Although Arab leaders will continue
to support the idea of unity in public, their
actual policies toward other Arab states and
outside powers will be dictated by their own
differing national and dynastic interests.
Thus the dynastic rivalry between Hashemite
Iraq and Saudi Arabia will almost certainly
continue to hinder cooperation among the
Arab states. It also appears likely that Iraq
and Egypt will engage in increasingly bitter
rivalry for leadership of the Arab states, which
will have an important bearing upon any
effort to organize regional defense.*

Arab Relations with Israel

32. Hatred and fear of Israel will continue to
be a fundamental force in Arab thought and
conduct, and the question of relations with
Israel will have high priority in Arab foreign
policy. The Arab policy toward Israel is based
on: (a) the argument that the Western Pow-
ers created the Jewish state and must solve
the resulting problems themselves, and (b)
the growing conviction that time is on the
Arab side. The latter belief is strengthened
by exaggerated ideas of the harm which the
boycott inflicts upon Israel, and by the view
that US policy is becoming pro-Arab and that
US military aid to the Arab states will even-
tually give them military superiority over
Israel and the power to achieve a settlement
favorable to the Arabs.

*See NIE 30-54, “Prospects for Creation of a Mid-
dle East Defense Grouping and Probable Conse-
quences of such a Development,” 22 June 1954.

ie
ae

Tian Po ee

ila EPSON

33. Arab leaders are likely to be extremely
cautious about offending public feeling on the
Israeli question and will probably not be will-
ing for some time to risk negotiation and
compromise on the most important issues.
Arab policy toward Israel will probably con-
tinue along the lines developed in the Arab
League since 1949. The Arab states will prob-
ably continue the economic and political boy-
cott of Israel which has been and probably
will continue to be the outstanding example
of unified Arab policy. They will refuse to
meet with Israel for the purpose of negotiat-
ing outstanding issues unless Israel meets
conditions — acceptance of existing UN reso-
lutions as a basis for negotiation — which the
Arabs are reasonably sure Israel will never
agree to.

34, In dealing with specific problems in Arab-
Israeli relations short of a formal peace set-
tlement some Arab leaders have recently ap-
peared less intransigent. Examples of this
have been recent Arab reception of proposals
on the regional development of J ordan Valley
water resources and of Tripartite recommen-
dations for improving the border situation.
The Israelis have not, however, shown a like
tendency to reasonableness and compromise.

35. In line with their general policy of play-
ing for time, as well as out of fear of Israel’s
military superiority, the Arab states have con-
sistently sought to avoid border clashes with
Israel which might lead to war. The Arab
governments, however, and particularly Jor-
dan, have been unable to control their borders
and considerable infiltration of Israeli terri-
tory has taken place. Israel’s policy has been
one of “active defense,” including reprisal
raids into Arab territory by sizeable Israeli
military forces. There is no evidence that
any present Arab Government is supporting
or countenancing the infiltration of Israeli
territory or plans to initiate an armed attack
on Israel within the foreseeable future.
However, recent large Israeli raids have led
the governments of bordering Arab states to
deploy their military forces in such a way as
to make them available for an immediate
counterattack against any Israeli raid. In
the prevailing state of tension, a minor border

—SEeERET—

incident could lead to extensive armed con-
flict.

36. In the event of extensive armed conflict
between Israel and any of the Arab states,
the latter would employ all diplomatic means
to persuade the signers of the Tripartite Dec-
laration (US, UK, and France) to intervene
against Israel, and Jordan, if attacked, would
seek to invoke its treaty of alliance with the
UK. The signatories of the Arab Collective
Security Pact would probably vote to take
joint military action against Israel, but little
substantial or effective united military action
would be likely to follow. The Arab states
would probably declare war on Israel, mobilize
their own forces separately, and deploy them
in defensive positions near the Israeli frontier.
Most Arab states, with the possible exception
of Jordan, would probably seek to avoid com-
mitting their troops in offensive action against
Israel.

37. If extensive armed conflict took place be-
tween the Arab states and Israel during the
period of this estimate, it is probable that the
comparative military capabilities of the two
antagonists would prove to be much the same
as they were at the time of the Palestine War
of 1948-1949. Since the Palestine War Israel
has concentrated on improving its armed
forces through reorganization, intensive train-
ing (both of regular and reserve units), and
a build-up of reserve stocks of military sup-
plies. The Arab armed forces have improved
in some respects and declined in others. It is
unlikely that they would be able to cooperate
more effectively than they did in the Palestine
War.

Arab Relations with the West

38. The Arab attitude toward the West is and
will continue to be an ambivalent one. Some
Arabs, many of them in high position, are
appreciative of Western values and institu-
tions and believe that the best chance for the
advancement of the Arab states lies in coop-
eration with the Western Powers, although
these men are aware of the popular suspicion
of the West and hesitate to express their views
publicly. Most Arabs are profoundly influ-
enced by the anti-imperialist and neutralist

~/Ob

doctrines of nationalist movements and blame
the Western Powers for the existence of Israel
and for most of the other ills of the Arab
world. They are continually drawn in the
direction of a neutralist policy by the belief
that the struggle between the West and the
Soviet Bloc is a contest for world domination
in which small nations have no part and by
the parochial and exclusive character of Arab
culture. Yet many Arabs who are convinced
anti-Westerners are none the less anxious to
obtain for their countries the advantages of
cooperation with the West.

39. While current conditions and trends in
the Arab world on the whole are adverse to
the continuation of special military, political,
and economic positions for the West, settle-
ment of the Suez issue with the UK and pros-
pects for US military and economic assistance
may provide a new basis for Arab-Western
collaboration. However, the extent of Arab
collaboration with the West will be influenced
by the extent to which Western policies are
brought in line with the most fundamental
local desires; e.g., the elimination of the Brit-
ish position in the Near East currently based
on “unequal” treaties, further change in US
treatment of the Arab-Israeli question, and,
to a lesser extent, change in France’s policy
towards its North African possessions.

40. US prestige and influence are currently
greater in the Arab world than those of any
other great power, despite the stigma of the
US relationship with Israel and the two “im-
perialist” powers, the UK and France. The
potential availability of US economic and mili-
tary aid, and the reputation of US technical,
industrial, and military competence provide
strong bases for the preferred position of the
US in the area. However, US relations with
the Arab states will be determined primarily
by political factors. An important considera-
tion will be the degree to which the US sup-
ports individual Arab states against their
rivals or aids such rivals.

41. Arab attitudes toward the European na-
tions are strongly influenced by the past and
present activities of those nations in the Arab
area. The UK retains military facilities, com-
mercial enterprises, and financial investments,

and exerts important influence in Iraq, Jor-

dan, and the Arabian principalities. How-
ever, Arab resentment of British “imperial-
ism” and the reduction in the British world
power position have greatly reduced the effec-
tiveness of British influence in the Arab states.
Completion of the Anglo-Egyptian agreement
on the Suez Canal Base and the revision of
the Anglo-Iraqi Treaty, perhaps along similar
lines, will lessen Arab hostility but will not
restore the UK’s former prestige. France’s
influence in the area is negligible, even in
Syria and Lebanon, and its North African poli-
cies contribute to anti-Western sentiment.
On the other hand, West Germany’s position
in the area is improving rapidly. Arabs gen-
erally admire German industrial and commer-
Cial skill and are not apprehensive of German
political designs.

42. Western oil companies operating in Arab
States will almost certainly be subjected to
growing pressure to enlarge the Arab share of
profits. Reactivation of the Iranian oil in-
dustry will cause concern in the Arab states
lest it lead to reduced production in Arab oil-
fields. The Saudi Government will probably
lead the way in demands for revisions, includ-
ing a modification of the profit sharing agree-
ment, and it is likely to use threats of nation-
alization as a means of obtaining its ends.
Iraq and Kuwait are unlikely to attempt to
change drastically the present agreements
within the near future, but any modification
of the agreement with Saudi Arabia will al-
most certainly have to be matched by the oil
companies operating in the other Arab states.

Relations with Asian and African States

43. Arabs feel an affinity for the peoples of
Asia and Africa and many believe that the
Arab states should seek to cooperate with
Asian and African states in the UN and in
other fields of international politics. While
many Arabs respect Pakistan because it is a
Moslem state and because of the evidences
of vigor and strength it has shown since it
became independent, there has been little
direct contact between Pakistanis and Arabs
and many of their problems and interests dif-
fer. Pakistan’s adherence to a defense agree-

SECRET

~10)

ment with Turkey favored by the West has,
however, made the whole idea of a regional
defense organization slightly more palatable
for most Arabs.

44. Most Arabs feel a grudging respect for
Turkey but few like the Turks or look to Tur-
key for leadership. Many distrust Turkey be-
cause of its former domination of the area,
its recognition of and trade relations with
Israel, its secular institutions, and its close
relations with the West. Turkey’s strength
and prosperity are, however, a potent lesson
to the Arabs on the advantages of cooperation
with the West. a

45. India’s Prime Minister Nehru is respected
in the Arab states, where his neutralist, Asia-
for-Asians doctrines have a strong appeal.
Nehru will continue to have some influence
among the Arabs, but Arab interests and poli-
cies are likely to remain provincial in charac-
ter and to be influenced only peripherally by
India.

46. The Arab states will almost certainly in-
crease their efforts to help nationalist causes
in North Africa, especially through continuing
efforts to obtain favorable UN action on the
Tunisian and Moroccan cases. The small re-
sources of the Arab states will limit their
capabilities for material assistance, but they
will probably help North African nationalist
exiles, provide increasing financial aid, and
assist in smuggling arms.

Relations with the Soviet Bloc

47. No official Soviet relations are maintained
with Jordan, the Sudan, or the Arabian Pen-
insula. Soviet diplomatic missions are main-
tained in the remaining Arab states, and Cairo
is the principal Arab center of Soviet Bloc
representation. Egypt is the only Arab state
which has sought closer economic relations
with the Soviet Bloc, and it has done so as a
result of the decline of the Western market
for Egyptian cotton and as part of a general
drive to lessen economic dependence on the
UK. Most Arab governments are probably
not anxious to engage in closer relations with
the Bloc, though they might do so on occasion
if they believed they could thereby bring pres-

SECRET”

sure upon the Western Powers. The two re-
cent Russian vetoes in the UN Security Coun-
cil of resolutions favored by Israel and opposed
py the Arabs impressed many Arabs as evi-
dence of Soviet opposition to imperialism and
friendship for peoples who had suffered from
it. Yhe Arab response has also been favor-
able to recent Soviet efforts to improve rela-
tions on the diplomatic level, as well as to
Soviet talk of increased trade between the Bloc
and the Arab states. Trade between the So-
viet Bloc and the Arab states has not, however,
been significant in the past, except for ex-
change of Bloc wheat for Egyptian cotton.
The Arab states would probably be receptive
to Soviet Bloc trade proposals. It is unlikely,
however, that any of the Arab states would
welcome a Soviet program for aid and develop-
ment, and the Arab states would probably dis-
courage any closer relations with the Soviet
Bloc than they deemed necessary to put pres-
sure on the West.

Il. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN EGYPT

48. Internal affairs. The members of the
Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) have
acquired political experience rapidly during
their two years in power. AS political novices,
however, they have had to resort frequently
to extemporization and have made frequent
tactical shifts. They have relied upon au-
thoritarian methods and have resisted a re-
turn to parliamentary government largely be-
cause the principal opposition groups — the
old-line nationalist Wafd Party and the Is-
lamic traditionalist Moslem Brethren — have
better organized popular followings. The
RCC has not had notable success in developing
its political party (the Liberation Organiza-
tion) into a strong organ of popular support.
In recent months the RCC has made a serious
effort to build up support for its policies
among urban laborers and the peasantry, but
at best it will be some time before it can rely
upon its supporters to defeat the opposition
at the polls.

49, The RCC’s short-term prospects of main-
taining itself in power are favorable because
of: (a) its control of the armed forces, the
-police, and all media of communication; (b)

108

USECRET— - 10

the credit it gained by the recent agreement
with the UK on the evacuation of the Suez
Base — the long-time goal of Egyptian na-
tionalism; and (c) popular hope that the
RCC’s reform program will ameliorate the
poverty and end the corruption and ineffec-
tiveness associated with the former monarchy.
However, the RCC faces serious political and
economic problems upon the solution of which
will depend its longer term tenure of power
and the continuation of a relatively stable
situation in Egypt.

50. Egypt’s fundamental economic problem —
the inadequacy of the country’s resources to
the demands of its large and rapidly growing
population — will become an increasing bur-
den. The RCC is placing great emphasis
upon a program of land reform and has made
partial plans for and some start on economic
development programs which include a high
dam above Aswan, land reclamation on the
Delta fringes, and industrialization. While
these measures may eventually result in an
increase in Egypt’s gross national product,
they are inadequate to make possible a rising
standard of living, and will probably not pre-
vent a declining one in the period through
1956.

51. The Wafd Party and the Moslem Brethren
will remain capable of causing serious trouble
for the regime, and any such efforts would
probably be aided by the Socialist and Com-
munist groups, as in February-March 1954
when opposition groups united behind Presi-
dent Nagib. If the RCC cooperates with the
Western Powers for regional defense and other
common purposes and accepts aid from the
US, the Wafd will be able to arouse opposition
among the extreme nationalists who are op-
posed to any kind of collaboration with the
West. The RCC’s secular policies and its re-
fusal to accept the guidance of the Moslem
Brethren will keep the Islamic traditionalists
in the opposition camp. AU opposition groups
will agitate for popular elections and will gain
support from elements, such as professional
groups and students, which want a return
to parliamentary government. Any regime
which replaced the RCC would probably be a
coalition, including military elements, and

SECRET

would reflect the outlook and experience of
the growing middle group in Egyptian urban
society.

52. External affairs. Egypt will endeavor to
maintain its position of leadership among the
Arab states and will seek to extend its in-
fluence to the south and west on the African
continent. Egypt has less direct interest in
the Arab-Israeli problem than have some other
Arab states, and is likely to become more
amenable to the regularization of relations
with Israel if and as a final agreement on the
British evacuation of the Suez Base is imple-
mented, and US aid becomes a reality. It will
probably not assume leadership in urging fur-
ther intransigence, and in the case of Jordan
Valley development will probably urge the
Arab states directly involved to adopt a policy
of “realistic” bargaining. Nevertheless, Egypt
is likely to continue to resist any formal peace
settlement with Israel, if only to avoid alienat-
ing the other Arab states.

53. The July 1954 Anglo-Egyptian agreement
in principle on the Suez Canal Base, will, if
formalized and implemented, associate Egypt
with Western defense plans for the area and
may result in cooperation with the Western
Powers for regional defense and other pur-
poses. The extent of Egyptian cooperation
will depend largely upon the smoothness with
which the Suez settlement is implemented and
upon the nature and extent of US and other
Western military and economic assistance to
Egypt. The period of this estimate will be a
difficult and delicate one in Egyptian relations
with the West. Egypt will not only seek ad-
vantageous terms for itself in such matters
as foreign aid, but will also attempt to in-
fluence Western arrangements with other
states of the area in such a manner as to pre-
serve or promote Egyptian leadership of the
Arab states and secure Arab military superior-
ity over Israel. For example, Egypt will prob-
ably seek to make the Arab Collective Security
Pact the basis for the organization of regional
defense.

54. The RCC will probably continue to believe
that Egypt’s advantage lies in cooperation
with the Western Powers. This belief is based

more upon a calculation of the comparative
advantages likely to be attained than upon
ideological preference for the West or accept-
ance of the need for defense against the Soviet
Bloc. Egypt will seek to increase its trade
With the Soviet Bloc, particularly to increase
exports of cotton, but Egyptian relations with
the Bloc will be fundamentally cautious.
More extensive relations with the Bloc, even
if mainly in the commercial sphere would
seem certain to raise the morale of the few
thousand Egyptian Communists and Commu-
nist sympathizers and provide opportunities
for Soviet espionage.

lll. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SUDAN

55. Sudanese stability faces severe tests dur-
ing the remainder of the 1953-1956 period of
transition from Anglo-Egyptian condominium
to self-government and to self-determination
of the Sudan’s future status. Considerable
progress has been made to date: (a) in ef-
fecting the transfer of executive power from
the Governor-General to the Sudanese cabinet
and parliament, elected in late 1953, and (b)
in replacing British administrative personnel
with Sudanese. The process can probably be
completed without a constitutional break-
down, although frictions will probably develop
and serious crises are possible.

56. Among the sources of tension is the con-
flict between the opposition Umma Party, po-
litical expression of the Ansar sect of Islam,
which favors Sudanese independence with
some UK ties, and the incumbent National
Unionist Party, supported by the Khatmiyah
(orthodox) Moslems, which inclines toward
closer relations with Egypt. The struggle be-
tween these two groups, involving both politi-
cal and religious rivalry, has led to violence
before and, especially as the restraining in-
fluence of the British is withdrawn, could re-
sult in serious instability or even civil war.

57. Another source of tension is the deep cul-
tural, ethnic, and religious cleavage between
the Moslem, Arabized North, and the pagan,
Negroid South. The backward South fears
Northern domination as it loses the protection
heretofore given it by the British administra-

tors.

rer

2 a gine Gest ee coe

58. The clash between Egyptian and UK am-
bitions for influence in the Sudan may also
create serious problems. The UK would like
to have the Sudan opt for independence and
conclude defense and commercial agreements
with the UK. The UK is prepared to con-
tinue its orderly withdrawal, although it will
seek to maintain existing commercial and cul-
tural ties. It may also attempt to counter
Egyptian influence by encouraging those Su-
danese elements which oppose Egyptian dom-
inance. Egypt would prefer complete integra-
tion of the Sudan with Egypt, but such a re-
lationship is opposed by practically all Su-
danese elements and would arouse the violent
hostility of many. Although the likelihood
of serious UK-Egyptian conflict over the Su-
dan will decrease as the UK continues to re-
linquish control, both nations’ hopes for spe-
cial position in the Sudan may embroil them,
and their respective Sudanese proteges, in
contests over the Sudan’s future status and
orientation.

59. We believe that the Sudan is likely to
choose independence, although commerical,
cultural, and military relations with Egypt
are likely to become increasingly close, and
the Sudan will probably tend to follow Egypt's
lead in intraregional and foreign relations.
The present Sudanese Government would
probably wish to maintain friendly relations
with the UK but refuse a formal treaty de-
signed to maintain the UK’s special position.

IV. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN IRAQ

60. Internal affairs. Iraq's traditional ruling
oligarchy, composed primarily of tribal
leaders, landlords, wealthy businessmen, and
professional politicians, will probably remain
in power at least during the next two or three
years. Prospects for evolution toward a more
progressive government in Iraq were improved
by the Throne’s support between September
1953 and April 1954 of a relatively progressive
and reform-minded government under the
leadership of Dr. Fadhil Jamali, but Jamali’s
government fell for want of organized politi-
cal support, and the Old Guard appears to
be back in control. The conservative policies
of Nuri Said and his colleagues in the ruling

_—}4Jd

oligarchy will probably intensify the opposi-
tion of moderate reform-minded elements and
may increase the likelihood of mass demon-
strations and other pressure tactics by ex-
tremists of the right and left.

61. However, no opposition party or combina-
tion has yet shown sufficient strength to
threaten Nuri Said’s personal following in
Parliament. The National Front, which com-
bined the forces of the extreme nationalist
Istiqlal and the Communist-infiltrated 'Na-
tional Democrats for the June 1954 elections,
appears to be in process of dissolution. Should
the aging Nuri Said be removed from the
scene, the effectiveness of the old ruling group
would greatly decline.

62. Iraq’s economic prospects are the bright-
est of any Arab state because of its large oil
reserves and extensive tracts of unused but
potentially arable land. Seventy percent of
Iraq’s oil revenues, expected to average about
$112,000,000 yearly over the next five years,
are earmarked for the Iraq Development
Board. Despite manifold political pressures,
the Board appears to be moving ahead with
a reasonable and far-sighted program. Over
the long run, this program is capable of sig-
nificantly improving economic conditions and
thereby lessening some popular grievances.
In the short term, however, the fact that most
of the big development projects cannot pro-
duce rapid and easily perceived results will
limit the program’s effectiveness as a stabil-
izing factor.

63. External affairs. Iraq’s policies toward
other Arab states will continue to be infiu-
enced by the conflict between: (a) its ambi-
tions to achieve Arab leadership against the
opposition of Egypt (and Saudi Arabia), while
strengthening itself militarily by ties with the
West, and (b) its desire for continued Arab
solidarity on the issues of Israel, imperialism,
and colonialism in North Africa. Iraq will
support publicly the Arab League and Arab
Collective Security Pact, vigorously oppose
settlement with Israel, and perhaps lead in
Arab-.isian efforts to bring the French-North
African problem before the UN. Iraqi leaders
will probably continue to foster the idea of
Arab union or federation, which often leads

“SEGRE

—f--GR-E-T— 7 12°

to tampering with the internal politics of
Syria and Jordan.

64. Iraq will be less influenced by the concepts
of neutralism than any other Arab govern-
ment. Iraqi leaders are aware of the Soviet
threat and favor joining some sort of regional
defense association which the US would sup-
port. However, they will approach this move
Slowly and cautiously from fear of the popwlar
reaction at home and opposition from the
other Arab states. This attitude is evident in
Prime Minister Nuri Said’s latest proposal for
broadening the Arab Collective Security Pact
to include non-Arab countries. Iraqis believe
that the US shows undue favoritism toward
Israel, but look increasingly to the US for sup-
port. The present ruling group, however,
takes a realistic view of the need for some UK
support, and will almost certainly seek a modi-
fication and extension of the Anglo-Iraqi
treaty of alliance (due to expire on 3 October
1957). If the attempted extension is to have
any chance of success, however, it will have
to go at least as far as the Suez agreement
in meeting the aspirations of the Iraqi nation-
alists.

V. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN SYRIA

65. Internal affairs. We believe that Syria
will continue to be politically unstable. Al-
though the overthrow of Shishakli in Febru-
ary 1954 led to reinstitution of civilian gov-
ernment after four years of military control
of Syrian affairs, conflict between the civilian
authorities and the army is a constant danger.

66. The continuation of moderate civilian
regimes will depend in large part on the abil-
ity of the two major conservative parties, the
Populists and the Nationalists, to maintain a
working alliance. Conservative prospects are
weakened by the lack of a strong leader
acceptable to all conservatives, the resulting
struggles for power among lesser figures, and
the long-standing cleavage between the inter-
ests of Northern Syria, especially Aleppo
(stronghold of the Populists), and those of
Damascus (center of Nationalist strength).

67. The Syrian Army, which played a decisive
role in politics from 1949 to 1954, remains a

~I1)

ee a ee

“1 PERE - 13.

serious potential threat to the civilian regime.
The probable role of the Army is difficult to
estimate, since no single leader now appears
dominant and the Army itself is divided into
factions somewhat parallel to civilian political
divisions. However, an army coup is possible,
particularly if decisive civilian leadership fails
to develop. In addition, the Army’s power
gives it a tacit veto in major political de-
cisions. For example, an effort to form a
Syrian-Iraqi union, which many Populists
favor, would probably result in firm counter-
measures or possibly another coup by the
Army.

68. Conservative disunity has enhanced the
appeal and bargaining position of extremist
elements drawing support from the discon-
tented, politically conscious urban middle
group. The most significant of these is the
left-wing, strongly anti-Western Arab Social-
ist-Resurrectionist Party of Akram Hawrani,
which advocates social and political revolu-
tion. Hawrani, who accepted the support of
Syrian Communists, also enjoys the support
of a number of influential army officers and
has the sympathy of at least a few leading
members of the volatile Druze community in
southern Syria. With this support, Hawrani
has a fairly good chance of increasing his
power and influence in a government of
divided conservatives. He would, however,
have to have Army support to seize control of
the government.

69. Syria’s living standards are low, but there
are no immediately critical economic prob-
lems, and it has an economic resource in un-
developed and unused land.

70. External affairs. Syria is a prize in con-
tests between other Arab states to expand
their influence, rather than itself a major
force in Arab affairs. Syrian policies and
stability have been generally affected by: (a)
the internal conflict between Syrian nation-
alism and Arab unity, and (b) the overt and
covert attempts of Iraq and Saudi Arabia to
win Syria to their respective sides. During
the period of this estimate Syria will probably
waver between the Iraqi and Saudi-Egyptian
camps. Although Syria would almost cer-
tainly join the other Arab states against Israel

if war broke out, it fears Israeli military su-
periority and is not likely to initiate hostili-
ties. However, if confronted with unilateral
Israeli resumption of the Jordan River diver-
sion project ‘in the demilitarized zone at
Banat Yaacov, Syria would almost certainly
feel compelled to take strong measures short
of war to protect its water interests, and might
be driven to desperate steps which could easily
bring on hostilities.

71. Syria’s policy toward the US and UK, in-
cluding its attitude toward cooperation in a
regional defense arrangement, is likely to be
determined by what Iraq and Egypt do in this
respect. While many of the old-line Syrian

leaders privately favor cooperation with the

West, their present weakness in the face of
nationalist pressures and Arab League policy
will probably continue to prevent the govern-
ment from making pro-Western moves unless
and until the stronger governments of Iraq
and Egypt take the lead. French influence in
Syria is now limited to the cultural field and
will have little effect in determining Syria’s
relations with the West.

72. Syria has recently been more responsive
to Soviet diplomatic and commercial moves.
The Soviet Union has expanded its diplomatic
and propaganda activities in Syria and Soviet
Bloc countries have stepped up commercial
efforts, particularly since the present regime
came to power. The conservative leadership
is likely to continue to maintain the present
superficially cordial relations with the Bloc,
partly for reasons of trade and partly to im-
prove Syria’s bargaining position with the
West. However, the conservatives’ basic fear
of Communism and of the USSR would almost
certainly limit relations with the Bloc. Seiz-
ure of power by some combination of extrem-
ists might make Syria more receptive to Soviet
influence, and would probably increase neu-
tralist tendencies. However, the Army, with-
out whose support such a regime could prob-
ably not last, would be likely to oppose any
strongly pro-Soviet policies.

VI. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN LEBANON

73. Relative political stability is maintained
by means of a delicate balance of power be-

wR

ie ~ 2

tween Moslem and Christian religious groups.
The Lebanese will probably continue to accept
the present modus vivendi for the next few
years. The rigidity of the system, however,
and the fact that the Moslem population is
increasing faster than the Christian will even-
tually endanger political stability. In com-
mon with other Arab states, Lebanon faces
the problems resulting from a decaying tradi-
tional structure in conflict with the rising
political consciousness and power of restless
urban elements. The latter are now politi-
cally fragmentized, but their resentment of
the old-line leadership, whose monopoly of
wealth and power has seriously impeded social
and economic progress, has contributed to ex-
tremism of the right and left.

74, Lebanon's strong desire to be accepted as
part of the Arab world, its military weakness,
and dependence on regional trade will con-
tinue to influence its policy in favor of close
relations with the other Arab states and at
least a superficial adherence to Arab League
solidarity. Lebanon is anxious to avoid in-
volvement in inter-Arab disputes, such as the
Hashemite-Saudi struggle, in order to keep
friendly relations with all. The Lebanese are
more tempted than other Arabs by the com-
mercial! possibilities of an Arab-Israeli settle
ment, but they will continue to follow the
general Arab line in this respect.

75. Lebanon’s large Christian population, and
its cultural and commercial ties with the West
also make it the most strongly pro-Western
of the Arab states, and it feels the need for
Western support to protect its peculiar posi-
tion. Consequently, while its outlook will
continue to be somewhat ambivalent, its
present leaders would probably welcome a
general development of closer Arab-Western
relations and would be glad of the oppor-
tunity to follow the lead of Iraq or Egypt in
securing US military and economic aid.

Vil, PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN
SAUD! ARABIA

76. Saudi Arabian stability depends upon the
maintenance of the personal authority of
King Saud, who lacks the prestige, skill, and
strength of character of his father, whom he

—STrernht—

SEGRE 14°

succeeded in 1953. King Saud is maintain-
ing most of his father’s domestic policies. In
the short run, at least, Saud can probably
retain the support of the numerous royal
princes, the chief officials, and the tribal lead-
ers if he is able to continue the costly sub-
sidies on which their loyalty depends. How-
ever, his administration is weakened by ineffi-
ciency and corruption, an extreme dependence
on oil royalties for its revenue, and failure to
recognize growing resentment of the profii-
gacy of the royal family and government
officials.

77. Saudi Arabia exerts a peculiar influence
in the Arab world because it possesses the
most important Moslem holy places, because
it is the last stronghold of certain aspects of
traditional Arab culture, and because the King
has personal control of substantial revenues
with which he subsidizes elements in other
Arab states on behalf of Saudi interests.
King Saud is ambitious to play a leading role
in Arab affairs and has been actively attempt-
ing to forestall Iraqi expansion and the in-
crease of Iraqi prestige. He has sought to
maintain Arab intransigence on the question
of Israel, and prevent Arab states from be-
coming too closely associated with the West-
ern Powers. He will probably try to obstruct
moves to regularize the relations of Arab
states with Israel. However, King Saud
probably overestimates his influence among
the Arab states, and he will probably not be
able to persuade any other Arab state to make
a move which it does not independently con-
sider advantageous.

78. Partly influenced by his anti-Western ad-
visers, Saud has been generally less friendly
toward the West and particularly toward the
US than was his father. Saudi relations with
the US deteriorated seriously in the past year,
as evidenced by Saudi rejection of a standard
MDAP agreement with the US and termina-
tion of US technical assistance to the king-
dom. Saudi relations with ARAMCO also de-
teriorated as a result of the government's de-
mands for increased oil revenues and services
from the company, and its conclusion of an
oil tanker arrangement with the Argentine-
Greek shipowner, A. S. Onassis, which violates

the terms of the ARAMCO concession.

ac

79. There are current indications that Saudi
Arabian relations with the West are under-
going a change for the better. However, if
the general deterioration of relations which
took place during the past year should con-
tinue, the US Government might have diffi-
culties when the Dhahran airbase agreement
comes up for renewal in 1956 and ARAMCO
might find it difficult to maintain satisfactory
relations with the Saudi Government. The
Saudis might consider nationalizing their oil
industry, but extreme dependence on large
and uninterrupted oil revenues would proba-
bly make them hesitate to nationalize, even
if their relations with ARAMCO do not im-

prove.

80. The strike of October 1953 gave evidence
of a considerable increase in group-conscious-
ness among the employees of ARAMCO and
the USAF Dhahran airbase in Eastern Saudi
Arabia, where tribal values are being more

quickly destroyed than in other parts of the .

country. Another strike, perhaps accom-
panied by violence, is a strong possibility.
The Saudi Government has established a labor
committee in Dhahran and may be preparing
a revised labor law for the kingdom. How-
ever, these new arrangements probably would
not stand up under the strain of serious labor

trouble.

81. Saudi relations with the UK may improve
somewhat as a result of the recent agreement
on a solution for the Buraimi boundary dis-
pute. In addition, an influential element in
the Saudi Government hopes to introduce
British oil interests into the kingdom as a
lever against ARAMCO.

Vill. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN JORDAN

82. Jordan’s political atmosphere will be dom-
inated by tension between political leaders of
the relatively well-educated and half-West-
ernized former Arab Palestinians and the old-
line leaders of Transjordan. The Palestine
Arabs will probably continue to increase their
power within the government. They will at-
tempt to orient the government toward ex-
treme Arab nationalism and away from UK
influence.

K—SPerrt

83. However, British influence will probably
remain strong in Jordan because of UK subsi-
dies to the impoverished kingdom. The
Anglo-Jordanian Alliance (a twenty-year mu-
tual assistance pact signed in March 1948) is
likely to remain in effect as the cornerstone
of Jordan’s external relations. Jordan will
continue to lack confidence in Great Power
guarantees or the UN machinery as effective
barriers against Israeli attack. Anti-British
feeling is growing, as is the tendency of Jor-
danian government leaders to act more inde-
pendently, but neither government nor op-
position leaders have found any practical sub-
stitute for the UK subsidy which in 1953
constituted 54 percent of the country’s total
revenues. The whole relationship, however,
would probably be wiped out should Israel
attack in force and the UK fail to respond to
a Jordanian appeal under the treaty, or if the
Arab Legion were restrained by its British
officers from contesting a major Israeli in-
cursion with sufficient vigor.

84. Almost half of the nearly one million Arab
refugees from the former territory of Pales-
tine which is now in Israel live in Jordan.
Unlike the smaller refugee groups in other
Arab states, who lack influence in the host
countries, the refugees in Jordan constitute a
source of serious political and social unrest.
They will continue to constitute a major
political problem and an economic factor in
Jordan.

85. Jordan will continue to need and desire
US economic and technical aid. However, the
Jordanians, especially the former Palestin-
fans, deeply resent past US support of Israel
and continue to believe that a truly impartial
US policy is impossible because of US internal
political pressures. US efforts to maintain
peace in the area and to strengthen the Arab
states may eventually lessen this resentment
but, for the present, Jordanians suspect US
motives and feel that an attitude which ap-
proves the status quo— less favorable than
the UN partition plan of 1947 — is actually
favoritism toward Israel.

86. A number of regional rivalries, often dis-
cussed but of indeterminate strength, center

around Jordan. Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and

— SY

Israel—each for its own reasons — are de-
termined to prevent amalgamation of Jordan
with Irag, and the ex-mufti of Jerusalem is
intriguing to keep Jordan isolated in line with
his personal ambition to establish a separate
state in Arab Palestine. The Palace and the
British maneuver to keep the status quo.
Within Jordan itself the Palestinians are more
receptive than are the Transjordanians to
talk of amalgamation with a neighboring
state. '

IX. PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN YEMEN
AND ARABIAN PENINSULA
PRINCIPALITIES

87. Yemen seems likely to remain the most
isolated and the least influential of the in-
dependent Arab states. The Imam Ahmad
will probably be able to control such opposition
as the “Free Yemeni” movement, but assassi-
nation is always a possibility. There will prob-
ably continue to be friction with the UK,
stemming mainly from border disputes with
Aden.

88. Kuwait. While Britain’s legal position in
Kuwait is unlikely to change, British preroga-
tives have not been firmly exercised in recent
years and the trend seems likely to continue.
The outlook is not favorable for the develop-
ment of a capable and responsible Kuwaiti
ruling group able to fill any vacuum left by
contraction of the British position. There are
a few manifestations of nationalism, mainly

16

insistence that Kuwaitis should have a bigger
Share in the control and benefits of business
in Kuwait. The scale of Kuwait royalities in
relation to population is many times that of
neighboring oil-producing countries and will
continue to play an increasingly important
role in the economy of the country. Such
revenues provide the present weak but benevo-
lent and pro-British ruler with a unique op-
portunity to mitigate the effects of many of
the social and economic problems contributing
to political instability. However, Kuwait can-
not in the long run escape the upsetting ef-
fects of radical economic and social changes
on a conservative Arab society, and Commu-
nist propaganda is already increasing in Ku-
wait in an attempt to exploit the situation
against the West.

89. Other British-controlled Arabian areas.
The UK position will continue to be the key
to short-run stability in the principalities of
the Arabian Peninsula. The British will con-
tinue attempts to strengthen their position,
particularly in the Aden Protectorate and the
Trucial Sheikhdoms. With British backing,
the ruling families of the principalities will
probably be able to maintain themselves in
power. The UK will also probably continue
to defend vigorously the interests of its client-
rulers against Saudi Arabia and Yemen. The
construction and operation of the new refinery
in Aden will assist the local economy, and in
some principalities economic benefits may also
Tesult from continued oil explorations.

LT

‘a[qrBu pus ‘suojspurs ‘wnsdé3 ‘usu
-nyiq ‘Inudins “yuauiaa ‘4y,es uoTyONpold ayeos
lewg “(uoyonpomd priom yquaoied  p-Esg61)
SdA1ISa1 [JO B8pnid plIom yusd1ed OF ynoqy

“ saljut exe’, ‘pasejans
SaTJul 09Z'T
ssa[ IO yUaDIEd GT

(ZS61) Org

(€G61) sz0dxa 1u70} Jo
quacied gg fuori zse$ ssyonpoid wmayoimjad

‘umajoizad =‘Zujyuuys uo0jjo9 ‘Buyssavo1d pooj

‘0208q0} ‘soyep ‘u0}}{0R ‘QdTI ‘AatIuq “Baym
89198 9%

queosed TZ

(ES6T) O00‘00T'S

"ur “bs Q00's9T

bear

ir

poe

‘PUBL [BINA[NIIZB v[qusn AyWUaIIND .

‘psonpoid s[wiauyur 13ayj0 pus
gsauvsuvur ‘yo01 ayeuydsoyd ‘wmosjomed sayy
-quunb [[ewig ‘saomnosai padolaaap ‘Jyud[s ON

SatjuUl LOT‘L
saljUt 9eZ's
quaoiad gt

(ZSG1) PITS

(S61) 1810} Jo JuUa.Iad Og ‘UOTIITW PEE$ :U07}00

Buyssav0id ~pooy
‘ga}paIUsTyO ‘S[]O “BIA ‘s9[[}X9q ‘Fujssav0id uo0jz}09

JIAOTD “Qal[pur ‘VdjI ‘UIOD ‘4uaym ‘U07}09
53198 £0

quaoied ¢%

(ES6T) OOO'T PETZ

“wt ‘bs ooo'9se

4déaq

] XIGNiddV¥

saoinosey sseq jUsIG
spsouw

SpBOllVU

ayey Aows97z7I

AND 3yjdvo Jad

sjiodxq ujetW

gajIjsnpul UE

sdoig uv

« BYAVO Jaq puvy ‘oy
yyAoip uoysindog [unuuy
uoyyuindod

wary

AULNNOD

‘lamod

PUB 19}8M IO} padolaaap aq UTD YUM ‘TAY
JUBYT faoanosayz TBInguu jofeW -‘sqjsodap a0
UOlt sduAapPTAM ‘aqyusyy Aypenb Moy sy[sodaq

SoU SIF ‘AayAO fsarpur

CIB'T ‘paovjins
Salful Ege

yuadiad o9-o¢

(2S61) seet

suojuo ‘sarddv ‘yynay sniqyjo

duyuyal qjo ‘spoo3
JTalunsuos izayyo pus ‘sa[}}x9} ‘yuauraa

‘s}[NIJ ‘020Bqo} ‘SOATIO

5a[quyasdaa puv
‘Aajaeq “yeaym

$310¥ F'g9

quaaiad Fz

(€S6T) 000'9FE'T

‘ua “bs go0'F

uouuqay

“PUBL [BANZINIIIe ajqusn AWUaIINO,

“WNyWOIys pues ysejod azinos vag
pead “uoWezIJOdsuLsy Jo YOR] &qQ payelos; pus
SJOAIVUL WoT Ivy asay, — uinsddéB pus ‘asaues
“UB ‘810 Ul] ‘say eydsoud — sreaauyu awog

Salju Ose’, ‘1ayjo ‘ogg ‘spor 197 BIM-[TB
SaT]Ul 97%

quaaiad gg-st

(2S61) oQr$

4001 a}yeydsoud
‘syonpoad Teanynojage Jo sapyyyuenb pezywyt

que. ‘syonpoid
TUINY[NIIde Zuyssavoid Sajijsnpuy [pews

S$9]QUzaGIA ‘sqNay Jao ‘sadvas
‘SdATIO ‘ovaNqo4 *Za[JuL ‘azpuur ‘Aajiuq ‘yvaye

(sdadnjal dujpnyoxa) saiov ST

(FS6I “989 VMUNN) quadsad ¢'z

Saadnjar aupsareg 000‘0cr
Sopnlouy (ZS61) oo0O'OEee'T

“ul "bs goo'Le

uspior

saoInosay ojsuq ‘jyusjg
sproy

Spworlpay

ayey Aoelayzyy

AND 87/009 J3ag

SyIOdxg ue

SayIysnpul uyeyy

sdoig uyepy
s BYAUO jag puvy ‘Ody

UJMOIH uo}eINdog [enuuy

uoyjyBndog

wary

ee
(panuyyu0d) AULNNOD

C

6T

*"s90INOSaI [wIVUyW
peddeyun 4ak sv iyo pus ‘y,es ‘plo’ ‘zaddoo

synuvad ‘ojqvie wind ‘paasuojjo9 ‘u07109

Suyssao0id pooj ‘Suyssao0id u07}00

03998q04 ‘sun3 ‘synuvad ‘auluses ‘U07}00

quooied gz
(ZS6I) 000'7L6'8

“ul “bs 00S'L96

uspng

“puBrl [BINNjIZe ajquen A[yusIIND ,

*payiodai sqjsodap aio uory !AqjjUtNb [jesus

Ul pauyUl ploH “(UOT}ONpOId plioMm yUaored
L-Z2S61) ‘JO apnio saArasar pjiom yuso1ed ZI
SUMO} A3aZIvl 9Y} yOIUUOD SpLOoI z[qussud
Sal[yur OSE

quaoiad g-¢E

(ZS61) 99$

syonpoid urnajosjed A,
~9IJJUD YSOU[B ‘UOTT[TU 9ZS$ ESBT SJIOdxa [B07

auyuyst pus uoyonpoid wumayjosyed
s3}8p

Baie yUadIId g UB} ssoT PUD] ‘OpIZy

(483 £S61) 000‘00S'E

“ul "bs 000'L26

Biqely jpneg

sa0INOsSeyY ISvd "JUsIg
spvoy

SPBOLIVY

ayey Adu197;'7

dND ¥}du9 139d

syiodxgq ule

SIJIJSNpUL Ups

sdo1ig ulsj

o BYdVO sag pusy ‘ogy
ywoip uoyuindog [enuuy
uojyuindog

wary

(panuyyuoo) AULNNOD

Re
€

a3e4yI04g

YO Jo AqyTIqQssod

4a] ALIA

uyeid ‘9ayoo

*PUyy aTQBAy}[No
(9jaae uy padudua ‘dod qusoiad 96)

(€SGE “989) 000‘00S‘e

(489) “ul “bs QO0'SL

uaulax

“awWO1yD pus
‘TaqajU ‘Auowyzus ‘taddoo ‘pval ‘sayeydsoud jo
SUO}}CIPUT “sadinosar [wiauyur padosaap oN

SoU GPE
‘TaABI3 JO YZIva ‘satyw 212% ‘paoujans pivy

S9[TU OL9

quvoiad ¢z-0z

(@S6T) OrI$

SUjBId ‘OOM ‘U07}00 ABI

dvos ‘anoy ‘joyoory ‘oupa *$99}9103]9 ‘910M
~S8R[9 ‘S9]}]xX9} ‘UIvA U0}}09 ‘spoo3 zaWINSUOD

0998q0} ‘saAjfOo ‘U07}09 ‘sadui3 ‘Aayieq ‘qyuaua

$3190 FZ
quadied pz
(€S6T) o00‘SEeR‘e

“ul “bs 900'0L

Bldg

‘pus, [VINZ[NIIIB o[quen A[yUaIIND,

sa0Inosay osvq "JUTTg

spLoy
SPvoaljuy

ayey AdvIIIYT
AND Uydep s9q

syiodxg ujvel

Sayaysnpul uyew

sdoig ue

e BYd8D ag puvy ‘ody
YyAorp uojyjysindog enuuy
uo] B[ndog

vay

(panuyju09) AULNNOD

rod (geet

Sima

SOW FINES
008 009 oor 00g 0

“UNION .2Z 18 Apu anay ajeas

SSLV1S HVAV FHL

ANVIETV INOS
VISTLUINA

VOIUAYV

Vans
WILd ADA

TVIYOLVOAO'R

VOTUAV
-LSHAN
HONAWA

“‘pettenjep veoq oy sod swopyyeys jonony sy) pue
sieoppertag vepy ‘Vows, yom Fesepunog wergery pres

NVWNO
ONY : vaair
LYOBNN :

oc oO

Qoessnvnon N Vv U I

pa, snighko

ADTHUNAL

69 Gr

oF
