Status of Insurgency in Venezuela
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000126963, dated 4 September 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000126963).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

FY oy oy 3
ry ea 2 Ore 4

en y eyias y
a thre
nese # NLj_PS-/33
“fe
rE Oc: oe ne i,
CUMenr? Py
- , ee
eT

DIRECTORATE OF
INTELLIGENCE ©

Intelligence Memorandum

Status of Insurgency in Venezuela

31 October 1968

; No. 2048/68
APPROVED FOR RELEASE

0 NOV 1997

WRISTS

18, sections 793 an
Its transmission or

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
Directorate of Intelligence
31 October 1968

INTELLIGENCE MEMORANDUM

Status of Insurgency in Venezuela
Summary

Active insurgency in Venezuela in the past year
has been sporadic and small scale when compared with
the high level of leftist activity that preceded
the 1963 presidential elections. This is attribut-
able in part to the government's increasingly effec-
tive counterinsurgency program as well as to divi-
sions within and between the guerrilla bands. The’
insurgency effort is further hampered by the present
policy of the pro-Soviet Communist Party of Venezuela
to postpone armed struggle in favor of participating
in the political processes through its electoral
front, the Union for Advancement. In anticipation
that some extremists may attempt to disrupt the gen-
eral elections to be held in December, the govern-
ment has increased its security precautions and ap-
pears capable of coping with the problem.

Note: Thts memorandum wae produced solely by CIA.

It was prepared by the Office of Current Intelligence
and coordinated with the Office of National Eetimates
and the Clandestine Services.

SEORET

SBGREL

The Nature of the Insurgency Movement

1. The insurgency movement in Venezuela is
a long-standing effort which has persisted despite
the insurgents' inability to seize power, disrupt
the economy or political processes, or provoke a
military coup. Over the years the insurgents have
faced--and survived--government sweeps, internal
bickering, logistical problems, and undependable
outside support. By surviving, the insurgents have
accumulated experience and have demonstrated that
they are not to be destroyed easily. Their numbers
have been reduced, but they retain a harassment
capability and continue to conduct operations in
both urban and rural areas.

2. The insurgency movement is split into three
separate forces: the dissident Communist Armed
Forces of National Liberation (FALN) under the com-
mand of Douglas Bravo Mora; the predominantly hard-
line Castroite Movement of the Revolutionary Left
(MIR); and the now dormant guerrilla force of the
pro-Soviet Communist Party of Venezuela (PCV).

The Armed Forces of National Liberation

3. Douglas Bravo, leader of the FALN, or Uni-
fied Command FLN/FALN (CUFF) as its members prefer
it to be called, is a former PCV politburo member
and one of the hard-liners expelled from the Commu-
nist Party in July 1966 for refusing to accept the
party's decision to de-emphasize armed struggle.
Bravo's guerrillas operate in the states of Yaracuy
and Falcon, and in the traditional guerrilla areas
of Lara, Trujillo, and Portuguesa states. Estimates
of the FALN strength vary, with somewhere between
45 and 60 the most probable. There have been recent
reports, however, that Bravo's group has become
badly split over tactics and that one faction under
the command of his chief lieutenant, Luben Petkoff,
has agreed to merge with the MIR. Radio Havana
has sharply criticized: Bravo recently for refusing
to engage the enemy directly in urban areas. Petkoff
reportedly adopts a more aggressive line, which is

-2-

“Sar

SBOKET

more to the Cubans' liking.

450)
3,a(b)(0)

4. Although it is not yet confirmed, there
is some evidence that another group of Bravo's fol-
lowers has deserted him and is operating indepen-
dently in the west. Despite these internal prob-
lems, the Bravo forces have been credited with many
recent actions in the west, including attacks on
electoral registration boards, bank robberies, and
raids on small towns to obtain supplies, including
medicines.

The Movement of the Revolutionary Left

5. Potentially, the most important of the
guerrilla forces is the Castro-supported MIR. It
can probably muster a strength of 100-125 hard-core
members plus an unknown number of partisans. This
force has been painstakingly rebuilt since the vir-
tual wiping out of the terrorist forces in the east
in 1964-1965.

6. The MIR maintains a guerrilla force in
eastern Venezuela--the Ezequiel Zamora Front with
about 50 members located in the El Bachiller Moun-
tains, and the Antonio Jose de Sucre Front of some
75 men operating in the states of Monagas, Sucre,
Anzoategui, and Delta Amacuro. There are uncon-
firmed reports that most of the El Bachiller force
moved in September to join with the Antonio Jose
de Sucre band. The MIR also has a smaller group
of unknown size and composition in the western part
of the country.

. 7. MIR forces operating in the east recently
received a large supply of explosives that should
enable them to attack bridges, pipelines, trans-
portation routes, and power relay stations--vulner-
able targets which have not been exploited in re-
cent months. In addition, it appears that as a
result of the government's recent amnesty of poli-
tical prisoners, several former members may soon
be able to rejoin the MIR band. Others who have

~3-

~ Spe

- set

been abroad for guerrilla training may even now be
in transit to Venezuela.

8. Like the Communist Party, the MIR has one
faction that favors armed struggle and another that
sees greater gains in peaceful participation in
elections. Moises Moliero, the secretary general
of the MIR, recently published an article in the
MIR organ Izquierda calling for participation under
certain conditions in the general elections to be
held in December. Moliero's article, reportedly
written at the urging of the Communist Party, is a
departure from traditional MIR policy and may well
Signal yet another dispute in a leadership long
troubled by internal strife.

The Communist Party's Attitude toward the Elections

9. Communist Party policy at the moment is
to avoid all types of subversion and terrorism prior
to the elections. The guerrilla forces of the party,
consisting of a nucleus of some 30 men, are reportedly
at present concentrating on organizing and building
for future operations. In line with this policy,
party leaders have sought as far as possible to pre-
vent the MIR and the FALN from initiating actions
that would provoke government repression and under-
cut the party's electoral front, the Union for Ad-
vancement (UPA). In the event of a military golpe
or a breakdown in civil order, however, the Commu-
nist Party would quickly abandon its pacific role
and attempt to be in the vanguard of the protesters.

10. Although the official position of the
Communist Party is the temporary abandonment of
violence as a road to power, the clandestine wing
of. the party, the Metropolitan Military Commission
(MMC), is working as in the past on an elaborate
contingency plan for insurrection in Caracas and
is attempting to organize cells throughout the city
-The actual organization work, however,-is proceed-
ing slowly, and apparently no action cells have
been formed in Caracas. Most of the planning is on
paper and the members of the MMC seem to be resigned
to the fact that it will still be on paper at the
end of the year. Although MMC members have specific

| >.

authority and instructions from the party leader-
ship, they are getting little support from party
leaders and cadres, who are concentrating their ef-
forts on the UPA and preparations for the elections.

ll. If the party decided to abandon its pacific
policy, it could probably count on a fairly large
number of men who are already trained and experienced
in guerrilla tactics. The Simon Bolivar Front in
the west is still technically in existence, but it
is not presently organized as a fighting unit and
reportedly suffered major losses in a recent govern-
ment raid. The Manuel Ponte Rodriguez Front in the
east is also engaged only in training and organiza-
tional activities. Its membership is believed to
be about 70 men.

12. The capabilities of the PCV for violence.
are fairly high in terms of its ability to harass ~
and create a problem for the government, but rela-
tively low from the strategic standpoint. The guer-
villas in the field are armed and could ambush army
units and attack small towns, but they would prob-
ably suffer high losses in the process. Recent am-
nesties have released many capable, trained guer-
rillas and terrorists who could contribute greatly
to the launching of organized violence should the
PCV decide that the time is ripe.

Government Counterinsurgency Capabilities and Prob-
ems

13. Against this array of guerrilla forces,
the government has fielded 13 battalions of spe-
Cialized and heavily armed antiguerrilla troops
supported by Bell 47G and Alouette 111 helicopters.

14. Although the majority of the population
supports the federal government, a historical antip-
athy of mountain people to any government has been
exploited in some areas by the guerrillas. This
is especially true in the east, where a reduction
of the labor force by the oil companies in 1968 has
caused an economic slowdown that the government has
been unable to reverse.

-5-

speet

oe i5. In Falcon State, the FALN has made ex-

a tensive use of Douglas Bravo's family ties to gain
logistical support and information. In Yaracuy
State, long disregarded by the government, the Com-
munists were able to build a series of rest areas
and to gain the support of the residents.

16. In an effort to counter this situation,

the government through its military civic action

, program has engaged in basic development projects
in rural areas, including the construction by Army
engineers of access roads, schools, and buildings.
In addition, the army and national guard provide
medical and dental facilities in rural towns and
settlements.

/

17. The general effectiveness of the governs,
ment's counterinsurgency campaign and the present
disarray in subversive groups make it unlikely that
the subversive forces will be able to carry out more
than token harassment of the elections.

a

VENEZUELA: Areas of Insurgent Activity

> . CARIBBEAN SEA GRENADA 17
“NETHERLANDS* "ls, ° (UK)
~~ ANTILLES oid .
22> Recent FALN °
area of operat; NUEVA aS o
18 Fhito -ESPARTA CX/2) TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO

1° CARACAS TEPER AL a ee

ATLANTIC

OChK AN
TERRIFORIO

dewt eo

Wey.
Rt
Ss

Seegeat
Oy SES EPRAPURE 383

Can
ph a.

—_ ww :
f
{
BRAZIL \
\
N,,
° 50 100 150 Miles

@ $0 109 150 Kilometers

92393 10-68 CIA
