Intelligence Warning of the Tet Offensive in South Vietnam PublicationN Date Es
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000097712, dated 1 March 1968.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000097712).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

1.5(¢)
TOP-sroki, QD 3.4(0)(1)

No Foreign Dissem

RECEIVED |
INTELLIGENCE WARNING OF THE TET 0&?ARTMENT oF sTATE—~INA/RCI
OFFENSIVE IN SOUTH VIETNAM 2

ADO «
(Interim Report) APR» 1968
A.M. P.M,
MSWMM EBB 4. 2G !

A. Procedures

1. A working group has been formed under the
chairmanship of R. J. Smith, on which CIA, DIA, INR,
NSA, and the Joint Staff are represented. This group
has compiled dossiers on the raw intelligence informa-
and intelligence summaries and judgments received in
various US headquarters before Tet, with emphasis
on the period 15-30 January 1968, and on the finished
intelligence disseminated to senior officers of
the government as a result.

2. Representatives of the group from CIA, DIA,
and the Joint Staff visited Vietnam from 16 to 23

March. They were joined there by observers from
GINCPAC, MACV, and the CIA station in Saigon. In
addition to collecting a large quantity of pertinent
documents, the delegation received briefings and
conducted interviews, both in Saigon and the field,
with many senior officials, US and Vietnamese. On
the US side, members of the delegation talked to
Ambassador Bunker, General Westmorelanc, General
Abrams, Ambassador Komer, Lt. General Cushman, Lt.
General Rosson, Maj. General Peers, Maj. General
Eckhardt, and the commanding generals of lst Marine
Division and 4th Infantry Division. They also inter-
viewed the G-2s of I and II Field Forces and the

G-2 of III Marine Amphibious Force, and the G-2
advisers and the CIA Regional officers in all four
Corps Tactical Zones (CTZs). They were briefed ex-
tensively by MACV J-2 and by the CIA station in
Saigon, and contacted the Director of Intelligence,
Seventh Air Force, NSA Representative Vietnam, and
the Army Headquarters Area Command in Saigon. On
the Vietnamese side, they interviewed the commanding
generals of I and II Corps, J-2 of the Joint General
Staff and his deputy, and the deputy director of
National Police. In the course of these discus-
sions members of the group visited Phu 3ai, Da Nang,
Pleiku, Camo Enari, Nha Tranc, Bien Hoa, Lone Binh,
and Can Tho.

APPROVED FOR RELEASE

APR 28 1897 No Foreign Dissem

4.5(c)
3.4(b)(1)

pa a oe
o Foreign Dissem 3.4(6)(1)

B. General Findings

3. As the DCI informed the President's Foreign
Intelligence Advisory Board in February, there was
evidence, both in Saigon and in Washington, that
the enemy was engaging in his much-advertised "winter-
spring campaign" and was preparing for a series of
coordinated attacks, probably on a larger scale
than ever before. There was evidence in January
that some attacks in the highlands might be con-
ducted during the Tet holiday. .In the latter part
° e month it was eviden nat other attacks
were imminent ; and some of the Lardets bad pest
idéntified. fo) in Saigon and in Washington this
intelligence was communicated to senior military

and political officers. As a result, a series of
actions were taken in Vietnam which d e

impact of the enemy offensive.

4. The warning thus provided represents no
small achievement for the US intelligence apparatus
in Vietnam. it has no high-level clandestine pene-
trations of the Communist hierarchy and high-level
Communist communications are for the most part
unreadable. It must therefore rely on classic in-
dications techniques. This is difficult under any
circumstances. The intelligence organization itself,
military and civil, US and Vietnamese, is complex
and the volume of material it handles is large.
Thus, the recognition of significant reports from
human sources through the blare of background noise
presents.a major problem. Moreover, the very nature
of the war_leads tg the “crying wolf" svndrome.

@ have little doubt that at some level of the in-

felliaence apparatus low-level reports could be
found forecasting manv of the attacks made at Tet;
we have eauallv little doubt that similar reports
qoulg be found _alludingto-attacks on many other Td_be found alluding to attacks on many other
cities and on manv other dates.

5. The enemy took great pains to conceal his
intentions: Knowledge of his plans was fully com-
partmented and the actual attack order was dis-
seminated to attacking units only in the final
24 to 72 hours. Although US and Vietnamese authori-
ties received some reports of individual attack
plans, probably no Communist officer below the

4.5(c)

ee
Bree) 5 3.4(6)(1)
TPT Gi

Oo a 1.5(c)
: 3,A(ey(1)

level of COSVN, front, or military region was aware
of the full scope of the offensive. General west-
moreland believes the Communists sacrificed coordina-
tion for security, and this is evident in the pre-
mature attacks by units of Military Region 5 (MR 5)
on the night of 29-30 January, attacks which served

to alert the US command to the much more extensive
attacks on the following night.

6. Despite enemy security measures, communica-
tions intelligence was able to provide clear warnin
that attacks, probably on a larger scai ten le than ever
before, were in the offing. Considerable numbers —
of medium- and Low-grade enciphered enemy messages
were read. These messages appeared in many areas
of South Vietnam. They included references to im-
pending attacks, more widespread and numerous than
Seen before. Moreover, they indicated a sense of”
urgency, along with an emphasis on thorough plan-
ning and secrecy not previously seen in such communi-~
cations. These messages, taken with such nontextual
indicators as~increased message volumes and radio
direction finding, served both to validate informa-
tion from other sources in the hands of local au-
thorities and to provide warning to senior offi-
cials. The indicators, however, were not suf-
ficient to predict the exact timing of the attack.

nd

C. Impact of the Enemy Offensive

7. Although warning had thus been provided,
the intensity; coordination, and timing of the enemy
attack were not fully anticipated. Ambassador Bunker
and General Westmoreland attest fo this. The most
important: factor was timing. Few US or GVN officials
believed the enemy would attac uring Tet, nor dal
fhe Vietnamese public. There was good reason <Or
this: Tet symbolizes the solidarity of the Vietnam-
ese people. It_is the most important holidav_in
Vietnam, an occasion observed by all members of
every family whether they are Buddhist, Christian, oF
Communist. The Communists evidently believed they could
exploit this solidarity to produce an antigovernment,
antiforeign, antiwar uprising. This did not take
place. The enemy therefore paid a price in the
antagonisms he generated among the urban population,

4.5{c)

ac
inet ? iss a 3. A(b))

| 1.5(¢)

“No Foreign Dissem

but he gained enormously in two ways: The GVN's

army and police were generally far below their

usual state of readiness, and the precedent of Tet
made it possible for large numbers of VC to enter

the cities without causing alarm. General Westmore-
land expected heavy attacks either just before or just
after Tet, and as Tet approached and major attacks
had not materialized, the Vietnamese Joint General
Staff had authorized 50 percent leaves. Evidence

to upset this general belief did not come to hand
until 24 hours or so before the, attacks were launched,
the most important being the premature initiatives in
MR-5. The latter brought the intelligence already
available into sharp focus and provided the missing
element of timing. In the short time available,

US and ARVN units could be alerted and were, but

ARVN performance was reduced in many areas by Tet
leaves. ;

8. A second major unexpected element was the
number of simultaneous attacks mounted. US
tntelligence had given the enemy a capability of-
attacking virtually all of the points which he
did in fact attack and of mounting coordinated
attacks in a number of areas. He was not, however,
granted a specific capability for coordinated at-
facks in all areas at once. More important, the
nature of the targets was not anticipated. Wash-
‘ ‘ ee
ington and Saigon _exnected attacks on some cities,

but they did not expect the offensive to have the
Gities, the Civilian command and control centers,
radio stations and police headquarters as primary
objectives. Finally, the quantity of new, modern
weapons in the hands of Main and Local Force Viet
Cong who engaged in the attacks Was higher than
expected. The AK-47 rifle and RPG-7 antitank gre-

nade were particularly effective against ARVN units
and the Regional and Popular Forces.

9. Underlying these specific problems was a
more basic one: most commanders and intelligence
officers, at all levels, did not visualize the
enemy as capable of accomplishing his stated goals
as they appeared in propaganda and in captured docu-
ments. Prevailing estimates of attrition, infiltra-
tion, and local recruitment, reports of low morale,

~f-
.; ; 4.5(¢)
Fc | a 3.4{6)(1)

Soars: | Hy
< | 3.4(0)(1)

No Foreign Dissem

and _2_long_series-of defeats hae neg e a  aeas
Or the enemy. The general picture presented was an,
enemy unable to Conduct an offensive of such scope
and intensity. commanders and intelligence officers
saw his generalized calls for a “general uprising”
as merely exhortatory, and not as a ueprint for
what’ was to tollow. Moreover, in the past many

"great offensives" had blossomed in Communist propa-
ganda but had not materialized on the ground.

D. Response to Warnings

10. Nevertheless, Washington and Saigon were,
as stated earlier, fully aware that the enemy planned
a major offensive, probably coordinated attacks in
northern I CTZ, at Dak To in the highlands of II
CTZ, and toward Saigon from virtually all sides-in
III CTZ. As early as 10 January, General Westmore-
land had canceled certain planned operations in
northern III CTZ in order to reposition US forces
nearer to Saigon. In subsequent days he issued a .
series of warnings to his commanders, and to the US
Mission, that the enemy was preparing to attack.
Although he had not originally expected attacks dur-
ing Tet, he recognized the significance of the
premature attacks in MR 5 and on 30 January noti-
fied all his commanders to expect attacks that night.
As_a.result all US units were fully alerted, al-
though in most cases they did not have time or in=
formation to take offensive measures against the
enemy prior to the actual attack. Ail Seventh Air
Force bases were put on a maximum state of alert, and
the 7th AF Director of Intelligence testifies that
this step "saved Tan Son Nhut,"; Perhaps the best
evidence that COMUSMACV's measures were effective and
that the enemy's strategic intelligence was faulty is
that, with the exception of Hue, the enemy failed to
hold any of his major military objectives for a sig-
nificant period of time.

ll. The urgency felt in Saigon was not, however,
fully felt in Washington in the immediate pre-attack
periog.—AS-a result, finished Intelligence disseminated
In Washington did not contain the atmosphere is

present in Saigon. We do not believe this represents
a failure on anvone's part. The information available
eg EC A

-5-

1.5)
“ex NO ee sn Dissem 3.40}(1)

T SD 1.5(6)

: A (3)
No Foreign. Dissem 3.4(b}(1)

was transmitted and duly analyzed, but atmosphere is
not readily passed over a teletype circuit. Although
Senior orticials in Washington received warnings in the
period 25-30 January, they did not receive the full
sense of immediacy and intensity which was present in
Saigon. On the other hand, with Saigon alerted, virtu-
ally nothing further could be done in Washington that
late in the game which could affect the outcome.

12. Within this general picture, there were sig-
nificant differences among the four corps areas. IIl
MAF expected assaults on Khe Sanh and Quang Tri. It
had received from a local CIA operation the enemy at-
tack plan for Da Nang, but not the date. General Cush-
man stated that he expected to be attacked during Tet
mnd enemy activities in northern I CTZ had prompted
higher authority to cancel the Tet truce in I CTZ2.

As a result both US and Vietnamese forces were better
prepared here than elsewhere. Most Vietnamese units
were at nearly full strength. The extent and co-
ordination of the enemy's attacks, considerably ex-
ceeded expectations, as did his tenaciously held

lodgement in Hue. In general, however, his assaults
were easily thrown back.

13. In II CTZ, allied forces in the coastal low-
lands were for the most part attacked on the night
of 29-30 January by MR 5S units. They did not have
the advantage of forewarning which these attacks provided
units farther south, nor were they in the "alert"
posture of Allied forces in I Corps. The Allied
forces were on a higher than normal state of alert,
which was, however, directed against the inevitable
cease-fire violations rather than attacks on the
cities. In the highlands, singutarly unlike any,
other area, intelligence was available from communica-
tions intelligence, prisoners, and documents reflect—
Ing specific plans for attacks during Tet. For in-
Stance, Communist plans for attacking Dak To, Pleiku,
and Kontum were known well in advance, and the US 4th
Division was able to correlate them with enemy de-
ployments. This provided one of the few opportuni-
ties for US forces to take active measures against

the enemy; Pleiku_was the most successful US overa-
tion_of ¢ j Elsewhere in the highlands

Intelligence was not as good, but there was enough
information to lead two of the three ARVN division
commanders in II CTZ to cancel all leaves on their

ay

eee ie 4.5(¢)
No acre Dissem 3.40oy(4)

; 4.5(¢)
Tope T at)

No Foreign Dissem

own initiative. We do not believe, however, that
these orders were totally effective in recovering per-
sonnel who had already departed.

14. It has been noted above that US redeploy-
ments in III Corps began before mid-January. These
movements were triggered by the concentration of three
enemy divisions along the Cambodian border north and
northwest of Saigon and by indications that these
units were beginning to deploy southward toward the
city. In addition, US and ARVN intelligence officers
had earlier deduced from a reorganization of the enemy
command structure in MR 4, which surrounds the Saigon
area, that its purpose was to improve command and
control for the coordination of an attack on that city.
III Corps and II Field Force were put on a general
alert on 30 January (General Westmoreland's actions
resulting from the attacks in MR 5 the previous night),
and during the course of the day began to receive
more specific information that Saigon was to be at-
tacked that night. In most ARVN units in III Corps the
troops appear to have been in their normal Tet condi-
tion.

15. In IV CTZ, the nature and extent of the
enemy's aftacks were almost total unexvected. Al-
fted forces were aware that Viet Cong capabilities
had improved. An NSA report of 25 January, which
warned of the possibility of impending attacks in
other areas, noted that units in the "Nam Bo area,"
which includes the Delta, might also be involved.
The supply of modern weapons had increased and the
vc had shown an ability to conduct a series of co-
ordinated attacks throughout the Delta. To some
degree however, this could be inta@rpreted as reac-
tions to a more aggressive allied posture in the
area. In the Delta cities the presence of the VC
during Tet was so traditional as to be accepted
as routine. General Eckhardt, Senior Adviser,
stated that the only warning he received was General
Westmoreland's alerting message of 30 January. Gen-
eral Eckhardt was able to alert the US support and
logistic units in the Delta, but was unable in the
time available to restore the readiness of ARVN
units. The ARVN Corps commander and his three divi-
sion commanders were present at their headquarters
when the offensive struck, but their units were far
below strength.

eo

No Foreign Dissem 4.5(0)
Tecan GD 3.40

TOPSEGLET Gl 1500)

No Foreign Dissem 3.4(0)(1)

E. Responses to Specific Questions

16. The preceding paragraphs have been respon-
sive to General Taylor's questions a, b, f, and g.
Our preliminary findings on questions c, d, and e are
as follows:

Cc. (Provision of information bv civilians

Prior to the offensive there were very few cases of
civilians volunteering information on €hé impending
attacks. this is not necessarilv, however, a measure
of the dearee of civilian cooperation with the regime.
The enemy's security measures, his rapid deployments
through territory much of which was under his control,
and the basic difficulty of rapid communication from
countryside to city would have prevented friendly
villages from passing warnings in many cases. As
noted above the presence of infiltrators in the cities
was unremarkable during Tet. During the Tet fi¢ht-
ing, and since, there has been a marked increase in
information volunteered from the populace.

d. (Exchange of information)

Given the size and complexity of the US and Vietnam-
ese intelligence systems, we Zound cooperation and
exchange in this case to be remar - No

Gase was reported to us of the deliberate withhold-
ing of significant warning information by one agency
from another. With the mass of intellicence informa-
tion acquired in Vietnam every day, there was in-
evitably some human error. Not all low-level reports
got to everyone they should have. There is no evi-
dence, however, that these minor shortcomings affected
the general intelligence picture.

e. (Identification of units)

Most of the units engaged in the offensive have been
identified. In general, there was a close correla-
tion between US order-of-battle holdings in a given
area prior to the attacks and the units identified
in the attacks, although not all units deployed in
any given area were actually committed in most cases,
and some new provisional units were identified in
the attacks. As noted above, the enemy's facade of

-g-
; 1.5(¢)

No Fore Sissem 4

pad

4.5(6)
Ta: 3.4(0)(1)

No Foreign Dissem

a “general uprising" required him to attack with his
Viet Cong units wherever possible. Especially in III
and IV CTZs he held back many Main Force and most NVN
units for follow-up. Because of the failure of the ini-

tial attacks, in all but a few instances a follow-up
never came.

- 9 -
4.5(¢)

No Foreign Dissem 4
ht 3,4(b)(1)
Toc
