Latin America Review-peru: Sendero Luminoso
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000037954, dated 1 August 1982.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000037954).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Dircvlorae of
Entcli wots

Latia Apertes
Resies

t3 Sepiember [982

This feflist insurgent group does not threaten the government
directly, but President Beleunde may heve to call in the military to
quell the group's activities. A similar situation/oocurred during
“a first presidency and ie part led his subsequent ouster,

a

hb fey .
fe Re Te hati ben non FEAT)? PTO ihe AL SNe Ty

‘.

=,

Pears

Articles <

:
: Peru:
: Sendero Luminoso
Summary

Sendero Luminovo tSL} is a small, Maotst terrorist
zi grourg : eee Te tts
; largest concentratiur of armed followers ts in the
B Andean dcpuriment of Ayacucho, although it has
+ smal! cells in Lima and other metropolitan areas.
5
Hf

At present, SL's numerical weakness and lack of
popula suppurt outsde certain areas of Ayacucho do
hot give it the capability to thecaten the government
directly. We the civitian security forces {311 to control
its activities, however, President Fernando Belaunde
probably would have fo authorize the military to take
o direct rofe, A similac situation occurred during
Betaunde’s first presidency and in part ied to his
subsequent ouster, Wig believe that even if the miti-
tary does intervene again, however, a related coup
against Belaunde is unlikely because he would make
every effort to limit the miljlary’s involvem nt and
sirengthen bis own cont

er as eB

batt

Background
Sendcro Luminoso Shining Path) is a radical, leftist
rerrorist and insurgent group that follows the organi-
Fational and idcological modet of Mav's peasaat-
based revotution in China. The SLs goats are to bring
down the Relsunde government and to remove for-

” gign—particularly US—influence from Peru

The SL was formed in th: eral southern department
of Ayacucho in the fate 160s by Ruben Abimael
Gurman Reynoso, then 9 philosophy teacher al the
San Cristobal de Hwamaaga National University in
Ayacuchy. Gurmar was also a member of the Ban-
deta Roja, a pro-Chinese Cummunist party made up

primarily of attorneys, professors, and merchants.
German and his fotlowers—mostly craftsmen, peas-
ants, and studcnts—charged thal the group was in-
creasingly favoring urban arcas to the detriment of
the countryside and was overly deemphasizing armed
struggle. Since formatty breaking with the Bandera
Roja to pursue a more violent path. Gurman has
mainiained that the SL is the only fegitimare Com-

| ghunist party in Peru

SL's Operctions -

Following President Betaurde's inauguration in 1980,
the SL embarked on a campaign of low-risk, high-
profife terrorist attacks consisting primacity of dyna-
miting electrical lowers, public buildings. and such
symbols of authority as the Justice Ministry and
police posts, Within the last year, however, SL opera-
tions have increased, White bombings continue, at-
tacks agains! people, including the assassination of
focal officials and suspected police informants, are
increasing

Members of che SL arc organized iato cells that
operate -dependently<e ;

concentration remains in Ayacucho, recent activities
and reports indicate an increased presence in Lima
and other melropolilan areas

+ Srefes of Emarpency

"Cote A Lite Any
‘.
u \Stotes of Emergency
’ ee ~..
~.,

Pacihe Orean

—.— Beparamanta
boundary

Province doundary
Unclostified

Ltd E sopra hemigtcm "=
ed nos Oe be ly Bythoreisterd

vot only is the SE's Maoist ideutogy

Soviet philosophy, bel. more im-
portanily, Moscow values its arms relationship with
Peru, its onfy client in South America

The US Embassy reports that members arm them-
aclves with small arms end machineguns purchased in
Peru of stolen from police and military posts. Eaplo
sives are Stolen from mines and construction sites.
Funds are obtained primarily from robberies, al-
though there are uncon?irmed reports of money dSeing
eniorted from narcotics traffickers. Indoctrination
and paramilitary ttaining are given at clandestine
“people's schools |

Twice in little more than g year, the US Fimbassy was
the target of bomb attacks, presumably perpetrated
by the $1. On 31 August 198t, dynamite thrown
from a passing vehicle caused structural damage to
the chancery and amba:sador's residence, recently 2
caller to a Lima newspaper claimed that the SL was
responsible for the attack, fn an almost identical
operation on 24 July 1932. terrorists wsed more
sophisticated nitrate-pasted explosives, which caused

minor damage to the chancery, three Peruvian police-
men guarding the cumpound ere injured. In sddi-
tion, US and olber foreign-owaed businesses bare
been ure

Other recent terrorist operations suggest that the SL's
plan to increase its activity is being implemented. In
March. the SL mounted a highly successful attack on
the Ayacucho prison and freed 247 inmates, including
accused and convicted terroris:s. More recently, nu-
merous civil guard posts and small municipalities
have been attacked. Last month, the SL dynamited
several electrical towers neat Lima. blacking out the
tity for several hours. Al present, states of emergency
exist in Lima. Caflao, three provinces of Ayacucho
de nd one in Apurimac deparimeni.

The Theest to the Goteranent

The threat to the Belaunde administration is indirect.
We judge that the SL catnot by itself overthrow the
government, and its operations in the past tended to
recede temporarily in response fo government pres
sure. implying thal they may tail off again under the
current stale of emergency. if, however, the cerrorists
were to assassinate a prominent official, pull off
another spectacular such as the jailbreak in Ayacu-
cho, or generstly stage more technically sophisticated
operations, military nre-sure on Belaunde to sanction
a direct Army rote could be overwhelming. Civil-
military relations could then wndergo a period of
stress, although we are by ho means terlain thal the
Belaunde government would be threatened by a mili-
tary takeover as 8 fesull

The SL appears to enjoy little popular support. even in
Ayacucho, alihough it may appeal to a few Indian
groups by harking bach to thei? Incan heritage °

mere Hy assassinating sus-

a officiats, the SL has
probably aliensted most people in the affected area.
Fhe periodic attacks in Lima have not won SL many
adhercais in the capital, whose more sophisticated

non- Indian inhabitants are even less bhely to aporeci-

atc the SEs unusual idedtogs thin the bghluad

pepulation

The SL probsbly beleves. however, that its current

facies —even though the» ma} not be winning much
pupulaf supoort—will prow ke a violent response by

the Army. Fhes hone that phus in turn will tesd to

military fepressiun and a subsequent oe in popular

sympathy for the SE and us wiufent taches, The

Peruvian public so far seems to be increasingly weary

of terrorist dioturbances, brewever, and w probably
more bkely to approve of d rect mifttary action
against the SE than lo support the terrorist

fats uperations to date, the Sh, has not posed a

significant threat 10 the mcitary. Destruction of elec-
trical towers and assruits on isolated pofice posts are
Wifficutt to prevent and require hitle technical exper-
Sint of the SL's recent arben opers-

five tu cvccute
tions gould hase

been plinred and carsed nut by

smal well-trained unit

According fo the OS Embossy, mount of the S£°¢

successes suchas the Asvacucnhe milorcak —can be
attubuted to the Livity and incfficicacy of the civilian

security forses Rivatries ameang the waricus intelli

gence and law enforcement orgunizations hamper the

gmcramcat’s efforts. Fhe competing organizations

often refuse to share information ar to fottow up Jeads.
at was notably the case in the jailbreak, Coordinating

and conteafizing intelligence and Law enforcement

activitics, combined with mare modern police equip-

ment. probably would gine the cvihan services afl

they anced te nculralize the Sf. We see no indication,

however, that this paruchiulism will be avercome in
the neat future, incressing Ehe fikelibewad tbat
Helaunds may have to bring in the Army

Likelihood of lntersention

We agree with the embassy assessment that Belaunde

will delay invulving the mil tary as tong as possible,
even at the esk of appearing indecisive. fle clearly
hopes that the civilun forces, aided by increased

military Jogestic support. can hold the line against fhe
SL. The President remembers his ousted if POR by a
militaty that had become highly politucieed during its
carher involvement in 4 coentermsurgency campaign,

and he dues not @ant to scl up a similar situation now.
In addition, the Embassy reports be is cuncerned that
& tough Army antiterrorixt campaign might endsnger
Peru's favorable human rights image and pesham aid
the SL's Fopes of increasing its pe blic supporr

We believe military intervention could fotlow an
incident that highhghied police inefficiency and made
the terrorists appear more dangerous than we believe
they are. ft could also reso ft from a tong necind of
heightened terrorist activity thal clearly could npt be
teontrofled by civilian forces. A major SE suceess
against ah Army unit—rather than nie police —tould

also provoke a military response.

that. if they were , ordered to mune against the SE. the
President would have to mussie amy press criticism of
their actions, They also insisted that the Army be
given command of all antiterrorist operations and
totaf control of all routes in and out of Ayacucho.
Belaunde probably would refuse to graat the military
such sweeping authority and would try to maintain his
ability te monior and control the scone of operations,
Hle might, for example, allow the Army to operste in
isolated Ayacucho, where civitian security forces hace
been fess tucees ful than in Lima. Fle would he feos
bhely to surrendce full civilian authority in the capital
or other major ¢ities, where targe-scale military active
ity would be under closer national and international
srutiny. We believe that the service chiefs would
agree to some such restrictions to arevent a major
break with the President, which thes probsbly would

prefer to avoi

Ouilook

While tensions betecen civilian and military authori-

lies almost ceriainly would rise during an Army

intervention against the SL, we believe that this would
probably not lezd toa coup. Military leaders sre not
eager lo reassume political power because they are

‘ fuliy aware that they have #0 innovative sofutions to
Peru's current prodlems, fost want lo concentrate on
professional matiers neglected during the 12 yeurs the
military governed the coun

The survival of Peruvian democracy—and pan ofar-

by the pro US Belaunde government—remains impor-
, tant both for its demonstration effect and for the long-
, term prospects for stability in the repion, We do not
betieve that Si. alone currently represents # threat to
Belaunde. but rhe military—the direct threat—will be
carefully monitoring events, Military intervention
- would become more tikely as resslt of:

® Encreasing popular support for the SL.

© Evidence of substantial foreign assistance to the SL.

© Terrorist activity in the sorthern and jungle regions.

* Larger, more wophisticaled SL operations azainst F

important government tergets, especially military :

oni See :

Fven under these ciecumstances, the SL would almost
certainly be shattered by a confrontation with the
Army, especially if the mi itary had the kind of
unfettered authority it wowld like. The terrorists are
still at a relatively rudimentary stage and the Army
has performed effectively in past counterinsurgency

campaigns!

Fie kee)

‘
1
ws
'
=e,
4
ws
7
*
