Oci Reporting on Communist Influence and Activities in Cuban Revolution
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132546, dated 3 September 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132546).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

CIA ISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM
RELEASE AS SANITIZED
1997 7 26007 1260

MEMORANDUM FOR: feting Director of Central Intelligence

: TROUGH «'«'«‘t;«s«éepuity Dicctor (ImteLligence)
: SUBFECT OCI Reporting ou Communist Influence and
; A£otiviticsa in Cuban Revolution

This Office hes printed oumercus articles thet pointed
up the interest, influence end setivities of the Cuban
Comsuntet party in Fidel Castro's revolutionary movement
and ta the guvernsent established by Castro on 1 January
1959. ‘The articles appeared tu the Current Intelligence
Bulletin, the Curreat Intelligesce Reviev, and notes
prepared for delivery to the ational fecurity Council.

The publication, its date, and the pertinent data
coacerping the Commminiet subversion are listed in the attached

coupilation.

Curreat LIatelligerced
Enclosure: a/s

CD/WE: HBBrown/jb/x4281 £25 Oct 60)

Ristribution:
Orig & 1 ~ Addressee
1 = O/DDCI Document Ho. 3G.
1 - DDI Dee ene _
L - AD/CI E56 ere ee bree Bs, oot |
1 ~ CA/EW, CB/LA () DECLASSIFIED at
1 -— CB/¥E Class. CHANGED TO: 15

DDA Memo, 4 Apr 77 Se
_ Auth: _DDA REG. T7f1763 E
Roe.
Date: L{/fralTeé. By: gag

—_—

Cc- 26260

Vy

ee came LUBE eee sete emiee o

ey.

t ‘ ;
eer as ereeoce car oa

eer aa
ose
inva: el

Se eapoee

eer

oct Reporting on ist Influence
aud Activities in the Cuban Revolution
The following excerpts were taken frou ths Baily Bulletin
and ¥eokly Review published between 6 April 1658 and 13 October
1960. (peges 1 to 6&3) TEs excerpts from MSC briefing notes
are fraa briefings prepared from 24 faptezber 1958 te 29 September

1860 (pages 52 to 66).

CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE BULLSTIA

“
a meet ee

Vette
et
ete nate eae,

G April 1956

Z duly 1853

14 July 1958

“to outiawcd Cuban Communist party
bes offered Castre unsclicited support
for a general etrike....several of
Castzo's Lollowere—including his
teother, eso is kaowa to have traveied

Sees

orders froa bis

"officers of the US Naval Base at
Guantanamo expect the 29 Aserican
esr

ceusular officers dealing with Eawl
Castro heve keen usable definitely to

auli

STR a

2 Jenuary 1259

3 January 1959

& damiary 1959

9 January 1259

identify any member of his group as

a Communiat, but nevertheleas belicere

that ecae of the isedorship may be.”

“The catlawed Popular Socialiat
(Communist) party (PSP) may now in-

| crease ite efforts to ally itself with

the rebel ceuge in em atteupt to gain
political sdévanteges or recognition
under a new government...Oc 2 January
the Communist chief announced support
of the rebel sorement and called for a
“united front™....Caommaist syxpathizers
axa belfeved to have penetrated the
rebel sxeovement on a low level, asd the
anti~fscvican aeutinents held by some
revels-——perticulariy within tke group
ccamended by Haul Camtre--could well be
ec aeetets ts en edvantaege.™

“TES Lesiderstin af Osba's etrong labor
movement is at etake....%se Comanists,
who heave uatnteined an underground

Zabor organisatian, cam be expected ta
make a a ee. Rid ——— of y oreanized

“The Cuban Caumuniegt party (PsP) bas
succeeded in obtaining a minority voice

in the orgenizdd Yebor morencat end is
represented on an explores coamittee chich
is attempting to take over tho manage-—
ment of the Cuban Electric Coupeny, a
gubsidiary of a US firm. The SSP is
acting spenly to create an tspreasion

ef iegality. However’ s the Urrutia

Sg NE gh DA t .

“Meanwhile there are soma sigus of

eee cane sect mn thea oe

|

12 January 1959

29 February i859

14 Farch 1989

2G Merch 1959

- Gee

oe

“Pidel Castro and other leaders of the
politically dowmizeat 26 of duly Eovement
he Popular Secialiet

-heve Gaclared that?
(Communist) party (FSP) will now be

permitted to epsrate es a legal party
‘since frecdom of political action ia
gusrantecd by the constitution....Ga 16
Jantary, the Coamunieta ia Esvasa held -
their first public rally since Batista
outlawed their party im 1653. Tke |
Comsunist dsily newepaper hes resumed

cation, and the party epensd
effices in Havana end Santiago.”

ees

“KEcetings planned in Cuba fox ister
thia month croag leaders of several
Latin American Communist parties may
coscersg Comsanista efferte te coatrol
the eoveral ‘liberation’ scresents
being farmed with Cuban govrerament
encourggencnt to onat ‘dictators’ in
the Caribbscen area.” ©

ch

*Distilueionment with the Csatro regise
secus ta be spreading. ..-Castro's.c.
ation with certein projects cuch
as social and cerexvian reform ia Eelaying
ecouauic recevery. He kas alienated :
certain cowssreial, prefeseiensi, and
political groups, including scene of bis
forser supporters, hut kis popularity
with the leser claseda is apparently
undiminished. Certéin sovea by the

Forusr Costa Hicen President Jase Figueres,
during his current trip to Cuba, will
probably try to dissuade Castro fren
sotions thet would iacrease Communist
eapebilities in the area, end eeek Castro's
ay iO eda

« ate a

help for his own planus for ougting the
regimes in Kicaragua and Doninican
Republic. He and his ally, Yenezuelan
President Betancouxt are deeply con-
cerned over Castro‘s dcemagoguery and his
predilection Zor gupporting pro-Communist
groups of revolutionaries in his crusade
against dictatorships." {%

27 Karoh 1959 ‘yormer Costa Rican President Figueres

gupperting irresponsible Communist groups
in its campaign egainst Caribbean dictator~
ships.“ & SESS TE

1 April 1959 "The extent of Communist influence in
Cuba was impressed on former Costs Rican
President Figueras during his visit there
| least week. Figueres nov definitely regerds
| Cuban Prine Hinieter Fidel Castro 28 an
opponent of the leftist non—-Cesamnist
Latin American revolutionsery movement
represented by himeelf end Venezuelan
| President Betanuccurt. He expects serious
political deterioration in Cuba, after
i which tanything ean happen, ‘ including
4 Coemunist doaination." “Figueres and his
d close ssgociate, Gonzalo Facion, returned
| convinced that the Commintats are influential,
pet enly in the Cuban Army and in organized
| labor, but also in circles clese to Prine
Minister Fidel Cagtro....He atrougly
suspects that there is a nucleus of
dedicated Communists in Cuba trying te
’ create a “Hungary in reverge' requiring
US armed intervention....Figueres‘
observations were apparently confined to
; the Havana areai...in Oriente Province, —— ~~
\ where the Communists appear to exert their
greatest influence....Communists sre
prominent anong the teachers being
recruited for the violently anti-US
political-indectrinetion schools which
the government is establishing to teach
the illiterate rural masses. The schools
are expected to be extended to the res
of the island.“ foo Sune cae Sarees

t
ree

ace

10 April 1959

14 April 1989

18 April 1959 -

are among his sides.” as

“In private conversation with Cuban
businesgemen on 4 April, Pezos (president
of the Cuban Rationgl Bank) reportedly
expresecd pesaimiem concerning Cuba's
future under the Castro regine. ESeverel
other cbeervers of Cuban developments .
have recently voloed gimtlar pessimien.
Berafino Romialdi, A¥I-CIO represertative
to the Inter-Axerican Regional Labor
Organization (ORIT), reported on 8 April
thet GRIT has concluded that the Castxo
governzent fs opening tts doors to
Comminigm in Cuba." €&

“Opposition to the Castro regime, @tili
largely unorganized, is increasing ag
Castro continues to revesl authoritarian
tendencies. Catholic Church leaders are
deeply disturbed over the Comminist gains
and are said to be planning the establish-
ment of a political party to influence
political eventa....A4 number of Cubans,
meet of them disillusfoned former
eupporters of Fidel Castro,...are slarnacd
at the regime's snti-US orientation and
the influence cf the Communists on the
government...Aftery his return from his

‘Caben visit last month, former Coeta

Rican President Figueres, who has always
been glow to pin the Communist lebel on |
anyone without adequate proof, teld US
Ambegsador Willauer that he wae tending
more and more to believe that Castro may,
in fect, be a Comuinitat himself. While
there ig no proof that he is a member eof
the Communist party, it is clear that the
Communists have made significant gains
since Castro came to power last January
and that Cenmuniats or pro-Commnists

"The Communist threat in the Caribbean
area is considered alarming by a group

ef Latin American and US likerala meeting
in Coata Rica with former President Jesea
Figueres. The group...is particularly

res

te meee 8

Lat,

23 April 1959

1 May 1959

Zl Kay 1959

concerned over Communist penetration of
the Cuben Government. Figueres and
Hetancourt (President of Venezuela) ere
justified in’ their fear that Comzuntgt.
controlled Nicaraguan and Dominican
revolutionary groups, which have been
sympathetically received and encourgged
by Cuban officials, will spread
throughout the srea,." Ges

“Raul Cagtre, the irresponsible Commnigt~
influenced brother of the prime Binister,
strongly attacked the United States as
one of ‘the enemies of the Cuban revolution!
in a apeech on 20 April." ae eae |

So ak ee ek gee

“Sweeping changes are reported being sade
in the military high command es well as
anong lower ranking officere. Raul Castro,
coumander in chief of the earned forces,
apperently initiated the changes prior to
his hurried trip to meet Fidel Castre in
Houston on 28 April. They may be deaigned
to eliminate officers ke considers to be
rightists and unsyepsthetic to him....
Coumunists, who have geined a foothold in
Cuban organized labor under the Caetro
regime, will undeubtedly play a prominent
role in the 1 Hay celebrations. The pro-
Communist army major ‘Che' Guevara hes .
announced plans for en ‘armed workers
militia’ to parade on 1 May, but the head
ef the Cuban Confederation of Workers has
stated that such a militia has not yet

been organized." @&

“A man with a long record of Commnist
essociationg has been naned executive
director of the agrarian reforn machinery
established by cabinet decree on 17 Key.
Land reform is the key to the country's
economic and social development, and
penetration of its administratien would
provide the Communists with the means of
building up considerable political atrength
in the rural aress....The Communists have

eek oe mene amg me am ee em oe,

ll July 1959

ll July 1959

18 July 1959

already shown considerable activity in ~
sone xvural areas, particularly in Grientsg
Provinose where they have staffed
‘revolutionary schools’ designed to inetily
revolutichary fexvor in the masses. They
have aleo been involved in the formation
ef an arned civilian militia in Ortente,*

ores
pee

See

“Caba ia interested in purchasing a light-
axmas factory from Czechoslovakia, according
to a reliable gource of the American Embassy
in Havana. A Czech offfeial already in
Cuba diecussing tractor sales hes indicated
that a Czech expert on arus gales ie

ted See

a branch of their official news agency in
Havena and are reportedly planning to
pubiifeh e Chinege-languege newspaper. A
Chinese Comzanist ‘journalist' delegation
is currently making a substantial pro-
pegenda effort in Cuba, following earlier
visits to Chile, Brazil, and Urugury. This
ectivity reflects the sharply increased
Chinese Comsuntat effort in Latin America
eepectally apparent since Latin Amerfcan
Cosmunists met with top Chinese officials.
in Peipi e a
ees =

apparently view ere Communists have
made considerable gaing under Castro-—as a
particularly favorable center for developing
& propaganda network in the area.*

“Fidel Cestro's successful 17 July maneuver
ef forcing the resignation of President
Kanuel Urrutia by dramatically threatening
his own resignation as prime minister has
increased the opportunities for further
Cozmminist gains in Cuba. Commnists

quickly joined in the emotional public
expressions of eupport for Castro and against

&

Sete BO

Urrutia..../Castro/sharply attacked Urrutia
for criticizing Communists and said his
differences with the former president were
"95% ideological.‘...Raul Castro, who kas
fecilitated Communist penetration of the
arzed forces, reportedly told Urrutie on
1l July that he would make certain govern
ment appointments regerdiess of the
President's contrary wishes. %&

18 August 1959 ‘rhrushchey has been invited to visit —
| extended G22

eS

19 August 1959
for Cultural Rels
Countries Glee Se requested a one-month
visa for the chief cf its Latin American
Department to visit Cuba § cee

eee ake

Ce qu Zz .
a wepapers' invitation to Khrushchev
to visit Havana. Bloc propaganda over the
lest geveral months kas paid increasing

to Cuban developusate.

1 Septexber 1959 ‘trhere is a widening rift between the
AFL/CIC-backed Inter-American Regional
Organization of Workers and its affiliate,
the Cuban Confederation of Yorkers. The
result is likely to ke an increase in anti-
US sentiment in Cuban organized labor, where

ets have made gains by promoting
tunity! with adherents of the 26 of July
Movement....In the 15 of 33 constituent
federations of the CIC which have recently
held elections, Coagsunists or suspected
Communists were elected, under 26 of July
cever, to the executive committees of five
federations, including Cuba's second, third,
and fourth largest. Communist gains were
also significant in earlier lecal union
elections." Gz eae

,
ee
en. Se

aft

4 September 1959

L5 Sentember 1959

17 September 1959

“...The removal of fBatiate7 holdovers,
most of them technicians snd nechanics,
has further aggravated the already
chaotic conditions in the arned forces,
which have been a focal point of Communist
Penetration and efforts at subverat

. “Raul Castro in a Strongly anti-US speech

on 11 September endorsed the calling of a
Latin American people's congress. This
nay be the congress planned in Moscaw at

a @pecial conference of delegates of the
18 Latin American Comsunist perties
attending the 2lst congress of the Communist
party of the Soviet Unien last February.
Identification with the Castro revolution
rather than with a local Coamunist party
would mske the congress nore attractive
than otherwise to certain non-Comminists
end previde opportunities for Communist
penetration of future khenispheric
activities....Such a COnETeES appears to
h@ part of the Communist plan of action fn
this healephere...Heanwhile, Ernesto
GueVara, & pre-Cosowint st leader of the
Castro revolution, told a TY eudience on
i4 September that the US naval base at
Guantansse Bay made Cuba a taxget for
nuclear attacks. An intensified caupaign
against US military bases and eissione was
another important tactie in the action pro-
gvém adopted in Moscow." =x

eS oes

“A cabinet minister has told & usually
relfable seurce that Fidel Castro is planning
impertant changes in key government positions.
There have been numerous reports that some
moderates may be forced out ef the govern-
ment and the pro-Communist Ernesto Guevara
will have an influential industrial Planning
role....The retention of trained efficials...
determined te keep the Cuban economy from
collapsing would serve ans s caunterbalance

to the apparently increasing pover of Raul

Rud other extreme leftists."

rae

1 October 1959

29 Getober 1859

24 October 1959

_ served before the revolution." Gee

",..Castro's..-high praise of ‘Chet Guevara,
whom he placed in charge of industrial plann-
ing, may reflect swareness of the distrust
which many regponsible Cubans feel for Guevara,
who is generally regarded as pre-Communtat...,

officials. Raul Castro heads a powerful new
ministry of the armed forces; one of his
closest asecciates, characterized by the
Anerican Embassy xe an extreme leftist, has
been aseigned to head the key labor wintstry
+ee-Kartinez /new labor minister/ may facilit-
ate expected Comminist attempts to dominate
the CTC national conference in Hovember,

when top officere will be elected. Eaul
Castro...commander of all Cuban armed forces
since...February...has converted the military
into a political instrument, dismissing al-
most all army and air force members who ha

Ophea

"In a TV speech on 22-23 Octcober....the Cuban
premier gaid he did not believe accusations
made against Communist regimes since they

were the came charges leveled against the
revolution he leads; he said he did not care
if his movement was labeled Communiots,...
Charging the U8 with attempts to keep Cuba
defenseless againat its enemies by blocking
purchases of military equipment such as
British jet aircraft, Castro said that the
workers and pessants now are Cuba's mein

ferce and that they must be armed. Earlier
this year Cuban Communiste prepesed that a
people's armed militia be organized, and
extremist government officials now controlling
labor and agrarian reform may reapand to
Castro's declaration by creating such a militia
with help from Raul Castre, the leftist minis-

26 October 1959

4 Eovember 1959

11 November 1959

14 Kovember 1959

‘ri del Castro's vitriolic ettacks on

opinions which diverge in any way from hia

own, hia receutly increased rabble-rousing,

and the appointment of known leftists to

high offices all indicate a real threat of
extremist control ever the Cuban leader,

A qualified American ebeerver feels thksre

i@a simost no hope that Castro can now bea
influenced to moderate the ocurza of his
regime or to rocoguine the danger of Conmunian!'

“On 3 Mevember Revelucicn, the official daily
of Fidel Castro's "28th of July Movement,‘
advecated that Soviet Deputy Fremier Kikeyan,
who will inaugurate the Soviet exhibition

in Mexico on 22 KRoremwber, be invited to visit
Cuba ss a prelude to the resumption ef relation:
and to expended trade between Cuba and the
USSR....The Castro governuent may /s1ls0/7 be
plenning to 111 open trade relations with
East Germany...A Soviet cultural official
made an unpublicized visit to Havana in Octo-
ber, and the USER kas ordered 560,000 tons

ef Cuban sugar during 1959, the largest
amount since 1255...‘Che' Gievara, a pre-
Communist who reportedly exercises great
influence over Castro in watters of fareign
policy, was reliably qucted in Harck, i959

as being determined te restore diplomatic
ties with the Soviet Union."Ga eee

“While the 26th of July Eoremsnt claims
eveeping victories, Communiets are believed

to heave gained substantial repreeentation
among the 3,000 delegates elected by local
unions...to attend the nationsl CONES. s

of the dominant and politically poverful

Cuban Labor Confederation. Rattl Cestro and
his confident, Labor Minister Martinez fancher,
are expected to remove from powsar Confederation
leaders who are opposed to grewing Communiat
influence in labor and in the government."

"Fidel Castro evidently plans to subordinate
the Cuban Government as well aw the entire
Cuban economy to the contrel of the leftist—
led National Agrarian Reform Institute (IRA).
He is alleged to have said in a closed seeting
of IKRA offictale that his government could

ie Eovember 1959

28 EHovember 1959

12 December 1959

obtain all the money necessary for its
plans and that no private investment rould
be needed er Sees etate EQuid own every-

“At lent ‘one of the several Cuban ntlitary
purchasing miseflonsa now in Kurope ia helicved
to be in Prague. The Cubans are in ssarch

of @ nuaber of types of aras end aircraft,
reportedly including Soviet BIGS....Thke
extremiat, snti-U8S leaders now dominating

the Cuban Government appear anxious to pro-
mote trade with the Soviet bloc as 2 means

of shifting the pattern of Cuba's inter~
nation trade el ote ae ee he
US maxket." (Uae ooo ee ee eae

“The gheke-up 3 in kigh government posits on

26 Kavenber is a further step in the leftiat
trend that has keen evident for the pest
three months. ‘Che' Guevara, named to head
the Ketienal Benk, will now be fn a position
to implement bis cenviction tkat Cuban indep-
Gndence murt be achieved by shifting trade
petterns away from reliance on the Uaited
States. The new winieter of public works,
Camani Cienfuegos, ia probably a Conaunist...
remaining nederates in the government, con-
vinced that Cuba is rapidly headieg for
economic collapse aud Coaminiat takeover,
will almost certainly be replaced... 4mbessa-
éox Bonsall sees /the government shake~up/

as etregeing Fidel Cagtro's cesmituent 5
extreme leftist poelictes snd hia growing
receptivity to guidsnce by Comminist-oriented

“The Soviet press is deveting increased
attention to Cuba, and Ixvestia recently
characterized the Castre regime not as the
usual Latin American revolution but a ‘national
liberation movement'-~Seviet terminology
ugually reserved for Afro-Asian anticolonialist
movements. This portrayal implies thet Kos-
cow has put the stamp of appreval on the

Cuban revolution within the cont t :
Mearxigt-Leniniat dogma." Gis Zee

12

13 January 1969 ‘'Becent developments indicate increasing
Cuben contacts with Commnist China, end
“g@ believe that the Castro government will
i

20 January 1960
on the opening of the Soviet expesitica in
Kevana on 30 January, Eossow plans to send
Beputy Prentex Eikoyan to the inauguration
ceremony and is arranging a nunber of perfor-
mences by prominent Geviet artists. The
American ambsessedoy in Kexico reports close
lieieon there between the Cuban and Soviet
embassies, with renewal of diplomatic relat-

le_¢arly objccative." ete eee

ey

seen

6 Febcuary 1260

\
i
i
i
i
1
i
H
H

near future." Resumption of diploxatic
relations with the USSR ecsexus almost certain.
Hikoyan's delegation /to the Soviet expemition/
is heavily weighted with trade specialists rT
end Cuba is expected to respond fLaverably
to any Bow ‘ex tures."

se 21 February LEGO The Castro government will probably expand

: fis economic relations vith ether Sine-Soviet
biec countries in «dditien to the substantial
trade contracts with the USSR which will
evidently follow Kikoyan's visit. The Mexican
eebassedor to Craecheslovakia claims to have
information that three Cubans errived in
Prague on 7 February to buy munitione--one
of several such missions reported in Prague
during the past six months. An East German
trede delegation is in Havana to negotiate
a barter agreement with Cuba, and Poland and
Communist China recently bought sizeable

¢ sugar from the Castro govern-

im 0

15 February 1860 “An sgreenent for a long-term Soviet purchase
ef Cuban sugar and the extension of the USSR 's

13

1? Febxuary 1960

23 Kasch 1960

30 Earch 1860

6 April 1960

£

usual $160,000,000 eceromic development
credit indicate a shift from Moscow's
attitude ef eloofness of the past year to
getive support of the Castro regire. Thee
agrecwents and Hikeyan's statement indicat-
ing a willingness to eupply military meterial
to Cuba "if requested" Gee zeus :

“ane American Eabasey in Eavana believes
thet tke nest serfeus results of Eikoyan's
eicit t3 Cuba are the expressed intention

of the Seviet and Castro governments to
collaborate actively in the UM and the offer
of technical agefsatsauce by the USSR. -' Enbassy
officials state that the Cuban gcvernment

kes txken a long step toward putting itself
definitely in the Soviet camp, that there

4 Little possiblity that the United States
will reach a satiefactory relationship with
the pregent regime, and that ‘tine is working
against us' aa Castro's coatrel over Cuban

ghtens ee

rege soe

if Sibg ReaD
diplomatic relations wi
end Bulgaria.” &

world community. Rea... isplied that le
dees not beste I alder le biee represents
RLEVGEY. oe ee ee ea
“Comesunists ox pro-Communists from fifteen
Latin Azerican countries attended the closing
ceremonies of the ‘Week of Solidarity with
the struggles of the Latin American Peoples‘
in Havana on 26 March...Cuba is rapidly be-
coming a base for Communist activities in. >
the rest of Latin America."

Be,

Ges

“Nelegates from the Sinc-Seviet bloee and
from Latin American nations are now in Ravana
for the Fourth Fational Congress of the
Youth Section of the Cuban Communist party...
The congress has been given TV time and other

14

7 Apvil 1260

& April 12690

S £pxil 1960

18 April 1960

20 April 1960

facilities by the Castro regime....
Preparetians are being made for an catensibly
non-Comminist Latin American Yeuth Congress
which ig to be held in Cuba, reportedly next
duly...it is’ expected that it will be man-
ipulated by Comsunists...The Ccamunist youth
activities in Ciba are only ene indication

of the extent to which the Castro regine is
Lending itself te furtherance ef world

Latin America,"

"..Cheddi Jagan /Gf Britieh Guiana7 ...
couferred at length on 4 April with Carlos
Rafael Rodriguez, a high-devel Cuban

Communi st Cee ee astro

“Tie Covmunieta ara making a determined

effort to take cemplete control of the Cuban
Labor Confederation befere the massive labor
wally planned for Mey Dey. Their move is
gaining nomentus with support from the minister
of labor, whe bes Fidel Cas to & endorss~
ment. ese Fee ee tee

“The Cestra segine ig evidently preparing to
accept its first ambassador from a Sino~
Geviet blec country...Vladimiy Favlicek
who, as /Ceech7 minister te Hexico, arranged
for the shipment of Czech arms to the Arbenz,
regime in Guatemala in 1954." Gis? Bepeerae oe

“Fidel Cestro geers detsrnined to make the

Eay Day rally in Havana a demonstration of
strong support fer his regime net only by

the Cuban masses but also by public sentinent
throught the hemisphere and by the Sino-Soviet
bloc...The Cuban Government reportedly is
paying transportation and lodging costs for

18 Chinese Communists who will participate

in the Hay Day rally aleng with 73 Eeviet
ci TLE e Pad

",,./Edication Minister? £ Bart...is believed
to be dominated by his wife, Haydee Santamaria,

22 April 1960

28 April 1969

9 Kay 1960

18 Hay 1960

.,.Castro {in recent months hes endoreed
the support given the Commumists by hig
brether Reul and Raul's pretege, pro-
Communist Labor Kinister Hartinex Zeanches,"

“Exchange visits between Cuban and Communist
blec delegrtes for Hay Day colebraeticags

and the kiring of Czech technicians by

the Cuben Goveranent highlight Castra's
vapidly grewing involvezent with Communist
countries. The Brazilian embarsador in

Cuba gays he does not know whether the Cuban
leader retains ‘auffictent sutanony and free-
damn @f action public to define hincelf
Cleaxly regarding Cawmunism.'....4n oeheer-
ver close to Cagtro thinks the Cuban Zexder
Kay not be free te oppose the trend /Ttoward
growing involvenent with Comsunist countries/

nusercus Czech tecuntelce bot canine
presontat ives tote Sees in Cuba in April

oe’

"The 7 Kay announcexzent of the «stablishnent
of diplomatic relations between the Castro‘
regime and the Soviet Union formalizes in-
creasingly close economic and political
ties since Mikoyan's visit to Cuba ze
February..."

“Cestro's former minister of finance is
reported to have commented privately on 16
Kay that the Cuban Geverument is ‘under
heavy pressure’ to recognize Commnist China
immediately...Many regime officials are

'
:
‘

oe

21 May 1960

23 May 1960

27 Fay i869

30 Kay 1960

eympathetic to the Chinese Communists,

Cuban Armed Forces Inspector General William
Galvez Rodriguez recently had two suascnces
with Mao Tee-~tung..."

“The Castro Government on 18 Kay ordered
that each refinery in Cuba for the rest

of this yesr must purchese approximately
300,600 tons of Seviet crude oil, now arrivy-
th Cuban Sovist trade agreement."

aorepacod: pply cuba with at

least token deliveries of arms...Since

Hikoyan's visit to Cuba last February, bloc

activity in Cuba has increased sharply. . (Ee
BC ag Bites esas Se

nicians are ———s ‘Cuba, probably to _
begin preliminary planning for projects
under the $100,000,000 Soviet line of credit.

“Eighty Russians arrived in Cuba en 22 Hay
to join the Soviet Trade Commission estab-
liehed during HMikoyan's visit in February,
according to information considered reliable

blec personnel without apparent regard to

their status or activities...Cuban-Poligh

diplomatic relztions will robabl be sannoun~
ES YORAE ESTE ENTS Ree

ra

An unverified vopeee net

Cubans have been gent to the USSR for Jet
training has added to speculation that the
Soviet bloc may s
jet planes...“

“The Peiping opera company which has been
touring Latin America will spend most of

June in Havana. The Cuban Government is
emphasizing cultural ties with Communist
China and may secon preceed with the long-
foreseen establighment of diplomatic relations.
A group of students arrived in Peiping from
Cuba on 25 Hay, the latest of numerous Cuban
visitors there, and Cuba seems to be a key
target of Peiping's stepped-up propaganda
aectivities in Latin America." Be See:

i7

dae

4 June 1960

4 gune 1960

13 June 1860

18 June 1960

Ga

".,.Honduras may /break relations with Cuba/
because the Cuban ambassador there has been
particularly provocative in his support of
radical, Communigt-inspired opposition groups...
Cuban President Dorticos' ‘geod will' trip

in South America...ig dexonstraeting that the
best organized support in Latin aren ICFs

“soviet Premier Khrushchev has eccepted

an invitetion to visit Cubes, according to
TAEB.... The snnouncement following Khrushchev's
recent pergGnal endorsement of Fidel Ceaxtro
snd his glowing praise for the sims and methods
ef the Cuban revolution, suggests that...
Nogecew is more villing than it was during
Hikoyen's winter visit to Havana to exploit

the Cuban Government's how ti tity te the US

‘In another move promoting close bloc-Cukan
economic relations, Czechoglovakia hag extended
to the Castro gevernment a $20,000,000 credit
for indugtrial developwent. A technical
assistance sgreement end a five~year trade

pect sleo vere concluded on 10 dune. GG?

ial i8 The Czech foreign trade official res-

ponsible for negotiating military deliveries

to non- bloc countrses was in Havana at thet
Ree eres rhe Seviet diplomat

fren the atemic spying in

Canada fron 1942 to 1945 repertedly will

"Fidel Castro has told a usually reliable
source that he is confident of obtaining
transportation for Cuba's entire POL re-
quirements...and thus is prepared for early
seizure of the US and British-owned refineries
which have refused to precesa Seviet crude
o1il....The 60,000 barrels per day ef POL
required for Cuba's internal needs would
ginest certainly be replaced by the USSR,
which is prsand shipping @mealler amounts
ee Ge agreesents."

29 Juna 1e60

ai dune i260

1 July 1860

8 July i960

42 July 1860

etrative esponsibili tt with kaon Ses
“ask ; Sanaa es : Wn fe Sc. ns, ae s-

“The regiguation of tro under-secretartes

in the Cuben Foreign Hintatry, snnounced

on 17 June, ig prebably the precursor of

a general shake up ef top offfcials in

the winistey...Ose ef the newly appointed
under eccretaries f@ regarded es a Communit et;
-«-EGth kay have been selected by Raul
Cactro, guggéeating that he and the Communiats

“The Castro regime ecntinues ite efforts
to secure industrial gocds send technical
as#iatence through the ocanslusion of trade
and aid Saree Rts with the ofa noeee tet
eis Be ee eines ae : :

Se Say

“The Argentine asbassader in Havana reports
that Fidel Castro told Khim thet Baul Castro
is te eign a ‘military pact' with Creecho-
Slovakia duxing bis current vieit to Prague,
according to...an influential official of
the Argentine Foreign Binistry.

“Repexted Soviet aegsurances of both economic
and political suppert to Cuba have strengthened
Castro's kend in hie anti-US nolicies....

The cutback im Cuba fugar experts to the

United States way px sent new opportunities
for bloc exploitetic . The bloota general
low level of suger « -osumption enables it to
sbeorb whatevex purcheses are considered
politically expedient." aera

“Communists centinue to expand Eele in Castro
regime. The Castro regime im believed to be
considering the appointment of Carlos

Rafael Redriguez as minister of finance...
Rodriguez, a leading mezber of the Comzunisats'
Popular Socialist party and editor of the
party daily, has long been among Castro's
close advisers. The keavy workload of Fidel
Castro and hig chief aides, “Che” Guevara,
Antenio Runez Jimenez, and Baul Castro~-all
three of them indistinguishable fron
Communists--nay dictate the sharing of admini-

sa 3
oF cy

18 July 1960

L6 July 1969

26 July 1960

27 July 1960

"Eheuehohew's eualified recket threzt on
@ July, and pledge cf general suppert ea
123 -Saly, im defense ef Cuba ia designed to
inflate the Cuban ation.” (ae eee mal or

“.coeG LL July the leadera of a Cuban
workera’ delegation in China etated that
‘the Cuban revolu<ion has drawn On the ex-

“/Ya/the tvade past concluded on 23 fuly
Piping has prosiged to buy at world prices
up to 500,G00 tong ef Cuban sugar aunually
aver the next five yeere-—-well corer twice
the ameount of sugas normally imparted from
nen—Gleg countries by Ching. The trade
agresnent is to be fellowed later this year
by an economic aid egreement under which
Feiping is te previde industrial equipment
——— technical essistance to Cuba."

“The leng-plenned Letin American Youth
Cangregs, which opens on 26 July, will be a
wajer exfort te propegandize the Castro--and
Coumuniet goal of ‘liberating Latin America
from US imperialiem.' Eecause the congress
is likely to be coepletely Commnist
dominsted, youth groups in Peru, Bolivia,
Chile, and other countries have boycotted
it, but delegates are expected from nost
Latin American coun
Sine-Soviet bloc."

“The Argentine aubssaador in Cuba, Julio
Aneedo, teld Ambassador Bongal that he fears
Fidel Castro is a ‘doomed man‘ and that the
gituation in Cuba is ‘hastening to a tragic
outceme in which Castro will be the victin.'
Anzoedo who has been the Latin American

anbessador clesest to Cestro and vham

: fiubaseedor Bongal regards ee a reliable and
syrpethetic ally of the US, received this
impression during a 23 July converextion with
Ceetro in the course of which ‘Che’ Guevara
unexpectedly appeered. Ascedo fecia Castro
was unable to speak to him because of the
presence first of acting Foreign Kinieter
Clivares, & pre-Comzsunist, and later of
Guevara. He concludes that Castro has he-

5 August 1960

prebably still k ing
denocxacy.' Bie wee se

16 4£uguat 1¢S60 ‘The efghth national cengressa of the Popular
: focisl (Communist) party of Cuba opens on
16 August with the attendance ef relatively
high party officials frou France, Italy,
end moat countries of the Sine-Sceviet bloc.

e
fobs
+)
8
bs
B
&
-
:*]
se
pe
a
:

18 August 1960 “The Salvadoran ambassador in Havana has
received reports from a contact in the
Cuban Kational Bank that the Castro regime
ia sending large emounts of meney to various
other Latin American countries to carry on
Cuba's campaign againet the OAS, and perhaps
to bribe delegates to the OAS foreign

bBo?
aie

a

129 August 12606

22 Auguet 1960

39 August 1960

1 €éptember 1960

3 September 1260

9 September 1960

6 October 1960

. ¥imanced by the Ceatro regime."

arus deliver)

“Following the breakdown on 5 August of
trade negotiations between Cuba and the
Fedeval Republic, Bonn believes that the
Cestro regine say extend diplomatic

reoogniticn to Eset Gexmany."™ aes

"Cossunista and other pre-Castre elenenta
fin @ number of Latin Americen countrics ere
Likely to attempt demoustrations this week
éecigned te influence the G48 foreicn
ministers’ useting. Such dexcnatretions
fare/encoureged aud prebably Lengel

“rhe US Arsiy Attaché in Havana hes received
a preas photegraph...which clearly shoxs
Ceech semiautemetic rifles in the hands of
Cuban weilitie....Thkere is no indicstien of
the amwount of Geeon mater tal which bes been
delivered." 322552: se

"Korth Korea has received ita firat diplomatic
recegnition cutside the bloc with the 29
fugugt sgreesent te exchange ambassadors

with Cuba ‘as goon as poessiblei'..cuba hes
little to gsin econewically from Forth

Korea, but sstebliechment of relations at

this tixe is censistent with the increasingly
elase ties between Cuba ens the Sinc-foviet
bloo... 7s feen %

“Yn the moet vindictive attack on the United
States of his career, Fidel Castro defiantly
announced en 2 September Cuba's intention
to establish diplomatic relations with the
Pelping regine....Castro in effect witk-
drew his country from the inter-—American
gystem and from the Western alliance.

"A Soviet merchant ship...arrived in Cuba
on 8 September with Moscow's first mz
to the Castro regine."

GareSatatober; the National Bank of Cuba
purchased in Kew York the equivalent of
nearly $4,500,000 in pounds sterling ands-
ordered ita deposit: ine London, te the
ecacan €, of: the: Czech: State-Benk. This
transaction was probably a payment for

|
|
|

iZ Getecber 1260

19 October 1840

“Peruvian President Prado has stated
that he ig ready to break diplonetic
xGletiong with Cuba on the grounds that
Cer portt Zuvian Cammniste."

Rt

awtee

aS es

“Fidel Castro told [oye se =
Henth that he believed pitelies is on

its way cut...Ee expressed confidence that
the Sinc-Soviet bloc would win today's
iceological struggle and said it was thexefor
necessary for him to align Cuba with the
Compsinist countxvies...Be becase enthusiestic
when referring to the operations ef the

Cuban Petroleum Institute under the

uicance of So :

: eRe ROR
Se: ee

Span ee eae

A Cuban deputy foreign winister told the
Yeast Germen anbstsador fn Ravana on 17
Octeber that Cuba intends to extend
Giplouatic recognition te the Eset German
regine...Cuba has already racognized all
ether countries of the Sinc-Eeviet bloc
except Albania
Mengolia."” ©

CURRENT IRTELLIGENCE WEEKLY REVIEW

10 April i258 “Although individual members of the
revement have. been suspected of being
Comsuntet symoathizersa, Castro hac re~-
eently refused epparently unseiicited
effera of help from the outlawed Cubsn
Cosssmniat party, which et present is
estinated to number 8,000 to 12,0600
mnembere. The Caxmmuniste, hewever, have
jurped oncthe rebel bandveagen to veice
Neoliderity™ with the Cuban people in

pipet the dictatorekip."

1G July 1858 “Rsul's forces, which may be Comnuniet
infiltrated, are isolated from effective
censtact with the “2éth ef July" movement
headquarters in the Sierra Eeoetra, and
hig civilian supporters have been intin-
idated by axm bombings nde poriatic

2 October 1958 “The Ctban Governsent has long charged
that opposition groups, particularly
the “26th of July" movement, are Conmmu-~-
niet dominated... Although a few al~
leged Counmuniet sympethizers have post-
ticas of importance, particularly within
the group coamanded by Reul Castro, and
ethers sre to be found on lower levels,
there ia no evidence to gupport the
charge against the Castro movement. The
; youth and political immaturity of many
‘26th ef July" members, as well as the
| exigatence cf some anti-Americaniom, ¢s-
H
|

h

it

|
|
‘
|
!
d
i

pecially \ within Raul‘s commend, leaves
the mover 2

8 January 1959 “The Comaunists have satrengly supported
the rebel movement in recent public state-
mants, but their frequent efforts during
the two-ycar revolution to obtain accept-
amce in a united rebel front were repeat-
edly rebuffed. Hevertheless, they are
believed to have infiltrated some rebel
unite on a low level and may exploit the
anti-US sentiments cf scone rebel leaders.
Sinee Batista's custer...the Cuban Conm-
wunist party (PSP} kas worked epenly to

tn eee ine enane one ane seen abe eee

|
|
4

15 January 1959
(It)

2G February 1959

18 March 1959
(11)

to create an impression of legality.
It has succeeded in obtaining a mi-
nority voice in the organized labor
movement and“has opened two overt of
fices in Havana." Geos Seg

“zhe Cuban Communists, whose party was
cutlaved by Eatista in 1953, have been
making rapid gains since his fall and
have been exerting a special- effort to
influence the labor movenent.... Fidel
Castro...has declared that the PSP now
will be permitted legal status...‘Che'
Guevara...went further than his chief
and said he would not oppese Comsunist
participation in the government.... The
PSP eurfaced imsediately after Batista's
Fell and succeeded in naming five rep-
resentatives to a 22-man ‘national
labor committee‘ which intends to re-

"Cuban Comaunists, after five years of
illegal, underground existence during
the Batista regime, now are staging a
series of overt demonstrations and
meetings concexned with both internal
and foreign matters. The first impor-
tant public meeting, a three-day scs-
sion of the national committee of the
Popular Socialist (Communist) party
(PSP) that began on 26 January, dealt
with the domestic gaituation and empha-
sized issues that would identify the
party with the program and policies of
the provisional Cuban Government."

‘Pidel Castro's campaign against dic-
tatorships places him in the same camp
with such liberal leaders as Yenezuelan
President Romulo Betancourt and former
Costa Rican President José Figueres,
but his predilection for revolutionary
methods and his recent tendency to deal

26 March 1959
(II)

2 April 1959

with Communist—influenced exile groups
heve- prevented concerted efforts by
these leaders.... Castro hes author-—
ized Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara, the con-
troversial leftist Argentine revolu-
tionary, who worked closely with Cestro
during the revolution, to deal with
such groups.... Castro's apparent sup~
port for the Conmunist-—influenced
Rominican Patriotic Union has met with .
opposition from Betancourt and Figueres."
a Pp Ren ec een ee

“President Romulo Betancourt ef Yenezuela
and former Costa Rican President José
Figueres have grave misgivings concern~
ing the methods and objectives of the
latest leader of the crusade egaingt
dictators, Cuban Prime Hinister Fidel
Castro. Both are alarmed at Castro's
demagoguery and his tendency to support
pro—Communist a and Dominigar
revolutionaries. (ie =

“‘Compunists in Cuba continue to operate
with little restraint and have succeaded
in making inroads in the organized Labor
movement, the armed forces, and probably
the press.... The Argentins~born rebel
leader Ernesto ‘Che' Guerara, placed in
charge of the Cabana fortress in Havana,
has permitted Communist rotivities with-
in his command.... The creation of a

new section of the General Staff, known
as G6 or ‘direction of culture,' has
provided another opening for Comnunist
penetration in the armed forcas. Headed
by the pro-Communist brother of the army
ehief of staff, G-6 is reportedly engaged
in rewriting textbooks for military per-
gonnel. In Santiago, a group of citizens
found it advisable to disband their anti-
Communist civic committee, since anti-
Communists are being equated with counter-
revolutionaries-—-who are considered close
to being traitors in Cuba today." ee

Mele te oem an ene ae

30 April 1959
{1i1)

7 Hay 1959
(11)

“Charges that Raul /Castro7 is pro-
Communist rest partly on His asso-—
ciations. In January of this year,

he married Vilma Espin, a fellow rebel
who hes heen’ reported to be pro-Con-
munist. e has worked clogely with
the pro-Coumunist guerrilla leader
‘Che’ Guevara in the activities of rev~
Olutionary exiles in Cuba. Es went to
Vienna in Harch 1983 to attend a Con-
ference for the Befense of the Rights
of Youth"...and may have traveled to
bloc countries efterwards.... Whatever
Baul's precise relations with the Com-
munists, his action have certainly fa-
eilitated Communist gains in Cuba. In
the army, he hes permitted Communist
influence to epread.... Bitterly anti-
Azerican, he has made frequent state-
ments blaming the United States for
Cuba's economic, a aes and eocial
probleas.™ é 9

"Cuban Communists have been making a
special drive for control of organ-
ized labor and are evidently meeting
with some success by working at the
locel level and behind the scenes....
4mong the moves edvocated by Cammu-—-
nists is the formation of a worker's
militia. This project has been en--
dorsed by a number of top labor lead-
ers and by Kajor Ernesto ‘Che' Guevara,
an important Castro adviser whose ac-
tions frequently encoursged and facil-
itated Communist activities.... Though
not proven to be a Communist, Guevara
publicly maintains that by their aid

in the revolution--which, in fact, was
minimal-~-Communists earned the right to
participate in the government Commu-
nist activity has bsen pronounced in
his army command...." € os

27

1
4

28 Kay 1859
(11)

25 June 1959
(II)

16 July 1959
(1)

23 July 1959

. eRe

‘Noderates in the Cuban cabinet evidently
oppoge parte of Prime Kinister Fidel Ces
tro'e drastic and couplicated new agrerien
reform lew. The vermicen unofficfally pub
lished on 19 Kay hae confiecatory aapects
likely to iepade Cuban cconcaio recovery,
It alse gives aweeping powerg to the Ha-
tional Agrarian Reform Inctitute, the cr-
ganization charged with enfereiug the law
end at present under the executive direc-
tion of a pre—Communiat-~Antosio Kune
Jimenez, an intelleatusl with a Long rec-
erd of Comminist asgociations and wide-~
epread influence in the Cuban revelutionary
government. Kunee and other pro-Coemn-
nista are belfleved to ksve drafted the law
in such a way es to gire them carte blanche
te extend their influence in egricultural

‘aresg--as hag already happened with pro-

Coesuntets in some of the labor unions,
paxts of the revolutionary army, and pcs
sibly in public education." Gee Sees wey

“Exngeto ‘Che’ Guevera--a high-recking
pro-Communfet military subordinate of Cuban
Prime Minister Castre~—-repertedly plans

to go to China after hie current visit to
the U4R, and Pefping may discuss with hin
the possibility lonatic relatiozs.™

attention is drawn to Communist ponetra-
tien of his ¢ : Bee ia

¢
@
Le |
:
B
Ny
2
at

Cae eee ae

“Peiping sppeara to be making Cuba a cen-
ter for its propaganda activities in the
aver. It kas already established a press
effice in Havana aud it plans to have the
local Communist press print a Chinese
lenguage newspaper. The Chinese will
probably also exploit the new Latin
American Preas Agescy, which is pene-
trated by Communists and has editorial

3 Septenber 1959
(Ir)

-24 Eeptember 1959
(IX)

offices in the game building as KCKAs
Havana bureau...THe delegation of
Chinese “journali: te"...have exploited
all epportunitiles to hint at the de-
Sirebility of Cuban adoption of Chinese
Communist land reform techniques...."

Ausrican news agency formally launched
on 9 June in Havane...is believed to

be substantially financed by the Cagtre
regime, and its eteff is couposed
largely ef persons with an anti-Us bias,
seaenof them suspected Communiats....The
etaff comprises suspected Communtats and
others, including Birector Haegetti, who
held prominent offices in former Argentine
Dictater Peron‘s Agencia Latina, a “news
agency" that was in fact a strongly
anti-US propagenda machine. Angel
Borlenghi, a Gryptc~Cosssunist who was
Feren'a interior minigter, is reported

to ney
peceiee 2 Seca

efforta to arouse exti~US feeling and te
sponser ectivitise which promote Soviet
etrategy. Eaul recently epoke in support

ef ecnrvening a Lstin American "people's
congress"--g project for which consider—

able groundwork was laid during digcus-

sions by Communists and other Latin

Averican leftiats in Santiago de Chile

in Auguet....Latin American delegates to

the Seviet 2lst party congress in:

Hoscow early this year rezolved to hold

a “people's cengregs" estensibly ‘
Gedicated to some pepular cause which

could he uged to attract the spensorship

ef popular leaders like Fidel Cestre,

The sponsors would be drawn into association
with the Communists, who would remain in

the background guiding the congress in

an “anti-imperilaliat,” anti-US direction. An

cme ewe elt wee ieee oe

i re

22 October 1859
(i)

29 October 1959
qa)

3 Se
hisatee aign against US military
“Eo and missions was another important
tactic in the action program adopted in
Hoscow. Khether by coincidence or de-
sign, Ernesto Guevara has picked up this
theze. In one of his frequent specches
since his return from an extended tour
of neutralist countries in the Hiddle
Eaet and Asia, he declared that the US
naval bese at Guantaneno Bay makes Cuba
a target for nuclear attacks and argued
that Cuba should ie a neutralist
foreign policy.“ eee sceneries

“strong opposition bas evidently teen
aroused among some of Fidel's trusted
officials by his gupport of Leftists

and pro-Communists in the Cuban Govern-
ment. Huber Katos, one of Castro's top
lieutenants during the fight against
Batista, resigned 45 governor of Cam-
aguey Province this week because of his
conviction that extremists led by Raul
Castro and 'Che' Gusvara are now firmly
in control of the Castro regime....
There have been reports of Gissatisfac-—
tion over Communist influence by other
provincial officials, but none has taken
a public stand.” re SURO.

"Fidel Castro apparently does net recog-
nize the danger of Communism for Cuba
end is not likely to be influenced to
moderate his course...«-. leaders of the

extremist forces aré Baul Castro and
‘Chet Guevara, both obsessively anti-

Asserican and suspected of Communist sym-
pathies. Raul was recently nawned sin-
ister of all army, navy, air, and police
forces, which will enable him to control
them even more closely for political pur-
poses than he has done thus far. Guevara
ia director of industrial regulation and
development and considered actually to
run the Castro regime's most powerful

and unrestricted agency, the National
Agrarian Reform Institute (IKRA). Both
Raul and Guevara 4re believed to exert

5 Rovember 1959

12 Kovember 1959

dominating influence in determining high
Cuban policy in all domestic and foreign
matters and to nullify the influence of

moderate officials who hitherto have
managed to texper some of the revolu

“Cuba may be planning to resume diplo-
matic relations with the USSR and open
trade relations with East Germany. On
3 Rovember the semiofficial daily Revolucion
urged that Soviet First Deputy Premier
Kikoyan...be invited to visit Cuba ag

the first step toward renewed relations

and further trade with the USER. Ambas-
sador Bonsal in Havana has reported that
East German economic officials are ex-~
pected in Cuba soon, and he considers
it quite likely that some rapprochement
may be contemplated.” (EE

“The Communists are likely to increase
their influence in the large and politically
powerful Cuban Forkers' Confederation (CTC)
during its national congress from ]18& to

21 November. Although the revolutionary
26th of July Hovement claims sweeping
victories, Comnunists are believed to

have gained substantial representation
among the 3000 delegates elected to the
congress by local unions on 8 November.
Their efforts to infiltrate the CTC will
be facilitated by the actions of ¢x-
_tremists who now wirtually control she
Cuban Government.... Raul Castro, considered
leader of the extremists in the govern-
mont, is reliably reported to have ordered
the expulsion of five non-Communists from
the CTC directorate, probably during the
congress. They evidently refused to agree
automatically with governwent actions they
disapproved. The new labor minister,
Augusto Kartinez Sanchez, who is closély

31

J
4
i
i
i

25 Kavember 1959
(Xr)

3 December 1959
69)

idgntiiied with Raul, hes already sug-
geagted that he will not give non~Con-
munists the tacit government support
which, esrly.in the Castro regine, en-
ables 26th of July laber leaders to
vesiet Cuban Communist party (PSP)
efforts to dominate the cro. Tne labor
minister's influence and the PSP etrategy
of diecrediting individuel anti-Coseunist
Icadera while not challenging labor

. officials who do not openly sppese Com.

sunist efforts will give the BEP minerity
in the labor movement a disproportionate
behind-tke-scenes voice in the election

of nationsl CTC leaders during the
congreas.” Gee ne ee es

rte

“The regults of the etoruy congress of
the dozinant Cuban Workers' Confederation
(CTC) which ended on 23 Kovember

may be only a surface getback for Fidel
Castro and are, at the least, a partial
wictory fox the fnfluential Comeuniet
minority in the Crc. The delegates
rejected a “unity™ elate for the top
officiais ef the CIC executive commitice
which had been endoreed by Ceetre and
contained three Comministe, but chose a
greup with at leagt three labor leaders
likely to cellatorate with Communists.
David Galveder, an cpportunist whe hes
worked with Communists in the past,
resaing as Castro's hand-picked cecretary
general. Of the five strengly anti-
Communiet menberg on the CTC directorate
whieh has servéd provisicnally since
Batista's defeat, only two were re-elected,
Reul Castro reportedly hed ordered the
expulsion ef sll five.* 2

“The shake-up in high Cukan Government
posts on 26 Kovember demonstrates Fidel
Castro's apparently coaplete commitment
to extremiem in his efforts to remake

32

‘ed

!
i
i
!
1
i

16 December 1956
iil

Cuba....Ambassador Bonsal believes this

trend is accompanied by a growing re-
ceptivity to guidance by Communist.
oriented elements, The pro-Comminist
Ernesto “Che" Guevara, new head of the
Kational Bank, now is in a position to
determine the allocation of th foretgen
exchange, on which Cuba's economy is
based because of its large sugar sales.
-«. The prime minister relies heavily
for advice on Guevara, whose economic
knowledge is basically weak and colored
by his concept of the Cuban revolution .
&S a class struggle in which the govern
meng rust “change the economia Panorama"
of the country and its social system,
The new minister of public works--also

a powerful post-~-is Captain Osmani
Cienfuegos, who is probably a Communist
+... The few remaining moderate officials
+--now are virtually without influence
and almost certain to be replaced soon,
They are convinced that Cuba is rapidly
headed for economic collapse and a
Communist takeover," oS ae

“Kn attempting to build an authoritarian
political machin, based on mass support,
Castro is turning more and more to Com
munist oriented advisers, and Communists
are benefitting from the demagogic tirades
against the rich and against the United
States that Castro uses to mobilize his
mass following.... The Popular Socialist
(Communist) party (PSB) of Cuba, which

has some 17,000 members including its
youth secton, has made steady gains since
Castro came to power last January. The
party has benefited directly from the
actions of such highly placed Sympathizers
ag armed forces chief Raul Castro, economic
and foreign policy adviser "Che" Guevara,
and agrarian reform chief Antonio Nunez -
Jimenez, all of whom have been instrumental
in securing important government positions
for known Communists.

33.

tee ne eee ee ee ce ate ot ce le eee ep Nee teprermeennnenntiet

23 December 1969
II

3Q Decesmher 1969
Ti

30 December 1959
Ir

The armed forces and the agrerien
reform machinery have been penetrated by
Conmuniats whose potential fer infiltrating
the economic organizations of the state wag
greatly enlanced by the appointment en 2g
Rovember of "Che" Guevara to head the
Rational Bank. CGmiani Clenfuegos, nemed:
minister of public works the sane day, ig
the first prehable Communist to gecure a
pest fn the cabinet. EHeliable sources ro-
ported recently that a top PSP official was
being considered ag minieter of finance.

In contrast to Cosmunist policy in
Guatemala during the Arbenz regime, vhen en
attempt was made renidly to build a mas
party, the P&P in Cuba appears to be concen-
trating on quality rether than quantity. The
glow recruitment and emphacisa on indootrinr-
tion suggeet censiderable cere in the selec-
tion of new rmexbera, paxticularly in view
eof the extrexely favorgbhle {ona f
the party's groeth." 2

“The Cuban Bedical fAseociation, whose strong
Havena branch defeated a revolutionary slate
of efficers in elections en 1 December,
elected a pretege of pre-Communist "Che"
Guevara as preeident on 20 December, repor-
tedly after hcevy preeeure fron the govern—
Rent." ae Pa ee eee

“Fidel Castro‘s drestic reform pregran,

hig stimuleatien of cless antegonisme by

bitter attacks on the wealthy, the growing
atrength of Comsunists and pro-Comminists in
the government, and his incressingly auth-
oritarian nethods have’resulted in a definite
nerrowing of the base of his regime." ae

“During his recent visit to Kexico, Mikoyan
is reported to have approved a deal whereby
the USSR is to previde Cuba with from $5,000,
000 to $6,060,000 worth of agricultural
implements, to be delivered on credit by

a Mexican company, and to have premised that
Seviet technicians would aervice the equip-
ment....

'
{
‘
3

poe

i :
eee samaritan et agen Ae eee em nen a

2l January 1960

28 Jenuary 1960

Cuba has accepted Hoscow'sa offer to
present its exhibition in any Latin Aserican
country fellowing its etnay in Hexico City.
The exhibit is now scheduled te open in
Havana sbeut February.

Satellite missions have visited ar are
planning to visit Cuba to try to capitalize
on snuti-Western sentiment end establish trade
relations. Cxecheslevakia has elresdy
established & p< scentative
in Hereanes.” (osc

“the /Retional Agrarian Reforn/ institute

is already seixving significant ecreages

of sugar land, with this year's eugar har~
weat barely under way. Its executive director,
guspected Communiet Antonio Runes Jimenez,
declared on 12 January that...‘in a few days
all large suger plantations will also cane
under TERAts control'....The American enmb-
seeedor in Kexice reports close liefson

there between the Goviet and Cuban embassies

Se ees ee ag

“toaording to ‘Chet Guevara, pro- Cosmunist
president of Cuba's Rational Bank, foreign
hanks will no longer be pereitted to redis-
eount with the Katfonal Bank their erep loans
te either American - or Cuban-~owned sugar
coupsaniew....It could be a step toward
netienslizstion of the entire banking system,
ane of Castro's early atated ohjectives....
The government, in a strong curb en private
business, has sleo issued reguiations putting
eontrel ef all changes of exployment uncer
the Labor Ministry....In another move toward
cleser relations with Cemnunist and neutral
countries, the Castre-subsidized presa 6r-
vice, Prensa Latina, concluded news exchange
agreesents on 20 January in Havena with re~
presentatives from the USSR, UAR, Communist
Chinr, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria,
Yugoslavia, East Germany, Indonesia, and
Japan....there is siready guspicien in ether
countries of Communist influence in /PL's/

& pa

pexrgennel and output."

i
1
I

ee = men

4 February 1960

ll February 19690

18 February 1960

"Kikoyen's presence in Havana...will give
enpetuse to increased Cuben-Soviet relations
in several fielde....In recent months there
hsve bean numerous ea-set-unconfirmed reports
that the USER and other Scviet hlea countries
heve offered Cagtre large barter denle, acne
involving Cuban minerels a8 well ag suger,
and credits for equipment badly neeced for

Castro's reform pregres#....Ineide Cuba

the numerous milities fermed emong Labor,
etudent and ether greuj:2--o0n Castro's @ex=
hertstion but at the exviginal esuggestien of
the Cuban Communist perty--have bsen more
tightly exganixed under the control of Kinie—

' tery of the Armed Forces Revl Castro and of

Che Guevara, whe remains bead ef tustruction
fox the armed forces. Keul Caetre alee e¢xer-
eises increasingly decisive guthority over
Cubsp economic life through Kintater of

Labor Kaxtiner, whe céentrols employment and
is impowered to intervene in business manage~
went aluost at will.” Gee ee eg

ee Fe
Sak é eto?

3 ..Cuban Commerce Minister Cepero cited
theee blec /auger7 purchases as Gf great value
in helping Cube ell ite unusually large
carvy-ever from the 1959 crap....Cepero
epecifically welcaued increased Seviet-Cuban
trede....Tue Castro governmsnt is aiso
enceurseging clever relations with other bloc
cauntries...,Iin Havana, an untested source

in a positicn to observe, reports that Prensa

Latina, the Castro-eubsidized Latin fverican

Rees sgency, now hss a yedio tranemitter

“In the nearly 14 months since
seizure of power in Cuba, Mescow's attitude
hes changed from cauticus approval of the

new government to eptiniem regarding the
opportunities the situation presents for

the advancement of Soviet interests in Latin
America....Tne highly erganized Cuban Popular
Socialist (Communist) party (FSP)--17 ,G00
nembera--has enjoyed considerable success

in following the directives laid down by

36

25 February 1960

17 Kexch 1860

24 March 1960

bloc leaders during the 2let party congrees
in Koecow in early 1959....The PSP has
Openiy identified itself with the principal
ecales cf Castro's program. Party nembersg
pose as strong supporters of the revelution.
weking advantage of the governacnt's henge
volent attitude toward the party, the

Cuban Coamuniats have suaceeded in obtaining
ceusiderable influence in the gorernxent,
pesticoulerly in the military and econonic
seatorga, end in the lebor novement....The
USSR intenda to take advantage cf Cuba's
ecencaic weaknesses} its dependence on

the gale of sugar, ita lack of investment

dered

ao¢

in ether Latin American cepitals because
of authoritarian methods, suspectibility
to Communist influence, and ites unorthodox
behaview in hemfepheore affairs... Although
few officials consider Fidel Czretro a
Csmeuntet, many sre convinced that cloge
sides such as Che Guevara and Kaul Castro
are promoting Ceamunist chgectives and that
the prester himeelf im in danger cf be-
coming & pt

"Cuba ia becoming the center of Communist
aativity in Latin America. A hexlephere
peace Conference under the auspices of
the Comzunist~freat Forld Feace Council
is being planned for Havana in Kay or dune,
and the Comsniet hand is aleo evident in
the ‘Friends of Cuba‘ societies being
formed in mest Latin American countries.
Caomminist blec prepaganda continues its
active support of Cestro, and Cuba's
ecencnic, labor, end cultural contacts
with the bloc are increasing.

“The Castro regime is tightening its
eentrel cover cammunications madia and
extending its radical socic-ecencuic
pxGgreams....Qver &O radio and television

37.

31 Karch 1960

T £pril 1960

21 April 1960

atations hzeve been formed into the
‘Independent Front of Free Traenzpitters'
(FIEL)...Bany of the anncuncers are pre~
Comzuniets and the output often fellows

the Comauniat line....Aacording to.
Peiping!s Kew China Kowa fgency, which

hes been timely and scctrate on recent |
internal Cuban developments, the 'peorples'
atoreg,* erganised hy tke regime's

Agrarian Reform Institute...sre being
extended to the cities....Eecent defections...
ecineide with inoregsingly cutspeken attacks
on Communierm by Cuban groups slarmed

at recent Communist gaing,....The ‘¥Yeek of
Solidarity with the Struggles of the Latin
Arerican People,‘ declared by the Communict-
infiltrated Cukan Labor Confederation...

Ee wernly endorsed by the Cubsn Comminiet

“Castre's Cuba is inoreasing hegpitable
enema: See Cozenniet activity."

“fre Cestro regime is moving to tighten

its contrel cover Cxben universities and to
equelch the recent manifestations of enti-=
Communist sentiment emang politically active
atudent grauupe#. At the sane tine, the
regine has nrevided television facilities
aud helped in etker ways the natienal con-
gexes@a of the yeuth section of the Cuban
Cossuntiet narty which opened in Havana

on 4 April...-Arrangements are probably
being made at the congress to manipulate

a preparatory mecting...for the Latin
Amerioan Youth Congress which Castro
is promoting in Havana in July."

_ The Cuban Communist party is taking a

leading part in preparations for the May
Day rally and ia using them in an effort
te resolve in its favor the bitter interzi
xvivealries with non-Communiet facticns in
the poverful Cuban Labor Confederation.
The Cuban Government is reportedly paying
transportation and ledging costs for 18
Chinese Communistea whe are to participate
in the Hay Dey rally. Leaders of the

| Cuban
expressed great setisfaction with their
eccomplishwentsa since the advent of Castro

and with the considerable influence they

have over high Cuban officials, sccording

to ea usually reliable cource. Que top
Comzuniet is reported to have privately :
eteted that ‘Castro can de mere to further / _
our aime than we could possibly de...ve ~
keep in the background and there is no need

te do etherwige....If we controlled the

Cuban Government, we could not make the

repid progre@s Wo are making. Here we

are doing things that canset even be done

in the peoples’ democracies. ‘'" EES ieeet:

28 Avril 1960 " ...THe three-ran Chinese Communist
delegation that arrived in Havana om22°.
April was the firet of many foreign ~
delegations, including other representatives
from the Soviet bloc, to caze for the Hay
Dey events in Cuba. Greeting the Chinese
at the rirport, Cuban pro-Cosuunist labor
leader Soto aaid, "you heave hed revolutionary .

Sheer

& Bay 1260 “eee Cartro regize, which cantinues to
etrengthen its ties with the Sinc-£oviet
blec, is becoming further isolated from
ether Latin Asexican governmenta....Cuba -

hes weintained close contacts with dis- —

| getisfied elexents in Yenezusla's govern- -

pant coalition end with Communists there,
and 4t may Ge giving them financial aid —

| and guidance....Karta Frayde--a charter

|

Re SR eS ea aa

wember of the 26th ef July mcvement and.
elese confidente of Castro--told the -
- press during her recent visit to Erét :

. Germany that she favored cloger relaticns
between both countries. Peiping radio
continues its extensive reporting on _
evente in Cuba, and the secretary general
of the Cuban Communist party, Bales Roca,!
was received by Hao Tec-tung while in —

Peiping for May Day celebrations." *

ees a

Es
Cas 3 (reat >
ters ie Se Tee en aE, PEE:

Cia, :
ln ca 9 ape oe

sen a wn aa a 2 ts claimant irene tin mn 8 3 ea ae

12 May 1960

19 Kay 1960

‘rhe Castro government is moving to
implement promptly the eetablighment
ef relations with the USSR ana éd on
Esasaas ae a Bo ae enn Co oe 2 EER. .

are ears eae

gee sas

Sy ier SE epee Ries oe
the Cuban Exbaessy in Mexice City ‘to
furvieh vieas to #ll Eoviet dipicxatic
persennel who may request them, especially.
to diplosstic courlers.‘....Faure Chausont
/to be Cuban exbassader to Moscow ia
Pelteved to have allowed the Ceszunists

to use hie now practically defunct
Revolutionary Directorate as a front, and
in 1859 he was sent by Castro to Comnunist
China, Ceechoslovakia, and ether countries
'to make frienda for the Cuban Revolution. '
t : bD@ an anncune way
of establishment of diplezatic relations
with Csechoslovakia....O0n 7 Kay a Cuban
radio station said that a Czech mission
had arrived in Havana to conclude a trade
agreement. On the same day & etaffi rember

ON ER ae

the first year of its sgrarian reform pro~-
gxem, which hes already transferred neat

of the Cuban economy. Meanwhile, there sre
new indications of cleser relations with
Communist Chine. Bajor Williem Galvez
Eodriguez, inspector general of the Caban
Arwzed Forces, reached Peiping in early

May on an extended good-will tour af
neutralist and bloc countries. Ee had

at least two audiences with Kao Tse-Tung and,
according to the Kew China Kews Agency,

gaid on 12 Kay that the Cuban people desired
to intengify their ‘intimate rezationship'
with the Chinese people aud to unite with
them in oppositien to the ‘imperializts of
the US.‘ On 16 Kay, Castro's fermer minieter
ef finance is reported to have said that
the Cuban Gevernment is ‘under heavy
preseaure' to recognize Communist China
immediately and that he felt the move was
fuminent'. epee ee es

Sze

ie it

26 Hay 1960

Z dune 1960

“The Brevgilian and Argentine smbassadors

in Havens have previously been sympathetic
beth with the sims of the Cuban Revolution
and to Cestro, but ese his present pelicies
as leading only to chsos and commnion....
Tue effeot ef Cactre's hice ties are hecoming
sore epperent. Hefineries fn Cuba have

been told thet during the rest of this ysar
each must purchase approximately 300,000

_ tens of the Seviet orude of1 alresdy

arriving under the Cuban-fSceviet trade
agreenent. This affects primarily Esso,
Texazce, and Shell, whick presesa about
$5% of Cubata refined petroleum producta.
fhe newly eppointed Cxech aubagsador to
Kevena kes hed many years’ experience in
Latin America. As minicter to Hexice in

Keres, who heads the tech
of the Cecch Hinistry of Foreign Trade and
negetiated arms dexle with the UAR and
Indonesia, was tesued Cuben vieas for
himself end several other Creech trades
osficiasle....Establishuent of Cuban-Folish
dipl
Se ee

wt

and active rele in the revolutionary
procesces now remaking the eoenemic and |
political life of Cuba than they ever cid
in Gastensla ox any other Latin Asorican
country. In the 18 months gince Castro
eeme to power, they have benefited frems

the fact that his methoda and aius have
generally paralleled theirs, at least in
the short run, and fram the active as~-
gietance of the pre-Commnists or cryptco-
Communists who are Castro's clegest and
most trusted aides. Castro hinself hes
atrougly implied, and other high-ranking
officisls have flatly eseerted, that, to

be anti-Communist is to be ‘counter-
revolutionary,’ and this etatement has been
a guide in the purges that have periodically
ewept ell areas of the government.
Communists or pre-Communiets now hold

q

ae

positions of ultimate suthority in the
eracd forces, the important Kational
Agrarian Reform Institute, the Rational
Bsnk, the Ministry of Public Yorks,
varftous propaganda median, and organized
lgborw. They eleo sppeex to exercise
considerable influence in the ferexistion
of foreign policy. In addition, Communists
have gucceeded in occupying a coansicerable
number of lower and medium-level posts
throughout the buresueracy. The Popular
Ecofaliet (Communist) party (PSB).../i87
the only orgenized party active in Cuba
teday....Ita real guins come from
penetration of key peeition through the
principgl areas of government. Comuuniet
activity in the srmed forces hes follcved
twe general direotionar (1) political

and sccial indoctrination of the commen
goldters, most of them pcorly educated,
and of certein officer groups; and (2)
active penetration at all levels by BSP
militants and Comuniet-froat nembers.
Cestro's three clezgest aides, all of then
pre-Comsuniete, have had en sctive paxt in
feciliteting Comeniet success in the
mtlitary....The army is the nowt heavily
infiltrated of the three earvices...
Comeuniots ere playing a major role in

the formulation end execution of policy

by the Hational égrarian Reform Tnsatitute
(IERA), the inetrusent through which the
yeyine ig rapidly consolidating ite contrel
of the netieon's agriculture, industry, and
trade. Kost previsions of the agrarian
reform lew ss well as the measures Luplementing
the Law clogzely fcilew the P&P program...-
The Comauntats are also active in other
areas af civil governsent...The judicial
system is coming under steady Communiet
engxroanchment....In the Kinitstry of
Education, the Cosmuniets have won gtrategic
pesitions from which they are eppsrently
able to appoint additionrgl Comuunists to
pesitiens vacated by purged career enployees.
In Favane University, Communists ere
inoreseingly influential as the regime
tightens its centrel ever the teaching
staff end student groups. Under the

presidency of Che Guevara, the Kational
Bank has deceme a ‘camp of Communists, '
in the works of sn embassy informant.
Yelfare institutions are aleo a Communist
terget. The Hinistry of Fublic Yorks,
with a large reservoia of patronage, is
headed by a probeble Cosamanist. fhe

YSP now contrels an influscntial seguent
of Cubsen ners eeodia....Commuintets algo
exert #eignificent influence on many
non-Cosemnist newa media. Revolucion,
the regime's daily press organ, is
directed by pro-Cometniet Carlos Franqui
end has geveral Cousuniets on its etaff.
Its propaganda fe indistinguisheble

from the Cocmunist line. The director
and et least five of the chief editors
fet the Cestro-aubsidized Prensa Latine/
‘exe Cowmanists cr Communist symgpathicers.

Since lest January, PL has made exchange

rgereencnts with news egencies of the
Soviet Union, Ceechoslevakia, Foland,
Bulgaria, Eaet Germany, and Communist
China. The pewerful Cuban Yorkers’
Confederation (CTC), which has becone
the lebor arm of the Castro regine, is

a mejor target for PSR ceatrel and is
the organization fn which the Communists
keave been vost opa fia their efforts to
win diminance. The Commsiurdiets, wko
ceutrellicd the cenfederstion prior to
1947, hed & mucleus of trained and
experienced leaders when Castro took
erer...and, deazpite texporary setbacks,
have eteadily regained influence in tho
ergenization....A labor mintater
wupayrpethetic to Communists vas replaced
in Gotebex by Raul Castro protege Kajor
A&gueto Hartinez Sanckez, who is ;
enthuslastically eupperted by the

Communista....Castro's foreign policy... has

been ardently supported by the PSP....
Although nominally ‘neutraliat,* Cuban
policy has meant steadily closer relations
with the Sino Soviet blec....There has
been some Cosmunist penetration of the
foreign service, even at the embassadorial
levwel....

|

2 June 1960

-- Barly this year a secret section was

reportedly created in the Foreign Minis.
try for the purpose of placing agent
informers in certain Cuban enbassies,
Members of the new section are reported
to be Communist andoctrinated, and on
of their primary jobs is eaid to be the
surveillance of regular foreign service
personnel....Communists have elso heen
active in the Cuban-dponsored subversive
aotivities against...governments of the
Caribbean area.

The Latin American Youth Congress,
scheduled for July in Havanea,...eppears
certain to be dominated by the Communists,
The forthcoming youth ceongresa, the
meeting last Harch of representatives

of various Latin American ‘peacet comni-
ttees, the meetings of internetional
labor representatives in Cuba, and other
gatherings of Camnunist-frent groups are
all illustratied of the extent to which
the world Communist movement can new uss

Venezuelan newspapers have reported that
Russians and Czechs recently passing
through that country en route to Cuba
are documented ag EGChanics, technicians,
and experts on airports, hydrology,

_fetéorclogy, and other talities,
ER eae ee ee oes: the
granving Visas freely

to bloe tionals,..,The expected estab—
lishment of relations between Cuba and
Communist China MAY come in June... .Soze
30 Cubans are reliably reported to be
attending a six-nonth training course

in China, and at least three other stu-

dent, labor, and official Cuban delega-

Gzted there in recent weeks,
SD a EE

Ree

|
|

@ June 1960

16 fane 160

.°’¢praghchey's acceptance of an Lnvitation

to visit Cuba is the latest evidence of
Soviet intentions to exploit felly Castra'g
open heatility to the US and evident -
észire fer eleser relatious with the blac -
wee Reporte that Cainese Coaminist Peenier
Chou Ea-lead hes eles accepted an invite-
tien ¢o visit Cubs persist in Hevana, .
whese the Feiping Cgpera Company raneaes

tndusteislisstion pregras under which
nechinety was sixeady being purchased .
end inatakled fa ‘70 factaries’....5er-
gey Kudrayavtsev...freportedly/ will be
nesed ambasseder to Havane kas been -
tésutified ag the intelligance officer
whe orgentsed and ren the Soviet etomic
Bry ring $n Caeneéa fron 1242 to LE4S.cce
There have been ferther cxamples this
reath of the increasingly cloce relaticn-
ship between the Castro regine and the
Coomunist blee. A group of Bulgarians...
aerived in Kevana...suppesedly to discuss
trade. Sevict technicians continue to
be received waraly by the Cuban gevern-
sent fend Castre hes expressed gratifica-~
tion Gver the attentiveness shogn to the
Cuban commercial wfsesien new in Hosacer.

es Ee ee
.. Communist

strength within the Cuban

government is growing. Enown Ccamunists,
tneluding at least two from other Latin
American countries, have been eppointed
to kay. positions by Castro....Arrange-
ments are probably under way for chip-
ment of Soviet petreleum and products

in larger quant

+

23 Juno 1960 “The resignation of two under secretaries
' in the Cuban Foreign Ministry, announced
on 17 June, appears to be the precursor
ef a general shakeup that is likely to
end in increased Coumunist influence over
Cuba's foreign policy....@me of the
newly appointed under secretarieg--
Hector Rodriguez Llompart--<is believed
to be a Communist,..Both may have boon
H selected by Raul Castro, who has played
| a key role in Communist finreads in the
| military organized labor, and other areas
eecsA Cuban economic mission headed by
| egrarian reform director Nunez Jinenez
| has reached a sericsg of agreements in
| Koscow giving substance to the Saviet-
{
i
|
|
I
|
|

ae copie

Cuban trade and aid agreements concluded
last February," 5 ene eee ee

oT

Be AI SCS Soran en
BRET CE AO er ORR ET

Prgcmra tiie

$

30 June 1960

“Raul Castro arrived in Prague on 26
dune...likely to seek military equipment.
According to unconfirned reports, Raul
Cxstre is also to visit Moscow to negot-—
date a ‘'nonagression! pact....Surveys

of Cuban resources are keing conducted
by some of the blec technicians in Cuba

Ne Name Beh

gn kinistry auth

visas for a Chinese Communist commercial
| , mission. /At Havana University/ faculty
| members are being purged by Communist-

| dominated student groups, and Communist
*goon' squads almost control the univer~
| aity....The seizure on 29 June of the

| $21,000,060 Texaco refinery may presage

46

i
1
t

7 July 1960

i4 July 12960

21 July 1960

28 July 1960

fused to

_eeizare of the other two major refineries,

both foreign ewned, which have also re-
mrocesa Soviet crude oil,"
: =

it no longer would be a disagter far
Cuba if the United States stops buying
Cuban sugar, since now ‘we have the kelp
of the Soviet Union and other socialist
countries.*....pre—Communist Carlos
Olivares...appointed under secretary
fof the Foreign Ministry/ has been
assuming an inergasing share of -res-
ponsibtlity in the ministry. CGlivares,
a member of Eaul Castro's clique, has
been a legding organizer for the Castro

etek. Ese aig. etn taon

“The immediate response anong Castro
followers to Ebrushchev's declaration

ef suppert for the Castro regine on 9
duly was fast and enthusiastic....The
trends in Cuba continue teward tighter
dictatorship and enhanced Communist
influence....The Castre regime is be~
lieved to he considering the appointment
of Carlos Rafael Rodriguez, a high
Communist leader and director of the
party's daily, as minister of finance...
Rodriguez has leng been among Castr
closest edvisers," . S233 323 see"

continue to tighten their grip on Cuba,
The Castro-sponsored Latin American Youth
Congress, scheduled to open on 26 July,
was first discussed at the Communist-
front Forld Youth Festival in Vienna

last summer. Cubans have for months been
traveling throughout Latin America, where,
with the help of local Communists, they
have stimulated the organigation of dele-
gations to the congress, foes re

“Prominent Cubans are continuing to resign
their positions, and further defections

5 August 1960

11 August 1960

18 August 1960

ea ne a nn en EN ee a en ern ns ea en ns eh

matic recognition to Rast

foe. Rane states

SS

.are likely. Dr Perez Cisneros, alter.

nate Cuban representative to the OAS
Council, resigned over the pro-Soviet
trend of the Cuban government.... Fest
Germany continuss to delay concluding

a trade agreement with Cuba, and Bonn
efficiais have recently expressed cen-
cern that the Castro regine, annoyed at
these hesitationa, may grent diple-~
German,"

SLID
Sean

authority in the government may heve besn
significantly reduced in recent weeks

and that the pre-Communiet clique headed
by the ambitious and hard-—driving Che
Guevara may have gained correspondingly

in power, Guevara, viose adutnistrative
abilities contrast sharply with Castro's
own disorganized methods of governin g,
has become the virtual tsar of Cubats
etate directed economy and exerts con-
siderable influence in other areas of
governuent....Fresident Dorticos, a

former Communist whe has never recanted,
hes shown himself to be a atronger .
personality than his figurehead status .
would imply, and he would became an

even more influential figure if Fidel
Castro should temporarily or permanently >, .
leave power, The Argentine and Braziilen®.

_ ambassadors in Havene--whe have shorn

thenselves unusually astute observers

“are becoming convinced that Castro has

become, in fact, a prisoner," (see Seay
ne . RS CaRE eS

“There is new evidence of preparations
for the delivery of blec arms to Cuba...
Additional gatherings of Communists and
Conmunist-front groups are echeduled, now
that the youth congress is ever,"

trot Ree

“In accordance with the 8 Hay announcement
of the resumption of diplomatic relations,

48

25 August 1960

1 September 1960

-Amorican Comeunist parties probably

_Soviet Embassy personnel--many of whom

bave been drawn from embassies in Kexico
City and Hontevidec--are beginning to
reach Cuba, Ambassador Kudrayavtsev
arrived on 17 August.

On 14 August President Dorticos, an
increasingly authsritative spokesman

for the regime, teld a television audience
that ‘there can be no scefal progress
based On vague and rowantic theories

and the theory of representative democ-~
racy...he ettacked private enterprise

as the root of Cuba's economic ills,

The eighth naticnsl congress of Cuba's
Popular Secialist (Communist) party
opened on 16 Auguet in Havana....The
gathering provided an opportunity for
international Communist liaison and the
further exploitation of Guba as a bese
for operations in Latin Anerica....the
USSR may be represented by Ambassador
Kudryevtsev, Communist China, East
German, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Hun-~
gary, Rumania, and Polend sent members ‘
of party central committees, and North
Korea algo sent delegates, Mast Latin

are represented..."

"In the report to the eighth national
congress of the Communist PSPT on the
PSP program, it was emphasized that much
remains to be done, including the tinter-—
ventiont of remaining US property, ouster
of the United States from the Guantanazo
Raval Base, and completion of the renodel~
ing of the gevernment on the Communist
pattern. Fidel Castro's remarks in a

23 August speech...probably forecast
Cuba's position of support for the Soviet
Union on all issues at the UK General
Assembly session, includin
admiesion of Communist Chi

49

agreed to establish diplomatic relationg
“en the ambassadorial level ‘as soon ag
possible'...§f Cuba grants diplomatic
recognition to the Xerth Korean regine,
it will be the first nen-blcc country to
60 60....A phetograph...of a militia
review before Fidel Castro on 21 August
i setablished that Czech seni automatic
7. 26-2m rifles.,,have been delivered
to Ciba. These sre the fixst bloc arns
to be positively identified in Cuba,
These weapons presumably arrived on
board a Soviet merchant ship. which —
arrived ba on 6 duly. ¢ ss

~

8 September 1960 “Fidel Castro in effect withdrew Cuba

announcenent of his entention to exteb-
lish diplomatic relations with Communist
* China, Cuba, with a Chinese community
; ef about 20,000,~-the largest in Latin
| AmeTicz--will be e Particularly valuable
i base for the Chinese Communists in pro-

at Havena with e 4,000 ton cargo on 8
September, the first major bloc arns

noting their influence in Latin Anerica,*
“4 / L5 September 1860 The Seviet ship Ilya Keohnikey arrived
i 4
|

shipment to the Castro regine," es
Sera See —
coe ee oe ee

23 September 1960 “Fidel Castro's address before the UN

H General Assembly cn 26 September showed
the degree te which Cuba has become com-
mitted to Soviet foreign BOlicy objectives

eee. Meanwhile there ig an increasing

volume of travel toe the Sine~Soviet bloc

by Cuban students, Laber unionists, artists,
and others, The Cuban Communists continue

to strengthen their posttion,..,Comiunists

are organizing tunited frontst at the

; local level... probably intended to becane
the beses for Provinelal, the national,
political machines, In addition, the

|

Line eho mene

6 Gctober 1860

Communists now have virtually taken-

“over the powerful Cuban fWorkers* Con-~

federation. Communists are probably
also active in indoctrination programs
directed at veriQis
populeticn,* &

Ga 3 Gctcber, the National Bank of Cuba
purchseed in New York the equivalent of
nearly $4,500,000 tn pounds sterling and
ordered Sts depoakt- ‘in London.-ta. the.
account.of the Cuech. State- Bank® This.
transaction was probably a payment for
bloc arms....The expected /Bulgarian/
trade agreemcnt will be the seventh
concluded by Cuba thig year with bloc
countries....Che Guevara is to visit
Koscow in early KRevember for the anniver-
gary celebrations of the Soviet revolu-
tion, and Carlos Franqui, pro—Comunist
director of the government's newspaper,
eceleft on 29 September to study Soviet
journalism, Kumerous other Cubans now
are visiting Boscov, Peiping and satellite
capitals." eee ee :

o1

In addition to these printed axticlea, thore vers elgo

beilefing netes prepared for the Kattonal &scurity Council

briefinze. The date and betel highlights of <cesh fellow,

24 Septexher 1958

229 OGcteber 1853

26 Harch 1959

“The Cubsn government continues to Ghargee
Communist tic-up with rebele. Bosuments
provided US Ambassador Suity by Batieta,
kovever, fail to establ{eh Comaunist con~
neotions. There ere cane alleged Communtst
eyapathizers on leaderzhip es vell as leser
levela, but there ie no evidence that the
rebel novement is it-domtinated."

“Communists, operating openly and legally,
have gained footholds in the orgsnized labor
movement, the exrmed forces, and pessibly the
press. The government ia not new Cosmzunist
deominated or controlled, however, althodgh
the potential for further Comeanist penetra-
tion exists. Castro hres indicated he will
not allow the Comzniniats to ‘steal the reve
lution’ from him. S60 far, however, there has
been no gericus attexpt to prescribe Commis
nist activities. A vehicle for Cosusunist ©
Fenetration of the army is a new G-6 Sectien

is ope tee EID wn Se ely ahora aha

21 Kay 1959

9 July 1959

16 July i259

23 July 1959

22 Octaber 1959

vhich ia in charge ef ‘educating’ the
Rarxiet teachings are prevalent."

Again emphasized footholds Commniets hed
gained in exrgexnized labor, armed forces end
press. “Yay open for further Commntet pene
tration; Castro has made no serious attexpt
to proscribe Commmnist sctivities. Indectri-
nation programs in the schools for educating
the illiterate rural meeses reported to be
strengly sati~American; Communists believed
pes tees pat te in ks certchch te peur $e next

In a  dtecuseion of tha: new agrarian reform
law giving its details was the following
statement, “Castro has selected as Executive
Director, Antonio Runes Jimenez, apparently

a coufidant of pro-Cowsunist military leader
Che Guevera. Hunex hieself has a long record
ef Communist associations and may even be a
menber of the Coeminiet party." &

"Fn Cuba Fidel Castro facing intensifying
Gese@stic unrest. Charges of Cossunist in-
filtration in armed forces recently aired
by resigning air force chief Major Diaz Lanz
points up issue ef growing concern to many
informed Cubans. Anti-Communist officers
being purged from air ferce and prebably
from other services."

The Director referred to the establishment
by the Chinese Comzuniats of a newspaper and
& propaganda center in Cuba.

The Director pointed out that Castro's anti-
Urrutia charges and the indications that the
ouster of Urrutia amounted to a plus for the
Communists. "Castro's action against Urrutia
clearly helps Cosssunists. Castro more con
mitted than ever to public position against
action to control Communists....Sose indica-
tions that Urrutia‘'s cust rT may
fluence ef Raul Castro." m

“Raul Castro has consolidated pesition in
government. Wow holds powerful new cabinet
post aw head of all army, navy, and police
forces. Raul reorganizing armed forces, which

29 Octcher 1959

25 Kevenber 1959

he considerm prizarily as means to political
ends, to bring then under tighter, direot
control....Oae of Reul's close Rse0clates
named Kintater of Labor, replacing noderatg
whe had tricd to resiat Couminist efforts
to contrel union elections," Rigs #5

“Trend of past few weeks indicates real
threat of extremist control, and there {fs
almost no hope Fidel Castro can be influenced
to moderate his course or recognize danger

of Communism. Castro relies alecst entirely
on leftist advisers, and leat week said; LS 4
they want to call us Communiats for what we
are doing, then I say let them....' Che dues
vara, probably the real pover in Wational
Agrarian Reform Institute, is in charge of
industrial plenning and deve lopmuent....The
relatively few noderzte mexbers of ¢

ment ecem now to be ignored." €

“Communists have registered important gains
this year in penetrating Cuban revolution and
other aspects of Cuban life. The Cuban
government continues its rapid trend to

the left. Cocmunist-influenced Kational
Agrarian Reform Institute (IeRA) becoming
all-powerful, D@A's pro-Communist director
eaid at clozed meeting in early October

that the Institute is the 'real governsent

of Cuba , '«< TET UR AU Ses? Sis semen te cee

eerie ee ™ At the meeting
Fidel Castro said he would obtain funds
necessary for IMBA since through it the
government will control the entire economy.
INRA exprepriations and other activities

to date do indeed suggest plans to control
production and sale of all agricultural
comzodities, cattle, minerals, petroleum,
and other raw materfals, Lands teken are
organized as state-crned cooperatives, and
not given to peasants as promised by Castro.
As head of IMRA's industrial section pro~
Comminist Che Guevara has almost unlimited
powers in formulating foreign and domestic
econcozic policy." Faeze= ee

54

' Recembey 1959 “Thea <3 Noweubes government shakeup is
Latest icve by regime in ite rapid trend
te the left. Ehekeup bripges pro-Cosmunict
Che Guarera even more to the fore ag new
head of Katicsal Bank. Guevera hes so
edezonie hackevavnd and kas comecpt of

sham cervelution as a claca struggie that
will shauge cocnemic structure end eeeial
eyatem. Few winister ef public works,
Csrani Glienfueges, ia prebably a Communist.
Comsuntiet~influenced Rational Agrarian
RS _ East beaoming all-powerful."

ae Wise ae at. >
BE REN AL Oe ARLE TE oP cae eS Aen SEN SCR SES

14 January 1269 “the Cauminiet-infiltreted Ceban Yorkers‘

. Confederation aunounced en 11 January
Chat it wld tuvite Latin American labor
exguntisatiens te moet in Havana in Febxrucry
te discuss plans for a congress et which
a new ‘independent! Latin Americen labor
federation would be formed. Such a
fedaretien was discussed by Latin dserxrican
Coemunists attending the Zist Party Caugress
tn Kesccew as long age as last February
and was proposed by the Cubsa federation
in Kevesber 1959 when 1t withdrew from the
Inter~Aucrican Regional Grganizetion of
Yerkera, ich its affaliated with ICYTU,
free union. Meeswhile, recent developments
indicate increasing Cuban contacts with
Communist China, and wa think Castro will
prebably recognize Feiping sometine this
year. It is reported that 20 Chinese industria
end sericuitural technicians--apparently
by Defense Kinistexs Raul Crstre--weuld
arrive in Cuba duxing January. Soviet
expositien brought from Mexico City to open
in Hevapa ebout 1 February. US& plans a
simultaneous strong propaganda effort
featuring filma, coneerts, and visits by

leadi foviet cultural reprezentatives."

tox

21 January 1960 ‘Moscow ig moving to extract the maximum.
propaganda and political benefit from its
exhibition in Havana, epening 30 January.

Ags in Hexico, Bikoyan is scheduled to

eper it. Kikoyan will also no doubt be
prepared to discuss regusption of diplomatic
reletious. Cuben and Soviet embsasefes in

18 February if60

10 Harch 1960

17 Harch 18960

Mexico City are maintaining close contect.,.,
As. the USSR's economic advance~-man, Kikoyaen
will eleo Press for expanding econonte con-
tacts..." e eS eae ue ote ee ER 3

‘Kikoyan's visit marks definite espousal of
Cestre regime by Seviet Union. . VEER hes
shifted from cautious attitude to ene of
active support. Close ecanomic ties
established with signing of trade egxecment

.afid Soviet extension of £100,000,000

ecenente sid credit. Heth gavernnents keve
expressed intention of cellaborating
actively in UM. Diplomatic relations also
expected to ke resumed seon. He sention
of arms in official communique and thus far
no evidence arms Geel has been made. But
et offielal reception Mikoyen, in angvwer

ta question, expressed Soviet readiness to
provide military aireraft if requested....
Rapidity of government's moves tovard close
ties with USSR and intensification of

econtrels over business, finance, labor, and

freedom of expression have aroused some
opposition esmeng middie and upper clesses
end among students." &

“US Embeesy in Havana tees no hope that

US will ever be eble to establish a satis-
factory. reletianehip with any Cuban govern-
ment dominated by Fidel Castre and his
seeociates... Castro and Gievara continue
to condemn foreign and private investment.
They will dominate the newly-formed Central
Planning Board, which will supervise and
control every phage of Cuba's econony,
particularly industry. Castro regime...
will turn to USSR and European countries
for technical advice and supplica.

“Cuba becoming a center for Latin American
Communist activities. Hemispheric “peace"
conference planned for Havana in Kay or
dune. Representatives of seven LA

' gffiliates of Ferld Peace Council met in

Havana last week to prepare for conference....
Conference would implement one ef plans
developed by representatives of LA

Communist perties at clandestine sessions

in Kogcow at time of 2let CPSU Congress

in early 1959. At Hoacow meetings,
Commniets egreed to strengthen ‘peace’ .

fue oan fee

Veen:
i a ee ee ee

24 Harch 1960

movernent, launch propsganda ettscks an

US missions and bases, and cali a con-
tinental peace conference by mid-1860....
Popilsr Secisliet party (Consuntet) of
Cubs... giving epern support ta ‘week of
salidsrity with tke struggles of the LA
pecples' S0-87 March, called by Commniet-
infiltrated Cuben Labor Confederation.
‘Casa da las Americas’ in Cuba, run by pro-
Communist wife ef education minister, is

promoting ‘friends ef Cubat societies in

seat other LA countries, societies are,
in effect, Communist frente. Active in

‘propaganda, ‘oultural' affeira.

Sine~Soviet tlee continues active support

for Caatro. Sino-Seviet propaganda repeating
Cestro'gs anti-US charges. Representatives

Gf Polish fereign trede oxgenization re-
ported by US Eabaesy Warecw to be departing
goon for Cuba to discuss supplying foundry
end relling mill inetallations and cther
cepitel gocds, Eset Germans and Czechs
already sctive commercially in Cuba

oP ass <

"ye believe that Fidel Castro and his govern-
m6nt are not now demonstratably under the
dcsination or control of the international
Communiat movement...-Yet, we believe that
the Cuban regime is in practice fellewing
the line set for Latin American Commimnist
parties at the time of the 2ist Party
Cosgresa in Moecow in February 1959 and that
it will continue to pursue policies adven-
tageous te the Communists and te accept
Comuniet assistance and advice in eaxrying
then aut....Tke nore /Cantre/ becames
embroiled with the US, the more he will Look

te the Bloc for support, including pro-
vizion of wilitary equipment, although
both the Bloc and the Cobans would pro-
bably seek te evoid any eccusation that
Cubs was being made inte a Soviet hese.
fkould the Cactrs regise be threatened,
the USSR weald probably do what it could
to support the regime. However, the USSR
would not hesitate te write off the Castro
regime before involving itself in a direct
military cenfrontation with the UB over
Cube, cx at least, during the present
atate of Sevfet policy, in a major diplo-
| metic crigis with the 08." begs SSeS
1

1 April 1¢60 ‘rrend continues taward Cuba's becoming
j base fox Cessuniet activity in rest of
a] Latin America. Communists or pro-Comminists
{ ; from at least 15 of the other 19 Latin
| Asexican countries were in Havana last
week for ‘Week of Eolidarity With Struggles
ef latin Amperican Pesple....' Manifesto
published 26 Karch, last day of ‘Solidarity
; Week,* vowed an ‘enti-~imperlalist and ;
! anti feudal revolutioniin all Latin America.'
i Cuben labor léadex announced that Cuban
groups vill leave on 1 Kay for other Latin
ad American countries, ‘ta give them help and
7 ; to request sid fox the Cuban revolution....'
; Increased liaison smong Latin American
Commnists now taking place in Cuba and the
heufspheric ‘peace’ conference planned for
| . Kay or June in Havana were also parts of
program develeped at the Koscow meeting.
| Eeet German newSpapsrmanu says Cuban and Gm
| will exchange permanent trade missions in
. next two months, after which it will be
| easy for GDR to open ‘anbassadorial’ office
in Havana for Latin Amsrica similar to one
it has in Europe." =

TY April 1960 ‘The Castro regime continues to further
world Communiet objectives in Latin America.
Soviet, Chinese, Czech, and other Bloc
delegates, #8 well as Communists from various
Latin American countries are now in Havana
for the Fourth Ketional Congress of the
Youth Section of the Cuban Communist party.

This week-long congress, which opened on

Konday, hes been accorded TV tine end
Gther facilities by the regime. A pre-
paratory ueeting ef the Conmsaniet-~front
Latin American Youth Congress ia scheduled
for Eavene en 25 Aurily arrangenents for
this axe prebably being made at the current
Communiet gathering, The Yeuth Congress

ig only cone of several such Latin fmerican
Communiat efforts centered in Guba. A
Latin American ‘Pasoe't Conference is
plenned for Eay cr June in Cuba. Plans,
but no date, kave also been snnounced for

a ‘great Latin Aserican COBETGESS tO orerte
the apparatus to figkt the caunen eneny,
imperialigw.' A cenference of ‘democratic
political and intellectual leaders' of
Latin America is planned for 30 April in
Cuba, end this eas well as the henisphere
labor meetings which are expected is almost
certain to be Commnist-dominmeted. Kesn-
while, the trend continues toward cloger
economic and ‘cultural’ ties with the Sinc-
Soviet bloc. The trade end payments sgree-
ment signed with Poland on $1 Merch was
supplemented by an agreement for technical
cooperation, acientific assistance, and
credit for the muixvchase of industrial

3 ba is
Hungary for delivery
rs worth of
machinery, <-1 ye The first ship-
ment of Russian crude oil is en route to
Cuba, where it is te be processed in govern-
ment-operated refineries. Reportedly, gone
70 Cubans ‘from all walks of life' will
leave on 20 April for a tour ef the USER,

and in return some 70 Ruesians will visit

Cuba. Also, a good source reperts that a2
top Cuban Cozmminist will shortly go to
Moscow to ‘feel out' Seviet leaders on
their willingness to make a military
commitment to Cuba.

Donestically, the Castro regime is tightentre
ita political controls....In line with
Castro's equating ‘anti-Communismt with
‘counterrevolution', the government-deminated
leaders of the principal university student
crganizations have formed special ceurts to
try students guilt

} 14 April 1e¢60 “Cuba preparing establish diplomatic
relations with Cxechoslovakia, first with
eny Sino Soviet bles country since 1962.

: oR oe

|
He Se: fox Viadiety Paviteck as
L —
|
]
t

complete contral Cuba's powerful labor
confederation. Labox miniater Hartinez
Sanches, clese escoolate of Raul Caztra,

is putting governuent's weight on side of
Communists in bitter sub-surface eae”
in labor confederation." ES %

28 April 1960 “Top Cuben Comsunists in Peiping for Hay
Day~-including Bless Roca, Secretary-General
i of party. ‘fhree Seviet tankers and ten
i cargo ships bkeve or shortly will arrive
in Cuben ports, implenen ing iban~
USSR trade deal." WSs ey

i 20 Kay 1860 “On 16 Hay Rufo Lopes Fresquet, Cestro's
former finance minister, told a fairly
i reliable source that Castro government
funder heavy pressure’ to recognize
Communist China and that he believes the
sq move is imuinent. Cuban Armed Forcés
‘Inspector General said in Peiping en 12 Hay
i that ‘Cuban people desire to intensify their
. intimate relation with the Chinese people
end to unite with them in‘ opposition to
US imperialiete....' Cuban archbishop‘s
circumspect pastoral letter of 17 Hay
stating that Commniem already within the
gates of Cuba and that Catholics must. not
cooperate with Communism may also hea
effect in Latin America."

8 June 1960 . “In agreeing to visit Cuba Khrushchev is
exploiting the Cuban government's hostility
te the US and its desire to strengthen Ceban

ties with Communist bloc. Khrushchev in-

vited on 3 June by Agrarian Reform Institute

Director Runex Jimenez who heads commercial

i migsion to USSR, Czechoslovakia, East Germany,

and Poland....Seviet trade specialists and

technicians beginning to arrive in Cuba

| in sizable numbers, in addition to Czechs,

J

i

‘

i
sted
Toes
‘

22 June 1960

Bulgarians, East Germans, and Poles On gin
ilar missions. Working sessions of eight
Cuban-Soviet committees on induatrialivze—
tion ‘end other satters' “began & June in

a

gE
» probably
Head of Technical
Directorate of Ceach Ministry of Foreign
Trade, which handles Czech export of eilitary
equipment to non=-blos countries, on-l2:May:

Castro regime May recognize Pelping at
any time and one of few remaining moderate
Cuban radio stations broadcast reports that
Chou En-lai has also accepted invitation to
visit Cuba. (No corfirnation of this.) One
of our Uatin American sources Says 39 Cubans
Row in China for 6~menth training courge on

-military strategy and egrarian reform,"

“Fidel Castro's rapid concentration of Cuba's
political and economic sources of control

in the hands of a radical snd authoritarian
clique hes been marked by deep and increas-
ing Communist influence. He hsg flaunted

his willingness to deal with both Cuban
Communists and the Sino-Soviet bloc, eviden-
tly because he regards them aq helpful and
reliable allies in achieving his objectives.
Communiats are deeply tnvolved in the remodel-
ing of Cuba. Cuba has becone a base for
Communiam in Latin America. The Outlook is
for Castro's increased dependence on Commun-
iste. If this trend continues, the Communists
will gain de facto control of the regine and

hota
ffi

. .
pelts '
: 1 4
ee oe ante ee creo Pere ae a Ho ae ee me

7 July 1960

axe near thie point novw....

The regime's moves in egriculture,
egrmmaerce, industry, education, armed forces,
information medin, and labor denonetrate a
determination Fyepidly to reorganise cil
Cuba into tightly katt geraups uhder elosg
government direction’and sontrel. Comuntetg
heve been particularly aotive in these «fferts

e¢oen

Cuba's political and ecencmic ties with
the Sine-Seviet blea, at first apparently
notiveated by defiance cf the US, have fast
become the basia of Cestro's foreign rela-
tions. Relatioas with USSR and Cxecheslovakia
were announced in Hay end with Poland in
June. Eecognition ef cther bloc countries
including Comaunist China end possibly Hest
Germany is likely. Cuba will probably
Support seating ef the Peiping gevernrent
in the UH in the fall....Agreements for trade,
technical assistance, and $120 million worth
ef credits have been signed gince the first
of the year with the USSR, Czechoslovakia,
Poland, end Eset Germany and are in prospect
with Bulgaria and others. Ko firm evidense
that military agreexsnts were concluded dur-
ing the Czech negotiations, but possibility
remsing that the bloc has agreed to provide
sone military equipment. Agreements will
ell probably be rapidly implemented, as
Soviet agreement already is....Sergey Eud-
ryavteev, Soviet minister-counselor in Paris ,
hes said he will be exbsssador to Havana,
according to excellent sources... According
to TASS, agrarian reform director Kunez
Jimenez said in Moscow on 17 June that Castro
will accept Hikoyan's February invitation to

isit Kozcow at an unspecified date." & Nees

“Cuban reaction to US sugar lew has been
quick end violent as expected. Cuban Labor
Confederation, Castro's Communist-contrelled
labor arm, has called for a mass rally pro-
testing ‘aggression of imperialist and pro-
Kani government of US....' Raul Castro's
i6-nan party arrived in Prague on 28 June.

é2

u
t
a .

cle plicit, “op a aia

ee oe mee aera cen eter eres

15 July 1960

15 July i960

Hecican ambaseudor in Pregue has report
Czechs have agreed to pravide Cuba with small
arus, ertillery, and jet saircraft of unknown
type. Rumors in Havana say Raul is algo
going to visit Heecew to negotiate soue

farm of pact with USSR..." Gee :

“Khrushchev's ambiguous threat of 9 duly to
employ rockets in support of Cuba is big
etep forward in Soviet attempts to exploit
Cuban situation and inflate it into a maior
international question jugt as the Cubans
are preparing to present conuplsint against
the US in the United Kations...

In a letter to Cestro, Khrushchev
dimited himself to expressions of “indignaticn'
at US actions and ‘sympathy' for the Cuban
people, and in his 12 July prees conference
he went no further than to pledge ‘support
to Cuba in the event ef US aggression. The
Soviet government may aiso use repeated
charges of US intervention in Cuba to
juetify conclusiecn of an arms agreement be-
tween Castro and the Bloc....Enthusiastic
response Of Castro officials and Cuban
Communists to Khrushchev‘'s public support
was reflected in speeches to 10 July mass
relly in Havana. ‘Chet Guevara teld crowds:
‘Cuba teday ia a glorious islend defended
by the rockets of the greatest military
pewer in history....¥e are practically the
erbiters of world peace....'"

“Internally, trends continue toward tighter.
dictatership and enhanced Communist in-
fluence....Pro-Castro lawyers, some in
militia uniform, seized offices Havana Bar
Association and on 8 July named new governing
board...-Ambassador Bonsal comments: ‘This
is another important step in establishing
monolithic support of government by pro-
fessional inetitutions.' Cuban press
announced 6 July that all provincial officers
ef powerful Communist~controlled Cuban
Yorkers‘ Confederation have been replaced

by ‘men who truly respond to the revolu-
tionary moment in which the country now
lives.' Communist leader Carlos Rafael

Ro drt guez RAY be named crea of finance..."

29 July 1960 “Castro regime and Comsunists continue
to tigkten grip on Cuba. Cosemunist-
dominated Latin American Youth Congress
to epen 28 July in Cuba. Delegations en
route from mest Sinc-Goviet bloc countries,
even Horth Vietnam, and fron: Afre-Asian
countries, including FLE....In what prees
called a ‘gimple but exotional' ceremony
on 14 July, Comarnist daily Hoy wes given
printing plant vacated by Hevolucion,
Castro's official newspsper, which was
moved to larger quarters. Regime'ts links
with Communists have arcused protests.
Church leaders now moving away from
: earlier vacillation on Castro. Director
— of very popular weekly magazine Bohenia,
with wide circulation among other Latin =
Ss American countries, defected 18 July
saying he was not permitted te publish
anti-Communist article and denouncing
Castre for making Cuba a Soviet satellite....
: Sine-Soviet bloc continues support. 14-man
Chinese Communist mission, headed by deputy
minister foreign cosmerce, arrived Havana
16 July. Kew Chinese sugar purchase,
reportedly as high as 500,000 tons, is
likely. HWavane-Peiping diplomatic relations
probably being discussed....Armed forces
Es _ chief Esul Castro arrived Kescow from
: Prague 17 July. May be concluding arms
deal probably d d
Prague....7 &

ae ee

24 July 19860 “Communist bloc approaches to Cuba centinue.
Trade pact concluded with Communist China
en 23 July represents atrong Chinese effort
to win diplomatic recognition from Cuba
and demonstrates Peiping's willingness to

; back anti~US movements with considerable

material support. Recognition appears

; imminent....Economic aid agreement expected

later this year, under which Peiping to

provide industrial equipment and presumably
technical assistance to Cuba. Raul Castro
vigit to Moscow resulted last week in

: communique which promised continuing Seviet

fupport to Cuba....Delegationus are arriving

in Havana for 26 July opening of Communist-
dominated Latin American Youth Congress."

1 August 1960 “Communist~dominsted Iatin Amerioan Youth
Congress began ceselons in Ravana 29 July...
Delegetes...present from most Sino-Soviet
blec oountries....Promizent Communists end
pro-Communists fron other Letin Aserican
countries fIrcquently visit Cabajy some live
there... Seviet, Cesch technicians continue
to arvrive in Cuba. At lesest 140 Russians
and 25 Czechs bave arrived since February,
but cone have apparently remained only a
short time...." Y= eae Ses SE

12 August 1960 “Serious church-state conflict may be
shaping up after 7 August pastoral letter
sharply attacking Communist influence in

i government...Issue likely to have strong

j impact Cuban public as well hemisphere

4 opinion, particularly if continued cut-

breaks force archbishop to carry cut threat

to close all churches, charging government
inability to ¢ ar entee freedom of worship."

‘ 23 September 1960 “Castro regine kas become virtually a
menber of Seviet bloc. First major blocs
exms shipment arrived 8 September. Included
ten tanks, 100 anti-aircraft guns, machine
guns, large quantities of smmo and electro-
nic equipment. Kore probably «n route. A
number of Cubans have been undergoing
training in Czechoslevakia for soue
months, possibly for jet aircraft.
Se See ae almost
weekly departure Cuban delegations for
Sino-Seviet blee visits. Include students,
Laber unionists, a medical mission, and

s :.
co Me

at

Rr
:
a8
a
et
a
*
tt
iw
a
res
»
ja
ma
°
«

i ARO acressed Comminist centrol continue.
Last independent TY-radio networks seized
12 September. Last vestiges of an
independent judiciary fast disappearing
under pressure government campaign to
‘revolutionize’ judicial branch... ‘United
front! groups being formed in municipalities
in an evident Communist effort to build
Comminist~dominated political machine at
gress roots. Implementing August Comsunist
party congress call for fusion of all revo-
lutionary groups into single revolutionary

t
ae

nivesent ‘under leadership of Fidel

Castro’. ‘Gaited fronta' evidently.

ceatain representatives of Communist

party exd of Cocmunist-infiltrated

'£3 of July Hovesent' sud studexta'

Boveluticnary Directorate. Leaal

*frentea' will Brobebly beeane bagig

for pxovincial, then nationel politias]

machise. Commntiate have coy virtually

coxpleted capture ef poverful Confederation

ef Cubsa Yorkers (CIC), which takes Lleeding

Kole in organizing Cestre's mage ralifes....

Workers on Revana'ts waterfrant grumbling

et Cosomniat eeleure of untess sad ever
se declining income.” §& es

pyicsg etre
