Gary Powers (US and British Must Share Guilt for U-2-USSR Int'l Affairs)
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000022334, dated 4 July 1960.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000022334).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

, : - BR1- jal
s pSsSR INTERNATIONAL
avg. 19, 1960

COMMEND ON TRIAL OF U.S. SPY POWERS . Say : :
Rene nixon’ Siauders Soviet Justice; age Oe

2 7 ane ees TEE afa( ecm RR Rie as ee
Moscow, TASS, Redivte lety pe in English to Europe, Aug. 18, 1960;
1738 GMT--L
j ee ee age gon Fe Nate - ;
{ : (Text) flew York" “The New York HEARLD TRIBUNE carrie? & upi report ya:
: the statawent by Vice President Nixon slander ing Soviet justice 10 0 -
n with the trial of spy pilot Powers. Nixon referred to
Uspyiet statements” to the effect that “the Unite States . -
was on triel rather than tue U-2 pilet Francis Powers" dna idle inventions
that the Soviet Goverment is allegedly "more “euncervet about joter-
national repercussions" then about "Powers 36 an "individual." Ga this.
: ground," Nixon said that there "covid pot have been @ more terrible end.
devastating reflection on Soviet justice.". "Tt is not real justice 85
we know it,” Mr. Nixon excieimed. _ ce TAREE Red Beg Se
na hurry to make his sianderous
he would nave pad to adpit

eonnectic
nonexistent

re eres

According to the news service, Nixunm was i
statepant on the eve of the trial; otherwise
that toe trial proceeded strictiy according ty lav, io full coni ormity
with norus of legal procedure. This is reported by the correspondents

of ali the Western newspapers and news services. In 4ny ease none of

them cunld give a single example of violation of the Jay. The fact thet
the trial of spy pilot Powers, " in Nixoa's words,
exposes the unseemly role of Powers" bigh- piaced inspirers, is by no
means the fault of toe Soviet court, which is serupu lous ly cbserving

the generally accepted rules of legal p : it of those >:
why heve made espionage a principle of their foreign policye "70> = gle

ary

, It is indicative that Nixon again tried to justify 5P
that the "United States was siwply. trying te protect

surprise attacks." 20-5 s5

we ee oe oe

fv --

rr ee -

eae SES
Spy Flan .:

“Wixon packs Gates!
iB, 1960, 1830 omT--L.

a a oa. ET ne anes
ace in Norwegian, Aug.
ps Lee .

Moscow, Soviet European Serv

(Viktorov commentary )

(Excer pt) At this very tine, while the trial is in progress, American
Deferse Secretary Gates stated thet a new boavd for wilitary planning
has teen set up under General Power in order to pinpoint q4pstallations
in Russia which would be hit by ell of the Amerinen strategic weapons.
Is it for this kind of plenning that the Amexican Govex pment needs the

like of Powers? Presvmably the enswer is yes.
APPAGVED FOR RELEASE

othe 22 SEP tag

aren

wee eet

1

ca he eS bere a

Cc

~
C _ BB 2 - BSR INTERNATIONAL arrarns = / 22
: Buz 19, 196C

Powers’ excursions ere inks in the preparations for aggression.
Powers is awaiting his sentence. This sentence will be passed in
accord with the lav and the severity of his crime.

But the judgement of the policy Which Eisethower and Nixoo and their
ilk are -brying to defend pas already been passed by the people. This
policy has been condeaned by all progressive wankind as a policy of
a geression which is ained st undermining peace and increasing joter
tension. Ce Spee oe

national

(E@itor's Note--L: Moscow Soviet European service in Rerwegien at 1830
GMT on Bug. 164 carries a’ longer version ef the sane commentary excerpts
from which follow. ; ee -* ,

("Washington is all nerves cow, The teneiou is increasing. Ricberd Nixon,
U.S. vice president and Republican Party presidential cendidate, is very
puch displeased that the public considers the Powers trial to ve a triel
of U.S. foreign policy. Nixon teilé correspondents thet Powers shouid
be able to expect the court to examine his case in essence since it

is concerned with his actions 48 an individual. Toe yice President is
trying to break bis way +hrough on open door. That is exactly whet the
eourt is examining. Foreign lewyers observing the trial unanimously
agree taat the case is being conducted in strict accordance with legal
norms, It is not the fault cf the court but rather the wisfortune of
Nixon that the Fovers cese an inseparable from the dirty affairs and
policy of these whusent himon thet spy mission over the USSR,

("Powers is being questioned, end be is giving the evidence. Eisenhower,
Nixon, and Herter are not being questioned; nevertheless they 47e also
giving evidence. They are coming forward with their explanations and

the motivations of their policy, but these explanations and aotivatzons
merely coufirnm, just as Powers’ evidence does, that there is no
justification for the policy which they have been follcwing and wh

4ntend to follow.

ich they

("Nixcn does not leg behind Bisenhower. He explains the necessity for
such criminal acts by the desire to protect the United States Tron:
surprise attack. Now, how does Nixon expiaio the statement of U.&.
Defense Secretary Gates, during these day5 of the trial, that a new
beard for pinpointing military jnstallaticas hee been set up with
General Power in command? Mow is not this why Nixon wants all. these
Powers, to implement such plens?")

1

- BB 3 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 19, 1960

Fi - Congressaen Take Distorted View | 7
Moscow, TASS, Radioteletype in Bpelish to Europe, Aug. 15, 1560,
1655 GMP--L ot tet ee Hey a

(Orlov comnentary)}= a ta . meee
eg. aes ot pen a ceN ye - 3 2 Bae ares

nstances of the grievous criue perpetrated by the

(Text) The circu
hich ere being established

fmerican spy, Pilot Francis Gary Powers, ©

~ with scrupalous ecctracy and strict regard for rules of procedure,
on wake many Washington leaders vary nervous, One can fully understand
i the difficult position in which they heve Janded, because they heve
7 nothing to counterpose to objective fects.

What should one go in such a case? They found a wey out. Facts, it
seems, can be jgnored. That is how meabers of the U.S. Bouse of

Representatives Mahon, Walter, and McGee decided to act.

. Whatever is seid_

sbout the trial by eyewitnesses, whatever is reported”
i py the American correspondents on the evidence given by defendant Powers,
these congressaen have decided, in advance, to repeat over and over again
the word they have learned vy heart--"prepaganda,.” In this way they
eaicuiated, perhaps, to wave aside numerous questions which are probably
put to them these days by American voters. Atteopts were made to adopt
the same tactics by certein papers which printed articles by “specialists
on Russian lav in an attempt to “prove” that no noraal, honest trial
of a foreigner, let alone an American, could take place in Moscov.
The purpose vas to lead the reader to the conclusion that something
like a “pelitical aemonstration,” a propagenda cempaign against the United
States would allegedly take piece instead of a trial in Moscow. They ~—
speculated on the silly idea that the Russians bed "“trainvasbed" Powers
and that it was useless even to listen to the court procesdings. ,

But, a8 always, facts ere stronger than fiction. fter the first day
-of the Povers trial the professional “skeptics” and evil-rinded i
ists were ridiculed by the world press and the foreign

propagandi
The foreigners neted the exceptinnaily strict %

observers at the trial.
* observance of rules of procedure at the trial cowbined with the humanity -

of the Soviet court.: The father of the defendant, Oliver Powers, watching”

the trisl, told American agency correspondents thet his son had not changed

' gnd that be was speaking his own mind. The same views were expressed by ...-

the American lawyer Parker who accompanied Francis Gary Powers! wife, |,

radg
tnt
.

+ Meet Emm

Ree We MO ator oer nae

: : . side Rika: Be eke es &

- EBA - USSR TNTRRMATIONAL LEFAIRS

Aug. 19, 1960

Many European newspapers today enphasized the strict ooservence of
juridical procedare at the trial. (PARIS -JOUREAL?), for instance,
grows attention bo the fect that the Soviet court "gives every
guarentee of freedom ané defense of personality." Lionel Daichess
the British lewye?, writing io the London EVENING STANDARD, poirts
out that the procedure at the Moscow trial is alaost the same 85
that of the British military court. ‘Other expe

spirit.

Eow will the discredited American congressmen yeact after ail this?

What new tricks will they invent to cast aspersions on the
of the American spy? :
U.S. Leaders Stand Condé emned

Moscow, Soviet Fone Service, Aug. 18, 196°, 1200 GMT--L
ne attention of the worle is focused on the trial of
"Agerican Policy at the Bar” is the

yants in SOVIET RUSSIA.

(excerpts) T
the American Sty pilot Powers.
title of an erticle py Comrade Dad

around the House of
the faces of the peop
their day’s work or during their weal preak. Their faces ave eonc
and stern. Povers is on trial. Jt is hard to rec
aroused so much public attention both here in the

throughout the world.

There are, rany people
curiosity engreved on

Soviet Union and
overs himself, of course, *ho

sent aS a “hero of the
f the United States lies

And it is not nerely a question of F
American propaganda ig now tivirg to repre
free world.” The 4nteraatisual prestige ©

puried beneath the wrecsege of Powers’ plene-

the hall for ‘Powers’ relatives. His

A special box 4s set aside in
1 father owns 4 snall

father, wotvher, ani wife ere there. Powers
shoe repair shop in Pound, Virginia.
got one- But why didn't Powers’ spiri
for a visa? why did not those who pear the primary res
his cime, the inspirers and orgenizers 0
subversion against the Soviet Union, agi: for vises?

Tt was Secretary of State Herter who proclained espionage to be
U.S, national policy. Tt was Secre
to the Senate Foreign Relations Coumitvee abou
flights over Russia. It wes; finelly,
the order for Spy flights over Soviet territory.

t the success cf spy

rts write in & sioiler

fair trias

the Unions. Tt is not idle

de who have cote here after
entreted

all aby trial that has

He asked for 8 Soviet visa and

tual father, Alten Tulles, ask °
ponsibitity for

f the policy of espionage and

sary of Defense Gates who boasted

President Risenhower Who Gave

eee et

Ke ok, Akay ead PS C

fase
- BBS - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 19, 1960

After the exhaustive aémissions of Power's and U.S. leaders, whet is
the value of -the vain attenpts of the jeckels of the American press
to comprouise the Soviet court and cast doubt upon Povers! evidence?

Z qantas tS eohey lout se! ‘ Be Ne = ‘
The Povers case 4s" indeed different Iron normal spy cases. Not only - .
he bioself, but bis pecomplices, leading U.S. figures, have confessed
themselves guilty spies. The leaders of American policy have cone to
the Powers case absolutely without @efense. Trve, they are not there

in the hall of columns at the bar that divides the unmasked S5DY froo

the outside world. But invisibly they are there on trial. Every
sentence af the indictwent, every sentence of the cross questioning

is a blow to them.

"S res Powers 4 Product of Capitalisa :

Moscow, Seviet Europeen Service in Hungarian, AUg- 18, 1950, 2030 cGMT--L
(Excerpts | The leader of America's espionege ‘service, Alien Dulles,
once said: We feel that the scientific side of gatbering reconnaissance
information must be developed to a stage where radar and electronic
instruments take the place of those carrying out reconnaissance+

Powers! U-2 spy plane came UP to Dulles! requirements if every respect.
Yes, everything was evailable in this espionage combine, tade UP of 4
pwacbine and a human being turned into a machine, everything including

a self-exploding mechanisa in the plane and a poisoned needle to

destroy the pilot's 1ife.

Ana why did Powers not use” the poisoned n:xdle? Inmedierely before the
trial, the New York TIMES Geseripbed Fowers es one of the representatives
of a growp of respectable men and women who defend the bastions of America
against the constant threats that, they Say, the Soviet Unicon and its
armed forces represent. . It is improbable that these Lozty ideas turned
Powers into a Spy. Replying to questions by the defense eounsel, Powers
told his life story- Tris life story is in many respects typical of
American (middle, class?) families. -- arn wena, eye wt a

Powers ie not only a product, but also a victio of the capitalist system.
The power of, money--the yellow devil--bears down heaviiy on the people

of Amerize, crippling people's souls end turning thew into mercensries.’
It transforns some into gangsters ready to rob their compatriots, and" 7%
others into spies who under cover of night penetrate the territory of -- 2s

foreign POWeTS+,. rot ee ee eee 7
so ie re cae ee iP Feats Pa AS

Tt is not, Lupprising' that Powers’ 48 ot even consider using the \.
poisonet needle... There is no deal in the American espionage service os 7e

that vould have been’ worth bis life. geo ee Ee ARE | eee

Oh handle,

a PCRS TA EN Liha te re ties to de ig PN sts aa
i

. noted, were evidently seeking to do a service

- 3B 6 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIPS
Aug. 19, 1960

cS

It is possible that Powers, the American spy, began to realize in
court “hat a vile and dirty affair he had got mixed up in. But it
is evident to everybody that also his nasters, the ringleaders of the
imperialist policy of America, the warmongers, and the instigators
of cricinal aggression, have become involved in tois filthy affair

wp to their necks. * , : er, ee ;

British Must Share Guilt

Mescow, Soviet European Service in English, Aug. 18, 1960, 2090 GM?--L

abo a

(Vetrov comuentary)

(Text) The trial of Francis Fowers, the American U-2 spy pilot, is
causing great concern not only in Washington but also in London.
Before the court proceedings began the DAILY TELEGRAPH, the DAILY MAIL,
and other publications came out with slanderous articles to discredit
Soviet justice. Several officials took part in this campaign. On the
eve of the trial the British Eubassy in Tokyo included in its official
bulletin en unsavory, anti-Soviet article, containing statenents that
the DAILY MERROR very sensibly characterized as idiotic and completely
irresponsible. The DAILY MIRROR declared that the Russians had every
right to try Powers and that Britain would heve done the sane.

The very first day of the open court procesdings in Mcszow showed the
world that the American spy, Francis Powers, was questioned and is
being tried according to all standards of legal procedure. The
calumy, originated in Tokyo, burst like a soap bubble. Yesterday
at the press conference in London, the Foreign Office representative
was forced to disscciete himself from the sordid and not very bright
stetement made by his collesgues in Tokyo who, @s one nevspeperman
to Alien Dulles and his
department. It is quite typical that after the first day of Powers !
trial, some British papers which had previousiy been writing all sorts
of nonsense about the Soviet judicial system, began to lose interest.
Thay (grew scared?) at some of the facts that came to light during"
the trial. ; ‘ - :

Lenden Ls worried lest some additional facts emerge on Britsin's role

in the American provocations ageinst the United States. Actually, 7 .-

Powers Jid admit thet the British suthorities had something to do

- vith his spy mission, It was British personnel that cate out to 7

service his plane at Bahrein. That is where the Awerican spies stopped

over on their way to the point where Powers was to take off for Soviet .
skies. Even though the Foreign Office representati-e r2fused to give |¢.
any details yesterday, it is obvious that the British Government has .."-
- placed its bases in Britsin and outside the country at the disposal of **

the U.S. spy Powers,

re

The trial is still going on;
policy of provocations against the

This policy broke up the summit conference.
and 1a causing thé deterioration of relationships

international situation a
between _statess

British ruling eircies must
this dangetous course.

& ete ee we
: U.S. Lawyer
: Mosco, TASS, Radioteletype in
{ : 1346 GMT--B :lem os

(Text) Vincent Hollinan,
correspondent he regarded
absolutely fair.

Hollinan, who was a U.S, preside
7 Powers trial along with lasyers
American lawyer emphasized that he
hag been strongly impressed by its

Hollinan said that in his view the
ease just es any ordinary eriminal
that the judges were military men.

Holj.inan pointed
the defenjant.

fullest possible jaformation
the defenjzant in 4

and consideration were
he regarded the defense o

> perfect. 7. - wee at

1327 CME--L Oi Se

ap oe te fed

{Text} likhail G
correspondent tnat he hada ta
USSR Supreme
and mother of

ahate oof

rom

held.

ttt e
fino ree

- BB? -
but already the danger

The court, proceedings against Po
shoulder (some of the 7) responsibility for

praises Soviet Judiciary

English to Europe,

the distinguished
the judicial proceedings in the

ntial candidate in 1952,
from a number

out that Soviet Procurator General Rudenso was ft

The questions he asked Powers
on the substance of the ca

aifficvlt situation. oe

Hollinan said he dic not think Powers would be treate

he on trial in
f the accused vy Soviet lawyer wikhail Grinev 45

Moscow, TASS: Padioteletypé in Russian to Europe,

Francis Powers!
E Yk after the Aug. 18 morning meeting of the
Court military collegium with the father,

the deféndant. .. oe ater gee arte aes

The talk took ‘place at theix redue /

ce [27

USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aue. 19, 1960

presented by the U.5.
usse and other eountries is quite plain,
It is aggravating the

wers have shown that

Aug. 18, 1960, .. ++

Ymerican Lawyer, told a TASS
Powers casé a5 -

gq attending the
of other countries. The
had*studied Soviet criminal law and

progressive and bumane nature.

was exacining the Powers

military court
The only difference was

court would.
air toward

were aimed at gaining the
se and not at placing

4 with so much courtesy

the United States. Hollinan remarked

' a pis

2 mot cette .
Grinev Meets Powers! Family

aug. 18, 1960, —

+ ha. -

‘gerange”counsel, told a TASS

sister, wife, dee
Bo Figs eo Sek. Ha Peg

tee foe Seem
La

soy Tone a eats
rit ee are

vimed bee

(>

lay¥

cS

- BBS - uSSR TTEREATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 19; 1960

Powers’ samily wes anterested in Grinev’s opinion on the progress of the

trial and the general gituation of the defendant

Toe lewyer said that based on powers' behavior at the trial, pis

repentance, and the regret he expressed with regard to what be pad done,

he, Grinev, hopes the court will show mercye-.

Powers’ relatives also wanted to Jmow about the further course of the
trial, andi they yeceived the = essary information -

o tell Powers that "they aré shinking

The family asked the defense counsel t
their request.

of bim all the time." The lavyer promised to comply with

USSR COVERAGE OF AUC. 18 TRIAL SESSION :
Home Service Report

Hoscow, Soviet Home Service, Aug. 18, 1960, 1800 Gum--L
ers trial by special corresponéents valentin

{recorced reportage of Pov
and vyacbeslav Chemyshev

vin, Vradimir Treguocv, Yuriy Knarlanov,
from the nall of columns)

(Excerpts) Commentator: The public trial of the Smericen Spy pilot

Francis Gary Povers ig in its second day-

Question: Defendant powers, do you repent Your action?

Powers: Yes, Very much.

Conmer.teator: Apparently even this American spy is beginning ta realize that

in the chase after dollars he bes comiutted a very serious crime! Powers

regrets! And in this be differs from those who bad sent hin- The leaders

in Vashington who bear direct responsibility for Powers’ piretical flight

do now even nov think of repenting! Alien Dulles; the generals from the '
pentagon, end the Stete Department knew Tull well ane possible consequences :
of this provocative flignt. They knew, and committed this ¢rbue- And, \
moreover, they are still saying that they will continae to carry on ae :
espionage against the Soviet Union. And so Powers, ana with bin the —

pionage and subversion against countries of the

entire policy of es

socielist camp pursued by the United States, is on tre bench. The same
fate awaits ail spies? Having prepared this provocative flight the :
American intelligence organs heve not only committed & erime against
the goviet Union but also against & neutral s-ate,; Afghanistan, whose
airspace VaS violated, by the y-2 plane on May 1. . Tb:
intentionally - Besides, the American bress hats hed in cold plood,
planned 4 similar erime against two other states--Finland and Sweden.

‘mat

mo

Pps ares . a9

cy

- BBO - USSR INFERNAPIONAL AFALRS
Aug. 19, 1960

{Listen to this report, It is read by the presiding judge: to the
commander of the eruly unit. :

official: I report that the order to annihilate an airplane dhick viriated
the USSR state border and. intxuded inte our jomeland on Tay 1; 1960, bas
been carried out. At 0853 Moseow tine (es heard), 85 the aircraft web
entered the firing zone av an altitude over 20,000 meters, one rociet

~eg launched, which destroyed the target. The hit on the target was
observed bY instriments, and efter & short time, bY visual observation
pests. The fall of pieces of the aixcrart was recorded. Sa was she
descent of the pilot, who bailed out of the plane. Major Voronov,
May 1, 1060. Beate Seite eR ever ay els te or - es

-

Commentator: The hearing continues. The state prosecutor quotes
dncontrovertible facts which snow the defendant's guilt. Counsel for

the defense and the aefendent sre Leoking for mitigating circunstances -"~ 5
This is 4 pattie of sides, OTs 6S lawrers call it, of the trial contestants.
Tt is characteristic of Soviet law that it gives the @efendant tre,

widest possible opportunities for defense-"  * a me

& battie is also being waged asong those present in the heli--4 mate v
and noiseless pattle, but still a battle. This is particularly

obvious in the press gallery- T> the sane
differently. Sone quickly make notes to provide the pub
truth about the trial as soon as possible. Some nervously pite vheir -
Lips and gnaw on their pencils. Watching them, one ean jmmediataly pick
out representatives of pro-U.5. press orgens in Europe and yeactionary
papers in New York, Washington, and other cities.

Commentator: Wrat aid Powers* bosses think when they eave jim Goviet- -'
eurrency and gold?

Powers: I do not know; perhaps there were other objects. T cannot
renenbere qhere was a’ wateh which was supposed to te in my pocket, 4 compass;

Soviet money, gold coins.

Question:

at All that was
not so? - fits slg ae

Yor oribing Soviet people, is this “- -

= ae a eo Soi. te hee ae hee

Povers: It was to help in eny possible yay to get out of the cnuntry. <<
Question; So, 25 q sald, with the help of bribery?

o]

Tf Ycould neve, I would probably pave done it.’ I don't iknow.
T would probably rave done so-2
er :

Powers:
If I could have ‘bought food with sone nency,
if I had to stert on & 1, 400-mile walk. In oth
this to help myself og ES slom reset Gis

eee

POR eel ad

G “UE Be

’

‘ Vimit ourselves only to flights elong the fT

- BB 10 - USSR JNTERHATIONAL APFATRS
Bug. 195 1960

Question: And you found out that you were of course ‘onable to mse the
money te pribe Soviet eitizens, since the very first Soviet citizens
you came in cortact with disarzed you and handed you over to the
authorities? soe oe : , S

powers: I ain't try. os

Question: You didn*t try?

Powers: ” No.

Question: T feBl sure that your attempts would have been wnguecessiul.

Powers: I think so, too-

n continues. jhe court calis the expexts. More

Commentator: Tne sessio
those who sent spies over the

evidence of the prenedieted actions Of
Soviet sky is Heard in the courtroom. The gui
proved without doubt. The guilt of the organizers of his flight is just
as dncontestable, of all those who direét this vile (sink?) of

the Bisenhorer government to the level cf state

espionage, raised by
policy of the United States. And, hoveve
however the criminals try to get out of the resp

has been proven. ‘This was heart by all those who were in the nall of the
columns today. This was heard ‘Dy you, yadio Listeners- dhe whole world..

bas become convinced of this.

2

Additional Reportage
Moscow, Soviet Hone Service, Aug: 18, 2950, 2013 GMr--L

(Recorded yeportage co Aug. 15 session) .
(excerpts) ' Grinev: ‘\hen aia you hear about this (flying over the uSSR--Ed-)
for the first tine? : : He na este tie? Gey ot

onths later, after q nad signed the

Defendant Powers: "sig or seven ©
the USSR would ‘be part of ny

contract; then T was told that flights across
a@uties. As it becane u“nown that the Soviet yadar systea wag more

effective Than jad been considered eartier, I wes told "we shat provebly = -
yontiers of the Soviet Union."

4
,
t

Grinev; IF you hed refused to carry out your flying task ‘on Iny 1, 1
would you have received the sum which, according to contract, you were not .

panded rigut awayT be os Lge ters oe withage Boos le tS:

up in such "a way that it depended .
ame. Tney could consider this to be &

Defendant Povers! qhe contract vas drawn
wholly upcn those whe employe
nonfulfilhaent of contract on my part. :

‘De fendant Powers:

OC C ! 3/
ist a of - BB il - USSR THTERNALTONAL AFFALKS
ae ae Aug. 19, 1960

Budenko: Thus you +yiotated the sovereignty of the neutral state,

Afghanistan? Panes
Defendant Powers!- If my unit aid no
permission, <I aid violate ggere

% receive the velevant

Ingiamres ait = ee ee :

Rudenkoz But did your unit Feceive permission
boundaries of the Soviet Unicn? toh :

‘to go beyond the

The question nonplusses the defendant. Be keeps silent and then

replies: I assume that this was not the case-

Replying to further questions put by the prosecutor the defendant
confirms that his plane wet shot down at 4 height of 68,000 feet.
te eta oie Ye ee pote we

Rodenko: You were flying in the Sverdlovsk area at precisely this

height of 68,000 feet?
te - bom . rie oo eet eae et

ig heignt of 68,000 feet you were shot dawn

ca

Radenko: At precisely th
py a Soviet rocket?

Defendant Powers: Yes; something shes me down at this height -*
Rodenko: You said samething had shot you down? But it was precisesy
at that height that you vere shot down? , Lye

wae

Defendant Powersi- Yes ae

Borisogiebskly : You told the court yesterday that Colonel Shelton was
especially interested in pocket-launching sites.

‘ dong Hes

yes, he pointéd out a section of the map where
might be rocket -Launching sites. |)

eter.

Defendant Powers:
according to his calculation, there

that the main aim of your flight
het-Launckirg sites?

3 ser

Borisoglebskly: Could one say on May 1
was to discover end pinpoint roc ° Fe ee

Defendant’, Powers: tL ecan omly express iy personal opinion on this
question, = am sure that the experts yho studied the film from my_
cameras can tell what interested the people who sent me- In wy
et rockets are-7 “eat interest not oniy +o the |
military authorities of th. Enited, “States , butte the whoie world.
heli). o> Seo Deca ae ae ee enn aes :
ate

r
ae

ae
rs

CO - 132

- BB 12 - USSR TPERNATIONAL AFFALRS
Aug. 19, 1969

In the course of the trial an incress ingly clear picture of Powers
himself is emerging, @ carefully bvort indistinct) dangerous * .
criminal. The evidence of witnesses and the accurate and objective
data of experts 4ncontrovertibly> show that Powers’ spy flight was &
premeditated and carefully prepared aggressive act against the UESR.-
: Nobody now has a shadow of a doubt that since ‘he was recruited in
1956 by CIA, Povers actively dngaged in espionege against the USSR'™.-
in expression of the aggressive policy carried ‘out by the U.S. :

; Governnent.

oe Pee

ai — “ RPurther Detaiis Pern boloowtefel fox fe te
Moscow, Soviet Home Service, Aug. 18, 1960, 1300 Geit--L

(Correspondents ' report from the Halli of olumns of the House of
the unions } cn Eee La pons ; : bt oe

' (Excerpts ) Under the weight of incontrovertible evidence the accused
tbovs his head tower and lower- Repentance can be detected ta his
replies more and more often. And when-the chairman puts the straight
question to him: "Do you repent of what you heve done?" Powers rep ies,
"Yes, very much."

his makes a clear distinction between him and those who sent him.

“For inleed the leading statesmen of Washington, ubo are Girectiy

Pesponsivie for Powers’ bandit flight, as reports from the United
States indicate, have no thought of repentance. They foilew the
example of their President who, being caught redhanded ; instead of
offering the necessary apologies to the Soviet Government , preferred
to assume responsibility for the collapse of the Paris conference

ad and for the aggravation of international tensiom. 2°" -. i ee

Witnesses appear vefore the court, simple Soviet people who detained
the U.S. spy. They describe how Powers was seized. The chairman asks .
the accused: Have you any qursticas to ask the witnesses? I have no -:°
questions, says Powers, but T should like to express my gratitude to

these people for tre way they treated me on that day which was BOrwe GPRS i '
unfortunate for me. —~ - coer tn esi < S geass ee :

~~? an ere: as 1

we.) CO Press Coverage: ‘'--:-

Moscow, TASS, ‘Radloteletype in Rusgian to Europe, Aug- 18, 196057
OCT GME--Loo a went gh MER ani Ee ae wo paigi Roenr Sort:

a

(Excerpt yO aan Moscow papers ‘on Aug- 18 publish nxtensive commentasies <*
on the trial of the U.S. spy pilot. Detail by detail the picture of the
dirty doings of the American spy centers are being dram in ali their.

' wnseemliness-

a

ENG ky

. Pa’
ip detiwlr:

Pee

Nees

ee: - BB 13 - USSR INPERUATICNAL AFFAIRS
> Bae Aug. 19, 1960

epie of Moscow and prominent jurists who have come to
the trial from almost aii enfas of the earth, and many representatives
of large papers and ageacies, do not cease to be surprised at how low
tte ethice of the pourgeots world have faileo, which proétaim in words .
freedom and democracy but in fact serve the dollare.2 sf 7 40 7- ae

Both ordinary pe

ing in the dock along with Powers are the
people who paid him money, who sent bit ebout his foul Dpusiness, and
who elevated spying to the Leeé1 of U.S. state policy.

Pe aed toe ie

PRAVDA enphesizes that sitt

Be te pee ia. arr Body Sea tai On ;

of whom does this physically strong but morally wagped young man remind
one, sk KOMSCMOLSKAYA PRAVDA observers. Were not those young men like
that, who, fed or. Hitlerite bread, 20 years ago destroyed cities and
pestially murderéd millions of people? They aisa thought about nothing,
but obediently cerried out their orders. “Fascism gave Dirth to these
unthinking monsters of cruelty. Powers is through and through 4°
representative of the American wey of 4ife. Is not this the reason
he and those like him are being defenied by Fisenhower and shielded
by Nixon and Herter? And today in Mescow, the paper writes, not
only Powers is on trial, but also the jeaders of the state which
proclained international banditry as its policy+ ;
SOVIET CULTURE ridicules Suizberger's fabrications in the New York TIM'S
thet Poyerr was conditioned on the basis of the “conditioned reflexes"
theory. It is certain, says the paper, that Powers' followers, af
foltowers they be, will have lost scme of their reflexes calculated
with the assistance of Allen Dulies-. The sight of Soviet military
objectives is uniikely to fake them want to start clicking their

camera shutters. But this has nothing to do with the teaching cf
Academician Pavisv. And anyway why should Powers have been “eonditioned?”
The guilt of the rulere of the United States of crimes against peace

has already been fully confirmed by the cynical admissions of Eisenhower,
Nixon, and Herter themselves. The millions of ordinary P
countries will never forgive the leaders of the United Stetes for
aisrupting the summit conference, will never permit banditry and...
dawlessness to become the accepted standards of gnternational yalations--~
it 1s they who can bear witness to the indictment, points out the paper:

i reed

Beto ees a

why

ed Further Details”
h, Aug. 19, 1960, 0630 cur--L

Seren: Se eer

Moscow, Soviet African Service in Englis

e Powers trial.
11-trained,

(Text) The papers carzy detailed reports abont th
- Ags it proceeds it becomes clear that Powers is a we

dangerous criminal.

okjaiiaLan?,

cae omnes Se oe a a

bos eat, deeds ~ SRS WW

© ee

USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug- 19, 19

- BB 14 -

qhe testimony of witnesses Aug. 18 and the precise, anbiased information
of experts prove irrefutably that the spy flight of Powers Was an
intentional, carefully prepared aggressive act against the Soviet Union-
Qhere“is absolutely no doubt thet after having been signed UP py CIA ia
1956 Powers spied o2 the USSR, which shows the aggressive policy adiered

to by the U.S. Government:
PRAVDA states that Lhe Soviet people are not only trying Powers, & poisonous
imizal morality

but small worm in & pilot's suit; they are trying tne ¢r
which is tased on the medieval slogao used by
n aim--all without

of American imperialism,
Amy meaps cat be used

the filthiest.

the inquisitors: to achieve 4

exception, even
states); the
ta understand

ain witb which
the chain is
ch link that

a norms between
their being educated
of a gefamed ch

instead of generally accepte
corruption of youns people, instead of
jPumanism and nobleness--those are the Links
American imperialism is still trying to tie the world. But
eracking here and there. Francis Gary Fowers is another Su
jas fallen out of <he rusted chaio of U.S. j{mperialiso-

Espionage,

PASS REPORTAGE ON AUG. 19 PROCEEDINGS 2

_ Report on Session

Moscow, TASS, Radioteletype ip English to Europe, hog. 19, 1960, 1039 GMr--L
(Excerpts) The session of the military collegivm of the USSR Supreme
resumed at 1000 hours

Court in the case of the American Spy pilot Powers

Moscow tine Aug. 19... +
‘spoke for the srosecution.

Roman Rudenko,
1 term for Powers.

The procurator general, of the USSR,
ft the end of his speect: he demanded & 1s-year jai

Mikhail Grinev, took
+ for Powers-

ecess, Powers! gefense counsel,

After a 20-minute ©
the floor and asked the court for milder punishmen
At 1242 hours Powers made a three-minute final appeal-
At 1245 hours the court retired to the conference room to delibarate on

e@ 17OO hours Moscaw tine-+

the verdict. The verdict i5 not expected pefor

‘ © C 13s7

a - BRIS - Ss TNCERNS TIONAL AFFAIRS
Ang. 19, 1960

4
3 a Summary of Rudenko Speech
; Moscow, TASS, RadiotelstyP® in English to EBsrop*, fue. 19, 1960,
Bl eo ee a foe _
Sirs ee See S on abe SL Pe Ee nee las
< (text) Roma, Rodenko, USSR procurator gcheral, speaking Aug. 1g.at
i e gaia that tnis trial” .-

the trial of the American spy pilot Powers,

exposes the crimes conmitted not

but winesks coupletely the eriminal agercss
( *) quarters, these actual inspirers and organizers of tne mo

zve actions of u.s. ruling»
ns trous
crimes directed against the peace and security of the, regples:" oe

This trial has proved once again, the state prosecutor enphasized,
> the pasetionary

that in the struggle against the forees of peace
forces of the United States anserupuiousiy use Sny means, criminally
Srample underfoot elementary norms of qnternational 12%, and violate
the national sovereignty of other states with a view to pursuing the
bankrupt “brinkranship" policy. ee ae hae -
Rudento qualified the intrusion by the America plane into the :
airspace of the USSR on May 1, 1960, 25 a Mpandit aggressive raid’
and a "Aangerous provocation." : :

The pecples of the world branded with infamy these provocative, -
perficious actions, whien, 3 officially admitted by Bisenhower »
Wixon, and Herter, were carried out on airect orders of the governnent
ana the U.S. President himself and are @ carculated orficial policy
of the Unitea States. =~ Be bbe .

own bY”
aenonstrated
provocative

The procuzator general of the USSR acclared thet, 3s sh
subsequent events, the Government of the United States
before the entire world its, real intention +o use the
incursion of the U-2 plane inte Soviet airspace &S 4 pretext for” es
wrecking the summit meeting, plunging the world egeir. inte the state |

of ccid war, aggravating tension in international relations, ana “|
putting a brake on the great powers disarmanient talks -. aise tiene BEES

Hodenko emphasized that the’ exposure of poder, one of the agents of ..
the American intelligence service, vas similtaneously 6p exposure of
the reactiouary reling circles of the United States of America which -.-
have made the netional policy of their ‘country 4 calentated poricy of |:

perfidy, provocation, espianage; 3 policy. of baiancing on the brink of
yar in the intercsts et enpshal joe wood ss - eee ey La And oo tat, 0

eRe eee ee

Poearen Tn]

ocd

i bees bah st

ye

“: # be . . a >. es oe Ww) Rata abt aoe x
> A jae.

- BS 16 - USER TNTERNATEONAL AZPAIRS
Aug. 19, 1960

The procurator general poted that the crimival actiozs of Porers, i8

their significance and the great consequences they have already entailed,

not to mention “those they eovld have evtailed, 6° far beyond en ordinary

felony. The specific circunstances of this case cannot but Lead any

rational person to draw conclusions about the aggressive sins of U.S.

policy, the Flouting by the American military of ali universally

recognized standards of international law, the criminal violation

of the national sovereignty of other states. :

The procurator general believes that the verdict in the Powers case
will have a bearing on more that” jest the personal fate of the eccused
Powers. This verdict will again convincingly expose before the whole | .
#orld the criminal, ugegressive policy of the ruling é@ircies of the %
United States. Tt will play its role in the struggle of the peace
f-xces against the forces of ageression- go?

qQurning to the factual circumstances of the case; the state prosecutor

pointed out that the criminsl actions committed by the secused Fowers
have been fully established by evidence impossible to refute or shake.
The charges against Powers are fully substantiated by many objective
pieces of evidence. This the accused nimself yealizes, and he does
not attempt to dispute his respousibiity for Bie crimes.

The prosecutor considers it established that Powers spent his espionage
service at the 10-10 espionage @etachnent based at qucirlik airbase

jn Turkey. ‘The aggressive flight on Mey 4, 1960, wes the last in
Powers’ espiouage career, Which began way back in 1956 whea Powers
signed a secret contract with the Central Intelligence Agency ef the
United States. It was precisely from that time that powers becaze 4
staff spy Pilot ready to coumit any crime in the interest cf the
American military, who are in the service of monopoly capital.

Commenting on Ppowers' training for u-2 flignts at the secret Las,
Vegas atomic range in the Nevada desert and his training i
special reconnaissance equizprent which was directed by representatives
and pilots of the Lockheed company which makes these planes, and also
by military pilots, Rudenko declared: "Yere is 4 patent example of
crimval collusion between @ big American capitalist compery, an
espionage and intelLigence center, and the U.6. niiitary-

Powers confessed that, in conformity with the contract he bad
concluded with CIA, he was 4 pilot of a special e@ir a@etachment engaged a
in collecting information on Soviet radio shations and radar facilities
and also om the location of rocket sites» 3

© 137

ussR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

- BB1T -
Aug. 19, 196¢

emphasized, , the aggressive penetration
ory on May 1 was planned by the

eas eariy &5 August 1958
ane from the Incirlik
field at which he --

Unquestionably; the prosecutor
into the depths of Soviet territ
American intelligence gervice way in advance, sinc
Powers received an assignment to transfer 6 U-2 pl
base to Bodoe airfield in Norway, the ‘very sane oir
was to complete his May VL flight.-.1 22-77 +r ee

testimony that be ad piloted a u-2 pl
Wiesbaden, West Germany, to a U.S.

neral declared: ae
e based on the territory

The revanchist
cessery to lodge 4
as other NATO states

first to express
tg of U-2 planes." :

ane from 4n American

Recalling Povers"
Air Force base

airbase in the area of,
at Plattsourg, New York, the procurator ge
“This shows once moré that American U-2 planes wer
of West Germany ana made flights from that territory:
Adenauer government, however, @id not even find it ne
protest in this connection with the U.S. Government,

did. Furthernore, Chancellor Adenauer hastened to be
approval of tbe crininel, aggressive, espionage flig

By carrying out espionage flights, the state prosecutor said, Powers
and ‘his masters shamelessly violated the sovereignty of otber countries.
u-2 planes flew over yarious countries dnvolved by the United States in
its expansionist, apgressive policy. They lent their airbases for the
use of American military planes. With even greater arrogance, Powers
and other American spies violated the sovereignty of neutral countries,
in particular Afghanistan, taking advantage of their technical
superiority to do so.
g' testimonys revenled to the
nts--to collect information on
ablishments in the Soviet

before the May 1 flight. .::

Phe procurator general,
court the nature of the esp
specially important defense
Union--which Powers received

n a@vance the possibility of its
event exposure, conditioned Powers
be ghould come down alive on
misanthropic ethics ov.
this ‘yellow devil,' higher

American intelligence, enviseging i
agent's failure, ana desiring to pr
to the idea of inevitable suicide in cés¢
Soviet territory. “Bere you see the savage,
Mr. Dulles and companys placing tbe dollar,
than human Life, the prosecutor declaredvt.. 2-0 "6°

er ee Se "se

¥a material evidence, and the findings of «+:
experts, Rudenko beld it proved that Povers' Lockheed U-2 plane ¥as 4

special militery recommaissance plane; -equipped with @ special device by -: .
means of which the pilot gould plow it up in the event of 4 forced landing « .
on USSR territeryé = eh Rr Pic ae rr er Go mee!

Oe a ad es
ip odo 4

Cas 7
Referring to Powers’ testimon

~

és Sati he 3
{his evidence--that

Oo Se
“ USSR IRTEREAPIONAL AFFAIRS 138

- BB 18 -
‘ Aug. 19, 1960

Powers pleaded guilty to having flown over Soviet territory and to having
switched on and off over the points 4{udicated to hiw for his Zlight the _
controls of the special equipment installed in hi§-plane. During the flight
Fowers also conducted visusl ubservations and plotted the results on the

peme oar eR A. eT

ope

flight maps i: atm Te

_ o*

+ t

y of-official Avericon: statements elleging .~
ivil sircraft aod Powers 6 pired employee of

£

Rudenko exposed the falsit
that the U-@ plane was 4 ¢
the Lockbeed aircraft corporation.
The procuretor general noted that, 85 established by Powers’ testimony
concerning the circumstances in which he was recruited for intelligence ;
service, the organization and implementation of aggressive Spy flights - ,
into Soviet airspace were directly effected under the supervision of
CIA, witn the knowledge and sanction of the U.S. Governpent and
President Eisenhower. — 22 7-0 S Sete na eet :

eutor deélersd, conclusively
s nothing but

The materials of this trial, the state prose
prove Fhat the 10-10 detachement in which Powers served #8

a wilitary intelligence unit... i° 0. %.-

There is not the slighest doubt, Rudenko pointed out, thst Powers’ plane
was @ military aircraft specielly eguipped ars sent. into Soviet airspsce
with aggressive esplonage purposes, and that Powers, by the very nature
of his activity, coutinued to rewain 8 military Pilot discharging the

duties of a military intelligence wan’ and spy.

"In fact this is nothing but an espionage pybrid--sn offspring of CHA,
and the military intelligeace uf the U.S, Air Force, covered up by the
NASA figleat," declared the procurator general. “ roe
Ruwjenko considered that the ‘esiponage purposes of Powers' flight over:
the Soviet territory had been confirmed by all the circumstances of the
case, including the testimony of the accused and the abundant material
evidence. vt: Ll! : PotD ee TT : ae 5 mae

. irae

» Baas

- eel

=: oc

that the statements of leading U.S, statesmen,

hat espionage and violation of the
United States,
wudicial evidence

Rudenko emphasized

acknowledging to the whole world tha
sovereigoty of other states are national policy of the
acquire procedural importence and had to be considered
in light of the criminal Powers casessi. a oS

these U.S. jeeders--fully. ..-:
e@ inspirer eud organizer Obs 2

nent Ret llienan. 2 Tsay:

is, the statements of
establishes that the U.S. Government was th
the criwes cowmitted by Powers and others like bin. Ja the opinion OF De ve
the procurator general, there was every y,eason to regaré the above-
mentioned statements as irrefutable evidence in the Powers case.

i ri ekected . ; ou se ot ot Renee es $A :
ae /37
: “ _ HB 19 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AEFAIRS
SS iat as Aug. 19, 1960

AL wmiaey

Rudenke thoroughly analyzed the ebundent material evidence. fie said
that as a result of its careful etudy by experts tbe prosecution was
in possession of, objective, irrefutable dete, proving with new force the
_ indictwent, against, the defendant, Powers, end the deliberate, eggressive
nature and espicnage purpose of his criminal mission (Over 320,000 Soviet
_ citizens and 20,000 foreigners have Seen the material evidence on” © =
public display--. PAGS): eee: 2 See TOT ot ware ete 7

ae tees aie Se Se ee ecae SR Ae

ca units of the plane, Rudenko announued, scattered over an area
ley of sone 20 square kiloweters, were found where the Lockheed y-2 plane,
{ . fell, including the forepart of the fuselage with the central wing and -.
4 the cockpit with equipment; the turbojet engine, and the fuselag2’s* :
tale wore ee ETSaK ows tel Re ek ee cee =

| rE ete tee ee ke we Ha ie

e false alle ations that the U-2 plane was 4 civilian acd ©
jal note that
markings

Parta and

Maer ree

In refuting th
not a oilitary airerait, the state prosecutor made spec
the radioctechncial intelligence equipment and scue other units’ had

showing that they belonged to the U.S, military establisnenent.

Ben Pg ae basows of

ae ate OR ene

The material evidence had established jrrefutably, the procurator general
Geclared, that the flight of the American plane over Soviet territory was
deliberatd and planned’ in aévance. Aa seen frou the’ conclusions of i
experts, the map showing the flight route apd navigation calculations was
prepared on the ground before the takeoff. While in the air the flier
knew his position, systematically checked off the marked reference points
as he flew qver them, and strictly adhered to the established route. While
over USSR territory the flier plotted on the map intelligence anf ormation.

aay testes - :
a ee a = Cree ee

The state prosecutor Tegarded the’ photcequirment of the aircraft and. =
the immediate resuits of its photo reconnaissance aS important evidence -

exposing the espionage’ purposes of Powers' flight. 7 700! ae

teeanical findings by experts bave established t
graphical equi pvent: installed ‘in the U-2 plane is 4 special @er jel -—-

reconnaissance’ camera’ for photographing strips of land from greet: ae

altitudes.. A special aerial photofila was designed for seriel survey * *

‘ of military avi topegraphical objectives. Tha aerial photos teken | ns

contain intelligence’ infcrmation on qndustriai and ‘pilitery objectives ive

in the USSRJs--F- Be 2 AF ae mane? Cahn Seaget @ ee Te PS Ae ee

7" ee ert re

o- ree . :
fn 0g 2 ee = peters we we OE

hat the aerial photo-

Expert findings on the tape yecorder and its tape have Shown that the
signals recorded by Powers’ came fro surface radar system dnguring the
‘antiaireralt defense of the Soviet Union." Special equipaant 4ad been™ ~,
anstalled in Fuvers' aircraft to sounta rae! and jriterfere with jnter="" 3
ception radar stativns and fighter plan direction. : .

; ers
a ial

be ey at

Be ~ oe ne a s

- BB 2 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 19, 1950

Ag Ruodenko further pointed out, the absence of Torg-distance radio-
communication facilities in the U-2 plane is further evidence that the

sponsors of the aggressive intrusion took measures tO conceal the
piratical flight and t> prevent jts possible detection on Sovies territory:
rs = m~ et ‘oo oad atta! ot

* eat “eet wma
aa = ee a ca oe ae et SS x

Were it not for the fact that the assigments received ‘by Povers were of a
eriminal nature; Rudenko pointed out, his masters would not have supplied
him with a deadly pin, The éxperts* conelusion was that a prick of this
pin would kill a person jnstantaneously- - - .

~, :
= eof he .

An analysis of the material evidence; the prosecutor concluded, fully

ar olishes the crines committed by Povme’» finely exposes the inspsrers
and organizers of these erimes, and provides justice with incriminat2ng
evidence of great convicting force. The prosecutor general euphasized
that Powers personally carried out specially Aangerous criminal assignments
which directly endangered universal peace and might have prought upon

mankind a terrible disaster. 27: => th, Ak :

From the ground no one could tell whe ther bis hostile plant, which .- ;
uncerenonious ly and arrogantly intruded into the Soviet airspace, was carrying
a deadly load. It is fully obvious, Ruderko declared, :
certain states possess muclear weapas an:
targets at almost Lightening speed, the aggress2
United States on May 1, 1960, against the Sovie
endangers the security of all mankind and vere fraught with the gravest

consequences for the whole world.

Rudenko declared that the Powers case exposed the eriminel flouting of

all universally recognized standards of international law by Anericea yuling
quarters. 4n 4ndispatable principle of snternational lav, the state —
prosecutor recalled, is the principle of full and exclusive sovereignty

of a state over its territory, including the entire airspace above it.

The U.5. Government did not react to the ‘repeated Soviet protests ecncerning
jllegal violation of Soviet airppace py American plenes- on the cor trary,
4% contvinued its policy of cold war, of gross violation of the sovereignty

of other states+ a oe ; re ee .

Rudenko further declared: "He who elevates crime to the level of Sa . 4
calculated national policy del ‘berately runs the risk of being caught in
the act of committing the crime, recognizes the positions of streng-h

policy as a supreme principle of national policy, without a twinge of - ~~”

conscience disregards generally accepoed international practice expressed

in the lofty principles of international law, and replaces lav and justice.
by arbitrariness ani lawlessness «”. . ag Ms : e

USSR TNTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS

- BBL -
Aug. 19, 1960

Examining the question of woetner the. anteusion of even @ single plane -
anto the airspace ef another country is an act of aggression, the state

prosecutor declared: . "There is every reasou bo-can¢lude that, the incursion
of a foreign plane, guch 8s the’ incursion: of the U-2 Spy. plane, undoubtedly
constitutes an act of aggression ." i table, he added, that under

mofern conditions the incursion by even a single plane into the airspace -
of ‘any state threatens disastrous eonsequencese - "i+ - | s c
E Uren ie: Syke eee e ee eS gis SR -

sinc the United States constantly keeps 19 the air squadrons of banbers
with atomic and hydrogen pombs, the appearance over Soviet territory of even
a single reconnaissance plane can always portend an air attack. But even
4f squadrons of Doeubers do not trmediately Follow the reconnaissance plane,
the flight of such a piane with qts air survey and reconnaissance of USSR
antiaircraft Gefense radar facilities. are integral elenents of an air.:
attack, Rudenko pointed out. ee gee See ee Sou) > i Ss

The procurator general exposed the attempts of leading U.S. statesmen to-.

conceal their eriminal aggressive acts with allegedly peace-loving jntentient

He revealed the hypocrisy of the President, the Vice President, and the"
ne U-2 flight and preceding

sed that th
had 20 aggressive purpos

U.S. secretary of state, who allies
incursions oF U.S. planes anto Soviet airspace
but were supposedly defensive measures. ,

es’

out that U.5. statesmen sought to revise the pankrupt,
which has been refuted by pistory --

wat

Rudenko pointed
fixed idea of Veomunist menace,"
itself. : :

court's attention to the fact that snvolved
4 complicity.

in the Povers' case is the peculiar instance of invernationa ;
an planes over Soviet territory

The aggressive espionage flignts by Aner ic

could not have taken place if states close to the Saviet Union--in this

ease Turkey, Pakistan, and Horvway- -haa not made availab

to the American military- jhe range of ‘the U-2 plane vould not

allowed it to’ operate directly from U.S. territory: PRES <a
“% Bc) eb dgtiecwee: ch Set taTED a ca a

The state prosecutor drew the

have
ee ee peat

‘

sae (7 : 4a.
st : is -~ BB 22 —- USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
; Aug. 19, 1960

Rudenke dectared: nyr we are to assess al] these circumstances in
conformity with the doctrine of complicity, we should regar¢ as Powers!
accomplices those who organized and sponsored this erime, and 4190 those
who ag accomplices obviously facili ated the execution of the crime by
- making means avatlable and removing - petaclese™ 10.0 77 -

ie Lets. WD ae 7 Pan ae eas ea a
Recalling that the Soviet Government had more than once warned the = -
governments of countrics linked by wilitary blocs with the United States
against the danger that installation of U.S. military bases on their
territory creates for them, Rudenko said that this trial showed graphically
how well founded these warnings issued by the Soviet Government Were.

Fae ibd ,

£ €. ir ee ree - iz ear

This trial Cully reveals the aggressive; man-hating policy of U.S. ruling
circles and military who, for the saxe of their dirty aims,do not stop

at TlouLing any sacred principle of international lag to continue their
dangerous brinknanship, he euphasized.

The state prosecutor then gave a judicial assegsment of the actions Powers
is aceased of, Pointing out that Powers! guilt of espionage hed peen : -
irrefutably proved from the standpoint of the criminal legislation of the

Soviet Union, he emphasized that, in conformity with U.S. jegislation boo,
Powerg' actions, had they been committed in the United States and directed
against tiat country, would also bave been regarded as espionage? and

entailed stern panishwent.

for the prosecution, Rudenko reemphasized that
mnankind might have followed from

id mow what further aggressive
+ carried.

Coneluding his speech

: grievous consequences to peace and to
: Powers’ eriminal actions. No one cou
actions Powers’ flight portended and what death-dealing toad i

drilled eriminal,

uzht with danger

|

Powers is no ordinary Spy, put a specially and carefully
: Rudenko said, . Powers carried out his crimes by means fra
4 for millions upon millions of people.

. Addressing the judges, the procurator general declared: “May your verdict
be a stern warning to those who carry through an aggressive policy;
criminally flout generally accepted standards of international 1a and
national sovereignty, and proclaim a policy of cold war ard espionage

as their national policy. May this yerdict also pe a stern warning to all
other Powerses who, et the bidding of their masters, woulé seek to undermine
the cause of peace, to encroach on the honor, dignity, and integrity of

the great Soviet Ynion."

ed

. Tepentance of @efewiant Powers pefore the Soviet Union of the crime

Cs a 43
: _ - BB 23 - USSR INTERNAT TONAL AFPAL
ae Aug. 19, 1960

Supporting fully the stave prosecution in the Puwers case, phe

procurator generel said: .. - eg .

"T have every reason to request the cours to apply ‘the sypreme

penalty to” defendant Powerse But taking into account the sincere
committed, I do not insist on the death pevalty for bim and_as* the court
to sentence defendant Powers to 15 years* detention.” aise EE ag We

(Baitor's Nobel: ab O844 Gar on Auge 19 pass states? wape punishment
demanded for Powers by the procurator general was met by a storm of
applausee")- sas Geka eran el pact Lite aa :

a Sunmary of Grinev Speech’ ae

19, 1960, 0912 GE--

Moscow, ‘TASS, Radioteletype in English to Europe » Abas

(next) Boviet server Wiktatl, Grinev, Soressed at tes trial of the... 7
American, Francis G. Powers, Dis “exceptionally airficutt, incemparab ly
complicated positions” He voted that the defense was further complicated

by the demand of the state prosecutor. Pee m aa! . Fs

It is oor eivie and professionel duty +0 help ‘a Zefendeant yoo wiskes to
avail himself of the right te defense guaranteed ‘by the constitution of
the Soviet Union, the defense counsel said. He recalled that the Soviet
procedural code not only granted the right to defense but also

provided broad practical possivilities for exercising itech <b Yi Ae
The defense counsel said ‘he’ intended to set forth arguments: wrich -
gave him the right to ask--and the judges perhaps to ngreézathat

the (demand of the state prosecutor not be granted? )«. Hee i ae .
Since Powers had pleaded fully guilty, the ‘gefense ‘counsel said thet ~

; the defense challenged neither the facts of the charges prefezred is

against Powers nor the appraisal of the crime gived py the state cote
prosecutdre ©.) aes ee Ake Ae pce “Ti, t Ue ose? ee

oo ry

hd@cessing the court, the Jawyer said that he doula expect with full”
confidence thet the judges would accept Powers! testimony as truthful,
The defense ‘counsel ‘stressed the international significanc? of the.”
Poyers case inasmuch as Powers, ove of the, perpetrators of a perridionvs
and aggressive act against the Soyiek Mien, ahd be joined on trial
by his nesters, WbO ought to attend this triai invisibly, the Central _

Intelligence Agency heeded by Allen Dulles, the Aaerican military, and
with them all those sinister, aggressive forces which stuive to touch off

another world wars

mo * ~ BB.24 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFFA .
: Aug. 19, 1959

*

{ * he defense counsel urged the judges to Fay atteotion to this

‘ faztor which he believed would ve of substantial importance in
dekermining Powers’ punishment, that although Fowers was the :
direct executor, the main culprits were those who sent hin to commit
this crimes. Coe yaa : me a kt a

4 ate, Weer Ss ee  apiceateate

ra

= OE lars eee eer a

ead

In view oe” thik, the defense counsel expressed regret” .
trat Powers alone was on trial. Otherwise Powers would have held
a secondary place, in the case and thus could undoubtedly expect 8
mich milder punishnente Pia ea

Ff

Without absolving hia of responsibility, the defense counsel stressed
that Powers committed this erime not cf his own volition, but oP
crders of bis bosses; in doing so ‘he was not connected with any of
them except hie direct superior, Colonel Shelton, and was not even
informed by them about the plans they harboreé wh2n sending hin to
commit this. crime. Moreover, they deliberately misled pin by_ giving
aasurances that the flight over Soviet territory was absolutesy safe .

sna did not involve any risk.

Beers Wanercrereee ce

-u

The defense counsel expressed the conviction that ip setting

ak the punishment for Powers the court yould take icto account his

treach’of Colonel Shelton's order to destroy the plane and co
suicide in case of a forced landing, abandonment of the plane, oF
capture. =

Mhe defense counsel also asked the court to take into account
Powerat > truthfoal and frank testimony during the preliminary
and court investigations. . . : ea

"T do not know,” Grinev said, “whether Powers has told all of the

truth, but doubtless what be did say is true.” F 7

The defense ecansel ‘stressed “that ‘despite the fact that aivulgenceé es

of state secrets is punishable in the United States by 10 years 4n

prison or a 10,000 dollar fine, Powers pevyerbheless testified ~

truthfally and thereby sharply conflicted with pis employes ; .

Grinev expressed the ‘yiew that Powers! pandvritten testimony and

the evidence which he gave repeatedly of his owe will were, perhaps, .._ '
“a result of some. inner change which he begaa to experience £ :
"\ the mouwent he came into contect with the Soviet people 84
that much of, what he vas told in America about whe! Soviet
the Soviet people was in’sharp coutradiction to veelity..
Ae ot z ane ee ees -  *& POS gee tes <n

Sean’ ee eho ger ie! Tay: ie Baa? a

Union and

GO: eS | 1Ys~

: - BB 25 - USSR INTERNATIONAL AFPAIAS

i tes eres Aug. 19, 1960
: 2
In part of pis testimony, the acfense counsel recalled, Powers said
that he was deceived by his bosses and that he never expected to be 50
well treated in the Soviet Union. Referring to ‘article 33 of the
fundamental criminal code of the USSR, the defense counsel saida that
Powers" truthful testimouy. ana conduct constituted circumstaices _.. .
wy mitigating hs yes ponsibility and gave grounds for a milder attitude .. 07
ward him. 7. Aa ee SES oy an So ee Gy ae
= Surveying Povers! Vite, the’ defense’ counsel showed what roads led him
‘eS to the U.S. central Intelligence Agency and made hin @ tool ef the
\ ms U.S. Government's, aggressive POMICYs c- Caeene Se eS

Though he Jacked adequate means, powers! father, sought to give his
son a higher education. But Powers winted to” stand on his cwn fect
the sacrifices’he vould have to make |
great deal to obtain a fa

sooner, to freé the eather of
if his son gontinued studying, since, it costs &
higher education in the United States ie ee
After graduating from college in je50, powers’ took a temporary job.’ ;
Mass unempleyment ena’ bis, forthcoming “army draft kept him from finding

a steady job. , Thus Powers, anticipaSing the draft, yoluntecred for r
the U.S. Air Force in'1950 in order not to worry about the, Future.
Raving finished his pilot course, Powers, Like every American, was
taugh> to worship the omnipotent doller. False American propagenda
could not leave Ppovers? character and upbringing unaffected, ae
especially. "is jdeas of the, Sovict Union. It is not accidental that
at the preliminary, inv
such humané treatment’ in
pumiliateds” ©: area ae

estigation Powers said that he dia not expect
the USSR- He expected tobe tortured and

ro

va ee aidy he

: ; ge Se Es

t a

riomercgi os. ase i

a ee Ee bop =+ + wets Roe. . . - oa

How Powers, who did not have any political convictions or a. pe
predilecticns,” could Gecoms exbroi1ea ‘in such a large-scale, dangerous = |

; “conditions of ee a ys

‘g unemplo the ‘@efense

. political’ venture, Was expiainea by, the

capitalist America, with its” permanent mass <uncmployment,
counsel told she court’? eM a

The bourgeois ethics, which, prevail there are characterised-by strongly

expressed individualism, and greed. | In accordance with bourgeois,** 7)”

‘ morals, it.is quite’ permissivic to sacrifice honer, nonesty,, and truth
in the nam2 of profit, in the.neme of dollars. Influenced 2y these
ethics, said Grinev,_ Poycrs, Lived under the delusion thet noney does
not smell, and he dia ‘not ‘realize thet tne 2,500 dollars he was 7)
yeceiving from the Central Intelligence Agency @id have a most evil”
smell, though he had some doubts the last time he extended his contract

with that organization.

ee. 2 CO rw)

a : - BB 26 - USSR INTERNATIONAL APPAIRS
: Aug. 19, 1960

The defense counsel expressed the hope that Fovers' expericnecs had
geretand the nature of the money he received under
aoubtedly would be an earnest of his ccrrect

conduct in the future. . A id Me tine Niae SE

} eee ee er ea ger ee — .

; Turning to Powers’ statement to the effect that maybe Soviet lav
stipulated tne acath penalty irrespective of his testimony and behavior,
the defense counsel stressed that the Soviet criminal code aid not

know such 6 formal approach to sentencing persons who are guilty of
even the gravest crimes -. ee ae PO Pee 2 :

rs ae

The Soviet court is a humane court, the defense counsel said, where
motives of the formal requirements of law are not the only determining
factors. In pessing sentences, 4 Soviet court is never guided bY
considerations of crucity or revenge. Tt always takes into account
not only from the e_roumstanc es of the case,
defendant's qndividuality, 35 well as mitiga

en deere en see Se

ing circumstances -

nea that Powers" gruthful, sincere testimony
and his age since he recently had his 3ist birthday, were mitigeting
circumstances. Be reminded the eourt that when powers concluded his
contract with the central Intelligence Agency he aia not know the

real puroose of the task get before him. a,

The defense counsel maintai

The defense counsel also called attention t Powers" doubts as to

whether his previous actions in the Central Intelligence Agency

were correct. . ;
: : és ~

on the basis of all this, tne defense counsel said that there was

every reason to recognize the presence of mitigating circumstances

and to adopt 4 less severe sentence. In asking the eourt to mitigate
Powers" punishment, he would proceed not only from the reasons

underlying the motives of the cripe and the circumstances poder yhich :
it was perpetraved, as well as Powerst conduct after his éetention,
put also from the strength, might, and power of the Sevict union, and

from the fact that initiative and strength were at present jn the °
hands of the peace forces, the camp of af ie Fe

peace and socialiso .

el said: “your: sentence will add one
e humanity of Sovict © ss ‘

Jn conclusion, the defense couns
more examale &o the numerous jnstance of th a
justice aad will sharly eontxest with the attitude toward man practiced —,
by Powers! masters --the Central Inte a eee,

very forces of the United States that sen

jiigence Agency, the yuling 3
yeactionary t hin ta a sure dcath |
and wanted hin to aie. " wim ot : ime

+ . = r

; os . - BB ET - USSR TITESNATICNAL AFFAIRS
Aug. 19, 1960

a
he

Text of Powers" Appeal

Woseov, TASS, Radioteletype fn English to Europe, Au3- 19, 1960,
1004 qat--L tyces 7 :

eet! 2

here eels

atten i i¢

ur trys oe

: {Text} You have now heard all the evidence in the case, and you mst
decide uy fate. o--- 2 7 sr ie, Wide cage 0 : :
oe) I realize that I have committed 2 most grave crime and deserve punishment.
| Tack the court to weigh all the evidence and take into account not only
thefact that I committed the crine but also the circumstances which.”

induced me to it.

“Task the court to take into account that no secret data or information
ALL fell into the

. ; ven. through the channels they were supposed to-
hands of Soviet authorities. a ee ee
‘ [ realize that Russians yegaTd me as an enemy, put E should like to =
stress that I personally, do not nave and bave never had 6ny enmity ..
toward the Russian people. —

ene

nemny but 2s B uran being who 7"
@ man who never be fore had faced
o deeply realizes his guilt. ;

tJ
tT ask the court to judge me not &s an &
4s not an enmey of the Fussien people,
a court on any charge whatsoever and wh
Thank: you. pth Sa

Report on Interval Before Sentencing

Moscow, TASS, Radioteletype sn Russian to Europe, hug. 19; 1960, -
13L5 Gi#?--L
(Text) Moscow--Awaiting the announcement of his sentence, Francis
Powers told Defense Counsel Grinev that the tremendous strain which
he felt during the closing speech by the .state prosecutor had gone and
pe felt greatly relieved when he earned that the prosecutor did not

insist on the death penelty-

The defense counsel visited Powers while the judges vere in conference
about the actual sentence. Grinev found Powers reading. Powers had

just finished his dinner and was enjoying after @inner grapes. During the
ecnversation his defense counsel told Powers about the launching of 8
second cosmic satellite ship by the Soviet Unton. Powers said it was

wonderful news.

OMe _ pp 29 -  °—CUSSR DTEWATIONL AFFAIRS
: i » pug. 19, 1960

j
: Report on Sentence

Moscow, TASS; Radioteletype in English to Burope, Aug- 19; 1960,
3600 G@-L www Pm dee, Gee ee gO

i (Text) The president of the military collegiva of the USSR.
\ Supreme Court, Lt. Gen. Of justice ¥.¥. Borisoglebskiy, read the

Te court found éefendant Francis G.» Powers guilty of the erime covered

‘py Art. 2 of the jaw of the Soviet Union on criminal responsibility for,
state crimes, end sentenced him to 10 years' “confinement, with the. ~
first three years to be served in prison. i :

The sentence is final end not subject to appeals -. -

Announcement of the sentence was ‘met with great satisfaction and
applause by all those present.

This ended the session of the military collegium of the USSR Supreme - -
Court. a)? 7 wag ie : ~ /

(gaitor'¢ Note--L: So far, Moscow kas not broadcast any more information

on the details of the sentence, described Dy TASS English as "10 years’
of liberty, the

iipprisonment," by TASS Russian as "10 years deprivation
rirst three years to be served in prison.")}

court verdict in the criminal case of American spy pilct Francis G. Powers-
