The Situation in the Caribbean Through 1959
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000132410, dated 2 May 1959.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000132410).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

2 a3 : S 7 a
IEE gece poe need pres TRE pa et ee PB tt SEO ENY TOIT YS
TEE Geo Re ees geek PIP GRE RP ONE OEE MRT DOT FEE

cy = " _ g
- a
“F

ee ; SNIE -59
CUAHISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM, f= aimee
se RELEASEAS SANITIZED = Paka
vy 1997 | Skike
SPECIAL |
NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE
| NUMBER &6-59 |

i THE SITUATION IN THE CARIBBEAN
oo THROUGH 1959

Fock a

etd

wee Submitted dy the

oy DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE

The following inteLigence organizations participated ta the
preparation of thls estimate: Fhe Central Intelligence Agency
and the intelligence organizations of the Departments of
State, the Army, the Navy, the dir Force, and The Joint Stof.

Concurred tn by the
UNITED ST4TES INTELLIGENCE BOARD

on 30 June £959. Concurring were The Lirector of InfelH-
gence and Research, Depariment of State; the Assistant Chtef
Of Steffi for Intelligence, Department of the Army; the Asstat-
ant Chief of Naval Operctions for Intelligence, Department
_ of the Novy; the Aaststant Chief of Stef, Intelligence, USAF;
and the Director for Infelligence, The Joint Staff. The
Atomle Energy Commisston Representative fo the USIB, the
Aaisistant fo the Secretary of Defense, Spectal Operations,
the Director of the National Security Agency, and the scstef-
ant Director, Pederal Bureau of Investigation, ebstained, the. for ies
eubject being outside of thelr furtediction. tei o Chet
at @ 1 O6T-15%63—

afl

TABLE OF CONTENTS

THE PROBLEM ........ er i
CONCLUSIONS .. 2-1 ee ee ee ee wee ee ee |
DISCUSSION ......4+--. a a oe eae
> & INTRODUCTION a ra
Il. THE SITUATION AND OUTLOOK INCUBA... .- 2 2-

A. The Present Situation ...... oe ee te wees

The Character of Cestro and His Regime... .. 2...
The Communist Party... 2. 2 21 see ee es .
The Government. 2. 2 6 2 ee ee eee wees

% .t Economic Situation . 2... 1. 2 eee te
Ag. ‘*n Reform ..- - 2-2-2 ee ee eee eee

B. The Qutiok. 2. 2. 21. 2 2 ww ww ew oe ween
IM]. CARIBBEAN REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENTS. .....
Haiti. 2. we ee ee we cee ewe

Dominican Republic. 2 2... 2 6 ee ee ee ee
Nicaragua 2... 0-2 ee ee es oo ee ew

reir

ogg

THE SITUATION IN THE CARIBBEAN THROUGH 1959

THE PROBLEM

To estimate the prospects through 1959 for political stability in the Caribbean
republics, with particular reference to Communist strength and influence in Cuba

CONCLUSIONS

1. In Cuba, Fidel Castro achieved im-
mense popularity through his leadership
in the overthrow of the Batista dictator-
ship, a popularity which since has been
decreasing. His temperament and inex-
perience ill fit him to administer the gov-
ernment. He is inspired by a messianic
sense of mission to aid his people and
draws upon the common stock of Latin
American reformist ideas, but he has
little sense of the practical consequences
of his impulsive attitudes and actions.
(Paras. 10, 12-13)

2. The Communist Party in Cube has at
various times been and is again one of the
strongest in Latin America. With great
akili, it has succeeded in Identifying itself
with the Castro revolution, and is exploit-
ing the confusion and ineptitude of the
Castro administration to penetrate the
bureaucracy, the army, organized labor,
and the organization set up to carry out
the agrarian reform. The Communists
probably do not now control Castro, but

they are in a position to exert influence
in his regime and to carry on further or-
ganizational work. We believe ‘hat at
least for the period of this estimate the
Communists will continue to support
Castro’s program and will attempt to
avoid giving Castro any cause for be-
lieving that they are seeking to usurp his
position as leader. We, therefore, believe
that Castro is unlikely to take the drastic
steps necessary to check their increasing
power. (Paras. 14-15, 17-18, 21, 24-25)

$. The trend of developments in Cube
has alienated elements in the upper and
middle classes and the Catholic Church,
including many who originally sup-
ported Castro. His agrarian reform
law has aroused substantial opposition
even among smaller Cuban landowners.
There is also some dissatisfaction in the
military and to some extent in the rebel.
movement itself. Exile groups abroad
are plotting. Although opposition is on
the rise, Castro continues to enjoy wide

ox fier | 1

. ae <2 . v w ren ox eae 4
SRS AGS at R ISS TRIS ag es EISELE

ne oem ai yp Mes £: ir - me. wy?
. orf T “2
\

popularity. While moves te overthrow
the regime are possible, it ls unlikely that
dissatisfied elements either separately or
together will challenge him successfully
during 1959. (Para. 23}

4 Castro is concerned that his radical
actions, especially agrarian reform, could
cause the US to modify Cuba’s preferen-
tial treatment in the US sugar market.
However, should he believe that the US
Government or private interests were
exerting pressures to bring ebut a modi-
fication of his policies, he would probably
react strongly. It is possible that Castro
would threaten to demand the US with-
drawal from its nava] base at Guanta-
namo or threaten the expropriation of
other large US holdings. (Paras. 20-22}

§. Castro’s revolution in Cuba has
greatly stimulated revolutionary activity
throughout the Caribbean area. partic-
ularly among exiles from Nicaragua, the
Dominican Republic, and Haiti. Initially
Castro made the overthrow of dictator-
ship throughout Latin America a part
of his program. Lately, he has realized
the advisabibty of publicly adhering to
the doctrine of nonintervention as a pro-
tection for the revolution in Cuba.
Nevertheless, we believe he wil} continue
to assist revolutionary exile groups in
Cuba to invade their respective home-
lands. (Paras. 11, 28-29}

~

abo

ye? oe ers “ca

PEE Sty arse os

DISCUSSION

& INTRODUCTION

10. Fidel Castro’s victory freed Cubs from
Batista’s corrupt dictatorship. It also opened
the way for social, economic, and political re-
form. Castro’s objectives are to bring about
& social revolution including the reduction of
power of the wealthy, both Cuban and foreign,
and the improvemené of the lot of the poorer
classes. However, he ts ruling as a dictator
stating that democratic government is to be
re-established, but that it must be delayed
“until! the major economic and social reforms
have been successfully launched. The most
dangerous aspect of this situation of radical)
change is the opportunity which it gives to
the Communists, for they tan consolidate
thelr position by vigorously supporting Cas-
tro’s programs.

11. Castro's victory bas also given a new im-
petus to the groups seeking to overthrow the
dictatoria) regimes (n the Dominican Repub-
lic, Nicaragua, and Haiti, His success has
been of particular importance because ft dem-
onstrated a method whereby a small group
of determined men could win, and because if
showed that widespread popular support could
be generated for a sweeping social ard eco-
homic revolution. Castro's cal) for @ radical
change in the old order within the Caribbean
area, coupied with his affinity for extremist
revolutionaries, has increased the Commurdst
potential throughoul the area.

fl. TRE SITUATION AND OUTLOOK IN CUBA

A The Present Sitvation

12. The Character of Castro end His Regime.
Fidel Castro achieved brmense popularity
through his leacership in the overthrow of the
Batista dictatorship, # popularity which since
has been decreasing. He is inspired by a mes-
sianic sense of mission to aid his people and
draws upon the common stock of Latin Amer-
fcan reformist ideas, but he has Little sense of
the practical consequences of his impulsive
attitudes and actions. Furthermore he ap-
pears unwilling to tolerate disagreement with
his policies and labels any dissenter a counter-

revolutionary.

13. Castro's regime has functioned in e highly
unpredictable manner. In part this is the
result of the collapse of the former govern-
menta] structure and the inexperience of his
followers. But to a greater extent this prob-
ably stems from the fact thet he has none
Gecision-raaking in his own

bands. The regime has devoted much eflort
t punishing al! persons In and out of govern-
ment whom the revolutionaries class as Ba-
fista supporters. It has also put into effect
drastic measures which were designed to
weaken the position of the wealthy and the
middle class and to improve conditions of the
Jower classes. Some of these may have a bene.
ficial effect in (he Jong run. However, they
have been Introduced in an erratic manner

CRET

Mr Tet. wet

oe Ae:

oes Fp Lee 5 oe ar gee : . — -
FEN SE SEN SS LS BE RE es EEE '

sypfos ;

and have put new strains on an economy
which wat already suffering from the effects
of the prolonged civil war.

14. The Communist Party. The most danger:
ous aspect of this situation has been the op-
portunity created for the Cuban Comrounist
Party (Popular Socialist Party—P5&P) to im-
prove its position. This well organized party
has at various times been and fs again one of
the strongest in Latin America. By the end
of Batista’s regime in late 1058, the PSP had
been reduced to an estimated 6,000~-12,000
members. Nevertheless, even during the Be-
tista dictatorship, it was active in the Gelds
of labor, education, and entertainment. Al-
though the PSP as a party did not support
the Castro movement until its success was
imminent, it has since January given solid
support to Castro's program of purging Ba-
tista men and of social and economic reforr.
It has also actively sought to increase its mem-
bership and influence. Since Batista’s over-
throw PSP strength has increased, and today
ft may be as high as 17,000.

Js. Tae Government. The civillan govern-
ment, severely purged after Castro’s victory,
is still in a state of disorganization. Manuel
Urrutia remains @ rubber-stemp President.
The Cabinet includes sn ultranationalist, &
few moderates, and a number of political un-
knowns; recent changes in the Cabinet's
makeup may have reduced {ts competence.
In general its influence on Castro seems BEC-
ondary to that of his extremist advisers from
among his comrades in the 26th of July Move-
ment. A large part of the former bureaucracy
has been replaced by inexperienced adherents
of Castro’s movement and in certain cases by
known Communists or persons amenable to
Communist influence, including some at high
levels.

16. Tre Miliary. The regime bas attempted
to insure the loyally of the army by the mass
integration of 26th of July Movement forces
{nto its ranks, by the dismissal of many former
army troops, and by the execution or im-
prisonment of many professiona] army ofi-
cera. Therefore the new army, though lacking
in effective organization as a military estab-
Ushment, is probably loyal to Castro. The alr

force Is undergoing s purge and the navy has
lost many of its experienced high level officers.
The loyalty of both services to the regime
doubtful, and their capabilities have been cod-
siderably reduced.

17. Yhere ate @ pumber of Communists or
Communist sympathizers in the militery
forces, some of whom hold key spots. Castro's
brother Reul, who ts strongly sympathetic to
communism, commands the armed forces.
Major Ernesto “Che” Guevare Serna, a key
figure in the revolution who now commands
Havana's most important military installia-
tion, has consistently furthered Communist
interests. Other high ranking officers prod-
ebly are Communists or Communist sympa-
thizers. Communists have penetrated the
lower echelons of the new army. Al) members
of the armed forces are being subjected to
& political indoctrination program in which
the Corarmaunists have important influence.

18. Orpanized Lobdor. Castro has moved to
establish control of organized labor. This
force wes politically powerful even under Ba-
tists and gave little support to Castro until
the dictator fied. At that time a group of
rebels and s minority of five Communists
seized the directorate of the national labor
confederation. Subsequently Castro, to insure
his control of labor, reorganized the directo-
rate and excluded the Communists. Further-
more, in recent local union elections, his move-
ment won almost all ¥: Jership positions.
Although most Communist contenders were
defeated, it Is probable that some Commu-
nists won as candidates of the 26th of July
Movement. Morcover, it is likely that some
of the non-Communist but relatively inexpe-
rienced Castro followers are amenable to Com-
munist Influence. There are also Communists
in the rank-and-file and lower leadership eche-
ons of labor, and they enjoy certain sdvan-
tages from their long years of experience in
the labor movement. Thus, Gespite Castro's
efforts to develop & Iabor movement responsive
to his leadership, the Communists have been
able to retain @ strong position.

19. The Economic Situation. While the Cuban
economic situation is not yet critical, it has
deteriorated and holds potential for Commu-

anQner

pist exploitation. With labor's cooperation,
the suger industry, despite the late start in
the grinding season, has reached the 1058

2 However, @ lower world sugar price
has cantributed to & reduction in the island ‘s
tocome. Other sectors of the economy have
registered slight gains since the initial dis-
Jocations accompanying the revolt. They cou-
tinue to suffer as a result of apprehension in
business and commercial circles about Castro's
policies, €.g., the arbitrary lowering of rents
and the sequestration of International Tele-
phone and Telegraph properties. Tourism
and exports are down. Merchandising is off.
Construction has virtually ceased. High un-
employment, a chronic problem in Cuba, will
become more serious as the suger harvest is
completed. While there has been some prog-
pess toward stabilizing the labor-management
relationship, Jabor is restive.

20. Agrarian Reform. Castro has placed the
greatest emphasis on agrarian reform. Such
reform fs in the ibera) Latin American tradl-
tion and if ably carried out, probably would
benefit Cuba in the long run’ To put this
into effect, he promulgated in early June a
law eimed at dividing land holdings and at
eventually ending foreign ownership of Cuban
land. The law is the recognized product of
Castro's radical and extremist supporters; it
was adopted In place of a more moderate law
drafted by the former Minister of Agriculture.

21, Cuban moderates are concerned that Com-
munists will exploit the program to thelr own
advantage and that implementstion by in-
experienced officials will adversely affect the
economy. Their concern fs justified. Castro
has appointed pro-Communist AntonJo Nunez
Jimenez as director of the Agrarian Reform
Institute which is charged with supervising
the implementation of the program. The
moderates probably are also worried that the
effect of this law together with the regime's

*Buger normally accounts for about a quarter of
the annual GNP and brings tm $400-700 miltion
foreign exchange.

“Less than eight percent of landowners own 73
percent of Cuba's tote) agriculture! area.

ovefer

“A,

other e -tions G private investment,
Will be to discourage new investment by
Cubans as well as forcigners.*

22. While Castro was displeased with the US
reaction to his program, nevertheless he
evinced concern that his radical reform &c¢-
tions could result in loss of Cuba's preferential
treatment in the US sugar market. He is also
mindful of the importance of the US to Cubs
as its major trading partner and source of
investment capital. At the same time, be
probably calculates that the US freedom to
adopt sanctions against Cuba ts restricted by
US concern to avoid actions which might seri-
ously impair its influence elsewhere in latin
America. Should he believe that the US Gor-
ernment or private interests were exerting
pressures to bring sbout a modification of his
policies, he would probably react strongly. It
is possible that Castro would counter US pres-
sures by threatening to demand the US with-
drawal from its naval base at Guantanamo
or by threatening the expropriation of other
large US holdings.

B. The Outlook

23. Despite Castro's continuing appeal as @
national hero, opposition to him is growing.
The confiscatory nature of his agrarian reform
law has aroused substantial opposition from
the middle and upper classes. These segments
of the population, impatient with Castro's in-
experience snd impulsiveness, are generally
dissatisfied with his mismanagement of the
economy and the radical tone of his program.
Together with the hierarchy of the Catholic
Church and even some members of Castro's
movement, they are increasingly dissatisfied

US direct Investment in Cuda amounts to edout

million, representing almost the entire
‘amount of al) foreign investment in the country.
It ta roughly divided betecen investment in agzt-
culture, eblefiy sugar, ond that fa public aGl-
itles—telephone, power, and railroad com partes.
American sugar companies operating St of the
total 16] euger mills, bold about two million acres
7 land, zess then balf the total cane acreage,
and lease or contract for the purchase of cane
from another 600,000 acres. The doren US muzar
eompanie uced sbout @ Unird of the 1058

™ ota

Pa

with his feflure to curb Communist influence.
There are discontented elements in the active
and retired military because of Joss of personal

tion. ‘There is some dissatisfaction in
other groups which took part in the revolu-
tion, because Castro has failed to give them
a larger roje In the government. Exiles in the
US, Mexico, and the Dominican Republic are
actively plotting; there are a few armed re-
sistance groups forming in Cube itself. How-
ever, while armed attacks against the regime
are possible, we do not believe that any of
these groups 1s sufficiently well organized at
this time to pece a serious threat to Castro.
Nor do we gee a leader on the horizon capabie
of unifying the opposition. Therefore we be-
Lieve that Castro will remain in power at least
during the period of this estimate.

24. The Communists probebly do not now ccn-
trol Castro, but the are in a position to exert
Influence In his regime and to carry on Sur-
ther organizational work. As we have noted
above they have succeeded in gaining positions
in some of the country's most important Insti-
tutions and organizations. Additionally, the
Cuban Communist Party, probably Cuba's best
organized political party, is expanding its in-
uence in the country's radio and TV systems
and, to a lesser extent in the newspapers and
in the educational system. Its position 1s en-
hanced by Castro's sense of need for Commu-
nist cooperaton at the moment. We believe
that at Jeast for the period of this estimate
the Communists will continue to support
Castro's progrem end will attempt to avoid
giving Castro any cause for believing that they
are seeking to move In on his position es
leader.

25. Castro and certain of his followers have
recently made antlCommunist statements
which suggest that they have some concern
about the local Communists as @ potential
threat to the 26th of July Movement’s dom!-
pance. Thus far, however, Castro has taken
virtually no action to curb the Communists,
and we believe that he is unlikely to take
drastic steps against them during the period of
this estimate. _-

$8. After taking power in Cuba, Castro ss
sumed leadership of the crusade against dic-
tatorship. However, Betancourt and Figueres
goon became alarmed at Castro's demagogu-
ery, his support of Communist-connected exile
revolutionists, and his offensive treatment of
Figueres, and are presently at odds with him.
Despite Castro's open break with these estab-
lished Uberal leaders in Sfarch, Cuba ccn-
tinues to be a main gathering piace of exiles
and mercenaries who are planning revolution
ageinst the Dominican Republic, Haiti, and
Nicaragua. Castro left the task of Gealing
with these groups to his brother Raul and
“Che” Guevara, who have displayed a clear
preference for Communist-connected Nicare-

and Dominican groups. Other more
moderate revolutionists continued to look to
Figueres and Betancourt for ald and guidance.

ie ‘i

~*

RASFLUEES. FP Es BS REET

a AR Segoe, we ~~ x  ' i
Soe | . 8 afi T Wh q
: - ¢«

7
oo et Chet

- _ 28. The prompt reaction of the Organization ° ~
of American States (OAS) to the April in- ;
wasion of Panama by Cubans caused Castro to ; f£ document not
reiterate a policy of nonintervention in the reraane to Cubes material
affairs of other states. Nevertheless, Castro was not treated

is continuing to support various exile groups .
and we believe that in spile of the risks in-
volved be will continue to assist these groups
fo invede their respective homelands.

° SO. No government in the arvea, with the ex-
> ception of Cubs and possibly Venezuela, is
. likely to give substantial material afd to revo-
.  Jutfonary invasion forces. However, most of
: them play hosts to numbers of exiles. More
3 over, while most governments were willing to
: epprove OAS action which supported the Pan-
i amanian Government against invasion, they
; were reluctant to act when exiles recently in-
j vaded Nicaragua, and they will be even morc
: reluctant to agree to OAS action on behalf o
j « __the Trujillo regime. -
