Probable Developments in Egypt
Central Intelligence Agency
Declassified CIA document 0000119706, dated 3 February 1953.
Public domain: work of the United States federal government. OCR text from the Internet Archive CIA Reading Room mirror (https://archive.org/details/cia-readingroom-document-0000119706).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

waht

Approved for Release

Date 9 SEP 1997

aS :
See see:

DISSEMINATION NOTICE

~N4\. This copy of this publication is for the information and use of the recipign’
. design@ed on the front cover and of individuals under the jurisdiction of 4. @re
_cipient’s off who require the information for the performance of their off al duties
_ Purther dissemPmgion elsewhere in the department to other offices wth: require the
_ information for the Pexformance of official duties may be authorjeeG by the following:
a. Special AssistalM\to the Secretary for Intelligengefor the Department of
State ee ee fo, ee gee ee
b. Assistant Chief of Staff, G2, for the Dgsfrtment of the Army _
ec. Director of Naval Intelligence, e Department of the Navy
d. Director of Intelligence, mM", tor“sge Department of the Air Force
e. Deputy Director for Inpeffigence, Joint SDK for the Joint Staff
f, Director of Intelligefice, AEC, for the Atomic EMacey Commission
g. Assistant to jefe Director, FBY, for the Federal Bure of Investigation
h. Assistgaz® Director for Collection and Dissemination, CDs for any other
Depeftment or Agency oe Me
2. his copy may be either retained or destroyed by burning in accordan with .
apyable security regulations, or returned to the Central intelligence. Agency By
angement with the Office of Collection and Dissemination, CLA.

WARNING

within the me espionage laws,
Tie 18, USC aud) i34, the trans-
Tevelation of which in™
nN unauthorized person is prohibited by

DISTRIBUTION: -

White House

National Security Council

Department of State

Department of Defense

Mutual Security Agency é
Psychological Strategy Board é
Atontic Energy Conminussion

Federal Bureau of Investigation Peon. gory -2 f 3

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS IN EGYPT

CONCLUSIONS

1. Egypt is of major importance to West-
er security interests because Western
access to its territory in time of war is
essential for effective defense of the Mid-
dle East and because of the influence
which developments in Egypt are likely
to have on the other Arab states.

2. Egypt is now controlled by a mili-
tary junta, the Revolutionary Command
Council, which has espoused a program
of internal reform and is currently at-
tempting to secure Egypt’s foreign policy
objectives through negotiation with,
rather than defiance of, the West.

3. Although the present regime has in-
herent political weaknesses and will iace
many difficulties, it appears capable of
coping with all purely domestic problems
likely to arise during the next few
months. Barring unpredictable contin-
gencies such as assassination, its earliest
and possibly most decisive test is likely to
arise in the field of foreign policy, specifi-
cally in connection with the contemplated
negotiations with the West regarding
British evacuation of the Suez base and
Egypt’s role in Middle East defense.

4. Asuccessful outcome of these negotia-
tions cannot be predicted, particularly
if the Egyptians continue to insist on
complete British evacuation before con-
sidering the defense arrangement which
they will accept thereafter. Difficulties

“SECRET

O_O Eee

will almost certainly be created by hard
bargaining tactics by both the British
and the Egyptians, and by the many sub-
stantive issues which must still be re-
solved.

5. If the negotiations broke down and a
prolonged stalemate ensued, the present
government would probably seek to cover
the failure of its foreign policy by assum-
ing an anti-Western attitude. Faced
with internal dissension, increasing op-
position, and possible overthrow, the gov-
ernment would probably seek arms and
increased trade from the Soviet bloc and
at least acquiesce in a renewal of guer-
rilla warfare against the British garri-
sons. Any successor regime would prob-
ably be more extremist and anti-Western.
Serious disorders would lead the British
to consider military occupation of other
parts of Egypt.

6. The achievement of an agreement
with the West satisfactory to Egypt
would greatly strengthen the position of
the present Egyptian regime. Its domes-
tic prestige would be increased and it
would obtain the means for making a
start toward improving its military and
economic position.

7. Egypt would remain, however, a bas-
ically unstable country. Even with for-
eign aid, the regime would be faced with
difficult problems of management and

1

-24¢4

social adjustment in carrying out its in-
ternal reform program. Egypt’s eco-
nomic fortunes would continue to be
largely determined by the fluctuations of
the world cotton market. Finally the
regime would remain burdened with the
long-range problem of coping with heavy
population pressure and emerging popu-
lar aspirations in a land of limited possi-
bilities for increasing output.

8. The achievement of a defense agree-
ment settlement with Egypt along the
lines now contemplated by the US and
UK would provide the West with Egyp-
tian commitments regarding the Suez
base area. It would also provide the
West with an opportunity to secure closer
cooperation from the other Arab states.
Important sources of friction would re-
main, however, notably .Anglo-Egyptian
suspicions and Arab-Israeli tensions.

DISCUSSION

INTRODUCTION

9. Egypt is of major importance to Western
security interests. The Suez Canal lies en-
tirely within Egyptian territory. The Suez
Canal area contains the largest and best
located military base in the Middle East, and
its communications facilities and labor sup-
ply are the best in the region. Western
access to Egyptian territory in time of war is
considered essential for effective defense of
the Middle East. Moreover, because Egypt is
the most advanced and influential of the
Arab states, developments in Egypt will have
considerable effect on the attitude of the
other states of the Middle East toward the
West, on Arab-Israeli relations, and on Com-
munist influence in the area.

10. The Revolutionary Command Council!
under the chairmanship of General Moham-
med Nagib has complete control over the
Egyptian Government. Since overthrowing
King Farouk in July 1952, the RCC has put
an end to parliamentary government by abro-
gating the 1923 Constitution and abolishing
all political parties, and has destroyed or neu-
tralized major opposition groups. General
Nagib is Prime Minister and has assumed
extraordinary powers for three years. The
RCC not only has control over the govern-

‘The Revolutionary Command Council, commonly
called the High Military Committee until a re-
cent official announcement, is hereinafter re-
ferred to as the RCC.

—SHrerrtT—

ment and the ability to maintain public order,
but it currently enjoys widespread public
support for its domestic and foreign policies.

11. The members of the RCC regard them-
selves as revolutionary reformers; they are
committed to a bold program aimed at achiev-
ing sweeping internal reforms, at gaining and
exercising full Egyptian sovereignty, and at
strengthening Egypt economically and mili-
tarily. Breaking with the precedent of the
governments that preceded it, the RCC in-
augurated its regime with an energetic as-
sault on corruption and inefficiency and a
change of approach in the field of foreign
policy which has provided a new and favora-
ble opportunity for the negotiation of out-
standing issues with the UK.

BASIC CONCERNS OF GOVERNMENT
IN EGYPT

Political

12. By decree, supreme sovereignty is exer-
cised by Nagib in conjunction with the RCC,
which reportedly follows the principle of ma-
jority rule. A Council of Ministers, which is
appointed by and may be dismissed by the
RCC, sits with the RCC to pass on the general
policy of the state. The RCC has the coop-
eration of a number of competent civilian
leaders in high posts and of the rank-and-file
of civil servants.

13. Since coming to power the RCC has ruled
with increasing effectiveness and has dis-

~245

IEEE ED EE OU EE EE EE ee

played great shrewdness in dealing with
existing political organizations and prom-
inent political personalities. It has an-
nounced and implemented extensive reforms,
which have always been contrived and pre-
sented in a manner which has attracted more
support than opposition and conveyed a sense
of active concern for the nation or some large
element within it. The RCC has been able to
achieve this political success, in spite of the
handicap of inexperience, because its pro-
gram has appealed to the important middle
sector of Egyptian society, made up of stu-
dents, government workers, professional
classes, and small businessmen. The mem-
bers of the RCC are themselves members of
that social group, were educated in institu-
tions where its emerging ideals predominated,
and accept the principles and objectives of
Egyptian nationalism. The RCC has won
the support of the members of the middle
sector of Egyptian society because its pro-
gram gives expression to their aspirations for
independence and reform and gives hope for
the achievement of these long-cherished
goals.

14. The RCC is apparently aware of the im-
portance of catering to the urge of the mid-
dle sector to engage in political activity and
so far has managed to keep it satisfied and
loyal, without sacrificing its own power.
Over the long run, however, the RCC will have
to provide other means for this middle group
to get a sense of participation in political life,
or run the risk of dangerous opposition from
the most politically conscious and influential
members of Egyptian society. It is currently
attempting to do this through the medium of
the new official “Liberation Organization”
which is designed to provide a new center
around which political support for the new
regime can be organized. The RCC has
placed great emphasis upon its reformist
aspirations, but it has shown increasing cau-
tion about unorthodox schemes for solving
the country’s problems, however great imme-
diate political value they might have. Ina
period of crisis, however, inexperience and
zeal to win wider popular support might lead

the RCC to attempt sweeping programs be-
yond the capability of the government.

15. A potential source of weakness in the RCC
is its reported division into two factions on
questions of principle and tactics. One
group, which includes General Nagib and
which has dominated the RCC from the be-
ginning, supports a policy of moderate na-
tionalism and currently advocates an at-
tempt to secure benefits for Egypt through
bargaining with the West. A second group is
said to lean more toward extreme nationalism
and a tactic of toughness and militancy.
Divisions within the RCC are likely to in-
crease if the regime fails to make progress,
thus decreasing the effectiveness of the gov-
ernment.

16. There exist several opposition groups
which might participate in a counter-revolu-
tionary movement. These include the sup-
porters of the monarchy, the upper-class poli-
ticians who formerly dominated Parliament,
the Wafd Party, and Army groups associated
with the former High Command or opposed
to the Army’s new political role. All these
groups have been weakened or neutralized by
the present government, but they would gain
strength if the government suffered serious
reverses or failed to make progress, or if seri-
ous conflicts developed within the RCC itself.
Even the groups now supporting the RCC,
particularly the Moslem Brethren, might turn
against it under certain circumstances.

17. The small and factional Communist
movement in Egypt is not likely to become
a Serious threat as long as the present regime
makes progress toward its announced goals.
The RCC government will continue to sup-
press Communism and apparently has the
means to control Communist-inspired disor-
ders in Egypt. While these circumstances
prevail, Communists are unlikely to make
progress toward infiltrating the armed forces
or the civil agencies of the government.
Communists in Egypt will probably concen-
trate on anti-Western propaganda themes
such as “imperialism,” and US support of
Israel, particularly while negotiations with
the West continue. If, however, the govern-

FHCRET”

Qdb

“SECRET 4

ment’s policy of bargaining with the West
should end in stalemate the Communists
would enjoy an increased propaganda ad-
vantage. If economic deterioration and fail-
ure of projected economic and social reforms
produced widespread dissatisfaction, Commu-
nist influence with students, labor, and peas-
ants would be greatly increased. In the event
of the serious weakening of the government’s
position in Egypt, the Communists could con-
tribute to the general instability by support-
ing one or more of the opposition groups now
infiltrated to a limited extent.

Economic

18. When it came to power in Egypt, the RCC
was keenly aware that much of the dissatis-
faction with the former regime stemmed from
its corruption and from its failure to deal
effectively with the country’s growing eco-
nomic problems. It took early and strong
action against the governmental corruption
and inefficiency which had had an adverse
effect on the economy. The many royal
favorites were removed from positions of
power and political parties were required to
disown and expel corrupt elements. It an-
nounced a sweeping land reform program
and took steps to meet the immediate domes-
tic cotton crisis.

19. The RCC’s land reform program as en-
acted, though less ambitious than the one
originally announced, remains its most im-
portant domestic innovation and a principal
reason for its reputation as a champion of
reform. Under present plans, the govern-
ment will in the next five years take over
that portion of individual holdings which is
in excess of 200 acres for redistribution to
landless peasants in two to five acre plots.
In addition, the government is instituting col-
lateral changes which may have an even more
pronounced effect on Egyptian agriculture,
among them a restatement of peasant rights
vis-a-vis their landlords, provision for govern-
mental fixing of agricultural wages, and com-
pulsory membership in agricultural coopera-
tives by all holders of five acres or less. The
land redistribution program will involve
about one-tenth of the land now under culti-

yation, less what the larger landholders give
to their relatives or sell to others, as permitted
by the law, before the government moves in.
The program is set up on self-liquidating
lines; the government will pay off the large
landowners in government bonds and in turn
is to be paid back by the new peasant pro-
prietors over a thirty-year period.

20. The program has thus far been a major
political asset to the regime; its popularity
among the peasantry and the middle groups
has more than outweighed the adverse effect
on the already hostile landlord class. How-
ever, the political value of the program may
decline as it is carried out. Present suppor-
ters of the program may become disillusioned
as it becomes apparent that only a small
fraction of the millions of landless peas-
ants — perhaps 150,000 families — will obtain
plots of their own. Even if the program is
quickly and efficiently implemented, rural
living standards will not necessarily improve.
Unemployment among hired farm laborers
may increase, and production may actually
decrease as a result of the changes in owner-
ship, production methods, and marketing
channels. We believe that government at-
tempts to exact payments from the new
peasant proprietors will become a continuing
cause of friction, even though payments are
to be spread over a thirty-year period and
compensation rates have been set at half or
less of the current value of the land expro-
priated.

21. The RCC has been forced to address itself
to a serious cotton situation resulting
from excessive speculation under preceding
regimes, increased production of Egyptian
cotton, and a slump in the world cotton
market. Soon after the beginning of the
new cotton crop year in September 1952, the
RCC government found that the state owned
a large carry-over from the preceding year’s
crop and that speculation had priced Egyp-
tian cotton out of the world market, in which
prices were falling. The government closed
the futures market, pegged the price of cot-
ton, and offered to buy it at that price in
order to prevent the ruin of Egyptian pro-
ducers. With great effort the agents of the

—6EGRET—

-247

—pPrenet

government have succeeded in disposing of
more cotton abroad than had been sold or
bartered at this time last year. The big cot-
ton problems, however, remain unsolved.
Because of increased Egyptian production,
this year’s carry-over will probably be larger
than last year’s, even if sales hold up. The
most dangerous element in the situation is
the effect that the current low price of cotton
(less than half of last year’s price for the long
staple variety) has on foreign exchange earn-
ings, upon which Egypt depends for vital
imports.

22. Under the present organization of the
Egyptian economy, Egypt exports about half
of its agricultural output by value, using the
proceeds to purchase essential foodstuffs and
items like fertilizer needed to maintain pro-
duction. Of these exports, cotton is by far
the most important, normally providing some
75-80 percent of Egypt's foreign exchange
earnings. Egypt could make some adjust-
ments to a continuation of the present slump
in world cotton prices. It could probably
divert considerable additional acreage from
cotton to wheat, but even at present prices
wheat is still far more expensive to produce
at home than to buy with cotton proceeds
abroad. Egypt may be able to barter increas-
ing quantities of cotton to the Soviet bloc in
exchange for wheat and other goods. In any
case, Egypt’s economy would probably still
remain heavily dependent on the export of 4
single commodity, the world price of which is
unsteady and may be moving downward.
Moreover, it will probably be impossible to
find a substitute high money-yield crop or to
achieve comparable returns from crop diversi-
fication.

23. The RCC will also be burdened by Egypt's
basic economic and social problem, namely the
extreme poverty caused by the pressure of
rapid growth of population on the country’s
meagre resources. There is no ready solu-
tion to this problem. The productivity of
land now under cultivation probably cannot
be substantially increased. Although it is
estimated that the cultivated area could be
enlarged by 25 to 50 percent through reclama-
tion and irrigation of presently unused land,

—SEORE—

this might cost as much as ten billion dollars,
or one-quarter of the total national income
over a twenty-year period. In past years,
gains in Egyptian production have been more
than matched by increased population, and
there is no reason to believe that there will
be any rapid change in the conditions which
are currently stimulating population growth.
Industrial development on a scale sufficient to
affect the Egyptian standard of living would
require an investment which, like that re-
quired for the reclamation of potentially
cultivable land, is larger than the economy
can carry. Moreover, possibilities for indus-
trial development are limited by the scarcity
of known natural resources and by the ab-
sence of an adequate industrial base on which
to build.

Military

24. Egypt’s military forces comprise a 65,000-
man army consisting of two infantry divi-
sions plus smaller infantry, armored force,
antiaircraft, and coast artillery units; an air
force of about 3,000 men, and 111 fighter
planes (37 of them jets), 17 bombers, and 57
transports; and a navy of about 5,600 men,
equipped with a variety of light escort and
coastal patrol vessels. These forces, to-
gether with the police, are adequate for main-
taining internal order, although their present
combat effectiveness is low. Much of the
equipment on hand is obsolete or obsolescent,
and there are serious shortages not only in
major items of unit and individual equipment
but also in spare parts and ammunition.

25. Egypt’s present leaders, whose drive to
power stemmed initially from resentment
over the weakened and corrupt;state of the
armed forces under King Farouk, have made
it clear that they want to build a modern
military establishment capable of standing
up against Israel and capable of assuming
sole responsibility for defense of Egypt’s
cities and bases. This desire to strengthen
the armed forces is reinforced by recognition
of the favorable psychological effect which
such a result would have, not only on the
population at large but also on the military

forces themselves, on whose continued sup-

~2U¥

port the present regime relies primarily for
survival. However, Egypt cannot obtain the
volume of equipment it desires without meet-
ing the conditions which the US and UK
wish to impose. Moreover, even if equipment
is made available, the transformation of the
Egyptian military establishment into an ef-
fective fighting force will require sustained
outside technical assistance and a long period
of training. Although their effectiveness as
combat forces would probably remain low,
Egyptian forces could be extremely useful as
base and line of communications personnel.

Foreign Policy

26. The RCC government has had its greatest
success in the field of foreign policy. It has
concluded that Egypt’s strategic assets and
the West’s need for Egypt's cooperation make
it possible for Egypt to bargain effectively
with the West. It has consequently aban-
doned the unyielding approach of its pred-
ecessors, and entered into negotiations with
the West. This does not indicate a reversal
of basic Egyptian attitudes. The RCC is bar-
gaining with the West, not because it is pro-
Western, but because it believes it can thus
best achieve its principal foreign policy objec-
tive: (a) full sovereign independence and the
strength to maintain it. The government
also believes that the realization of this objec-
tive would contribute to the accomplishment
of its other principal foreign policy aims;
(b) leadership in the Arab world; and (c) pre-
vention of the expansion of Israel.

27. The achievement of full Egyptian sover-
eignty through the evacuation of the Sudan
and the Suez base area and the military and
economic build-up of Egypt with Western aid
are the most important of the government’s
announced foreign policy objectives. Al-
though the RCC has adopted a more flexible
policy in bargaining with the British on the
Sudan question, RCC members probably share
the almost pathological distrust of the British
which characterizes their countrymen. Fur-
ther success in Anglo-Egyptian negotiations
will tend to ease relations between the two
countries, but will almost certainly not elimi-
nate mutual suspicions.

28. Egyptians do not regard the US as a colo-
nial power, but US support of Israel has made
them profoundly suspicious and resentful of
US policy in the area. At the moment the
Egyptian Government has an extremely cor-
dial attitude toward the US, but this is prob-
ably based largely on considerations of ex-
pediency. The RCC has counted on the US to
bring pressure on the UK to make concessions
and sees in the US the most likely source of
military and economic assistance. If the
RCC became convinced that it could not ob-
tain these benefits from the US, it would
almost certainly abandon its present coopera-
tive attitude. Under any circumstances, the
RCC would object to anything which it inter-
preted as US interference in Egyptian affairs.

29. The Egyptian Government will continue
its policy of developing and exercising political
ascendency in the Arab world. Although
Egypt may devote increasing attention to the
Sudan and Libya, it will continue to play the
leading role in the Arab League. The other
Arab states would probably follow Egypt’s lead
in associating themselves with a Middle East
defense organization if offered comparably fa-
vorable terms, and would be unlikely to join if
Egypt failed to do so. The other Arab states
will also tend to give considerable weight to
the Egyptian position in such matters as joint
action relating to Israel. With the possible
exception of Syria, however, they are unlikely
to recognize Egyptian authority to make deci-
sions for the Arab League.

30. The RCC is well disposed toward Pakistan
and would probably welcome that country’s
participation in an area defense organization
in which Egypt was involved. However, it
would resist Pakistani efforts to exercise lead-
ership in the Arab world.

31. Egypt’s desire to obtain and to continue
to receive military and economic aid from the
West may lead the government to restrain
itself in its public utterances and public policy
toward Israel, but Egyptian hostility toward
Israel cannot be expected to change. The
RCC will attempt to strengthen the Arab
League boycott, which it recognizes has been
causing trouble for Israel. Egypt’s policy on
the procurement of arms and military assist-

SECRET

~244

~S-e-REE 7

ance will continue to be conditioned in large
measure by its desire to redress the military
balance of power between itself and Israel.
There is little likelihood that Egypt will take
steps to come to an over-all peace settlement
with Israel, or accept such overtures as Israel
is willing tomake. However, the present gov-
ernment’s evident belief in the advantages of
bargaining and of compromise may lead it to
move toward some more specific regulariza-
tion of its relations with Israel.

32. The attitude of the RCC toward the East-
West conflict is opportunistic. It sees a more
immediate threat from Israel and the UK
than from the USSR. It regards the cold war
primarily as a circumstance which enhances
its bargaining power with the West, particu-
larly the US. It is willing to contemplate co-
operation with the West for regional defense
mainly because it hopes the West in return
will evacuate the Suez base area and grant
military and economic aid. If aid were not
forthcoming from the West, we believe the
Egyptians would probably attempt to obtain
arms from or to expand trade with the Soviet
bloc, although, as with the West, they would
attempt to avoid any agreements with the
bloc which would involve any form of political
alignment. However, opportunities for trade
with the Soviet bloc are limited and the USSR
would not be likely to give substantial assist-
ance to any Egyptian regime which was not
under virtual Communist domination.

PROBABLE DEVELOPMENTS

33. Although the present government is ap-
parently capable of maintaining security and
has reportedly made provision for an orderly
succession within the RCC, the Egyptian sit-
uation contains so many elements of insta-
bility that the course of events might be sud-
denly shifted by some unpredictable develop-
ment. Nevertheless, the present regime
apparently intends to follow through with a
policy of achieving Egyptian objectives if pos-
sible through negotiations with the West.
The outcome of these negotiations not only
will have a major effect on Western interests
in Egypt and in the rest of the Middle East but
also is likely to exercise a determining in-
fluence on the RCC'’s future policies and ten-

ure of power. We foresee no domestic issues
which are likely to produce serious dissension
within the RCC or to provide opposition
groups with a sufficiently powerful lever to
oust it from office during the next few months.
Economic problems, while serious, are not
likely to assume critical proportions during
that period. Thus the earliest and possibly
most decisive test of the regime is likely to
arise over foreign policy.

34. The first stage in the execution of this
policy has recently been completed by the
signing of an Anglo-Egyptian agreement pro-
viding for self-determination of the Sudan
within a period of three years. The RCC has
secured the early removal of the British-
dominated Sudan administration and has
gained at least temporarily the good will of
the great majority of Sudanese leaders. The
Western Powers, meanwhile, have achieved
the removal of the principal stumbling block
to settlement of their other outstanding prob-
lems with Egypt without abandoning the prin-
ciple that the Sudanese must be able to decide
for themselves whether they wish to be inde-
pendent or joined in some fashion with Egypt.

Negotiations with the UK and the US

35. With the completion of the formal Sudan
agreement, negotiations are now to go for-
ward on the future of the British-occupied
Suez base and on Egypt's role in defense of the
Middle East. Itis expected that Egypt will be
offered a firm commitment regarding evacua-
tion of British troops from Egyptian soil and
assurance of UK-US economic and military
assistance in return for commitments regard-
ing: (a) Western use of the Suez base in time
of war; (b) peacetime maintenance and air
defense of the Suez base area; and (c) Egyp-
tian participation in a regional defense organ-
ization.

36. We are unable to estimate the outcome of
these negotiations.

a. On the one hand, the successful conclu-
sion of the Sudan talks has created a favor-
able atmosphere for the negotiations. RCC
members have conceded the need for Western
technicians to maintain the Suez base, and
have indicated that the government would be

~—~SEC-RE-T—

250

Shon

willing to consider participation in Middle
East defense planning once its demands re-
garding evacuation and military assistance
had been met. The British, for their part,
have agreed to the principle of evacuation of
their troops from Egyptian territory, provid-
ing that satisfactory alternate security ar-
rangements are worked out with Egypt.

b. On the other hand, the multitude of com-
promises which must be worked out and the
attitudes which the UK and Egypt are likely
to display in dealing with each other will tend
to make the negotiations protracted and diffi-
cult. The UK will probably continue to re-
gard the Egyptians as oriental bargainers who
would be quick to take advantage of any loop-
hole and who would regard any freely offered
concession as a sign of weakness; in conse-
quence, the British will probably continue to
favor a legalistic step-by-step bargaining tech-
nique designed to assure 4 firm Egyptian com-
mitment in return for every British concession
made. For their part, the Egyptians will tend
to remain suspicious about British sincerity
on the evacuation issue, skeptical about the
military necessity for foreign participation in
the maintenance and the ground defense of
the Suez base area, and anxious to make the
most of current Western eagerness to reach a
settlement.

37. Negotiating difficulties are mostly likely
to arise over the following points:

a. Evacuation of the Suez Base. The UK
plans to phase withdrawal of British troops
from the Suez base area with progress in the
negotiations, in order to insure Egypt’s fol-
lowing through with negotiations in good
faith. On the other hand, the Egyptians have
not only insisted that complete evacuation of
British troops from Egypt is a prerequisite to
a deal with the West, but have sometimes
asserted that serious negotiations might be
out of the question until evacuation had been

completed.

b. Air Defense. The UK will urge the mili-
tary necessity of having RAF squadrons par-
ticipate in air defense of the Suez base area
until Egyptian capabilities improve. Egyp-
tian distrust of the British and their sensi-

ce

tivity on the question of sovereignty may lead
them to reject this proposal or to demand
restrictions on RAF activity unacceptable to
the British.

c. Base Technicians. Arguments over the
number of technicians needed and their rela-
tionship with the Egyptian Government will
almost certainly arise.

d. Regional Defense Organization. Al-
though the Egyptians have indicated a will-
ingness to discuss plans for a Middle East de-
fense organization if their own requirements
are fulfilled, they have shown little real en-
thusiasm for the project and will probably
seek to keep their own commitments to the
organization to a minimum. They will prob-
ably be reluctant to grant the organization
pre-emergency rights in Egypt. In addition,
they can be expected to take strong exception
to having a British officer head the military
command or staff organization. The Egyp-
tians may present their own plan for an area
defense organization based on the Arab
League Security Pact.

e. Economic and Military Aid. The Egyp-
tians may object to the proposed phasing of
aid to progress in the negotiations. They
may make unreasonable demands regarding
the type and quantity of aid, and may hold
out for grant aid with no strings attached.
Finally, probable British insistence on the
UK’s position as Egypt's habitual source of
military supplies may cause difficulties.

If Negotiations Break Down

38. If the negotiations broke down completely
and if the US and UK were unsuccessful in
evolving some new and different approach to
the problem, we believe that the situation in
Egypt would gradually deteriorate. Open
opposition to the British would increase, and
opponents of the policy of negotiating with
the West would be strengthened. At least ini-
tially, the RCC would probably seek to con-
vince the US of the necessity of assisting them
regardless of what the British thought. Re-
quests for US economic and military assist-
ance would be renewed, accompanied by warn-
ings of the increasing danger of the assump-
tion of power by Communist or ultra-nation-

SECRET

~ 2451

ORE . 9:

alist elements and by hints that Egypt might
be forced to turn to the Soviet bloc for
assistance.

39. If the stalemate between Egypt and the
West continued, the regime would almost cer-
tainly be compelled to adopt new tactics. US
ability to influence the situation would de-
crease. The Egyptian Government would
probably seek to obtain arms from and to in-
crease its trade with the Soviet bloc. Anti-
British demonstrations would probably take
place in the cities, and a renewal of guerrilla
warfare against the British troops in the Suez
base area would be likely. Although the
Egyptians would not be capable of physically
expelling the British garrisons there, even if
the Egyptian Army were employed, a com-
bination of guerrilla attacks and economic
sanctions could make the operation and
maintenance of the base difficult and costly.
As tensions mounted within Egypt, the RCC
would face internal dissension, increasing op-
position and possible overthrow. Any suc-
cessor regime would probably be more ex-
tremist and anti-Western. Serious disorders
would lead the British to consider military
occupation of other parts of Egypt.

If Negotiations Succeed

40. If the RCC succeeded in reaching a satis-
factory agreement with the West, its position
would be greatly strengthened. Even if some
technicians and RAF units were allowed to re-
main, Egyptian assumption of control over
the Suez base and the evacuation of its British
garrison —a goal which previous Egyptian
governments have attempted in vain — would
represent an important triumph for the re-
gime which would add to its prestige and un-
dermine the opposition. The removal of the
immediate causes of friction between Egypt
and the West under these favorable circum-
stances would increase Egyptian self-esteem.
Finally, receipt of economic and military aid
would further strengthen the position of the
government and permit it to make some prog-
ress toward improving economic conditions.

41. Achievement of a general settlement be-
tween Egypt and the West would at best
ameliorate the situation and would not itself

SHEREE

guarantee lasting results. Several potential
sources of friction between Egypt and the
West would remain:

a. Suspicion of the West and lack of pri-
mary concern over the Soviet menace would
continue, at least initially. As a result Egypt
would probably be grudging in its cooperation
with the Middle East defense organization and
might seek, in response to popular pressure or
on its own initiative, to circumscribe the ac-
tions of the defense organization and of West-
ern military advisers within its territory.

b. Egypt would almost certainly insist on
continuing economic and military aid as the
price of continued cooperation with the West.
Particularly in the military field, friction
would be likely to arise over the amount and
character of Western assistance.

c. Antagonism between the Arab states and
Israel would continue, and the provision of
substantial amounts of military equipment to
Egypt would arouse Israel's fears of a renewal
of hostilities. US association with Israel
would continue to handicap US relations with
Egypt.

42. Other potential sources of friction not
directly connected with the settlement will
remain:

a. Some friction will probably arise over
implementation of the Sudan agreement, par-
ticularly as the time for elections and for the
later decision on Sudan’s future status comes
near. The retiring British element in the
Sudan administration is bitterly hostile to
Egypt and will probably seek to encourage
anti-Egyptian tendencies in the Sudan.
Egypt, on the other hand, will probably em-
ploy electioneering and proselytizing tactics to
which the British would take exception.

b. The status of the Suez Canal might also
become the subject of controversy. Egypt has
sought to prevent the movement of Israel-
bound goods through the canal, and the Brit-
ish and French have asked the help of other
Western nations to bring an end to this prac-
tice. The RCC government will probably
continue to attempt to block the passage of
Israeli goods.

~252

Sen

aan

ele Taek Ni et ns ee ee

The Outlook for Internal Stability

43. In any event, Egypt would remain a bas-
ically unstable country. Under the best of
circumstances, the RCC regime would have
serious problems of management and social
adjustment in carrying out its internal reform
program. In addition, it has only limited
ability to fulfill the hopes and expectations of
a better life which its own program is helping
to stimulate. Egypt’s economic fortunes will
continue to be largely determined by the fluc-
tuations of the world cotton market. The
younger middle-class element which repre-
sents the most volatile group in Egyptian po-
litical life will still find only limited opportu-
nities for acquiring jobs and status. Finally,
the government will continue to be confronted
with the underlying difficulty of coping with
heavy population pressure in a land of scarcity
in all the factors required to expand agricul-

Sek h— : 10 |

tural and industrial output. Although this is
a chronic problem which may never emerge
in the form of a clear-cut immediate crisis, it
nevertheless makes Egypt’s long-range pros-
pects for stability unfavorable.

44. Even with the benefit of foreign military
and economic aid, the regime would still have
difficulty in sustaining the atmosphere of
progress which has helped to buttress its
position thus far. In order to provide the
lower middle and fellahin groups with an
emotional substitute for unachieved social
and economic improvements, it might be
obliged to adopt extremist policies, in the
foreign as well as in the domestic field. If
the regime failed to make continuing progress
and was unable to provide adequate emotion-
al substitutes, it would probably have to re
sort increasingly to repressive and author-
itarian methods to remain in power.

a

- 2453
