CICERO: DE FINIBUS BONORUM ET MALORUM
With an English translation by H. Rackham (Loeb Classical Library)
London: William Heinemann; New York: The Macmillan Co., 1914. (Latin with facing English.)
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/definibusbonoru00cicegoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY

BDITBD  Br

T.  E.  PAGE,  LiTT.D.,  AND  W.  H.  D.  ROUSE,  Lrrr.D.

CICERO
DE  ' 'JIBUS  BONORUM  ET  MALORUM

CICERO

IE  PINIBTJS  BONOEUM
ET  MALORUM

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  liY

H.  BACKHAM,  M.A.

LONDON: WILLIAM HEINEMANN
NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.

j^t-r

33-,^

778824

CONTENTS

^Suction

c  III
<1V

77
S15

INTRODUCTION.
The  de  Finibas  Bonorum  el  Malorum  is a  trentjse  ^'
I  On  the  theory  of  Ethics. It  expounds  and  criticizes
I  the  three  ethical  systems  most  prominent  in  Cicero's
I  day,  the  Epicurean,  the  Stoic  and  that  of  the  Aca-
i  demy under Antiochus. The most eluhorate of
I  Qcero's  philosophical  writings,  it has had fewer
I  readers  than  his  less  technical  essays  on  moral  sub-
;  jects. But  it  is  of  importance  to  the  student  of  philo*
Sophy as the only systematic account survivins
from  antiquity  of  those  rules  of  life  which  divided
the  allegiance  of  thoughtful  men  during  the  cen-
turies when  the  old  religions  had  lust  their  hold  and
Christianity  had  not  yet  emerged. And  the  topics
that  it  handles  can  never  lose  their  interest.

The  title 'Almut  the  Ends  of  Goods  and  Evils'  ^
requires  explanation.  It  was  Aristotle  who  put  the  "■'
ethical  problem  in  the  form  of  the_iiuestioQ,  Wliat
is.  the  TeAiw  or  End,  the  supreme  aim  of  man's  en-
deavour, in  the  attainment  of  which  his  Good  or
Well-being  hes?  For  Aristotli;,_2e/iy_cQiinated_nflt_
Baly  aim,'  but  completion ' ;  and  he  found  the
Miswer  to  his  question  in  the  complete  development
lad  right  exercise  of  tlie  faculties  of  man's  nature.

tfid  particularly  of  the  distinctively  human  faculty
tf_Beason.  The  life  of  the  Intellect  was  the  Best,
!flsis_jveis_  Means  to
jie  attainment  of  this  Bind,  Thus  was  introduced
tb^  notion  of  an  ascending  scale  of  Goods,  and  this

effected  the  interpretation  of  the  term  jf'gfoj. Tehs
Luch  the

extrsme

e  to  he  understood  as  denoting  not  si
or  aim  of  endeavour  aji  the  end  or

INTRODUCTION  3

point  of  a  series,  the  topmost  ^ood.  To  this  wa
naturally  opposed  an  extreme  of  minus  value,  tli'
to^nostj  or  rather  bottommost,  evil^  Tlie  expres
sions  T«Aos  dya0mv,  rikoq  «mitBii',  End  of  Goods,  o
Evils,'  do  not  occur  in  extant  Greek  (though  Dio
genes  has  nXiKo.  KaKii,  '  final  evils  ")i  hut  they  ar.
attested  by  Cicero's  translation  ^ij  bonorum  el  mala
rum.  As  a  title  for  his  book  he  throws  this  phras.
into  the  plural,  meaning  different  vietvs  as  to  th
Chief  Good  and  Evil.'  Hence  in  title  and  to  som
extent  in  method,  the  de  Finibiis  may  be  comparer
with  such  modem  works  as  Martineau's  Types  q
Ethical  Theory  and  Sidgwick's  Methods  o/  Ethics.

iceroas  a  Cicero  belongs  to  a  type  not  unknown  in  Englis'

riV^r  OH  life,  that  of  the  statesman  who  is  also  a  student  and
kilosophy.  writer.  From  his  youth  he  aspired  to  play  a  part  i:
r  public  affairs,  and  the  first  step  towards  this  ambitio.

was  to  learn  to  speak.  He  approached  Greek  philo
sophy  as  part  of  a  liberal  education  for  a  politic*
career,  and  he  looked  on  it  as  supplying  themes  fc
practice  in  oratory.  But  his  real  interest  in  it  wen
deeper;  the  study  of  it  formed  his  mind  and  hi:
manized  his  character,  and  he  loved  it  to  the  end  <
his  life.

In  his  youth  he  heard  tbeheads  of  the  three  cIim
Schools  of"  Athens,~Pliacdrus"the  Epicurean,  jjijjdl
tus  the  Stoic,  and  Philo  the  Academic,  jwhu.lifl
come  to  Rome  to  escape  the  disturbances  of  tlj
Mithradalic  War.  WJien  already  launched  in  publ:
life,  he  withdrew,  at  the  age  of  27(79  B.r.),todevol
two  more  years  to  philosophy  and  rhetoric.  Si
months  were  spent  at  Athens,  and  the  introductio
to  de  Fiiiibus  Book  V  gives  a  brilliant  picture  of  h

=  ■  stade

INTRODUCTION

5"  stadeut  life  tliete  with  his  friends.  No  passage
and  her  memories
At  Athens  Cicero
attended  the  lectures  of  the  Epicurean  Zeno  and  the
Academic  Antiochus.  Passing  on  to  Rhodes  to
work  under  the  leading'  professors  of  rhetoric,  he
there  met  Posidonius,  the  most  renowned  Stoic  of
the  day.  He  returned  to  Borne  to  plunge  into  his
career  as  advocate  and  statesman;  but  his  Letters
show  him  continuing  his  studies  in  his  intervals  of
leisure.  For  many  years  the  Stoic  Diodotus  was  an
inmate  of  his  liouse.

Under  the  Triumvirate,  as  his  influence  in  politics

wnned,  Cicero  turned  more  and  more  to  literature.

His  earliest  essay  in  rhetoric,  the  de  InvmUione,  had

appeared  before  he  was  twenty-five; but  liis  first

considerable works on rhetoric and on political

sdence,  the  de  Oratore,  de  Republica,  and  de  Legibia,

lO-l  were  written  after  hia  return  from  exile  in  57. The

^■aVi  c^iening  pages  of  de  Fiai6iis  Book  III  give  a  glimpse

fortof  hifi  studies  at  this  period. In 51 he  went  as

^nll  Governor  to  Cilicia;  and  he  wrote  no  more  until  the

liu-ldefeat  of  Pompey  at  Pharsalus  had  destroyed  his

I  cillwpes  for  the  Republic.

I  After  his  reconciliation  with  Caesar  and  return  to
)ie()H(iine  in  the  autumn  of  4-6,  Cicero  resumed  writing
.(IqJ  to  rhetoric.  In  February  45  came  the  death  of  his
liaJ  Moved  daughter  TuIlLi,  followed  soon  afler  by  the
bikl  downfall  of  the  Pompeians  at  Munda.  Crushed
L>li(|lT',pu'>lic  and  private  sorrow,  he  shut  himself  up  in
utfl^ti^of  his  country  houses  and  sought  distraction  in
Sii^remitting  literary  work.  He  conceived  the  idea,
Ihe  implies  in  the  preface  to  de  Finihus,  ai  render-
a  last  service  to  his  country  by  bringing  the

INTRODUCTION

fla/c  n/  de treasures  of  Greek  thought  within  the  reach  of

""  "^'  Roman  public. Both  his  Arademlca  and de  Ft,

were  compiled  in  the  following  summer;  the  li

(was  probably  presented  to  Brutus,  to  whom
dedicated,  on  his  visit  to  Cicero  in  August  iS
Att.  Xlll,  4>4).  Seven  months  later  Brutus  was
of  the  ctssassins  of  Caesar.  In  the  autumn  o
Cicero  flung  himself  again  into  the  arena  witl;
attack  on  Antony,  which  led  to  his  proscription
death  in  December  43.

Excepting  the  de  Oralore,  de  RepubUca  am
Legibus,  the  whole  of  Cicero's  most  impoi
Method  of  writings  on  philosophy  and  rhetoric  belong
composition.  46-44  B.C.  and  were  achieved  within  two  y
Such  a  mass  of  work  so  rapidly  produced  c
hardly  be  original,  and  in  fact  it  made  no  claii
be  so.  It  was  designed  as  a  sort  of  encyclopi
of  philosophy  for  Roman  readers.  Cicero's  plar
to  take  each  chief  department  of  tliought  in  'i
and  present  the  theories  of  the  leading  schools  >
it,  appending  to  each  theory  the  criticisniB  o
opponents.  Nor  had  his  work  that  degree  of  i
pendence  which  consists  in  assimilating  tlie  tlio
of  others  and  recasting  it  in  the  mould  of  the  wri
own  mind.  He  merely  chose  some  recent  hand-!
on  each  side  of  the  question  under  considera
and  reproduced  it  in  Latin,  encasing  passage
continuous  exposition  in  a  frame  of  dialogue,
adding  illustrations  from  Roman  history  and  po
He  puts  the  matter  frankly  in  a  letter  to  At
(XII,  59);  '  You  will  say,  'What  is  your  metht
such  compositions?'  They  are  mere  transcripts
cost  comparatively  little  labour;  I  only  supplj
words,  of  which  I  have  a  copious  flow." In  de  Ft

^^Wgle

INTRODUCTION

itiiout  ^^H

>s  tlie  ^M

(l,  6)  he  rates  liis  work  a  little  higher,  not  without
justice,  and  claims  to  be  the  critic  as  well  i
interpreter  of  his  authorities.

Thismethodof  writing  was  consonant  with  Cicero's  Cicen
own  position  in  philosophy.  Since  his  early  studies  ^j]^^;f^^'
Doder  Philo  he  had  been  a  professed  adherent  of  the
New  Academy,  and  as  such  maintained  a  sceptical
attitude  on  questions  of  knowledge.  On  morals  lie
was  more  positive ;  though  without  a  loj^ical  basis  for
hi_s principles,  he  accepted  the  verdict  of  tile  comioon  ■
lUOTal  conscience  of  his  age  and  country.  Epicure-
oQiSia  he  abhorred  as  demoralizing.  Tiie  Stoics
repelled  him  by  their  harshness  and  narrownesSj  but
attracted  him  by  their  strict  morality  and  lofty  the-
ology. His  competence  for  the  task  of  interpreting
Greek  tlinught  to  Rome  was  of  a  qualified  order.
He  had  read  much,  and  had  heard  the  chief  teachers
of  the  day.  But  with  learning  and  enthusiasm  he
combined  neither  depth  of  insight  nor  scientific
precision.  Yet  his  services  to  philosophy  must  not
be  underrated.  He  introduced  a  novel  style  of  ex-
position, copious,  eloquent,  impartial  and  urbane ;
■nd  he  created  a  philosopliical  terminology  in  Latin
which has passed  into  the languages  of  modem

The  de  Finibtu  consists  of  three  separate  dialogues,  Conlenis  of
nch  dealing  with  one  of  the  chief  ethical  systems  ^^  F'libus.
of  the  day.  The  esponents  of  each  system,  and  the
minor  interlocutors,  are  friends  of  Cicero's  younger
days,  all  of  whom  were  dead  when  he  wrote;  brief
notes  upon  them  will  be  found  in  the  Index,  The
«lie  of  critic  Cicero  takes  himself  throughout.

The  first  dialogue  occupies  Books  I  and  II;  in  the

INTRODUCTION
former  tbe  Ethics  of  Epicurus  are  expoundedj  and
in  the  latter  refuted  fronTthe  Stoic  standpoint.  The
scene  is  ]aid  at  Cicero's  villa  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Cumae,  on  the  lovely  coast  a  little  north  of
Naples.  The  spokesman  of  Epicureanism  is  L.  Man-
lius  Torquatus,  a  reference  to  whose  praetorship
(II,  7+)  fixes  the  date  of  the  conversation  .it  50
shortly  after  Cicero's  return  froni  his  province  of'
Cilicia.  A  minor  part  is  given  to  the  youthful
C  Valerius  Triarius.

In  the  second  dialogue  the  Stoic  ethics  are  ex-
pounded (in  Book  III)  by  M.  Cato,  and  criticized  (in.
Book  IV)  from  the  standpoint  of  Antiochus  by
Cicero.  Cicero  has  run  down  to  his  place  at  Tuscu»
lum,  fifteen  miles  froni  town,  for  a  brief  September
holiday,  while  the  Games  are  on  at  Rome ;  and  he
meets  Cato  at  the  neighbouring  villa  of  Lucullus,
whose  orphan  son  is  Cato's  ward.  A  law  passed  by
Pompey  in  52  b.c.  is  spoken  of  (IV,  l)  as  new,  so
the  date  falls  in  that  year;  Cicero  went  to  Cilicia
in  51.

The  third  dialogue  (Book  V)  goes  back  to  a  much
earlier  period  in  Cicero's  life.  Its  date  is  79  and  its
scene  Athens,  where  Cicero  and  his  friends
eagerly  attending  lectures  on  philosophy.  The  posi?
tion  of  the  Old  Academy"  of  Antiochus  is  main-
tained by  M.  Pupius  Piso  Calpumianus,  and  after-
wards criticized  by  Cicero  from  the  Stoic  point  of
view;  tlie  last  word  remains  with  Piso.  The  othen
present  are  Cicero's  brother  and  cousin,  and  his
friend  and  correspondent  Titus  Pomponious  Atticua,
a  convinced  Epicurean,  who  had  retired  to  AtheiU
from  the  civil  disorders  at  Rome,  and  did  not  return
for  over  twenty  years.

mie

INTRODUCTION

ik  I  the  esposition  of  Epicureanism  pro-  Ciivnfs

s  from  some  compendium  of  the  school,  j""^*/?^

.  . it.\-f ■  •  de  rinibUB,

IS  to  have  siiminanzed  \\)  i,picurus  s  essay

I  Telos,  (a)  a  resume  of  the  points  at  issue

'een  Epicurus  and  the  Cyrenaics  (reproduced  I,

■),  and  (a)  some  Epicurean  work  on  Friendship

5-70).

ne  Stoic  arguments  against  Epicurus  in  Book  II

ro  derived  very  likely  from  Aiitiochus ;  bub  in  the

=ism of  Epicurus  there is  doubtless  more of

ro's  own  thought  than  anywhere else  in  the

lie  authority  for  Stoicism  relied  on  in  Book  III
most  probably Diogenes  of Babylon,  who  is
1^  to  by  name  at  III,  33  and  49.
Hooks  IV  and  V  Cicero  appears  to  have  followed

F-

lesauder  the  Great  died  in  323  and  Aristotle  in  f
B.C. Botli  Epicurus  and  Zeno,  the  founder  of  (!
asm,  began  to  teach  at  Athens  about  twenty  years
t.  The  date  marks  a  new  era  in  Greek  thought
■teek  life. Speculative  energy  had  exhausted
Wf  the  schools  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  showed
PKgour  after  the  death  of  their  founders. En-
teninent  had  undermined  religion,  yet  the  philo-
lers  seemed  to  agree  about  nothing  except  that  |
gs  are  not  what  they  appear; and  the  plain  |'
if  their  conclusions  was  raised  into  a '
tidsm  by  #yrrho. Meanwhile  the
rder  too  had  changeJr~~yor  Plato  and  Aris-
;  good  life  could  only  be  lived  in  a  free
Lte,  like  the  little  independent  Greek  cities
Ithey  knew ;  but  these  had  now  fallen  under

Igic

INTRODUCTION

the  empire  of  Mncedon,  and  the  barrier  betwei
Greek  and  barbarian  was  giving  way. The  wars
Alexander's  successors  rendered  all  things  insecur
exile,  slavery,  violeiit  death  were  possibilities  with
which  every  man  must  lay  his  account.

Epicureanism  and  Stoicism,  however  antagonistic,
have  certain  common  features  corresponding  to  the
needs  of  the  period.  Philosophy  was  systematized^
and  fell  into  three  recognized  departments.  Logic,
Pliysics  and  Ethics;  and  for  both  schools  the  third
department  stood  first  in  importance.  Both  schools
offered  dogma,  not  speculation ;  a  way  of  life  for
as  man,  not  as  Greek  citizen.  Both  abandoned
idealism,  saw  no  reality  save  matter,  and  accepted
sense  experience  as  knowledge.  Both  studied  the
world  of  nature  only  in  order  to  understand  the
position  of  man.  Both  looked  for  a  happiness
secure  from  fortune's  changes ;  and  found  it  in  peace
of  mind,  undisturbed  by  fear  and  desire.  But  here
the  rival  teachers  diverged :  Epicurus  sought  peace
in  the  liberation  of  man's  will  from  nature's  law,
Zeno  in  submission  to  it;^  and  in  their  conceptions!
of  nature  they  differed  profoundly.

Formal  Logic  Epicurus  dismissed  as  useless,  butJ
he  raised  the  problem  of  knowledge  under  thef
heading  of  Canonic.  The  Canon  or  measuring-rod,l
the  criterion  of  truth,  is  furnished  by  the  sensations"
and  by  the  itdOti  or  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain-j
Epicurus's  recognition  of  the  latter  as  qualities  c
any  state  of  consciousness  and  as  distinct  from  tha
sensations  of  sight,  hearing,  etc.,  marks  a  Qotablf)

'  Et  mihi  res  non.  me  rebus  suHvngere  Conor,  says  Horacn
of  his  lapses  from  Stoicism  into  Cy re"  "'"'""

INTRODUCTION
advance  in  psychology.  The  sensations  and  the
feelings  determine  our  judftment  and  volition
respectively,  and  they  are  all  true,'  i.e.,  real  data
of  experience.  So  are  tlie  irpoXiJ^e^,  or  precon-
ceptions' by  which  we  recogniae  each  fresh  sensa-
tion. I.e.,  our  general  concepts;  for  these  are  a
mulations of past sensations. It is in iirok-qil/ei^,

£  opinions,'  i.e.,  judgments  about  sensations,  that
en-or  can  occur.  Opinions  are  true  only  when  con-
firmed, or,  in  the  case  of  those  relating  to  imper-
ceptible objects  (e.g.  tlie  Void),  when  not  contra-
dicted by  actual  sensations.  Thus  Epicurus  adum-  ^
brated,  however  crudely,  a  logic  of  inductive
science.

His  Natural  Philosophy  is  touched  on  in  de  Finibvs,  Epici
I,  c. vi. It  is  fully  set  out  iu  the  great  poem  o{^^->'"
Gcero's  contemporary,  Lucretius,  who  preaches  his
master's  doctrine  with  religious  fervour  as  a  gospel

[  of  deliverance  for  the  spirit  of  man.  Epicurus  ad  opt-

I  ed  the  Atomic  theory  of  Democritus,  according  to
vilich.  the  primary  realities  are  an  infinite  number  of
tiny  particles  of  matter,  indivisible  and  indestructi-
ble, moving  by  their  own  weight  through  an  infinite
expanse  of  empty  space  or  Void.  Our  perishable
world  and  all  that  it  contains  consists  of  temporary
dusters  of  these  atoms  interspersed  with  void. In-

I  aamerable  other  worlds  beside  are  constantly  form-
ing and  dissolving.  This  universe  goes  on  of  itself:
there  are  gods,  but  they  take  no  part  in  its  guidance ;
live  a  life  of  untroubled  bliss  in  the  empty  spaces
between  the  worlds.  The  human  soul  like  every-
thing else  is  material ;  it  consists  of  atoms  of  the
smallest  and  most  mobile  sort,  enclosed  by  the
atoms  of  the  body,  and  dissipated  when  the

sm

INTRODUCTION

body  is  dissolved  by  deatli.  Death  tlierefore  r
extinction.

Thus  man  was  relieved  from  the  superstitioni
preyed  upon  his  happiness, — fear  of  the  godi
fear  of  punishment  after  death.  But  a  worse  tyi
remained  if  all  that  liappens  is  caused  by  inext
fate.  Here  comes  in  the  doctrine  of  the  S«
which  Cicero  derides,  but  which  is  essential  ti
system.  Democritus  had  taught  that  the  h(
atoms  fell  faster  tlirough  the  void  than  the  li
ones,  and  so  overtook  them.  Aristotle  correcte
error ;  and  Epicurus  turned  the  correction  to  ace
He  gave  his  atoms  a  uniform  vertical  velociti
supposed  them  to  collide  by  casually  making  a  i
sideway  movement.  This  was  the  minimum
thesis  that  he  could  think  of  to  account  fo
formation  of  things;  and  it  served  his  purpo
destroying  the  conception  of  a  fixed  order  in  N:
The  capacity  to  swerve  is  shared  by  the  atoms
compose  the  human  soul;  hence  it  accounts  f<
action  of  the  will,  which  Epicurus  regards  as  en
undetermined.  In  this  fortuitous  universe  n
free  to  make  his  own  happiness.

In  Ethics  Epicurus  Itased  himself  on  Arist:
the  pupil  of  Socrates  and  founder  of  the  Schi
Cyrene.  With  Aristippus  he  held  that  pleasure
only  good,  the  sole  constituent  of  man's  well-l
Aristippus  had  drawn  the  practical  inference
the  right  thing  to  do  is  to  epjoy  each  pleasure  i
moment  as  it  offers.  His  rule  of  conduct  is  sui
up  by  Horace's  Carpe  diem.  But  this  natf  hedi
was  so  modified  by  Epicurus  as  to  become  in  his
an  entirely  dilTerent  theory.  Its  principal  tenet
that  the  goodness  of  pleasure  is  a  matter  of  i

bgle

r"

INTRODUCTION

intuition,  and  is  attested  by  natural  instinct,  as  seen
in  tile  actions  of  infants  and  animals;  that  all  men's
ttioduct  does  as  a  matter  of  fact  aim  at  pleasure ;  that
t  proper  aim  is  to  secure  the  greatest  balance  of
pleasure  over  pain  in  the  aggregate ; that  absence
of  pain  is  the  neatest  pleasure,  which  can  only  be
vuied,  uot  augmented,  by  active  gratification  of  the
sense ;  that  pleasure  of  the  mind  is  based  on  pleasure
of  the  body,  yet  that  mental  pleasure  may  far  sur-
;r piss  bodily  in  magnitude,  iacluding  as  it  does  with
i( tire  consciousness  of  present  gratification  the  memory
I, uf  past  and  the  hope  of  future  pleasure ; that  '  un-
)1 Bataral  and  unnecessary'  desires  and  emotions  are  a
tt chief  source  of  unhappiness;  'and  that  Prudence,
o Temperance  or  self-control,  and  the  other  recognized
If Virtues  are  therefore  essential  to  obtain  a  life  of
jr the  greatest  pleasure,  though  at  the  same  time  the
e Mies  are  of  no  value  save  as  conducive  to  pleasure.
all This  original,  and  in  some  respects  paradoxical,
V  development  of  hedonism  gave  no  countenance  to  the
Ij  nJuptuary.  On  the  contrary  Epicurus  both  preached
ii  nd  practised  the  simple  life,  and  the  cultivation  of
the  ordinary  virtues,  though under  utilitarian  sanc'
If lions  which  led  Iiim  to  extreme  unorthodoxy  in  some
o  ptrticulars. Especially, he denied any absolute
IE  ralidity  to  Justice  and  to  Law,  and  inculcated  absten-
e  tion  from  the  active  duties  of  citiKensliip.  To  Friend-
ii'  ship  he  attached  the  highest  value;  and  the  School
that  he  founded  in  his  Garden  in  a  suburb  of  Athens,
ind endowed by  will,  was  as  much a  society  of
friends  as  a  college  of  students. It  still  survived
tnd  kept  the  birthday  of  its  founder  in  Cicero's  time.
Epicurus  is  the  forerunner  of  the  English  Utilita-
rians ;  but  he  differs  from  them  in  making  no  attempt
I  xvii

H  hap

H  oth<

r

INTRODUCTION
to  combine  hedonism  with  altruism. '  The  greatest
happiness  of  the  greatest  number '  is  a  formula  that
counterpart  in  antiquity. The  problem  that
when  the  claims  of  self  conflict  with  those  <A
others  was  not  explicitly  raised  by  Epicurus. But  it
is  against  the  egoism  of  his  Ethics  at  least  as  much
against  its  hedonistic  basis  that  Cicero's  criticisms
are  really  directed.

The  Stoics  paid  much  attention  to  Logic.  In  this
department  they  included  with  Dialectic,  which  they
developed  on  the  lines  laid  down  by  Aristotle,
Grammar,  Rhetoric,  and  the  doctrine  of  the  Criterion.
The  last  was  their  treatment  of  the  problem  of  know-
ledge. Like  Epicurus  they  were  purely  empirical,
but  unlike  him  they  conceded  to  the  Sceptics  that
sensations  are  sometimes  misleading.  Yet  true  sensa-
tions, they  maintained, are  distinguishable  from  false;
they  have  a  clearness'  which  compels  the  assent'
of  the  mind  and  makes  it  comprehend '  or  grasp
the  presentation  as  a  true  picture  of  the  external
object.  Such  a  comprehensible  presentation,'
Kara^TjTTTiKii  ^avTaa-ta.,  is  the  criterion  of  truth ;  it  is
a  presentation  that  arises  from  an  object  actually
present,  in  conformity  with  that  object,  stamped  on
the  mind  like  the  impress  of  a  seal,  and  such  at
£ould  not  arise  from  an  object  not  actually  present'
So  their  much-debated  formula  was  elaborated  ii
Jeply  to  Sceptical  critics.  If  asked  how  it  happeni
that  false  sensations  do  occur^-e.g.,  that  a  straigh''
stick  half  under  water  looks  crooked — the  Stoici
replied  that  error  only  arises  from  inattention ;  care
ful  observation  will  detect  the  absence  of  one  a
other  of  the  notes  of  '  clearness.' The  Wise  MaJ

INTRODUCTION
"  to  an  'incomprehensible  presents-  '

In  contradiction  to  Epicurus,  the  Stoics  taught  S/oic
that  the  universe  is  guided  by,  and  in  the  last  resort  ^^'f""
is,  God.  The  sole  first  cause  is  a  divine  Mind,  which
realizes  itself  periodically  in  the  world-process.  But
this  belief  they  expressed  in  terras  uncompromisingly
materialistic.  Only  the  corporeal  exists,  for  only  the
Gor[ioreal  can  act  and  be  acted  upon.  Mind  there-
fore is  matter  in  its  subtlest  form ;  it  is  Fire  or
Breath  (spirit)  or  Aether.  The  primal  fiery  Spirit
creates  out  of  itself  the  material  world  that  we  know,
and  itself  persists  within  the  world  as  its  heat,  its
tension,'  its  soul;  it  is  the  cause  of  all  movement,
and  the  source  of  life  in  all  animate  creatures,  whose
souls  are  detached  particles  of  the  world-soul.

Tbe  notion  of  Fire  as  the  primary  substance  the
Sttucs  derived  from  Heracleitus.  Of  the  process  of
creation  they  offered  an  elaborate  account,  a  sort  of
^™  imaginary  physics  or  chemistry,  operating  with  the
jji  hot  and  cold,  dry  and  moist,  the  four  elements  of
,1,  fire,  air,  earth  and  water,  and  other  conceptions  of
1 1  previous  physicists,  which  came  to  them  chiefly
ill through  the  Peripatetics.

c  The  world-process  they  conceived  as  going  on
I  J  iccording  to  a  fixed  law  or  formula  (Ao'yos);  effect  !
nl  following  cause  in  undeviating  sequence.  This  law
I  (■  they  regarded  impersonally  as  Fate,  or  personalty  as
divine  Providence ;  they  even  spoke  of  the  Deity  as
g]i  being  himself  the  Logos  of  creation.  Evidences  of
design  they  found  in  the  beauty  of  the  ordered
world  and  in  its  adaptation  to  the  use  and  comfort
of  man.  Apparent  evil  is  but  the  necessary  imperfec-
\,ii Uon  of  the  parts  as  parts ;  the  whole  is  perfectly  good.

INTRODUCTION

As  this  world  had  a  beginning,  bo  it  will  have  on
end  in  time ;  it  is  moving  on  towards  a  universal
conflagration,  in  which  all  things  will  return  to  the
primal  Fire  from  which  tliey  sprang.  But  only  for
a  moment  will  unity  be  restored.  The  causes  that
operated  before  must  operate  again;  once  more  the
creative  process  will  begin,  and  all  thuigs  will  recur
exactly  as  they  have  occurred  already.  So  existence  ■
goes  on,  repeating  itself  in  an  unending  scries  of
identical  cycles.

Such  rigorous  determinism  would  seem  to  leave  n
room  for  human  freedom  or  for  moral  choice.  Yet  the
Stoics  maintained  that  though  man's  acts  like  all
othereventsarefore-ordained.his  will  is  free.  Obey  the
divine  ordinance  in  any  ease  he  must,  but  it  rests  with
\liim  to  do  so  willingly  or  with  reluctance.  To  under-
stand the  world  in  which  he  finds  himself,  and  tojub-
i,mit  his  will  thereto — herein  man's  well-being  lies.

Oh  tTils  foundation  they  reared  an  elaborate  struc-  '
ture  of  Ethics.  Their  formula  for  conduct  was  To
live  io  accordance  with  nature.'  To  interpret  this,
they  appealed,  like  Epicurus,  to  instinct,  but  with  a
different  result  According  to  the  Stoics,  not  plea-  ,
sure  but  self-preservation  and  things  conducive  to  it
are  the  objects  at  which  infants  and  animals  aim.
Such  objects  are  primary  in  the  order  of  nature';
and  these  objects  and  others  springing  out  of  them,
viz.,  all  that  pertains  to  the  safety  and  the  full  deve-
lopment of  man's  nature,  constitute  the  proper  aim
of  human  action.  The  instinct  to  seek  these  objects
is  replaced  in  the  adult  by  deliberate  intention;  as
his  reason  matures,  he  learns  (if  unperverted)  to
understand  the  plan  of  nature  and  to  find  his  happi-
ness in  willing  conformity  with  it.  This  Tightness  of

l|c

INTRODUCTION

understanding  and  of  will  (the  Stoics  did  not  separate
tlie  twb,~  since  for  theni  the  mind  is  one)  is  Wisdom  .
or  Virtue,  which  is  the  only  good ;  their  wrongiiess  is
Folly  or  \'ice,  the  only  evil.  Not  that  we  are  to  ignore
external  things :  on  the  contrary,  it  is  in  choosing'
amongthemasNatureintendsthat  Virtue  is  exercised.
Buttheattainmeutof  the  natural objectsis  immaterial;
it  is  the  effort  to  attain  them  alone  that  counts.

Tliis  nice  adjustment  of  the  claims  of  Faith  and
Works  was  formulated  in  a  series  of  technicalities.
A  scale  of  values  was  laid  down,  and  on  it  a  scheme
of  conduct  was  built  up.  Virtue  alone  is  good'
and  to  be  sought,'  Vice  alone  evil '  and  to  be
shunned';  all  else  is  indifferent.'  But  of  things
indifferent  some,  being  in  accordance  with  nature,
are  '  promoted '  or  preferred  '  (jr/jojjy/Ui'a),  as
having  '  worth '  (a^t'n),  and  these  are  to  be
chosen  ';  others,  being  contrary  to  nature,  are  de-
f  promoted '  {djrcmpmjyfuya,)  as  having  unworth  '
(airo^ia,  negative  value),  and  these  are  'to  be  re-
jected'; while  other  things  again  are  absolutely
I  indifferent,'  and  supply  no  motive  for  action.  To
sim  at  securing  '  things  promoted,'  or  avoiding
their  opposites  is  an  appropriate  act '  (KaSviKoii)  :
this  is  what  the  young  and  uncorrupted  do  by  in-
ttinct.  When  the  same  aim  is  taken  by  the  rational
adult  with  full  knowledge  of  nature's  plan  and
deliberate  intent  to  conform  with  it,  then  the
appropriate  act '  is  perfect,'  and  is  a  rigiit
actiim '  or  'success'  (KaTopBwija).^ Intention,  not

•Cicero  Inevitably  obscures  Ihe  poinl
byo^riwrn. To  say  Ihat  fungi  officii!

t*l  than  it  really  was.

rendering  Kad^aov
a  do  one's  duty,'

^l  .'errc

INTRODUCTION

achievement,  constitutes  success. The  only failure,'
pin ' (the  term aiidp-rqiia includes all
these  notions)  is  tlie  conduct  of  the  rational  being
who  ignores  and  violates  nature.

In  identifying  the  Good  with  Virtue  and  in  inter-
preting Virtue  by  the  conception  of  Nature,  the
Stoics  were  following  their  forerunners  the  Cynics;
but  they  parted  company  with  the  Cynics  in  finding
B  place  in  their  scheme  for  Goods  in  the  ordinary
sense.  For  though  they  place  pleasure  among
things  absolutely  indifferent,'  their  examples  of
things  promoted '^life,  health,  wealth,  etc. — arc
pretty  much  the  usual  objects  of  man's  endeavour.
Hence,  whereas  the  Cynics,  construing  'the  natu-
ral '  as  the  primitive  or  unsophisticated,  had  run
counter  to  convention  and  even  to  decency,  the
Stoics  in  the  practical  rules  deduced  from  their
principles  agreed  in  the  main  with  current  morality,
and  included  the  recognized  duties  to  the  family
and  the  state.

But  their  first  principles  themselves  they
ated  in  a  form  that  was  violently  paradoxical.  Virtui
being  a  state  of  inward  righteousness  tliey  regardi
as  something  absolute. Either  a  man  has  attained
it,  when  he  is  at  once  completely  wise,  gi
happy,  and remains  so  whatever  pain,  sorrow,
misfortune  may  befall  him ;  or  he  has  not  attained
it,  in  which  case,  whatever  progress  he  has  made
towards  it,  he  is  still  foolish,  wicked  and  miserable.
So  stated,  the  ideal  was  felt  to  be  beyond  man's
reach. Chrysippus,  the  third  head  of  the  school,
confessed  that  he  had  never  known  a  Wise  Man.
Criticism  forced the  later Stoics to compromise.
The  Wise  Man  remained  as  a  type  and  an  ensample ;

INTRODUCTION

ogress,  ^^H

tiut  positive  value  was  conceded  to  moral  progress,
and  '  appropriate  acts '  tended  to  usurp  the
that  strictly  belonged  to right  acts.'

The  last  sjstem  to  engage  Cicero's  attention,- that  yy^
of  his  contemporary  Antiochus,  is  of  much  less  in-  Acade
terest  than  the  two  older  traditions  with  which  he
nnges  it.

Within  a  century  of  the  death  of  its  founder  Plato,
the  Academy  underwent  a  complete  transformation.
Arcesilas,  its  head  in  the  middle  of  the  third  cen-
tury B.C.,  adopted  the  scepticism  that  had  been
established  as  a  philosophical  system  by  Pyrrho  two
generations  before,  and  denied  the  possibility  of
knowledge.  He  was  accordingly  spoken  of  as  the
fbander  of  a  Second  or  New  Academy.  His  work
was  carried  fiirther  a  century  afterwards  by  Car-
oeades.  Both  these  acute  thinkers  devoted  them-
selves to  combating  the  dogmas  of  the  Stoics.
Arcesilas  assailed  their  theory  of  knowledge;  and
Cameades  riddled  their  natural  theology  with  shafts
that  have  served  for  most  subsequent  polemic  of  the
kind.  On  the  basis  of  philosophic  doubt,  the  New
Academy  developed  in  Ethics  a  theory  of  reasoned
probability  as  a  sufficient  guide  for  life.

The  extreme  scepticism  of  Cameades  led  to  a
Kftction.  Philo,  who  was  his  next  successor  but
<aie,  and  who  afterwards  became  Cicero's  teacher  at
Rome,  reverted  to  a  more  positive  standpoint.  Doing
violence  to  the  facta,  he  declared  that  the  teaching
of  the  Academy  had  never  changed  since  Plato,  and
(bat  Arcesilas  and  Cameades,  though  attacking  the
Criterion  of  tlie  Stoics,  had  not  meant  to  deny,  all
possibility  of  knowledge. The  Stoic comprehen-

w

^V  SIOR

INTRODUCTION

sioR'  was  impossible,  but  yet  there  was  a  cleartms'
about  some  impressions  tbat  gives  a  conviction  ot
tbeir  truth.

next  head,  Antiocbus,  went  beyond  this
ambiguous  position,  and  abandoned  scepticism  alto-
gether. Contradicting  Philo,  lie  maintained  that
the  true  tradition  of  PJato  had  been  lost,  and  pro-
fessed to  recover  it,  calluig  his  school  the  Old
Academy.'  But  liis  readmg  of  the  history  of  philo-
sophy was  hardly  more  accurate  than  Philo' s.
asserted  that  the  teachings  of  the  older  Acadei
and  Peripatetics  and  of  the  Stoics  were,  in  £thici|
at  all  events,  substantially  the  same,  and  that  Z
had  borrowed  his  tenets  from  his  pre  dec
merely  concealing  the  tlieft  by  hia  novel  t
ology.

Tlie  latter  thesis  is  argued  in  de  Finiliiis,  Book  IV]
while  Book  V  gives  Antiochus's  version  of  the  OMJ
Academic  and  Peripatetic  '  Ethics,  which  he  himseUj

professed. His  doctrine  i
for  happiness, but tliat i

that  Virtue  is  sufficieit|
the  highest  degree  c

happiness  bodily  and  external  goods  also  form  a  partT
The  Stoics  will  not  call  these  latter  goods,'  but  I
only  'thuigs  promoted';  yet  really  they  attach  no  I
less  importance  to  them.

Antiochus  could  only  maintain  his  position  by
ignoring  nice  distinctions.  The  Ethics  of  Aris-
totle in  particular  seem  to  have  fallen  into  complete
oblivion.  Aristotle's  cardinal  doctrines  are,  that
well-being  consists  not  in  the  state  of  virtue  but  in
the  active  exercise  of  all  human  exeeUences,  and
particularly  of  man's  highest  gilt  of  rational  t
templation ;  and  that  though  for  this  a  modicum  of
external  goods  is  needed,  these  are  but  indispensable

■  INTRODUCTION

'Onditions,  and  in  no  way  constituent  parts,  of  the

^hief  Good.

The  fact  is  that  philosophy  in  Cicero's  day  had
ost  all  precision  as  well  as  originality.  It  must  be
idmitted  that  de  Fiaibas  declines  in  interest  when  it
xnnes  to  deal  with  contemporary  thought  Not  only
loes  the  plan  of  the  work  necessitate  some  repetition
n Book  V of  argumentsatready  rehearsed  in  Book  IV;
jnt  Antiochus's  perversion  of  preceding  systems
.mpairs  alike  the  criticism  of  the  Stoics  and  the
[iresentatioii  of  his  own  ethical  doctrine.

The  text  of  this  edition  is  founded  on  that  of  TAt  I
Madvig,  wliose  representatives  have  kindly  per-
mitted use  to  be  made  of  the  latest  edition  of  his
de  Fi?iilnis,  dated  18T6.  Madvig  first  established
the  text  of  the  book ;  and  it  is  from  no  lack  of
appreciation  for  his  Herculean  labours  that  I  have
ventured  here  and  tliere  to  modify  his  results,
whether  by  adopting  conjectures  suggested  in  his
notes,  or  by  preferring  MSS.  readings  rejected  by
him,  or  conjectures  made  by  other  scliolars  and  in
Hue  or  two  places  by  myself.  In  supplementing
Madvig's  work  I  have  derived  much  help  i'rom  the
I'eubner  text  of  C.  W.  F.  Miiller,  ISO*.  Madvig's
punctuation  I  have  altered  throughout,  both  to  con-
form it  with  English  usage  and  also  occasionally  to
suggest  a  different  connection  of  thought

Departures  from Madvig's  text  (referred  to  as  T/ie  n
Mdv.)  are  noted  at  the  foot  of  the  page. So  also  ^'o'^^-
are MSS. variants of  importance  for the sense ;
in  such  places  the  readings  of  the  three  beat  MSS.
and  of  the  inferior  group  are  usually  given. But  no
attempt  is  made  to  present  a  complete  picture  of

I.

^^W^l(

The  MSS.

I

Editions.
Traiislalio

I

Books  of
S^ference.

L

INTRODUCTION
the  state  of  the  MSS.,  for  which  the  student  must

go  to  Madvig.

The  best  MSS.  of  de  Finilnu  are;  A,  Palutinus  I,
11th  c,  which  ends  soon  after  the  beginning  of
Book  IV ;  B,  Palatinus  II ;  and  E,  Erlangensis,  1 5th  c. ,
These  three  form  one  family,  within  which  B  and  E
ore  more  eiosely  related. The  other  MSS.  known I
to  Madvig  form  a  second  family,  inferior  in  general  r!
to  the  former,  though,  as  Miiller  points  out,  not  to  '
be  entirely  dispensed  with. Both  families  according
to  Madvig  descend  from.a  late  and  already  consider-
ably corrupted  archetype.

The earliest edition is  believed to  have  been
printed  at  Cologne  in  1467. Madvig's  great  com-  i
mentary  (Copenhagen,  1839,  1869,  ISTfi)  supersedes
all its predecessors. There is a small annotated
edition,  largely  based  upon  Madvig,  by  W,  M.  L.
Hutchinson  {London,  I909).
^- English  translations  are  those  of  Samuel  Parker
{Tall^'g  Five  Boots  de  Finibus,  or  Cmicemin^  Ike  Last
OlfjeeU  of  Desire  and  Aversion,  done  into  English  bs
S. P., GetiL, revised  .  .  .  by Jeremy Collier, M.A., 1
London,  1702;  page-heading,  TuUy  qf  Moral  Ends;
a  and  edition  published  by  Bliss,  Oxford,  18is);  of  '
Guthrie  (London,  1 74*) ;  of  Yonge  (in  Bohn's  series,
1848);  and  of  J.  S.  Reid  (Cambridge,  1883,  now  out
of  print). The  first  of  these,  and  the  German  version
of  KirchmanninthePhilosophischeBibliothek(l8t)8),
I  have  consulted  occasionally,  the  former  with  plea-
sure, but  neither  with  much  profit.

The  fullest  treatment  in  English  of  the  subjects
dealt  with  in  de  Finibus  will  be  found  in  Zeller's
States,  Epicureans  and  Sceplics  and  Eclectics.  Zeller's
monumental  work  requires  supplementing  especially

i  INTRODUCTION

in  r^&rd  to  Stoicism.  Recent  books  of  value  are
Arnold's  Roman  SUnasm,  Hicks's  Stmc  and  Epicurean,
hbA  Sevan's  Stoics  and  Sceptics.  Reid's  edition  of
Aeadenuca  is  a  mine  of  informBtion  about  Cicero's
piiilosophicBl  work.  For  the  sources,  a  selection  for
i)^inners  is  Adam's  Texts  to  lUustraie  Greek  Pkilo-
'  y  after  Aristotle.

I  must  express  my  gratitude  to  my  friend  Miss
W.  M.  L.  Hutchinson  for  reading  the  proofs  of  my
translation  and  doing  much  to  improve  it.  Nor  can
I  forget  my  debt  to  the  late  Dr  James  Adam,  whose
lectures  on  de  Fimbus  first  aroused  my  interest  in
ethical  theory.

H.  R.

ERRATUM.
On  p.  22j  note,  for  Democritus  read  Epic

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
BOOK  I

M.  TULLII  CICERONIS

DE

FINIBUS  BONORUM  ET  MALORUM

LIBER  PRIMUS

I.  Non  eram  nescius,  BrutCj  cum  quae  sununi:
geniis  exquisitaque  doctrina  philosophi  Graeco  ser-
mone  tractavissent  ea  Latinis  litteris  tnandaremus,
fore  ut  hie  noster  labor  in  varias  reprehensiones  in-
curreret.  Nam  quibusdnm,  et  its  quidem  non  admo-
dum  indoctis,  totum  lioc  displicet  philosophari.
Quidam  autem  non  tam  id  reprehendunt  si  remissius
agatur,  sed  tantum  studium  tamque  multam  operam
ponendam  in  eo  non  arbitrantor.  Erunt  eliam,  et  hi
quidem  cruditi  Graecis  litteris,  contemnentes  Lati-
nas,  qui  se  dicant  in  Graecis  legendis  operam  malle
consumere.  Postremo  aliquos  futures  suspicor  qui  me
ad  alias  litteras  vocent,  genus  hoc  scribendi,  etsi  sit
i  elegans,  personae  tamen  et  dignitatis  esse  negent
Contra  quos  omnes  dicendum  breviter  existima
Quamquam  philosophiae  quidem  vituperatoribuB
satis  responsum  est  eo  libro  quo  a  nobis  philosophia
defensa  et  collaudata  est  cum  esset  accusata  et
vituperata  ab  Hortensio.  Qui  liber  cum  et  tibi  pro-
batus  videretur  et  iis  quos  ego  posse  iudicare  arbi-
trarer,  plura  suscepi,  veritus  ne  movere  hominura  |
studia  vidcter,  retinere  non  posse.'  Qui  autem,  i
"This  boD

lyCjOogle

BOOK I

1  I.  My  oeab  Bbutus, — Tbe  fallowing  essay,  I  am  Pt
well  aware,  attempting  as  it  does  to  present  in  a  Latin  ai.
dress  subjects  that  philosophers  of  consummate
abOitj  and  profound  learning  have  already  handled
in  Greek,  is  sure  to  encounter  criticism  from  different
quarters.  Certain  persons,  and  those  not  without
some  pretension  to  letters,  disapprove  of  the  study
of  philosophy  altogether.  Others  do  not  so  greatly
object  to  it  provided  it  be  followed  iji  dilettante
fashion ;  but  they  do  not  think  it  ought  to  engage  so
large  an  amount  of  one's  interest  and  attention.  A
third  class,  learned  in  Greek  literature  and  contemp-
tuous of  Latin,  will  say  that  they  prefer  to  spend  their
time  in  reading  Greek.  Lastly,  1  suspect  there  will
be  some  who  will  wish  to  divert  me  to  other  fields  of
authorship,  asserting  that  this  kind  of  composition,
though  a  graceful  recreation,  is  beneath  the  dignity

a  of  my  character  and  position. To  all  of  these  objec-
tions I  suppose  1  ought  to  make  some  brief  reply.  The  pi
indiscriminate  censure  of  philosophy  has  indeed  been  st
sufficiently  answered  already  in  the  book"  which  1
wrote  in  praise  of  that  study,  in  order  to  defend  it
against  a  bitter  attack  that  had  been  made  upon  it
by  Hortensius. The  favourable  reception  which  that
volume  appeared  to  obtain  irom  yourself  and from
others whom 1 considered competent judges en-
iraged  me  to  embark  upon  further  undertakings  ;
r  I  did  not  wish  to  be  thought  incapable  of  sus- •
Ining  the  interest  that  I  had  succeeded  in  arousing.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

e  hoc  placeat,  moderatius  tamen  id  volunt  fieri,
difficilcm  qiiandam  temperantiam  postulant  in  eo
quod  semel  adinissum  coerceri  reprimique  non  potest ;
lit  propeniodum  iustioribus  utamur  illis  qui  omnino
avocent  a  philosophia,  quam  his  qui  rebus  infinitis
moduiii  constituaiit  in  reqiie  eo  meliore  quo  maior  sit

3  mediocritatem  desiderent.  Sive  enim  ad  sapientiam
perveniri  potest,  non  paranda  nobis  solum  ea  sed
fruenda  etiam  est;  sive  hoc  difficile  est,  tamen  nee
modus  est  ullus  investigaiidi  veri  nisi  inveneris,  et
quaerendi  defetigatio  turpis  est  cum  id  quod  quae-
ritur  sit  pulclierriniuin.  Etenini  si  delectamur  cum
seribimns,  quis  est  tarn  invidus  qui  ah  eo  nos  abducat  ?
Sin  laboramus,  quis  est  qui  alienae  modum  statuat
industriae?  Nam  ut  Terentianus  Chremes  non  in-
bumanus,  qui  novum  vicinum  non  vult

Fodere  aut  arare  aut  aliquid  ferre  denique—
(non  enim  ilium  ab  industria  sed  ab  illiberati  labore
deterret),  sic  isti  curiosi,  quos  oiTendit  noster  minime
nobis  iniucundus  labor.

4:  II.  lis  igitur  est  difficiHus  satisfacei-e  qui  se  Latiua
scripta  dicunt  contemncre.  In  quibus  hoc  primum
est  in  quo  admirei",  cur  in  gnivissiniis  rebus  non
delectet  eoa  sermo  patrius,  cum  iidem  fabellas  Latinos
ad  verbum  e  Graecis  expressas  non  inviti  legant.
Quis  enim  tam  inimicus  paene  nomini  Romano  est,
qui  Enni  Medeam  aut  Antiopam  Pacuvi  spernat  aut

i,y(^OOgle

BOOK  I.  i-ii
The  second  class  of  critics,  who,  however  much  they  n
approve  of  philosophy,  nevertheless  would  rather  '■
have  it  less  eagerly  prosecuted,  are  asking  for  a
restraint  that  it  is  not  easy  to  practise.  The  study
is  one  that  when  once  taken  up  admitsof  no  restriction
or  control.  In  fact,  the  attitude  of  the  former  class,
who  attempt  to  dissuade  us  from  philosophy  alto-
gether, seems  ahnost  less  unreasonable  than  that  of
those  who  would  set  limits  to  what  is  essentially  un-
limited, and  expect  us  to  stop  half-way  in  a  study
3  that  increases  in  value  the  further  it  proceeds.  If
Wisdom  be  attainable,  let  us  not  only  win  but  enjoy
it;  or  if  attainment  be  difficult,  still  there  is  no  end
to  the  search  for  truth,  other  than  its  discovery.  It
were  base  to  flag  in  the  pursuit,  when  the  object  pur-
sued is  so  supremely  lovely.  Indeedif  we  like  writing,
who  would  be  so  churlish  as  to  debar  us  from  it  ?  Or
'  if  we  find  it  a  labour,  who  is  to  set  limits  to  another
man's  exertions  ?  No  doubt  it  is  kind  of  Chrcmes
in  Terence's  play  to  urge  his  new  neighbour

Neither  to  dig  nor  plough  nor  burdens  bear":
for  it  is  not  industry  in  general,  but  toil  of  a  menial
kind,  from  which  he  would  deter  him ; but  only  a
busybody  would  take  exception  to  an  occupation
which,  like  mine,  is  a  labour  of  love.
i II.  A  more  difficult  task  therefore  is  to  deal  with  J
tile  objection  of  those  who  profess  a  contempt  for  □;
Latin  writings  as  such.  What  astonishes  me  first  of  all
ab«ut  them  is  this, — why  should  they  dislike  their
native  language  for  serious  and  important  subjects,
when  they  are  quite  willing  to  read  Latin  plays  trans-"'
lated  word  for  word  from  the  Greek  ?  Who  has  such
a  hatred,  one  might  almost  say,  for  the  very  nutne  of
Roman,  as  to  despise  and  reject  the  Medea  of  Ennius

CICERO  DE  riNlliUS
reiciat  quod  se  iisdem  Euripidis  fabulis delei5tari
dicatj  Latinas  litteras  oderit? Synephebos  ego,  in-
quit,  potius  Caecili  aut  Andriani  Terenti  quam  ut-

5  ranique  Menandri  legam?  A  quibus  tantum  dissentio
utj  cum  Sophocles  vel  oplime  scripserit  Electram,
tamen  male  eonversam  Atili  niilii  legendam  puteui,
de  quo  Licinius  ferreum  scriptorcm,'  VLTum  opinor
scriptorem  tamen,  ut  legendus  sit.  Rudem  enim
esseomnino  in  nostris  poetis  aut  inertissimae  segnitlae
est  aut  fastidi  delicatissinii.  Mihi  quidem  iiulli  satis
eruditi  videntur  quibus  nostra  ignota  sunt. An

Utinam  ne  in  nemore —
nihilo  minus  legimus  quam  hoc  idem  C!rHeciini,  qua'e
autem  de  bene  beateque  vivendo  a  Platone  disputata

6  suntj  haec  explicari  nnn  placebit  Latine  ?  Quid  si
nos  non  interpretum  fungimur  muuere,  sed  tuemer
ea  quae  dicta  sunt  ab  lis  quos  probamus,  eisque  no-
stnim  iudicium  et  nostrum  scribendi  ordinem  adiungi-
mus?  quid  habent  cur  Graeca  anteponant  iis  quae
etsplendide dicta  sintnequesintconversade  Graecis?
Nam  si  dicent  ab  illis  has  res  esse  tractatas,  ne  ipsos
quidem  Graecos  est  cur  tarn  niultos  legant  quaai
legendi  sunt. Quid  enim  est  a  Chrjsippo  praeter-

n  Stoicis? Legimus  tamen  Diogenem,  An- |

i,y*^oogie

BOOK  I.  ii

or  the  An&ope  of  Pacuvius,  and  give  as  his  reason  that
though  he  enjoys  the  corresponding  playsof  Euripides
he  cannot  endure  books  written  in  Latin  ?  What,  he
cries,  am  I  to  read  The  Young  Comrades  of  Caecilius,  or
Terence's  Maid  of  Aridroi,  wlien  I  miglit  be  reading

5  the  same  two  comedies  of  Menander?  With  tliis  sort
of  person  I  disagree  so  strongly,  that,  admitting  the
Electra  of  Sophocles  to  be  a  masterpiece,  I  yet  think
Atilius's  poor  translation  of  it  worth  my  while  to
read.  An  iron  writer,'  Licinius  called  him ;  still,
in  my  opinion,  a  writer  all  the  same,  and  therefore
deserving  to  be  read.  For  to  be  entirely  unversed
in  our  own  poets  argues  either  the  extreme  of  mental
inactivity  or  else  a  refinement  of  taste  carried  to  the
point  of  escess.  To  my  mind  no  one  can  be  styled
a,  well-read  man  who  does  not  know  our  native
literature. If  we  read

Would  that  in  forest  glades — °
just  as  readily  as  the  same  passage  in  the  Greek,
shall we object to having Plato's discourses on
morality  and happiness set  before  the  reader  in

6  Ijitin  ?  And  supposing  that  for  our  part  we  do  not
iill  tlie  office  of  a  mere  translator,  but,  while  preserv-
ing the  doctrines  of  our  chosen  authorities,  add
thereto  our  own  criticism  and  our  own  arrangement :

I  what  ground  have  these  objectors  for  ranking  the
writings  of  Greece  above  compositions  that  are  at
once  brilliant  in  style  and  not  mere  translations  from
Greek  originals?  Perhaps  they  will  rejoin  that  the
subject  has  been  dealtwith  by  the  Greeks  already.  But
then  what  reason  have  they  for  reading  the  multitude
of  Greek  authors  either  that  one  has  to  read  ?  Take
Stoicism :  what  aspect  of  it  has  Chrysippus  left
untouched? Yet we read Diogenes, Antipater,

I

L

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

lipatrum,  Mnesarcfium,  Panaetium,  multos  alios,  jn
primisque  familiarem  nostrum  Posidonium.  Quid  ?
Theoplirnstus  mediocriterne  delectat  cum  tract^t
locasabAristoteleante tractates?  Quid?  Epicure! num
desistunt  de  iisdem,  de  quibus  et  ab  Epicuro  scriptum
est  et  ab  antiquis,  ad  arbitrium  suum  scribere  ?  Quodsi
Graeci  legiintur  a  Graecis,  iisdem  de  rebus  alia  ratione
compositis,  quid  est  cur  nostri  a  nostris  non  legantur  ?

7  III.  Quamquam  si  plane  sic  verterem  Platonem
aut  Aristotelem  ut  verterunt  nostri  poetae  fabulas,
male,  credo,  mererer  de  meis  civibus  si  ad  eorum
cognition€*m  divina  ilia  ingenia  transferrem.  Sed  id
neque  feci  adhuc  nee  mihi  tamen  ne  faciam  inter-
dictum  puto.  Locos  quidem  quosdam,  si  videbilur,
transferam,  et  maxime  ab  lis  quos  modo  nominavi,
cum  incident  ut  id  apte  fieri  possit;  ut  ab  Homero
Ennius,  Afranius  a  Menandro  solet.  Nee  vero,  ut
noster  Luciiius,  recusabo  quo  minus  omnes  niea
legant.  Utinam  esset  ille  Persius !  Scipio  Vero  et
Rutilius  multo  etiam  magis ;  quorum  ille  iudicium
reformidans  Tarentinis  ait  se  et  Consentinis  et
Siculis  scribere.  Facete  is  quidem,  sicut  alia^;  sed
neque  tam  docti  turn  erant  ad  quorum  iudicium
elaboraret,  et  sunt  illius  scripta  leviora,  ut  urbanitas

) summa appareat, doctrina mediocris. E^o autem

quem  tim.eam  lectorem,  cum  ad  te,  ne  Graecis  qui-

'  o/ia  Mdv.  ;  alias  MSS.

aLucilius,  the  satirist,  148-1(13  B.C.,  avowed  that  he  wrote
for  the  moderately  learned  like  Laellus.  not  for  great
scholars  like  Persius :  '  Perslum  non  euro  legere,  Laelium
Decimum  volo'  (Cic.  de  Or.  2.25).  In  the  next  sentence
here  Cicero  seems  to  refer  lo  some  other  passages  of
Liicilius,  in  which  he  put  his  claims  still  loner  and  pro-
fessed to  write  for  illiterate  provincials,  not  for  cultured
noblemenlikeScipioAfricanus  Minor  and  F,  Rutilius  Rufus.

^  BOOK  I.  ii-iii

Mnesarchus,  Panaetius,  and  many  others,  not  least
our  friend  Posidonius.  Again,  Tlieophrastus  handles
topics  previously  treated  by  Aristotle,  3'et  he  gives
us  no  small  pleasure  all  the  same.  Nor  do  the  Epi-
cureans cease  from  writing  as  the  spirit  moves  them
on  the  same  questions  on  which  Epicurus  and  the
ancients  wrote.  If  Greek  writers  find  Greek  readers
when  presenting  tlie  same  subjects  in  a  different
setting,  why  should  not  Romans  be  read  by  Romans?

J  III.  Yet  even  supposing  I  gave  a  direct  trans-
lation of  Plato  or  Aristotle,  exactly  as  our  poets
have  done  with  the  plays,  would  it  not,  pray,  be
a  patriotic  service  to  introduce  those  transcendent
intellects  to  the  acquaintance  of  my  fellow-country-
men ?  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  this  has  not  been
my  procedure  hitherto,  though  I  do  not  feel  I  am  de-
barred from  adopting  it.  Indeed  I  expressly  reserve
the  right  of  borrowing  certain  passages,  if  I  think
fit,  and  piarticularly  from  the  philosophers  just  men-
tioned, when  an  appropriate  occasion  offers  for  so
doing;  just  as  Ennlus  regularly  borrows  from  Homer,
and  Afranius  from  Menander.  Nor  yet  sliall  1  object,
like  our  Lueilius,*  to  all  the  world's  reading  what  I
write.  I  only  wish  his  Persius  were  alive  to-day  I
and  still  more  Scipio  and  Rutilius,  in  fear  of  whose
criticism  Lucllius  protests  that  he  writes  for  the
public  of  Tarentum,  Consentia  and  Sicily.  Here  of
course,  as  elsewhere,  he  is  not  to  be  taken  too
seriously.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  there  were  not  such
learned  critics  in  his  day,  to  tax  his  best  efforts;  and
also  his  writings  are  in  a  lighter  vein :  they  show

9  consummate  wit,  but  no  great  erudition.  I,  however,
need  not  be  afraid  of  any  reader,  if  I  am  so  bold
as  to dedicate my  book  to  you,  who rival even
9

CICEBO  DB  FINIBUS
dem  cedentem  in  philosophia,  audeam  scribere?
Quamquam  a  te  ipso  id  quidem  facio  provocatui
gratissirao  mihi  libro  quem  «d  me  de  virtute  misistL
Sed  ex  eo  credo  quibusdam  usu  venire  ut  abhorreant
a  LatiniSj  quod  iiiciderint  in  iiiculta  quaedam
liorrida,  dc  malis  Graecis  Latine  scripta  detenus.
Quibus  ego  assentior,  dum  modo  de  iisdem  rebus  ne
Graecos  quidem  legendos  putent.  Res  vero  bonaa
verbis  electis  graviter  omateque  dictas  quis  i
legat?  Nisi  qui  se  plane  Graeciun  dici  velit,  ut  a
9  Scaei'ola  est  praetore  salutatus  Athenis  Albucius.
Quem  quidem  locum  cum  multa  venustate  et  omm
sale  idem  Lucilius,  apud  quem  praeclare  Scaevola;

Gr&eCQiu  te,  Albuci,  quam  Romanum  atquc

Sabinum,
Municipem  Ponti,  Tritanni,  centurionum,
Praeclarorum hominum ac pritnorum signife-

rumque,
Maluisti  dici;  Graece  ergo  praetor  Athenis,
Id  quod  maluisti,  te,  cum  ad  me  accedis,  saluto;
Xntpt,'  inquam, Tite!' Lictores,  turma  omnis

cohorsque^:
'Xaipe, Tite!'  Hinc hostis mi Albucius, hinc

;,  Mdv.;  chvrusguc,  MSS.

A

■  BOOK  I.

he  Greeks  as  a  philosopher.  Still,  rou  yourself
■hallenged  me  to  tbe  venture,  by  dedicating  to  me
rour  delightful  essay  On  J'irlue,  But  I  have  no
lonbt  that  the  reason  why  some  people  take  a
lislike  to  Latin  literature  is  that  they  have  happened
to  meet  with  certain  illiterate  and  uncouth  produc-
tons  which  are  bad  Greek  books  in  worse  Latin
i-ersions.  1  have  no  quarrel  with  these  persons,
provided  that  they  also  refuse  to  read  the  Greek
irriters  on  the  same  subjects.  But  given  a  noble
theme,  and  a  refined,  diguiiied  and  graceful  style,
who  would  not  read  a  Latin  book?  Unless  it  be  some
•me  ambitious  to  be  styled  a  Greek  out-and-out,  as
Albucius  was  greeted  by  Scaevola  when  the  latter
tros  praetor  at  Athens.  1  am  again  referring  to
Lucilius,  who  relates  the  anecdote  with  much  neat-
ness and  point ;  he  puts  tbe  following  excellent  lines
nto  the  mouth  of  Scaevola :

"  You  vow'd,  Albucius,  that  to  suit  ye
"Twas  as  a  Greek  we  must  repute  ye ;
'Roman'  and Sabine'  being  names
Your  man  of  ion  and  taste  disclaims !
You  soom'd  to  own  your  native  town, —
Which  bore  such  captains  of  renown
As  Pontius  and  Tritannius  bold.
Who  in  the  van  Rome's  ensigns  hold.
And  so,  at  Athens  when  I  lay.
And  your  respects  you  came  to  pay.
My  worship,  humouring  your  freak.
Gave  you  good-morrow  straight  in  Greek,
With Chaire,  Titus  ! '  '  Chaire,'  bawl
luards,  aidcs-de-camps,  javelin-men  and  all  1
—Hence  comej

CICERO  DE  riNIBUS  ^H

10  Sed  iure  Mucius.  Ego  auteni  mirari  satis  noti*  qu^
unde  hoc  sit  tam  insolens  domesticarum  rerum  fasti-
diuiD.  Non  est  omiiino  hie  docendi  locus,  sed  itt
setitio  et  saepe  disserui,  Latinam  Hnguam  non  moda
noil  inopenij  ut  vulgo  putarent,  sed  locupletiorem
etiam  esse  quam  Graecam.  Quando  enim  nobis,  vel
dicam  aut  oratoribus  bonis  uut  poetis,  postea  quidem
quam  fuit  quern  imitarentur,  ullus  orationis  vel
copiosae  vel  elegantis  omatus  defuit?

__^  C  IV.  EgO¥ero,quoiiiam'forensibusoperis,laboribii%
periculis  non  deseruisse  niilii  videor  praesidaum  in
quo  a  populo  Romano  locatus  sum,  debeo  profedfl,
quantumcumquc  possum,  in  eo  quoque  elaborare  tt
sint  opera,  studio,  laljore  ineo  doctiores  cives  mei,
nec  cum  istis  tanto  opere  pugnare  qui  Graeca  legere
matint,  modo  legant  ilia  ipsa,  ne  simulent,  et  iis
servire  qui  vel  utrisque  litteris  uti  velint  vel,  si  su»

1 1  habent,  illas  non  magno  opere  desiderent.  Qui
autem  alia  matunt  scribi  a  nobis,  aequi  esse  debent,
quod  et  seripta  multa  sunt,  sic  ut  plura  nemini  e
nostris,  et  scribentur  fortasse  plura  si  vita  suppetet;
et  tamen  qui  diligenter  haec  quae  de  philosophia
Htteris  mandamus  legere  assueverit,  iudicabit  nulla
ad  legendum  his  esse  potiora. Quid  est  enim  in

ta/«  now  Mdv.  {salis  mirari  non  Or.);  mitor!  <m
n  Mdv.,  cum  MSS.

MSS.

BOOK  I.  iii-iv

i  however  deserved. But  for

I  my  part  I  can  never  cease  wonderiug  what  tan  be

[  the  origin  of  the  exaggerated  contempt  for  hi

[  dncts  that  is now  fashionable. It  would  of

I  be  out  of  place  to  attempt  to  prove  it  here,  but  in  my

1  B{)iliioii,  as  I  have  often  argued,  the  Latin  language,

o  far  from  having  a  poor  vocabulary,  as  is  commonly

supposed,  is  actually  richer  than  the  Greek. When

\  have  we,  that  is  to  say  when  have  our  competent

^  orators  or  poets,  at  all  events  since  tliey  have  liad

I  models  to  copy,  ever  lacked  any  of  the  resources

■  either  of  the  florid  or  the  chaste  style  F

V IV, In  my  own  ease,  just  as  I  trust  I  have  done  Tii
I my  duty,  amidst  the  arduous  labours  and  perils  of  a  dig
^ public  career,  at  the  post  to  *hieh  the  Roman  people  ^"
iippointed  me,  so  it  is  assuredly  incumbent  on  me
also  to  use  my  best  endeavours, with  such  zeal,
, enthusiasm  and  energy  as  I  possess,  to  promote  the
advancement  of  learning  among  my  fellow-country-
men. Nor  need  I  be  greatly  concerned  to  join  issue
iwith  people  who  prefer  to  read  Greek,  provided  that
they  actually  do  read  it  and  do  not  merely  pretend
to  do  BO. It  is  my  business  to  serve  those  who
desire  to  enjoy  both  literatures,  or  who,  if  books  in
their  own  language  are  available,  do  not  feel  any
great  need  of  Greek  ones. Those  again  who  would
^ rather  have  me  write  on  other  subjects may  fairly
,1  be  indulgent  to  one  who  has  written  much  already

■  i — in  fact  no  one  of  our  nation  more— and  who  per-
i-^ haps  will  write  still  more  if  his  life  be  prolonged.

And  even  were  it  not  so,  anyone  who  has  made  a

practice  of  studying  my  philosophical  writings  will

I pronounce  that  none  of  them  are  better  worth  read-  g^^

1  ing  than  the  present  treatise. For  what  problem  '^

13

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
vita  tanto  opere  quaerendum  quam  cum  oinn
philosophic,  turn  id  quod  his  libris  quaeritur,  qui  sit
finis,  quid  extremuni,  quid  ultimum  quo  sint  omnis
bene  vivendi  recteque  faciendi  cotisilia  referenda!
quid  sequatur  natura  ut  summum  ex  rebus  expeteD-
dis,  quid  fiigiat  ut  extremum  malorum?  Qua  de  re
cum  sit  inter  doctissimos  sunima  dissensio,  quis  alie-
num  putet  cius  esse  dignitatis  quam  tnihi  quisque
tribuat,  quid  in  omni  munere  vitae  optimui
verissimum  sit  exquirere  ?  An,  pmrtus  auciUoe
sitne  in  fructu  haljendus,  disseretur  inter  principa
civitatis,  P.  Scaevolam  Maniuniqiie  Manilium,  »b
iisque  M.  Brutus  dissentiet  (quod  et  acutum  genoi
est  et  ad  usus  civium  non  inutile,  nosque  ea  scripti
reliquaque  eiusdem  generis  et  legimus  libenter  et
legemus) ;  haec  quae  vitam  omnem  continent
neglegentur?  Nam  ut  sint  ilia  vendlbiliora,  hue
uberiora  certe  sunt.  Quamquam  id  quidem  licebit
lis  existimare  qui  legerint.  Nos  autem  banc  omnem
quaestionem  de  finibus  bonorum  et  malorum  fei
a  nobis  explicatam  esse  his  litteris '  arbitramur,  i
quibus,  quantum  potuimus,  non  modo  quid  nobis
probaretur  sed  etiam  quid  a  singulis  philosophiae
disciplinis  diceretur  persecuti  sumus.

V. Ut  autem  a  facillimis  ordiamur,  prima  vex

^HII

;  Mdv.  witli  others  conjeclu'cs  libris.

■^  BOOK  I.  iv-v

does  life  offer  so  important  as  all  tlie  topics  of
philosophy,  and  especially  the  question  raised  in
these  volumes — What  is  the  End,  the  final  and
ultimate  aim,  which  gives  the  standard  for  all  prin-
ciples of  right  living  and  of  good  conduct?  What
does  Nature  pursue  as  the  tiling  supremely  desirable,
what  does  she  avoid  as  the  ultimate  evil?  It  is
a  Gubject  on  which  the  most  learned  philosophers
disA^ee  profoundly ;  who  then  can  think  it  de-
rogatory to  such  esteem  as  each  may  assign  to
roe,  to  investigate  what  is  the  highest  good  and  the
troest  rule  in  every  relationship  of  life  ?  Are  we  to
have  our  leading  statesmen  debating  such  topics  as
whether  the  offspring  of  a  female  slave  is  to  be  con-
sidered as  belonging  to  the  party  who  has  hired  her,
Publius  Scaevola  and  Manius  Manilius  upholding
one  opinion  and  Marcus  Brutus  the  contrary  (not  but
what  such  discussions  raise  nice  ptoints  of  law,  as
well  as  being  of  practical  importance  for  the  business
of  life ;  and  we  read  and  shall  continue  to  read  with
pleasure  the  treatises  in  question  and  others  of  the
same  nature);  and  shall  these  questions  which  cover
the  entire  range  of  conduct  be  neglected  ?  Legal
handbooks  no  doubt  command  a  readier  sale,  but
philosophy  is  unquestionably  richer  in  interest.
However,  this  is  a  point  that  may  be  left  to  the
reader  to  decide.  In  the  present  work  we
we  have  given  a  more  or  leas  exhaustive  exposition
of  the  whole  subject  of  the  Ends  of  Goods  and
Evils.  The  book  is  intended  to  contain  so  far  as
possible  a  complete  account,  not  only  of  the  views
that  we  ourselves  accept,  but  also  of  the  doctrines
enunciated  by  all  tlie  different  schools  of  philosophy.
V.  To  begin  with  what  is  easiest,  let  us  first  pass

L.

15

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
in  medium  Epicuri  ratio,  qu»e  plerisque
est ;  qiiara  a  nobis  sic  intelleges  expnsitai

)E  FINIBUS  ^1

),  qu»e  plerisque  notiaal^^H
ntelleges  expnsiUni,  «^^^H
probaiit  non  soleat  aecinl^
(lira  invenire  volumus,  ntfli

ipsis  qui  earn  disciplinan
tius  esplicari.  Verum  i
tamquam  adversarium  ali quern  ci

Accurate  atitem  quondam  a  L.  Torquato,  homine
omni  doctrina  erudito,  defensa  est  Epicuri  sententla
de  voluptate,  a  meque  ei  responsum,  cum  C  Triarius,
in  primis  gravis  et  doctus  adulescens,  ei  disputationi

14>  interesset.  Nam  cum  ad  me  in  Cunianum  salutandl*
causa  uterque  venisset,  pauca  prinio  inter  nos
litteris,  quarum  summum  ernt  in  utroque  studiu
deinde  Torquatus,  Quoniam  nacti  te,"  in  quit,
sumus  aliquando  otiosum,  certe  audiam  quid  sit  quod
Epicurura  nostrum  non  tu  qiiideni  oderis,  ut  fere
faciunt  qui  ab  eo  dissentiunt,  sed  certe  non  probes,
eum  quem  ego  arbitror  unum  vidisse  verum  maxj-
misque  error!  bus  animos  hominum  libera visse  et
omnia  tradidisse  quae  pertinerent  ad  bene  beateque
vivendum ;  sed  existimo  te,  sicut  nostrum  Triarium,
minus  ab  eo  delectari  quod  ista  Platonis,  Aristoteli,
Theophrasti  orationis  ornamenta  neglexerit.  Nam
illud  quidem  adduci  vis  possum,  ut  ea  quae  senserit

15  ille  tilii  non  vera  videantur."  Vide  quantum,"  jn-
quam,  fallare,  Torquate.  Oratio  me  istius  pliilo-
sophi  non  oifendit;  nam  et  complectitur  verbis  quod
vult  et  dicit  plane  quod  intetlegam ;  et  tamen  ego
a  philosopho,  si  afferat  eloquentiam,  non  aspemer,  S

BOOK 1.  V

in  review  the  system  of  Epicurus,  which  to  most  inirodi
men  is  the  best  known  of  any.  Our  exposition  of  it,  ^Se'st
as  yoii  shall  see,  will  be  as  accurnte  as  any  usually  Epicun
given  even  by  the  professed  adherents  of  his  school,  teem;  o
For  our  object  is  to  discover  the  truth,  not  to  refute  ^'''"B"
an  opponent.

An  elaborate  defence  of  the  hedonistic  theory
of  Epicurus  was  once  delivered  by  Lucius  Tor-
quatus,  a  scholar  of  consummate  erudition  ;  to  him
I  replied,  and  Gaius  Triarius,  a  youth  of  remark-
able learning  and  seriousness  of  character,  assisted  at

1  the  discussion.  Both  of  these  gentlemen  liad  called
to  pay  me  their  respects  at  my  place  at  Cumae.  We
first  exchanged  a  few  remarks  about  literature,  of
which  both  were  enthusiastic  students.  Then  Tor-
qnatus  said.  As  we  have  for  once  found  you  at
leisure,  I  am  resolved  to  hear  the  reason  why  you
regard  my  master  Epicurus,  not  indeed  with  liatred,
as  do  most  of  those  who  do  not  share  his  views,  but
at  all  events  with  disapproval.  I  myself  consider  him
as  the  one  person  who  has  discerned  the  truth,  and
who  has  delivered  men  from  the  gravest  errors  and
imparted  to  them  all  there  is  to  know  about  right
(NMiduct  and  happiness.  The  fact  is,  I  think  that  you
are  like  our  friend  Triarius,  and  dislike  Epicurus  he-
cause  he  has  neglected  the  graces  of  style  that  you
find  in  your  Plato,  Aristotle  and  Tlieophrastus.  For
I  can  scarcely  bring  myself  to  believe  that  you  think

5  his  opinions  untrue."  Let  me  assure  you,  Tor-
quatus,"  said  I,  '  that  you  are  entirely  mistaken.
With  your  master's  style  I  have  no  fault  to  find.
He  expresses  his  meaning  adequately,  and  gives  me
a  plain  intelligible  statement.  Not  that  1  despise
eloquence  in  a  philosopher  if  he  has  it  to  offer,  but

I  c  17

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

non  habeatj  non  admodum  flagitem. Re  mihi  I

aeque  satisfacit  ,  et  quidem  locis  pluribus. Sed i

I homines, tot  sententiae'; falli igitur possumq^

Quamobrem  tandem," inquit, non  satisfacitF,!

enim  iudicem  aequum  puto,  modo  quae  dicat  i

16  bene  noris."  Nisi  mihi  Phaedruni,"  inqotri
"mentitum  aut  Zenonem  putas,  quorum  utrumque
audivi,  cum  mihi  nihil  sane  praeter  sedulitatem
probarent,  omnes  mihi  Epicuri  sententiae  satis  notae
sunt;  atque  eos  quos  nominavi  cum  Attico  nostra
frequenter  audivi,  cum  miraretur  ille  quidem  utrum-
que, Phaedruni  autem  etiam  amaret ;  cotidieque
inter  nos  ea  quae  audiebamus  conferebamus,  neque
erat  umquam  controvcrsia  quid  ego  intellegerem,  sed
quid  probarem."

1 7  VI.  Quid  igitur  est  ? "  inquit ;  audire  enim
cupio  quid  non  probes."  Principle,"  inquam,  in
physicis,  quibus  maxime  gloriatur,  priraum  totus  est
alienus.  Democritea  dlcit,  perpauca  mutans,  sed  itft
ut  ea  quae  corrigere  vult  mihi  quidem  depravare
videatur.  Ille  atomos  quas  appellat,  id  est  corpora
individua  propter  soliditatem,  censet  in  infinite  inani,
in  quo  nihil  nee  summuni  nee  infimum  nee  medium
iiec  intimum  ^  nee  extremum  sit,  ita  feiii  ut  con-
cursionibns  inter  se  cohaerescant,  ex  quo  efliciantmr

^salU/acil  Mdv.  as  below  i  MSS.  htre  satisfecit.
»  intimum.  Jonas,  Mijller ;  ulHmum  Mdv.  with  MSS,

■  Terence,  Phormio  454.

BOOK  1.  v-vi

I  should  not  greatly  insist  on  it  if  he  has  not  But
his  matter  I  dt)  not  find  so  satisfactory,  and  that  in
more  points  than  one.  However,  many  men,  many
minds'^:  so  it  is  possible  that  I  am  mistaken."  What
is  it,  pray,"  he  said,  to  whieh  you  take  exception?
For  I  recognize  you  as  a  just  critic,  provided  you

6  really  know  what  his  doctrines  are." Oh,"  said  I,

I  know  the  whole  of  Epicurus's  opinions  well
enough, — -unless  you  think  that  Phaedrus  or  Zeno
did  not  tell  me  the  truth.  1  have  heard  both  of  them
lecture,  though  to  be  sure  they  convinced  n»e  of
nothing  but  their  own  devotion  to  the  system.  In-
deed I  regularly  attended  those  professors,  ii
psny  with  our  friend  Atticus,  who  for  bis  part  had  an
admiration  for  them  both,  and  a  positive  affection  for
Phaedrus.  Every  day  we  used  to  discuss  together  in
private  what  we  had  heard  at  lecture,  and  there  was
never  any  dispute  as  to  what  I  could  understand ;
the  question  was,  what  I  could  accept  as  true."

7  VI.  "  Well  then,  what  is  the  point?"  said  he;  "l  Cicero^tat™
should  very  much  like  to  know  what  it  is  that  you  Eptaurasf
disagree  with."  Let  me  begin,"  I  replied,  with  pHiSS"^'ia
the  subject  of  Natural  Philosophy,  which  is  Epicurus's  either  not  np»
particular  boast.  Here,  in  the  first  place,  he  is  entirely  "' ""'  ^™*'
second-hand.  His  doctrines  are  those  of  Democritus,
with  a  very  few  modifications.  And  as  for  the  latter,
where  lie  attempts  to  improve  upon  his  original,  in
my  opinion  he  only  succeeds  in  making  things  worse.
Oemoeritus  believes  in  certain  things  which  he  terms

atoms,'  that  is,  bodies  so  solid  as  to  be  indivisible,
moving  about  in  a  vacuum  of  infinite  extent,  which
has  neither  top,  bottom  nor  middle,  neither  centre  nor
cjrcutnference.  The  motion  of  these  atoms  is  such
that  they  collide  and  so  cohere  together  ;  and  from
c2  19

^sm

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

ea  quae  sint quaeque cemantur omnia; eumque

motum  atomorum  nuflo  a  priiicipio  sed  ex  aetemo

18  tempore  intellegi  convenire.  Epicurus  autem,  in
quibus  sequiturDemocritum,  noil  fere  labitur,  Quam-
quam  utriusque  cum  mutta  non  prolx).  turn  illiid  in
priniis,  quoJ,  cum  in  rerum  nalura  duo  quaerenda
sint,  ununi  quae  materia  sit  ex  qua  quaeque  res
cfficiatur,  alterum  quae  vis  sit  quae  quidque  efficiat,
de  materia  disserucrunt,  vim  et  causam  efficiendi
reliquerunt.  Sed  lioc  commune  vitiuni ;  illae  Epicur
propriae  ruinae:  censet  enim  eadem  ilia  indlvidua  e
solida  corpora  ferri  deorsum  suo  pondere  ad  lineam  i
hunc naturalem esse omnium corporum motuni;

1 9  deinde  ibidem  homo  acutus,  cam  illud  occorreret,  j
omnia  deorsum  e  regione  ferrentur  et,  ut  dixi,  ad
lineam,  numquam  fore  ut  atomus  altera  alteram
posset  attingere,  itaque  attulit  rem  commenticiam:

■  declinare  dixit  atomum  perpaulum,  quo  nihil  posset
fieri  minus;  ita  eifici  complexiones  et  copulationes  et
adhaesiones  atomorum  inter  se,  ex  quo  eificeretur
mundus  omnesque  partes  mundi  quaeque  in  eo
essent.  Quae  cum  res  tota  fieta  sit  piieriliter,  turn
ne  efficit  quidem^  quod  vult.  Nam  et  ipsa  declinatio
ad  libidinem  fiiigitur  (ait  enim  deelinare  atomum
sine  causa,  quo  nibil  turpius  physico  quam  fieri  quid-

iriW^m  [[

eil  by  cdd.

BOOK  I. vi

this  process  result  the  whole  of  the  things  that  exist
and  that  we  see. Moreover,  this  movement  of  the
_  atoms  must  not  be  conceived  as  starting  froni  a  be-
,  but  as  having  gone  on  from  all  eternity.
s  for  his  part,  where  he  follows  Deaiocritus,
lo  serious  blunders. Still,  there  is  a  great
1  each  of  them  with  which  I  do  not  agree,  and
especially  this ;  in  the  study  of  Nature  there  are  two
questions  to  be  asked,  first,  what  is  the  matter  out
of  which  each  thingismade,  second,  what  is  the  force
by  which  it  is  made;  now  Democritus  and  Epicurus
have  discussed  the  question  of  matter,  but  tliey  have
not  considered  the  question  of  force  or  the  efficient
cause. But  this  is  a  defect  shared  by  both;  I  now
CMne  to  the  lapses  peculiar  to  Epicurus. He  believes
that  these  same  indivisible  solid  bodies  are  borne  by
their  own  weight  perpendicularly  downward,  which
^9  he  holds  is  the  natural  motion  of  all  bodies;  but  then
in the very same breath, being sharp  enough to
recollect  that  if  they  all  travelled  downwards  in
L a  straight  line,  and,  as  I  said,  perpendicularly,  no  one
^Lgtau  would  ever  be  able  to  overtake  any  other  atom,
^Hj^consequently  introduced  an  idea  of  his  own  inven-
^^Upn :  he  said  that  the  atom  makes  a  very  tiny  swerve,
^r^- — the  smallest  divergence  possible;  and  so  are  pro-
F duced  entanglements  and  combinations  and  cobe-
I dons  of  atoms  with  atoms,  which  result  in  the  creation
i of  the  world  and  all  its  parts,  and  of  all  that  in  them
Now  not  only  is  the  whole  of  this  affair  a  piece
of  childish  fancy,  but  it  does  not  even  achieve  the
result  that  its  author  desires. The  swerving  is  itself
I arbitrary  fiction ; for Epicurus s;iys the  atoms
swerve without  a cause, ^yet  this  is  the  capital
offence  in  a  natural  philosopher,  to  speak  of  some-
Si

Coogfe

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quam  sine  causa  dicere),  et  Uluml  motum  naturalen
omnium  ponderumj  ut  ipse  constituit,  e  regjone  in
ferioreni  locum  petentium,  siiie  causa  eripuit  atomis
nee  tamen  id  cuius  causa  haec  finxerat  assecutus  est

SO  Nam  si  omnes  atooii  dcclinabunt,  nullae  umquan

cohaerescent :  sive  aliae  declinabunt,  uliac  suo  nuti

recle ferentur,  primum erit  hoc  quasi provincial

atomis  dare,  quae  rectej  quae  oblique  fcrantur, de^

inde  eadem  ilia  atomorum  (in  quo  etiam  Democritu;

haeret)  turbulent»  concursio  huiic  mondi  ornatua

I eiBcere  non  poterit. Ne  illud  quidem  phj'sicij  crederf

/  aliquid esse miuimum ; quod profecto nuroquam

' putavisset  si  a Pojyaeno  familiar!  suo  geometric»

discere  maluisset  quam  ilium  etiam  ipsum  dedocere.

Sol  Democrito  magnus  v-idetur,  quippe  homini  erudite

in  geometriaqueperfecto;  huic  pedalis  fortasse : tan-

tum  enim  esse  eenset  quantus  vidctur,  vel  paulo  aut

21  maiorem  aut  minorem.  Ita  quae  mutat  ea  corrumpit,
quae  sequitur  sunt  tota  Deniocriti,  atomi,  inane^
imagines,  quae  tiSotka  nomiiiant,  quorum  tncursione
non  solum  videamus  sed  etiam  cogitemus;  in&nitio
ipsa,  quam  iTrv-piav  vocant,  tota  ab  illo  est,  turn  in-
numerabiles  mundi qui et oriantur et intcreant

B  Democritus  explaintd  sight  as  being-  caused  by  tbc
impact  on  the  eye  of  films  or  husks  which  are  conlinuaHy
bein^  thrown  off  from  the  surface  of  objccLs.  These
'images,' penetrating  to  the  mind  through  the  pores  of  llie
body,  also  caused  mental  impressions

^^le

BOOK  I.  vi

thing  taking  place  uncaused.  Then  also  he  gratuit-
ously deprives  the  atoms  of  what  he  himself  declared
to  be  the  natural  motion  of  all  heavy  bodies,  namely,
movement  in  a  straight  line  downwards,  and  yet  he
does  not  attain  the  object  for  the  sake  of  which  this

;0  fiction  was  devised.  For,  if  all  the  atoms  sweri-e,
none  will  ever  eome  to  cohere  together ;  or  if  some
swerve  while  others  travel  in  a  straight  line,  at
their  own  will  and  pleasure,  in  the  first  place  this
will  be  tantamount  to  assigning  to  the  atoms  their
different  spheres  of  authority,  some  to  travel  straight  ,
and  some  sideways ;  while  secondly  (and  this  is  a  |
weak  point  with  Deraocritus  also)  this  riotous
hurly-burly  of  atoms  could  not  possibly  result  in  the
ordered  beauty  of  the  world  we  know.  Again,  it  is  '.
unworthy  of  a  natural  philosopher  to  deny  the  infinite
divisibility  of  matter ;  an  error  that  assuredly  Epi-
curus would  have  avoided,  if  he  had  been  willing  to
let  his  friend  Polyaenus  teach  him  geometry  instead
of  making  Polyaenus  himself  unlearn  it.  Democritus,
being  an  educated  man  and  well  versed  in  geo-
metry, thinks  the  sun  is  of  vast  size  ;  Epicurus  con-
siders it  perhaps  a  foot  in  diameter,  fov  he  pro-
nounces it  to  be  exactly  as  large  as  it  appears,  or  a

I  little  larger  or  smaller.  Thus  where  Epicurus  alters
the  doctrines  of  Democritus,  he  alters  them  for  the
worse;  while  for  those  ideas  which  he  adopts,  the
credit  belongs  entirely  to  Democritus,— -the  atoms,
the  void,  the  images,*  or  as  they  call  them,  eidala,
whose  impact  is  the  cause  not  only  of  vision  but  also
of  thought;  the  very  conception  of  infinite  space,
apeiria  as  they  term  it,  is  entirely  derived  from
Democritus;  and  again  the  countless  numbers  of
worlds  that  come  into  existence  and  pass  out  of
23

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
cotidie. Quae etsi milii nullo modo prgbf
tamen  Democritum,  laiidatuni  a  ceteris,  ab  lioc,  1
cum  unum  secutus  esset,  nollem  vituperatui

VII.  'lam  in  altera  philosophiae  parte,  quae  fl
quaerendi  ac  disserendi,  quae  Xoyixii  dicilur,
vester  plane,  ut  raihi  quidem  videtur,  iiiermis  ac
dus  est  ToUit  definitiones ;  nihil  de  dividendo  ac
partiendo  docet;  non  quomodo  efficiatur  conchida-
turque  ratio  tradit;  non  qua  via  captiosa  solvantur,
ambig'ua  distinguantur  ostendit;  iudicia  rerum  in
sensibus  ponit,  quibus  si  semel  aliquid  falsi  pro  vero
probatum  sit,  sublalum  esse  omne  iudicium  veri  et
falsi  putat.  .  .  .

.  . .  Confiriuat  autem  illud  vel  maxiine  quod  ipse
natura,  ut  ait  ille,  sciseat  et  probet,  id  est  voluptatem
et  dolorem.  Ad  haec  et  quae  sequamur  et  quae  fu-
giamus  refert  omnia.  Quod  quamquam  Aristippi  est
a  Cyrenaicisque  mulius  liberiusque  def'cnditur,  tamea
eiusmodi  esse  iudico  ut  nihil  homine  videatur  indi-
gnius.  Ad  maiora  enim  quaedam  nos  natitra  genuit  et
conformavit,  ut  mihi  quidem  videtur.  Ac  fieri  potest
ut  errem ;  sed  ita  prorsus  existimo,  neque  eum  Tor-
quatumquihocprimuscognomeninvenit'auttorquem
ilium  hosti  detraxisse  ut  aliquam  ex  eo  pereiperet
corpore  voluptatem  aut  cum  Latuiis  tertio  consulutu

'  inziCHi/  B,  E  ;  invcneril  A  and  inf,  MSS,

"In  Greek  Logic  Bialptrjis,  tliemelhod  of  defining  a  species
by  dividing  and  subdividing  a.  genus:  cp.  Bk.  11.  g  26.

1>  The  interprelation  is  here  uncertain,  and  probably  morn
than  one  sentence  has  been  losl.

BOOK  1.  vi-v'ii
existence  every  day.  For  my  own  part  1  reject
these  doctrines  altogether;  but  still  i  could  wish
that  Democritus,  whom  everyone  else  applauds,  had
not  been  viliRed  by  Epicurus  who  took  him  as  his  sole
guide.

i  VII.  Turn  next  to  the  second  division  of  philo-  F'Tmi
Bophy,  the  department  of  Method  and  of  Dialectic,  j^eiiiei
which  is  termed  LogikS.  Of  the  whole  armour  of
Logic  your  founder,  as  it  seems  to  me,  is  ahsolutely
destitute.  He  does  away  with  Definition ;  he  has  no
doctrine  of  Division  or  Partition';  he  gives  no  rules
for  Deduction  or  Syllogistic  Inference,  and  imparts
no  method  for  resolving  DUemmas  or  for  detect-
ing Fallacies  of  Equivocation.  The  Criteria  of
reality  he  places  in  sensation;  once  let  the  senses
accept  as  true  something  that  is  false,  and  every
possible  criterion  of  truth  and  falsehood  seems  to
liim  to  be  immediately  destroyed. .  ,  .

IS ..,*'He  lays  the  very  greatest  stress  upon  thatii^E'
which,  as  he  declares.  Nature  herself  decrees  and  comti
sanctions,  that  is  the  feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain,  n'otaimsoieiy
TTiese  he  maintains  lie  at  the  root  of  every  act  of  Weaiure;
choice  and  of  avoidance. Tliis  is  the  doctrine  of
Aiistippus,  and  it  is  upheld  more  cogently  and  more
frankly by  the Cyrenaics; but nevertheless it  is
in  my  judgment  a  doctrine  in  the  last  degree  un-
worthy of  the  dignity  of  man.  Nature,  in  my  opinion
at  all  events,  has  created  and  endowed  us  for  higher
ends. I  may  possibly  be  mistaken;  but  I  am  abso-
lutely convinced  that  the  Torquatus  who  first  won
that  surname  did  not  wrest  the  famous  necklet  from
his  foe  in  the  hope  of  getting  from  it  any  pliysical
enjoyment,  nor  did  he  fight  the  battle  of  the  Veseris
against  the  Latins  in  his  third  consulship  for  the  sake
95

nyGoogle

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

conflisisse  apud  Veserim  propter  voluptatem.  Quod
vero  securi  percussit'  filium,  privavisse  se  etiam  vi-
detur  multis  voluptatibus,  cum  ipsi  naturae  patrioque
amori  praetulerit  ius  maiestatis  atque  imperi.

Quid?  T.- Torquatus,!s  qui  consul  cum  Cn.Octavio
fuit,  cum  illam  severitatem  in  eo  lilio  adhibuit  quem
in  adoptionem  D,  Silano  e  man  ci  pave  rat,  ut  eum,
Macedonum  legntis  accusantibus  quud  pecunias  prae-
torem  in  provincia  cepisse  argiierent,  causam  apud  se
dicere  iuberet,  reque  ex  utraque  parte  audita  pro-
nuntiaret  eum  non  talcm  videri  fuisse  in  imperio
quales  eius  maiores  fuissent,  et  in  conspectum  suum
venire  vctuit,  numquid  tibi  videtut  de  voluptatibus
suis  cogitavisse?  Sed  ut  omittana  pericula,  labores,
doiorem  etiam  quem  optimus  quisque  pro  patria  et
pro  suis  suscipitj  ut  non  niodo  nullam  captet  sed
etiam  praetereat  omiies  voluptates,  dolores  denique
quosvis  suscipere  malit  quam  deserere  uUam  oUici
partem,  ad  ea  quae  hoc  non  minus  declarant  sed  vi-
dentur  leviora  veniamus.  Quid  tibi,  Torquate,  quid
huic  Triario  litterae,  quid  historiae  cognitioque  rerum,
quid  poetarum  evolutio,  quid  tanta  tot  versuum  me*
moriavoluptatisaffert?  Nee  mihi  illud  dixerist  Haec
enim  ipsa  milii  sunt  voluptati,  et  erant  ilia  Torquatis.
Numquam  hoc  ita  defcndit  Epicurus  neque  Metj^-
dorus  aut  quisquam  eorum  qui  aut  saperet  aliqujd

'percussit  Mdv.j  percusseril  MSS.
''  T.  edd.  from  Liv.  epiL  54  ;  L.  MSS.
36

BOOK  1.

of  pleasure.  Indeed  in  sentencing  his  son  to  be  be-
headed, 'it  would  seem  that  he  actually  deprived
himself  of  a  great  deal  of  pleasure :  for  he  suorificcd
his  natural  instincts  of  paternal  affection  to  the
claims  of  state  and  of  his  military  office.

"Tlien,  think  ofthe  Titus  Torquatus  who  was  consul
with  Gnaeus  Octavius;  when  lie  dealt  so  stenily
with  tlie  son  who  had  passed  out  of  his  patenial  con-
trol through  his  adoption  by  Decius  Silanus — when
be  summoned  him  into  his  presence  to  answer  to  the
charge  preferred  against  him  by  a  deputation  from
Macedonia,  of  accepting  bribes  while  praetor  in  that
province — when,  after  hearing  both  sides  of  the  case,
he  gave  judgment  that  he  found  his  son  guilty  of
having  conducted  himself  in  office  in  a  manner  un-
worthy of  his  ancestry,  and  banished  him  for  ever
from  bis  sight, — ^think  you  he  had  any  regard  for  his
own  pleasure?  But  I  pass  over  the  dangers,  the
toils,  the  actual  pain  that  all  good  men  endure  for
country  and  for  friends,  not  only  not  seeking  plea-
sure, but  actually  renouncing  pleasures  altogether,
and  preferring  to  undergo  every  sort  of  pain  rather
than  be  false  to  any  portion  of  their  duty.  Let  us
torn  to  matters  seemingly  less  important,  but  equally
!S  conclusive.  What  actual  pleasnre  do  you,  Torquahis,
or  does  Triarius  here,  derive  from  literature,  from
history  and  learning,  from  turning  the  pages  of  the
poets  and  committing  vast  quantities  of  verse  to
memory?  Do  not  tell  me  that  these  pursuits  are  in
themselves  a  pleasure  to  you,  and  that  so  were  the
deeds  1  mentioned  to  the  Torquati,  That  line  of
defence  was  never  taken  by  Epicurus  or  Metrodorus,
nor  by  any  one  of  them  if  he  possessed  any  intelli-
gence or  had  mastered  the  doctrines  of  your  school.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
aut  ista  didicisset.  Et  quod  quaeritur  saepe  cur  tam
multi  sint  Epicure!,  sunt  aliae  quoque  causae,  sed
raultitudinem  haec  maxime  allicit  quod  ita  putant
dici  ah  illo,  recta  et  honesta  quae  sint,  ea  facere  ipsa
per  se  taetitiam,  id  est  voluptatem.  Homines  optimi
non  intellegunt  totam  rationem  everti  si  ita  res  se
liabeat.  Nam  si  concederctur,  etiamsi  ad  corpus  nihil
referatur,  ista  sua  sponte  et  per  se  esse  iucunda,  per
se  esset  et  virtus  et  coguitio  rerun»,  quod  miiiime  ille
vult,  expetenda.

Haec  igitur  Epicuri  non  probo,"  inquam.  De  ce-
tero  vellem  equidem  aut  ipse  doctrinis  fuisset  instru-
ctior  (est  enini,  quod  tibi  ita  videri  necesse  est,  non
satis  potitus  iis  artibus  quas  qui  tenant  eniditi  appel-
lantur),  aut  ne  deterruisset  alios  a  studiis.  Quaiuquam
te  quidem  video  minime  esse  deterritum."

VIII.  Quae  cum  dixissem,  magis  ut  ilium  provO'
carem  quam  ut  ipse  loquercr,  turn  Triarius  Icniter
arridens ;  Tu  quidem,"  inquit,  totiim  Epicurum
paene  e  philosophorum  choro  sustulisti.  Quid  ei
reliquisti  nisi  te,  quoquo  modo  loqiieretur,  intelle-
gere  quid  diceret?  Aliena  dixit  in  pliysicis,  nee  ea
ipsa  quae  tibi  probarentur.  Si  qua  in  iis  corrigere
voluit,  deteriora  fecit.  Disserendi  artem  nullam
liabuit.  Voliiptjitem  cum  summum  bouura  diceret,
primum  in  eo  ipso  parum  vidit,  deinde  hoc  quoque

BOOK  1.  vii-viii
Again,  as  to  the  question  often  asked,  why  so  man;
men  are  Epicureans,  though  it  is  not  the  only  reason,
thethingthatmost  attracts  the  crowd  is  the  heUef  that
Epicurus  declares  right  conduct  and  moral  worth  to
be  intrinsically  and  of  themselves  dehghtful,  which
means  prcnductive  of  pleasure.  These  worthy  people
do  not  realize  that,  if  this  is  true,  it  upsets  the
theory  altogether.  If  it  were  admitted  that  goodi
is  spontaneously  and  intrinsically  pleasant^
without  any  reference  to  bodily  feeling,  then  virtue
would  be  desirable  for  its  own  sake,  and  so  also  would
knowledge;  but  this  Epicurus  by  no  means  allows.
6  'These  then,"  said  I,  are  the  doctrines  of  Epi-
curus that  I  cannot  accept  For  the  rest,  1  could
desire  that  he  himself  had  been  better  equipped
with  learning  (since  even  you  must  recogniBe  that
he  is  deficient  in  that  liberal  culture  which  confers
on  its  possessor  the  title  of  an  educated  man)  or  at
all  events  that  he  had  not  deterred  others  from  study.
Although  I  am  aware  that  he  has  not  succeeded  in
deterring  you."

VIII.  I  had  spoken  rather  with  the  intention  of
drawing  out  Torguatus  than  of  deUvering  a  discourse
of  my  own.  But  Triarius  interposed,  with  a  smile  :
"  Why,  you  have  practically  expelled  Epicurus
altogether  from  the  philosophic  choir.  What  have
you  left  to  him  except  that,  whatever  his  style  may
be,  you  find  his  meaning  intelligible?  His  doctrines
in  Natural  Philo.sophy  were  second-hand,  and  in  your
opinion  unsound  at  that ;  and  his  attempts  to  improve
on  his  authority  only  made  tilings  worse.  Dialectic
he  had  none.  His  identification  of  the  Chief  Good
with  pleasure  in  the  first  place  was  in  itself  an
error,  and  secondly  this  also  was  not  original ;  for  it

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
aiieniim ;  nam  ante  Aristippus,  et  ille  melius.
disti  ad  extremum,  etiam  indoctum  fuisse."
inquam,  Triari,  nullo  pacto  potest  ut  non  dica
lion  probes  eius  a  quo  dissentias.  Quid  <
prohiberet  Epicureum  esse,  si  probarem  quae  1
diceret?  eum  praesertim  ilia  perdiscert
Quamobrem  disseiitientium  inter  se  reprehensiones
non  sunt  vituperandae ;  maledicta,  contumeliae,  turn
iracundae'  contention es  concertationesque  in  dispu-
tando  pertinaces  indignae  philosophia  mihi  videri  ^
Solent."  TumTorquatus;  Prorsus,"  inquit,  assentior;
neque  enim  disputari  sine  repreliensione,  nee  cum
iracundia  aut  pertinacia  recte  disputari  potest.  Sed
ad  haec,  nisi  molestum  est,  habeo  quae  velim."  An
me/'  inquam,  nisi  te  audire  vellem,  censes  haec  di-
ctutum  fuisse?  "  Utruni  igitur  percurri  omneni  Epi-
curi  disciplinam  placet,  an  de  una  voluptate  quaeri,  de  '
qua  omne  certamen  est?"  "Tuo  vero  id  quidem,"  I
inquam,  "arbitratu."  "Sic  faciam  igitur,"  inquit :
unam  rem  explicabo  eamque  niaximam;  dc  phj'sicis
alias  ;  et  quidem  tibi  et  declinationem  istam  atomo-
rum  et  magnitudinem  solis  probabo,  et  Democriti
errata  ab  Epicuro  reprehensa  et  correcta  permulta.
Nunc  dieam  de  voluptate,  nibil  scilicet  novi,  ea  tamen
quae  te  ipsum  probaturum  esse  confidam." Certe,"

indae  Mdv.

andiae  MSS,

r  BOOK  1.  viii

hod  been  said  before,  and  said  better,  by  Aristippus.
To  crown  all  you  added  that  Epicurus  was  a  person
BT  of  no  education."  Well,  Triariiis,"  I  rejoined,
when  one  disagrees  with  a  man,  it  is  essential  to
say  what  it  is  that  one  objects  to  in  his  views.  What
should  prevent  me  from  being  an  Epicurean,  if  1
Accepted  the  doctrines  of  Epicurus?  especially  as
the  system  is  an  exceedingly  easy  one  to  master.
You  must  not  Rnd  fault  with  members  of  opposing
schools  for  criticizing  each  other's  opinions;  though
I  always  feel  that  insult  and  abuse,  or  ill-tempered
wrangling  and  bitter,  obstinate  controversy  are
t8  beneath  the  dignity  of  philosophy."  I  am  quite  of  Torqnatu
your  mind,"  said  Torquatus;  it  is  impossible  to  de-  Epicnms'
bate  without  eriticieing,  but  it  is  equally  impossible  'i=f™"'>
to  debate  properly  with  ill-temper  or  obstinacy.  But
I  have  something  I  should  like  to  say  in  reply  t«  all
this,  if  it  will  not  weary  you."  "Do  you  suppose,"
said  I,  that  1  should  have  said  what  I  have,  unless
I  wanted  to  hear  you  ?  "  Then  would  you  like  me
to  make  a  rapid  review  of  the  whole  of  Epicurus's
Efstem,  or  to  discuss  the  single  topic  of  pleasure,
which  is  the  one  main  subject  of  dispute?"  Oh,"  aiKUHion
I  said,  tliat  must  be  for  you  to  decide."  Very  ^'•''a.
well  then,"  said  he,  "this  is  what  I  will  do,  1  will
expound  a  single  topic,  and  that  the  most  important.
Natural  Philosophy  we  will  postpone  ;  though  I  will
undertake  to  prove  to  you  both  your  swerve  of  the
atoms  and  size  of  the  sun,  and  also  that  very  niany  ei
of  Democritus  were  criticized  and  corrected  by  Epti-
curus.  But  on  the  present  occasion  I  will  speak  about
pleasure  ;  not  that  I  have  anything  original  to  con-
"«ite,  yet  I  am  confident  that  what  1  say  v

n  your  acceptance." Be  assured,"  I  said,

■^  CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^M

inquain, pertinax  iion  ero  tibique,  si  milii  probabis

29  eaquae  dices,  libenterasseiitiar."  Probabo,"  inquit,
modo  ista  sis  aequitate  quam  osteiidis.  Sed  uti
oratione  perpetua  malo  quam  interrogare  aut  interro-
gari."  lit  placet,"  iiiquam.  Turn  dicere  ejtorsus  est.
IX.  Primum  igitur/'  inquit,  sic  agam  ut  ipsi
auctori  huius  disciplinae  placet ;  constituatn  quid  et
quale  sit  id  de  quo  quaerimus,  non  quo  ignorare  vos
arbitrer,  sed  ut  ratione  et  via  procedat  oratio.  Quaeri-
mus igitur  quid  siTextremum  et  ultimuin  bouoruni,
quod  omnium  philosophorum  sententia  tale  debet  esse
ut  ad  id  omnia  referri  oporteat,  ipsum  autem  nusquam,
tloc  Epicurus  in  voluptAte  ponit,  quod  summum
bonum  esse  viilt  summumque  malum  dolorem ;  idque
^0  instituit  docere  sic :  Omne  animal  simul  atque  natum
sit  voluptatem  appetere  eaque  f*audere  ut  summo
bono,  dolorem  aspeniari  ut  summura  malum  et  quan-
tum possit  1  se  repellere,  idque  facere  nondum  de-
praotum,  ipsa  natura  incotrupte  atque  integre  mdi
cante  Itaque  negat  opus  esse  ratione  neque
disputatione  quamobrem  voluptas  e\petenda,  fu-
giendus  dolor  sit  Sentiri  liaec'  put^t,  ut  calere
ignem  ni\cm  esbe  albam  mel  dulce,  quorum  iiiliil
oportere  exquisitis  rationibus  confirmare,  tantum
satis  esse  admonere  (Interesse  enim  inter  argumen-
tum  conclusionemque  rationis  et  inter  mediocrem
animadversionem  atque  admonitionem :  altera  occulta
'  Aaec  A ;  hoc  Mdv,  with  other  MSS.

■r  BOOK  I.  viii-ix

that  I  shall  not  be  obstinate,  but  will  gladly  own
myself  convinced  if  you  can  prove  your  case  to  my
29  satisfaction." I  shall  do  so,"  he  rejoined, provided
you  are  as  fair-minded  as  you  promise. But  I  prefer
to  employ  continuous  discourse  rather  than  question
■ud  «jjswer." "As  jou  please,"  said  I, So  he  began.
IX. I  will  start  then,"  he  said, in  the  manner
approved  by  the  author  of  the  system  himself,  by
settling  wliat  is  tlie  essence  and  quality  of  the  thing
that  is  the  object  of  our  inquiry;  not  that  I  suppose
yon  to  be  ignorant  of  it,  but  because  this  is  the
logical nietliod of procedure. We are inquiring,  Pleiiuretli
then,  what  is  the  final  and  ultimate  Good,  which  as  p,
all  philosophers  are  agreed  must  be  of  such  a  nature  ^
as  to  be the Elnd  to  which  all other  things  are  sti
means,  while  it  is  not  itself  a  means  to  anything
else. This  Epicurus  finds  in  pleasure;  pleasure  he
holds  to  be  the  Chief  Good,  pain  the  Chief  Evil.

:S0  This  he  sets  out  to  prove  as  follows:  Every  animal,
as  soon  as  it  is  bom,  seeks  for  pleasure,  and  delights
in  it  as  the  Chief  Good,  while  it  recoils  from  pain  as
the  Chief  Evil,  and  so  far  as  possible  avoids  it.  This
it  does  as  long  as  it  remains  unperverted,  at  the
prompting  of  Nature's  own  unbiased  and  honest
verdict.  Hence  Epicurus  refuses  to  admit  any  neces-
sity for  argument  or  discussion  to  prove  that  pleasure
i&  desirable  and  pain  to  be  avoided.  These  facts,
he  thinks,  are  perceived  by  the  senses,  as  that  fire
is  hot,  snow  white,  honey  sweet,  none  of  wltich
things  need  be  proved  by  elaborate  argument:  it  is
enough  merely  to  draw  attention  to  them.  {For  there
is  a  difference,  he  holds,  between  formal  syllogistic
proof  of  a  thing  and  a  mere  notice  or  reminder;
the  former  is  the  method  for  discovering  abstruse

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quaedam  et  quasi  involuta  aperiri,  altera  prompta  et

aperta  indi

Etenim  quoniam  detractis  de  ho-
lms veliqui  nihil  est,  necesse  est  quid  aut

ad  naturam  aut  contra  sit  a  natura  ipsa  iudicart.  Ea
quid percipit aut quid  iudicat, quo aut petat aut

3 1  fiigiat  aliquid,  praeter  voluptatem  et  dolorem  ?  Sunt
autem  quidam  e  nostris  qui  haec  subtilius  velint
tradere,  et  negent  satis  esse  quid  bonum  sit  aut  quid
maiuni  sensu  iudicari,  sed  animo  etiam  ac  ratione
intellegi  posse  et  voluptatem  ipsam  per  se  esse  ex-
petendam  et  dolorem  ipsuni  per  se  esse  fugiendum.
Itaque  aiunt  banc  quasi  naturalem  atquc  insitam  in
animis  nostris  inesse  notionem  ut  alterum  esse  appe-
tendum,  alterum  aspernandum  sentiamus.  Alii  autem,
quibus  ego  assentior,  cum  a  phdosoplils  compluribus
pennulta  dicantur  cur  nee  voluptas  in  bonis  sit  nu-
meranda  nee  in  mails  dolor,  non  existimant  oportere
nimium  nos  causae  confidere,  sed  et  argumentandum
et  accurate  disserendum  et  rationibus  conquisitis  de
voluptate  et  dolore  disputandum  putant.

S'i  X.  Sed  ut  perspiciatis  unde  omnis  iste  natus  error
sit  voluptatem  accusantium  doloremque  laudantium,
totam  rem  aperiam,  eaque  ipsa  quae  ab  illo  inventore
veritatis  et  quasi  architecto  beatue  vitae  dicta  sunt
explicabo.  Nemo  enim  ipsam  voluptatem  quia
voluptas  sit  aspematur  aut  odit  aut  fugit,  sed  quia
consequuntur  magni  dolores  eos  qui  ratione  volupta-
tem sequi  nesciunt.  Neque  porro  quisquam  est  qui  do-
'  indicari  inf.  MS. ;  iudicari  Mdv.  with  other  MSS.

34

^ssmm<^

^^^e

r

and  recondite  truths,  the  latter  for  indicating  facts
that  are  obvious  and  evident.}  Strin_  mankind  of
sensation,  and  nothing  remains;  it  follows  that
Nature  herself  is  the  judge  of  that  which  is  in  accord-
ance with  or  contrary  to  nature.  What  does  Nature
perceive  or  what  does  she  judge  of,  beside  pleasure
and pain, to guide her actions of desire and of

I  avoidance?  Some  members  of  our  school  however
irould  refine  upon  this  doctrine ;  these  say  that  it  is
not  enough  for  the  judgment  of  good  and  evil  to
rest  with  the  senses;  the  facts  that  pleasure  is  in
and  for  itself  desirable  and  pain  in  and  for  itself
to  be  avoided  can  also  be  grasped  by  the  intellect
and  the  reason.  Accordingly  they  declare  that
the  perception  that  the  one  is  to  be  sought  after  and
the  other  avoided  is  a  natural  and  innate  idea  of  the
mind.  Others  again,  with  whom  I  agree,  observing
that  a  great  many  philosophers  do  advance  a  vast
array  of  reasons  to  prove  why  pleasure  should  not  be
counted  as  a  good  nor  pain  as  an  evil,  consider  that
we  had  better  not  be  too  confident  of  our  case ;  in
their  view  it  requires  elaborate  and  reasoned  argu-
ment, and  abstruse  theoretical  discussion  of  the
nature  of  pleasure  and  pain.

i X. But!  must  explain  to  you  how  all  this  mistaken  13>
idea  of  reprobating  pleasure  and  extolling  pain  arose,  en
To  do  so,  I  will  give  you  a  complete  account  of  the  ?^j{^
systeiu,  and  expound  the  actual  teachings  of  the  oi
great  explorer  of  the  truth,  the  master-builder  of  ^
human  happhiess. No  one  rejects,  dislikes  or  avoids
pleasure  itself,  because  it  is  pleasure,  but  because
those who  do  not  know how  to pursue  pleasure
rationally  encounter  consequences  that  are  extremely
painful. Nor  again  is  thei

pi.'

;ij

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
lortm  ipsum  quia  dolor  sit  amet,  consectetur,  adipisci
velit.stdquianonnumquameiusmoditemporainddunt
lit  labore  et  dolore  mngiiam  aliiiuam  quaerat  votupta-
tem.  Ut  enim  ad  minima  veniam,  quis  nostrum
excri?itiitionem  ullam  corporis  suscipit  laboriosam,
nisi  ut  aliquid  e\  ea  commodi  coiisetjuatur?  Quis
autem  vel  eum  Jure  repreheiiderit  qui  in  ea  voluptate
velit  esse  quatn  nihil  molestiae  consequatur,  vel  ilium
qui  dolorem  eum  fugiat  quo  voluptas  nulla  pariatur?

33  At  vero  eos  et  accusamus  et  iusto  odio  dignissimos
ducimus  qui  blandiliis  praesentium  voluptatum  dele-
iiiti  atque  corrupt!  quos  dolores  et  quas  molestias
excepturi  sint  occaccati  cupiditate  non  provident,
similique  sunt  in  culpa  qui  otiicia  deserunt  mollitia
anirai,  id  est  laborum  et  dolorum  fuga.  Et  harum
quidem  rerum  facilis  est  et  eicpudita  distinctio.  Nam
libero  tempore,  cum  soluta  nobis  est  eligendi  optio
cumque  iiiliil  impedit  quo  minus  id  quod  maxime
placeat  facere  possimus,  omnis  voluptas  assumenda
est,  omnis  dolor  repellendus.  Temporibus  autem
quibusdam  et  aut  otRciis  debitis  aut  rerum  nccessita-
tibus  saepe  eveniet  ut  et  voluptates  repudiandae  sint
et  molestiae  non  recusandae.  Itaque  earum  rerum
Inc  tenetur  a  sapiente  delectus  ut  aut  reiciendis
voluptJitibus  maiores  alias  consequatur  aut  perferendis  '
doloribus  asperiores  repcllat.  J

;!■!■  Hanc ego cum teneara sententiam, quid est ]

cur  verear  ne  ad  eam non possim accommodaxe 1
Torquatos nostros? quos  tu  paulo  ante  cum  me-
niorit«r turn etiam erga nos amice et bene  vole

oo^e

the  other  hand,  i
L  and  dislike  n
by  the  chart;

I  trouble  that  HI

BOOK  I.  X

pursues  or  desires  to  obtain  pain  of  itself,  because  it
is  pain,  but  because  occasiooally  circumstances  occur
in  which  toil  and  pain  can  procure  him  some  great
pleasare.  To  take  a  trivial  example,  which  of  us  ever
undertakes  laborious  physical  exercise,  except  to  ob-
tain some  advantage  from  it  ?  But  who  has  any  right
to  find  fault  with  a  man  who  chooses  to  enjoy  a  plea-
sure that  has  no  annoying  consequences,  or  one  who
&  avoids  a  pain  that  produces  no  resultant  pleasure  ?  On
»u-  »1-1.».  i,„«.i  ...g  denounce  with  righteous  indigna'
len  who  are  so  beguiled  and  demora-
ns  of  the  pleasure  of  the  moment,  so
:,  that  they  cannot  foresee  the  pain
bound  to  ensue ;  and  equal  blame
;  who  fail  in  their  duty  through
which  is  the  same  as  saying  through
shrinking  from  toil  and  pain.  These  cases  are  per-
fectly simple  and  easy  to  distinguish.  In  a  free  hour,
when  our  power  of  choice  is  untrammelled  and  when
nothing  prevents  our  being  able  to  do  what  we  like
best,  every  pleasure  is  to  be  welcomed  and  every
certain  circumstances  and
Ig  to  the  claims  of  duty  or  the  obligations  of
frequently  occur  tjiat  pleasures  have
'be  repudiated  and  annoyances  accepted.  The  wise
therefore  always  holds  in  these  matters  to. this
principle  of  selection :  he  rejects  pleasures  to  secure
other  greater  pleasures,  or  else  he  endures  pains  to
avoid  worse  pains.

"Thisbeingthetheoryl  hold,  why  need  I  be  afraid  mi
of  not  being  able  to  reconcile  it  with  the  case  of  thi
the  Torquati  my  ancestors  ? Your  references  to  thi
jost  now  were  historically  correct,  and  also  shi
yonr  kind  and  friendly  feeling  towards  myself;  but

-  "■  ""-  eiiUy  dism-
tO  them  teresKd.

showed  ^2

:tf;  but  ^1

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
collegisti;  nee  me  tatnen  laudandis  maioribus  meis
corrupisti  nee  segniorem  ad  respondendum  reddidisti.
Quorum  facta  quemadmodum,  quaeso,  interpretaris  ?
Sicine  eos  censes  aut  in  armatum  Iiostem  impetum
fecisse  aut  in  liberos  atque  in  sanguinera  suuni  tam
crudeles  fuisse,  nihil  ut  de  utilitatibus,  niliil  ut  de
commodis  suis  cogitarent?  At  id  ne  ferae  quidem
faciunt,  lit  ita  ruant  itaque  turbent  ut  earum  motus
et  impetus  quo  pertineant  non  iutellegamus ;  tu  tam
egregios  viros  censes  tantas  res  gessisse  sine  eausa?
Quae  fuerit  causa  mox  videro ;  intevea  lioc  tenebo,  si
ob  aliqunm  causain  ista,  quae  sine  dubio  praeclara
sunt,  fecerint,  virtutem  iis  per  se  ipsam  causam  non
fuisse. — Torquem  detraxit  host:. — Et  qiildem  se  tcJcit
ne  interiret.^  At  magnum  periculuni  adiit. — In  ocujis
quidem  exercitus. — Quid  ex  eo  est  consecutus?—
Laudem  et  caritateni,  quae  sunt  vitae  sine  metu
degendae  praesidia  firmissima. — Filium  inorte  multa-
vit.— Si  sine  causa,  nollem  me  ab  eo  ortum,  tam
importuno  tamque  crudeli;  sin  ut  dolore  suo  sanciret
militiris  imperi  disciplinam  exercitumque  in  gravis-
metu  contineret,  saluti
it  el  lege  bat  contineri  suam.
haec  ratio  late  patet.  In  quo  enim  maxime
it  iactare  vestra  se  oratio,  tua  praesertim,  qui
studiose  antiqua  persequeris,  claris  et  fortibus  virifi

simo  bello  animad'
prospexit  civium,  <

oo9Tc

BOOK  1.
M  the  same  I  am
of  my  family,  and
Opponent.  Tell  nie,  pray,  what  explfinatLon  do  you
put  upon  their  actions?  Do  you  really  believe  that
they  charged  an  armed  enemy,  or  treated  their
children,  their  own  flesh  and  blood,  so  cruelly,  with-
out a  thought  for  their  own  interest  or  advantage?
Why,  even  wild  animals  do  not  act  in  that  way;
they  do  not  run  amok  so  blindly  that  we  cannot  dis-
cern any  purpose  in  their  movements  and  tlieir  on-
slaug'hts.  Can  you  then  suppose  that  those  heroic
men performed their  famous deeds without  any

85  motive  at  all?  Wliat  their  motive  was,  I  will  con-
sider in  a  moment :  for  the  present  I  will  confidently
Msert,  that  if  they  had  a  motive  for  those  undoubt-
edly glorious  exploits,  that  motive  was  not  a  love  of
virtue  in  and  for  itself. — He  wrested  the  necklet
&oin  his  foe. — Yes,  and  saved  himself  from  death, —
But  he  braved  great  danger.^Yes,  before  the  eyes
of  an  arniy, — What  did  he  get  by  it? — Honour  and
esteem,  the  strongest  guarantees  of  security  in  life.
— He  sentenced  his  own  son  to  death. — If  from  no
motive,  I  am  sorry  to  be  the  descendant  of  anyone
so  savage  and  inliuman ;  but  if  his  purpose  was  by
inflicting  pain  upon  himself  to  establish  his  authority
as  a  commander,  and  to  tighten  the  reins  of
discipline during a very serious  war  by  holding

,  over  his  army  the  fear  of  punishment,  then  hi.s
action aimed  at  ensuring  the safety  of  his  fcUow-

id  dtieens,  upon  which  he  knew  his  own  depended.
And  this  is  a  principle  of  wide  application.
People  of  your  school,  and  especially  yourself,  who
are  so  diligent  a  student  of  history,  have  found  a
favourite  field  for  tlie  display  of  your  eloquence  in
39

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
commemorandis  eorumque  factis  non  emolumento
aliquo  sed  ipsius  honestatis  decore  Uudandis,  id
totum  evertitur  eo  delectu  rerum  quern  modo  dixi
constituto,  ut  aut  voluptates  omittantur  maiorum
voluptatum  adipiscendamiu  causa  aut  dolores  susci-
piantur  maionim  dolonim  efTugiendorum  gratia.
I  XI.  Sed  de  clarorum  hominum  factis  illustribus
et  gloriosis  satis  hoc  loco  dictum  est  Erit  enim  iam
de  omnium  virtutum  cursu  ad  voluptatem  proprius
disserendi  locus.  Nunc  autem  expticabo  voluptas
ipsa  quae  qualisque  sit,  ut  tollatur  error  omnis
imperitorum  Intel  legaturque  ea  quae  voluptaria,
delicata,  mollis  habeatur  disciplina  quam  gravis,
quam  contiiiens,  quam  severa  sit.  Non  enim  banc
solam  sequimur  quae  suavitate  aliqua  naturam  ipsaoi
move tet  cum  iucunditalequadam  percipitur  scnsibus,
sed  maximam  voluptatem  illam  liabemus  quae  [>er-
cipitur  omni  dolore  detracto.  Nam  quoniam,  cum
privamur  dolore,  ipsa  liberatione  ct  vacuitate  omnis
molestiae  gaudemus,  omne  autem  id  quo  gaudemus
voluptas  est  (ut  omne  quo  offendimur  dolor);  doloris
omnis  privatio  recte  nominata  est  voluptas.  Ut  enioi,
cum  cibo  et  potione  fames  sitisque  depulsa  est,  ipsa
dctractio  molestiae  consecutionem  affert  voluptatis,
sic  in  omni  re  doloria  omotio  successioneni  efficit
40

BOOK  I.  x-xi
recalling  the  stories  of  brave  and  furaous  men  of  old,
and  in  praising  their  actions,  not  on  utilitarian
grouads,  but  on  account  of  the  splendour  of  abstract
moral  worth.  But  all  of  this  falls  to  the  ground  if  the
principle  of  selection  that  I  have  just  mentioned  be
established, — the  principle  of  forgoing  pleasures  for
the  purpose  of  getting  gi'eater  pleasures,  and  en-
during pains  for  the  sake  of  escaping  greater  pains,
)T  XI.  '  But  enough  has  been  said  at  this  stage  about  -
the  glorious  exploits  and  achievements  of  the  heroes  J
of  renown.  The  tendency  of  all  of  the  virtues  to  i
produce  pleasure  is  a  topic  that  will  be  treated  in  its
own  place  later  on.  At  present  I  shall  proceed  to
expound  the  essence  and  the  quality  of  pleasure  it-
self, and  shall  endeavour  to  remove  the  misconcep-
tions of  ignorance  and  to  make  you  realize  how
serious,  how  temperate,  how  austere  is  the  school
that  is  supposed  to  be  sensual,  lax  and  luxurious.
The  pleasure  we  pursue  is  not  that  kind  alone  which
affects  our  physical  being  with  a  definite  delightful
feeling, — a  positively  agreeable  perception  of  the
senses ;  on  the  contrary,  the  greatest  pleasure  accord-
ing to  us  is  that  which  is  experienced  as  a  result  of
the  complete  removal  of  pain.  When  we  are  released
from  pain,  the  mere  sensation  of  complete  emancipa-
tion and  relief  from  uneasiness  is  in  itself  a  source  of
gratification.  But  everything  that  causes  gratification
pleasure  {just  as  everything  that  causes  annoyance
ig  a  pain).  Therefore  the  complete  removal  of  pain
correctly  been  termed  a  pleasure.  For  example,
ten  hunger  and  thirst  are  banished  by  food  and
he  mere  fact  of  getting  rid  of  uneasiness
brings  a  resultant  pleasure  in  its  train.  So  generally,
the  removal of  pain causes pleasure to take  its

CICERO  DF,  FINIBUS

38  voluptatis.  Itaque  non  placuit  Epicure  medium  esse
quiddam  inter  dolorem  et  voluptatem ;  illud  enim
ipsum  quod  quibusdam  medium  videretut,  cum  omni
dolore  careret,  non  modo  voluptatem  es^e  verum
etiam  sunimam  voluptatem.  Quisquis  enim  sentit
qutmadraodum  sit  affectus,  eum  necesse  eat  aut  in
voluptate  esse  aut  in  dolore.  Omnis  autem  privatione
doloris  putat  Epicurus  termiuari  summam  voluptatem,
ut  postea  variari  voluptas  distinguique  possit,  augeri

39  amplificarique  non  possit.  At  etiam  Athenis,  ut  a
patre  audiebam,  facete  et  urbane  Stoieos  irridente,
statua  est  in  Ceramieo  Chrysippi  sedentis  porrecta
manu,  quae  manus  significet .  ilium  in  hac  esse
rogatiuncula  delectatum :  Numquidnam  manus  tua,
sic  affecta  quemadniodum  affects  nunc  est,  deside-
ral?' —  Nihil  sane.'—  At  si  voluptas  esset  bonum,
desideraret.' —  Ita  credo." —  Non  est  igitur  volu-
ptas bonum.'  Hoc  ne  statuam  quidcm  dicturam  pater
aiebat  si  loqui  posset.  Conclusum  est  enim  contra
Cyrenaicos  satis  acute,  nihil  ad  Epicumm.  Nam  si
en  sola  voluptas  esset  quae  quasi  titillaret  sensus,  ut
ita  dicam,  et  ad  eos  cum  suavitate  afflueret  et  illabe-
retur,  nee  manus  esse  contenta  posset  nee  ulla  pars
vacuitate  doloris  sine  iucundo  motu  voluptatis.  Sin
autem  summa  voluptas  est,  ut  Epicuro  placet,  nihil
dolere,  primum  tibi  recte,  Chrysippe,  (

+2

!-^H!^e

BOOK  1.  xi
[SB  place.  Kpicorus  consequently  maintained  tllat  there
is  no  such  thing  as  a  neutral  slate  of  feeling  inter-
mediate hetween  pleasure  and  pain;  for  the  state
supposed  by  some  thinkers  to  be  neutral,  being
characterized  as  it  is  by  entire  absence  of  pain,  is  it-
self, he  held,  a  pleasure,  and,  what  is  more,  a  pleasure
of  the  highest  order.  A  man  who  is  eoiiscious  of  his
condition  at  all  must  necessarily  feel  either  pleasure
or  pain.  But  complete  absence  of  pain  Epicurus
considers  to  be  the  limit  and  highest  point  of
pleasure;  beyond  this  point  pleasure  may  vary  in
9  kind,  but  it  cannot  vary  in  intensity  or  degree.  Yet  at
Athens,  so  my  father  used  to  tell  me  when  he  wanted
to  air  his  wit  at  the  expense  of  the  Stoics,  in  the
Ceramicus  there  is  actually  a  statue  of  Chrysippus
seated  and  holding  out  one  hand,  the  gesture  being--,
intended  to  indicate  the  delight  which  he  ^ised  to  /
teke  in  the  following  little  syllogism:  'Does  your  /  ]
hand  want  anytliing,  while  it  is  in  its  present  condi-  /
tion?'  Answer;  ' No, nothing." — 'Butif pleasurewere  J
a  good,  it  would  want  pleasure.' — '  Yes,  I  suppose  it'
would.' —  Therefore  pleasure  isnotagood.'  An  argu-
ment, as  my  father  declared,  which  not  even  a  statue
would  eniploy,if  a  statue  could  speak ;  because  though
it  is  cogent  enough  as  an  objection  to  the  Cyrenaics,
it  does  not  touch  Epicurus.  For  if  the  only  kind  of
pleasure  were  that  which  so  to  speak  tickles  the
senses,  an  influence  permeating  them  with  a  feeling
of  delight,  neither  the  hand  nor  any  other  member
COnId  be  satisfied  with  the  absence  of  pain  unaccom-
panied by  an  agreeable  and  active  sensation  of
pleasure.  Whereas  if,  as  Epicurus  holds,  the  highest
pleasure  be  to  fee!  no  pain,  Chrysippus's  interlocutor,
though  justiAed  in  making  his  first  admission,  that
43

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

nihil  desiderare  maiium  cum  ita  esset  affecta,  secun-
dum non  recte,  si  voluptas  fsset  bonum,  fuisse
desideraturam.  Idcirco  enim  non  desidernret  quia
quod  dolore  caret  id  in  voluptate  est.

■K)  XII.  E.Ktremum  autem  esse  bonoram  voluplatem
ex  hoc  fadllime  persplci  potest :  Const  it  nam  us  a1i~
queni  magnis,  multis,  perpetuis  fruentem  et  animo
et  corpore  voluptatibus,  nullo  dolore  nee  impediente
nee  impendente ;  quem  tandem  hoc  statu  praestabili-
orem  ant  magis  expetendum  possimus  dicere?  In-
esse  enim  necesse  est  in  eo  qui  ita  sit  affectus  et
lirmitatem  animi  iiec  mortem  nee  dolorem  timentis,
quod  mors  sensu  careat,  dolor  in  longinquitate  levis,
in  gravitate  brevis  soleat  esse,  ut  eius  magnitudinem

■H  celeritas;  diutumitatem  allevatio  consoletur.  Ad  ea
cum  accedit  ut  neque  divinum  numen  ^nm-at.  riec
praeteritas  voluptates  effluere  patiatur  earunique
assidua  recordatione  laetetur,  quid  est  quod  hue
possit,  quo  melius  sit,^  accedere?  Statue  contra  ali-
quem  confectum  tantis  am  mi  corponsque  doloribus
quanti  in  hominim  maximi  cadere  (wssunt,  nulla  spe
proposita  fore  Icmus  aliquando,  nulla  praeterea
neque  praesenti  nee  exspectata  loluptate;  quid  eo
miserius  dici  aut  lingi  potest '  Quod  si  vita  doloribus
referta  maxime  fugienda  est,  summum  profecto
malum  est  vivere  cum  dolore ;  cui  sententiae  conseii-
taneum  est  ultimum  esse  bonoruxo  cum  voluptate
vivere. Nee  enim  habet  nostra  mens  quidquam  ubi

'  giio  me/iiis  sli  Miiller ;  gi.od  melius  sii  Mdv.  with  MSS.

BOOK I.

his  hand  in  that  condition  wanted  nothing',
justified  in  his  second  admission,  that  if  pleas
a  good,  his  hand  would  have  wanted  it.  And
reason  why  it  would  not  have  wanted  pteas
that  to  be  «ithout  pain  is  to  be  in  a  state  of  pleasure.
40  XJI.  "The  truth  of  the  position  that  pleasure  is  the  Pta
ultimate  good  will  most  readily  appear  from  the  ^y,
following  Ulustration.  Let  us  imagine  a  man  living  '^^
in  the  continuous  enjoyment  of  numerous  and  vivid
pleasures  alike  of  body  and  of  mind,  undisturbed
either  by  the  presence  or  by  the  prospect  of  pain ;
what  possible  state  of  existence  could  we  describe  as
being  more  excellent  or  more  desirable?  One  so
situated  must  possess  in  the  first  place  a  strength  of
mind  that  is  proof  against  all  fear  of  death  or  of
pain;  he  will  know  that  death  means  complete  un-
consciousness, and  that  [lain  is  generally  light  if  long
and  short  if  strong,  so  that  its  intensity  is  compen-
sated by  brief  duration  and  its  continuance  by
H  diminishing  severity.  Let  such  a  man  moreovei
have  no  dread  of  any  supernatural  power;  let  him
never  suffer  the  pleasures  of  the  past  to  fade  away,
but  constantly  renew  their  enjoyment  in  recollec-
tion,— and  his  lot  will  be  one  which  will  not  admit
of  further  improvement.  Suppose  on  the  other  hand
a  person  crushed  beneath  the  heaviest  load  of  mental
and  of  bodily  anguish  to  which  humanity  is  liable.
Grant  him  no  prospect  of  ultimate  reHef  in  view;
let  him  neither  have  nor  hope  to  have  a  gleam  of
pleasure.  Can  one  describe  or  imagine  a  more  piti-
able state  i'  If  then  a  life  full  of  pain  is  the  thing
most  to  be  avoided,  it  follows  that  to  live  in  pain  is
^H^  highest  evil;  and  this  position  implies  that  a  life
^^Bf  leasupe  is  the  ultimate  good. In  fact  the  mind

'as  not  ^^M

e  were  ^^M

id  the  ^

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

consistat  tamquam  in  extremo,  omnesque  et  metus  et

aegritudines  ad dolorem  refenintur,  iiec prneterea
est  res  ulla  quae  sua  natura  aiit  sollicitare  pnssit  aut
aiigere.
2  Praeterea  et  appetendi  et  refugiendi  et  omnino

rerum  gerendarum  initia  proficiscmitiir  aut  a  volu-
ptate  aut  a  dolorc.  QhcmS  cum  ita  sit,  perspicuum
est  omnes  rettas  res  atque  laudabiles  eo  referri  ut
cum  voluptate  vivatur.  Quoniam  autem  id  est  vel
suinmum  vel  ultimum  vel  extremum  bonoruni  {quod
Graeci  reAos  nominant)  quod  ipsiim  nullam  ad  aliam
rem,  ad  id  autem  res  referuntur  omnes,  fateiidum  est

XIII.  Id  qui  in  una  virtute  ponuiit  et  splendore
nominis  capti  quid  natura  postutet  non  intellegunt,
errore  maximo,  si  Epicurum  audire  voluerint,  libera-
buntur.  Istae  enim  vestrae  eximiae  pulchraeque
virtutes  nisi  voluptatem  efficerent,  quis  eas  aut
laudabiles  aut  expetendas  arbitrareturf  Ut  enim
medico  rum  scientiam  non  ipsius  artis  sed  bonae
vatetudinis  causa  probamus,  et  guberiiatoris  ars,  quia
bene  navigandi  rationein  liabet,  utililate,  non  arte
laudatur,  sic  sapientia,  quae  ars  vivendi  putanda  est,
non  expeteretur  si  nihil  efficeret;  nunc  expetitur
quod  est  tamqiiain  artifex  coiiquirendae  et  compa-
i randae voluptatis. (Quam autem  ego  dicam  volu-

;.  pain  of  boily  :  dolorem  her

^^^^^^^We

Hgfe

BOOK  r.

dback  ^M

wliicli  ^^1

possesses  nothing  in  itself  upon  which  it  can  rest
final. Every  fear,  every  sorrow  can  be  tmced
to  pain";  there  is  no  other  thing  besides  pain
is  of  its  own  nature  capable  of  causing  either  anxiety
or  distress.

i  Pleasure  and  pain  moreover  supply  the  motives  p

of  desire  and  of  avoidance,  and  the  springs  of  conduct  ^
generally.  This  being  so,  it  clearly  follows  that  ai
actions  are  right  and  praiseworthy  only  as  being  a
means  to  the  attainment  of  a  life  of  pleasure.  But
that  which  is  not  itself  a  means  to  anything  else,  but
to  which  all  else  is  a  means,  is  what  the  Greeks  term
the  Telos,  the  highest,  ultimate  or  final  Good.  It
must  therefore  be  admitted  that  the  Chief  Good  is  to
live  agreeably.

XIII. Those  who  place  the  Chief  Good  in  virtue  t
alone  are  beguiled  by  the  glamour  of  a  name,  and  ^
do  not  understand  the  true  demands  of  nature. If  ™
they  will  consent  to  listen  to  Epicurus,  they  will  be
delivered from the grossest error. Your school
dilates on  the transcendent  beauty  of  the  virtues;
but  were  they  not  productive  of  pleasure,  who  would
deem  them  either  praiseworthy  or  desirable? We
esteem  the  art  of  medicine  not  for  its  interest  as
a  science  but  for  its  conduciveness  to  health ;  the  art
of  navigation  is  commended  for  its  practical  and  not
its  scientific  value,  because  it  conveys  the  rules  for  -

sailing a ship with success. So also Wisdom,  |

which must be considered as the  art of  living,  "'Mom; |
if  it  effected  no  result  would  not  be  desired;  but  as
it  is,  it  is  desired,  because  it  is  the  artificer  that

3  procures  and  produces  pleasure.  (The  meaning  that
I  attach  to  pleasure  must  by  this  time  be  clear  to
you,  and  you  must  not  be  biased  against  my  argu-

I

CICERO  DR  FINIBUS
ptatem  inm  videtis,  ae  invidia  verln  labe&ctetitr
'  oratio  mea.)  Nam  cum  ignonitione  rerum  bonarum
et  mntarum  maxime  liominum  vita  vexetur,  ob  eum-
que  errorem  et  voluptatibus  maximissaepepriventnr
et  durissimis  animi  doloribus  torqueantur,  sapi»itia
est  adhibenda,  quae  et  tcrroribus  eupiditatibusque
detractis  et  omnium  falsarum  opmionum  temeritate
(lerepta  certissimam  se  nobis  ducem  praebeat  ad
voluptatem.  Sapientia  enim  est  una  quae  maesti-
tiam  pellat  ex  animis,  quae  nos  exhorrescere  metn
noil  sinat ;  qua  praeeeptrice  in  tranquillitate  vivi
potest,  omnium  cupiditatuni  ardore  restincto.  Cupi-
ditates  enim  sunt  insatiabiles,  quae  non  modo  siogulos
liomines  sed  universas  familias  evertuiit,  totam  etiam

44  labefactant  saepe  rem  publicam.  Ex  cupiditatibus
odia,  discidia,  discordiae,  aeditiones,  bella  nasmntur,
Nee  eae  se  foris  solum  iactant  nee  tantum  in  alios
caeco  impetu  incurrunt,  sed  intus  etiam  in  animis
inclusae  inter  se  dissident  atque  discordant;  ex  quo
litam  amarissimam  neceaseest  effici,  ut  sapiens  se-
luni,amputata  circunicisaque  inanitate  omni  et  eirore,
naturae  finibus  contentus  sine  aegritudine  possit  et

1.1  sine  metu  vivere.  Quae  est  enim  aut  utilior  ant  ad
bene  vivendura  aptior  partitio  qunm  ilia  qua  est  usus
Epicurus?  qui  unum  genus  posiiit  earum  cupiditatum
quae  essent  et  naturales  et  necessariae,  alterum  quae
naturales  essent  nee  tamen  necessariae,  tertium  quae
nee  naturales  nee  necessariae;  quariBn  ea  ratio  est
ut  necessariae  nee  opera  multa  nee  impeosa  expleao'
tur;  ne  naturales  quidem  multa  desiderant,  propterex
48

^^^^We

BOOK  I.  Kiii

lent  owing  to  the  discreditable  associntions  of  tlie
erm.)  The  great  disturbing  factor  in  man's  life  is
l^orance  of  good  and  evil;  mistaken  ideas  about
hese  frequently  rob  us  of  oiir  greatest  pleasures,  and
orment  ns  with  tbe  most  cruel  pain  of  mind.  Hence
fe  need  the  aid  of  Wisdom,  to  rid  ua  of  our  fears
nd  appetites,  to  root  out  all  our  errors  and  pre-
udiees,  and  to  serve  as  our  infallible  guide  to  the
ttainment  of  pleasure.  Wisdom  alone  can  banish
orrow  from  our  hearts  and  protect  us  from  alarm
,nd  apprehension;  put  yourself  to  school  with  ber,
,nd  you  may  live  in  peace,  and  quench  the  glowing
lames  of  desire.  For  the  desires  are  incapable
if  satisfeption;  they  ruin  not  individuals  only  but
(■hole  families,  nay  often  shake  the  very  foundations
if  the  state.  It  is  they  that  are  the  source  of  hatred,
luarrelling  and  strife,  of  sedition  and  of  war.  Nor
!o  they  only  flaunt  themselves  abroad,  or  turn  their
ilind  onslaughts  solely  ^^linst  others;  even  when
irisoned  within  the  heart  they  quarrel  and  fall  out
imong  themselves;  and  this  cannot  but  render  the
vhole  of  life  embittered.  Hence  only  the  Wise
"Ian,  who  prunes  away  all  the  rank  growth  of  vanity
ind  error,  can  possibly  live  untroubled  by  sorrow  and
ly  fear,  content  within  the  bounds  that  nature  has
et.  Nothing  could  be  more  instructive,  more  help-
ui  to  right  hving,  than  Epicurus's  doctrine  as  to
he  different  classes  of  the  desires.  One  kind  he
classified  as  both  natural  and  necessary,  a  second  as
natural  without  being  necessai'y,  and  a  third  as
neither  natural  nor  necessary ;  the  principle  of
rlassification  being  that  the  necessary  desires  are
gratified  with  little  trouble  or  expense;  the  natural
desires  also  require  but  little,  since  nature's  own

1^

i9

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

quod  ipsa  natura  divitias  quilms  contenta  sit<t  para-
biles  et  terniinatas  habct;  inaniuiu  autem  cupidi-
tatum nee modus  ullus  nee  finis  inveniri  potest

46  XIV.  Quod  si  vitam  oranem  perturbari  videmus
errore  et  inscientia,  sapientiamque  esse  solam  quae  nos
a  libidinum  impetu  et  a  formidinum  terrore  vindicet  el
ipsius  fortunae  tnodice  ferre  doceat  iniurias  et  omnes
moiistret  vias  quae  ad  quietem  et  tranquil litatem
ferant,  quid  est  cur  diibitemus  dicere  et  sapientiam
propter  voluptates  expetendam  et  insipientiam  pro-
pter uiolestiaa  esse  fugiendam?

47  Eademque  ratione  ne  temperantiam  quidem  pro-
pter se  expetendam  esse  dicemus,  sed  quia  pacem
aniniis  afferat  et  eos  quasi  concordia  quadam  placet
ac  leniat.  Temperantia  est  enim  quae  in  rebus
aut  expetendis  aut  fugiendis  ut  rationem  sequamur
monet.  Nee  enim  satis  est  iudicare  quid  faciendum
non  faciendumve  sit,  sed  stare  etiam  oportet  in  eo
quod  sit  iudicatum.  Plerique  autem,  quod  tenere
atque  servare  id  quod  ipsi  statuerunt  non  possunt,
victi  et  debilitati  obiecta  specie  voluptatis  tradunt
se  libidinibus  constringendos  iiec  quid  eventurum
sit  provident,  ob  eamque  causam  propter  voluptatem
et  parvam  et  non  necessariam  et  quae  vel  aliter
pararetur  et  qua  etiam  carere  possent  sine  dolore,
tum  in  morbus  graves,  turn  in  damna,  turn  in  dedc-
cora incurrunt, saepe etiam legum iudlciorumque

48  poenis  obligantur.  Qui  autem  ita  frui  volunt  volo-
ptatibus  ut  nulli  propter  eas  consequantur  dolores,  et

B  i«nnis  hollow  vain unr

eans'bascd  on  afalseideaof

(vhat  is  good  or  necessary  ':

ai  di  (rfi^  ^jTiSuMiu^l  o6r(  0i'!rijcaJ

Difre  ivayKHiai, ifAi.  rapi  c

■ijp  SS^ai- ■yii>6)itvai.  Epiciirus  in

DiQKcnesLaerliiis  10.  149.

^K  BOOK  I.  xiii-xiv

riches,  whicli  suffice  to  content  her,  are  Iioth  easily
procured  and  limited  in  amount;  but  for  the  ininsiii-
arj"  desires  nobound  or  limit  can  be  discovered.

i  XIV.  If  then  we  observe  that  ignorance
reduce  the  whole  of  life  to  confusion,  while  Wisdom
alone  is  able  to  protect  us  from  the  onslaughts  of
appetite  and  the  menaces  of  fear,  tenehing  us  to
bear  even  the  affronts  of  fortune  with  moderation,
and  showing  us  all  the  paths  that  lead  to  calmness
and  to  peace,  why  should  we  hesitate  to  avow  that
Wisdom  is  to  be  desired  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasures
it  brings  and  Folly  to  be  avoided  because  of  its
iiyurious  consequences?

I"  '  The  same  principle  will  lead  as  to  pronounce  that  Tempei
Temperance  also  is  not  desirable  for  its  own  sake,
but  because  it  bestows  peace  of  mind,  and  soothes
the  heart  with  a  tranquillizing  sense  of  harmony.
For  it  is  temperance  that  warns  us  to  be  guided  by
reason  in  what  we  desire  and  avoid.  Nor  is  it  enough
to  judge  what  it  is  right  to  do  or  to  leave  undone;
we  also  need  to  abide  by  our  judgment.  Most  men
however  lack  tenacity  of  purpose;  their  resolution
weakens  and  succumbs  as  soon  as  the  fair  form  of
pleasure  meets  their  gaze,  and  they  surrender  them-
selves prisoners  to  their  passions,  failing  to  foresee
the  inevitable  result.  Thus  for  the  sake  of  a  pleasure
at  once  small  in  amount  and  unnecessary,  and  one
which  they  might  have  procured  by  other  means  or
even  denied  themselves  altogether  without  pain,  they
incur  serious  disease,  or  loss  of  fortune,  or  disgrace,
and  not  infrequently  become  liable  to  the  penalties
'  '  the  courts  of  justice.  Those  on
rho  are  resolved  so  to  enjoy  their
aid  all  painful  consequences

e2

51

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
qui  siium  indicium  retinent  ne  voliiptate  victi  faeiant
id  quod  seiitiant  non  esse  faciendum,  ti  voluptatem
maximam  adipiscuntur  praetermittenda  voluptate.
lidem  etiam  dolorem  saepe  perpetiuntur  ne,  si  id
noil  faciaiit,  incidant  in  maiorem.  Ex  quo  iotelle-
gitur  nee  iiitemperaiitiam  propter  se  esse  fugiendaiD,
temperantianique  expetendam  non  quia  voluptates
fugiat  sed  quia  maiores  consequatur.
I  XV.  Eadem  fortitudinis  ratio  reperietur.  Nun  ■
neque  lalwrum  perfunetio  neque  perpessio  dolorum
per  se  ipsa  allicit,  nee  patientia  nee  assiduitas  nee
vigiliae  nee  ipsa  quae  laudatur  industria,  ne  fortitudo
quidem,  sed  ista  sequimur  ut  sine  eura  metuque  ri-
varaus  animumque  et  eorpus  quantum  efficere  possi'
mus  molestia  liberemus.  Ut  enim  mortis  tuetu
omnis  quietae  vitae  status  perturbatur,  et  ut  suc-
cumbere  doloribus  eosque  huniili  animo  inibecilloque
ferre  miserum  est,  ob  earaque  debilitateni  animi
multi  parentes,  multi  amicos,  nonntilli  patriam,
pierique  autem  se  ipsos  penitus  perdiderunt,  sic
robustus  animus  et  excelsus  omni  est  liber  cura  et
angore,  cum  et  mortem  contenmit,  qua  qui  alfecti
sunt  in  eadem  causa  sunt  qua  antequam  nati,  et  ad
dolores  ita  paralus  est  ut  meminerit  maximos  raorte
finiri,  parvos  niulta  habere  intervnlla  requietis,  me-
diocrium  nos  esse  dominos,  ut  si  tolerabiles  sint
feranius,  si  minus,  animo  aequo  e  vita,  eum  ea  non
placeat,  tamquam  e  theatro  eitcamus.  Quibus  rebus
53

BOOK  I.  siv-xv
from,  and  wlio  retain  their  faculty  of  judKnieiit  and
avoid  being  seduced  by  pleasure  into  courses  that
they  perceive  to  l>e  wrong,  reap  the  very  highest
pleasure  by  forgoing  pleasure.  Similarly  also  they
often  voluntarily  endure  pain,  to  avoid  incur-
ring greater  pain  by  not  doing  so.  This  clearly
proves  that  Intemperance  is  not  undesirable  for  its
own  sake,  while  Temperance  is  desirable  not  because
it  renounces  pleasures,  but  because  it  procures
greater  pleasures,

9  XV.  '"  The  same  account  will  be  found  to  hold  good  Com
of  Courage.  The  performance  of  labours,  the  endu-
rance of  i^ains,  are  not  in  tiiemselvea  attractive,  nor
are  patience,  industry,  watchfulness,  nor  yet  that
much  lauded  virtue,  perseverance,  nor  even  courage ;
but  we  aim  at  these  virtues  in  order  to  live  without
anxiety  and  fear  and  so  far  as  possible  to  be  free
from  pain  of  mind  and  body.  Tlie  fear  of  death
plays  havoc  with  the  calm  and  even  tenor  of  life,
and  to  bow  the  head  to  pain  and  bear  it  abjectly  and
feebly  is  a  pitiable  thing;  such  weakness  has  caused
many  men  to  betray  their  parents  or  their  friends,
some  their  country,  and  very  many  utterly  to  ruin
themselves.  So  on  the  other  hand  a  strong  and
lofty  spirit  is  entirely  iree  from  anxiety  and  sorrow.
It  makes  light  of  death,  for  the  dead  are  only  as
they  were  before  they  were  bom.  It  is  schooled  to
encounter  pain  by  recollecting  that  pains  of  great
severity  are  ended -by  death,  and  sbght  ones  have
frequent  intervals  of  respite ;  while  those  of  niedium
intensity  life  within  our  own  control ;  we  can  bear
them  if  they  are  endurable,  or  if  they  are  not,  we

1 may  serenely  quit  life's  theatre,  when  the  play  has
ceased  to  please  us. These  considerations prove

I  53

I

CICEIIO  1)E  FINIBUS

intellegitur  nee  timiditatem  ignaviamque  vituperari
nee  fortitudinem  patieiitiaBtque:  laudari  suo  numine,
sed  illas  reiei  quia  dolorem  pariant,  has  optari  quia
vofuptatem.

XVI.  lustitia  restat,  ut  de  onrni  virtute  sit  dictum ;
sed  similia  fere  dici  possunt.  Ut  enim  sapientiam,
temperantiam,  fortitudinem  copulatas  esse  docui  cum
voluptate  ut  ab  ea  nullo  modo  nee  divelli  iiec  di&-
trahi  possint.  sic  de  lustitia  iudicaiidum  est,  quae  non
modo  numquam  nocet  cuiquam,  sed  contra  semper
aliquid  impertit'  cum  sua  vi  atque  natura,  quod
tranquillet  aninios,  turn  spe  nihil  earum  rerum  de-
futurum  quas  natura  non  depravata  desideret.  Et'
quemadmodum  temeritas  et  libido  et  ignavia  semper
animum  excruciant  et  semper  sollicitant  turbulen-
taeque  sunt,  sic  improbitas  si^  cuius  in  mente  con-
sedit,  hoc  ipso  quod  adest  turbulent»  est;  si  vero
molita  quidpiam  est,  qoamvis  occulte  fecerit,  num-
quam tamen  id  confide t  fore  semper  oceultum.
Plerumque  improborum  facta  primo  suspicio  inse-
quitur,  dcin  sermo  atque  fama,  tum  accusator,  tunl
tudex ;  multi  etiam,  ut  te  consule,  ipsi  se  indicave-
I  runt.  Quod  si  qui  satis  sibi  contra  hominum  con-
scientiam  saepti  esse  et  muiiiti  videntur,  deorum
tamen  horrent,  easque  ipsas  sollicitudines  quibus
eorum  aiiimi  noctesque  diesque  exeduntur  a  dis  im-
mortalibus  suppHci  causa  importari  putant.  Quae
autem  tanta  ex  iniprobis  factis  ad  minuendas  vitae

'  imperiil  supplied  bj-  Muller;  Mdv,  marks  lacuiis
^£/iiiseMedbj  Mdv.

'  improbitas  si  supplied by  Mdv.  (cp. iinproborn
probe,  ititpmbis,  improbitalem  below).

^  ROOK I.  Nv-xvi

that  timidity  and  cowardice  are  not  blamed,  nor
courage  «nd  endurance  praised,  on  their  own
account ;  the  former  are  rejected  because  they
bring  pain,  the  latter  coveted  because  they  produce
pleasure.

)  XVI.  '  It  remains  to  speak  of  Justice,  to  complete  Jiwii«  i
the  list  of  the  virtues ;  but  this  admits  of  practically  '**''''"
the  same  treatment  as  the  others.  Wisdom,  Tem-
perance and  Courage  I  have  shown  to  be  so  closely
litdced  with  Pleasure  that  they  cannot  possibly  be
severed  or  sundered  from  it.  The  same  must  Ije
deemed  to  be  the  case  with  Justice.  Not  only  does
Justice  never  cause  anyone  barm,  but  on  the  con-
trary it  always  brings  some  benefit,  partly  owing  to
its  essentially  tranquil  lifting  influence  upon  the  mind,
partly  because  of  the  hope  that  it  warrants  of  a  never-
failing  supply  of  the  things  that  uncorrupted  nature
really  needs.  And  just  as  Rashness,  Licence  and
Cowardice  ever  torment  the  mind,  ever  awaken  trouble
and  discord,  so  Unrighteousness,  when  firmly  rooted
in  the  heart,  causes  restlessness  by  the  mere  fact  of
its  presence ;  and  if  once  it  has  found  expression  in
some  deed  of  wickedness,  however  secret  the  act,
yet  it  can  never  feel  assured  that  it  will  always  rt
undetected.  The  usual  consequences  of  c
first  suspicion,  next  gossip  a
the  accuser,  then  the  judge ;  many  wrongdos
even  turned  evidence  against  themselves.as  happened

1  in  your  consulship.  And  even  if  any  think  them-
selves well  fenced  and  fortified  against  detection  by

I their  fellow-men,  they  still  dread  the  eye  of  heaven,

'  md  fancy  that  the  pangs  of  anxiety  night  and  day
guawing  at  their  hearts  are  sent  by  Providence  to
punish  them. But  what  can  wickedness  contribute

1

CICERO  DE  FINIBLS
molesttas  accessio  potest  Geri,  quanta  s.d  augenAas
CBin  conscientia  factorum  turn  poena  legum  odioque
civium?  Et  tamen  in  quibusdam  neque  piecuniae
modus  est  neque  honoris  neque  imperi  nee  libidinum
nee  epulanim  nee  reliquarum  ciipiditatum,  quas  nulla
praeda  umquam  improbe  parta  minuit,  potiusque  in-
flanimat,  ut  coercendi  magis  quam  dedocendi  esse

52  videantur. Invitat  igitur  vera  ratio  bene  sanos  ad
' iustitiam,  aequitatem,  fidem. Neque  homini  infanti

aut  impotenti  iniuste  facta  condueimt,  qui  nee  fiaoil^
efficere  possit  quod  conetur  nee  obtinere  si  effecCTlt,
et  opes  vel  fortunae  vet  ingeni  liberalitati  ma^s  con-
reniunt,  qua  qui  utuntur  benevolentiam  slbl  cpn-
ciliant  et,  quod  aptissimum  est  ad  quiete  vivendiua,
caritatem ;  praesertim  cum  omnino  nulla  sit  causa

53  peccandi:  quae  enim  cupiditates  a  natura  profiei-
scuntur,  facile  esplentur  sine  ulla  iniuria ;  quae  autem
inanes  sunt,  iis  parendum  non  est,  nihil  enim  de-
siderabile  concupiscunt ;  plusque  in  ipsa  iniuria  detri-
menti  est  quam  in  iis  rebus  emolument!  quae  pariuntur
iniuria.  Itaque  ne  iustitiam  quldem  reetc  quis  dixerit
per  se  ipsam  optabilem,  sed  quia  iucunditatis  vel
plurhnum  afferat.  Nam  diligi  et  carum  esse  iucun-
dum  est  propterea  quia  tutiorem  vi tarn  etvoluptatum'
pleniorem  efficit.  Itaque  non  ob  ea  solum  incom'
moda  quae  eveniunt  improbis  fugiendam  improbita-
tem  putamus,  sed  multo  etiam  magis  quod,  cuius  in

'■oelupiatum  yinWet; i-oliiplale.

fLili  SISS.

oWre

BOOK  1,  vvi
towards  lessening  the  annoyances  of  life,  commen-
surate with  its  effect  in  increasing  them,  owing  to
the  burden  of  a  guilty  conscience,  the  penalties  of
the  law  and  tile  hatred  of  one's  fellows  ?  Yet  never-
theless some  men  indulge  without  limit  their  avarice,
ambition  and  love  of  power,  lust,  gluttony  and
those  other  desires,  which  ill-gotten  gains  can  never
diminish  but  rather  must  inflame  the  more ;  inso-
much that  they  appear  proper  subjects  for  restraint

2  rather  than  for  reformation.  Men  of  sound  natures,
therefore,  are  summoned  by  the  voice  of  true  reason
to  justice,  equity  and  honesty.  For  one  without
eloquence  or  resources  dishonesty  is  not  good  policy,
since  it  is  difficult  for  such  a  uian  to  succeed  in  his
designs,  or  to  make  good  his  success  when  once
achieved.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  rich  and
clever  generous  conduct  seems  more  in  keeping,
and  liberality  wins  them  affection  and  good  will,  the
surest  means  to  a  life  of  peace;  especially  as  there

>3  really  is  no  motive  for  transgressing:  since  the
desires  that  spring  from  nature  are  easily  gratified
without  doing  any  man  wrong,  while  those  that  are
imaginary  ought  to  be  resisted,  for  they  set  their
affections  upon  nothing  that  is  really  wanted ;  while
there  is  more  loss  inherent  in  Iiijustice  itself  than
there  is  profit  in  the  gains  it  brings.  Hence  Justice
ectly  be  said  to  be  desirable  in  and
;o  because  it  is  so  highly  productive
For  esteem  and  affection  are  grati-
fying, because  they  render  life  safer  and  fuller  of
pleasure.  Hence  we  hold  that  Unrighteousness  is
to  be  avoided  not  simply  on  account  of  the  dis-
advantages that  result  from  being  unrighteous,  but
even  far  more  because  when  it  dwells  in  a  man's
5?

also  caimot  c
for  itself;
of  gratiScatio

I

CICERO  DE  FIXIBLS
animo  versatur,  numquam  sinit  enm  respirare,  num-
quaiB  acquiescere.

t  Quod  si  ne  ipsarum  quidem  virtutuin  Isus,  in  qua

maxime  cetcrorum  philosophorum  eiultat  oratio,  rc-
perire  exitum  potest  nisi  dirigatur  ad  voluptatem.
voluptas  autem  est  sola  quae  nos  vocet  ad  se  et  alliciat
suapte  natura,  nan  potest  esse  dubtum  quin  id  sit
suminuinatqueextremumbonorumomniiiiD,l>eateque
rivere  nihil  aliud  sit  nisi  cuin  voluptate  vivere.

>  XVII.  Huic  eertae  stabilique  sententiae  quae  sint
coniuncta  esplicabo  brevi,  NuUusinipsis  error  est  fini-
bus  bunoniin  et  malorum,  id  est  in  voluptate  aut  in
dotore,sediniisrebus  peccant  cum  e  qujbus  haec  eflici-
anturif^orant.Animiautemvoluptatesetdoloresnasd
fatemur  e  corporis  voluptatibus  et  dotoribus  (itaque
concedoquod  modo  dicebas,  cadere  causa  si  qni  e  nostris
aliter  existimant,  quos  quidem  video  esse  multos,  sed
imperitos);  quamquam  autem  et  laetitiain  nobis  volu-
ptas animi  et  molestiam  dolor  alFerat,  eonun  tameu
utrumque  et  ortum  esse  e  corpore  el  ad  corpus  referri ;
nee  ob  earn  causani  non  multo  maiores  esse  et  voluptat  es
et  dolores  animi  qiiam  corporis.  Nam  corpore  nijiil  nisi
praesens  et  quod  adest  sentire  possumus,  animo  au-
tem et  praeterita  et  iutura.  (Jt  enim  aeque  doleamus
[animo],'  cum  corpore  dolemus,  fieri  tamen  permagna
accessio  po  test  sialiquodaeternumet  infinitum  inipeii-

"(on/mol  bracketed  by  Mdv,

'  Tliis  chaplcr  appears  to  be  an  unintelligfent  transcript  of
a  sumcnary  of  the  Epicurean  answers  to  the  followne
Cyrenaic  criticisms;  (i)  pleasure  is
oiving  to  mcniHl  perversion,  (2j  all  pli
(3)  bodily  pleasures  are  stronger  tlia
absence  of  pain  is  not  pleasure,  (sjnicir
or  pleasure  are  nol  real  pleasures.

^  See  g  25  above.
58

heart  it  never  suffers  him  to  breathe  fretlj  or  know
a  moment's  rest.

i  "  If  then  even  the  glory  of  the  Virtues,  on  w  hich
all  the  other  philosophers  love  to  expatiate  so
eloquently,  has  in  the  last  resort  no  meaning  unless
it  be  based  on  pleasure;  whereas  pleasure  is  the  only
thing  that  is  intrinsically  attractive  and  alluring,  it
cunnot  be  doubted  that  pleasure  is  the  one  supreme
and  final  Good  and  that  a  life  of  happiness  is  nothiug
else  than  a  life  of  pleasure.

3  XVII.  "  The  doctrine  thus  finnly  established  has  M
corollaries  which  I  will  briefly  expound.  ( I )  Tlie  Ends  upon^'iudiiy"
of  Goods  and  Evils  themselves,  that  is,  pleasure  and  po^rf^^'^"^
pain, are  not  open  to  mistake ;  where  people  Ko  wrong  "
is  in  not  knowing  what  things  are  productive  of
pleasure  and  pain.  (2)  Again,  we  aver  that  mental
pleasures  and  pains  arise  out  of  bodily  ones  (and
therefore  I  allow  yourcontention''that  any  Epicureans
who  think  otherwise  put  themselves  out  of  court ;  and
I  am  aware  that  many  do,  though  not  those  who  can
speak  with  authority);  but  although  men  do  experi-
ence mental  pleasure  that  is  agreeable  and  mental
pain  that  is  annoying,  yet  both  of  these
arise  out  of  and  are  l>ased  upon  bodily  sensations.
(3)  Yet  we  maintain  that  this  does  not  preclude""
mental  pleasures  and  pains  from  being  much  more
intense  than  those  of  the  body ;  since  the  body  can  feel
only  what  is  present  to  it  at  the  moment,  whereas  the
mfnd  is  also  cognizant  of  the  past  and  of  the  future. .
For  granting  that  pain  of  body  is  equally  painful,
yet  our  sensation  of  pain  can  be  enormously  increased
by  the  belief  that  some  evil  of  unlimited  magnitude
md  duration  threatens  to  befall  us  hereafter. And

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

dere  malum  nobis  opine mur.  Quod  idem  licet  transferre
in  voluptatem,  ut  ea  maior  sit  si  nihil  tale  metuamu&

56  lam  illud  quidem  persplcuum  est,  maximam  animi
aut  voluptatem  aut  molestiam  plus  aut  ad  beatam  aut
ad  miseram  vitam  afferre  momenti  quam  eonim
utrumvis  si  aeque  diu  sit  in  corpore.  Non  placet
autem  detracta  voluptate  aegritiidinem  statim  conse-
qui,  nisi  in  voliiptatis  locnm  dolor  forte  successerit;
at  contra  gaudere  nosmet  oraittendia  doloribas,
etiainsi  voluptas  ea  quae  sensum  moveat  nulla  suc-
cesserit ;  eoque  intellegi  potest  quanta  voluptas  sit

57  non  dolere.  Sed  ut  lis  bonis  ei'igimur  quae  expecta-
mus,  sic  laetamur  iis  quae  recordamur.  Stulti  autem
malorum  memoria  torquentur;  sapientes  bona  prae-
terita  grata  recoi-datione  renovala  delectant.  Eat
autem  situm  in  nobis  ut  et  adversa  quasi  perpetua
oblivione  obruamus  et  secunda  iucunde  ac  suaviter
memineTimus.  Sed  cum  ea  quae  praeterierunt  acri
animo  et  attento  intuemur,  turn  fit  ut  aegritudo  se-
quatur  si  ilia  mala  sint,  si  bona,  laetitia.

XVIII.  O  praeclaram  beate  vivendi  et  apertam  et
simplicem  et  directam  viam!  Cum  enim  certe  nihil
homini  possit  melius  esse  quam  vacare  omni  dolore  et
molestia  perfruique  maximis  et  animi  et  corporis
voluptatibus,  videtisne  quam  nihil  praetermlttatur
quod  vitam  adiuvet,  quo  facilius  id  quod  propositum
est  summum  bonum  consequamar?  Clamat  Epicurus,
is  quern  vos  niinis  voluptatibus  esse  deditum  dicitis,
non  posse  iucunde  vivi  nisi  sapienter,  lioneste  iuste-
que  vivatur,  nee  sapienter,  honeste,  iuste  nisi  iucunde.
60

■^  BOOK  1.  xvii-sviii

the  same  consideration  may  be  transferred  to  plea-
sure :  a  pleasure  is  greater  if  not  accompuiiied  by  any

)  appreliension  of  evil.  This  therefore  clearly  ap-
pears, that  intense  mental  pleasure  or  distress  con-
tributes more  to  our  happiness  or  misery  than  a
bodily  pleasure  or  pain  of  equal  duration.  (+)  But  we
do  not  agree  that  when  pleasure  is  witlidrawn  un-
easiness at  once  ensues,  unless  the  pleasure  happens
to  have  been  replaced  by  a  pain :  Vhile  on  the  other
hand  one  is  glad  to  lose  a  pain  even  though  no  active
sensation  of  pleasure  eomes  in  its  place :  a  fact  that
serves  to  show  how  great  a  pleasure  is  the  mere

7  absence  of  pain,  (5)  But  just  as  we  are  elated  by
the  anticipation  of  good  things,  so  we  are  delighted
by  their  recollection.  Fools  are  tormented  by  the
remembrance  of  former  evils;  to  wise  men  memory
is  a  pleasure— by  it  they  renew  the  goods  of  the  past.
We  have  the  power  if  we  will  both  to  obliterate
our  misfortunes  by  a  sort  of  permanent  forgetfulness
and  to  summon  up  pleasant  and  agreeable  memories
of  our  successes.  But  when  we  concentrate  our  mental
vision  closely  on  the  events  of  the  past,  then  sorrow
or  Kindness  ensues  accord  in  gas  these  were  evil  or  good.

XVill.  '  Here  is  indeed  a  royal  rond  to  happiness  a  ill
—open,  simple,  and direct ! For  clearly  man can  "^J
have  no  greater  good  than  complete  freedom  from  and
pain  and  sorrow  coupled  with  the  enjoyment  of  the
highest  bodily  and  mental  pleasures. Notice  then
how  the  theory  embraces  every  possible  enhancement
of  life,  every  aid  to  the  attainment  of  that  Chief
Good  which  is  our  object. Epicurus,  the  man  whom
you  denounce  as  a  voluptuary,  cries  aloud  that  no
one  can  live  pleasantly  without  living  wisely,  hoi
ablv  and  justly,  and  no  one  wisely,  honourably  a
«I

CICERO  DF.  FINIBUS

SS  Neque  enim  civitas  in  seditione  beata  esse  potest  uec
in  discordia  dominorum  domus ;  quo  minus  animus  a  "
se  ips^  dissidens  sccumque  discordans  gustare  partem
ullam  liquidae  voluptatis  et  liberae  potest.  Atqui
pugnantibus  et  contrariis  studiis  consiliisque  semper
utens nihil quieti viderCj  nihil tranquiiti potest.

^9  Quod  si  corpoiis  gravioribus  morbis  vitae  iucunditas
impeditur,  quanto  magis  aiiimi  morbis  impediri
Aninii  autem  rnorbi  sunt  cupiditates
inanes  divitiarum,  gloriae,  dominationis,
libidinosarum  etiam  voluptatuni.  Acccdunt  aegritu-
dines,  molestiae,  maerorcs,  qui  exedunt  aiiimos  con-
ficiuntque  curis  horainum  non  inte liege ntium  nihil
dolendum  esse  aninio  quod  sit  a  dolore  corporis  prae-
senti  futurove  seiunctum.  Nee  vero  quisquam  stultus
non  horum  morborum  aliquo  laborat;  nemo  igitur

tiO  stultus  ^  non  miser.  Accedit  etiam  mors,  quae
quasi  saxom  Tantalo  semper  impendet;  tum  super-
stitio,  qua  qui  est  imbutus  quietus  esse  numquam
potest.  Praeterea  bona  praeterita  non  memineruut,
praesentibus  non  fruuntur;  futura  modo  exspectant,
quae  quia  eerta  esse  non  possunt,  conficiuntur  et  au-
gorc  et  metu ;  maximeque  cruciantur  cum  sero  sen-
tiunt  frustra  se  aut  pecuniae  studulsse  aut  imperiis
aut  opibus  aut  gloriae.  Nullas  enim  consequuntur
voluptates  quarum  potiendl  spe  inflammati  multos

61 labores  magnosque  susceperant.  Ecce  autem  alii
nuti  et  aTigusti,aut  omnia  semper  desperantes,aut

cr;  csl  Mtli

li  MSS.

^f  DOOK  I.  xviii

■  justly  without  living  pleasantly. For  a  city  rent  by  Control  of  the
faction  cannot  prosper,  nor  a  house  whose  masters  ^JJ,?d  lo
are  at  strife;  much  less  then  can  a  mind  divided ''»pp"«sj.
against  itself  and  filled  with  inward  discord  taste  any
particle  of  pure  and  liberal  pleasure. But  one  who  is
perpetually  swayed  by  conflicting  and  incompatible
counsels  and  desires  can know  no  peace or calm.

I  Why,  if  the  pleasantness  of  life  is  diminished  by
the  more  serious  bodily  diseases,  how  much  more
must  it  be  diminished  by  the  diseases  of  the  mind!
Butestravagantandimaginarydesires,for  riches,  fame,
power,  and  also  for  licentious  pleasures,  are  nothing
but  mental  diseases.  Then,  too,  there  are  grief,
trouble  and  sorrow,  which  gnaw  the  heart  and  con-
sume it  with  anxiety,  if  men  fail  to  realize  that  the
mind  need  feel  no  pain  unconnected  with  some  pain
of  body,  present  or  to  come.  Yet  there  is  no  foolish
man  but  is  afflicted  by  some  one  of  these  diseases ;
therefore  there  is  no  foolish  man  that  is  not  unhappy.

I  Moreover,  there  is  death,  the  stone  of  Tantalus  ever
hanging  over  men's  heads;  and  superstition,  that
poisons  and  destroys  alt  peace  of  mind.  Besides,  they
do  not  recollect  their  past  nor  enjoy  their  present
blessings;  they  only  took  forward  to  those  of  the
future,  and  as  these  are  of  necessity  uncertain,  they
are  consumed  with  agony  and  terror ;  and  the  climax
of  their  torment  is  when  they  perceive  too  late  that
all  their  dreams  of  wealth  or  station,  power  or  fame,
have  come  to  nothing.  For  they  never  attain  any  of
the  pleasures,  the  hope  of  which  inspired  them  to
undergo  all  their  arduous  toils.  Or  look  again  at
others,  petty,  narrow-minded  men,  or  confirmed  pes-
simists, or  spitefiil,  envious,  ill-tempered  creatures,  un-
sociable, abusive,  cantankerous ;  others  again  enslaved
(i3

^^^^Ic

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
levoli,  invidi.  ditticiles,  lucifiigi,  maledici,  morosi,*  alii
autem  etiam  aniatoriis  levitatibus  dediti,  alii  petu-
lantes,  alii  audaces,  proleni,  iidem  mtemperantes  et
ignavi,  numquam  in  sententia  permanentes.  quas  ob
causas  in  eorum  vita  nulla  est  iiitercapedo  molestiae.
I^tur  neqiie  stultoruin  quisquam  beatus  Deque  sapi-
entium  noti  beatus.  Multoque  lioc  melius  nos  verius-
que  quam  Stoici.  Illi  enii»  tiegant  esse  bonuni  quid-
quani  nisi  nescio  quam  illam  umbram  quod  appellant
lionestum,  non  tarn  solido  quain  splendido  nomine :
virtutem  autem  njxam  hoc  honesto  iiullam  requirere
voluptatem  atquc  ad  beate  livendum  se  ipsa  esse
contentam.

6'2  XIX.  '  Sed  iK>ssunt  haec  quadam  ratione  dici  non
modo  non  repugnantibus,  venim  etiam  approbantibus
nobis.  Sic  enim  ab  Epicuro  sapiens  semper  beatus
indueitur :  tinitas  habet  cupiditates ;  neglegit  mortem ;
de  dis  Imraortalibus  sine  ullo  metii  vera  sentit;  non
dubitat,  si  ita  melius  sit,  migrare  de  vita.  His  rebus
instructus  semper  est  in  voluptate.  Neque  enim
tempus  est  uUum  qua  non  plus  voluptatum  habeat
quam  dolorum.  Nam  et  praeterita  grate  meminit
et  praeaentibus  ita  potitur  ut  animadvertat  quanta
sint  eii  quamque  iucunda,  neque  pendet  es  futuris,
sed  expectat  ilia,  fniitur  praesentibus :  ab  iisque  vitiis
quae  paulo  ante  collegi  abest  plurimum,  et  cum  stul-
toruni  vitam  cum  sua  comparat,  magna  aflicitur  vo-
luptate. Dolores  autem  si  qui  incurrunt,  numquam
vim  tantam  habent  ut  non  plus  habeat  sapiens  quod

63  gaudeat  qu.nm  quod  angatur.  Optime  vero  Epicuma,
quod exiguam '  dixit  fortunam  intervenire  sapienti,

'BiomtiLambiniis;  mu7iylnisi Mdv.  with  MSS.

4

^  BOOK  I.  xviii-six

to  the  follies  of  love,  impodent  or  reckless,  wanton,
headstrong  and  yet  irresolute,  always  changing  their
minds.  Such  tailings  render  their  lives  one  unbroken
round  of  misery.  The  conclusion  ia  that  no  foolish
man  can  be  happy,  nor  any  wise  man  fail  to  be
happv.  This  is  a  truth  that  we  establish  far  n
conclusively  than  do  the  Stoics.  For  they  maintain
that  nothing  is  good  save  that  vague  phantom  which
tbey  entitle  Moral  Worth,  a  title  more  splendid  than
substantial;  and  say  that  Virtue  resting  on  this
Moral  Worth  has  no  need  of  pleasure,  but  is  herself
her  own  sufficient  happiness.

XIX.  "  At  the  same  time  this  Stoic  doctrine  can  be  The  w
stjited  in  a  form  which  we  do  not  object  to,  and  in-  '"''
deed  ourselves  endorse.  For  Epicurus  thus  represents
the  Wise  Man  as  always  happy;  his  desires  are  kept
within  bounds;  death  he  disregards;  he  has  a  true
conception,  untainted  by  fear,  of  the  Divine  nature ;
if  it  be  expedient  to  depart  from  life,  he  does  not
hesitate  to  do  so.  Thus  equipped  he  enjoys  per-
petual pleasure,  for  there  is  no  moment  when  the
pleasures  he  experiences  do  not  outbalance  the
pains;  since  he  remembers  the  past  with  delight,
grasps  the  present  with  a  full  realization  of  its
pleasantness,  and  does  not  rely  upon  the  future;
he  looks  forward  to  it,  but  finds  his  true  enjoyment
in  the  present.  Also  he  is  entirely  free  from  the
vices  that  I  instanced  a  few  moments  ago,  and  he
derives  no  inconsiderable  pleasure  from  comparing
his  own  existence  with  the  Hfe  of  the  foolish.  More-
over, any  pains  that  the  Wise  Man  may  encounter  are
never  so  severe  but  that  he  has  more  cause  for  glad-
ness than  for  sorrow.  Again,  it  is  a  fine  saying  of  "^,^^1
Epicurus  that  'the  Wise  Man  is  but  little  interfered  'une-
F  65

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

maximasque  ab  eo  et  gravissimaa  res  consilio  ipsius
et  ratioiie  adniinistrari ;  neque  maiorem  voluptatem
ex  infiiiito  tempore  aetatis  percipi  posse  quam  ex  hoc
percipiatur  quod  videamus  esse  finitum.'  In  diale-
ctic» autem  vestra  nullam  existimavit  esse  nee  ad
melius  vivenilum  nee  ad  commodius  disserenduin
vim.  In  physicis  plurimum  posuit.  Ea  scientia  et
verborum  vis  et  natiira  orationis  et  consequentium
repugnant!  umve  ratio  potest  perspici ;  onmium  autem
'  reruni  natura  cogntta  levamur  superstitione,liberamur
mortis  metu,  non  conturbamur  ignoratione  rerum,  e
qua  ipsa  horribiles  exsistunt  saepeformidines ;  denique
etiam  morati  melius  erimus  cum  didicerimus  quid
natura  desideret.  Turn  vero,  si  stabileni  scientiam
rerum  tenebiinus,  servata  ilia  quae  quasi  delapsa  de
caelo  est  ad  cojirnitionem  omnium  ri-gula,  ad  quam
omnia  indicia  rerum  dirigentur,  uumquam  utHus
64  oratione  victi  senteiitia  desistemus.  Nisi  autem
rerum  natura  perspecta  erit,  nullo  mode  paterimus
sensuum  iudicia  defendere.  Quidquid  porro  animo
cemimus,  id  omne  oritur  a  sensibus;  qui  si  omnes
■■  veri  erunt,  ut  F.picuri  ratio  doeet,  tum  denique  po-
tent aliquid  cognosci  et  percipi.  Quos  qui  tollunt
et  nihil  posse  percipi  dicunt,  ii  remotis  sensibus  nc

■Ejjicurus  discarded  the  ortliodox  Logic  (cp.  §  22],  but
attacked  some  of  its  problems  in  the  light  of  his  Natural
Philosophy:  e.g.  denying  necessity  in  Nature,  he  denied
the  Law  of  (he  Excluded  Middle  {Afademica  2,  97,  and  see
W.  M.  L.  Hutchinson,  deFinibus  p.  2^4).  The 'criterion' or
lest  of  truth  he  treated  under  the  head  of  '  Canonic '  (namii,
regula,  a  measuring -rod).  Being  based  on  his  theory  of
sensation  (3  ai),  'Canonic'  was  ranged  under  'Phyric'
(Diogenes  Laerlius,  10.  30).  It  made  the  senses  infallible,  .
and  the  sole  source  of  knowledge;  and  it  gave  rules  for
testing  the  validity  of  inference  from  sensation,  whicb  art  I
a  crude  adumbration  of  a  Logic  of  Induction.
6()

Sfle

BOOK  I.

things  ^^H

Id be  ^1

with  by  fortune :  the  great  concerns  of  life,  tlie  things
that  matter,  are  controlled  by  his  own  wisdom
reason'; and that no  greater pleasure could
derived  from  a  hfe  of  infinite  duration  than  is  actually
afforded  by  this  existence  which  we  know  to  be
finite." Logic,  on  which  your  school  lays  such  stress.  Logic
he  held  to  be  of  no  effect  either  as  a  guide  to  conduct  based
or  as  an  aid  to  thought. Natural  Philosophy  he  j^gcl
deemed  all -important. This  science"  explains  to  us  JJ^"
the  meaning  of  terms,  the  nature  of  predication,  and  as  ten
the  law  of  consistency  and  contradiction;  secondly,  bappL
a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  nature  relieves
us  of  the  burden  of  superstition,  frees  us  from  fear  of
death,  and  shields  us  against  the  disturbing  effects
of  ignorance,  which  is  often  in  itself  a  cause  of
terrifying  apprehensions ;  lastly,  to  leam  what  na-
hire's real requirements are improves  the moral
character  also. Besides,  it  is  only  by  firmly  grasping
a well-established  scientific  system,  observing  the
Rule  or  Canon  that  has  fallen  as  it  were  from  heaven
to  afford  us  a  knowledge  of  the  universe— only  by
makingthat  Canon  the  test  of  all  our  judgments,  that
we  can  hope  always  to  stand  fast  in  our  belief,  un-
4  shaken  by  the  eloquence  of  any  man. On  the  other
hand,  without  a  full  understanding  of  the  world  of
nature  it  is  impossible  to  muinlain  the  truth  of  our
sense-perceptions. Further,  every  mental  presenta-
tion has  its  origin  in  sensation ;  so  that  no  knowledge
or  perception  is  possible,  unless  all  sensations  are
true,  as  the  theory  of  Epicurus  teaches  that  they
are. Those  who  deny  the  validity  of  sensation  and
soy  that  nothing  can  be  perceived,  having  excluded
f9  67

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
id  ipsum  quidetn  expedire  possunt  quod  dissenint.
Praeterea  sublata  cognitione  et  scientia  tollitur  om-
nis  ratio  et  vitae  degendae  et  rerum  gerendanim.
Sic  e  physicis  et  fortitudo  sumitur  contra  mortis
timorera  et  constantJa  contra  metum  religionis  et
Bcdatio  animi,  omnium  rerum  occultaruro  ignoratione
sublata,  et  moderatio,  natura  cupiditatum  g-eneri'
busque  earum  explicatis,  et,  ut  modo  docui,  cogni-
tionis  regula  et  iudicio  ab  eodem  illo  constitute)  veri
a  falso  distinctio  traditur.

1  XX.  Restat  locus  huic  disputationi  vel  maxime
necessarius,  de  aniicitia,  quam  si  voluptas  summum
sit  bonuiii  aflirmntis  nullam  omuino  fore ;  de  qua
Epicurus  quidem  ita  dicit,  omnium  rerum  quas  ad
beate  vivendum  sapientia  comparaverit  nihil  esse
maius  amieitiaj  nihil  uberius,  nihil  iucundius.  Nee
Tcro  hoc  oratione  solum  sed  multo  magis  vita  et
factis  et  moribus  comprobavit.  Quod  quam  magnum
sit  fictae  veterum  fabulae  declarant,  in  quibus  tarn
raultis  tamque  vuriis,  ab  ultima  antiquitate  repetitis,
tria  vix  amicorum  paria  reperiimtur,  ut  ad  Orestem
pervenias  profectus  a  Theseo.  At  vero  Epicurua  una
in  domo,  et  ea  quidem  angusta,  quam  magnos  quon-
taque  amoris  conspiratione  consentientes  tenuit  ami-
corum greges  I  quod  fit  etifmi  nunc  ab  Epicureia.
Sed  ad  rem  redeamus;  de  hominibus  diei  non  ne- ,

>  cesse  est.  Tribus  igitur  modis  video  esse  a  nostril
de  amicitia  disputatum. Alii,  cum  eas  vcJuptatCS

HOOK  I.  xiN-xx
the  evidence  of  the  senses,  are  unable  even  to  ex-
pound their  own  argument.  Besides,  bj  abolishing
knowledge  and  science  they  aboUsh  all  possibility  of
rational  life  and  action.  Thus  Natural  Philosophy
supplies  courage  to  face  the  fear  of  death  ;  resolution
to  resist  the  terrors  of  religion ;  peace  of  mind,  for
it  removes  all  ignorance  of  t^le  mysteries  of  nature;
self-control,  for  it  explains  the  nature  of  the  desires
and  distinguishes  their  different  kinds;  and,  as
I  showed  just  now,  the  Canon  or  Criterion  of  Know-
ledge, which  Epicurus  also  estahlished,gives  a  method
of  dificeming  truth  from  falsehood.

5 XX. There  remains  a  topic  that  is  pre-eminently  Friend
germane  to  this  discussion,  I  mean  the  subject  of  iclm^
Friendship. Your  school  maintains  that  if  pleasure  ^^^"'
be  the  Chief  Good,  friendship  will  cease  to  exist,  uiiiiiy
Now  Epicurus's  pronouncement  about  friendship  is
tliat  of  all  the  means  to  happiness  that  wisdom  has
devised,  none  is  greater,  none  more  fruitful,  none
more  delightful  than  this. Nor  did  he  only  com-
mend this  doctrine  by  his  eloquence,  but  far  more
by  the  example  of  his  life  and  conduct.  How  great  a
tiling  such  friendship  is,  is  shown  by  the  mythical
stories  of  antiquity.  Review  the  legends  from  the  re-
motest ages,  and,  copious  and  varied  as  they  are,  you
will  barely  find  in  them  three  pairs  of  friends,  beginning
with  Theseus  and  ending  with  Orestes. Yet  Epicurus
in  a  single  house  and  that  a  small  one  maintained  a
whole company  of  friends,  united by  the  closest
sympathy  and  affection;  and  this  still  goes  on  in  the
Epicurean  school. But  to  return  to  our  subject,  for

'6  there  is  no  need  of  personal  instances : I notice  Three
that  the  topic  of  friendship  lias  been  treated  by  ''"'"'
Epicm'eans  in  three  ways, (l)  Some  have  denied
69

I

^^^^e

CICERO  DE  FINIBL'S
quae  ad  amieos  pcrtinerent  negarent  esse  per  sc  ip-
sas  tarn  ejtpetendas  quam  nostras  expeteremus,  quo
loco  vidctur  quibusdam  stabilitas  amieitiae  vacillare,
tuentur  tamen  eum  locum  seque  facile,  ut  mihi  vide-
tur,  expediunt.  Ut  euim  virtutes,  de  quibus  ante
dictum  est,  sic  amicitiam  negant  posse  a  voluptate
discedere.  Nam  cum  solitudo  et  vita  sine  amicis
insidiarum  et  metus  plena  sit,  ratio  ipsa  monet  ami-
citias  comparare,  quibus  partis  conlinnatur  animus  et
a  spe  paricndanim  voluptatum  seiungi  non  potest

fi"  Atque  ut  odia,  invidiae,  despicationes  adversantiir
voluptatibus,  sic  amicitiae  non  modo  fautrices  fidelis-
simae  sed  etiam  effectrices  sunt  voluptatum  tarn
amicis  quam  sibi;  quibus  non  solum  praesentibus
fruuntur  sed  etiam  spe  eriguntur  consequentis  ac  po-
steri  tcmporis.  Quod  quia  nullo  modo  sine  amicitia
firmam  et  perpetuam  lucunditatem  vitae  tenere  pos-
sumus  neque  vero  ipsam  amicitiam  tueri  nisi  aeque
amieos  et  nosmet  ipsosdiligamus,idctrco  et  hoc  ipsum
efficitur  in  amicitia  etamicitia  cum  voluptate  connect!'
tur. Nam  et  laetamur  amiconim  laetitia  aeque  atque

68  nostra  et  pariter  dolemus  angoribus.  Quocirca  eodem
modo  sapiens  erit  affectus  erga  amicum  quo  in  se  ipsum,
quosque  labores  propter  suam  voluptatcm  susciperet,
eosdem  suscipiet  propter  amici  voluptatcm.  Quae-
que  de  virtutibus  dicta  sunt,  quemadniodum  eae
semper  voluptatibus  inhaererent,  eadem  de  amicitia
dicendn  sunt.  PraecJare  enim  Epicurus  his  paene  ver-
bis: Eadem/  inquit,  sententia  confirmavit  aniinum
ne  quodautsempitemum  aut  diuturnum  timeretma-
70

HOOK  1.
that  pleasures  affecting  our  friends  are  in  theni-
selves  to  be  desired  by  us  in  the  same  degree  as  we
desire  our  own  pleasures.  This  doctrine  is  thought
e  critics  to  undermine  the  foundations  of  friend-
ship; however,  its  supporters  defend  their  position,
■od  in  my  opinion  have  no  diRieulty  in  making  good
their  case.  They  argue  that  friendship
be  sundered  from  pleasure  than  can  the  virtues,
which  we  have  discussed  already.  A  solitary,  friend-
less hfe  must  be  beset  by  secret  dangei-s  and  alarms.
Hence  reason  itself  advises  tJie  acquisition  of
friends;  tlieir  possession  gives  confidence,  and  a
7  firmly  rooted  hope  of  winning  pleasure.  And  just
as  hatred,  jealousy  and  contempt  are  hindrances  to
pleasure,  so  friendship  is  the  most  trustwortliy  pre-
server and  also  creator  of  pleasure  alike  for  our
friends  and  for  ourselves.  It  affords  us  enjoyment
in  the  present,  and  it  inspires  us  with  hopes  for  the
near  and  distant  future.  Thus  it  is  not  possible  to
secure  uninterrupted  gi-atification  in  life  without
friendship,  nor  yet  to  preserve  friendsliip  itself  un-
less we  love  our  friends  as  much  as  ourselves.  Hence
this  unselfishness  dues  occur  in  friendship,  while  also
friendship  is  closely  linked  with  pleasure.  For  we
rejoice  in  our  friends'  joy  as  much  as  in  our  own,
and  are  equally  pained  by  thi
the  Wise  Man  will  feel  exactly  the  s:
friend  as  he  does  towards  himself,
himself  as  much  for  his  friend's  plea;
for  his  own.  All  tliat  has  been  said  about  tlie
tial  connexion  of  the  virtues  with  pleasure  must  be
repeated  about  friendship.  Epicurus  well  said  (I
give  almost  his  exact  words):  'The  same  creed  that
has  given  us  courage  to  overcome  all  fear  of  ever-

Tlierefore

s  towards  his

id  will  exert

he  would

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Inm,  quae  perspexit  in  hoc  ipso  vitae  spatio  amicitiae

69  praesidium  esse  firmiasimum.'  Sunt  autem  quidam
Epicurei  tiraidiores  paulo  contra  vestra  convicia  sed
tamen  satis  aciiti,  qui  verentur  ne,  si  amicitiam  pro-
pter nostram  voluptatem  expetendam  potemus,  tota
amicitia  quasi  claudicare  videntur.  Itaque  primos
congressus  copulation  esq  ue  et  coiiauetudinum  insti-
tuendarum  voluatates  fieri  propter  voluptatem,  cum
autem  usus  progrediens  familiar!  tat  em  effecerit,  tum
amorem  effiorescere  tantum  ut,  etiamsi  nulla  sit
utilitas  ex  amicitia,  tamen  ipsi  amici  propter  se  ipsos
amentur.  Etenim  si  loca,  si  faiia,  si  urbes,  si  gym-
nasia, si  campum,  si  canes,  si  equos,  si  ludicra  exer-
cendi  aut  venandi,  consuetudine  adamare  solemus,
quanto id in hominum consuetudine facijius fieri

70  potent'  et  iustius?  Sunt  autem  qui  dicant  foedus
esse  quoddam  sapientium  ut  ne  minus  amicos  quam
se  ipsos  diligant.  Quod  et  posse  fieri  intellegiiuus
et  saepe  evenire^  videmvis,  etperspicuum  est  nihil  od
iucundeviyendumreperiripossequodconiunetionetali
sit  aptius.

Quibus  ex  omnibus  iudicari  potest  non  modo  non
impediri  rationem  amicitiae  si  summum  bonum  in
voluptate  ponatur,  sed  sine  hoc  institutionem  omnino
amicitiae  non  posse  reperiri.

71  XXr.  Quapropter  si  ea  quae  dixi  sole  ipso  illu-
striora  et  clariora  sunt,  si  omnia  hausta^  e  fonte
naturae,  si tota oratio nostra omnem sibi fidem

'poien/  most  cdd.;  poluerit  Mdv.  with  MSS.

■e  Holm  !  +  e.

iMdv.

'1th  MSS.

*  omnia  dixi  hausta  i&Si%,\  i/m-i  bracketed  by  Mdv.  \

BOOK  I.  ss-SLii
lasting  at  long-enduring  evil  hereafter,  has  discerned
li<)  that  fri«-ndship  is  our  strongest  safeguard  in  this
present  term  of  life.'^(2)Otlier  Epicureans  though  by
no  means  lacking  in  insight  are  a  little  less  courage-
ous in  defying  the  opprobrious  criticisms  of  the
Academy.  They  fear  that  if  we  hold  friendship  to
be  desirable  only  for  the  pleasure  that  it  affords  to
ourselves,  it  will  be  thought  that  it  is  crippled  alto-
gether. They  tJierefore  say  that  the  first  advances
and  overtures,  and  the  original  inclination  to  form  an
attachment,  are  prompted  by  the  desire  for  pleasure,
but  that  when  the  progress  of  intercourse  has  led  to
intimacy,  the  relationship  blossoms  into  an  affection
strong  enough  to  make  us  love  our  friends  for  their
own  sake,  even  though  no  practical  advantage  accrues
from  their  friendship.  Does  not  familiarity  endear  to
us  localities,  temples,  cities,  gymnasia  and  playing-
grounds,  horses  and  hounds,  games  and  field-sports?
Then  bow  much  more  natural  and  reasonable  that  it
should  have  the  same  result  in  the  case  of  our  inter-

70  course  with  our  fellow-men !— (3)  The  third  view  is
that  wise  men  have  made  a  sort  of  compact  to  love
their  friends  no  less  than  themselves.  We  can  under-
stand the  possibility  of  this,  and  indeed  we  oltcn  see
it  happen.  Clearly  no  more  effective  nieans  to  happi-
ness could  be  found  than  such  an  alliance.

All  these  considerations  go  to  prove  not  only  that
the  rationale  of  friendship  is  not  impaired  by  the
identification  of  the  Chief  Good  with  pleasure,  but
also  that  without  this  no  foundation  for  friendship
whatsoever  can  be  found.

71  XXI.  "If  then  the  theory  I  have  set  forth  is  P^roi
clearer  and  more  luminous  than  daylight  itself;  H  ^^^i
it  is  derived  entirely  from  Nature's  source;  if  my  "">"''

sensibus  c
tcstibus,  s
loquuntur
sperum  n
de  quibus

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

infirmat,  id  est  incorruptis  atque  integris
i  infantes  pueri,  mutae  etiam  bestiae  paene
',  magistra  nc  duce  natura,  niliil  esse  pro-
isi  voluptatem,  nihil  asperum  nisi  dolorem,
s  neque  depravate  iudicant  neque  cornipte,
nonne  ei  maximam  gratiam  habere  debemus  qui  hac
exaudita  quasi  voce  naturae  sic  earn  firme  graviterque
comprehenderit  ut  omnes  bene  sanos  in  viam  placa-
tae,  tranquillae,  quietae,  beatae  vitae  dedueeret?
Qui  quod  tibi  parum  videtur  eruditus,  ea  causa  est
quod  nullain  eruditionem  esse  duxit  nisi  quae  beatae
72  vitae  disciplinam  iuvaret.  An  ille  tempus  aut  in
poetis  evolvendis,  ut  ego  et  Triarius  te  hortatore
facimus,  consumeret,  in  quibus  nulla  solidu  utilitas
omnisque  puerilis  est  deleetatio,  aut  se,  ut  Plato,  in
musicis,  geometria,  numeris,  astris  contereret,  quae
et  a  falsis  initiis  profecta  vera  esse  non  possunt  et  si
essent  vera  nihil  afferrent  quo  iucundius,  id  est  quo
melius  viveremus ;  —  eas  ergo  artes  persequeretur,
vivfndi  artem  tantani  tamque  operosam  et  perinde
fructuosam  rebnqueret?  Non  ergo  Epicurus  ineru-
ditus,  sed  ii  indocti  qui  quae  pueros  non  didicisse
turpc  est  ea  putant  usque  ad  senectutem  esse  di-
scenda."  Quae  cum  dixissft,  "Explicavi,"  inquit,
sententiam  mcam  et  eo  quidem  consilio,  tuum
iudicium  ut  cognoscerem,  quae  mihi  facultas,  ut  id
meo  arbitratu  facerem,  ante  hoc  tempus  numquam
est  data."

«hole  discourse  relies  throughout  for  confirmation
on  the  unbiased  and  unimpeachable  evidence  of  the
senses;  if  lisping  infants,  nay  even  dumb  animals,
prompted  by  Nature's  teaching,  almost  find  voice  to
proclaim  that  there  is  no  welfare  but  pleasure,  no
hardship  but  pain — and  their  judgment  in  these
matters  is  neither  sophisticated  nor  biased — ought
we  not  to  feel  the  greatest  gratitude  to  him  who
listened  to  this  utterance  of  Nature's  voice,  and
grasped  its  import  so  firmly  and  so  fully  that  he  has
guided  all  sane-minded  men  into  the  paths  of  peace
and  happiness,  calmness  and  repose  ?  You  arc
pleased  to  think  him  uneducated.  The  reason  is
that  he  refused  to  consider  any  education  worth  the
name  that  did  not  help  to  school  us  in  happiness.
!  Was  he  to  spend  his  time,  as  you  encourage  Triarius
and  me  to  do,  in  perusing  poets,  who  give  us  nothing
solid  and  useftil,  but  merely  childish  amusement?
Was  he  to  occupy  himself  like  Plato  with  music  and
geometry,  arithmetic  and  astronomj,  which  starting
from  false  premises  cannot  be  true,  and  which  more
over  if  they  were  true  would  contribute  nothing  to
make  our  lives  pleasanter  and  therefore  l>etter?
Was  lie,  I  say,  to  study  arts  like  these,  and  neglect
the  master  art,  so  difficult  and  correspondingly  so
fruitful,  the  art  of  living?  No!  Epiturus  was  not
uneducated:  the  real  phllistines  are  those  who  isk
us  to  go  OD  studying  till  old  age  the  subjects  that
we  ought  to  be  ashamed  not  to  have  learnt  in
boyhood."  Thus  concluding,  he  added:  I  have
explained  my  own  view,  but  solely  with  the  object
of  learning  what  your  verdict  is.  I  have  never
hitherto  had  a  satisfactory  opportunity  of  hearing
it"

7^

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
BOOK  U

M.  TULLII  CICERONIS

FINIBUS  BONORUM  ET  MALOHUM
LIBER  SECUNDUS

1  I.  Hie  cum  uteriiuemeintueretursesetiuead  au<U-
endum sigiiificarcnt paratos, Prinium," inquam,

deprccor  ne  luc  tamquani  philosophum  putetis
scholam  vobis  aliquam  explicaturum,  quod  ne  in  ipsis
quidem  philosopliis  magiio  operc  uinquam  probavi.
Quando  enim  Socrates,  qui  parens  philosophiae  iure
dici  potest,  quidquam  tale  fecit?  Eorum  erat  iste
mos  qui  turn  sophistae  nominabaiitur ;  quorum  e
numero  primus  est  ausus  Leontinus  Gorgias  in  eon-
ventu  poscere  quaestionem,'  id  est  iubtre  dicere
qua  de  re  quis  vellet  audire.  Audax  nepotimu.  dice-
rem  impudens,  nisi  hoc  institutum  postea  translatum

2  ad  nostroa  philosophos  esset.  Sed  et  ilium  quein  no-
minavi  et  ceteros  sophistas,  ut  e  Platone  intellegi
potest,  lusos  videmus  a  Socrate.  Is  enim  percontando
atque  intcrrogando  elicere  solebut  eorum  opiniones
quibuscum  disserebat,  ut  ad  ea  quae  ii  respon dissent
si  quid  videretur  diceret.  Qui  mos  cum  a  posteriori-
bua  non  esset  retentus,  Arcesilas  eum  revocavit  insti-
tuitque  ut  ii  qui  se  audire  vellent  non  de  se  quaere-
rent  sed  ipsi  dicerent  quid  sentirent;  quod  cum
dixissent,  ille  contra,  Sed  eum  qui  audiebant  quoad
poterant  defendebant  seiitentiam  suam ;  apud  ceteros

lyCjOoole

BOOK  II

1,  Upon  this  they  both  looked  at  me,  and  signiiied  Rcfuuii
their  readiness  to  hear  me.  So  I  began:  "First  of  all,  I  j^'"^
beg  of  you  not  to  imagine  that  1  am  going  to  deliver  rcpiyinR
you  a  forma]  lecture,  like  a  professional  philosopher,  proposes
That  is  a  procedure  which  even  in  the  case  of  philo-  ^^„',J'
sophers  I  have  never  very  much  approved.  Socrates,  '
who  is  entitled  to  be  styled  the  father  of  philosophy,
never  did  anything  of  the  sort.  It  was  the  method  of
his  contemporaries  the  Sophists,  as  they  were  called.
It  was  one  of  the  Sophists,  Gorgias  of  Leontini,  who
first  ventured  in  an  assembly  to  invite  a  question,'
that  is,  to  ask  anyone  to  state  what  subject  he  desired
to  hear  discussed.  A  bold  undertaking,  indeed,  I
should  call  it  a  piece  of  effrontery,  had  not  this  cus-
tom later  on  passed  over  into  our  own  school.  But
we  see  that  Socrates  made  fun  of  the  aforesaid
Gorgias  and  the  rest  of  the  Sophists  also,  as  we
can  learn  from  Plato,  His  own  way  was  to  ques-
tion his  interlocutors  and  by  a  process  of  cross-
examination  to  elicit  their  opinions,  so  that  he  might
express  his  own  views  by  way  of  rejoinder  to  their
answers.  This  practice  was  abandoned  by  his  suc-
cessors, but  was  afterwards  revived  by  Arcesilas,  wlio
made  it  a  rule  that  those  who  wished  to  hear  him
should  not  ask  him  questions  but  should  state  their
own  opinions ;  and  when  they  had  done  so  he  argued
against  them.  But  whereas  the  pupils  of  Arcesilas  did
Iheirbesttodefendtheirown  position,  with  the  rest  of
the  philosophers  the  student  who  has  put  a  question
79

!^oogle

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

aiitem  philosophos  qui  quaesivit  aliquid  tacet;  quod
quidem  ium  fit  etiam  in  Academia.  Ubi  emm  is  qui
audire  vult  ita  dixit:  Voluptas  mihi  videtur  esse
summum  bonum,'  p^rpetua  oratione  contra  disputa^
tur,  ut  facile  intellegi  possit  eos  qui  aliquid  sibi  videri
dicant  non  ipsos  in  ea  sententia  esse  sed  audire  velle

3  contraria.  Nos  commodius  agimus.  Non  enini
solum  Torquatus  dixit  quid  sentiret  sed  etiam  cur.
E^o  autem  arbitror,  quamquam  admodimi  delcctatus
sum  eius  oratione  perpetua,  tamtn  commodius,  cum
in  rebus  singulis  insistas  et  intelleg'as  quid  quisque
concedut,  quid  abnuat,  ex  rebus  concessis  concludi
quod  veils  et  ad  exitum  perveniri.  Cum  enim  fertur
quasi  torrens  oralio,  quamvis  multa  cuiusquemodi
rapiat,  niliil  tamen  teneas,  nihil  repreliendaa/  nus-
quam  orationem  rapidam  coerceas.

Omnis  autem  in  quaerendo  quae  via  quadam  et
ratione  liabetur  oratio  praescribere  primum  debet,  ut
quibusdam  in  formulis:  ea  hes  aoetiib,  ut  inter  quos
disseritur  conveniat  quid sit id de quo disseratur.

4  II.  Hoc  positum  in  Phaedra  a  Platone  probavit  Epi-
curus sensitque  in  omni  disputatione  id  fieri  oportere.
Sed  quod  proximum  fuit  non  vidit.  Negat  enim
definiri  rem  placere,  sine  quo  fieri  interdum  non

'  reprehendas  Mdv.  with  B  ;  olhcr  MSS.  apprekendas.

m  BOOK  ir.  i-ii

is  then  silent;  and  indeed  tliis  is  nowadays  the  cus-
tom in  the  Academy  too.  The  woiild-be  learner  says,
for  example.  The  Chief  Good  in  my  opinion  is
pleasure,'  and  the  contrary  is  then  maintained  in  a
formal  discourse ;  so  that  it  is  not  hard  to  realize  that
those  who  say  they  are  of  a  certain  opinion  do  not
actually  hold  the  view  they  profess,  but  want  to  hear
what  can  be  argued  against  it  We  are  adopting  a
more  proStable  mode  of  procedure,  for  Torquatus  has
not  only  told  us  his  own  opinion  but  also  his  reasons
for  holding  it.  Still,  for  my  part,  though  I  enjoyed  liis
long  discourse  very  much,  I  believe  all  the  same  that
it  is  better  to  stop  at  point  after  point,  and  make  out
what  each  person  is  willing  to  admit  and  what  he
denies,  and  then  to  draw  such  inferences  as  one
desires  from  these  admissions  and  so  arrive  at  one's
conclusion.  When  the  exposition  goes  rushing  on
like  a  mountain  stream  in  spate,  it  cames  along
with  it  a  vast  amount  of  miscellaneous  material,  but
there  is  nothing  one  can  take  hold  of  or  rescue  from
the  flood;  there  is  no  point  at  which  one  can  stem
the  torrent  of  oratory.

However,  in  philosophical  investigation  a  raetho-  e
dical  and  systematic  discourse  must  always  begin  by  Jj^
formulating  a  preamble  like  that  which  occurs  in  iv
certain  forms  of  process  at  law. This  shall be  the  «p
point  at  issue';  so  that  the  parties  to  the  debate
may  be  agreed  as  to  what  the  subject  is  about  which
I.  they  are  debating. II. This  rule  is  laid down  by
Plato in  the Pkaednis,^  and  it  was  approved  by
Epicurus,  who  realized  that  it  ought  to  be  followed
in  every  discussion. But  he  failed  to  see  what  this
involved. For  he  says  that  he  does  not  hold  with
giving  a  definition  of  the  thing  in  question; yet
(I  81

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
potest  nt  inter  eos  qmi  ambignnt  cooTeniat  quid  sit
id  de  quo  agatar;  relat  in  hoc  ipso  de  qoo  nunc  dis-
putamus.  Quaenmns  enim  6nein  boDorum;  possu-
musne  hoc  scire  qaale  sit.  nisi  contulerimus  inter  nos,
cam  finem  bonorum  dixerimus.  quid  finis,  quid  etiani

J  (itipsuni  bmium?  Atqui  haec  patefactlo  qaasi  remm
opertanim,  cam  quid  quidque  sit  aperitur.  definitio
est;  qua  tu  etiam  imprudens  atebare  nonnumqu&m.
Nam  hunc  ipsum  sjve  linem  sive  extremum  sive  ulti-
mum  defmiel>as  id  esse  quo  omnia  quae  recte  fierent
referrentur  neque  id  ipsum  usquam  referretur.  Prae-
clare  hoc  quidem.  Bonum  ipsum  etiam  quid  esset
fortasse  si  opus  fuisset  delinisses  aut  quod  esset  natura
appetendum,  aut  quod  prodesset,  aut  quod  iuvaret.
aut  quod  liberet  modo.  Nunc  idem,  nisi  molestuni
est,  quoniam  tibi  non  omnino  displicet  definire  et  id
facis  cum  vis,  vetim  deRnias  quid  sit  voluptas,  de  quo

i  omiiis  haec  quaestio  est."  Quis,  quaeso,"  inquit,
est  qui  quid  sit  voluptas  nesciat  aut  qui  quo  magis
id  intellegat  deftnitionem  aUquam  desideret?"  Me
ipsum  esse  dicerem,"  iiiquam,  nisi  mihi  viderer
habere  bene  cognitam  voluptatem  et  satis  lirme  con-
ceptam  animo  atque  comprensam.  Nunc  autem  dico
ipsum  Epicuruni  nescire  et  in  eo  nutare,  eumque  qui
crebro  dicat  diligenter  oportere exprimi  quae vis

^f^^^^e

I  BOOK  II.  ii
without  this  it  is  sometimes  impossible  for  the  dis-
putants to  agree  what  the  subject  tinder  discussion
is;  as,  for  example,  in  the  case  of  tlie  very  question
we  are  now  debating.  We  are  trying  to  discover  the
EDdof  Goods;  bat  how  can  we  possibly  know  what  the
nature  of  this  is,  without  comparing  notes  as  to  what
we  mean,  in  the  phrase End  of  Goods,'  by  the  term

j  'End'  and  also  by  the  term  'Good'  itself?  Now  this
process  of  disclosing  latent  meanings,  of  revealing
what  a  pjirticular  thing  is,  is  the  process  of  definition ;
and  you  yourself  now  and  then  nnconscioiisly  em-
ployed it.  For  you  repeatedly  defined  this  very
conception  of  the  End  or  linal  or  ultimate  aim  as
that  to  which  all  right  actions  are  a  means  white  it
is  not  itself  a  means  to  anything  else.'  Excellent  so
far.  Very  likely  had  occasion  ariset}  you  would
have  defined  the  Good  itself,  either  as  the  naturally
desirable,'  or  the  beneficial,'  or  the  delightful,'  or
just  'that  which  we  like.'  Well  then,  if  you  don't
mind,  as  you  do  not  entirely  disapprove  of  deltuition,
and  indeed  practise  it  when  it  suits  your  purpose,  I
should  be  glad  if  you  would  now  define  pleasure,  the
thing  which  is  the  subject  of  the  whole  of  our  pre-

(i  sent  inquiry."  'Dear  me,"  cried  Torquatus,  '  who
is  there  who  does  not  know  what  pleasure  is?  Who
needs  a  definition  to  assist  him  to  understand
it?"  I  should  say  that  I  myself  was  such  a  per-
son," I  replied,  did  I  not  believe  that  as  a  matter
of  fact  1  do  fully  understand  the  nature  of  pleasure,
and  possess  a  well-founded  conception  and  compre-
hension of  it.  As  it  is,  J  venture  to  assert  that
Epicurus  himself  does  not  know  what  pleasure  is,
but  is  in  two  minds  about  it.  He  is  always  harping
on  the  necessity  of  carefully  sifting  out  the  meaning
c2  83

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  Tj

subiecla  ait  vocibus,  non  intellegere  interdum  quid
sonet  haec  vox  voluptatis,  id  est  quae  res  huic  voci

subiciatur."

III.  Turn  ille  ridens:  Hoc  vero,"  inquit,  opti-
mum, ut  is  qui  Hnem  reruni  espetendarum  volupta-
tem  esse  dicat,  id  extremura,  id  ultimum  bonorunij
id  ipsum  quid  et  quale  sit  neaciat!"  Atqui,"  in-
quam,  aut  Epicurus  quid  sit  voluptas  aut  onuies
mortales  qui  ubique  sunt  iiesciunt."  Quonam,"
inquit,  modo?"  Quia  voluptatem  lianc  esse  sen -
tiunt  omnes  quam  sensus  accipieiis  movetur  et  iucun-
r  ditate  qiiadam  perfunditur."  Quid  ergo?  istam
voluptatem,"  inquitj  Epicurus  ignorat?"  Non
semper,"  inquam;  "nam  interdum  nimis  etiam
novitj  quippe  qui  testificetur  ne  intellegere  quidem
se  posse  ubi  sit  aut  quod  sit  uUuni  bonum  praeter
illud  quod  fibo  et  potione  et  aurium  delectatione  et
obscena  voltiptate  capiatnr.  An  haec  ab  eo  non  di-
cuntur?"  Quasi  vero  me  pudeat,"  inquit,  isto-
rum  aiit  non  possim  quemadiiiodum  ea  dicantur
ostendere!"  "Kgo  vero  non  dubito,"  inquam,  "quin
facile  possis,  nee  est  quod  te  pudeat  sapienti  assentiri
qui  se  unus,  quod  sciam,  sapientem  profiteri  sit  ausus.
Nam  Metrodorum  non  puto  ipsum  professum,  sed,
cum  appellaretur  ab  Epicuro,  repudiare  tantura  bene-
84-

^Sfle

BOOK  II.

underlying  the  teiins  we  employ,  and  yet  lie  occa-
sionally fails  to  understand  what  is  the  import  of
the  word  pleasure,'  that  is,  what  is  the  thing  that
underlies  the  word."

III.  Torquatus  laughed.  Cotoe,  that  is  a  good  vii.  pieasi
joke,"  he  said,  '  that  the  author  of  the  doctrine  ^„'^*^j
that  pleasure  is  the  End  of  things  desirable,  the  *^i°=*  °/  ?■
final  iind  ultimate  Good,  should  actually  not  know  distinct  fri
what  manner  of  thing  pleasure  itself  is  !  "  "  Well,"  pi™'»^-
I  replied,  either  Epicurus  does  not  know  what
pleasure  is,  or  the  rest  of  mankind  all  the  world  over
do  not"  How  so?"  he  asked.  Because  the
universal  opinion  is  that  pleasure  is  a  sensation
actively  stimulating  the  percipient  sense  and  diffus-
"  ing  over  it  a  certain  agreeable  feeling."  '  What
then?"  he  replied;  does  not  Epicurus  recognize
pleasure  in  your  sense?"  Not  always,"  said  1;
now  and  then,  I  admit,  he  is  only  too  well  ac-
quainted with  it ;  for  he  solemnly  avows  that  he
cannot  even  understand  what  Good  there  can  be  or
where  it  can  be  found,  apart  from  that  which  is
derived  from  food  and  drink,  the  delight  of  the  ears,
and  the  grosser  forms  of  gratification.  Do  I  mis-
represent his  words  ?  "  Just  as  if  1  were  ashamed
of  all  that,"  he  cried,  or  unable  to  explain  the  sense
in  which  it  is  spoken !  "  Oh,"  said  I,  "  1  haven't
the  least  doubt  you  can  explain  it  with  ease.  And
you  have  no  reason  to  lie  ashamed  of  sharing  the
Opixuons  of  a  Wise  Man — who  stands  alone,  so  far
as  I  am  aware,  in  venturing  to  arrogate  to  himself
that  title.  For  I  do  not  suppose  that  Metrodorus
himself  claimed  to  be  a  Wise  Man,  though  he  did
not  care  to  refuse  the  compliment  wlien  the  name
was  bestowed  upon  him by  Epicurus; while the

1

^F  S'lorum

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
ise ;  septem  autem  illi  non  si

lo  sed  popu-
Verum  hoc
1  voluptatis

.flVagio  omnium  nominati  sunt.

lo  verbis  his  eandem  certe  vii
Epicurum  nosse  quam  ceteros.  Omnes  enim  iucun-
dum  motum  quo  sensus  Iiilaretur  Graece  ijSonJv,
Latine  voluptatem  vocant."  Quid  est  igitur,"  in-
quit,  quod  requiras?"  Dicani,"  inquam,  etqui-
dcm  discendi  causa  niagis  quam  quo  te  aut  Epicunua
reprensum  veliin."  Ego  quoque,"  inquit,  'didi-
cerim  libentius  si  quid  attuleris  quam  te  reprende-
rim."  Teiiesne  igitur,"  inquam,  Hieronymus
Rhodius  quid  dicat  esse  summum  bonom,  quo  putet
omnia  referri  oportere?"  Teneo,"  inquit,  fincm
illi  videri  nihil  dolere."  Quid?  idem  iste,"  in-
quam, de  voluplate  quid  sentit?"  Negat  esse
eam,"  inquit,  propter  se  expetendam."  Aliud
igitur  esse  censet  gaudere,  aliud  non  dolere."  Et
quidem,"  inquit,  vehementer  errat;  nam,  ut  paulo
ante  docui,  augendae  voluptatis  finis  est  doloris  omnis
amotio."  Non  dolere,"  inquam,  istud  quam  vim
habeat  postea  videro;  aliam  vero  vim  voluptatis  esse,
aliani  nihil  dolendi,  nisi  valde  pertinax  fueris,  con-
eedas  neoesse  est."  "Atqui  teperies,"  inquit,  "in
hoc  quidem  pertinacem  ;  dici  cnim  nihil  potest
verius." Estne,  quaeso,"  inquam, sitienti  in  bi-

jOo9Tc

^  BOOK II.  iii

Seven  Wise  Men  of  old  received  tiieir  appcllution
not  by  their  own  votes,  but  by  the  universal  suffrages
S  of  mankind.  Still,  for  the  present  I  take  it  for
granted  that  in  the  utterance  in  question  Epicurus
undoubtedly  recognizes  the  same  meaning  of  plea-
sure '  as  everybody  else.  Every  one  uses  the  Greek
word  hidone  and  the  Latin  voluplas  to  mean  an  agree-
able and  exhilarating stimulation of  the sense."

Well  then,"  he  asked, what  more  do  you  want  ?  "

1  wilt  tell  you,"  I  said,  though  more  for  the  sake
of  ascertaining  the  truth  than  from  any  desire  to
criticine  yourself  or  Epicurus." I  also,"  he  replied,

would  much  rather  learn  anything  you  may  have
to  contribute,  than  criticize  your  views."  '  Do  you
remember,  then,"  I  said,  'what  Hieronymus  of
Rhodes  pronounces  to  be  the  Chief  Good,  the  stan-
dard as  he  conceives  it  to  which  all  other  things
should  be  referred  ? "  I  remember,"  said  he,  that
he  considers  the  End  to  be  freedom  from  pain."
"Well,"  said  I,  "what  is  the  same  philosopher's
9  view  about  pleasure  ?  "  He  thinks  that  pleasure
is  not  desirable  in  itself."  Then  in  his  opinion  to
feel  pleasure  is  a  different  thing  from  not  feeling
pain  f  "  Yes,"  he  said,  and  there  he  is  seriously
mistaken,  since,  as  1  have  just  shown,  the  complete
removal  of  pain  is  the  limit  of  the  increase  of
pleasure." "Oh," 1 said, "as for the formula

freedom  from  pain,'  I  will  consider  its  meaning
later  on  ;  but  unless  you  are  extraordinarUy  obstinate
you  are  bound  to  admit  that  ireedom  from  pain '
does  not  mean  the  same  as  'pleasure.'"  "Well,
but  on  this  point  you  will  find  me  obstinate,"  said
he;  "for  it  is  as  true  as  any  proposition  can  be,"
"  Pray,"  said  I,  when  a  man  is  thirsty,  is  there  any
87

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
bcndo  Toluptas?"  "Quis  istud  possit,"  inquit,
"negare?"  "Eademnequaerestinctasiti?"  '  Immo
alio  genere.  Bestincta  enim  sitis  stftbilitAteiu
voluptatis  liabet,  ilia,  autem  voluptas  ipsius  restin-
ctionis  in  motii  est" "Cur  igitur,"  inquani,  '  res

1 0  tam  dissiniiles  eodem  nomine  appellas  ?  "  Quid
paulo  ante,"  inquit,  dixerim  nonne  meministi,,cum
omnis  dolor  detrat-tua  esset,  variari,  non  augeri  volu-
ptatem?"  Memini  vcro,"  inquam  ;  sed  tu  istuc
dixti  bene  Latin e,  parum  plane.  Varietas  enim
Latinuni  verbum  est,  idque  proprie  quidem  in  dis-
pnribus  coloribus  dicitur,  sed  transfertur  in  multa
djsparin :  varium  poema,  varia  oratio,  varii  mores,
varia  fortuna,  voluptas  etiam  varia  dici  solet,  cum
percipitur  e  multis  dissimilibus  rebus  dissimiles  effi-
cieiitibus  voluptates.  Earn  si  varietatem  dicere^,  in-
tellegerem,  ut  etiam  non  dicente  te  intellego ;  ista
varietas  quae  sit  non  satis  perspicio,  quod  ais  cum
dolore  careamus  turn  in  summa  voluptate  nos  esse,
cum  autem  vescamur  iis  rebus  quae  dulcem  motum
afferant  sensibus,  turn  esse  in  motu  voiuptatem,  quae'
facial  varietatem  votuptatum,  sed  non  augeri  illam
non  dolendi  voiuptatem,  quam  cur  voiuptatem  ap-
peltes  nescio."

11  IV.  'An potest,"  inquit ille,'  "quidquam esse

fOo9Tc

■  BOOK  n.  iii'iv

pleasure  in  the  act  of  drinking  ?  "  '  That  is  unde-
niable," he  answered.  Is  it  the  same  pleasure  as
the  pleasure  of  having  quenched  one's  thirst  ? "
"  No,  it  is  a  different  kind  of  pleasure.  For  the
pleasure  of  having  quenched  one's  thirst  is  a  static '
pleasure,  but  the  pleasure  of  actually  quenching  it  is
a  kinetic'  pleasure,"  Why  then,"  I  asked,  do
you call two such different things by  the same

)  name  ? "  Do  you  not  remember,"  he  replied,
'  what  I  said  just  iiow,'t!iat  when  all  pain  has  been
removed,  pleasure  may  vanr  in  kind  but  cannot  be
increased  in  degree?"  Oh,  yes,  I  remember,"
said  I ;  but  though  your  language  was  quite  correct
in  form,  your  meaning  was  far  from  clear.  Varia-
tion '  is  a  good  I^atin  term ;  we  use  it  strictly  of
different  colours,  but  it  is  applied  metaphorically  to
a  number  of  things  that  differ  ;  we  speak  of  a  varied
poem,  a  varied  speech,  a  varied  character,  varied
fortunes.  Pleasure  too  can  be  termed  varied  when
it  is  derived  from  a  number  of  unlike  things  pro-
ducing unlike  feelings  of  pleasure.  If  this  were  the
variation  you  spoke  of,  I  could  understand  the  term,
just  as  I  understand  it  even  without  your  speaking
of  it.  But  1  q^gi^^uite  grasp  what  you  mean  by
'  variation '  wheffyoil  say  that  when  we  are  free  from
pain  we  experience  the  highest  pleasure,  and  that
when  we  are  enjoying  things  that  excite  a  pleasant
activity  of  the  senses,  we  then  experience  an  active
or  kinetic '  pleasure  tha^ causes  a  variation  of  our
pleasant  sensations,  but  ifl^  increase  in  the  former
pleasure  that  consists  in  absence  of  pain^ — although
why  you  should  call  this  pleasure'  I  cannot  make
out"

1 IV. "Well," he asked, "cau  anything be more
89

pterea
tia?"

CICEltO  DE  FINIBUS  ■  i

quam  nihil  dolere?" "immo  sit  sane  nihil
'  inquam, (nondum  enim  id  quaero),iiumpro-

dem  voluptas  est  quod,  ut  ita  dicam,  indolen-

Plane  idem,"  inquit,  '  et  maxima  quidem,

i  nulla  maior  potest." Quid  dubitas  igitur,"

inquam,  sumnio  bono  a  te  ita  constituto  ut  id  totum
in  non  dolendo  sit,  id  tenere  unum,  id  tueri,  id
I  defendere  ?  Quid  enim  necesse  est,  'tamquam
meretricem  in  matronarum  coetum,  sic  voluptatem
in  virtutum  concilium  adducere?  Invidiosum  nomen
est,  infame,  suspectum.  Itaque  lioc  frequenter  dici
solct  a  vobis,  non  intellegere  nos  quam  dicat  Epicurus
voluptatem.  Quod  quidem  milii  si  quando  dictum
est  (est  autem  dictum  nou  parum  saepe),  etsi  satis
clemens  sum  in  disiiutando,  tamen  interdum  soleo
subirasci.  Egone  non  in  tell  ego,  quid  sit  ^fionj
Graece,  Latine  voluplas'?  utram  tandem  linguam
nescio?  Deinde  qui  fit,  ut  ego  ncsciam,  sciant
omnea  quicumque  Epieurei  esse  voluerint  ?  Quod
vestri  quidem  vel  optima  disputant,  nihil  opus  esse
eum  qui  futurus  sit  philosophus  scire  litteras.  Itaque
ut  maiores  nostri  ab  aratro  adduxerunt''  Cincinnatum
ilium  ut  dictator  esset,  sic  vos  de  pagis  omnibus
colligitis  bonos  iilos  quidem  viros  sed  certe  non  pe^

n,Wi«

'»/:  s

inf.  MSS.  abiluxeniii,

■  BOOE  IL  n

pleasant than fii  lJum 6vaD painr" "StiS.'^

replied, "granting tfacR  k nottnig facttrr (Aat  ^^ ^

point  1  vaive  for  tl>c  moowntX  Stmiy  it  does  not  4*^^
tbercfoK  foUow  that  «hat  1  nuv  «II  the  nesatian  £^~^
(^  pain  is  the  same  thing  as  pleasure"'  Absolntelf  ,^
the  same,"  said  be,  "iodeed  the  ne^tion  of  paiB  is
a  very  interL^e  pleasore,  the  nto^  intense  pleasure
posable,"  "If  then,"  said  1,  "aeconJing  to  ya«ir
account  the  Chief  Good  confists  entireir  in  feeliim
no  pain,  trhy  do  yoo  not  keep  to  this  without  waver-
ing? Why  do  yon  not  fiimiy  maintain  this  coucep-
'.  tion  of  the  Good  and  no  other?  What  need  is  there
to  introduoe  so  abandoned  a  character  as  Mistress
Pleasure  into  the  company  of  those  respectable  ladies
the  Virtues?  Her  very  name  is  suspcet.  aiid  lies
under  a  cloud  of  disrepute — so  much  so  that  you
Epicureans  are  fond  of  telling  us  that  we  do  not
understand  what  Epicurus  means  by  pleasure.  1
am  a  reasonably  good-tempered  disputant,  but  for
n>y  own  part  when  1  hear  this  a^ertion  (and  I
have  encountered  it  fairly  often),  1  am  sometimes
inclined  to  be  a  little  irritated.  Do  I  not  understand
the  meaning  of  the  Greek  word  hPdone,  the  Latin
imluptas  ?  Pray  which  of  these  two  languages  is
it  that  I  am  not  acquainted  with?  Moreover  how
comes  it  that  I  do  not  know  what  the  word  means,
while  all  and  sundrj-  who  have  elected  to  be  Epicu-
reans do?  As  for  that,  your  sect  argues  very
plausibly  that  there  is  no  need  for  the  aspirant  to
philosophy  to  be  a  scholar  at  all.  And  you  are  as
good  as  your  word.  Our  ancestors  brought  old  Ciii-
cinnatus  from  the  ])lough  to  be  dictator.  You  ran-
sack the  country  villages  for  your  assemblage  of
doubtless  respectable  but  certainly  not  very  learned
»1

CICERO  DB  FINIBUS  HH

•  erudites.  Ergo  illi  iiiteliegimt  quid  Epicurus  dicat,
ego  not!  intellego?  Ut  sdasme  intellegere,  primuni
idem  esse''  dico  ' voluptatenij'  quod  ille  ^Sonji'.  Et
quidem  saepe  quaerimus  verbum  Latinum  par  Graeco
et  quod  idem  valeat ;  hie  nihil  fuit  quod  quaereremus.
Nullum  inveniri  verbum  potest  quod  magis  idem
declaret  Latiiie  quod  Graece,  quam  declarat  volu-
ptas.'  Huic  verbo  omiies  qui  ubique  sunt  qui  Latine
sciunt  duas  res  subiciuntj  laetitiam  in  animo,  com-
motioneni  suavem  iucunditatis  in  cmrpore.  Nam  et
ille  apud  Trabeam  voluptatem  aninii  niniiam'  lae-
titiam dicit,  eandem  quam  ille  Caecilianus  quia  omni-
bus laetitiis  laetum '  esse  se  narrat.  Sed  hoc  interest,
quod  voluptaa '  dicitur  etiam  in  animo  (vitiosa  res,  ut
Stoici  putant,  qui  eam  sic  definiunt:  suhlat.ionem
animi  sine  ratione  opinantis  se  m^iynn  Iwino  fruiO.

i  non  dicitur  laetitia'  nee  'gaudium'  in  corpore.  In
eo  autem  voluptas  omnium  Latine  loqueiitium  more
ponitur,  cum  percipitur  ea  quae  sensum  aliqueni
moveat  iucunditas.  Hanc  quoque  iucunditatem,'
si  vis,  transfer  in  animum  (  iuvare '  enim  in  utroque
dicitur  ex  eoque  'iucundum'Xmodo  intellegas  inter
ilium  qui  dicat

Tanta  laetitia  auctus  sum  ut  nihil  constet,^
''esse  Mdv.  brackets,  but  cp.  II  77, III 22, V 18, JO
(MiiUer).

'  ut  niMil  censtei  ■■  iome  inf.  MSS.  ui  miAi -non  constem.

Caeciliiis  Statins):  it  appears  to  have  r

^^oogfe

^  BOOK  II.  iv

13  adherents.  Well,  if  these  getitleiiien  can  under-
stand what  Epicurus  means,  cannot  1?  1  will  prove
to  you  that  I  do.  In  tlie  first  place,  I  mean  tile
same  by  pleasure'  as  he  does  by  fwdont:  One  often
has  some  trouble  to  discover  a  l.atin  word  that  shall
be  the  precise  equivalent  of  a  Greek  one ;  but  in
this  case  no  search  was  necessary.  No  instance  can
be  found  of  a  Latin  word  that  more  exactly  con-
veys the  same  meaning  as  the  eorresponding  Greek
word  than  does  the  word  voluplas.  Every  person  in
the  world  who  knows  Latin  attaches  to  this  word
two  ideas— that  of  gladness  of  mind,  and  that  of  a
delightful  excitation  of  agreeable  fee)ing  in  the
body.  On  the  one  hand  there  is  the  character  in
Trabea  who  speaks  of  excessive  pleasure  of  the
niind,'°  meaning  gladness,  the  same  feeling  as  is  in-
tended by  the  person  in  Caecilius  who  describes  him-
self as  being  glad  witli  every  sort  of  gladness.'  But
there  is  this  difference,  that  the  word  pleasure"  can
denote  a  mental  as  well  as  a  bodily  feeling  (the
former  a  vicious  emotion,  in  the  opinion  of  the  Stoics,
whodefine  it  as '  elation  of  the  mind  under  an  irrational  a

cnnvfctinn fliat i

L-enjnying  <

■ ^rp^t yoo.r1

whereas  joy'  and  gladness'  are  not  used  of  bodily
1  *  sensation.  However  pleasure  according  to  the
usage  of  all  who  speak  good  Latin  consists  in  the
enjoyment  of  a  delightfiil  stimulation  of  one  of  the
senses.  The  tenn  delight'  also  you  may  apply  if
you  Idte  to  the  mind  ('to  delight"  is  said  of  both
mind  and  body,  and  from  it  the  adjective  delight-
red), so long as  you understand that

let  ween  the  n

So  ful

D  says

1  I  of  gladnt

CICERO  DE  FINIliLS

Nunc  dcmum  mihi  animus  artlet,
quorum  alter  laetitia  gestiat,  alter  dolorc  crucietur,
esse  ilium  medium:

Quamquam  Imec  inter  nos  nuper  notitia  admodum  est,
qui  nec  laetetur  necangatur;  itemque  inter  eum  qui
potiatur  corporis  expetitis  voluptatibus  et  eum  qui
excmcietur  summis  doloribus  ease  eum  qui  utroque

I  V.  Satisne  igitur  videor  vim  verborum  tencre,  an
sum  etiam  nunc  vel  Graecc  loqui  vel  Latine  doceii-
dus?  Et  tamen  vide  ne,  si  ego  iion  intellegam  quid
Epicurus  loquatur,  cum  Graece  ut  videor  luculenter
sciam,  sit  aliqua  culpa  eius  qui  ita  loquatur  ut  non
intellegatur.  Quod  duobus  modis  sine  reprensione
fit,  si  aut  de  industria  facias,  ut  Heraclitus,  cogno-
mento  qui  o-Kin-fn'oi  perhibetur,'  quia  de  naturu
nimis  obscure  memoravit,'  aut  cum  reruni  obscuritas,

.  non  verborum,  facit  ut  non  intellegatur  oratio,  qualis
est  in  Tiniaeo  Platonis.  Epicurus  autem,  ut  opinor,
nec  non  vult  si  possit  plane  et  aperte  loqui,  nec  de

,  re  obscura,  ut  physici,  aut  artilictosa,  ut  matlieraatici,
sed  de  illustri  et  facili  et  iam  in  vulgus  pervagata
loquitur.  Quamquam  non  negatis  nos  intetlegere
quid  sit  voluptas,  scd  quid  ille  dicat;  e  quo  efficitur

»Tbe

ars

quotation  is

from  an

unknow

comic  writer:

the  second

'rom  Caecll

akes  a

heavy

falher-

say

Nunc  enim

demum

nibi  anic

nos  arde

iinulaliirira

(quoted

n  full  by

Cicero;!

™c«/.

37)!  th

e  th

rd  is  from  T

»^rence,  JJ

eautoni,

f-  Il3

above :

Chr

tmes'  mild  i

his  new

neie-hbo

ur,  the

Self-To

oddly  in

tancedas  an  illns

ration

of the  n

eiitralslateorem

mediate

mental

pleasur

dpain.

I' The

quo

a.tion  is  possibly  from  Lucllius

^f^^^^e

and  liim  who  says

Now,  now  my  soul  witli  ang'er  burnSj
one  of  whom  is  transpoi'ted  with  gladness  and  the
Other  tormented  with  painful  emotion,  there  is  the
uitermediftte  state :
Though  our  acquaintanceship  is  but  quite  recent,"
where  the  speaker  feels  neither  gladness  nor  sor-
row; and  that  similarly  between  tlie  enjoyment  of
the  most  desirable  bodily  pleasures  and  the  endurance
of  the  most  escmciating  pains  there  is  the  neutral
state  devoid  of  either.

15  V.  Well,  are  you  satisfied  that  I  have  gi-asped  the
meaning  of  the  terms,  or  do  1  still  require  lessons  in
the  use  of  either  Greek  or  Latin  ?  And  even  supposing
that  I  do  not  understand  what  Epicurus  says,  still  1
believe  1  really  have  a  very  clear  knowledge  of  Greek,
so  that  perhaps  it  is  partly  his  fault  for  using  such
unintelligible  language.  Obscurity  is  excusable  on
two  grounds: it  may  be  deliberately  adopted,  as  In

^jie  case  of  Heraelitus,

^^^L The  surname  of  the  Obscure  who  bore,

^^^m So  dark  his  philosophie  lore'';

^^S  the  obscurity  may  bo  due  to  the  abstruseness  of
the  subject  and  not  of  the  style — an  instance  of
this  is  Plato's  Timacui.  But  Epicurus,  in  my  opinion,
has  no  intention  of  not  speaking  plainly  and  clearly
if  he  can,  nor  is  he  discussing  a  recondite  subject
like  natural  philosophy,  nor  a  technical  subject  such
as  mathematics,  but  a  lucid  and  easy  topic,  and  one
that  is  generally  familiar  already.  And  yet  you
Epicureans  do  not  deny  that  we  understand  what
pleasure  is,  but  what  he  means  by  it;  which  proves
95

■5!-««

CICRRO  DE  FINIBUS

non  ut  nos  noii  intellegamus  quae  vis  sit  istiiis  verbi,

sed  ut  ille  suo  more  toquatur,  nostrum  neglegat.

16  Si  enim  idem  didt  quod  Hieronymus,  qui  censet
summiiin  bonum  esse  sine  ulla  molestia  vivere,  cur
maviilt  dic^erc  voluptiitein  quiim  vacuitiiteni  doloris,
ut  ille  facit,  qui  quid  dicat  intellegit?  sin  autem
voluptatem  putat  adiungendani  earn  quae  sit  in  motu
(sic  enim  appellat  banc  dulceni,  in  motu,'  illam
nihil  dolentis,  in  stabilitate'))  quid  tendit?  cum
efficere  non  possit  ut  cuiquam  qui  ipse  sibi  notus  sit,
hoc  est  qui  suam  naturam  sensumque  perspexerit,
vacuitaa  doloris  et  voluptas  idem  esse  videatur.  Hoc
est  vim  aff'erre,  Torquale,  sensibus,  extorquere  ex
animis  cognitiones  verborum  quibus  imbuti  sunius.
Quis  est  enim  qui  non  videat  haec  esse  in  natura
rerum  tria?  unum  cum  in  voluptate  sumus,  alterum
cum  in  dolore,  tertium  hoc  in  quo  nunc  equidem
sum,  credo  item  vos,  nee  in  dolore  nee  in  voluptate;
ut  ill  voluptate  sit  qui  epuletur,  in  dolore  qui  tor-
queatur:  tu  autem  inter  haec  tantam  multitudi-
nem  hominum  interiectam  non  vides  nee  laetantium

1 7  nee  dolentium  ? "  Non  prorsus,"  inquit,  omnesque
qui  sine  dolore  sint  in  voluptate,  et  ea  quidem  sum-
ma,  esse  dico." Ergo  in  eadem  voluptate  eum  qui

BOOK  II.  V

not  that  we  do  not  understand  the  real  nieaiiiitg  of
the  word,  but  that  Epicurus  is  speaking  an  idiom  of

16  his  own  and  ignoring  ourafceptedterminolog-y.  Forif  Abwaa
he  means  the  same  as  Hieronymus,  who  holds  that  ",'10™
the  Chief  Good  is  a  hfe  entirely  devoid  of  trouble,  pieasun
why  does  he  insist  on  using  the  term  pleasure,  and

not  rather  '  freedom  from  pain,'  as  does  Hieronymus,

who  understands  bis  own  meaning  ? Whereas  if  his"  1

view  is  that  tlie  End  must  include  kinetic  pleasure  I

(for  so  he  describes  this  vivid  sort  of  pleasure,  calling  I

it kinetic'  in  contrast  with  the  pleasure  of  freedom  I

from  pain,  which  is static '  pleasure),  what  is  he  I

really  aiming  at? For  he  cannot  possibly  convince  I

HHy  person  who  knows  himself* — anyone  who  has  I

^died  his  own  nature  and  sensations — that  freedom  I

a  pain  is  the  same  thing  as  pleasure. To  identify  I

L,  Torquatus,  is  to  do  violence  to  the  senses  ;  it  I

s  uprooting  from  our  minds  the  knowledge  of  the  I

meaning  of  words  imbedded  In  them. Who  is  not  1

aware  that  the  world  of  experience  contains  these  j
three states of  feeling : first, the enjoyment of

pleasure  ;  second,  the  sensation  of  pain ;  and  third,  I
which  is  my  own  condition  and  doubtless  also  yours

at  the  present  moment,  the  absence  of  both  pleasure  I

and  pain  ? Pleasure  is  the  feeling  of  a  man  eating  1

a  good  dinner,  pain  that  of  one  being  broken  on  I

the rack ; but  do  you  really  not  see  that  inter-  I

mediate between those  two  extremes  lies  a  vast  I

multitude  of  persons  who  are  feeling  neither  gratifi-  1

17  cation  nor  pain?"  "l  certainly  do  not,"  said  he ;
"  I  maintain  that  all  who  are  without  pain  are
enjoying  pleasure,  and  what  is  more  the  highest
form  of  pleasure."  Then  you  think  that  a  man
who,  not  being  himself  thirsty,  mixes  a  drink  for  I

B  97

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^M

alteri  misceat  mulsiim  ipse  non  siticns,  et  eum  qui
illud  sitiens  bibat?"

VI.  Turn  ille;  Finenr,  inquit,  interrogandi,  si
videtur;  quod  quideni  ego  a  principio  ita  me  malle
diseram,  lioc  ipsum  provideas,  dialecticas  captiones."

Rhetorice  igitur,"  inquain,  nos  mavis  quain  diale-
ctiee  disputare?"  Quasi  vero,"  inquit,  perpetua
oratio  rhetorum  solum,  non  etiamphilosophorumsit."

Zenonis  est,"  inquam,  hoc  Stoici ;  omnem  vim
loquendi,  ut  iam  ante  Aristoteles,  in  duas  tributam
esse  partes,  rhetoricam  palmae,  dialecticam  pugni
similem  essedicebat,  quod  latius  loquerentur  rhetores,
dialectiti  autera  compressius.  Obsequar  igitur  volun-
tati  tuae  dicamque  si  potcro  rhetorice,  sed  hac  rhe-
torics philosophorum,  non  nostra  ilia  forensi,  quam
necesse  est,  cum  populariter  loquatur,  esse  interdum
1 8  paulo  hebetiorem.  Sed  dnm  dialecticam,  Torquate,
contemnit  Epicurus,  quae  una  contiiiet  omnem  et
perspiciendi  quid  in  qnaqtie  re  sit  acientiam  et
iudicaudi  quale  quidque  sit  ct  ratione  ac  via  dispu-
tandi,  ruit  in  dicendo,  ut  mihi  quidem  videtur,  nee
ea  quae  docere  vult  ulla  arte  distinguit;  ut  haec  Ipsa
quae  modo  loquebamur.  Summum  a  vobis  bonum
voluptis  dicitur.  Aperiendum  est  igitur  quid  sit
9«

;  thirsty

^H  BOOK  11.

another,  feels  tlie  same  pleasu
who  driiiks  it?"

VI. At  this  Torquatus  exclaimed; A  truce  toques-  J^"
tion  and  answer,  if  you do not  mind. I  told  you  iher  q
from the beginning  that I preferred continuous  „n"n
speeches. 1  foresaw  exactly  what  would  happen;  1
knew  we  should  come  to  logic-chopping  and  quib-
bling." Then," said I, would you sooner  we
adopted  the  rhetorical  and  not  the  dialectical  mode
ofdebate?" Why/'  he  cried, justas  if  continuous
discourse  were  proper  for  orators  only,  and  not  for
philosophers  as  well!" That  is  the  view  of  Zeno
the Stoic," 1 rejoined; he  used  to say  that  the
faculty  of  speech  in  general  falls  into  two  depart-
ments, as  Aristotle  had  already  laid  down;  and  that
Rhetoric  was  like  the  palm  of  the  hand.  Dialectic
like  the  closed  fist;  because  rhetoricians  employ  an
expansive  style,  and  dialecticians  one  that  is  more
compressed. So  I  will  defer  to  your  wish,  and  will
speak  if  I  can  in  the  rhetorical  manner,  but  with  the
rhetoric  of  the  philosophers,  not  with  the  sort  which
we  use  in  the  law-courts. The  latter  being  addressed
to  the  public  ear  must  necessarily  sometimes  be  a  httle
18  lacking  in  'subtlety. Epicurus  however,  Torquatus,  Epici
in  hia  contempt  for  dialectic,  which  comprises  at  once  ^^.
the entire science of discerning the essence of  ?u«  i
things,  of  judging  their  qualities,  and  of  conducting  "
a  systematic  and  logical  argument, — Epicurus,  J  say,
makes  havoc  of  his  exposition. He  entirely  fails,  in
my  opinion  at  all  events,  to  impart  scientific  precision
to  the  doctrines  he  desires  to  convey. Take  tor
example  the  particular  tenet  that  we  have  just  been
discussing. The  Chief  Good  is  pleasure,  say  you  Epi-
Well  then,  you  must  explain  what  pleasure

L

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
voluptas ;  aliter  enim  explicari  quod  quatritur
non  potest.  Qusm  si  explicavisset,  non  tara  haesi-
taret;  uut  enim  earn  voluptatem  tueretur  quain
Aristippus,  id  cat  qua  seuaus  dulciter  ac  iucunde
moyetur,  quam  etiam  pecudes  si  loqui  possent  apel-
larent  voluptatem ;  aut,  si  magis  placeret  suo  more
loqui  quam  ut

Omnes  Danai  atque  Mycenenses,

Attica  pubeSj
reliquique  Graeci  qui  lioc  anapaesto  citantur,  hoc
non  dolere  solum  voluplatis  nomine  appellaret,  illud
Aristippeum  contemneret;  aut,  si  utrumque  probaret,
ut  probat,  coniungeret  doloris  vacuitatem  cum  volu-
]  y  ptate  et  duobus  ultimis  uteretur.  Multi  enim  et
magni  philosoplii  haec  ultima  bonorum  iuncta  fece-
runt;  ut  Aristoteles^  virtutis  usum  cum  vitae  perfe-
ctae  prosperitate  coniunxit,  Callipho  adiunxit  nd
honestatem  voluptatem,  Diodorus  ad  eatidcm  hone-
statem  addidit  vacuitatem  doloris.  Idem  fecisset
EpicuruS]  si  sententiam  banc,  quae  nunc  Hiei'onynii
est,  eoniunxisset  cum  Aristippi  vetere  sententia.  UH
enim  inter  se  dissentiunt;  propterca  singulis  finibus
utuntur,  et,  t-um  uterque  Graece  egregie  loquatur,nec
Aristippus,  qui  voluptatem  sumraum  boiium  dicit,  in
voluptate  ponit  non  dolere,  neque  Hieronymus,  qui

BOOK  II.  vi

is ;  otherwise  it  is  impossible  to  make  clear  the  sub-
ject under  investigation.  Had  Epicurus  cleared  up
the  meaning  of  pleasure,  he  would  not  have  fallen
into  such  confusion.  Either  he  would  have  upheld
pleasure  in  the  same  sense  as  Aristippus,  that  is,  an
agreeableaud  delightful  excitation  of  the  sense,  which
is  what  even  dumb  cattle,  if  they  could  speak,  would
call  pleasure;  or,  if  he  preferred  to  use  an  idiom  of
his  own,  instead  of  speaking  the  language  of  the

Danaans  one  and  al

Scions  of  Athens,"

nof  ^

and  the  rest  of  the  Greeks  invoked  in  these  anapaests,
he  might  have  conlined  the  name  of  pleasure  to  this
state  of  freedom  from  pain,  and  despised  pleasure  as
Aristippus  understands  it;  or  else,  if  he  approved  of
both  sorts  of  pleasure,  as  in  fact  lie  does,  then  he
ought  to  combine  together  pleasure  and  absence  of
19  pain,  and  profess  ln>o  ultimate  Goods. Many  dis-
tinguished philosophers  have  as  a  matter  of  fact  thus
interpreted  the ultimate Good as composite. For
Instance,  Aristotle  combined  tlie  exercise  of  virtue
with  well-being  lasting  throughout  a  complete  life-
time; Callipho  united  pleasure  with  moral  worth;
^^^Diodorus  to  moral  worth  added  freedom  from  pain,
^^b^curus  would  have  followed  their  example,  had  he
^^H^pled  the  view  we  are  discus-sing,  which  as  it  is
^^Belongs  to  Hieronymus,  with  the  old  doctrine  of
Aristippus. For  there  is  a  real  difference  of  opinion
between  them,  and  accordingly  each  sets  up  bis  own
separate End; and as  both speak unimpeachable
Greek, Aristippus, who calls pleasure  the Chief

r,  does  not  count  absence  of  pain  as  pleasure,
.  Hieronymus, who  makes the Chief  Good

umquam  utitur  pro  ilia  ii
expetendis  quidem  rebus
1  VII.  "Duae  suiit  en:
solum  putes.  Unum  e
cum  voluptate ;  vos  ex  hi
modo nomen unum (ni

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
D  bonum  statuit  non  dolere,  voluptatis  nomine
indolentia,  quippe  qui  ne  in
s  numeret  voluptatem.
m  res  quoque,  ne  tu  verba
it  sine  dolore  esse,  alterutn
s  tamdissimilibus  rebus  non
.m  id  facilius  paterer),  sed
etiam  rem  unam  es  duabus  facere  eonamini,  quod
fieri  nullo  modo  potest.  Hie,  qui  utrumque  probat,
ambobus  debuit  uti,  sicut  facit  re  neque  tamcn  divi-
dit  verbis.  Cum  enim  eam  ipsam  voluptatem  quan)
eodem  nomine  omnes  appellamus  laudat  locls  pluri-
mis,  audet  dicere  ne  suspicari  quidem  se  ullum  bonum
seiunctum  ab  illo  Aristippeo  generc  voluptatis ;  at-
que  ibi  hoc  dicit  ubi  omnis  eius  est  oratio  de  summo
bono.  In  alio  vero  libro,  in  quo  breviler  compre-
hensis  gravissimis  sententiis  quasi  oracula  edidisse
sapientiae  dicitur,  scribit  his  verbis,  quae  nota  tibi
profecto,  Torquate,  sunt  (quis  enim  vestrum  non  edi-
dieit  Epicuri  nvpins  So^its,  id  est  quasi  maxime  ratas,
quia  gravissiniae  sint  ad  beate  vlvendum  breviter
enuntiatae  sententiae  ?)  aniniadverte  igitur,  rectene
hanc  sententiam  interpreter :  Si  ea  quae  sunt
9  efficientia  voluptatum  liberarent  eos  deo-
et mortis et doloris metu docerentquc qui

BOOK II,

t  does  ^^M

at  ^1

absence  of  pain,  never  employs  the  name  pli
to  denote  this  negation  of  pam,  and  in  fact
not  reckon  pleasure  among  things  desirable  at

'} VII, For  you  must  not  suppose  it  is  merely
verbal  distinction  : the  things  themselves  are  differ-  JJ^J^'j'
ent. To be  without pain is one thing, to  feeloo";;
pleasure  another;  yet  you  Epicureans  try  to  combine  dc5n'
these  quite  dissimilar  feelings — not  merely  under  a  ^s*"'
single  name  (for  that  I  could  more  easily  tolerate),  i»  mi
but  as  actually  being  a  single  thing,  instead  of  really  "  ""
two ; which is absolutely impossible. Epicurus,
approving  both  sorts  of  pleasure,  ought  to  have  re-
cognized both sorts ; as he  really  does in fact,
though  he  does  not  distinguish  them  in  words. In
a  number  of  passages  where  he  is  commending  that
real  pleasure  which  all  of  us  call  by  the  same  name,
he  goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  cannot  even  imagine
any  Good  that  is  not  connected  with  pleasure  of  the
kind  intended  by  Arlstippus, This  is  the  language
that  he  holds  in  the  discourse  dealing  solely  with
the  topic  of  the  Chief  Good. Then  there  is  an-
other treatise  containing  his  most  important  doc-
trines in a compendious form, in which we are
told  he  uttered  the  very  oracles  of  Wisdom. Here
he writes the following  words,  with which you.
Torquatus,  are  of  course  familiar  (for  every  good
Epicurean  has  got  liy  heart  the  master's  Kiiriai  Doxni
or  Authoritative  Doctrines,  since  these  brief  aphor-
isms or  maxims  are  held  to  be  of  sovereign  efficacy
for  happiness). So  I  will  ask  you  kindly  to  notice

I whether  I  translate  this  maxim  correctly  ; If  the

things  in  which  sensualists  find  pleasure  could  deliver

them  from  the  fear  of  the  gods  and  of  death  and

pain,  and  could  teach  them  to  set  bounds  to  their

103

mm

CICERO  DK  FINIBUS  ^H

esserit  fines  cupiditatum,  nihil  hnberemus  quod  re-
prehend cremus,'  cum  undique  complerentur  volupta-
tibus  nee  haberent  ulla  ex  parte  aliquid  aut  dolens
aut  aegrum,  id  est  autem  malum.'"

Hoc  loco  tenere  se  Triarius  non  potuit.  Obsecro,"
iuquit,  Torquate,  haec  dieit  Epicurus?"  (quodmihi
quidem  visus  est,  cum  sciret,  velle  tamen  confitenteni
audire  Torquatum).  At  ille  non  pertimuit  saneque
fidenter:  "istis  quidem  ipsis  verbis,"  inquit ;  "sed
quid  sentiat  non  videtis."  Si  aha  sentit,"  inquam,
alia  loquitur,  numquam  intellegam  quid  sentiat ;
sed  plane  dicit  quod  intellegit.  Idque  si  ita  dicit,
lion  esse  reprendendos  luxuriosos  ai  sapientes  sint,
dicit  absurde,  similiter  ct  si  dicat  non  reprendendos
parricidas  si  nee  cupidi  sint  nee  deos  metuant  nee
mortem  nee  dolorem.  Et  tamen  quid  attinet  luxu-
riosis  ullam  exceptionem  dari  aut  fingere  aliquos  qui,
cum  luxuriose  viverent,  a  summo  philosopho  non  re-
prenderentur  eo  nomine  dumtaxat,  cetera  caverent?
22  Sed  tamen  nonne  reprenderes.  Epicure,  luxuriosos
ob  earn  ipsam  causam  quod  ita  viverent  ut  perse-
querentur  cuiusquemodi  voluptates,  cum  esset  prae-
sertim,  ut  ais  tu,  summa  voluptas  niliil  dolere  ?
Atqui  reperiemus  asotos  primum  ita  non  religiosoa
ut  edint  de  patella,'  deinde  ita  mortem  non  ti-
mentes  ut  illud  in  ore  habeant  ex  Hymnide :

reprchen  deremus

I  g-lutlony. The

translaled from the

4.

reason  to  blame  them,
luld  be  abundantly  sup-
lo  side  would  be  exposed
re  the  sole  evil."'
>u!d  contain bin

^  BOOK  II.

desires,  we  should  have  no  re:
since  on  every  hand  they  v
plied  with  pleasures,  and  on
to  any  pain  or  grief,  which  a

At  this  point  Triarius  c
longer.  '  Seriously  now,  Torquatus,"  he  broke  out,
"does  Epicurus  really  say  that?"  (For  my  own
part,  I  believe  that  he  knew  it  to  be  true,  but
wanted  to  hear  Torquatus  admit  it.)  Torquatus,
nothing  daunted,  answered  with  complete  assurance :
Certainly,  those  are  his  very  words.  But  you
don't  understand  his  meaning."  Oh,"  I  retorted,
"  if  he  means  one  thing  and  says  another,  1  never
shall  understand  his  meaning.  But  he  does  not;
he  states  the  case  clearly  as  he  understands  it.  If
his  meaning  is  that  sensualists  are  not  to  be  blamed
provided  they  are  wise  men,  he  is  talking  nonsense.
He  might  as  well  say  that  parricides  are  not  to  be
blamed  provided  they  are  free  from  avarice  and
from  fear  of  the  gods,  of  death  and  of  pain.  Even
BO,  what  is  the  point  of  granting  the  sensual  any
saving  clause?  Why  imagine  certain  fictitious  per-
SDOS  who,  though  living  sensually,  would  not  be
blamed  by  the  wisest  of  philosophers,  at  all  events
for  their  sensuality,  and  who  avoided  other  faults  ?

tS  All  the  same,  Epicurus,  would  not  you  blame  sen-
sualists for  the  very  reason  that  their  one  object  in
life  is  the  pursuit  of  pleasure  of  any  and  every  sort,
especially  as  according  to  you  the  highest  pleasure
is  to  feel  no  pain  ?  Yet  we  shall  find  profligates  in
tiie  first  place  so  devoid  of  religious  scruples  that
rtiey  will  eat  the  food  on  the  paten,' "  and  secondly
so  fearless  of  death  as  to  be  always  quoting  the  lines
from  the  Hymnis^:

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Mihi  sex  menses  satis  sunt  vitae ;  septimiim  Oreo
spondeo.

lam  doloris  medicainenta  ilia  Epicurea  tamquam  de
narthecio  proment :  Si  gravis,  brevis :  si  longus,
levis.'  Unum  nescio,  quomodo  possit,  si  luKuriosus
sit,  Rnitas  cupiditates  habere,
(  VIII.  Quid  ergo  attinet  dicere;  Nihil  haberem
quod  reprenderem,  si  finitas  cupiditates  haberent?"
Hoc  est  dicere :  Non  reprenderem  asotos  si  non
essent  asoti.'  Isto  modo  ne  improbos  quldem  si  es-
sent  boni  viri.  Hie  homo  severus  luxuriam  ipsam
per  se  reprendendam  non  putat.  Et  hercule,  Tor-
quatCj  ut  venim  loquamur,  si  summum  bonum  volu-
ptas  est,  rcctissioie  non  putat.  Nolim  enim  mihi
fingere  asotos,  ut  soletis,  qui  in  mensam  vomant  et
qui  de  conviviis  auferantur  crudique  postridie  se
rursus  ingurgitent,  qui  solem,  ut  aiunt,  nee  occiden-
tem  umquam  vidcrint  nee  orientem,  qui  consumptis
patrimoniis  cgeant.  Nemo  nostrum  istius  generis
asotos  iucunde  putat  vivere.  Mundos,  elegantes,
optimis  cocis,  pistoribus,  piscatu,  aucupio,  veiiatione,
his  omnibus  exquisitis,  vitantes  cruditatem,  quibus
'  vinum  defusum  e  pleno  sit,  t  hirsizon '  (ut  ait  Luci-
lius)  cui  nihil  dum  sit  vis  et  sacculus  abstulerit,'  ad-

'  hirsieon,  hirsyflum  or  the  like,  MSS. ;  and  for  dunt  sil
some  have  dempstt,  dempserU.  No  plausible  reconstruction
has  been  suggested;  but  the  reference  seems  to  be  lo  the
process  of  straining  wine  to  remove  the  lees  and  get  rid  of
vis,  harshness  of  flavour.

»Cf.  I  §  40.

1

r  BOOK n.  vii-viii

Enough  for  me  six  months  of  life,  the  seventh  to

Hell  I  pledge !
Or  if  they  want  an  antidote  to  pain,  out  comes  from
their  medicine-chest  the  great  Epicurean  panacea,
'short  if  it's  strong,  hght  if  it's  long.''  Only  one
point  I  can't  make  out:  how  can  a  man  at  once  be
a  sensualist  and  keep  his  desires  within  bounds?

VIII.  '  What  then  is  the  point  of  saying  I  sliould
have  no  fault  to  find  with  them  if  they  kept  their
desires  within  bounds'  ?  That  is  tantamount  to
saying  I  should  not  blame  the  profligate  if  they
were  not  profligate.'  On  that  principle  you  would
not  biame  the  dishonest  either,  if  they  were  upright
men.  Here  is  a  rigid  moralist,  who  thinks  that
sensuality  is  not  in  itself  blameworthy!  And  I
profess,  Torquntus,  on  the  hypothesis  that  pleasure
is  the  Cliief  Good  he  is  perfectly  justified  in  think-
ing so.  I  had  rather  not  draw  disgusting  pictures,
as  you  are  so  fond  of  doing,  of  debauchees  who  are
sick  at  table,  have  to  be  carried  home  from  dinner-
parties, and  next  day  gorge  themselves  again  before
they  have  recovered  from  the  efl^ects  of  the  night
before;  men  who,  as  the  saying  goes,  have  never  seen
either  sunset  or  sunrise ;  men  who  run  through  their
inheritance  and  sink  into  penury.  None  of  us  sup-
poses that  profligates  of  that  description  live  plea-
santly. No.  but  fastidious  gourmets,  with  first-rate
chefe  and  confectioners,  fish,  birds,  game,  and  all  of
the  very  best;  careful  of  their  digestion;  with
Wine  in  flask

Decanted  from  a  new-broach'd  cask, .  .  .
as  Lucilius  has  it.

Wine  of  tang  bereft.

All  harshness  in  the  strainer  left;

107

CICERO  DE  FINIHUS
hibentes  ludos  et  quae  sequuutur,  ilia  quibus  detradtis
claniat  Epicurus  sc  nescire  quid  sit  bonum ;  adsint
etiara  formosi  pueri  qui  miiiistrent;  respondeat  his
vestis,  argentum,  Cdrintliium,  locus  ipse,  acdificium ;
—  Iios  ergo  asotos  bene  quidem  vivere  aut  beale
24  numquam  diKerim.  Es  quo  efficitur  non  ut  voluplas
ne  sit  voluptas,  sed  ut  voluptas  non  sit  sumnium
bonum.  Nee  ille  qui  Diogenem  Stoicum  adulescens,
post  autem  Panaetium  audierat,  Laelius  eo  dictus  est
sapiens  quod  non  intellegeret  quid  suavissimum  esset
(iiec  eniin  sequitur  ut  cui  cor  saplat  ei  non  sapiat
palatus);  sed  quia  parvi  id  duceret.

O  lapathe,  ut  iactare  nee  es  satis  cognitus  qui  sis  1
In  quo  Laelius  clamores  0-0(^0!  ille  solebat
Edere,  eompellans  gumias  ex  ordine  nostroa.

Praeclnre  Laelius,  et  rccte  0-01^5,  illudque  vere :

O  Publi,  o  giirges,  Gallon!,  es  homo  miser,'  inquit.
Cenasti  in  vita  numquam  bene,  cum  oninia  in  ista
Consumis  squilla  atque  acipensere  cum  decimano."

Is  haec  loquitur  qui  in  voluptate  nihil  ponens  negat
eum  bene  eenare  qui  omnia  ponat  in  voluptate; et

If^e

^  BOOK tl.  viii

with  the  arcompaiiiraent  of  dmmatic  performances
and  tlieir  usual  sequel,  the  pleasures  apart  from
which  Kpicunis,  as  he  loudly  proclaimSj  does  not
know  what  Good  is;  give  them  also  beautiful  bojs
to  wait  upon  them,  with  drapery,  silver,  Corinthian
bronzes,  and  the  scene  of  the  feast,  the  banqueting-
room,  all  ia  keeping;  take  profligates  of  this  sort;
that  these  live  well  or  enjoy  happiness  I  will  never

2*  allow. The  conclusion  is,  not  that  pleasure  is  not
pleasure  but  that  pleasure  is  not  the  Chief  Good.
The  famous  Laelius,  who  had  been  a  pupil  of  Dio-
genes the  Stoic  in  his  youth  and  later  of  Panaetius,  y,
was  not  called the  Wise'  because  he  was  no  judge  ^
of  good  eating  (for  a  wise  mind  is  not  necessarily  at
incompatible  with  a  nice  palate),  but  because  he
set  little  store  by  it.

Dinner  of  herbs,  how  all  the  earth

■^  Derides  thee  and  ignores  thy  worth!

^^ft  Tho'  Laelius,  our  old  Roman  sage,

1^^  Shouted  thy  praises  to  the  age,

Our  gourmands  one  by  one  arraigning.
Bravo, Laelius, sage'  indeed. How  true  too  the

to  bottomless  gulf  of  gluttons',
Pul)lius  Gallonius,'  cried  he,
'You're  a  poor  devil,  truth  to  tell.
Who  never  in  your  life  diiied  well.
No,  never  once,  although  you  pay
A  fortune  for  a  fish  away.
Lobster  or  sturgeon  Brobdingnagian.''
e speaker is a  man who, setting no value on
pleasure,  declares  that  he  who  makes  pleasure  his
all in all cannot  dine  well. Observe,  he  does  not

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

tamen  non  negat  libenter  umquam  cenasse  Gallo-
nium  (mentiretiir  enini),  sed  bene.  Itn  gray  iter  e.t
severe  voluptatem  secemit  a  bono.  Ex  quo  illud
efficiturj  qui  bene  cenent  omnes  libenter  cenare,  qui
libenter,  non  continue  bene. Semper  Laelius  bene.

25  Quid  bene? Dicet  Lucilius;

Condito,
sed  cedo  caput  c

d

si  quaeris,  libenter;

veniebat  enim  ad  cenam  ut  anfino  quieto  satiaret
desideria  naturae.  Recte  ergo  is  negat  uraquain
bene  cenasse  Gallonium,  recte  miseruin,  cum  prae-
sertim  in  eo  omne  studio m  consumeret.  Queiii
libenter  cenasse  nemo  negat.  Cur  igitur  non  bene?
Quia  quod  bene,  id  recte,  frugaliter,  honeste;  ille
porro  prave,'  nequiter,  turpiter  cenabat ;  non
igitur  bene.  Nee  lapathi^  suavitatem  acipenseri
Galloni  Laelius  anteponebat,  sed  suavitatem  ipsani
neglegebat ;  quod  non  faeeret  si  in  voluptate  sum-
mum  bonum  poneret.
]  IX.  Seniovenda  est  igitur  voluptas  non  solum  ut
recta  sequamini  sed  ctiam  ut  loqui  dcceat  fruga-

.'.  brackets. "^^H

■  BOOK  II.  viii-ix

say  Galloriius  never  dined  pleasantly  (whicli  would
be  untrue),  but  never  well.  So  strict  and  severe  is
the  distinction  he  draws  between  pleasure  and  good.
The  conclusion  is  that  though  all  who  dine  well  dine
pleasantly,  yet  he  who  dines  pleasantly  does  not
necessarily  dine  well.  Laelius  always  dined  well.
i  What  does  well '  mean  ?  Lucilius  shall  say :
Well-cook'd,  well-season'd,
ah,  but  now  the  principal  dish :

BEwi

Of  honest  talk,
the  result :

for  he  came  to  di

might satisfy the

right therefore h

dined  veil,  right  i

too  although all  his  thoughts

pleasures  of  the  tabh

a  pleasant  meal;
lev  that  with  mind  at  ease  he
vants  of  Nature.  Laelius  is
denying  tliat  Gallon! us  ever
calling  him  unhappy,  and  that
ire  centred  on  the
will  deny  tliat  he
dined  pleasantly.  Then  why  not  well '  ?  Because
■weir  implies  rightly,  respectably,  worthily ;  whereas
Gallonius  dined  wrongly,  disreputably,  basely ;  there-
fore he  did  not. dine  well.  It  was  not  that  Laelius
thougUt  his  dinner  of  herbs'  more  palatable  than
Gallonius 's  sturgeon,  but  that  he  disregarded  the
pleasures  of  the  palate  altogether ;  and  this  he  could
not  have  done,  had  he  made  the  Chief  Good  consist
in  pleasure.
5  IX.  Consequently  you  are  bound  to  discard  plea-
sure, not  merely  if  you  are  to  guide  your  conduct
aright,  but  even  if  you  are  to  be  able  consistently  to

i  the  language  of  respectable  people. Can  ^

L.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  HM

liter.  Possumusue  ergo  in  vita  summum  bonum  di-
cere  quod  ne  in  cena^  quidem  posse  videamur  ?
Quomodo  autetii  philosophus  loquitur  ?  Tria  genera
cupiditatum,  naturales  et  necessariae,  naturules  et
non  necessariae,  nee  natu rales  nee  necessariae.'
Frinium  divisit  ineleganter;  duo  enim  genera  quae
erant,  fecit  tria.  Hoc  est  non  dividere  sed  frangere.
Qiii  haec  didieerunt  quae  ille  contemnit,  sic  sclent :
Duo  genera  cupiditatum,  naturales  et  inanes ;
naturaiium  duo,  necessariae  et  non  necessariae.'
Confecta  res  esset,  Vitiosiim  est  enim  in  dividendo
■  partem  in  genere  numerare.  Sed  hoc  sane  conce-
dunms.  Contemnit  disserendi  elegantiam  ;  confuse
loquitur ;  gerendus  est  mos,  modo  recte  sentiat.
Equideni  illud  ipsum  non  niniium  probo  et  tantum
pfttior,  philosophum  loqui  de  cupiditatibus  finiendis.
A  p  t  t  cupiditas  finiri  ?  Tollenda  est  atque  ex-
t  h  nd  adicitus.  Quis  est  enim  in  quo  sit  cupi-
d  tas  q  n  recte  cupidus  dici  possit  ?  Ergo  et  avarus
t  d  finite,  et  adulter,  verum  babebit  modutn,  et
I  eodem  modo. Qualis  ista  pliilosophia  est

qu  n  n  nteritum  afferat  pravitatis  sed  sit  contents
n  d  nt  te  vitiorum?  Quamquam  in  hac  Avisionc
psa  prorsus  pi-obo,  elegantiam  desidero.  Ap-
pell  the  desideria  naturae ;  cupiditatis  nomen
servet  alio,  ut  earn  cum  de  avaritia,  cum  de  intem-

uod  ne  in  cena  Thos.  Bentley  ;  cum  id  ne  in  cena  Mdv.

wilt  MSS.

aSeenoteon  Bk.  I.  §45,

nljIil^fCotTOTe

|c

P  BOOK  II.  U

possibly  therefore  call  a  thing  the  Chief  Good  with
regard  to  living,  when  we  feel we  caiuiot  call  it  50
even  in  regard  to  dining  ? But  how  says  our  philo-  and  m
sopher? The  desires  are  of  three  kinds,  natural  ^^f^
and  necessary,  natural  but  not  necessarj',  neither  5"'[*
natural nor necessary.' To  begin  with,  this  is  a  mUiea
cluTOsy  division  ;  it  makes  three  classes  when  there
are really only two. This is not dividing but
hacking  in  pieces. Thinkers  trained  in  tlie  science
which  Epicunis  despised- usually  put  it  thus: The
desires  are  of  two  kinds,  natural  and  imaginary';
natural desires again fall into two subdivisions,
necessary and not necessary.' That would have
rounded  it  oif  properly. It  is  a  fault  in  division  to

7  reckon  a  species  as  a,  genus.  Still,  do  not  let  us
stJckle  about  form.  Epicurus  despises  the  niceties
of  dialectic ;  he  affects  a  careless  style ;  we  must
humour  him  in  this,  provided  that  his  meaning  is
correct.  But  for  my  own  part  I  cannot  cordially  approve,
I  merely  tolerate,  a  philosopher  who  talks  of  setting  ~i_  I
bcKHids  to  the  desires. Is  it  pusaihie  for  desire  to  '

be  kept  within  bounds?  It  ought  to  be  destroyed,
uprooted  altogether.  On  your  principle  there  is  no
form  of  desire  whose  possessor  could  not  be  morally
approved.  He  will  be  a  miser — within  limits ;  an
adulterer^ — in  moderation  ;  a  sensualist — to  the
same  extent.  What  sort  of  a  philosophy  is  this,
that  instead  of  dealing  wickedness  its  death-blow,
is  satisfied  with  moderating  our  vices?  Albeit  I
quite  approve  the  substance  of  this  classification  ;  it
is  the  form  of  it  to  which  I  take  exception.  Let
bim  speak  of  the  first  class  as  the  needs  of
nature,'  and  keep  the  term  desire '  for  another
occasion,  to  be  put  on  trial  for  its life  when he

CICERO DE  FINIBUS
perantia,  cum  de  maximis  vitlh  loqiielur  tamquam
capitis  accusct

(  Sed haec quidem liberius  ab eo dicuntur  et

saepius.  Quod  eqiiidem  non  reprendo ;  est  enim
tanti  philosophi  tamque  nobilis  audacter  sua  de-
creta  defendere.  Sed  tamen  ex  eo  quod  earn  volu-
ptatem  quam  omnes  gentes  hoc  nomine  appellant
videtur  aniplexari  saepe  vehementius,  in  magnis
interduni  versatur  angustiis,  tit  hominum  conscientia
remota  nihil  tarn  turpe  sit  quod  voluptatis  causa  non
videatur  esse  fac turns.  Deinde  ubi  erubuit  (vis
enim  est  pcrniagna  naturae),  confugit  illuc  ut  neget
accedere  quidquam  posse  ad  voluptatem  nihil  dolen-
tis.  At  iste  non  dolendi  status  non  vocator  voluptas.
Non  laboro,  inquit,  de  nomine, — Quid  quod  res  alia
tota  est  ?— Eeperiam  multos  vel  innomerabiles  potiiis
non  tam  curiosos  nee  tam  molestos  quam  vos  estis,
qui  bus  quid  quid  velim  facile  persoadeam. — Quid
ergo  dubitamus  quin,  si  non  dolei'e  voluptas  sit
summa,  non  esse  in  voluptate  dolor  sit  maximus  ?
eur  id  non  ita  fit? — Quia  dolori  non  voluptas  con-
traria  est  sed  doloris  privatio,

)  X.  Hoe  *ero  non  iidere,  ina\imo  argumento  esse
voluptatem  dlam,  qua  sublata  neget  se  intellegere
omnino  quid  sit  bonuni  (eani  autem  ita  pcisequitur
quae  palato  percipiatur  quae  auribus  — ceter  i  dddit

4

,  and  all

r  BOOK  II.  ix-K

comes  to  deal  with  Avarice,  Iiitenipcraii
the  major  vices,

1 "This  classification  of  the  desires  is  then  a  subject  (2)  »iiae«is&
on  which  Epicut^iis  is  fond  of  enlarging. Not  that  back  on  aiKcra
I  find  fault  with  him  for  that ;  we  expect  so  great  and  chwf'G™'!"'*
famous  a  philosopher  to  maintain  his  dogmas  boldly.
But  be  often  seems  unduly  eager  to  approve  of  plea-
sure in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term,  for  this
occasionally  lands  him  in  a  very  awkward  position.
It  convejs  the  impression  that  there  is  no  action  so
base  but  that  he  would  be  ready  to  commit  it  for
the  sake  of  pleasure,  provided  he  were  guaranteed
against  detection. Afterwards,  put  to  the  blush  by
this  conclusion  (for  the  force  of  natural  instinct  after
all  is  overwhelming),  he  turns  for  refuge  to  the
assertion  that  nothing  can  enhance  the  pleasure  of
freedom  from  pain. Oh  but,'  we  urge, your  alatic
condition  of  feeling  no  pain  is  not  what  is  termed
pleasure  at  all.' —  I  don't  trouble  about  the  name,'
be replies. —  Well,  but  the thing itself  is  abso-
lutely different' —  Oh, 1 can  find  hundreds and
thousands  of  people  les.s  precise  and  tiresome  than
yourselves,  who  will  be  glad  to  accept  as  true  any-
thing 1  like  to  teach  them.'—  Then  why  do  we  not"^
go  a  step  further  and  argue  that,  if  not  to  feel  puin  /
is  the  highest  pleasure,  therefore  not  to  feel  pleasure  I
is  the  greatest  pain  ?  Wliy  does  not  this  hold  good  ? '  )
— '  Because  the  opposite  of  pain  is  not  pleasure  but/
absence  of  pain.'

) X. But  fancy  his  failing  to  see  how  strong  a  proof  If  it
it  is  that  the  sort  of  pleasure,  without  which  he  piejs
declares  he  has  no  idea  at  all  what  Good  means  (and
he  defines  it  in  detail  as  the  pleasure  of  the  palate,
of the ears, and subjoins the other kinds of

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quae  si  appelles,  honos  praefandus  sit) — hoc  igitur,
quod  solum  bonum  severus  et  gravis  pliilosophus  no-
vit,  idem  non  videt  iie  expetendum  quidem  esse,
quod  earn  voluptatem  lioc  eodem  auctore  non  desi-
deremus,  cum  dolore careamus  I Qiiam  Iiaec sunt

30  contraria !  Hie  si  definire,  si  dividere  didicisset,  si
loquendi  vim,  si  denique  consuetudinem  verhorum
teneret,  nuraquam  in  taiitas  salebras  incidisset.  Nunc
vides  quid  faciat.  Quam  nemo  umquam  voluptatem
appellavit.  «ppellat;  quae  duo  sunt,  unum  facit.  Hanc
in  motu  voluptatem  (sic  enim  has  suaves  et  quasi
dulces  voluptates  appellat)  interdum  ita  extenuat  ut
M'.  Curium  putes  locjui,  interdum  ita  laudat  ut  quid
praeterea  sit  boniim  neget  se  posse  ne  suspicari  qui-
dem. Quae  iam  oratio  non  a  philosopho  aliquo  sed  a
censore  opprimenda  est;  non  est  enim  vitium  in  ora-
tione  solum  sed  etiam  in  moribus.  Luxuriain  non
reprendit,  modo  sit  vacua  iniinita  cupiditatc  et  timore.
Hoc  loco  discipulos  quaerere  videtur.  ut  qui  asoti  esse
velint  philosophi  ante  fiant.

31  'A  primo,  ut  opinor,  «nitnantium  ortu  p^;tit.iir  iirign
sum  mi  boni.  Simul  atque  natum  animal  est,  gaudpt
voluptate  et  earn  ap petit  ut  bonum,  aspematur
dolorem  ut  malum.  De  malis  autem  et  bonis  ab
iis  animalibus  quae  nondum  depravata  sint  ait  opti-
me iudieari. Haec et tu ita posuisti ct verba

116

BOOK  II.  X
plesisure,  which  cannot  be  specified  without  an
apology),— he  fails,  I  say,  to  see  that  this,  the  sole
Good  with  which  our  strict  and  serious  philosopher
is  acquainted,  is  actitalJy  not  even  desirable,  in-
asmuch as  on  his  own  showing'  we  feel  no  need  of
this  sort  of  pleasure,  so  long  as  we  are  free  from
30  pain!  How  inconsistent  this  is!  If  only  Epicurus-TLis  incoa-""'
had  studied  Definition  and  Division,  if  he  understood  dcr^'Ho''™"
the  meaning  of  Predication  or  even  the  customary  ?ioraB«y,
uses  of  terms,  he  would  never  have  fallen  into  such  a
quandary.  As  it  is,  you  see  what  he  does.  He
calls  a  thing  pleasure  that  no  one  ever  called  by  that
name  before  ;  he  confounds  two  things  that  are  dis-
tinct. The  '  kinetic '  sort  of  pleasure  (for  so  he
terms  the  delightful  and  so  to  speak  sweet-flavoured
pleasures  we  are  considering)  at  one  moment  he  so
disparages  that  you  would  think  you  were  listening
to  Manias  Curius,  while  at  another  moment  he  so
extols  it  that  he  tells  us  he  is  incapable  even  of
fanagining  what  other  good  there  can  be.  Now  that
is  language  that  does  not  call  for  a  philosopher  to
answer  it,- — it  ought  to  be  put  down  by  the  police.
His  morality  is  at  fault,  and  not  only  his  logic.  He
does  not  cen.sure  profligacy,  provided  it  be  free
from  unbridled  desire,  and  from  fear  of  conse-
quences. Here  he  seems  to  be  making  a  bid  for
disciples  :  the  would-be  rove  need  only  turn  philo-
G6pher.

1 For  the  origin  of  the  Chief  Good  he  goes  back,  1  Again,  U  io-
iraderstand,  to  the  birth  of  living  things. As  soon  as  active  pleasure,
an  animal  is  bom,  it  delights  in  pleasure  and  seeks  it  p^™,^'t  ^,,
as  a  good,  but  shuns  pain  as  an  evil. Creatures  as  yet  cbi«l  g<  "
imcornipted  arc  according  to  him  the  best  judges  of
Good  and  Evil. That  is  the  position  both  as  you  ex-

CICERO  DE  1-INIBUS
vestra  sunt.  Qnani  multa  vitiosa !  Summum  enim
bonum  et  matum  vagiens  puer  utra  voluptate
diiudicabit,  stante  an  movente  ?  quoniam,  si  dis
placet,  ab  Epicuro  loqui  discimus.  Si  stante,  hoc
natura  videlicet  vult,  salvam  esse  se,  quod  concedi-
mus  ;  si  movente,  quod  tamen  dicitjs,  nulla  turpis
voluptas  erit  quae  praetermittenda  sit,  et  simul  non
profieiscititr  animal  illud  modo  nabum  a  summa  vo-

32  luptate,  quae  est  a  te  posita  in  non  dolendo.  Nee
tamen  arguraentum  hoc  Epicurus  a  parvis  petivit  aut
etiam  a  bestiis,  quae  putat  esse  specula  naturae,  ut
diceret  ab  iis  duce  natura  banc  voluptatem  expeti
nihil  dolendi.  Neque  enim  haee  movere  potest  ap-
petitum  animi,  nee  ullum  habet  ictum  quo  pellat
animum  status  hie  non  dolendi  (itaque  in  hoc  eodem
peccat  Hieronymus),  at  ille  pellit  qui  peniiulcet  sen-
sum  voluptate.  Itaque  Epicurus  semper  hoc  utitur
ut  probet  voluptatem  natura  expeti,  quod  ea  volu-
ptas quae  in  m.otu  sit  et  parvos  ad  se  alliciat  et  bestias,
non  ilia  stabilis  in  qua  tantum  inest  nihil  dolere.
Qui  igitur  convenit  ab  alia  voluptate  dicere  naturam
proficisci,  in  alia  summum  bonum  ponere  ?

33  XI.  '  Bestiarum  vero  nullum  indicium  puto.  Quam-
vis  enim  depravatae  non  sint,  pravae  tamen  esse  pos-
sunt,  Ut  bacillum  aliud  est  infle>:m])  et  incurvatum
de  industria,  aliud  ita  natum,  sic  feranim  natura  non

118

!oogfe

BOOK  II.  x-xi
pounded  it  and  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  pliriiseology  of
your  school.  What  a  mass  of  fallacies  I  Which  kind
of  pleasure  will  it  be  that  guides  a  mewling  infant
to  distinguish  between  the  Chief  Good  and  Evil,

static '  pleasure  or  kinetic '  ? — since  we  learn  our
languag-e,  heaven  help  us  '.  from  Epicurus. If  the

static  '  kind,  the  natural  instinct  is  clearly  towards
self-preservation,  as  we  agree  ;  but  if  the  kinetic,'
and  this  is  what  nevertheless  you  maintain,  then  no
pleasure  will  be  too  base  to  be  accepted ;  and  also
our  new-bom  animal  in  this  case  does  not  find  its
earliest  motive  in  the  highest  form  of  pleasure,  since
this  on your  showing  consists in absence  of  pain.

32  For  this  latter  doctrine,  however,  Epicurus  cannot
have  gone  to  children  nor  yet  to  animals,  which  ac-
cording to  him  give  a  true  reflection  of  nature ;  he
could  hardly  say  that  natural  instinct  guides  the
young  to  desire  the  pleasure  of  freedom  from  pain.
This  cannot  excite  appetition ;  the  static  '  condition
of  feeling  no  pain  exerts  no  driving-power,  supplies
no  impulse  to  the  will  (so  that  Hieronymus  also  is
wrong  here)  ;  it  is  the  positive  sensation  of  pleasure
and  delight  that  furnishes  a  motive.  Accordingly
Epicurus's  standing  argument  to  prove  that  pleasure
is  naturally  desired  is  that  infants  and  animals  are
attracted  by  the kinetic '  sort  of  pleasure,  not  the

static '  kind  which  consists  merely  in  freedom  from
pain.  Surely  then  it  is  inconsistent  to  say  that
natural  instinct  starts  from  one  sort  of  pleasure,  but
that  the  Chief  Good  is  found  in  another.

33  XI.  As  for  the  lower  animals,  I  set  no  value  on  in
their  verdict.  Their  instincts  may  be  wrong,  although  '^'^,
we  cannot  say  they  are  perverted.  One  stick  has  am
been  bent  and  twisted  on  purpose,  another  has  grown  *""

119

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

est  ilia  quidem  depravata  mala  disciplina,  sed  natura
Nee  vero  ut  vuluptatem  expetat  natura  iiiovet
infaiitem,  sed  tantura  ut  se  ipse  diligat,  ut  integrum
BC  salvijmqne  velit.  Omne  enim  animal,  simul  est
ortum/  et  se  ipsum  et  omnes  ijartes  suas  diligit,  du-
asque  quae  maximae  sunt  in  prirnis  amplectitur,  ani-
n  et  corpus,  delude  utriusque  partes.  Nam  aunt
J  praecipua  quaedam  et  in  corpore,  quae
cum  leviter  agnovit,  turn  discemere  incipit,  ut  ea
quae  prima  data  sint  natura  appetat  aspemeturque
34  contraria.  In  his  primis  naturalibus  voluptas  insit
,  magtta  quaestio  est;  nihil  vera  putare  esse
praeter  voluptatem,  non  membra,  non  sensus,  non
ingeni  motum,  non  integritatem  corporis,  non  vale-
tudtnem,  summae  mihi  videtur  inscitiae.  Atque  ab
isto  capite  fluere  neeesse  est  omnem  rationem  bono-
1  et  malorum.  Polemoni  et  iam  ante  Aristoteli
ea  prima  visa  sunt  quae  paulo  ante  dixt.  Ergo  nata
est  sententia  veterum  Academicoi'um  et  Peripateti-
a  ut  finem  bonorum  dicerent  secundum  naturam
id  est  virtute  adhibita  frui  primis  a  natura
datis.  Callipho  ad  virtutem  nihil  adiuiixit  nisi  volupta-
tem; Diodoras  vacuitatem  doloris. . .  .  '  His  omnibus
quos  dixt  conseqiienles  sunt  fines  bonorum ;  Aristippo
simplex  voluptas;  Stoieis  consentire  natm-ae,  quod
e  volunt  e  virtute,  id  est  honeste  vivere,  quod  ita

'simul  esi  ortum  a  conjecture  of  Mdv.,  who  prints  simut
[(■/]  orlum  est  with  MSS.

*  Mdv.  marks  a  lacuna.  A  sentence  has  been  lost  indt-
caling  tlie  '  primary  objects  of  desire  '  of  the  piiilosophare

iCBSoflhe  limbs  and  of  the  senses.

Hgle

BOOK II.
crooked ;  similarly  the  nature  of  wild  aniuials,  though
not  indeed  corrupted  by  Ijad  education,  is  corrupt  of
its  own  nature. Again  in  the  infant  the  natural  in-
stinct is  not  to  seek  pleasure ;  its  instinct  is  merely
towards  self-regard,  seif-presetvation  and  protection
from  injury. Every  living  creature,  from  the  moment
of  birth,  loves  itself  and  all  its  members;  primarily
this  self-regard  embraces  the  two  main  divisions  of
mind  and  body,  and  subsequently  the  parts  of  each
of  these. BotJi  mind  and  body  have  certain  e
lences;  of  these  the  young  animal  grows  vaguely
conscious,  and  later  begins  to  discriminate,  and  to
seek  for  the  primary  endowments  of  Nature  and  shun
34  their  opposites. Whether  the  list  of  these  primary  But  in  «nj- caw
natural  objects  of  desire  includes  pleasure  or  not  is  a  ShiiiMopha
much  debated  question;  but  to  hold  that  it  includes  ''^^.'^l.^.l'L
nothing  else  but  pleasure,  neither  the  limbs,  nor  the  im
senses,"  nor  mental  activity,  nor  bodily  integrity  nor  "^
health,  seems  to  me  to  be  the  height  of  stupidity.
And  on  one's  view  as  to  the  objects  of  instinctive
desire  must  depend  one's  whole  theory  of  Goods  and
Evils.  Polemo,  and  also  before  him  Aristotle,  held  that
the  primary  objects  were  the  ones  I  have  just  men-
tioned. Thus  arose  the  doctrine  of  the  Old  Academy
and  of  the  Peripatetics,  maintaining  that  the  End  of
Goods  is  to  live  in  accordance  with  Nature,  that  is,  to '
enjoy  the  primary  gifts  of  Nature's  bestowal  with  the
accompaniment  of  virtue.  Callipho  coupled  with  virtue
pleasure alone; Diodorus  freedom  from  pain....
In  the  case  of  all  the  philosophers  mentioned,  their
End of  Goods logically  follows ; with Aristippus
I it  is  pleasure  pure  and  simple ; witli  the Stoics,
L harmony  with  Nature,  which  they  interpret  as  mean-
% ing  virtuous  or  morally  good  life,  and  further  explain

^n-ii

CICERO  DK  FINIBUS  ^B

interprelantur,  vivere  cum  intellegentia  rerum  earum
quae natura evenirent, eligentem ea quae essent

35  secundum natu ram  reicientemque  contraria.  Ita  tres
sunt  fines  espertes  honestatis,  unus  Ariatippi  vel
Epicuri,  alter  Hieronymi,  Carneadi  tertius;  tres  in
qiiibus  honestAS  cum  aliqua  accessione,  Polemonis,
Calliphontis,  Diodori ;  una  simplex,  cuius  Zeno  auctor,
posita  in  decore  tota,  id  est  in  hoiiestate.  (Nani
Pyrrho,  Aristo,  Erillus  iam  diu  abiecti.)  Reliqui  sibi
constiteruntj  ut  extrema  cum  iiiitiis  convenirent,  ut
Aristippo  voluptas,  Hieronymo  doloris  vacuitas,  Car-
neadi frui  principiis  naturalibus  esaet  extremum  ;
XII.  Epicurus  autem  cum  in  prima  commendation e
voluptatem  dixisset,  si  earn  quam  Aristippus,  idem
tenere  debuit  ultimum  bonorum  quod  ille  ;  sin  earn
quam  Hieronymus,  fecisset  idem  ut  voluptatem  illam
Aristippi  in  prima  commendatione  poneret?'

36  Nam  quod  ait  sensibus  ipsis  iudicari  voluptatem
bonum  esse,  dolorem  malum,  plus  tribuit  sensibus
quam  nobis  leges  permittunt  cum°  privatarum  litium
iudices  sumus.  Nihil  euim  possumus  iudicare  nisi
quod  est  nostri  iudici ;  in  quo  frustra  iudices  solent,
cum  sententiam  pronontiant,  addere  : si  quid  mei

''Aristippi .  . .  ponerel?eii.;[Anslippi\.  .  . pomrel.  Mdv.,
Muller,
'  cum  inserted  lierc  hy  Mdv. ,  after  litium  by  OrellL.
12s

Sfc

^  BOOK  II.  xi-Nii

this  as  meaning  to  live  witli  an  understanding  of  the
natural  course  of  events,  selecting  things  that  are  in
accordance  with  Nature  and  rejecting  the  opposite.
S,i  Thus  there are three Ends  that  do  not  include
moral  worth,  one  that  of  Aristippus  or  Epicurus,  the
second  that  of  Hieronymus,  and  the  third  that  of
Cameades ;  three  that  comprise  moral  goodness  to-
gether with  some  additional  element,  those  of  Polemo,
Callipho  and  Diodorus;  and  onetheorythat  is  simple,
of  which  Zeno  was  the  author,  and  which  is  based
entirely  on  propriety,  that  is,  on  moral  worth. (As
for  Pyrrho,  Aristo  and  Erillus,  they  have  long  ago
been  exploded.) All  of  these  but  Epieu
consistent,  and  made  their  final  Ends  agree  with  tlieir
first  principles, — Aristippus  holding  the  End  to  be
Pleasure,  Hieronymus  freedom  from  pain,  Cameades
the enjoyment of the primary natural objects.
XII. Whereas  Epicurus,  if  in  saj-ing  that  pleasure  s°  ihat  Epicun
was tlie primary object of  attraction,  he  meant  mateSaEnd
pleasure  in  the  sense  of  Aristippus,  ought  to  ''ave  ^g^'j^."'^
maintained  the  same  ultimate  Good  as  Aristippus ;  from  (he
or  if  he  made  pleasure  in  the  sense  of  Hieronymus  his  IwSrfdiSgto
Chief  Good,  should  he  at  the  same  time  have  allowed  ^^tS""'
himself  to  make  the  former  kind  of  pleasure,  that  of
Aristippus,  the  primary  attraction  ?
36 "Tlie  fact  is  that  when  he  says  that  the  verdict  of  Not  the  srnsei,
the  senses  themselves  decides  pleasure  to  be  good  and  must  d*  ofdolhi
pain  evil,  he  assigns  more  authority  to  the  senses  than  ^'"^'^  '"^  "^
the  law  allows  to  us  when  we  sit  as  judges  in  private  viriue.
suits. We  cannot  decide  any  issue  not  within  our
jurisdiction  ;  and  there  is  not  really  any  point  in  the
proviso  which  judges  are  fond  of  adding  to  their  ver-
dicts : if  it  be  a  matter  within  my  jurisdiction,'  for
if  it  were  not  within  their  jurisdiction,  the  verdict

123

4

CICERO  DK  FINIBUS

:st'i  si  enim  non  fuit  eorum  tudici,  nihilo

ma^s  hoc  non  adtlito  illnd est  iudicatum. Quid

iudicant sensus? Dulce,  amarum,  leve,  asperum,

prope,  longe,  stare,  movere,  quadratum,  rotundura.

37  Aequam'  igitur  pronuntiabit  sententiara  ratio,  ad-
hibita  primum  divuiHrum  liumanaruiuque  re  rum
Bcientia,  qiiae  potest  appellari  ritir  sapientia,  deiiide
adiunctis  virtutibus,  quas  ratio  rerum  omnium  do-
minas,  tu  voluptatum  satellites  et  mjnistras  esse
voluisti;  quarum  adeo  omnium  ex  sententia  pro-
nuntiabit primum  de  voluptiite,  nihil  esse  ei  loci,
non  modo  ut  sola  ponatur  in  suinmi  boni  sede  quam
quaerimus,  sed  ne  illo  qiiidem  modo  ut  ad  honesta-
tem  applicetur. De  vaeuitate  doloris eadem  sen-

38  tentia  erit.  Reicietur  etiam  Carneades,  nee  ulla  de
snnuno  bono  ratio  aut  voluptatis  non  dolendive  par-
ticeps  aut  lionestatis  espers  probabitur.  Ita  relin-
quet  duus,  de  quibus  etiam  atque  etiam  eonsideret.
Aut  enim  statuet  nihil  esse  bonum  nisi  honestum,
nihil  malum  nisi  turpe,  cetera  aut  omnino  nihil
habere  momenti  aut  tantuoi  ut  nee  expetcnda  nee
fugienda  sed  eligeiida  modo  aut  reidenda  sint;  aut

Lnnteponet  earn  quam  cum  honestate  ornatissimam,
turn  etiam  ipsis  initiis  naturae  et  totius  perfectione
vitae  tocupletatam  videbit, Quod  eo  liquidius  faciet,
124.

I

M

BOOK  II.  xii

would  be  equallj  invalid  were  the  proviso  omitted,
AVTiat  does  come  under  the  verdict  of  the  senses  ?
Sweetness,  sourness,  smoothness,  roughness,  proxi-
mity, distance ;  whether  an  object  is  stationary  or

^7  moving,  square  or  round.  A  just  decision  can  there-
fore only  be  delivered  by  Reason,  with  the  aid  in
the  first  place  of  that  knowledge  of  things  human
and  di\'ine,  which  may  rightly  claim  the  title  of
Wisdom ;  and  secondly  with  the  assistance  of  tile
Virtues,  which  Reason  would  have  to  be  the  mistresses
of  all  things,  but  you  considered  as  the  handmaids
and  subordinates  of  the  pleasures.  After  calling  all
of  these  intn  council,  she  will  pronounce  first  us  to
pleasure,  that  she  has  no  claim,  not  merely  to  be
enthroned  alone  in  the  seat  of  that  Chief  Good
which  we  are  seeking,  but  even  to  be  admitted  as
the  associate  of  Moral  Worth. As  regards  freedom

38  from  pain  her  decision  will  be  the  same.  For  Car-
neades  wUl  be  put  out  of  court,  and  no  theory  of
the  Chief  Good  will  be  approved  that  either  includes
pleasure  or  absence  of  pain,  or  does  not  include
moral  worth.  Two  views  will  thus  he  leit.  After
prolonged  consideration  of  these,  either  her  final
verdict  will  be  that  tliere  is  no  Good  but  moral
worth  and  no  Evil  but  moral  baseness,  all  other
things  being  either  entirely  unimportant  or  of  so
little  importance  that  they  are  not  desirable  or  to  be
avoided,  but  only  to  be  selected  or  rejected  ;  or  else
she  will  prefer  the  theory  which  she  will  recognise
as  including  the  full  beauty  of  moral  worth,  enriched
by  the  addition  of  the  primary  natural  objects  and
of  a  life  completed  to  its  perfect  span.  And  her
judgment  will  be  all  the  clearer)  if  she  can  first  of  all
settle whether the dispute between these rival

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

SI  perspexerit  rerum  inter  eas  verborurane  sit  con-
troversia.

39  XIII.  "  Huius  ego  nunc  auctoritatem  sequens  idem
faciam.  Quantum  enim  potero,  miiiuam  contentiones
omnesque  sententiaa  simpliees  i-onim  in  quibus  nulla
estvirtutisadiunctioomninoaphilosDphiasemovendas
piitalw, — prinium  Aristippi  Cyrenaicorumque  om-
nium, quos  non  est  veritum  in  ea  voluptate  quae
maxima  dulcedine  seiisuni  moveret  summum  bonum

-to  ponere,  contemneiites  istam  vacuitutem  doluris.  Hi
non  viderunt,  ut  ad  cursum  equum,  ad  arandum
bovem,  ad  indagandum  canem,  sie  hominem  ad  duas
res,  ut  ait  Aristoteles,  ad  intellegendum  et  ad'  agen-
dum e^e  natum,  quasi  mortalem  deum,  contraque  ut
tardam  aliquam  et  lauguidam  pecudem  ad  pastum  et
ad  procreandi  voluptatem  hoc  divinum  animal  ortum

41  esse  voluerunt,  quo  nihil  mihi  videtur  absurdius.
Atque  liaec  contra  Aristippuni,  qui  eam  voluptatem
non  moda  summam  sed  solam  etiam  ducjt,  quam  oinnes
unam  appellamus  voluptatem.  Aliter  autem  vobis
placet.  Sed  ille,  ut  dixi,  vitiose.  Nee  enini  figura
corporis  nee  ratio  excellens  ingeni  humani  significat
ad  unam  hanc  rem  natum  hominem  ut  frueretur
voluptatibus.  Nee  vero  audiendus  Hieronymus,  cui
summum  bonum  est  idem  quod  vos  interdum  vel
potius  nimium  saepe  dicitis,  nihil  dolere.  Non  enim,
si  malum  est  dolor,  carere  eo  nialo  satis  est  ad  bene
'  ad  Mipplicd  by  Mdv.

^m  BOOK 11.  vii-:dii

theories  is  one  of  fact,  or  turns  on  verbal  differences

39 Xlir.  "Guided  by ^hf  authontv  of  Reason  1  will  A
now adopt  a  similar  procedure  myself. As  far  as  jd
possible  1 will narrow  the  issue,  and  will  assume  *"
that  all  those  theories  of  the  simple  type,  that  in-
clude no  admixture  of  virtue,  are  to  be  eliminated
from philosophy altogether. First  among these
comes  the system  of  Aristippus  and  the CjTenaic
school  in  general,  who  did  not  shrink  from  finding
their  Chief  Good  in  pleasure  of  the  sort  that  excites
the  highest  amount  of  actively  agreeable  sensation,

-(0  and  who  despised  your  freedom  from  pain.  They
failed  to  see  that  just  as  the  horse  is  designed  by
nature  for  running,  the  ox  for  ploughing,  and  the  dog
for  hunting,  so  man,  as  Aristotle  observes,  is  born  for
two  purposes,  thought  and  action  :  he  is  as  it  were  a
mortal  God.  The  Cyrenaics  held  on  the  contrai-y
that  this  godUke  animal  came  into  being,  like  some
dull,  half-witted  sheep.  In  order  to  teed  and  to  ei^oy
the  pleasure  of  procreation, — a  view  that  seems  to  me

■H  the  climax  of  absurdity.  So  much  in  answer  to  Aris-
tippus, who  considers  pleasure  in  the  only  sense  in
which  we  all  of  us  employ  the  term  to  be  not  merely
the  highest  but  the  sole  pleasure  that  exists.  Your
school  holds  a  different  view.  However,  as  1  said,
Aristippus  is  wrong.  Neither  man's  bodily  con-
formation nor  his  surpassing  mental  faculty  of  reason
indicates  that  he  was  Imm  for  the  sole  purpose  of  en-
joying pleasure.  Nor  yet  can  we  listen  to  Hierony-
mus,  whose  Chief  Good  is  the  same  as  is  occasionally,
or  rather  only  too  frequently,  upheld  by  yourselves,
freedom  from  pain.  If  pain  is  an  evil,  to  be  without
this  evil  is  not  enough  to  constitute  the  Good  Life,

CICERO  DE  FiNIBUS
vivendum. Hoc  dixerit  potiiis  Eiinius  :

Nimium  boni  est  cui  nihil  est  mati;
nos  beatom  vitam  iion  depulsione  mali  sed  adeptione
boni  iudicemus,  nee  earn  cessando,  sive  gaudentem,
ut  AristippuB,  sive  noii  dolentem,  ut  hio,  sed  agendo
aliquid  «.■onsiderandove  quaeramus.

•i'2  Quae  possunt  eadeni  contra  Carneadeum  illud

summum  bonuni  dici,  qiiod  is  non  tam  ut  probaret  pro-
tblit,  quam  ut  Stoicis  quibuscum  bellum  gerebat  uppo-
neret ;  id  autem  eiusmodi  est  ut  additum  ad  virtutem
auctoritatemvideaturhabiturumet  expletorum  cumu-
late vitam  beatam,  de  quo  omnis  haec  quaestio  est.
Nam  qui  ad  virtutem  adiungiuit  vel  voluptatem,  quam
unam  virtus  miniuii  facit,  vel  vacuitatem  doloris,  quae
etiamsi  malo  caret  tamen  non  est  summum  bonuni,
aceessione  utuntur  non  ita  probabili,  nee  tamen  cur  id
tam  parce  lamque  restricte  faciant  intellego.  Quasi
enim  emendum  eis  sit  quod  addant  ad  virtutem,  pri-
mum  vilissimas  res  addunt,  deinde  singulas  potius
quam  omnia  quae  prima  natura  approbavisset  ea  cum

■(■3  honestate  con iunge rent.  Quae  quod'  Aristoni  et
Pyrrhoni  omnino  visa  sunt  pro  niliilo,  ut  inter  optime
valere  et  gravissime  aegrotarc  nihil  prorsus  dicerent
interesse,  recte  iam  pridem  contra  eos  desitum  est
disputari.  Dum  enim  in  una  virtute  sic  omnia  esse
V"orfMdv.;ci<MMSS.

a  Frum  Ennl'
KcTyos  iXfiuliraTi

BOOK II.  xii
Let  Ennius  say  if  he  likes  that

Enough,  s
Is  his  who  hath  n

.  iiir

',  of  good

but  let  us  reckon  happiness  not  by  the  avoithince  of
evil  but  by  the  attainment  of  good.  Let  ns  seek  it
not  in  the  idle  acceptance  whether  of  positive  delights,
like  Aristippus,  or  of  freedom  from  pain,  like  Hier-
onymus,  but  in  a  life  of  action  or  of  study.
!  '  The  same  arguments  can  be  urged  against  the  Chief
Good  of  Cameades,  which  he  advanced  less  from  a
desire  to  prove  it  true  than  to  use  it  as  a  weapon  in
his  battle  with  the  Stoics;  though  it  is  such  that  if
added  to  Virtue  it  may  be  thought  to  be  of  import-
ance and  to  be  likely  to  augment  the  sum  total  of
Happiness,  which  is  the  one  subject  of  our  inquirj'.
Whereas  those  who  join  witli  Virtue  either  pleasure,
the  one  thing  she  values  least,  or  freedom  from  pain,
which  even  though  it  is  devoid  of  evil  yet  is  not  the
Chief  Good,  make  a  less  satisfactory  combination ;
nor  yet  can  1  understand  why  they  go  to  work  in  so
cautious  and  niggardly  a  fashion.  You  would  think
they  had  to  purchase  the  commodity  which  is  to  be
added  to  virtue.  To  begin  with  they  choose  the
cheapest  things  they  can  find  to  add,  and  then  they
each  dole  out  one  only,  instead  of  coupling  with  moral
worth  all  the  things  initially  approved  by  Nature.
Aristo  and  Pyrrho  thought  all  these  things  utterly  ■
worthless,  and  said,  for  example,  that  there  was  abso-  ,
lutely  nothing  to  choose  between  the  most  perfect '
health  and  the  most  grievous  sickness  ;  and  conse-
quently men  have  long  ago  quite  rightly  given  up
arguing  against  them.  For  in  insisting  upon  the
unique  importance  of  virtue  in  such

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

voluenint  ut  earn  rerum  selectione  esspoliarent.iiec  ei
quidquam  aut  unde  oriretuv  darent  aut  ubi  niteretur,
virtutem  ipsam  quam  amplexabantur  sustulenint.
Erillus  auteni  ad  scientiam  omnia  revocans  uniun
quoddam  bonuni  vidit,  sed  nee  optimum  nee  quo  vita
gubemari  possit.  Itaque  liic  ipse  iam  pridem  est
reiectus ;  post  enim  Chrjsippum  non  sane  est  dispu-
tatum.

XIV.  Restatis  igitur  vos ;  nam  cum  Academicis  in-
certa  luctatio  est,  qui  nihil  affirmant  et  quasi  desperata
cognitione  eerti  id  sequi  volunt  quodcmnque  veri
-t-t  simile  videatur.  Cum  Epicuro  autem  hoc  plus  est
negoti  quod  e  dupHci  geiiere  voluptatis  coniunctus
catj  quodque  et  ipse  et  amici  eius  et  multi  postea  de-
fensores  eius  sententiae  fuerunt,  et  nescio  quomodo,
is  qui  auctoritatem  minimara  habet,  maximmn  vim,
populus  cum  illis  fucit  Quos  nisi  redarguimus,  om-
nis  virtus,  omne  decus,  omnis  vera  laus  deserenda
est.  Ita  ceterorum  sententiis  semotis,  lelinquitur
non  mill!  cum  Torquato  sed  virtuti  cum  voluptate
certatio.  Quam  quidem  ceilationem  homo  et  acutus
et  diligens,  Chrysippus,  non  contemnit,  totumque
discrimen  sununi  boni  in  earuni  eomparatione  posi-
turn  putat.  Ego  autem  existimo,  si  lionestum  esse
aliquid  ostendero  quod  sit  ipsum  sua  vi  propter  seque
expetendum,  iacere  vestra  omnia.  ItAque  eo  quale
sit  breviter  ut  tempus  postul&t  constituto,  accedam

130

^OOgT(

BOOK  II.  xiii-xiv
rob  it  of  any  power  of  choice  among  external  things
and  to  deny  it  any  starting-point  or  basis,  they
destroyed  the  very  virtue  they  desired  to  cherish.
Again,  Erillus,  in  basing  everything  on  knowledge,
fixed  his  eyes  on  one  definite  Good,  but  this  not  the
greatest  Good,  nor  one  that  could  serve  as  the  guide
of  life.  Accordingly  Erillus  himself  has  long  ago
been  set  aside ;  since  Clirysippus  no  one  has  even
troubled  to  refute  him,

XIV.  Accordingly  your  school  remains  ;  for  there  T
is  no  coming  to  grips  with  the  Academics,  who  ir,
affirm  nothing  positively,  and  despairing  of  a  know-
ledge of  certain  truth,  make  up  their  minds  to  take
i  apparent  probability  as  their  guide.  Epicurus  how-
ever is  a  more  troublesome  opponent,  because  he  is  a
combination  of  two  different  sorts  of  pleasure,  and
because  besides  himself  and  liis  friends  there  have
been  so  many  later  champions  of  Jiis  theory,  which
somehow  or  other  enlists  the  support  of  that  least
competent  but  most  powerful  adherent,  the  general
public.  Unless  we  refute  these  adversaries,  all  virtue,
all  honour,  all  true  merit  must  be  abandoned.  Thus,
when  all  the  other  systems  have  been  discarded,
there  remains  a  duel  in  which  the  combatants  are,
not  myself  and  Torquatus,  but  Virtue  and  Pleasure.
This  contest  is  by  no  means  ignored  by  so  penetrating
and  so  industrious  a  writer  as  Clirysippus,  who  con-
siders tjiat  the  rivalry  between  pleasure  and  virtue  is
the  cardinal  issue  in  the  whole  question  of  the  Chief
Good.  My  own  view  is  that,  if  I
proving  the  existence  of  Moral  Worth  as  a  thing
essential]}' and  for  itself  desirable,  your  entire' system
at  once  collapses.  Accordingly  I  will  begin  by  de-
fining, with  such  brevity  as  the

1

w

^P  01

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

ia  "tua, Torquate, nisi memoria forte de-

Honestum  igitur  id  mtelleginius  quod  tale  est  ut
detracta  omni  utilitate  sine  ullis  praemiis  fructiljusve
per  se  ipsum  possit  iore  laudari.  Quod  quale  sit,
lion  tam  definitionCj  qua  sum  usus,  intellegi  ijotest
(quamquam  aliquantum  potest)  quani  coniniuni  om-
nium iudicio  et  optimi  cuiusque  studiis  atque  factis,
qui  pennulta  ob  eain  unam  causain  faciunt  quia
decet,  quia  rectum,  quia  honestum  est,  etsi  nullum
con  se  cut  u  rum  emolument  urn  vident.  Homipes
enim.  etsi  alji^  ni^ltig,  t.impn  hop  npn  plurimiipi
Jt^a  bestiis  differunt  quod  ratiiijii-iii  Imlipnt.  a  natm-!]

datam mentemoue arrem et vi(;pHtf"' ccler-

rimeque  multa  simul  af;itantem  et.  ut  iln  dicam,
sagacem,  quae  et  caiisas  re  rum  et  consecutiones
videat  et  similitudiiies  transferal  et  disiuncta  con-
iuiigat  et  cum  praeseiitibus  futura  copulet  om-
nemque  complectatur  vitae  consequentis  statum.
Eademque  ratio  fecit  hominem  hominum  appeten-
tem  cumque  tis  natura  et  sermone  et  usu  congruen-
tem,  ut  profcctus  a  caritate  domesticorum  ac  suorum
serpat  longius  et  se  imp  licet  primum  civium,  deinde
omnium  mortalium  societate  atque,  ut  ad  Archytam
scripsit  Plato,  now  sibi  se  soli  natum  meminerit  sed
patriae,  sed  suis,  ut  perexigua  pars  ipsi  relinquatnr.

s.  unless  ^H

^  BOOK  II.  liv

the  nature  of  Moral  Worth ;  aod  then,  Torquatus.  I
will  proceed  to  deal  with  each  of  your  points,  u
my  memory  should  happen  to  fail  n
t.i "By Moral Worth, then, we  understand  that  M«»iiiT<'?
which  is  of  such  a  nature  that,  iJiough  devoid  of  all  m'sn?™  iu
utility,  it  can  justly  be  commended  in  and  for  itself,  ^^"^[^^
apart  from  any  profit  or  reward. A  formal  defiitition  and  lui-c  itia
such  as  I  have  given  may  do  something  to  indicate  ™n,^  "^
its  nature ;  but  this  is  more  clearly  explained  by  the
general  verdict  of  mankind  at  large,  and  by  the  aims
and  actions  of  all  persons  of  high  character. Good
men  do  a  great  manj-  things  from  which  they  antici-
pate no  advantage,  solely  from  the  motive  of  pro-
prietj',  morality  and right. For  among  the  many
points  of  difference  between  man  and  the  lower  ani-
mals, the  greatest  difference  is that Nature has
bestowed  on  man  the  gift  of  Reason,  of  an  active,
vigorous  intelligence,  able  to  prosecute  several  trains
of  thought  with  great  swiftness  at  the  same  time,
and  having,  so  to  speak,  a  keen  scent  to  discern  the
sequence  of  causes  and  effects,  to  draw  analogies,
combine  things  separate,  connect the  future  with
the  present,  and  survey  the  entire  field  of  the  sub-
sequent course  of  life. It  is  Reason  moreover  that
has inspired man with a relish for his kind;
she has  produced conformity  of  character,  of  lan-
guage and  of  habit ; she  has  prompted  the  indi-
vidual, starting  from fi-iendship and from family
affection,  to expand his interests,  forming social
ties  first  with  his  fellow-c|tizeHS  and  later  with  all
mankind. She  reminds  hira  that,  as  Plato  puts  it  in
his  letter  to  .^rchj-tas,"  man  was  not  born  for_self
alone,  but  for  country  and  for  kindred,  claims  that

46  leave  but  a  smairpart  of  him  for  himself. Nature

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
46  £t  quoniam  eadem  natura  cupiditatcm  ingenuit  lio-
miiii  veri  videndi,  quod  facillime  apparet  cum  vacni
curis  etiam  quid  in  caelo  fiat  scire  avemus,  his  initiis
inducti  oinnia  vera  dUigimus,  id  est  fidella,  simpticin,
constantia,  turn  vana,  falsa,  fallentia  odimus,  ut  frau-
dem,  periurium,  malitiam,  iniuriam.  Eadem  ratio
habet  in  se  quiddam  amplum  atque  magnificum,  ad
imperandutn  iiiagis  quani  ad  parendum  accomnioda-
tum,  omnia  liumana  non  tolerubilia  solum  sed  etiam
leviadueens,altumquiddaiuet  excelsuiu, nihil timens,
■1-7  nemini  cedens,  semper  invictum.  Atque  his  tribus
jceneribus  hoiiestnrimi  notatis,  quartum  sequitur  et
in  eadem  pulehritudine  et  aptuni  ex  illis  tribus,  in
quo  inest  ordo  et  moderatio.  Cuius  similitudine
perspecta  in  formarum  specie  ac  dignitate,  transitum
est  ad  honestateiii  dictorum  atque  factoruni.  Nam
ex  his  tribus  laudibus  quas  ante  dixi,  et  temeritatem
reformidat  et  non  audet  cuiquajn  aut  dicto  protervo
aut  facto  noeere,  vereturque  quidqaam  aut  facere  aut
eloqui  quod  parum  virile  videatur.
48  XV.  Hubes  undique  expletam  et  perfectam,  Tor-
quate,  formam  honestatis,  quae  tota  quattuor  his  vir-
tutibus  quae  a  te  quoque  commemoratae  sunt  conti-
iietur.  Hanc  se  tuus  Epicurus  omnino  igiiorare  dicit
quani  aut  qualem  esse  velint  ii  qui  honestate  sununum

134

^oogfe

anal
^o  1

I  BOOK  II.  xiv-xv

has  also  engendered  in  mankind  the  desire  of  con-  (i)  Wadou
templating  truth. This  is  most  clearly  manifested
in  our  hours  of  leLsure ; when our  muids  are  at
ease  we  are  eager  to  acquire  knowledge even  of
the movements of the heavenly bodies. This
primary  instinct  leads  us  on  to  love  all  truth  as  such,  (■)  JibUm,
that  is,  all  that  is  trustworthy,  simple  and  consistent,
and  to  hate  things  insincere,  false  and  deceptive,
such as cheating, perjury, malice and injustice.
Further,  Reason  possesses  an  intrinsic  element  of  (5)  Connp
dignity and grandeur, suited rather to require  J

obedience  than  to  render  it,  esteeming  all  the  acci-  H

dents  of  human fortunes  not  merely  as  endurable  H

but  also  as  unimportant ;  a  quality  of  loftiness  and  I

elevation,  fearing  nothing,  submitting  to no  one,
ever  unsubdued. These  three  kinds  of  moral  good-  (*)  Tt
ness being noted, there follows a fourth kind,
possessed  of  equal  beauty,  and  indeed  combining  in
itself  the  other  three. This  is  the  principle  of  order
juid of restraint. From recognizing something  — ,
.logous  to  this  principle  in  the  beauty  and  dignity ^
outward  forms,  we  pass  to  beauty  in  the  moral
of  speech  and  conduct, F^ch  of  the  three
«llences  mentioned  before  contributes  something
this  fourth one: it  dreads  rashness; it shrinks
from  injuring  anyone  by  wanton  word  or  deed:  and
it  fears  to  do  or  say  anything  that  may  appear
unmanly.  _

XV. There,  Torquatus,  is  a  full,  detailed  and  com-  Morality  la
plete  account  of  Moral  Wortli,  a  whole  of  which  these  a'dwre'tont
four  virtues,  which  you  also  mentioned,  constitute  the  "'"'•
Yet  your  Epicurus  tells  us  that  he  is  utterly
Ices  to  know  .what  nature  or  qualities  are  assigned
this  Morality  by  those  who  make  it  thi

135

i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

bonum  metiuntur.
referantur  neque  in

nequeintellegereni

k  ad  honestatem  omnia
I  ea  voluptatem  dtcant  inesae,  ait
re  (his  enim  ipsis  verbis  utitur),
:c  videre  sub  banc  vocem  honestatis
quae  sit  subicienda  seiitentia.  Ut  enim  consuetude
loquitur,  id  solum  dicitur  honestum  quod  est  popular
fama gloriosuin.  Quod,  iiiQuit,  quauiquam  voluptati-
bus  quibusdam  est  saepe  iucundius,  tamen  expetitur
+9  propter  voluptatem.  ^''idesne  quam  sit  magna  dis-
sensio  ?  Pbilosoplius  nobdis,  a  quo  non  solum  Graecia
et  Italia  sed  etiam  omms  barbana  commota  est
honestum  quid  sit,  si  id  non  sit  iii  \oJuptate  negat
se  intellegere,  nisi  forte  illud  quod  multitudiniii
rumore  laudetur.  Ego  autem  hoc  etiam  turpe  esse
saepe  iudico  et,  si  quando  turpe  iion  sit,  turn  esse  noii
turpe  cum  id  a  multitudine  laudetur  quod  sit  ipsum
per  se  rectum  atque  laudabile  ;  tamen  non  ob  earn
causam  illud  dici  esse  honestum  quia  laudetur  a
multis,  sed  quia  tale  sit  ut,  vel  si  ignorarent  id  ho-
mines vel  si  obmutuissent,  sua  tamen  pulchritudine
esset  specieque  laudabile.  Itaque  idem  natura  victus,
cui  obsisti  non  potest,  dieit  alio  loco  id  quod  a  te
etiam  paulo  ante  dictum  est,  non  posse  iucunde  vivi
50  nisi  etiam  lioneste.  Quid  nunc  lioneste '  dicit  ?
idemne quod iucunde  '  ? Ergo ita : non posse

•  Here  as  elsewhere  no  I  ranslalion  can  convey  the  di
meaning  of  the  word  honestum,  '  honourable,'  used  i
equivalent  oi  rb  KoKiv,  '  the  morHlly  beaut!  Tul  or  g'ood.

)uble

^■^  BOOK  II.  XV

of  the  Chief  Good.  For  if  Morality  be  the  standard
to  which  all  things  are  referred,  while  yet  they  will
not  allow  that  pleasure  forms  any  part  of  it,  he  de-
clares tliat  they  are  uttering  sounds  devoid  of  sense
(those  are  hia  actual  words),  and  that  he  has  no
notion  or  perception  whatever  of  any  meaning
that  this  term  Morality  can  have  attached  to  it.  In
common  parlance  '  moral'  (honourable)'  means
merely  that  which  ranks  high  in  popular  esteem.
And  popular  esteem,  says  Epicurus,  though  often  in
itself  more  agreeable  than  certain  forms  of  pleasure,

49  yet  is  desired  simply  as  a  means  to  pleasure.  Do
you  realize  how  vast  a  difference  of  opinion  this  is  ?
Here  is  a  famous  philosopher,  whose  influence  has
spread  not  only  over  Greece  and  Italy  but  through-
out all  barbarian  lands  as  well,  protesting  that  he  can-
not understand  what  Moral  Worth  is,  if  it  does  not
consist  in  pleasure  ;  unless  indeed  it  be  that  which
wins  the  approval  and  applause  of  the  multitude.
For  my  part  I  hold  that  what  is  popular  is  often  posi-
tively base,  and  that,  if  ever  it  is  not  base,  this  is  only
when  the  multitude  happens  to  applaud  something
that  is  right  and  praiseworthy  in  and  for  itself;  which
even  so  is  not  called  '  moral '  (honourable)  because
it  is  widely  applauded,  hut  because  it  is  of  such  a
nature  that  even  if  men  were  unaware  of  its  exist-
ence, or  never  spoke  of  it,  it  would  still  be  worthy  of
praise  for  its  own  beauty  and  loveliness.  Hence
Epicurus  is  compelled  by  the  irresistible  force  of  in-
stinct to  say  in  another  passage  what  you  also  said
just  now,  that  it  is  impossible  to  live  pleasantly  with-

50  out  also  living  morally  (honourably).  What  does  he
mean  by  morally'  now?  The  same  as  pleasantly'  ?
If  so,  does  it  amount  to  saying  that  it  is  impossible

137

m

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

lioneste  vivi  nisi  honeste  vivatur  ?  An  nisi  populari
taina  '  Sine  ea  igitur  lucunde  negat  posse  i>e  vivere*'
Quid  turpius  quam  sapientis  Mtani  e\  insipientiutii
sermonc  penderc  Quid  eigo  hoc  loco  intpllegit
honestum  Certe  nihil  nisi  quod  possit  ipsuui  prop
ler  se  luie  laudari  Nam  si  propter  \oluptattni
quae  est  ista  laus  quae  possit  e  niacello  peti  Non
IS  iir  est  ut  cum  honestdtem  eo  loco  lialieat  ut  sine
ea  lucunde  neget  posse  vm  illud  honestum  quod
populare  sit  sentiat  et  sine  eo  ntget  lucunde  vi\i
posse  aut  quidquam  aliud  lionestum  intellegat  mt.i
qnod  Sit  rectum  ipsumque  per  se  sua  ii  sui  sponte
sua  iiatura  laudabik
I  XV I  Itaque  Torquate  eum  dtceres  clamare  Epi
curuni  non  posse  iucunde  vivi  nisi  honeste  et  sapi-
enter  et  iuste  viveretur,  tu  ipse  mihi  gloriari  videbare.
Tants  vis  inerat  in  verbis  propter  earum  rerum  quae
signifieabantur  liis  verbis  dignitatem,  lit  altior  fieres,
lit  interduin  insisteres,  ut  nos  intueus  quasi  testiiica-
rere  laudari  honestatem  et  iustitiam  aliquando  ab
Quam  te  decebat  iis  verbis  uti  quibus  si
non  iiterentur,  philosophia  omnino  non
Istonun  enim  verborum  amore,  quae
perraro  appellantur  ab  Epicuro,  sapientiae,  fortitudi-
nis,  iustitiae,  temperantiae,  praestantissimis  ingeniis

Epicuro.  (
philosophi
egeremus.

^fiasse  sevivere  Mdv.  ;  fiosse  vivi  Ore\\{\  pos.

■e  MSS.

■  BOOK  I!,  xv-xvi

to  live  morally  unless  you — live  morally  ?  Or,  u:
you  make:  public  opinion  your  standard  ?
then  that  he  cannot  live  pleasantly  without  the
approval  of  public  opinion  ?  But  what  can  be  baser
than  to  make  the  conduct  of  the  Wise  Man  depend
upon  the  gossip  of  the  foolish  ?  What  therefore  does
he  understand  by  moral'  in  this  passage?  Clearly,
nothing  but  that  which  can  be  rightly  praised  for  its
own  sake.  For  if  it  be  praised  as  being  a  means  to
pleasure,  what  is  there  credituhle  about  this  ?  Yon
can  get  pleasure  at  the  pi-ovision-dealer's.  No, —
Epicurus,  who  esteems  Moral  Worth  so  highly  as  to
say  that  it  is  impossible  to  live  pleasantly  without  it,
is  not  the  man  to  identify '  moral '  (honourable)  with
popular '  and  maintain  that  it  is  impossible  to  live
pleasantly  without  popular  esteem  ,  he  cannot  under-
stand moral'  to  mean  anjthmg  else  than  that
which  is  right,— that  wliich  is  m  and  for  itself,
independently,  intrinsically,  and  of  its  own  nature
praiseworthy.

I XVI. This,  Torquatus,  accounts  for  the  glow  of  Seif-ia
pride  with  which,  as  I  noticed,  jou  mtormed  us  how  roant":
loudly  Epicurus  proclaims  the  impossibility  of  living  )''"'?''
pleasantly  without  living  morallj,  wiselj  and  justly.
Your  words  derived  potency  from  the  grandeur  of
the  things  that  they  denoted  ;  you  drew  yourself  up  to
your  full  height,  and  kept  stopping  and  Rxing  us  with
your  gaze,  and  solemnly  asseverating  that  Epicurus
does  occasionally  commend morality and  justice.
Were  those  names  never  mentioned  by  philosophers
we  should  have  no  use  for  philosophy ;  how  well  they
sounded  on  your  lips  1 Too  seldom  does  Epicurus
speak  tons  of  Wisdom,  Courage,  Justice,  Temperance. '
Yet  it  is  the  love  that  those  great  names  inspu'e  which
139

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

ad philosophiue studium contulcrunt.

.i9  Oculorum,  inquit  Plato,  est  in  nobis  sensus  acerrimus,
qiiibus  sapientiam  iion  cerninius ;  quam  ilia  ardentes
amores  excitaret  sui,  si  videretur'l  Cur  tandem?  an
quod  ita  callida  est  ut  optime  possit  architectari  vo-
luptates?  Cur  iustitia  laudatur?  aut  unde  est  hoc
contritum  vetustate  proverbium  ;  quicum  in  tene-
bris'^? Hoc,  dictum  in  una  re,  latissime  patet,  ut

5S  in  omnibus  factis  re,  lion  teste  moveamur.  Sunt  enim
lev'ia  et  perinRrma  quae  dicebantiir  a  te,  animi  con-
scientia  improbos  excruciari,  turn  etiam  poenae  timore
qua  aut  afliciantur  aut  semper  sint  in  metu  ne  aSici-
antur  aliquando.  Non  oportet  timidum  aut  imbecillo
animo  fingi  non  bonum  ilium  virum,  qui  quidquid
fecerit  ipse  ae  cruciet  omniaque  formidet,  sed  omnia
calbde  referentem  ad  utilitatem,  acutum,  versutum,
veteratorem,  facile  ut  excogitet  quomodo occulte,

54>  sine  teste,  sine  ullo  conscio  fallat.  An  tu  me  de
L.  Tubulo  putas  dicere  ?  qui  cum  praetor  quaestionem
inter  siearios  exercuisset,  ita  aperte  cepit  pecunias  ob
rem  iudicandam  ut  anno  proximo  P.  Scaevola  tribunus
plebis  ferret  ad  plebem,  vellentne  de  ea  re  quaeri.
Quo  plebiscito  decreta  a  senatu  est  consuli  quaestio
Cu.  Caepioni ;  profectus  in  exsilium  Tubulus  statim
nee  respondere  ausus  ;  erat  enim  res  aperta.

'si  -viilereluT  Mdv.  om.  with  A,  B,  E,  but  cp,  Plato,
Phaedi'.  250  D.  61^11  yi.p  i]fi.iy  ifuT-irij  TrSf  Sii  toC  aiiftoTo»
(pX""' o'"'^')*'''"'  W  ^pi'V'i  "^  iparai.  Snyois  ylip  iy  vaptTxcv
hapyi! eHuXi» rapelxero (ii

iijiit  iL.

^^^^c

BOOK II.  xvi
h^  lured  the  ablest  of  mankind  to  devote  themselves

}2  to  philosophical  studies.  The  sense  of  sight,  says
Plato,  is  the  keenest  sense  we  possess,  yet  our  eyes
cannot  behold  Wisdom ;  could  we  see  her,  what
passionate  love  would  she  awaken  !  And  why  is
this  so  f  Is  it  because  of  iitr  supreme  ability  and
cunning  in  the  art  of  contriving  pleasures  ?  Why  is
Justice  commended  ?  What  gave  rise  to  the  old
familiarsayingj'Amanwithwhom  you  might  play  odd  %.
aJid  even  in  the  dark '  ?  This  proverb  strictly  applies
to  the  particular  case  of  honesty,  but  it  has  this
general  application,  that  in  all  our  conduct  we  should
be  influenced  by  the  character  of  the  action,  not  by

j3  the  presence  or  absence  of  a  witness.  How  weak
and  ineffectual  are  the  deterrents  you  put  forward,
— the  torture  of  a  guilty  conscience,  and  the
fear  of  the  punishment  that  offenders  incur,  or  at
all  events  stand  in  continual  dread  of  incurring  in  the
end  '■  We  must  not  picture  our  unprincipled  man  as
A  poor-spirited  coward,  tormenting  himself  about  his
past  misdeeds,  and  afraid  of  everything ;  but  as
shrewdly  calculating  profit  in  all  he  does,  sharp,
dexterous,  a  practised  hand,  fertile  in  devices  for
cheating  in  secret,  without  witness  or  accomplice.

5+  Don't  suppose  I  am  speaking  of  a  Lucius  Tubulus,
who  when  he  sat  as  praetor  to  try  charges  of  murder
made  so  little  concealment  of  taking  bribes  for  his
verdict  that  next  year  the  tribune  of  the  plebs,
Publius  Scaevola,  moved  in  the  plebeian  assembly  for
a  special  inquiry.  The  bill  passed  the  plebs,  and  the
senate  commissioned  the  consul  Gnaens  Caepio  to
hold  the  investigation ;  but  Tubulus  promptly  left
the  country,  and  did  not  venture  to  stand  his  trial,
so  open  was  his  guilt.

141

CICERO  DE  FINiaUS  ^J

XVII.  "  Non  igitur  de  improbo  sed  de '  callido  im-
probo  quaerimus,  qualis  Q.  Pompeius  in  f'oedere  Nii-
mantiiio  infittando  ftiit,  nec  vero  anmia  timente  sed
primiim  qui  animi  conscientiam  non  curet,  quam
scilicet  comprimere  nihil  est  negoti.  Is  enim  qui
occultus  et  tectus  dicitur,  tantum  abest  ut  se  indicet,
perficiet  etiam  ut  dulere  alterius  improbe  facto  vi-
deatur  ;  quid  est  enim  aliud  esse  versutum?
i  '  Memiiii  me  adesse  P.  Sextilio  Rufo  cum  is  rem  ad
amicos  ita  deferret,  se  esse  heredem  Q.  Fadio  Gallo,
cuius  in  testamento  scriptum  esset  se  ab  eo  rogatum  ut
omnis  liereditas  ad  filiam  perveniret.  Id  Sexlilius
factum  negabat ;  poterat  autem  impune  ;  quis  enim
redargueret  ?  Nemo  nostrum  credebat,  eratque  veri
similius  hunc  mentiri,  cuius  interesset,  quatn  ilium,
qui  id  se  rogasse  scripsisset  quod  debuisset  rogare.
Addebat  etiam  se  in  legem  Voconiam  iuratum  contra
earn  facere  non  audere,  nisi  aliter  amicis  videretur.
Aderamus  nos  quidem  adulescentes,  sed  multi  am-
plissimi  viri,  quorum  nemo  censuit  plus  Fadiae  dan-
dum  quam  posset  ad  earn  lege  Voconia  pervenire.
Tenuit  permagnam  Sextilius  hei-editateni  unde,  si
secotus  esset  eorum  seiitentiam  qui  honesta  et  recta
cmolumentis  omnibus  et  commodis  ante  pone  rent,
'  de  inserted  by  Mdv.

ming  a

The

Voconian  law  prohibited  a  woman  from  being  l<

an  estate. It  was  evaded  by  bequeathing'  the  estate  to  a

Triend  who  had  promised  to  hand  it  on  to  the  intended

passed  to  the  '  heies '  pi
had  been  made  to  Fadi;
get  nothing.

ippears  to  have  allowed  a  beques

BOOK  n.  xvii

XVII "it  is  not  thevet'ore  a  question  of  a  rascal  Foi
merely,  but  of  a  irafty  rascal,  like  Quiiitus  Pompeius  ^ia
when  he  disowned  the  treaty  lie  had  made  with  the  ^"1
Namantines ;  nor  yet  of  a  tiniid,  cowardly  knave,  fies
but  of  one  who  to  begin  with  is  deaf  to  the  voice  of  pj^,
conscience,  which  it  is  assuredly  no  difficult  matter
to  stifle. The  man  we  call  stealthy  and  secret,  so
far  from  betraying  liis  own  guilt,  will  actually  make
beheve  to  be  indignant  at  the  knavery  of  another ;
that  is  what  we  mean  by  a  cunning  old  hand.
5  I  remember  assisting  at  a  consultation  which

Publius  Sextilius  Rufus  held  with  his  friends  on  the
following  matter.  He  had  been  left  heir  to  Quintus
Fadius  Gallus.  Fadius's  will  contained  a  statement
that  he  had  requested  Sextilius  to  allow  the  whole  of
the  estate  to  pass  to  his  daughter.  Sextilius  now  de-
nied the  arrangement,  as  he  eould  do  with  impunity,
for  there  was  no  one  to  rebut  him.  Not  one  of  us
believed  liis  denial ;  it  was  more  probable  that  he
should  be  lying,  as  his  pocket  was  concerned,  than
the  testator,  who  had  left  it  in  writing  that  he  had
made  a  request  which  it  had  been  his  duty  to  make.
Sextilius  actually  went  on  to  say  that,  having  sworn
to  maintain  the  Voconian  law,"  he  would  not  venture
to  break  it,  unless  his  friends  thought  he  ought  to
do  so.  I  was  only  a  young  man,  but  many  of  the
company  were  persons  of  high  consideration ;  and
every  one  of  these  advised  him  not  to  give  Fadia
more  than  she  was  entitled  to  get  under  the  Voconian
law.''  Sextilius  kept  a  handsome  property,  not  a
penny  of  which  he  would  have  touched  had  he
_  followed  the  advice  of  those  who  placed  honour  and
jght  above  all  considerations  of  profit  and  advantage.
>  you  therefore  suppose  that  he  was  afterwards
143

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

n  nullum  attigisset.  Num  igitur  eum  postea
censes  anxio  animo  aut  sollieito  fuisse  ?  Nihil  minus,
contraque  ilia  liereditate  dives  ob  eamque  rem  laetus.
Magiii  enim  aestimabat  pecuniam  non  modo  non
pontra  leges  sed  etlam  legibus  partam  ;  quae  quidem
vel  cum  periculo  est  qiiaereiida  vobis ;  est  enim
efFeetrix  multarum  et  magnarum  voluptatum.

56  Vt  igitur  illis  qui,  recta  et  honesta  quae  sunt,  ea

statuunt  per  se  expetenda,  adeunda  sunt  saepe  peri-
cnla  decoris  honestatisque  causa,  sic  vestris,  qui  omnia
voluptate  metiuntur,  pericula  adeunda  sunt  ut  adipi-
scantur  magnas  voluptates.  Si  magna  res,  magna
hereditas  agetur,  cum  pecunia  voluptates  pariantur
plurimae,  idem  erit  Epicuro  vestro  faciendum,  si
suum  finera  bonotum  sequi  volet,  quod  Scipioni,
magna  gloria  propositi  si  Hannibalem  in  Africam
retraxisset.  Itaque  quantum  adiit  periculum  !  Ad
honestatem  enim  ilium  omnem  conatum  suum  re-
.  ferebat,  non  ad  voluptatem.  Sic  vester  sapiens,
magno  aliquo  emolumento  commotus,  cum  causa,*

.'•7  si  opus  erit,  dimicabit.  Occultum  f'acinus  esse  po-
tuerit,  gaudebit ;  deprebensus  omnem  poenam  con-
temnet.  Erit  enim  iiistructus  ad  mortem  contemnen-
dam,  ad  exilium,  ad  ipsum  etiam  dolorem.  Quem
quidem  vos  cum  improbis  poenam  proponitts  impe-
tibilem  facitis,  cum  sapientem  semper  boni  plus
habere  vultis  tolerabilem.

XVIII.  "  Sed  finge  non  solum  callidura  eum  qui  flli-
B  nulium  ;  some  inf.  MSS.  ne  numtnum  gui^nt
V.  marks  as  corrupt,  and  conjectures  cum

juWre

F  BOOK  II.  svii-sviii

troubled  by  remorse  f  Not  a  bit  of  it.  On  the  con-
trary, the  inheritance  made  him  a  rich  man,  and  he
was  thoroughly  pleased  with  himself  in  consequence.
He  thought  he  had  scored  heavily  :  hi  '  '
fortune,  not  only  by  no  illegal  means,  but  actually
by  the  aid  of  the  law.  And  according  to  your  school
it  is  right  to  try  to  get  money  even  at  some  risk ;
for  money  procures  many  very  deUghtful  plew

Therefore  just  as  those  who  hold  that  things  right
and  honourable  are  desirable  for  their  own  sake  must
often  take  risks  in  the  cause  of  honour  and  morality,
so  Epicureans,  who  measure  all  things  by  plea
may  properly  take  risks  in  order  to  obtain  consider-
able pleasures.  If  a  large  sum  of  money  or  a  great
inheritance  is  at  stake,  inasmuch  as  money  buys  a
vast  number  of  pleasures,  your  Epicurus,  if  he  wishes
to  attnm  his  own  End  of  Goods,  will  have  to  act
as  Scipio  did,  when  he  had  the  chance  of  winning
great  renown  by  enticing  Hannibal  back  to  Africa.
To  do  so,  he  risked  enormous  dangers.  For  honour
and  not  pleasure  was  the  aim  of  that  great  enter-
prise. Similarly,  your  Epicurean  Wise  Man,  when
stirred  by  the  prospect  of  some  considerable  gain,
will  fight  to  the  death,  if  need  be,  and  with  good
reason.  Do  circumstances  allow  his  crime  to  go
undetected,  so  much  the  better ;  but  if  found  out,
he  will  make  light  of  every  penalty.  For  he  will
have  been  schooled  to  make  light  of  death,  of  exile,
even  of  pain  itself.  The  latter  indeed  you  make
out  to  be  unendurable  when  you  are  enacting
penalties  for  the  wicked,  but  easy  to  bear  \
you  are  maintaining  that  the  Wise  Man  will  always  le
command  a  preponderance  of  Good.  Epta^^^.

XVIII. But  suppose  that  our  evil-doer  is  not  only  cipin.
L  145

In  (lel.  di

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^^

quid  improbe  fuciat,  verum  etiam  praepotentem,  ut
M.  Crftssus  fuit, — qui  tamcn  solebat  uti  suo  bono, —
ut  hodie  est  noster  Pompeius,  cui  recte  facie nti  gratia
est  habenda;  esse  enim  quam  vellet  iniquiis  poterat
impune. Quam  molta  vero  iniuste  fieri  possunt  quae

5S  nemo  possit  reprehendere !  Si  te  amicus  tuus  moriens
rogaverit  ut  hereditatem  reddas  suae  filiae,  nee  us-
quam  id  scripserit,  ut  scripsit  Fadius,  nee  cuiquaiii
dixerit,  quid  facies?  Tu  quidem  reddes;  ipse  Epi-
curus fortasse  redderet;  ut  Sex.  Peducaeus,  Sex.  F.,
is  qui  hirnc  nostrum  reliquit  etfigiem  et  liumauitatis
et  probitiitis  suae  filium,  cum  doctus,  turn  j^tniiium
vir  optimus  et  iustissimus,  cum  sciret  nemo  eum  ro-
gatum  a  C.  Piotio,  equite  Romano  splendido,  Nur-
sino,  ultro  ad  mulierem  venit  eique  nihil  opinanti  viri
mandatum  exposuit  hereditatemque  reddidit.  Sed
ego  ex  te  quaero,  quoniam  idem  tu  certe  fecisses,
nonne  intellegas  eo  maiorem  vim  esse  naturae  quod
ipsi  vos,  qui  omnia  ad  vestrum  commodum  et  ut  ipsi
dicitis  ad  voluptatem  referatis,  tamen  ea  faciatis  e
quibus  appareat  non  voluplateni  vos  sed  olficium  se-
qui,  plusque  rectam  naturam  quam  rationem  pravam

59  valere  ? Si  scieris,  inquit  Carneades,  aapidem  occulte
latere  uspiam  et  velle  aliquem  imprudentem  super
cam  asaidere  cuius  mors  tibi  emolumentum  fiitura  sit,
U6

BOOK  II.  xviii
dever  but  also  supremely  powerful,  as  was  Marcus
CrassuSj^who  however  was  mostly  content  to
on  his  private  resources ;  or  like  our  friend  Pompeius'
at  the  present  time,  who  deserves  ourgratitude  for  his  /
upright  conduct,  since  he  might  be  as  unjust  as  he'
liked  with  impujiity.  But  how  many  unrighteous
acts  are  possible  which  no  one  would  be  in  a  position

i  to  censure  !  If  a  friend  of  yours  requests  you  on  his
death-bed  to  hand  over  his  estate  to  his  daughter,
without  leaving  his  intention  anywhere  in  writing,
as  Fadiusdid,  or  speaking  of  it  to  anybody,  what  will
you  do  ?  You  no  doubt  will  hand  over  the  money  ;
perhaps  Epicurus  himself  would  have  done  the  same  ;
as  did  Sextus  Peducaeus,  son  of  Sextus,  a  scholar  and
a  gentleman  of  scrupulous  honour,  who  left  behind
him  a  son,  our  friend  of  to-day,  to  recall  his  father's
culture  and  integrity.  No  one  knew  that  a  similar
request  had  been  mode  to  Sextus  by  a  distinguished
Roman  knight  named  Gains  Plotius,  of  Nursia  ;  but
Sextus  of  his  own  accord  went  to  Plotius's  widow,  in-
formed her,  much  to  her  surprise,  of  her  husband's
commission,  and  handed  over  the  property  to  her.
But  the  question  I  want  to  put  to  you  is  this  :  since
you  yourself  would  undoubtedly  have  done  the  same,
do  you  not  see  that  the  force  of  natural  instinct  is  all
the  more  firmly  established  by  the  fact  that  even  you
Epicureans,  who  profess  to  make  your  own  interest
and  pleasure  your  sole  standard,  nevertheless  perform
actions  that  prove  you  to  be  really  aiming  not  at
pleasure  but  at  duty  ;  prove,  I  say,  that  the  natural
impulse  towards  right  is  more  powerful  than  corrupt

9  reason  ?  Suppose,  says  Cameades,  you  should  know
that  there  is  a  viper  lurking  somewhere,  and  that
some  one,  by  whose  death  you  stand  to  profit,  is  about

l2

147

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

improbe  feceris  nisi  monueris  ne  assidat.  Sed  itn-
punite  tamen;  scisse  enitn  te  quis  coarguere  possit?
Sed  nimis  multa.  Perspkuum  est  enim,  nisi  aequitas,
lides,  iustitia  profiriscantur  a  natura,  et  si  omnia  haec
ad  utilitatem  referantitr,  virum  boniim  iion  posse  re-
periri,  deque  his  rebus  satis  multa  in  nostris  de  re
publica  libris  sunt  dicta  a  Laelio.

fiO  XIX.  '  Transfer  idem  ad  niodestiam  vel  temperan-
tiam,  quae  est  moderatio  eupiditatum  ration!  obediens.
Satisne  ergo  pudori  consiilat  si  quis  sine  teste  libidlni
pareat?  An  est  aliquid  per  se  ipsuni  flagitiosuni,
etiamsi  nulla  comitetur  infamia  ?  Quid  ?  fortes
viri  voluptatunine  calculis  subduetis  proflium  ineunt,
sanguinem  pro  patria  profundunt,  an  quodam  animi
ardore  atque  impetu  concitati  ?  Utrum  tandem
censes,  Torquate,  Imperiosum  ilium,  si  nostra  verba
audiret,  tuamne  de  se  orationem  liljentius  audituruni
fuisse  an  meam,  cum  ego  dicerem  nihil  cum  fecissc
sua  causa  omniaque  rei  publicae,  tu  contra  nihil  nisi
sua?  Si  yero  id  etiam  explanare  velles,  apertiusque
diceres  nihil  emn  fecisse  nisi  voluptatis  causa,  quo-

61  modo  eum  tandem  laturum  fuisse  existimas?  Esto;
fecerit,  si  ita  vis,  Torquatus  propter  suas  utilitates
(malo  enim  dicere  quam  voluptates.  in  tanto  prae-
sertim viro); num  etiam eius eollega P. Decius,

US

^^^^^^^^e

BOOK  II.  xi-iii-xix
to  sit  duwn  on  it  unawares ;  tiieti  you  will  do  a  .
wicked  deed  if  you  do  not  warn  him  not  to  sit  down.
But  still  your  wickedness  would  go  unpunished,  for
who  could  possibly  prove  that  you  knew  ?  How-
ever, I  labour  the  point  unnecessarily.  It  is  obvi
that,  if  fair-dealing,  honesty  and  justice  have  not  their
source  in  nature,  and  if  all  these  things  are  only
valuable  for  their  utility,  no  good  man  can  anywhere
be  found.  The  subject  is  fully  discussed  by  Laelius
in  my  volumes  On  the  State.

)  XIX.  Apply  the  same  test  to  Temperance  or  .v..
Moderation,  which  means  the  control  of  the  appetites  ^^^
in  obedience  to  the  reason.  Suppose  a  man  yields  to  Coui
vicious  impulses  in  secret, — is  that  no  offence  against
purity  ?  Or  is  it  not  true  that  an  art  can  be  sinful  in
itself,  even  though  no  disgrace  attends  it?  And  again,
does  a  brave  soldier  go  into  battle  and  shed  his  blood
for  his  countiy  upon  a  nice  calculation  of  the  balance
of  pleasures,  or  in  hot  blood  and  under  the  stimulus
of  impulse  ?  Come,  Torquatus,  if  the  great  Im-
periosus  were  listening  to  our  debate,  which  of  our
two  speeches  about  himself  would  he  have  heard
with  greater  satisfaction,  yours  or  mine  ?  Me  declar-
ing that  no  deed  of  his  was  done  for  selfish  ends,  but
all  from  motives  of  patriotism,  or  you  maintaining
that  he  acted  solely  for  self?  And  suppose  you  had
wanted  to  make  your  meaning  clearer,  and  had  said
more  explicitly  that  all  his  actions  were  prompted  by
desire  for  pleasure,  pray  how  do  you imagine  he

1  would  have  taken  it?  But  grant  your  view;  assume
if  you  like  that  Torquatus  acted  for  his  own  advan-
tage (I  would  sooner  put  it  in  that  way  than  say  'for
his  own  pleasure,'  especially  in  the  case  of  so  great
a  man).  Yet  what  about  his  colleague  Publius
149

lik

^^uWre

CICERO  DK  IINIBUS  !■

princeps  ill  ea  familia  consulatus,  cum  se  devoverat
ft  equo  admisso  in  meiiiam  aciem  Latinorum  irruebat,
aliquid  de  voluptatibus  suis  cogitabat?  ubi  ut  earn
caperet  aut  qiiaiido?  cum  scire t  confestim  esse  niori-
endum,  eamque  mortem  ardentiore  studio  petcret
quain  Epicurus  voluptatem  peteiidam.  putat.  Quod
quidem  eius  factum  nisi  esset  iure  laudatum,  non
esset  imitatus  quarto  consulatu  suo  filius,  neque  porru
ex  eo  natus  cum  Pyrrho  bellum  gerens  consul  cecidis-
set  in  proelio  seque  e continenti  genere  tertiam

6i  victimam  rei  publicae  praebuisset.  Contineo  me  ab
exemplis.  Graecis  hoc  modicum  est,  Leonidas,
Epaminondas,  tres  aliqui  aut  quattuor :  ego  si  nostros
colligere  coepero.  perfjciam  illud  quidem  ut  se  vir-
tuti  tradat  poustringendam  voluptas,  sed  dies  me
deficiet,  et,  ut  A.  Varius,  qui  est  habitus  iudex  durior,
dicere  consessori  solebat,  cuui  datis  testibus  alii
tamen  eitarentur;  'Aut  hoc  testium  satis  est  aut
nescio  quid  satis  sit/  sic  a  me  satis  datum  est  te-
stium. Quid  ftiim  ?  te  ipsum,  dignissimum  maiori-
bua  tuis,  voluptasne  induxit  ut  adulescentulus  eripe-
res  P.  Sullae  coiisulatum?  Quem  cum  ad  patrein
tuum  rettulisses,  fortissimum  viruin,  qualis  Ule  vel
consul  vel  civis  cum  semper,  tum  post  consulatum
fuit!  Quo  quidem  auctore  nos  ipsi  ea  gessimus  ut
omnibus  potius  quam  ipsis  nobis  consul uerimus.

6S  At  quam  pulchre  dicere  videbare,  cum  ex  altera

"A  reference  to  the  suppression  of  the  Cat
piracy  and  Cicero's  subsequent

^^^^^^^C

^K  BOOK  H.  xix  I

DeciuSj  the  first  of  his  family  to  be  consul  ?  Wlien
Decius  vowed  himself  to  deatli,  and  setting  spurs  to
his  horse  was  charging  into  the  thickest  of  the  Latin
ranks,  surely  he  had  no  thought  of  personal  pleasure  ?
Pleasure  where  to  be  enjoyed  or  when  ?  For  he
kjiew  he  must  die  in  a  moment,  aye  and  lie  courted
death  with  more  passionate  ardour  than  Epicurus
would  have  us  seek  pleasure.  Had  not  his  exploit
earned  renown,  it  would  not  have  been  imitated  by
his  son  in  Ills  fourth  eonsulsliip ;  nor  would  the
tatter's  son  again,  commanding  as  consul  in  the  war
with  Pyrrhus,  have  also  fallen  in  battle,  third  in  suc-
cession of  his  line  to  give  himself  a  victim  for  the

62  state. I  refrain  irom  further  instances. The  GreekS\
have but  a  modest list, — Leonidas, Epaminondas,  I
som.e  three  or  four ;  but  were  I  to  begin  to  cite  the  I
heroes  of  our  race,  I  should  doubtless  succeed  in  (
making  Pleasure  yield  herself  prisoner  to  Virtue,  but I
— daylight  would  fail before I  had  done/'  Aulus
V'arius,  noted  for  his  severity  as  a  judge,  used  to  say
to  his  colleague  on  the bench,  when  afler  witnesses
had been produced still further witnesses were
called  ;  '  Either  we  have  evidence  enough  already,
or  I  do  not  know  what  evidence  can  be  enough.'
Well,  I  have  cited  witnesses  enough. Why,  you
yourself,  in  every  way  a  worthy  scion  of  your  stock,
— was  pleasure  the  inducement  that  led  you,  a  mere
youth,  to  wrest  the  consulship  from  Publius  Sulla  ?
You  won  that  office  for  your  gallant  father ;  and  what
a  consul  he  was ! What  a  patriot,  all  his  life  long
and  more  especially  after  his  consulship  ! It  was
with his  support that 1  carried  through  an affair,
which  was  for  all  men's  interest  rather  than  my  own."

53 "  But  how  well  you  thought  you  put  your  case
151

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

parte  ponebas  cumulattim  aliquem  pluriitu
voluptatibus  nullo  nee  praesenti  nee  future  dolore,
eit  altera  autera  eruciatibus  maximis  toto  corpore
nulla  nee  adiuncta  nee  sperata  voluptate,  et  quaere-
bas  quis  aut  hoc  miseiior  sut  superiore  illo  beatior ;
deinde  eoneludebas  summum  malum  esse  dolorem,
summum  bonum  voluptatem  I

XX.  L.  Tiiorius  Balbus  fuit,  Lanuvinus,  quem
meminisse  tu  non  potes  ;  is  ita  viyebat  ut  nulla  tarn
exquisita  posset  inveniri  voluptas  qua  non  abundaret.
Erat  et  cupidus  voluptatum  et  eius  generis  intelle-
gens  et  copiosus ;  ita  non  superstitiosus  ut  ilia  plurima
in  sua  patria  sacrificia  et  fana  contemneret;  ita  non
timidus  ad  mortem  ut  in  acie  sit  ob  rem  publicam
fi4  interfectus.  Cupiditates  non  Epicuri  divisione  finie-
bat  sed  sua  satietate.  Habebat  tamen  rationem
valetudinis ;  utebatur  lis  exereitationibus  ut  ad
cenam  et  sitiens  et  esuriens  veniret,  eo  eibo  qui  et
suttvisslnius  esset  et  idem  facillimus  ad  eoncoquen-
dum,  vino  et  ad  voluptatem  et  ne  noceret.  Cetera
ilia  adhibebat,  quibus  demptis  negat  se  Epicurus
intellegere  quid  sit  bonum.  Aberat  omnis  dolor ;
qui  si  adesset,  nee  molliter  terret  et  tamen  medicis
plus  quam  philosophis  uteretur.  Color  egregius,  In-
tegra valetudo,  summa  gratia';  vita  denique  conferta.
159

U  BOOK  11.  xix-icx

when  you  pictured  on  the  one  hand  a  person  loaded  The
with  an  abundance  of  the  most  delightful  pleasures  ^^pj,
and  free  from  all  pain  whether  present  or  in  pros-  J*^^'
pect,  and  on  the  other  one  racked  throughout  his
fi-ame  by  the  most  excruciating  pains,  unquaUfied  hy
any  pleasure  or  hope  of  pleasure  ;  then  proceeded  to
ask  who  could  be  more  wretched  than  the  latter  or
more  happy  than  the  former ;  and  finally  drew  the
conclusion  that  pain  was  the  Chief  Evil  and  pleasure
the  Chief  Good  '.

XX,  "Well,  there  was  a  certain  Lucius  Thorius  of
Lanuviom,  whom  you  cannot  remember ;  he  lived
on  the  principle  of  enjoymg  in  the  fullest  measure
all  the  most  exquisite  pleasures  that  could  possibly
be  found.  His  appetite  for  pleasures  was  ordy
equalled  by  his  taste  and  ingenuity  in  devising  them.
He  was  so  devoid  of  superstition  as  to  scoff  at  all  the
sacrifices  and  shrines  for  which  his  native  place  is
famous ;  and  so  free  from  fear  of  death  that  he  died
4  in  battle  for  his  country.  Epieurus's  classification
of  the  desires  meant  nothing  to  him ;  he  knew  no
limit  but  satiety.  At  the  same  time  he  was  care-
ful of  his  health  :  took  sufficient  exercise  to  come
hungry  and  thirsty  to  table  ;  ate  what  was  at  once
most  appetizing  and  niost  digestible  ;  drank  enough
wine  for  pleasure  and  not  too  much  for  health.  Nor
did  he  forgo  those  other  indulgences  in  the  absence
of  wluch  Epicurus  declares  tliat  he  cannot  uader~
stand  what  Good  is.  Pain  he  never  experienced  at
all ;  had  it  come  to  him,  he  would  hnvqr  iinme  it
with  fortitude,  yet  woulrl  havt?  fiUpfl  '"  "  tlni-tnr
sooner  than  a  philosopher.  He  had  excellent  health
IS  extremely  popular.
;  of  every
153

a  sound  constitution.
f'ttt  short,  his  life  was  replete  with  ple^

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

5  voluptatum  omnium  varietate.  Hunc  vos  beatutn, —
ratio  quidem  vestra  sic  co^t;  at  ego  quem  huic
anteponam  non  audeo  diceve  ;  dicet  pro  me  ipsa
virtus,  iiec  dubitabit  isti  vestro  beato  M.  Regulum
antepotiere,  quem  quidem,  cum  sua  voluntate,  nulla
vi  coactuB  praeter  iidem  quaui  dederat  liosti,  ex
patria  Carthaginem  revertisset,  turn  ipsunij  cum
vigiliis  et  fame  cmeiaretur,  clamat  virtus  beatioreift
fuisse  quam  potantem  in  rosa  Thorium.  Bella  magna
gesserat,  bis  consul  fuerat,  triumphajat^  nee  tamen
sua  ilia  superiora  tam  magna  neque  tarn  praeclara
ducebat  quam  ilium  ultimum  casum  quem  propter
fidem  eonstantiamque  susceperat ;  qui  nobis  misera-
bilis  videtur  audientibus,  illi  perpetienti  erat  volu-
ptarius.  Non  enim  hilaritate  nee  lascivia  nee  risu
aut  ioco,  comite  levitatis,  ^saepe  etiam  tristes  firmi-
i  tate  et  constantia  sunt  beati.  Stuprata  per  vim
Lucretia  a  regis  filio  testata  cives  se  ipsa  interemit.
Hie  dolor  populi  Romani  duce  et  auetore  Bruto  causa
civitati  libertatis  fuit,  ob  eiusque  mulieris  memoriam
primo  anno  et  vir  et  pater  eius  consul  est  (actus.
Tenuis  L.  Verginius  unusque  de  multis  sexag-esimo
anno  post  libertatem  receptara  virginem  filiam  sua
manu  occidit  potius  quam  ea  Ap.  Claudi  libidini,  qui
turn  erat  cum*  summo  imperio,  dederetur.

HOOK  II.  XX
Your  school  pronounces  him  a  happy  man,
at  least  your  theory  requires  you  to  do  so.  But  I
place  above  him — I  do  not  venture  to  say  whom;
Virtue  herself  shall  speak  for  me,  and  she  will  not
hesitate  to  rank  Marcus  Regulus  liigher  than  this
typically  happy  man,  as  you  would  call  him.  Regulus,
of  his  own  free  will  and  under  no  compulsion  except
that  of  a  proniise  given  to  an  enemyj  returned  from
his  native  land  to  Cartilage  ;  yet  Virtue  proclaims
that  when  he  liad  done  so  he  was  happier  while
torm.eTitedwith  sleeplessness  andhunger  than  Thorius
carousing  on  his  couch  of  roses.  Regulus  had  fought
great  wars,  had  twice  been  consul,  had  celebrated  u

■  triumph  ;  yet  all  his  earlier  exploits  he  counted  less
great  and  glorious  than  that  final  disaster,  which  he
chose  to  undergo  for  the  sake  of  honour  and  of
loyalty :  a  pitiable  end,  as  it  seems  to  us  who  hear
of  it,  but  iiill  of  pleasure  for  him  who  endured  it.
Gaiety  and  merriment,  laughter  and  jesting,  those
comrades  of  frivolity,  are  not  the  only  signs  of
happiness ;  often  in  sadness  those  are  happy  whose
(ifi  wills  are  strong  and  true.  Lucretia  outraged  by
the  royal  prince  called  on  her  fellow-citizens  to
witness  her  wrong  and  died  by  her  own  hand.  The
indignation  that  this  aroused  in  the  Roman  People,
under  the  leadership  and  guidance  of  Brutus,  won
treedom  for  the  state  ;  and  ui  gratitude  to  Lueretia's
memory  both  her  husband  and  her  father  were  made
consuls  for  the  first  year  of  the  republic.  Sixty  years
after  our  liberties  had  been  woHj  Lucius  VerginiusT
a  poor  man  of  humble  station,  killed  his  maideni
J  daughter  with  his  own  hand  rather  than  surrenderl
T  to  the  lust  of  Appius  Claudius,  who  then  held!
e  highest  power  in  the  state.  /

CICERQ  DE  FINIBUS
fi7  XXI.  '  Aut  haec  tibi,  Torquate,  sunt  vituperaiida
nut  patrocmiimi  voluptatis  repudianduni.  Quodautem
patrociniuiu  aut  quae  ista.  causa  est  voluptatis  quae
nee  testes  ullos  e  claris  viris  nee  laudatores  potent
adhibere  ?  Ut  enim  nos  ex  annalium  monumentis
testes  excitamus  eus  quorum  oninis  vita  consumpta
est  in  laboribus  gloriosis,  qui  voluptatis  nomen  audire
non  possent,  sic  in  vestris  disputationibus  liistoria
muta  est.  Numquam  audivi  in  Epicuri  schola  Lycur-
gum,  Solonem,  Miltiadem,  Themistoclem,  Epami-
nondam  norainari,  qui  in  ore  sunt  ceterorum  philoso-
phorum  omnium.  Nunc  vero,  quoniam  haec  nos
etiam  tractare  coepimus,  suppeditabit  nobis  Atticus
6S  noster  e  thesauris  suis  quos  et  quantos  viros  !  Nonne
melius  est  de  his  aliquid  quam  tantis  voluminibus  de
Themista  loqui  ?  Sint  ista  Graecorum  ;  quamquam
ab  lis  philosophiam  et  omnes  ingenuas  disciplinas
habemus ;  sed  tamen  est  aliquid  quod  nobis  non
liceat,  liceat  illis.  Pugnant  Stoici  cum  Peripateticis.
Alteri  negant  quidquam  esse  bonuni  nisi  quod  bo-
nestum  sit,  alteri  plurimum  se  et  longe  longeque
plurimum  tribuere  honestat),  sed  tamen  etin  corpore
et  extra  esse  quaedam  bona.  Et  certanien  honestum
et  disputatio  splendida  !  Onniis  est  enim  de  virtutis
dignitate  content! o.  At  cum  tuis  cum  disseras,
multa  sunt  audienda  etiam  de  obscenis  votuptatibus,
69  de  quibus  ab  Epicuro  saepissime  dicitur.  Non  potes
ergo  ista  tueri,  Torquate,  mihi  crede,  si  te  ipse  et

irical  and  biographical  miscellai

1

BOOK  11.  xxi

67  XXI,  Either,  Torqiiatus,  yon  must  reprobate  i
these  actions,  or  you  must  give  up  your  championship  ]
of  Pleasure.  But  what  defence  can  Pleasure  offer,  <
what  case  can  you  make  out  for  her,  when  she  will
be  able  to  produce  no  famous  men  as  her  witnesses
or  supporters? On  our  side  we  cite  in  evidence

^^from  our  records  and  our  annals  men  who  spent  their

^^Urjiole  lives  in  glorious  toils,  men  who  would  not  have

^^Bome to hear  pleasure  so  much  as  named ; but

^Flti  your  discourses  liistory  is  dumb. In  the  school  of

"Epicurus  I  never  heard  one  mention  of  Ljcurgus,

Solon,  Miltiades,  Themistocles,  Epaminondas,  who

are  always  on  the  lips  of  the  other  philosophers.  And

now  that  we  Romans  too  have  begun  to  treat  of  these

themes,  what  a  marvellous  roll  of  great  men  will  our

triend  Attieus  supply  to  us  from  his  store-houses  of

68  learning ! '  Would  it  not  be  better  to  talk  of  these  than
to  devote  those  bulky  volumes  to  Themista?  Let  us
leave  that  sort  of  thing  to  the  Greeks.  True  we  owe
to  them  philosophy  and  all  the  liberal  sciences  ;  yet
there  are  topics  not  permitted  to  us,  that  are  allow-
able for  thera.  Battle  rages  between  the  Stoics  and
the  Peripatetics.  One  school  declares  that  nothing
is  good  but  Moral  Worth,  the  other  that,  while  it
assigns  the  greatest,  and  by  far  the  greatest,  value
to  Morality,  yet  still  some  bodily  and  external  things
are  good.  Here  is  an  honourable  quarrel,  fought  out
in  high  debate  !  For  the  whole  dispute  turns  on  the
true  worth  of  virtue.  But  when  one  argues  with
your  friends,  one  has  to  listen  to  a  great  deal  about

i  grosser  forms of  pleasure  ! Epicurus  is

I  alway.s  harping  upon  them  1 Believe  me  then,  Tor-

latuB,  if  you  will  but  look  within,  and  study  your  |

thoughts and  inclinations,  you cannot con-

157

H^^e

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

teas  cogitationes  et  studia  perspexeris  ;  pudebit  te,
inquam,  illius  tabulae  qiiam  Cleanthes  sane  com-
mode verbis  depingere  solebat.  lubebat  eos  qui
audiebant  secum  ipsos  cogitare  pictam  in  tabula
voluptatem  pulclierrimo  vestitu  et  omatu  regali  in
Holio  sedentem  ;  praesto  esse  virtutes  lit  ancillulas,
quae  nihil  aliud  agerentj  nullum  suum  officium  duce-
rent  nisi  ut  voluptati  ministrarent,  et  earn  tantum  ad
aurem  admonerent  (si  modo  id  pictura  intellegi  pos-
set) ut  caveret  ne  quid  faceret  iniprudens  quod  offen-
deret  animos  hominum,  aut  quidqiiani  e  quo  oriretur
aliquis  dolor.  Nos  quidem  virtutes  sic  natae  sumus
ut  tibi  serviremus  ;  aliud  negoti  nihil  habemus.'

)  XXII.  "  At  negat  Epicurus  (hoc  enim  vestrum
lumen  est)  quemquam  qui  honeste  non  vivat  iucuiide
posse  vivere.  Quasi  ego  id  curem  quid  ille  aiat  aut
neget;  illud  quaero,  quid  ei  qui  iii  voluptate  sum-
mum  bonum  ponat  oansentaneum  sit  dicerc.  Quid
afiers  cur  Thorius,  cur  Chius  Postumius/  cur  om-
nium horum  mogister,  Orata,  non  iucundissime  vi-
xerit?  Ipse  negat,  ut  ante  dixi,  luxuriosorum  vitam
reprendendam  nisi  plane  fatui  sint,  id  est  nisi  aut
cupiant  aut  metuant.  Quarum  ambarura  rerum  cum
medicinam  pollicetur,  luxuriae  licentiam  pollicetur.
His  enim  rebus  detractis  negat  se  reperire  in  asoto-

1  rum  vita  quud  reprendat.  Non  igitur  potestis  volu-
ptate omnia  dirigentes  aut  tueri  aut  retinere  virtutem.
Nam  nee  vir  bonus  ac  iustus  baberi  debet  qui  ne

■Inf.  MSS.  liave  Poslumius  cur  Chius.  Mdv.  maiks
a  comiplion,  suspecting'  that  three  persons  were  enu-
merated before  cur  omniiini  horum:  perhaps  err  Hirrius
(an  epicure  mentioned  by  Varro  and  Pliny  the  Elderl,  cut

S^5oo9Tc

r  BOOK II.  xxi-xKii

tinue  to  defend  the  doctrines  you  profess.  You
will  be  put  to  the  blush,  I  say,  by  the  picture  that
Cleanthes  used  to  draw  so  cleverly  in  his  lectures.
He  would  tell  his  audience  to  imagine  a  paint-
ing representing  Pleasure,  decked  as  a  queen,  and
gorgeously  apparelled,  seated  on  a  throne  ;  at  hen
side  should  stand  the  Virtues  as  her  handmaids,
who  should  make  it  their  sole  object  and  duty  to
minister  to  Pleasure,  merely  whispering  in  her  ear
the  warning  (provided  this  could  be  conveyed  by  the
painter's  art)  to  beware  of  unwittingly  doing  aught
to  offend  public  opinion,  or  anything  from  which  pain
might  result.  As  for  us  Virtues,  we  were  bom  to
be  your  slaves ;  that  is  our  one  and  only  business.'

) XXI  I. But,  you  will  tell  me,  your  great  luminary  in  i
Epicurus  denies  that nnyone  who does not live  o^JJ'for'i
morally  can  live  pleasantly. As  if  I  cared  what  "P
Epicurus  says  or  denies  ! What  I  ask  is,  what  is  it
consistent  for  a  man  to  say  who  places  the  Chief
Good  in  pleasure? What  reason  can  you  give  for
thinking  that  Thorius,  or  Postumius  of  Chios,  or  the
master  of  them  all,  Grata,  did  not  live  extremely
pleasant  lives  ? Epicurus  himself  says  that  the  life
of  sensualists  is  blameless,  if  they  are  not  uttet

_,fools — for  that  is  what  his  proviso, if  they  are  free
o  fear  and  from  desire,'  amounts  to. And,  as  he
1  antidote  for  both  desire  and  fear,  he  vir-
al ly  offers  free  indulgence  for  sen  sua!  itj'.  Eliminate
'those  passions,  he  says,  and  he  cannot  find  anything
7 1 to  blame  in  a  life  of  profligacy. Consequently  you
Epicureans,  by  taking  pleasure  as  the  sole  guide,
make  it  impossible  for  yourselves  either  to  uphold

Sto  retain  virtue.  For  a  man  is  not  to  be  thought
id  and  just  «ho  refrains  from  doing  wrong  to

^Kiallyc

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
malum  habeat  absttnet  se  ab  iniuria ;  nosti,  credo,
illud:

Nemo  pius  est  qui  pietatem — ;
cave  putes  quidquam  esse  verius.  Nec  enim  dum
jnetuit  iustus  est,  et  certe  si  metiiere  destiterit  non
erit ;  non  metuet  autem  sive  celare  poterit  sive
opibus  magnis  guidquid  fecerit  obtinere,  certeque
malet  existimari  vir  bonus  ut  non  sit,  quam  esse  ut
non  putetur.  Ita,  quod  certissimum  est,'  pro  vera
certaque  iustitia  simulationeni  nobis  iustitiae  traditis
praecipitisque  quodam  modo  ut  nostram  stabilem
conscientiam  contemnamus,  aliorum  errantem  opi-
a  nionem  aucupemur.  Quae  dici  eadem  de  ceteris
virtutibus  possunt,  quarum  omnia  fundaments  vos  in
voluptate  tamquam  in  aqua  ponitis.  Quid  enim  ?
fortemne  possumus  dicere  eiindem  ilium  Torqua-
tum  ?  —  delector  enim,  quamquam  te  non  possum,
ut  ais,  corrumpere,  delector,  inquam,  et  familia  vestra
et  nomine ;  et  hercule  mihi  vir  optimus  nostrique
amantissimus,  A.  Torquatus,  versatur  ante  oculos,
cuius  quantum  studium  et  quam  insigne  fuerit  erga
me  temporibus  illis  quae  nota  sunt  omnibus,  scire
necesse  est  utrumque  vestrum ;  quae  mihi  ipsi,  qui
volo  et  esse  et  haberi  gratus,  grata  non  essent  nisi
eum  perspicerem  mea  causa  mihi  amieum  fuisse,  non
sua ;  nisi  hoc  dicis,  sua,  quod  interest  omnium  recte
facere. Si  id  dicis,  vicimus ;  id  enim  volumus,  id

/  Mdv.  s

inept  i,

''Cp.  §  62  above.
160

I doubt you know the

None  is  good,  whose  love  of  goodness  — ;'

believe  me,  nothing  cau  be  truer.  As  long  as  his
motive  is  fear,  he  is  not  just,  and  assuredly  «s  soon
as  he  ceases  to  fear,  he  will  not  be  just ;  and  he  will
not  feel  fear,  if  he  can  conceal  his  wrong-doing,  or  is
sufficiently  powerful  to  brazen  it  out;  and  lie  will
assuredly  prefer  the  reputation  without  the  reality
of  goodness  to  the  reality  without  the  reputation.  So
your  school  undoubtedly  preaches  the  pretence  of
justice  instead  of  the  real  and  genuine  thing.  Its
lesson  amounts  to  this- — we  are  to  despise  the  trust-
worthy voice  of  our  own  conscience,  and  to  run  after
73  the  fallible  imaginations  of  other  men.  The  same
applies  in  the  case  of  the  other  virtues.  Basing  them
entirely  on  pleasure  yon  are  laying  their  foundations
in  water.  Why,  take  the  great  Torquatus  again  :
can  he  really  be  called  brave  ? — for  I  delight,  albeit
my  flattery,  as  you  put  it,  is  powerless  to  bribe
you,  I  delight,  I  say,  in  your  name  and  lineage ;  and
indeed  I  have  personal  recollections  of  that  distin-
guished man,  Aulus  Torquatus,  who  was  an  affec-
tionate friend  of  my  own,  and  whose  signal  loyalty
and  devotion  to  me  in  circumstances  that  are  within
universal  knowledge''  must  be  familiar  to  you  both  ;
yet  for  my  part,  anxious  as  I  am  to  feel  and  show  a
proper  gratitude,  I  would  not  have  thanked  him  for
his  friendship  had  I  not  known  that  it  was  dis-
interested; unless  you  choose  to  say  that  it  was  for
his  own  interest  in  the  sense  that  it  is  to  every
man's  interest  to  act  rightly.  If  you  do  say  so,  we
have  won  our  case ;  tor  our  one  principle,  our  one
H  i6l

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
7S  contendimus,  ut  offici  fructus  sit  ipeuni  officinm.  Hoc
ille  tuus  lion  vult,  omnibusque  ex  rebus  voluptatem
quasi  mercedem  esigit.  Sed  ad  ilium  redeo ;  si  vo-
laptatis  causa  cum  Gallo  apud  Anienem  depiignavit
provocatus  et  ex  eius  spoliia  sibi  et  torquem  et  co-
gnomen iuduit  uHam  aliaiu  ob  causam  nisi  quod  ei
talia  facta  digna  viro  videbaiitur,  fortem  noii  puto.
lam  si  pudur,  si  modestia,  si  pudicitia,  si  unn  verbo
teroperantia  poenae  aut  infamiae  metu  coercebuntur,
non  sanctitate  sua  se  tuebuntur,  quod  adulterium,
quod  stupriun,  quae  libido  aon  se  proripiet  ac  proiciet
aut  occultatione  proposita  aut  impuiiitate  aut  li-
rentia  ?
74>  Quid?  illud, Torquate,  quale  tandem  videtur, — te

isto  nomine  ingenio  gloria,  quae  facis,  quae  cogitas,
quae  contendis  qiio  referas,  cuius  rei  causa  perficere
quae  coiiaris  velis,  quid  optimum  denique  in  vita
iudices,  non  audere  in  conventu  dicere  ?  Quid  enim
mereri  velis,  iam  cum  magistratum  inieris  et  in  coii-
tionem  ascenderis  (est  eiiini  tibi  edicendum  quae  sis
observaturus  in  iure  dicendo,  et  fortasse  etiam,  si  tibi
erit  visum,  aliquid  de  maioribus  ttds  et  de  te  ipso  dices
more  maiorum), — quid  merearis  igitur  ut  dicas  te  in
eo  magistratu  omnia  voluptatis  causa  facturum  esse
teque  nihil  fecisse  in  vita  nisi  voluptatis  causa  ?--
1 63

^  BOOK [1.  xxii

73  contention  is,  that  duty  is  its  own  reward.  This
your  great  master  does  not  allow ;  he  expects
everything  to  pay — to  yield  its  quota  of  plensure.
But  1  return  to  old  Torquatus.  If  it  was  to  win
pleasure  that  he  accepted  the  Gallic  warriors  chal-
lenge to  single  combat  on  the  banks  of  the  Anio,
and  if  he  despoiled  him  and  assumed  his  necklet
and  the  corresponding  surname  for  any  other
than  that  he  thought  such  deeds  became  a  man,  I
do  not  consider  him  brave.  Again,  if  modesty,  self-
control,  chastity,  if  in  a  word  Temperance  is  to
depend  for  its  sanction  on  the  fear  of  punishment  or
of  disgrace,  and  not  to  maintain  itself  by  its
intrinsic  sacredness,  what  form  of  adultery,  vice  or
lust  will  not  break  loose  and  run  riot  when  it  is
assured  of  concealment,  impunity  or  indulgence.

^4  Or  what,  pray,  are  we  to  think  of  the  situation  if

you,  Torquatus,  bearing  the  name  you  do,  and  gifted
and  distinguished  as  you  are,  dare  not  profess  before  a
public  audience  the  real  object  of  all  your  actions,
aims  and  endeavours,  the  motive  that  inspires  you
to  accomplish  your  undertakings,  what  it  is  in  short
that  you  consider  the  greatest  good  in  life?  In  re-
turn for  what  payment  or  consideration,  when  not
long  hence  you  have  attained  to  public  office  and
come  forward  to  address  a  meeting  (for  you  will  have
to  announce  the  rules  that  you  propose  to  observe  in
admmistering  justice,  and  very  likely  also,  if  you
think  good,  you  will  follow  the  time-honoured  custom
of  making  some  reference  to  your  ancestors  and  to
yourself), — forwhat  consideration  then  would  you  con-
sent to  declare  that  you  intend  in  office  to  guide  your
conduct  solely  by  pleasure,  and  that  pleasure  has
been  your  aim  in  every  action  of  your  life  ? —  Do  yon

?X

U2

16:

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

All  me,'  inquis,  '  tsm  amentem  putas  ut  apud
iinperitos  isto  modo  loquar  ? ' — At  tu  eadem  isto  die
in  iudicio  aut,  si  coronam  times,  die  in  senatu.  Num-
qiiam  facies.  Cur,  nisi  quod  turpis  oratio  est  ?  Mene
ergo  et  Triariuiii  digiioM  existitnas  apud  quos  turpiter
loquare?

75  XXIII.  Verum  esto :  verbum  ipsum  voluptatis
non  habet  dignitatem,  iiec  nos  fortasse  intellegi-
mus ;  hoc  enim  identidem  dicitis,  non  intelleif ere  nos
quam  dicatis  voluptatem.  Rem  videlicet  difficilem
et  obscurant !  Individua  cum  dicitis  et  intermundia,
quae  nee  sunt  ulla  nee  possunt  esse,  intellegimus ;
voluptas,  quae  passeribus  nota  est  omnibus,  a  nobis
intelli'gi  non  potest  ?  Quid  si  efficio  ut  fateare  me
non  modo  quid  sit  voluptas  scire  (est  enim  iucundus
motus  in  sensu),  sed  etiam  quid  earn  tu  velis  esse  ?
Turn  enim  earn  ipsam  vis  quam  modo  ego  dixi,  et
nomen  imponis  in  motu  ut  sit  et  faciat  atiquam  varie-
tatem,  tum  aliam  quandam  summam  votuptatem  cui
addj  nihil  possit ;  earn  tum  adesse  eum  dolor  omnis

76  absit ;  eam  stabilem  appellns.  Sit  sane  ista  voluptas.
Die  in  quovis  conventu  te  onniia  facere  ne  doleas.
Si  ne  hoc  quidem  satis  ample,  satis  honeste  dici
putas,  die  te  omnia  et  in  isto  magistratu  et  in  omni
vita  utilitatis  tuae  eausa  facturum,  nihil  nisi  quod

164.

!^oogfe

BOOK  H.  xxii-xxiii
take  me  for  such  an  imbecile,'  you  exclaim,  as  to  talk
in  that  fashion  before  ignorant  people?" — Well,  make
the  same  profession  in  a  law-court,  or  if  you  are  afraid
of  the  public  there,  say  it  in  the  senate.  You  will
never  do  it.  Why  not,  unless  because  such  language
is  disgraceful  ?  Then  whatacomplinienttoTorquatus
and  myself,  to  one  it  in  our  presence!

XXIll.  'But  let  us  grant  your  position.  The  actual
word  pleasure'  has  a»  undignified  sound;  and  per-
haps we  do  not  understand  its  significance :  you  are
always  repeating  that  we  do  not  understand  what
you  mean  by  pleasure.  As  though  it  were  a  difficult
or  recondite  notion !  We  understand  you  when  you
talk  of  indivbible  atoms'  and  cosmic  interspaces,'
things  tlmt  don't  exist  and  never  can  exist;  then  is
our  intelligence  incapable  of  grasping  the  meaning
of  pleasure,  a  feeling  known  to  every  sparrow?  What
if  I  force  you  to  admit  that  I  do  know  not  only  what
pleasure  really  is  {it  is  an  agreeable  activity  of  the
sense),  but  also  what  you  mean  by  it  ?  For  at  one
moment  you  mean  by  it  the  feeling  that  I  have  just
defined,  and  this  you  entitle  '  kinetic '  pleasure,  as
producing  a  definite  change  of  feeling,  but  at  another
moment  you  say  it  is  quite  a  different  feeling,  which
is  the  acme  and  climax  of  pleasure,  but  yet  consists
merely  in  the  complete  absence  of  pain ;  this  you
76  call  static  '  pleasure.  Well,  grant  that  pleasure  is
the  latter  sort  of  feeling.  Profess  in  any  public
assembly  that  the  motive  of  all  your  actions  is  the
desire  to  avoid  pain.  If  you  feel  that  this  too  does
not  sound  sufficiently  dignified  and  respectable,  say
^_thst  you  intend  both  in  your  present  office  and  all
^nottr  hfe  long  to  act  solely  for  the  sake  of  your  own
^^Edvantage,— to  do  nothing  but  what  will  pay,  nothing
^E  165

mi

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
expediat,  nihil  deiiique  nisi  tua  causa  ;  queni  cla-
morem  contionis  aut  quam  spem  consulatus  eias  qui
tibi  paratissimus  est  futiiram  putas  ?  Eamne  rationem
igitur  sequere'  qua  tecum  ipse  et  ciim  tuis  utare,  pro-
fiteri  et  in  medium  proferre  noii  audeas?  At  vero
ilia  quae  Peripatetic!,  quae  Stoici  dicunt,  semper  tibi
in  ore  sunt  in  iudiciis,  in  senatu.  OfKcium,  aequl-
tatem,  dignitatem,  fideni,  recta,  honesta,  digna  im-
perio,  digna  populo  Romano,  omnia  pericula  pro  re
publica,  niori  pro  patria,— haec  cum  loqueris,  nos
harones  stupemus,  tu  videlicet  tecum  ipse  rides.
■  Nam  inter  ista  tam  magnifica  verba  tanique  praeclara
non  habet  ullum  voluptas  locum,  non  modo  ilia  quam
in  motu  esse  dicitis,  quam  omnes  urbani,  rustici,
omnes,  inquam,  qui  I^atine  loquuntur,  voluptatem
vocant,  sed  ne  baec  quidem  stabilis,  quam  praeter
vos  nemo  appellat  voluptatem.  XXIV.  Vide  igitur
ne  nan  debeas  verbis  nostris  uti,  sententiis  tuis.  Quod
si  vultum  tibi,  si  incessum  fingeres  quo  gravior  vide-
rere,  non  esses  tui  similis  ;  verba  tu  fingas,  et  ea  dicas
quae  non  sentias  ?  aut  etiam,  ut  vestitum,  sic  sen-
tentiam  habeas  aliam  domesticam,  aliam  forensem,
ut  in  fronte  ostentatio  sit,  intus  Veritas  occultetur  f
Vide,  quaeso,  rectumne  sit.  Mihi  quidem  eae  verae
videntur  opiniones  quae  honestae,  quae  laudabiles,
quae  gloriosae,  quae  in  senatu,  quae  apud  populum,
^seguere  A;  most  MSS.  seguare.
166

^B  BOOK  II.  xxiu-xxiv

in  short  that  is  not  for  your  own  interest ;  imagine
the  uproar  among  the  audience  I  What  wonld  be-
come of  your  chances  of  the  consulship,  wliich  as  it
is  seems  to  be  a  certainty  for  you  in  the  near  future  ?
Will  you  then  adopt  a  rule  of  life  which  you  can  ap-
peal to  in  private  and  among  friends  but  which  you
dare  not  openly  profess  or  parade  in  pubhc  ?  Ah,
but  it  is  the  vocabulary  of  the  Peripatetics  and  the
Stoics  that  is  always  on  your  lips,  in  the  law-courts
an"3  the  senate.  Duty,  Fair-dealing,  Moral  Worth,
FideUty,  Uprightness,  Honour,  the  Dignity  of  office,
the  Dignity  of  the  Roman  People,  Risk  all  for  the
state.  Die  for  your  Country, — -when  you  talk  in
this  style,  we  simpletons  stand  gaping  in  admiration,
77  — and  you  no  doubt  laugh  in  your  sleeve.  For  in  that
glorious  array  of  high-sounding  woi'ds,  pleasure  finds
no  place,  not  only  what  your  school  calls  kinetic  '
pleasure,  wliich  is  what  every  one,  polished  or  rustic,
every  one,  I  say,  who  can  speak  Latin,  means  by
pleasure,  but  not  even  this  static'  pleasure,  which
no  one  but  you  Epicureans  would  call  pleasure  at  all.
XXIV,  Well  then,  are  you  sure  you  have  any  right
to  employ  our  words  with  meanings  of  your  own  ?  If
you  assumed  an  unnatural  expression  or  demeanour,
~  a  order  to  look  more  important,  that  would  be  insin-
Are  you  then  to  affect  an  artificial  language,
lod  say  what  you  do  not  tliiuk  ?  Or  are  you  to
jbange  your  opinions  like  your  clothes,  and  have  one
set  for  indoor  wear  and  another  wlien  you  walk
abroad  ?  Outside,  all  show  and  pretence,  but  your
genuine  self  concealed  within  ?  Reflect,  1  beg  of
L,  is  this  honest  ?  In  my  view  those  opinions  are
;  which  are  honourable,  praiseworthy  and  noble
s-^'which  can  be  openly  avowed  in  the  senate  and
167

^Eere.
^Bebani

maximis  etiamsi  ad  s
dest,  inquit,  inihi  eo

esse  poteris  i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quae  in  omni  coelu  concilioque  profitendae  sint,  ne
id  non  pudeat  sentire  quod  pudeat  dicere.
t  'Amicitiae  vero  locus  iibi  esse  potest  aul  quis
amicus  esse  cuiquam  quem  non  ipsum  amet  propter
ipsum?  Quid  autem  est  amare,  e  quo  nomen  du-
ctum  amicitiae  est,  nisi  velle  bonis  aliquem  affici  quam
s  ex  iis  nihil  redundet""  ?  Pro-
esse  animo.  Immo  videri  for-
isi  eriSj  non  potes^;  qui  autem
amor  ipse  ceperit  f  quod  non
subdiicta  utilitatis  ratione  effici  solet,  sed  ipsum  a  se
oritur  et  sua  sponte  nascitur.  i\tf  f-""^^  Sfiqi""'
utilitatem.'  Manebit  erj^o  amicitia  tarn  diu  quam
diu  sequetur  utilitas,  et,  si  utilitas  constituet  amici-
79  tiam,  toilet  eadem.  Sed  quid  ages  tandem  si'utilitas
ab  amicitia,  ut  fit  saepe,  defecerit  ?  Relinquesne  ?
quae  ista  amicitia  est  ?  Retinebis  ?  qui  convenit  ?
quid  enim  de  amicitia  statueris  utilitatis  causa  expe-
tenda  vides.  Ne  in  odium  veniam  si  amicum  de-
stitero  tueri.'  Primum  cur  ista  res  digna  odio  est
nisi  quod  est  turpis  ?  Quod  si  ne  quo  Incommodo
afficiare  non  relinques  amicum,  tamen,  ne  sine  fructu
alligatus  sis,  ut  raoriatur  optabis.  Quid  si  non
modo  utibtatem  tibi  riullam afFeret,  sed iacturae

'  redundet  Mdv, ;  MSS.  redeunt  ft,  redeat  it,  redeat  quid.

'  For  the  auspicious  words  esse  enim,  nisi  eris,  mm  pofes,
which  malcE  the  following-  sentence  tautological,  Graser
conjectures  esse  enim,  nisi  videris,  non  predesl.  "  '  It  pays
tan  (you  say)  to  be  a  disinterested  friend.'  No,  to  seem  so
perhaps  ;  it  doesn't  pay  to  be  so  without  seeming  so.  Bui
how  can  you  be  so  unless,  etc.  ..."
1 68

M

BOOK  11.

mblj-.

the  popular  assembly,  and  in  every  company
gatliering,  so  that  one  need  not  be  ashamed
whaC  oiie  is  not  ashamed  to  think.

78  "Again,  how  will  friendship  be  possible?  How  P'
can  one  man  be  another  man's  friend,  if  he  does  not  oi
love  him  in  and  for  himself?  What  is  the  meaning
of  to  love  '—from  M-hich  our  word  for  friendship  is
derived — «xcept  to  wish  some  one  to  receive  the
greatest  possible  benefits  even  though  one  gleans
no  advantage  therefrom  oneself?  It  pays  me,'  you
say,  to  be  a  disinterested  friend.'  No,  perhaps  it
pays  you  to  seem  so.  Be  so  you  cannot,  unless  you
really  are ;  but  how  can  you  be  a  disinterested  friend
unless  you  feel  genuine  aifection  ?  Yet  affection
does  not  commonly  result  from  any  calculation  of
expediency.  It  is  a  spontaneous  growth  ;  it  springs
up  of  itself.  '  But,'  you  will  say,  '  1  am  guided  by
expediency.'  Then  your  friendship  will  last  just  so
long  as  it  is  attended  by  expediency. If  expediency

79  creates  the  feeling  it  will  also  destroy  it  But  what,
pray,  will  you  do,  if,  as  often  happens,  expediency
parts  company  with  friendship  ?  Will  you  throw
your  friend  over  ?  What  sort  of  irtendship  is  thai  ?
Will  you  keep  him?  How  does  that  square  with
your  principles  ?  You  remember  your  pronounce-
ment that  friendship  is  desirable  for  the  sake  of
expediency.  1  might  become  unpopular  if  I  left
a  friend  in  the  lurch.'  Well,  in  the  first  place,  why
is  such  conduct  unpopular,  unless  because  it  is  base  ?
And  if  you  refrain  from  deserting  a  friend  because
to  do  so  will  have  inconvenient  consequences,  still
you  will  long  for  his  death  to  release  you  from  an
unprofitable  tie.  What  if  he  not  only  brings  you
no  advantage,  but  causes  you  to  suffer  loss  of  pro-

ly  and  V

to  say  ^H

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

rei  fainiliaris  erimt  faciundiit!,  labores  suscipieiidi,
adeundum  vitae  periciilum  ?  ne  turn  quidem  te  re-
spicies  et  coffitabis  sibi  quemqiie  natum  esse  et  suis
voluptatibus  ?  Vadem  te  ad^  mortem  tyranno  d.ibis
pro  amico,  ut  Pytliagoreus  ille  Siculo  fecit  tyranno,
au'  Pylades  cum  sis,  dices  te  esse  Oresten  ut  mo-
riare  pro  amico,  aut  si  esses  Orestes,  Pyladem  refel-
leres,  te  indicares,  et  si  id  non  probares,  quo  minus
ambo  una  necaremini  non  deprecarere'  ?

80  XXV.  '  Faceres  tu  quidem,  Torquate,  haec  omnia ;
nihil  enim  arbitror  magna  laude  dif^num  esse  quod
te  praeterraissurum  credam  aut  mortis  aut  doloris
metu.  Non  quaeritiir  autem  quid  naturae  tuae  con-
sentaneura  sit,  sed  quid  disciplinae.  Ratio  ista  quam
defendis,  praecepta  quae  didicisti,  quae  probas,  fun-
ditus  evertunt  amicitiam,  quamvis  eam  Epicurus,  ut
facit,  in  caelum  efferat  laudJbus.  At  coluit  ipse
amicitias.'  Quis,  quaeso,  ilium  negat  et  bonum
viruni  et  comem  et  humanum  fuisse  ?  De  ingenio
eius  in  Ilis  disputationibus,  non  de  moribus  quaeritur.
Sit  ista  in  (Jraecorum  levitate  perversitas,  qui  male-
dictis  insectantur  eos  a  quibus  de  veritate  dissenti-
unt.  Sed  quamvis  comis  in  aniicis  tuendis  fuerit,
tamen,  si haec  vera  sunt  (nihil  enim  affirmo),  non

81  satis  acutus  fuit.  At  multis  se  probavit.'  Et  qui-
dem ture  fortasse  ;  sed  tamen  non  gravissimum  est
testimonium  multitudinis. In  omni  enim  arte  vel

•  deprecarere  edd.;  precarere  Mdv.  with  the  MSS.

'Phintias,  pleadingforhiBfriendDaiiniiibeforeDionysiiis,
'  tyrant '  of  Syracuse;  Diorysius  pardoned  them  both  and
begged  to  become  a  third  In  such  ^friendship.  Cf.  Off.  3.  45.

bCf.  V.  63.  Cicero  refers  to  a  scene  in  the  Dulorestes  of
Pacuvius,  where  Thoas  King  of  the  Taiiri  wislied  to  kiK
whichever  of  the  two  caplives  brought  before  him  was
Orcsles.

170

!C^^^e

^  BOOK  11.  xKiv^xiiV

perty,  to  underg-o  toil  and  trouble,  to  risk  j-our  life .'
Will  you  not  even  then  take  interest  into  account,  and
reflect  that  eacli  man  is  born  for  himself  and  for  his
gwn  pleasure  r  Will  jou  go  bail  with  your  life  to  a.
tyrant  on  behalf  of  a  friend,  as  tjie  famous  Pytha-
^rean'  did  to  the  Sicilian  despot?  or  being  Pylades''
will  you  say  you  are  Orestes,  so  as  to  die  in  your
friend's  stead  ?  or  supposing  you  were  Orestes^
would  you  say  Pylades  was  lying  and  reveal  your
identity,  and  if  they  would  not  believe  you,  would
you  entreat  that  you  both  might  die  together  ?
80  XXV.  "  Yes,Torquatus,  you  personally  would  do  all  Ep;
these  things ;  for  I  do  not  believe  there  is  any  high  or
noble  action  which  fear  of  pain  or  death  could  induce
you  to  forgo.  But  the  question  is  not  what  conduct  is
consistent  with  your  character,  but  what  is
tent  with  your  tenets.  The  system  you  uphold,
the  principles  you  have  studied  and  accept,  under-
mine the  very  foundations  of  friendship,  however
much  Epicurus  may,  as  he  does,  praise  iriendship  up
to  the  skies.  But,"  you  tell  me,  Epicurus  himself
had  many  friends.'  Who  pray  denies  that  Epicurus  was
a  good  man,  and  a  kind  and  humane  man  ?  In  these
discussions  it  is  his  intellect  and  not  his  character
that  is  in  question.  Let  us  leave  to  the  frivolous
Greeks  the  wrong-headed  habit  of  attackingand  abus-
ing the  persons  whose  views  of  truth  they  do  not
share.  Epicurus  may  have  been  a  kind  and  faithful
friend ;  but  if  what  I  say  is  true  (for  1  do  not  dog-
Si  matize),  he  was  not  a  very  acute  thinker.  But  he
■won  many  disciples.'  Yes,  and  perhaps  he  deserved
to  do  so ;  but  still  the  witness  of  the  crowd  does  not
carry  much  weight;  for  as  in  every  art  or  study  or
science of  any kind, so  in  right  conduct itself,

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

studio  vel  quavis  scientia,  vel  in  ipsa  virtute,  optimum
quidque  rarissimum  est.  Ac  milii  quideni,  quod  et
ipse  bonus  vir  fuit  et  multi  Epicurei  et  fuerunt  et
hodie  sunt  et  in  amicitiis  fideles  et  in  omni  vita  con-
stantes  et  graves  nee  voluptate  sed  officio  consilia
moderantes,  hoc  videtur  maior  vis  lionestatis  et
minor  voluptatis.  Ita  enim  vivunt  quidam  ut  eorum
vita  refellatur  oratio.  Atque  iit  eeteri  dicere  existi-
iDantur  melius  quamfaeere.sie  himihividentur  facere
melius  quam  dicere.

82  XXVI.  "  Sed  haec  nihil  sane  ad  rem ;  ilia  videamus
quae  a  te  de  amieitia  dicta  sunt.  E  quibus  unum
mihi  videbar  ab  ipso  Epicuro  dictum  cognoscere,
amicitiam  a  voluptate  iion  posse  divelli  ob  eamque
rem  colendam  esse  quod,  cum^  sine  ea  tuto  et  sine
metu  vivi  non  posset,  ne  iucunde  quidem  posset.
Satis  est  ad  hoc  responsum.  Attuhsti  aliud  humanius
horum  recentiorum,  iiumquam  dictum  ab  ipso  illo,
quod  sciam,  primo  ittilitatis  causa  amicum  expeti,
cum  autem  usus  accessisset,  tum  ipsum  amarj  per  se,
etiam  omissa  spe  voluptatis.  'Hoc  etsi  multis  modJE
repreiidi  potest,  tanien  accipio  quod  dant ;  mihi  enim
satis  est,  ipsis  nan  satis.  Nam  ahquando  posse  recte
fieri  dicunt,  nulla  exspectata  nee  quaesita  voluptate,

83  Fosuisti  etiain  dicere  alios  foedus  quoddam  inter  ae

led  by  Mdv.

1

BOOK  II.  xxv-sxvi
supreme  excellence  is  extremely  rare.  And  to  my
mind  the  fact  that  Epicurus  himselfwas  a  good  n
and  that  many  Epicureans  both  have  been  and  to-
day are  loyal  to  their  friends,  consistent  and  high-
principled  throughout  their  lives,  ruling  their  con-
duct by  duty  and  not  by  pleasure, — all  this  does  but
enforce  the  value  of  moral  goodness  and  diminish
that  of  pleasure.  The  fact  is  that  some  persons'
lives  and  behaviour  refute  the  principles  they  pro-
fess. Most  men's  words  are  thought  to  be  better
than  their  deeds  ;  these  people's  deeds  on  the  con-
trary seem  to  nie  better  than  their  words.

82  XXVI.  "But  this  I  admit  is  a  digression.  Let  us  Th
return  to  what  you  said  about  iriendship.  In  one  of  of
your  remarks  J  seemed  to  recognize  a  saying  of  Epi-  '"
curus  himself, — that  friendship  caimot  be  divorced
from  pleasure,  and  that  it  deserves  to  be  cultivated
for  tile  reason  that  without  it  we  cannot  live  secure
and  free  from  alarm,  and  therefore  cannot  live  agree-
ably. Enough  has  been  said  in  answer  to  this  already.
You  quoted  another  and  a  more  humane  dictum
of  the  more  modern  Epicureans,  which  so  far  as  I
know  was  never  uttered  by  the  master  himself.  This
was  to  the  effect  that,  although  at  the  outset  we
desire  a  man's  friendship  for  utilitarian  reasons,  yet
when  intimacy  has  grown  up  we  love  our  friend  for
his  own  sake,  even  if  all  prospect  of  pleasure  be  left
out  of  sight.  It  is  possible  to  take  exception  to  this
position  on  several  grounds;  still  I  welcome  their
concession,  as  it  is  sufficient  for  my  case  and  not
sufficient  for  theirs.  For  it  amounts  to  saying
that  moraL action,  js  occasionally  possible, — action
prompted  hy  no  anticipation  or  desire  of  pleasure.

83  You  further  alleged  that  other  thinkers  speak  of

173

id  et  fieri

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
facere  sapientes  ut,  quemudnioduni  sint  i)
animati,  eodem  modo  sint  erga  3
posse  et  saepe  esse  factum  et  ad  voluptates  percipi-
endas  maxime  pertinere.  Hoc  foedus  facere  si
potuerunt,  faciant  etiiitn  illud,  ut  aequitatem,  mode-
stiam,  virtutes  omnes  per  se  ipsas  gratis  diligant.  An
vero  si  fructibus  et  emolumentls  et  utilitatibus
amicitias  colemus,  si  nulla  caritas  erit  quae  faciat
amicitiam  ipsam  sua  sponte,  vi  sua,  ex  se  et  propter
se  expetendam,  dubium  est  quin  fundos  et  insulas
amicis  anteponamus  ?  Licet  hie  rursus  ea  comme-
mores  quae  optimis  verbis  ab  Epicure  de  laude  ami-
citiae  dicta  sunt.  Non  quaero  quid  dicat,  sed  quid
convenienter  possit  rationi  et  sententiae  suae  dicere.
Utilitatis  causa  amicitia  est  quaesita,'  Num  igitur
utiliorem  tibi  hunc  Triarium  putas  esse  posse  quam
si  tua  sint  Puteolis  granaria  ?  Collige  amnia  quae
soletis :  Praesidiuni  amicorum."  Satis  est  tibi  in
te,  satis  in  legibus,  satis  in  mediocribiis  amicitiis
praesidi ;  iam  contemni  non  poteris ;  odium  autem
et  invidiam  facile  vitabis :  ad  eas  enim  res  ab  Epi-
cure praecepta  dantur.  Et  tamen  tantis  vectigaljbuB
hac  Pjladea  amici-

ad  liberalitatem  utens,  etii
tia  multorum  te  bene  volenti
)  munies.  At  quicum  iocn  se
arcana,  quicum  occulta  om
deinde  etiitm  cum  mediocri  a
174

praeelare  tuebere  et
a,  ut  dicitur,  quicum
ia  ?  Tecum  optime,
lico. Sed  fac  ista  esse

^P  BOOK  II.  xxvi

wise  men  as  making  a  sort  of  mutual  compact
to  entertain  the  same  sentiments  towards  their
friends  as  they  feel  towards  themselves ;  this  {you
said)  was  possible,  and  in  fact  had  often  occurred  ;
and  it  was  highly  conducive  to  the  attainment  of
pleasure.  If  men  have  succeeded  in  making  this
compact,  let  them  make  a  further  compact  to  love
&ir-dealing,  self-control,  and  all  the  virtues,  for  their
own  sakes  and  without  reward. If  on  the  other

I  hand  we  are  to  cultivate  friendships  for  their  results,
for  profit  and  utility ;  if  there  is  to  be  no  affection  to
render  friendship  in  and  for  itself,  intrinsically  and
spontaneously,  desirable ;  can  we  doubt  that  we  shall
value  land  and  house- property  more  than  fiiends  ?

8l  It  is  no  good  your  once  again  repeating  Epicurus's
admirable  remarks  in  praise  of  friendship.  I  am  not
asking  what  Epicurus  actually  says,  but  what  he  can
say  consistently  while  holding  the  theory  lie  pro-
fesses. Friendship  is  originally  sought  after  from
motives  of  utility.'  Well,  but  surely  you  don't  reckon
Triarius  here  a  more  valuable  asset  than  the  granaries
at  Puteoli  would  be  if  they  belonged  to  ynu  ?  Cite
all  the  stock  Epicurean  maxims.  Friends  are  a  pro-
tection.' You  can  protect  yourself;  the  laws  will
protect  you ;  ordinary  friendships  offer  protection
enough ;  soon  you  will  be  too  powerful  to  be  des-
pised ;  moreover  you  will  easily  avoid  hatred  and
envy, — Epicurus  gives  rules  lor  doing  so  1  And  even
otherwise,  with  so  large  an  income  to  give  away,  you
can  dispense  with  the  romantic  sort  of  friendship
that  we  have  in  mind;  you  will  have  plenty  of  well-

15  wishers  to  defend  you  quite  effectively. But  a  con-
fidant, to  share  your grave  thoughts  or  gay  '  as  the
saying  is,  all  your  secrets  and  private  affairs? Your
175

M

CICERO  DE  FINIBL'S  ^^

nnn  importunn  ;  quid  ad  utilitatem  tantae  pecuniae?
Vldes  if^itur,  ni  amicitiam  sua  caritate  metiare,  nihil
omf.  prnestaiitius,  sin  emolumento,  summns  faiiiiliari~

fmctuosorum mercede superari.
les  oportet,  non  mea,  si  veri  amici

totes praedioruni
Me  iffitur  ipsiini  ai

XXVIf.  "Sed
I  urn  II  a, Perfecto

1  rebus  apertissimis  nimium  longi
rnim  et  concluso  neque  virtutibus
ncqiic  nmicitiis  usquam  locum  esse  si  ad  voliiptatem
omnia  referantiir,  nihil  praeterea  est  magno  opere
dicendum.  Ac  tamen,  ne  cui  loco  non  videatur
esse  respoiisum,  pauca  etiain  nunc  dicani  ad  reli-
!i  qimni  orntionem  tiiam.  Quoniam  igitur  omnis  sum-
lua  jilillosophine  ad  beate  vivenduin  refertur,  idque
tiniim  cxpetentes  homines  se  ad  lioc  studium  contu-
tcnint,  hente  nuteni  vivere  alii  in  alio,  vos  in  vo-
luptAtc  ponitis,  item  contra  miseriasi  omnem  in
dolore,  id  prinium  videamus,  beate  vivere  vestnmi
quale  sit.  Atque  hoc  dabitis,  ut  opinor.  si  modo  sit
«liquid  esse  be«tuin.  id  oportere  totum  poni  in  pote-
statr  sapientis.  Nam  si  amitti  ritn  beatJi  potest,
iKvta  esse  non  potest.  Quis  enim  eonBdit  semper
sib»  ilhid  stjibile  et  firtnum  permansnniin  quod  fragile
et  eaducum  dt  ?  Qui  autem  diSdit  pcrpetoitati
hononRB  sttoruin.  timeat  necesf^e  est  ne  aliquando

ire

H^  BOOK II. xxvi-xsvii

best  confidant  is  yourself;  you  may  also  confide  in  a
friend  of  the  average  type.  But  granting  that
friendship  has  the  conveniences  you  mention,  what
are  they  compared  with  the  advantages  of  such  vast
wealth  ?  You  see  then  that  although  if  yoi
friendship  by  the  test  of  its  own  charm  il
passed  in  value,  by  the  standard  of  profit  the  most
affectionate  intimacy  is  outweighed  by  the  rents  of  a
valuable  estate.  So  you  must  love  me  myself,  not
my  possessions,  if  we  are  to  be  genuine  friends.

XXVII. But  we  dwell  too  long  upon  the  obvious.  Not  tni.
For  when  it  has  been  conclusively  pi^oved  that  if  JJjfi^J^
pleasure  is  the  sole  standard  there  is  no  room  lefl  h^ppy.  i
either  for  virtue  or  friendship,  there  is  no  great  need  Good;
to  say  anything  fiirther. Still  I  do  not  want  you  to
think  I  have  failed  to  answer  any  of  your  points,  so
1 will now  say  a  few  words  more  in  reply  to  the
86  remainder  of  your  discourse. The  end  and  aim  of
every  system  of  philosophy  is  tlie  attainment  of  hap-
piness; and  desire  for  happiness  is  the  sole  motive
that  has  led  men  to  engage  in  this  study. But
different  thinkers  make  happiness  consist  in  different
things. According to your school it  consists  in
pleasure,  and  conversely  misery  consists  solely  in
pain. Let  us  then  begin  by  examining  what  sort  of
thing  happiness  as  you  conceive  it  is. You  will  grant,
1  suppose,  that  if  there  is  such  a  thing  as  happiness,
it  is  bound  to  be  attainable  in  its  entirety  by  the
Wise  Man. For  if  happiness  once  won  can  be  lostj^
a happy  life is impossible. Since  who  can  feel
confident  of  permanently  and  securely  retaining  a
possession  that  is  perishable  and  precarious  ? yet
one  who  is  not  sore  of  the  permanence  of  his  Goods,
must  inevitably  fear  that  a  time  may  come  when  he
K  177

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

amissis  illis  Rit  miser.  Beattts  autem  esse  in  maxi-
'  maruni  rerum  timore  nemo  potest.  Nemo  igitiir
esse  beatus  potest,  Neque  enim  in  aliqua  parte  sed
in  perpetuitate  temporis  vita  beata  dici'  solet,  nee
appetUtur  omnino  vita  nisi  confecta  atque  absoluta,
nee  potest  quisquam  alias  beatus  esse,  alias  miser ;
qui  enina  existimabit  posse  se  miserum  esse,  beatus
non  erit.  Nam  cum  suscepta  semel  est  beata  vita,
tam  permanet  quam  ipsa  ilia  effectrix  beatae  vitac
sapientia,  neque  exspectat  ultimum  tempus  aetatis,
quod  Croeso  scribit  Herodotus  praeceptum  a  Soloiie.
At  enim,  quemadmodum  tute  dicebas,  negat  Epi-
curus ne  diuturnitatem  quidem  tfinporis  ad  beate
vivendum  aliquid  affeite,  nee  ininorem  voluptatem
percipi  in  brevitate  temporis  quam  si  ilia  sit  sempi-
t  tema.  Haec  dicnntur  inconstantissime.  Cum  enim
summum  bonum  in  voluptate  ponat,  negat  infinito
tempore  aetatis  voluptatem  fieri  maiorem  quam  finito
atque  modico.  Qui  bonum  omne  in  virlute  ponit,
is  potest  dicere  perfici  beatam  vitam  perfectione  vir-
tutis :  negat  enim  summo  bono  afFerre  incrementum
diem ;  qui  autem  voluptate  vitam  effici  beatam  pn-
tabit,  qui  sibi  is  conveniet  si  negabit  voluptatem
crescere  longinquitate  ?  Igitur  ne  dolorem  quidem.
An  dolor  longissimus  quisque  miserrimus,  volupta-
tem non  optabiliorem  diutumitas  facit .''  Quid  est
igitur  cur  ita  semper  dcum  Epicurus  beatum  appel-
let  et  aeternum  ?  Dempta  enim  aeteniitate  nihilo
beatior  luppiter  quam  Epicurus;  uterque  enim  sum-
M.W  MdY.:  rfuoMSS,

BOOE  U.  ]

m^  leec  th^  and  m  be  mtisetabk.  But  iKt
S7  cui  be  hapgj  «bo  feais  Bttrr  mai.  Tbovforr
one  cMi  be  b^vQ*  at  alL  For  we  naudly  $pe«k
a  lifi?  as  ■  happ^  arte  Dot  in  reference  to  a  part
of  it,  bat  to  the  whoJe  of  s  lit^time :  indeed  '  ■  lifr "
means  a  finished  and  omiplete  Life ;  nor  is  it  possible
to  be  at  one  time  happy  and  at  another  miserable,
since  he  who  thinks  tlwt  be  may  be  miserable,  will
not  be  happr.  For  when  happiness  has  onee  been
achieved,  it  is  as  pennanent  as  Wisdom  itself,  which
is  the  etScient  cause  of  happiness ;  it  docs  not  wait
for  the  end  of  our  mortal  term,  as  Croesus  in  Hcro-
dotus's  history  was  warned  by  Solon  to  do.

It  may  ite  rejoined  that  Epicurus,  as  you  your-  ^^,
self  were  saying,  denies  that  lon^  duration  can  *■>*«■
add  anything  to  happiness;  he  says  that  as  much  ""'
pleasure  is  enjoyed  in  a  brief  span  of  time  ns  if
i8  pleasure  were  everlasting.  In  saying  this  he  is
grossly  inconsistent,  j  He  places  the  Chief  Goi«l
in  pleasure,  and  yet  he  says  that  no  greater  pleasure
would  result  IVoni  a  lifetime  of  endless  duration  than
from  a  limited  and  moderate  period.  If  a  person
finds  the  sole  Good  in  Virtue,  it  is  open  to  him  to
say  that  the  happy  life  ia  consummated  by  the  con-
summation of  Virtue ;  for  his  position  is  that  the
Chief  Good  is  not  increased  by  lapse  of  time.  Hut
if  one  thinks  that  happiness  is  produced  by  plcasuro,
how  can  he  consistently  deny  that  pleasure  is  in-
creased by  duration  ?  If  it  is  not,  pain  is  not  cither.
Or  if  pain  is  worse  the  longer  it  lasts,  is  not  pleasure
rendered  more  desirable  by  continuance  ?  ICpicuru*
always  speaks  of  the  Deity  as  happy  and  everlasting ;
but  on  what  ground  ?  Tftke  away  his  evr^rlosting
life,  and  Jove  is  no  happier  than  Epicurus  ;  each  of

«a  179

CICRRO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

mo  bono  fruitur,  id  est  voluptate.  At  enim  hie
etinm dolore  1  ' At  eum  nihili  facit ;  ait  enim  se,

)  si  uratur, '  Quam  hoc  suave '. '  dicturum.  Qua  igitur
re  a  deo  vincitur  si  aetemitate  non  vincitur  ?  In
qua  quid  est  boni  praeter  summam  voluptatem  et
earn  sempitemam  ?  Quid  ergo  attliiet  gloriose  loqui
nisi  constanter  loquare  ?  In  voluptate  corporis
(addam,  si  vis,  animi,  dum  ea  ipsa,  ut  vultis,  sit  e
corpore)  situm  est  vivere  beate.  Quid  ?  istam  vo-
luptatem peipetuam  quis  potest  praestare  sapienti  ?
Nam  quibus  rebus  efficiuntur  voluptates,  eae  non
sunt  in  potestate  sapientis.  Non  enim  in  ipsa  sa-
pientia  positum  est  beatum  esse,  sed  In  iis  rebus
quas  sapientia  comparat  ad  voluptatem.  Totum
autem  id  externum  est,  et  quod  externum,  id  in
casu  est.  Ita  Rt  beatae  vitae  domina  fortuna,  quam
Epicurus  ait  exiguam  intervenire  sapienti.

)  XXVIII.  Age,'  inquies,  ista  parva  sunt.  Sapi-
entem  locupletat  ipsa  natura,  cuius  divitias  Epicurus
parabiles  esse  docult.' — Haec  bene  dicuntur,  nee
ego  repugno ;  sed  inter  sese  ipsa  pugnant.  Negat
enim  tenuissimo  victu,  id  est  contemptissimis  escis
et  potionibus,  minorem  voluptatem  percipi  quam
rebus  exquisitissimis  ad  epulandum.  Huic  ego,  si
negaret  quidquam  interesse  ad  beate  vivendum  quali
uteretur  victu,  concederem;  laudarem  etiam;  venim

n  bull  of  Phalaris,  cf.  V.  3o,

I

BOOK  II.  !

IUiem  enjoys  the  Chief  Good,  that  is  to  sayj  plei
Ah  butj'  you  say, Epicurus  is  liahle  to  pain  as  well.'
Yes,  but  he  thinks  nothing  of  pain  ;  for  he  tells
that  if  he were being burnt  to  death"  he would''

89  exclaim,  '  How  delightful  this  is  '. '  Wherein  then
is  be  inferior  to  God,  except  that  God  lives  for  ever  ?
But  what  good  has  everlasting  life  to  otter  beside
supreme  and  never-ending  pleasure  ?  What  then  is
the  use  of  your  high-flown  language,  if  it  be  not
consistent  ?  Physical  pleasure  (and  I  will  add  if  you
like  mental  pleasure,  so  long  as  this,  as  you  hold,  is
understood  to  have  its  source  in  the  body)  consti-  ,
tutes happiness. Well, who can guarantee this

•pleasure  for  the  Wise  Man  in  perpetuity  ?  For  the
tilings  that  produce  pleasure  are  not  ui  the  Wise
Man's  control ;  since  happiness  does  not  consist  in
wisdom  itself,  but  in  the  means  to  pleasure  which
wisdom  can  procure.  But  all  the  apparatus  of  plea
is  external,  and  wliat  is  external  must  depend  on
chance.  Consequently  happiness  becomes  the  slave
of  fortune ;  yet  Epicurus  says  that  fortune  inter-
feres with  the  Wise  Man  hut  little!

90  XXVIII.  "  'Come,'  you  will  say,  'these  are  trivial  e
objections.  The  Wise  Man  is  endowed  with  Nature's  ^
own  riches,  and  these,  as  Epicurus  has  shown,  are  ea
easy  of  attainment.' "This  is  excellently  said,  and  I  je
do  not  combat  it; but  Epicunis's  own  statements  p'
are  at  war  with  each  other. He  tells  us  that  the
amplest  fare,  that  is,  the  meanest  sorts  of  food  and
drink,  afford  no  less  pleasure  than  a  banquet  of  the
rarest  delicacies. For  my  part,  if  he  said  that  it

^^  made  no  difference  to  happiness  what  sort  of  food
^^L&e  ate,  I  should  agree,  and  wliat  is  more  I  should
^^Bqiplaud; for he would he  telling the  trutli.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

enim  diceret,  idqiie  Socrateiu,  qui  voluptateiii  nullo
loco  numeral,  audio  dicentem,  cibi  condimentum
esse  famem,  potionis  sitim.  Sed  qui  ad  voluptatem
omnia  referens  vivit  ut  Gallonius,  loquitur  ut  Frugi
ille  Piso,  uoii  audio,  nee  eum,  quod  sentiat  dicere

91  existimo.  Naturales  divitias  dixit  parubites  esse
quod  parvo  esset  iiatura  contenta.  Certe,  nisi  volu-
ptatem tanti  aestimaretis.  Non  minor,  inquit,  volu-
ptas  percipitur  ex  vilissimis  rebus  quam  ex  pretiosis-
simis. Hoc  est  non  modo  cor  non  habere  sed  ne

^  palatum  quidem.  Qui  enim  voluptatem  ipsam  eon-
temnunt,  iis  iicet  dicere  se  acipeiiserem  inaenae  non
anteponere;  cui  vero  in  voluptate  summum  bonum
CBt,  huic  omnia  sensu,  non  ratione  sunt  iudicanda,

92  eaque  dicenda  optima  quae  sunt  suavissima.  Verum
esto ;  coiisequatur  summas  voluptates  non  modo  i»arvo,
sed  per  me  nihilo,  si  potest;  sit  voluptas  non  minor
in  nasturcio  lUo  quo  vesci  Pergas  esse  solitos  seribit
Xenophon.quaminSyracusanismensisquaea  Platone
graviter  vituperantur ;  sit,  inquam,  tarn  facilia  quam
vultis  comparatio  voluptatis;  quiddedoloredicemus?
cuius  tanta  tormenta  sunt  ut  in  iis  beata  vita,  si
modo  dolor  summum  malum  est,  esse  non  possit.
Ipse  enim  Metrodorus,paene  alter  Epicurus,  beatum
esse  describit  his  fere  verbis :  cum  corpus  bene  con-
stitutura  sit  et  sit  exploratum  it»  futurum.  An  id
cxploratum  cuiquam  potest  esse,  quomodo  se  hoc
habiturum  sit  corpus  non  dico  ad  annum,  sed  ad
vesperum? Dolor  igitur,  id  est  summum  malum.

J

BOOK  H.  Kxviii
Ewill  listen  to  Socrates,  who  holds  pleasure  of  no
iccouDt,  when  he  says  that  the  best  sauce  for  food
is  hunger  and  the  best  flavouring  for  drink  thirst
But  1  will  not  listen  to  one  who  makes  pleasure  the
sole  stajidard,  when  while  living  like  Gallonius  he
talks  like  Piso  the  Thrifty ;  I  refuse  to  believe  in  his

91  sincerity.  He  said  that  natural  wealth  is  easily  won,
because  nature  is  satisfied  with  little.  Undoubtedly,
— if  only  you  Epicureans  did  not  value  pleasure  so
highly.  As  much  pleasure,  he  says,  is  derived  from
the  cheapest  things  as  from  the  most  costly.  Dear
me,  his  palate  must  be  as  dull  as  his  wits.  Persons
who  despise  pleasure  in  itself  are  at  liberty  to  say  that
they  value  a  sturgeon  no  higher  than  a  sprat;  but  a
man  whose  chief  good  consists  in  pleasure  is  bound
to  judge  everything  by  sensation,  not  by  reason,  and
to  call  those  thuigs  the  best  which  are  the  pleasant-

93  est.  However,  let  us  grant  his  point:  let  him  get
the  highest  pleasures  cheap,  or  for  all  I  care  for
nothing,  if  he  can;  allow  that  there  is  as  much
pleasure  to  be  found  in  the  cress  salad  which  accord-
ing to  Xenophon"  formed  the  staple  diet  of  the
Persians,  as  in  the  Syracusan  banquets  which  Plato''
takes  to  task  so  severely;  grant,  I  say,  that  pleasure

■  is  as  easy  to  get  as  your  school  makes  out; — but
-what  are  we  to  say  of  pain?  Pain  can  inilict  such
tortures  as  to  render  happiness  absolutely  impossible,
4liat  is,  if  it  be  true  that  pam  is  the  Chief  Evil,
Metrodorus  himself,  who  was  almost  a  second  Epi-
curus, describes  happiness  (I  give  almost  his  actual

words)  as  'sound  health,

C_..+i.ma[j(.e  ■  Qgjf  anyone  have  an
his  health  will  be,  I  don't  say
his  evening? It  follows  that  w<

of  its
of

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

metuetur  semper  etiamsi  non  aderit ;  ia.ni  enim  adesse
poterit.  Qui  potest  igitur  habitare  in  beata  vita  summi

93  mail  inelus?  Traditur,  inquit,  ab  Epicuro  ratio  ne-
glegendi  doioris.  lam  id  ipsum  absurdum,  maximum
malum neglegi. Sed quae tandem ista  ratio est?

Maxinius  dolor,'  inquit,  brevis  est.'  Primum  quid
tu  dicis  breve?  delude  dolorem  quem  i
Quid  enim?  Summus  dolor  plures  t
potest?  Vide  ne  etiam  menses  I  Nisi  forte  eum
dicis  qui  simul  atque  arripuit  interfieit.  Quis  istum
dolorem  timet  ?  Ilium  mallem  levares  quo  optimum
atque  humanissimum  virum,  Cn.  Octavium,  M.  F,,
familiarem  meum,  confici  vidi,  nee  vero  semel  nee  ad
breve  tempus  aed  et  saepe  et  plane  diu.  Quos  die,
di  immortales!  cum  omnes  artus  ardere  viderentur,
cruciatus  perferebat!  Nee  tamen  miser  esse,  quia
summura  id  malum  non  erat,  tantuuuuodo  laboriosus
videbatur.  At  miser,  si  in  flagitiosa  atque  vitiosa  vita
afflueret  voluptatibus.

94  XXIX.  Quod  autem  magnum  dolorem  brevem,
longinquum  levem  esse  dicitis,  id  non  intellego  quale
sit.  Video  enim  et  magnos  et  eosdem  bene  longin-
quos  dolores;  quorum  alia  toleratio  est  verior,  qua
uti  vos  non  potestis  qui  honestatem  ipsam  per  se
non  amatis.  Fortitudinis  quaedam  praecepta  sunt
ac  paene  leges,  quae  effeminari  virum  vetant  in
dolore. Quamobrem  turpe  putandum  est,  non  dico

1S4

^  BOOK  II.  xxviii-xxix

free  from  the  apprehension  of  pain,  which  is  the  Cliief
Evil,  even  when  it  is  absent,  for  at  any  moment  it
may  be  upon  us. How  then  can  life  be  happy  when

93  haunted  by  fear  of  the  greatest  Evil  ?  Ah  but,"  he
rejoins,  Epicurus  teaches  a  method  for  disregarding
pain.'  To  begin  with,  the  mere  idea  of  disregard-
ing that  which  is  the  greatest  of  evils  is  absurd.  But
what  is  this  method,  pray?  Tlie  severest  pain,'  says
he,  is  brief.'  First  of  all,  what  do  you  mean  by
brief?  and  secondly,  what  do  you  mean  by  the
severest  pain  ?  Why,  cannot  the  most  intense  pain
last  for  several  days?  You  may  find  it  last  for
months  1  Unless  indeed  you  mean  a  seizure  that
instantaneously  kills  you.  But  no  one  is  afraid  of
such  a  pain  as  that.  1  want  you  rather  to  alleviate
such  agony  as  I  have  seen  afflicting  my  excellent
and  amiable  friend,  Gnaeus  Octavius,  son  of  Marcus ;
and  that  not  once  only  or  for  a  short  time,  but
repeatedly  and  for  very  long  periods.  Great  heavens,
what  torments  he  used  to  suffer!  All  his  joints  felt
as  if  on  fire.  And  yet  one  did  not  think  of  him
as  miserable,  because  such  pain  was  not  the  greatest
evil, — only  as  afflicted.  Miserable  he  would  have
been  if  he  had  lived  a  life  of  profligacy  and  vice  sur-
rounded by  every  pleasure.

S4  XXIX.  "As  for  your  maxim  that  severe  pain  is  Ej
short  and  prolonged  painlight,  I  cannot  makeout  what  ^l
it  may  mean.  For  1  see  pains  that  are  at  once  severe
and  considerably  prolonged ;  and  the  truer  way  to
endure  them  is  that  other  method,  which  you  who  do
not  love  moral  worth  for  its  own  sake  are  not  able
to  employ.  Courage  has  its  precepts  and  its  rules,
rules  of  constraining  force,  that  forbid  a  man  to
show  womanish  weakness  in  pain.  Hence  it  must
1S5

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
;  (nam  id  quidem  est  interdum  necesse),  sed
11  illud  Lemniuni '  clamore  Philocteteo fune-

Quod  eiulatu,  questu,  gemitu,  fremitibus
Resonando  mutuni  flebiles  voces  refert.
Huic  Epicurus  praecentet,  si  potest,  cui

i

Sic  Epicurus ; '  Philocteta,  si  gravis  dolor,  brevis.' '  At
iam  dccitnum  annum  in  spelimca  iacet Si  longus,

95  levis;  dat  enim  iiitervalla  et  relaxat.'  Prinium  non
fiaepe,  deinde  quae  est  ista  relaxatio,  cum  et  praeter-
iti  doloris  memoria  recens  est  et  fiituri  atque  im-
pendentis  torquet  timor?  Moriatur,  inquit.  Fortasse
id  optimum, sed  ubi  Olud:  Plus  semper  voluptatis?'
Si  enim  ita  est,  vide  ne  facinus  facias  cum  mori
suadeas,  Potius  ergo  ilia  dicantur,  turpe  esse,  viri
non  esse  debilitari  dolore,  frangi,  succumbere.  Nam
ista  vestra :  Si  gravis,  brevis ;  si  longus,  levis '  dictata
sunt.  Virtutis,  magnitudinis  animi,  patientiae,  for-
titudinis  fomentis  dolor  mitigari  solet.

96  XXX.  Audi,  ne  ionge  abeam,  moriens  quid  dicat
Epicurus,  ut  intellegas  facta  eius  cum  dictis  discre-
pare:  Epicurus  Henaarcho  S.  Cum  ageremus,'  inquit.

'  E  inserted  by  Baiter.

*Si  (or  sit)  gravis  dolor,  brevis  inf.  MSS. ;
vis  A,  B,  E.— Mdv.  'Philocteta,  st!  Brevis
•  and  95.

'  Quoted  probably  from  the  Philectites

S  dolor

be  considered  a  disgrace,  I  do  not  say  to  feel  paiii
(that  is  sometiaies  inevitable),  but  that  '  rock  ol'
Leomos  to  outrage '  *  with  the  cries  of  a  Philoctetes,

^V* Till  the  dumb  stones  utter  a  voice  of  weeping,
^V* Echoing  his  wails  and  plaints,  his  sighs  and
'  groanings.

Let  Epicurus  soothe  with  his  spells,  if  he  can,  the

Veins  and  vitals,  from  the  viper's  faiig

Envenom'd,  throb  with  pangs  of  anguish  dire.

Thus  Epicurus; Philoctetes! If  pain  is  severe,  it  is

short,' Oh,  but  he  has  been  languishing  in  his  cave

these  ten  years  past. If  it  is  long,  it  is  light :  for

95  it  grants  intervals  of  respite.'  In  the  first  place,
these  are  few  and  far  between ;  and  secondly,  what
is  the  good  of  a  respite  embittered  by  recent  pain
stdl  fresh  in  memory,  and  tormented  by  fear  of  pain
impending  in  the  future?  Let  him  die,  says  Epicu-
rus. Perhaps  that  were  the  best  course,  but  what
becomes  of  the  maxim  about  a  constant  preponder-
ance of  pleasure'?  If  that  be  true,  are  you  not  guilty
of  a  crime  in  advisuig  him  to  end  his  life?  Well
then,  let  us  rather  tell  him  that  it  is  base  and  un-
manly to  be  enfeebled,  crushed  and  overpowered  by
pain.  As  for  the  formula  of  your  sect.  Short  if
it's  strong,  light  if  it's  long,'  it  is  a  tag  for  copy-
books. Virtue,  magnanimity,  endurance,  courage,
— -it  is  these  that  have  balm  to  assuage  pain,

96  XXX.  "But  I  must  not  digress  too  far. Let  me  Fonuudn  li  th
repeat  the  dying  words  of  Epicurus,  to  prove  to  you  ^o""d?JI\.'
the  discrepancy  between  his  practice  and  his  prin-  wocdi  ihotr,
ciples  : Epicurus  to  Hermarchus,  greeting. I  write

187

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

vitae  beatum  et  euiidem  supremum  diem,  scribe-
bamus  haec.  Tanti  aderant  vesicae  et  tonninum
morbi  ut  nihil  ad  eonim  magnitudinem  posset  acce-
dere.'  Miserum  hominem !  Si  dolor  summura  malum
est, dici  aliter  now  potest. Sed  audiamus  ipsum,

Compensabatur,'  inquit,  tameii  cum  his  omnibus
animi  laetitia  quam  capiebam  memoria  ratioiium  in-
ventorimique  nostroruni.  Sed  tu,  ut  digntim  est  tua
erga  mc  et  pliilosophiam  voluntate  ab  adulescentulo

97  suscepta,  fac  ut  Metrodoii  tueare  liberos.'  Non  ego
lam  Epaniinondae,  non  Leonidae  mortem  huius
morti  antepono  ;  quorum  alter  cum  vicisset  Lacedae-
monios  apud  Mantineam  atque  ipse  gravi  vulnere
exanimari  se  videret,  ut  piimuin  dispexit,  quaesivit
salvusne  esset  clipeus.  Cum  salvum  esse  fientes  sui
respondissent,  rogavit  essentne  fusi  hostes.  Cum  id
quoque  ut  ciipiebat  audivisset,  evelli  iussit  earn  qua
erat  transfixus  liastam.  Ita  multo  sanguine  profiiso
in  laetitia  et  victoria  est  mortuus. Leonidas  autem,

■  ren  Lacedaemoniorum  se  in  Thermopylis  trecen-
tosque  eos  quos  eduxerat  Sparta,  cum  esset  proposita
aut  fuga  turpis  aut  gloriosa  mors,  opposuit  hostibus.
Praeclarae  mortes  sunt  imperatoriae ;  philosophi
autem  in  suis  lectulis  plerumque  moriuntur.  Refert
tamen  quomodo.  fieatus  sibi  videtur  esse  raoriens.
Magna  laus.^ Compensabatur,'  inquit,  "  cum  sum-

98  mis  doloribus  laetitia.'  Audio  equidem  philosophi
vocem,  Epicure ;  sed  quid  tibi  dicendum  sit  oblitus
es. Primum  enim,  si  vera  sunt  ea  quorum  recorda-

^USS.  Re/frtfamctt  guod  sibi  videtur  es
JUS,  with  variants  quo  modo,  videbalur  a.
eslore»  as  ;ibove,  inserting  beaius-

. Mdv.

^r  BOOK 11. XXX

these  words,'  he  saySj  'on  the  happiest,  and  the  last,
day  of  my  life.  1  am  sufl'ering-  from  diseases  of  the
bladder  and  intestines,  which  are  of  the  utmost
possible  severity.'  Unhappy  creature  I  If  pain  is
the  Chief  Evil,  that  is  the  only  thing  to  be  said.  But
let  us  hear  his  own  wjjrds.  Vet  all  my  sufferings,'
he  continues,  are  counterbalanced  by  the  joy  which
!  derive  from  remembering  my  theories  and  dis-
coveries. I  charge  you,  by  the  devotion  which  from
your  youtli  up  you  have  displayed  towards  myself
and  towards  philosophy,  to  protect  the  children  of

97  Metrodorus.'  When  I  read  this  I  rank  the  death-
scene  of  Epicurus  on  a  level  with  those  of  Epami-
nondas  and  of  Leonidas.  Epaminondas  had  defeated"  1
the  Lacedemonians  at  Mantinea,  and  perceived  him-
self to  be  mortally  wounded.  As  soon  as  he  regained
consciousness  he  inquired  if  his  shield  were  safe.
His  weeping  followers  told  him  that  it  was.  He
asked,  were  the  enemy  routed.  Satisfied  on  this
point  also,  he  bade  them  pluck  out  the  spear  that
pierced  his  side.  A  rush  of  blood  followed,  and  so^
in  the  hour  of  joy  and  victory  he  died.  Leonidas,
king  of  the  Lacedemonians,  had  to  choose  between
dishonourable  flight  and  a  glorious  death  ;  with  the
three  hundred  warriors  that  he  had  brought  from
Sparta  he  confronted  the  foe  at  Thermopylae,  It  is
glorious  to  fall  when  leading  an  army;  but  philoso-
phers mostly  die  in  their  beds.  Still  the  manner  of
their  death  makes  a  difference.  Epicurus  counts
himself  happy  in  his  last  moments.  All  honour  to
him. My  joy,'  he writes, counterbalances the

98  severest  pain.'  Tiiere,  Epicurus,  it  is  true,  I  hear
the  voice  of  a  philosopher;  but  you  forf^et  what  you
logically  ought  to  say. In  the  first  place,  if  the  thing

>  DE.  FDHBt'S  ^B

tfeWM;  tiri^uki  e  tfieis,  line  e^  a.«eia.  sunt  toa  scripts
et  mventa,  gaodnre  ttes  potes ;  riihil  eoim  iam  habes
/jnftd  ad  carpaa  referas :  est  antem  a  te  semper  di-
ctum r^e  gandere  qDenupiAm,  nisi  propter  corpus  nee
dolere.  Praeteritis,  mqait,  gamdeo.  Quibusnatn
praeteritiA^  si  ad  corpos  pntineatibas,  rationes
tOM  tc  video  conpensare  mm  istis  doloribus,  noD
memoruiD  oorpore  perceptanno  valnptatum :  sin
«ut«m  ad  animam,  falsom  est  qaod  negas  animi
ullum  eg§e  gaudium  quod  non  referatur  ad  corpus.
Ciir  (Icindc  Metrodori  liberos  cominendas  ?  quid  in  ^
iBtoegregio  tuo  officio  ettanta  fide  (sic  enim  existimo)
m!  rorjius  refers  ?

g  XXXI.  "  Hue  etilloc,Torqunte,vosversetis  licet;
nihil  ill  Itac  praeclara  epistula  seriptum  ab  Epicuro
coiigrucns  et  conveniens  decretis  eius  reperietis.  Ita
rrdorguitur  ipse  n  sese,  convincunturque'  scripta  eius
proliitate  ipsius  ac  moribus.  Nam  ista  commendatio
puerorum,  menioria  et  caritas  amicitiae,  sumniorum
ofBciomm  in  entremo  spiritu  coiiservatio  indicat  in-
natani  esse  lioniini  probitatem  gratuitain,  non  invita-
t»m  volupUtibus  nee  praemiorum  mercedibus  evoca-
tani.  Quod  enim  testimonium  maius  quaerimus,  quae
honeKt*  et  recta  sint,  ipsa  esse  optabilia  per  sese,

fl  rtini  vidcamus  tanta  officia  morientis  ? Sed  ut  epi-

st«lani  laudandam  arhitror  cam  quatn  modo  totidem

fr«  vertifa  intcri«*tat'>s  s"»-  quamquam  ea  cum

snmma  pSmh  philoso|J»ia  nullo  niodo  congruebat,  sic

'NlSS.*m. 'hepi-cposifion:  Mdv.  suggests  iti,  but  writes

t..V  ■«■«»1  «hiW  fM.

*y»*i«V»<wi-Mwtw  MJv.  after  Daxis:  li^cu^fur.

■^  BOOK  n.  xxx-xxxi

in  the  recollection  of  wliich  you  profess  to  find  plea-
sure, I  mean  your  writings  and  your  theories,  are
true,  you  enniiot  really  be  feeling  pleasure.  All
feelings  referable  to  the  body  are  over  for  you  ;  yet
you  have  always  maintained  that  no  one  feels  either
pleasure  or  pain  except  on  account  of  the  body.  He
says  I  take  pleasure  in  my  past  feelings.'  What
past  feelings  ?  If  you  mean  bodily  feelings,  I  notice
that  it  is  not  the  memory  of  bodily  delights,  but  your
philosophical  tlieories,  that  counterbalance  for  you
your  present  pains  ;  if  mental  feelings,  your  doctrine
that  there  is  no  delight  of  the  mind  not  ultimately
referable  to  the  body  is  an  error.  And  secondly,
why  do  you  provide  for  the  children  of  Melrodorus?
What  standard  of  bodily  pleasure  are  you  following
in  this  signal  act  (for  so  I  esteem  it)  of  loyalty  and
duty?

)9  XXXI.  Yes,  Torquatus,  you  people  may  turn  and
twist  as  you  like,  but  you  will  not  find  a  line  in  this
famous  letter  of  Epicurus  that  is  not  inconsistent  and
incompatible  with  his  teachings.  Hence  he  is  his
own  refutation ;  his  writings  are  disproved  by  the
uprightness  of  his  character.  That  provision  for
the  care  of  the  children,  that  loyalty  to  friend-
ship and  affection,  that  observance  of  these  solemn
duties  withhis  latest  breath, provethat  there  was  innate
in  the  man  a  disinterested  uprightness,  not  evoked  by
pleasure  nor  elicited  by  prizes  and  rewards.  Seeing
so  strong  a  sense  of  duty  in  a  dying  man,  what  clearer
evidence  do  we  want  that  morality  and  rectitude

)0  are  desirable  for  their  own  sakes  ? But  while  I  think  '°™
that  the  letter  I  have  just  translated  almost  word  for  ii
for  word  is  most  admirable,  although  entirely  incon-  ^"^,
sistent  with  the  general  tenor  of  his  philosophy,  yet  bi
191

^^^^C

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^^

eiusdem  testamentum  non  solum  a  philosophi  gravi-
tate sed  etinm  itb  ipaius  sententia  iiidico  discrepare.
Scripsit  enim  et  multis  saepe  verbis  et  breviter  aper-
teque  in  eo  libro  quern  modo  nominavi,  mortem
nihil  ad  nos  pertinere;  quod  enim  dissoluturn  sit,  id
esse  sine  sensu;  quod  autem  sine  sensu  sit,  id  nihil
ad  nos  pertinere  omnino.'  Hoc  ipsum  elegamtius
poni  meliusque  potuit.  Nam  quod  ita  positum  est,
quod  dissoluturn  sit,  id  esse  sine  Rensu,'  id  eiusmadi

101  est  ut  non  satis  plane  dicat  quid  sit  dissolutum.  Sed
tamen  inteliego  quid  velit.  Qiiaero  autem  quid  sit
quod,  cum  dissolutionej  id  est  morte  sensus  oranis  en-
sting-uatur,  et  cum  reliqui  nihil  sit  omnino  quod  per-
tineat  ad  nos,  tarn  accurate  tamque  diligenter  caveat
et  sanciat  ut  Amynoraachus  et  Timocrates,  heredes
sui,  de  Hermarchi  sententia  dent  quod  satis  sit  ad
diem  agendum  natalem  suum  quotannis  niense  Game-
Hone,  itemque  omnibus  m.ensibus  vicesimo  die  lunae
dent  ad  eoriim  epulas  qui  una  secum  philosophati

102  sint,  ut  et  sui  et  Metrodori  memoria  colatur."  Haec
ego  non  possum  dicere  non  esse  hominis  quamvis  et
belli  et  humani,  sapientis  vero  nullo  modo,  physici
praesertim,  quera  se  ille  esse  vult,  putare  uUum  esse
cuiusquam  diem  natalem.  Quid?  idemne  potest  esse
dies  saepius  qui  semel  fuit?  Certe  non  potest  An
eiusdemmodi  ?  Ne  id  quidem,  nisi  m.ulta  annorum
intercesserint  milia,  ut  omnium  siderum  eodem  unde

192

^m  BOOK [I.  \:i[»

1  consider  his  will  to  be  quite  out  of  harmony  not
only  with  the  dignity  of  a  philosopher  but  also  with
his  own  pronouncement.  For  he  repeatedly  argued
at  length,  and  also  t^tated  briellj'  and  plainly  in  the
book  I  have  just  mentioned,  that  death  does  not]
affect  us  at  all  ;  for  a  thing  that  has  experienced  disJ
solution  must  be  devoid  of  sensation  :  and  that  whiclJ
is  devoid  of  sensation  cannot  affect  us  in  any  degree)
whatsoever.'  The  maxim  such  as  it  is  might  havel
lieen  better  and  more  neatly  put.  For  the  phrasej
'  what  has  experienced  dissolution  must  be  devoid  ofj
sensation,'  does  not  make  clear  what  it  is  that  ha^

01  experiejiced  dissolution.  However  in  spite  of  this
I  understand  the  meaning  intended.  What  I  want
to  know  is  this  ;  if  all  sensation  is  annihilated  by  dis-
solution^  that  is,  by  death,  and  if  nothing  whatever
that  can  affect  us  remains,  why  is  it  that  he  makes
such  precise  and  careful  provision  and  stipulation
'  that  his  heirs,  AmjTiochus  and  Timocrates,  shall
after  consultation  with  Hermarchus  assign  a  sulScicnt
sum  to  celebrate  his  birthday  every  year  in  the
month  of  Gamelion,  and  also  on  the  twentieth  day
of  every  month  shall  assign  a  sum  *'"■■  n  l»i"nqiipt  \n
his  felloW-gtudfitits  m  philosophy,  in  order  to  keep
alive  the  memory  of  himself  and  of  Metrodorus'?

02  I'hat  these  are  the  words  of  as  amiable  and  kindly  a
man  as  you  like,  I  cannot  deny ;  but  what  business
has  a  philosopher,  and  especially  a  natural  philoso-
pher, which  Epicurus  claims  to  be,  to  think  that  any
day  can  be  anybody's  birthday  ?  Why,  can  the
identical  day  that  has  once  occurred  recur  again  and
again  ?  Assuredly  it  is  impossible.  Or  can  a  similar
day  recur  f  This  too  is  impossible,  except  after
interval  of  many  thousands  of  years,  when  all

o  193

I

J

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

profecta  sint  fiat  ad  unum  lempus  reversio.  Nullus
est  i^itur  cuiusquam  dies  natalis.  At  habetur.'  Kt
ego  id  scilicet  nesciebani !  Sed  ut  sit,  eliainne  post
mortem  coletur?  idque  testamento  cavebit  is  qui
nobis  quasi  oraculum  ediderit  nihil  post  mortem  ad
nos  pertinere  ?  Haec  non  erant  eius  qui  innumera-
biles  mundos  infinitasque  regiones,  quarum  nulla
essct  ora,  nulla  extremitaSj  mente  peragravisset.'
Num  quid  tale  Democritus  ?  (Ut  alios  omittam,  hunc

103  appello  quem  ille  unum  secutus  est.)  Quod  si  dies
notandus  fuit,  eumne  potius  quo  natus,  an  eum  quo
sapiens  factus  est  ?  Non  potuit,'  inquies,  fieri
sapiens  nisi  natus  esset.'  Isto  modo  ne  si  avia  qui-
dem  eius  nata  non  esset  Res  tola,  Torquate,  non
doctorom  hominuni,  velle  post  mortem  epulis  cele-
brari  memoriani  sui  nominis.  Quos  quidem  dies
quemadmodunt  agatis  et  in  quantam  hominum  face-
torum  urbanitatem  incurratis,  non  dico  ;  nibil  opus
est  litibus  ;  tantum  dico  magis  fuisse  vestrum  agere
Epicuri  diem  natalem  quam  illius  testamento  cavere

104  XXXII.  "Sed  ut  ad  propositum  revertamur  tde
dolore  enim  cum  diceremus,  ad  istam  epistulam  de-
lati  sumus),  nunc  totum  Olud  concludi  sic  licet :  Qui  in

a  This  conception  is  found  in

\t  the  Great  Year  or  Perfecl
[2,954  solar  years.

ito,  Timacus  39,  and  was
who  calculated  the  period

BOOK  II.  \xxi-x-xxii
Iieavenly  bodies  simultaneously  achieve  their  return
to  the  point  from  which  tliey  started.*  It  follows
that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  nnybody's  birthday.
'  All  tile  same,  people  do  keep  birthdays.'  Much
obliged,  1  am  sure,  for  the  informatiuti !  But  even
granting  birthdays,  is  a  person's  birtjiday  to  be
observed  when  he  is  dead  ?  And  to  provide  for
this  by  will — is  tliis  appropriate  for  a  man  who
told  us  in  oracular  tones  that  nothing-  can  atfect  us
afler  death  ?  Such  a  provision  ill  became  una  whose
'  intellect  had  roamed  over  unnumbered  worlds  and
realms  of  infinite  space,  unbounded  and  unending-.
Did  Democritus  do  anything  of  the  kind  ?  (To
omit  others,  I  cite  the  case  of  the  philosopher  who

{  was  Epicurus's  only  master.)  And  if  a  special
day  was  to  be  kept,  did  he  do  well  to  take  the  day
on  which  he  was  bom,  and  not  rather  that  on  which
he  became  a  Wise  Man?  You  will  object  that  he
could  not  have  become  a  Wise  Man  if  he  had  not
first  of  all  been  born.  You  might  equally  -well  say,
if  his  grandmother  had  not  been  born  either.  The
entire  notion  of  wishing  one's  name  and  memory  to
be  celebrated  by  a  banquet  after  one's  death  is  alien
to  a  man  of  learning.  I  won't  refer  to  your  mode  of
keeping  these  anniversaries,  or  to  the  ridicule  you
bring  upon  yourselves  from  persons  with  a  sense  of
humour.  We  do  not  want  to  quarrel,  I  only  remark
that  it  was  more  your  business  to  keep  Epicurus's
birthday  than  his  business  to  provide  by  will  for  its
celebration,

I XXXII.  '  But  to  return  to  our  subject  (for  we  were  Uninw  that
discussing  the  question  of  pain,  when  we  digressed  ril^^omory^
to  the  letter  of  Epicurus), The  whole  matter  may
now  be  put  in  the  following  sj'llogism :  A  man  un-
o2  195

CICERO  DE FINIBUS

o  malo  est,  is  turn  cum  in  eo  est  non  est  beatus ;
sapiens  autem  semper  beatus  est  et  est  aliquaudo  in
dolore ;  non  est  igitur  sununum  malum  dolor,  lam
illud  quale  tandem  est,  bona  praeterita  non  elfluere
sapienti,  mala  meminisse  non  oportere  ?  Priraum  in
nostranc  est  potestate  quid  meniinerinius?  Tliemi-
stocles  quidem,  cum  ei  Simonides  an  quis  alius  artem
e  polliceretur,  Oblivionis,'  inquit,  mallem;
i  etiam  quae  nolo,  obltvtsci  non  possum
'j  quae  volo.'  Magno  liic  ingenio;  sed  res  se  tamen
sic  habet  ut  nimis  imperiosi  philosophi  sit  vetare
meminisse.  Vide  »e  isla  sint  Maniiann  vestra  aut
maiora  etiam,  si  imperes  quod  facere  non  possim.
Quid  si  etinni  iucunda  memoria  est  praeteritorum
nialorum?  ut  proverbia  nonnulla  veriora  sint  quam
vestra  dogmata.  Vulgo  enim  dieitur;  lucundi  acti
labores';  nee  male  Euripides  {concludam,  si  potero,
Latine;  Graecum  enim  bunc  versum  nostis  omnes);

Suavis  laborum  est  praeteritorum  memoria.
Sed  ad  bona  praeterita  redeamus.  Quae  si  a  vobis
talia  dicerentur  qualibus  C.  Marius  uti  poterat,  ut
expulsus,  t-gens,  in  palude  demersus  tropaeorum  re-
cordntione  levaret  dolorem  suum,  audireni  et  plane
probareni. Nee enim  absolvi beata  vita  sapientis

BOOK  II.  xxxii
dergoiDg  the  supreme  Evil  is  not  for  the  time  being
happy ;  but  the  Wise  Man  is  always  happy,  and  some-
times undergoes  pain ;  therefore  pain  is  not  the
supreme  Evil.  And  again,  what  is  the  sense  of  the
maxim  that  tlie  Wise  Man  will  not  let  past  blessings
fade  from  memory,  and  tliat  it  is  a  duty  to  forget
past  misfortunes?  To  begin  with,  have  we  the  power
to  choose  what  we  shall  remember?  ThemJstocles
at  all  events,  when  Simonides  or  some  one  offered  to

ma

teach  him  the  art  of  memory,  replied  tuai  he  v
prefer  the  art  ol  torgettuig;  for  I  remember.'  said
hg,''  ^V^n  thnigs  I  dfl  not  wish  to  remember,  but  I
,)  cannot  torgt-t  tilings  I  wisli  to  lorget.'  F.picnrus
was  a  very  able  man ;  but  still  the  fact  of  the  matter
is  that  a  philosopher  who  forbids  us  to  remember
lays  too  heavy  a  charge  upon  us.  Why,  you  are  as
great  a  martinet  as  your  ancestor  Manlius,"  or
greater,  if  you  oi-der  me  to  do  what  is  beyond
my  power.  What  if  the  memory  of  past  evils  be
actually  pleasant?  provinjf  certain  proverbs  truer
than  the  tenets  of  your  school.  There  is  a  popular
saying  to  the  effect  that  Toil  is  pleasant  when  'tis
over';  and  Euripides  well  writes  (I  will  attempt  a
verse  translation :  the  Greek  line  is  known  to  you
all):

Sweet  is  the  memory  of  sorrows  past. V

But  kt  us  return  to  the  question  of  past  blessings.
If  your  school  meant  by  these  the  sort  of  successes
that  Gaius  Marius  eould  fall  back  on,  enabling  him
when  a  penniless  exile^up  to  his  chin  in  a  swamp  to
lighten  his  sufferings  by  recollecting  his  former
victories,  I  would  listen  to  you,  and  would  unreserv-
edly assent. Indeed  it  would  be  impossible  for  the

CICERO  DF.  FINIBUS  ^H

neque  ad  exilum  perduci  potent,  si  prima  quaeque
bene  ab  eo  consulta  atque  facta  ipsius  oblivione  ob-

1 06  nieiilur.  Sed  vobis  ^oluptatum  perceptanim  recor-
datio  vitam  beatam  facit,  et  quideni  corpore  perce-
ptJtmm ;  nam  si  quae  sunt  aliae,  falsum  est  omnes
animi  voloptates  esse  e  corporis  societate.  Corporis
autem  voluptas  si  etiam  pmeterita  delectntj  non
intellego  cut  Aristoteles  Snrdanapalli  epigramma
tanto  opere  derideat,  in  quo  ille  rex  Syriae  glorietur
se  omnes  seoum  abstulisse  libidinum  voluptates.  Quod
eiiim  ne  vivas  quidem,  inquit,  diutius  sentire  poterat
quam  dum  fruebatur,  quomodo  id  mortuo  potuit  per-
nianere?  Fluit  igitur  voluptas  corporis  et  prima
quaeque  avotat,  saepiusque  reliiiquit  eausam  paeui-
tendi  quam  recordandi.  Itaque  beatior  Africanus
cum  patrift  itlo  modo  loquens:

Desine,  Roma,  tuos  bostes —  ^H

reliquaque  praeclare;  ^^

Nam  tibi  moenimenta  mei  peperere  labores.
Laboribus  bie  praeteritis  gaudet,  tu  tubes  voluptati-
bus ;  et  bic  se  ad  ea  rerocat  e  quibus  nihil  umquant
rettulerit  ad  corpus,  tu  totus  haeres  in  corpore.

107  XXXIII.  lUud  autem  ipsura  qui  obtineri  potest,
quod  dicitis  omnes  animi  et  volitptates  et  dolores  ad
corporis  voluptates  ac  dolores  pertinere  ?  NihUne
te  delectat  umquam  (video  quicuni  loquar),  te  igitur,

=  In  a  work  now  lost.  Tlie  lines  referred  to  run  ks»  f^w
Sffu'  ft>a.-,ov  Ko!  /<tn--?piira.  ita!  oilp  (pt^l  riprt  (raOm  •  ri  Si  irrtAd
Kai  BX/Sm  i-dKTa  XAnr-TOi. (ap. Allien, 336a.)

''  Apparently  from  the  Annals  of  Ennius.

■^  300K  II.  xxxii-xxsiii

happiness  of  the  Wise  Man  to  attain  its  final  and
ultimate  perfection,  if  all  his  previous  wise  designs
and  achievements  were  to  be  erased  from  his  memory.

16  But  with  you  it  is  the  recolleetion  of  pleasures
enjoyed  that  gives  happiness ;  and  those  must  be
bodily  pleasures, — for  if  it  be  any  others,  it  ceases  to
be  true  that  mental  pleasures  all  arise  from  the
connection  of  the  mind  with  the  body.  Yet
if  bodily  pleasure  even  when  past  can  give
delight,  I  do  not  see  why  Aristotle''  should  be  so
contemptuous  of  the  epitaph  of  Sardanapalus.  The
famous  Syrian  monarch  boasts  that  he  has  taken
with  him  all  the  sensual  pleasures  that  he  has
enjoyed.  How,  asks  Aristotle,  could  a  dead  man
continue  to  experience  a  feeling  which  even  while
alive  he  could  only  be  conscious  of  so  long  as  he  was
actually  enjoying  it?  So  that  bodily  pleasures  are
transient;  each  in  turn  evaporates,  leaving  cause  for
regrets  more  often  than  for  recollection.  Accordingly
Africanus  must  be  counted  happier  than  Sardanapa-
lus, when  he  addresses  his  country  with  the  words:

^^L  Cease,  Rome,  thy  foes —

^Hkd  the  glorious  conclusion :

^V^ My  toils  have  won  thee  battlements  secure.''
His  past  toils  are  what  he  delights  in,  whereas  you
bid  us  dwell  upon  our  past  pleasures;  he  recalls  ex-
periences that  never  had  any  connection  with  bodily
enjoyment,  but  you  never  rise  above  the  body.

17  XXXIII, Again  how  canyon  possibly  defend  the  or  that  all
dictum  of  your  school,  that  all  mental  pleasures  and  ^"i"^"^
pains  alike  are  baaed  on  pleasures  and  pains  of  the  "iiypt ' "
body? Do  you,  Torquatus  (for  I  bethink  me  who  it
ia  I  am  addressing) — do  you  personally  never  experi-

199

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

Torqiiate,  ipsum  per  sc  nihil  deleptat?  Omitto  digni-
tatem, honestateni,  speciem  ipsani  virtutiini,  de  qui-
bus  ante  dictum  est ;  haec  leviora  ponam :  pocma,
orationem  cum  aut  scribis  aut  legis,  cum  onuiium
factorum,  cum  regionum  conquiris  Iiistoriam,  signuni,
tabula,  locus  amoenus,  ludi,  venatio,  villa  Luculli
(nam  si  tuam  dicerein,  latebram  babcres ;  ad  corpus
diceres  pertinere) — sed  ea  quae  disi  ad  corpusne  re-
fers? an  est  aliquid  quod  te  sua  sponte  delectet?
Aut  pertinacissimus  fiieris  si  perstiteris  ad  corpus  ea
quae  dixi  referre,  aut  deseruerls  totani  Epieuri  \-olii-
ptatem  si  negaveris.
■i  Quod  vero  a  te  disputatura  est  maiores  esse  vo-

luptates  et  dolores  animi  quam  corporis,  quia  trium
temporum  particeps  animus  sit,  corpore  autem  prae-
sentia  solum  sentiantur,  qui  id  probari'  potest  lit  is
qui  propter  me  aliquid  gaudeat  plus  quam  ego  ipse
tcaudeat ?  [ Animo  voluptas oritur  propter loluptatem
corporis,  et  raaior  est  animi  voluptas  quam  corporis;
ita  6t  ut  gratulatorlaetior  sit  quam  is  cui  gratulatur.^]
Sed  dum  efficere  vultis  beatum  sapientem  ctun  maxi-
mas  animo  voluptates  pcreipiat  ommbusque  partibus
maiores  quam  corpore,  quid  occurrat  uon  videtis.
Animi  enim  dolores  qnoque  percipiet  omnibus  parti-
s  quam  corporis.  Ita  misei  sit  aliquajido
:  is  quem  vos  beatum  semper  \'ultis  esse;

'fHi  id  pTobari  B; quid  id  prab. E;  qnid  prohari, gut
pTOb.  other  MSS.

*  Animo —graiwlatut  rejected  bj'  edti.  as  a  note  clumsilj-
explaining  the  simile  in  the  form  of  \vhich  llic  pieceding
redvctio  ad  ahstirduni  is  expressed — bodj-  :  minrt  :;  liappy
person  :  sympathizing  friend.
200

I^  liOOK  11.  xKsiii

ence  delight  in  some  thing  for  its  own  s.-ike?  I
pass  over  moral  worth  and  goodness,  and  the  in-
trinsic beauty  of  the  virtuesj  of  which  we  spoke  be-
fore. I  will  suggest  less  serious  matters,  reading  or
writing  a  poem  or  a  speech,  the  study  of  history  or
geography,  statues,  pietures,  beautiful  scenery;
sport,  hunting,  Lucullus's  country  house  (I  won't
mention  your  own,  for  that  would  give  you  ii  loop-
liole  of  escape ;  you  would  say  it  is  a  source  of  bodily
enjoyment) ;  but  take  the  things  I  have  mentioned, —
do  you  connect  them  with  bodily  sensation  ?  Is  there
nothing  wliich  of  itself  affords  you  delight  ?  Persist
in  tracing  back  the  pleasures  I  have  instanced  to  the
body — and  you  show  yourself  impervious  to  argu-
ment; recant — ^and  you  abandon  Epicurus's  concep-
tion of  pleasure  altogether.

I  'As  for  your  contention  that  mental  pleasures  and  '>«' '

pains  are  greater  than  bodily,  because  the  mind  appre-  qui»
-  hends  all  three  periods  of  time,  whereas  the  bodj-  '■'""
perceives  only  present  sensations,  surely  it  is  absurd
to  say  that  a  man  who  rejoices  in  sympathy  with
my pleasure feels more  joy than I feel myself.
[Pleasure  of  the  mind  arises  out  of  sympathy  with
that  of  the  body,  and  pleasure  of  the  mind  is  greater
than  that  of  the  body  ;  thus  it  comes  about  that  one
who  offers  congratulations  feels  more  delight  than
the  person  congratulated.] But  when  you  try  nTl
prove  the  Wise  Man  happy  on  tiie  ground  that  he  I
enjoys  the  greatest  mental  pleasures,  and  that  these I
arc  infinitely  greater  than  bodily  pleasures,  you  do  I
not  see  the  difficulty  that  meets  you. For  it  follows  I
that  the  mental  pains  which  he  experiences  w '"
be  infinitely  greater  than  the  bodily  ones. Hei
he  whom  you maintain to  be  always happy  wo
201

I

11  als»>

CICEUO  DE  FINIBUS
id  diim  omnia  ad  voluptatem  doloremque

■feretis  efficietis  uniquntn.  Quart  aliud  aliquot],
TorquatCj  hominis  sumniuni  bonum  reperiendum
est ;  voluptatem  bestiis  coiicedamus,  quibus  vos  de
siimnio  bono  testibus  uti  soletis.  Quid  si  etiam
bestiae  multa  faciunt,  duoe  sua  quaeque  natura,  par-
tim  iiidulgenter  vel  cum  labore,  iit  in  gignendo,  in
educando,  perfacile  ut'  appareat  aliud  quiddam  iis
propositiim,  non  voluptatem?  partim  cursu  et  pera-
grationp  taetantur;  congregatione  atiae  coetum  quo-
dam  modo  civitatjs  imitantur;  videmus  in  quodam
volucrium  genere  nonnulla  indicia  pietatis,  co-
gnitionem,  memoriam ;  in  muitis  etiam  desideria  vide-
mus; ergo  in  bestiis  erunt  secreta  a  voluptate
humanarum  quaedam  simulacra  virtutum,  in  ipsis
hominibus  virtus  nisi  voluptatis  causa  nulla  erit?  Et  ~
bomini,  qui  ceteris  animantibus  pluriinuni  praestnt,
praecipui  a  natura  nihil  datum  esse  dicemus?

XXXIV.  Nos  vero,  si  quidem  in  voluptate  sunt
omnia,  longe  multumque  superamur  a  bestiis,  quibus
ipsa  terra  fundit  ex  sese  pastus  varios  atque  abun-
dantes  nihil  laborantibus ;  nobis  autem  aut  vis  aut
lie  vis  quidtm  suppelunt  multo  labore  quacrentibus.
Nee  tameu  ullo  modo  summum  pecudis  bonum  et
hominis  idem  niihi  videri  potest.  Quid  enim  tanto
opus  est  instrumento  in  optimis  artibus  comparandis,
quid  tanto  concursu  honestissimorum  studiorum,  tanto

'«;  supplied  by  Miiller.

BOOK  II.

fact  will  ^M

,  as  long  ^M

tandard.  ^^|

inevitably  be  fiometim^s  miserable  ;  nor  in  fact  v

you  ever  prove  him  to  lie  invariably  happy,  i

as  yoii  make  pleasure  and  pain tlie sole  standard.

09  Therefore we are bound,  Torquatus,  to find  !
other  Cliief  Good  for  man. Let  us  leave  pleasure  "^
to  the lower  animals,  to  whose  evidence  on  this  "■
question  of  the  Chief  Good  your  school  is  fond  of
appealing. But  what  if  even  animals  are  prompted
by  their  several  natures  to  do  many  actions  conclu-
sivelj-  proving-  that  they  have  some  other  End  in  view
than  pleasure  ?  Some  of  them  show  kindness  even  at
the  cost  of  trouble,  as  for  instance  in  (giving  birth  to
and  rearing  their  offspring  ;  some  delight  in  running
and  roaming  about ;  others  are  gregarious,  and  create

1 0  something  resembling  a  social  polity ;  in  a  certain
class  of  birds  we  see  some  traces  of  alfection  for
human  beings,  recognition,  recollection ;  and  in  many
we  even  notice  regret  for  a  lost  friend.  If  animals
therefore  possess  some  semblance  of  the  human
virtues  unconnected  with  pleasure,  are  meji  them-
selves to  display  no  virtue  except  as  a  means  to
pleasure  ?  And  shall  we  say  that  man,  who  so  far
surpasses  all  other  living  creatures,  has  been
gifted  by  nature  with  no  exceptional  endowment  ?

1 1  XXXIV.  "As  a  matter  of  fact  if  pleasure  be  all  in  P.™,i™
all,  the  tower  animals  are  far  and  away  superior  to  f'ri,igi,™"
ourselves.  The  Karth  herself  without  labour  "f^^i'^'"
theirs  lavishes  on  them  food  from  her  stores  in  great ''  """'
variet;  and  abundance ;  whereas  we  with  the  most
laborious  efforts  can  scarcely  if  at  all  supply  our
needs.  Yet  I  cannot  think  that  the  Chief  Good  can
possibly  be  the  same  for  a  brute  beast  and  for  a  man.
What  is  the  use  of  all  our  vast  machinery  of  cul-
ture, of  the  great  company  of  liberal  studies,  of  the

20«

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
virtutum  comitatu,  si  ea  nullam  ad  aliam  rem  nisi  ad
1  2  voluptatem  conquinintur?  Ut,  si  Xerxes,  cum  tantis
classibus  tantisque  equestribus  et  pedestribus  copiis.
Heilesponto  iuncto,  Atlione  perfosso,  mari  ambula-
visset,  terra'  navigavisset,  si,  cum  tanto  impetu  in
Graeciam  veiiisset,  causam  quis  ex  eo  qiiaereret  tan-
tarum  copiarum  tantique  belli,  mel  se  auferre  ex
Hymetto  voluisse  diceret,  certe  sine  causa  \'ide-
retur  tanta  conatus,  sic  nos  sapientem,  plurimis  el
gravissimis  artibus  atque  virtiitibiis  instructuni  et
ornntum,  non,  ut  ilium,  marin  pedibus  peragrantem,
classibus  montes,  sed  omiie  caelum  totamque  cum
universo  mari  terram  mente  comptexum,  voluptatetn
petere  si  dicemus,  mellis  causa  dicemus  t.-inla  moli-

I .'!  Ad altiora quaedaui et uiaf^ificentjora,  miiii

['rede,  Turquate,  tiati  sumus;  iiec  id  ex  aiiimi  solum
partibus,  in  quibus  inest  memnria  rerun)  imiumera-
bilium,  ill  te  quidem  intinita,  inest  coniectura  conse-
queiitium  non  multum  a  divinatione  dilferens,  inest
moderator  cupiditntis  pudor,  inest  ad  liumanam
societatem^  iustitiae  lida  custodia,  inest  in  pcrpetiendis
laboribus  adeundisque  periculis  fii'ma  ot  stabitis
doloris  mortisque  contemptio;^erjrt>  haec  in  animis:
tu  autem  etiam  membra  ipsa  sensiisque  considera,  qui
tibijUtreliquaecoiporia partes, non  comitessoium  vir-

'  mari ..  terra  Bailer; Mdv. approve?
.  terrai»  with  MSS.
^SBCietaUm  luendam  one  inf.  MS.

s  wnrtigy.^

^M  BOOK  li.  xxxiv

goodly  fellowship  of  the  virtues,  it  all  these  things
are  sought  after  solely  for  the  sake  of  pleasure?

1  '2  Suppose  when  Xerxes  led  fortji  lijs  huge  fleets
and  armies  of  horse  and  foot,  bridged  the  Helles-
pont, cut  through  Athos,  marched  over  sea  and
sailed  over  land — suppose  on  his  reaching  Greece
with  his  great  armada  some  one  asked  him  the
reason  for  all  this  enormous  apparatus  of  warfare,
aiid  he  were  to  reply  that  he  had  wanted  to  procure
some  honey  from  HymettusI  surely  he  would
be  thought  to  have  had  no  adequate  motive  for
so  vast  an  undertaking.  So  with  our  Wise  Man,
equipped  and  adorned  with  all  the  noblest  aecom-
plishmenls  and  virtues,  not  like  Xerxes  traversing
the  seas  on  foot  and  the  mountains  on  shipboard,  hut
mentally  embracing  sky  and  earth  and  sea  in  their
entirety— to  say  that  this  man's  aim  is  pleasure  is  to
say  that  all  his  high  endeavour  is  for  the  sake  of  a
little  honey.

I ;}  No,  Torquatus,  believe me,  we are born for

loftier  and  more  splendid  purposes.  Nor  is  this
evidenced  by  the  mental  faculties  alone,  including
as  they  do  a  memory  for  countless  facts,  in  your
case  indeed  a  memory  of  unlimited  range ;  a  power
of  forecasting  the  future  little  sliort  of  divination ;
the  sense  of  modesty  to  curb  the  appetites;  love  of
justice,  the  faithful  guardian  of  human  society;  con-
tempt of  pain  and  death,  remaining  firm  and  stead-
fast when  toil  is  to  be  endured  and  danger  under-
gone. These  are  our  mental  endowments.  But  1
would  also  have  you  consider  our  bodily  frame,  and
our  organs  of  sensation,  which  latter  like  the  other

Krts  of  the  body  yoo  for  your  part  will  esteem  not
the  comrades  merely  but  actually  as  the  servants  oi
20.';

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

114  tutum  aed  miiiistri  etiam  videbuntur.  Quod  si  in  ipso
corpore  multa  voliiptati  praeponenda  sunt,  ut  vires,
valetudo,  velocitas,  piilchritudo,  quid  tandem  in
anirais  censes  ?  in  qiiibus  doctissimi  illi  veteres  inesse
quiddam  caeleste  et  divinuni  putaverunt.  Quod  si
essct  in  voluptate  summum  bonum,  ut  dicitis.
optabile  esset  in  maxima  voluptnte  nullo  inter-
vallo  interiecto  dies  noctesqueversari,  cum  omnes
sensus  dulcedine  omni  quasi  perfusi  moverentur.
Quis  est  autem  dignus  nomine  hominis  qui  unum
diem  totum  velit  esse  in  genere  isto  voluptatis?
Cyrenaici  quidein  noii  recusant;  vestri  haec  vere-

1 1 5  cundius,  illi  fortasse  constantius.  Sed  lustremus
animo  non  has  niaximas  artes  quibus  qui  carebant
inertes  a  maioribus  noniinaljantur,  sed  qunero  num
existimes,  non  dico  Honierum,  Archilochuni,  Pinda-
rum,  sed  Phidian,  Polyclitum,  Zeuxim  ad  voluptatem
artes  suas  direxisse.  Ergo  opifex  plus  sibi  proponet
ad  formarum  quam  (.'ivis  excellens  ad  factorum  pul-
chritudinem?  Quae  autem  est  alia  causa  erroris
tanti,  tain  longe  ktcque  difTusi,  nisi  quod  is  qui
voluptatem  summum  bonum  esse  deeemit  non  cum
ea  parte  animi  in  qua  inest  ratio  atque  consilium,
sed'cum  cupiditate,  id  est  cum  animi  levissima  parte
detiberat?  Quaero  enim  de  te,  si  sunt  di,  ut  vos
etiam  putatis,  qui  possint  esse  beati  cum  voluptates
corpore  percipere  non  possint,  aut  si  sine  eo  genere
voluptatis  beati  sunt,  cur  similem  animi  usum  in
sapient e  esse  nolitis.

206

^K  BOOK  II.  xsxiv

.1  the  virtues.  Bui  it' even  the  body  has  many  attributes
of  higher  value  than  pleasure,  such  as  strength,  health,
beauty,  speed  of  foot,  what  pray  think  you  of  the
mind  ?  The  wisest  sages  of  antiquity  believed  that  the
mind  contains  an  element  of  the  celestial  and  divine.
Whereas  if  the  Chief  Good  consisted  in  pleasure  as
your  school  avers,  the  ideal  of  happiness  would  be
to  pass  days  and  nights  in  the  enjoyment  of  the
keenest  pleasure,  without  a  moment's  intermission,
every  sense  drenched  and  stimulated  with  every  sort
of  dehght.  But  who  that  is  worthy  to  be  called  a
human  being  would  choose  to  pass  a  single  entire
day  in  pleasure  of  that  description?  The  Cyrenaics,
it  is  true,  do  not  repudiate  it;  on  this  point  your
friends  are  more  decent,  but  the  Cyrenaics  perhaps

1 5  more  consistent  But  let  us  pass  in  review  not  these
arts'  of  first  importance,  a  lack  of  whicli  with  our
ancestors  gave  a  man  the  name  of  inert'  or  good-
for-nothing,  but  1  ask  you  whether  you  believe  that,
I  do  not  say  Homer,  Archilochus  or  Pindar,  but
Phidias,  Polyclitus  and  Zeuxis  regarded  the  purpose
of  their  art  as  pleasure.  Then  shall  a  craftsman
have  a  higher  ideal  of  external  than  a  distinguished
citizen  of  moral  beauty  ?  But  what  else  is  the
cause  of  an  error  so  profound  and  so  very  widely
diffused,  than  the  fact  that  he  who  decides  that
pleasure  is  the  Chief  Good  judges  the  question  not
with  the  rational  and  deliberative  part  of  his  mind,
but  with  its  lowest  part,  the  faculty  of  desire?  For
I  ssk  you,  if  gods  exist,  as  your  school  too  believes,
how  can  they  be  happy,  seeing  that  they  cannot
enjoy  bodily  pleasures?  or,  if  they  are  happy  without
that  kind  of  pleasure,  why  do  you  deny  that  the  Wise
Man  is  capable  of  a  Uke  purely  mental  activity?
207

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
)  XXXV.  '  Lege  laudatioiies,  Torquate,  non  eonrai
qui  sunt  ab  Huiiiero  laudati,  non  Cyri,  non  Agesilai,
non  Aristidi  aut  Themistocli,  non  Pliilippi  aut  Ale-
xandri ;  lege  nostrorum  Iioniinum,  lege  vestrae  fami-
liae;  neminem  videbis  italaudatumutartifex  callidus
coniparandarum  voluptatum  diceretur.  Non  elogia
monumentoriim  id  significant,  velut  hoc  ad  portam;

1 1  7  MABIUM  I'uissE  viHUH.  Idne  consensisse  de  Calatino
plurimas  gentes  arbitramur,  primariom  populi  fuisse
quod  praestantissiraus  fuisset  in  conficiendis  volapta-
tibuE?  Ergo  in  iis  adulescentibus  bonam  spem  esse
dicemuB  et  magnam  indolem  quos  suis  commodis  in-
servituros  et  quidquid  ipsis  expediat  facturos  arbitra-
bimur  ?  Nonne  videmus  quanta  perturbatio  rerum
oninium  consequatur,  quanta  confusio?  Tolbtur
beneficium,  tollitur  gratia,  quae  sunt  vincla  concor-
diae.  Nee  enim  cum  tua  causa  cui  commodes  bene-
ficium itlud  habendum  est,  sed  feneratio,  nee  gratia
deberi  videtur  ei  qui  sua  causa  commodaverit.
Maximas  vero  virtutes  iacere  omnes  necesse  est
voluptate  dominante;  sunt  etiam  turpitudines  plu-
rimae  quae,  nisi  honestas  natura  plurimum  valeat,
cur  non  cadant  in  sapientem  non  est  facile  defen-

1 1  a  dcre.  Ac  ne  plura  complectar  (sunt  enin»  innume-
rabilia),  bene  laudata  virtus  voluptatis  aditus  inter-

I

T^SWovTe

W  BOOK  II.  sxxv

1  XXXV.  ''  ReaJ  tlie  panegyrics,  Torquatus,  not  of
the  heroes  praised  by  Homerj  not  of  Cyrus  or  Agesi-
]aus,  Aristides  or  Themistocles,  Philip  or  Alexander  ;
but  read  those  delivered  upon  our  own  great  men,
read  those  of  your  own  family.  You  will  not  find
anyone  extolled  for  liis  skill  and  cunning  in  procuring
pleasures.  This  is  not  the  purport  of  laudatory  epi-
taphs, like  that  one  near  the  city  gate ;

Herel

r  AND  GREATEST  C

Do  we  suppose  that  all  mankind  agreed  that  Hedi
Ciilatinus  was  Rome's  greatest  citizen  because  of  his  "
surpassing  eminence  in  the  acquisition  of  pleasures  ?
'i'hen  are  we  to  say  that  a  youth  is  a  young  man  ot
ffreat  promise  and  high  character,  when  we  judge
Mm  likely  to  study  his  own  interests  and  to  do
whatever  will  be  for  his  personal  advantage  ?  Do
we  not  see  what  a  nniversal  upheaval  and  confusion
would  result  from  such  a  principle  ?  It  does  away
with  generosity  and  with  gratitude,  the  bonds  of
mutual  harmony.  If  you  lend  a  man  money  for
your  own  advantage,  this  cannot  be  considered  an
act  of  generosity— it  is  usury;  no  gratitude  is  owing
to  a  man  who  lends  money  for  gain.  In  fact  if
pleasure  usurps  the  sovereignty,  all  the  cardinal
virtues  nuist  inevitably  be  dethroned;  and  indeed
there  are  a  number  of  morally  base  actions  which
can  with  difficulty  be  proved  inconsistent  with  the
character  of  the  Wise  Man,  unless  it  be  a  law  of
B  nature  that  moral  goodness'should  be  supreme.  Not  pen
to  bring  forward  further  arguments  (for  they  are  "  ^
countless  in  number)  any  honest  panegyric  of
Virtue  must  needs  keep  Pleasure  at  arm's  length.

CICERO  DE  FIN  I  BUS
cludat  necesse  eat  Quod  iam  a  me  exspectare  noli ;
tute  introspice  in  mentera  tuam  ipse  eatnque  omni
cogitatione pertractans percontare ipse te, per-

quam

petuisne  malis  voluptatibus  perfriicns
saepe  usurpabas  traiiquillitate  degere  o
tern  sine  dolore,  assumpto  etiam  illo  quod  v
adiungere  soletis  sed  fieri  non  potest,  sine  doloris
metu,  an,  cum  de  omnibus  gcntibus  optime  mere-
rere,  cum  opem  indigentibus  salutemque  ferres,  vel
Herculis  perpeti  aeruranas.  Sic  enim  maiores  nostri
labores  non  fugiendos  tristissimo  tamen  verbo  aerum-
)  nas  etiam  in  deo  nominaverunt.  Elicerem'  es  te
cogeremque  ut  responderes,  i
lem  ipsuni  ea  quae  pro  salute  gentiun
gessisset  voluptatis  causa  gessisse  diceres."

Quae  cum  dixissem,  Habeo,"  inquit  Torquatus,
ad  quos  ista  referam,  et,  quamquam  aliquid  ipse
e  malo  paratiores."  Fami-
redo,  Sironem  dicis  et  Philodemum,
cum  optimos  viros,  turn  homines  doctissimoa."
Recte,"  inquit,  '  intellegis."  Age  sane,"  in-
quam ;  sed  erat  aequius  Triarium  aliquid  de  dis-
sensione  nostra  iudicare."  Eiuro,"  inquit  arridens,
"iniquum,  hac  quidem  de  re  ;  tu  enim  ista  leiiJus,  hie
Stoicorum  more  nos  vexat,"  TumTriarius;  Posthac
quidem,"  inquit, audacius,  nam  haec  ipsamihierunt

'  ciicetem  Bailer,  Mdv.;  MSS.  cliserfm,  exigtrcm.

poteram,  tamen
Hares  nostros.

^  BOOK II.  XXXV

Do  not  expect  me  further  to  argue  the  point ;  look
within,  study  your  own  consciousness.  Then  after
full  and  careful  introspection,  ask  yourself  the  ques-
tion, would  you  prefer  to  pass  your  whole  life  in
that  state  of  calm  which  you  spoke  of  so  often,
amidst  the  enjo3Tnent  of  unceasing  pleasures,  free
from  all  pain,  and  even  (an  addition  which  your
school  is  fond  of  postulating'  but  which  is  really  im-
possible) free  from  all  fear  of  pain,  or  to  be  a  bene-
factor of  the  entire  human  race,  and  to  bring  succour
and  safety  to  the  distressed,  even  at  the  cost  of
enduring  the  agonies  of  a  Hercules?  Agonies — that
was  indeed  the  sad  and  gloomy  name  which  our
ancestors  bestowed,  even  in  the  case  of  a  god,  upon

19  labours  which  yet  were  not  to  be  evaded.  I  would
press  my  question  and  drag  an  answer  from  yon,
were  I  not  afraid  lest  you  should  say  that  Hercules
himself  in  the  toils  and  labours  that  he  wrought  for
the  preservation  of  mankind  was  acting  for  the  sake
of  pleasure  I"

Here  I  concluded.  I  am  at  no  loss  for  authori-
ties," said  Torquatus,  to  whom  to  refer  your  argu-
ments. I  might  be  able  to  do  some  execution  myself,
but  1  prefer  to  find  better  equipped  champions."
No  doubt  you  allude  to  our  excellent  and  learned
friends  Siro  and  Philodemus."  You  are  right,"  he
replied.  Pray  appeal  to  them,"  said  1  ;  but  it
would  be  fairer  to  let  Triarius  pronounce  some  ver-
dict on  our  dispute."  I  formally  object  to  him  as
prejudiced,"  he  rejoined  with  a  smile,  at  all  events
on  this  issue.  You  have  shown  us  some  mercy,  but
Triarius  lays  about  him  like  a  true  Stoic."  Oh,"
interposed  Triarius,  'I'll  fight  more  boldly  still  next
time,  for  I  shall  have  the  arguments  I  have  just
p2  21]

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ]

ill  promptu  quae  i»odo  iiudivi ;  nee  ante  aggredia
quatn  te  ab  istis  qiios  dicis  instructum  videi'o."  Quai
cum  esspiit  dicta,  fineiii  fecimus  et  anibiilnndi  et  dis
piitundi.

HSIii

BOOK  II.  XXXV
heard  rcndy  to  my  Imtid,  though  I  won't  «ttack  you
till  I  see  you  liave  been  nrmed  by  the  instructors
whom  you  mention. "  And  with  tliese  words  we
brought  our  promenade  and  our  discussion  to  an  end
together.

M.  TULLIl  CICERONIS

FINIBUS  BONORUM  ET  MALORUM
LIBER  TERTIUS

i  I.  Voluptatem  quidem.  Brute,  si  ipsa  pro  se  lo-
quatur  nee  tarn  pertinaces  habeat  patronos,  conces-
suram  arbitror,  convictam  superiore  libro,  dignitati.
Etenim  sit  impudens  si  virtuti  diutius  repugoet  aiit
si  honestis  iucunda  anteponatautplurisessecontendnt
dulcedinem  corporis  ex  eave  iiatam  laetitiam  quai»
gravitatem  animi  atque  constantiam.  Quare  illiiin
quidem  dimittamus  et  suis  se  liiiibus  tenere  iubeamiis,
ne  blanditiis  eius  illecebrisque  impediatur  disputandi

2  severitas.  Quaerenduni  est  enim  ubi  sit  illud  sum-
mum  bonum  quod  reperire  ('olumtis,  quoniam  et
voluptas  ab  eo  remota  est  et  eadem  fere  contra  eos
dici  possunt  qui  vacuitatem  dolorls  (inem  bonoruni
esse  voluerunt;  nee  vcro  ullum  probetur  oportet'
summum  bonum  quod  virtute  careat.  qua  nihil  possit^
esse  praestantius.

Itaque  quamquam  i
quato  est  habitus  non
Acrior  est  cum  Stoicis  parata  contentio.  Quae
enim  de  voluptate  dicuntur,  ea  nee  acutissime
nee abseoadite  disseruntur; neque enim  qui  de-

)  sermone  qui  cum  Tor-
lissi  fuimus,  tamen  haec

DE  FINIBUS

1  I.  Mv  DEAR  Brutus.- — Were  Pleasure  to  speak  for  intredneikm  tt
herself,  in  default  of  such  redoubtable  advocates  as  rv^KoioiiSlt
she  now  has  to  defend  her,  my  behef  is  that  she
would  own  defeat.  Vanquished  by  the  arguments
of  our  preceding  Book,  she  would  yield  the  victory
to  true  Worth.  Indeed  she  would  be  lost  to  shame
if  she  pei'sisted  any  longer  in  the  battle  against
Virtue,  and  rated  what  is  pleasant  above  what  is
morally  good,  or  maintained  that  bodily  enjoyment
or  the  mental  gratification  which  Springs  from  it  is
of  higher  value  than  firmness  and  dignity  of  character.
Let  us  then  give  Pleasure  her  dismissal,  and  bid  her
keep  within  her  own  domains,  lest  her  charms  and
blandishments  put  snares  in  the  way  of  strict  philo-

2  sophical  debate.  The  question  before  us  is,  where  is
that  Chief  Good,  which  is  the  object  of  our  inquiry,
to  be  found f  Pleasure  we  have  eliminated;  the
doctrine  that  the  End  of  Goods  consists  in  freedom
from  pain  is  open  to  almost  identical  objections;  and
in  fact  no  Chief  Good  can  be  accepted  that  is  with-
out the  element  of  Virtue,  the  most  excellent  thing
that  can  exist.

Hence  although  in  our  debate  with  Torquatus  siokiim
we  did  not  spare  our  strength,  neverthele.ss  a  keener  ['^ "pTi
struggle  now  awaits  us  with  the  Stoics.  For  pleasure  ['"1"™^
is  a  topic  that  does  not  lend  itself  to  very  subtle  or  logiodm
profound  discussion ;  its  champions  are  little  skilled  in  ''"'"''""i'

2ir

nOOgTc

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
fendunt  earn  versuti  in  disserendo sunt nee qui

3  contra  dicunt  causani  difficilem  repellunt.  Ipse  etiam
dicit  Epicurus  ne  argumentandum  quidem  esse  de
voluptate,  quod  sit  positum  iudicium  eius  in  sensibus,
ut  commoner!  nos  satis  sit,  nihil  attineat  doeeri.
Quare  ilia  nobis  simplex  fuit  in  utramque  partem
disputatio.  Nee  enim  in  Torquati  sermone  quidqaaoi
implicatum  aut  tortuosum  fuit,  nostraque,  ut  milii
videtur,  dilucida  oratio.  Stoicorum  aut  em  non
ignoras  quam  sit  subtile  vel  spinosuni  potius  disse-
rendi  genus,  idque  cum  Graecis,  turn  magis  nobis
quibus  etiam  verba  parienda  sunt  imponendaque
nova  rebus  no  vis  nomina.  Quod  quidem  nemo
niediocriter  doctus  niirnbitui",  cogitans  in  omni  arte
cuius  usus  vulgaris  communisque  non  sit  niultam
ncivitatem  nominum  esse  cum  constituantur  eanim
rerum vocabiila quae in quaque arte versentur.

(■  Itaque  et  dialectic!  et  phjsici  verbis  utuntur  iis  quae
ipsi  Graeciae  nota  non  sint,  geometrae  vero  et
musici,  grammatici  etiam,  more  quodam  loquuntur
siio;  ipsae  rhetorum  artes,  quae  sunt  totae  forenaes
atque  populares,  verbis  tamen  in  doeendo  quasi
privatis  utuntur  ac  siiis.

II,  Atque  ut  oniittam  has  artes  elegantes  et  in-
genuas,  ne  opifices  quidem  tueri  sua  artificia  possent
nisi  vocabulis  uterentur  nobis  incognitis,  usitatb  sibi.
Quin  etiam fagri  cultur^  quae  abhorret  ab  omni
politiore  elegantia,  tamen  e;is  res  in  quibus  versatur

218

■^  HOOK  HI.  i-ii

dia]et:tic,Biid  their  adversaries  have  no  difficult  case  to

3  refute.  InfoctEpicurushimself  declares  thatthereis
nooccasion  to  argue  about  pleasure  at  all :  its  criterion
resides  in  the  senses,  so  that  proof  is  entirely  super-
fluous ;  a  reminder  of  the  facts  is  all  that  is  needed.
Therefore  our  preceding  debate  consisted  of  a  simple
statement  of  the  case  on  either  -side.  There  was
nothing  abstruse  or  intricate  in  the  discourse  of
TorquatuSj  and  my  own  exposition  was,  I  believe,  as
clear  as  daylight.  But  the  Stoics,  as  you  are  aware,
afTect  an  exceedingly  subtle  or  rather  crabbed  style
of  argument ;  and  if  the  Greeks  find  it  so,  still  more
must  we,  who  have  actually  to  create  a  vocabulary,
and  to  invent  new  terms  to  convey  new  ideas.  This
necessity  will  cause  no  surprise  to  anyone  of  moderate
learning,  when  lie  reflects  that  in  every  branch  oi
science  lying  outside  the  range  of  common  everyday
practice  there  must  always  be  a  large  degree  of
novelty  in  the  vocabulary,  when  it  comes  to  fixing  a
terminology  to  denote  the  conceptions  with  which

4  the  science  in  question  deals.  TTius  Logic  and  Naturiil
Philosophy  alike  make  use  of  terms  unfamiliar  even
to  Greece;  Geometry,  Music,  Grammar  also,  have  an
idiom  of  their  own.  Even  the  manuals  of  Rhetoric,
which  belong  entirely  to  the  practical  sphere  and  to
the  life  of  the  world,  nevertheless  employ  for  pur-
poses of  instruction  a  sort  of  private  and  peculiar
phraseology.

II.  And  to  leave  out  of  account  these  liberal  arts  Apuiogy  lo
and  accomplishments,  even  artisans  would  be  unable  "oPd^lnL
to  preserve  the  tradition  of  their  crafts  if  they  did
not  make  use  of  words  unknown  to  us  though
familiar  to  themselves,  Nay,  agriculture  itself,  a  sub-
ject entirely  unsusceptible  of  literary  refinement,  has
219

CICERO  DF,  I-INIBUS
noiMinibus  notnvit  novie.  Quo  magis  hoc  philosopho
faciendum  est;  ars  est  enim  philosophin  vibte,  dc
qua  dissereiis  arripere vcrbn  de  foro  iion  potest.

3  Quamquam  ex  omnibus  philosophis  Stoici  pluriraa
novaverunt,  Zeitoque  eorum  priiiceps  non  tam  rerum
inventor  ftiit  quaih  verborum  novorum.  Quod  si  in
ea  lingua  quam  plerique  uberiorem  putant  concessum
est  ut  doctissimi  homines  de  rebus  non  pervngatis
inusitntis  verbis  uterentnr,  qitanto  id  nobis  magis
est  roncedendum  qui  ea  nunc  primiim  audemus
attingere?  Et  quoniam  saepe  diximus,  ct  quideni
cum  aliqua  querela  non  Graecorum  modo,  sed  eorum
etiam  qui  se  Graecos  niagis  qiiani  nostros  liaberi
volunt,  nos  non  modo  non  vinci  a  Graecis  verborum
copia  sed  esse  in  ea  etiam  snperiorea,  elaborandum
est  ut  hoc  non  in  nostris  solum  artibus  sed  etiam  in
illorum  ipsoruni  assequamur.  (Juamquara  ea  verba
quibus  instituto  veterum  utimur  pro  Latinis,  ut  ipsa
pliilosophia,  ut  rhetoriea,  dialectica,  grammatics,
geometria,  miisica,  quamquam  Latine  ea  dici  pote-
rant,  tamen  quoniam  usu  percepta  sunt  nostra  duca-
mus. Atque  haec  quidem  de  rerum  nominibus.

6  De  ipsis  rebus  auteni  saepenumero,  Brute,  vereor
ne  reprehendar,  cum  haec  ad  te  scribam,  qui  cum
in  pliilosophia,  turn  in  optimo  genere  philosophiae
tantum  processeris. Quod  si  facerem  quasi  te  eru-

"Cp.  1,  Sff.

-I

W  BOOK  III.  ii

yet  had  to  coin  teclmical  terms  to  denote  tlie  things
with  which  it  is  occupied.  All  the  more  is  the
philosopher  compelled  to  do  likewise ;  for  philosophy
is  the  Science  of  Life,  and  cannot  be  discussed  in

)  language  taken  at  random  from  the  street.  Still  of
all  the  philosophers  the  Stoics  have  been  the  greatest
innovators  in  this  respect,  and  Zeno  their  founder
was  rather  an  inventor  of  new  terms  than  a  dis-
coverer of  new  idea!j.  But  if  men  so  learned,  using
a  language  generally  supposed  to  be  more  copious
than  our  own,  were  allowed  in  handling  recondite
subjects  to  employ  unfamiliar  terms,  how  much
more  right  have  we  to  claim  this  licence  who  are
ventuiing  now  to  approach  these  topics  for  the  first
time?  Moreover  we  have  often  declared,  and  this
under  some  protest  not  from  Greeks  only  but  also  from
persons  who  would  lather  be  considered  Greeks  than
Romans,'  that  in  fullness  of  vocabulary  wc  are  not
merely  not  surpassed  by  the  Greeks  but  are  actually
their  superiors.  We  are  therefore  bouiid  to  do  our
utmost  to  make  good  this  claim  not  in  our  native
arts  only  but  also  in  those  that  belong  to  the  Greeks
themselves.  However,  words  which  the  practice  of
past  generations  permits  us  to  employ  as  Latin,  e.g.
the  term  'philosophy'  itself,  or  'rhetoric,'  'logic,'
grammar,'  geometry,'  music '  we  may  consider  as
being  our  own  ;  the  ideas  might  it  is  true  have  been
translated  into  Latin,  but  the  Greek  terms  have  been
naturalized  by  use. So  much  for  terminology.

i  As  regards  my  subject,  I  often  fear,  Brutus,  that  1  aod  for  di
shall  meet  with  censure  for  writing  upon  this  topic  to  "J,'|I^'^
you,  who  are  yourself  so  great  an  adept  in  philosophy,  pllUc«ph)^
andinthehighest  branch  of  philosophy.''  Did  I  assume
the  attitude  of  an  instructor,  such  censure  would  be
221

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
diens,  iiire  reprehenderer.  Sed  al>  co  plurimum
absum  neque  ut  ea  co{pioscas  quae  tibi  notissima
sunt  ad  te  mitto,  sed  quia  facillime  in  nomine  tuo
acquiesco  et  quia  te  habeo  aequissimum  eorum  studio-
rum  quae  mihi  comtnunia  tecum  sunt  existimatorem
et  iudjcem.  Attendes  igitur  ut  soles  diligenterj
eaiuque  controversiam  diiudicabis  quae  mibi  fuit
cum  avunculo  tuo,  divino  ac  singulari  viro.

'  Nam  in  Tusculano  cum  essem  vellemque  e  biblio-
theca  pueri  Luculli  quibusdam  libris  uti,  veni  in  eius
villam  ut  eos  ipse  ut  solebam  depromerem.  Quo  cum
venissem,  M.  Catonem  quem  ibi  esse  nescieram  vidi  in
bibliotheca  sedentem,  multis  circumfusum  Stoicorum
libris.  Erat  enim  ut  scis  in  eo  aviditas  k-gendi,  nee
satiari  poterat ;  quippe  qui  ne  reprensionem  quidem
vulgi  inaneni  refomiidana  in  ipsa  curia  soleret  legere
saepe  dum  senstus  cogeretur,  nihil  operae  rei  publicae
detrahcns;  quo  magis  turn  in  summo  otio  maximaque
copia  quasi  helluari  libris,  si  hoc  verbo  in  tam  clara

i  re  utendum  est,  videbatur.  Quod  cum  accidisset,
ut  alter  alterum  necopinato  videremus,  surrexit  sta-
tim.  Deinde  prima  ilia  quae  in  congressu  solemus :
"Quid  tu,"  inquit,  "hue?  a  villa  enim  credo;"  et:
Si  ibi  te  esse  scissem,  ad  te  ipse  veitissem."
"Heri,"  inquem,  "ludis  cotnmissis  ex  urbe  profectus

222

^^^^^e

BOOK  III.  ii
But  nothing  could  be  farther  from  rafL
P  dedicate  my  work  to  you,  not  to  teach  you  what
I  know  extremely  well  already,  but  because  your
e  gives  me  a  very  comforting  sense  of  support,
and  because  1  find  in  you  a  most  impartial  judge  and
critic  of  the  studies  which  I  share  with  yourself.
You  will  therefore  grant  me,  as  always,  your  closest
attention,  and  act  as  umpire  of  the  debate  which  1
held  with  that  remarkable  man  of  genius,  your  uncle.

'  I  was  down  at  my  place  at  Tusculum,  and  wanted  Sc«
to  consult  some  books  from  the  library  of  the  young  „01
Lucullus ;  so  I  went  to  his  country-house,  as  I  was  in
the  habit  of  doing,  to  help  myself  to  the  volumes  I
needed.  On  my  arrival,  seated  in  the  library  I
found  Marcus  Cato;  I  had  not  known  he  was  there.}
He  was  surrounded  by  piles  of  books  on  Stoicism  ;l
for  he  possessed,  as  you  are  aware,  a  voracious  appe-
tite for  reading,  and  could  never  have  enough  of  it ;
Indeed  it  was  often  his  practice  actually  to  brave  the '
idle  censure  of  the  mob  by  reading  in  the  senate-
house  itself,  while  waiting  for  the  senate  to  assemble,
— he  did  not  steal  any  attention  fi-om  public  business.
So  it  may  well  be  believed  that  when  1  found  him
taking  a  complete  holiday,  with  a  vast  supply  of
books  at  command,  he  had  the  air  of  indulging  in  a
literary  debauch,  if  the  term  may  be  applied  to  so

i  honourable  an  occupation.  Upon  this  chance  en-
counter, each  of  us  being  equally  surprised  to  see
the  other,  he  at  once  rose,  and  we  began  to  exchange
the  usual  greetings.  "What  brings  you  here?"  cried
he ;  "  You  are  from  your  country-seat,  I  suppose.  Had
I  known  you  were  there,"  he  continued,  "  I  should
have  anticipated  you  with  a  visit."  Yes,"  I
answered, the  games  began  yesterday,  so  I  came

i^

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
veni  ad  vesperum. Causa  autem  fuit  hui

iiiendi

ut  quosdnm  liinc  libros  promerem.  Et  quidem,  Cato,
lianc  totam  copiam  iam  Lucullo  nostro  iiotam  esse
oportebit ;  nana  liis  libris  eum  malo  quam  reliquo
ornatu  villae  delectari.  Est  enim  mihi  magnae  curae
(quamquam  hoc  quidem  proprium  tuum  munus  est)
ut  ita  enidiatur  ut  et  patri  et  Caepioni  nostra  et  tibi
tam  propinquo  respondeat. Laboro  aut«m  non  sine

1  et  a

ignoras  quanti  fecerim  Caepioiiem,  qui,  ut  opiiiia
mea  fert,  in  principibus  iain  esset  si  viveret)  et'
Lucullus  mihi  versatur  ante  oculos,  vir  eum  omnibus'
excellens,  turn  mecum  et  ainicitia  et  omni  voluntate
9  sententiaque  coniunetos."  Praeclare,"  inquit,  facis
eum  et  eorum  memoriam  tenes  quorum  uterqiie  tibi
testamento  liberos  suos  coramendavit,  et  puerum
diligis.  Quod  autem  nieum  munus  dJL'is  non  equidem
recuso,  sed  te  adiungo  socium.  Addo  etiam  illud,
multa  iam  mihi  dare  signa  puci'um  et  pudoris  et
ingeiii;  sed  aetatem  vides."  Video  equidem,"
iuquam ;  sed  tamen  iam  infici  debet  iis  artibus  quas
si  duni  est  tener  combiberit,  ad  maiora  veniet  para-
Sic;  et  quidem  diligentius  saepiusque  ista
ur  inter  nos  agemusque  communiter.  Sed
us,"  inquitj  si  placet,"  Itaque  fecimus.
'  Halm  conj.  L.  Lucullus,
'  Baiter  conj.  omnibus  iiirtjitibus.
ii  The  young'  Lucullus's  grandfather,  Q.  Servilius  Caepio,
was  quaestor  loo  B.C.  and  died  90  B.C.  when  Cicero  was  16.
But  the  following  words  seem  to  refer  lo  a  Caepio  who,  had
he  liol  died  prematurely,  would  be  in  the  prime  of  life  when
Cicero  writes.  This  must  mean  the  Caepio  of  the  pre-
ceding sentence,  LncuUus's  uncle,  who  may  well  have  left
Cicero  as  ihe  guardian  of  his  son,  as  is  stated  below.  We
niiiy  assume  that  avi  is  a  slip,  either  of  Cicero's  or  of  a
copyist's,  for  avunmli  (Schlitz).
294

loquen

residai

■^  BOOK  III.  ii

out  of  town,  and  arrived  late  in  the  afternoon.  My
reason  for  coming  on  here  was  to  get  some  booka
from  the  library.  By  tlie  way,  Cato,  it  will  soon  be
time  for  otir  friend  Liicullus  to  make  acquaintance
with  this  tine  collection ;  for  1  hope  he  will  take
more  pleasure  in  his  library  than  in  all  the  other
appointments  of  his  country-house.  I  am  extremely
anxious  (though  of  course  the  responsibility  belongs
especially  to  you)  that  he  should  have  the  kind  of
education  that  will  turn  him  out  after  the  same
pattern  as  his  father  and  our  dear  Caepio,  and  also
yourself,  to  whom  he  is  so  closely  related.  And  I
have  every  motive  for  my  interest  in  him.  I  cherish
the  memory  of  his  grandfather*  {and  you  are  aware
how  highly  I  esteemed  Caepio,  who  in  my  belief  would
to-day  be  in  the  front  rank,  were  he  still  alive).  And
also  Lucullus  is  always  present  to  my  mind ;  he  was
a  man  of  surpassing  eminence,  united  to  me  in  senti-
f)  ment  and  opinion  as  well  as  by  friendship."  I  com-
mend you,"  rejoined  Cato,  for  your  loyalty  to  the
memory  of  men  who  both  bequeathed  their  cliildren
to  your  care,  as  well  as  for  your  affectionate  interest
in  the  lad.  My  own  responsibility,  as  you  call  it,  I
by  no  means  disown,  but  1  enlist  you  to  share  it
with  me.  Moreover  I  may  say  that  the  youth
already  seems  to  me  to  show  many  signs  both  of
modesty  and  talent;  but  you  know  how  young  he
is."  I  do,"  said  I,  but  nil  the  same  it  is  time  for  him
to  be  dipping  into  studies  which,  if  allowed  to  soak
in  at  this  impressionable  age,  will  render  him  better
equipped  when  he  comes  to  the  business  of  life."
True,  and  we  will  discuss  this  matter  again  several
times  more  fully  and  takecommonavtion,  Butletusbe
seated,"  he  said,  "if  agreeable  to  you."  So  we  sat  down,
Q  225

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

10  III.  Turn  ille :  Tu  autem  eum  ipse  tantum  libro-
nim  habeas,  quos  hie  tandem  requiris?"  "Commen-
tarios  quosdam,"  iiiqiiam,  Aristotelios,  quos  Iiic
Bciebani  esse,  veni  ut  auferrem,  quos  legerem  duni
essem  otiosus;  quod  quidem  nobis  non  saepe  con-
tingit."  "Quam  vellem,"  inquit,  "te  ad  Stoicos
inclinavisses !  Erat  eninij  si  cuiusquani,  certe  tuum
nihil  praeter  virtuteni  in  bonis  ducere."  Vide  ne
magis,  inquam,  tuum  fuerit,  cum  re  idem  tibi  quod
roilii  videretur,  non  nova  te  rebus  nomina  imponere.
Ratio  enim  nostra  consentit,  pugnat  oratio."  Mi-
nime  vero,"  inquit  illc,  consentit.  Quidquid  enim
praeter  id  quod  bonestum  sit  expetcndum  esse  dise-
ris  in  bonisque  numeraveris,  et  honestum  ipsuin;
quasi  virtutis  lumen,  exstinxeris  et  virtutem  penitns

1 1  everteris."  Dicuntur  ista,  Cato,  magniiicc,"  in-
quam; sed  videsne  verborum  gloriam  tibi  cam
Pyrrhone  et  cum  Aristone,  qui  omnia  exaequant,
esse  eommunem?  de  quibus  cupio  scire  quid  sentias."

Egone  quaeris,"  inquit,  quid  sentiam?  quosbonos
viros,  fortes,  iustos,  moderatos  aut  audivimus  in  re
publica  fuisse  aut  ipsi  vidimus,  qui  sine  u!la  doctrina,
naturam  ipsam  secuti.  multa  laudabilia  fecerunt,  cos
melius  a  natura  institutos  fuisse  quam  institui  potuis-
sent  a  philosophia,  si  uUam  aliam  probavissent  praeter
eam  quae  nihil  aliudin  bonis  haberetnisi  honestum,
nihil  nisi  turpe  in  malis :  ceterae  philosophorum  dtsci-

226

BOOK III.  iii
III.  Cato  then  resumed: But  what  pray  are  the  Ptdimin.iry
books  that  you  must  come  here  for,  when  you  have  so  csta:  if  any-
large  a  library  ol"  your  own?" "l have  come  to  SJ^|'?S?^^ ia
fetch  some  commentaries  on  Aristotle,"  I  replied,  desirable,  VMui
which  I  knew  were  here, 1  wanted  to  read  them  porcaniibe'
during  my  holiday; I  do  not  often  get  any  leisure."  ^if^^^n^iV"
How  I  wish,"  said  he, that  you  had  tlirnwii  in  aiwayahappy.
your  lot  with  the  Stoics! You of  all men might
have  been  expected  to  reckon  virtue  as  the  only
good." Perhaps  you  might  rather  have  been  ex-
pected," I  answered, to  refrain  from  adopting  a,
new  terminology,  when  in  substance  you  think  as  I
do. Our  principles  agree ;  it  is  our  language  that  is
at  variance." '  Indeed,"  he  rejoined, they  do  not
agree  in  the  least. Once  pronounce  anything  to  be
desirable,  once  reckon  anything  as  a  good,  other  than
Moral  Worth,  and  you  have  extinguished  the  very
light  of  virtue.  Moral  Worth  itself,  and  overthrown
I virtue  entirely." That  all  sounds  very  fine,  Cato,"
I  replied, but  are  you  aware  that  you  share  your
lofty  pretensions  with  Pyrrho  and  with  Aristo,  who
make  all  things  equal  in  value  ?  I  should  like  to  know
what  your  opinion  is  of  them." My  opinion?  "  he
said. '  You  ask  what  my  opinion  is  ? That  those
good,  brave,  just  and  temperate  men,  of  whom  we
have  heard  as  having  lived  m  our  state,  or  whom  we
have  ourselves  seen,  who  under  the guidance  of
Nature  herself,  without  the  aid  of  any  learning,  did
niany  glorious  deeds,^that  these  men  were  better
educated  by  nature  than  they  could  possibly  have
been  by  philosophy  had they  accepted  any  other
system of  philosophy than the one that counts
Moral  Worth  the  only  good  and  Moral  Baseness  the
only  evil. All  other  philosophical  systems — in  vary-

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

plinae,  omnino  alia  magts  alia,  sed  tamen  omnes  quae
rem  ullam  virtutis  expertem  aut  in  bonis  aut  in  malis
numerent,  eas  non  modo  nihil  adiuvare  arbitror  neque
afferre^  quo  meliores  siinus,  sed  ipsam  depravare  natn-
ram.  Namnislhoc  obtineatur,  id  solum  bonum  esse  quod
honestum  sit,  nuUo  modo  probari  possit  beatam  vi-
tam  virtute  effici ;  quod  si  ila  sit,  cur  opera  philoso-
pliiae  sit  danda,  nescio.  Si  enim  sapiens  aliquis  raiser
esse  possit,  ne  ego  istam  gloriosam  memorabilemque
virtutem  non  magno  aestimandam  putem,"
J  IV.  Quae  adhuc,  Cato,  a  te  dicta  sunt,  eadem,"
inquam,  dicere  posses  si  sequerere  Pyrrhonem  aut
Aristonem.  Nee  enim  ignoras  iis  istud  honestum
non  summum  modo  sed  etiara  ut  tu  vis  solum  bonum
ri ;  quod  si  ita  est,  sequitur  id  ipsum  quod  te

esse  sapientes.
inquam,  sen-
Minime  vero
m  virtutis  hoc
nduni  naturain
exaequaverunt

velle  video,  omnes semper beatos

Hosne  igitur  laudas  et  haiic  eorum,'

tentiam  sequi  nos  censes  oportere  ?  "

istorum  quidem,"  inquit ; cum  en

proprium  sit,  carum  reruni  quae  sec

sint  habere  delectum,  qui  omnia  sii

ut  ill  utramque  partem  ita  paria  redderent  uti  nulla

selectione  uterentur,  hi  virtutem  ipsam  sustulerunt."
( '  Istud  quidem,"  inquam,  optime  dicis;  sed  quaero,

nonne  tibi  faciendum  idem  sit  nihil  dicenti  bonum

quod  non  rectum  honestunique  sit,  rellquarum  rerum

discrimen  omne  tollenti."  Si  quidem,"  iiiqiiit,
|c  '"tollerem;  sed  reiinquo." Quonam  modo?"  in-

'  affetre  edd. ;  affirmarf  MSS.,  and  Mdv. with  mark  of
corruption.
228

BOOK  III.

Ii  reckon ^^H
either  as  ^^|

ive  us  no  ^H

ing  degrees  no  doubt,  but  still  all, — wliitrli  r
anything  of  which  virtue  is  not  an  element  either  ai
a  good  or  an  evil,  do  not  merely,  as  1  hold,  give  u:
assistance  or  support  towards  becoming  better  r
but  are  actually  corrupting  to  the  character. Either .  j.

this  point  must  be  lirmly  maintained,  that  Moral KoHt^T
Worth  is  the  sole  good,  or  it  Is  absolutely  inipos-  ^_

sible  to  prove  that  virtue  constitutes  happiness. And  ^H

in  that  case  I  do  not  see  why  we  sliould  trouble  to  ^H

study  philosophy. For  if  a  Wise Man  could be  ^H

miserable,  1  should  not  set  much  value  on  your
vaunted  and  belauded  virtue."
13  IV.  What  you  have  said  so  far,Cato,"  I  answered,  ciaxo:  Howd
"might  equally  well  be  said  by  a  follower  of  Pyrrho  S^f'^'iVd™'
or  of  Aristo.  They,  as  you  are  aware,  think  as  you  ''>Y''°i'i  TSj!!!
do,  that  this  Moral  Worth  you  speak  of  is  not  merely  Bbsoiuiriy  inS
the  cliief  but  the  only  Good;  and  from  this  of '*™'  '''"'°'
necessity  follows  the  proposition  tliat  I  notice  you
maintain,  namely,  that  the  Wise  are  always  happy.
Do  you  then,"  I  asked,  commend  these  philosophers,
and  thinkthatweought  to  adopt  this  view  of  theirs?"
I  certainly  would  not  have  you  adopt  their  view,"  he
said;  for  it  is  of  tlie  essence  of  virtue  to  exercise
choice  among  the  things  in  accordance  with  nature;
so  that  philosophers  who  make  all  things  absolutely
equal,  rendering  them  indistinguishable  cither  as
better  or  worse,  and  leaving  no  room  for  selection

1 3  among  them,  have  abolished  virtue  itself."  Excel-
lently ■put,"  I  rejoined;  but  pray  are  not  you
committed  to  the  same  position,  if  you  say  that  only
what  is  right  and  moral  is  good,  and  abolish  all  dis-
tinction between  everytliing  else?"  Quite  so,"
said  he, if  I  did  abolish  all  distinction,  but  I  do

14  not." How  so?"  I  said. If  only  virtue,  only  that

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quam.  Si  una.  virtus,  unum  istud  quod  honestuni
appellasj  rectum,  laodabile,  decorum  (erit  enim
tiotius  quule  sit  pSuribus  notatum  vocabulis  idem
declarantibus),  id  igitur,  inqiiam,  si  solum  est  bonum.
quid  liabebis  praeterea  quod  sequare?  aut,  si  nihil
malum  nisi  quod  turpe,  inhonestum,  indecorum,  pra-
vum,  fjagitiosum,  foedum  (ut  hoc  quoque  pluribus
nominibus  insigne  faciamus),  quid  praeterea diccsesse
fugienduni  ? "  Non  ignoranti  tibi,"  inquit,  quid
sim  dicturus,  sed  aliquid,  ut  ego  suspicor,  ex  mea
brevi  responsione  arripere  cupienti  non  respondebo
ad  singula;  explicabo  potius,  quoniam  otiosi  sunius,
nisi  alienum  putas,  totam  Zenonis  Stoicorumque  sen-
tentiam."  Minime  id  quidem,"  inquam,  alienum,
multumque  ad  ea  quae  quaerimus  explicatio  tua
15  ista  profecerit."  Experiamur  igitur,"  inquit;  etsj
habet  haec  Stoicorum  ratio  diiiicilius  quiddam  et
obscurius.  Nam  cum  in  Graeco  sermone  liaec  ipsa
quondam  rerum  nomina  novarum  .  .  . '  non  videban-
tur,  quae  nunc  con.suetudo  diutuma  trivit ;  quid
censes' in  Latino  fore?"  Facillinium  id  quidem
est,"  inquam.  Si  enim  Zenoni  licuitj  cum  rem
aliquam  invenisset  inusitatara,  inauditum  quoque  ei
rei  nomen  imponere,  cur  non  liceat  Catoni?  Nee
tamen  exprimi  verbum  e  verbo  necesse  erit,  ut  inter-
pi-etes  indiserti  solent,  cum  sit  verbum  quod  idem
declaret  niagis  usitatum  ;  equidem  aoleo  etiam,  quod
uno Graeci,  si abter  non  possum,  idem pluribus

'  Mdv. marks  lacuna,  and conjectures novaruin niyfa
eraiit ftrtnda  non  videhanliir,
230

r  BOOK  III.  iv

one  thing  which  you  call  moral,  right,  praiseworthy,

becoming  (for  its  nature  will  be  better  understood  if
it  is  denoted  by  a  number  of  synonyms),  if  then,  I
say,  this  is  the  sole  good,  what  other  object  of  pur-
suit will  you  have  beside  it  ?  or,  if  there  be  nothing
bad but what is base,  dishonourable,  disgraceful,
evil,  sinful,  foul  (to  make  this  clear  also  by  using  a
variety  of  terms),  what else will you pronounce
worthy  to  be  avoided  ?  " You  know  quite  well,"  he
retorted, what  I  am  going  to  say ;  but  I  suspect  you  Caio  proposes
want  to  catch  up  something  in  my  answer  if  I  put  it  s"^''h^ji''°
shortly. So  I  won't  answer  you point  by  point.  Philosophy.
Instead  of  that,  as  we  are  at  leisure,  I  will  expound,
unless  you  think  it  out  of  place,  the  whole  system  of  ^^

Zeno  and  the  Stoics." Out  of  place?"  I  cried.  ^H

'  By  no  means. Your  exposition  tvill  be  of  great  ^^^

assistance  towards  solving  the  questions  we  are  ask-  ^^M

J  ing." Then  let  us  make  the  attempt,"  said  be,  ^^

albeit  there  is  a  considerable  element  of  difficulty  Apology  for  u
and  obscurity  in  this  Stoic  system. For  at  one  time  "'■""'""ey-
even the terms employed in Greek for its  novel
conceptions  seemed  unendurable,  when  they  were
novel,  though  now  daily  use  has  made  them  familiar;
what  then  do  you  think  will  be  the  case  in  Latin?"

Do  not  feel  the  least  difficulty  on  that  score,"  said
I.  If  when  Zeno  invented  some  novel  idea  he
was  permitted  to  denote  it  by  an  equally  unheard-of
word,  why  should  not  Cato  be  permitted  to  do  so
too?  Though  all  the  same  it  need  not  be  a  hard
and  fast  rule  that  every  word  shall  be  represented
by  its  exact  counterpart,  iflhen  there  is  a  more
familiar  word  conveying  the  same  meaning.  That
is  the  way  of  a  clumsy  translator.  Indeed  my  own
practice  is  to  use  several  words  to  give  what  is  ex-

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
fcrbis  esponere.  Et  t&men  puto  emicedi  nobis
oportere  ut  Gr«eco  verbo  utamnr,  si  qnando  minus
oocorret  Latinam,  ne  hcN;  ephippits '  et  acrato-
phoiis'  potius  quam  proegmenis'  et  '  apoproegme-
nis  '  concedatur.  Quamquam  haec  qDidem  praepo-
l6  sita'  rerteet  'reiecta' dicerelicebit."  "Bene bets,"
uoqait,  ''qtKxl  me  adinras;  et  istis  quidein  quae
modo  dixisti  atarpotiDS  Latiius;  in  n  li  liii  iBliiimi  i
si  me  baer^ntem  videbis."  "Sedolo,"  inqa^  '&-
dam.  Sed  forttma  fortes:  quare  eoavc^  ^— em.
Qiiid  enim  possamus  hot
V.  "  Placet  his,"  inqn

uteaKUncc

m  BOOK  in.  iv-v

pressed  iii  Greek  by  one,  if  I  cannot  convey  the
sense  otherwise.  And  at  the  same  time  I  hold  that  wc
may  fairly  claim  the  hcence  to  employ  a  Greek  word
when  no  Latin  word  is  readily  forthcoming.  Why
should  this  licence  he  granted  to  ephippia  (saddles)
and  acratophora  (jars  for  neat  wine)  more  than  to
proegtnena  and  apojtrocgmena}  These  latter  however
it  is  true  may  be  correctly  translated  preferred '  and
J  rejected.'  "  Thanks  for  your  assistance,"  he  said.
I  certainly  shall  use  for  choice  the  Latin  equiva-
lents  you  have  just  given;  and  in  other  cases  you  shall
come  to  my  aid  if  you  see  me  in  difficulties,"  I'll
do  my  best,"  1  replied.  But  fortune  favours  the
bold;  so  pray  make  the  venture.  What  sublimer
occupation  could  we  find  ?  "

V.  He  beffan;  "it  is  the  view  of  those  whose  ststemmi and
system  I  adopt,  that  immediately  upon  birth  (for  g^^'jj^^"^
that  is  the  proper  point  to  start  from)  a  living  i.  The  Niturei
creature  feels  an  attachment  _f or  itself,  and  an  xiw  new-bom  '
impulsO-tO-Preserve  itself  and  to  feeraHection  for  S."i'"1.^'Hl
its  own  constitution  and  for  those  things  which  tend  preservaiion  an
to  preserve  that  constitution ;  while  on  the  other  hand  d'JTci'vt'S  ^^\c
it  conceives  an  antipathy  to  destruction  and  to  those  g^'[JJo''^^5»
things  which  appear  to  threaten  destruction.  In  but  ooipioasuri
proof  of  this  opinion  tliey  urge  that  infants  de^e  ^_

things  conducive  to  their  health  and  r^ect  things  JH

that  are  the  opposite  before  they  have  ever  felt  ^^|

pleasure  or  pain ;  this  would  not  be  the  case,  unless  ^^|

they  felt  an  affection  for  their  own  constitution  and
were  afraid  of  destruction.  But  it  would  be  impossible  ""I

that  they  should  feel  desire  at  all  unless  they  pos-
sessed self- consciousness,  and  consequently  felt  affec-
tion for  theihselves.  This  leads  to  the  conclusion
that  it  is  love  of  self  wliich  supplies  the  primary

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
17  debet  principium  ductum  es.sc  a  se  diliBendo.  In
principiis  aiitem  naturalibus  plerique  Stoici  iion  pu-
tant  voluptatein  esse  ponendam  ;  qnibus  ego  vehe-
menter  assentior,  ne,  si  voluptateni  natura  posuisae
in  lis  rebus  videatur  quae  primae  appetuntur,  multa
turpia  sequantur.  Satis  esse  auteni  argumenti  vide-
tur  quaniobrem  ilia  quae  prima  sunt  ascita  natura
diligamus,  quod  est  nemo  quin,  cum  utrumvis  liceat,
aptas  mnlit  et  integras  omues  partes  corjwris  quain
eodem  usu  imminutas  aut  detortas  habere.

Rerum  autem  cognitiones  (quas  vel  comprehenai-
ones  vel  perceptiones  vel,  si  haec  verba  aut  minus  pla-
cent  aut  minu»  intelleguntur,  Ka.TiiKi'i4'"'>  appellemus
licet),  eas  igitur  ipsas  propter  se  asciscendas  arbitra-
tnur,  quod  habeant  quiddam  in  se  quasi  contplexum  et
continens  veritatem.  Id  aiitem  in  parvis  intellegi
potest,  quos  delectari  \ideamus,  etiamsi  eorum  nihil
1  S  intersit,  si  quid  ratione  per  se  ipsi  invenerint,  Artes
etiam  ipsas  propter  se  assumendas  putamus,  cum  quia
sit  in  iis  aliquid  dignum  assumptione,  tum  quod  con-
stent  ex  cognitionibus  et  contineant  quiddam  in  se
Tatione  constitutum  et  via.  A  falsa  autem  assensione
magis  nos  alienates  esse  quam  a  ceteris  rebus  quae
sint  contra  naturam,  arbitrantur.

"(lam  membrorum,  id  est,  partium  corporis  alia
videntur  propter  eorum  usum  a  natura  esse  donata,
ut  manus,  crura,  pedes,  ut  ea  quae  sunt  intus  in
corpore,  quorum  utilitas  quanta  sit  a  medicis  etiam

BOOK  111.  V

1 7  fanpul  setoaction.  Pleasure  on  tlie  contrary,  accord-
ing to  most  Stoics,  is  not  to  be  reckoneil  among
the  primary  objects  of  natural  impulse  ;  and  I  very
strongly  agree  with  them,  for  fear  lest  many
immoral  consequences  would  follow  if  we  held  that
nature  has  placed  pleasure  among  the  earliest  objects
of  desire.  But  the  fact  of  our  affection  for  the
objects  first  adopted  at  nature's  prompting  seems  to
require  no  further  proof  than  this,  tliat  there  is  no  one
who,  given  the  choice,  would  not  prefer  to  have  all  I
tbe  parta  of-liia^bodv  sound  and  whole,  rather  th'uT  |

Bmaimed  or  distorted  although  equally  serviceable. "I

|l' "Again,  acts  of  cognition  (which  we  may  term-

■nprehensions  or  perceptions,  or,  if  these  words  are

istasteful  or  obscure,  katalcpseis),  —  these  we  con-

Lder  meet  to  lie  adopted  for  tlieir  own  sake,  because

Etiey  possess  an  element  that  so  to  speak  embraces

''«nd  contains  the  truth.  This  can  be  seen  in  the
case  of  children,  whom  we  may  observe  to  take
pleasure  in  finding  something  out  for  themselves  by
the  use  of  reason,  even  tliougii  they  gain  nothing  by

i  it.  The  sciences  also,  we  consider,  are  things  to  be
chosen  for  their  own  sake,  partly  because  there  is  in
them  something  worthy  of  choice,  partly  because
they  consist  of  acts  of  cognition  and  contain  an
element  of  fact  established  by  methodical  reasoning.
The  mental  assent  to  what  is  false,  as  the  Stoics
believe,  is  more  repugnant  to  us  than  all  the  other
things  that  are  contrary  to  nature.

"(Again,'  of  the  members  or  parts  of  the^body,  i
some  appear  to  have  been  bestowed  on  us  by  nature

J

I

for  the  sake  of  their  i

, for

■  les^i  feet,  and  the  internal  •

r  «hose  ntility  even  physicians

miple  the  hands,
as  to  the  degree

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^M

disputatur,  alia  autem  iiullam  ob  utilitatem  quasi
ad  quendam  omatum,  lit  cauda  pavoiii,  plumae
versicalores  columbis,  viris  mammae  atqiie  barba.)

19  Haec  diciintur  fortasse  ieiunius;  sunt  enim  quasi
prima  elemeiita  naturae,  quibus  ubertas  orationis
adhiberi  vix  potest;  nee  equidem  earn  cogito  conse-
ctari;  verum  tamen  cum  de  rebus  grandioribusdicas,
ipsae  res  \'erba  rapiimt;  ita  fit  cum  gravior,  turn
etiam  splendidior  oralio."  Est  ut  dicis,"  inquatn;
sed  tamen  onine  quod  de  re  liona  dilucide  dicitur,
mihi  praeclare  dici  videtur.  Istiusmodi  autem  res
dicere  ornate  velle  puerile  est,  plane  autem  et
perspieue  expedite  posse  doeti  et  intellegentis  viri."

'iO  VI.  ProgTedianiurigitur,quoniani,"inquit,  abhis
principiis  naturae  discessimus,  quibus  congruere  de-
bent  quae  sequuntur.  Sequitur  autem  haee  prima
divisio ;  Aestiniabile  esse  dicunt  (sic  enim,  «t  opinor,
appellemus)  id  quod  aut  ipsum  secundum  naturam
sit  aut  tale  quid  efficiat,  ut  selectione  dignum  pro-
pterea  sit  quod  aliquod  pondus  habeat  dignum  aesti-
matione,  quam  illi  d$iav  vocant,  contraque  inaestima-
bile  quod  sit  superiori  contrarium.  Initiis  igitur  ita
constitutis  ut  ea  quae  secundum  naturam  sunt  ipsa
propter  se  sumenda  sint  contrariaque  item  reicienda,
236

■^  BOOK TIL  v-vi

while  others  serve  no  useful  purpose,  but  appear  to
be  intended  for  ornament:  for  Instanee  the  pea-
cock's tail,  the  plumage  of  the  dove  with  its  shitting
colours,  and  the  breasts  and  beard  of  the  male  human  "^

19  being.)  All  this  is  perhaps  somewhat  baldly  ex-
pressed; for  it  deals  with  what  may  be  called  the
primary  elements  of  nature,  to  which  any  enibeilish-
ment  of  style  can  scarcely  be  applied,  nor  am  1  for  my
part  concerned  to  attempt  it.  On  the  otiier  liand,
when  one  is  treating  of  more  majestic  topics  the  style
instinctively  rises  with  the  subject,  and  the  brillia
of  the  language  increases  with  the  dignity  of  the
theme,"  True,"  I  r^oined;  but  to  my  mind,
any  clear  statement  of  an  important  topic  possesses
excellence  of  style.  It  would  be  childish  to  desire
an  ornate  style  in  subjects  of  the  kind  with  which
you  are  dealing.  A  man  of  sense  and  education  will
be  content  to  be  able  to  express  his  meaning  plainly  /
and  clearly."  '

GO VI. To  proceed  then,"  he  continued, for  we  have  Sue
been  digressing  from  the  primary  impulses  of  nature ; .  t^
and  with  these  the  later  stages  must  be  in  harmony.  ^
The  next  step  is  the  following  fundamental  classili-  i^u
cation:  That  which  is  in  itself  in  accordance  with  "''
nature,  or  which  produces  something  else  that  is  so,
and which therefore is deserving of choice as
possessing  a  certain amount of  positive value-
aria  as  the  Stoics  call  it — this  they  pronounce  to  be
'valuable'  (for  so  I  suppose  we  may  ti-anslate  it);
and  on  the  other  hand  that  which  is  the  contrary  of
the  former  they  term valueless.' The  initial  prin-
ciple being  thus  established  that  things  in  accordance
with  nature  are  '  things  to  be  taken  '  for  their  own
sake,  and their  opposites similai'ly  'things  to  be
23-

CICERO  DE  FENIBUS
primum  est  officium  (id  enim  appello  «afl^Kov)  «t  se
conservct  in  naturae  statu,  deinceps  nt  ea  teneat
quae  secundum  naturani  sint  pellatque  coiitraria ;
qua  invents  selectione  et  item  reiectioiie,  sequitur
deinceps  cura  officio  selectio,  deinde  ea  perpetua,
turn  ad  extremum  constans  consentaneaque  naturae,
in  qua  primum  inesse  incipit  et  inteilegi  quid  sit
21  quod  vere  bonum  possit  dici.  Prima  est  cnim  con-
ciliatio  hominis  ad  ea  quae  sunt  secundum  naturam ;
simul  autcm  cepit  intellegentiam  vel  notionem  potius,
quam  appellant  fi'vatay  illi,  viditque  re  rum  aji^enda-
ruro  ordincm  et  ut  ita  dicani  concordiam.  multo  earn
pluris  aestimavit  quam  omnia  ilia  quae  prima  dilexe-
rat,  atque  ita  cognitionc  et  ratione  collegit  ut  sta-
tueret  in  eo  collocatum  summum  illud  hominis  per
sc  laudandum  et  expetendum  bonum ;  quod  cum
positum  sit  in  eo  quod  o/ioAo-yiav  Stoici,  nos  appclle-
mus  coiivenientiam,  si  placet,  —  cum  igitur  in  eo  sit
id  bonum  quo  omnia  referenda  sunt,  honeste  facta
ipsumque  honestum,  quod  solum  in  bonis  ducitur,
quamquam  post  oritur,  tamen  id  solum  vi  sua  et

«  The  Latin  is  here  inadequate ;  what  is  meant  is  appa-
rently that  the  adull  deliberately  selects  the  natural  Goods
which  as  a  child  he  pursued  instinctively,  and  that  the
selection  is  now  an  officium.  If  however  ciint  officio  is  the
mark  of  selectio  at  this  later  stag:e,  Cicero  is  inaccurate
above  when  he  applies  officium  to  the  instinct  of  self-
preservation  and  the  instinctive  choice  of  natural  Goods.
On  the  other  hand  it  is  not  clear  why  these  should  not  be
included  under  talhekon  'appropriate  action'  or  officium
' ■" ' '  '  5H,  '  an  act  of  which  a  probable  account  or

be  giv
238

^ni7ii^P^i!^5WW^TC

It  is  at  the  right  aii

.lied  firstirit-«tJ
its  trueltte(^«(«r

BOOK  ill.  vi  __

rejected,'  the  first  appropriate  act '  (for  so  I  render  '  Appropiisti
the  Greek  kathvkon)  is  to  preserve  oneself  in  one's
natural  constitution ;  the  nest  is  to  retain  those  things
which  are  in  accordance  with  nature  and  to  repel
those  that  are  the  contrary ;  then  when  this  principle
of  choice  and  also  of  r^ectitin  liaa  been  discovered,
there"  follows  next  in  order  choice  conditioned  L.iter  wc  ch.
by  appropriate  action';*  then,  such  clioice  be- 1
come  a  fixed  habit ;  and  finally,  choice
rationalized  and  in  harmony  with  nature.
this  final  stage  that  the  Good  properly  so  called  G
emerges  and  comes  to  be  understood  in  its  ti-^
1  nature.  Man's  first  attraction  is  towards  the  things
in  accordance  with  nature ;  but  as  soon  as  he  has
attained  to  understanding,  or  rather  to  conscious  in-
telligence—in Stoic  phraseology  ejinota^and  has  dis-
cerned the  order  and  so  to  speak  harmony  that  should
govern  conduct,  he  then  esteems  this  harmony  far
more  highly  than  all  the  things  for  which  he  originally
felt  an  affection,  and  by  exercise  of  intelligence  and
reason  infers  the  conclusion  that  in  this  order  resides
the  Chief  Good  of  man,  the  thing  that  is  praise-
worthy and  desirable  for  its  own  sake  ;  and  that  in-
asmuch as  this  consists  in  what  the  Stoics  term
Aomo/ogifl^nd  we  with  your  approval  may  call  qon-
fomiity ' ** — inasmuch  I  say  as  iu  this  resides  that
Good  which  is  the  End  to  which  all  else  is  a  means,
moral  conduct  and  Moral  Worth  itself,  which  alone
is  counted  as  a  good,  although  of  subsequent  develop-
ment, is  nevertheless  the  sole  thing  that  is  for  ita

^  *  To  iive  conformably/  a^^oXoyovfi^tias  ^v,  ^'as  Zeno'a
formula  for  the  End ;  it  was  interpreted  as  meaning  '  to
live  on  one  harmonious  plan." Cleanthes  added,  rj;  ipdafi,

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

dignitate  expetendum  est,  eorum  autem  quae  sunt
prima naturae propter se nihil est expetendum.

22  Cum  vcro  ilia  quae  otficia  esse  dixi  proficiscantur  ali
initiis  naturae,  necesse  est  ea  ad  haec  referri,  ut
recte  dici  possit  omnia  officia  eo  referri  ut  adipisca-
mur  principia  naturae,  nee  tamen  ut  hoc  sit  bononim
ultimum,  propterea  quod  non  inest  in  primis  naturae
eonciliationibus  honesta  actio ;  consequens  est  enim
et  post  oritur,  ut  dixi.  Est  tamen  ea  secundum
naturam  multogue  nos  ad  se  expetendam  magis  hor-
tatur  quam  superiora  omnia.  Sed  ex  hoc  primum
error  tollendus  est,  ne  quis  sequi  existimet  ut  duo
sint  ultima  bonorum.  Ut  enim  si  cui  propositum  sit
collineare  hastam  aliquo  aut  sagittam,  sicut^  nos
ultimum  in  bonis  dicimus,  sic  illi  facere  omnia  quae
possit  ut  collineet;  huic  in  eiusmodi  similitudine
omnia  sint  facienda  ut  collineet,  et  tamen,  ut  omnia
faciat  quo  propositum  assequatur,  sit^  hoc  quasi  ulti-
mum quale  nos  sununum  in  vita  bonum  dicimus,  illud
autem  ut  feriat,  quasi  seligendum,  non  expetendum.

23  VII.  Cum  autem  omnia  officia  a  principiis  naturae
proficiscantur,  ah  iisdem  necesse  est  proficisci  ipsam
sapien tiara.  Sed  quemadmodum  saepe  fit  ut  is  qui
commendatiis  sit  alicui  pluris  cum  faciat  cui  com-
mendatus  quam  ilium  a  quo  sit,  sic  minime  mirum

^sictii  MSS.;  sjVMdv.,  bracketing  sic  t71i~collineet .- the
tzealence  so  emended  may  be  rendered  "  For  suppose  a
man  were  to  set  himself  to  take  true  aim  at  a  mark  with  a
spear  or  an  arrow,  this  purpose  would  correspond  to  the
Ultimate  Good  as  we  define  it.  The  archer  in  thia  illustra-
tion would  have  to  do  all  he  could  to  aim  straight,  and  jet
it  is  this  doing  all  he  could  to  attain  his  purpose  that  would

3  Ultin-

:  End,  :

the  Chief  Good,  as  defined  by  u;
the  actual  hitting-  of  the  mark  wo
'  to  be  chosen,'  not  '  to  be  desired.' '
S40

1  th>

iduct  of  life ;
e,  in  our  phrase,
sie  idd.;  sic  MSS.

r  BOOK  111.  vi-vii

own  effitacy  and  value  desimlile,  whereas  none  of  the
primary  objects  of  nature  is  desirable  for  its  own  sake.

I  But  since  those  actions  which  I  have  termed  '  appro-
priate acts '  are  based  on  the  primary  natural  olyects,
it  follows  that  tlie  former  are  means  to  the  latter.
Hence  it  may  correctly  be  said  that  all  '  appropriate
acts  '  are  means  to  the  end  of  attaining  the  primary
needs  of  nature.  Yet  it  must  not  be  inferred  that  their
attainment  is  the  ultimate  Goo(],  inasmuch  as  moral
action  IS,  not  one  ot  the  primary  natural  attractions,
but  IS  an  omsjowtti  ot  these,  a  later  development,  as
I  have  said.  At  thesame  time  moral  action  is  in  accord-
ance with  nature,  and  stimulates  our  desire  far  more
strongly  than  all  the  objects  tiiat  a1±racted  na  earlier.
But  at  this  point  a  caution  is  necessary  at  the  outset.
It  will  be  an  error  to  infer  that  this  view  implies  two  ■*
Ultimate  Goods.  For  though  if  a  man  were  to  make
it  his  purpose  to  take  a  true  aim  with  a  spear  or
arrow  at  some  markj  his  ultimate  end,  corresponding
to  the  ultimate  good  as  we  pronounce  it,  would  be
to  do  all  he  could  to  aim  straight:  the  man  in  this
illustration  would  have  to  do  everything  to  aim
straight,  and  yet,  although  he  did  everything  to
attain  his  purpose,  his  ultimate  End,'  so  to  speak,
would  be  what  corresponded  to  what  we  call  the
Chief  Good  in  the  conduct  of  life,  whereas  the  actual
bitting  of  the  mark  would  be  in  our  phrase  to  be
chosen'  but  not to  be  desired.'

f  VII,  Again,  as  all  appropriate  acts'  are  based  ^d'^'
on  the  primary  impulses  of  nature,  it  follows  thattive.dt
Wisdom  itself  is  based  on  them  also.  But  as  it  often  P/^'^^'j;
happens  that  a  man  who  is  introduced  to  another  pUd'oI
values  this  new  friend  more  highly  than  he  does  the
person  who  gave  him  the  introduction,  so  in  like
R  341

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

est  primo  nos  sapientiae  commend  a  ri  ab  initiis
naturae,  post  autem  ipsnm  siipientiam  nobis  c
fieri  quam  ilia  sint  a  quibns  ad  ha
Atque  ut  membra  nobis  ita  data  sunt  ut  ad  quandani
rationem  vivendi  data  esse  appareant,  sic  appetitio
animi,  quae  op/n)  Graece  vocatur,  non  ad  quodvis
genus  vitae  sed  ad  quandam  formam  vivendi  videtur

24  data,  itenique  et  ratio  et  perfecta  ratio.  Ut  enim
histrioni  actio,  saltatQri  motus  non  quivis  sed  certus
quidam  est  datus,  sic  vita  agenda  est  certo.  prcnere
quodam,  non  quolibet;  quod  genus  conveniens  con-
sentaneumque  dicimus.  Nee  enim  gubemationi  aut
medicinae  similem  sapientiam  esse  arbitramur,  sed
action!  ilii  potius  quam  modo  dixi  et  saltation!,  ut  in
ipsa  insit,  non  foris  petatur  estremum,  id  est  artis
effcctio,  Et  tamen  est  etiam  alia  cum  his  ipsis
artibus  sapientiae  dissimilitude,  propterea  quod  in
illis  quae  recte  facta  sunt  non  continent  tamen
omncs  partes  e  quibus  constant ;  quae  autem  nos  aut
recta  «ut  recte  facta  dicamus,  si  placet,  itli  autem
appellant  k  or  op  SiufuiTa,  omnes  numeros  virtutis  con-
tinent. Sola  enim  sapientiainsetotaconversa est, qood

25  ideminceterisartibusnonfit  Inscite  autem  medicinae
et  gubemationis  ultimum  cum  ultimo  sapientiae  com-
paratur. Sapientia enim et  animi  magnitudinem

3  Effectio  is  here  taken  as  equivalent  to  the  Aristotelian
praxis,  as  in  g  45  j  but  it  might  be  construed  as  having;  the
sense  of  'efFectus'  in  Tusc.  i,  3,  viz.  ergon  in  its  wider
sease.,  the  product  of  an  art,  covering  both  praxis,  the
actual  exercise  of  the  art,  which  i&  the  product  of  a
'practic'  art,  and  ergon  in  the  narrower  sense,  'effectus'
in  S  3'.  the  extraneous  product  of  a  '  poiStic '  or  con-
structive art.
34S

l^c

BOOK  III.  vii

s  by  no  means  surprising  that  though  we
are  first  introduced  to  Wisdom  by  the  primary  natural
instincts,  afterwards  Wisdom  itself  becomes  de;
us  than  are  the  instincts  from  which  we  came  to  her.
And  just  as  our  limbs  are  so  fashioned  thiit  it  is  clear
that  they  were  bestowed  upon  us  with  a  view  to  a
certain  mode  of  life,  so  our  faculty  of  uppetition,  in
Greek  kormi;  was  obviously  designed  not  for  any  kind
of  life  one  may  choose,  but  for  a  particular  mode  of
living:  and  the  same  is  true  of  Reason  and  of  per-

y-t  feeted_Season. For  just  as  an  actor  or  dancer  Has  \
assigned  toTimi  not  any  but  a  certain  particular  part  ^
or  dance,  so  life  has  to  be  conducted  in  a  certain
fixed  way,  and  not  in  any  way  we  like. This  fixed
way  we  speak  of  as conformable '  and  suitable. In
fact  we  do  not  consider  Wisdom  to  be  like  seamanship
or  medicinC)  but  rather  like  the  arts  of  acting  and
of  dancing  justr  mentioned; its End, being the
actual  exercise  '  of  the  art,  is  contained  within  the
art  itself,  and  is  not  something  extraneous  to  it. At
the same time there is also  another point  which
marks  a  dissimilarity  between  Wisdom  and  these
same arts. In the latter  a movement perfectly
executed nevertheless does not involve all the
various  motions  which  together  constitute  the  sub-
ject matter  of  the  art; whereas  in  the  sphere  of
conduct,  what  we  may  call,  if  you  approve, right  -Rigbijc-
actions,' or  '  rightly performed actions/ in Stoic  \'^^g^^^
phraseology  katarihamala,  contain  all  the  categories  of  aspect p(  vi
virtue.  For  Wisdom  alone  is  entirely  self-contained,  (f''"""^  "^'

15  which  is  not  the  ease  with  the  other  arts. It  is  H
erroneous,  however,  to  place  the  End  of  medicine  or
of  navigation exactly on a par with the End of
Wisdom. For  Wisdom  includes  also magnanimity

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
coiuplectitiir  et  iustitiam  et  lit  omnia  quae  honiini
Accidaiit  infra  se  esse  iudicet,  quod  idem  ceteris  arti-
bus  non  cnntingit.  Tenere  autem  virtutes  eas  ipsas
quarum  modo  feci  raentionem  nemo  potent  nisi
stntuerit  nihil  esse  quod  intersit  aut  difFerat  aliud  ab
utio  praeter  honesta  et  tm-pia.

5  Videamus  nunc  quam  sint  praeclare  ilia  bis  quae

iam  posui  consequentia.  Cum  enim  }iuc  sit  estre-
mum  {sentis  enim,  tTedo,  me  iain  dia  quod  tsAos
Graeci  dicunt  id  dicere  tum  estrenmm,  turn  ulti-
mum,  tum  summum ;  licebit  etiam  finem  pro  extreme
aut  ultimo  dicere)- — cum  igitur  hoc  sit  extremum,
congruenter  naturae  convenienterque  vivere,  neces-
sario  sequitur  oinnes  sapientes  semper  feliciterj  abso-
lute, fortunate  vivere,  nulla  re  impediri,  nulla  prohi-
beri,  nulla  egere.  Quod  autem  continet  non  magis
eam  disciplinam  de  qua  loquor  quam  vitam  fortunas-
que  nostras,  id  est  ut  quod  bonestuiu  sit  id  solum
bonum  iudicenius,  potest  id  quidem  fuse  et  copiosc
et  omnibus  electissimis  verbis  gravUsinilsque  sen-
tentiis  rhetoi'ice  '  et  augeri  et  ornari ;  sed  consectaria
me  Stoicoruiu  brevia  et  acuta  deleetant.

'  VIII,  "  Concluduntur  igitur  eoruoi  argumenta
sic:  Quod  est  bonum,  omne  laudabile  est;  quod
autem  laudabile  est,  omne  est  honestum ;  bonum
igitur  quod  est,  honestum  est.  Satisne  hoc  conclu-
sum  videtur  ?  Certe  ;  quod  enim  efficiebatur  ex  iis
duobus  quae  erant  sumpta,  in  eo  vides  esse  conclu-

'  rAeiarii-^  some  inf.  MSS.  and  some  edd.  omil.

I  BOOK  in.  vii-viii

and  justice  and  a  sense  of  superiority  tu  all  thi
accidents  of  man's  estate,  but  this  is  not  the
with  the  other  arts.  Again,  even  the  very  virtues  I
have  just  mentioned  cannot  be  attained  by  anyone
unless  lie  has  realised  that  all  things  are  indifferent
and  indistinguishable  except  moral  worth  and  base-

j  We  may  now  observe  how  strikingly  the  prin-

ciples I  have  established  support  the  following
corollaries.  Inasmuch  as  the  final  aim^ — (and  you
have  observed,  no  doubt,  that  I  have  all  along  been
translating  the  Greek  term  lelos  either  by  iiiial '  or
ultimate  aim,"  or  chief  Good,'  and  for  final  or
ultimflte  aim '  we  may  also  substilnte  End  ') — inas-
much then  as  tile  final  aim  is  to  live  in  agreement
and  harmony  with  nature,  it  necessarily  follows
that  all  wise  men  at  all  times  enjoya  happy,  perfect
and  fortunate  life,  free  from  all  hindrance,  inter-
ference or  want.  The  essential  principle  not  merely
of  the  system  of  philosophy  I  am  discussing  but
also  of  our  life  and  fortunes  is,  that  we  should  believe
Moral  Worth  to  be  the  only  good.  This  principle
might  be  amplified  and  elaborated  in  the  rhetorical
manner,  with  great  length  and  fullness  and  with
all  the  resources  of  choice  diction  and  impressive
argument;  but  for  my  own  part  I  like  the  terse  and
pointed  syllogisms  of  the  Stoics.

7  VIII.  'They  put  their  arguments  in  the  follow-'
ing  syllogistic  form;  Whatever  is  good  is  praise-
worthy ;  but  whatever  is  praiseworthy  is  morally
honourable;  therefore  that  which  is  good  is  morally
honourable.  Do  you  think  this  is  a  valid  deduction  ?
Undoubtedly  it  is  so :  you  can  see  that  the  conclusion
rests  on  an  inference  logically  drawn  from  the  two
315

happy.

I

Virtue  llMKdi
Good,  pioviq
ByLLogisms ;

CICERO  DE  FIMBUS
sum,  Duoruni  auteiii  e  quibus  cffecta  conclusio
est  contra  superius  dici  solet  iioii  omiie  bonum  esse
laudabile ;  nam  quod  laudabile  sit  honestum  esse
coiiceditur.  Illud  autem  perabsurdum,  bonure  esse
aliqiiid  quod  noii  expetendum  sit,  aut  eipetendum
quod  non-placens,  aut  si  id,  non  etiani  diligendiiiii  ;
ergo  et  probandum  ;  ita  etiam  laudabile  ;  id  autem
lionestum.  Ita  fit  ut  quod  bonum  sit  id  etiam
honestum  sit.

i  Deinde  quaere  quis  aut  de  misera  vita  possit

gloriari  aut  de  non  beata.  De  sola  igitur  I)eata.
Ex  quo  elticitur  gloriHtiont-,  ut  ita  dicani,  dignam
esse  beatam  vitam,  quod  non  possit  nisi  honestae
vitae  iure  contingere.  Ita  fit  ut  honesta  vita  beata
vita  sit  Et  quoniam  is  cut  contingit  ut  iure  laude-
tur  habet  insigne  quiddani  ad  decus  et  ad  gloriam,
ut  ob  ea  quae  tanta  sint  beatus  dici  iure  possit,  idem
de  vita  talis  viri  rectissime  dicetur.  Ita  si  beata  vita
honestate  cernitur,  quod  honestum  est  id  bonum
solum  habendum  est.

)  Quid  vero?  negarine  ullo '  modo  possit  num-

quam  ^  quemquam  stabili  et  firmo  et  magno  animo,
quern  fortem  virum  dicimus,  effici  posse,  nisi  consti-
tutum  sit  non  esse  malum  dolorem  ?  Ut  eiiim  qui
mortem  in  nialis  ponit  non  potest  earn  non  tiniere,
sic  nemo  ulla  in  re  potest  id  quod  malum  esse  deere-
vetit  non  curare  idque  contenmere.  Quo  posito  et
OBtnium  assensu  approbate,  illud  assumitur,  eum  qui

'  negarine  vllo  Davis,  Mdv. ; jicgnri  huIIo  MSS.
''nmaguaiH  iaserled  by  Mdv.
S46

m  BOOK  III.  viii

premises.  The  usual  line  of  reply  is  to  deny  the
m^or  premise,  and  say  that,  not  everytliing  good  is
praiseworthy;  for  there  is  no  denying  that  what  is
praiseworthy  is  morally  honourable.  But  it  would
be  paradoxical  to  maintain  that  there  is  something
good  which  is  not  desirable;  or  desirable  that  is  not
pleasing;  or  if  pleasing,  not  also  esteemed;  and
therefore  approved  as  well ;  and  so  also  praiseworthy.
But  the  praiseworthy  is  the  morally  honourable.
Hence  it  follows  that  what  is  good  is  also  morally
honourable.

i  "Next  I  ask,  who  can  be  proud  of  a  life  that  is  (^1  >■
miserable  or  not  happy  ?  It  follows  that  one  can  only  o!=i
be  proud  of  one's  lot  when  it  is  a  happy  one.  This
proves  that  the  happy  life  is  a  thing  that  deserves,  so
to  speak,  that  one  should  be  proud  of  it;  and  this  can-
not  rightly  be  said  of  any  life  but  one  morally  honour-
able. Therefore  the  moral  life  is  the  happy  life.  And
the  man  who  deserves  and  wins  praise  has  exceptional
cause  for  pride  and  self-satisfaction;  but  these  things
count  for  so  much  that  he  can  justly  be  pronounced
happy  ;  therefore  the  life  of  such  a  man  can  with
full  correctness  be  described  as  happy  also.  Thus  if
Moral  Worth  is  the  criterion  of  happiness.  Moral
Worth  must  be  deemed  the  only  Good.

I  '  Once  more  ;  could  it  be  denied  that  it  is  impos-  (.i)  bi
sible  for  there  ever  to  exist  a  man  of  steadfast,  firm  f^"
and  lofty  mind,  such  a  one  as  we  call  a  brave  man,
unless  it  be  established  that  pain  is  not  an  evil  ?  For
just  as  it  is  impassible  for  one  who  counts  death  as
an  evil  not  to  fear  death,  so  in  no  case  can  a  man
disregard  and  despise  a  thing  that  he  decides  to  be
evil.  This  being  laid  down  as  generally  admitted,
we  take  as  our  minor  premise  that  the  brave  and
247

bfaitiDi
iuninbli

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

magno  sit  aniiiio  atque  forti  omnia  quae  eadere  in

hominem  possiiit despicere  ac pro  iiifiilo putare.

Quae  cum  ita  sint,  eiFectum  est  nihil  esse  malum

quod  turjie  non  sit. Atque  iste  vir  altus  et  excel-

lens,  magno  aiiimo,  vere  fortis,  infra  se  omnia  humana

ducens,  is,  inquamj  quern efficere  volumus,  queni

quaerimus,  certe  et  confidere  sibi  debet  ac  suae  vitae

et  actae  et  consequent!  et  bene  de  sese  iudieare,

statuens  nihil  posse  mali  incidere  sapienti. Ex  quo

intellegitur idem iljud, solum bonum esse quod

honestum  sit,  idque  esse  beate  vivere,  lioneste,  id  est

cum  virtu  te  v

3 IX.  "  Nee  vero  ignore,  varias  philosophorum  fuisse

sententias,  eoruni  dico  qui  summum  bonum,  quod

ulttraum  appello,  in  animo  ponerent. Quae  quam-

quam  vitiose  quidani  secuti  sunt,  tamen  non  modo

iis  tribus  qui  virtutem  a  summo  bono  segregaverunt,

n  aut  voluptatem  aut  vacoitatem  doloris  aut  prima

naturae  in  summis  bonis  ponerent,  sed  etiam  alteris

tribus  qui  mancam  fore  putaverunt  sine  aliqua  acces-

e  virtutem  ob  eamque  rem  trium  earum  rerura

guas  supra  dixi  singuh  singulas  addiderunt,  his  tamen

omnibus  eos  antepono,  cuicuimodi  sunt,  qui  summum

31  bonum  in  animo  atque  in  virtute  posuerunt. Sed

sunt  tamen  perabsurdi  et  ii  qui  cum  scientia  vivere

ultimum  bonorum,  et  qui  nullam  rerum  differentiam

■ dixerunt atque ita sapientem beatiim fore,

ud  alii  niomento  ullo  anteponenteni,  et  qui,'

gut  in.terted  by  Mdv.

BOOK  III.  viii-ix
hi|rh-minded  man  despises  and  holds  of  no  account
all  the  accidents  to  which  iDankind  is  liable.  The
conclusion  follows  that  nothing  is  evil  that  is  not
base.  Also,  your  lofty,  distinguished,  niagnaiiimous
and  truly  brave  man,  who  thinks  all  human  vicissi-
tudes beneath  him,  I  mean,  the  character  we  desire
to  produce,  our  ideal  man,  must  unquestionably  have
faith  in  himself  and  in  his  own  career  both  past  and
future,  and  think  well  of  himself,  holding  that  no  ill
can  befall  the  wise  man.  Here  then  is  another  proof
of  the  same  position,  that  Moral  Worth  alone  is  good,
and  that  to  live  honourably,  that  is  virtuously,  is  to
live  happily.

I IX. I  am  well  aware,  it  is  true,  that  varieties  of  s.TiieSWc
opinion  have  existed  among  philosophers,  1 mean  Sjtti'bycom^
among  those  of  them  who  have  placed  theChief  Good,  pariBon  with
the  ultimate  aim  as  I  call  it,  in  the  mind. In  follow-  ^'^kit
ing  out  these  various  views  some  of  them  fell  into  ^',"'^^„^„4
errors;  but  nevertheless  I  rank  all  those,  of  whatever  oiteiihingstha
type,  who  have  placed  the  Chief  Good  in  the  mind  inoiudo virtue,'
and  in  virtue,  not  merely  above  the  three  philoso-  iteChielGtml-
phers"  who  dissociated  the  Chief  Good  from  virtue  ^^

altogether  and  identilied  it  either  with  pleasure  or  ^H

freedom  from  pain  or  the  primary  impulses  of  nature,  ^H

but  also  above  the  other  three,  who  held  that  virtue  ^

would  be  incomplete  without  some  enhancement,
and  therefore  added  to  it  one  or  other  respectively

I  of  the  three  things  I  have  just  enumerated.  But  still  r«titijaiHi«.
those  thinkers  are  quite  beside  the  mark  who  pro-  m  other  tbingi
nounced  the  ultimate  Good  to  he  a  life  devoted  to  v^*™^('£
knowledge;  and  those  who  declared  that  all  things  rtgiiieiioiM
are  indifferent,  and  that  the  Wise  Man  ■
happiness  by  not  preferring  any  one  thing  in  the
least  degree  to  any  other;  and  those  again  who  said.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

ut  quidam  Academic!  constituisae  dicuntur,  extremum
bonoruin  et  suminuin  inunus  esse  sapientis  obsjstere
s  assensusque  suos  fimie  sustinere.  His  singulis
copiose  responderi  solet.  Sed  quae  perspicua  sunt
longa  esse  non  debent ;  quid  autem  apertius  quam,
si  selectio  nulla  sit  ab  iis  rebus  quae  contra  naturHm
sint  earum  rerum  quae  sint  secundum  naturam,
toilatur  omnis  ea  quae  quaeratur  laudeturque  pro-
dentia?  Circumscriptis  igitur  iis  sententiis  quas
posui,  et  iis  si  quae  simUes  earum  sunt,  relinquitiir
1  bonum  sit  vivere  scientiam  adlijbentem

I

k

CBrum  rerum  quae  natura  eveiiiantj  seligentem  quae
secundum naturam et quae contra naturam sint
reicieiitem, id est convenienter congruenterque
uaturae  vivere.
2  Sed  in  ceteris  artibus cum dicitur artificiose,

posteruni  quodam  modo  et  coiisequens  putandum
est,  quod  illi  hriytwrtfaTiKov  appellant ;  cum  autem
in  quo  sapienter  dicimus,*  id  a  primo  rectissime
dicitur.  Quidquid  enim  a  sapiente  proficiscitnr,
id  continuo  debet  expletum  esse  omnibus  suis
partibus ;  in  eo  enim  positum  est  id  quod  dicimus
esse  expeteudum.  Nam  ut  peccatum  est  patriam
prodere,  parcntes  violare,  fana  depeculari,  quae  sunt
in  effectu,  sic  timere,  sic  maerere,  sic  in  Hbidine  ease
peccatuua  est  etiam  sine  effectu. Verum  ut  haec  non

i

HT  BOOK  III.  ix

as  some  members  of  the  Academy  are  said  to  have
maintained,  that  the  final  Good  and  supreme  duty  of
the  Wise  Man  is  to  resist  appearances  and  resolutely
withhold  his  assent  to  the  reality  of  sense-impres-
sions. It  is  customary  to  take  tliese  doctrines  seve-
rally and  reply  to  them  at  length.  But  there  is
really  no  need  to  labour  what  is  self-evident;  and
what  could  be  more  obvious  than  that,  if  we  can
exercise  no  choice  as  between  things  consonant  with
and  things  contrary  to  nature,  no  scope  is  left  at  all
for  the  much-prized  and  belauded  virtue  of  Pnidei
Eliminating  therefore  the  views  just  enumerated ai
any  others  that  resemble  them,  we  are  left  with  the
conclusion  that  the  Chief  Good  consists  in  applying
to  the  conduct  of  life  a  knowledge  of  the  working  of
natural  causes,  choosing  what  is  in  accordance  with
nature  and  rejecting  what  is  contrary  to  it ;  in  other
words,  the  Chief  Good  is  to  live  in  agreement  and  in
harmony  with  nature.
i  But  in  the  other  arts  when  we  speak of  an  Mi

artistic  ■  performance,  this  quality  must  be  con-  "ir
sidered  as  in  a  sense  subsequent  to  and  a  result  of"
the  action ;  it  is  what  the  Stoics  term  epigennematiion
(in  the  nature  of  an  after-growth).  Whereas  in  con-
duct, when  we  speak  of  an  act  as  wise,'  the  term  ia
applied  with  full  correctness  from  the  lirst  inception
of  the  act.  For  every  action  that  the  Wise  Man
initiates  must  neces.wrily  be  complete  forthwith  in
all  its  parts;  since  the  thing  desirable,  as  we  term
it,  consists  in  his  activity.  As  it  is  a  sin  to  betray
one's  country,  to  use  violence  to  one's  parents,  to
rob  a  temple,  where  the  offence  lies  in  the  result  of
the  act,  so  the  passions  of  fear,  grief  and  lust  are
sins,  even  when  no  extraneous  result  ensues. The

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
ill  posteris  et  in  consequentibus,  sed  in  primis  con-
tinuo  peccata  sunt,  sic  ea  quae  proficiscuntur  n  vir-
tutCj  susceptione  prima,  non  perfection e,  rectu  sunt

33  X.  "Bonuni  autera  quod  in  hoc  sennone  totiens
usutpatuni  est  id  etiam  definitione  explicatur.  Sed
eorum  definitiones  paulum  oppido  inter  se  differunt,
et  tamen  eodem  spectant.  Ego  assentior  Diogeni
qui  bonum  definierit  id  quod  esset  natura  absolutum.
Id  autem  sequens  illud  etiam  quod  prodesset  {i!i<l>ekiiim
enim  sic  appellemus)  motum  aut  statuni  esse  dixit  e
natura  absolnto.  Cumque  rerum  notiones  in  animis
fiant  si  aut  usu  aliquid  cojjnituni  sit  aut  coniunctione
aut  similitudine  aut  collatione  rationis,  hoc  quarto
quod  extremuin  posui  boni  notitia  facta  est.  Cum
enim  ab  iis  rebus  quae  sunt  secundum  naturam
ascendit  animus  collatione  rationis,  turn  ad  notionem

34  boni  pervenit.  Hoc  autem  ipsum  bonum  non  acces-
sione  neque  crescendo  aut  cum  ceteris  comparando,
sed  propria  vi  sua  et  sentimus  et  appellamus  bonum.
Ut  enim  mel,  etsi  duleissimum  est,  suo  tamen  proprio
geiiere  saporis,  non  comparatione  cum  aliis  dulce
esse  sentitur,  sic  i)onum  boc  de  quo  agimus  est  illud
quidem  plurimi  'aestimandum,  sed  ea  aestimatio
genere  valet,  non  magnitudine.  Nam  cum  aestimatio,
quae  d^ia  dicitur,  neque  in  bonis  numerata  sit  neC
rursus  in  malis,  quantumcumque  eo  addideris,  in  suo

T^30UVTe

BOOK  III.

but  ^H

actions  ^^M

it  from  ^^1

latter  are  sins  not  in  their  subsequent  eiFecti
immediately  upon  their  inception;  similarly,
springing  from  virtue  are  to  be  judged  right
their  first inception,  and not in their  successful
completion.

iS  X.  "Again,  the  term  'Good,'  whieli  has  been  Defii
employed  so  frequently  in  this  discourse,  is  also  ex-  ^^"
plainecU>y  definition.  The  Stoic  definitions  do  in-
deed differ  from  one  another  in  a  very  minute  degree,
but  they  all  point  in  the  same  direction.  Personally
I  agree  with  Diogenes  in  delining  the  Good  as  that
which  is  by  nature  perfect.  In  consonance  with  this  he
pronounced  the  'beneficial'  (for  so  let  us  render  the
Greek  ^helcma)  to  be  a  motion  or  state  in  accordance
with  that.whicb  is  by  nature  perfect.  Now  notions
of  things  are  produced  in  the  mind  when  something
has  become  known  either  by  experience  or  by  com-
bination of  ideas  or  by  likeness  or  by  analogj'.  The
fourth  and  last  method  in  this  Ust  is  the  one  that  has
givenusthe  conception  of  the  Good.  The  mind  ascends
by  analogy  from  the  things  in  accordance  with  nature

Si  till  finally  it  arrives  at  the  notion  of  Good.  At  the
same  time  Goodness  is  absolute,  and  is  not  a  ques-
tion of  degree ;  the  Good  is  recognized  and  pro-
nounced to  be  good  from  its  own  inherent  properties
and  not  by  comparison  with  other  things.  Just  as
honey,  though  extremely  sweet,  is  yet  perceived  to
be  sweet  by  its  own  peculiar  kind  of  Savour  and  not
by  being  compared  with  something  else,  so  this
Good  which  we  are  discussing  is  superlatively  valu-
able, yet  the  value  in  its  case  depends  on  kind  and  not
on  quantity.  Value,  in  Greek  axia,  is  not  counted  as  a
Good  nor  yet  as  an  Evil;  so  that  however  much  you
n  amount,  it  will  still  remain  the  same
253

CICERO  DE  FINIBCS  ^

genere'manebit. Alia  est  igitur  propria  aestimatiD
virtutis,  quae  genere,  non  crescendo  valet.
5  Nee  vero  perlurbationes  animonim,  quae  vitam

insipientium  miseram  acerbamque  ,  redduiit  (quas
Graeci  irdO-ri  appellant,  poteram  ego  verbum  ipsum
interpretans  morbos  appellare,  sed  non  conveniret^
ad  omnia;  quia  enim  misericordiam  aut  ipiem  ira-
cundiam  morbum  solet  dicere?  at  illi  djcunt  raflw;

sit_igitur  perturbalio,  quae  nomine  ipso  vitiosa  de-
clarari  videtur;  nee  eae  perturbationes  vi  aliqua
naturali  moventur' ;  ornnesqoe  eae  sunt  genere  quat-
tuor,  partibus  pjures,  aegritudo,  fonnido,  libido,
quamque  Stoici  comrauni  nomine  corporis  et  animi
^&>i>i7i'  appellant,  ego  nialo  laetitiam  appellare,  quasi
gestientis  animi  elationem  voluptariara ;)  perturba-
tiones autetn  nulla  naturae  vi  commoventur,  omniaque
ea  sunt  opiniones  ac  iudicia  levitatis;  itaque  his
sapiens  semper  vacabit.
]  XI.  Omnc  autem  quod  honestum  sit  id  esse
propter  se  expetendum,  commune  nobis  est  cum
multorum  aliorum  philosophorum  sententiis.  Praeter
enim  tres  disciplinas  quae  virtutem  a  summo  bono
escludunt,  ceteris  omnibus  philosopliis  haec  est
tuendu  sententia,  maxime  tamcn  his  qui  nihil  aliiid
in  bonorum  numero  nisi  honestum  esse  voluerunt.
Sed  haec  quid  em  est  perfacilis  et  expedita  de-
fensio.  Quis  est  enim  aut  quis  umquam  fuit  aut
avaritia  tam  ardenti  aut  tarn  ejfrenatis  cupiditatibus,

'  fonvenirvl edd.  j  fam-enU'l  MSS.

'nec—movcntur  Mdv.  brackets.

^  his  qui  Mdv. ;  his  StQtcis  qni  M55.
354

BOOK  III.  x-xi

in  kind.  The  value  of  Virtue  is  therefore  peculiar
and  distinct;  it  depends  on  kind  and  not  on  degree.

J  Moreover  the  emotions  of  tlie  mind,  wliich  harass

and  embitter  the  life  of  the  foolish  (the  Greek  term
for  these  is  pathos,  and  I  might  have  rendered  tlijs
literally  and  stylfd  them  diseases,'  but  the  word
disease'  would  not  suit  all  instances;  for  example,
no  one  speaks  of  pity,  nor  yet  anger,  as  a  disease,
though  the  Greeks  term  these  pathos.  Let  us  tlien
accept  the  term  emotion,'  the  very  sound  of  which
seems  to  denote  something  vicious,  and  these  emo-
tions are  not  excited  by  any  natural  influence.  The
list  of  the  emotions  is  divided  into  four  classes,  with
numerous  subdivisions,  namely  sorrow,  fear,  lost,  and
that  mental  emotion  which  the  Stoics  call  by  a  name
that  also  denotes  a  bodily  feeling,  kedotic  pleasure,'
but  which  I  prefer  to  style  'delight,'  meaning  the
sensuous  elation  of  the  mind  when  in  a  state  of  ex-
ultation), these  emotions,  1  say,  are  not  excited  bj
any  influence  of  nature ;  they  are  all  of  them  mere
fancies  and  frivolous  opinions.  Therefore  tiie  Wise
Man  will  always  be  free  from  them.

3  XI.  "The  view  that  all  Moral  Worth  is  intrinsi-
callj  desirable  is  one  that  we  hold  in  common  with
many  other  systems  of  philosophy.  Excepting  three
schools  that  shut  out  Virtue  from  the  Chief  Good
altogether,  all  the  remaining  philosophers  are  com-
mitted to  tliis  opinion,  and  most  of  all  the  Stoics,
with  whom  we  are  now  concerned,  and  who  hold
that  nothing  else  but  Moral  Worth  is  to  be  counted
as  3  good  at  all.  But  this  position  is  one  that  is  ex-
tremely simple  and  easy  to  defend.  For  who  is  there,
or  who  ever  was  there,  of  avarice  so  consuming  and
appetites  so  unbridled,  that,  even  though  willing  to

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

ut  eaudem  illani  rem  quam  adipisci  scelere  quovis
velit  non  tnultis  partibus  tnalit  ad  sese  etiam  omni
impunitate  proposita  sine  facinore  quam  illo  modo
per  venire?

Quam  Ve»""  ll^ili^B^■'""  '■■■'■  gupm  fmf  tiim  pptpnhpi;

scire  cupimus  ilia  quae  occulta  nobia  sunt,  quomodo

moveantur  quibusque  de  c

a.fluai

santuti

Quis  autem  tnm  agrestlbus  institiitis  vivit
aut  quis  contra  studia  naturae  tarn  vehementer  obdu-
ruit  ut  a  rebus  cognitione  dignis  abhorrcat  easque
sine  voluptate  aut  utilitate  aliqua  non  requirat  et
pro  nihilo  putet  ?  aut  quis  est  qui  maiorum  ^  aut  Afri-
canorum  aut  eius  quem  tu  in  ore  semper  liabes,
proavi  mei  ceteronimque  virorum  fortium  atque
omni  virtute  praestantium  facta,  dicta,  consilia  co-

'.iS  gnoscens  nulla  animo  afficiatur  voluptate?  Quk
autem  honesta  in  familla  institutus  et  educatus  inge-
nue non  ipsa  turpitudine  etiamsi  eum  laesura  non  sit
offenditur?  quis  animo  aequo  videt  eum  quem  impure
ac  flagitiose  putet  vivere?  qhis  non  odit  sordidos,
vanos,  levesj  futiles?  Quid  autem  dici  poterit,  si
turpitudinem  non  ipsam  per  se  fugiendam  esse  sta-
tuemus,  quo  minus  homines  tcnebras  et  solitudinem
nacti  nuUo  dedecore  se  abstineant,  nisi  eos  per  se
foeditate  sua  turpitudo  ipsa  deterreat?  Innume-
rabilia  dici  possunt  m  hanc  sentcntiam;  scd  non
necesse  est.  Nihil  est  enim  de  quo  minus  dubitari
possit  quam  et  honesta  expetenda  per  se  et  eodem

:<9  modo  turpia  per  se  esse  fugienda. Constitute  autem

h  MSS.  (which

Mdv.  coiij.
Weidner  conj. ;

BOOK  III.  ti
commit  any  crime  to  achieve  his  end,  and  even
though  absolutely  secure  of  impunity,  yet  would  not
a  hundred  tinies  rather  attain  tlie  same  object  by
innocent  than  by  guilty  means?

37  Again,  what  desire  for  profit  or  advantage  under-

lies our  curiosity  to  learn  the  secrets  of  nature,  the
mode  and  the  causes  of  the  movements  of  the
heavenly  bodies?  Who  lives  in  such  a  boorish  state,
or  who  has  become  so  rigidly  insensible  to  natural
impulses,  as  to  feel  a  repugnance  for  these  lofty
studies  and  eschew  them  as  valueless  apart  from  any
pleasure  or  profit  they  may  bring?  Or  who  is  there
who  feels  no  sense  of  pleasure  when  he  hears  of  the
wise  words  and  brave  deeds  of  our  forefathers, — of
the  Africani,  or  my  great-grandfather  whose  name
is  always  on  your  lips,  and  the  other  heroes  of  valour

'iS  and  of  virtue?  On  the  other  hand,  what  man  of
good  breeding,  brought  up  in  an  honourable  family,
is  not  shocked  by  mora!  baseness  as  such,  even  when
it  is  not  calculated  to  do  him  personally  any  harm?
who  can  view  without  disgust  a  person  whom  he
believes  to  be  dissolute  and  an  evil  liver?  who  does
not  hate  the  mean,  the  empty,  the  frivolous,  the
worthless?  Moreover,  if  we  decide  that  baseness  is
not  a  thing  to  be  avoided  for  its  own  sake,  *hat
arguments  can  be  urged  against  men's  indulging  in
every  sort  of  unseemliness  in  privacy  and  under
cover  of  darkness,  unless  they  are  deterred  by  the
essential  and  intrinsic  ugluiess  of  what  is  base?
Endless  reasons  could  be  given  in  support  of  this
view,  but  they  are  not  necessary.  For  notliing  is
less  open  to  doubt  than  that  what  is  morally  good  is
to  be  desired  for  its  own  sake,  and  similarly  what  is

^9  morally  bad  is  to  be  avoided  for  its  own  sake. Again,
s  257

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
illo  de  quo  ante  diximus,  quod  honestum  esset  id  esse
solum  bonum,  intellegj  necesse  est  pluris  id  quod
honestum  sit  aestimandum  esse  quam  i!la  media  quae
ex  eo  com  parent  [ir.  Stultitiam  uutem  et  timiditatem
et  iniustitiam  et  intemperantiam  cum  dicimus  esse
fugienda  propter  eas  res  quae  ex  ipsis  eveniant,  non
its  dicimus  ut  cum  illo  quod  positum  est,  solum  id
esse  malum  quod  turpe  sit,  haec  pugnare  videatur
oratio,  propterea  quod  ea  non  ad  corporis  incommo-
dum  referuntur  sed  ad  turpes  actiones  quae  oriuntur
e  vitiis(quas  enim  «nKtas  Graeci  appellant,  vitia  malo
quam  malitias  nominare)."
)  XII.  Ne  tu,"  inquam,  Cato,  verbis  illustribus
et  id  quod  vis  declarantibus !  Itaque  mibi  videris
Latiue  docere  philosopliiam  et  ei  quasi  civitatem
dare ;  quae  quidcm  adhuc  peregrinari  Romae  vide-
batur  nee  offeiTe  sese  nostris  sermonibus,  et  ista
maxime  propter  limatam  quandam  et  rerum  et
verborum  tenuitatem.  (Scio  enim  esse  quosdam  qui
quavis  lingua  philosophari  possint;  nuUis  enim  parti-
tionibus,  nuUis  definitionibus  utuntur,  ipsique  dicunt
ea  se  modo  probare  quibus  natura  tacitaassentiatur;
itaqiie  in  rebus  minime  obseuris  non  niultus  est  apud
eos  disserendi  labor.)  Quare  attendo  te  studiose  et
quaecumque  rebus  iis  de  quibus  hie  sermo  est  no-
mina  imponis  memoriae  mando ;  mihi  enim  erit
iisdem  istis  fortasse  iam  utendum.  Virtutibus  igitur
rectissime  mihi  videris  et  ad  consuetudinem  nostrae
orationis  vitia  posuisse  contraria. Quod  enim  vitu-

r  BOOK III.  si-xii

the  principle  already  discussed,  that  Moral  Worth  is
the  sole  Good,  involves  the  corollary  that  it  is  of  more
value  than  those  neutral  things  which  it  procures.
On  tlie  other  hand  when  we  say  that  folly,  cowardice,
injustice  and  intemperance  are  to  be  avoided  because
of  the  consequences  they  entail,  this  dictum  must
not  be  so  construed  as  to  appear  inconsistent  with
the  principle  already  laid  down,  that  moral  baseness
alone  is  evil ;  for  the  reason  that  the  statement  does
not  refer  to  bodily  harm  but  to  the  base  actions  to
which  these  vices  give  rise  (the  term  '  vice '  *  I  prefer
to badness'  as  a  translation  of  the  Greek  ka/da)."

)  XII.  Indeed,  Cato,"  said  I,  your  language  is  '
lucidity  itself;  it  conveys  your  meaning  exactly.  In
fact  1  feel  you  are  teaching  philosophy  to  speak
Latin,  and  naturalizing  her  as  a  Roman  citizen.
Hitherto  she  has  seemed  a  foreigner  at  Rome,  and
not  able  to  fall  in  with  our  ways  of  speaking;  and
this  is  especially  so  with  your  Stoic  system  because
of  its  precision  and  subtlety  alike  of  thought  and
language.  (There  are  some  philosophers,  I  know,  who
could  express  their  ideas  in  any  language ;  for  they
ignore  Division  and  Definition  altogether,  and  them-
selves profess  that  they  seek  to  commend  only  those
principles  which  receive  the  tacit  assent  of  nature.
Hence,  their  ideas  being  so  far  from  recondite,  e.'ipo-
sition  is  with  them  no  laborious  matter.)  So  I  am
following  you  attentively,  and  am  committing  to
memory  all  the  terms  you  use  to  denote  the  con-
ceptions we  are  discussing.  For  very  likely  I  shall
soon  have  to  employ  the  same  terms  myself.  Well,
I  think  you  are  quite  correct  in  calling  the  oppo-
site of  the  virtues  vices.'  This  is  in  conformity
with  the  usage  of  our  language.  The  word
82  359

P'

^^r  perabi

^M .  vitiun

^P  virtu  ti

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

perabOe  est  per  se  ipsum,  id  eo  ipso  vitium  nomina-
tum  puto,  vel  etiam  a.  vitio  dictum  vituperari.  Sin
malitiam  dixisses^  a.d  aliud  nos  unum  certum
vitium  consuetude  Latina  traduceret;  nunc  omni
virtuti  vitium  contrario  nomine  opponitur."

Turn  ille:  His  igitur  ita  positis/'  inquit,  sequi-
tur  magna  conteiitio,  quam  tractatam  a  Peripateticis
moHius  (est  enim  eovum  consuetude  dicendi  non
satis  acuta  propter  ignorationem  dialecticae)  Carnea-
des  tuus  egregia  quadam  exercitatione  in  dialecticis
summaque  eloquentia  rem  in  summum  discrimen
adduxit,  propterea  quod  pugnare  non  destitit  in
omni  hac  quaestione  quae  de  bonis  et  malis  appelletur
non  esse  rerum  Stoicis  cum  Peripateticis  contro-
versiam  sed  noniinum.  Mihi  autem  nihil  tarn  perspi-
cuum  videtur  quam  lias  seiitentias  eorura  philoso-
pliorum  re  inter  se  magis  quam  verbis  dissidcre ;
maiorem  multo  inter  Stoieos  et  Peripateticos  rerum
esse  aio  discrepantiam  quam  verborum,  quippe  cum
Peripatetic!  omnia  quae  ipsi  bona  appellant  pertinere
dicant  ad  beate  vivendum,  nostri  non  ex  omni  quod
aestimatione  aliqua  dignum  sit  compleri  vltam  beatam
putent.

XIII.  "  An  vero  certius  quidquam  potest  esse
quam  illorum  ratione  qui  dolorem  in  malis  ponunt
non  posse  sapientem  beatum  esse  cum  eculeo  tor-
queatur? Eorum  autem  qui  dolorem  in  malis  non

^5i^^^^j^^^Wc

■  BOOK  III.  xii-xiii
denotes,  T  beUeve,  that  which  is  in  its  own  uatare
' vitoperable ' ;  or  else  'vituperable'  is  derived  from
'vice.' Whereas if you had rendered iaiia by

■  'badness'  ('malice')]  Latin  usage  would  point  us  to
another  meaning,  that  of  a  single  particular  vice.
As  it  is,  we  make  'vice'  the  opposite  term  to  virtue'
in  general."

I  '  Well,  then,"  resumed  Cato,  "these  principles:
established  there  follows  a  great  dispute,  which  on  j
the  side  of  the  Peripatetics  was  carried  on  with  no
great  pertinacity  (in  fact  their  ignorance  of  logic  ren-
ders their  habitual  style  of  discourse  somewhat  defi-
cient in  cogency) ;  but  your  leader  Carneades  with  his
exceptional  protieieney  in  logic  and  his  consummate
eloquence  brought  the  controversy  to  a  head.  Car-
neades never  ceased  to  contend  that  on  the  whole
so-called  problem  of  good  and  evil,'  there  was  no
disagreement  as  to  facts  between  the  Stoics  and  the
Peripatetics,  but  only  as  to  terms.  For  my  part,  how-
ever, nothing  seems  to  me  more  manifest  than  that
there  is  more  of  a  real  than  a  verbal  difference  of
opinion  between  those  philosophers  on  these  points.
I  maintain  that  tlici'e  is  a  far  greater  discrepancy
between  the  Stoics  and  the  Peripatetics  as  to  facts
than  as  to  words.  The  Penpatetics  say  that  all  the
things  which  under  their  system  are  called  goods  con-
tribute to  happiness ;  whereas  our  school  does  not
believe  that  total  happiness  comprises  everything
that  deserves  to  have  a  certain  amount  of  value
attached  to  it.

i  XIII.  Again,  can  anything  be  more  certain  than
that  on  the  theory  of  the  school  that  counts  pain  as
an  evil,  the  Wise  Man  cannot  be  happy  when  he  is
being  tortured  on  the  rack  ? Whereas  the  system

261

CICERO  DF.  FINIBUB  ^M

hiihent  riitio  certe  cogit  (it  in  omnibus  tormentis
conservetur  beata  vita  sapienti.  Etenim  si  dolotes
eosdein  tolerabilius  patiuiitur  qui  excipiunt  eos  pro
patria  quam  qui  leviore  de  causa,  opinio  facit,  non

i  natura,  vim  doloris  aut  maiorem  ant  minorem.  Ne
illud  quidem  est  consentaneum,  ut  si  cum  tria  genera
boiiorum  sint,  quae  seutentia  est  Peripateticomni,  eo
beatior  quisque  sit,  quo  sit  corporis  aut  estemis  bonis
plenior,  ut  hoc  idem  approbandum  sit  nobis,  ut  qui
plura  Iiabeat  ea  quae  in  corpore  magni  aestimantur
sit  beatior.  Illi  enim  corporis  commodis  compleri
vitam  beatam  putant,  nostri  nihil  minus.  Nam  cum
ita  placeat^ne  eorum  quidem  bonorum  quae  nos  bona
vere  appellemus  frequentia  lieatiorem  vitam  fieri  aut
magis  expetendam  aut  pluris  aestimandam,  certe
minus  ad  beatam  vitam  pertinet  multitudo  corporis

t  commodorum.  Etenim  si  et  sapere  expetendum  sit
et  valere,  coniunctum  utrumque  magis  expetendum
sit  quam  sapere  solunij  ueque  tamen  si  utrumque  sit
aestimatione  digiium,  pluris  sit  coniunctum  quam
sapere  ipsum  separatini.*  Nam  qui  valetudinem
aestimatione  aliqua  dignam  iudicamus  neque  earn
tamen  in  bonis  ponimus,  iidem  censemus  nullam  esse
tantam  aestimationem  ut  ea  virtuti  anteponatur ;
quod  idem  Peripatetici  non  tenent,  quibus  dicendum
est  quae  et  honesta  actio  sit  ct  sine  dolore  earn  magis
esse  expetendam  quam  si  esset  eadera  actio  cum
dolore.  Nobis  aliter  videtur ;  recte  seeusne,  postea ;_
sed  potestne  rerum  maior  esse  dissensio  ?
^sefiaratim  MSS.;  separatum  Mdv.
262

^H

■  BOOK  III.  Yiii

that  considers  pain  no  evil  clearly  proves  that  the  Wise
Man  retains  his  happiness  amidst  the  worst  torments.
The  mere  fact  that  men  endure  the  same  pain  n
easily  when  they  voluntarily  undergo  it  for  the  sake  of
their  country  than  when  they  suffer  it  for  some  lesser
cause,  shows  that  the  intensity  of  the  pain  depends  on
the  stateof  mindof  the  sufferer,  notonitsownintrin-

4'3  sic  nature.  Further,  on  the  Peripatetic  theory  that  «nd(2ihap
there  are  three  kinds  of  goods,  the  more  abundantly  grees.
supplied  a  man  is  with  bodily  or  external  goods,  the
happier  he  is ;  but  it  does  not  follow  that  we  Stoics  can
accept  the  same  position,  and  say  that  the  more  a  man
has  of  those  bodily  tilings  that  are  highly  valued  the
happier  he  is.  For  the  Peripatetics  hold  that  thesum  of
happiness  includes  bodily  advantages,  but  we  deny
this  altogether.  We  hold  that  the  multiplication  even
of  those  goods  that  in  our  view  are  tnily  so  called  does
not  render  life  happier  or  more  desirable  or  of  higher
value;  even  less  therefore  is  happiness  affected  by

\i  the  accumulation  of  bodily  advantages.  Clearly  if
wisdom  and  health  be  both  desirable,  a  combination
of  the  two  would  be  more  desirable  than  wisdom
alone  ;  but  it  is  not  the  case  that  if  both  be  deserv-
ing of  value,  wisdom  plus  wealtli  is  worth  more  than
wisdom  by  itself  separately.  We  deem  health  to  be
deserving  of  a  certain  value,  but  we  do  not  reckon
it  a  good ;  at  the  same  time  we  rate  no  value  so
highly  as  to  place  it  above  virtue.  This  is  not  the
view  of  the  Peripatetics,  who  are  bound  to  say  that
an  action  which  is  both  morally  good  and  not  attended
by  pain  is  more  desirable  tlian  the  same  action  if
accompanied  by  pain.  We  think  otlierwise— whi'ther
rightly  or  wrongly,  I  will  consider  later;  but  how  could
there  be  a  wider  or  more  real  difference  of  opinion  ?

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

5  XIV.  "  Ut  enini  obscuratur  et  oiFunditur  luce  solis
lumen  luccmae,  et  ut  interit  in '  magnitudine  maris
Aegaei  stilla  mellis  et  ut  in  divitiis  Croesi  teruiici
accessio  et  gradus  unus  in  ea  via  quae  est  hinc  in
Indiani]  sic,  cum  sit  is  bonorum  finis  quem  Stoici
dicuiit,  omnis  ista  rerum  corporearum  aestimatio
splendore  virtutis  et  magnitudine  obscuretur  et  ob-
niatur  atque  intereat  necesse  est.  Et  quemadmo-
dum  opportuiiitHS  (sic  enim  appellemus  ivKaipiav)
non  fit  maior  productione  temporis  (liabent  eahn
Buum  inodum  quae  opportuna  dicuntur),  sic  recta
effectio  {KaTopOtua-iv  enim  ita  appello,  quoiiiam  rectum
factum  KaropSio/iu),  recta  igitur  effectio,  item  con-
venientia,  deiiique  ipsum  bonum,  quod  in  eo  positum
est  ut  naturae  consential,  crescendi  accessionetn
i  nullam  babet,  Ut  enim  opportunitas  ilia,  sic  baec
de  quibus  dixt,  non  fiunt  temporis  productione
maiora.  Ob  eanique  causam  Stoicis  non  videtur  opta-
bilior  nee  magis  expetendn  beata  vita  si  sit  longa
quam  si  brevis ;  utunturque  siniili ;  Ut,  si  cothurni
laus  ilia  esset,  ad  pedeni  apte  convenire,  neque  multi
cotliumi  paucis  anteponerentur  nee  maiores  minori-
bus,  sic,  quorum  omne  bonum  convenientia  atque
opportunitate  finitur,  ea^  nee  plura  paucioribus  nee
'  longinquiorabrevioribusanteponentur.*  Necverosatis
acute  dicunt ;  Si  bona  valetudo  pluris  aestimanda  sit
longa  quam  brevis,  sapientiae  quoqiie  usus  longissimus
quisque sit plurimi. Non intellegunt valetudinis

ted  by  Hal

,  Mdv.

^ea  inserted  by  Miiller  (^ni

■cA).

BOOK  III.  xiv

45  XIV.  "  The  light  of  a  lamp  is  eclipsed  and  over-
powered by  the  rays  of  the  sun  ;  a  drop  of  honey  is  lost
in  the  vastness  of  the  Aegean  sea  ;  an  additional  six-
pence is  nothing  amid  the  wealth  of  Croesus,  orasingle
step  in  the  journey  from  here  to  India.  Similarly  if
the  Stoic  definition  of  the  End  of  Goods  be  accepted,
it  follows  that  all  the  value  you  set  on  bodily  advan-
tages mnst  be  absolutely  eclipsed  and  annihilated  by

the  brilliance  and  the  majesty  of  virtue. And  just  Mwi ,,

as  opportuneness  (for  so  let  us  translate  eukairia)  is  n!^„'^e'S.'^
not  increased  by  prolongation  of  time  (since  things  tanced  by  dura
we  call  opportune  have  attained  their  proper
measure),  so  right  conduct  (for  thus  I  translate
tatorihosis,  since  katortkuma  is  a  single  right  action),
right  conduct,  I  say,  and  also  propriety,  and  lastly
Good  itself,  which  consists  in  harmony  with  nature,

■K)  are  not  capable  of  increase  or  addition.  For  these
things  that  I  speak  of,  Uke  opportuneness  before  men-
tioned, are  not  made  greater  by  prolongation.  And  on
this  ground  the  Stoics  do  not  deem  happiness  to  be
any  more  attractive  or  desirable  if  it  be  lasting  than  if
it  be  brief;  and  they  use  this  illustration :  Just  as,  sup-
posing the  merit  of  a  shoe  were  to  fit  the  foot,  many
shoes  would  not  be  superior  to  few  shoes  nor  bigger
shoes  to  smaller  ones,  so,  in  the  case  of  things  the
good  of  which  consists  solely  and  entirely  in  pro-
priety and  opportuneness,  a  larger  number  of  these
things  will  not  be  rated  higher  than  a  smaller
number  nor  those  lasting  longer  to  those  of  shorter

1-7  duration.  Nor  is  there  much  point  in  the  argu-
ment that,  if  good  health  is  more  valuable  when
lasting-  than  when  brief,  therefore  the  exercise  of
wisdom  also  is  worth  most  when  it  continues  longest.
This  ignores  the  fact  that,  whereas  the  value  of
3fi5

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
aestimationem  spatio  iudicari,  virtutis  opportunitate  ;
ut  videantiir  qui  illud  dicant  iidem  hoc  esse  dicturi,
bonam  mortem  et  bonuin  partura  meliorem  longum
esse  quam  brevem. Non  vident  alia  brevitate  pluris

+8  aestimari,  alia  diuturnitate.  Itaque  consentanenra
est  his  quae  dicta  sunt  ratione  illorum  qui  Ilium
bonorum  finem  quod  appellamus  extreraum,  quod
ultimum,  crescpre  putent  posse,  iisdem  placere  esse
alium  alio  etiam  sapientiorem,  itemque  alium  mag^s
alio  vel  peccare  vel  recte  facere,  quod  nobis  non
licet  dicere  qui  creseere  bonorum  finem  non  putamus.
Ut  enim  qui  demersi  sunt  in  aqua  nihilo  magis  respi-
rare  possunt  si  non  longe  absunt  a  summo,  ut  iam
iamque  possint  emergere,  quam  si  etiam  turn  essent
in  profundo,  nee  catulus  ille  qui  iam  appropinquat  ut
videat  plus  cernit  quam  is  qui  modo  est  natus,  item
qui  processit  aliquantum  ad  virtutis  habitum  nihilo
minus  in  miseria  est  quam  ille  qui  nihil  processit,

XV.  Haec  mirabilia  videri  intellego ;  sed  cum
certe  superiora  firma  ac  vera  sintj  his  autem  ea
consentanea  ot  eon  sequent!  a,  ne  de  horum  quidem
est  veritate  dubitandum.  Sed  quamquam  negant
nee  virtutes  nee  vitia  creseere,  tamen  utrumque
eorum  fundi  quodam  modo  et  quasi  dilatari  putant.

49  Divitias  autem  Diogenes  eenset  non  earn  modo  v

V  BOOK  ill.  xiv-xv

health  is  estimated  by  duration,  that  of  virtue  is
measured  by  opportuneness ;  so  that  tliose  who  use
the  argument  in  question  might  equally  be  expected
to  say  that  an  easy  death  or  an  easy  child-birth
be  better  if  protracted  than  if  speedy.  Tliey  fail  to
see  that  some  things  are  rendered  more  valuable

+8  by  brevity  as  others  by  prolongation.  So  it  is  con-
sistent with  the  principles  already  stated  that  those
who  deem  the  End  of  Goods,  that  which  we  term
the  extreme  or  ultimate  Good,  to  be  capable  of
degree,  are  on  their  own  theory  also  bound  to
hold  that  one  man  can  be  wiser  than  another,  and
similarly  that  one  can  commit  a  more  sinful  or  more
righteous  action  than  another  ;  which  it  is  not  open
to  us  to  say,  who  do  not  think  that  the  End  of
Goods  can  vary  in  degree.  For  just  as  a  drowning
man  is  no  more  able  to  breathe  if  he  be  not  far  from
the  surface  of  the  water,  so  that  he  might  at  any
moment  emerge,  than  if  he  were  actually  at  the
bottom  already,  and  just  as  a  puppy  on  the  point  of
opening  its  eyes  is  no  less  blind  than  one  just  born,
similarly  a  man  that  has  made  some  progress  towards
the  state  of  virtue  is  none  the  less  in  misery  than  he
that  has  made  no  progress  at  all.

XV.  I  am  aware  that  all  this  seems  paradoxical;
but  as  our  previous  conclusions  are  undoubtedly  true  '
and  well  established,  and  as  these  are  the  logical
inferences  from  them,  the  truth  of  these  inferences
also  cannot  be  called  in  question.  Yet  although  the
Stoics  deny  that  cither  virtues  or  vices  can  be  in-
creased in  degree,  they  nevertheless  believe  that
both  of  them  can be in a sense expanded and

4-9  widened  in  scope." Wealth  again,  in  the  opinion  of
867

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

habere  ut  quasi  duces  sint  ad  voiuptatem  et  ad  vale-
tiidinem  bonara,  sed  etiam  uti  ea  contincant:  non
idem  facere  eas  in  virtute  neque  in  ceteris  artlbus,
ad  quas  esse  dux  pecuuia  potest,  continere  autem
n  potest ;  itaque  si  voluptas  aut  si  bona  valetudo
sit  in  bonis,  divitias  quoque  in  bonis  esse  ponendas :
at  si  sapientia  bonum  sit,  nonsequi  ut  etiam  divitias
bonum  esse  dicamus.  Neque  ab  ulla  re  quae  non  sit
in  bonis  id  quod  sit  in  bonis  contineri  potest ;  ob
eamque  causam,  quia  cognitiones  comprensionesque
rerun,  e  quibus  efficiontur  artes,  appetitionem  mo-
vent, cum  divitiae  non  sint  in  bonis,  nulla  ars  divitiis
.50  contineri  potest.  Quod  si  de  artibus  concedamns,
virtutis  tamen  non  sit  eadem  ratio,  propterea  quod
haec  plurimae  commentationis  et  exercitationis  indi-
g-cat,  quod  idem  in  artibus  non  sit,  et  quod  virtus
stabllitatem,  iirmitatem,  constantiam  totius  vitae
complectatur  nee  haec  eadem  in  artibus  esse  videa-

Deinceps  esplicatur  differentia  rerum ;  qunm  si
non  uUam  esse  diceremus,  confunderetur  oninis  vita,
ut  ab  Aristone,  neque  ullum  sapientiae  munus  aut
opus  inveniretur,  cuni  inter  res  eas  quae  ad  vitani
degendam  pertinerent  nihil  omnino  inleresset  neque
ullum  dilectum  adhiberi  oporteret,  Itaque  cum
esset  satis  constitutum  id  solum  esse  bonum  quod
esset  honestum  et  id  malum  solum  quod  turpe,  turn
inter ilia quae nihil valerent  ad  beate  misereve

III  is  lo  be  remembered  that  'artes,'  technai,  included
professions,  trades  and  handicrafts  as  Well  as  sciences  and
the  line  arts,  and  it  is  of  the  simpler  crafts  that  phllo-
sophers,  following'  Socrates,  were  moslly  thinking  when
I  hey  compared  and  contrasted  Ihe  other  '  arles '  with  the
'ars  Vivendi.'

^^^SWovTe

■^  BOOK III.  XV

Diof^enes,  though  so  important  for  pleasure  and
health  as  to  be  not  merely  conducive  but  actually
essential  to  them,  yet  has  not  the  same  effect  in  rela-
tion to  virtue,  nor  yet  iii  the  case  of  the  other  arts ;  for
money  may  be  a  guide  to  these  but  cannot  form  an
essential  factor  in  tbem ;  therefore  although  if  plea-
sure or  if  good  health  be  a  good,  wealth  also  must  be
counted  a  good,  yet  i^  wisdom  is  a  Good,  it  does  not
follow  that  we  must  also  pronounce  wealth  to  be  a
good.  Nor  can  anything  which  is  not  a  good  be  essen-
tial to  a  thing  that  is  a  good;  and  hence,  because
acts  of  cognition  and  of  comprehension,  which  form
the  raw  material  of'  the  arts,  excite  desire,
wealth  is  not  a  good,  wealth  cannot  be  essential  to

"lO  any  art.  But  even  if  we  allowed  wealth  to  be
essential  to  the  arts,  the  same  argument  neverthe-
less could  not  be  applied  to  virtue,  because  virtue  (as
Diogenes  argues)  requires  a  great  amount  of  thought
and  practice,  which  is  not  the  case  to  the  same  extent
with  the  arts,^  and  because  virtue  involves  life-long
steadfastnesEjStrength  and  consistency,  whereas  these
qualities  are  not  equally  manifested  in  the  arts.

Next  follows  an  exposition  of  the  difference  be-  a.
tween  things;  for  if  we  maintained  that  all  things  J^,
were  absolutely  indifferent,  the  whole  of  life  would
be  thrown  into  confusion,  as  it  is  by  Aristo,  and  no
function  or  task  could  be  found  for  wisdom,  since
there  would  be  absolutely  no  distinction  between
the  things  that  pertain  to  the  conduct of  life,  and
no  choice  need  be  exercised  among  them. Accord-  Al
ingly  after  conclusively  proving  that  morality  alone  ^
is  good  and  baseness  alone  evil,  the  Stoics  went  on  J*"
to  affirm  that  among  those  things  which  were  of  no  lo
importance for happiness or misery, there was

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

vivendum  aliquid  tamen  quod  differret  esse  voluerunt,
ut  essent  eomm  alia  aestimabilia,  alia  contra,  alia

I  neutrum.  Quae  autem  aestimanda  essent,  eorum  in
aliis  satis  esse  causae  quamobrem  quibusdam  antepo-
nerentur,  ut  in  valetudiue,  ut  in  integritate  sensuum,
ut  in  doloris  vacuitate,  ut  gloriae,  divitiarum,  sinii-
lium  rerum,^  alia  autem  non  esse  eiusmodi ;  itemque
eorum  quae  nulla  aestimatione  digna  essent,  partim
satis  habere  causae  quamobrero  reicerentur,  ut  dolo-
rem,  morbuin,  sensuum  amissionem,  paupertatem,
ignominiam,  similia  horutn,  partim  non  item.  Hinc
est  illud  eJtortum  quod  Zeno  Trpoijy/ievoi',  coiitraque
quod  a-rrmrporiyii.ii'ov  nominavit,  cum  uteretur  in
lingua  copiosa  factis  tamen  nominibus  ae  uovis,  quod
nobis  in  hac  inopi  lingua  non  conceditur  ;  quamquam
tu  hanc  copiosiorem  etiam  soles  dicere.  Sed  non
alienum  est,  quo  faciUus  vis  verbi  intellegatur,  ra-
tionem  huius  verbi*  faciendi  Zenonis  exponere.

I  XVI.  Ut  cnim,  inquit,  nemo  dicit  in  regia  regem
ipsum  quasi  productum  esse  ad  dignitatem  (id  est
enim  ffpmjy^ji'oi'),  sed  eos  qui  in  aliquo  lionore  sunt
quorum  oi'do  proxime  accedit,  ut  secuudus  sit,  ad
regium  principatum,  sic  in  vita  non  ea  quae  primo
ordine^  sunt,  sed  ea,  quae  secundum  locum  obtinent,
irpoTiyiiiva,  id  est,  producta  nominentur ;  quae  vel  ita
appellemus  (id  erit  verbum  e  verbo)  vel  promota  et
remota  vel  ut  dudum  disimus  praeposita  vel  praeci-
'  terum  :  rerum  in  usu  com.  O.  Hein.
'verbiom.A.
' ordin

loco  ivilh  n

BOOK  UL  xv-sTi
nemtheless  aa  dcnkcnt  of  difference,  nuking'  some
of  tfaem  of  posttiTe  and  others  of  negative  value,

I and  oth«rs  nentEaL Again  among  things  raiiialile  tt
— e.g.  health,  ttniinpaired  senses,  freedom  from  pain,  ^
fame,  wealth  anl  the  like — thej  said  that  some  aflbfd  »
us  adequate  groonds  tor  prcfeiring  them  to  other  m
things,  whDc  otben  are  tkot  of  this  nature :  and  a
larly  »mnng  those  things  which  are  desening  of  no  ■■
value  some  aSbrd  adequate  grautds  for  oar  rejecting
them,  such  as  pain,  disease,  loss  of  the  senses,  poverty,
di^rsce,  andtfaebke;atfaeniiotsoL  Hence  arose  the
distinction,  in  Zetw's  tenninolagjr,  betweoi  pm^menm
and  the  oppeaUt,  ■papwiai»^"" — tor  Zeno  using  the
copious  Greek  butguage  (till  CBt^ajvd  novel  words
coined  for  the  oceaaon,  a  licence  not  allowed  to  ns
with  the  poor  voeabulary  of  Latin ;  though  you  are
fond  of  saving  that  Latin  is  actually  more  coiHous  than
Greek. However,  to  make  it  easier  to  understand
the  meaning  of  this  term  it  will  not  be  out  of  place
to  explain  the  method  which  Zeno  pursued  in  coin-
ing it

i£  WL  In  a  n^al  court,  Zeno  remarks,  no  one
speaks  of  the  king  himself  as  prconoted '  to  booour
(for  that  is  the  meaning  of  procgmfaom),  but  the  term
is  applied  to  those  holding  Mme  office  of  state
whose  rank  most  nearly  approaches,  though  it  is
second  to,  the  royal  pre-eminenc«  ;  similarly  in  the
conduct  of  life  the  title  pmegmautn,  that  is,  '  pro-
moted.' is  to  be  given  not  to  those  things  which  are
in  the  first  rank,  but  to  those  which  heAd  the  seciMul
place  ;  for  these  we  may  use  either  the  term  sug-
Kested  {[or  that  will  be  a  literal  translation)  or
advanced*^nd  degraded,'  or  the  iena  we  have
been  using  all  along,  preferred '  or  '  superior,'  and
271

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^M

pua,  et  ilia  reieeta. Re  enim  intellecta  in  verbo-

.^J  rum  usii  faciles  esse  debemus.  Quoniam  autem
oiiiiie  quod  est  bonum  primuni  locum  tenere  dicimus,
iiecesse  est  nee  bonum  esse  nee  malum  hoc  quod
praepositum  vel  praecipuum  nomiiiamus ;  idque  ita
definimus,  quod  sit  indifferens  cum  aestimatione
mediocri ;  quod  enim  illj  dSidijtopoi-  dicunt,  id  mihi
ita  oceurrit  ut  indifferens  dicerera.  Neque  enim
illud  fieri  poterat  utlo  modo  ut  nihil  relinquerelitr  in
mediis  quod  aut  secundum  naturam  esset  aut  contra^
nee,  eum  id  reliiiqueretur,  nihil  in  his  poni  quod
satis  aestimabile  esset,  nee  hoc  posito  non  aliqua  esse

5i  praeposita.  Recte  igitur  haec  facta  distinctio  est ;
atque  etiam  ab  iis  quo  fecilius  res  perspici  possit  Hoc
simile  ponitur:  Ut  enim,  inquiunt,  si  hoc  Rngamus
esse  quasi  fineni  et  ultimmn,  ita  iacere  talum  ut
rectus  assistatj  qui  ita  talus  erit  iactus  ut  cadat
rectus  praepositum  quiddam  habebit  ad  finem,  qui
aliter  contra,  neque  tamen  ilia  praepositio  tali  ad
eum  quern  dixi  finem  pertinebit,  sic  ea  quae  sunt
praeposita  referuntur  ilia  quidem  ad  finem  sed  ad
eius  vim  naturamque  nihil  pertinent.

53  Sequitur  ilia  divisio,  ut  bonorum  alia  sint  ad

illud  ultimum  pertinentia  (sic  enim  appello  quae
reXiKu  dicuntur ;  nam  hoc  ipsum  instituamus,  ut
placuit,  pluribus  verbis  dicere  quod  uno  non  poteri-

arn/i,  realorarlificial,  were  used  as  dice;  Ihey  had  four
long  sides  and  two  pointed  ends  i  of  the  sides  two  were
broad  and  two  narrow.  The  iaius  v/as  said  tobe  rectus
when  lying'  on  a  narrow  side,  and  firoaus  when  on  a  broad
side.  Thus  cadere  rectus,  to  alight  uprightly  hen  thrown,
would  he  the  first  stage  towards  I  -  '-■-  --■  -
standing  upright.
372

■^  BOOK  111.  xvi

for  the  opposite  '  rejected." If  the  meaning  is  intel-
li^ble  «e  need  not  be  punctilious  about  the  use  of

53  words.  But  since  we  declare  that  everything  that
is  good  occupies  the  first  nuik.  it  follows  that  this
which  we  entitle  preferred  or  superior  is  neither
good  nor  evil ;  and  accordingly  we  define  it  as  being
indifferent  but  possessed  of  a  moderate  value — since
it  has  occurred  to  me  that  I  maj  use  the  word  .
indifferent '  to  represent  their  term  adiaphonm.
For  in  fact,  it  was  inevitable  that  the  class  of  inter-
mediate things  should  contain  some  things  that  were
either  in  accordance  with  nature,  or  the  reverse,  and
this  being  so.thatthiselassshould  include  somethings
which  possessed  moderate  value,  and,  granting  this,
that  some  things  of  this  class  should  be preferred.'

54>  There  were  good  ground.?  therefore  for  making  this
distinction  ;  and  furthermore,  to  elucidate  the  matter
still  more  clearly  they  put  forward  the  following  illus-
tration ;  Just  as,  supposing  we  were  to  assume  that
our  end  and  aim  is  to  throw  a  knuckle-bone  '  in  such
a  way  that  it  may  stand  upright,  a  bone  that  is  thrown
so  as  to  fall  upright  will  be  in  some  measure  pre-
ferred '  or  advanced  in  relation  to  the  proposed  end,
and  one  that  falls  otherwise  the  reverse,  and  yet
that  advance '  on  the  part  of  the  knuckle-bone  will
not  be  a  constituent  part  of  the  end  indicated,  so
those  things  which  are  preferred '  are  means  it  is
true  to  the  End  but  are  in  no  sense  constituents  of
its  essential  nature.

35  Next  comes the division of  goods into three  GoodjeLmsd

classes,  first  those  which  are  'constituents'  of  the  "effl^eor

|.  final  End  (for  so  1  represent  the  term  lelihi,  \i\is  ^

:ase  of  an  idea  which  we  may  decide,  as  we

XI  express  hi  several  words  as  we  cannot  do

27»

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^M

mus,  ut  res  intellegatur),  alia  autem  effirientia,  quae
Graeci  TroijjrfKit,  alia  utrumque.  De  pertinentibus
nihil  est  bonum  praeter  actiones  honestas,  de  effi-
cientibus  nihil  praeter  amicum,  sed  et  pertiiientem
et  efficientem  sapientiaiu  volunt  esse.  Nam  quia
sapientia  est  conveniens  actio,  est  in  illo  ^  pertinenti
,  genere  quod  dixi ;  quod  autem  honestas  actiones
atFert  et  efficit,  id efficiens  dici  potest.

56  XVn.  Haec  quae  praeposita  dicimus  partini  sunt
per  se  ipsa  praeposita,  partini  quod  aliquid  efficiunt,
partim  utrumque :  per  se,  ut  quidam  iiabitus  oris  et
vultus,  ut  status,  ut  motus,  in  quibus  sunt  et  prae-
ponenda  quaedam  et  reicienda;  alia  ob  earn  rem
praeposita  dicentur  quod  ex  se  aliquid  efficiant,  ut
pecunia,  alia  autem ob utramque rem, ut integri

57  sensus,  ut  bona  valetudo.  De  bona  autem  fama
(quam  enim  appellant  fiiSo^lav  aptius  est  bonam
famam  iioc  loco  appellare  quam  gloriaroj,  Chrjsippus
quidem  et  Diogenes  detracta  utilitate  ne  digitum
quidem  eius  causa  porrigendum  esse  dicebant,  qui-
bus ego  vehementer  assentior.  Qui  autem  post  eos
fueruntj  cum  Cameadem  sustinere  non  possentj  hanc
quam  dixi  bonam  famam  ipsam  propter  se  praeposi-
tam  et  sumendam  esse  dixerunt,  esseque  hominis
ingenui  et  liberaliter  educati  velle  bene  audire  a
parentibus,  a  propinquis,  a  bonis  etiam  viris,  idque
propter  rem  ipsam,  non  propter  usum;  dicuntque,  ut

■•7/0  inf.  MSS,

BOOK  III.  xvi-xvii
I  one,  in  order  to  make  the  meaning  clear),
f  secondly  those  which  are productive  '  of  the  End,
I  Uie  Greek  poietika ; and  thirdly  tliose  which  are
J  both. The  sole  instance  of  a  good  of  the con-
I  stituent '  class  is  moral  action  ;  the  sole  instance  of
I  «  '  productive '  good  is  a  friend. Wisdom,  according
fto  the  Stoics,  is  both  constituent  and  productive;
I  for  as  being  itself  an  appropriate  activity  it
K  Under  what  I  called  the  constituent  class  ;  as  causing
and  producing  moral  actions,  it  can  be  called  pro-
ductive.

56  XVII. These  things  which  we  call preferred '
are  in  some  cases  preferred  for  their  own  sake,

t  others  because  they  produce  a  certain  result,  and
others  for  both  reasons ;  for  their  own  sake,  as  a
Certain  cast  of  features  and  of  countenance,  or  a
certain  pose  or  movement,  things  which  may  be  in
themselves  either  preferable  or  to  be  rejected ;
others  will  be  called  preferred  because  they  produce
a  certain  result,  for  example,  money ;  others  again
for  both  reasons,  like  sound  senses  and  good  health.

57  About  good  fame  (that  term  being  a  better  transh
tion  in  tliis  context  than  'glory'  of  the  Stoic  e!
pression  etidoxirf)  Chrysippus  and  Diogenes  used  to
aver  that,  apart  from  any  practical  value  it  may
possess,  it  is  not  worth  stretching  out  a  finger  for  ;
and  I  strongly  agree  with  them.  On  the  other  hand
their  successors,  finding  themselves  unable  to  resist
the  attacks  of  Cameades,  declared  that  good  fame,

s  I  have  called  it,  was  preferred  and  desirable  for

&  own  sake,  and  that  a  man  of  good  breeding  and

t  liberal  education  would  desire  to  have  the good

I  opinion  of  his  parents  and  relativeSj  and  of  good

n  general,  and  that  for  its  own  sake  and  not

■2  275

indlflnCDi

I

{Ibsclanliw

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

liberis  consultum  velimus  etiamsi  postumi  futuri  sint
propter  ipsos,  sic  futurae  pmst  mortem  famae  tamen
esse  propter  rem  etiam  detraeto  usu  consulendum.  '

I  Sed  cum  quod  lionestuni  sit  id  solum  bonum  esse

dicamus,  consentaneum  tamen  est  fungi  officio  cum
id  oflieium  nee  in  bonis  ponamus  nee  in  malis.  Est
enim  aliquid  iii  his  rebus  probabile,  et  quideni  ita  ut
eius  ratio  reddi  possit;  ergo  ut  etiam  probabiliter
acti  ratio  reddi  possit;  est  autem  ofiicium  quod  ita
factum  est  ut  eius  facti  probabib'i!  r.itio  reddi  possit:
ex  quo  intellegitur  oliicium  medium  quiddam  esse
quod  neque  in  bonis  ponatur  nequc  in  contrariis.
Quoniamque  in  iis  rebus  quae  neque  in  virtutibus
sunt  neque  in  vitiis,  est  tamen  quiddam  quod  usui
possit  esse,  tollendum  id  non  est.  Est  autem  eius
generis  actio  quoque  quaedam,  et  quidem  talis  ut
ratio  postulet  agere  aliquid  et  facere  eorum;  quod
autem  ratione  actum  est  id  officium  appellamus;  est
igitur  oflieium  eius  generis  quod  nee  in  bonis  ponatur
nee  in  contrariis.

)  XVIII.  "Atque  perspicuum  etiam  illud  est,  in
istis  rebus  raediis  aliquid  agere  sapienten^  ludicat
igitur  cum  agit  officium  illud  esse.  Quod  quoniam
nuuiquam  fallitur  in  iudicando,  erit  in  mediis  rebus

^f^^^^e

BOOK  III.

>r  their  ^^|

for  anf  practical  adrantage ;  and  they  argue  t
just  as  we  study  the  welfare  of  our  children,  <
such  as  may  be  bom  after  we  are  dead,  for  1
own  sake,  so  a  man  ought  to  study  his  reputatio
even  after  death,  for  itself,  even  apart  from  any
advantage.
5S '  But  although  we  pronounce  Moral  \A'ortJt  to  be  .\a'appn>prii
the  sole  good,  it  is  nevertheless  consistent  to  perform  j^'^^^g
an  appropriate  act,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  we  count  «none  in-
appropnate  action  neither  a  good  nor  an  enl. torui  tbouin  acca
thesphereof  these  neutral  things  there  is  an  element  ^"^Ifhn,
of  reasonableness,  in  the  sense  that  an  account  can  ^™?,^,!^!^
be  rendered  of  it,  and  therefore  in  the  sense  that  an  ,  -^gtii
account  can  also  be  rendered  of  an  act  reasonably  i«"™'-'
performed ;  now  an  appropriate  act  is  an  act  so  per-
formed that  a  reasonable  account  can  be  rendered
of  its  performance ;  and  this  proves  that  an  appro-
priate act  is  an  intermediate  thing,  to  I>e  reckoned
neither  as  a  good  nor  as  the  opposite. And  since
those  things  which  are  neither  to  be  counted  among
virtues  nor  vices  nevertheless  contain  a  factor  which

*caii  be  useful,  their  element  of  utility  is  worth  pre-
gerving.  Again,  this  neutral  class  also  includes  action
fef  a  certain  kind,  viz.  such  that  reason  calls  upon  us
to  do  or  to  produce  some  one  of  these  neutral  things  ;
but  an  action  reasonably  performed  we  call  an  appro-
priate act ;  appropriate  action  therefore  is  included
in  the  class  which  is  reckoned  neither  as  good  nor
the  opposite.
.ig  XVIII.  "It  is  also  dear  that  some  actions  are
performed  by  the  Wise  Man.  in  tlie  sphere  of  these
neutral  things.  Well  then,  when  he  does  such  on
liction  he  judges  it  to  be  an  appropriate  act.  And
s  judgment  on  this  point  never  erra,  therefore
977

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

oflicium.  Quodefficiturhacetiamconcluslonerationis:
Quoniam  enim  videmus  esse  quiddam  quod  recte
factum  appellemus,  id  autem  est  perfectum  oflicium,
erit  etiam  inchoatum  ;  tit,  si  iuste  depositum  reddere
in  rect«  factis  sit,  in  officiis  ponatur  depositum  red-
dere ;  illo  enim  addito  iuste,'  fit  recte  factum,  per  se
autem  hoc  ipsum  reddere  in  officio  ponitur.  Quoni-
amque  non  dubium  est  quin  in  iis  quae  niedia  dica-
mus  sit  aliud  sumendum,  aliud  reiciendum,  quidquid
ita  at  aut  dicitur  omne  officio  continetur.  Ex  quo
intellegitur  quoniam  se  ipsi  omnes  natura  diligant,
tarn  insipientem  quam  snpientem  siimpturum  quae
secundum  naturam  sint  reietturumque  contraria.  Ita
est  quod  dam  commune  oflicium  sapientis  et  insi-
pientis;  e\  quo  eflicitur  versari  in  iis  quae  media
60  dicamus,  Sed  cum  ab  his  omnia  proficiscantur
officia,  non  sine  causa  dicitur  ad  ea  referri  omnes
nostras  cogitationes,  in  his  et  excessum  e  vita  et  in
vita  mansionem.  In  quo  enim  plura  sunt  quae
secundum  naturam  sunt,  huius  oflicium  est  in  vita
manere;  in  quo  autem  aut  sunt  plura  contraria  aut
fore  videntur,  huius  officiura  est  e  vita  excedere.
£  quo  apparet  et  sapientis  esse  aliquando  officium

■  BOOK  III.  Kviii

appropriate  action  will  exist  in  the  sphere  of  these
neutral  things.  This  is  also  proved  by  the  following
syllogistic  argument :  We  observe  that  something
exists  which  we  call  right  action  ;  but  this  is  an
appropriate  act  perfectly  performed ;  therefore  there
will  also  be  such  a  thing  as  an  imperfeft  appropriate
act :  so  that,  if  to  restore  a  trust  as  a  matter  of  prin-
ciple is  a  right  act,  to  restore  a  trust  must  be  counted
as  an  appropriate  act ;  the  addition  of  the  qualifica-
tion on  principle'  makes  it  a  right  action  r  the
restitution  in  itself  is  counted  an  appropriate  act.
Again,  since  there  can  lie  no  question  but  that  the  class
of  tilings  we  call  neutral  includes  some  things  worthy
to  be  chosen  and  others  to  be  rejected;  therefore
whatever  is  done  or  described  in  this  manner  is  en-
tirely included  under  the  term  appropriate  action.
This  shows  that  since  love  of  self  is  implanted  by  ,
nature  in  all  men,  both  the  foolish  and  the  wise  alike
will  choose  what  is  in  accordance  with  nature  and  re-
ject the  contrary.  Thus  there  is  a  region  of  appropriate
action  which  is  common  to  the  wise  and  the  unwise  ;
and  this  proves  that  appropriate  action  deals  with

60  tlie  things  we  call  neutral. But  since  these  neutral  i.p
things  form  the  basis  of  all  appropriate  acts,  tiiere  g^*
is  good  ground  for  the  dictum  that  it  is  with  these  a°  '
things  that  all  our  practical  deliberations  deal,  in-
cluding the  will  to  live  and  the  will  to  quit  this  life.
When  a  man's  circumstances  contain  a  preponderance
of  things  in  accordance  with  nature,  it  is  appropriate
for  him  to  remain  alive  ;  when  he  possesses  or  sees
in  prospect  a  majority  of  the  contrary  things,  it  is
appropriate  for  him  to  depart  from  life. This  makes
it  plain  that  it  is  on  occasion  appropriate  for  the
Wise  Man  to  quit  life  aitjiough  he  is  happy,  and  also
879

mii

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

cxcedere  e  vita  cum  beatus  sit,  et  stulti

61  vita  cum  sit  miser.  Nam  bonum  itlud  et  maltim  quod
saepe  iam  dictum  est  postea  oonsequitur ;  prima  autem
ilia  naturae  sive  secunda  sive  contraria  sub  iudicium
sapientis  et  dilectum  cadunt,  estque  ilia  subiecta
quasi  materia  sapientiae.  Itaque  et  manendi  in  vita
et  migrandi  ratio  oranis  iia  rebus  quas  supra  dixi
metienda.  Nam  neque . .  }  virtute  retinetur  in  vita,
nee  iis  qui  sine  virtute  sunt  mors  est  oppetenda,  Et
saepe  oflicium  est  sapientis  desciscere  a  vita  cum  sit
beatissimus,  si  id  opportune  facere  possit.  Sic  enim
censent,  opportiinitatis  esse  beate  vivere  quod  est
convenienter  naturae  vivere,'  Itaque  a  sapientia
praecipitur  se  ipsam  si  tisus  sit  sapiens  ut  relinquat.
Quamobrem  cum  vitiorum  ista  vis  non  sit  ut  causam
afferant  mortis  voluntariae,  perapieuum  est  etiam
stultorum  qui  iidem  miseri  sint  ofticium  esse  manere
in  vita,  si  sint  in  maiore  parte  earum  rerum  quas
secundum  naturam  esse  dicimus.  Et  quoniam  exce-
dens  e  vita  et  manens  aeque  miser  est,  nee  diutumitas
magis  ei  vitam  fiigiendam  facit,  non  sine  causa  dicitdr
iis  qui  pluribus  naturalibus  frui  possint  esse  in  vita
maneadum.

62  XIX,  Pertinere  autem  ad  rem  arbitrantur  in-
tellegi  iiatura  fieri  ut  liberi  a  parentibus  amentur ;

'  Mdv.  conj.  neque  is  qui  virtute  utitur  retinetur  or  the

''QuBd^^ivere  aflcr/iMW/SoMjV above  MSS.,  Mdv.  after
Baiter  suggests  the  transposition.
3K0

^  BOOK  III. xviii-xix

of  the  Foolish  Man  to  remain  in  life  altliougli  he  is

3\  miserable.  For  with  the  Stoics  good  and  evil,  as
has  repeatedly  been  said  already,  are  a  subsequent
outgrowth  ;  whereas  the  primary  thing-s  of  nature,
whether  favourable  or  the  reverse,  fall  under  the
judgment  and  choice  of  the  Wise  Man,  and  form
so  to  apeak  the  subject-matter,  the  given  material
with  which  wisdom  deals.  Tlierefore  the  reasons
both  for  remftining  in  life  and  for  departing  from  it
are  to  be  measured  entirely  by  the  primary  things
of  nature  aforesaid.  For  the  virtaous  man  is  not
necessarily  retained  in  life  by  virtue,  and  also  those
who  are  devoid  of  virtue  need  not  necessarily  seek
death.  And  very  often  it  is  appropriate  for  the  Wise
Man  to  abandon  life  at  a  moment  when  he  is  enjoy-
ing supreme  happiness,  if  an  opportunity  offers  for
making  a  timely  exit.  For  the  Stoic  view  is  that
happiness,  which  means  life  in  harmony  with  nature,
is  a  matter  of  seizing  the  right  motaent.  So  that
Wisdom  her  very  self  upon  occasion  bids  the  Wise
Man  to  leave  her.  Hence,  as  vice  does  not  possess
the  power  of  furnishing  a  reason  for  suicide,  it  is  clear
tliat  even  for  the  foolish,  who  are  also  miserable,  it
is  appropriate  to  remain  alive  if  they  possess  a  pre-
dominance of  those  things  which  we  pronounce  to
be  in  accordance  with  nature.  And  since  the  fool  is
equally  miserable  when  departing  from  life  and
when  remaining  in  it,  and  the  undesirability  of  his
life  is  not  increased  by  its  prolongation,  there  is
good  ground  for  saying  that  those  who  are  in  a
position  to  enjoy  a  preponderance  of  things  that  are
natural  ought  to  remain  in  life.

62 XIX.  "  Again,  it  is  held  by  the  Stoics  to  be  im-  s,
portant  to  understand  that  nature  creates  in  parents  ni
281

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

a.  quo  initio  profectam  communem  liumani  generis
societatem  persequimur.  Quod  primum  iutellegi
debet  figura  membrisque  corporum,  quae  ipsa  de-
clarant, procreandi  a  natura  Iiabitam  esse  rationem.
Neque  vero  haec  inter  se  cougruere  possent  ut  na-
tura et  procreari  vellet  et  diligi  procreates  non
curaret.  Atque  etiam  in  bestiis  vis  naturae  perspici
potest;  quarum  in  fetu  et  in  educatione  laborem
cum  cemimus,  naturae  ipsius  vocem  videmur  audire.
Quare  ut'  perspicuum  est  natura  nos  a  dolore  abhor-
rere,  sic  apparet  a  natura  ipsa  ut  eos  quos  genueri-
I  impelb.  £x  hoc  nascitur  ut  etiam
s  hominuin  inter  homines  naturalis  sit  com-
mendatio,  ut  oporteat  hominem  ab  homine  ob  id
ipstim  quod  homo  sit  non  alienum  videri.  Ut  enim
in  membris  alia  aunt  tamquam  sibi  nataj  ut  oeuli,  ut
auresj  alia  etiam  ceterorum  membrorum  usum  adiu-
vant,  ut  crura,  ut  raanus,  sic  immanes  quaedam
bestiae  sibi  solum  natae  sunt,  at  ilia  quae  in  concha
patula  pina  dicitur,  isque  qui  enat  e  concha,  qui  quod
earn  custodit  pinoteres  vocatur,  in  eandemque  cum
se  recepit  includitur,  ut  videatur  monuisse  ut  cave-
ret,  itemque  formicae,  apes,  ciconiae  aliorum  etiam

'  lit  inserted  by  edd.

"A  reminiscence  of  Terence,  who  h

moroiisly  puts  this

Stoic  tagr  into  the  mouth  of  Chremes  as

neighbourly  curiosity:  Homosum.hum

ni  nil  a  me  alienum

puto,  Heaiil.  25,  Cp.  I  3,  11  14.

b  A  mussel  in  whose  '  beard  '  a  small

entanRled. The  notion of  their  partr

ership  is  found  in

Aristotle  i  Chrysippus  introduced  it as

Ethics.

^f^^^^e

^i^  BOOK  XII.  xix

an  fllFection  for  their  children;  and  parental  affec-
tion is  the  germ  of  that  social  community  of  tlie
human  race  to  which  we  afterwards  attain,
cannot  but  be  clear  in  the  first  place  from  the
formation  of  the  body  and  its  members,  which  by
themselves  are  enough  to  show  that  nature's  scheme
included  the  procreation  of  olTspring.  Yet  it  could
not  be  consistent  that  nature  should  at  once  intend
offspring  to  be  born  and  make  no  provision  for  that
offspring  when  born  to  he  loved  and  clieriahed.
Even  in  the  lower  animals  nature's  operation  can  be
clearly  discerned;  when  we  observe  the  labour  that
they  spend  on  bearing  and  rearing  their  young,  we
seem  to  be  listening  to  the  actual  voice  of  nature.
Hence  as  it  is  manifest  that  it  is  natural  for  us  to
shrink  from  pain,  so  it  is  clear  that  we  derive  from
nature  herself  the  impulse  to  love  those  to  whom  we

63  have  given  birth.  From  this  impulse  is  developed
the  sense  of  mutual  attraction  which  unites  human
beings  as  such ;  this  also  is  bestowed  by  nature.
The  mere  fact  of  their  common  humanity  requires
that  one  man  should  feel  another  man  to  be  akin  to
hini.^  For  just  as  some  of  the  parts  of  the  body,
such  as  the  eyes  and  the  ears,  are  created  as  it  were
for  their  own  sakes,  while  others  like  tlie  legs  or  the
hands  also  subserve  the  utility  of  the  rest  of  the
members,  so  some  very  large  animals  are  bom  for
themselves  alone ;  whereas  the  sea-pen,''  as  it  is
called,  in  its  roomy  shell,  and  the  creature  named
the  pinoteres '  because  it  keeps  watch  over  the  sea-
pen,  which  swims  out  of  the  sea-pen's  shell,  then  re-
tires back  into  it  and  is  shut  up  inside,  thus  appear-
ing to  have  warned  its  host  to  be  on  its  guard — these
creatures,  and  also  the  ant;  the  bee,  the  stork,  do

ass

1

CICERO  DF.  FINIBUS
causa  qunedam  faciunt.  Multo  haec'  coniuncUuB
homines,^  Itaque  natura  sumus  apti  ad  coetus,  con-
cilia, civitates.

i  MnpHiin) autem censent  regi  mipiine  ^l^-oniTri

eumque  esse  quasi  conimunem  urbem  et  civitatem
hominum  et  deorom,  et  ununiquemque  nostnin  eius
miiiidi  esse  partem;  ex  quo  illud  natura  cousequi  ut
communem  utilitateni  nostrae  anteponamuB.  Ut
enini  leges  omnium  salutem  singulorum  saluti  ante-
ponunt,  sic  vir  bonus  et  sapiens  et  legibus  parens  et
civilis  ofliej  non  ignarus  utilitatj  omnium  plus  quam
unius  alicuitis  aut  suae  consulit.  Nee  magis  est  vitu-
perandus  proditor  patriae  quam  eommunis  utilitatis
aut  salutis  deserter  propter  suam  utilitatem  aut
salutem.  £x  quo  fit  ut  laudandus  is  sit  qui  mortem
oppetat  pro  re  publica,  quod  deceat  cariorem  nobis
esse  patriam  quam  nosmet  ipsos.  Quoniamque  ilia
vox  iiihumana  et  sceterata  ducitur  eorum  qui  negant
se  recusare  quo  minus  ipsis  mortuis  terrarum  omnium
deflagratio  consequatiir  (quod  vulgar!  quodam  versu
Graeco  pronuntiari  solet),  certe  verum  est  etiam  iis
qui  aliquando  futuri  sint  esse  propter  ipsos  con-
sulendum.

)  XX.  Ex  liac  animoruni  affectione  testamenta
conunendationesque  morientium  natae  sunt,  Quod-
que  nemo  in  summa  solitudine  vitam  agere  velit  ne
cum  infinita  quidem  voluptatum  abundantia,  facile
intellegitur  nos  ad  coniunctionem  congregationem-
que  hominum  et  ad  naturalem  communitatem  esse

If^^^^e

^i^  BOOK  III.  xix  XX

certain  actions  for  the  sake  of  others  besides  tl
selves. With  huniBn  beings  this  bond  of  mutuitt  a:
is  far  more  intimate. It  follows  tliat  i
nature  fitted  to  form  unions,  societies  and  states.

6i  Again,  they  hold  that  the  universe  is  governed  The  CosuiopoUs

by  divine  will ;  it  is  a  city  or  state  of  which  both
men  and^ods  are  members,  and  each  one  of  us  is  a
part  of  this  universe;  from  which  it  is  a  natural
consequence  that  we  should  prefer  the  common
advantage  to  our  own.  For  just  as  the  laws  set
the  safety  of  all  above  the  safety  of  individuals,  so
a  good,  wise  and  law-abiding  man,  conscious  of  his
duty  to  the  state,  studies  the  advantage  of  all  more
than  that  of  himself  or  of  any  single  individual.  The
traitor  to  his  country  does  not  deserve  greater  repro-
bation than  the  man  who  betrays  the  common
advantage  or  security  for  the  sake  of  his  own  advan-
tage or  security.  This  explains  why  praise  is  owed  P.
to  one  who  dies  for  the  commonwealth,  because  it
becomes  us  to  love  our  country  more  than  ourselves.
And  as  we  feel  it  wicked  and  inhuman  for  men  to
declare  (the  saying  is  usually  expressed  in  a  familiar
Greek  line  *)  that  they  care  not  if,  when  they  them-
selves are  dead,  the  universal  conflagration  ensues,
it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  we  are  bound  to  study
the  interest  of  posterity  also  for  its  own  sake.

6^> XX. This  is  the  feeling  that  has  given  rise  to  Care  im
the practice of making a will and appointing  "^ ^'
guardians for  one's children  when  one  is  dying.
And  the  fact  that  no  one  would  care  to  pass  his  life
alone  in  a  desert,  even  though  supplied  with  pleasures
in  unbounded  profusion,  readily  shows  that  we  are
bom  for  society  and  intercourse,  and  for  a  natural  jj^fu
partnership  with  our  fellow  men. Moreover  nature  ''^"'
285

s  them-  ^H

tuat  aid  ^^M

are  by  ^

i

^sm

4

4

V

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

natos. Impellimur  autem  natura  ut  prodesse  velimus
quam  pluriniis in primisque  docendo  rationibusqiie

66  prudentiae  tradendis.  Itaque  noii  facile  est  iiivenire
qui  quod  sciat  ipse  noil  tradat  alteri ;  ita  non  solum
ad  discenduin  propensi  sumus  verum  etiam  ad  doeen-
dum.  Atque  ut  tauris  naturn  datum  est  lit  pro  vi-
tulis  contra  leones  sunima  vi  impetuque  contendant,
sic  ii  qui  valent  opibus  atque  id  facere  possunt,  ut  de
Hercule  et  de  Libero  accepimus,  ad  aervandum  genus
hominum  natura  incitantur.  Atque  etiam  lovem
cum  Optimum  et  Maximum  dicimus  cumqiie  eundem
Salutarenij  Hospitalem,  Statorem,  hoc  intellegi  volu-
miis,  salutem  hominum  in  eius  esse  tutela.  Minime
autem  convenit,  cum  ipsi  inter  nos  viles  neglectique
simuB,  postulare  iit  dis  immortalibus  can  simus  et  ab
lis  diliganiur.  Quemadmodum  igitur  membris  uti-
mur  prius  quam  didicimus  cuius  ea  utilitatis  causa
habeamus,  sic  inter  nos  natura  ad  civilem  conimuni-
tatem  coniuncti  et  consociati  sumus.  Quod  ni  ita  se
haberet,  nee  iustitiae  ullus  esset  nee  bonitati  locus.

67  Sed '  quomodo  hominum  inter  homines  iuris
esse  vincula  putant,  sic  homini  nihil  iuris  esse  cum
bestiis.  Praeclare  enlm  Chrysippus  cetera  nata  esse
hominum  causa  et  deorum,  eos  autem  communitatis  et
societatis  suae,  ut  bestiis  homines  uti  ad  utilitatem
suam  possint  sine  iniurin ; quoniamque ea  natura

hominis  ut  ei  cum  gencre  humano  quasi  civile
'jerfMdv.;  etnSS.

^n  BOOK  III.  XX

inspires  us  with  the  desire  to  benefit  as  many  people
as  we  can,  and  especially  by  imparting  information  and

66  the  principles  of  wisdom.  Hence  it  would  be  hard  to
discover  anyone  who  wOl  not  impart  to  another  any
knowledge  that  he  may  himself  possess  ;  so  strong  is
our  propensity  not  only  to  learn  but  also  to  teach.
And  just  as  bulls  liave  a  natural  instinct  to  fight  nuprc
with  all  their  strength  and  force  in  defending  their  o'"""
ealves  against  lions,  so  men  of  exceptional  gifts  and
capacity  for  service,  like  Hercules  and  Liber  in  the
legends,  feel  a  natural  impulse  to  be  the  protectors
of  the  human  race.  Also  when  we  confer  upon  Jove
the  titles  of  Most  Good  and  Most  Great,  of  Saviour,
Lord  of  Guests,  Rallier  of  Battles,  what  we  mean  to
imply  is  that  the  safety  of  mankind  lies  in  his  keep-
ing. But  how  inconsistent  it  would  be  for  us  to
espect  the  immortal  gods  to  love  and  cherish  us,
when  we  ourselves  despise  and  neglect  one  another !
Therefore  just  as  we  actually  use  our  limbs  before
we  have  learnt  for  what  particular  useful  purpose
they  were  bestowed  upon  us,  so  we  are  by  nature
united  and  allied  in  the  common  society  of  the  state.
Were  this  not  so,  there  would  be  no  room  either  for
Justice  or  benevolence.

G?  But  just  as  they  hold  that  man  is  united  with  Anim.-Js  hav»

man  by  the  bonds  of  right,  so  they  consider  that  no  "*''"■
right  exists  as  between  man  and  beast. For  Chry-
sippus  well  said,  that  all  other  things  were  created  for
thesakeof  men  and  gods,  but  that  these  exist  for  their  ^M

own  mutual  fellowship  and  society,  so  that  men  can  ^|

make  use  of  beasts  for  their  own  purposes  without  ^|

injustice. And  the  nature  of  man,  he  said,  is  such,  H

that  as  it  were  a  code  of  law  subsists  between  the  The  rights  o[
individual  and  the  human  race,  so  that  he  who  up-  ■°'°-
287

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

ius  intercederetj  qui  id  conservaret  eum  iustum,  qui
migraret  iniustum  fore.  Sed  queraadmodurn,  thea-
truni  cum  commune  sit,  recte  tamen  dici  potest  eius
esse  eum  locum  quem  quisque  occupant,  sic  in  urbe
mundove  communi non adversatur ius quo minus

6S  suum  quidqiie  cuiusque  sit.  Cum  autem  ad  tuendos
conservandosque  homines  hominem  natum  esse  vi-
deamus,  cotisentaneum  est  huic  naturae  ut  sapiens
velit  gerere  et  administrare  rem  publicam  atque,  ut
e  natura  vivat,  uxorem  adiungere  et  velle  ex  ea
liberos.  Ne  amores  quidem  sanctos  a  sapiente  alienos
esse  arbit/antur.  Cynicorum  autem  rationem  atque
vitam  alii  cadere  in  sapientem  dicunt,  si  qui  eius-
tnodi  forte  casus  incident  ut  id  faciendum  sit,  alii
nullo  modo.

69  XXI.  Ut  vero  conservetur  omnis  homini  erga
homiiiem  societas,  cotiiunctio,  caritas,  et  emolumentn
etdetrinientaCquae(ur^eX^/MtTciet,8A.o;i;taTaappellant)
communia  esse  voluerunt,  quorum  altera  prosunt,
nocent  altera;  iieque  solum  ea  communia  verum
etiam  paria  esse  dixerunt.  Incommoda  autem  et
conmioda  (ita  enim  (vxpijo-r^^tuTa  et  SiwxpjjoTJj/MiTa
appello)  communia  esse  voluerunt,  paria  noluerunt
Ilia  enim  quae  prosunt  aut  quae  nocent  aut  bona
sunt  aut  mala,  quae  sint  paria  necesse  est;  commoda
autem  et  incommoda  in  co  genere  sunt  quae  prae-
posita  et  reiecta  dicimus ;  ea  possunt  paria  non  esse,
Sed emolumenta' communia esse dicuntur, recte

el  delrimtnta.  •

'  Aficr  emvlumeiiia  Lanibin

aThe  Cynics  cast  off  the  ties  of  country  and  family,  and
proclaimed  themselves  Kosmou  Palilai,  citizens  of  the
Universe  and  members of  the universa.!  brotherhood  of

^^^^^We

J

yUfea

I

BOOK  III,  xx-xxi
holds  this  code  will  be  just  and  he  who  departs  from
it, unjust. But  just  as  though the  theatre  is  a  PropMiy
public  place  it  is  yet  correct  to  say  that  the  parti-
cular seat  a  man  has  taken  belongs  to  him,  so  in  the
state  or  in  the  universe,  thougli  these  are  common
to  all,  no  principle  of  justice  militates  against  the
58  possession  of  private  property. Again,  since  we  see  p
that  man  is  designed  by  nature  to  safeguard  and  j
protect  his  fellows,  it  follows  from  this  natural  dis-
position, that  the  Wise  Man  should  desire  to  engage
in  politics  and  government,  and  also  to  live  in  ac-
cordance with  nature  by  taking  to  himself  a  wife  and
desiring  to  have  children  by  her. Even  the  passion
of  love  when  pure  is  not  thought  incompatible  with
the  character  of  the  Stoic  Sage.  As  for  the  principles
and  habits  of  the  Cynics,'  some  say  that  these  befit
the  Wise  Man,  if  circumstances  should  happen  to
indicate  this  course  of  action  ;  but  other  Stoics  reject
the  Cynic  rule  unconditionally.
) XXI. Tosafeguardtheuniversal alliance, solidarity  'Goods
and  affection  that  subsist  between  all  mankind,  the  J^!^''.'
Stoics  held  that  both  'benefits'  and 'injuries'  (in  their  mon.ai
terminology,  opheletnala  and  bUtmmala)  are  common,  pJii'rJI
the  former  doing  good  and  the  latter  harm  ;  and  they  commo
pronounced  them  to  be  not  only common'  but  also
equal.' Disadvantages'  and advantages'  (for  so  I
render  euchreslemaia  and  duschcitSmata)  they  held  to
be  'common'  but  not 'equal.'  For  things 'beneficial'
and  'injurious'  are  goods  and  evils  respectively,  and
these  must  needs  be  equal;  but advantages'  and
'disadvantages'  belong  to  the  class  we  speak  of  as
'preferred'  and  'rejected,'  and  these  may  differ  in
degree. But  whereas benefits'  and injuries'  are

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
aiitem  facta  et peccata  non habentur  i

"0  Amicitiam  autem  «dhibendam  esse  censent  quia

sit  ex  eo  genere  quae  prosunt,  Quamquam  autem
in  amicitia  alii  dicant  aeque  caram  esse  sapienti
ration  em  amici  ac  suam,  alii  autem  sibi  cuique
cariorera  suam,  tamen  hi  quoque  posteriores  fatentur
alienum  esse  a  iustitia,  ad  quam  nati  esse  videamur,
detrahere  quid  de  aliquo  quod  sibi  assumat  Minime
vero  probatur  huic  disciplinae  de  qua  loquor  aut
iustitiam  aut  amicitiam  propter  utilitates  ascisci  aut
probari.  Eaedem  enim  utilitates  poterunt  eas  labe-
factare  atque  pervertere.  Etenim  aec  iustitia  nee
amicitia  esse  omnino poterunt nisi ipsae per se

71  expetuntur.^  lus  autem,  quod  ita  dici  appellarique
possit,  id  esse  natura ;  alienumque  esse  a  sapiente
non  modo  iniuriam  cui  faeere  verum  etiam  nocere.
Nee  vero  rectum  est  cum  amicis  aut  bene  meritis
consociare  aut  coniungere  iniuriam;  gravissimeque
et  verissime  defenditur  numquam  aequitatem  ab
utilitate  posse  seiungi,  et  quidquid  aequum  iustumque
esset  id  etiam  honestum,  vicissimque  quidquid -esset
honestum  id  iustum  etiam  atque  aequum  fore.
'  exfietuntiir  ■■  inf.  MSS.  expetantuT.

s  Moral  and  immoral  acta  (a)  viewed  for  their  results  for
g-ood  and  ill  affect  all  mankind,  (b)  viewi?d  in  themselves
concern  the  agent  only;  while  in  both  aspects  they  do  not
admit  of  deg^ree,  but  are  either  good  or  bad,  right  or  wrong
absolutely.  Whereas  things  indifferent  (i.e.  everything  but
moral  good  and  evil)  are  more  or  less  advanlageous  or  Ihe
reverse,  both  to  the  person  immediately  concerned  and  to
the  world  at  large.

pronounced  to  be
acts  are  not  considered

1  They  recommend  the  cultivation  of  friendship,  Fr

classing  it  among  things  beneHcial.'  In  iriendship  tti<
some  profess  that  the  Wise  Man  will  hold  his  friends'  d«
interests  as  dear  as  his  own,  wliile  others  say  that  a
man's  own  interests  must  necessarily  be  dearer  to
him ;  at  the  same  time  the  latter  admit  that  to  en-
rich oneself  by  another's  loss  is  an  action  repugnant
to  that  justice  towards  which  we  seem  to  possess  a
natural  propensity.  But  the  school  I  am  discussing
emphatically  rejects  the  view  tliat  we  adopt  or  ap-
prove either  justice  or  friendship  for  the  sake  of
their  utility.  For  if  it  were  so,  the  same  claims  of
utUity  would  be  able  to  undermine  and  overthrow
them.  In  fact  tile  very  existence  of  both  justice
and  friendship will be impossible if  they are not

1  desired  for  their  own  sake.  Right  moreover,  properly
so  styled  and  entitled,  exists  (they  aver)  by  nature ;
and  it  is  foreign  to  the  nature  of  the  Wise  Man  not
only  to  wrong  but  even  to  hurt  anyone.  Nor  again
is  it  righteous  to  enter  into  a  partnership  in  wrong-
doing witli  one's  friends  or  benefactors ;  and  it  is
most  truly  and  cogently  iiiaintained  that  honesty
is  always  the  best  policy,  and  that  ivhatever  is  fair
and  just  is  also  honourable,''  and  conversely  whatever
is  honourable ''  will  also  be  just  and  fair.

l>The  sense
lhH.n  hanesluti
In  popular  est

.s  kon,

re  utile,  •  useful,'  rather
intended  to  mean  '  held

\o  profitable.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  HH

:!  Ad  easque  virtutes  de  quibus  disputatum  est  dia-

lecticam  etiam  adiungunt  et  physicam  easque  ambas
virtutum  nomine  appellant,  alteram  quod  habeat
rationem  ne  cui  falso  assentiamur  neve  umquain
captiosa  probabilitate  fallamur,  eaque  quae  de  bonis
et  malis  didicerimus  ut  teiiere  tuerique  possimus ;
nam  sine  hac  arte  quemvis  arbitrantur  a  vero  abduci
fallique  posse.  Recte  igitur,  si  omnibus  in  rebus
temeritas  ignoratioque  vitiosa  est,  ars  ea  quae  tollit
haec  virtus  nominata  est.

i  XXII.  Physicae  quoque  non  sine  causa  tributus
idem  eat  lionos.jropterea  quod  qui  convenienter

victur

j  sit  ei  proficiseeiidum  est  ab  c

niiimj^)  iitqiif  nl'  riiii  prnfiimHrtnr Nee  vero  potest

quisquam  de  bonis  et  malis vere  iudicare  ni
cognita  ratione  naturae  et  vitae  etiam  dec

L,  et

utnim  eonveniat  necne  nntura  hominis  cum  universa.
Quaeque  sunt  Vetera  praecepta  sapientium,qui  iubent
tempori  pavere '  et  sequi  deum  '  et  se  iioscere,'  et
nihil  nimis,'  haec  sine  physicis  quam  lim  habeant
(et  habent  maximam)  videre  iiemo  potest.  Atque
etiam  ad  iustitiani  colendam,  ad  tuendas  amieitias
et  reliquas  earitates  quid  natura  valeat  baec  una
cognitio  potest  tradere ;  nee  vero  pietas  adversus
deos  nee  quanta  iis  gratia  debeatur  sjne  explJcatione
iiaturae  intcllefri  pntpst.
i  Sed  iam  sentio  me  esse  longius  proveetum  quam

W  BOOK  in.  Kxi-xxii

i  To  the  virtues  ive  have  discussed  they  also  add  Logicii

Dialectic  and  Natural  Philosophy,  Both  of  these  phiiMoi
they  entitle  by  the  name  of  virtue  ;  the  former  Virtun.
because  it  conveys  a  method  that  guards  us  from
giving  assent  to  any  falsehood  or  ever  being  deceived
by  specious  probability,  and  enables  us  to  retain
and  to  defend  the  truths  that  we  have  learned  about
good  and  evil ;  for  without  the  art  of  Dialectic
they  hold  that  any  man  may  be  seduced  from  truth
into  error.  If  therefore  rashness  and  ignorance  are
in  all  matters  fraught  with  mischief,  the  art  which
removes  them  is  correctly  entitled  a  virtue.

i  XXII.  The  same  honour  is  also  bestowed  with
good  reason  upon  Natural  Philosophy,  because  he
who  is  to  live  in  accordance  with  nature  must  base
his  principles  upon  the  system  and  government  of
the  entire  world.  Nor  again  can  anyone  judge  truly
of  things  good  and  evil,  save  by  a  knowledge  of  the
whole  plan  of  nature  and  also  of  the  life  of  the  gods,
and  of  the  answer  to  the  question  whether  the
nature  of  man  is  or  is  not  in  harmony  with  that  of
the  universe.  And  no  one  without  Natural  Philo-
sophy can  discern  the  value  (and  their  value  is  very
great)  of  the  ancient  maxims  and  precepts  of  the
Wise  Men,  such  as  to  '  obey  occasion,'  '  follow  God,'
know  thyself,'  and  moderation  in  all  things,'  Also
this  science  alone  can  impart  a  conception  of  the
power  of  nature  in  fostering  justice  and  maintaining
friendship  and  the  rest  of  the  affections ;  nor  again
without  unfolding  nature's  secrets  can  we  understand
the  sentiment  of  piety  towards  the  gods  or  the
degree  of  gratitude  that  we  owe  to  them.

t '  However  I  begin  to  perceive  that  1  have  let  p^t^u
myself  be  carried  beyond  the  requirements  of  the  Sioicty
39a

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

proposjta  ratio  postularet,  V^erum  admirabilis  com-
positio  disciplinae  incredibi Usque  me  rerum  traxit
ordo  ;  quern  per  deos  immortales  nonne  miraris  ?
Quid  enim  aut  in  natura,  qua  nihil  est  aptius,  nihil
deseriptius,  aut  in  operibus  manu  factis  tam  compo-
situm  tamque  compactum  et  coagmentatum  inveniri
potest  ?  quid  posterius  priori  non  convenit  ?  quid
sequitur  quod  non  respondeat  superiori  ?  quid  non
sic  aliud  ex  alio  nectitur  ut  si  ullam  litteram  moveris
labent  omnia  ?  Nee  tamen  quidquam  est  quod  mo-
veri  possit.
5  Quam  gravis  vero,  quatn  magnifica,  quam  constans

conficitur  persona  sapieiitis  !  qui,  cum  ratio  docuerit
quod  honestum  esset  id  esse  solum  bonura,  semper
sit  necesse  est  beatus  vereque  omnia  ista  iiomina
possideat  quae  irrideri  ab  imperitis  solent.  Rectius
enim  nppellabitur  rex  quam  Tarquinius  qui  nee  se
nee  suos  regere  potuit,  rectius  magister  populi  (is
enim  est  dictator)  quam  Sulla  qui  trium  pestifero-
rum  vitiorum,  luxuviae,  avaritiae,  erudelitatis  magi-
ster  fuit,  rectius  dives  quam  Crassus  qui  nisi  eguisset
numquam  Euphraten  nulla  belli  causa  transire  VO'
luisset.  Recte  eius  omnia  dicentur  qui  scit  uti  solus
omnibus ;  recte  etiam  pulcher  appellabitur  (animi
enim  liniamenta  sunt  pulcliriora  quam  corporis)  recte
solus  liber,  nee  domination]  cuiusquam  parens  nee

^^5oo9Tc

r  BOOK  m.  xxii

plan  that  I  set  before  me.  The  fact  is  that  I  have  been
led  on  by  the  marvellous  structure  of  the  Stoic  sys-
tem and  the  miraculous  sequence  of  its  topics  ;  pray
tell  me  seriously,  does  it  not  fill  you  with  admiration  ?
Nothing  is  more  finished,  more  nicely  ordered,  than
nature  ;  but  what  has  nature,  what  have  the  pro-
ducts of  handicraft  to  show  that  is  so  well  con-
structed, so  firmly  jointed  and  welded  into  one  f
Where  do  you  find  a  conclusion  inconsistent  with
its  premise,  or  u  discrepancy  between  on  earlier  and
a  later  statement  f  Where  is  lacking  such  close
interconnexion  of  the  parts  that,  if  you  alter  a  single
letter,  you  shake  the  whole  structure?  Though
indeed  there  is  nothing  that  it  would  be  possible  to

>  Then,  how  dignified,  how  lofty,  how  consistent  w

is  the  character  of  the  Wise  Man  as  they  depict  it  1
Since  reason  has  proved  that  moral  worth  is  the  sole
good,  it  follows  that  he  must  always  be  happy,  and
that  all  those  titles  which  the  ignorant  are  so  fond  of
deriding  do  in  very  truth  belong  to  him.  For  he
will  have  a  better  claim  to  the  title  of  King  than
Tarquin,  who  could  not  rule  either  himself  or  his
subjects;  a  better  right  to  the  name  of  Master*  of
the  People '  (for  that  is  what  a  dictator  is)  than
Sulla,  who  was  a  master  of  three  pestilential  vices,
hcentiousness,  avarice  and  cruelty  ;  a  better  claim  to
be  called  rich  than  Crassus,  who  had  he  needed
nothing  would  never  have  been  induced  to  cross  the
Euphrates  for  any  military  reason.  Rightly  will  he
be  said  to  own  all  things,  who  alone  knows  how  to
use  all  things ;  rightly  also  will  he  be  styled  beauti-
ful, for  the  beauty  of  the  soul  is  fairer  than  that  of
the  body  ;  rightly  the  one  and  only  free  man,  as  sub-
295

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^1

obediens  cupiditati,  recte  invictus,  cuius  etiamai
corpus  constringatur,  animo  tamen  vincula  inici
76  nulla  possint.  Nee  exspectat'  uUum  tempus  aetatis,
ut  turn  deiiique  iudicetur  beatusne  fuerit  cum  ex-
tremum  vita.e  diem  morte  confecerit ;  quod  ille  unus
e  septeni  sapientibus  non  sapienter  Croesum  monuit,
nam  si  beatus  umquam  fuisset,  beatam  vitara  usque
ad  ilium  a  Cyro  exstructum  rogum  pertulisset.  Quod
si  ita  est  ut  neque  quisquam  nisi  bonus  vir  et  omnes
boni  beati  sint,  quid  philosophia  magis  colendum  aut
quid  est  virtute  divinius?"

■t  ad  potelii

BOOK  in.  xxii

ject  to  no  man's  authoritj,  and  slave  of  no  appetite  ;
rightly  unconquerable,  for  though  his  body  be  thrown
into  fetters,  no  bondage  can  enchain  his  soul.  Nor
does  he  wait  for  any  period  of  time  that  the  decision
whether  he  has  been  happy  or  not  may  be  finally
pronounced  only  when  he  has  rounded  off  his  life's
last  day  in  death, — the  famous  warning  so  unwisely
given  to  Croesus  by  old  Solon,  one  of  the  seven
Wise  Men;  forhadCroesuseverbeen  happy,  he  would
have  carried  his  happiness  uninterrupted  to  the  pyre
raised  for  him  by  Cyrus.  If  then  it  be  true  that  all
the  good  and  none  but  the  good  are  happy,  what
possession  is  more  precious  than  philosophy,  what
,  more  divine  than  virtue  ? ' '

Google

M.  TULLI  CICERONIS
DE

FINIBUS  BONORUM  ET  MALORUM
LIBER  QUARTUS

1  I.  Quae  cum  dixisset,  finem  ille. Ego  autem:
Ne  tu,  inquam,  Cato,  ista  exposuisti,  ut  tam  multa,

memorjter,  ut  tam  obscura,  dilucide.  Itaque  aut
omittamus  contra  omnino  velle  aliquid  aut  spatium
Humamus  ad  co^tandum;  tam  enim  diligenter,
etiamsi  minus  vere  (nam  nonduni  id  quidem  audeo
dicere),  sed  tamen ''  accurate  non  modo  fundatam
verum  etiam  exstruetani  disciplinam  non  est  facile
perdiscere."  Turn  ille:  Ain  tandem?"  inquit;
cum  ego  te  hac  nova  lege  videam  eodem  die  accu-
satori  respondere  et  tribus  horis  perorare,  in  hac  me
causa  tempus  dilaturum  putas?  quae  tamen  a  te
agetur  non  melior  quaiu  iliae  sunt  quas  interdum
obtines.  Quare  istam  quoque  aggredere,  tractatam
praesertim  et  ab  aliis  et  a  te  ipso  saepe,  ut  tibi

2  deesse  non  possit  oratio."  Turn  ego:  Non  meher-
eule,"  inquam,  soleo  temere  contra  Stoicos,  non  quo
illis  admodum  assentiar,  sed  pudore  impeidior;  ita
multa  dicunt,  quae  vix  intellegara."  'Obscura,"
inquit,  quaedam  esse  conHteor;  nee  tamen  ab  illis
ita  dicuntur  de  industria,  sed  inest  in  rebus  ipsis

'  sed  tamen  ;  Lambinus  cnnjectures  sed  tamen  tam,  Davis
sed  tam.  Perhaps  audeo  dieerey  sed  lamen)  non  modo;  and
bracket  aecurate  a.s  interpolated.

'Passed  by  Pompej',  $2  B.C.,  to  limit  the  concluding
speeches  in  lawsuits  to  two  hours  for  the  prosecution  and
three  for  the  defence,  both  to  be  delivered  on  the  same  day,
300

^^OOgTt

BOOK  IV

I  I.  With  these  words  he  conchided.  A  most  Ref.
faithful  and  lucid  exposition,  Cato,"  said  1,  "  con- n»
sideling  tlie  wide  range  of  your  subject  and  its  '""'
obscurity.  Clearly  I  must  either  give  up  all  idea  ot
replying,  or  must  take  time  to  think  it  over;  it  is
no  easy  task  to  get  a  thorough  grasp  of  a  system  so
elaborate,  even  if  erroneous  {for  on  that  point  I  do  not
yetventure  to  speak ),but  at  all  eventssohighly  finish-
ed both  in  its  first  principles  and  in  their  working  out"
Vou  don't  say  so!"  replied  Cato.  '  Do  you  sup-
pose I  am  going  to  allow  our  suit  to  be  adjourned,
when  I  see  you  under  this  new  law '  replying  for
the  defence  on  the  same  day  as  your  opponent  con-
cludes for  the  prosecution,  and  keeping  your  speech
within  a  three  hours'  limit?  Though  you  will  find
your  present  case  as  shaky  as  any  of  those  which
you  now  and  then  succeed  in  pulling  off.  So  tackle
this  one  like  the  rest,  particularly  as  the  subject  is
familiar;  others  have  handled  it  before,  and  so  have
you  repeatedlj-,  so  that  you  can  hardly  be  gravelled

'.i  for  lack  of  matter."  I  protest,"  I  exclaimed,  I
am  not  by  way  of  challenging  the  Stoics  lightly;
not  that  I  agree  with  them  entirely,  but  modesty
restrains  me :  there  is  so  much  in  their  doctrines
that  I  can  hardly  understand."  I  admit,"  he  said,
that  some  parts  are  obscure,  but  the  Stoics  do  not
affect  an  obscure  style  on  purpose ;  the  obscurity  is
inherent  in  the  subjects  themselves." How  is  it.

,1,,,  .yCoogle

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

obscuritas."  Cur igituv easdem res," inquam,

Peripateticis  dicentibus  verbum  nullum  est  quod
non  intellegatur?"  "Easdemne  res?"  inquit;  "an
parum  disserui  non  verbis  Stoicos  a  Peripateticis  sed
universa  re  et  tota  sententia  dissidere?"  Atquij"
inquam,  Cato,  si  istud  obtinueris,  traducas  rae  ad
te  totum  licebit"  Putabam  equidem  satis,"  inquit,
me  dixisse.  Quare  ad  ea  primum,  si  videtur;  sin
aliud  quid  voles,  postea."  Immo  istud  quidem,"
inquam,  quo  loco  quidque  . . .'  nisi  iniquum  postulo,
arbitratu  meo."  L't  placet,"  inquit;  etsi  enim
illud  erat  aptius,  aequum  cuique  concedere,"

J  II.  Existimo  igitur,"  inquam,  Cato,  veteres
illos  Platonis  auditores,  Speusippum,  Aristotelem,
Xenocratem,  deinde  eorum  Polemonem,  Theophra-
stum,  satis  et  copiose  et  eieganter  habuisse  constitu-
tam  disciplinara,  ut  non  esset  causa  Zenoni  cum
Polemonem  audisset  cur  et  ab  eo  ipso  et  a  superiori-
bus  dissideret ;  quorum  fuit  haec  institutio,  in  qua
aiiimadvertas  velim  quid  mutandum  putes,  nee
exspectes  dum  ad  omnia  dicam  quae  a  te  dicta  sunt :
universa  enim  illoram  ratjone  cum  tota  vestra  con-

*  Rigeiidum puto. Qui cum viderent  ita  nos esse
natos  ut  et  communiter  ad  eas  virtutes  apti  essemus
'  accurreril  or  some  similar  word  lias  been  lost.
.■50-2

S^5oo9Tc

BOOK  IV.  i-ii
then,"  I  replied,  that  when  the  same  subjects  are
discussed  by  the  Peripnletics,  every  word  is  intelh-
gible  ?  "  '  The  same  subjects?  "  he  cried.  Have
I  not  said  enough  to  show  that  the  disagreement
between  the  Stoics  and  the  Peripatetics  is  not  a
matter  of  words,  but  concerns  the  entire  substance
of  their  whole  system?"  "O  well,  Cato,"  I  re-
joined, if  you  can  prove  that,  you  are  welcome  to
claim  me  as  a  whole-hearted  convert."  I  did
think,"  said  he,  that  I  had  said  enougli.  So  let  us
take  this  question  first,  if  you  like ;  or  if  you  prefer
another  topic,  we  will  take  this  later  on."  Nay,"
said  Ij  as  to  that  matter  I  shall  use  my  own  dis-
cretion, unless  this  is  an  unfair  stipulation,  and  deal
with  each  subject  as  it  comes  up."  Have  it  your
way,"  he  replied  :  my  plan  would  have  been  n
suitable,  but  it  is  fair  to  let  a  man  choose  for
himself."

.t  II.  My  view  then,  Cato,"  I  proceeded,  is  this,  Reviewofolder
that  those  old  disciples  of  Plato,  Speusippus,  Aris-  wb^zMu
totle  and  Xenocrates,  and  afterwards  their  pupils  ^ft^'S't.™
Polemo  and  Theophrastus,  had  developed  a  body  of  Theirtaree-ioid
doctrine  that  left  nothing  to  be  desired  either  in  ^o^yfetain^
fullness  or  finish,  so  that  Zeno  on  becoming  the  pupil  '>'/  "ic  sioics.
of  Polemo  had  no  reason  for  differing  either  from  his
master  himself  or  from  his  master's  predecessors.
The  outline  of  their  theory  was  as  follows— but
I  should  be  glad  if  you  would  call  attention  to  any
point  you  may  desire  to  correct  without  waiting  for
nie  to  deal  with  the  whole  of  your  discourse;  for  I
think  I  shall  have  to  place  their  entire  system  in

4.  conflict  with  the  whole  of  yours.  Well,  these  philo-
sophers obsen'ed  (l)  that  we  are  so  constituted  as
to  have  a  natural  aptitude  for  the  recognized  and

CICERO  DEFINIBUS  ^B

quae  notac  iltustresque  sunt,  ioslitiam  dico,  teinpe-
rantiam,  ceteras  generis  eiusdem  (quae  omnes  similes
artium  reliqiiarum  materia  tan  turn  ad  m  el  lore  m
partem  et  tractatione  ditFerunt),  casque  ipsas  virtutes
viderent  nos  magnificentius  appetere  et  ardentius ;
habere  etiam  iiisitam  quandani  vel  potius  innatam
cu  pi  dilate  m  scientiae,  natosque  esse  ad  congrega-
tionera  hominum  et  ad  societatem  com  muni  tatemque
generis  liumani,  eaque  in  maximis  ingeniis  raaxime
elucere,  totam  philosophiam  tres  in  partes  diviserunt,
quam  partitionem  a  Zenone  esse  retentam  videmus.
3  Quarura  cum  una  sit  qua  mores  conformari  putantur,
differo  earn  partem,  quae  quasi  slirps  est  huius
quaestiunis ;  qui  sit  enim  finis  bonorum,  mox ;  lioc
loco  tantum  dico  a  veteribus  Peripatetieis  Aeademi-
cisque,  qui  re  consentientes  vocabulis  difTerebant,
eum  locum  quem  civilem  recte  appellaturi  videmur
(Graeci  iroAtTiRoi') graviter  et  copiose  esse  tractalum.
HI,  "Quam  multa  illi  de  re  publica  scripseruntj
quam  multa  de  legibus !  quam  multa  non  solum
praecepta  in  artibus  sed  etiam  exempla  in  orationi-
bus  bene  dicendi  reliqueruut!  Primum  enim  ipsa
tUa  quae  subtiiiter  disserenda  erant  polite  apteque
dixeruntj  turn  definientes,  turn  partientes,  ut  vestri
etiam ;  sed  vos  squalidius ;  illorum  vides  quam  niteat

■This  sentence  might  appear  to  imply  that  the  three
departments. of  philosophy  were  (i)  Ethics,  (a)  Physics  and
Logic,  (3)  Politics;  but  in  the  followiDg-  chapters  Cicero
adopts  the  normal  division,  (i)  Logic,  c.  IV,  (2}  Physics,
c.  V,  (3)  Elhics,  cc.  VI  foil.,  with  its  two  subordinate
branches  of  Politics  and  Rhetoric  which  are  disniissEd
parenthetically  in  c.  III.
301

B^  BOOK  IV.  ii-iii

standard  virtues  in  general,  I  mean  Justice,  Tem-
perance and  the  others  of  that  class  (all  of  which
resemble  the  rest  of  the  arts  and  differ  only  by  ex-
celhng  them  in  the  material  with  which  they  work
and  in  their  treatment  of  it);  they  obser
over  that  we  pursue  these  virtues  with  a  more  lofty
enthusiasm than we do the  arts ; and  (a) that
we  possess  an  implanted  or  rather  an  innate  appe-
tite for  knowledge,  and  (s)  that  we  are  naturally
disposed towards  social life  with  our  fellow
and  towards fellowship  and  community  with  the
human  race; and  that  these  instincts  are  displayed
most  clearly  in  the  most  highly  endowed  natures.'
Accordingly they divided philosophy into three
departments,  a  division  that  was  retained,  as  we
3  notice,  by  Zeno. One  of  these  departments  is  the  Eihics
science  that  is  held  to  give  rules  for  the  formation  r^m^
of  moral  character; this  part,  wliich  is  the  founda-  (J^HJ^
tion  of  our  present  discussion,  I  defer. For  I  shall  Old  ai
consider  later  the  question,  what  is  the  End  of  Goods,  ^teiu
For  the  ptesent  I  only  say  that  the  topic  of  what  I
think  may  fitly  be  entitled  Civic  Science  (the  adjec-
tive in  Greek  is  politikoi)  was  handled  with  authority
and  fullness  by  the  early  Peripatetics  and  Academics,
who  agreed  in  substance  though  they  differed  in
terminology.

III.  "what  a  vast  amount  they  have  written  on
politics  and  on  jurisprudence  I  how  many  precepts  of
oratory  they  have  left  us  in  their  treatises,  and  how
many  examples  in  their  discourses!  In  the  first
place,  even  the  topics  that  required  close  reasoning
they  handled  in  a  neat  and  polished  manner,  em-
ploying now  definition,  now  division ;  as  indeed
your  school  does  also,  but  your  style  is  rather  out-
X  305

%X

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

6  oratio.  Deinde  ea  quae  requirebant  orationem
omatam  et  gravem,  quam  magnifice  sunt  dicta  ab
ilHs,  quam  splendidpl  de  iustitia,  de  temperantia,  de
fortitudine,  de  amicitia,  dt  aetate  degenda,  de  phi-
losophia,  de  capessenda  re  publica,  hominum  nee
spinas  velleiitium,  ut  Stoici,  nee  ossa  nudantium,
sed  eorum  qui  grandia  ornate  vellent,  enueleate
minora  dicere.  Itaque  quae  sunt  eorum  consola-
tiones,  quae  cohortationes,  quae  etiam  monita  et
consilift  scripta  ad  summos  viros  I  Rrat  enim  apud
eos,  lit  est  renim  ipsarum  natura,  sic  dicendi  exerci-
tatio  duplex.  Nam  quidquid  quaeritur,  id  liabet  aut
generis  ipsius  Bine  personia  temporibusque  aut  iis
ftdiunctis  facti  aut  iuris  aut  iiominis  controversiam.
Ergo  in  utroque  exereebantiir :  eaque  disciplina
effecit  tantum  illorum  utroque  in  genere  dicendi

7  copiam,  Totum  genua  hoe  Zeno  et  qui  ab  eo  sunt
aut  non  potuerunt  tueri  ^  aut  noluerunt,  eerte  re-
liquerunt.  Quamquam  scripsit  artem  rhetoricani
Cleanthes,  Chrysippus  etiam,  sed  sic  ut  si  quis
ubmutescere  concupierit  nihil  aliud  legere  debeat.
Itaque  vides  quoniodo  loquantur :  nova  verba  fingunt,
deserunt  usitata.  At  quanta  conanturl — mundum
hune  omnem  oppidum  esse  nostrum.  Vides  quan-
tam  rem  agat  ut  Circeiis  qui  habitet  totum  liunc
mundum  suum  municipium  esse  existimet.  Incendit

^nec  Mulleri  non  Mdv.;  i!e  M5S.
^tueii  inserted  by  Cobel,  Mdv.  o

"Cp.  m,  64.

iI^^^5oo9Tc

■r  BOOK  IV.  iii

6  at-elbowB,  while  theirs  is  noticeably  elegant.  Then,
in  themes  demanding  ornate  and  dignified  treat-
ment, how  imposing,  how  brilliant  is  their  diction !
On  Justice,  Temperance,  Courage,  Friendship,on  the
conduct  of  life,  the  pursuit  of  wisdom,  the  career
of  the  statesman, — no  hair-splitting  like  that  of  the
Stoics,  no  bare  skeleton  of  argument,  but  the  loftier
passages  studiously  ornate,  and  the  minor  topics
studiously  plain  and  clear.  As  a  result,  think  of
their  consolations,  their  exhortations,  even  their
warnings  and  counsels,  addressed  to  men  of  the
highest  eminence  I  In  fact,  their  rhetorical  exercbes
were  twofold,  like  the  nature  of  the  subjects  them-
selves. For  everj-  question  for  debate  can  be  argued
either  on  the  general  issue,  ignoring  the  persons  or
circumstances  involved,  or,  these  also  being  taken
into  consideration,  on  a  point  of  fact  or  of  law  or  of
nomenclature.  They  therefore  practised  themselves
in  both  kinds; and this  training  produced their

7  remarkable  fluency  in  each  class  of  discussion. This  Pounanog.
whole field  Zeno  and  his  successors  were  either  stoUa./ndihBii
unable  or  unwilling  to  cover; at  all  events  they  EUHciinfBrtor.
left  it  untouched. Cleanthes  it is  true  wrote a
treatise  on  rhetoric,  and  Chrysippus  wrote  one  loo,
but  what  are  they  like  ?  wliy,  they  fumisii  a  com-
plete manual  for  anyone  whose  ambition  is  to  hold  his
tongue;  you  can  judge  then  of  their  style,  coining
new  words,  discarding  those  approved  by  use. But,'
you  wilt  say, think  how  vast  are  the  themes  that
they  essay  1  for  example,  that  this  entire  universe  is
our own town.'' You see the magnitude of
a  Stoic's  task,  to  convince  an  inhabitant  of  Circeii
that  the  whole  vast  world  is  his  own  borough ! '  If
so, he must  rouse his audience to enthusiasm.'

x-i  307

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

igitur  eos  qui  audiunt. Quid?  ille  incendat ? Re-

stinguet  citius  si  ardentem  accepeiit.  Ista  ipsa
quae  tu  breviter,  regem,  dictatorem,  divitem  solum
esse  sapientem,  a  te  quidem  apte  ac  rotunde ;
quippe;  liabes  enim  a  rhetorilms ;  illorum  vero  ista
ipati  quam  exsilia  de  virtutis  vi  1  quam  tantam  volunt
esse  ut  bcatum  per  se  efBcere  [Ktssit.  Pungunt
enitn,  quasi  aculeis,  interrogatiunculis  angustis,
quibus  etiam  qui  assentiuntur  nihil  commutaiitur
animo  et  iidem  abeunt  qui  venerant;  res  enim  for-
tasse  verae,  certe  graves,  non  ita  tractantur  ut
debent,  sed  aliquanto  minutius,
i  IV.  Sequiturdisserendi  ratio  eognitioquenalurae;
nam  de  summo  bono  mox,  ut  di)ii,  videbimus  et  ad
id  explicandum  dispulationem  omnem  conferemus.
In  bis  igitur  partibus  duabus  nihil  erat  quod  Zeno
commuture  li^estiret;  res  enim  se  praeclare  habebat,
et  quidem  in  utraque  parte.  Quid  enim  ab  antiquis
ex  eo  genere  quod  ad  disserendum  valet  praetermis-
sum.  est?  qui  et  definierunt  plurima  et  definiendi
artes  reliquerunt,  quodque  est  delinitioni  adiun-
ctum,  ut  res  in  partes  dividatur,  id  et  fit  ab  Oils  et
quemadmodom  fieri  oporteat  traditur;  item  de  con-
trariis,  a  quibus  ad  genera  formasque  generum  vene-
runt.  lam  argument!  ratione  conelusi  caput  esse
faciunt  ea  quae  perspicua  dicunt;  deinde  ordinem
sequuntur;  tum  quid  verum  sit  in  singulis  extrema

308

I

BOOK  l\'.  iu-iv
What?  a  Stoic  rouse  enthusiasm?  He  ia  much
more  likely  to  extinguish  any  enthusiasm  the  student
may  have  liad  to  begin  with.  Even  those  brief
maxims  that  yon  propounded,  that  the  Wise  Man
alone  ia  king,  diebitor,  millionaire, — neatly  rounded
off  no  doubt  as  you  put  them ;  of  course,  for  you
leamt  them  from  professors  of  rhetoric; — but  how
bald  are  those  very  maxims,  on  the  lips  of  the  Stoics,
when  they  talk  about  the  potency  of  virtue, — virtue
which  they  rate  so  highly  that  it  can  of  itself,  they
say,  confer  happiness !  Their  meagre  little  syllo-
gisms are  mere  pin-pricks;  even  if  they  convince
the  intellect,  they  cannot  convert  the  heart,  and  the
hearer  goes  away  no  better  than  he  came.  What
they  say  is  possibly  true,  and  certainly  important;
but  the  way  in  which  they  say  it  is  wrong;  it  is  far
too  nigghng.

IV.  Next  come  Logic  and  Natural  Science;  for  AifotLofio, ti
the  problem  of  Ethics,  as  1  said,  we  shall  notice  ac
later,  concentrating  the  whole  force  of  the  discussion  '"
upon  its  solution.  In  these  two  departments  then,
there  was  nothing  that  Zeno  need  have  desired  to
alter ;  since  all  was  in  a  most  satisfactory  state,  and
that  in  both  departments.  For  in  the  subject  of
Logic,  what  had  the  ancients  left  undealt  with  ?  They
defined  a  multitude  of  terms,  and  left  treatises  on
Definition ;  of  the  kindred  art  of  the  Division  of  a
thing  into  its  parts  they  give  practical  examples,  and
lay  down  rules  for  the  process  ;  and  the  same  with
the  Law  of  Contradictories,  from  which  they  arrived
at  genera  and  species.  Then,  in  Deductive  reason-
ing, they  start  with  what  they  term  self-evident
propositions  ;  from  these  the  argument  proceeds  by
rule ;  and  finally  the  conclusion  gives  the  inference
ao9

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

9  conclusio  est.  Quanta  autem  ab  illis  varietas  argu-
mentorum  rati  one  concludentium  corumque  cum
captiosis  intcrrogationibus  dissimilitudo !  Quid  quod
pluribus  Wis  quasi  denuntiant  ut  neque  sensuum
fidem  sine  ratione  nee  rationis  sine  sensibus  exqui-
ramus  atque  ut  eorum  alterum  ab  altero  ne'  sepa-
remus?  Quid?  ea  quae  dialectici  nunc  tradunt  et
decent,  iionne  ab  illis  instituta  sunt?'  De  quibus
etsi  a  Chrysippo  maxime  est  elaboratum,  tanien  a
Zenone  minus  muUo  quam  ab  antiquis;  ab  hoc  autem
quaedam  non  melius  quam  veteres,  quaedam  omnjno
1 0  relicta.  Cumque  duae  sitit  artes  quibus  perfecte
ratio  et  oratio  compleatur,  una  inveniendi,  altera
disserendi,  banc  post«riorem  et  Stoici  et  Peripatetici,
priorem  autem  illi  egregie  tradiderunt,  hi  omnino  ne
attigerunt  quidem.  Nam  e  quibus  locis  quasi  the-
sauris  argumenta  depromerentur,  vestri  ne  suspicati
quidem  sunt,  superiores  autem  artificio  et  via  tradi-
derunt. Quae  quidem  ars'  efficit  ne  necesse  sit
iisdera  de  rebus  semper  quasi  dictata  decantare  neque
a  commentariolis  suis  discedere.  Nam  qui  sciet  ubi
quidque  positum  sit  quaque  eo  veniat,  is,  etiamsi
quid  obrutum  erit,  poterit  eruere  semperque  esse  in
disputando  suua.  Quod  etsi  ingeniis  magnis  praediti
quidani  dicendi  copiam  sine  ratione  eonsequuntur,  ars

"Afi.

Mdv.

iupplied  by  Lai

:r  inslilutn  sunt  all  but  or

ildv.  brackets.

Mdv.:  om.  A,  other  MSS.

inferior  MS.  add  h

'Cp.  1,39-

b  •  Inventio,'  Topiki,  ar
lopoi,  pi^euD-hotes  as  it
310

anged  stock  argnmenls  in  '  loci,'
i-ere  of  the  memory:  Cp.  V,  i.

K  BOOK  IV.  iv

Q  valid  in  the  particular  case.  Again, howmanydifierenl
forms  of  Deduction  they  distinguish,  and  how  widely
these  differ  from  sophistical  syllogisms^!  Think  how
earnestly  they  reiterate  the  warning,  that  we  must
not  expect  to  find  truth  in  sensation  unaided  by
reason,  nor  in  reason  without  sensation,  and  that  we
are  not  to  divorce  the  one  from  the  other !  Was  it
not  they  who  first  laid  down  the  rules  that  form  the
stock-in-trade  of  professors  of  logic  to-day  ?  Logic,
no  doubt,  was  very  fully  worked  out  by  Chrysippus,
but  much  less  was  done  in  it  by  Zeno  than  by  the
older  schools ;  and  in  some  parts  of  the  subject
his  work  was  no  improvement  on  that  of  his  pre-
decessors, while  other  parts  he  neglected  altogether.
10  Of  the  two  sciences  which  between  them  t
the  whole  field  of  reasoning  and  of  oratory,  one  tht
Science  of  Topics'*  and  the  other  that  of  Logic,
the  latter  has  been  handled  by  both  Stoics  and
Periiwtetics,  but  the  former,  though  excellently
taught  by  the  Peripatetics,  has  not  been  touched  by
the  Stoics  at  all.  Of  Topics,  the  store-chambers  in
which  arguments  are  arranged  ready  for  use,  your
school  had  not  the  faintest  notion,  whereas  their
predecessors  propounded  a  regular  technique  and
method.  This  science  of  Topics  saves  one  from
always  having  to  drone  out  the  same  stock  argu-
ments on  the  same  subjects  without  ever  departing
from  one's  notes.  For  a  man  who  knows  under  what
general  heading  each  argument  comes,  and  how  to
lay  his  hand  on  it,  will  always  be  able  to  unearth
any  particular  argument  however  far  out  of  sight  it
lies,  and  will  never  lose  his  self-possession  in  debate.
The  fact  is  that  although  some  men  of  genius  attain
to  eloquence  without  a  system,  nevertheless  science
311

wmm

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

taraen  est  dux  certior  quam  natura.  Ajjud  est  enim
poetarum  more  vi^rba  fundere.  aliud  eaquae  dicas
ratione  et  arte  distingucre.

V.  Similia  did  possunt  de  expHcatione  naturae,
qua  et  hi'  utuntur  et  vestri,  neque  veto  ob  duas
modo  causas,  quomodo  Epicuro  videtur,  ut  pellatur
mortis  et  religionis  metus ;  sed  etiam  modestiam
quandam  cognitio  rerum  caelestium  affert  iis  qui
videant  quanta  sit  etiam  apud  deos  moderatio,  quan-
tus  ordo,  et  magnitudinem  animi  deorum  opera  et
facta  cernentibus,  iustitiani  etiam,
habeas_3uod_sLL-£iiiniiii-rectQns_a£_c
uod  consilium,  quae  voluntas ;  cuius  ad  naturam

apta  ratio  vera  ilJa  et
12  Inest  in  eadem  expli
dam  e  cognosce  ndj
confectis  rebus
liberaliter  possimus

lex  a  philcisophis  dicitur,
)ne  naturae  insatiabilis  quae-
bus  voluptas,  in  qua  una,
'acui  negotiis  lioneste  ac
Ergo  in  hac  ratione  tota
fere  rebus  Stoici  illos  secuti  sunt,  ut  et
deos  ease  et  quattuor  ex  rebus  omnia  constare  dice-
rent.  Cum  autem  quaereretur  res  admodum  difficilis
num  quinta  quaedam  natura  videretur  esse  ex  qua
ratio  et  intellegentia  oriretur,  in  quo  etiam  de  animis
cuius  generis  essent  quaereretur,  Zeno  id  dixit  esse
ignem ;  nonnulla  deinde  aliter,  sed  ea  pauca ;  de
autem  re  eodem  modo,  divina  mente  atque

'  giia  et  hi  Mdv.:  que  hie,  qua  hie  MSS,

a  Aristotle  spoke  of

BOOK  IV,  iv-v

ientilic  ^^M

is  a  safer  guide  than  nature.  A  poetic  out-pouring
of  language  is  one  thing,  the  systematic  and  scientilic
marshalling  of  one's  matter  is  another.

; V. Much  the  same  may  be  said  about  Natural  inPi
Philosophy,  which  is  pursued  both  by  the  Peripatetics  '^,
and  by  your  school,  and  that  not  merely  for  the  two  «re  it
objects,  recognized  by  Epicurus,  of  banishing  super-  qhs.
stition  and  the  fear  of  death. Besides  these  benefits,
the study of the heavenly phenomena bestows
a  power  of  self-control  that  arises  from  the  percep-
tion  of  the  consummate  restraint  and  order  that
obtain  even  among  the  gods  ;  also  loftiness  of  mind
is inspired by contemplating the creations and
actions  of  the gods,  and  justice  by  realizing  the
will, design and purpose of the Supreme Lord
and  Ruler  to  whose  nature  we  are  told by  philo-
sophers  that the True Reason  and  Supreme Law

i  are  conformed.  The  study  of  Natural  Philosophy
also  afiords  the  inexhaustible  pleasure  of  acquiring
knowledge,  the  sole  pursuit  wliicli  can  afford  an  hon-
ourableandelevatedoccupation  for  the  hours  of  leisure
left  when  businesshas  been  finished.  Now  in  the  whole
of  this  branch  of  philosophy,  on  most  of  the  impor-
tant points  the  Stoics  followed  the  Peripatetics,
maintaining  the  existence  of  tlie  gods  and  the
creation  of  the  world  out  of  the  four  elements.
Then,  coming  to  tiie  very  difficult  question,  whether
we  are  to  believe  in  the  existence  of  a  fifth  substance,*
as  the  source  of  reason  and  intellect;  and  bound  up
with  this  the  further  question  of  the  nature  of  the
soul,  Zeno  declared  this  substance  to  be  fire  ;  next,
as  to  some  details,  but  only  a  few,  he  diverged  from

but  o

1  question  he  agreed
vhole  and  its  chief  parts  are

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

nahiramMndumuniyersumatque  eius  max imas  partes

administrari. Materiara  vero  rerum  et  copiam  apud

13  hos  exileni,  apud  illos  uberrimam  rcperiemus.  Quam
Diulta  ab  iis  conquisita  et  collects  sunt  de  omnium
animantium  geiiere,  ortu,  membris,  aetatibus  1  quam
multa  de  rebus  iis  quae  glgnuntur  e  terra !  quam
multae  quainque  de  variis  rebus  et  causae  cur  quid-
que  fiat  et  demon strationes  qucmadmodum  quidque
fial  I  qua  e\  omni  copia  plurima  et  cerlissima  argu-
raenta  sumuntur  ad  cuiusque  rci  naturam  explican-
dam.  Ergo  adhuc,  quantum  equidem  intellego^
causa  non  vidctur  fuisse  mulandi  nominis ;  iioii  enim,
si  omnia  non  sequebatur,  idcirco  non  erat  ortuE
illinc.  Equidem  etiam  Epicurum,  in  phjsicis  quidem,
Democriteum  puto.  Pauca  mutat,  vel  plura  sane;  at
cum  de  plurimis  eadem  dicit,  tum  certe  de  maxi-
mis.  Quod  idem  cum  vestri  faciant,  non  satis  ma-
gnam  tribuont  inventoribus  gratiam.

J  i  VI,  Sed  haec  hactenus.  Nunc  videamus,  quaeso,
de  summo  bono,  quod  continet  philosophiam,  quid
tandem  attulerit  quamobrem  ab  inventoribus  tam-
quam  a  parentibus  dissentiret.  Hoc  igitur  loco,
quamquam  a  te,  Cato,  diligenter  est  explicatum  linis
liic  bonorum  et  qui  a  Stoicis  et  quemadmodum  di-
ceretur,  tamen  ego  quoque  exponam,  ut  perspicia-
mus  si  potuerimus  quidnam  a  Zenone  novi  sit  allatum.

■  i.e.  for  Zcno's  school  to  be  calkd  Stoic  and  not Peri-
311

^^5oo9Tc

■  BOOK IV.  v-vi

Sovemed  by  a  divine  mind  and  substance.  In  poini
of  ftiUness,  however,  and  fertility  of  treatment  we
shall  find  the  Stoics  meagre,  whereas  the  Peripatetics
1 3  are  copious  in  the  extreme.  What  stores  of  facts
they  discovered  and  collected  «bout  the  classiRcation,
reproduction,  morphology  and  biology  of  animals
of  every  bind !  and  again  about  plants !  How
copious  and  wide  in  range  their  explanations  of  the
causes  and  demonstrations  of  the  mode  of  different
natural  plienomcna  I  and  all  these  stores  supply  them
with  numerous  and  conclusive  arguments  to  ex-
plain the  nature  of  each  particular  thing.  So  far
then,  as  far  as  I  at  least  can  understand  the
there  appears  to  have  been  no  reason  for  the  change
of  name";  that  Zeno  was  not  prepared  to  follow  the
Peripatetics  in  every  detail  did  not  alter  the  fact
that  he  had  sprung  from  them.  For  my  own  part  I
consider  Epicurus  also,  at  all  events  in  natural
philosophy,  simply  a  pupil  of  Democritus.  He  makes
a  few  modifications,  or  indeed  a.  good  many;  but  on
most  points,  and  unquestionably  the  most  important,
he  merely  echoes  his  master.  Your  leaders  do  the
same,  yet  neglect  to  acknowledge  their  full  debt  to
the  original  discoverers.
1  +  VI.  But  leaving  this  let  us  now,  if  you  please,
turn  to  Ethics.  On  the  subject  of  the  Chief  Good,
which  is  the  keystone  of  philosophy,  what  precise ,
contribution  did  Zeno  make  to  justify  his  quarrelling  i
with  his  parents,  the  originators  of  the  doctrine  ?
Under  this  head  you,  Cato,  gave  a  careful  exposition
of  the  Stoics'  conception  of  this End  of  Goods,'  and

Ceaning  they  attached  to  the  term  ;  still  I  also
ate  it,  to  enable  us  to  perceive,  if  we  can,
ement  of  noveltj-  was  introduced  by  Zeno.

a  Etbia.  tbe

^^^^e

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Cum  enim  superiores,  e  quibus  planissime  Polemo,
secundum  naturam  vivere  summum  bonum  esse
dixisseiit,  his  verbis  ttia  significari  Stoici  dicunt,
unum  eiusmodi,  vivere  adhibentem  scientiam  earum
rcrum  quae  natura  evenirent ;  liunc  ipsum  Zenonis
aiunt  esse  finem,  declarantem  illud  quod  a  te  dictum
1 5  est,  convenienter  na.turae  vivere.  Alterum  signifi-
cari idem  ut  si  diceretur  ollicia  media  omnia  aut
pleraque  servantem  vivere.  Hoc  sic  expositum  dis-
simile  est  superiori ;  illud  enim  rectum  est  (quod
KaTopdui/ia  dicebas)  contingitque  sapienti  soli;  lioc
autera  inchoati  cuiusdam  offici  est,  non  perfecti,  quod
cad  ere  in  nonnullos  insipientes  potest.  Tertlum
autem,  omnibus  aut  maximis  rebus  iis  quae  secun-
dum naturam  sint  fruentem  vivere.  Hoc  non  est
positum  in  nostra  actione ;  completur  enim  et  ex  eo
gencre  vitae  quod  virtute  fruitur'  et  ex  iis  rebus
quae  sunt  secundum  naturam  ncque  sunt  in  nostra
potestate.  Scd  hoc  summum  bonum  quod  tertia
signification e  intellegitur,  eaque  vita  quae  ex  summo
bono  degitur,  quia  coniuncta  ei  virtus  est,  in  sapien-
tem  solum  cadit,  isque  finis  bonorum,  ut  ab  ipsis
Stoicis  scriptuni  videmus,  a  Xenocrate  atque  ab
Aristotele  constitutus  est.  Itaque  ab  iis  constitutio
ilia  prima  naturae  a  qua  tu  quoque  ordiebare  his
prope  verbis  exponitur.

Yr«

.r  M5S.  [

P  BOOK  IV. vi

Preceding  thinkers,  and  among  them  most  explicitly
Polerao,  had  explained  the  Chief  Good  as  being
to  live  in  accordance  with  nature.'  This  formula
receives  from  the  Stoics  three  interpretations.  The
first  runs  thus,  'to  live  in  the  light  of  a  knowledge  of  /
the  natural  sequence  of  causation.'  This  conception
of  the  End  they  declare  to  be  identical  with  Zeno's,
being  an  explanation  of  your  phrase  to  live  in  agree-  •>  .
)  ment  with  nature.'  Their  second  interpretation  is  that  inierpnied  ai
it  means  the  same  as  to  live  in  the  performance  of  ^'it'tht'^e.
all,  or  most,  of  one's  intermediate  duties.^  The  maccotdancE
Chief  Good  as  thus  expounded  is  not  the  same  as
that  of  the  preceding  interpretation.  That  is  right
action '  {kaloHhoma  was  your  term),  and  can  be
achieved  only  by  the  Wise  Man,  but  this  belongs  to
duty  merely  inchoate,  so  to  speak,  and  not  perfect,
which  may  sometimes  be  attained  by  the  foolish.
Again,  the  third  interpretation  of  the  formula  is  to
livein  the  enjoyment  of  all,  orof  the  greatest,  of  those
things  which  are  in  accordance  with  nature.'  This
does  not  depend  solely  on  our  own  conduct,  for  it
involves  two  factors,  first  a  mode  of  life  enjoying
virtue,  secondly  a  supply  of  the  things  which  are  in
accordance  «itli  nature  but  which  are  not  within
our  control.  But  the  Chief  Good  as  understood  in
the  third  and  last  interpretation,  and  life  passed  on
the  basis  of  the  Chief  Good,  being  inseparably  coupled
with  virtue,  lie  within  the  reach  of  the  Wise  Man
alone  ;  and  this  is  the  account  of  the  End  of  Goods,
as  we  read  in  the  writings  of  the  Stoics  themselves,
which  was  given  by  Xenocrates  and  Aristotle.  They
therefore  describe  the  primary  constitution  of  nature,
which  was  your  starting  point  abo,  more  or  less  in
the  following  terms.

■Hi

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

5  Vli.  "  Omnis  natura  wit  esse  conservatrix  sui,  ut
et  salva  sit  et  in  genere  conservetur  suo.  Ad  hanc
rem  aiunt  artes  quoque  requisitas  quae  naturftm
adiuvarent,  in  quibus  ea  numeretur  in  primis  quae
est  Vivendi  ars,  ut  tueatur  quod  a  natura  datum  sit,
quod  desit  acquinit ;  iidemque  diviserunt  naturam
hominis  in  atdmum  et  corpus ;  cutnque  eoruni  utrum-
que  per  se  expetendum  esse  dixis&ent,  virtutes  quo-
que utriusque  eorum  per  se  expeteiidas  esse  dicebant ;
et'  cum  animum  infinita  quadam  laude  anteponerent
corpori,  virtutes  quoque  animi  bonis  corporis  ante-
'  ponebant.  Sed  cum  sapientiam  totius  hominis  cu-
stodem  et  procuratricem  esse  velleiit,  quae  esset
naturae  comes  et  adiutrlx,  hoc  sapientiae  muims  esse
dicebant  ut  cum^  eum  tueretur  qui  constaret  e\
animo  el  corpore,  in  utroque  iuvaret  eum  ac  conti-
neret,  Atque  ita  re  simpliciter  primo  cotlocatit,
reliqua  subtilius  persequentes  corporis  bona  facilem
quandam  rationem  habere  censeljant,  de  animi  bonis
aceuratius  exquirebant,  in  priraisque  reperiebant  esse
in  iis  iustitiae  semina,  primique  ex  omnibus  philo-
sophis  natura  tributum  esse  docuerunt  ut  ii  qui  pro-
creati  essent  a  procrealoribus  amarentur,  et,  id  quod
tenjporum  ordine  aiitiquius  est,  ut  cotiiugia  virorum
et  uxorom  natura  coniuncta  esse  dicerent,  qua  ex
stirpe  orirentur  amicitiae  cognationum.  Atque  ab
his  initiis  profecti  omnium  virtutum  et  originem  et

^  BOOK  IV.  vii

5  VII.  "Every  natural  organism  aims  at  being  its  Feritirttag
own  preserver,  so  as  to  secure  its  safetj'  and  also  its  jtinct  of  self-
preservation  true  to  its  specific  type.  With  this  ["w  i^k™'-
object,  they  declare,  man  called  in  the  aid  of  the  "mni"' body  ^
arls  also  to  assist  nature  ;  and  chief  among  the  arts  ufoiigh  d«mic
is  counted  the  art  of  living,  which  aims  at  guarding  ™"''  'J^^'*
the  gifts  that  nature  has  bestowed  and  at  obtaining  la-'
those  that  are  lacking.  They  further  divided  the
nature  of  man  into  soul  and  body.  Each  of  these
parts  they  pronounced  to  be  desirable  for  its  own
sake,  and  consequently  they  said  that  the  virtues
also  of  each  were  desirable  for  their  own  sakes ;

the  same  time  they  extolled  ih
surpassing  the  body  in  glory,  and
the  virtues  also  of  the  mind  aboi
■  body.  But  they  held  that  wisdi
and  protectress  of  the  whole  mai
rade  and  helper  of  nature,  and

soul  as  infinitelj-
iccordingly  placed

tlie  goods  of  the
n  is  the  guardian
as  being  the  eom-
they  said  that  the

function  of  wisdom,  as  protecting  a  being  that  c
sisted  of  a  mind  and  a  body,  was  to  assist  and  pre-
serve liim  in  respect  of  bftth.  After  thus  laying  the
first  broad  foundations  of  the  theory,  they  went  on
to  work  it  out  in  greater  detail.  The  goods  of  tlie
body,  they  held,  required  no  particular  explanation,  «n
but  the  goods  of  the  soul  they  investigated  with  S?
more  elaboration,  finding  in  the  fii-st  place  that  in  ^'
them  lay  the  germs  of  Justice  ;  and  they  were  the
first  of  any  philosophers  to  teach  that  the  love  of
parents  for  their  offspring  is  a  provision  of  nature ;
and  that  nature,  so  they  pointed  out,  has  ordained
the  union  of  men  and  women  in  marriage,  which  is
prior  in  order  of  time,  and  is  the  root  of  all  tiie
family  affections.  Starting  from  these  first  prin-
ciples  they  traced  out  the  origin  and  growth  of  nil
.11!)

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
progressionem  persecuti  sunt.  Ex  quo  magnitude
quoqiie  animi  exsistebat  qua  facile  posset  repugnari
obsistique  fortunae,  quod  masimae  res  esaent  in
potestate  sapientis;  varietates  autetri  iniuriasque  for-
tunae facile  veterum  philosoptiorum  praeceptis in-

18  stituta  vita  superabat.  Principiis  autem  a  natura
datis  amplitudines  quaedam  bonorum  excitabantur,
partim  profectae  a  contemplatione  rerum  oecultarmn,
quod  erat  insitus  menti  cognitionia  amor,  e  quo  etjam
rationis  esplicandae  disserendique  cupiditas  conse-
quebatur ;  quodquc  hoc  solum  animal  nntum  est
pudoris  ac  verecundiae  particeps  appetensque  con-
victum  hominum  ac  aocietatem  animadvertensque  in
omnibus  rebus  quas  ageret  aut  diceret  ut  ne  quid  ab
eo  fieret  nisi  honeste  ac  decorc,  his  initiis  et^  ut
ante  dixi  seminibus  a  natura  datis,  temperantia,
modestia,  iustitin  et  omnis  honcstas  perfecte  absoluta
est.

13  VIII.  Habes,"  inquam,  Cato,  formam  eorum
de  quibus  loquor  philosophurum.  Qua  exposita
scire  cupio  quae  causa  sit  cur  Zcno  ab  liac  antiqua
constitutione  desciverit,  quidnam  horum  ab  eo  non
sit  probatum :  quodne  onmem  iiaturam  conservatri-
ceni  sui  dixerint,  an  quod  omne  animal  ipsum  sibi
commendatum  ut  se  salvum '  in  suo  genere  inco-
lumeque  ¥  el  let,  an  quod,^  cum  omnium  artium  finis
is  esset  quern  natura  maxime  quaereret,  idem  statui
debere  de  totius  arte  vitae,  a

'*(  inserted  by  Mdv.
'sesalvum  Lambinus,  Mdv.;  ;
'  yuoif  inserted  by  Mdv.
320

quaereret,  i

•/  sah'um  MSS.

1
I

BOOK  IV.  vii-viii
the  virtues.  From  thesame  source  was' developed
loftinessof  mind,  which  could  render  us  proof  against
tlie  assaults  of  fortune,  because  the  tilings  that
matter  were  under  the  control  of  the  Wise  Man  ;
whereas  to  the  vicissitudes  and  blows  of  fortune  a
life  directed  by  the  precepts  of  the  old  philosophers

1  could  easily  rise  superior.  Agaui,  upon  the  founda-
tions given  by  nature  was  erected  a  spacious  struc-
ture of  escellences,  partly  based  on  the  contemplation
of  the  secrets  of  nature,  since  the  mind  possessed  an
innate  love  of  knowledge,  whence  also  resulted  the
passion  for  argument  and  for  discussion ;  and  also,
since  man  is  the  only  animal  endowed  with  a  sense
of  modesty  and  shame,  with  a  desire  for  intercourse
and  society  with  his  fellows,  and  with  a  scrupulous
care-in  all  his  words  and  actions  to  avoid  any  con-
duct that  is  not  honourable  and  seemly,  from  these
beginnings  or  germs,  as  1  called  them  before,  of
nature's  bestowal,  were  developed  Temperimce,  Self-
control,  Justice  and  moral  virtue  generally  in  full
flower  and  perfection.

I VIII.  "There,  Cato,"  I  said,  "  is  an  outline  of  the  Thmior.  Ze
philosophers  of  whom  I  am  speaking. Having  put  but »  new  wi
it  before  you,  I  should  be  glad  to  learn  what  reason  "liooiogy,
Zeno had for  seceding from this  old-established
system. Which  precisely  of  these  doctrines  did  he
think  unsatisfactory:  the  doctrine  that  every  organism
instinctively  seeks  its  own  preservation  ?  or  that  every
animal  has  an  affection  for  itself,  prompting  it  to
desire  its  own  continuance  safe  and  unimpaired  in
its  specific  type?  or  that,  since  the  End  of  every  art
is  some  special  natural  requirement,  the  same  must
be  affirmed  as  regards  the  art  of  life  as  a  whole  ?  or
that,  a^  we  consist  of  soul  and  body,  these  and  also
V  321

mm^

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

constaremus  et  corpore,  et  haec  ipsa  et  eorum  vir-
tutes  per  se  esse  sumendas.  An  vero  displicuit  ea
quae  tributa  est  animi  virtutibus  tanta  praestantia?
an  quae  de  prudentia,  de  cognitione  rerum,  de  con-
iu  nation  e  g'eneris  humani,  quaeque  ab  iisdem  de
temperantia,  de  modestia,  de  magnitudine  animi,  de
omiii  honestate  dicuntur?  Fatebuntur  Stoidi  haec
omnia  dicta  esse  praeclare  neque  earn  causam  Zenoni
20  desciscendi  fuisse.  Alia  quaedam  dicent,  credo,
magna  antiquorum  esse  peecata  quae  ille  veri  inve-
stigandi  cupidus  nuUo  modo  ferre  potuerit.  Quid
enim  perversius,  quid  intolerabilius,  quid  stuitius
quam  bonam  valetudinem,  quani  dolorum  ompium
vacuitatem,  quam  integritatem  otulorum  reliquorum-
que  aensuum  ponere  in  bonis  potiua  quam  dicerent
niliil  omnino  inter  eas  res  iisque  contvarias  interesse?
ea  erim  omnia  quae  illi  bona  dicerent  praepnsita
esse,  non  bona ;  itemque  ilia  quae  in  corpore  excel-
lerent  stulte  antiques  dixissc  per  se  esse  expetenda;
sumenda  potiua  quam  expetenda;  ea  denique  omni
vita  quae  in  virtute  una  consisteret,  illam  vitam  quae
etiam  ceteris  rebus  quae  essent  secundum  naturam
abundaret,  magis  expetendam  non  esse  sed  magis
sumendara ;  cumque  ipsa  virtus  efficiat  ita  beatam
vitam  ut  beatior  esse  non  possit,  tamen  quaedam
deesse  sapientibus  turn  cum  sint  beatissimi ;  itaque
eos  id  agere  ut  a  se  dolores,  morbos,  debilitates
repellant.
322

m  BOOK  IV,  viii

the  virtues  of  these  are  desirable  for  their  own
sakes?  Or  again,  did  he  take  exception  to  the
ascription  of  such  pre-eminence  to  the  virtues  of  the
soul?  or  with  what  they  say  about  prudence  and
knowledge,  about  the  sense  of  human  fellowship,  or
about  temperance,  self-control,  magnanimity,  and
moral  virtue  in  general?  No,  the  Stoics  will  admit
that  all  of  these  doctrines  are  admirable,  and  that

20  Zeno's  reason  for  secession  did  not  lie  here.  As  I
understand,  they  will  accuse  the  ancients  of  certain
grave  errgrs  in  other  matters,  which  that  ardent
seeker  after  truth  found  himself  quite  unable  to
tolerate.  What,  he  asked,  could  have  been  more
insufferably  foolish  and  perverse  than  to  take  good
health,  freedom  from  all  pain,  or  soundness  of  eye-
sight and  of  the  other  senses,  and  class  them  as
goods,  instead  of  saying  that  there  was  nothing
whatever  to  choose  between  these  things  and  their
opposites?  According  to  him,  all  these  things
which  the  ancients  called  good,  were  not  good,  but
preferred";  and  so  also  with  bodily  excellences,  it
was  foolish  of  the  ancients  to  call  them  desirable
for  their  own  sakes';  they  were  not  desirable'
but  worth  adopting ' ;  and  in  short,  speaking
generally,  a  Ufe  boiintifiiUy  supplied  with  all  the
other  things  in  accordance  with  nature,  in  addition
to  virtue,  was  not  more  desirable,'  but  only  more
worth  adopting"  than  a  life  of  virtue  and  virtue
alone;  and  although  virtue  of  itself  can  render
life  as  happy  as  it  is  possible  for  it  to  be,  yet
there  are  some  things  that  Wise  Men  lack  at  the
very  moment  of  supreme  happiness ;  and  accordingly
[hey  do  their  best  to  protect  themselves  from  pain,
e  and  infirmity.
2  323

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^M

SI  IX.  '  O  magnam  vim  ingeni  causamque  iustam  cur
nova  exsisteret  dispiplina !  Pergeporro:  sequuntur
enim  ea  quae  tu  sdentissime  complexus  es,  omnium
insipientiam,  iniustitiam,  alia  vitia  similia  esse,  om-
niaque  peccata  esse  paria,  eosque  qui  natura  doctri-
naque  lonjfe  ad  virtutem  processissent,  nisi  earn
plane  consecuti  essent,  summe  esse  raiseros,  neque
inter  eorum  viiam  et  improbissimorum  quidquam
omnino  interessCj  ut  Plato,  tantus  ille  vir,  si  sapiens
non  fuerit,  nihilo  melius  quam  quivis  improblssimus
nee  beatius  vixerit.  Haec  videlioet  est  correctio
philosophiae  veteris  et  emendatio,  quae  omnino
aditum  nullum  habere  potest  in  urbem,  in  forum,  in
curiam.  Quis  enim  ferre  posset  ita  loquentem  eum
qui  se  auctorem  vitae  graviter  et  sapienter  agendae
profiteretur,  nomina  rerura  coramutantem,'  cumque
idem  sentiret  quod  omnes,  qiiibus  rebus  eaudem
vim  tribueret  alia  nomina  imponentem,  verba  modo
22  mutantem,  de  opinionibus  nihil  detraheiitem  f  Pa-
tronusne  causae  in  epilogo  pro  reo  dicens  negaret
esse  malum  cxsilium,  publicationem  bonorum?  haec
;se,  non  fugienda  ?  nee  misericordem
ie  oportere  ?  In  contione  autem  si
i  Hannibal  ad  portas  venisset  murumque
iaculo  traiecisset,  negaret  esse  in  malis  capi,  venire,
interfici,  patriam  amittere? An  senatus,  cum  trium-

'  «amino rerum commutantem  bracketed bv Mdv.  and

reicienda  i
iudicem  e
loqueretur

BOOK  IV.  ijc

I  IX.  What  acuteness  of  intellect!  What  a  satis-  «nii
factory  reason  for  the  creation  of  a  new  pliilosophy !  '^pj
But  proceed  further;  for  vc  now  come  to  the '^''™
doctrine,  of  which  you  gave  such  a  masterly  summary,
that  all  men's  folly,  injustice  and  other  vices  are
alike  and  all  sins  are  equal  ;  and  that  those  who  by
nature  and  training  have  made  considerable  pro-
gress towards  virtue,  unless  they  have  actually
attained  to  it,  are  utterly  miserable,  and  there  is
nothing  whatever  to  choose  between  their  existence
and  that  of  the  wickedest  of  mankind,  so  that  the
great  and  famous  Plato,  supposing  he  was  not  a
Wise  Man,  lived  a  no  better  and  no  happier  life
than  any  unprincipled  scoundrel.  And  this,  if  you
please,  is  your  revised  and  corrected  version  of  the
old  philosophy,  a  version  that  could  not  possibly  be
produced  in  civic  life,  in  the  law-courts,  in  the
senate '.  For  who  could  tolerate  such  a  way  of  speak-
ing in  one  who  claimed  to  be  an  authority  on  wise  and
moral  conduct?  Who  would  allow  him  to  alter
the  names  of  things,  and  while  really  holding  the
same  opinions  as  everybody  else,  to  impose  different
names  on  things  to  which  he  attaches  the  same
meanings  as  other  people,  just  altering  the  terms
while leaving the ideas themselves untouched?

!  Could  an  advocate  wind  up  his  defence  of  a  client  by
declaring  that  exile  and  confiscation  of  property  are
not  evils?  that  tliey  are  to  be  rejected,'  but  not
to  be  shunned'?  that  it  is  not  a  judge's  duty  to
show  mercy?  Or  supposing  him  to  be  addressing  a
meeting  of  the  people;  Hannibal  is  at  the  gates
and  has  flung  a  javelin  over  the  city  walls ;  could  he
say  that  captivity,  enslavement,  death,  loss  of
country  are  no  evils?  Could  the  senate,  decreeing
325

i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

phum  Africano  decemeret, quod  eiuB  virtute/  aut

felicitate '  posset  dicere,  si  neque  virtus  in  ullo
nisi  in'  sapiente  nee  felicitas  vere  dici  potest?
Quae  est  igitur  ista  philosophia  quae  communi  more
in  foro  loquitur,  in  libellis  suo?  praesertim  cum
quod  illi  suis  verbis  significant^  in  eo  nihil  novetur,^

23  eaedem  I'ea  maneant  alio  modo.  Quid  enim  interest,
divitias,  opes,  vatetudinem  bona  dicas  anne  prae-
posita,  cum  ille  qui  iata  bona  dicit  nihilo  plus  iis  tri-
buat  quam  tu  qui  eadcm  ilia  praeposita  nominas?
Itaque  homo  in  primis  ingenuus  et  gravis,  dignus  ilia
familiarilate  Scipionis  et  Laeli,  Panaetius,  cum  ad
Q.  Tuberonem  de  dolore  patiendo  scriberet,  quod
esse  caput  debebat  si  probari  posset,  nusquam  posuit
non  esse  malum  dolorem,  sed  quid  esset  et  quale,
quantumque  in  eo  esset  alieni,  deinde  quae  ratio
esset  pcrfcrendi;  cuius  quidem,  quoniam  Stoicus
fuit,  sententla  condemnata  mihi  videtur  esse  inanitas
ista  verborum.

Si  X.  Sed  ut  propius  ad  ea,  Cato,  accedam  quae  a.
te  dicta  sunt,  pressius  agamus  eaque  quae  modo
disisti  cum  iis  conferamus  quae  tuis  antepono.  Quae
sunt  igitur  communia  vobis  cum  antiquis,  iis  sic
utamur  quasi  concessis;  quae  i»  coutroversiam  ve-

'signijica

»After«o

326

3st  MSS.

/  Kayscr  ;  signijiceni  MSS.,  Mdv.
etur  MSS.  add  de  ipsis  rebus  nihil  niu,

^^  BOOK  IV.  ix-x

a  triumph  to  Africanus,  use  the  formula,  whereas
by  reason  of  liis  valouPj'  or  good  fortune,'  if  (lo
one  but  the  Wise  Man  can  truly  be  said  to  possess
either  valour  or  good  fortune?  What  sort  of  a
philosophy  then  is  this,  which  speaks  the  ordinary
language  in  public,  but  in  its  treatises  employs  an
idiom  of  its  own?  and  that  though  the  doctrines
which  the  Stoics  express  in  their  own  peculiar
terras  contain  no  actual  novelty;  the  ideas  remain

23  the  same,  though  clothed  in  another  dress.  Why,
what  difference  does  it  make  whether  you  call
wealth,  power,  health  goods,'  or  things  pre-
ferred,' when  he  who  calls  them  goods  assigns  no
more  value  to  them  than  you  who  stj'le  exactly  the
same  things  preferred'?  This  is  why  so  eminent
and  high-minded  an  authority  as  Panaetius,  a  worthy
member  of  tlie  famous  circle  of  Scipio  and  Laelius,
in  his  epistle  to  Quintus  Tubero  on  the  endurance
of  pain,  has  nowhere  made  what  ouglit  to  have  been
his  most  effective  point,  if  it  could  be  shown  to  be
true,  namely  that  pain  is  not  an  evil;  instead  he
defines  its  nature  and  properties,  estimates  the  de-
gree of  its  divergence  from  nature,  and  lastly  pre-
scribes the  method  by  which  it  is  to  be  endured.
So  that  by  his  vote,  seeing  that  he  was  a  Stoic,  your
.terminological  fatuities  seem  to  me  to  stand  con-
demned.

24  X.  '  But  I  want  to  come  to  closer  quarters,  Cato,  rcIuIs
with  the  actual  system  as  you  stated  it;  so  let  us  g'^f''
press  the  matter  home,  and  compare  the  doctrines  hisim
you  have  just  enunciated  with  those  which  I  think  ^5,™
superior  to  yours.  Let  us  then  take  for  granted  the  ''*""
tenets  that  you  hold  in  common  with  the  ancients,

but  discuss,  if  you  are  willing,  those  about  which
327

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^B

niunt,  de  iis  si  placet  disseramus."  Mihi  vero,"
inquit,  placet  agi  subtilius  et  ut  ipse  dixisti  pres-
sius.  Quae  enim  adhuc  protulisti,  popularia  sunt;
ego  autem  a  te  elegantiora  desidero."  A  ineiie
tuf"  inquam; sed  tamen  enitar,  et  si  minus  multa

35  mihi  occurrent  noii  fugiam  ista  popularia.  Sed
positum  sit  primum  nosmet  ipsos  commendatos  esse
nobis  primamque  ex  natura  banc  habere  appetitionem
ut  conservemus  noamet  ipsos.  Hoe  convenit;  sequi-
tur  iltud  ut  animadvertamus  qui  simus  ipsi,  ut  nos
qtiales  oportet  esse  servemus,  Sumus  igitur  homines ;
ex  anima  constamus  et  eorpore,  quae  sunt  cuiusdam
modi,  nosque  oportet,  ut  prima  appetitio  naturalis
postulat,  haec  diligere  constituereque  ex  his  (inem
ilium  summi  boni  atque  ultimi ;  quem  si  prima  vera
sunt  ita  constitui  necesse  est,  earum  rerura  quae  sint
secundum  naturam  quam  plurima  et  quam  ma}:ima

96  adipisci.  Hunc  igitur  finem  ilii  tenuerunt,  quodque
ego  pluribus  verbis,  iiU  brevius,  spcimdnm  nahiyam
vjvere.  hoc  iis  bonorum  videbatur  extremum.

XI.  "  Age  nunc  isti  doceant,  vel  tu  potius  (quis
enim  ista  melius?),  quonam  modo  ab  iiadem  princi-
piis  profecti  eiiiciatis  ut  honeste  vtvere  (id  est  enim

328

^^^^^^e

BOOK  IV.  x-xi
there  is  dispute,"  "Oh,"  said  he,  '  T  am  quite
willing  for  the  debate  to  go  deeper ;  to  be  pressed
home,  as  you  phrase  it.  The  arguments  you  have
so  far'put  forward  are  of  the  popular  order ;  but  I
look  to  you  to  give  me  something  more  out  of  the
common."  What,  do  you  look  to  me  ?"  said  I.  But
all  the  same  I  will  do  my  best,  and  if  I  am  short  of
matter,  I  shall  not  shrink  from  the  arguments  you  are

25  pleased  to  call  popular.  But  let  it  be  granted  to  :
begin  with,  that  we  have  an  nfTection  for  ourselves, '
and  that  the  earliest  impulse  bestowed  upon  us  by '
nature  is  a  desire  for  self-preservation.  On  this  we
are  agreed ;  and  the  implication  is  that  we  must
study  what  we  ourselves  are,  in  order  to  keep  our-
selves true  to  our  proper  eharacter.  We  are  tlien
human  beings,  consisting  of  soul  and  body,  and  these
of  a  certain  kind.  These  we  are  bound  to  esteem,  as
our  earliest  natural  instinct  demands,  and  out  of
these  we  must  construct  our  End,  our  Chief  and
Ultimate  Good.  And,  if  our  premises  are  correct,
this  End  must  be  pronounced  to  consist  in  the
attainment  of  the  largest  number  of  the  most  im-

i6  portant  of  the  things  in  accordance  with  nature.  This
then  was  the  conception  of  the  End  that  they  up-
held ;  the  supreme  Good  they  believed  to  be  the  thing
which  I  have  described  at  some  length,  but  which
they  more  briefly  expressed  by  the  formula  '  life  ac-
cording to  nature.'

XI.  Now  then  let  us  call  upon  your  leaders,  or  i
better  upon  yourself  (for  who  13  more  qualilied  to  I
speak  for  your  school  ?)  to  explain  this  :  how  in  the  <
world  do  you  contrive,  starting  from  the  same  first
principles,  to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the  Chief
Good  is  moraUty  of  life? — for  that  is  equivalent  to
329

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^|

vel  e  virtute  vel  naturae  congruenter  vivere)  sum-
niuin  bonum  sit,  tt  quonam  modo  aut  quo  loco
corpus-subito  deserueritis  omniaque  ea  quae  secun-
dum naturam  cum  sint  absint  a  nostra  potestate,
ipsum  denique  officiuni.  Quaero  igitur  quoniodo  hae
tantae  commendation es  a  natura  profcctae  subito  a.

27  sapientia  relictae  sint.  Quod  si  non  hominis  sum-
mum  bonum  quaereremus  sed  cuiusdam  animantis,
is  autcni  esset  nihil  nisi  animus  (liceat  enim  fingere
aliquid  eiusmodi  quo  verum  facilius  reperiamus),
tamen  illi  aiiimo  non  esset  hie  vester  finis.  Deside-
raret  enim  valetudinem,  Tacuitatem  doloris,appeteret
etiam  conservation  em  sui  earumque  rerom  custodiam,
finemque  sibi  constitueret  secundum  naturam  vivere,
quod  est  ut  disi  habere  ea  quae  secundum  naturam

28  sint  vel  omnia  ve!  plurima  et  maxima.  Cuiuscum-
que  enim  modi  animal  constitueris,  necesse  est,
etiamsi  id  sine  corpore  sit  ut  fingimus,  tamen  esse  in
animo  quaedam  similia  eorum  quae  sunt  in  corpore,
ut  nullo  modo  nisi  ut  exposui  constitui  possit  finis
bonorum.  Chrysippus  autem  exponens  differentiaa
animantium  ait  alias  eai-um  corpore  excellere,  alias
autem  animo,  nonnullas  valere  utraque  re ;  deinde
disputat  quod  cuiusque  generis  animantium  statu!
deceat  extremum. Cum  auteni  hominem  in  eo  ge-

;  posuisset  ut ei tribuerct animi excellentiam,

330

^^oogfe

W^  BOOK  IV. xi

your  life  in  agreement  with  virtue  '  or  life  in  har-
mony with  nature.'  By  what  means  or  at  what
point  did  you  suddenly  discard  the  body,  and  all
those  things  which  are  in  accordance  with  nature
but  out  of  our  control,  and  lastly  duty  itself?  My
question  then  is,  how  comes  it  that  so  many  things
that  Nature  strongly  recommends  have  been  sud-

27  denly  abandoned  by  Wisdom?  Even  if  we  were  not
seeking  the  Chief  Good  of  man  but  of  some  living
creature  that  consisted  solely  of  a  mind  (let  us  allow
ourselves  to  imagine  such  a  creature,  in  order  to
facilitate  our  discovery  of  the  truth),  even  so  that
mind  would  not  accept  this  End  of  yours.  For  such
a  being  would  ask  for  health  and  freedom  from  pain,
and  would  also  desire  its  own  preservation,  and
security  for  the  goods  just  specified  ;  and  it  would
set  up  as  its  End  to  live  according  to  nature,  which
means,  as  I  said,  to  possess  either  all  or  most  and  the
most  important  of  the  things  which  are  in  accord-

28  ance  with  nature.  In  fact  you  may  construct  a
living  creature  of  any  sort  you  like,  but  even  if  it
be  devoid  of  a  body  like  our  imaginary  being,  never-
theless its  mind  will  be  bound  to  possess  certain
attributes  analogous  to  those  of  the  body,  and  con-
sequently it  will  be  impossible  to  set  up  for  it  an
End  of  Goods  on  any  other  lines  than  those  which  I
have  laid  down.  Chrysippus,  on  the  other  hand,  in
his  survey  of  the  different  species  of  living  things
states  that  in  some  the  body  is  the  principal  part,  in
others  the  mind,  while  there  are  some  that  are  equally
endowed  in  respect  of  either ;  and  then  he  proceeds  to
discuss  what  constitutes  the  ultimate  good  proper  to
each  species.  Man  he  has  placed  under  that  species  in
which  the  mind  is  principal ;  and  yet  he  so  defines

331

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

1  bonum  id  constituit,  non  ut  excellere  ani-
mus secl  ut  nihil  esse  praeter  animum  videretur.
XII.  Uno  aotem  modo  in  virtute  sola  summum
bonum  recte  poneretur,  si  quod  esset  animal  quod
totum  ex  mente  constaret,  id  ipsum  taraen  sic  ut  ea
mens  nihil  haberet  in  se  quod  esset  secundum  natu-

99  ram,  ut  valetudo  est.  Sed  id  ne  cogitari  quidem
potest  quale  sit  ut  non  repugnet  ipsum  sibi.

Sin  dicunt'  obscurari  quaedam  ncc  apparere
quia  valde  |mrva  sint,  nos  quoque  concedimus;  quod
dicit  Epicurus  etiam  de  voluptate,  quae  minimae
sint  voluptates,  eas  obscurari  saepe  et  obrui;  sed  non
sunt  in  eo  genere  tantie  commoditates  corporis
tamque  productae  tetnporibus  tamque  multae.  Ita-
que  in  quibus  propter  eorum  exiguitatem  obscuratio
consequitur,  saepe  accidit  ut  nihil  interesse  nostra
fateamur  sint  ilia  necne  sint  (ut  in  sole,  quod  a  te
dicebatur, lucernam adhibere nihil interest aut

30  teruncium  adicere  Croesi  pecuniae);  quibus  autem
in  rebus  tatita  obscuratio  non  fit,  fieri  tamen  potest
ut  id  ipsum  quod  interest  non  sit  magnum  (ut  ei
qui  iucunde  vixerit  annos  decem  si  acque  vita
iucunda  menstrua  addatur,  quia  momentum  aliquod
habeat  ad  iucundum  accessio,^  bonum  sit;  si  autem
id  non  concedatur,  non  continuo  vita  beata  tollitur).
Bona  autem  corporis  huic  sunt  quod  posterius  posui
similiora. '  Habent  enim  accessionem  dignam  in  qua
eiaboretur:  ut  mihi  in  hoc  Stoici  iocari  videantur

dicit  MSS.  (in  neit  line E b

as dicut

for  dicit.

n accessio  edd. with inf. MSS

, but  ?-

Other  MSS.  hav

^f^^^^e

m  BOOK  IV.  xi-xii

man's  End  as  to  make  it  appear,  not  that  lie  is  prin-
cipally mind,  but  that  he  consists  of  nothing  else.
XII.  But  the  only  case  in  which  it  would  be  correct
to  place  the  Chief  Good  in  virtue  alone  is  if  there
existed  a  creature  consisting  solely  of  pure  intellect,
with  the  further  proviso  that  this  intellect
devoid  of  any  attribute  that  is  in  accordance  with

}  nature,  such  as  liealth. But  it  is  iinpossibli

to  imagine  a  self-consistent picture  of  what  such  a
creature  would  be  like.

If  on  the  contrary  they  urge  tiiat  certain  things  Bodily  Budn
are  so  extremely  small  that  they  are  eclipsed  and  lost  ^'/."?,',*_'^,^,
sight  of  altogether,  we  too  admit  this  ;  Epicurus  also  bi
says  the  same  of  pleasure,  that  the  smallest  pleasures  ,y,
are  often  eclipsed  and  disappear. But  things  so  im-  ^|
portant, permanent and numerous as the bodily  «■
advantages  in  question  are  not  in  this  category. On  "'
the  one  hand  therefore,  with  things  so  small  as  to
be  eclipsed  from  view,  we  are  often  bound  to  admit
that  it  makes  no  difference  to  us  whether  we  have
themornotCjust  as,  totake  your  illustration,  it  makes
no  difference  if  you  light  a  lamp  in  the  sunshine,

3  or  add  sixpence  to  the  wealth  of  Croesus);  while  on
the  other  hand,  with  things  which  are  not  so  com-
pletely eclipsed,  it  may  nevertlieless  be  the  case  that
the  precise  difTerence  they  make  is  not  very  great
(thus,  if  a  man  who  has  lived  ten  years  enjoyably
were  given  an  additional  month  of  equally  enjoy-
able life,  the  addition  to  his  enjoyment,  being  of
some  value,  would  be  a  good  thing,  but  yet  the  re-
fusal of  the  addition  does  not  forthwith  annihilate
his  happiness).  Now  bodily  goods  resemble  rather
the  latter  sort  of  things.  For  they  contribute  some-
thing worth  taking  trouble  to  obtaiji ;  so  that  1  feel
333

lUpSRl

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

interdum  cum  ita  dicant,  si  ad  illam  vitjun  quae  ctim
virtute  degatur  ampulla  aut  strigiHs  accedat,  sum-
pturum  sapientein  earn  vitam  potius  quo  haec  adiecta
fore.  Hoc
quam  oratione
e  sit,  quis  non
At  vero  pravi-
n  si  quis  quern
ille'^  sapiens  ad

Bint  nee  beatiorem  tameti  ob  e
simile  tandem  est  ?  non  risu  potiu
eiciendura?  Ampulla  enim  sit  nei
iure  Optimo  irrideatur  si  laboret  ?
tate'  membrorum  et  cruciatu  dolor
levet,  magnam  ineat  gratiam ;  nee  i
tortoris  eculeum  a  tyranno  ire  cogatur  similem  ha-
beat  vultuni  et  si  ampullam  perdidisset,  sed  ut
magnum  et  difficile  certamen  iniens,  cum  sibi  cum
capitali  adversario,  dolore,  depugnandum  videret,
excitaret  omnes  rationes  fortitudinis  ac  patientiae
quarum  praesidio  iniret  difficile  illud  ut  dixi  ma-
gn  unique  proelium.  Deinde  non  quacrimus  quid
obscuretur  aut  intereat  quia  sit  admodum  parvum,
sed  quid  tale  sit  ut  expleat  summam.  Una  voluptas
e  multis  obscuratur  in  ilia  vita  voluptaria ;  sed  tamen
ea,  quamvis  parva  sit,  pars  est  eius  vitae  quae  posits
est  in  voluptate.  Nummus  in  Croesi  divitiis  obscu-
ratur, pars  est  tamen  divitiaram.  Quare  obscurentur
etiam  haec  quae  secundum  naturam  esse  dicimus  in
vita  beata,  sint  modo  partes  litae  beatae.
i  XIII.  Atqui  si,  ut  convcnire  debet  inter  nos,
est  quaedam  appetitio  naturalis  ea  quae  secundum
naturam  sunt  appetens,  eorum  onuiium  est  aliqua

'  fi,av

M^  BOOK  IV.  xii-xiii

the  Stoics  must  sometimes  be  joking  on  this  point,
when  they  say  that  if  to  the  life  of  virtue  be  added
an  oil-flask  or  a  flesh-brush,  the  Wise  Man  will
choose  the  life  so  augmented,  by  preference,  but  yet
31  will  not  on  that  account  be  any  happier.  Pray  d
this  illustration  really  hold  good  ?  is  it  not  rather  to
be  dismissed  with  a  laugh  than  seriously  refuted  ?
Wiio  does  not  richly  deserve  to  be  laughed  at  if  he
troubles  about  having  or  not  having  an  oil-flask  ?  But
rid  a  man  of  bodily  deformity  or  agonies  of  pain,
and  you  earn  his  deepest  gratitude  ;  and  if  the  Wise
Man  is  ordered  bya  tyrant  togo  to  the  rack,  he  would
not  wear  the  same  look  as  if  he  had  lost  his  oil-flask.
He  would  feel  that  he  had  a  severe  and  searching
ordeal  before  him ;  and  seeing  that  he  was  about  to
encounter  the^sugcgme^antagonist,  gain,
summon  up  all  his  prindf^eso?"  courage  and  endur-
ance to  fortify  him  against  that  severe  and  searching
struggle  aforesaid. — Again,  the  question  is  not
whether  such  and  such  a  good  is  so  trifling  as  to  be
eclipsed  or  lost  altogether,  but  whether  it  is  of  such
a  sort  as  to  conlribute  to  the  sum  total.  In  the  hfe
of  pleasure  of  which  we  spoke,  one  pleasure  is  lost  to
sight  among  the  many ;  but  all  the  same,  small  as  it  is,
it  is  a  part  of  the  life  that  is  based  upon  pleasure.  A
halfpennyislosttosight  amidst  the  riches  of  Croesus;
still  it  forms  part  of  those  riches.  Hence  the  circum-
stances according  to  nature,  as  we  call  them,  may  be
unnoticed  in  a  life  of  happiness,  only  you  must  allow
that  they  are  parts  of  that  happiness.
!  XIII.  Yet  if,  as  you  and  we  are  bound  to  agree,  bt
there  does  exist  a  certain  natural  instinct  to  desire  ?j
the  things  in  accordance  with  nature,  the  right  proce-
dure is  to  add  together  all  these  things TiTone'definite

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

Bumma  facienda.  Quo  constitute)  turn  licebit  otiose
ista  quaerere,  de  maffnitudine  renim,  de  excellentia
quanta  in  quoque  sit  ad  beate  vivendum,  de  istis
ipsis  obscurationibus  quae  propter  esigultatem  vix
aut  ne  vix  quidem  appareant.  Quid  de  quo  nulla
dissensio  est  ?  Nemo  enim  est  qui  aliter  dixerit  quin
omnium  naturarum  simile  esset  id  ad  quod  omnia
referrentur,  quod  est  ultimum  rerum  appetendarum.
Omnis  enim  est  natura  diligens  sui.  Quae  est  enim
quae  se  umquam  deseral  aut  partem  aliquam  sui  aut
eius  partis  habitum  aut  vim  aut  ullius  earum  rerum
quae  secundum  naturam  sunt  aut  motum  aut  st&tum  ?
Quae  autem  natura  suae  primae  institutionis  oblita
est  ? Nulla  profeeto  est'  quin  suam  vim  retineat  a

33  primo  ad  extremum.  Quomodo  igitur  evenit  ut
hominis  natura  sola  esset  quae  hominem  relinqueret,

.  quae  oblivisccretur  corporis,  quae  summum  bonum
non  in  toto  homine  sed  in  parte  Lominis  poneret  ?
Quomodo  autem,  quod  ipsi  etiam  fatcntur  constatque
inter  omnes,  conservabitur  ut  simile  sit  omnium
naturarum  illud  ulttmum  de  quo  quaeritur  ?  Turn
enim  esset  simile  si  in  ceteris  quoque  naturis  id
cuique  esset  ultimum  quod  in quaque  excelleret.

34  Tale  enim  visum  est  ultimum  Stoicorum.  Quid
dubitas  igitur  mutare  principia  naturae  ?  Quod  *
enim  dicis,  omne  animal,  simul  atque  sit  ortum,
applicatum  esse  ad  se  diligendum  esseque  in  ae
conservando  occupatum,  quin  potius  ita  dicis,  omne

'  es/  supplied  by  Mdv.

:onj.

Miiller

MSS.  and  edd.  Quid—

Tupalum  ?

md  the  ^^|

!■  BOOK  IV.  xiii

total. This  point  established,  it  will  then  be
to  us  to  investigate  at  our  leisure  your  questioi
about  the  importance  of  the  separate  items,  and  tl
value  of  their  respective  contributions  to  happiness,
and  about  that  eclipse,  as  you  call  it,  of  the  things
so  small  as  to  be  almost  or  quite  imperceptible.
Then  what  of  a  point  on  which  no  disagreement  aci*
exists  ? I  mean  tjiis  :  no  one  will  dispute  that  the  ^^''^
supreme  and  final  End,  the  thing  ultimately  de-|'ii=»'
airable, is analogous for all natural species  alike.
For  love  of  self  is  inherent  in  every  species  ;  since
what  species  exists  that  ever  deserts  itself  or  any
part  of  itself,  or  any  habit  or  faculty  of  any  such  part,
or  any  of  the  things  ui  accordance  with  nature,  either
in  motion  or  at  rest  ? What  species  ever  forgot  its  |
own  original  constitution  ? Assuredly  there  is  not  ^
one  that  does  not  retain  its  own  proper  faculty  from

13  start  to  finish.  How  then  came  it  about  that,  of  all
the  existing  species,  mankind  alone  should  abandon
man's  nature,  forget  the  liotlj',  and  find  its  Chief
Good  not  in  the  whole  man  but  in  a  part  of  man  ?
How  moreover  is  the  axiom  to  be  retained,  admitted
as  it  is  even  by  the  Stoics  and  accepted  universally,
that  the  End  which  is  the  subject  of  our  inquiry  is
analogous  for  all  species  ?  For  the  analogy  to  hold,
every  other  species  also  would  have  to  find  its  End
in  that  part  of  the  organism  which  in  that  particular
species  is  the  highest  part ;  since  that,  as  we  have
seen,  is  how  the  Stoics  conceive  the  End  of  man.

i*  Why  then  do  you  hesitate  to  alter  your  conception  nrgi^ti,
of  the  primary  instincts  to  correspond  ?  Instead  of  shouidsa
saying  that  every  animal  from  the  moment  of  its  pui»'i™i
birth  is  devoted  to  love  of  itself  and  engrossed  in  p^"oJJJ
preserving  itself,  why  do  you  not  rather  say  that  "niy.
z  3S7

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
animaJ  applicatuni  esse  ad  id  quod  in  eo  sit  optimuTa
et  in  eius  unius  occapatum  esse  custodia,  reliqunsque
naturas  nihil  aliud  agere  nisi  ut  id  conservent  quod
in  quaque  optimum  sit  ?  Quomodo  autem  optimum,  si
bonumpraeterea  nullum  est  f'  Sin  autem  rellquaappe^
tends  sunt,  cur,  quod  est  ultimum  rerum  appetenda-
rum,  id  non  ant  ex  omnium  carum  aut  es  pluriwiarum
et  maximarum  appetitione  concluditur?  Ut  Phidias
potest  a  primo  iiistituere  signum  idque  perfieere,
potest  ab  alio  inehoatum  aecipere  et  absotvere,  huic
simjlis  est  sapientia ;  non  enim  ipsa  genuit  hominem
sed  accppit  a  natura  inehoatum  ;  banc  ergo  intuens

35  debet  institutum  illud  quasi  signum  absolvere.  Qua-
lent  igitur  liominem  natura  inchoavit  ?  et  quod  est
munus,  quod  opus  sapientine  F  quid  est  quod  ab  ea
absolvi  et  perfici  debeat  ?  Si  nihil  [in  eo  quod
perficiendum  est]'  praeter  motum  ingeni  quendam,
id  est,  rationem,  necesse  est  Imic  ultimum  esse  ex
virtute  agere  ;  rationis  enim  perfectio  est  virtus  ;  si
nihil  nisi  corpus,  sumnia  enint  ilia,  valetudo,  vaeuit^

30  doloris,  pulchritudo,  cetera.  XIV.  Nunc  de  hominis
summo  bono  quaeritur ;  quid  igitur  dubitamus  in
tota  eius  natura  quaerere  quid  sit  efTectum  ?  Cum
enim  constet  inter  omnes  omne  officium  munusque
sapientiae  in  hominis  cultu  esse  oecupatum,  alii  (ne
me  existimes  contra  Stoicos  solum  dicere)  eas  sen-

Mdv.

^f^^^^e

^  BOOK  IV.  xiii-Kiv

every  animal  is  devoted  to  the  best  part  of  itself

and  engrossed  in  protecting  that  alone,  aod  that

every  other  species  is  solely  engag-ed  in  preserving

the  part  that  is  respectively  best  in  each  ? But  in

what  sense  is  one  part  the  best,  if  nothing  beside  it

is  good  at  all  ? While  if  on  the  contrary  other

things  also  are  desirable,  why  does  not  the  supremely

desirable  thing  consist  in  the  attainment  of  all,  or  of

the  greatest  possible  numberand  the  most  important,

of  these  things  ?  A  Pheidias  can  start  to  make  a  statue

from  the  beginning  and  carry  it  to  completion,  or  he

can take  one rough-liewn by some one else and

finish that. The latter case typifies the work  of  ButWiidom'"

Wisdom. She  did  not  create  man  herself,  but  took  SS^toie^iT

him  over  in  the  rough  from  Nature  ;  her  business  is  '',°/'",'^^'"'

to  finish  the  statue  tliat  Nature  began,  keeping  her

35  eyes  on  Nature  meanwhile.  What  sort  of  thing
then  is  man  as  rough-hewn  by  Nature  ?  and  what  is
the  fiinetion  and  the  task  of  Wisdom  ?  what  is  it
that  needs  to  be  consummated  by  her  finishing
touch  ?  If  it  is-  a  creature  consisting  solely  of  a
certain  operation  of  the  intellect,  that  is,  reason,  its
highest  good  must  be  activity  in  accordance  with
virtue,  since  virtue  is  reason's  consummation.  If  it
is  nothing  but  a  body,  the  chief  things  will  be  health,

36  freedom  from  pain,  beauty  and  the  rest.  XIV.  But
as  a  matter  of  fact  the  creature  whose  Chief  Good
we  are  seeking  is  man.  Surely  then  our  course  is
to  inquire  what  Nature's  handiwork  has  been  in
man — the  whole  man.  All  are  agreed  that  the  duty
and  function  of  Wisdom  is  entirely  centred  in  the
work  of  perfecting  man  ;  but  then  some  thinkers
(for  you  must  not  imagine  that  I  am  tilting  at  the
Stoics  only)  produce  theories  which  place  the  Chief

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ■

tentias  afferunt  ut  summum  bonum  in  eo  genere
ponant  quod  sit  ejctra  nostram  potestatem.  tamquani
de  inanmio  aliquu  loquantur,  alii  contra,  quasi
corpus  nullum  sit  liominis,  ita  praeter  a
curant,  cum  praesertim  ipse  quoque
inane  nescio  quid  sit  (neque  f '

legere)  sed  in  quodam  geoere  corporis,  ut  ne  is
quidem  virtute  una  contentus  sit  sed  appetat  vacui-
tatcm  doloris.  Quamobrem  utrique  idem  faciunt  ut
si  laevam  partem  neglegerent,  dexteram  tuerentur,
aut  ipsius  animi,  ut  fecit  Erillus,  cognitionem  ample-
sarentur,  actionem  relinquerent.  Eorum  enim  om-
nium, multa  practermittcntium  dum  eligant  aliqutd
quod  scquantur,  quasi  curta  sententia  ;  at  vero  ilia
pcrfecta  atque  plena  eorum  qui,  cum  de  hoininis
summo  bono  quaererent,  nullam  in  eo  neque  animi
neque  corporis  partem  vacuam  ttitela  reliquerunt.
37  Vos  auteni,  Cato,  quia  virtus,  ut  omnes  fatemur,
altissimum  locum  in  homine  et  maxime  excellentem
tenet  et  quod  eos  qui  sapientes  sunt  absolutes  et
perfectos  putamus,  aciem  animorum  nostrorum
virtutis  Hplendore  praestringitis.  In  omni  enim
animante  est  summum  aliquid  atque  optimum,  ut  in
equis,  in  canibus,  quibus  tamen  et  dolore  vacare
opus  est  et  valere ;  sic  igitur  in  homine  pertectio
ista  in  eo  potissimum  quod  est  nptimumj  id  est,  in
virtute  laudatur.  Itaque  mihi
considerare  quod  iti
Non  enim,  quod  facit  in  frugibus,  ut,  cum  ad  spicam
perduserit  ab  herba,  rejinquat  et  pro  nihilo  habeat
herbam,  idem  facit  in  homine  cum  eum  ad  rationis

^f^^^^e

ir^  BOOK  IV.  xiv

Good  in  the  class  of  things  entirely  outside  our  con-
trol, as  though  they  were  discussing  some  creature
devoid  of  a  mind  ;  while  others  on  the  contrary
ignore  everything  but  mind,  just  as  if  man  had  no
body ;  and  that  though  even  tlie  mind  is  not  an
empty,  impalpable  something  (a  conception  to
me  unintelligible),  but  in  some  sort  corporeal,  and
therefore  even  the  mind  is  not  satisfied  with  virtue
alone,  but  desires  freedom  from  pain.  In  fact,  with
each  school  alike  it  is  just  as  if  they  should  ignore
the  left  side  of  their  bodies  and  protect  the  right,
or,  in  the  mind,  like  Erillus,  recognize  cognition  but
leave  the  practical  faculty  out  of  account.  They  pick
and  choose,  pass  over  a  great  deal  and  fasten  ona  single
aspect ;  so  that  all  their  systems  are  one-sided.  The
full  and  perfect  philosophy  was  that  which,  investi-
gating the  Chief  Good  of  man,  left  no  part  either  of
37  his  mind  or  body  uncared-for.  Whereas  your  friends,  »1
Cato,  on  the  strength  of  the  fact,  which  we  all  m
admit,  that  virtue  is  man's  highest  and  supreme  '''
excellence  and  that  the  Wise  Man  is  the  perfect
and  consummate  type  of  humanity,  try  to  dazzle  our
mental  vision  with  virtue's  radiance.  Every  animal,
for  instance  the  horse,  or  the  dog,  has  some  supreme
good  quality,  yet  at  the  same  time  they  require  to
have  health  and  freedom  from  pain  ;  similarly  there-
fore in  man  that  consummation  you  speak  of  attains
its  chief  glory  in  what  is  his  chief  excellence,  namely
virtue.  This  being  so,  I  feel  you  do  not  take  suffi-  Bi
cient  pains  to  study  Nature's  method  of  procedure,  fg,
With  the  growing  corn,  no  doubt,  her  way  is  to  guide  Jt
its  development  from  blade  to  ear,  and  then  discard
the  blade  as  of  no  value ;  but  she  does  not  do  the
same  with  man,  when  she  has  developed  in  him.  the
341

J

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

habitum  perduxit^  Semper  enim  ita  assumit  aliqiud

38  ut  ea  quae  prima  dederit  non  deserat.  Itaque
bus  rationem  adiunxit  et  ratione  effecta  sensus
reliquit. Ut  si  cultura  \itium,  cuius  hoc  munus

est  ut  efiiciat  ut  vitis  cum  omnibus  partibus  suis
quam  optime  ae  habeat, — sed  sic  intellegamus  (licet
enim,  ut  vos  quoque  soletis,  fingere  aliquid  docendi
causa):  si  igitur  ilia  cultura  vitium  in  vite  insit  ipsa,
cetera,  credo,  velit  i]uae  ad  colendam  vitem  attitie-
bunt  sicut  antea,  ae  autem  omnibus  vitis  partibus
praeferat  statuatque  niliil  esse  melius  in  vite  quam
se  ;  simibter  senaus,  cum  acceasit  ad  naturam,  tuetur
illam  quidem  sed  etiam  ae  tuetur ;  cum  autem
assumpta  est  ratio,  taiito  in  dominatu  loeatur  ut
omnia  ilia  prima  naturae  huius  tutelae  subiciantur.

39  Itaque  non  disc  edit  ab  eorum  curat)  one  quibns
praeposita  vitam  omncm  debet  gubemare  ;  ut  mirari
satis  istorum  inconstantiam  non  possim.  Naturalem
enim  appetitiouem,  quam  vocant  op/uji',  itemque
officium,  ipsam  etiam  virtutem  volunt  esse  earum
rerum  quae  secundum  naturam  sunt.  Cum  autem
ad  summum  bonum  volunt  pervenire,  transiliunt
omnia  et  duo  nobis  opera  pro  uno  reiinquunt,  ut
alia  sumamus,  alia  expetamus,  potius  quam  uno  line
utrumque  concluderent,

40  XV.  "At  enim  [namj^  dicitis  virtutem  non  posse

'  perduxifiAAv.  (cp.  V,  41  raep!mus),  JterduxeHtlilSS.

•  istorum  fAAw.-.fomm  MSS.

^namof  best  MSS. Mdv.  brackets:  other  MSS.  veram.

Hi  book  IV.  siv-xv

faculty  of  reason. For  she  continually  superadds
fresh  faculties  without  abandoning  her  previous  gifts.

18  Thus  she  added  to  sensation  reason,  and  after
creating  reason  did  not  discard  sensation.  Suppose
the  art  of  viticulture.,  whose  function  is  to  bring  the
vine  with  all  its  parts  into  the  most  thriving  con-
dition— at  least  let  us  assume  it  to  be  so  (for  we
may  invent  an  imaginary  case,  as  you  are  fond  of
doing,  for  purposes  of  illustration)  ;  suppose  then
the  art  of  viticulture  were  a  faculty  residing  in  the
vine  itself,  this  faculty  would  desire,  douf)tless,  as
before,  every  condition  requisite  for  tlie  health  of
the  vine,  but  would  rank  itself  above  all  the  other
parts  of  the  vine,  and  would  consider  itself  the
noblest  element  in  the  vine's  organism.  Similarly
when  an  animal  organism  has  acquired  the  faculty
of  sensation,  this  faculty  protects  the  organism,  it  is
true,  but  also  protects  itself;  but  when  reason  has
been  superadded,  this  is  placed  in  such  a  position  of
dominance  that  all  the  primary  gifts  of  nature  are

iy  placed  under  its  protection.  Accordingly  Hea
never  abandons  its  task  of  safeguarding  the  earlier
elements ;  its  business  is  by  controlling  these  to
steer  the  whole  course  of  life ;  so  that  I  cannot
sufficiently  marvel  at  the  inconsistency  of  your
teachers.  Natural  desire,  which  they  term  Aortite,
and  also  duty,  and  even  virtue  itself  they  reckon
among  things  according  to  Nature.  Yet  when  they
want  to  arrive  at  the  Supreme  Good,  they  leap  over  all
of  these,  and  leave  us  two  operations  instead  of  one;
some  things  we  are  to  adopt,'  others  to  desire  ' ;
instead  of  including  Ixith  operations  under  a  single
End.

10 XV. "But  you protest that  if  other  things  than
3+3

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

cDDstitui,  si  ea  quae  eKtra  virtutem  sint  ad  beate
vivcndum  pertiiieant.  Quod  totum  contra  est;  in-
trodufi  eiiim  virtus  nullo  modo  potest,  nisi  omnia
quae  leget  quaeque  reiciet  unam  referentur  ad
suramara.  Nam  si  omnino  nos^  neglegemus,  in
Aristonea  vitia  incidemus  et  peccata  obliviscemurque
quae  virtuti  ipsi  principia  dederimus ;  si  ea  non  neg-
legemus neque  tamen  ad  liiiem  sumiui  boni  refere-
mus,  non  multum  ab  Erilli  levitate  aberiinus ;  ^
duarum  enim  vitarum  nobis  erunt  instituta  caplenda.
Facit  enim  ille  duo  seiuncta  ultima  bonorum,  quae
ut  essent  vera  coniungj  debuerunt;  nunc  ita  separan-
tur  ut  diiuncta  sint,  quo  nihil  potest  esse  perversius.
41  Itaque  contra  est  ac  dicltis;  nam  constitui  virtus
nullo  modo  potest  lusi  ea  quae  sunt  prima  naturae
ut  ad  summam  pertinentia  tenebit.  Quaesita  enim
virtus  est  non  quae  relinqueret  naturam  sed  quae
tueretur;  at  ilia  ut  vobis  placet  partem  quandam
tuetur,  reliquam  deserit.  Atque  ipsa  hominis  insti-
tutio  si  loqueretur  buc  diceret,  primos  suos  quasi
coeptus  appetendi  fuisse  ut  se  conservaret  in  ea
natura  in  qua  ortus  esset.  Nondum  autem  esplana-
tum  satis  erat  quid  raaxime  natura  vellet.  Explanetur
igitur.  Quid  ergo  ?  aliud  ^  intellegetur  nisi  uti  ne  quae
pars  naturae  neglegatur? lo  qua  si  nihil  est  praeter

'■nos: edd.  conj.  ea, Mdv.  marks  as  corrupt,  and  conj.

luis/ra  corpora  neglegemus.

^aierimus Cobet ('admodum prababiliter
aberrabimus  Mdv..  MSS.

'  Quid  ergo?  aliuded. Quid  ergo  aliud  M6v,  c

Mdv.]:

■  BOOK  IV.  XV

virtue  go  to  make  up  happiness,  virtue  cannot  be  v
establislied.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  entirely  the  Ihe'-fiSi^ic
other  way  about :  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  place  for  Jyj^V'*^^.""
virtue,  unless  all  the  things  that  she  chooses  and  buteioha^pi-
rejects  are  reckoned  towards  one  sum-total  of  good,  ^^ise'in'so-"
For  if  we  entirely  ignore  ourselves,"  we  shall  fall  into  leciin^thBe.ai
the  mistakes  and  errors  of  Aristo,  forgetting  the  a  part  of  nwn'i
things  that  we  assigned  as  the  origins  of  virtue  "'""^■
herself;  if  while  not  ignoring  these  things,  we  yet
do  not  reckon  them  in  the  End  or  Chief  Good,  we
shall  be  well  on  the  road  towards  the  extravagances
of  Erillus,  since  we  shall  have  to  adopt  two  different
rules  of  life  at  once.  Erillus  sets  up  two  separate
ultimate  Goods,  which,  supposing  his  view  were
true, he  ought  to  have  united  in  one;  but  as  it  is  he
makes  them  so  separate  as  to  be  mutually  exclusive
alternatives,  which  is  surely  the  extreme  of  perversity.
11  Hence  the  truth  is  just  the  opposite  of  what  you
say ;  virtue  is  an  absolute  impossibility,  uh/cm  it
holds  to  the  objects  of  the  primary  instincts  as
going  to  make  up  the  sum  of  good.  For  we  started
to  look  for  a  virtue  that  should  protect,  not  abandon,
nature ;  whereas  virtue  as  you  conceive  it  protects  a
particular  part  of  our  nature  but  leaves  the  remainder
in  the  lurch.  Man's  constitution  itself,  if  it  could
speak,  would  declare  that  its  earliest  tentative
niovements  of  desire  were  aimed  at  preserving
itself  in  the  natural  character  with  which  it  was
born  into  the  world.  But  at  that  stage  the  principal
intention  of  nature  had  not  yet  been  fully  revealed.
Well,  suppose  it  revealed.  What  then?  will  it  be
construed  otherwise  than  as  forbidding  that  any
part  of  man's  nature  should  be  ignored?  If  man
consists  solely  of  a  reasoning  faculty,  let  it  be  granted
34.5

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

rationem,  sit  in  una  virtute  finis  bononim ;  sin  est
etiam  corpus,  ista  explanatio  naturae  ntmpe  hoc
effecerit  ut  ea  quae  ante  expianationeni  teiiebamus
relinquamus. Ergo id est conveiiienter naturae

2  vivercj  a  natura  discedcre,  Ut  quidani  philosophi,
cum  a  sensibus  profecti  maiora  quaedam  et  diviniora
vidissent,  sensus  reliquerunt,  sic  isti,  cum  ex  appeti-
tione  rerum  virtu  tis  pulehritudinem  aspcxissent,
omnia  quae  praeter  virtutem  ipsam  viderant  abiece-
runt,  obliti  naturam  omnem  appetendaruin  rerum
ita  late  patere  ut  a  prjncipiis  permanaret  ad  fines,
neque  intellegrunt  se  rerum  illarum  pulclirarum
atque  admirabilium  fundainenta  subducere.

3  XVI.  Itaque  milii  vldentur  omnes  quidem  illi
errasse  qui  finem  'bonorum  esse  dixerunt  lioiieste
vivere,  sed  alius  alio  magis;  Pyrrho  scilicet  maxime,
qui  virtute  constituta  nihil  omnino  quod  appetendum
sit  relinquat;  deinde  Aristo,  qui  nihil  rehnquere
non  est  ausus,  introduxit  autem,  quibus  commotus
sapiens  appeteret  aliquid,  'quodcunique'  in  mentem
incideret'  et  quodcumquc  tamquani  occurreret.'  la
hoc  melior  quam  Pyrrho  quod  aliquod  g-enus  appe-
tendi  dedit,  deterior  quam  ceteri  quod  penitus  a
natura  recessit,  Stoici  autem  quod  finem  bonorum
in  una  virtute  ponunt,  similes  sunt  illorum;  quod
autem principium offici quaerunt, melius quam

'  guodcumgue  edd.,  cf.  §  47:  quod  ruique  MSS.
'juorf  aliquod  B, E; guod  ve/  aliqvod  inf,  MSS.]  quod
[v>l\al.  Mdv.

T^f^^^^e

m  BOOK  IV.  )

that  the  End  of  Goods  is  contained  in  virtue  alone;
but  if  he  has  a  body  as  well,  the  revelation  of  our
nature,  on  your  showing,  will  actually  have  resulted
in  our  relinquishing  the  things  to  which  we  held
before  that  revelation  took  place.  At  this  rate  to
live  in  harmony  with  nature'  means  to  depart  from

!  nature.  There  have  been  philosophers  who,  after
rising  from  sensation  to  the  recognition  of  nobler
and  more  spiritual  faculties,  thereupon  threw  the
senses  on  one  side.  Similarly  your  friends,  starting
from  the  instinctive  desires,  came  to  behold  virtue
in  all  her  beauty,  and  forthwith  flung  aside  all  they
had  ever  seen  besides  virtue  herself,  forgetting  that
the  whole  instinct  of  appetition  is  so  wide  in  its
range  that  it  spreads  from  the  primary  objects  of
desire  right  up  to  the  ultimate  Ends,  and  not  realiz-
ing that  they  are  undermining  the  very  font
of  the  graces  which  they  so  much  admire.

t  XVI,  In  my  view,  therefore,  while  all  who  have  t
de6ned  the  End  of  Goods  as  the  life  of  moral  con-  J^
duct  are  in  error,  some  are  more  wrong  than  others.  '<>
Tlie  most  mistaken  no  doubt  is  Pyrrho,  because  his  do
conception  of  virtue  leaves  nothing  as  an  object  of  ^
desire  whatever.  Next  i
did  not  venture  to  go  s

introduced  as  the  Wise  Man's  motives  of  desire  ^|
'  whatever  chanced  to  enter  his  mind "  and  what-
ever struck  him.'  Aristo  was  better  than  Pyrrho  in
so  far  as  he  allowed  desire  of  some  sort,  but  worse
than  the  rest  because  he  departed  so  utterly  from
nature.  Now  the  Stoics  in  placing  the  End  of
Goods  in  virtue  alone  resemble  the  philosophers
already  mentioned ;  but  in  trjing  to  find  a  founda-
tion for  virtuous  action  they  are  an  improvement
347

Aristo,  who  Pyirhn,  lliDU«b

far  as  Pyrrho,  but  who  u.e'-prima''™

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Pyrrho;  quod  ea  non  occurrentia'  fingunt,  vincunt
Aristonem ;  quod  autem  ea  quae  ad  natiiram  accom-
modata  ct  per  se  assumenda  esse  dicunt  non  adiun-
gunt  ad  finem  boDorum,  desciscunt  a  natura  et
quodam  modo  sunt  non  dissimiles  Aristanis.  lUe
eoim  occurrentia'  nescio  quae  coomiiniscebatur ;
hi  autem  ponunt  illi  quidem  prima  naturae,  sed  ea
5<^iungunt  a  finibus  et  summa  bononim ;  quae  cum
praeponunt'  ut  sit  aliqua  reniin  selectio,  naturam
videnlur  sequi ;  cura  autem  neg-ant  ea  quidquam  ad
beatam  vitam  pprtinere,  rursus  naturam  relinquunt.

4+  Atque adhuc ea dixi, causa cur Zenoni non

fuisset,  quamobrem  a  superiorum  auetoritate  dis-
cederet;  nunc  reliqua  videamus,  nisi  aut  ad  haec,
Cato,  dicere  aliquid  vis  aut  nos  iam  lougiores  sumus."
Neutrum  vero,"  inquit  ille ;  nam  et  a  te  perfici
istain  disputationem  volo  nee  tua  mihi  oratio  louga
videri  potest."  Optime,"  inquam;  quid  enim
mihi  potest  esse  optatius  quam  cum  Catonc,  omnium

45  virtutum  auctore,  de  virtotibus  disputare?  Sed  pri-
mum  illud  vide,  gravissimam  illam  vestram  senten-
tiam,  quae  familiam  ducit,  bonestum  quod  sit  id  esse
solum  bonum  honesteque  vivere  bonorum  finem,
communem  fore  vobis  cum  omnibus  qui  in  una  virtute
constituunt  finem  bonorum ;  quodque  dicitis  infor-
mari non posse  virtutem si quidquam nisi quod

'  ea  dixi,  causa  curZemmi  nonfuisiet  {cum  tar  cut  EJ  MSS.  ,
Mailer;  Mdv,  marks  as  corrupt,  and  suggests  earn  dixi
causam  (i.e.  earn  causam  egi,  sic  disputavl,  ut  o^leiide-
rem),  Zenoni  nonfuisse  quamobrem  — ,  Mdv.  formerly  con-
jectured ea  dixi,  causam  Zenoni  nonfuisse.

Ji

^  BOOK  IV.  xvi

upon  Pyrrho,  and  in  not  finding  this  in  imaginary
tilings  that  strike  the  mind '  they  do  better  than
Aristti;  though  in  speaking  of  certain  things  as
suitable  to  nature'  and  to  be  adopted  for  their
own  sakes,'  and  then  refusing  to  include  them  in
the  End  of  Goods,  they  desert  nature  and  approxi-
mate in  some  degree  to  Aristo.  For  Aristo  invented
his  vague  things  that  strike  the  mind';  while  the
Stoics,  though  recognizing,  it  is  true,  the  primary
objects  of  nature,  yet  allow  no  connection  between
these  and  their  Ends  or  sum  of  Goods.  In  making
tile  primary  objects  preferred,"  so  as  to  admit  a  cer-
tain principle  of  choice  among  things,  they  seem  to
be  following  nature,  but  in  refusing  to  allow  them  to
have  anj-thing  to  do  with  happiness,  they  again
abandon  nature.

H  So  far  what  I  have  said  was  to  show  why  Zeno

had  no  grounds  for  seceding  from  the  earlier  autho-
rities. Now  let  OS  turn  our  attention  to  the  rest  of
my  points,  unless,  Cato,  you  desire  to  say  anything
in  reply  to  tliis,  or  unless  we  have  gone  on  too  long
already."  Neither  is  the  ease,"  he  answered,
since  I  am  eager  for  you  to  iinish  your  argu-
ment, and  no  discourse  of  yours  could  seem  to  me
long."  Thank  you  very  much,"  I  rejoined;  for
what  could  I  desire  better  than  to  discuss  the  sub-  i/
ject  of  virtue  with  that  pattern  of  all  the  virtues

-5  Cato?  But  iirst  I  would  have  you  observe  that  the
most  important  of  all  your  doctrines,  the  head  of
the  array,  namely  that  Moral  Worth  alone  is  good
and  that  the  moral  life  is  the  End  of  Goods,  will  be
shared  with  you  by  all  those  who  make  tjie  End  of
Goods  consist  of  virtue  alone;  and  your  view  that
it  is  impossible  to  frame  a  conception  of  Virtue  if
S4g

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

honestum  sit  numeretur,  idem  dicetur  ab  illis  quos
modo  noniinavi.  Mi  hi  autem  aequius  videbatur
Zenoneni  cum  Polemone  disceptantem,  a  quo  quae
essent  principia  naturae  acceperiit,  a  communibus
initiis  progredieiitem  videre  ubi  priraum  insisterct
et  unde  causa  controversiae  nasceretur,  non,  stantem
cum  lis  qui  ne  dicercnt  quidem  sua  summa  bona
esse  a  natura  profecta,  uti  iisdem  argumentis  qujbus
tUi  utereiitur  iisdemque  sententiis.
S  XVII.  "Minime  vero  illud  probo  quod,  cuiii
docuistis  ut  vobis  videmini  solum  bonum  esse  quod
honestum  sit,  turn  rursum  dicitis  initia  proponi  ne-
cesae  esse  apta  et  accommodata  naturae  quorum  ex
selectione  virtus  possit  existere.  Non  enim  in  sele-
ctione  virtus  ponenda  erat,  ut  id  ipsum  quod  erat
bonorum  ultimum  aliud  aliquid  acquireret.  Nam
omnia  quae  sumenda  quaeque  legends  aut  optanda
sunt  inesse  debent  in  summa  bonorum,  ut  is  qui  earn
adeptus  sit  nihil  praeterea  desideret.  Videsne  ut
quibus  summa  est  in  voluptnte  perspicuum  sit  quid
lis  faciendum  sit  aut  non  faciendum  ?  ut  nemo  dubi-
tet  eorum  omnia  ofUcia  quo  spectare,  quid  sequi,
quid  fugere  debeant  ?  Sit  hoc  ultimum  bonorum
quod  nunc  a  me  defenditur;  apparet  statim  quae
sint  officia,  quae  actioncs. Vobis  autem,  quibus  nihil

350

^^oogfe

r  BOOK  IV.  xvi-xvii

anjrthing  beside  Moral  Worth  be  counted  in  it,  will
also  be  maintained  by  t)ie  piiilosopliers  whom  I  just
now  mentioned.  To  my  mind  it  would  have  been
feirer  for  Zeno  in  liis  dispute  with  Polemo,  whose
teaching  as  to  the  primary  impulses  of  nature  he
had  adopted,  to  have  started  from  the  fundamental
tenets  which  they  held  in  common,  and  to  have
marked  the  point  where  he  first  called  a  halt  and
where  occasion  for  divergence  arose;  not  to  take  his
stand  with  thinkers  who  did  not  even  profess  to  hold
that  the  Chief  Good,,  as  they  severally  conceived
it,  was  based  on  natural  instinct,  and  employ  the
same  arifuments  and  the  same  doctrines  as  they  did.

i  XVII.  "Another  point  to  which  I  take  great  in
exception  is  that,  when  you  have  proved,  as  you  "i
think,  that  Moral  Worth  alone  is  good,  you  then  "
turn  round  and  say  that  of  course  there  must  be  na
advantages  adapted  to  our  nature  set  before  us  as  a  "
Etarting  point,  in  exercising  choice  among  which
advantages  virtue  may  be  able  to  come  into  exis-
tence. Now  it  was  a  mistake  to  make  virtue  consist
in  an  act  of  choice,  for  thi.s  implies  that  the  very
thing  tliat  is  the  ultimate  Good  itself  seeks  to  get
something  else.  Surely  the  sum  of  Goods  must
include  everything  worth  adopting,  choosing  or
desiring,  so  that  he  who  has  attained  it  may  not
want  anything  more.  In  the  case  of  those  whose
Chief  Good  consists  in  pleasure,  notice  how  clear  it  is
what  things  they  are  to  do  or  not  to  do;  no  one  can
be  in  doubt  as  to  the  proper  scope  of  all  tlieir  duties,
what  these  must  aim  at  and  what  avoid.  Or  grant
the  ultimate  Good  that  I  am  now  upholding,  and  it
becomes  clear  at  once  wliat  one's  duties  are  and
what  actions  sre  prescribed.  But  you,  who  have  no
351

.yng  Ibc

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

estaliudpropositumnisirectuiDatquehonestuiii,nnde

offici,  utide  agendi  principium  nascatur  non  reperietis.

47  Hoc  igitur  quaerentes '  omnes,  et  ii  qui  quodcunique
ill  nientem  veniat  aut  quodcumque  occurrat  se  sequi
dicunt*  et  vos,  ad  nataram  reverteminL'  Quihus
natura  iure  respondent  non  esse  verum  aliunde  finem
beate  vivendi,  a  se  prineipia  rei  gerendae  peti ;  esse
enim  unam  rationem  qua  et  principia  renim  agen-
darum  et  ultima  bonorum  continerentur,  atque  ut
Aristonis  esset  explosa  sententia  dicentis  nihil  dif-
ferre  aliud  ab  alio  nee  esse  res  ullas  praeter  virtutes
et  vitia  inter  quas  quidquam  omnino  interesset,  sic
errare  Zenonem  qui  nulla  in  re  nisi  in  virtute  aut
vitio^  propensionem  ne  minimi  quidem  momenti  ad
summum  bonum  adipiscendum  esse  diceret  et,  cum
ad  beatam  vitam  nullum  momentum  cetera  habe-
rent,  ad  appetitionem  tamen*  rerum  esse  in  iis
momenta  diceret ;  quasi  vero  haec  appetitio  non.  ad

iS  summi  boni  adepttonem  pertineret!  Quid  autem
minus  consentaneum  est  quam  quod  aiunt  cognito
summo  bono  reverti  se  ad  naturam  ut  ex  ea  petant
agendi  principium,  id  est  offici  ?  Non  enim  actionis
aut  offici  ratio  impellit  ad  ea  quae  secundum  naturam
sunt  appetenda,  sed  ab  iis  et  appetitio  ct  actio  com-
movetur.

XVIII. Nunc  venio  ad  ilia  tua  brevia,  quae  con-
sectaria esse  dicebas,  et  primum  illud,  quo

^guaerentes  Goreni,  Mdv.]  gvaeritis  MSS.
=  dicunt  ed.  i  dicent  MSS.,  Mdv.

^  revertemini  Mdv.  with  inf.  MSS.;  reuertimini  G,  E.
*  aut  vitio  some  edd.  bracket.
'  cetera  hahetent .  .  .  /amen  Mdv.  with  Davis  and  Bi
;«  res  kaberet .  .  .  autem  WSS.
352

1

m^  BOOK  IV.  xvii-xviii

other standard in view but abstract right and [
morahty,  will  not  be  able  to  find  a  source  and  start- [

47  ing  point  for  duty  and  for  conduct.  In  the  search  *■
for  this  you  will  all  of  you  have  to  return  to  nature,^ —
both  those  who  say  that  they  follow  whatever  conies
into  their  mind  or  whatever  occurs  to  them,  and  you
yourselves.  Both  will  be  met  by  Nature's  very  just
reply  that  it  is  unfair  that  the  standard  of  Happiness
should  be  sought  elsewhere  while  the  springs  of  con-
duct are  derived  from  herself;  that  there  is  a  single
principle  which  must  cover  both  the  springs  of
action  and  the  ultimate  Goods;  and  that  just  as
Aristo's  doctrine  has  been  quite  discredited,  that
everything  is  absolutely  indifferent  and  there  is
nothing  whatever  to  choose  between  any  things
at  all  excepting  virtues  and  vices,  so  Zeno  was
mistaken  in  saying  that  nothing  else  but  virtue
or  vice  affected  even  in  the  smallest  degree  the
attainment  of  the  Chief  Good,  and  that  although
other  things  had  no  effect  whatever  upon  happi-
ness, they  yet  had  some  influence  upon  our  de-
sires; just  as  though  desire,  if  you  please,  bore  no
relation  whatever  to  the  attainment  of  the  Chief

tS  Good  1  But  what  can  be  more  inconsistent  than  tbe
procedure  they  profess,  to  ascertain  the  Chief  Good
first,  and  then  to  return  to  Nature,  and  demand  from
her  the  primary  motive  of  conduct  or  of  duty  ?  Con-
siderations of  conduct  or  duty  do  not  supply  the
impulse  to  desire  the  things  that  are  in  accordance
with  nature  ;  it  is  these  things  which  excite  desire
and  give  motives  for  conduct.

XVIII.  "l  now  come  to  those  concise  proofs  ofTh.
yours  which  you  said  were  so  conclusive.  I  will  J^"
start  with  one  as  concise  as  anything  could  be :  'fi"

AA  353  Tn»

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^|

potest  brevius:  Bonum  omne  laudHbile;  laudabile
autem  omne  honestum ;  boimm  igitur  omne  hone-
stum.'  O  plumbeuni  pugJDnem  '.  Quis  enim  tibi
primum  illud  concesserit?  (quo  quidem  concesBO,
niliil  opus  est  secuudo  ;  si  enim  omne  bonum  lauda-

49  bile  est,  omne  honestum  est);  quis  igitur  tibi  istud
dabit  praeter  Pyrrlionemj  Aristonem  eorumve  simi-
les? quos  tu  non  probas.  Aristoteles,  Xenocrates,
tota  ilia  familia  non  dabit,  quippe  qui  valetudinem,
vires,  divitias,  gioriam,  multa  alia  bona  esse  dicant,
laudabilia  non  dicant.  Et  hi  quidem  ita  non  sola
virtute  finem  bonorum  contineri  putant,  ut  rebus
tamen  omnibus  virtutem  anteponant ;  quid  censes
eos  esse  facturos,  qui  omnino  virtutem  a.  bonorum
fine segregaverunt, Epicurum, Hieronymum,  illos

50  etiam,  si  qui  Camcadeum  finem  tueri  volunt  ?  lam
aut  Callipho  aut  Diodorus  quomodo  poterunt  tibi
istud  concedere,  qui  ad  huncstatcm  aliud  adiungunt,
quod  ex  eodem  genere  non  sit  ?  Placet  igitur  tibi,
Cato,  cum  res  sumpseris  non  concessas,  es  illis  effi-
cere,  quod  velis  ?  lam  ille  sorites  est,'  quo  nihil
putatis  esse  vitiosius,  '  quod  bonum  sit,  id  esse  opta-
bile ;  quod  optabile,  id  expetendura ;  quod  expe-
tendum,  id  laudabile';  dein  reliqui  gradus,  sed  ego
in  hoc  resisto ;  eodem  enim  modo  tibi  nemo  dabit,
quod  expetendum  sit,  id  esse  laudabile. Illud  vero

;  consectarium,  sed  in  primis  hebes,  illonim

'  esi  inserted  by  BaitOB,  Mdv.
■Cp.  noleonll,  48.

H^  BOOK  IV.  xviii

Everything  good  is  praiseworthy ;  but  everything
praiseworthy  is  honourable  {moral ') ;  therefore
everything  good  is  lionourable  (moral).'  What  a
dagger  of  lend!  Why,  who  will  grant  you  your
major  premise  ?  (and  if  this  he  granted  there  is
no  need  of  the  minor ;  for  if  everything  good  is
praiseworthy,  then  everything  good  is  honourable).

J-9  Wlio,  I  sfty,  will  grant  you  this,  except  Pyrrho,
Aristo  and  their  fellows,  whose  doctrines  you  reject?
Aristotle,  Xenocrates  and  the  whole  of  their  follow-
ing will  not  allow  it ;  because  they  call  health,
strength,  riches,  fame  and  many  other  things  goodj
but  do  not  call  them  praiseworthy.  And  these,
though  holding  that  the  End  of  Goods  is  not
limited  to  virtue  alone,  yet  rate  virtue  higher  than
all  other  things ;  but  what  do  you  suppose  will  he
the  attitude  of  those  who  entirely  dissociated  virtue
from  ,the  End  of  Goods,  Epicurus,  Hieronymus,
and  also  of  any  supporters  of  the  End  of  Cameades?

50  Or  how  will  Callipho  or  Diodorus  be  able  to  grant
your  premise,  who  combine  with  Moral  Worth
another  factor  belonging  to  an  entirely  different
category  ?  Are  you  then  content,  Cato,  to  take
disputed  premises  for  granted,  and  draw  from  these
the  conclusion  you  want .''  And  again,  the  following
proof  is  a  sorites,  which  according  to  you  is  a  most
fallacious  form  pf  reasoning:  what  is  good  is  to  be
■wished ;  what  is  to  be  wished  is  desirable  ;  what  is
desirable  is  praiseworthy';  and  so  on  through  the
remaining  steps,  but  I  call  a  halt  at  this  one,  for,  just
as  before,  no  one  will  grant  you  that  what  is  desira-
ble is  praiseworthy.  And  once  again,  here  is  an  argu-
ment which  so  far  from  being  conclusive  is  stupid  to  a
degree,  though,  of  course,  the  Stoic  leaders  and  not

aa3

S5B

mf

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^J

scilicet,  non  tuom, gloriatione  dignam  esse  beatam
vitatn,  quod  non  possit  sine  honestate  contingere,  ut

I  iure  quisquamglorietur.'*  DabJt  hoe  Zenoni  Polemo ;
etiam  magister  eius  et  tota  ilia  gens  et  reliqui  qui
virtutem  omnibus  rebus  niulto  anteponentes  adiun-
gunt  ei  tamen  aliquid  summo  in  bono  tiniendo ;  si
enim  virtus  digna  est  gloriatione,  ut  est,  tantumque
praestat  reliquis  rebus  ut  dici  vix  possit,  et  beatus
esse  poterit  virtute  una  praeditus  carens  ceteris,  nee
tamen  illud  tibi  concedet,  praeter  virtutem  nihil  in
bonis  esse  ducendutn.  111!  autem  quibus  summum
bonum  sine  virtute  est,  non  dabunt  fortasse  vitam
beatam  habere  in  quo  possit  lure  gloriari ;  etsi  illi
quidem  etiam  voluptates  faciunt  interdum  gloriosas.

i  XIX.  Vides  igitur  te  aut  ea  sumere  quae  non
concedantur  aut  ea  quae  etiam  concessa  te.  nihil
iuvent.  Equidem  in  omnibus  istis  conclusionibus
hoc  putarem  philosophia  nobisque  dignum,  et  maxi-
nie  cum  summum  bonumquaereremus,vitamnostram,
consilia,  voluntates,  non  verba  corrigi.  Quis  enim
potest  istis  quae  te  ut  ais  delectant  brevibus  et
acutis  auditis  de  sententia  decedere?  Nam  cum
exspectant  et  avent  audire  cur  dolor  malum  non  sit,
dicunt  illi  asperum  esse  dolere,  motestum,  odiosum,
contra  naturam,  difficile  toleratu,  sed  quia  nulla  sit
in  dolore  nee  fraus  nee  improbitas  nee  malitia  aec

ut-glor,

rejecis  as  interpolated.

*Viz,  that  only  what  is  moral  is  a  thing  to  be  proud  of.
S56

■  BOOK  IV.  xviii-xix

yourself  are  responsible  for  that :  Happiness  i.
thing  to  be  proud  of,  whereas  it  cannot  be  the  e
that  anyone  should  have  good  reason  to  be  proud

1  without  Moral  Worth.'  The  minor  premise^  Polemo
will  concede  to  Zeno,  and  so  will  his  master  and  the
whole  of  their  clan,  as  well  as  all  the  other  philoso-
phers that  while  ranking  virtue  far  above  all  else  yet
couple  some  other  thing  with  it  in  defining  the  Chief
Good ;  since  if  virtue  is  a  tiling  to  be  proud  of,  as  it
is,  and  if  it  is  almost  inexpressibly  superior  to  every-
thing else,  Polemo  will  be  able  to  be  happy  if
endowed  solely  with  virtue,  and  destitute  of  all
besides,  and  yet  he  will  not  grant  you  tliat  nothing
except  virtue  is  to  be  reckoned  as  a  good.  Those  on
the  other  hand  whose  Supreme  Good  dispenses  with
virtue,  will  perhaps  decline  to  grant  that  happin
contains  any  just  ground  for  pride ;  although  they,
it  is  true,  sometimes  make  out  even  pleasures  to
be  things  to  be  proud  of.

i XIX. So  you  see  that  you  are  either  making  and  sucii
assumptions  which  cannot  be  granted  or  ones  which  po^ieiJ
even  if  granted  do  you  no  good. For  my  own  part,  as  J''i^t'"''
regards all these Stoic syllogisms, 1 should  have " '^'
thought  that to  be  worthy  of  philosophy  and  of
ourselves, particularly when the subject of our
inquiry  is  the  Supreme  Good,  the  argument  ought
to  amend our lives,  purposes  and  wills,  not  just
correct  our  terminology. Would  those  concise  epi-
grams which  you  say  give  you  so  much  pleasure
make  any  man  alter  his  opinions?  Here  are  people  all
agog  to  learn  why  pain  is  no  evil ;  and  the  Stoics  tell
them  that  though  pain  is  irksome,  annoying,  hateful,
unnatural  and  hard  to  bear,  it  is  not  an  evil,  because
it  involves  no  dislionesty,  wickedness  or  malice,  no
357

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

^  turpitudo  non  esse illud  nialui

Hm

m  videor  an  totas
sit apud illos,  id

rum  conservatus  et

(.Ic  enlm  alebiu),

falsi  s  principiis

qui  audierit, ut ridere non curet, discedet tamen
niliilo firmior  ad  dolorem  ferendum  quam  venerat.

53  Tu  autem  negas  fortem  esse  quemquam  posse  qui
dolorem  malum  putct.  Cur  fortior  sit  si  illud  quod
tute  concedis  asperum  et  vis  ferendum  putabit?  Ex
rebus  enim  timiditas,  non  ex  vocabulis  naseitur.  Et
ais,  si  una  littera  commota  sit,  fore  tota  ut  labet  disci-
plina.  Utrum  igitur  tibi  littera
paginas  commovere?  tit  enim
quod  est  a  te  laudatum,  ordo  re
omnia  inter  se  apta  et  connexa
tamen  persequi  non  debemus  si
profecta  congruunt  ipsa  sibi  et  a  proposito  non  aber-

54  raut.  In  prima  igitur  constitutione  Zeno  tuus  (
natura  recessit,  cmnque  summum  bonum  }
in  ingeni  praestuntla  quam  virtutem  i
quidquam  aliud  esse  bonum  dixisset  nisi  quod  esset
honestum,  nee  virtutem  posse  constare  si  in  ceteris
rebus  esset  quidquam  quod  aliud  alio  melius  esset
aut  peius,  his  propositis  tenuit  prorsus  consequentia.
Hecte  dicis;  negare  non  possum;  sed  itn  falsa  sunt
ea  quae  consequuntur,  ut  ilia  e  quibus  haec  nata

55  sunt  vera  esse  non  possint.  Decent  enim  nos,  ut
scis,  dialectici,  si  ea  quae  rem  aliqoam  sequantur,
falsa  sintj  falsam  illam  ipsam  esse  quam  sequantur.
Ita  fit  ilia  eonclusio  non  solum  vera  sed  ita  perspicua
ut  dialectici  ne  rationem  quidem  reddi  putent  opor-
tere:  Si  illud,  hoc;  non  autem  hoc;  igitur  ne  illud
quidem. Sic  consequentibus  vestris  sublatis  prima

358

K  BOOK  IV.  xix

moral blame  or  baseness. He  wlio  heHrs  this  may
or  may  not  want  to  laugh,  but  lie  will  not  go  away  any

i3  stronger  to  endure  pain  than  he  came.  You  how-
ever say  that  no  one  can  be  brave  who  thinks  pain
an  evil.  Why  should  he  be  braver  for  thinking  it
■what  you  yourself  admit  it  to  be,  irksome  and
almost  intolerable  ?  Timidity  springs  from  facts,
not  from  words.  And  you  aver  that  if  a  single  letter
be  altered,  the  whole  system  will  totter.  Well  then,
do  you  think  I  alter  a  letter  or  wholif  pages?  Even
allowing  that  the  Stoics  deserve  the  praise  you  gave
them  for  the  methodical  arrangement  and  perfect
logical  connection  (as  you  described  it)  of  their
system,  still  we  are  not  bound  to  accept  a  chain  of  Moreover,  t:
reasoning  because  it  is  self- con  si  stent  and  keeps  to  ^«^"fs"!
the  line  laid  down,  if  it  starts  from  false  premises,  moraijiopn

)4  Now  your  master  Zeno  deserted  nature  in  framing  IS  bo  (niM^b
liis  first  principles;  he  placed  the  supreme  Good  in  oftt^MM^
that  intellectual  excellence  which  we  term  virtue,  siooj.
and  declared  that  nothing  but  Moral  Worth  is  good,
and  that  virtne  cannot  be  estalilished  if  among  the
rest  of  things  any  one  thing  is  better  than any
other; and  he  adhered  to  the  logical  conclusions
from  these  premises. Quite  true,  I  can't  deny  it.
But  the  conclusions  are  so  false  that  the  premises

j5  from  which  they  sprang  cannot  be  true.  For  the
logicians  teach  us,  as  you  are  aware,  that  if  the
consequences  that  follow  from  a  proposition  be
false,  the  proposition  from  which  those  consequences
follow  must  itself  be  false.  On  this  is  based  the
following  syllogism,  which  is  not  merely  true,  but  so
self-evident  that  the  logicians  assume  it  as  axiomatic;
If  A  is  B,  C  is  D;  but  C  is  not  D;  therefore  A  is
not  B.  Thus,  if  your  conclusions  are  upset,  your
359

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

tolhintur. Quae sequuntur
non sint sapiciites  aeque

Omnes  qui
se ;  sapientes
;  beatos;  recte  facta  omnia  aequalia,
omnia  peccata  pari» ; — quae  cum  magnifice  primo  dici
viderentur,  considerata  minus  probabantur.  Sensus
enim  cuiusque  et  natura  rerum  atque  ipsa  Veritas
clamabat  quodam  modo  non  posse  adduci  ut  inter
eas  res  quas  Zeno  exaequaret  nihil  interesset.

56  XX.  '  Postea  tuus  ille  Pocnulus  (scis  enim  Citieos
clientes  tuos  e  Phoenica  profectos),  homo  igitur
aeutus,  causam  nan  obtinens  repugnante  natura,  verlu
versare  coepit;  et  primum  rebus  iis  quas  nos  bonas
dicimus  concessit  ut  haberentur  aestimabiles '  et  ad
naturam  accommodatae,  faterique  coepit  sapienti,
hoc  est,  summe  beato  commodius  tamen  esse  si  ea
quoque  habeat  quae  bona  non  audet  appellare,
naturae  accommodata  esse  coneedit ;  negatque  Plato-
nem,  si  sapiens  non  sit,  eadem  esse  in  causa  qua
tyrannum  Dionysium :  huic  mori  optimum  esse
propter  desperationem  sapientiae,  illi  propter  spem
vivere ;  peccata  autem  partim  esse  tolerabtlia,  partim
nullo  modo,  propterea  quod  alia  peccata  plures,  alia
pauciores  quasi  nuraeros  oflici  praeterirent ;  iam
insipientes  aHos  ita  esse  ut  nullo  modo  ad  sapientiam
possent  pervenire,  alios  qui  possent,  si  id  egissent,

57  sapientiam  consequi.  Hie  loquebatur  aliter  atque
omnes, sentiebat idem quod ceteri. Nee vero

,  MuUf

'labHes  MSS. ;  Mdv.

*Zeno  came  from  Citium  in  Cyprus,  said  to  have  been
tbe  scat  of  a  Phoenician  colony  ;  and  the  Pboenicians  were
proverbially  crafty.  Calo  superintended  the  reduction  of
Cyprus  to  a  Roman  province,  and  Cicero  in  his  Letters
speaks  of  tbe  island  as  under  Cato's  protection.

360

^^^^^^e

■^  BOOK  IV.  xix-x

premises  are  upset  also.  What  then  are  your  con-
clusions? That  those  who  are  not  wise  are  all
equally  wretched ;  tiiat  the  wise  are  all  supremely
happy;  that  all  right  actions  are  equal,  all  ;'
on  a  par; — these  dicta  may  have  had  an  imposing
sound  at  a  first  hearing,  but  upon  examination  they
began  to  seem  less  convincing.  For  common  sense,
the  facts  of  nature,  truth  herself  seemed  to  cry
aloud  that  nothing  should  persuade  them  that  there
was  actually  no  difference  between  the  things  which
Zeno  made  out  to  be  equal.

j6 XX.  "  Subsequently  your  little  Phoenician (for  zt
you  are  aware  that  your  clients  of  Citium  originally  JJ^;
came  from  Phoenicia"),  with  the  cunning  of  his  race,  ihaniniub-
on tailing to make good  his  case  in  defiance  ofHesotnur-
Nature's protest,  set  about  juggling  with  words,  pjrj^oira thai
First  he  allowed  the  things  that  we  in  our  school  ihevwtrovir-
call goods  to be considered 'valuable'  and suited  tf^inoi Uie"
to  nature,'  and he began  to  admit that  though  a  ^Jj^^""'"'""
man  were  wise,  that is  supremely  happy,  it  would
yet  be  an  advantage  to  him  if  lie  a
things  which  he  is  not  bold  enough  to  c
but  allows to be suited to  nature.' He main-
tains that  Plato,  even  if  he  be  not  wise,  is  not  in  the
same  case  as  the  tyrant  Dionysius :  Dionysius  must
despair  of  wisdom,  and  his  best  fate  would  be  to  die ;
but  Plato  hashopesof  it,  and  had  better  live.  Again,
he allows that some sins are endurable, while
others  are  unpardonable,  because  some  sins  transgress
more  and  others  fewer  points  of  duty; moreover
some  fools  are  so  foolish  as  to  be  utterly  incapable  of
attaining  wisdom,  but  others  might  conceivably  by

57  great  effort  attain  to  wisdom. In  all  this  though  his
language  was  peculiar,  his  meaning  was  the  same  as
36 1

CICEBO  DR  FINIBUS
t  aestimunda  ducebat  ea  quae  ipse  bona
negaret  esse  quam  illi  qui  ea  bona  esse  dicebant
Quid  igitur  voluit  sibi  qui  ilia  mutaverit?  Sallem
aliqiiid  de  pondere  detraxisset  et  paulo  minoris
aestirnavisset  ea  quam  Peripatetic!,  ut  sentire  quo-
que  aliud,  non  solum  dicere  videretur.  Quid?  de
ipsa  beata  vita,  ad  quam  omnia  referuntur,  quae
dicitis?  Negatis  earn  esse  quae  expleta  sit  iis  rebus
omnibus  quas  natiira  desideret,  totamqoe  earn  in
una  virtiite  poiiitis.  Cumque  omnis  controversia
aut  de  re  soleat  aut  de  nomine  esse,  utraque  eamm
nascitur  si  aut  res  ignoratur  aut  erratur  in  nomine.
Quorum  si  neutrum  est,  opera  danda  est  ut  verbis
utamur  quam  usitatissimis  et  quam  maxime  aptis,  id
58  est  rem  declarant! bus.  Nura  igitur  dubiura  est  quin,
si  in  re  ipsa  nihil  peccatur  a  superioribus,  verbis  illi
comraodius  utantur?  Videamos  igitur  sententias
eorum ; turn  ad  verba  redeamus.

XXI.  Dicunt  appetitionem  animi  moveri  eum
aliquid  ei  secundum  naturam  esse  videatur;  omnia-
que  quae  secundum  naturam  slot  aestimatione
aliqua  digna,  eaque  pro  eo  quantum  in  quoque  sit
ponderis  esse  aestimanda ;  quaeque  secundum  natu-
ram sint,  partim  nihil  habere  in  sese  eius  appetitionis
de  qua  saepe  iam  diximus,  quae  nee  honesta  nee
362

m  BOOK  rV. xx-xxi

thnt  of  everybody  else.  In  fact  lie  set  no  lower  value
on  the  tilings  be  himself  denied  to  be  good  than  did
those  who  said  they  were  good.  What  then  did
he  want  by  altering  their  names?  He  ought  at
least  to  have  diminished  their  importance  and  to
have  set  a  slightly  lower  value  on  them  than  the
Peripatetics,  so  as  to  make  the  difference  appear  to
be  one  of  meaning  and  not  merely  of  language.
Again,  what  do  you  and  your  seliool  say  about
happiness  itself,  the  ultimate  end  and  aim  of  all
things?  You  will  not  have  it  to  be  the  sum  of  all
nature's  requirements,  but  make  it  consist  of  virtue
alone.  Now  all  disputes  usually  turn  either  on
facts  or  on  names ;  ignorance  of  fact  or  error  as  to
terms  will  cause  one  or  the  other  form  of  dispute
respectively.  If  neither  source  of  difference  is
present,  we  must  be  careful  to  employ  the  terms
most  generally  accepted  and  those  most  suitable,

i  that  is,  those  that  best  describe  the  fact.  Can  we
doubt  that,  if  the  older  philosophers  are  not  mis-
taken on  the  point  of  fact,  their  terminology  is  the
more  convenient  one? Let  us  then  consider  their

•  opinions  and  return  to  the  question  of  terminology

XXI. Their  statements  are  that  appetition  is  The  •
excited  in  the  mind  when  something  appears  to  itg^'^s
to  be  in  accordance  with  nature ;  and  that  all  things  '^"  ■
that  are  in  accordance  with  nature  are  worth  some  iused
value,  and  are  to  be  valued  in  proportion  to  the  im-  "'^"'
portance  that  they  severally  possess; and that  of
those  things  which  are  in  accordance  with  nature,
some  excite  of  themselves  none  of  that  appetition
of  which  we  have  often  spoken  already,  and  these
are  to  be  called  neither  honourable  nor  praisewortliy.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
laudabilia  dicantur,  partim  quae  valuptatem  habeant
in  omni  animante,  sed  in  homine  rationem  etiam;
ex  ea  quae  sint  apta,  ea  honesta,  ea  pulclira,  ea
laudabilia,  ilia  auteni  superiora  naturalia  nominantur,
quae  coniuneta  cum  honestis  vitam  beatam  perficiunt

59  et  absolvunt.  Omnium  autem  porum  commodomm
qutbus  non  iUi  plus  tribuunt  qui  ilia  bona  esse  dicunt
quam  Zeno  qui  negat,  tonge  praestantissimutn  esse
quod  honestum  esset  atque  laudabile :  sed  si  duo
honesta  proposita  sint,  alterum  cum  valetudine,
alterum  cum  morbo,  non  esse  dubium  ad  utrum
eorum  natura  nofi  ipsa  deductura  sit;  sed  tamen
tantam  vim  esse  honestatis  tantumque  earn  rebus
omnibus  praestare  et  eitcellere  ut  nullis  iiec  suppliciis
nee  praemiis  demoveri  possit  ex  eo  quod  rectum
esse  decreverit;  omiiiaque  quae  dura,  diflicilia,
advei-sa  videantur,  ea  virtutibus  iis  quibus  a  natura
essemus  omati  obteri  posse ;  non  facile  ilia  qnidem,
nee  contemnenda  esse^  (quid  enini  esset  in  virtute
tantum  ?),  sed  ut  hoc  iudicaremus,  non  esse  in  his
partem  inaximani  positam  beate  aut  secus  vivendi.

60  Ad  summajn  ea  quae  Zeno  aestimaiida  et  sumenda
et  apta  naturae  esse  dixit,  eadem  illi  bona  appellant ;  ■

'  non /acile  ilia  guidem{s<:.  obteri  posse)  nee  cmxiemnenda
esse  conj.  Mdv.,  who  prints  witb  a  mark  of  corruption  the
MSS.  nonfaciles  illas  guidem  nee  contetnnemias  (yuid  etc.).

"This  confused  passage  ia  conjecturally  remedied  by
W.  M.  L.  Hutchinson,  rfe  Fin.  p.  235,  who  for  in  sese  sug-
^i^sts  in  sltTpe  (cp.  V,  jo  stirpium  naturas),  and  for  volu-
Ptatem,  voluniatem  (cp.  Tusc.  IV,  12).  Lastly  the  clause
quae  nee  honesta  nee  laudabilia  dieanlur  logically  should
come  immediately  after  quaegne  secundum  natutam  sint,
though Cicero may have  carelessly misplaced it. The

S64>

M

BOOK  IV.  xjii
while  Borne  are  those  which  are  objects  of  pleasure
in  every  hving  creature,  but  in  man  are  objects  of
the  reasonalso;^  those  which  are  suitable  in  accord-
ance with  reason  are  called  honourable,  beautiful,
praiseworthy ;  but  the  former  class  are  called  natural,
the  class  which  coupled  with  things  morally  worthy
59  render  happiness  perfect  and  complete.  They  fur-
ther hold  that  of  all  those  advantages,  which  they
who  call  them  goods  rate  no  more  highly  than  does
Zeno  who  says  they  are  not  goods,  by  far  the  most
excellent  is  Moral  Worth  and  what  is  praise-
worthy; but  if  one  is  offered  the  choice  between
Moral  Worth  plus  health  and  Moral  Worth  plus
disease,  there  is  no  doubt  to  which  of  the  two  Nature
herself  will  guide  us;  though  at  the  same  time
Moral  Worth  is  so  potent,  and  so  overwhelmingly
superior  to  all  other  things,  that  no  penalties  or
rewards  can  Induce  it  to  swerve  from  what  it  has
decided  to  be  right;  and  all  apparent  hardships,
difficulties  and  obstacles  can  be  trodden  under  foot
by  the  virtues  with  which  nature  has  adorned  us;
not  that  these  hardships  are  easily  overcome  or  to
be  made  light  of  (else  where  were  the  merit  of
virtue  ?),  but  so  as  to  lead  us  to  the  verdict  that
these  things  are  not  the  main  factor  in  our  happi-
)  ness  or  the  reverse.  In  fine,  the  ancients  entitle
the  same  things  good '  that  Zeno  pronounced
valuable,' to  be  adopted,'  and suited  to  nature';

sentence  will  then  run  ;  'Things  in  accordance  with  nature,
which  I  he  Stoics  pronounce  neither  moral  nor  praise  worthy,
(i)  in  plants  excite  none  of  tlie  appelicion  of  which  we  have
often  spoken,  but  (2)  in  animals  excite  volition,  and  parli-
cularly  (3)  in  man  excite  the  reason  al5o(i.e.  are  the  objects
of  rational  choice).'

365

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^H

vilam  autem beatam illi  earn  quae  constaret  ex  iis

rebus  quas  dixi,  aut  plurimis  aut  gravissimis,  Zeno
autem  quod  suam,  quod  propriam '  speciem  habeat
cur  appetendum  sit,  id  solum  bonum  appellat,  bea-
tam auttm vitam earn solam quae cum virtute

XXII.  Si  de  re  disceptari  oportet,  nulla  mthi
tecum,  Cato,  potest  esse  dissensio;  nihil  est  enim  de
quo  aliter  tu  sentias  atque  ego,  modo  commutatis
verbis  ipsas  res  conferamus.  Nee  hoc  ille  non  vidit
sed  verborum  magnificentia  est  et  gloria  delectatus;
qui  si  ea  quae  dicit  ita  sentiret  ut  verba  significant,
quid  inter  eum  et  vel  Pjrrbonem  vel  Aristonem
intereaset  ?  Sin  autem  eos  non  probabat,  quid  attinuit
cum  iis  quibuscum  re  concinebat  verbis  discrepare?
61  Quid  si  reviviscant  Flatonis  ilii  et  deinceps  qui  eorum
auditorcs  fuerunt  et  tecum  ita  loquantur?  Nos  cum
te,  M.  Cato,  studiosissimura  philosophiae,  iustissimum
virum,  optimum  iudicem,  religiosissimum  testem,
audiremus,  admirati  sunius  quid  esset  cur  nobis
Stoicos  anteferres,  qui  de  rebus  bonis  et  malis  sen-
tirent  ea  quae  ab  hoc  Polemone  Zeno  eognoverat,
nominibus  uterentur  iis  quae  prima  specie  admirati-
onem,  re  explicata  risum  nioverent.  Tu  autem,  si
tibi  ilia  probabantur,  cur  non  propriis  verbis  ilia
tenebas  ?  sin  te  auctoritas  commovebat,  nobisne
omnibus  et  Platoni  ipsi  nescio  quern  ilium  antepone-
bas  ? praesertim cum in re publica princeps esse

er;Mdv.conj.  j

;>firo/,ri.

BOOK  IV.

and  they  call  a  life  happy  which  comprises
the largest  numher  or  the  most  important  of
things-  aforesaid ;  Zeno  on  the  contrary  calls  nothing
good but that  which has  a peculiar  cliarm  and
attractiveness  of  its  own,  and  no  life  happy  but  the
life  of  virtue.

XXII,  If,  Cato,  the  discussion  is  to  turn  on  :
facts,  disagreement  between  me  and  yourself  is  out  i
of  the  question :  since  your  views  and  mine  are  the  ]
same  in  every  particular,  if  only  we  compare  the  i
actual  substance  after  making  the  necessary  changes
in  terms.  Zeno  was  not  unaware  of  this,  but  he  was
beguiled  by  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  language ;
Iiad  he  really  thought  what  he  says,  in  the  actual
sense  of  the  words  he  uses,  what  difference  would
there  be  between  him  and  either  Pyrrho  or  Aristo?
If  on  the  other  hand  he  rejected  Pyrrho  and
Aristo,  what  was  the  point  of  quarrelling  about  words
witli  those  with  whom  he  agreed  in  substance  f
What  if  the  pupils  of  Plato  were  to  come  to  life
again,  and  their  pupils  again  in  succession,  and  were
to  address  you  in  this  fashion  ?  As  we  listened,
Marcus  Cato,  to  so  devoted  a  student  of  philosophy,  so
just  a  man,  so  upright  a  judge,  so  scrupulous  a  witness
as  yourself,  we  marvelled  what  reason  could  induce
you  to  reject  us  for  the  Stoics,  whose  views  on  good
and  evil  were  the  views  that  Zeno  learnt  from  Polemo
here,  but  who  expressed  those  views  in  terms  at  first
sight  startling  and  upon  examination  ridiculous.  If
you  accepted  those  views  on  their  merits,  why  did
you  not  hold  them  under  their  own  terminology  ?  or
if  you  were  swayed  by  authority,  could  you  prefer
that  nobody  to  all  of  us,  even  to  Plato  himself?
especially  when  you  aspired  to  play  a  leading  part  in
367

either  ^H

the  ^M

othing  ^^1

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

velles  ad  eamque  tuendam  cum  summa  tua  dtgnitate
maxime  a  nobis  ornari  atque  instrui  posses.  A  nobis
enim  ista  quaesita,  a  nobis  descripta,  notata,  prae-
cepta  sunt,  omniumque  rerum  publicarum  rectionis
g-enera,  status,  mutationes,  leges  etiatn  et  instituta  ac
mores  civitatum  perse ripsimus.  Eloqiientiae  vero,
quae  et  principibus  maximo  ornamento  est  et  qua
te  audimus  valere  plurimum,  quantum  tibi  es  monu-
mentis  nostris  addidisses  ! '  Ea  cum  disissent,  quid
62  tandem  talibus  viris  responderes  ?  "  Ko^arem  te,"
inquit,  ut  diceres  pro  me  tu  idem  qui  lllis  orationem
dictavisses,  vel  potius  paulum  loci  milii  ut  iis  re-
sponderem  dares,  nisi  et  te  audire  nunc  mallem  et
istis  tamen  alio  tempore  responsurus  essem,  turn
scilicet  cum  tibi."

XXni.  Atque  si  verum  respondere  velles,  Cato,
haec  erant  dicenda,  non  eos  tibi  non  probates,  tantis
ingeniis  homines  tantaque  auctoritate,  sed  te  anim-
advertisse  quas  res  illi  propter  antiquitatem  parum
vidissentj  eas  a  Stoicis  esse  perspectas,  eisdemque  de
rebus  hos  cum  acutius  disseruisse,  turn  sensisse  gravius
et  fortius,  quippe  qui  primum  valetudinem  bonam
eipetendam  negent  esse,  eligendam  dicant,  nee  quia
bonum  sit  valere  sed  quia  sit  nonnihilo  aestimandum
(neque  tamen  pluris  illis  videtur,  qui  illud  non  dubi-
tant  bonum  dicere;)  hoc  vero  te  ferre  non  potuisse,
quod  antiqui  illi  quasi  barbati  (ut  nos  de  nostris
'A  inserted  by  Lambinus,  Mdv.
•  The  early  Romans  wore  beards,  whereas  for  several
generalions  before  Cicero  it  ha'd  been  usual  lo  shave.
368

W^  BOOK  IV.  xxii-xxiii

the  state,  and  we  were  the  very  persons  to  ann  and
equip  you  to  protect  the  state  with  all  the  weight  of
your  hig-h  character.  Why,  it  is  we  who  invented
political  philosophy  ;  its  classifications,  its  nomencla-
ture, its  practical  rules  are  our  creation ;  on  all  the
various  forms  of  government,  their  stability,  their
revolutions,  the  laws,  institutions  and  customs  of
states,  we  have  written  exhaustively.  Oratory  again
is  the  proudest  distinction  of  tlie  statesman,  and  in
it  you,  we  are  told,  are  pre-eminent ;  but  how  vastly
you  might  have  enriched  your  eloquence  from  the
records  of  our  genius.'  What  answer,  pray,  could  you
32  give  to  these  words  from  such  men  as  those  ?  "  I
would  beg  of  you,"  replied  Cato,  to  be  my  spokes-
man also,  as  you  hnve  been  their  prompter  in  this
harangue ;  or  rather  I  would  ask  you  to  grant  me  a
moment's  space  in  which  to  answer  them,
not  that  for  the  present  1  prefer  to  listen  to  you,
and  also  intend  to  reply  to  your  champions  at  another
time,  I  mean  when  I  reply  to  yourself."

XXIII. "Well,  Cato,  if  you  wanted  to  answer Ti
truly,  this  is  what  you  would  have  to  say  r  that  with  ,^
all  respect  for  the  high  authority  of  men  so  gifted, «'
you  had  observed  that  the  Stoics  had  discovered
truths  which  they  in  those  early  days  had  naturally
failed  to  see ;  the  Stoics  had  discussed  the  same  sub-
jects with  more  insight  and  had  arrived  at  bolder  and
more  profound  conclusions ;  first,  they  said  that  good
health  is  not  desirable  but  is  worthy  of  selection,  and
that  not  because  to  be  well  is  a  good,  but  because
it has some positive value (not that  any greater
value  is  attached  to  it  by  the  older  school  who  do
not  hesitate  to  call  it  a  good) ;  well  then,  you  couldn't
stand  those  bearded*  old  fogies  (as  we  call  our  own

CICERO  DE  FINI8US  ^H

solemus  dicere)  crediderint,  eius  qui  honeste  viveret,
si  idem  etiam  bene  valeret,  bene  audiret,  popiosus
esset,  optabiliorem  fore  vitam  melioremque  et  magis
expetendam  quam  illius  qui,  aeque  vir  bonus,  tnultis
modis  esset,  ut  Enni  Alcmaeo,

tircumventus  morbo,  exsilio  atque  inopis.'

63  Illi  igitur  antiqui  iion  tarn  acute  optabiliorem  illam
vitam  putant,  praestantiorem,  beatiorem ;  Stoici  au-
tem  tantummodo  praeponendam  in  seligendo,  non
quo  beatior  ea  vita  sit,  sed  quod  ad  naturani  acpom-
modatior ;  et  qui  sapientes  non  sint,  omnes  aeque
miseros  esse.  Stoici  hoc  videlicet  viderunt,  illos
autem  id  fugerat  superiores,'  homines  sceleribus  et
parricidiis  inquinatos  nihilo  miseriores  esse  quam  eos
qui,  cum  caste  et  integre  viverent,  nondum  perfe-

6+  ctam  illam  sapientiam  esseiit  conseeuti,  Atque  hoc
loco  similitu dines  eas  quibus  illi  uti  solent  dissimilli-
mas  proferebas.  Quis  enim  ignorat,  si  plures  ex
alto  emergere  velint,  propius  fore  eos  quidem  ad
respirandum,  qui  ad  summam  aquam  iam  appro-
pinquent  sed  nihilo  magis  respirare  posse  quam  eos
qui  sint  in  profundof  nihil  igitur  adiuvat  procedere
et  progredi  in  virtu  te  quominus  miserrimus  sit  ante-
quam  ad  earn  pervenerit,  quoniam  in  aqua  nihil
adiuvat.  Et  quoniam  catuli  qui  iam  dispecturi  sunt
caeci  aeque  et  ii  qui  modo  nati,  Platonem  quoque
necesse  est,  quoniam  nondum  videbat  sapientiam,
aeque  caecum  animo  ac  Plialarim  fuisse.

65 XXIV. Ista  similia  non  sunt,  Cato,  in  quibus

superiores MSS. add qui arbitrabnnhir ; edd.

S70

^  BOOK  IV.  xxiii-sxiv

Roman  ancestors)  believing  that  a  man  who  lived
moralJy,  if  he  also  had  health,  wealth  and  reputation,
had  a  preferablej  better,  more  desirable  life  than  he
who,  though  equally  good,  was,  like  Alcmaeon  in
Ennius,

In  divers  ways  beset
With  sickness,  banishment  and  poverty.

63  Those  men  of  old  then,  with  their  duller  wits,  think
that  the  former  life  is  more  desirable,  more  excellent,
more  happy ;  the  Stoics  on  the  other  hand  consider
it  merely  to  be  preferred  for  choice,  not  because  it  is
a  happier  life  but  because  it  is  more  adapted  to
nature.  The  Stoics  we  must  suppose  discerned  a
truth  that  had  escaped  tjieir  predecessors,  namely
that  men  deliled  by  crimes  and  murders  are  no
more  miserable  than  those  who  though  pious  and
upright  in  their  lives  have  not  yet  attained  ideal  and

64  perfect  wisdom.  It  was  at  this  point  that  you  brought  xheir  BDaic«te>
forward  those  extremely  false  analogies  which  the  ^''u'Sh^nitaH^'*
Stoics  are  so  fond  of  employing. For  who  cannot  ab[e  are

see  that  if  tliere  are  several  people  plunged  in  deep  "  '"
water  and  trying  to  get  out,  those  already  approach-
ing the  surface,  though  nearer  to  breathing,  will
be  no  more  able  actually  to  breathe  than  those  at
the  bottom  ?  You  infer  that  improvement  and
progress  in  virtue  are  of  no  avail  to  save  a  man  from
being  utterly  wretched,  until  he  has  actually  arrived
at  virtue,  since  to  rise  in  the  water  is  of  no  avail.
Again,  since  puppies  on  the  point  of  opening  their
eyes  are  as  blind  as  those  only  just  bom,  it  follows
that  Plato,  not  having  yet  attained  to  the  vision  of
wisdom,  was  just  as  blind  mentally  as  Phalarisl

65  XXIV. Really,  Cato,  there  is  no  analogy  between

BB<e  371

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quamvis  multufu  processeris,  tamen  illud  in  eadem
causa  est  a  quo  abesse  velis,  donee  evaseris.  Nee
enim  i!le  respirat  antequam  emereit,  et  catuli  aeque
caeci  priusquam  dispexerunt  ae  si  ita  futuri  semper
essent.  Ilia  sunt  similia:  hebes  acies  est  cuipiam
oeulorum,  corpore  alius  languescit ' ;  hi  curatione  ad-
hibitJL  levantur  in  dies ;  valet  alter  plus  eotidie,  alter
videt;  his  similes  sunt  omnes  qui  virtuti  student;
levantur  vitiis,  levantur  erroribus.  Nisi  forte  censes
Ti.  Gracchum  patrem  non^  beatiorcm  fuisse  quam
filium,  eum  alter  stabilire  rem  publicam  studuerit,
alter  evertere.  Nee  tamen  ille  erat  sapiens;  quis
enim  hoc?  aut  quando?  aut  ubi?  aut  unde?  sed
quia  studebat  laudi  et  dignitati,  muttum  in  virtute
)  processerat.  Confer*  avura  tuurn  Drusum  cum  C.
Graccho,  eius  fere  aequali.  Quae  hie  rei  publicae
vulnera  imponebat,  eadem  ille  sanabat.  Si  nihil  est
quod  tam  miseros  faeiat  quam  impietas  et  seelus,  ut
iam  omnes  insipientes  sint  miseri,  quod  profeeto
sunt,  non  est  tamen  aeque  miser  qui  patriae  eonsulit
et  is  qui  illam  exstinctani  cupit.  Levatio  igitur  vi-
tiorum  magna  fit  in^  iis  qui  habent  ad  virtutem  pro-
I  gressionis  aliquantum.  Vcstri  autem  progressionem
ad  virtutem  fieri  aiunt,  ievationeni  vitiorum  fieri
negant.  At  quo  utantur  homines  acuti  argumento
ad probandum operae pretium est considerare.

•  lat^uesdt  inf.  MSS. ;  nescil  B  E  ;  senescit  Mdv.

-non  inserted  by  eiJd.

*Confe>{am^i\meT:  Conferam  BE;  Confer.
MSS.;  Conferam  \a-ulem\ .  .  ,  aequali?  Mdv.

'iH  E.  om.  B  and  other  MSS.

■■m  autem  faSur

i

■  BOOK  IV.  xxiv

progress  in  virtue  and  cases  such  as  you  describe,  in
which  however  far  one  advances,  the  situation  one
wishes  to  escape  from  still  remains  the  same  until
one  has  actually  emerged  from  it.  The  man  does
not  breathe  until  he  has  risen  to  the  surface  ;  the
puppies  are  as  blind  before  they  have  opened  their
eyes  aa  if  they  were  going  to  be  blind  always.  Good
analogies  would  be  these :  one  man's  eyesight  is  dim.,
another's  general  health  is  weak ;  apply  remedies,
and  they  get  better  day  by  day;  every  day  the  one
is  stronger  and  the  other  sees  better;  similarly  with
all  who  earnestly  pursue  virtue;  they  get  better,
their  vices  and  errors  are  gradually  reduced.  Surely
you  would  not  maintain  that  the  elder  Tiberius
Gracchus  was  not  happier  than  his  son,  when  the  one
devoted  himself  to  the  service  of  the  state  and  the
other  to  its  destruction.  But  still  the  elder  Gracchus
was  not  a  Wise  Man;  who  ever  was?  or  when,  or
where,  or  how?  Still  he  aspired  to  fame  and  honour,
and  therefore  had  advanced  to  a  high  point  in  virtue.

56  Compare your grandfather 0rusus with Gaius  Ti
Gracchus,  who  was  nearly  his  contemporary. The  ^
former  strove  to  heal  the  wounds  which  the  latter  '^
inflicted  on  the  state. If  tliere  is  nothing  that  makes
men  so  miserable  as  impiety  and  crime,  granted  that
alt  who  are  foolish  are  miserable,  as  of  course  they
are,  neverthele.ss  a  man  who  serves  his  country  is  not
so  miserable  as  one  who  longs  for  its  ruin. There-
fore those  who  achieve  definite  progress  towards
virtue  undergo  a  great  diminution  of  their  vices.

67  Your teachers, however,  while allowing progress

towards  virtue,  deny  diminution  of  vice. But  it  is

worth  while  to  examine  the  argument  on  which  these

clever  people  rely  for  the  proof.  Their  line  is  this :  In

37s

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
sapientia  pedein  ubi  pouerct  non  hnbebat  suUatis
officiis  omnibus,  officia  autem  tollebantur  delectu
omni  et  discrimine  remoto,  quae  esse  non  poterant
rebus  omnibus  sic  exaequiitis  ut  inter  eas  nihil
interesset,  ex  his  angustiis  ista  evaserunt  deteriora
quani  Aristonis.  Ilia  tamen  sioiplicia;  lestra  ver-
suta.  Roges  enim  Aristonem,  bonane  ei  videantur
baec,  vacuitas  doloris,  divitiae,  valetudo;  neget.
Quid  ?  quae  contraria  sunt  his  nialane  ?  Nihilo
inagis.  Zetionem  roges;  respondeat  totidem  verbis.
Admirantes  quaeramus  ab  utroque  quonam  modo
vitam  agere  possimus  si  nihil  interesse  nostra  pute-
mus,  valeamus  aegrine  sinius,  vacemus  an  cruciemur
dolore,  frigus,  famem  propulsare  possimus  necne
possimus.  Vives,  in  quit  Aristo,  magnifice  atque
praeclare;  quod  erit  cumque  visum  ages;  numquam

TO  angere,  numquam  cupies,  numquam  timebis.  Quid
Zeno  ?  Portenta  haec  esse  dicit  neque  ea  ratione  ullo
modo  posse  vivi ;  se  dicere  ^  inter  honestum  et  turpe
nimium quantum, neseio quid immensum, inter

71  ceteras  res  nihil  omnino  interesse.  Idem  adliuc;
audi  reliqua  et  risum  contine  si  potes.  Media  ilia,
inquit,  inter  quae  nihil  interest,  tamen  eiusmodi
sunt  ut  eorum  alia  eligenda  sint,  alia  reicienda,  alia
omnino  neglegenda,  hoc  est  ut  eorum  alia  velis,  alia
nolis,  alia  non  cures. —  At  modo  dixeras  nihil  in  istis

'non  inserted  by  edd.
'«  dicere  Mdv. ;  sed  dicere  B.  E  ;  sed  dig
376

■  BOOK IV.  XXV

ground  to  stand  on  when  desires  were  abolished;
desires  were  abolished  when  all  choice  and  distinc-
tion was  done  away  with ;  distinction  was  impossible
when  all  things  were  made  absolutely  equal  and  in-
different ;  and  these  perplexities  resulted  in  your
paradoxes,  which  are  worse  than  those  of  Aristo.
His  were  at  all  events  frank  and  open,  whereas  yours
are  disingenuous.  Ask  Aristo  whether  he  deems
freedom  from  pain,  riches,  health  to  be  goods,  and
he  will  answer  No.  Well,  are  their  opposites  bad  ?
No,  likewise.  Ask  Zeno,  and  his  answer  would  be
identically  the  same.  In  our  surprise  we  should
inquire  of  each,  how  can  we  possibly  conduct  our
lives  if  we  think  it  makes  no  difference  to  us  whether
we  are  well  or  ill,  free  from  pain  or  in  torments  of
agony,  safe  against  cold  and  hunger  or  exposed  to
them.  O,  says  Aristo,  you  will  get  on  splendidly,
capitally;  you  will  do  exactly  what  seems  good  to
you ;  you  will  never  know  sorrow,  desire  or  fear.

rO  What  is  Zeno's  answer .''  This  doctrine  is  a  philo-
sophical monstrosity,  he  tells  us,  it  renders  life
entirely  impossible  ;  his  view  is  that  while  between
the  moral  and  the  base  a  vast,  enormous  gulf  is
fixed,  between  all  other  things  there  is  no  difference

J  ]  whatever.  So  far  this  is  the  same  as  Aristo ;  but
hear  what  follows,  and  restrain  your  laughter  if  you
can.  These  intermediate  things,  says  Zeno,  which
have  no  difference  between  them,  are  still  of  such  a
nature  that  some  of  them  are  to  be  selected  and
others  rejected,  while  others  again  are  to  be  entirely
ignored ;  that  is,  they  are  such  that  some  you  wish
to  have,  others  you  wish  not  to  have,  and  about  others
you  do  not  care. —  But  you  told  us  just  now  that
there  wa$  no  difference  among  them.' —  And  I  say
377

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  !■

quod  interesset.' — '  Et  nunc  idem  dico/  inqulet,

sed  ad  virtutes  et  ad  vitia  nihil  interesse.'
XXVI.  Quis  istud,  quaeso,  nesdebat?  Verum
audiamus.^  Istn,'  inquit,  'quae  dixistj,  valere,
locupleteni  esse,  non  dolere,  bona  non  dico  sed
dioam  Graece  jrpcniyiiiva.  La  till  e  autem  products
(sed  praepositi  aut  praecipua  malo;  sit^  tolerabilius
et  mollius) ;  ilia  autem,  morbum,  egestateni,  dolorem,
non  appello  mala  sed  si  libet  reiectanea.  Itaque
ilia  non  dico  me  expetere  sed  legere,  nee  optare
contraria  autem  non  fugere  sed  quasi
Quid  ait  Aristoteles  reliquique  Pla-
tonis  alumni  ?  Se  omnia  quae  secundum  naturam
sint  bona  appellare,  quae  autem  contra  mala.  Vi-
desne  igitur  Zenonem  tuum  cum  Aristone  verbis
consistere,^  re  dissidere;  cum  Aristotele  et  illis  re
consentire,  verbis  discrepare?  Cur  igitur  cum  de  re
conveniat  non  malumus  usitate  loqui?  Aut  doceat
paratioreni  me  ad  contemnendam  pecuniam  fore  si
illam  in  rebus  praepositis  quam  si  in  bonis  duxero,
fortioremque  in  patiendo  dolore  si  eum  asperum  et
difficilem  perpessu  et^  contra  naturam  esse  quam  si
73  malum  dinero.  Facete  M.  Piso  familinris  noster  et
alia  multa  et  hoc  loco*  Stoicos  irridebat.  'Quid
enim?'  aiebat;  bonum  negas  esse  divitias,  praeposi-
tum  esse  dicis;  quid  adiuvas?  avaritiamne  minuis?

'  sif  B.  Mdv.  i_fie  E ;  sic  other  MSS.

•consisteiv;  inf.  MS.  amseti/iiv  ;  Cobet,  MliUer  concinert.

'  perpessu  e/'mf.  MSS.,  t/ldv. ;  fierfiessi  B,  E;  perpessu  si

iorenz.  Miiller.

'loca  Mdv.  with  inf.  MSS.;  niodo  B,  E,  MuUer.

37B

■  BOOK IV. JtXV-KKvi

the  same  now,'  he  will  reply, but  I
ference  in  respect  of  virtue  and  vice.' •

72  XXVI.  "Who,  pray,  did  not  know  that?  How-
ever, let  us  hear  what  he  has  to  say. —  The  things
you  mentioned,'  he  continues,  health,  affluence,
freedom  from  pain,  I  do  not  call  goods,  but  I  wUl
call  them  in  Greek  praegmena,  that  is  in  your  lan-
guage "brought  forward"  (though  I  will  rather  use
preferred "  or  pre-eminent,"  as  these  sound
smoother  and  more  acceptable)  and  on  the  other
hand  disease,  poverty  and  pain  I  do  not  style  evils,
but,  if  you  please,  things  rejected."  Accordingly
I  do  not  speak  of  desiring"  but  selecting"  these
things,  not  of  "wishing"  but  "adopting"  them,  and
not  of  "avoiding"  their  opposites  but  so  to  speak
discarding"  them.'  What  say  Aristotle  and  the
other  pupils  of  Plato?  That  they  call  all  things  in
accordance  with  nature  good  and  all  things  contrary
to  nature  bad.  Do  you  see  therefore  tliat  between
your  master  Zeno  and  Aristo  there  is  a  verbal  har-
mony but  a  real  difference ;  whereas  between  him
and  Aristotle  and  the  rest  there  is  a  real  agreement
and  a  verbal  disagreement?  Why,  then,  as  we  are
agreed  as  to  the  fact,  do  we  not  prefer  to  employ
the  usual  terminology?  Or  else  let  him  prove  that
I  shall  be  readier  to  despise  money  if  I  believe  it  to
be  a  thing  preferred'  than  if  I  believe  it  to  be  a
good,  and  braver  to  endure  pain  if  I  say  it  is  irk-
some and  hard  to  bear  and  contrary  to  nature,  than

rS  if  I  call  it  an  evil.  Our  friend  Marcus  Piso  was
often  witty,  but  never  more  so  than  when  he  ridi-
culed the  Stoics  on  this  score.  What?'  he  said.
You  tell  us  wealth  is  not  good  but  you  say  it  is
preferred";  how  does  that  help  matters?  do  you
379

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Quomodo? Si  verbum sequimur,  primum  longius

verbum  praepositum  quam  bonum.' —  Nihil  ad  rem ! '
—  Ne  sit  sane;  at  certe  gravius.  Nam  bonum  ex
quo  appellatum  sit,  iiescio ;  praepositum  ex  eo  credo,
quod  praeponatur  aliis :  id  mihi  magnum  videtur.'
Itaque  dicebat  plus  tribui  divitiis  a  Zeiione  qui  eas
in  praepositis  poneret  quam  ab  Aristotele  qui  bonum

divitias  fateretur  sed  neque  magnum  bonum  et
prae  rectis  honestisque  conlemneiidum  ac  despici-
endum  nee  magna  opere  expetendum;  omninoque
de  istis  omnibus  verbis  a  Zenone  mutatis  ita  disputa-
bat,  et  quae  bona  negarentur  esse  ab  eo  et  quae
mala,  ilia  laetioribus  nominibus  appellari  ab  eo  quam
a  nobis,  haee  tristioribus.  Piso  igitur  hoc  raodo,  vir
optimus  tuique,  ut  scis,  amantissimus ;  nos  paucis  ad
haec  additis  liiiem  faciamus  aliquando;  longum  est
enim  ad  omnia  respondere  quae  a  te  dicta  sunt.

XXVII.  Nam  ex  eisdem  verborum  praestigiis  et
regna  nata  vobis  sunt  et  imperia  et  divitiae,  et  tantae
quidem  ut  omnia  quae  ubique  sint  sapientis  esse
dicatis.  Solum  praeterea  formosum,  solum  liberum,
solum  civem;  stultos'  omnia  contraria,  quos  etlam
insanos  esse  vultis.  Haec  TrnpoSo^a  illi,  nos  admira-
bilia dicamus. Quid autem habent admirationis

prope  accesseris?  Conferam  tecum  quam  cuique

380

d  by  Mdv.

^y^^^^e

BOOK  IV.  xxvi-xxvii
dimmish  avarice?  In  what  way?  If  it  is  a  question
of  words,  to  begin  with  *  preferred"  is  a  longer
word  than  good."  '—  That  is  no  matter.' —
'Granted,  by  all  means;  but  it  is  certainly  more
impressive.  For  1  do  not  know  the  derivation  of
'  good,"  whereas  preferred"  I  suppose  means
"placed  before"  other  things;  this  implies  to  my
mind  something  very  important.'  Accordingly  he
would  maintain  that  Zeno  gives  more  importance  to
wealth,  by  classing  it  as  preferred,'  than  did
Aristotle,  who  admitted  wealth  to  be  a  good,  yet
not  a  great  good,  but  one  to  be  thought  lightly  of
and  despised  in  comparison  with  uprightness  and
Moral  Worth,  and  not  to  be  greatly  desired;  and
on  Zeno's  innovations  in  terminology  generally  he
would  declare  that  the  names  he  actually  gave
to  the  things  which  he  denied  to  be  good  or  evit
were  pleasanter  and  gloomier  respectively  than  the
names  by  which  we  call  them.  So  said  Piso,  an
excellent  man  and,  as  yon  know,  a  devoted  friend
to  yourself.  For  my  part,  let  me  add  a  few  words
more  and  then  finally  conclude.  For  it  would  be  a
long  task  to  reply  to  all  your  arguments. .

XXVII.  The  same  verbal  legerdemain  supplies  Their  pmadoi
you  with  your  kingdoms  and  empires  and  riches,  iJi^S^'ind*
riches  so  vast  that  you  declare  that  everything  the
world  contains  is  the  property  of  the  Wise  Man,
He  alone,  too,  you  say,  is  beautiful,  he  alone  a  free
man  and  a  citizen :  while  the  foolish  are  the
opposite  of  all  these,  and  according  to  you  insane
into  the  bargain.  The  Stoics  call  these  paradoxa,
as  we  might  say  startling  truths.'  liut  what  is
there  so  startling  about  them  viewed  at  close
quarters?  I  will  consult  you  as  to  the  meaning  you
3SL

analoginwill

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

verbo  rem  siibicias ;  nulla  erit  controversia.  Omnia
peccata  paria  dicitis.  Non  ego  tecum  tam  ita  ioca-
bor  ut  iisdem  bis  de  rebus  cum  L.  Murenam  te
accusante  defenderem.  Apud  imperitos  turn  ilia
dicta sunt ; aliquid etiam coronae datum ; nunc

75  agendum  est  subtilius.  Peccata  paria. — Quonam
modo? — Quia  nee  honesto  quidquam  honestius  nee
turpi  turpius. — Perge  porro,  nam  de  isto  magna  dis-
sensio  est ;  ilia  argiimenta  propria  videamus  cur
omnia  sint  paria  peccata.^ — Ut,  inquit,  fidibus  plu-
ribus,  si  nulla  earum  ita  contenta  nervis  sit  ut  cun-
centum  servare  possit,  omnes  aeque  incontentae
sint,  sic  peccata,  quia  discrepant,  aeque  discrepant;
paria  sunt  igitur. — Hie  ambiguo  ludimur.  Aeque
enim  contingit  omnibus  Hdibus  ut  incontentae  sint;
illud  non  continuo  ut  aeque  incontentae.  CoHatio
igitur  ista  te  niliil  juvat;  nee  enim,  omnes  avaritias
si  aeque  avaritias  esse  diserimus,  sequetur  ut  etiam

76  aequas  esse  dicamus,  Ecce  aliud  simile  dissimile :
ut  enim,  inquit,  gubernator  aeque  peecat  si  palearum
navem  evertit  et  si  auri,  item  aeque  peecat  qui
parentem  et  qui  servum  iniuria  verberat. — Hoc  non
videre,  cuius  generis  onus  navis  vehat,  id  ad  guber-
natoris  artem  nihil  pertinere  I  itaque  aurum  pale-
amne  portet,  ad  bene  aut  ad  male  gubernanduni
nihil  interesse ;  at  quid  inter  parentem  et  servulom

'sint  paria  peccata  B,  E,  Mdv.;  peccata  sint  paria  inf.

"  See  the  i
60-66.

SS2

arkabic  passag'e  in  Cic<

s  Pro  Murena,

■  BOOK  IV.  .\xvii

attach  to  each  term;  there  shall  be  no  dispute.
You  Stoics  say  that  all  transgressions  are  equal.  I
won't  jest  with  you  now,  as  I  did  on  the  same  sub-
jects when  you  were  prosecuting  and  I  defending
Lucius  Murena.''  On  that  occasion  I  was  addressing
a  jury,  not  an  audience  of  scholars,  and  I  even  had
to  play  to  the  gallery  a  little ;  but  now  I  must  reason

'5  more  closely.  Transgressions  are  equal. — How  so,
pray? — Because  nothing  can  be  better  tiian  good  or
baser  than  base. — Explain  further,  for  there  is  much
disagreement  on  this  point;  let  us  have  your  special
arguments  to  prove  how  all  transgressions  are  equal,
— Suppose,  says  my  opponent,  of  a  number  of  lyres
not  one  is  so  strung  as  to  be  in  tune ;  then  all  are
equally  out  of  tune;  similarly  with  transgressions,
since  all  are  departures  from  rule,  all  are  equally
departures  from  rule ;  therefore  all  are  equal, ^ — -
Here  we  are  put  off  with  an  equivocation.  Ail  the
lyres  equally  are  out  of  tune;  but  it  does  not  follow
that  all  are  equally  out  of  tune.  So  your  com-
parison does  not  help  you ;  for  it  does  not  follow
that  because  we  pronounce  every  case  of  avarice
equally  to  be  avarice,  we  must  therefore  pronounce

J6  them  all  to  be  equal.  Here  is  another  of  these
false  analogies :  A  skipper,  says  my  adversary,  com-
mits an  equal  transgression  if  he  loses  his  ship  with
a  cargo  of  straw  and  if  he  does  so  when  laden  with
gold;  similarly  a.  man  is  an  equal  transgressor  if  he
beats  his  parent  or  his  slave  without  due  cause. —
Fancy  not  seeing  that  the  nature  of  the  cargo  has
nothing  to  do  with  the  skill  of  the  navigator !  so
that  whether  he  carries  gold  or  straw  makes  no  dif-
ference as  regards  good  or  bad  seamanship ;  whereas
the  distinction  between  a  parent  and  a  mere  slave
S83

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
intersit  inteltegi  et  potest  et  debet.  Ergo  in  guber-
nando  nihil,  in  officio  plurimum  interest  quo  in  genere
peccetur.  Et  si  in  ipsa  gubematione  neglegentia  est
navis  eversa,  maius  est  peccatum  in  auro  quam  in
palea.  Ooinibus  enim  artibus  volumus  attributam
esse  earn  quae  communis  appellatur  prudentia,
quam  oranes  qui  cuique^  artificio  praesunt  debent
habere. Ita  ne  hoc  quidem  modo  paria^  peccata

I  XXVIIl.  Urguent  tamen  et  nihil  remittunt,
Quoniam,  inquiunt,  omne  peccatum  imbecilhtatis  et
inconstantiae  est,  haec  autem  vitia  in  oninibus  stultis
aeque  magna  sunt,  necesse  est  paria  esse  peccata.
Quasi  vero  aut  concedatur  in  omnibus  stultis  aeque
magna  esse  vitia  eteademimbecillitateetineonstantia
L.  Tubulum  fuisse  qua  ilium  cuius  is  condemnatus
est  rogatione  P.  Scaevolam  ;  et  quasi  nihil  inter  res
quoque  ipsas  in  quibus  peccatur  intersit,  ut,  quo
liae  maiores  minoresve  sint,  eo  quae  peccentur  in

i  his  rebus  aut  maiora  sint  aut  minora!  Itaque  (iam
enim  concludatur  oratio)  hoc  uno  vitio  maxima  mihi
premi  videntur  tui  Stoici,  quod  se  posse  putant  duas
contrarias  sententias  obtinere.  Quid  enim  est  tam
repugnans  quam  eundem  dicere  quod  honestum  sit
solum  id  bonum  esse,  qui  dicat  appetitionem  rerum
ad  vivendum  accommodatarum  a  natura  profectam?
Ita  cum  ea  volunt  retinere  quae  supcriori  sententiae

'qiiicuigue  MSS.,  Mailer;  cuicumgue  Mdv.
'ne  hoc  quidem  modo  paria  Lambinus. Muller) ne  hoc
modo  paria  quidem  MSS,,  Mdv.
384

BOOK  IV.  xxvii-xsviii

is  one  that  cannot  and  ought  not  to  be  overlooked.
Hence  the  nature  of  the  object  upon  whicli  tlie
offence  is  committed,  which  in  navigation  makes  no
difference,  in  conduct  makes  all  the  difference.
Indeed  in  the  case  of  navigation  too,  if  the  loss  of
the  ship  is  due  to  negligence,  the  offence  is  greater
with  a  cargo  of  gold  than  with  one  of  straw.  For
the  virtue  known  generally  as  prudence  is  an  attri-
bute as  we  hold  of  all  the  arts,  and  every  master
craftsman  in  any  branch  of  art  ouglit  to  possess  it.
Hence  this  proof  also  of  tlie  equality  of  transgres-
sion breaks  down.

7  XXVIII.  "However,  they  press  the  matter,  and  a»,
will  not  give  way.  Every  transgression,  they  argue,  note
isaproof  of  weakness  and  instability  of  character;  but

all  the  foolish  possess  these  vices  in  an  equal  manner ;
therefore  all  transgressions  must  be  equal.  As  though
it  were  admitted  that  all  foolish  people  possess  an
equal  degree  of  vice,  and  that  Lucius  Tubulus  was
exactly  as  weak  and  unstable  as  Publius  Scaevola  who
broughtin  the  bill  forhiscondemnation;  and  as  though
there  were  no  difference  also  between  the  respective
circumstances  in  which  the  transgressions  are  com-
mitted, so  that  the  magnitude  of  the  transgression
varies  in  proportion  to  the  importance  of  the  cir-

8  cumstances! And therefore {since my discourse  stale;
must  now  conclude)  this  is  the  one  chief  defect  *)„"
under  which  your  friends  the  Stoics  seem  to  me  to  "'■i'
labour, — they  think  they  can  maintain  two  contrary
opinions  at  once. How  can  you  have  a  greater
inconsistency  than  for  the  same  person  to  say  both
that  Moral  Worth  is  the  sole  good  and  that  we  have

a  natural  instinct  to  seek  the  things  conducive  to

life? Thus  in  their  desire  to  retain  ideas  consonant

CC  385

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
conveniunt,  in  Aristonem  incidunt;  cum  id  fugiunt,
re  eadem  defendunt  quae  Pcripatetici,  verba  tenenl
mordicus.  Quae  rursus  dum  sibi  evelli  es  ordine'
nolunt, liorridiores  evadunt,  asperiores,  duriores  ct

79  oratione  et  moribus.  Quam  illorum  tristitiam  atque
asperitatem  fiigiens  Panaetius  nee  acerbitatein
sententiarum  nee  disserendi  spinas  probavit,  fuitque
in  altero  genere  mitior,  in  altero  illustrior,  semperquc
habuit  in  ore  Platonem,  Aristotelem,  Xenocratem,
Theophrastum,  Dicaearchum,  ut  ipsius  scripta  de-
clarant. Quos  quidem  tibi  studiose  et  diligenter

80  tractandos  luagno  opere  censeo.  Sed  quoniam  et
advesperascit  et  inilii  ad  villain  reverteiidum  est,
nunc  quidem  hactenus;  verum  hoc  idem  faciamus
saepe."  Nos  vero,"  inquit  ille;  nam  quid  pos-
sumus  facere  melius  ?  Et  banc  quidem  primam
exigani  a  tc  operam,  ut  audias  me  quae  a  te  dicta  sunt
refellentem.  Sed  memento  te  quae  nos  sentiamua
omnia  probare,  nisi  quod  verbis  «liter  utamur,  mihi
autem  vestrorum  nihil  probari."  Scrupulum,  in-
quam,  abeunti;  sed  videbimus."  Quae  ciun  essent
dicta,  discessimus.

'  ordins  MSS.,  Mdv.  (explaining  '  en  ordine  disciplinae ');
'nolunt  inf.'  MSS.;  iw/nni  B,  E.

M^  BOOK  IV.  xxviii

with  the  former  doctrine  they  are  landed  in  the
position  of  Aristo ;  and  when  they  try  to  escape  from
this  they  adopt  what  is  in  reality  the  position  of  the
Peripatetics,  though  still  clinging  tooth  and  nail  to
their  own  terminology.  Unwilling  again  to  take
the  next  step  and  weed  out  this  terminology,  tliey
end  by  being  rougher  and  more  uncouth  than  e
full  of  asperities  of  style and even

'9  Panaetius  strove  hard  to  avoid  this  uncouth  and  re-
pellant  development  of  Stoicism,  censuring-  alike  the
harsliness  of  its  doctrines  and  the  crabbedness  of
its  logic.  In  doctrine  he  was  mellower,  and  in
style  more  lucid.  Plato,  Aristotle,  Xenoc rates,
Theophrastus  and  Dicearchus  were  constantly  on
his  lips,  as  his  writings  show ;  and  these  authors  I
strongly  advise  you  to  take  up  for  your  most  careful

JO  study.  But  evening  is  closing-  in,  and  I  must  be
getting  home.  So  enough  for  the  present ;  but  I  hope
we  may  often  renew  this  conversation."  Indeed
we  will,"  he  replied;  what  better  occupation  could
we  have?  and  the  first  favour  1  shall  ask  of  you  is
to  listen  to  my  refutation  of  what  you  have  said.
But  bear  in  memory  that  whereas  you  really  accept
all  of  our  opinions  save  for  the  difference  of  termin-
ology, I  on  the  contrary  do  not  accept  any  of  the
tenets  of  your  school."  A  parting  shot  indeed!"
said  I;  ''but  we  shall  see."  And  with  these  words
I  took  my  leave.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
BOOK  V

M.  TULLI  CICERONIS

PINIBUS  BONORUM  ET  MALORUM
LIBER  QUINTUS

I.  Cum  audissem  Antiochum,  Brute,  ut  soleliam/
cum  M.  Pisone  in  eo  gymnasio  quod  Ptolenjaeum
vocatur.  unaque  nobiscum  Q.  frater  et  T.  Pomponius
Luciusque  Cicero,  frater  iioster  cognatione  patruelis,
amore  g-ermanus,  constituimus  inter  nos  ut  arabula-
tionem  postnieridianam  conficeremus  in  Acadeniia,
maxime  quod  is  locus  ab  omni  turba  id  temporis
vacuus  esset.  Itaque  ad  tempus  ad  Pisonem  omnes.
Inde  vario  semione  sex  ilia  a  Dipjlo  stadia  confeci-
mus.  Cum  autem  venissemus  in  Academiae  non  sine
causa  nobilitata  spatia,  solitudo  erat  ea  quam  volue-
i  ramus.  Turn  Piso:  Naturane  nobis  hoc,"  inquit,
datum  dicam  an  errore  quodam,  ut,  cum  ea  loca
vidcamus  in  quibus  memoria  dignos  viros  acceperi-
mus  multum  esse  versatos,  magis  moveamur  qiiam  si
quando  eorum  ipsoruni  aut  facta  audiamus  aut  scri-
ptum  aliquod  legamus?  Velut  ego  nunc  moveor.
Venit  enini  mihi  Platonis  in  mentem,  quem  accepi-
mus  prinium  hie  disputare  solitum;  cuius  etiam  illi
pi'opinqui  hortuli  iion  memoriam  solum  mihi  afFerunt
sed  ipsum  videntur  in  conspectu  meo  ponere.  Hie
Speusippua,  hie  Xenocrates,  hie  eius  auditor  Poleinoj_

■  soUbnm  Mdv. ;  solebat  MSS,

1  I.  Mv  Deah  Bhiitus, — Once  I  had  been  «ttending  Bi
a lecture of  Antiochus, as I was  in the  habit of  ^
doing,  with  Marcus  Piao,  in  the  building  called  the  ■:
School  of  Ptolemy  ;  and with  us  were  my  brother  Sc
Quintus,  Titus  Pomponius,  and  Lucius  Cicero,  whom  "■
I  loved  as  a  brother  but  who  was  really  my  first  cousin.
We  arranged  to  take  our  afternoon  stroll  in  the
Academy,  chiefly  because  the  place  would  be  quiet
and  deserted  at  that  hour  of  the  day. Accordingly
at  the  time  appointed  we  met  at  our  rendeevous,
Piso's  lodgings,  and  starting  out  conversed  on  various
subjects  while  we  covered  the  three-quarters  of  a
mile  from  the  Dipylon  Gate. When  we  reached  the
walks  of  the  Academy,  which  are  so  deservedly  fa-
mous, we  had  them  entirely  to  ourselves,  as  we  had

2  hoped. Thereupon  Piso  remarked  ; Whether  it  is  pi
a  natural  instinct  or  a  mere  illusion,  I  can't  say;  but  ^
one's  emotions  are  more  strongly  aroused  by  seeing  *'
the  places  that  tradition  records  to  have  been  the
favourite  resort  of  men  of  note  in  former  days,  than
by  hearing  about  their  deeds  or  reading  their  writings.
My  own  feelings  at  the  present  moment  are  a  case
in  point. I  am  reminded  of  Plato,  the  first  philoso-
pher, so  we  are  told,  that  raade  a  practice  of  holding
discussions  in  this  place ; and  indeed  his  garden

,  close  at  hand  yonder  not  only  recalls  his  memory  but
seems  to  bring  the  actual  man  before  my  eyes.  This
was  the  haunt  of  Speusippus,  of  Xenoerates,  and  of

Ces'  pupil  Polemo,  who  used  to  sit  on  the

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

ipsa  sessio  fuit  quam  videmus.
etiam  curiam  nostram  (Hostiliatn  dico,  non  hanc  n
vam,  quae  minor  nijlii  esse  videtur  posteaquam  est
maior)  solebaiu  inttiens  Scipioneni]  Catoneni,  Lae-
lium,  nostrum  vero  in  primis  avum  cagiXate;  tanta
vis  admonitionis  inest  in  locis;  ut  non  sine  causa  ex
lis  memoriae  ducta  sit  disciplina."
1  Turn  Quintus :  Est  plane,  Piso,  ut  dicis,"  inquit.
Nam  me  ipsum  hue  modo  venientem  convertebat
ad  sese  Coloneus  ille  locus,  cuius  incola  Sophocles
ob  oculos  versabatur,  quem  scisquam  admirer  quam-
que  eo  delecter.  Me  quidem  ad  altiorem  memoriam
Oedipodis  hue  venientis  et  illo  mollissimo  carmine
quaenam  essent  baec  ipsa  loca  requirentis  species
quaedam  commovit,  inanlter  scilicet,  sed  commovit

Turn  Pcmponius :  At  ego,  quem  vos  ut  deditutn
Epicitro  insectari  soletis,  sum  multum  equidem  cum
Phaedro,  quem  unice  diligo,  ut  scitis,  in  Epicuri
hortis,  quos  modo  praeteribamus,  sed  veteris  pro-
verbi  admonitu  vivonim  memini';  nee  tamen  Epi-
curi licet  oblivisci,  si  cupiam,  cuius  ima^nem  non
modo  in  tabuHs  nostri  familiares  sed  etiam  in  poculis
et  in  anulis  habent."

'  The  senate-house,  ascribed  by  tradition  la  King-  Tullus
Hostilius,  was  enlar^d  by  Sulla  a  year  or  two  before  the
date  of  the  dialogue.

I"  Presumably L. Piso Frugi, the 'Man of  Worth,'

^Greek  Mnemonics  or  menioria  technica,  said  to  have
been  invented  by  the  poet  Simonides,  cp.  11,  104,  seems  to
have  been  based  on  viiiual  memory ;  it  arranged  the  subjects
to  be  remembered  in  riiiroi,  loci.  The  art  was  associated
with  Inventio  as  a  branch  of  Rhetoric,  cp,  IV,  10.
892

,l,.™,y*^OOgK

BOOK  V.  i

very  seat  we  see  over  there.  For  my  own  part
even  the  sight  of  our  senate-house  at  home  (I  mean
the  Curia  HostiUa,  not  the  present  new  building,
which  seems  to  me  to  be  smaller  since  its  enlarge-
ment)" used  to  call  up  to  me  thoughts  of  Scipio,
Cato,  Laelius,  and  chief  of  all,  my  grandfather;^  such
powers  of  suggestion  do  places  possess.  No  won-
der the  scientific  training  of  the  memory  is  based
upon  locality."*^
!  Perfectly  true,  Piso,"  rejoined  Quintus. I  my-

self on  the  way  here  just  now  noticed  yonder  village
of  ColonuB,  and  it  brought  to  niy  imagination  Sopho-
cles who  resided  there,  and  who  is  as  you  know  my
great  admiration  and  delight.  Indeed  my  memory
took  me  further  back ;  for  I  had  a  vision  of  Oedipus,
advancing  towards  this  very  spot  and  asking  in  those
most  tender  verses,^  '  What  place  is  this  ?  '—a  mere
fancy  no  doubt,  yet  still  it  affected  me  strongly."

For  my  part,"  said  Pomponius,  you  are  fond  of
attacking  me  as  a  follower  of  Epicurus,  and  I  do
spend  much  of  my  time  with  Phaedrus,  who  as  you
know  is  my  dearest  friend,  in  Epicurus's  Gardens'
which  we  passed  just  now  ;  but  I  obey  the  old  saw;  *
I  think  of  those  that  are  alive.'  Still  Z  could  not
forget  Epicurus,  even  if  I  wanted  ;  the  members  of
our  body  not  only  have  pictures  of  him,  but  even
have  his  likeness  on  their  drinking-cups  and  rings."

•I  Sophocles  Oedifrus  Coloneiis,  i  f. :

TiKKm  Tvi\ou  T^pouToi,  ' hrrcyirri,  rimt
XiiipBut  i^tif/tiB'  ij  Tivuii'  dfSpiiv  rika  ;

"  Bequeatbed  by  Epicurus  as  a  sort  of  college  to  his  sue-

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
'  II.  Hie  ego:  Pomponius  quidem,"  inquam,
noster  iocari  videtur,  et  fortasse  suo  iure;  ita  enim
se  Athenis  collocavit  ut  sit  paene  unus  ex  AtticiSj  ut
id  etiam  cognomen  videatur  habitunis ;  ego  autem
tibi,  Piso,  assentior,  usu  hoc  venire  ut  acrius  ali-
quauto  et  attentius  de  clans  viris  locorum  admonitu
cogitemus.  Scis  enim  me  quodam  tempore  Meta-
pontum  venisse  tecum  neque  ad  hospitem  ante
devertisse  quam  Pythagorae  ipsum  ilium  locum  ubi
vitam  ediderat  sedemqut  viderim.  Hoc  autem  tem-
pore, etsi  multa  in  omni  parte  Athenaruni  sunt  in
ipsis  locis  indicia  summorum  virorum,  tamen  ego  ilia
moveor  exhedra  ;  modo  enim  fuit  Cameadis  ;  quem
videre  videor  (est  enim  nota  imago),  a  sedeque  ipsa
tanta  Ingeni  magnitudine  orbata  desiderari  illam.  vo-

i  Turn  Piso  :  Quoniam  isitur  aliquid  omnes,  quid
Lucius  noster?"  inquit;  an  eum  locum  libenter
invisit  ubi  Demosthenes  et  Aeschines  inter  se  de-
certare  solitisunt?  Suo  enim  quisque  studio  maxime
ducitur."

Et  ille,  cum  erubuisset.  Noli,"  inquit,  ex  me
quaerere,  qui  in  Phalericum  etium  descenderim,  quo
in  loco  ad  fluctum  aiunt  declamare  solitum  Demo-
sthenem  ut  fremitum  assuesceret  voce  vincere.  Modo
etiam  paulum  ad  dexteram  de  via  declinavi  ut  ad
Pericli  sepulcrum  accederem. Quaniquam  id  qui-

'  guisque  Mdv.  with  inf.  MSS.  j  unus  quisgu.

B,  E.

bCarneades  died  129  B.C.,  fifty  years  before  the  supposed
date  of  this  dialogue.
394

^f^^^^e

BOOK  V.  ii

■  II.  Asforourfriend  Pomponius,"  I  interposed,  I
believe  he  is  joking  ;  and  no  doubt  he  is  a  licensed
wilj  for  he  has  bo  taken  root  in  Athens  that  he  is
almost  an  Athenian  ;  in  fact  I  expect  he  will  get
the  surname  of  Atticus!^  But  I,  Piso,  agree  with
you ;  it  is  a  common  experience  that  places  do
strongly  stimulate  the  imag'ination  and  vivify  our
ideas  of  famous  men.  You  remember  how  I  once
came  with  you  to  Metapontum,  and  would  not  go  to
the  house  where  we  were  to  stay  until  1  had  seen  the
abode  of  Pythagoras  and  the  very  place  where  he
breathed  his  last.  All  over  Athens,  I  know,  there
are  many  reminders  of  eminent  men  in  the  actual
places  where  they  lived;  but  at  the  present  moment
it  is  that  hall  over  there  which  appeals  to  me ;  for
not  long  ago  it  belonged  to  Cameades.  I  fancy  I
see  him  now  (for  his  portrait  is  well  known),  and  I
can  imagine  that  the  very  place  where  he  used  to  sit
misses  the  sound  of  his  voice,  and  mourns  the  loss  of
that  mighty  intellect."

j  "Well,  then,"  said  Piso,  "as  we  all  have  some
association  that  appeals  to  us,  what  is  it  that  interests
our  young  friend  Lucius?  Does  he  enjoy  visiting  the
spot  where  Demosthenes  and  Aeschines  used  to  light
their  battles  ?  For  we  are  all  mainly  influenced  by
our  own  particular  study."

Praydon't  ask  me,"  answered  Lucius  with  a  blush ;
"  1  have  actually  made  a  pilgrimage  down  to  the  Bay
of  Phalenim,  where  they  say  Demosthenes  used  to
practise  declaiming  on  the  beach,  to  learn  to  pitch
his  voice  so  as  to  overcome  an  uproar.  Also  only  just
now  I  turned  off  the  road  a  little  way  on  the  right,
to  visit  the  tomb  of  Pericles.  Though  in  fact  there
395

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
dem  infinitum  est  in  liac  urbe ; quacumque
ingredimur,  in  aliqua  historia  vestigium  ponimus."

)  Turn  Piso  :  Atqui,  Cicero,  inquit,  ista  studia  si  ad
imitandos  summos  viros  spectant,  ingeniosorum  sunt,
sin  tantummodo  ad  indicia  veteris  memoriae  cogno-
scenda,  curiosorum ;  te  autem  hortamur  onines,
currentem  quidem  ut  spero,  ut  eos  quos  novisse
vis  imitari  etiam  velis."  Hie  ego:  Etsi  facit  hie
quidem,"  inquam,  Piso,  ut  vides,  ea  quae  praecipis,
tamen  mihi  grata  hortatio  tua  est."  Turn  ille  aml-
cissime,  ut  solebat :  "  Nos  vero,"  inquit,  "omnes
omnia  ad  liuius  adulescentiam  conferamus,  in  primis-
que  ut  aliquid  suorum  studiorom  philosophise  quoque
impertiat,  vel  ut  te  imitctur  quem  amat,  vel  ut  illud
ipsum  quod  studet  facere  possit  ornatius.  Sed  utrum
hortandus  es  nobis,  Luci,"  inquit,  an  etiam  tua
sponte  propensus  es  ?  Mihi  quidem  Antiochum,
quem  audis,  satis  belle  videris  attendere."  Turn
iile  timide  vel  potius  verecunde  :  Facio,"  inquit,
eguidem  ;  sed  audistine  modo  de  Carneade  ?  Kapior
illuc ;  revocat  autem  Antiochus ;  nee  est  praeterea,
quem  audiamus."

J  III.  Turn  Piso :  Etsi  hoe,"  inquit,  fortasse  non
poterit  sic  abire  cum  hie  adsit"  (me  autem  dicebat),
tamen  audeim  te  ah  hac  Academia  nova  ad  illam
veterem  vocare,  in  qua,  ut  dicere  Aiitiochum  audiebas,
non  it  suli  numerantur  qui  Academic i  vocantur,
Speusippus,  Xenocrates,  Polemo,  Grantor  ceterique,
sed  etiam  Peripatetic!  veteres,  quorum  prince ps
Aristoteles,  quem  excepto  Platone  baud  scio  an  recte
396.

r  BOOK  V.  ii-iii

is  no  end  to  it  in  this  city;  wherever  you  go  you
tread  historic  ground."

!  "Well,  Cicero,"  said  Piso,  "these  enthusiasms
befit  a  young  man  of  parts,  if  they  lead  him  to  copy
the  example  of  the  great.  If  they  only  stimulate
antiquarian  curiosity,  they  are  mere  dilettantism.
But  we  all  of  us  exhort  you — and  I  hope  it  is  a  case
of  spurring  a  willing  steed- — to  resolve  to  imitate
your  heroes  as  well  as  to  know  about  them."  He
is  practising  your  precepts  already,  Piso,"  said  I,
as  you  are  aware;  but  all  the  same  thank  you  for
encouraging  him."  Well,"  said  Piso,  with  his  usual
amiability,  let  us  all  join  forces  to  promote  the  lad's
improvement;  and  especially  let  us  try  to  make  him
spare  some  of  his  interest  for  philosophy,  either  so  as
to  follow  the  example  of  yourself  for  whom  he  has
such  an  aifection,  or  in  order  to  be  better  equipped  for
the  verj'  study  to  which  he  is  devoted.  But,  Lucius,"
he  asked,  do  you  need  our  urging,  or  have  you  a  na-
tural leaning  of  your  own  towards  philosophy?  You  are
keeping  Antiochus's  lectures,  and  seem  tn  me  to  be  a
pretty  attentive  listener."  I  tryto  be,"  replied  Lucius
with  a  timid  or  rather  a  modest  air  ;  but  have  you
heard  any  lectures  on  Carneades  lately?  He  attracts
me  immensely ;  but  Antiochus  calls  me  in  the  other
direction  ;  and  there  is  no  other  lecturer  to  go  to."

' III. Perhaps,"  said  Piso, it  will  not  be  alto- PiuRcoin'
gether  easy,  while  our  friend  here"  (meaning  me)  A^dcmy!' i.e.
is  by,  still  I  will  venture  to  urge  you  to  leave  the  iteii™  ad-
present  New  Academy  for  the  Old,  which  includes,  Antiochisas
as  you  heard  Antiochus  declare,  not  only  those  who  J^^Aademi^
bear  the  name  of  Academics,  Speusippus,  Xenocrates,  ™^  PMipsteiiu
Polemo,  Grantor  and  the  rest,  but  also  the  early
Peripatetics,  headed  by  their  chief,  Aristotle,  who,

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
dixerim  principera  philosophorum.  Ad  eos  igitur
converte  te.  quaeso.  Ex  eorum  enim  scriptis  et
institutis  cum  orants  doctrina  liberalis,  omnis  historia,
omnis  sernio  elegans  sumi  potest,  turn  varietas  est
tanta  artiura  ut  nemo  sine  eo  instrumento  ad  ullam
rem  illustriorem  satis  ornatus  possit  accedere.  Ab
his  oratores,  ab  his  imperatores  ac  rerum  publicarum
principes  exstiterimt.  Ut  ad  minora  veniam,  mathe-
matiei,  poetae,  musici,  medici  denique  ex  hac  tam-
quam  omnium  artificum  olficina  profectt  sunt."
i  Atque  ego :  Scis  me,"  inquam,  istud  idem  sentirej
Piso,  sed  a  te  opportune  facta  mentio  est ;  studet
enim  mens  audire  Cicero  quaenam  sit  istius  veteris
quam  commemoras  Academiae  de  fiiiibus  bononiin
Peripateticorumque  sententia.  Censemus  autem
facillime  te  id  explanare  posse,  quod  et  Staseam
Neapolitanum  multos  annos  habueris  apud  te  et
coinplures  iam  menses  Athenis  baec  ipsa  te  ex
Antiocho  videamus  exquirere."  Et  ille  ridens:
"Age,  age,"  iiiquit,  "(satis  enim  seite  me  nostri
semionis  principium  esse  voluisti),  exponamus  adu-
lescenti  si  quae  forte  possumus.  Dat  enim  id  nobis
solitudo,  quod  si  qui  deus  diceret,  numquam  putarem,
me  in  Academia  tamquam  philosophum  disputaturum.
Sed  ne,  dum  huic  obsequor,  vobis  molestus  sim."
Mihi,"  inquam,  qui  te  id  ipsum  rogavi?"  Turn,
Quintus  et  Pomponius  cum  idem  se  velle  dixissent,
Piso  exorsus  est ;  cuius  oratio  attende  quaeso,  Brute

'Briijicum  B,  E,  MGller ;  Br/.«m  with  inf.  MSS.  Mdv.,

'  BOOK  V.  iii

if  Plato  be  excepted,  I  almost  think  deserves  to  be
called  the  prince  of  philosophers.  Do  you  then
join  them,  1  beg  of  you.  From  their  writing's  and
teachings  can  be  learnt  the  whole  of  liberal  culture,
of  history  and  of  style;  moreover  they  include  such
a  variety  of  sciences,  that  without  the  equipment
that  they  give  no  one  can  be  adequately  prepared
to  embark  on  any  of  the  higher  careers.  They  have
produced  orators,  generals  and  statesmen.  To  come
to  the  less  distinguished  professions,  this  factory  of
experts  in  all  the  sciences  has  turned  out  mathema-

i  ticians,  poets,  musicians  and  physicians."  '  You  know
that  I  agree  with  you  about  that,  Piso,"  I  replied;
but  you  have  raised  the  point  most  opportunely ;
for  my  cousin  Cicero  is  eager  to  bear  the  doctrine
of  the  Old  Academy  of  which  you  speak,  and  of  tlie
Peripatetics,  on  the  subject  of  the  Ends  of  Goods.
We  feel  sure  you  can  expound  it  with  the  greatest
ease,  for  you  have  had  Staseas  from  Naples  in  your
household  for  many  years,  and  also  we  know  you
have  been  studying  this  very  subject  under  Anti-
ochus  for  several  months  at  Athens."  '  Here  goes,
then,"  replied  Piso,  smihng,  ''(for  you  have  craftily
arranged  so  that  our  discussion  shall  start  with  me),
let  me  see  what  I  can  do  to  give  the  lad  a  lecture.  If
an  oracle.had  foretold  that  I  should  find  myself  dis-
coursing in  the  Academy  like  a  philosopher,  I  should
not  have  believed  it,  but  here  1  am,  thanks  to  the
place  being  so  deserted.  Only  don't  let  me  bore  the
rest  of  you  while  I  am  obliging  our  young  friend."
What,  bore  me?"  said  I.  Why,  it  is  I  who  asked
you  to  speak."  Thereupon  Quintus  and  Pomponius
having  declared  that  they  wished  it  too,  Piso  began.
And I will  ask  you, Brutus, kindly to consider

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
satisne  videatur  Antiochi  complexa  esse  sententiam,
quam  tibi  qui  fratrem  eius  Aristum  frequenter  audi-
eris  maxime  probatam  existimo.
)  IV.  Sic  est  igitur  locutus.  Quantus  omatus  in
Peripateticorum  disciplina  sit,  satis  est  a  me,  ut
brevissime  potuit,  paulo  ante  dictum.  Sed  eat  forma
eius  disciplinae,  sicut  fere  ceterarum,  triplex;  una
pars  est  naturae,  disserendi  altera,  vivendi  tertia.
Natura  sic  ab  iis  investigata  est  ut  nulla  pars  caelo,
mari, terra (ut poetice loquar) praetermissa sit.

Quin  etiam,  cum
locuti  essent,  ut  i
tatione  sed  etiam
con  elude  rent.

de  re
3ultai

initiis  omnique mundo

modo  probabili  nrgumen-

mathematicorum  ratione

materiam  ex  rebus  per  se

ultarum  cognitionem  attu-

10  lerunt.  Persecutus  est  Aristoteles  animantium  om-
nium ortus,  V ictus,  figuras,  Theoplirastus  autem
stirpiuin  naturas  omniumque  fere  rerum  quae  e  terra
gignerentur  causas  atque  rationes ;  qua  ex  cognitione
facilior  facta  est  investigatio  rerum  occultissimarum.
Disserendi  que  ab  iisdem  non  dialectice  solum  sed
etiam  oratorie  praecepta  sunt  tradita;  ab'Aristote-
leque  principe  de  singulis  rebus  in  utramque  partem
dicendi  exercitatio  est  instituta,  ut  non  contra  omnia
semper,  sicut  Arcesilaa,  diceret,  et  tamen  ut  in  om-
nibus rebus  quidquid  ex  utraque  parte  dici  posset

1 1  expromeret.  Cum  autem  tertia  pars  bene  vivendi
praecepta  quaereret,  ea  quoque  est  ab  iisdeni  non

400

H^  BOOK  V.  iii-iv

whether  you  think  his  discourse  a  satisfactory  s
mary  of  the  doctrine  of  Antiochus,  which  I  behe
be  the  system  which  you  most  approve,  as  you  ha*
often  attended  the  lectures  of  his  brother  Aristus.
9 IV.  Accordingly  Piso  sjioke  as  follows: About  2.  PieiiminKy
the  educational  value  of  the  Peripatetic  system  I  S^^te^Syi-
liave  said  enough,  in  the  briefest  possible  way,  a  few  /f^H*!,^*''
moments  ago. Its  arrangement,  like  that  of  most  PbikiBp^;
other  systemSj  is  threefold : one  part  deals  with  Rhetoric;  Eihio
nature,  tlie  second  with  discourse,  and  the  third  "™i  PoUtics.
with  conduct. Natural  Philosophy  the  Peripatetics
have  investigated  so  thoroughly  that  no  region  in
sky  or  sea  or  land  (to  speak  poetically)  has  been
passed  over. Nay  more,  in  treating  of  the  origin  of
creation  and  the  constitution  of  the  universe  they
have  established  much  of  their  doctrine  not  merely
by  probable  arguments  but  by  conclusive  mathe-
matical demonstration,  applyingaquantity  of  material
derived from  facts  that  they  have  themselves  in-
vestigated to  the  discovery  of  other  facts  beyond  the

10  reach  of  observation.  Aristotle  gave  a  complete
account  of  the  birth,  nutrition  and  structure  of  all
living  creatures,  Theophrastus  of  the  natural  history
of  plants  and  the  causes  and  constitution  of  vege-
table organisms  in  general ;  and  the  knowledge  thus
attained  facilitated  the  investigation  of  the  most
obscure  questions.  In  Logic  their  teachings  include
the  rules  of  rhetoric  as  well  as  of  dialectic;  and  Aris-
totle their  founder  set  on  foot  the  practice  of  argu-
ing pro  and  contra  upon  every  topic,  not  hke
Areesilas,  always  controverting  every  proposition,
but  setting  out  all  the  possible  arguments  on  either

1 1  side  in  every  subject.  The  third  division  of  philo-
sophy investigates  the  rules  of  human  well-being;

DD  401

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
solum  ad  privatae  vitae  rationem,  sed  etiam  ad  rerum
pubHcamm  rectionem  relata.  Onaniuin  fere  civita-
turn  non  Graeciae  solum,  sed  etiam  barbariae  ab
Aristotele  mores,  instituta,  disciplinas,  a  Theophrasto
leges  etiam  cognovimus.  Cumque  uterque  eomm
docuisset  qualem  in  re  publica  principem  esse  ^  con-
veniret,  pjuribus  praeterea  conscripsisset  qui  essel
optimus  rei  piiblicae  status,  hoc  amplius  Theophra-
stus,  quae  essent  in  re  publiea  rerum  inelinationes  et
momenta  temporam  quibus  esset  moderandiim  ut-
cumque  res  postularet.  Vitae  autem  degendae  ratio
maxime  illis  quidem  placuit  qiiieta,  in  contempla-
tione  et  cogiiitione  posita  rerum,  quae  quia  deorum
vitae  erat  simillima,  sapiente  visa  est  dignissima.
Atque  his  de  rebus  et  splendida  est  eoruni  et  illustris
oratio.
i  V,  De  summo  autem  bono  quia  duo  genera  libro-
rum  sunt,  unum  populariter  scriptum  quod  e^iurepiKor
appellabant,  alterum  limatius  quod  in  comnientsriis
reliquerunt,  non  semper  idem  dicere  videntur;  nee
in  summa  taraen  ipsa  aut  varietas  est  uila,  apud  hos
quidem  quos  nominavi,  aut  inter  ipsos  dissensio.  Sed
cum  beata  vita  quaeratur  idque  sit  unum  quod  philo-
sophia  spectare  et  sequi  debeat,  sitne  ea  tota  sita  in
poteslate  sapientis  an  possit  aut  labefactari  aut  eripi
rebus  adversis,  in  eo  nonnumquam  variari  inter  eos
et dubitari videtur. Quod maxime  efEcit  Theo-

'  esse  inserted  by  edd.

k

<D  Ethics  but  the  whole
',  except  (he  recenllj*-
, belong: to  'his latter

5!iI^^^5oo9Tc

BOOK  V.  iv-v
this  too  was  treated  by  the  Peripatetics,  s
prise  not  only  the  principles  of  individual  conduct
but  also  of  the  government  of  states. From  Aristotle
we  learn  the  customs,  institutions  and  regulations,
and  from  Theophraslus  the  laws  also,  of  nearly  all  ^^
the  states  not  only  of  Greece  but  of  the  barbarians  as
well. Both  described  the  proper  qualifications  of  a
sovereigiijbothmoreoveriwrote  lengthy  treatises  on  the
best  form  of  constitution  ;Theophrastus  treated  a
fully  the  subject  of  political  vicissitudes  a
ments  wliich  have  to  be  controlled  as  the  o
mands.  Among  the  alternative  ideals  of  conduct  they
gave the  highest  place  to  the  life  of  retirement,
devoted  to  contemplation  and  to  study.  This  was  pro-
nounced to  be  most  worthy  of  the  Wise
nearly  resembling  the  life  of  the  gods. These  topics
they  handle  in  a  style  as  brilliant  as  it  is  illuminating.
i V.  "Their  books  on  the  subject  of  the  Chief  oivt
Good  fall  into  two  classes,  one  popular  in  style,  and  sdhooi «
this  class  they  used  to  call  their  exoteric  works;  the  ^
other  more  carefully  wrought.'  The  latter  treatises
theyleftinthe  form  of  note-books.  Thisdistinction  oc-
casionally gives  them  an  appearance  of  inconsistency ;
but  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  the  main  bulk  of  their
doctrine  there  is  no  divergence,  at  all  events  among
the  philosophers I  have mentioned,  and  no  dis-
agreement between  them. But  on  the  chief  object
of  inquiry,  namely  Happiness,  and  the  one  question
which  philosophy  has  to  consider  and  to  investigate,
whether  this  lies  entirely  within  the  control  of  the
Wise  Man,  or  whether  it  can  be  imjiaired  or  destroyed
by  adversity,  here  there  does  appear  sometimes  to
exist  among  them  some  divergence  and  uncertainty.
This  effect  is  chiefly  produced  by  Theophrnstus's
U03  403

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
phrasti  de  beata  vitA  liber,  in  quo  multutn  admodum
fortunae  dntur;  quod  si  ita  se  habeat,  iion  possit
beatam  vitam  praestare  sapientia,  Haec  mihi  vide-
tur  delicatior,  ut  ita  dicam,  molliorque  ratio  quam
virtutis  vis  gravitasque  postulat.  Quare  teneamus
Aristotelein  et  eius  filium  Nicomachum,  cuius  accu-
rate script!  de  tnoribus  libri  dicuiitur  itli  quidem
esse  Aristoteti,  sed  non  video  cur  non  potuerit  patri
similis  esse  iilius.  Theopbrastuni  tamen  adhibeamus
ad  pleraque,  dum  modo  plus  in  virtute  teneamus

13  quam  ille  tenuit  firmitatis  et  roboris.  Simus  igitur
content!  his.  Namque  horum  poster!  meliores  illi
quidem,  mea  sententia,  quam  reliquarum  philosophi
disci  pi  in  arum,  sed  ita  degenerunt  ut  ipsi  ex  se  nati
esse  videantur.  Primum  Theophrasti,  Strato,  physi-
cum  se  voluit;  in  quo  etsi  est  magnus,  tamen  nova
pleraque,  et  perpauca  de  raoribus,  Huius,  Lyco,
oratione  locuples,  rebus  ipsis  ieiunior.  Concinnus
deinde  et  elegans  huius,  Aristo,  sed  ea  quae  desi-
deratur  a  magno  philosopho  gravitas  in  eo  non
fuit;  scripta  sane  et  multa  et  polita,  sed  nescio
quo  pacto  auctoritatem  oratio  non  habet.

1 4  Praetereo  muttos,  in  his  doctum  hominem  et  sua-
vem,  Hieronymum,  quern  iam  cur  Peri  pate  tic  um
appellem  Jiescio ;  sununum  enim  bonum  exposuit
vacuitatem  doloris; qui  autem  de  sununo  bono  dis-

»  Aristotle's  principal  work  on  Ethics  is  entitled  The  Ni-
chomachean  Ethics,  to  distinguish  il  from  two  other  treatises
ascribed  to  him,  the  Eudemian  Ethics  and  the  AfagTia
Jtforalia.  The  title  may  imply  that  I  he  book  was  dedicated
to,  or  possiblv  that  it  was  ediled  by,  Nichomachus;  but
hardly,  pace  Cicero,  that  it  was  wrillen  by  him,  since  he
died  in  battle  while  still  a  youth,  ll  seems  certain  thai
Cicero  had  never  read,  or  had  forgotten,  the  book,  for  he
entirely  ignores  its  distinctive  doctrines.  Cp.  IV  12  n.
404

BOOK  V.  V
book Oa Happineis,  in  which a very considerable
amount  of  importance  is  assigned  to  fortune; for
if  this  be  correct,  wisdom  alone  could  not  guar-
antee happiness.  This  theory  seems  to  me  to  be,
if  I  may  so  call  it,  too  enervating  and  unmanly  to  be
adequate  to  the  force  and  dignity  of  virtue. Hei
we  had  better  keep  to  Aristotle  and  his  son  Nico-
machus;  the  latter's  elaborate  volumes  on  Ethics
are  ascribed,  it  ia  true,  to  Aristotle,  but  I  do  not  see
why  the  son  should  not  have  been  capable
lating  the  father." Still,  we  may  use  Theophraslus
on most  points, so  long  as  we maintain a  larger
element  of  strength  and  solidity  in  virtue  than  he

13  did. Let  us  then  limit  ourselves  to  these  author!-  Decline  of  it»
ties. Their  successors  are  indeed  in  my  opinion  school. "^
superior  to  the  philosophers  of  any  other  school,  but

are  so  unworthy  of  their  ancestry  that  one  might
imagine  thenj  to  have  been  their  own  fathers.  To
begin  with,  Theoplirastus's  pupil  Strato  set  up  to  be
a  natural  philosopher;  hut  great  as  he  is  in  this  de-
partment, he  is  nevertheless  for  the  most  part  an  in-
novator; and  on  ethics  he  has  hardly  anything.  His
successor  Lyco  has  a  copious  style,  but  his  matter  is
somewhat  barren.  Lyco's  pupil  Aristo  is  polished
and  graceful,  but  has  not  the  authority  that  we
expect  to  find  in  a  great  thinker;  he  wrote  much,
it  is  true,  and  he  wrote  well,  but  his  style  is  some-
how lacking  in  weight.

14  I  pass  over  a  number  of  writers,  including  the
learned  and  entertaining  Hieronymus.  Indeed  I
know  no  reason  for  calling  the  latter  a  Peripatetic
at  all ;  for  he  defined  the  Chief  Good  as  freedom
from  pain:  and  to  hold  a  different  view  of  the
Chief  Good  is  to  hold  a  different  system  of  philo-

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

sentit,  de  tola  philosophiae  ratione  disaentit  Crito-
laus  imitari  voluit  antiquos;  et  quidem  est  gravitate
proxiinos  et  redundat  oratio;  ac  tamen  ne^  is  quidem
in  patriis  institutis  manel.  Diodorus,  eius  auditor,
adiungit  ad  honcstatt-m  vacuitatem  doloris.  Hie
quoque  suus  est,  de  summoque  bono  dissentiens  dici
vera  Peripateticus  non  potest.  Antiquorum  autem
sententiam  Antiochus  noster  mihi  videtur  perseqoi
diligentissime,  quam  eandem  Aristoteli  fuisse  et
Polemonis  docet.

15  VI.  "Facit  igitur  Lucius  noster  prudenter  qui
audire  de  summo  bono  potissimum  velit;  hoc  enim
constitute  in  philosopliia  constituta  sunt  omuia.
Nam  ceteris  in  rebus  sive  praetermissum  sive  i^nu-
ratum  est  quidpiam,  non  plus  incommodi  est  quam
quaiiti  quaeque  earum  rerum  est  in  quibus  negle-
ctum  est  aliquid;  summum  autem  bonum  si  ignore-
tur,  Vivendi  rationeni  ignorari  necesse  est;  ex  quo
tantus  error  consequitur  ut  quern  in  portum  se
recipiant  scire  non  possint.  Cognitis  autem  rerum
finibus,  cum  intellegitur  quid  sit  et  bonorum  extre-
muni  et  malorum,  inventa  vitae  via  est  conforma-

1 6  tioque  omnium  officiorum,  inventuni  igitur,'  quo
quidque  rcferatur;  ex  quo,  id  quod  omnes  expe-
tunt,  beate  vivendi  ratio  inveniri  et  comparari  potest.

Quod  quoniam  in  quo  sit  magna  dissensio est,
Carneadia nobis adhibenda  divisio est,  qua  noster

'  ne  added  by  edd.

''invenlum  igilur  MOllcr  ;  mm  igitur  B,  E  j  est  igitur  inf.

BOOK  V.  v-vi
fiopliy  altogether.  Critolaus  professed  to  imitate
the  ancients;  and  he  does  in  fact  come  nearest
to  them  in  weight,  while  his  style  is  copious  to  a
degree;  all  the  same,  even  he  is  not  true  to  his
ancestral  principles.  Diodorus,  his  pupil,  couples
with  Moral  Worth  freedom  from  pain.  He  too
stands  by  himself;  differing  about  the  Chief  Good
he  cannot  correctly  be  called  a  Peripatetic.  Our
master  Antiochus  seems  to  me  to  adhere  most  scru-
pulously to  the  doctrine  of  the  ancients,  which
according  to  his  teaching  was  common  to  Aristotle
and  to  Polemo.

1 5  VI.  Our  young  friend  Lucius  is  therefore  well
advised  in  desiring  most  of  all  to  hear  about  the
Chief  Good;  for  when  you  have  settled  tliat  point  in
a  system  of  philosophy,  you  have  settled  everything.
On  any  other  topic,  some  degree  of  incompleteness
or  uncertainty  causes  no  more  mischief  than  is  pro-
portionate to  the  importance  of  the  particular  topic
on  which  the  neglect  has  occurred;  but  uncertainly
as  to  the  Chief  Good  necessarily  involves  uncertainty
as  to  the  principles  of  conduct,  and  this  must  carry
men  so  far  out  of  their  course  that  they  cannot
know  what  harbour  to  steer  for.  On  the  other  hand
when  we  have  ascertained  the  Ends  of  things,
knowing  the  ultimate  Good  and  ultimate  Evil,  we
have  discovered  a  map  of  life,  a  chart  of  all  the

16  duties;  and  therefore  have  discovered  a  standard  to
which  each  action  may  be  referred ;  and  from  this
we  can  discover  and  construct  that  rule  of  happiness
which  all  desire,

"  Now  there  is  great  ditFerence  of  opinion  as  to
what  constitutes  the  ultimate  End. Let  us  therefore
adopt the classiBcation  of  Cameades,  which  our
407

i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Antiochus  libenter  uti  solet.  II!e  igitur  vidit  non
modo  quot  fuissent  adliue  philosophorum  de  summo
bono  sed  quot  omnino  esse  posse nt  seiitentiae.
Negabat  igitur  ullam  esse  artem  quae  ipsa  a  se
proficisceretur ;  elenini  semper  illud  extra  est  quod
arte  comprehenditiir.  Nihil  opus  est  esemplis  hoc
facere  longius;  est  enim  perspicoum  nuUam  artem
ipsam  in  se  versari,  sed  esse  aliud  artem  ipsam,
aliud  quod  propositum  sit  arti ;  quoniam  igitur,  ut
medieina  valetudinis,  navigationis  gubernatio,  sic
Vivendi  ars  est  pnidentiaj  necesse  est  earn  quoque

17  ab  aliqua  re  esse  eonstitutam  et  profectam.  Consti-
tit  autem  fere  inter  omnes,  id,  in  quo  prudentia
versaretur  et  quod  assequi  veliet,  aptum  et  accom-

d  t  aturae  esse  oportere  et  tale  ut  ipsum  per

ta t  et  alliceret  appetitum  aninii,  quern  apiLxjv

&  ant. Quid  autem  sit  quod  ita  moveat

taq  tura  in  prirao  ortu  appetatur,  non  constat,

d  q  t  inter  philosophos,  cum  summum  bonum

q t omnis  dissenslo. Totius  enim  quaestionis

q I  dbetur  de  finibus  bonorura  et  malomm,

m  q tur  in  his  quid  sit  extremum,  quid  ulti-

n n f eperiendus  est  in  quo  sint  prima  invita-

m ta  n  turae ;  quo  invento  omnis  ab  eo  quasi  capite

d  bono  et  malo  disputatio  ducitur.

18  Vn.  Voluptatis  alii  primum  appetitum  putaat  et
primam  depulsionem  doloris;  vacuitatem  doloris  alii

4U8

a  BOOK  V.  vi-vii

teacher  Antiochus  is  very  fond  of  employing.  Car-
neades  passed  in  review  all  the  opinions  as  to  the
Chief  Good,  not  only  that  actually  had  been  held  by
philosophers  hitherto,  but  that  it  was  possible  to
hold.  He  then  pointed  out  that  no  science  or  art
can  start  wholly  from  itself;  it  must  always  have
subject-matter  which  is  outside  itself.  There  is  no
need  to  enlarge  upon  or  illustrate  this  point;  for  it
is  evident  that  no  art  is  occupied  with  itself;  the  art
is  distinct  from  the  subject  with  which  it  deals;
since  therefore,  as  medicine  is  the  art  of  health  and
navigation  the  art  of  sailing  the  ship,  so  Prudence^'i,
or  Practical  Wisdom  is  the  art  of  conduct,  it  follows
that  Prudence  also  must  take  its  being  and  origin  ^ ^

17  from  something. Now  practically  all  have  agreed  The  Ei
that  the  subject  with  which  Prudence  is  occupied  ^J'^t
and  the  end  which  it  desires  to  attain  is  bound  to  ™"i
be  something  intimately  adapted to  our  nature ;  it
must  be  capable  of  directly  arousing  and  awakening
an  impulse  of  desire,  what  in  Greek  is  called  hormey^
But  what  it  is  that  at  the  first  moment  of  our  ex-
istence excites  in  our  nature  this  impulse  of  desire,
—as  to  this  there  is  no  agreement. It  is  at  this
point  that  all  the  difference  of  opinion  among  stu-
dents of  the  ethical  problem  arises. Of  the  whole
inquiry  into  the  Ends  of  Goods  and  Evils  and  the
question  which  among  them  is  ultimate and final,
the fountain-head is to be found in the earliest
instincts  of  nature;  discover  these  and  you  have  the
source  of  the  stream,  the  starting-point  of  the  debate

as  to  the_  Chief  Good  and  Evil.  .^

18  ■  VII,  One  school  holds  that  our  earliest  desire  is  jecti  d
for  pleasure  and  our  earliest  repulsion  is  from  pain ;  fJ'p^S^
another  thinks  that  freedom  from  pain  is  the  earliest  "wS™  i

«9 szst

i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
censent  primum  ascitam  et  primum  dectinatum  do-
lorem ;  ab  iis  alii  quae  prima  secundum  naturam
nominant  proticiscuntur,  in  quibus  nunierant  incolu-
mitatem  conservationemque  omnium  partium,  vale-
tudinem,  sensus  inte^os,  doloris  vacuitatem,  vires,
pulchritudinem,  cetera  generis  eiusdem,  quorum  Si-
milia  sunt  prima  in  animis,  quasi  virtutum  igniculi
et  semina.  Ex  his  tribus  cum  unum  aliquid  sit  quo
primum  natura  luoveatur  vet  ad  appetendum  vel  ad
repellendum  nee  quidquam  omnino  praeter  haec
tria  possit  esse,  nee  esse  est  omnino  ofliciuni  aut
fugiendi  aut  sequendi  ad  eorum  atiquid  referri,  ut
ilia  prudentia  quam  artem  vitae  esse  diximus  in
earum  trium  remia  aliqua  versetur  a  qua  totius  vitae
ducat  exordium,
)  Ex  eo  autem  quod  statuerit  esse  quo  primiun

natura  moveatur,  exsistet  recti  etiam  ratio  atque
honesti,  quae  cum  aliquo  uno  ex  tribus  illis  congru-
ere  possit,  ut  aut  id  lionestura  sit,  facere  omnia'
voluptatis  causa  etiamsi  earn  non  consequare,  aut
non  dolendi  etiamsi  id  assequi  nequeas,  aut  eorum
quae  seeuudum  naturam  sunt  adipiscendi  etiamsi
niliil  consequare.  Ita  lit  ut  quanta  differentia  est  in
principiis  naturalibus,  tanta  sit  in  finibus  bonorum
malorumque  dissimOitudo.— Alii  rursum  iisdem  a
principiis  omne  officium  referent  aut  ad  voluptatem

'  After

a  MSS.  !

',  Mdv.  brackets.

=^^c

BOOK  V.  vii

thing  welcomed,  and  pain  the  earliest  thing  avoided ;
others  again  start  from  what  they  term  the  primary
objects  in  accordance  with  nature,  among  which  they
reckon  the  soundness  and  safety  of  all  the  parts  c
the  body,  health,  perfect  senses,  freedom  from  pain,
strength,  beauty  and  the  like,  analogous  to  which
are  the  primary  intellectual  excellences  which  are
the  sparks  and  seeds  of  the  virtues.  Now  it  must
be  one  or  other  of  these  three  sets  of  things  which
first  excites  our  nature  to  feel  desire  or  repulsii
nor  can  it  be  anything  whatsoever  beside  these  three
things.  It  follows  therefore  that  every  right  act
of  avoidance  or  of  pursuit  is  aimed  at  one  of  these
objects,  and  that  consequently  one  of  these  three
must  form  the  subject-matter  of  Prudence,  which  we
spoke  of  as  the  art  of  life ;  from  one  of  the  three
Prudence  derives  the  initial  motive  of  the  whole  of
conduct

)  Now,  from  whichever  Prudence  decides  to  be  n»  EbA

the  object  of  the  primary  natural  impulses,  will  arise  J^^pi,'
a  theory  of  right  and  of  Moral  Worth  which  may  "he  attai
correspond  with  one  or  other  of  the  three  objects  three:
aforesaid. Thus Morality will consist eitlier in
aiming  all  our  actions  at  pleasure,  even  though  one
may  not  succeed  in  attaining  it ;  or  at  absence  of
pain,  even  though  one  is  unable  to  secure  it;  or  at
getting  the  things  in  accordance  with  nature,  even
though one  doeS  not  attain  any  of  them. Hence
there  is  a  divergence  between  the  different  concep-
tions as  to  the  Ends  of  Goods  and  Evils,  precisely
equivalent  to  the  difference  of  opinion  as  to  the

1,  primary  natural  objects. — Others  again  starting  from
;  primary  objects  will  make  the  sole  stan-

EdArd  of  right  action  the  actual  attainment  of  plea-

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
aut  ad  non  dolendum  aut  ad  prima  ilia  secundum
naturam  obtinenda.

0  Expositis  iam  igitur  sex  de  summo  bono  senteu-

tiis,  trium  proximarum  hi  principes:  voluptatis  Ari-
stippus,  non  dolendt  Hieronymus,  fruendi  rebus  iis
quas  primas  secundum  naturam  esse  diKiinus  Carne-
ades  non  ille  quidem  auctor  sed  defensor  disserendi
causa  fuit.  Superiores  trea  erant  quae  esse  possent;
quarum  est  una  sola  defensa  eaque  vehementer.
Nam  voluptatis  causa  facere  omnia  cum,  etiamsl  nihil
consequamur,tamen  ipsum  illud  consilium^tafaciendi
per  se  expetendum  et  honestum  et  solum  bonuni  sit,
nemo  dixit.  Ne  vitationem  quidem  doloris  ipsam
per  se  quisquam  in  rebus  expetendis  putavit  nisi
etiam  evitare  posset  At  vero  facere  omnia  ut  adi-
piscamur  quae  secundum  naturam  sunt  etiamsi  ea
non  asscquaniur,  id  esse  et  honestum  et  solum  per
se  expetendum  et  solum  bonum  Stoici  dicunt.

[  VIII.  'Sex  igitur  hae  sunt  simplices  de  summa
bonorum  malorumque  sententiae,  duae  sine  patrono,
quattuor  defensae.  lunctae  autem  et  duplices  ex-
positiones  summi  boni  tres  omnino  fuerunt,  nee  vero
plures,  si  penitus  rerum  naturam  videas,  esse  potue-
runt.  Nam  aut  voluptas  adiungi  potest  ad  honesta-
tem,  ut  Calliphonti  Dinomachoque  placuit,  aut  doloris
vacuitas,  ut  Diodoro,  aut  prima  naturae,  ut  antiquis,
quos  eosdem  Academicos  et  Peripateticosnominamus.

'Tliis  is  obviously  incorrect;  for  formal  completeness,
Carneades  □ug'ht  to  have  made  six  composile  Ends,  by
combining-  Morality  witb  the  pursuit  of  each  of  the  three
primary  objects  of  desire  as  well  as  with  their  attainmenli
but  no  doubt  at  this  point  he  felt  the  unreality  of  his  scheme
and  drew  back,  since  Morality,  according  to  Aristippus,
Epicurus  and  the  Stoics  wai  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  free-
dom from  pain,  and  Ibe  natural  goods  respectively,
i.l2

I

[  BOOK  V.  vii-viii

sure,  freedom  from  pain,  or  the  primary  things  in
accordance  with  nature,  respectively.

0  Thus  we  have  now  set  forth  six  views  as  to  the
Chief  Good.  The  leading  upholders  of  the  latter
three  are:  of  pleasure,  Aristippus;  of  freedom  from
pain,  Hieronyiuus ;  of  the  enjoyment  of  what  we
have  called  thenrimary  things  in  accordance  with
nature,  Cameades, — that  is,  he  did  not  originate
this  view  hut  he  upheld  it  for  polemical  purposes.
Tlie  three  former  were  possible  views,  but  only  one
of  them  has  been  actually  maintained,  though  that
with  great  vigour.  No  one  has  asserted  pleasure  to
be  the  sole  aim  of  action  in  the  sense  that  the  mere
intention  of  attaining  pleasure,  although  unsuccess-
ful, is  in  itself  desirable  and  moral  and  Ihe  only
good.  Nor  yet  has  anyone  held  that  the  effort  to
avoid  pain  is  in  itself  a  thing  desirable,  without  one's

being  able  actually  to  avoid  it.  On  the  other  hand,  that  [Tiie  stoic  v
morality  consists  in  using  every  endeavour  to  obtain
the  things  in  accordance  with  nature,  and  that  this
endeavour  even  though  unsuccessful  is  itself  the  sole
thing  desirable  and  the  sole  good,  is  actually  main-
tained by  the  Stoics.

1  VIII.  "  These  then  are  the  six  simple  views  about  or  the  End  i
the  End  of  Goods  and  Evils ;  two  of  them  without  a  ^^S'^atlmi
champion,  and  four  actually  upheld. Of  composite  o"»  o' U"
or  dualistic  definitions  of  the  Supreme  Good  there  virtue.
have  been  three  in  all;  nor  were  more  than  three
possible,  if  you examine the  nature  of  the  case
closely." There  is  the  combination  of  Morality  with
pleasure, adopted by Callipho and Dinomachus;
with  freedom  from  pain,  by  Diodorus ;  or  with  the
primary  objects  of  nature,  the  view  of  the  ancients,  as
we  entitle  both  the  Academics  and  the  Peripatetics.

413

k.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Sed  quoniam  non  possunt  omnia  simul  dici,  haec
in  praesentia  nota  esse  debcbunt,  voluptalem  semo-
vendam  esse,  quando  ad  maiora  quaedam,  ut  iam  ap-
parebit,  nati  sumus.  De  vacuitate  doloris  eadem  fere
22  dici  Solent  quae  de  voluptate.'  Nee  vero  alia  sunt
quae renda  contra  Cameadiani  illam  sententiam;  quo-
cumque  enini  niodo  summum  bonum  sic  exponitur  ut
id  vacet  bonestate,  nee  officia  nee  virtutes  in  ea  ratione
nee  amicitiae  constare  possunt.  Coniuncti6  autem  ettin
honestate  vel  voluptatis  vel  non  dolendi  id  ipsum
hone&tum  quod  amplecti  vult  id  ettieit  turpe.  Ad  eas
s  referre  quae  agas,  quarum  una  si  quis  malo
eareat  in  sumnio  euro  bono  dieat  esse,  altera  versetur
in  levissima  parte  naturae,  obseurantis  est  omneni
splendorem  hoiiestatis,  ne  dicam  inquinantis.  Kestant
Stoici,  qui,  cum  a  Peripateticis  et  Academicis  omnia
transtulissent,  nominJbus  aliis  easdem  res  secuti  sunt.
"  Hos  contra  singulos  dici  est  melius;  sed  nunc
quod  agimus;  de  iiiis  cum  volemus.
(  'Democriti  autem  securi  tas,  quae  est  animi  tranquil-
litas,^  quani  appellavit^  (vOv/iiav,  eo  separanda  fuit  «b
hac  disputatione,  quia  ista  animi  tranquillitas  ea
est  ipsa  beata  vita;  quaerimus  autem  non  quae  sit
sed  uude  sit.  laui  explosae  eiectaeque  sententiae
Pyrrhonis,  Aristonis,  Erilli,  quod  in hunc orbem

'After voluptate, MSS, add; Quoniam igilur tt dt
•uoluptate  cum  Totqvalo  ei  de  honestale,  in  gua  una  omnt

guae  contra  ■volufitatem  dicla  sunt,  eadeni  fere  cadunl
nmtra  ■vacuitaiem  dolorii.  Edd.  reject  this  reference  to
Ihe  two  earlier  dialogues  as  an  interpolation,  since  thej  «re
supposed  to  lake  place  at  a.  later  dale  than  the  present  one.

>  hanquiUitas  MQIler  ;  tranquillitas  tanquam  B  E  ;  [tam-
quatii]  tranq, Mdv.

'appellavitmL  MSS.,  M&ller;  appellant  B,^,  Mdv.
41i

W^  BOOK  V.  viii

But  it  is  impossible  to  set  forth  the  whole  of  our  Rejecting  such
position  at  once ;  so  for  the  present  we  need  only  uva^in^i
notice  that  pleasure  must  be  discarded,  on  the  ground  i"  UwEt^  pka
that,  as  will  be  shown  later,  we  are  intended  by  of  pain,  or  dn
nature  for  greater  things.  Freedom  from  pain  is  ^,^^^^""
open  to  practically  the  same  objections  as  pleasure,  certabi  theDries

22  Nor  need  we  look  for  other  arguments  to  refute  the  fail  undct  the
opinion  of  Cameades ;  for  any  conceivable  account  1^'"«^^  l"
of  the  Chief  Good  which  does  not  include  the  factor  T'V'' j^".'' "'
of  Moral  Worth  gives  a  system  under  which  there  and  PeripateUci
is  no  room  either  for  duty,  virtue  or  friendship.  Jh^oHheStmc
Moreover  the  combination  with  Moral  Worth  either  t™,  vii.  Virtue
of  pleasure  or  of  freedom  from  pain  debases  the  ^oi^.

very  morality  that  it  aims  at  supporting.  For  to
uphold  two  standards  of  conduct  jointly,  one  of  which
declares  freedom  from  evil  to  be  the  Supreme  Good,  '
while  the  other  is  a  thing  concerned  with  tlie  most
frivolous  part  of  our  nature,  is  to  dim,  if  not  to  defile,
all  the  radiance  of  Moral  Worth.  There  remain  the
Stoics,  who  took  over  their  whole  system  from  the
Peripatetics  and  the  Academics,  adopting  the  same
ideas  under  other  names.

The  best  way  to  deal  with  these  different  schools
would  be  to  refute  each  separately;  but  forthepresent
we  must  keep  to  the  business  in  h«nd ;  we  will  dis-
cuss these  other  schools  at  our  leisure.

23  The  calmness  or  tranquillity  of  mind  which  is
the  Chief  Good  of  Democritus,  eulkvmia  as  he  calls  it,
has  had  to  be  excluded  from  this  discussion,  because
this  mental  tranquillity  is  in  itself  the  happiness  in
question ;  and  we  are  inquiring  not  what  happiness
is,  but  what  produces  it.  Again,  the  discredited
and  abandoned  theories  of  Pyrrho,  Aristo  and  Erillus
cannot  be  brought  within  the  circle  we  have  drawn,

415

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quein  circumscripsimus  incidere  tion  possunt,  adhi-
bcndae  omnino  non  fuerunt.  Nnm  cum  omnis  ha.ee
quaestio  dc  finibus  et  quasi  de  extremis  bonorum  et
malonim  ab  eo  proticiscatur  quod  di\inius  naturae
esse  aptuin  et  accommodatum,  quodque  ipsum  per
se  primum  appetatur,  hoc  totum  et  ii  toUunt  qui  in
rebus  iis  in  quibus  nihil  aut  honestum  aut  turpe  sit
negant  esse  ullam  eausam  cur  ahud  alii  anteponatur
nee  inter  eas  res  quidquam  omnino  putant  interesse,
et  Erillus,  si  ita  sensit,  nihil  esse  bonum  praeter
scientiam,  omneni  consili  capiendi  eausam  inven-
tionemque  oHici  sustulit

Sic  exclusis  sententiis  reliquorum,  cum  praeter-
ea  nulla  esse  possit,  haec  onti quorum  valeat  ne-
eesse  est.  Igitur'^  institute  veterum,  quo  etiam  Stoici
utuntur,  hinc  capiamus  exordium.
i  IX.  '  Omne  animal  se  ipsum  diligit,  ac  simul  est
ortum '  id  agit  ut  se  conserve!,  quod  hie  ei  primus  ad
omnem  vitam  tuendam  appetitus  a  natura  datur,  se
ut  conservet  atque  Ita  sit  affectum  ut  optime  secun-
dum naturani  affectuni  esse  possit.  Hanc  initio  in-
stitutionem  contiisam  habet  et  incertam]  ut  tantum-
modo  se  tueatur  qualecumque  sit ;  sed  nee  quid  sit
nee  quid  possit  nee  quid  ipsius  natura  sit  intellegit
Cum  autem  processit  paulum  et  quatenus  quidque'
se  attingat  ad  seque  pertineat  perspicere  coepit,  turn
sensim  incipit  progredi  seseque  agnoscere  et  intelle-

'Igilur:  inf.  MSS.  ergo.

'esl  ortum  conj. Muller, cp, II,  33  ;  flf  or  ut  ortum  est
MSS.:  [et]  ortum  rst  Mdv.
'fuidque  Baiter,  Mttller ;  quidguidMSS.,  Mdv.
416

BOOK  V.  viii-ix
and  so  we  have  not  been  concerned  to  consider  them
at  all.  For  the  whole  of  tliis  inquiry  into  the  Ends
or,  so  to  speak,  the  limits  of  Goods  and  Evils  must
begin  from  that  which  we  have  spoken  of  as  adapted
and  suited  to  nature  and  which  is  the  earliest  object
of  desire  for  its  own  sake ;  now  this  is  entirely  done
away  with  by  those  who  maintain  that,  in  the  sphere
of  things  which  contain  no  element  of  Moral  Worth
or  baseness,  there  is  no  reason  why  any  one  thing
should  be  preferred  to  any  other,  and  who  consider
these  things  to  be  absolutely  indifferent ;  and  Erillus
also,  if  he  actually  held  that  tliere  is  nothing  good  but
knowledge,  destroyed  every  motive  of  rational  action
and  every  clue  to  right  conduct.

"  Thus  we  have  eliminated  the  views  of  all  the
other  philosophers;  and  no  other  view  is  possible;
theref&re  this  doctrine  of  the  Ancients  must  hold
good.  Let  us  then  follow  the  practice  of  the  old
philosophers,  adopted  also  by  the  Stoics,  and  make
til  is  our  starting-point.
i  IX.  '  Every  living  creature  loves  itself,  and  from
the  moment  of  birth  strives  to  secure  its  own  preser-
vation ;  because  the  earliest  impulse  bestowed  on  it
by  nature  for  its  life-long  protection  is  the  instinct
for  self-preservation  and  for  the  maintenance  of
itself  in  the  best  condition  possible  to  it  in  accord-
ance with  its  nature.  At  the  outset  this  tendency
is  vague  and  uncertain,  so  that  it  merely  aims  at  pro-
tecting itself  whatever  its  character  may  l>e;  it  does
notunderstand  itself  nor  its  own  capacitiesand  nature.
When,  however,  it  has  grown  a  little  older,  and  has
begun  to  notice  the  measure  in  which  different
things  affect  and  concern  itself,  it  now  gradually
commences  to  make  progress.  Self-consciousness
EE  417

(AlSrU-^nsen

^m  CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

^re  quam  ob  causam  habeat  eum  quem  diximus
animi  appetitutn,  coeptatque  et  ea  quae  naturae  sentit
apta  appetere  et  propulsare  contraria. Ergo  omni

animali  iltud  quod  npp^tit  positum  Est  in  eo  quod
naturae  est  accommodatuni.  Ita  finis  bononiin
exsistit,  secundum  naturam  vivere  sic  affectum  ut
optime  affici  possit  ad  naturamque  accommodatissime.

S5  Quoniaut  autem  sua  cuiusque  animantis  uatura  est,
necesseestfinemquoque  omnium  hiinc  esse  iit  natura
expleatur  (nihil  enim  prohibet  quaedam  esse  et  inter
se  animalibus  reliquis  et  cum  bestiis  hooiini  commu-
nia,  quoniam  omnium  est  natura  communis),  sed
estrema  illa  et  summa  quae  quaerimus  iuter  aiiima-
limn  genera  distincta  et  dispertita  sint  et  sua  cuique
propria  et  ad  id  apta  quod  cuiiisque  natura  desideret

26  Quare  cum  dicimus  omnibus  animalibus  extremum
esse  secundum  naturam  vivere,  non  ita  aceipicndum
est  quasi  dieainus  unum  esse  omnium  extremum  ;
sed  ut  omnium  artium  recte  dici  potest  commune
esse  ut  in  aliqun  scientia  versentur,  scicntiam  autem
suam  cuiusque  artis  esse,  sic  commune  aninialium
omnium  secundum  naturam  vivere,  sed  naturas  esse
diversas,  ut  aJiud  equo  sit  e  natura,  aliud  bovi,  aliud
homini,  et  tamen  in  omnibus  sutnma  communis,  et  qui-
dem  non  solum  in  animalibus  sed  etiam  in  refaua
418

BOOK  V.  is
dawns,  and  the  creature  begins  to  understand  the
reason  why  it  possesses  the  instinctive  nppetition
aforesaid,  and  to  try  to  obtain  tlie  things  which  it
perceives  to  be  adapted  to  its  nature  and  to  repel
their  opposites.  Every  living  creature  therefore
finds  its  object  of  appetition  in  the  thing  suited  to
its  nature.  Thus  arises  the  End  of  Goods,  namely
to  live  in  accordance  with  nature  and  in  that  condi-
tion which is  the  best  and  most  suited  to  nature

i5  that  is  possible.  At  the  same  time  every  animal  has
its  own  nature  ;  and  consequently,  while  for  all  alike
the  End  consists  in  the  satisfaction  of  that  nature
(for  there  is  no  reason  why  certain  things  should
not  be  common  to  all  the  lower  animals,  and  also
to  the  lower  animals  and  man,  since  all  have  a  com-
mon nature),  yet  the  ultimate  and  supreme  objects
that  we  are  investigating  must  be  differentiated  and
distributed  among  the  different  kinds  of  animals,
each  kind  having  its  own  peculiar  to  itself  and
adapted  to  the  requirements  of  its  individual  nature.

3fi  Hence  when  we  say  that  the  En'E  5f  alHiving  crea-
tures is  to  live  in  accordance  with  nature,  this  must
not  be  construed  as  meaning  that  all  have  one
and  the  same  End  ;  but  just  as  it  is  correct  to  say
that  all  the  arts  and  sciences  have  the  common
characteristic  of  occupying  themselves  with  some
branch  of  knowledge,  while  each  art  has  its  own
particular  branch  of  knowledge  belonging  to  it,  so
all  animals  have  the  common  End  of  living  accord-
ing to  nature,  but^their  natures  are  diverse,  so  that
one  thing  is  in  accordance  with  nature  for  the  horse,
another  for  the  ox,  and  another  for  man,  and  yet  in
all  the  Supreme  End  is  common,  and  tliat  not  only
in  animals  but  also  in  all  those  things  upon  which

1

CICERO  DE  FlNiauS

s  quas  natura  alit,  auget,  tuetur ;  in  quibus

videmus  ea  quae  gignujitur  e  terra  niulta  quodat
modo  efficere  ipsa  sibi  per  se  quae  ad  vivendum  cre-
scenduraque  valeant,  ut  suo '  genere  perveniant  ad
extremum  ;  ut  iara  liceat  una  comprehensione  omnia
complecti  non  dubitantemque  dicere  oranem  naturaui
esse  servalricem  sui  idque  habere  propositum  quasi
finem  et  extremum,  se  ut  eustodiat  quam  in  optimo
sui  generis  statu  ;  ut  necesse  sit  omnium  rerum  quae
natura  vigeant  similem  esse  finem,  non  eundem.  Ex
quo  intellegi  debet  homini  id  esse  in  bonis  ultimum,
secundum  naturam  vivere,  quod  ita  interpretemur,
vivere  ex  hominis  natura  undique  perfecta  et  nihil
27  requirente.  Haec  igitur  nobis  explicanda  sunt ;  sed
si  enodatius,  vos  ignoscetis.  Huius  enim  aetati
nunc*  haec  priraum  fortasse  audientis  servire  debe-
mus."  Ita  prorsus,"  inquam  ;  etsi  ea  quidem
quae  adhuc  diiisti  quamvjs  ad  aetatem  rectc  isto
modo  dicerentur."

X.  Exposita  igitur,"  inquit,  terminatione  rerum
expetendarum,  cur  ista  se  res  ita  habeat  ut  Hiri
deinceps  demonstrandum  est.  Quamobrem  ordia-
mur  ab  eo  quod  primum  posui,  quod  idem  reapse
prinium  est,  ut  intellegamus  omne  animal  se  ipsum
diligere.  Quod  quamquam  dubitationem  non  habet
(est  enim  infixum  in  ipsa  natura  comprehenditurque  ^
suis  cuiusque  sensibus,  sic  ut  contra  si  quis  dicere

0  Mdv.  i

^{c..

huicnunc..  a«rf«nW  MSS.,  Mdv.

<mprthendiiur  MSS.

M^  BOOK-  V,  ix-x

nature  bestows  nourishment,  increase  and  protec-
tion. Among  these  things  we  notice  that  plants
can,  in  a  sense,  perform  on  their  own  behalf  a  n
ber  of  actions  conducive  to  their  life  and  growth,  so  ^, j
that  they  may  attain  their  End  after  their  kind. So  ^\ 1
that  finally  we  may  embrace  all  animate  existence  in  '

one  broad  generalization,  and  say  without  hesitation,
that  all  nature  is  self-preserving,  and  has  before  it
the  end  and  aim  ofmalntaining  itself  in  the  best  pos-
sible condition  after  its  kind  ;  and  that  consequently
all  things  endowed  by  nature  with  life  have  a  similar,
but  not  anidentical,  End.  This  leads  to  the  inference,
that  the  ultimate  Good  of  man  is  life  in  accordance
with  nature,  which  we  may  interpret  as  meaning  life  V  'j-'Jf  „i
in  accordance  with  human  nature  developed  to  its^  fl**'*^^/

27  full  perfection  and  supplied  with  all  its  needs. Thi^™«'^EB
then,  is  the  theory  that  we  have  to  expound;  but  if  it  JlJ^SaiiMi'of
requires  a  good  deal  of  explanation,  you  will  receive  buman  natun '
it  with forbearance. For  this  is  perhaps  the  first  developaieiit
time  that  Lucius  has  heard  the  subject  debated,  and
we  must  make  allowance  for  his  youth." Very
true,"  said  I ; albeit  the  style  of  your  discourse  so
far  has  been  suited  to  hearers  of  any  age."

X.  Well  then,"  he  resumed,  having  explained  Seu  love
what  the  principle  is  which  determines  what  things  "°
are  desirable,  I  have  next  to  show  why  the  matter  is
ag  I  liave  stated.  Let  us  therefore  begin  from  the  posi-
tion which  I  laid  down  first  and  which  is  also  first  in  the
order  of  reality :  let  us  understand  that  every  living
creature  loves  itself.  The  fact  that  this  is  so  admits  of
nodoubt,  for  indeed  it  is  a  fundamental  fact  of  nature,
and  one  that  everybody  can  grasp  for  himself  by  the
evidence  of  his  senses,  so  much  so  that  did  anyone
choose  to  deny  it,  he  would  not  get  a  hearing ;
4^1

CICERO  DR  FINIBUS
velit  non  oudintur),  tamen  ne  quid  praetermittainns

28  ration^s  quoque  cur  hoc  ita  sit  afferendas  puto.  Etsl
qui  potest  iiitellegi  aut  cogitari  esse  aliquod  animal
quodseoderit?  Res  enim  concurrent contrariae.  Nam
cum  appetitus  ille  animi  aliquid  ad  se  trahere  coeperit
consulto  quod  sibi  obsit,  quia  sit  sibi  inimicus,  cum
id  sua  causa  faciet,  et  oderit  se  et  simul  diliget,  quod
fieri  non  potest.  Necesseque  est  si  quis  ipse  sibi
inimicus  est  eum  quae  bona  sunt  mala  putare,  bom
contra  quae  mala,  et  quae  appetenda  fugere  et  quae
fugienda  appetere  ;  quae  sine  dubio  vitae  est  eversio,
Neque  enim,  si  noniiulli  reperiuntur  qui  aut  laqueos
aut  alia  e\itia  quaerant,  aut'  ille  apud  Terentiu
qui  decrevit  taiitisper  se  minus  iniuriae  suo  ni
facere  (ut  ait  ipse)  dum  fiat  miser,"  inimicus  ipse  siK

29  putandus  est.  Sed  alii  dolore  moventur,  alii  capidi-
tate  ;  iracundia  etiam  multi  efferuntur  et,
mala  scientes  irruunt,  tuni  se  optime  silii  consoleK
arbitrantur. Itaque  dicunt  ncc  dubitant :

'  Mihi  sic  est  usus  ;  tibi  ut  opus  est  facto,  face.'
Qui  ipsi  sibi  *  bellum  indixissent,  cruciari  dies,  noctei
torqucri  vellent,  nee  vero  sese  ipsi  accusarent  ob  ci
causam  quod  se  male  suis  rebus  consuluisse  dicereot;
eorum  enim  est  haec  querela  qui  sibi  can  sunt  si
que  diltgunt. Quare,  quotienscumque  dicetur  mile

•aul.-  aulutMSS.;  an/ [tif]  Mdv.

'Qui  ipsi  sibi  MSS., edd.;  qui  y

inf.MS. Perhaps  Qui  si  ifisi  sibi  e

;  gut  itEi  ffa

BOOK  \".  X

nevertheless,  so  that  no  step  may  he  omitted,  I  sup-
pose  I  ought  also  to  give  reasons  to  show  why  it  is

^  so.  Yet  how  can  you  form  any  intelligible  concep-  (o
tion  of  an  animal  that  should  hate  itself  ?  The  thing  ^
is  a  contradiction  in  terms.  For  the  creature  being  U'
its  own  enemy,  the  instinctive  appetition  we  spoke
of  will  deliberately  set  about  drawing  to  itself  some-
tiling  harmAil  to  itself;  yet  it  will  be  doing  this
for  its  own  sake  ;  tlierefore  the  animal  will  both
hate  and  love  itself  at  the  same  time,  which  is  im-
possible. Also,  if  a  man  is  his  own  enemy,  it  follows
that  he  will  think  good  evil  and  evil  good  ;  that  he
will  avoid  things  that  are  desirable  and  seek  things
that  ought  to  be  avoided  ;  but  this  undeniably  would
mean  to  turn  the  whole  of  life  upside  down.  A  few
people  may  be  found  who  attempt  to  end  their  lives
with  a  halter  or  by  other  means ;  but  these,  or  the
character  of  Terence^  who  (in  his  own  words)  '  re-
solved that  if  he  made  himself  to  suffer,  he  so  made
less  the  wrong  he  did  his  son,'  are  not  to  be  put  down

)  OS  haters  of  themselves.  The  motive  with  some  is
grief,  with  others  passion;  many  are  rendered  insane
by  anger,  and  plunge  into  ruin  with  their  eyes  open,
fancying  all  the  time  that  wliat  they  do  is  for  their
own  best  interests.  Hence  they  say,  and  say  in  all
sincerity :

It  is  my  way ;  do  you  do  as  it  suits  you."''
Men  who  had  really  declared  war  against  themselves
would  court  days  of  torment  and  nights  of  anguish,
nor  would  they  reproach  themselves  for  havirg
done  so  and  say  that  they  had  been  misguided  and
imprudent ;  such  lamentations  show  that  they  love
and  care  for  themselves. It  follows  that  whenever

L

I"

I

CICEBO  DE  FINIBUS
quis  de  se  mereri  sibique  iniaiicus  esse  atqwe  hostis,
vitam  denique  fiiprere,  intellegatur  aliquam  subesse
eiusmodi  causam  ut  es  eo  ipso  intellegi  possit  sibi

30  quemque  esse  caruio.  Nee  vero  id  satis  est,  nemi-
netn  esse  qui  ipse  se  oderit,  sed  illud  quoque  intelle-
gendum  est,  neminem  esse  qui  quomodo  se  habeat
nihil  sua  censeat  interesse.  Tolletur  enlm  appetitus
anitni  si,  ut  in  iis  rebus  inter  quas  nihil  interest
neutrara  in  partem  propensiores  sum  us,  item  in
nobisniet  ipsis  quemadniodum  afFecti  simus  niliil
nostra  arbitrabimur  interesse.

XI.  Atque  etiam  illud  si  qui  dicere  velit,  perab-
surdum  sit,  itu  diligi  a  sese  quemque  ut  ea  vis
diligendiad  aliamremquanipiamreferatur,nonadeuni
ipsum  qui  sese  diligat.  Hoc  cum  in  amicitiis,  cum
in  oificiis,  cum  in  virtutibus  dicitiir,  quomodocumque
dicitur,  intellegi  tamen  quid  dicatur  potest ;  in
nobismet  ipsis  autem  ne^  intellegi  quidem  ut^
propter  aliam  quampiain  rem,  verbi  gratia  propter
voluptatem,  nos  amemus ;  propter  nos  enim  illam,

31  non  propter  earn  nosmet  ipsos  diligimus.  Quam-
quam  quid  est  quod  magis  perspicuutn  sit  quam  ^  non
modo  carum  sibi  quemque,  verum  etiam  veheraenter
earum  esse }  quis  est  enim  aut  quotas  quisque  cui
mors  cum  appropinquet  non

refugiat  tiiuido  sanguen  atque  cxalbescat  metu'?
£tsi  hoc  quidem  est  in  vitio,  dissolutionem  naturae

it  is  said  of  a  man  that  lie  has  ruined  himself

is  his  own  worst  enemy,  and  that  he  is  tired

life,  you  may  be  sure  that  there  is  really  ai

planation  which  would  justify  the  inference,

from  such  a  case  as  this,  that  every  man  ioves  him-  (li)

30  self.  Nor  is  it  enough  to  say  that  nobody  exists  ™
who  hates  himself;  we  must  also  realize  that  no-'"
body  exists  who  thinks  it  makes  no  difference  to  him
what  his  own  condition  is.  For  it  will  be  destructive
of  the  very  faculty  of  desire  if  we  come  to  think  of
our  own  circumst«nces  as  a  matter  of  indifference  to
us,  and  feel  in  our  own  case  the  absolute  neutrahty
which  is  our  attitude  towards  the  things  that  are
really  indifferent.

XI. It  would  also  be  utterly  absurd if  any-  (iii
one  desired  to  maintain  that,  though  the  fact  of^|
self-love  is  admitted,  this  instinct  of  affection  is  really  "i
directed  towards  some  other  object  and  not  towards
the  person  himself  who  feels  it. When  this  is  said
of  friendship]  of  rigjit  action  or  of  virtue,  whether
correct  or  not,  it  has  some  intelligible  meaning  ;  but
in  the  case  of  ourselves  it  is  utterly  meaningless  to
say  that  we  love  ourselves  for  the  sake  of  something
else,  for  example,  for  the  sake  of  pleasure.  Clearly  we
do  not  love  ourselves  for  the  sake  of  pleasure,  but

31  pleasure  for  the  sake  of  ourselves.  Yet  what  fact  is  pv)  «ell-love
more  self-evident  than  that  every  man  not  merely  ^^u^™
loves  himself,  but  loves  himself  very  much  indeed  ?  "^^^''
For  who is  there, what  percentage  of  mankind,

whose

",  and  face  turn  pale
%  the  approach  of  death  i No  doubt  it  is

i

veoftM

i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
t«m  valde  perhorrescere  (qucxi  item*  est  reprehen-
deodum  in  dolore) ;  sed  qnU  fere  sic  atKciuntar
onines,  sntjs  argumenti  est  ab  interitu  Daturam  sb-
horrere  ;  idque  quo  magis  quidani  ita  fsciuiit  ut  iure
etiam  reprehendanfur,  hoc  magis  iutellegendum  est
liaec  ipsa  nitnia  in  quibusdam  iiitura  noD  fuisse  nisi
quaedain  essent  niodica  natura.  Nee  vero  dico
eonini  metum  mortis  qui,  quia  privari  se  vitae  bonis
srbitrentur  sut  quia  qoasdutn  post  mortem  formidines
eitimescant  aut  si  metuant  ne  cum  dolore  morian-
tur,  idcirco  mortem  fugiant ;  in  parvis  enim  saepe
qui  niliil  eorum  cugitant.  si  quaado  lis  ludentes
minamur  praecipitaturos  alicunde,  extimescunt.  Quin
etiani  ferae,'  inquit  Pacuvius,
quibus  abest  ad  praecavendum  intellegendi  astutia,'
i  iniecto  terrore  mortis  liorrescunt.'  Quis  autem  de
ipso  sapiente  aliter  existimat  quin,  etian)  cum  decre-
verit  esse  raoriendum,  tamen  discessu  a  suds  «tqne
ipsa  reliiiquenda  luee  moveatur?  Maxime  autem
in  hoc  quideni  genere  vis  est  perspicua  naturae,  cum
et  mendicilatem  multi  perpetiantur  ut  vivant,  et
angantur  appropinquatione  mortis  confeeti  homines
senectute,  et  ea  perferant  quae  Philoctetam  videmus
in  fubulis ;  qui  cuiu  cruciaretur  non  ferendis  dolori-
bus,  propagabat  tamen  vitam  aucupto ;  configebat
tardus  celeres,  stans  volantes/  ut  apud  Attium  est,

BOOK  V.  iti
recoil  so  violently  from  the  dissolution  of  our  being
(and  tile  same  timidity  in  regard  to  pain  is  blame-
worthy) ;  but  the  fact  that  practically  everybody  has
this  feeling  is  conclusive  proof  that  nature  shrinks
from  destruction ;  and  the  more  some  people  act  thus
—as  indeed  they  do  to  a  blameworthy  degree^the
moreit  is  to  be  inferred  that  this  very  excess  would  not
have  occurred  in  exceptional  eases,  were  not  a  cer-
tain moderate  degree  of  such  timidity  natural.  I  am
not  referring  to  the  fear  of  death  felt  by  those  who
shun  death  because  they  believe  it  means  the  loss  of
the  good  things  of  life,  or  because  they  are  afraid
of  certain  horrors  after  death,  or  if  they  dread  lest
death  may  be  painful :  for  very  often  young  children,
who  do  not  think  of  any  of  these  things,  are  terribly
frightened  if  in  fun  we  threaten  to  let  them  fall
from  a  height.  Even  wild  creatures,'  says  Pacuvius,
Lacking  discourse  of  reason
To  look  before,'
when  seized  with  fear  of  death,  bristle  with
!  horror,'  Who  does  not  suppose  that  the  Wise  Man  ia
himself,  even  when  he  has  resolved  that  he  must '"
die,  will  yet  be  affected  at  parting  from  his  friends
and  quitting-  the  very  light  of  day  ?  The  strength
of  natural  impulse,  in  this  manifestation  of  it,  is
extremely  obvious,  since  many  men  endure  to  beg
their  bread  in  order  -that  they  may  live,  and  men
broken  with  age  suffer  anguish  at  the  approach  of
death,  and  endure  torments  like  those  of  Philoctetes
in  the  play;  who  though  racked  with  intolerable
pains,  nevertheless  prolonged  his  hfe  by  fowling;

'  he  pierced  the  swift  <
I  «hot  them  on  the  wing,'

ith  t

standing

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
peimarumque  contextu  eorpori  tegumenta  faciebat,

33  De  honiinum  genere  aut  omnino  de  animalium  lo-
quor,  cum  arborum  et  stirpium  eadem  paene  natura
sit  ?  Sive  enim,  ut  doctissimis  viris  visum  est,  maior
aliqua  causa  atque  divinior  hanc  vim  ing^nuit,  sive
hoc  ita  fit  fortuito,  videmus  ea  quae  terra  gignit
corticibus  et  radicibus  vallda  servari,  quod  contingit
animalibus  sensuum  distributione  et  quadam  com-
pactione  membrorum.  Qua  quideni  de  re  quamquam
assentior  iis  qui  haec  omnia  regi  natura  putant,  quae  si
natura  neglegat,  ipsa  esse  non  possit,'  tanien  concede
ut  qui  de  hoc  dissentiunt  esistiment  quod  velint  ac  vel
hocintellegant,siquandonaturam  hominis  dicam,  ho-
niineni  dicere  me ;  nihil  enim  hoc  differt.  Nam  prius
a  se  poterit  quisque  discedere  quain  appetitum  earum
rerum  quae  sibi  conducant  amittere.  lure  igitur
gravissimi  philosopbi  initium  summi  boiii  a  natura
petivermit  et  ilium  appetitum  rerum  ad  naturam
accommodatarum  ingeneratum  putaverunt  omnibus,
quia  continetur^  ea  commendatione  naturae  qua  se
ipsi  dJligunL

34  XII.  Deinceps  videndum  est,  quoniam  satis
apertum  est  sibi  quemque  natura  esse  carum,  quae
sit  hominis  natura.  Id  est  enim  dc  quo  quaerimus.
Atqui  perspicuum  est  hominem  e  corpore  animoque
constare,  cum  primae  sint  animi  partes,  secundae

'possit  B,  E,  Milv. ;  possint  inf.  MSS.

"quia  conlinelur  suggested  by  Mdv.,  who  prints  quia
amtinentur ;  gut  con/intndir  MSS. ;  gui  conlinttvr  SchO-

BOOK  V.  xi-xii
as  Attius  has  it,  and  wove  their  plumage  together  to  M  ibe  u»  of

J  make  himself  garments.  But  do  I  speak  of  the  "tmw^»)
human  race  or  of  animals  generally,  when  the  nature  »°i™ato  natui
of  trees  and  plants  is  almost  the  same  ?  For  whether
it  be,  as  very  learned  men  have  thought,  that  this
capacity  has  been  engendered  in  them  by  some
higher  and  diviner  power,  or  whether  it  is  the  result
of  ehance,  we  see  that  the  vegetable  species  secure
by  means  of  their  bark  and  roots  that  support  and
protection  which  animals  derive  from  the  distribu-
tion of  the  sensory  organs  and  from  the  well-knit
framework  of  the  limbs.  On  this  matter  I  agree,  it
is  true,  with  those  who  hold  tliat  all  these  things
are  regulated  by  nature,  because  if  nature  were  to
neglect  them  her  own  existence  would  be  impossible ;
yet  1  allow  those  who  think  otherwise  on  this  point
to  hold  what  view  they  please  :  wlienever  I  nien-
tion  the  nature  of  man,"  let  them,  if  they  like,
understand  me  to  mean  man,'  as  it  makes  no
difference.  For  the  individual  can.  no  more  lose  the
instinct  to  seek  the  things  that  are  good  for  him
than  he  can  divest  himself  of  his  own  personality.
The  wisest  authorities  have  therefore  been  right  in
finding  the  basis  of  the  Chief  Good  in  nature,  and  in
holding  that  this  instinctive  desire  for  things  suited
to  our  nature  is  innate  in  all  men,  because  it  is
founded  on  that  natural  attraction  which  makes
them  love  themselves.  _

t XII. Having made it sufficiently clear that  Review  rf
every  one  by  nature  loves  himself,  we  must  next  ""^°' ""'""
examine  what  is  the  nature  of  man. For  it  is  human
nature  that  is  the  object  of  our  investigation. Now
it  is  manifest  that  man  consists  of  body  and  mmC
although  the  parts  of  the  mind  hold  the  first  plac

k^

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  ^

corporis.  Deinde  id  quoque  videmus,  et  ita  figu-
ratum  corpus  ut  excellat  aliis,  animumque  ita  consti-
tutum  ut  et  seiisibus  instruclus  sit  et  liabeat  prae-
slantiam  mentis  cui  tota  hominis  natura  pareatj  in
qua  sit  mirabilis  quacdam  vis  rationis  et  cognitionis
et  scientiae  virtutumque  omnium.  Nam  quae  corpo-
ris sunt  ea  nee  auctoritatem  cum  animi  partibus
comparaiidam  et  cognitionem  habent  facitiorem.
Itaque  ab  his  ordiamur.
5  Corporis  igitor  nostri  partes  totaque  figura  et

forma  ct  statura  quam  apta  ad  naturam  sit  apparet,
neque  est  dubium  quin  frons,  oculi,  aures  et  reliquac
partes  quales  propriae  sint  hominis  inteilegatur;  sed
certe  opus  est  ea  valere  et  vigere  et  iiaturales  motus
usosque  habere,  ut  nee  absit  quid  eorum  nee  aegrum
debilitatumve  sit.  Id  enim  natura  desiderat.  Est
autem  etiam  actio  quaedam  corporis  quae  motus  et
status  naturae  congruentes  tenet ;  in  quibus  si
peccetur  distortione  et  depravatione  quadam  ac
motu  statuve  deformi,  ut  si  aut  manibus  ingrediatur
quis  aut  non  ante  sed  retro,  fugere  plane  se  ipse  et
hominein  exuetis  ex  homine  naturam  odisse  videatur.
Quamobrem  etiam  sessiones  quaedam  et  flexi  fracti-
que  motus,  quales  protervorum  hominum  aut  mollium
esse  Solent,  contra  naturam  sunt,  ut  etiaiosi  animi
430

BOOK  V.  sii

and  those  of  the  body  the  Eecond.  Next  we  further
observe  both  that  man's  body  is  of  a  structure  sur-
passing that  of  other  animals,  and  that  his  mind  is  so
constituted  as  not  only  to  be  equipped  w
but  also  to  possess  the  predominant  factor  of  intel-
lect, which  commands  the  obedience  of  the  whole
of  man's  nature,  being  endowed  with  the  marvellous
faculties  of  reason,  of  cognition,  of  knowledge  and  of
all  the  virtues.  For  the  attributes  of  the  body  are
not  comparable  in  importance  with  the  parts  of  the
mind ;  and  moreover  they  are  easier  to  understand.
We  will  therefore  begin  with  them.
)  "  It  is  manifest  how  well  the  parts  of  our  body.  The  b
and  its  entire  fit?tire,  form  and  stature  are  adapted  [^^
to  our  nature;  and  that  special  conformation  of  the  by  it»
brow,  eyes,  ears  and  other  parts  which  is  appropriate
to  man,  can  be  recognized  without  hesitation  by  the
understanding;  but  of  course  it  is  necessary  that
these  organs  should  be  healthy  and  vigorous  and
possessed  of  their  natural  motions  and  uses ;  no  part
must  be  lacking  and  none  must  be  diseased  or  en-
feebled. This  is  a  requirement  of  nature.  Again,
our  body  also  possesses  a  faculty  of  action  which
keeps  its  motions  and  postures  in  harmony  with
nature;  and  any  error  in  these,  due  to  distortion
or  deformity  or  abnormality  of  movement  or  pos-
ture,^ — -for  example,  if  a  man  were  to  w^alk  on  his
hands,  or  backwards  instead  of  forwards,-^would
make  a  man  appear  alienated  from  himself,  as
if  he  had  stripped  off  his  proper  humanity  and
hated  his  own  nature.  Hence  certain  attitudes  in
sitting,  and  slouching,  languishing  movements,  such
as  are  affected  by  the  wanton  and  the  effeminate,  are
contrary  to  nature,  and  though  really  arising  from  a
431

id  ««I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

vjbio  id  evetiiat  tamen  in  corpore  mutari  hominis
1  iiatura  videatur. Itaque  e  contrario  moderati  aequa-
bilesqup habitus,  affectiones ususqiie corporis apti
esse  ad  naturam  videntur.

lam  vero  animus  non  esse  solum  sed  etiam  cuius-
dam  modi  debet  esse,  ut  et  omnes  partes  suas  habeat
incolumes  et  de  virtutibus  nulla  desit.  Atque  in
sensibus  est  sua  cuiusque  virtus,  ut  ne  quid  impediat
quo  minus  suo  sensus  quisque  munere  fungatur  in
lis  rebus  celeriter  expediteque  percipiendis  quae
subieetae  sunt  sensibus.  XIII.  Aiiimi  autem  et  eius
animi  partis  quae  princeps  est  quaeque  a.
iiatur  plures  sunt  virtu tes,  sed  duo  prima  genera,
unum  earum  quae  ingenenintur  suapte  iiatura  ap-
pellanturque  non  voluntariae,  alterum'  earum  quae
in  voluntate  positae  magis  proprio  nomine  appeUari
Solent,  quarum  est  excellens  in  animoruni  laude  prae-
stantia.  Prions  generis  est  docilitas,  meradria ;  quae
fere  omnia  appellantur  uno  ingeni  nomine,  easque
virtu  tes  qui  habent  ingcniosi  vocantur.  Alterum
autem  genus  est  magnarum  verarumque  virtutum.
quas  appellamus  voluntarias,  ut  prudentiam,  tem-
perantiam,  fortitudinem,  iustitiam  et  reliquas  generis
eiusdem,

"  Et  summatim  quidera  haec  erant  de  corpore  ani-
moque  dicenda,  quibus  quasi  informatum  est  quid
hominis  nature  postulet;  ex  quo  perspicuum  est,
quoniam  ipsi  a  nobis  diligamur  omniaque  et  in  animo

alien

1  E.

BOOK  V.

perver-  ^^M

ion  and  ^H

defect  of  mind,  suggest  to  the  eye  a  bodily  perver-
3  sion  of  man's  nature. And  so,  on  the  contrary,
controlled  and  well-regulated  bearing,  condition
movement  of  the  body  have  the  appearance  of  being
in  harmony  with  nature.

Turning  now  to  the  mind,  this  must  not  only  ibc  Stn
exist,  but  also  be of  a  certain character;  it  must
have  all  its  parts  intact  and  lack  none  of  the  virtues.
The  senses  also  possess  their  several  virtues  or  excel-
lences, consisting  in  the  unimpeded  performance  of
their  several  functions  of  swiftly  and  readily  per-
ceiving the  objects  presented  to  them. XIII. The  Thcmim
mind,  on  the  other  hand,  and  that  dominant  part  of  m^Mt
the  mind  which  is  called  the  intellect,  possess  many  "t'"'^''
excellences  or  virtues,  but  these  are  of  two  main  iwndinj
classes;  one  class  consists  of  those  excellences  which  "^™
are  the  result  of  our  natural  endowments  and  which
are called  non-vohtional ;  and  the  other  of  those
which,  depending  on  our  volition,  are  usually  styled
virtues '  in  the  more  special  sense ;  and  the  latter  are
the  pre-eminent  glory  and  distinction  of  the  mind.
To  the  former  class  belong  receptiveness  andmemory;
and  practically  all  the  excellences  of  this  class  are
included  under  one  name of talent,' and their
possessors  are  spoken  of  as talented.' The  other
class  consists  of  the  lofty  virtues  properly  so  called,
which we  speak of  as  dependent on  volition, for
instance.  Prudence,  Temperance,  Courage,  Justice,
and  the  others  of  the  same  kind.

Such  is  the  account,  a  brief  one,  it  is  true,  that  SeU-iovm
it  was  necessary  to  give  of  the  body  and  the  mind.  S^u^,
It  has  indicated  in  outline  what  the  requirements  ""
of  man's nature are ; and  it has clearly shown
that,  since  we  love  ourselves,  and  desire  all  our

FF  433

L.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
et  in  corpore  perfecta  velimus  esse,  ea  nobis  ipsa
cars  esse  propter  ?e  et  in  iis  esse  ad  bene  vivendum
momenta  maxima.  Nam  cuj  proposita  sit  conservatio
sui,  necesse  est  liuic  partes  quoque  sui  caras  e
carioresque  quo  perfectiores  sint  et  magis  in
genere  laudabiles.  Ea  enim  vita  expetitur  quae  sit
animi  corporisque  expleta  virtutibus,  iji  eoque  sum-
mum  bonum  poni  necesse  est,  quando  quidem  id  talf
esse  debet  ut  rerum  expetcndarum  sit  extremum,
Quo  cognito  dubitari  non  potest  qiiin,  cum  ipst
homines  sibi  sint  per  se  et  sua  sponte  cari,  partes
quoque  et  corporis  et  animi  et  earum  rerum  quae
sunt  in  utriusque  motu  et  statu  sua  earitate  colantai
HB  et  per  se  ipsae  appetintur.  Quibus  expositis  facilis
est  conieetura  ea  maxime  esse  expetenda  ex  nostris
quae  plurimum  habent  dignitatis,  ut  optimae  cuiaa-
que  partis  quae '  per  se  espetatur  virtus  sit  espetenil»
maxime.  Ita  fiet  ut  animi  virtus  corporis  virtnti
anteponatur  animique  virtutes  non  voluntarias  vin-
cant  virtutes  voluntariae,  quae  quidem  proprie  v
tutes  appellantur  multumque  excellunt,  propterw
quod  ex  ratione  gigimntur  qua  nihil  est  in  homii
divinius.  Etenim  omnium  rerum  quas  et  creat  n
tura  et  tuetur,  quae  aut  sine  animo  sunt  aut  no:
multo  secus,  earum  summum  bonum  in  corpore  est;
ut  non  inscite  illud  dictum  videatur  in  sue,  auimum
illi  pecudi  datum  pro  sale,  ne  putiseeret. XIV,  Sunt

ROOK V. xiii

attributes  both  of  mind  and  body  to  be  perfect,
our  mind  and  body  are  themselves  dear  to  us  for
their  own  sakes,  and  are  of  the  highest  importance
for  our  general  well-being.  For  he  who  aims  at  the
preservation  of  himself,  must  necessarily  feel  an  affec-
tion for  the  parts  of  himself  also,  and  the  more  so,
the  more  perfect  and  admirable  in  their  own  kind
they  are.  For  the  life  we  desire  is  one  fully  equipped  ^,
with  the  virtues  of  mind  and  body ;  and  such  a  life
must  constitute  the  Chief  Good,  inasmuch  as  it  must
necessarily  be  such  as  to  be  the  limit  of  things  desir-
able. -  This  truth  realized,  it  cannot  be  doubted  that,
as  men  feel  an  affection  towards  themselves  for  their
own  sakes  and  of  their  own  accord,  the  parts  also  of
the  body  and  mind,  and  of  those  faculties  which  arc
displayed  in  each  while  in  motion  or  at  rest,  are
esteemed  for  their  own  attractiveness  and  desired
t  for  their  own  sake.  From  these  explanations,  it  cs
may  readily  be  inferred  that  the  most  desirable  of  J^
our  attributes  are  those  possessed  of  the  highest "
intrinsic  wori;h  ;  so  that  the  most  desirable  excel-  m.
lences  are  the  escellences  of  the  noblest  parts  of  us,
which  are  desirable  for  their  own  sake.  The  result
■will  be  that  excellence  of  mind  will  be  rated  higher
than  escellence  of  body,  and  the  volitional  virtues
of  the  mind  will  surpass  the  non- volitional ;  the
former,  indeed,  are  the  virtues '  specially  so  called,
and  are  far  superior,  in  that  they  spring  from  reason,
the  most  divine  element  in  man.  For  the  inanimate
or  nearly  inanimate  creatures  that  are  under  nature's
charge,  all  of  them  have  their  supreme  good  in  the
body;  hence  it  has  been  cleverly  said,as  I  think, about
the  pig,  that  a  mind  has  been  bestowed  upon  this
animal  to  serve  as  salt  and  keep  it  from  going  bad.

FF2

435

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  '
autem  bestiae  quaedam  in  quibus  inest  aliquid  simile
virtutis,  ut  in  leonibus,  ut  in  canibus,  ut''  in  equis,
in  quibus  iion  corporum  solum  ut  in  suibus  sed  etiam
animoTum  aliqua  ex  parte  motus  quosdam  videmus.
In  homine  autem  summa  oinnis  animi  est  et  in  animo
rationis,  ex  qua  virtus  est,  quae  rationis  absolutio
definitur,  quam  etiam  atque  etiam  explicondun
putant.

39  Earum  etiam  renim  quas  terra  gignit  educriio
quaedam  et  perfectio  est  non  dissimilis  animaatiuiii;
itaque  et  vivere  viteni  et  mori  dicimus,  arboreinque
et  novellam  et  vetulam  et  vigere  et  senescere;  ex
quo  non  est  alienum  ut  animantibus  sic  illis  et  apti
quaedam  ad  naturani  putare  et  aljena,  earumque
augendarum  et  alendarum  qiiandam  cultricem  esse,
quae  sit  scientia  atque  ars  agricolarum,  quae  circum-
cidat,ainputet,erigat,eKtollat,adminiculet,utquona-
tura  ferat  eo  possint  ire ;  ut  ipsae  vites  si  loqui  possint  '
ita  se  tractandas  tuendasque  esse  fateantur.  Et  n
quidem  quod  earn  tuetur,  ut  de  vite  potissimuia
loquar,  est  id  extrinsecus ;  in  ipsa  enim  parum  magni
vis  inest  ut  quam  optime  se  habere  possit  si  null*

40  cultura  adhibeatur.  At  vero  si  ad  vitem  s
cesserit,  ut  appetitum  quendani  habeat  et  per  se
ipsa  moveatur,  quid  facturam  putas?  Au  ea  quse
per  vinitorem  antea  consequebatur  per  se  ipsa  e

'  Hi  inserted  by  edd.

a  This  definili

1  Qf  n

ority  t<

lellectual  (

e  and  the  doctrine  above
:celicnce  (the  exact  oppo-
tencts  foisted  on  the  Ptii-

!!^c

BOOK  V,  xiv
XIV.  But  there  are  some  animals  which  possess
something  resembling  virtue,  for  example.  Loos,
dogs  and  horses  ;  in  these  we  observe  not  only  bodily
movements  as  in  pigs,  but  in  some  degree  a  sort  of
niental  activity  also.  In  man,  however,  the  Supreme
End  appertains  entirely  to  the  mind,  and  to  the
rational  part  of  the  mind,  which  is  the  source  of
virtue  ;  and  virtue  is  defined  as  the  perfeetion  of
reason,'  a  doctrine  which  the  Peripatetics  think  can-
not be  expounded  too  often.

Plants  also  have  a  development  and  progress  to
maturity  that  is  not  unlike  that  of  animals  ;  hence
we  speak  of  a  vine  as  living  and  dying,  or  of  a  tree
as  young  or  old,  in  the  prime  of  life  or  decrepit ;
consequently  it  is  appropriate  to  suppose  that  with
them  as  with  animals  certain  things  are  suited  and
certain  other  things  foreign  to  their  nature ;  and
that  their  growth  and  nurture  is  tended  by  a  foster-
mother,  the  science  and  art  of  husbandry,  which
trims  and  prunes,  straightens,  raises  and  props,
enabling  them  to  follow  tile  course  that  nature  pre-
scribes, till  the  vines  themselves,  could  they  speak,
would  acknowledge  this  to  be  their  proper  mode  of
treatment  and  of  tendance.  In  reality,  of  course,
the  power  that  tends  the  vine,  to  take  that  parti-
cular instance,  is  something  outside  of  it ;  for  the
vine  does  not  possess  force  enough  in  itself  to  be
able  to  attain  its  highest  possible  development  with-
out the  aid  of  cultivation.  But  suppose  the  vine  to
receivS  the  gift  of  sensation,  bestowing  on  it  some
degree  of  appetition  and  power  of  movement ;  then
what  do  you  think  it  will  do  ?  Will  it  not  endeavour
to  provide  for  itself  the  benefits  which  it  previously
obtained  by  the  aid  of  the  vine-dresser? But  do

■137

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Sed  videsne  access  urani  ei  curam  nt  sensos

qiiO(iue  suos  eonuiMjue  omnem  appetitum  et  si  qua
sint  adiuTicta  ei  membrn  tueatur?  Sic  ad  ilia  quae
semper  habuit  iunget  ea  quae  postea  accesseriiit,'
nee  eundem  finem  habebit  queiii  cultor  eiiis  habebat.
sed  volet  secundum  cam  naturam  quae  postea  eiadiun-
cta  erit*  vivere.  Ita  similis  erit  ei  finis  boni  atque
antea  fuerat,  ncque  idem  tamen ;  non  enim  iam  stirpis
bonum  quaeret  sed  animalis.  Quid  si  non  sensus
modo  ei  datus  sit  verum  etiam  animus  hominis?  non
neeesse  est'et  ilia  pristina  manere  ut  tuenda  sint  et
baec  multo  esse  cariora  quae  accesserint,  animique
optimam  quamque  partem  carissimam,  in  eaqiie  ex.-
pletione  naturae  summi  boni  finem  consistere,  cum
longe  multunique  praestet  mens  atque  ratio?  Sie
exstitit'  extremiim  omnium  appetendorum  atque
duct  11  m  a  prima  conimendatione  naturae  raultis
gradibus  ascendit  ut  ad  summum  pert'eniret,  quod
cumulatur  ex  integritate  corporis  et  ex  mentis  ratione
perfecla.
I  XV.  Cum  igitur  ea  sit  quam  exposui  fomm  na-
turae, si  ut  initio  dixi  simul  atque  ortus  esset  se
quisque  cognosceret  iudicareque  posset  quae  vis  et
totius  esset  naturae  et  jiartium  singularum,  continuo  I
videret  quid" esset  hoc  quod  quaerimus,  omnium
rerum  quas  expetimus  summum  et  uitimum,  nee  ^
ulla  in  re  peccare  posset.  Nunc  vero  a  primo  quidem  f
mirabiliter occulta natura est nee perspici nee

'  acresseriai  tilSS.,  edd.;  Mdv.  suggests  acasseninl.  .

"enVMiiller:  nV  MSS. ;  est  Mdv.  \

"sicextiiitUdv.;  sic  et,  sicfut,  sit^ui  MSS.  I

[^  BOOK  V.  xiv-xv

you  tnark  how  it  will  further  be  concerned  to  pro-
tect its  sensory  faculties  also  and  all  their  appetitive
instincts,  and  aay  additional  organs  it  may  have
developed  ?  Thus  with  the  properties  that  it  always
posses-sed  it  will  combine  those  subsequently  added
to  it,  and  it  will  not  have  the  same  End  as  the  hus-
bandman who  tended  it  had,  but  will  desire  to  live  in
accordance  with  that  nature  which  it  hassubsequently
acquired.  Andsoits  End  or  Goodwill  be  similar  to,  but
not  the  same  as,  what  it  was  before ;  it  will  no  longer
seek  the  Good  of  a  plant,  but  that  of  an  animal.  Sup-
pose again  that  it  have  bestowed  upon  it  not  merely
sensation  but  also  a  human  mind.  Will  it  not  result
that  while  its  former  properties  remain  objects  of
its  care,  these  added  properties  will  be  far  more  dear
to  it,  and  that  the  best  part  of  the  mind  will  be  the
dearest  of  all  ?  Will  it  not  find  its  End  or  Chief
Good  in  this  crowning  development  of  its  nature,
inasmuch  as  intellect  and  reason  are  far  and  away
the  highest  faculties  tjiat  exist?  Thus  there  has  Man's  End  i
emerged  the  final  term  of  the  series  of  objects  of  £!^J^^J?^
desire ;  thus  guided by  the  primary  attraction  of  j|

nature  it  has  risen  by  many  stages  till  it  has  reached  ^M

the  summit,  the  consummation  of  perfect  bodily  in- *' ^M
tegrity  combined  with  the  full  development  of  the  ■

mental  faculty  of  reason.

XV.  The  plan  of  our  nature  being  then  that  Man  aiuim
which  I  have  explained,  if,  as  I  said  at  the  outset,  ^^ledJo'S
every  man  as  soon  as  he  is  born  could  know  himself*"
and  could  appreciate  the  powers  of  his  nature  as  a
whole  and  of  its  several  parts,  he  would  at  once  per-
ceive what  is  this  thing  that  we  seek,  the  highest  and
last  of  the  objects  of  our  desires,  and  he  would  be  in-
capable of  error  in  anything.  But  as  it  is,  our  nature
4S9

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

cogtiosci  potest ;  progredientibus  autem  a.etatibiu
sensimtardeve  potiits  quasi  nosmetipsoscognoscimus,
Itaque  prima  ilia  coniniendatio  quae  a  natura  nostri
facta  est  nobis  incerta  et  obscura  est,  primusque
appetitua  ille  aniiui  tantum  agit  ut  salvi  atque
integri  esse  possimus;  cum  autem  dispicere  coepi-
et  sentire  quid  simus  et  quid  ab"  animantibus
ceteris  difTeramus,  turn  ea  sequi  Incipimus  ad  quae
4'2  iiati  sumus.  Quam  similitudinem  videmus  in  bestiis,
quae  primo  in  quo  loco  natae  sunt  ex  eo  se  non
conimovent;  deindc  suo  quaeque  appetitu  movetur;
serpere  angiiiculoSj  nare  anaticulas,  evolare  merulas,
cornibus  uti  videmus  boves,  nepas  aculeis,  suam
denique  cuique  naturam  esse  ad  vivendum  ducem.
Quae  similitudo  in  genere  etiam  humano  apparet
Parvi  enim  primo  ortu  sic  iacent,  tumquam  omnino
sine  snimo  sint ;  cum  autem  puulum  firmitatis  acces-
sit,"  et  animo  utuntur  et  sensibus,  conituiiturque
sese  ut  erigant,  et  manibus  utuntur,  et  eos  agno-
scunt  a  quibus  educantur;  deinde  aequalibus  dele-
ctantur  libenterque  se  cum  iis  congregant  dantque
se  ad  ludendum  fabellarumque  auditione  ducuatur,
deque  eo  quod  ipsis  supcrat  aliis  gratifieari  volunt,
animadvertuntque  ea  quae  domi  Bunt  curiosius,
inctpiuntque  comnientari  aliquid  et  discere,  et  eonun
quos  vident  volunt  non  ignorare  noniina,  quibusque
rebus  cum  aequalibus  decertant  si  vicerunt  efferunt
se  laetitia,  victi  debilitantur  atiimosque  demittunt;

'  co^fiimus  Mdv.  with  some  MSS.  (cp.  42  accessit),  coeperi-

^ab  added  by  edd.

^acressit  Mdv.  with  B  and  E,  inf.  MSS.  accesserit.

I^  BOOK  V.  XV

at  the  beginning  is  curiously  hidden  from  us,  and  we
cannot  ftilly  realize  or  understand  it ;  yet  as  we  grow
older  we  gradually  or  I  should  say  tardily  come,  as  it
were,  to  know  ourselves.  Accordingly,  the  earliest
fteling  of  attraction  which  nature  has  created  in  us
towards  ourselves  is  vague  and  obscure,  and  the
earliest  instinct  of  appetition  only  strives  to  secure
our  safety  and  freedom  from  injury.  Wlien,  however,
discernment  dawns  and  we  begin  to  perceive  what
we  are  and  how  we  differ  from  the  rest  of  living
creatures,  we  then  commence  to  pursue  the  objects
i  for  which  we  are  intended  by  nature.  Some  re-
semblance to  this  process  we  observe  in  the  lower
animals.  At  first  they  do  not  move  from  the  place
where  they  were  born.  Then  they  begin  to  move,
under  the  influence  of  tlieir  several  instincts  of
appetition;  we  see  little  snakes  gliding,  ducklings
swimming,  blackbirds  flying,  oxen  using  their  horns,
scorpions  their  stings;  each  in  fact  has  its  own
nature  as  its  guide  to  life.  A  similar  process  is
clearly  seen  in  the  human  race.  Infants  just  bom
lie  as  if  absolutely  inanimate;  when  they  have
acquired  some  small  degree  of  strength,  they  exer-
cise their  mind  and  their  senses;  they  strive  to
stand  erect,  they  use  their  hands,  they  recognize
their  nurses ;  then  they  take  pleasure  in  the  society
of  other  children,  and  enjoy  meeting  them,  they
take  part  in  games  and  love  to  hear  stories;  they
desire  to  bestow  of  their  own  abundance  in  bounty
to  others ;  they  take  a  keen  interest  in  what  goes  on
in  the  household;  they  begin  to  rettect  and  to  learn,
and  want  to  know  the  names  of  the  people  they
see ;  in  competition  with  their  companions  they  are
elated  by  victory,  discouraged  and  disheartened  by
441

CICERO  DE  FlNinUS
43  quorum  sine  causa  fieri  nihil  putandum  est.
enim  natura  sic  generata  vis  hominis  ut  ad  otn
virtutem  percipiendam  facta  videatur,  oh  eamque
causam  parvi  virtutum  sitnulacris  quarum  ii;
habent  semina  sine  doctrina  moventur;  sunt  (
prima  elementa  naturae,  quibus  auctis  virtutis  quasi
gerraen^  eHicitur.  Nam  cum  itanati  factique  simus
ut  et  agendi  aliquid  et  diligendi  aliquos  et  liberali-
tatis  et  referendae  gratiae  principia  in  nobis  contine-
remus  atgue  ad  scientiam,  prudeiitiam,  fortitudinem
aptos animos habere mus  a  contrariisque  rebus  alienos,
non  sine  causa  eas  quas  dixi  in  pueris  virtutum  quasi
scintillas  videmus,  e  quibus  accendi  philosophi  ratio
debet,  ut  earn  quasi  deum  durem  subsequens  ad
naturae  perveniat  estremum.  Nam  ut  saepe  iam
dixi  in  infirma  aetate  imbeelllaquc  mente  vis  naturae
quasi  per  caliginem  cemitur ;  cum  autem  progrediens
eonfirmatur  animus,  agnoscit  ille  quidem  naturae
vim,  sed  ita  ut  progredi  possit  longius,  per  f
tantum"  inchoata.
44.  XVI.  '  Intrandum  igitur  est  in  rerum  naturam  et
penitus  quid  ea  postulet  pervidendum  ;  aliter
nosmet  ipsos  nosse  non  possumus.  Quod  praeceptum
quia  matus  erat  quam  ut  ab  horaine  videretiir,  idcirco
assignatum  est  deo.  lubet  igitur  nos  Pythius  Apollo
noscere  nosmet  ipsos ;  cognitio  autem  haec  est  uii»
nostri  ut  vim  corporis  animique  norimus  sequamur-
que  earn  vitam  quae  rebus  iis^  perfruatur.

'germen  GrDiiovLus,  Mdv.;  carmen  MSS.

■  fantum  Mdv.;  tamen  MSS.

'rebus  its  Muller  (cp.  g  46  and  IV,  28,  iitraquc

B,  E  i  rebus  ifisis  inf.  MSS.  i  [rebus]  h
442

Mciv.

SuWtc

!■  BOOK  V.  xv-xvi

defeat. For  every  stag-e  of  this  development  tliere

3  must  be  supposed  to  be  a  reason.  It  is  that  human  (btiithEg
capacity  is  so  constituted  by  nature  that  it  appears  ^Motata!
designed  to  achieve  every  kind  of  virtue;  hence  ^ '^jj?r
children,  without  instructionj  are  actuated  by  seni-
blance:s  of  the  virtues,  of  which  they  possess  in  them-
selves the  seeds,  for  those  are  primary  elements  of
our  nature,  which  seeds  sprout  and  blossom  into
virtue.  For  we  are  so  constituted  from  birth  as  to
contain  within  us  the  primary  instindts  of  activity,  of
affection,  of  liberality  and  of  gratitude ;  we  are  also
glided  with  minds  that  are  adapted  to  knowledge,
prudence  and  courage,  and  averse  from  their  oppo-
sites;  hence  we  see  the  reason  why  we  observe  in
children  those  sparks  of  virtue  I  have  mentioned,
from  which  the  philosopher's  torch  of  reason  must
be  kindled,  that  he  may  follow  reason  as  his  divine
guide  and  so  arrive  at  nature's  goal.  For  as  I  have
repeatedly  said  already,  in  the  years  of  immaturity
and  intellectual  weakness  tlie  powers  of  our  nature
are  discerned  as  through  a  mist;  but  as  the  mind
.  grows  older  and  stronger  it  learns  to  know  the
capacitj'  of  our  nature,  while  recognizing  that  this
nature  is  susceptible  of  further  development  and  has
by  itself  only  reached  an  incomplete  condition.

ti XVI. We  must therefore penetrate into the  Taknc
nature  of  things,  and  come  to  understand  thoroughly  ^^^
its  requirements;  otherwise  we  cannot  know  our-  mosii
selves. That precept  was  too  high  for  man's  dis-
cernment, and  was  therefore  ascribed  to  a  god. It
is  therefore  the  Pythian  Apollo  who  bids  us  '  know
ourselves' ;  but  the  sole  road  to  self-knowledge  is  to
know  the  powers  of  body  and  of  mind,  and  to  follow
the  path  of  life  that  gives  us  their  full  realization.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Quoniam  autem  is  animi  appetitus  a  principio  fuit,
ut  ea  quae  dixi  quam  perfectissima  natura  haberemus,
ponfitenduin  est,  cum  id  adepti  simus  quod  appetj turn
sit,  ill  eo  quasi  in  ultimo  consistere  naturam  atque
id  esse  sumtnum  bonuin  ;  quod  certe  universum  sua
sponte  ipsum  expeti  et  propter  se  uecesse  est,  quo-
niam ante  demonstratum  est  etiamsingulaseius  partes
esse  per  se  expetendas.

i  In  enumerandis  autem  corporis  commodis  si  quis

praetermissam  a  nobis  voluptatem  putabit,  in  aliud
tempus  ea  quaestio  differatur.  Utrum  enim  sit  volu-
ptas  in  iis  rebus  quas  primas  secundum  naturam  esse
diximus  necne  sit,  ad  id  quod  agimus  nihil  interest.
Si  enim,  ut  raihi  quidem  videtur,  non  esplet  bona
naturae  voluptas,  iure  praetermissa  est;  sin  autem
est  in  ea  quod  quidam  volunt,  nihil  impedit  hanc
nostram  comprebensionem  summi  boni ;  quae  enim
constituta  sunt  prima  naturae,  ad  ea  si  voluptas  acces-
serit,  unum  aliquod  accesserit  commodum  corporis
neque  earn  const! tuti one m  summi  boni  quae  est  prO"
posita  mutaverit.

J  XVII.  Et  adhuc  quidem  ita  nobis  progressa  ratio
est  ut  ea  duceretur  omnis  a  prinia  commendatione
naturae.  Nunc  autem  aliod  iam  argumentandi  se-
quamur  j^enus,  ut  non  solum  quia  nos  diligamus  sed
quia  cuiusque  partis  naturae  et  in  corpore  et  in
animo  sua  quaeque  vis  sit,  idcirco  in  his  rebus  summe'

•  summe  edd.;  su mma  MSS.

r"

BOOK  V.

Now  inasmuch  as  our  original  instinct  of  di
was  for  tlie  possession  of  the  parts  aforesaid  in  their
fullest  natural  perfection,  it  must  be  allowed  that,
when  we  have  attained  the  object  of  our  desire,  our
nature  takes  its  stand  in  this  as  its  final  End,  and
this  constitutes  our  Chief  Good ;  and  that  this  End
as  a  whole  must  be  desired  intrinsically  and  in  and
for  itself,  follows  of  necessity  from  the  fact  that  the
several  parts  of  it  also  have  already  been  proved  to
be  desirable  for  themselves.

)  If  however  anyone  thinks  tliat  our  enumeration

of  bodily  advantages  is  incomplete  owing  to  the
omission  of  pleasure,  let  us  postpone  this  question  to
another  time.  For  whether  pleasure  is  or  is  not  one
of  the  objects  we  have  called  the  primary  things  in
accordance  with  nature  makes  no  difttrenee  for  our
present  inquiry.  If,  as  I  hold,  pleasure  adds  nothing
to  the  sum-total  of  nature's  goods,  it  has  rightly  been
omitted.  If  on  the  contrary  pleasure  does  possess
the  property  that  some  assign  to  it,  this  fact  does
not  impair  the  general  outline  we  have  just  given  of
the  Chief  Good ;  since  if  to  the  primary  objects  of
nature  as  we  have  explained  them,  pleasure  be  added,
this  only  adds  one  more  to  the  list  of  bodily  advan-
tages, and  does  not  alter  the  interpretation  of  the
Chief  Good  which  has  been  propounded.

I  XVII.  So  far  as  our  argument  has  proceeded
hitherto,  it  has  been  based  entirely  upon  the  primary
attractions  of  nature.  But  from  this  point  on  let  us
adopt  a  different  line  of  reasoning,  namely  to  show
that,  in  addition  to  the  argument  from  self-love,  the
fact  that  each  part  of  our  nature,  both  mental  and
bodily,  possesses  its  own  peculiar  energy  goes  to  prove
that  the  activity  of  our  several  parts  '  is  pre-eminently
4.4.5

1  in  the

I

P nostra  spon
videsne  ut

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

nostra  sponte  moveamur. Atque  ut  a  corpore  ordiar,

'idesne  ut  si  quae  in  membris  prava  aut  debilitata
suit  occultent  homines  ?  ut  etiara  con-
tendant  et  elaborent,  si  efficere  possint,  ut  aut  non
appareat  corporis  vitiura  aut  quam  minimum  ap-
pareat,  multosque  etiam  dolores  curatioois  causa
perfcrant  ut,  si  ipse  usus  membrorura  non  modo  non
maior  verum  etiam  minor  futurus  sit,  eoruni  tamen
species  ad  naturam  revertatur  ?  Etenim  cum  om.nes
natura  totos  se  expetendos  putent,  nee  id  ob  aliam
rem  sed  propter  ipsos,  necesse  est  eius  etiam  partes
propter  se  expeti  quod  universum  propter  se  expe-
47  tatur.  Quid?  in  motu  et  in  statu  corporis  nihil  inest
quod  animadvert  en  dum  esse  ipsa  natura  iudicet  ?
quemadmodum  quisambulct,  sedeat,  qui  ductus  oris,
qui  vultus  in  quoque  sit  ?  nihilne  est  in  his  rebus
quod  di^num  llberu  aut  indigiium  esse  dueamus?
Nonne  odio  multos  digiios  putamus  qui  quodam
motu  aut  statu  videntur  naturae  legem  el  modum
contcmpsisse  ?  Et  quoiiiani  haec  deducuntur  de
corpore,  quid  est  cur  non  recte  pulchritudo  etiam
ipsa  propter  se  expeteuda  ducatur  ?  Nam  si  pravita-
tem  imminutioneraque  corporis  propter  se  fugiendam
putamus,  cur  non  etiam,  ac  fortasse  mag'is,  propter
se  formae  dignitatem  sequamur  ?  Et  si  turpitudinem
fugimus  in  statu  et  motu  corporis,  quid  est  cur  pul-
chritudinem  non  sequamur?  Atque  etiam  vale-
tudinem,  vires,  vacuitatem  doloris  non  propter
utilitatem solum sed etiam  ipsas propter  se ex-

spontaneous.  To  start  with  the  body,  do  you  notice  The  bodyt
how  men  try  to  hide  a  deformed  or  infirm  or  maimed  a^  bcjutr*^
limh?  They  actually  take  great  pains  and  trouhle  ^^J^""''*'
to  conceal,  if  they  possibly  can,  their  bodily  defect,
or  at  all  events  to  let  it  be  seen  as  little  as  possible ;
they  even  undergo  painful  courses  of  treatment  in
order  to  restore  the  natural  appearance  of  their
limbs,  even  though  the  actual  use  of  them  will  not
only  not  be  improved  hut  will  even  be  diminished.
In  fact,  since  every  man  instinctively  thinks  that  he
himself  in  his  entirety  is  a  thing  to  be  desired,  and
this  not  for  the  sake  of  anything  else  hut  for  his  own
sake,  it  follows  that  when  a  thing  is  desired  as  a
whole  for  its  own  sake,  the  parts  also  of  that  thing
'  are  desired  for  their  own  sakes.  Again,  is  there
nothing  in  the  movements  and  postures  of  the  hody
which  Nature  herself  judges  to  be  of  importance?  A
man's  mode  of  walking  and  sitting,  his  particular
cast  of  features  and  expression  ?  is  there  notliing  in
these  things  that  we  consider  worthy  or  unworthy
of  a  free  man  ?  Do  we  not  often  think  people
deserving  of  dislike,  who  by  some  movement  or
posture  appear  to  have  violated  a  law  or  principle  of
nature  ?  And  since  people  try  to  get  rid  of  these
defects  of  bearing,  why  should  not  even  beauty
have  a  good  claim  to  he  considered  as  desirable
for  its  own  sake  ?  For  if  we  think  imperfection  or
mutilation  of  the  body  things  to  be  avoided  for  their
own  sake,  why  should  we  not  with  equal  or  perhaps
stUl  greater  reason  pursue  dignity  of  form  for  its
own  sake  ?  And  if  we  avoid  ugliness  in  bodily
movement  and  posture,  why  should  we  not  pursue
beauty?  Health  also,  and  strength  and  freedom  .
from  pain  we  shall  desire  not  merely  for  tlieir  utility
4.47

CICEBO  DE  FINIBUS
pe  tern  us.  Qiioniam  eiiim  natura  stiis  omnibus
espleri  partibiis  viilt,  hunc  statiim  corporis  per  se
ipsum  expetit  qui  est  maxime  e  natura,  quae  totA
perturbatur  si  aut  aegrum  corpus  est  aut  dolet  aut
caret  viribus.

1  XVIII.  Videamus  animi  partes,  quarum  est  con-
spectus illustrior;  quae  quo  sunt  excelsiores,  eo  dant
clariora  indicia  naturae.  Tantus  est  igitur  innatus  in
nobis  cognitionis  amor  et  scientiae  ut  nemo  dubitare
possit  quin  ad  eas  res  hominum  natura  nullo  emolu-
mento  invitata  rapiatur.  Videmusne  ut  pueri  ne  ver-
beribua  quidem  a  con  tempi  andis  rebus  perqiiirendis-
que  deterreantur  ?  ut  pulsi  reciirranl  ?  ut  aliquid  scire
se  gaudeant?  ut  id  aliis  narrare  gcstiant?  ut  pompa,
ludis  atque  eiusmodi  spectaculis  tcncantur  ob  eamque
rem  vel  famem  et  sitim  perferant?  Quid  vero?  qui
ingenuis  studiis  atque  artibus  delectantur,  nonne
videmus  eos  nee  valetudinis  nee  rei  familiaris  habere
rationem  omniaque  perpeti  ipsa  cognitione  ct  scientia
captos  et  cum  maximis  curis  et  laboribus  compensare

I  earn  quam  ex  discendo  capiant  voluptatem?  Mihi
quidem  Homerus  huiusmodi  quiddam  vidisse  videtur
in  iis  quae  de  Sirenum  cantibus  finxerit.^  Neque
enim  vocum  suavitate  videntur  aut  novitate  quadam

et  varietate  cantandi
tervehebantur,  sed  quia
ut  homines  ad  earum  s

ulta

'OS  solitae  qui  prae-
scire  profitebantur,
iscendi  cupiditate  ud-
U  (perliaps  rightly  Mdv.);

BOOK  V.  J

nature  ^M

iiich  is  m

but  also  for  their  own  sakes.  For  since  our  nature
aims  at  the  full  development  of  all  its  parts,  i
desires  for  its  own  sake  that  state  of  body  wliicli  ii
most  ill  accordance  with  himself;  because  she  is
thrown  into  utter  disorder  if  the  body  is  diseased  ov
in  pain  or  weak.

XVIir. Let  us  consider  the  parts  of  the  mind.  The  mind:  (i)
which  are  of  nobler  aspect. The  loftier  these  are,  lacu^i?;  k^«-
the more unmistakable indications of nature do  j^^"^'^""
they  afford. So  great  is  our  innate  love  of  learning  itiutiliiy:
and of  knowledge, that no one can doubt that  ~

man's  nature  is  strongly  attracted  to  these  things
even  without  the  lure  of  any  profit.  Do  we
notice  how  children  cannot  be  deterred  even  by
punishment  from  studying  and  inquiring  into  the
world  around  them  ?  Drive  them  away,  and  back
they  come.  They  delight  in  knowing  things  ;  they
are  eager  to  impart  their  knowledge  to  others ;
pageants,  games  and  sliows  of  that  sort  hold  them
spell- bound,  and  they  will  even  endure  hunger
and  thirst  so  as  to  be  able  to  see  them.  Again,
take  persons  who  delight  in  the  liberal  arts  and
studies  ;  do  we  not  see  them  careless  of  health  or
business,  patiently  enduring  any  inconvenience
when  under  the  spell  of  learning  and  of  science,
and  repaid  for  endless  toil  and  trouble  by  the
pleasure  they  derive  from  acquiruig  knowledge?  For
my  part  I  believe  Homer  had  something  of  this  sort
in  view  in  his  imaginary  account  of  the  songs  of  the
Sirens.  Apparently  it  was  not  the  sweetness  of
their  voices  or  the  novelty  and  diversity  of  their
songs,  but  their  professions  of  knowledge  that  used
to  attract  the  passing  voyagers ;  it  was  the  passion
for  learning  that  kept  men  rooted  to  the  Sirens'
GO  449

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

haerescerent Ita  en
ut  quaedam  Homeri,  i

u  invitant  Ulixem  (nam  verti,
c  istum  ipsum  locutn);

O  decus  Argolicum,  quin  puppim  flectisj  Ulixes,
Auribus  ut  nostros  possis  agnoscere  cantus  ?
Nam  nemo  haec  umquam  est  transvectus  caerula

Quin  prius  astiterit  vocum  dulcedine  captus,
Post,  variis  avido  satiatus  pectore  inusis,
Doctior  ad  patrias  lapsus  pervenerit  oras,
Nos  grave  certamen  belli  clademque  tenemus,
Graecia  qoam  Troiae  diviiio  numine  vexit,
^ Oraniaque  e  latis  rerum  vestigia  terris.

I Vidit  HomeniB  probari  fabulam  non  posse  si  canti- .
unculis tantus irretitus vir teneretur ; scientiam
pollicentur.  quam  non  erat  mirum  sapientiae  cupido
patria  esse '  cariorem.  (]Atque  omnia  quidem  scire
cuiuscumquemodi  sint  cupere  curiosoruni\duci  vero
maiorum  rerum  contemplation  e  ad  cupimtatem  aci-
entiae  summonim  virorum  est  putandum.
iO XIX. Quern  enim  ardorem  studi  censetis  fuisse  in
Archimede,  qui  dum  in  pulvere  quaedam  describit
attentius,  ne  patriam  quidem  captam  esse  senserit ! '
quantum  Aristoxeni  ingenium  consumptum  videmas
in  musicis !  quo  studio  Aristoplianem  putanius  aeta-
tem  in  litteris  duxisse  I Quid  de  Pythagora,  quid
de Platone aut de Democrito loquar  ? a quibus
propter  discendi  cupiditatem  videmus  ultimas  terras
esse  peragratas. Quae  qui  non  vident,  nihil  urn- '
quam  magnum  ac^  cognitione  dignum  amaverunt.

ifjsemost  MSS.  omit.

'  magnum  ac  Bremiiis,  Mdv.  ;  magna  MSS.

rocky  shores.  This  is  their  invitation  to  Ulysses
(for  I  have  translated  this  among  other  passages  of
Homer) :

Ulysses,  pride  of  Argos,  turn  thy  bark
And  listen  to  our  music. Never  yet
Did  voyager  sail  these  waters  blue,  but  stayed
His  com^e,  enchanted  by  our  voices  sweet,
And  having  filled  his  soul  with  harmony,
Went  on  his  homeward  way  a  wiser  man.
We  know  the  direful  strife  and  clash  of  war
That  Greece  by  Heaven's  mandate  bore  to  Troy,
And  whatsoe'er  on  the  wide  earth  befalls."

Homer  was  aware  that  his  story  would  not  sound  plau-
sible if  the  magic  that  held  his  hero  immeshed  was
the  charm  of  mere  melody  !  It  is  knowledge  that  the
Sirens  offer,  and  it  was  no  marvel  if  a  lover  of  wisdom
held  this  dearer  than  his  home.  An  itch  for  miscel-
laneous omniscience  no  doubt  stamps  a  man  as  a
niere  dilettante ;  but  it  must  be  deemed  the  mark
of  a  superior  mind  to  be  led  on  by  the  contemplation
of  high  matters  to  a  passionate  love  of  knowledge.

XIX.  "  What  an  ardour  for  study,  think  you,  pos-
sessed Archimedes,  who  was  so  absorbed  in  a  diagram
he  was  drawing  in  the  dust  that  he  was  unaware  even
of  the  capture  of  his  native  city  I  What  genius  do
we  see  expended  by  Arlstoxenus  on  the  theory  of
niusic !  Imagine  the  zeal  of  a  lifetime  that  Ari-
stophanes devoted  to  literature  !  Why  should  I  speak
of  Pythagoras,  or  of  Plato,  or  Democritus  ?  For  they,
we  are  told,  in  their  passion  for  learning  travelled
through  the  remotest  parts  of  the  earth  !  Those
who  are  blind  to  these  facts  have  never  been  en-
amoured of  some  high  and  worthy  study.  And
oai  4S1

CICERO  DF,  FINIBUS
Atque  hoc  loco  qui  propter  animi  voluptates coli
dtcunt  ea  studia  quae  dixi,  non  intellegunt  idcirco
esse  ea  propter  se  expeteiida  quod  nulla  utilitate
obiecta  detcctentur  animi  atque  ipsa  scientia  etiamsi

51  incoinmodatura  sit  gaudeaiit.J  Sed  quid  attiiiet  de
, rebus  tam  apertia  plura  requircre  ?  1  Ipsi  enim  quae-

ramus  a  nobis  stellarum  motus  con  tempi  at  ionesque
rerum  cnelestium  eorumque  omnium  quae  naturae
obscuritate  occultantur  cognitiones  quemadmodum
nos  moveant,  et  quid  historia  delectet  quam  solemus
persequi  usque  ad  extremum,  prsetermissa  repeti-
muB,  inclioata  persequlmur.  Nee  vero  sum  nescius
esse  utilitatem  in  liistoria,  non  modo  votuptatem.
Quid  cum  Jictas  fabulas  e  quibus  utilitas  nulla  elici

52  potest  com  voluptale  legiraus?  Quid  cum  volumus
nomina  eorum  qui  quid  gesserint  nota  nobis  esse,
parentes,  patriam,  multa  praeterea  minime  neces-
saria  ?  Quid  quod  homines  infima  fortuna,  nulla  spe
reruni  gerendarum,  opifices  denique  delectantuT
historia  ?  maxim(;que  eos  videre  possunius  res  gestas
audire  et  legere  velle  qui  a  spe  gerendi  absunt  coii-
fecti  senectute.  Quocirca  intellegi  necesse  est  in
ipsis  rebus  quae  discuntur  et  cognoscuntur  invita-
menta  inesse  quibus  ad  discendum  cognosce ndumque

53  moveamur.  Ac  veteres  quidem  philosophi  in  beato-
rum  insulis  fingunt  qualis  futura  sit  vita  sapientium.

T

«ogTi

l^  BOOK  V.  six

those  who  in  this  connexion  allege  that  the  studies
I  have  mentioned  are  pursued  for  the  sake  of  mental
pleasure  fall  to  see  that  tbey  are  proved  to  be
desirable  for  their  own  sake  by  the  very  fact  that
the  mind  feels  delight  in  them  when  no  bait  of
advantage  is  held  out,  and  tinds  enjoyment  in  the
mere  possession  of  knowledge  even  though  it  is
likely  to  be  a  positive  disadvantage  to  its  possessor,

1  But  what  is  the  point  of  inquiring  further  into
matters  so  obvious  ?  \  Let  us  ask  ourselves  tbe  ques-
tion, what  feelings  are  produced  in  us  by  the  motions
of  tbe  stars  and  by  contemplating  the  heavenly
iKxhes  and  studying  all  the  obscure  and  secret  realms
of  nature;  what  pleasure  we  derive  from  books  on
liistory,  which  we  are  so  fond  of  perusing  to  the  very
last  page,  turning  back  to  parts  we  have  omitted,
and  pushing  on  to  the  end  when  we  have  once  be-
ffun.  Not  that  I  am  unaware  that  history  is  useful
as  well  as  entertaining. But  what  of  our  reading

2  fiction,  from  which  no  utilitycan  be  extracted?  What
of  our  eagerness  to  learn  tbe  names  of  people  who
have  done  something  notable,  their  parentage,  birth-
place, and  many  quite  unimportant  details  beside?
What  of  the  delight  that  is  taken  in  history  by  men
of  the  humblest  station,  who  have  no  expectation  of
participating  in  public  life,  even  mere  artisans?  Also
we  may  notice  that  the  persons  most  eager  to  hear
and  read  of  public  affairs  are  those  who  are  debarred
by  the  infirmities  of  age  from  any  prospect  of  taking
part  in  them.  Hence  we  are  forced  to  infer  that
the  objects  of  study  and  knowledge  contain  in  them-
selves the  allurements  that  entice  us  to  study  and  to

3  learning.  The  old  philosophers  picture  what  the  life
of  the  Wise  will  be  in  the  Islands  of  the  Blest,  and

453

wm

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
quDS  cura  omni  liberatos,  nullum  necessarium  vitae
cultum  aut  paratum  requirentes,  nihil  aliud  acturos
putant  nisi  ut  onine  tempus  iiiguirendo  ac  discendo
in  naturae  cognitionc  consumant.  Nos  autem  n
solum  beatae  vitae  istam  esse  oblectalionem  videmus
sed  etiam  levamentum  miseriarum ;  itaque  multi
cum  in  potestate  essent  h ostium  aut  tyra
raulti  in  custodia,  niulti  in  exsilio  dolorem  i
i  doctrinae  studiis  levanint.  Princeps  huius  civitatis
Phalereus  DemetriuSj  cum  patria  pulsus  esset  iniuria,
ad  Ptoleniaeuni  se  regem  Alexandream  contulit.
Qui  cum  in  hac  ipsa  philusophia  ad  quam  te  horta-
mur  excelleret  Tlieoplirastique  esset  auditor,  niulta
praeclara  in  illo  calamitoso  otio  scripsit  n
uliquem  suum  quo  erat  orbatus ;  sed  animi  cultus
ille  erat  ei  'quasi  quidam  liumanitatis  cibu!!.  Cqui'
dem  e  Cn.  Aufidlo,  praetorio,  erudito  homine,  oculis
capto,  saepe  audiebam  cum  se  lucis  magis  qunm  utili-
tatis  desideriu  moveri  diceret.  Somnum  denique
nobis,  nisi  requietem  corporibus  et  medicinam  quon-
dam laboris  afferretj  contra  natuvam  putaremus
datum  ;  aufert  enim  sensus  actionemque  tollit  f
ncm  ;  itaque  si  aut  requietem  natiira  non  quaereret
aut  eam  posset  alia  quadam  ratione  consequi,  facile
pateremur,  qui  etiam  nunc  agendi  aliquid  discendi-
que  causa  prope  contra  naturam  vigilias  suscipere

5  5 XX^"  Sunt  autem  etiam  clariora  vel  plane  perspicua
minimeque  dubitaiida  indicia  naturae,  maxime  scilicet

454

K^  BOOK  V.  xiK-Kx

imagine  them  released  from  ali  anxiety,  needing  none
of  the  necessary  equipment  or  accessories  of  life,  and
with  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  spend  their  whole  time
upon  study  and  research  in  the  science  of  nature.  We  on
the  other  hand  see  in  such  studies  not  only  the  amuse-
ment of  a  life  of  happiness,  but  also  the  alleviation  of
niisfortune;hence  the  numbers  of  men  who  when  they
had  fallen  into  the  power  of  enemies  or  tyrants,  or
when  they  were  in  prison  or  in  exi]e,have  solaced  their

+  sorrow  with  the  pursuit  of  learning.  Demetrius  of
Phajenim,  the  ruler  of  this  city,  when  unjustly
banished  from  his  country,  repaired  to  the  court  of
King  Ptolemy  at  Alexandria.  Being  eminent  in  the
very  system  of  philosophy  which  we  are  recommend-
ing to  you,  and  a  pupil  of  Theophrastus,  he  employed
the  leisure  afforded  by  his  disaster  in  composing  a
number  of  e>:cellent  treatises,  not  for  any  practical
use  in  his  own  case,  for  from  this  he  was  debarred;
but  he  found  a  sort  of  food  for  his  intellectual  tastes
in  thus  cultivating  his  mind.  I  myself  frequently
heard  the  blind  ex-praetor  and  scholar  Gnaeus  Aufi-
diua  declare  that  he  felt  tlie  actual  loss  of  light  more
than  the  inconvenience  of  blindness.  Take  lastly  the
gift  of  sleep :  did  it  not  bring  us  repose  for  our  bodies
and  an  antidote  to  labour,  we  should  think  it  a  viola-
tion of  nature,  for  it  robs  us  of  sensation  and  entirely
suspends  our  activity  ;  so  that  if  our  nature  did  not
require  repose  or  could  obtain  it  in  some  other  man-
ner, we  should  be  quite  content,  inasmuch  as  even
as  it  is  we  frequently  deny  ourselves  slumber,  almost
to  the  point  of  doing  violence  to  nature,  in  the  in-
terests of  business  or  of  study.

'■S~l XX. Even  more  striking,  and  in  fact  absolutely  (ii)

obvious  and  convincing  natural  indications  are  not  ^\

455  ™i

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
in  hoinine  sed  in  omni  animali,  ut  appetat  animus
agere  semper  aliquid  negue  ulla  condicione  quietem
sempitemani  possit  pati.  Facile  est  hoc  cernere  in
primis  pueronim  aetatulis.  Quaniciuam  enim  vereor
ne  nimlus  in  lioc  gencre  videar,  tamen  omnes  veteres
philosophi,  niaxime  nostri,  ad  incunabula  accedunt,
quod  ill  pueritia  facillime  se  arbitreatur  naturae
voluntateni  posse  cognoscere.  Videmus  igitur  ut
eonquiescere  ne  Infantes  quidem  possint;  cum  vera
paulum  process e runt,  lusjonibus  vel  laboriosis  dele-
ctantur,  ut  ne  verberibus  quideiu  deterreri  possint
Eaque  cupiditus  ngendi  aliquid  adutescit  una  cum '
aetatibus.  Itaque  ne  si  iucundissimis  quidem  nos
somniis  UHuros  putemus,  Endymlonis  somnum  nobis
velimus  dari,  idque  si  accidat  mortis  instar  puteniu8.7

56  Quiiv  etiam  inertissimos  homines,  nescio  qua  wngS^
lari  nequitia  pnicditos,  videmus  tamen  et  corpora  et
animo  moveri  semper  et,  cum  re  nulla  impedittntur
neoessariaj  aut  alveoluni  poscere  aut  quaerere  quem-
piam  ludiim  aut  sermonem  aliquem  requirere,  cumque
nonhabeantingenuasesdoctrinaoblectationeSjCircu-
losaliquoset  sessiunculasponsectari.  Ne*bestiae  qui-
dem quas  delectationi.s  causa  concludimus,  cum  copio-
sius  alantur  quam  si  essent  liberae,  facile  patiuntur
sese  contineri,  motusque  solutes  et  vagos  a  natura  sibi

57  tributes  requirunt.  Itaque  ut  quisque  optime  natus
institutusque  e^t,  esse  omiiino  nolit  in  vita  si  gerendis
negotiis  orbatus  possit  paratissimis  vesci  voluptatibus.

^guod.  .  arbiirentur  inf. MSS., Miilleri
arbitranhiT ;  g-ui .  ,  arbitrenlur  B,  E,  Mdv.
^Ve  inf.  MSS.,  Mdv.;  gain  ne  B,  gvin  It  E.
456

r  BOOK  V.  XK

■wanting,  more  particularly  no  doubt  in  man,  but
also  in  every  living  creature,  of  the  presence  of  a
positive  craving  for  constant  activity.  Perpetual  re-
pose is  unendurable  on  any  terms.  This  is  a  fact
that  may  be  readily  detected  in  children  of  the
tenderest  age,  if  I  may  risk  being  thought  to  lay  un-
due stress  on  a  field  of  observation  sanctioned  by  the
older  thinkers,  all  of  whom,  and  ray  own  school  more
than  others,  go  to  the  nursery,  because  they  believe
that  Nature  reveals  her  plan  to  them  most  clearly  in
cliUdhood.  Even  infants,  we  notice,  are  incapable  of
keeping  still.  Childrenof  a  somewhat  more  advanced
age  delight  in  games  involving  considerable  exertion,
from  which  not  even  fear  of  punishment  can  restrain
them.  And  this  passion  for  activity  grows  as  they
grow  older.  The  prospect  of  the  most  delightful
dreams  would  not  reconcile  us  to  falling  asleep  for
ever;  Endymion's  fate  we  should  consider  an  exact

id  image  of  death.  \  Observe  the  least  energetic  among
men:  even  in  a  notorious  idler  both  mind  and  body
are  constantly  in  motion ;  set  him  free  from  unavoid-
able occupations,  and  he  calls  for  a  dice-board,  goes
oif  to  some  sport,  or  looks  for  somebody  tq  chat  with,
seeking  at  the  club  or  at  some  trivial  social  gather-
ing a  substitute  for  higher  and  more  intellectual
amusements.  Even  the  wild  animals  that  we  keep  in
cages  for  our  entertainment  find  their  captivity  irk-
some, although  they  are  better  fed  than  if  they  were
at  large ;  they  miss  their  natural  birthright  of  free  and

7  untrammelled  movement.  Hence  the  abler  and
niore  accomplished  a  man  is,  the  less  he  would  care
to  be  alive  at  all  if  debarred  from  taking  part  in
affairs,  although  allowed  to  consume  an  unlimited
supply  of  pleasures.  ^  Men  of  ability  leithcr  choose
■'  457

k

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
Nam  aut  privatim  aliquid  gerere  malunt,  aat  qui
altiore  animo  sunt  capessunt  rem  publicam  honoribuE
imperiisquc  adipiscendis,  aut  totos  se  ad  studia  do-
ctrinae  conferunt ;  qua  in  vita  tantum  abest  ut  volu-
ptates  consectentur,  etiam  curas,  sollicitudines,  vigi-
lias  perferunt,  optimaque  parte  hominis,  quae  in  nobis
divina  ducenda  est,  ingeni  et  mentis  aeie  fniuntur,
nee  voluptatem  requirentes  nee  fugientes  laborem:
^nec  vero  inteniiittunt  aut  admiratioiieni  earum  rerum
quae  sunt  ab  antiquis  repertae  aut  investigationem
novarum ;  quo  studio  cum  satiari  non  x>ossint,^  om-
nium ceteranim  rerum  obliti  nihil  abiectum,  nihil
humile  cogitant;  tantaque  est  vis  tulibus  in  studiis,
ut  eos  etiam  qui  sibi  alios  proposuerunt  fines  bonorum,
quos  utilitate  aut  voluptate  diriguiit,  tamen  in  rebus
quaereodis  explicandisque  iiaturis  aetates  eonterere
videamu^  7
5»  XXI.  '*Ergo  hoc  quidem  apparet,  nos  ad  agendum
esse  natos.  Actionum  auteni  genera  plura,  ut  ob-
scurentur  etiam  niaioribus  minora,  maximae  autem
sunt  prinium,  ut  mihl  quidem  videtur  et  iis  quorum
nunc  in  ratione  versamur,  consideratio  cognitioque
rerum  caelestium  et  earum  quas  a  natura  occultatas
et  latentes  indagare  ratio  potest,  deinde  rerum  publi-
carum  admiiiistratio  aut  administrandi  acientia,  turn
prudens,  temp(?rata,  fortis,  iusta  ratio,  reliquaeque
virtutes  et  actiones  virtntibus  congruentes,  quae  uno
verbo  complexi  omnia  honesta  dicimus  ;  ad  quorum

'  /H/ssint  Ernesli,  Muller  ;  fiassunt  MSS. ,  Mdv.

aA reference to the Epicureans' interest in natural
:nce,  illustrmed  by  Lucretius.
4S8

BOOK  V.  xx-xsi
a  life  of  private  activity,  or,  if  of  loftier  ambition,
aspire  to  a  public  career  of  political  or  military  office,
or  else  they  devote  themselves  entirely  to  study  and
learning;  and  the  devotees  of  learning  are  so  far
from  making  pleasure  their  aim,  that  they  actually
endure  care,  anxiety  and  loss  of  sleep,  and  in  the
exercise  of  the  noblest  part  of  man's  nature,  the
divine  element  within  us  (for  so  we  must  consider '
the  keen  edge  of  the  intellect  and  the  reasoii),  they
ask for no pleasure and avoid no toil  f  they  are
ceaselessly  occupied  in  marvelling  at  the  mscoveries
of  the  ancients  or  in  pursuing  new  researches  of  their
own  ; insatiable  in  their  appetite  for  study,  they
forget  all  else  Iwsides,  and  harbour  not  one  base  or
mean  thought. So  potent  is  the  speU  of  these  pur-
suits, that  even  those  who  profess  to  foUow  other
Ends  of  Goods,  defined  by  utility  or  pleasure,  may
yet  be  seen  to  spend  their  whole  lives  in  investigating
and  unfolding  the  processes  of  nature.' '
i XXI. It  is  therefore  at  all  events  manifest  that  The  i
we  are  designed  by  nature  for  activity. Activities  "
are  of  various  kinds,  so  much  so  that  the  moi
portant actually  eclipse the less ; but the most  drveiop«]  by
important  are,  first  (according  to  my  own  view  and  ™"°°-
that  of  those  with  whose  system  we  are  now  occu-
pied)  the contemplation and the study of the
heavenly  bodies  and  of  those  secrets  and  mysteries  of
nature  which  reason  has  the  capacity  to  penetrate  ;
secondly,  the  practice  and  the  theory  of  politics ;
thirdly,  the principles  of  Prudence,  Temperance,
Bravery  and  Justice,  with  the  remaining  virtues  and
the  activities  consonant  therewith,  all  of  which  we
may  sum  up  under  the  single  term  of  Morality ;
towards  the  knowledge  and  practice  of  which,  when
459

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

1  coiToborati  natura  ipsa

et  cognition  em  et  u
praeeuiite  dedueimur-  Omnium  t
cipia  parva  sunt,  sed  suis  progressionibus  usa  augen-
tur ;  nee  sine  causa ;  in  primo  enim  ortu  inest
teneritas  ac  moUitia  quaedam,  ut  nee  res  vidcre
optinias  nee  agere  possint.  Virtutis  enim  beataeque
vitae,  quae  duo  maxime  expetenda  sunt,  serius  lumen
apparet,  multo  etiam  serius,  ut  plane  qualia  sint
intelleganlur.  Praeclare  enim  Plato :  '  Beatura  cui
ebiam  in  senectute  contigerit  ut  sapientiam  verasque
opiniones  assequi  poBsit  I'  Quare  quoniam  de  primis
naturae  commodis  satis  dictum  est,  nunc  de  maioribus

59  consequentibusque  videamus.  Natura  igitur  corpus
quidem  liominis  sic  et  genuit  et  formavit  ut  alia  in
primo  ortu  perficeret,  alia  progrediente  aet^te  finge-
ret,  neque  sane  multum  adiumeJitis  extemis  et
adventieiis  uteretur  ;  animum  autem  reliquis  rebus
ita  perfecit  ut  corpus ;  sensibus  enim  omavit  ad  res
percipiendas  idoneis  ut  nihil  aut  non  multum  adiu-
mento  ullo  ad  suani  confirmationem  indigerent ' ;  quod
autem  in  homine  praestantiasimuni  atque  optimum
est,  id  deseruit.  Etsi  dedit  talem  mentem  quae
omneni  virtutem  accipere  posset,  ingenuitque  sine
doetrina  notitias  parvas  renun  maximarum  et  quasi
instituit  docere,  et  induxit  in  ea  quae  inerant
tamquam elementa  virtutis. Sed virtutem ipsam

60  inehoavit ;  nihil  amplius.  Itaque  nostrum  est  (quod
nostrum  dico,  artis  est)  ad  ea  principia  quae  accepi-

'  indigerenl  Bremi ;  tndigeret  Mdv.  wilh  MSS.

I  BOOK  V.  xjci

we  have  grown  to  maturity,  we  are  led  onward  by
nature's  own  guidance.  All  things  are  small  in  their
first  beginnings,  but  they  grow  larger  as  they  pass
through  their  regular  stages  of  progress.  And  there
is  a  reason  for  this,  namely  that  at  the  moment  of
birth  we  possess  a  certain  weakness  and  softness
which  prevent  our  seeing  and  doing  what  is  best.
The  radiance  of  virtueand  of  happiness,  the  two  thhigs
most  to  be  desired,  dawns  upon  us  later,  and  far  later
still  comes  a  full  understanding  of  their  nature.
Happy  the  man,'  Plato  well  says,  who  even  in  old
age  has  the  good  fortune  to  be  able  to  achieve  wisdom
and  true  opinions.'*  Therefore  since  enough  has
been  said  about  the  primary  goods  of  nature,  let  us
now  consider  the  more  important  things  that  follow

■9  later.  In  generating  and  developing  the  human
body.  Nature's  procedure  was  to  make  some  parts
perfect  at  birth,  and  to  fashion  other  parts  as  it
grew  up,  without  making  much  use  of  external  and
artificial  aids.  Themindontheotherhandsheendowed
with  its  remaining  faculties  in  the  same  perfection  as
the  body,  equipping  it  with  senses  already  adapted
to  their  function  of  perception  and  requiring  little  or
no  assistance  of  any  kind  to  complete  their  develop-
ment; but  the  highest  and  noblest  part  of  man's
nature  she  neglected.  It  is  true  she  bestowed  an
intellect  capable  of  receiving  every  virtue,  and  im-
planted in  it  at  birth  and  without  instruction
embryonic  notions  of  the  loftiest  ideas,  laying  the
foundation  of  its  education,  and  introducing  it  to  the
elements  of  virtue,  if  I  may  so  call  them,  which  it
already  possessed. But  of  virtue  itself  she  merely

iO  gave  the  germ  and no  more. Tlierefore  it  rests
with  us  (and  when  I  say  with  us,  I  mean  with  our
461

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
mus  consequentia  exquirere,  quoad  sit  id  qnod
volumus  effectura ;  quod  quidem  ploris  eat  haud
paulo  magisque  ipsum  propter  se  expetendum  quam
aut  sensuB  aut  corporis  ea  quae  diximus,  quibus
tantuni  praestat  mentis  excellens  perfectio  ut  vix.
cogitari  possit  quid  intereit.  Itaque  omnis  hones,
omnis  admiratio,  onme  studium  ad  virtutem  et  ad
eas  actiones  quae  virtuti  consentaneae  sunt  refertur,
eaque  omnia  quae  aut  ita  in  anirais  sunt  aut  ita
geruntur  uno  nomine  honesta  dicuntur.

Quorum  omnium  quae  sint  notitiae  quae  que  signi-
ficentur  rerum'  vocabulis  quaeque cuiusque  vis  et

6l  natura  sit  mox  videbimus  ;  XXII.  hoc  autem  loco
tantum  explicemus,  haec  honesta  quae  dico,  praeter-
quam  quod  nosmet  ipsos  diligaraus,  praeterea  suapte
natura  per  se  esse  expetenda.  Indicant  pueri,  in
quibus  ut  in  specuhs  natura  cemitur.  Quanta  studia
decertantium  sunt  '.  quanta  ipsa  certamina  j  ut  illi
efferuntur  laetitia  cum  vjcerunt !  ut  pudet  victos  I  ut
se  accusari  nolunt '.  quam  cupiunt  laudari !  quos  illi
labores  non  ^  perferunt  ut  aequalium  principes  sint !
quae  memoria  est  in  iis  bene  merentium,  quae
referendae  gratiae  cupiditas  I  Atque  ea  in  optima
quaque  indole  maxime  apparent;  in  qua  haec  honesta
quae  intellegimus  a  natura  tamquam  adumbrantur.

69  Sed  haec  in  pueris ;  expressa  vero  in  iis  aetatibus
quae  iam  confirmatae  sunt. Quia  est  tarn  dissimUis

'  significenlur  rerum  Inf.  MSS.,  Mdv.  ;  significent  rtrum
B,  E;  Miiv.  cnnj.  significentttt  eorum;  Davis  gitibusqu*
sigTiijicenlur  [rerum].

-non  bracketed  by  Mdv.

BOOK  V.  xxi-xxii
;e),  in  addition  to  the  elementary  principles
bestowed  upon  us,  to  seek  out  their  logical  develop-
ments, until  our  full  purpose  is  realized.  For  this  is
much  more  valuable  and  more  intrinsically  desirable
than  either  the  senses  or  the  endowments  of  the
body  above  alluded  to ;  since  those  are  surpassed
in  an  almost  incou<;civable  degree  by  the  matchless
perfection  of  the  intellect.  Therefore  all  honour,
all  admiration,  all  enthusiasm  is  directed  towards
virtue  and  towards  the  actions  in  harmony  with
virtue,  and  all  such  properties  and  processes  of  tlie
mind  are  entitled  by  the  sing-le  name  of  Moral
Worth.

The  connotation  of  all  these  conceptions  and  the  **
Signification  of  the  terms  that  denote  tUeni,  and  their  pi
several  values  and  natures  we  shall  study  shortly';  Jhiidrm

!l  XXII.  for  the  present  let  us  merely  explain  that  this
Morality  to  which  I  allude  is  an  object  of  our  desire,
not  only  because  of  our  love  of  self,  but  also  intrinsi-
cally and  for  its  own  sake.  A  hint  of  this  is  givea  by
children,  in  whom  nature  is  discerned  as  in  a  mirror.
How  hotly  they  pursue  their  rivalries !  how  fierce
their  contests  and  competitions!  what  exultation
they  feel  when  they  win,  and  what  shame  when
they  are  beaten !  How  they  disUke  blame  I  how  they
covet  praise  I  what  toils  do  they  not  undergo  to
stand  first  among  their  companions!  how  good  their
memory  is  for  those  who  have  shown  them  kindness,
and  how  eager  they  are  to  repay  it!  And  these
traits  are  most  apparent  in  the  noblest  characters,  in
which  the  moral  excellences,  as  we  understand  them,

il  are  already  roughly  outlined  by  nature. But  this
belongs  to  childhood ;  the  picture  is  lilled  in  at  the
age  when  the  character  -is  fully  formed. Who  is
46s

I

L.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

homini  qui  non  moveatur  et  offensione  turpitudinis
et  com  probation  e  honestatis  ?  quis  est  qui  non  oderit
libidinosam.  protervam  adulescentiam  ?  quis  contra  in
ilia  aetate  pudorem,  constantiam,  etiamsi  sua  nihil
intersit,  non  tamen  diligat !'  quis  Pullum  NiitnitDrium
Fregellanum  proditorem,  quamqoani  rei  publicae  no-
strae  profuit,  non  odit?  quis  liuius  urbis
torem  Codrum,  quis  Erechthei  filias  noi
laudat  ?  cui  Tubuli  iiomen  odio  non  est  ?  quia  Aristi-
dem  noil  mortuuni  diligit  ?  An  obliviscimur  quanto
opere  in  audiendo  in*  legendoque  moveamur  cum
pie,  cum  amice,  cum  magno  animo  aliquid  factum

63  cognosciraus  ?  Quid  loquor  de  nobis  qui  ad  laudem
et  ad  decus  nati,  suscepti,  instituti  sumus  ?  qui
clamores  vulgi  atque  imperitorum  excitantur  in  the-
atris,  cum  ilia  dicuntur :

Ego  sum  Orestes,
contraque  ab  altero :

Immo  enimvero  ego  sum,  inquam,  Orestes!
Cum  autem  etiam  exitus  ab  utroque  datur  contur-
bato  errantique  regi :

Ambo  ergo  una  necarier  precamur,
quotiens  hoc  agitur,  ecquandone  nisi  admirationlbus
maximis  ? Nemo  est  igitur  quin  banc  alFectionem
animi  probet  atque  laudet  qua  non  modo  uttlttas
nulla  quaeritur  sed  contra  utilitatem  etiam  conserva-

64  tur  fides.  Talibus  exemplis  non  fictae  solum  fabulae
verum etiam historiae refertae sunt, et quidem

IS^f^^^^e

r  BOOK  V.  xKii

;o  unlike  a  human  being  as  to  feel  no  repulsion  at
baseness  and  no  approval  for  goodness?  Who  is
there  that  does  not  hate  a  youth  spent  in  debauchery
and  wantonness?  Who  on  the  contrary  would  not
esteem  modesty  and  orderliness  in  the  younft,  even
though  he  has  no  personal  concern  in  thetn  ?
Who  does  not  hate  the  traitor  Pullus  Numitorius  of
Fregellae,  although  he  did  a  service  to  our  country?
Who  does  not  praise  and  extol  Codrus,  the  preserver
of  this  eity,  or  honour  the  daughters  of  Erechtheus  ?
or  loathe  the  very  name  of  Tubulus  ?  or  love  the
memory  of  Aristides  ?  Do  we  forget  the  strong
emotion  that  we  feel  when  we  hear  or  read  of  some
deed  of  piety,  of  friendship  or  of  magnanimity?  But
I  need  not  speak  of  ourselves,  whose  birth,  breeding
and  education  point  us  towards  glory  and  towards
honour;  think  of  the  uneducated  multitude, — what
a  tempest  of  applause  rings  through  the  theatre  at
the  words :

1  am  Orestes,

and  at  the  rejoinder:

No,  no,  'tis  I,  I  say,  I  am  Orestes.
And  then  when  each  offers  a  solution  to  the  king  in
his  confusion  and  perplexity  :

Then  prithee  slay  us  hoth  ;  we'll  die  together  :
as  often  as  this  scene'  is  acted,  does  it  ever  fail  to
arouse  the  greatest  enthusiasm  ?  This  proves  that  all
men  without  exception  approve  and  applaud  the  dis-
position that  not  only  seeks  no  advantage  for  itself,
but  is  loyal  and  true  even  to  its  own  disadvantage.
These  high  examples  crowd  the  pages  not  only  of
e  but  also  of  history,  and  especially  the  history

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

e  nostrae.  Nos  enim  ad  sacra  Idaea  accipiend»
optimuni  virum  delegimus  ;  nos  tutores  regibus  a
mus  ;  nostri  imperatores  pro  salute  patriae  sua  capita
voverunt ;  nostri  coiisules  regeni  initnicissiinnni
moenibus  lata  appropinquantem  moiiueruut  a  ven<
ut  caveret ;  nostra  in  re  publica  et  quae  per  (
oblatuin  stuprum  voluntaria  morte  lueret  invents
est  et  qui  filiam  interficeret  ne  stupraretur  ;  quae
quidem  omnia  et  innumerabilia  praeterea  quis  est
quin  intellegat  et  eos  qui  fecerint  dignitatis  splendore
ductos  immemores  fuisse  utilitatum  suarum  nosque
cum  ea  lauderaus  nulla  alia  re  nisi  honestate  dud  ?
,  XXIII. Qitibus rebus breviter expositis  (ne

enim  sum  eopiam  quam  potui,  quia  dubitatio  in  i
nulla  erat,  persecutus),  sed  his  rebus  concluditur
profecto  et  virtutes  omnes  et  lionestura  illud  quod
ex  iis  oritur  et  in  illis  haeret  per  se  esse  expetendum.
65  In  omni  autem  honesto  de  quo  loquimur  nihil  est
tarn  illustre  nee  quod  latius  pateat  quam  eoniunctio
inter  homines  hominum  et  quasi  quaedam  societas  *
et  communicatio  utilitatum  et  ipsa  caritas  generis
humani,  quae  nata  n  primo  satu,  quod  a  procreatori-
bus  nati  diliguntur  et  tota  domus  coniugio  et  stirpe
coniungitur,  serpit  sensim  foras,  cognationibus  pri-
mum,  turn  affinitatibus,  deinde  amicitiis,  post  vicini-

»  Publiua  Cornelius  Scipio  Nasica,  chosen,  in  obedience  lo
an  oracle,  as  man  of  blameless  lite,  to  receive  Ihe  image  of
Cybele,  wliich  was  brought  from  Plirygia  to  Rome  »04  »,c.

«The  Decii,  cp.  II,  61.

i"  C.  Fabricius  and  Q.  /

Cyrrhus  tha.t  his  physicia

s  Papius,

affered  to

'Virgini

M

k  BOOK  V.  sxii-xxui

of  our  own  country.  It  was  we  who  chose  our  most
virtuous  citizen'  to  receive  the  sacred  emblems  from
Ida;  we  who  sent  guardians  to  royal  princes;''  our
generals"  sacrificed  their  lives  to  save  their  country ;
our  consuls^  warned  the  king  who  was  their  bitterest
foe,  when  close  to  the  walls  of  Rome,  to  be  on  his
guard  against  poison ;  in  our  commonwealth  was
found  the  lady'  who  expiated  her  outraged  honour
by  a  seif-sought  death,  and  the  father'  who  killed
his  daughter  to  save  her  from  shame.  Who  is  there
who  cannot  see  that  all  these  deeds  and  countless
others  besides  were  done  by  men  who  were  inspired
by  the  splendour  of  moral  greatness  to  forget  all
thought  of  interest,  and  are  praised  by  us  from  no
other  consideration  but  tjiat  of  Moral  Worth  ?

XXIII.  "The  considerations  thus  briefly  set  out  |C)  Relation
(for  I  have  not  aimed  at  such  a  full  account  as  I  andTitemii
iDight  have  given,  since  the  matter  admitted  of  no  s'"^-
uncertainty),  these  considerations  then  lead  to  the
undoubted  conclusion  that  all  the  virtues,  and  the
Moral  Worth  which  springs  froni  them  and  inheres
in  them,  are  intrinsically  desirable. But in the  justice  tbnii
whole  moral  sphere  of  which  we  are  speaking  there  il^ljjjjo^lo'^
is  nothing  more  glorious  nor  of  wider  range  than  the  cut,
the  solidarity  of  mankind,  that  species  of  alliance
and  partnership  of  interests  and  that  actual  alFection
which  exists  between  man  and  man,  which,  coming
into  existence  immediately  upon  our  birth,  owing  to  -
the  fact  that  children  are  loved  by  their  jiarents  and
the  family  as  a  whole,  is  bound  together  by  the  ties
of  marriage  and  parenthood,  gradually  spreads  its
influence  beyond  the  home,  first  by  blood  relation-
ships, then  by  connections  through  marriage,  later  by
friendships,afterwards  by  the  bondsof  neighbourhood,
hh2  467

atqut

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
tatibus,  turn  civibus  et  iis  qui  publice  i
amid  sunt,  deinde  totius  complcxu  gentij
quae  animi  afiectio  suum  cuique  tribuens  atque  hanc
quam  dico  societatem  coniunctionis  humanae  muni-
fice  et  aeque  tuens  iustitia  dicitur,  cui  sunt  adiun-
ctae  pietas,  bonitas,  liberalitas,  benignitas,  comitas,
quaeque  sunt  generis  eiusdem.  Atque  liaec  its
iustitiae  propria  sunt  ut  sint virtutum  reliquamm

S  communia.  Nam  cum  sic  hominis  natura  generata
sit  ut  habeat  quiddam  ingenitum  quasi  civile  atque
popularCj  quod  Graeci  woXniKoi'  vocant,  quidquii!
aget  quaeque  virtuSj  id  a  communitate  et  ea  quam
exposui  caritate  ac  societate  humana  non  abhorrebit.
vicissimque  iustitia,  ut  ipsa  fundet  se  usu  in  ceteras
virtutcs,  sic  iUas  expetet.  Servari  enim  iustitia  nisi
a  forti  viro,  nisi  a  sapiente  non  potest.  Qualis  est  ^
igitur  omnis  baec  quam  dico  conspiratio  consensus-
que  virtutum,  tale  est  illud  ipsum  honestum;  quando
quidem.  honestum  aut  ipsa  virtus  est  aut  res  gesta
virtute;  quibus  rebus  vita  consentiens  virtutibusque
respondens  recta  et  honesta  et  constans  et  naturae  (t
congruens  existimari  potest.

7 "Atque haec coniunctio confusioque virtutum  ''
tamen  a  philosophis  ratione  quadam  distinguitur.
Nam  cum  ita  copulatae  connexaeque  sint  ut  omnes
omnium  participes  sint  nee  alia  ab  alia  possit  se- I
parari,  tamen proprium  suum  cuiusque
468

BOOK  V.  xxiii
then  to  fellow-citizens  and  political  allies  and  friends,
and  lastly  by  embracing  the  whole  of  the  human  race.
This  sentiment,  assigning  eacli  his  uwn  and  main-
taining with  generosity  and  equity  that  human  soli-
darity and  alliance  of  which  1  speak,  is  termed
Justice ;  connected  with  it  are  dutiful  affection,
kindness,  liberality,  g-ood-will,  courtesy  and  the
other  graces  of  the  same  Itind.  And  while  these
belong  peculiarly  to  Justice,  they  are  also  factors
shared  by  the  remaining  virtues.  For  human  nature
is  so  constituted  at  birth  as  to  possess  an  innate  V
element  of  civic  and  national  feeling,  termed  in
Greek  poUlikofi;  consequently  all  the  actions  of
every  virtue  will  be  in  harmony  with  the  human
affection  and  solidarity  I  have  described,  and  Justice
in  turn  will  diffuse  its  agency  through  tlie  other  vir-
tues, and  so  will  aim  at  the  promotion  of  these.  For
only  a  brave  and  a  wise  man  can  preserve  Justice.
Therefore  the  qualities  of  this  general  union  and
combination  of  the  virtues  of  which  I  am  speaking
belong  also  to  the  Moral  Worth  aforesaid ;  inasmuch  [,
as  Moral  Worth  is  either  virtue  itself  or  virtuous
action ;  and  liie  in  harmony  with  these  and  in  accord-
ance with  the  virtues  can  be  deemed  right,  moral,
consistent,  and  in  agreement  with  nature.

'  At  the  same  time  this  complex  of  interfused  aiihouBb  thej"
virtues can yet  be  theoretically  resolved  into  its  ^JjMied
separate  parts  by  philosophers. For  although  the  "«'"eUtall)'.
virtues  are  so  closely  united  that  each  participates
in  every  other  and  none  can  be  separated  from  any
other,  yet  on  the  other  hand  each  has  its  own  special
function. Thus  Courage  is  displayed  in  toils  and
dangers.  Temperance in forgoing pleasures.  Pru-
dence in  the  choice  of  goods  and  evils.  Justice  in

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
ot  fortitude  iti  laboribiis  periculisque  cernatur,  tem-
perantia  in  praetermittetidis  volupUttibus,  prudentis
in  delectu  bunorum  et  raHloruni,  iustitia  in  sua  cuique
tribuendo.  Qiiando  igitur  inest  in  omni  virtut«
cura  quaedam  quasi  foras  spectans  aliosque  appetens
atque  complectens,  essistit  illud,  ut  amici,  ut  fratres,
lit  propinqui,  ut  affines,  ut  cives,  ut  omnes  denique
(quoniam  unam  sooietatem  huminum  esse  volumus)
propter  se  expetendi  sint.  Alqui  eorum  nihil  est
eius  generis  ut  sit  in  fine  atque  extremo  bonorum.

68  Ita  fit  ut  duo  genera  propter  se  expetendorum  re-
periantur,  unum  quod  est  in  iis  in  quibus  completur
illud  extremum,  quae  sunt  aut  animi  aut  corporis;
baec  autem  quae  sunt  extrinaecus,  id  est  quae  neque
in  animo  insunt  neque  in  corpore,  ut  amici,  ut  paren-
tes,  ut  liberi,  ut  propinqui,  ut  ipsa  patria,  sunt  iDa
quidem  sua  sponte  earn,  sed  eodem  in  genere  quo
ilia  non  sunt.  Nee  vero  umquam  summum  bonum
assequi  quisquani  posset  si  omnia  ilta,  quae  sunt  extra
quamquam  expetenda,  sumnio  bono  continerentur.

69  XXIV,  "  Quomodo  igitur,  inquies,  verum  esse
potent  omnia  referri  ad  summmn  bonuni,  si  amici'
tiae,  si  propinquitates,  si  reliqua  externa  summo
bono  non  continentur  ?  Hac  videlicet  ratione,  quod
ea  quae  externa  sunt  iis  tuemur  otficiis  quae  oriuDtur
a  suD  cuiusque  genere  virtutis.  Nam  et  amici  cultus
et  parentis  ei  qui  officio  fungitur  in  eo  ipso  prodest
quod  ita  fungi  officio  in  recte  factis  est,  quae  sunt
orta  a '  virtutibus.  Quae  quidem  sapientes  sequuntur
utentes  taraquam^  duce  natura  ;  non  perfecti  autem

1  a  inser

ed  by  Lam

lamgtiain

MBS.;  Mdv

biniis
Mdv

Mdv.
. brackets  ; vtenies  seguvnlur 1
videnles  sequunliir  duce  natura

470

r

n,3,lP<-.-,y*^nOO<^

BOOK  V.  xxiii-xxiv
Ifivisg  each  his  due.  As  then  each  virtue  contains  ^[^"llSirottt
element  not  merely  self-regarding,  which  em-  men:  which sn
braces  other  men  and  makes  them  its  end,  there  tiiernai  1,-pods,
results  a  state  of  feeling  in  which  friends,  brothers,  ^™*"!,!!!^"!
kinsmen,  connections,  fellow- citizens,  and  finally  all  Z^Fi*^
human  beings  (since  our  belief  is  that  all  mankind
;  united  in  one  society)  are  things  desirable  for
their  own  sakes. Yet  none  of  these  relations  is

E such  as  to  form  part  of  the  End  and  Ultimate  Good.

^  Hence  it  results  that  we  find  two  classes  of  things
desirable  for  their  own  sakes  ;  one  class  consists  of
those  things  which  constitute  the  Ultimate  Good
aforesaid,  namely  goods  of  mind  or  body;  the  latter
set,  wliich  are  external  goods,  that  is,  goods  that
belong  neither  to  the  mind  nor  to  the  body,  such  as
friends,  parents,  children,  relatives  and  one's  counti'y
itself,  while  intrinsically  precious  to  us,  yet  are  not
included  in  the  same  class  as  the  former.  Indeed,
no  one  could  ever  attain  the  Chief  Good,  if  all  those

^  goods,  which  though  desirable  are  external  to  us,
formed  part  of  the  Chief  Good,

59 XXIV. "How  then,  you  will object,  can  it  be  aiUioushtodo
true  that  all  things  are  means  to  the  Chief  Good,  if  "ih^jis  a^pari
friendships  and  relationships  and  the  other  external  "'  *>=•"=■
goods  are  not  part  of  the  Chief  Good  ? The  answer  ^m

is  that  it  is  in  this  way :  we  maintain  these  external  ^^M

goods  by  those  acts  of  duty  which  spring  from  the^ ^^M
particular  class  of  virtue  connected  with  each. For  ^^|

example,  dutiful  conduct  towards  friends  and  parents
benefits  the  doer  from  the  very  fact  that  such  per-
formance of  duty  is  a  right  action,  and  right  actions
take  their  rise  from  virtues.  And  wherea.s  the  Wise,  LDveoihonuur
under  nature's  guidance,  make  right  action  their  vinut
aim,  on  the  other  hand  men  not  perfect  and  yet
471

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
homines  et  tamen  ingeiiiis  excellentibus  praediti
escitaniur  saepe  gloria,  quae  habet  speciem  hone-
statis  et  similitudiiieni.  Quod  si  ipsam  honestAtem
undique  perfectam  atque  absolutam,  rem  unam  prae-
clarissimam  omnium  maximeque  laudandam,  penitos
viderent.  quonam  gaudio  complerentur,  cum tanto

70  opere  eius  adumbrata  opinione  laetentur  ?  Quem
enim  deditum  voluptatibus,  quem  cupiditatum  in-
cendiis  intlammatum  in  iis  potiendis  quae  acerrime
concupivissettantulaetitiaperfiindiarbitramurquajita
aut  superiorem  Africanum  Hannibale  victo  aut  poste-  ,
riorem  Carthagine  eversa  ?  Quem  Tiberina  descensio
festo  illo  die  tanto  gaudio  aH'ecit  quaiito  L.  Paulum,
cum  regem  Persem  captum  adduceret,  eodem  flumine

71  invectio?  AgenunCjLucinosterjexstrueanimoaltitu-
dinem  excellentiamque  virtutum  ;  iam  non  dubitatu
quin  earum  compotes  homines  magno  animo  erectoque
viventes  semper  sint  beati ;  qui  onmes  motus  fortunae
mutationesque  rerum  et  temporum  leves  et  imbecillos
fore  intellegant  si  in  virtutis  certamen  venerint.  Ilia
enim  quae  sunt  a  nobis  bona  corporis  numerata  com-
plent  ea  quidem  beatissimam  vitam,  sed  ita  ut  sine
illis  possit  beata  vita  exsistere.  Ita  enim  parvae  et
exiguae  sunt  iatae  accessiones  bonorum  ut,  quemad-
modum stellae in  radiis  solis,  sic  istae in  virtutum

72  splendore  ne  cernantur  quidem.  Atque  hoc  ut  vere
dicitur,  parva  esse  ad  beate  vivendum  momenta  ista
corporis  comtuodorum,  sic  nimis  violestum  est  nulla
esse dicere ; qui enim sic disputant,  obliti  railii

aThe  feslival  of  Fors  Fortuiia,  June  24, described by

Ovid  Fasti,  6,  774.

]!i^^^OOgT(

BOOK  V.  xxiv
endowed  with  noble  characters  often  respond  to  the
stiniulus  of  honour,  which  has  some  show  and  sem-
blance of  Moral  Worth.  But  if  they  couid  fully
discern  Moral  Worth  itself  in  its  absolute  perfection
and  completeness,  the  one  thing  of  all  others  most
splendid  and  most  glorious,  how  enraptured  would
they  be,  if  they  take  such a  delight  in  the  mere

0  shadow  and  reputation  of  it  ?  What  devotee  of  plea-
sure, though  consumed  by  most  glowing  passions,
can  be  supposed  to  feel  such  transports  of  rapture
in  winning  the  objects  of  his  keenest  desires,  as  were
felt  by  the  elder  Africanus  upon  the  defeat  of
Hannibal,  or  by  the  younger  at  the  overthrow  of
Cartilage  ?  Who  ever  esjjerienced  so  much  delight
from  the  voyage  down  the  Tiber  on  the  day  of  the
festival^  as  Lucius  Paulus  felt  when  he  sailed  up
the  river  leading  King  Perses  captive  in  his  train?  virtu

'1 Come  now,  my  dear  Lucius,  build  in  your  imagina-  f^^
tion  the  lofty  and  towering  structure  of  the  vir-  ^^™
tues ;  then  you  will  feel  no  doubt  that  those  who
achieve  them,  guiding  themselves  by  magnanimity  '-'
and  uprightness,  are  always  happy;  realizing  as  they
do  that  all  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  the  ebb  and
flow  of  time  and  of  circumstance,  will  be  trifling  and
feeble  if  brought  into  conflict  with virtue. The
things  we  reckon  as  bodily  goods  do,  it  is  true,  form
a  factor  in  supreme  happiness,  but  yet  happiness  is
possible  without  them. For  those  supplementary
goods  are  so  small  and  slight  that  in  the  liill  radiance
of  the  virtues  they  are  as  invbible  as  the  stars  in

72  sunlight. Yet  true  though  it  is  that  these  bodily <

advantages  are  of  but  slight  importance  for  hnppi'

ness,  ta  say  that  they  are  of  no  importance  is  too

sweeping ;  those  who  maintain  this  appear  to  me  to

473

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
ridentur  quae  ipsi  fecerint''  principia  naturae.  Tri-
buendum  est  igitur  his  aliquid,  dum  modo  quantuin
tribuendum  sit  intellegas.  Est  enim'  philosophi  non
taui  gloriosa  quani  vera  quaerentis  nee  pro  nihilo
putare  ea  quae  secundum  naturam  illi  ipsi  gloriosi
esse  fateantur,*  et  videre  taiitam  vim  virtutis  tan-
tamque  ut  ita  dicam  auctoritatem  honestatis  esse*  ut
reliqua  non  ilia  quidem  nulla  sed  ita  parva  sint  ut
nulla  esse  videantur.  Haec  eat  nee  omnia  spementis
praeter  virtutera  et  virtutem  ipsam  suis  laudibus
ampltficantis  oratio ;  denique  haec  est  undique  com-
pleta  et  perfecta  explicatio  summi  boni.

Hinc  ceteri  particulas  arripere  conati  suam
quisque  videri  voluit  afFerre  sententiam.  XXV.
73  Saepe  ab  Aristotele,  a  Theophrasto  mirabiliter  est
laudata  per  se  ipsa  rerum  scientia;  hoc  unu  captus
Erillus  scientiam  summum  bonum  esse  defendit,
nee  rem  ullam  aliam  per  se  espetendani.  Multa
dicta  sunt  ab  antiquis  de  contemnendis  ac  despi-
ciendis  rebus  hunianis ;  hoc  unum  Aristo  tenuit:
praeter  vitia  atque  virtutes  negavit  rem  esse  ullam
ant  fugiendam  aut  expetendam.  Positum  est  a
nostris  in  iis  esse  rebus  quae  secundum  naturam
essent  non  dolere ;  hoc  Hieronyinus  summum  bonuni
esse  dixit.  At  vero  Calliplio  et  post  eum  Diodorus,
cum  alter  voluptatera  adamasset,  alter  vacuitatM
^ fecerini  Lambinus,  Mdv.;  igerint  MSS.;  Ucerint  Gifll

■'enim  Davis,  Mdv.r  tamen  MSS.

'fateanfur  (conj.  Mdv.)  Miiller;  yiiC^i/i/j- E,  Mdv. ;  AJ
ianfurBandinr.  MSS.
'^siB  inserted  by  Mdv.

I  BOOK  V,  xxiv-xKv

have  forgotten  those  first  principles  of  nature  which
they  have  themselves  established.  Some  weight
then  most  be  given  to  bodily  goods  provided  one  .■
understands  what  is  the  proper  amount  of  weight.  ■1
The  genuine  philosopher,  who  aims  at  truth  and  not
ostentation,  while  refusing  on  the  one  hand  to  deny
all  value  to  the  things  which  even  those  high-
sounding  teachers  themselves  admit  to  be  in  ac-
cordance with  nature,  will  on  the  other  hand  realize
that  virtue  is  so  potent.  Moral  Worth  invested  so  to
speak  with  such  authority,  that  all  those  other  goods,
though  not  wortliless,  are  so  small  as  to  appear
worthless.  This  is  the  langTiag-e  that  a  man  will
hold  who  while  not  despising  all  else  but  virtue  yet
extols  virtue  herself  with  her  own  proper  praises  ;  in
short,  this  is  the  full,  finished  and  complete  account
of  the  Chief  Good.

"  From  this  system  all  the  other  schools  have  en-  (p)  Tiiis  Uu  i
deavoured  to  appropriate  fragments,  which  each  has  ^5'ichoiL"

"3  hoped  may  pass  for  original.  XXV.  Aristotle  and  i^ave  bmrowrr
Theophraatus  often  and  admirably  praised  knowledge  ttestaksha^
for  its  own  sake ;  Erilius,  captivated  by  this  single  ^°^U^_'*^  "
tenet,  maintained  that  knowledge  was  the  Chief
Good  and  that  nothing  else  was  desirable  as  an  end  in
itself.  The  ancients  enlarged  on  the  duty  of  rising
proudly  superior  \o  human  fortunes;  Aristo  singled
out  this  one  point,  and  declared  that  nothing  but
vice  or  virtue  was  either  to  be  avoided  or  desired.
Our  school  included  freedom  from  pain  among
the  things  in  accordance  with  nature;  Hieronymus
made  it  out  to  be  the  Supreme  Good.  On  the  other
hand  Cullipho  and  later  Diodorus,  the  one  having
fallen  in  love  with  pleasure,  and  the  other  with
freedom  trom  pain,  could  neither  of  them  dispense
475

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
doloris,  neuter  honestate  carere  potuit,  quae  est  h
74  nostris  laudata  niaxime.  Quin  etiam  ipsi  voluptarii
deverticula  quaerunt  et  virtutes  habent  in  ore  totos
dies  voluptatemque  dumtaxat  prinio  expeti  djcunt/
deinde  consuetudine  quasi  alteram  quandam  natnram
effici,  qua  impulsi  miilta  faciant'  nuUani  quaerentes
voluptatem.  Stoici  restaiit.  Ei  quidem  uon  uoam
aliquam  aut  alteram  rem^  a  iiobis,  sed  totata  ad  se
nostram  philosophiam  transtulerunt.  Atque  ut
reliqui  fures  earum  rerum  quas  ceperunt  signa  com-
mutant,  sic  illi  ut  senlentiis  nostris  pro  suis  uterentur
nomina  tamquam  rerum  notas  mutaverunt  Ita  re-
linquitur  sola  haee  disciplina  digiia  studiosis  ingenu-
II  artium,  digna  eruditis,  digna  clans  viris,  digna
principibus,  digna  regibus."
)  Quae  cum  dixisset  pauiumque  institisset,  Quid
est?"  inquit;  satisne  vobis  videor  pro  meo  iure  in
vestris  auribus  commentatus?"  Et  ego;  Tu  vero,"
inquam,  Piso,  ut  saepe  alias,  sic  hodie  ita  nosse  ista
visus  es  ut,  si  tui  nobis  potestas  saepius  fieret,  non
multum.  Graecis  supplicandura  putarem.  Quod  qiii-
dem  eo  probavi  magis  quia  memini  Staseam  Neapu-
litanum,  doctorem  ilium  tuum,  nobilem  sane  Peripa-
teticum,  aliquanto  ista  secus  dieere  solituni,  assen-
tientem  lis  qui  multum  in  fort  una  secunda  aut
adversa,  multum  in  bonis  aut  malis  corporis  pone-
rent."  '  Estutdicis,"  inquit;  "sed  haecabAntiocho,
familiari  nostro,  dicuntur  multo  meUus  et  fortius

■  quaerant  .  .  habent .  .  dicunt  Lambinua,  Miiller
rant.  .  habeani .  .  dicani  MSS.,  Mdv.,  with  mark
niplioa  I  quaerunt,  ut .  .  habtant .  .  dicani  Davis.

■'faciantT.  BmUey,  MiUler;  faciunl  MSS.,  Mdv.

''rem  inserted  by  T.  Beiitley,  Mdv.
476

BOOK  V XXV
with  Moral  Worth,  which  by  our  school  was  extolled

74  above  all  else.  Even  the  votaries  of  pleasure  take
refuffe  in  evasions :  the  name  of  virtue  is  on  their
lips  all  the  time,  and  they  declare  that  pleasure  is
only  at  first  the  object  of  desire,  and  that  later  habit
produces  a  sort  of  second  nature,  which  suppUes  a-
motive  for  many  actions  not  aiming  at  pleasure  at
all.  There  remain  the  Stoics.  The  Stoics  have
conveyed  from  us  not  some  one  or  other  item,  but
our  entire  system  of  philosophy.  It  is  a  regular
practice  of  thieves  to  alter  the  marks  upon  stolen
goods;  and  the  Stoics,  in  order  to  pass  off  our
opinions  as  their  own,  have  changed  the  names,
which  are  the  marks  of  things.  Our  system  there-
fore is  left  as  the  sole  philosophy  wortjiy  of  the
student  of  the  liberal  arts,  of  men  of  learning,  of
men  of  eminence,  rank,  and  power."

J 5  After  these  words  he  paused,  and  then  added:
How  now?  Do  you  judge  me  to  have  used  my
opportunity  well?  Does  the  sketch  I  have  given
satisfy  my  audience?"  "Why,  Plso,"  I  replied,
"you  have  shown  such  a  knowledge  of  your  theory,
on  this,  as  on  many  other  occasions,  that  I  do  not
think  we  sliould  have  to  rely  much  upon  the  aid  of
the  Greeks,  if  we  had  more  frequent  opportunities
of  hearing  you.  And  J  was  all  the  more  ready  to
be  convinced  by  you  because  I  remember  that  your
great  teacher,  Staseas  of  Naples,  a  Peripatetic  of
unquestionable  repute,  used  to  give  a  somewhat
different  account  of  your  system,  agreeing  with
those  who  attached  great-  importance  to  good  and
bad  fortune,  and  to  bodily  goods  and  evils."  That
is  true,"  said  he ;  but  our  friend  Antioehus  is  a  far
better  and  far  more  uncompromising  exponent  of  the
■477

mnii

CICERO  DE  FINIKUS
quam  a  SUsea  dicebantur.  Quamquam  ego  non
quaere  quid  tibi  a  me  probatum  sit,  sed  huic  Ciceroni
nostro,  quein  discipulum  cupio  a  te  abducere."

76  XXVI.  Turn  Lucius:  "Mihi  vero  ista  valde  pro-
bata sunt,  quod  item  fratri  puto." Turn  mihi Piso:

Quid  erg'o?"  inquit;  dasne  adulest^enti  veniam?
an  eum  discere  ea  mavis  quae  cum  plane  perdidi-
cerit  nihil  sciat?"  E^  vero  isti,"  inquam,  per-
mitto;  sed  noniie  meministi  licere  mihi  ista  probare
quae  sunt  a  te  dicta  ?  Quts  enim  potest  ea  quae  pro-
babilia  videantur  ei '  non  probare?"  '  An  vero,"
inquit,  quisquani  potest  probare  quod  perceptum,
quod  comprebensum,  quod  cognitum  non  habet?"

Non  est  ista,"  inquam,  Piso,  magna  dissensio.
Nihil  est  enim  allud  quamobrem  mihi  percipi  nihil
posse  videatur  nisi  quod  percipiendi  vis  ita  definitar
a  Stoicis  ut  negent  quidquaro  posse  percipi  nisi  tale
verum  quale  falsum  esse  nnn  possit.  Itaque  haee
cum  illis  est  dissensio,  cum  Peripateticis  nulla  sane.
Sed  haec 'omiti»mus;  habent  enim  et  bene  lon^m

77  et  satis  litigiosam  difiputationem ;  illud  mihi  a  te
nimium  festinanter  dictum  videtur,  sapientes  onmes
esse  semper  beatos.  Nescioquomodopraetervolavit
oratio.  Quod  nisi  ita  efficitur,  quae  Theophraftus
de  fortuna,  de  dolore,  de  cruciatu  corporis  dixit,  cum
quibuB coniungi vitam beatam nullo modo posse

'  ci  MS5.,  eilA.;  ea  two  inf. MSS. ;  perhaps  potest  qvae

■■A  reference  to  the  scepticism  of  the  New  Academy  of
Arcesilasand  Carneiidesi  their  doctrines,  thai  certainty  was

cient  guide  for  life,  are  avowed  by  Cicero  in  the  following

jli^^OOglt

1

BOOK  V.  x)tv-Kxvi

system  than  Staseas  used  to  be.  Though  I  don't
want  to  know  how  far  I  succeeded  in  convincing
you,  but  how  far  I  convinced  our  friend  Cicero  here;
I  want  to  kidnap  your  pupil  from  you."
i  XXVI.  To  this  Lucius  replied:  "Oh,  I  am  quite  5.  charge oi in
convinced  by  what  you  have  said,  and  I  think  my  bnittd(H?(S
brother  is  so  too.'" "How  now?"  said  Piso  to  me,  ^t^^^

Has  the  young  man  your  consent?  or  would  you  {j^'j^^^;^^
rather  he  should  study  a  system  which,  when  he  is  piMrfUieNH
perfect  ill  it,  will  end  in  his  knowing  nothing?""  ' ^-

"  Oh,  I  leave  him  his  liberty,"  said  I;  '  but  don't  ^H

you  remember  that  it  is  quite  open  to  me  to  approve  ^H

the doctrines you have stated? Since  who  can  ^|

refrain  from  approving  statements  that  appear  to
him probable?"  But," said he, can anyone

approve  that  of  which  he  has  not  full  perception,
comprehension  and  knowledge?"  There  is  no
great  need  to  quarrel  about  that,  Piso,"  1  rejoined.

The  only  thing  that  makes  me  deny  the  possibility
of  perception  is  the  Stoics'  definition  of  that  term ;
they  maintain  that  nothing  can  be  perceived  except
a  true  presentation  having  such  a  character  as  no
false  presentation  can  possess. Here  then  1  liave  a
quarrel  with  the  Stoics,  but  certainly  none  witli  the
Peripatetics, However  let  us  drop  this  question,
for  it  involves  a  very  long  and  somewhat  contentious
debate. It  is  the  doctrine  that  the  Wise  Man  is  but  i,  it  can-
always  and  invariably  happy  tiiat  1  would  challenge  "f^Jiiy^
as too hurriedly touched upon by you. Your  tonn  pari  of  t
discourse  somehow  skimmed  past  this  point. But  „^iSnt  loc"
unless this doctrine is  proved,  I  am  afraid  that  Wpioe»?
the  truth  will  lie  with  Theophrastua,  who  held  that
misfortune,  sorrow  and  bodily  anguish  were  incom-
479

k

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
putAvit,  vereor  ne  vera  sint.  Nam  illud  vehetnentei"
repugnat.  cundem  beatum  esse  et  multis  malis  op-
pressum.  Haec  quomodo  conveniant  non  sane
tellego."  Utrum  igitur  tibi,"  inquit,  non  placet
virtutisne  esse  tantam  vim  ut  ad  beate  vivendum  se
ipsa  coatenta  sit,  an,  si  id  probas,  lieri  ita  posse  □«
ut  ii  qui  virtutis  compotes  sint  etiaoi  quibusdam
malis  afFecli  beati  sint?"  Ego  vero  volo  in  virtute
vim  esse  quam  msximara;  sed  quanta  sit  alias,  nunc
tantum  possitne  esse  tanta,  si  quidquam  extra  virtu-

78  tem  habeatur  in  bonis."  Atqui,"  inquit,  si  Stoicis
concedis  ut  virtus  sola  si  assit  vitam  efficiat  beatam,
concedis  etiam  Peripatcticis.  Quae  enim  mala  Oli
non  audent  appellare,  aspera  auteni  et  incommoda  et
reicienda  et  alieiia  naturae  esse  concedont,  ea  n
mala  dicimus  sed  exigua  et  paene  minima.  Qua
si  potest  esse  beatus  is  qui  est  in  asperis  reiciendis-
que  rebus,  potest  is  quoque  esse  qui  est  in  parvis
malis."  Etego:  "  Piso,  inquam,  si  est  quisquam  qui
acute  in  rausis  videre  soleat  quae  res  agatur,  is  es
profecto  tu.  Quare  attende,  quaeso.  Nam  adhuc,
meo  fortasse  vitio,  quid  ego  quaeram  non  perspicis."

Istic  sum,"  inquit, exspectoque  quid  ad  id  quod
quaercbam  respondeas."

79  XXVII.  "Respondebo  me  non  quaerere,"  inquam,
''  hoc  tempore  quid  virtus  efficere  possit,  sed  quid
constanter  dicatur,  quid  ipsum  a  se  dissentiat."
"Quo," inquit,  '  modo?" Quia  cum  a  Zenone,"

480

r  BOOK  V.  MYi-xxvii

patible  with  happiness.  For  that  a  man  can  be  at
once  happy  and  overwhebned  with  erils  IE  violently
repugnant  to  common  sense.  How  happiness  and
misfortune  can  go  together  I  entirely  fail  to  under-
stand." Uliich  position  then  do  you  question?"
he  replied ;  that  virtue  is  so  potent  that  she  need
not  look  outside  herself  for  happiness  ?  or,  if  you
accept  this,  do  you  deny  that  the  virtuous  can  be
happy  even  when  alSieted  by  certain  evils  ?  "  "  Oh,  I
would  rate  the  potency  of  virtue  as  high  as  possible ;
but  let  us  defer  the  question  of  her  exact  degree  of
greatness ;  the  only  point  is  now,  could  she  be  so
great  as  she  is,  if  anything  outside  virtue  be  classed
as  a  good  ?  "  Yet,"  said  he,  if  you  concede  to  the  pi
Stoics  that  the  presence  of  virtue  alone  can  produce  5h»pp(iiMt«n
happiness,  you  concede  this  also  to  the  Peripatetics.  ?^^^  *"""  '
What  the  Stoics  have  not  the  courage  to  call  evils,  ^"*°  '"
but  admit  to  be  irksome,  detrimental, 'to  be  rejected,'
and  not  in  accordance  with  nature,  we  say  are  evils,
though  small  and  almost  negligible  evils.  Hence  if  a
man  can  be  happy  when  surrounded  by  circumstatices
that  are  irksome  and  to  be  rejected,  he  can  also  be
happy  when  surrounded  by  trilling  evils."  Fiso,"  I
rejoined,  you,  if  anyone,  a/e  a  sharp  enough  lawyer
to  see  at  a  glance  the  real  point  at  issue  in  a  dispute.
Therefore  I  beg  your  close  attention.  For  so  far,
though  perhaps  I  am  to  blame,  you  do  not  grasp  the
point  of  my  question."  I  am  all  attention,"  he
replied,"  and  await  your  reply  to  my  inquiry."

I XXVII.  "  My  reply  will  be,"  said  I, "  that  I  am  not  Cicao:
at  the  present  asking  what  result  virtue  can  produce,  «ih,  ci
but  what  is  a  consistent  and  what  a  self-contradic-  P[^J?
tory  account  of  it." How  do  you  mean?"  said  he.
"  Why,"  I  said, first  Zeno  enunciates  the  loflj  ■

Jcvlbu

I

ButU
u>  Vitii

I

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS  I

inquam,  hoc  magnilice  tamquatn  ex  oraculo  editur:
Virtus  ad  beate  vivendum  se  ipsa  contenta  est,'
Quare?'  inquit;  respondet;  Quia  nisi  quod  hone-
stum  est  nullum  est  aliud  bonum.'  Non  quaero  iani
venimne  sit ;  illud  dico,  ea  quae  dicat  praeclare  intei

)  se  cohaerere.  Dixerit  hoc  idem  Epicurus,  semper
beatum  esse  sapientem ;  quod  quidem  solet  ebullirc
nonnumquam ;  quem  quidem  cum  summis  doloribns
conficiatur,  ait  dicturum:  Quam  suave  est.'  quam
nihil  euro!'  Non  pugnem  cum  homlne,  cur  tantuin
aberret^  In  natura  boni;  illud  urgueam,  non  intet-
legere  eum  quid  sibi  dieendum  sit  cum  dolorem  sum-
mum  malum  esse  dixerit.  Eadeni  nunc  mea  adver-
sum  te  oratio  est.  Dicis  eadem  omnia  ct  bona  et
mala  quae  quidem'  dicunt  ii  qui  numquam  pbiloso-
phum  pictum  ut  dicitur  viderunt,  valetudinem,  vires,
staturam,  formam,  integritatem  unguiculorum
nium bona/ deform  itatem, morbum, debilitatem

1  mala.  lam  ilia  externa  parce  tu  quidem  ;  sed  haec
cum  corporis  bona  sint,  eorum  conficientia  certe  in
bonis  numerabis,  amicos,  liberos,  propinquos,  divitias,
honores,  opes.  Contra  hoc  attende  me  nihil  dicere;
illud  dicere,*  si  ista  mala  sunt  in  quae  potest  incidere
sapiens,  sapientem  esse  non  satis  esse  ad  beate  vi-
vendum." Immo  vero,"  inquit,  ad  beatissime
vivendum  parum  est,  ad  beate  satis."  Animad-
verti,"  inquam,  te  isto  modo  paulo  ante  ponere,  et
scio  ab  Antiocho  iiostro  dici  sic  solere; sed  quid

^  aberrel  Mailer \  habeai  MSS, ;  abeal  {' ta.m  loage  ti  ao\x3
discedat')  Mdv.
*  quidem  Mdv.  brackets.
^bona  inserted  by  Lambiiiua,  Mdv.
'iWarfrfirew  inserted  by  Mdv.
483

r  BOOK  V.  xxvii

oracular  utterance.  Virtue  need  not  look  outside
herself  for  happiness ' ;  Why  ? '  says  some  one.
Because,'  he  answers,  nothing  else  is  good  but
what  is  morally  good,'  I  am  not  now  asking  whether
this  is  true ;  what  I  say  is  that  Zeno's  statements  are
admirably  logical  and  consistent.  Suppose  Epicurus
to  say  the  same  thing,  that  the  Wise  Man  is  always
happy,— for  he  is  fond  of  ranting  like  this  now  and
then,  and  indeed  tells  us  that  when  the  Wise  Man  is
suffering  torments  of  pain,  he  will  say  How  pleasant
this  is !  how  little  I  mind ! ' — Well,  I  should  not  join
issue  with  tlie  man  as  to  why  he  goes  so  far  astray
about  the  nature  of  the  Good ;  what  I  should  insist
is  that  he  does  not  understand  what  is  the  necessary
corollary  of  his  own  avowal  that  pain  is  the  supreme
evil.  I  take  the  same  line  now  against  you.  As  to
wliat  is  good  and  what  is  evil,  your  account  agrees
entirely  with  that  of  those  who  have  never  set  eyes
on  a  philosopher,  even  in  a  picture,  as  the  saying  is :
you  call  health,  strength,  height,  beauty,  soundness
of  every  part  from  top  to  toe,  goods,  and  ugliness,
disease  and  weakness  evils.  As  for  external  goods,
you  were,  it  is  true,  cautious ;  but  since  these  bodily
excellences  are  goods,  you  will  doubtless  reckon  as
goods  the  things  productive  of  them,  namely  friends,
children,  relations,  riches,  rank  and  power.  Mark
that  against  this  1  say  nothing ;  what  I  say  is,  if  mis<
fortunes  which  a  Wise  Man  may  encounter  are  as  you
sayevilsjtobewise  is  notenough  for  happiness."  Say  Piso^Ya,
rather,"  said  he,  'not  enough  for  supreme  happiness,  fh^'^rca'toi
but  it  is  enough  for  happiness."  I  noticed,"  I  iiappinew.
replied,  you  made  that  distinction  a  little  time  Ciqgro^  t
ago,  and  I  am  aware  that  our  master  Aiitiochus  is  j^,^"
fond  of  saying  the  same ;  but  what  can  be  more  un-  luppmoi
113  483

k.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
minus  prol>andum  qiiani  esse  aliquetn  beatum  t
satis  beatum? Quod  autem  satis  est,  eo  quidquiiJ
accessit^  nimium  est;  et  nemo  nimium  beatus  est;

2  igitur*  nemo  beato  beatior."  Ergo,"  inquit,  ''
Q.  Metellus,  qui  tres  filios  consules  vidit,  e  quibus
unum  etiam  et  censorem  et  triumph antem,  quartum
autem  praetorem,  eosque  salvos  reliquit  et  tres  iilias
nuptas,  cum  ipse  consul,  censor,  augvr  fuisset  et
triumphasset,  ut  sapiens  fuerit,  nonne  beatior  quam,
ut  item  sapiens  fuerit,  qui  in  potestate  hostium  vi-
giliis  et  inedia  necatus  est,  Seji;u)us?"

3  XXVIIl.  "Quid  me  istud,"  inquam,  "rogas!
Stoicos  roga."  "Quid  igitur,"  inquit,  "eos  respon-
suros  putas?"  Nihilo  beatiorem  esse  Metellum
quani  Regultim."  Inde  igitur,"  inquit,  'ordien-
duin  est."  Tamen  a  proposito,"  inquam,  aberra-
mus.  Non  enim  quaere  quid  verum  sed  quid  cuique  •
dicendum  sit.  Utinam  quidem  dicerent  alium  alio
beatiorem  !  iam  ruinas  videres.  In  virtute  enim  sola
et  in  ipso  honcsto  cum  sit  bonum  positum  cumque
nee  virtus  ut  placet  illis  nee  honestum  crescat,  idque
bonum  solum  sit  quo  qui  potiatur  necesse  est  beatus
sit,  cum  augeri  id  non  possit  in  quo  uno  positum  est
beatuni  esse,  qui  potest  esse  quisquam  alius  alio
beatior?  Videsne  ut  haec  concinant  ?  Et  hercule  '
(fatenduni  est  enim  quod  sentio)  mirabilis  est  apud  -i
illos  contextus  rerum. Respondent  estrema  primis,

^aceessil  Miillcr  (cf.  IV,  37  perduxil);  accesserit  MSS  ,
Mdv.  1

"jifi'/MrMiiUer;  el  MSS.,  Mdv.  who  marks  as  corrupt
4.84

K  BOOK  V.  xxvii-xxviii

satisfactory  than  to  say  that  a  man  is  happy  but  not  \
happy  enough? Any  addition  to  what  is  enough
makes  too  much ;  now  no  one  has  too  much  happi-
ness; therefore  no  one  can  be  happier  than  happy."

Then  in  your  view,"  he  said,  was  not  Quintus  pijo:  i
Metellus,  who  saw  three  sons  consuls,  and  one  of  "^"^
these  made  censor  and  celebrating  a  triumph  as
■well,  and  a  fourth  praetor,  and  who  left  his  four  sons
alive  and  well  and  three  daughters  married,  having
himself  been  consul,  censor  and  augur  and  having  had
a  triumpli, — supposing  him  to  have  been  a  Wise  Man,
was  he  not  happier  than  Regulus,  who  died  a  cap-
tive in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  from  starvation  and
want  of  sleep,  allowing  him  also  to  have  been  a
Wise  Man?"

XXVIII.  "why,"  said  1,  "do  you  ask  that  ques- Pcuq;
tion  of  me?  Ask  the  Stoics."  "What  answer  "m™
then,"  he  said, do  you  think  they  would  give?"  ^^"^

That  Metellus  is  no  happier  than  Regulus."  unless  v
"Well  then,"  said  he,  '  let  us  start  from  thai."  paiJfto'

Still,"  said  I,  we  are  wandering  from  our  subject  ""  "^"
For  I  am  not  inquiring  what  is  tnie,  but  what  each
school  ought  consistently  to  say.  1  only  wish  they
said  that  there  were  degrees  of  happiness!  then  you
would  see  a  collapse  !  For  since  the  Good  consists
solely  in  virtue  and  in  actual  Moral  Worth,  and
neither  virtue  nor  Moral  Worth,  as  they  hold,  ad-
mits of  increase,  and  since  that  alone  is  good
which  necessarily  makes  its  possessor  happy,  when
that  which  alone  constitutes  happiness  does  not
allow  of  increase,  how  can  anyone  possibly  be  hap-
pier than  anyone  else  ?  Do  you  see  how  logical  this
is  ?  And  in  fact  (for  I  must  admit  what  I  really
think)  their  system  is  a  marvellously  consistent  whole.
485

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
media  utrisque,  omnia  omnibus ;  quid  sequatnr,  quid
repugnet,  vident. Ut  in  geometria,  prima  si  dedt-
ris,  danda  sunt  omnia. Concede  nihil  esse  bonuD
nisi  quod  honestum  sit ;  concedendum  est  in  virtute
positam esse' vitani  bentam. Vide rursus  retro
Dato  hoc,  dandum  est  illud. Quod  vestri  non  item.
t- Tria  genera  bonorum ' :  proclivi  cuirit  oratio. Venit  t
ad  extremuni ;  haeret  in  salebra  ;  cupit  enim  dicere
nihil  posse  ad  beatam  vitam  deesse  sapienti. Hoaesta
oratiOj  Soeratica,  Platonis  etiam. Audeo  dicere,'
inqtiit. Non  potes,  nisi  retexueris  ilia, Paupertas
si  malum  est, mendicus  esse beatus  nemo  potest
quamvis  sit  sapiens. At  Zeno  eum  non  beatum  mo-
do  sed  etiam  divitem  dicere  ausus  est. Dolere  malam
est ;  in  crucem  qui  agitur  beatus  esse  non  potest.
Bonum  liberi ; misera  orbitas ;  bonum  patria ;  mi-
serum  exsilium  ; bonum  valetudo ;  miser  morbus ;
bonum  integritas  corporis  ;  misera  debilitas ;  bonuic
incolumis  acies ; misera  caeeitas. Quae  si  potest
singula  consolando  levare,  universa  quomodo  sustine-  |
bit  ? Sit  enim  idem,  eaeeus,  debilis,  morbo  gravissimo
afFectus,  essul,  orbus,  egens,  torqueatur  eculeo ;  quem  '
hunc appellas, Zeno? 'Beatum,' inqujt. Etiam  f
beatissimum  ? Quippe,'  inquiet,

'  esse  inserted  by  Mdv.
>cum  lam  inf.  MSS.,  edd.;  cim  B,  E
habere  Baiter.
486

r  BOOK  V.  XKviu

The  conclusions  agree  with  the  first  principles,  the
middle  steps  with  both,  in  fact  every  part  with  every
other.  They  understand  wliat  inference  follows  from
and  what  contradicts  a  given  premise.  It  is  like
geometry:  grant  the  premises  and  you  must  grant
everything.  Admit  that  there  is  no  good  but  Moral
Worth,  and  you  are  bound  to  admit  that  happiness
consists  in  virtue.  Or  again  conversely ;  given  the
latter,  you  must  grant  the  former.  Your  school  are
not  so  logical.  Three  classes  of  goods':  your  ex-
position runs  smoothly  on.  It  comes  to  its  conclu-
sion, and  now  it  sticks  at  a  rough  place ;  for  it  wants
to  assert  that  the  Wise  Man  can  lack  no  requisite
of  happiness.  That  is  the  moral  style,  the  style
of  Socrates,  and  of  Plato  too.  '  I  dare  assert  it,'
cries  the  Academic.  You  cannot,  unless  you  recast
the  earlier  part  of  the  argument.  If  poverty  is  an
evil,  no  beggar  can  be  happy,  be  he  as  wise  as  you
like.  But  Zeno  dared  to  say  that  a  wise  beggar  was
not  only  happy  but  also  wealthy.  Pain  is  an  evil ;
then  a  man  sentenced  to  crucifixion  cannot  be
happy.  Children  are  a  good :  then  childlessness  is
miserable ;  one's  country  is  a  good :  then  exile  is
miserable ;  health  is  a  good  :  then  the  sick  man  is  mise-
rable ;  soundness  of  body  is  a  good ;  then  infirmity
is  miserable  ;  good  eyesight  is  a  good  :  then  blind-
ness is  miserable.  Perhaps  the  philosopher's  conso-
lations can  alleviate  each  of  these  misfortunes  singly ;
but  bow  will  he  enable  us  to  endure  them  all  at
once  ?  Suppose  a  man  to  be  at  once  blind,  infirm,
afflicted  by  dire  disease,  in  exile,  childless,  destitute
and  tortured  on  the  rack;  what  is  your  name,  Zeno,
for  him?  A  happy  man,"  says  Zeno.  A  supremely
happy  man  as  well  ?  To  be  sure,'  he  will  reply,
4B7

k.

^^i^^^^^^WK

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
erim  gradus  istam  rem  non  habere  quam  virtntem,

85  in  qua  sit  ipsum  etiam  beatum.'  Tibi  hoc  incredi-
bile  quod  beatissimum ;  quid?  tuum  credibile  ?
enim  ad  populum  me  vocas,  eum  qui  ita  sit  afTectus
beatum  esse  numquam  probabis ;  si  ad  prudentes,
altenim  fortasse  dubitabunt,  sitne  tantura  in  virtute
ut  ea  praediU  vel  in  Phalaridis  tauro  beati  sint;  J
alterum  non  dubitabunt,  quin  et  Stoici  convenientia
sibi  dicant  et  vos  repugnantia.  Theophrasti  igitur,'
inquit,  tibi  liber  illc  placet  de  beata  vita?"  Tamen
aberramus  a  proposito,  et  ne  longius,  prorsus,  inquam,

86  Piso,  si  ista  mala  sunt,  placet." "Nonne  igitur,"
inquit, tibi  videntur  mala?" Id  quaeris,"  inquam, ,

in  quo  utrum  respondero  verses  te  hue  atque  iliac
necesse  est"  Quo  tandem  modo?"  inquit  'Quia  I
si  mala  sunt,  is  qui  erit  in  iis  beatus  non  erit ;  si  mala
non  sunt,  iacet  nmnis  ratio  Peripateticorum,"  Et  '
ille  ridens  :  Video,"  inquit,  quid  agas  ;  ne  disci-
pulum  abdiicam  times."  Tu  vero,"  inquam,  ducas
licet  si  sequetur  ;  erit  enim  mecum  si  tecum  erit." ,

XXIX.  Audi  igitur,"  inquit,  Luci ;  tecum  enim
mihi  instituenda  oratio  est.  Omnis  auctoritas  philo-
sophiae,  ut  ait  Theophrastus,  consistit  in  beata  vita
Vivendi  cupiditate  incensi

lyl^OOgk

S^  BOOK  V.  xxviii-xxix

because  I  have  proved  that  happiness  no  more
admits  of  degrees  than  does  virtue,  in  which  happi-
ness itself  consists.'  To  you  the  statement  that  he  is
supremely  liappy  is  incredible;  but  what  of  your
own  view?  is  it  credible  ?  Call  me  before  a  jury  of
ordinary  people,  and  you  will  never  persuade  them
that  the  man  so  afflicted  is  happy ;  refer  the  case  to
the  learned,  and  it  is  possible  that  on  one  of  the  two
counts  they  will  be  doubtful  about  their  verdict,
whether  virtue  has  such  efficacy  that  the  virtuous
will  be  happy  even  in  the  bull  of  Phalaris :  but  on
the  other,  they  will  find  without  hesitation  that  the
Stoic  doctrine  is  consistent  and  yours  self- contradic-
tory. Ah,'  says  the  Academic,  then  you  agree
with  Theophrastus  in  his  great  work  On  Happiness?'
However,  we  are  wandering  from  the  subject ;  and
to  cut  the  matter  short,  Piso,"  I  said,  1  do  fully
agree  with  Theophrastus,  if  misfortunes,  as  you  say,
are  evils."  Then  don't  you  think  they  are  evils?  "
he  said.  To  that  question,"  said  I,  whichever
reply  I  make,  you  will  be  bound  to  shift  and  shuffle."
How  so  exactly?"  he  asked.  Because,"  I  replied,
if  they  are  evils,  the  man  who  suffers  from  them
will  not  be  happy ;  and  on  the  other  hand  if  they
are  not  evils,  down  topples  the  whole  Peripatetic
system."  I  see  what  you  are  at,"  cried  he  smiling ;
you  are  afraidof  my  robbing  you  of  a  pupil."  Oh,"
said  I,  you  are  welcome  to  convert  him  if  he  wants
to  be  converted;  for  if  he  is  in  your  fold,  he  will  be
in  mine"  pu  ....,

XXIX. "Listen  then,  Lucius,"  said  Piso,  "for  I  gju'',^^",^^
must  address  myself  to  you. The  whole  importance  in  wisdnm.  ttk
of  philosophy  lies,  as  Theophrastus  says,  in  the  attain-  pros^rity'l»
ment  of  happiness ;  since  an  ardent  desire  for  happi- «'^"'•"'''e  ■;

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
7  omnes  sumus.  Hoc  mihi  cum  tuo  fratre  convenit  i'
Quare  hoc  videndum  est,  possitne  nobis  hoc  ratio
philosophonim  dare.  Pollicetur  certe.  Nisi  enim
id  faceret,  cup  Plato  Aegyptum  peragravit  ut  a  sacer-
dotibus  barbaris  numeros  et  caelestia  acciperet?  cur
post  Tarentuni  ad  Archytam?  cur  ad  reliquos  Pytha-
goreos,  Echecratem,  Timaeum,  Arionem  Locros,  ut,
cum  Socratem  expressisset,  adiungeret  Pythagore-
oram  disciplinam  eaque  quae  Socrates  repudiabal
addisceret  ?  cur  ipse  Pythagoras  et  Aegyptum  lustra-
vit  et  Persarum  magos  adiit  ?  cur  tantas  regiones
barbarorum  pedibus  obiit,  tot  maria  transmisit  ?  cur
haec  eadem  Democritus  ?  qui  (vere  falsone,  quaerere
nolumos')  dicitur  se  oculis  privasse  ;  certe,  ut  quain  I
animus  a  cogitation! bus  abduceretur,  patri-  j
neglexit,  agros  deseruit  incultos,  quid
quaerens  aHud  nisi  vitam  beatam  ?  Quam  sj  etiam
in  rerum  cogTiitione  ponebat,  tamen  ex  ilia  investi-
gatione  naturae  consequi  volebat  bono  ut  esset  aninio ;
id  enim  ille  summum  bonura  cvdujutuv  et  saepe
aOonlSiav  appellat,  id  est  animum  terrore  liberum.
88  Sed  haec  etsi  praeclare,  nondum  tamen  perpolita;
pauca  enim,  neque  ea  ipsa  enucleate,  ab  hoc  de  '
virtute  quidem  dicta.  Post  enim  haec  in  hac  urbe
primum  a  Socrale  quaeri  cocpta,  deinde  in  hunc
locum  delata  sunt,  nee  dubitatum  quin  in  virtute
'  quaerere  nelumus  MQller  ;  guaereTemus.
490

are  agreed.

BOOK  V.  XXIX

s  all.  On  this  your  brotlier  and  I
Hence  what  we  have  to  consider  is
this,  can  the  system  of  the  philosophers  give  us
happiness  ?  It  certainly  professes  to  do  so.  Were
it  not  sOj  why  did  Plato  travel  through  Egypt  to
learn  arithmetic  and  astronomy  from  barbarian
priests  ?  Why  did  he  later  visit  Archytas  at  Taren-
tum,  or  the  other  Pythagoreans,  Echecrates,  Ti-
maeus  and  Arion,  at  Locri,  intending  to  append  to
his  picture  of  Socrates  an  account  of  the  Pythagorean
system  and  to  extend  his  studies  into  those  branches
which  Socrates  repudiated  ?  Why  did  Pythagoras
himself  scour  Egypt  and  visit  the  Persian  magi  ?  why
did  he  travel  on  foot  througli  those  vast  barbarian
lands  and  sail  across  those  many  seas  ?  Why  did
Democritus  do  the  same  f  It  is  related  of  the  latter
(whether  truly  or  falsely  we  are  not  concerned  to
inquire)  that  he  deprived  himself  of  eyesight ;  and
it  is  certain  that  in  order  that  his  mind  should  be
distracted  as  little  as  possible  from  reflection,  he
neglected  his  paternal  estate  and  left  his  land  uncul'
tivated,  engrossed  in  the  search  for  what  else  but
happiness?  Even  if  he  supposed  happiness  to  consist
in  knowledge,  still  he  designed  that  his  study  of
natural  philosophy  should  procure  him  peace  of  mind;
since  that  is  his  conception  of  the  Chief  Good,  which
he  entitles  eulhutnia,  or  often  alkambia,  that  is  free-
18  dom  from  alarm.  But  what  he  said  on  the  subject,
however  excellent,  nevertheless  lacks  the  finishing
touches;  for  indeed  about  virtue  he  said  very  little,
and  that  not  clearly  expressed.  For  it  was  later
that  these  inquiries  began  to  be  pursued  at  Athens
by  Socrates,  first  in  the  city,  and  afterwards  the  study
was  transferred  to  the  place  where  we  now  are ;  and
491

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
omnis  ut  bene  sic  etiara  beate  vivendi  spes  ponere-
iur.  Quae  cum  Zeno  didicisset  a  noetris,  ut  in
actionibiis  praescribi  solet.  de  eadem  re  fecit^  alio
Hoc  tu  nunc  in  illo  probas.  Scilicet  vocabulis
rerunj  mutatis  inconstantiae  crimen  ille  effiigit,  nos
effugere  non  possumus  I  Hie  Metelli  vitam  negat
beatiorem  quam  Reguli,  praeponendam  tamen ;  nee
magis  expetendam,  sed  magis  sumendam ;  et,  si  optio
esset,  eliKendam  Metelli,  Reguli  reiciendam  ;  ego,
quam  ille  praeponendam  et  magis  eligendam,  beati-
1  banc  appello,  nee  ullo  minimo'  momento  plus
i  vitae  tribuo  quam  Stoici.  Quid  interest,  nisi  quod
ego  res  notas  notis  verbis  appello,  illi  nomina  nova
quaerunt  quibus  idem  dicant  ?  Ita  quemadmodum
in  senatu  semper  est  aliquis  qui  interpretem  postulet,
sic  isti  nobis  cum  interprete  audiendi  sunt.  Bonum
appello  quidquid  secundum  naturam  est,  quod  contra,
malum ;  nee  ego  solus,  sed  tu  etiam,  Chrysippe,  in
foro,  domi ;  in  schola  desinis.  Quid  ergo  ?  aliter
homines,  aliter  pbilosophos  loqui  putas  oportere  ?
Quanti  quidque  sit,  aliter  docti  et  indocti ;  sed  cum
constiterit  inter  doctos  quanti  res  quaeque  sit, — ai
homines  essent,  usitate  loquerentur  ;-^dum  res  ma-
neant,  verba  fingant  arbitratu  suo,
'  FECIT  edd.  bracket.

'mmi-moinf.  MSS

,  Mdv. ;  omnino  B,  E.

"This  preamble seems
against  be'iaf;  non-suited  o
that  having  failed  in  liis  su
under  a  different  formula.

bi.e. when  an audience

o have giiarded the plainllff
n  a  plea  of  chose  juget,  in  case
t  he  chose  to  bring  it  in  again

was  given  lo  G.eek-speaking

^^oogre

II  BOOK  V.  x\i

no  one  doubted  that  all  hope  alike  of  right  conduct
and  of  happiness  lay  in  virtue.  Zeno  having  learnt
this  doctrine  from  our  school  proceeded  to  deal  with
the  same  matter  in  another  manner^'  as  the  common
preamble  '  to  an  indictment  has  it.  You  now  approve
of  this  procedure  on  his  part.  He,  no  doubt,  can
change  the  names  of  things  and  be  acquitted  of  in-
consistency, but  we  cannot!  He  denies  that  the  life
of  MetelluB  was  happier  than  that  of  Regulus,  yet
calls  it  preferable  '  ;  not  more  desirable,  but  more
worthy  of  adoption  ' ;  and  given  the  choice^  that  of
Metellus  is  to  be  selected '  and  that  of  Regulus
'rejected.'  Whereas  the  lifehecalled  preferable 'and
more  worthy  to  be  selected '  1  term  happier,  though  I
do  not  assign  any  the  minutest  fraction  more  value  to

I  that  life  than  do  the  Stoics.  What  is  the  difference
except  that  1  apply  familiar  terms  to  familiar  things,
whereas  they  invent  new  names  to  express  the  same
meaning  F  Thus  just  as  in  the  senate  there  is  always
some  one  who  demands  an  interpreter,''  so  we  must
use  an  interpreter  when  we  give  audience  to  your
school.  I  call  whatever  is  in  accordance  with  nature
good  and  what  is  contrary  to  nature  bad  ;  nor  am  I
alone  in  this  ;  you,  Chrysippus,  do  so  too  in  business
and  in  private  life,  but  you  leave  off  doing  so  in  the
lecture-room.  What  then  ?  do  you  think  phUo-
sophers  should  speak  a  different  language  from
ordinary  human  beings  ?  The  learned  and  the  un-
learned may  differ  as  to  the  values  of  things ;  but
when  the  learned  are  agreed  what  each  thing's  value
is, — if  they  were  human  beings,  they  would  adopt  the
recognized  form  of  expression;  but  so  long  as  the
actual  things  remain,  let  them  coin  new  words  at
their  pleasure.

49s

imii

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

90  XXX.  "  Sed  venio  ad  inconstantiae  crimen,  ne  s
plus  dicas  me  aberrare ;  quam  tu  ponis  in  verbis,  ego
positam  in  re  putabam.  Si  satis  erit  lioc  perceptum,  i
quo  adiutores  Stoicos  optimos  habemus,  tantam  vii
esse  virtutis  ut  omnia  si  ex  altera  parte  ponantur  n
appareant  quidem,  cum  omnia  quae  illi  commod
certe  dicunt  esse  et  sumenda  et  eligenda  et  prae-
posita  (quae  ita  definiunt  ut  satis  magno  aestimanda
sint),  haec  i^tur  cum  ego  tot  nominibus  a  Stoicis
appellata,  partim  novis  et  commenliciis  ut  ista pro-
ducta' et reducta,' partim idem signiRcantibus
(quid  enim  interest,  expetas  an  eligas?  inilii  quidem
etiam  lautjus  videtur  quod  eligitur  et  ad  quod  de- '
leotus  adhibetur),  sed, cum  ego  ista  omnia  bona I
dixero,  tantum  refert  quam  magna  dicam ;  cum  eX' I
petenda,  quam  valde. Sin  autem  nee expetenda I
ego  magis  quam  tu  eligenda,  nee  ilia  pluris  aesti- 1
manda  ego  qui  bona,  quam  tu  qui  producta  appeUas, |
omnia  ista  necesse  est  abscurari  nee  apparere  et  in i

91  virtutis  tamquam  in  solis  radius  iiicurrerc. At  enim ,
qua  in  vita  est  aliquid  mali,  ea  beata  esse  non  potest
Ne  seges  quidem  igitur  spicis  uberibus  et  crebris  si

1  uspiam  videris,  nee  mercatura  quaestuosa  si
194

T^!i^^ooaTc

BOOK V.  XXX

XXX. "  But 1 come to the charge of  inconsis-  we  assign
tency,  or  you  will say I digress too often. You  «leS^i
make  inconsistency  a  matter  of  words,  but  I  imagined  '^^J^i""
it  to  be  a  question  of  fact. Only  let  it  be  clearly
grasped,  and in this  we have the  Stoics  as  our
strongest  supporters,  that  sucli  is  the  power  of  virtue
that  all  other  things,  if  ranged  on  the  opposite
side to it, are absolutely  imperceptible in  com-
parison; then,  as for all  the  things  which they
admit to be advantageous and to be adopted '
and  '  selected '  and  '  preferred '  (terms  which  they
define  so  as  to  mean  possessed  of  considerable  value),
when  I  style  these  things,  which  receive  so  many
names  from  the  Stoics,  some  new  and  original,  like
your  words promoted  '  and degraded,'  some  iden-
tical in  meaning  (for  what  difference  is  there  between
desiring' a  thing and selecting' it? to my ear
there is a more sumptuous sound about a thing
that  is selected,  and to which choice  is applied),
— however  when  I  call  all  these  things  good,  the
only  thing  that  matters  is,  how  good  do  I  mean ;
when  I  call  them  desirable,  the  only  question  is,
how  desirable  ? But  if  on  the  other  hand  I  do  not
think  tliem  mare  '  to  be  desired '  than  you  '  to  be
selected,'  and  if  I  who  call  them  good  do  not  deem
them  more  vahiable  than  you  who  call  them pro-
moted,' all  these  external  things  will  necessarily  be
eclipsed  and  rendered  imperceptible  by  the  side  of
virtue ;  to  encounter  its  radiance  Is  like  meeting  the
rays  of  the  sun. But  you  will  say  lliat  a  life  which  i(  you ,
contains  some  evil  cannot  be  happy. At  that  rate  ^f^J^
a  crop  of  corn  is  not  a  heavy  and  abundant  crop  if  «*ii.  »?
you  can  spy  a  single  stalk  of  wild  oat  anywhere  Ju^o'd  i
among:  it; a  business  is  not  profitable  if  ^niong  ^j|^

CICERO  DE  FIKIBUS
in  maximis  lucris  pauluin  aliquid  damn!  contraxerit.
An  hoc  usquequaque,  alfter  in  vita?  et  non  ei
maxima  parte  de  tota  iudicabis?  an  dubium  est  qnin
virtus  ita  maximam  partem  obtineat  in  rebus  huma-
nis  ut  reliquas  obruat?  Audebo  igitur  cetera  quae
secundum  naturam  siiit  bona  appellare  nee  fraudare
Biio  Vetera  nomine  potius  quam  aliquod^  novum
quirere ;  virtutis  autem  amplitudinem  quasi  in  altera
92  librae  lance  ponere.  Terram,  mihi  crede,  ea  lani
et  maria  deprimet.  Semper  enim  ex  eo  quod  maxi-
mas  partes  eontinet  Iati:isimeque  funditur  tota  res
appellator.  Dieimus  aliquem  hilare  vivere ;  ergo
si  semel  tristior  elTectus  est  hilaru  vita  amissa  i
At  hoc  in  eo  M.  Crasso,  quem  semel  ait  in
risisse  Lucilius,non  contigit,utea  re  minus  ti-ytXcurro!,
,  ut  ait  idem,  voearetur.  Polycratem  Samium  felicem
appellabant.  Nihil  acciderat  ei  quod  nollet
quod  anulum  quo  delectabatur  in  mari  abiecerat
Ergo  infelix  una  molestia,  felix  rursus  cum  is  ipse
anulus  in  praecordiis  piscis  inventus  est  ?
vero  si  insipiens  {quod  certe,  quoniam  tyrannus),
numquam  beatus;  si  sapiens,  nc  turn  quidem  miser
cum  ab  Oroete  praetore  Darei  in  crucem  actus  (
At  multis  malis  afFectus.'  Quis  negat?  sed  ea  mala
virtutis  magnitudine  obruebantur.

'polius  guam  aliquod  Lamblnus,  Miiller;  gtiam  aliquid
(aliguam  B,  E)  potius  MS5.,  Mdv.  with  mark  of  corruptia
suffgfesting  reqite  aliguid potius.

«i.e. 'unsmiling.-  '~~~'  " ~~  '

bThe  story  is  told  by  Herodotus,  3.40  foil.

"i.e.  on  the  supposition  that  he  was  a  Wise  Man.

BOOK  V.  XKX

s  profits  it  suffers  a  single  loss.  Docs  one
principle  hold  good  in  everything  else,  but  another
in  conduct?  Will  you  not  judge  of  the  whole  by
tlie  largest  part?  Is  there  any  doubt  that  virtue
occupies  so  large  a  part  in  human  afTairs  tbat  it
eclipses  every  other  factor  ?  Well  then,  I  shall  make
bold  to  call  the  other  things  in  accordance  with
nature  goods,'  and  not  cheat  them  of  their  old
name,  rather  than  excogitate  some  new  one  ;  but  I
shull  place  the  massive  bulk  of  virtue  in  tlie  opposite
scale  of  the  balance.  Believe  me,  that  scale  will  Viri^  oi
weigh  down  the  earth  and  the  seas.  It  is  a  uni-
versal rule  that  any  whole  takes  its  name  from  its
most  predominant  and  preponderant  part.  We
say  that  a  man  is  a  cheerful  fellow;  but  if  he  is
once  in  rather  low  spirits,  has  he  therefore  lost
his  title  to  cheerfulness  for  ever?  Well,  the  rule
was  not  applied  to  Marcus  Crassus,  who  according
to  Luciiius  laughed  but  once  in  his  life ;  that  one
exception  did  not  prevent  his  being  called  age/astos*
as  Luciiius  lias  it.  Polycrates  of  Samoa  was  called
'the  fortunate.'  Not  a  single  untoward  circimi-
stance  had  ever  befallen  him,  except  that  he  hud
thrown  his  favourite  ring  overboard  at  sea.''  Did
that  single  annoyance  then  make  him  unfortunate  ?
and  did  he  become  fortunate  again  when  the  very
same  ring  was  found  in  a  fish's  belly  ?  But  Poly-
crates, if  he  was  foolish  (which  he  certainly  was,
since  he  was  a  tyrant),  was  never  happy ;  if  wise,  he
was  not  miserable  even  when  crucified  by  Oroetes,
the  satrap  of  Darius.  But,'  you  say,  many  evils
befell  him  I'  Who  denies  it?  but  those  evils  were
eclipsed  by  the  magnitude  of  his  virtue.'

KK  497

L.

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS
93  XXXI.  An  ne  hoc  quidetn  Peripateticis  con-
cedis,  ut  dicant  ommum  bonorum  virorum,  id  est
sapientium,  omnibus  virtu ti bus  ornatorum,  vitam
omnibus  partibus  plus  habere  semper  boni  quan
mail?  Quis  hoc  dicit?  Stoici  scilicet.  Minime;  sed
isti  ipsi  qui  voluptate  et  dolore  omnia  metluntur,
nonne  clamant  sapienti  plus  semper  adesse  quod
velit  quam  quod  nolit?  Cum  tantum  igitur  in  virtute
ponant  ii  qui  fatentur  se  virtutis  causa,  nisi  ea  volupta-
tem  faceret,'  ne  inanum  quidem  versuros  fuisse,  quid
facere  nos  oportet  qui  quamvis  rainimam  praestan-
tiam  animi  omnibus  bonis  corporis  anteire  dicamus
ut  ea  ne  in  conspectu  quidem  relinquantur?  Quis
est  enim  qui  hoc  cadere  in  sapientem  dicere  audeat,
ut  si  fieri  possit  virtiitem  in  perpetuum  ahiciat  ut
dolore  omni  liberetur?  Quis  nostrum  dixerit  (quos
nan  pudet  ea  quae  Stoici  aspera  dicunt  mala  dicere), .
melius  esse  turpiter  aliquid  facere  cum  voluptate
9+  quam  lioneste  cum  dolore?  Nobis  Heracleotes  ilk
Dionysius  flagitiose  descivisse  videtur  a  Stoicis  pro-
pter oculorum  dolorem.  Quasi  vero  hoc  didicisset  ■
Zenone,  non  dolere  cum  doleret!  Illud  audierat
nee  tamen  didicerat,  malum  illud  non  esse  quiaturpe
non  esset,  et  esse*  ferendum  viro.  Hie  si  Peripa-
teticus  fuisset,  permansisset,  credo,  in  sententia,  qui
dolorem  malum  dicunt  esse,  de  asperitate  autem  ehis
fortiter  ferenda  praecipiunt  eadem,  quae  Stoici.  Et
r,nr.  MSS.,Mdv.  wiih

'/acvrel  M'lkkelaen,  Miiller;  accir,
lark  of  corruption  ;  voluplaU  mace
'  esse  Manutius,  Mdv. ,  essef  MSS,

■e/  B,  E.

L  BOOK  V.  Kxxi

XXXI.  "Or  do  you  even  refuse  to  let  the  Peripa-  e™
tetics  say  that  every  part  of  the  life  of  all  good,  that  hoid"
is  of  all  wise  men,  men  whom  every  virtue  decks,  ^|^'
alivays  comprises  more  good  than  evil? Who  does  of  "hi
say  this? The  Stoics,  jou  suppose? Not  at  all;
but  the  very  people  who measure  all  things  by
pleasure  and  pain,  do  not  they  cry  aloud  that  the
Wise  Man  always  has  more  of  what  he  likes  than  of
what  hedislikes?  When  therefore  so  much  importance
is  assigned  to  virtue  by  those  who  confess  that  they
would  not  raise  a  hand  for  the  sake  of  virtue  if  it
did  not  produce  pleasure,  what  are  we  to  do,  who
say  that  the  smallest  amount  you  like  to  mention
of  mental  excellence  surpasses  all  the  goods  of  the
body,  and  renders  them  completely  imperceptible?
For  who  is  there  who  would  venture  to  say  that  it
would  become  the  Wise  Man  to  discard  virtue  for
ever  (were  this  possible)  for  the  sake  of  securing
absolute  freedom  from  pain? Who  of  our  school
(which  is  not  ashamed  to  call  evils  what  the  Stoics
term  '  amioyances ')  was  ever  known  to  say  that  it  is
better  to  commit  a  pleasant  sin  than  to  do  the  pain-
ful right? In  our  view  Dionysius  of  Heiaclea  was  in  qgi
wrong  to  secede  from  the  Stoics  because  of  a  malady  |^p'
of  the  eyes. As  though  Zeno  had  ever  taught  him  mo"^,
that  to  feel  pain  was  not  painful! What  he  had
heard,  though  he  had  not  learnt  the  lesson,  was  that
pain  was  not  an  evil,  because  not  morally  bad,  and
that it  was  manly  to endure it. Had Dionysius
been  a  Peripatetic,  I  believe  he  would  never  have
changed  his  opinions;  the  Peripatetics  say  that  pain
is  an  evil,  but  on  the  duty  of  bearing  the  annoy-
ance it  causes  with  fortitude  their  teaching  is  the
same  as  that  of  the  Stoics. And  indeed  your  friend
kk2  499

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

quidem  Arccsilas  tuus,  etsi  fuit  in  disserendo  perti-
nacior,  lamen  noster  fuit;  erat  eniin  Polenionis;  is  '
cum  arderet  podagrae  doloribus  visitassetque  homi-
nem  Charmides  Epicureus*  perfamiliaris  et  tristis
exiret.  Mane,  quaeso,'  inquit,  Charmide  noster;
nihil  illine  hue  pervenit.'  Ostendit  pedes  et  pectiu>
Ac  tamen  hie  mallet  noii  dolere.

95  XXXII.  Haee  igitur  est  nostra  ratio,  quae  tibi
videtur  inconstans,  cum  propter  virtutis  caelestem
quandam  et  divinam  tantamque  praestantiam,  ut,
ubi  virtus  sit  resque  magnae  et  summe  laudabiles
virtute  gestae,  ibi  esse  miseria  et  aerumna  non  possit,
tamen  labor  possit,  possit  molestia,  non  dubitem
dicere  onines  sapientes  semper  esse  beatos,  sed  tamen
fieri  posse  ut  sit  alius  alio  beatior."  Atqui  iste
locus  est,  Rso,  tibi  etiam  atque  etiam  confirmandus,"
inquam ; quem  si  tenueris,  non  raodo  meum  Cicero-  .

96  neni  sed  etiam  me  ipsum  abducas  licebit."  Tum
Quintus;  Mihi  quidem,"  inquit,  satis  hoc  confir-
matum  videtur,  laetorque  earn"  pbilosophiatn,  cuius
antea  supellectilem  pluris  aestimabam  quam  posses-
siones  reliquarum  (ita  mihi  dives  videbatur  ut  ab  c;
petere  possem  quidquid  in  studiis  nostris  concupis'
sem),  hanc  igitur  laetor  etiam  acutiorem  repertsm
quara ceteras,  quod  quidam ei deesse  dicebanf'

'Non quam  nostram  quidem,"  inquit  Pomponius '1
iocans; sed  mehercule  pergrata  mihi  fuit'  oratio
tua. Quae  enim  dici  Latine  posse  non  arbitrabar,

^  Epicureus  Mdv,,;  Epicurus  B,  E  ;  Epicuri  inf.  MSS,
'  laetorque  earn  Davis,  Mdv.  1  laetor  guidtm  MSS.
V"''  inserted  by  Mdv.
500

^;  BOOK  V.  xxxi-sjtxii

Arcesilas,  though  he  was  rather  too  dogmatic  in
debate,  was  still  one  of  us;  for  he  was  a  pupil  of
Polemo.  When  Polemo  was  racked  with  the  tor-
ments of  gout  he  was  visited  by  an  intimate  friend,
the  Epicurean  Charmides.  The  latter  was  depart-
ing in  distress.  '  Stay,  I  beg  of  you,  friend  Char-
mides,' cried  Polemo ;  no  pain  from  here  has  got  to
there '  (pointing  to  his  feet  and  his  breast).  Yet
Polemo  would  have  preferred  not  to  feel  pain,

XXXII.  This  then  is  our  system  which  you  *  Cnndusi
think  inconsistent.  1  on  the  other  hand,  seeing  the
celestial  and  divine  excellence  of  virtue,  excellence
so  great  that  where  virtue  and  the  mighty  and  most
glorious  deeds  that  she  inspires  are  found,  there
misery  and  sorrow  cannot  be,  though  pain  and
annoyance  can,  do  not  hesitate  to  declare  that  every
Wise  Man  is  always  happy,  but  yet  that  it  is  possible
for  one  to  be  happier  than  another."  Well,  Piso,"
said  I,  "  that  is  a  position  which  you  will  find  needs
a  great  deal  of  defending ;  and  if  you  can  hold  to  it,
you  are  welcome  tg  convert  not  only  my  cousin
i  Cicero,  but  also  myself."  For  my  part,"  remarked
Quintus,  I  think  the  position  has  been  satisfac-
torily defended,  and  I  am  delighted  that  the  philo-
sophy whose  household  gear  1  previously  thought
more  precious  than  the  landed  estates  of  the  other
schools  (1  deemed  her  so  rich  that  I  might  go  to  her
for  all  that  1  coveted  in  our  studies),  1  rejoice,  I  say,
that  this  philosophy  has  been  found  to  be  actually
subtler  than  the  rest,— a  quality  in  which  she  was
said  by  some  to  be  deficient."  Not  subtler  than
ours  at  all  events,"  said  Pomponius  playfully;  but
I  protest  I  was  most  delighted  by  your  discourse.
You  have  expressed  ideas  that  I  thought  it  Impos-

501

CICERO  DE  FINIBUS

eft  dicta  sunt  a  te,  nee  minus  plane,  quam  dicuntur
a  Graecis,  verbis  %ptis.^  Sed  tempus  est,  si  videtui;
et  recta  quidem  ad  me."  Quod  cum  ille  dixisset  el
aatis  disputatum  videretur,  in  oppidum  ad  Pomponium
perreximus  onmes.

^verbis  apfis  MOller  bracket!  with  Baiter.

n,3,i,.™3yGoogle

BOOK  V.  xjHtii
sible  to  express  in  Latin,  snd  you  have  expressed
them  as  lucidly  as  do  the  Greeks,  and  in  apt  lan-
guage. But  our  time  is  up,  if  you  please ;  let  us
make  straight  for  my  quarters."  At  these  words,  as
it  was  felt  there  hod  been  enough  discussion,  we  all
proceeded  to  the  town  to  Potnponius's  house.

INDEX

1 Platonic Sdiool of  Ariato  (o[  Chins,  a  beteiodni  Sloic,
pp.  «iii/;  n,  2;  v,  1  fl.  c.  2fl0  b.c],  m,  M,  B;  hi,  11;  it.

r,thoOld(i,al»foraArceillas'> «;  v,  E3,  73

up),  II,  St;  IV,  i;  V,  T  Aiistophsnea  (of  Byiaotiuin,  scholu,
r,  the  New  (i.e.  from  Acccsilas  b,  c,  S«0  B.C.,  head  of  Aieiandiian
ds),  n,  (3;y,7,T8n  library. Editor  of Homer, Plato,

po»,m,  B3  elt),  v,BO

.  (writer  ol  Roman' hi'slorical  it,  IV,  19,  M,  40,  ICW';  Hi,iil;'i«Ui

les,  b.  ft  150  B-c.l,  I,  7  V,  7,11/,  73;  style,  I.  It Sk  Peri-

[,'*,SS  Aiktoienus (of  TaiEoldoi,  pnpil  of

s  (King  of  Spacta  3S8-3eo  b.c, Aristotle,  philosopher  and  musuan,

ycued  in  Xenophon'a  Aiai- a.  3S0  b.c\  v,  60

II,  lia  Aristiu  (philosopher  ol  "  Old  "  Aca-

I,  Titns,  1, 8  demy,  brother  of  Antiechus),  v,  S

ex  the  Great  (King  a!  Uice-  AUambia.  y,  B7

3B-SZ3  B.C.),  II,  tia  Athena, pbilosopbical and lilErary

log ;  in  captivity.  V.  68  "  '  donia;  traces  of  Xenes'  canal  sliU

u (restocer  of the "OU" viable),  ii,llZ

my.d-M  n-c),  p-iiiv;  v,  1.  AtiUus  (koman  dram-itistcfflX)  B.C.),

T  (bead  of  Sloic  School  c.  44  Atoms,  i,  17#

t,  e  Atticua.  HCus  Pompooius  (fdend  and
1, 11  conespondcnt  of^Cicero|,  i.  Ifl;  ii.

gmma,  p.  iii;  iiilB,  61  87;  V,  1,  3,  OB;  origin  ot  snraaine,

naturae'  '  Altiiis,{RomanlKigicpoct,b.l70B.c,).

I  (founder  of  Second  or  New ii,S4;iv.e8;v,33

my;  c.  31B-B40  B.C.),  p.  «iii;  Auhdins,  GMeus  [Roman  ilatesman

h'us  (Greek  lyric  poet,  c.  7*0- M

cl.ii.llb  .<[ia;i»Velue

dent  mathematicians,  b.  2S7  Barbali,  iv,  62

V,  fiO  Blammala,  m.  M

s  (ot  Tarentum,  philosopher  Bnilua,  Lucius  Junius  (consul  »»
nathemaddan,  fl.  4O0  a.c), a.c.),  ir,  88

V,  87  Brutus.  Marcus  Junioi  (the  tyranni-
[^fthagorean  philosoplier|,  V, dde),  1, 1;  111,  1 ;  V,  1, 8

1  (Athenian  general  and  «tale»-  father  of  the  preceding),  i,  IS

called  "  The  Juat,"  d.  c.  470

11.118 ,  Caedlius  SUtiiB  (Roman  writer  of

e,  b.ft  4I8B.C.?,p.Kvi;i,  22; 14^^

r,  34/,  39.  11 ;  V.  20  Caepio,  Gnaeus  Iconnil),  ii,  84

of  Cecs,  head  of  Peripatetic  Caepio  |halt-brothecof  Cato),  iii,e

■ '" ;.).  m,  SO:  1»,  40,  Calatinns,  A.  Atihos(«a.  2Mand254
;  V,  13  B.C.  during  first  Punic  War;  buried

505

Igle

ouBide  the  Fntt  Capeoa  at  I
ItXlT
Callipha  (probably  a  di&dpio  i

visled  RoRiF  ise  B.

Cnnlor (Academic philom

Cr^asus,  Marcus,  called  agdaab
Cra=su5,  Marcus  (son  o!  the

suniamed  Elivu),  u,  67
CciMU^  Marcus  (son  ot Dii

Iilunlvir,  felt  m ParlhJa  i

v.ug

CataUnaric

72
Catc.  M.  (U4S  B.C.).  ipokHman  ul

Stoiciim  In  Bbs.  in  md  it.
Cato,  M.  Pordus,  thg  Ccqki  |£U'17S

ii,g.),  »,  a
Cauntiaa,  i,  IS,  19

CUldrea ibow  naluraUnipulsei,  i,  SO;

V,  78
Crilolaus  [sue

«  (the  litle-pBci  d(  1

B  (Ihlrd  b<
"  "-bit _,

cuosiii  of  Maic

Saf-Tommlari,  i.  3 ;  v,  ES/
OKTaiinus  (Ihlrd  bml  wtd  "  kgdiui
fouadci "  of  Itie  Sloic  Scbnol,  £80-

Circiii  (a  lownoiLatium),
Clandiiu.  Appius  (consul  au

itctic  Sduwl;  w
Kiu  (Kingof  Lrdia],  ni,  Tl
la  Hostilia,  y,  E

Cyienalcs  (tlu  Scbool  ol  Aiil

i.£3,30;li,  36/,  11«
Cyius,  King  oi  Persia,  ia,n
Cyrus (tbs  YouiigH, fcB  ii

Duiui  (Kins  of  Feisla

Decii,  the.  il,  CO;  v,  Ma

Defloltion,  ii,  4/
Denietrius of Phalmi... „
AlbcDS  Qoder  Cassaodei.  I

CoKiu,  V,  3

'Sfl;  tv.  4S

D«iita.  I.  43/
Desires  classified,  1, 45;  n,  H/
DIaleclii:  (u.  of»  Logic),  II.  I]
Dicaearchus  (pupil  of  Aibu

:,  III,  04, 69 : DUiomachos

^^le

r

a  (hKid  oi  StoicSchool ;  vislK

.15flB.c.l,r,fliii,M:

us  of  Keradea  |a  dlsdple  i

wha  became  a  Cyreuaic),  '

ficed  his  youngest  daughUr  to  uctUB
whose  dauflhtcr^  killed  themselves),

v.ez

EdUtis (of Carthage, a hetercdoi

£tbic9,  the  Feiipate
EiuhrhlemaUi.  iit,  6

c  tragedian,  4SD-4(H

Ede&iitlaaof,  i,4Z;ii,6

ion [in the  Greelt  myth, a

I  etemaav  asleep,  beloved  by

■Qon),  V,  65

[Roman  tragic  and  epic  poet),

I»  B.C.},  I,  4,  17;  II,  41,  10«:

:;  V  SI

man,  d.  3M!  b-c),  n,  6S,  8T,

BO  Scbool,  1,  BB;  II,  12,  101;

IS,  Gaius,  V,  etn
dc,  meaning  of  t
?f  composition,  p-

Friendship,  i,  66#;  ii,  76S:  m,  5

GaUonius,  PubUus.  ii,  24, »
Gallus,  Qnintus  Fadius,  ii,  GB
Gloria tio.  III,  ZB
Gods,  Stoic  viev

Good,  the  Cblei,  viei

HT  80/
Gonl  defined,  tt,  5;  tit,  33
Goods,  Mtemal,  in,  41ir;  iv
GoTRias  (the  Sophist,  came

Gracchiis,  jl)'  Tiberius,  tri

>,  classified,
1-,  ZSff.  iSf

B3(  n,M,S();  physiis,?.  iv;

123,  agraiian  relonoers,  stms  ol  (I)',

',flS/;iv,13;fflotives[orbtndy-
« ('3*2-279 B.C-), 1  and ii.

tv,  8B/

«;v,80:biillidaykepibyhis

Hannibal [Carlhagliiian invader o'

1,  tl, 101: claimed title ol

ItalyElSa.c),  IV,  22

tu,  11,  7;  debt  to  Deraonitns.

Happiness,  Epicurean  rule  of,  i,  S7#:
^toic  and  feripatetic  views  of,  m.

nB,i.,20;quotcd,  I,  57,03,68;

tiff

M,  100;  unleamed,  i,  20,  26,

Hellspoat  [the  Dardandica,  bridged

>ortUlsol,v,3;wii],ii,M»

with  boats  by  Xerxes),  11, 112

,<«a(«™.n.,32

eil5  (legendary  King  o(  Athens,

510  8.0.),  .1,15

L

607

i

bgk

r INDEX ^H^^^^I

iJ  Philosophy;  ,«Physia

alla:i«PriHHnflluiae

Phaedrlis' (Epicurean pliilosopher,

e,  lile  Id  accordance  with,  pp.

teacher  ol  Clcem),  i.  Xd;  v,  3

«chUB,V,lS

PhalBjj»  (cmel  tyrant  ot  Acragas,  150

otia  [in  Spain,  chief  tnwn  qI

PhaWum' (a' harlHur ol Athens),

ibalans),  ,i,M

Phe'idias  IGreek  Mulptor  490-432  B.C.),

ita,  Gnasus,  u,  B3

i,p.i.irm,a)jr,5ejr

ryla,  ni,  21

Phil'o,  pp.  viii  iiiii

Philocteles (Greek hero bitten by

«na,..V3S,8B

(^auiata,  a  &h;  nickname  el

^d''oD'Xol  U^Z^l,  '^  ^

of tragedies by SoptiiKles and

nds),.,8S;ii,7fl;v,fl3

Altius),  II,  g4;v,  32

1«  Piinia  naluiae

3,V,W

taught  at  Some  in  acao's  day),  .1
PhUosophy,  lU  three  parts,  iv,  4

ius  (Roman  tiesic  poet,  220-

^t^,|.:.7to^

K)B,c.),t,M;ii.7B;v,31,8a

Peflpalelic,  IV,  IS-v,»/;  Stoic, 'iii|

«J  Pleasure  and  pain

absence  of,  the  pealest  pleasuie,

'ff.iil'i.eff

Ptad^'''(G™ek  lyric  poet,  b.  <:.  B23

absence  o[-"Stalio"plKiaure.

Pisa  Fragi  |co!.  133  ».c opponent  ol

short  11  stmng,  Ugbt  il  long,  i.

Gaius Gracchus and author of

11,22

first  law  aeainsl  e.lorti™  in  the

.tins  (bead  of  Stoic  School),  180-

I,  Quin'tus  AemiJius^  v.'Oln

oia,  IV,  74

Bk.V),Iv,73;v.p«j™.

mi  not_.natnra1,  .i.,  36

B.C.).  11,  3,  1^  «,  la,  ^2,  102n;

IV,  21,  M,  79;  V.  2,  77  60,6«,  81

ly 7B B.C. when Cicero was

87

Pleasure  defined,  n,  fl,  8;  absence  of

«to).  M,  58

pain  the  greatest,  i,  37jf.  SB;  11,  8tf;

pllon.  Stoic  doctrine  ol,  v,  Tfl

Epicurean,  calculation  of,  i.  Ziff;
mental  and  bodily.  I.  as :  11, 13, 10?/;

ilstics  (the  School  oC  Aiislotk),

mental,  Stirfd  view  of,  lll,  33;  per-
ceived directly,  1,  80;  11,  M;  pri-

i«wed,'v, '9/;'  divergraces  on

mary  instnict  for,  I,  30;  sensnai.  a

ia,v.  12;  declined,  V,  13;  In-

"sutic"  ».d  "kinetic"  confused

led  in  the  Old  Academy,  v.  ^

by  Epicurus,  .1,  9,  IB;  Peripatetic

lletics and Academic Ethics

and  Academic,  view  of,  v,«

ilifiod,  V,  11;  21;  eipounded,  v.

Pleasure  and  pain  not  sole  motive»,

;  mUrepreeented,  v,  38n

.  (last  fang  01  Macedonia,  con-

I,  iSS;  ".  109/:  the  lUlimate  good
and  evil,  1,  29/,  40/;  a  7
Pleasure  and  virtue,  .,57/

red  by  L.  AenilliuB  Paului  1«3

Plotius,  Gaius,  II,  68

.«■[nigaldiel.ii,M

PoiHiMs.  Ill,  S6

509

gle

laal,  betrayEd  I^i^wIIih
PyTTho  '(of  EUi.  fomideT  at  ■.

Hays discing  uished)

lynaturalta.  IK,  81; Sapiml;sitV

la, II, 34; prima Saidaaapalus,

or  Mtocipla  a  natura  dalal sdpio,  Publim  CorneBiu  Nai

IIl,l7;prinaeitiiatuiaap[«titio. sdpfo (Publii»

natuialii  Appetitio,  i

J;  prima  invilani
ie,  mtnralia:::  prima

SdpionB,iH.3T
Scu-Lovfi^prlzaBryiDstlQct,  itt,'-
'  -■ resiivatioo the  imiver»

I,  aofe  aDd  intaUible  soi
72  knowledge, i, SO,  64;  pro

Pmfsmma.f.  xd;  m,  IS,  bl/;  iv,  7£  pleasure  good,  i,  30;  ii,  36

Probablliq',  v,  TB  SimonJiles  (Greek  lyric  poet,  ic

Ptolemy  tU» brat, sllma
KiJigof  £gypt  3£e-2»e

SIniu.  the,  v

^^Wgle

r

Hiermopylae,  battle  of  1190  b.

of  PekitboLia  in  GtEck  legends),  J,

■.s  as

I,  a  heap^  a  train  of llodns,  Lucius,  n,  SS/,  TO

^ti  proving  a  premUc TimaeiiafEYUidgoreuipiiilosapiier), Vj

ot  expresaed),  iv»
3r  of  Plato  as
phil^oplKr of

IS  Manlius  IiopeciiHus

I  (tiiend  of  Ciceio,

St

iii5  (Superbus.  thslast  Iting
,lKuuafcdBlOB.c.),  Ill,  7&

vii;  ],4E:Iti,2a

[P.  ToentiiiJ  Aler,  Roman
'  of  eomed;,  c.  1I»-1S9  B.C.),  i,
1,  H:  V,  29/
a  (vofo  of  Leontens  of  Lamp-

Tutioo,6.  (praetor  is'a  B.C.),  IV,'!
Tubulus,  Lucius  Ipraetot  142  B.C.

Tuscilum,  Cicero's  villa  al,  111,  7

Ulyaaea  v,  49

Vacuum,  i,  17,  !1
Value,  Stoic  doctr*'»*  of  if  wi  tj
Italy), Vorginiu!,  Lucius,

s,  340  b,

»  (nt

Latins).  .
Virtue  based  on  pleasure,

Voconian  law,  ii,  bS
Wisdom,  absolute,  In,  41

odes  (Athenian  general,  de-

I  Persians  at  Salamls  4B0  B.O.),  uesuis,  i,  <

104/,  118  I».  7,ai/

situs  IsucKssor  »1  Arlitalle  Wise  Hen,  ttie  Seven,  n,  7;

slwayll  happ»,  1,02;  111,  42:  IV,  31;
V,  77//I  displays  love  of  life.  v.  3!;
Eolcums  a.  It,  7;  IT.  3;  limits  bis
44,  GS/;  the  Stole,  m,  75/:

7S,  7fl

kibliltalilan^iv.M

Zena (Epicurean pbiltsopb — '

tEmporary  of  Cicecol,  i,  111
